England's IMPROVEMENT REVIVED: Digested into SIX BOOKS. BY Captain JOHN SMITH.

In the SAVOY. Printed by Tho. Newcomb for the Author, An. Dom. 1670.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM, Lrd VISCOUNT BROVNKER President of the ROYAL
SOCIETY.
My Lord,
HAving at length finished that Discourse of Planting, which about six Months
since in the first rude Draught I presented to Your Lordship; I now take the
Confidence from the Encouragement I then had from Your Hand, and that
unexpected Approbation thereof given me afterward by a worthy and learned
Member of Your Society, to whom, by Your Lordships Order, it was Referred, to
make it more Public under the Patronage of so great a Name: I question not but
I shall have many Readers, who, respecting more the Manner, then true end of
Writing Treatises of this Nature, will Cavil at the barrenness of my
Expression, and Faulting a thing I pretend not to, Condemn my Book before they
have scarce Examined its Contents: But, as that was very little discouragement
to me in the Writing, when I sought only to please some few Friends and my
Self, so will it be less now, when I can Retort on those who Carp at Me. This
Dedication I beseech Your Lordship therefore to accept of these my Endeavors
(which I hope, being pursued, will conduce very much to the Public Advantage)
and that Profession which therewith I make of being, My Lord,

Your Lps Most Humble and Obedient Servant John Smith.

The Report of John Evelyn Esquire, by Order of the Royal Society, concerning
the Following Discourse.
Mr. Smith,
I Have Perused your Accurate Treatise, Entitled, Englands Improvement
Revived; and find it so Industriously performed, and in so useful a Method,
that I cannot but cheerfully give it my Approbation: I have my self been
engaged on the same Argument, by Commands from the Royal Society, which has now
been sometime at the Printers, toward a Second Edition; and I shall therein
not fail to Publish a due Encomium of your Work, before it come abroad; For,
though in some particulars we may happen to Treat of the same Subject; yet, it
is without the least prejudice to each other: and, I am glad to find my own
Concep^ions Fortified, by a Person of so great a Talent and Experience beyond
me: Cedat ergo in bonum publicum.

Sayes-Court, Feb. 10. 68, J. EVELYN.

A LETTER from one of the Royal Society to his Friend the Author.
Worthy Kinsman;
UPon a second Perusal of your Papers, I am very glad to find the Opinion your
Friends long since had of their worth, and your great Abilities confirmed by
the Approbation of so Learned and Honorable a Person as Mr. Evelyn: I knew
they could be no longer alone in the Sentence they past, than till your self
would make your Experience in that main Piece of Husbandry, whereof your Book
Treates more Public. It Is a design truly generous, and an Improvement every
way so advantageous, if thoroughly pursued, both to the Nation in general, and
all Gentlemen who have a desire to make their Estates more considerable, that
you would have done Posterity (that I may not say this Age alone) an Injury, in
suppressing your thoughts. The next thing I wish to see, is, your Proposals put
into Practice, and then the many New Plantations which in every Shire of this
Kingdom shall be propagated, will be so many standing Monuments of your great
Love you bore your Country. I am Sir,

Yours, Sam. Woodford.
Bensted, October. 23, 1669.
TO THE READER.
ABout 5 years since being informed by several Gentlemen Commissioners of the
Navy, and others, that His Majesty having taken into consideration the great
Wastes and decay of all Woods and Timber in England, especially in His own
Forests; was resolved not only to Preserve those young Trees which were left
standing, but to Plant others for a future supply; and, being desired by some
of the foresaid Gentlemen my Acquaintance, to give them an Account what I might
Judge would be the Charges to Plant a Thousand Acres of Land with Seed and Sets
of Oak, Ash, Beech and Elm, at 5 distances, as from one Foot to 4 Perches,
together with the Manner and Way of Planting I should most approve of; in
obedience to their Commands I set about the following Work, my intent at the
first writing was, not to have exceeded half a score sheets of Paper; and when
I had communicated my Thoughts to the Persons who Employed me, to have laid
them by for my own, or the use of any of my Friends who should undertake such a
Design: but, I know not how one sheet produced another, and at length my Book
has sweld to the Bulk you find it; for, besides that it is such a Piece of
Husbandry that I have much delighted in, and endeavored to know above 30 years,
and, to effect the same, have made many Experiments throughout this Kingdom,
and in other parts (particularly in Ireland, where I formerly kept three
Ploughs of my own, till the Rebellion about 26 years since forced me thence.)
When I was once entered beyond my Commission, I took into Consideration all
those sorts of Under-Woods that are most proper, and most in use, as to present
advantage; and, I did it the rather, because I had Experienced they might
conveniently be planted among the Timber Trees, till they grow to some
considerable bigness, what other Improvements thou shall find, take it as
thrown into the Bargain.

I might have spoken here concerning the Firr-Tree, useful for Masts and Yards
of Ships, etc. but I fear the Clime partly, and partly the Soil in England
will not agree with it; For, although those kind of Trees will live where the
Crust or good Earth is but shallow, and of reasonable depth, as the Beech does,
yet if they find a deeper Crust they will thrive much better; Only this in the
General concerning the Firr, if they like the Earth, where they shall be
Planted, and grow, as in the more Northern parts, an acre planted with them, at
about 30 years end or growth may be worth 140 pounds; but, it was neither my
business, nor much in my mind to Treat of this kind of Timber, and therefore as
I omitted it in my Book, I forbear any further mention of it in this place.

In the Fifth Book I have taken occasion to Treat of Planting 200 Acres of
Land, as well for pleasure as profit; and though part of that Discourse may
cause Merryment in some, yet with the Pleasure I have intermingled many good
Rules and Observations, and I am so well satisfied with the Method I have
Propounded in that and the other Books, that if any Person of Honor should so
employ me, being unable by reason of the great Losses I have sustained, to put
my own Rules in Practice for my self, I doubt not but I should answer his
utmost Expectation.

If it be Objected, That this is a Subject which has been handled by several,
and that so it is impossible but I must, if I do well tread in their Steps: I
can safely answer for my self, and the main of my Discourse, that it is wholly
New, and such as never before appeared in Print, both as to the Manner,
Charges, and Advantage of Planting either one, or a thousand Acres, in the way,
and at the Distances propounded: I confess I am but a bad Writer, and have been
all my time more experienced in the Practice, then the Theory of this kind of
Husbandry; yet, having more consulted the Public then my self, I hope the
Learned will indulge me, and so I deliver things as they ought, pardon the
Rudeness of my words and expression.

A farther Advertisement to the Reader.
THough this Book came out t^us late, yet it was finished, at least the first
and biggest part, about three years since; but, I was not able to publish it,
by reason of my own great want, and former Losses; till I had obtained the
Subscriptions of several Gentlemen in the Country; who Reading it, and
approving both my Design and Method, freely contributed to the Charges of this
Publication.

ERRATA:
PAge 2 l. 25 r. within these few years. p. 7 l. 4, for which in, r. within.
ib. l. 29 r. dy-square. p. 19 l. 32, after but 1. of. p. 20 l. 9 r. that time.
ib. l. 18, for Masts 1. Mast. p. 22 l. 14, 15 r. Incroachment. p. 26 l. 12, for
chalk r. shank. p. 32 l. 33, so every r. very. p. 33 l. 32 r. they will. l. 34
r. of Trees. p. 39 l. 14 for their r. the. p. 41 l. 22, after whole r. ground.
p. 49 l. 23 for parted r. planted. p. 51. l. 5, for that r. after. p. 63 l. 1.
for de r. side p. 65 l. 20, after preserved r. in every Acre. p. 66 l. 33,
after small r. houses. after p. 160, as far as 1691. for 141, 142, etc. 161,
162, etc. p. 161 l, 32 dele the breadth cf. p. 177 l. 33, for whereby r. where.
p. 181 l. 13, for as r. when p. 182 l. 8 Anniseed r. Anniseseed. p. 236 l. 19.
for as in, r. alike in. p. 251. l. 17. for Rona r. Rova. p. 253 l. 23, for
Stars r. Scars. Other Fault^less considerable, and only literal, the Readers
judgment will easily supply.

THE CONTENTS.
The First Book.
IN this Book is set down the great benefit that does apise from Trading, which
is the Strength and Riches of a People, as also that the Kings of England are
the Sovereign Lords of the British Seas, and that the said Seas have by force
of Arms been kept and protected from the Power of all other Nations or Kings in
memory, by undoubted Records ever since Edgar, Etheldred, Canutus the Dane,
Edward the Confessor, William the Conqueror, and all the Kings of England
successively to this day. You have in it also a Collection of certain Breviats
of several Records now in the Tower of London proving the Sovereignty of the
British Seas wholly to belong to the Kings of England demonstratedly the
Examples of several other Kings and Princes; how they keep by force of Arms all
Seas within their Territories You have also here in passage shown the great use
of Ships, how they are the strength of a Kingdom or People, and the chief
Instruments of Trade: And this part lastly is concluded with a short
Declaration of the woeful Wastes and Decay of all Woods and Timber in England;
especially in His Majesty's Forests, not only during the Troubles, but to this
very day: together with some short Proposals for ppeserving these Trees that
are now standing and growing; planting wast Lands for a future supply, and
several ways of improving Barren Lands.

The Second Book.
IS treated the Planting Forrest-Lands, and other wast-Lands, with Plants for
Timber Trees; also of all kinds of Earth Simple or Compound, Rich or Barren;
and the manner and way of improving the same, either by planting Seed or sets
for Timber trees or Underwoods; Likewise by draining or watering such Lands
that require the same: and Devonshiring or Burning th^se Lands grown over with
Bushes, Heath Furs, Goss, or such like: Also the way of Improving all the
said several sorts of Earths by Lime, Marl, Dung, and many other such like
Improvements; likewise by Plowing, Delving, Trenching, or Plow-trenching the
said Land, and sowing seed for Corn or Grass, and of several Observations and
Directions therein.

The Third Book.
YOu have set down the manner and way of planting one Acre of Land
Statute-measure, that is 16 foot and a half to the Perch; with seed or sets
for Timber trees and Underwoods, at several distances, as from 1 foot to 4
Perch: Also the converting the said Woods to several uses, with the Charges
and Profit of performing the same, and several Observations in planting the
said Woods: Also a Conjecture at the growth and Age of Timber Trees, as Oaks
that are now standing and grow; which said Trees may be probably concluded to
be the Production of the Earth at the Creation of the World: together with
Preparatory Directions by plowing and sowing, with choice of Seed and Plants in
order to the planting a thousand Acres.

The Fourth Book.
YOu have Directions to plant a thousand Acres of Land, Woodland-measure, 18
foot to the Perch, with Seed and Sets for Timber trees and Underwoods at the
several distances before mentioned; and that is from one foot to four Perch.
Also here is set down the particular and total accounts of the Charges and
Profit of planting of the said Land by Plowing or delving, and sowing or
setting the same with seed or sets: As also converting the said Woods to
several uses.

The Fifth Book.
IN this Book are Directions set down how to plant 200 Acres of Land as well
for Pleasure as for Profit, wherein there shall be pleasant Walks with
Timber Trees and Groves of Underwoods; and several Orchards and Gardens, with
Fruit, Flowers and Herbs both for food and Physic, variety of Fowl, Bees,
Silkworms, Bucks, Does, Hares, and other Creatures of several kinds: And a
short account of the Charges and Profit of keeping a thousand Doe-Cenies in
Hutches, the Profit amounting to 4500 l. per Annum; Also Fish Ponds and Streams
of Water stored with many kind of Fish, and stocked with Decoy Ducks: And the
use and virtues of all the Plants growing in this Garden of Pleasure.

The Sixth Book.
YOu have a Description of the Islands of Orkney and Shotland, with the manner
and way of the Hollanders Fishing, and Trading in those Seas and Islands: Also
a Diurnal or short account of Coasting from London to those Islands, with a
discovery of several Rocks and Harbors on that Coast: Here is likewise set
down, that the Original of the Hollanders Trade, which is now much increased
and spread through a great part of the World, was and is from the Fish they
every year take on the Coast of England and Scotland. And in this Book lastly
is set down the great benefit that does arise from Trade, with a short
discourse, that the Traffic of Europe has been engrossed into the hands, and
carried on all along by the Venetians, Genoese, Portugals, Easterlings,
Hollanders and English; and that the falure and decay of the one was the
original rise to another. Also a Composition which the Hollanders made with
King Charles the First, to pay unto his Majesty one hundred thousand pounds
yearly, and a hundred thousand pounds ready down.

The TABLE.
PAge 1, 2, Discourse of Trade. Page 3, 4, 5, 6, Several records to prove that
the Sovereignty of the British Seas do wholly belong to the Kings of England.
P. 7, 8, Several proposals for the preserving timber trees. P. 9, 10, Hammers
and Furnaces for Iron great wasters of woods. From p. 11, to p. 17, Several
ways of Improving Land. From p. 18, to 22, Great Wastes committed by Keepers
and others. Page 23 to 29, Observations and Directions to make a good
serviceable and profitable Fence. Page 30, 31, The Charges of making the said
Fence. Page 32, The Original of Ground and Plants. Page 33 to 40, Several kind
of grounds not good to plant trees in. Page 41 to 44, The choice of Seed and
Plants. P. 45 to 51, Directions to plant one acre of Land, several ways, and
at several distances. Page 52, The Number of Seed and Plants given to Plant a
thousand acres of Land at several distances. Page 53, 54, The best season of
the yeat, and the manner and way of plowing Ground, in which to sow or set Seed
or Plants. P. 55, All kind of seed and plants will not thrive in one kind of
earth. P. 56 to 59, Several observations in plowing, sowing, and setting seed,
and plants for Trees. Page 60 to 63, Several observations in transplanting
Trees. P. 64 to 66, Several observations in planting for Under-Woods. P. 67 to
71, Transplanting Trees of great bulk or growth. P. 72 to 75, Observations in
dressing or proyning Trees, P. 76 to 80, The growth and age of Timber Trees. P.
81, Two several Chains to plant seed or sets by. P. 82 to P. 103, is set down
the profit of Planting a thousand acres of Land with seed or sets for
Timber Trees, and under-Woods. Page 104, An account given of 29548000 acres of
Land in England, besides that which is allowed for the Highways. P. 105, Loss
of ground by reason of the Fence. P. 106, to p. 125, you have an account of the
charges by plowing and planting seed and sets for Timber Trees and under-Woods.
P. 126 to p. 159, -- you have an account of the Charges, by delving the Land,
and planting seed and sets for Timber Trees and under-Woods. P. 160 to 163,
Planting pleasant walks with Timber Trees and Groves. P. 164, to 169, The
Charges and Profit keeping 1000 tame Conies. P. 170, 171, Several observations
about sheep. P. 172, 175, Several directions to make an Aviary: also a
Fish Pond; and several observations about Pigeons. P. 176, The choice of Cows
for a Dairy. P. 177 to p. 183, A particular view of every part of the pleasant
Land. P. 183, 184, An Alphabet of all Herbs growing in the Kitchen and Physic
Gardens. P. 185, 186, 187, Several Observations about planting Herbs. P. 188,
189, Directions to Plant Hops. P. 190, 191, 192, A View of the Pleasant-Land.
P. 193 to p. 243, The Virtues and use of Trees and Herbs. P. 244 to p. 248,
Several Physical Directions. P. 249 to p. 270, A Discourse of the Fishing-Trade
of Great Britain.
ENGLAND'S IMPROVEMENT REVIVED.
THE FIRST BOOK.
The Argument.
In this Book is set down the great benefit that do^ arise from Trading, which
is the Strength and Riches of a People; as also that the Kings of England are
the Sovereign Lords of the British Seas; and that the said Seas have by force
of Arms been kept and protected from the Power of all Nations and Kings in
memory, by undoubted Records ever since Edgar, Etheldred, Canutus the Dane,
Edward the Confessor, William the Conqueror, and all the Kings of England to
this day, You have in it also a Collection of certain Breviats of several
Records now in the Tower of London, proving the Sovereignty of the British Seas
wholly to belong to the Kings of England, demonstrated by the Examples of
several other Kings and Princes, how they keep by force of Arms all Seas
within their Territories. You have also here in Passage shown the great use of
Ships, how they are the Strength of a Kingdom or People, and the chief
Instruments of Trade. And this part lastly is concluded with a short
Declaration of the woeful wastes and decay of all Woods and Timber in England,
especially in his Majesty's Forests, not only during the Troubles, but to this
very day: Together with some short Proposals for preserving those Trees that
are now standing and growing, planting wast Lands for a future supply, and
several ways of improving Barren Lands.

HAving not long since in obedience unto his Majesty's Gracious Declaration for
the Fishing-Trade of Great Britain, discoursed something of Trade in general,
and how it has flourished; together with its Decay throughout Europe, as well
as here in England, and particularly of the Fishing-Trade, and the great
advantage that might accrue to this Nation thereby; I think it needless to
repeat here what I have other where more largely set down: It is well known
that Trade is the Life of all the habitable World, and that by the extent
thereof the Venetians and Genoese did engross the greatest part of the Wealth
of Europe, and by their Shipping, which continually supplied them with Men,
became a Terror unto all about them: But when their Trading decayed, their
Strength and Glory did with it fall; as if those two Twins, who were happily
born together, were unwilling to survive each other. After the Venetians and
Genoese, the Easterlings or Haunse Towns being Masters of the Trade, were very
powerful at Sea and Land, and in their own Bottoms transported our Staple
Commodities all over Europe, when we for want of Ships could only look on and
see them grow rich by our increase. I need not tell how also by their Shipping
the Saxons, Danes, and Normans invaded England, being the more powerful,
because Masters of a great Trade; but when that began to fail, their Strength
and Shipping sensibly decayed. After the Easterlings, the Portugals discovering
the way to the Indies by the Cape of good hope, quickly became Ingrossers of
the whole Trade thither, and at once undermined the Venetians and all the
Haunse Towns; and increasing with the strength of Spain, became as formidable
at home by Land, as they were abroad at Sea: But now in these years, those
great Trades are fallen betwixt Us and the Hollander, only the Hollander by art
and industry has better improved his Interest, and made himself rich by our
Staple Commodities; For the Original of all their Trade and Merchandise,
together with the great support of it, was and is from the Fish they take in
the Seas belonging unto England and Scotlandm, with the Product whereof, they
are grown to that greatness that now they are; and may be as ill Neighbors to
England as the Easterlings were. Now although there have been many that by way
of Argument and for discourse sake, would go about to prove that the Seas are
free and Common, and ought not to be bounded by any other Laws than their own
Shoars and Sands; yet the necessity of Order in Mutual Commerce, and the safety
of Men's Goods and Lives, may teach us by the very light of Nature, that Laws
are as necessary for the government and preservation of such as frequent the
Seas, as of those that trade on the firm Land: And though there be such Persons
that dare presume thus to dispose of, and at their pleasure dispossess his
Majesty of this his undoubted Birthright, the Royalties of the Seas, which his
Ancestors have held beyond all memory; yet I hope he will never be unprovided
of others to vindicate, as much as in them lies, by their Lives as well as
their Pens, that Right of his Crown, and maintain those ancient Laws and
Customs of his Kingdoms, unto which all foreign Princes and Nations have freely
submitted, as by several Records yet to be seen in the Tower of London will
evidently appear: And because it is the general disposition of Men, to choose
rather to i emain in ignorance than to be at charges, or by labor and industry
to search and find out the truth of things; to inform such as are willing at
least at another cost not to be ignorant, and strengthen the knowing, they
being many and very copious; I shall here only give you a Breviat of so many of
them as may suffice for this occasion.

1. There is to be seen a Record therefore in the Rolls there Concerning Taxes
and Tributes, imposed upon Ships passing and Fishing upon our Coasts; the
Ordinance was made in the second year of Richard the second, by the assent of
Parliament.

2. And to like purpose, is that of Edward the fourth, where it is manifestly
expressed, that the King appointed Wafters to guard the Fishers, not only of his
own Realm, but Forrainers and Strangers that Fish upon his Coasts; and that the
Wafters took a Ratable proportion of Every Ship toward their Cost and
Expenses securing their Fishing; and that these Wafters were to Prohibit all
other Wafters whatsoever, that presumed to take the Office upon them, and to
Commit them to Prison.

3. Cambden in his description of the North Riding of Yorkshire, says that the
Hollanders in their Fishing for Herrings upon the North Coast of England, did
first obtain License from Scarbrough Castle.

4. And all Neighbor Princes upon any such occasion have obtained License for
their Subjects to Fish in our Seas, as in a Truce of War, agreed between Henry
the 4th and the French King.

5. Also during a Treaty between Henry the 6th and the Duchess of Burgundy;
those of Brabant and Flanders had Liberty of free Fishing granted them.

6. And so it was in a another Truce, between the said King and the Duchess of
Burgundy.

7. The like we find in a Truce between Edward the 4th and Francis Duke of
Britain.

8. Phillip the 2d King of Spain, in the first year of Queen Mary, Obtained
License for his subjects to Fish upon the North Coasts of Ireland, for the
term of 21 Years, paying for the same yearly 1000 pounds: which was
accordingly brought into the Exchequer of Ireland, and received by Sir Henry
Fitton the then Treasurer there.

9. And the King of France, as others of his Predecessors, by special License
only of the King of England, Fisheth upon our Coasts near Rye, with a set and
Limited Number of small Boats, and that only for Provision for his own
Household.

10. All States and Princes, do generally give Laws to pass and fish in the
Seas Coasting upon their own Territories, and also Impose Taxes and Tributes
for their own Profit and Commodity.

11. The Emperor of Russia compels all Fishermen within his Seas, though it
be many Leagues from the Maine, to pay him Tribute.

12. In the Seas and Islands under the King of Sweden, they pay Taxes to him.

13. The King of Denmark at his Wardhouse in the sound, has for every License
a Doller, and for the Seal and Rose, a Noble of every Ship, and for every Last
of Herrings being 12. Barrels, a Doller.

14. The Duke of Medina Sidonia in Spain, has his greatest Revenues out of the
Taxes laid on Fishermen.

15. All Princes of Italy bordering upon the Seas, Receive a proportion of like
benifit.

16. And the Hollanders themselves Impose Taxes on the Fish taken by their
Fishermen in our Seas.

But I shall keep my self near home, and within the Sovereignty of our own
Seas, which our Ancient Monarchs of Britain, even from the first Memory that we
can have of them, were always most careful to preserve; for First, the Ancient
Britains admitted very few or no strangers at all into their Service at Sea,
least turning Renegadoes, they might upon occasion lay them open to the
Incursions of their Neighbors the Gauls, by discovering to them the manner of
their Shipping, which they kept as a very great secret: and therefore when
Julius Caesar came with an intention first of all to invade this Island; Gaul,
though very near and in sight of it, could not supply him with any that could
give him a certain Intelligence of the Place, or which way, unless in Vessels
of his own, or a few passage Boats used by Traders to get thither: But these
were Countermanded by a great Strength at Sea, which the Britains were Masters
of; Ships of a good Bulk, and serviceable in that Age for fight; which they
continually employed to Round the Island and scour the seas, which course the
Romans, after they once came to be settled in the Isle, put in practice, and
after something a better method; finding here such Timber as they could not be
provided with for that use in any other part of their Empire.

After the Romans; Edgar King of the Saxons continually kept in readiness a
Navy of 400 Ships, which being divided into 4 several fleets, did every year
after Easter, take their Course to the 4 quarters of England, where they
remained to Guard and scower the Seas, until the Winter following.

After Edgar, then Etheldred, for defense of the British Seas and Kingdom,
caused of every 310 hides of Land a Ship to be built; which all meeting at
Sandwich made the greatest Navy that ever this Kingdom set forth to Sea.

After him, Canutus the Dane Maintained a mighty Fleet of Ships, for the safety
of the Seas and Kingdom; and so the succeeding Kings to William the Conqueror:
I might instance in several of our Kings of later Ages, who to maintain the
Rights and Privileges of the Seas, have set forth Mighty Fleets, and by force
kept off the Hollanders and other Nations, till they by the increase of their
Shipping have grown to that greatness both in Riches and strength, that they
think they may do any thing, and for some time have usurpt that right which
undoubtedly belongs to his Sacred Majesty.

I might here enter upon the praise of the great use of Shipping, and the far
greater advantage that comes to a Nation thereby, of what importance it is to
any People, both for increase of their Riches and Wealth, Maintenance of their
Peace and to make them formidable to those that are round about them: But I
shall forbear, only thus much, it cannot but be infinitely more to us of this
Island, then to any other Nation in Europe; Nature having given us the Sea for
our bounds, which we can neither Pass nor Defend, but by the Convenience of
Shipping; Adding to this the great love his Majesty has to Navigation, and his
promoting all kind of Industry that may conduce to the securing of this Nation
from all assaults that way, there is none of his Loyal Subjects but think
themselves bound, as much as their Talent and Capacity will amount to, some one
way, some another, to advance so Noble a Design. For my own part, till an
opportunity offers of serving his Majesty upon that Element abroad, I shall
endeavor what lies in my power for preparing something in order to it upon the
Land at home; and shall hence take the occasion to Discourse of that great
foundation of all Shipping; Timber, chiefly the Oak: None therefore can be
ignorant of the great Wastes committed in this Nation, of all sorts of Timber
and especially of this, which in the space of 100 years, but much more within
these 30 years; so that his Majesty's Forests, that have most abounded with
the best Materials in the World for Shipping, are very much impoverished and
Decayed: Partly therefore upon the Reasons before mentioned, as a good Subject,
and partly out of my duty, having had Employment as a sworn Officer in one of
his Majesty's Forests, and at present dwelling on the Borders thereof, and
thereby better able to see and judge the Wastes that have been Committed: In
Order to the preserving and increasing of this so necessary a Material, I
Humbly Propose;

First, That there be special care taken for the Preservation of all such
Timber as shall yet be found standing and Growing.

2. That there be provision made for the Planting of young Timber Trees, in
such wast places of the Kingdom as are capable to produce them.

3. That no Person, whether of the Nobility or private Gentlemen, be permitted
to Cut down, Grub or stock up any Timber Trees or Woods of Timber under full
growth, or at the growth of 9 foot in the girt or Compass which is 3 foot
Diameter; For in the Parish where I dwell, there has been 5 several falls of
Timber Trees, the most of them Oaks, sold by private Gentlemen within this 7
years, whereof the greatest grown Oak was not above 12 Inches at the Lower or
Butt End, if hewed by square, but the most part of them not above 8.

4. That all Owners of Woods be enjoined at the time and season of their
Cutting or felling the Under Woods, to leave standing and growing 20 of the
best thriving young Trees, in each or every acre of Wood so cut or felled, if
there be not so many already standing and Growing at the time of Cutting, and
those to be preserved until they be of growth as aforesaid; for all Woods have
Univesally Received a Mortal Blow within the space of 30 years, notwithstanding
there is a statute for the Preservation and Maintenance of the same, Made the
35 Henry 8, and the 1. Elizabeth. That at every fall of Timber there should be
12 storers or standils left and growing upon an acre or every acre of Land so
felled; Now if the King and Kingdom were so sensible of the want of Timber in
those days, being 116 years since; much more may we now; therefore it is a
thing to be regarded and of great Concernment, for the abuses of Woods are
Infinite and intolerable, notwithstanding the words of the Statute: Indeed I
have seen in many places at the falls, where they have lest the number of
Standils and more; But instead of them, have cut down those that were Reserved
before; and at the next fall, even they escaped not, only a new race of young
standils were left again in their steads, to answer the bare word of the
Statute, and not the true meaning of it, which by this shift is very much
abused; therefore if Provision be not made to prevent that, and to put the true
intention of the Statute in more force, there can be no increase of Timber
trees expected.

5. Since Timber and timber Trees by due observation are found to decay very
fast, it behooves every good husband not only to Maintain and preserve such
trees as remain, and so by the Statute to be set out, but voluntarily to Plant
more, and because there is such a universal inclination to hurl down, it were
expedient, that since Wit and Providence will not, Authority should Constrain
some men, as well Lords as Tenants, to Plant, set or sow, with Acorns,
Ashen-keyes, Beechmast etc. For every hundred Acres of Land one acre: Or to
Plant the said Acre with sets or Plants, and to preserve and keep the same
until they come to full growth as aforesaid; Now although in former Ages, when
England was overgrowne with Woods; The Felling, Grubbing, of Stocing up of
Trees did prove a great benefit to the Nation, by making room for Men, Corn,
and Cattle; Yet moderation is now more necessary, for the too much overthrowing
of Timber Trees, and stocking up Woods, has brought a great scarcity of that
Necessary Commodity; and if for the overgreedy use and advantage, though but
small at the present, there be no regard of future occasions, there will follow
Extreme want, for there are many necessaries which without Fireing are of
little use, and Corn will require Mils to grind, if all were Meddow and
Pasture the Life of Cattle, then Arable Land the Life of Men were dead; when
for one commodities sake, another is abandoned by some private men, less
expedient for the Public Weal, it must of Necessity be destructive, and much
it is to be lamented that the Devastation of Woods, threatens a grievous
weakening to this Kingdom; such a pestilent heat, issues out of the many
forges and furnaces for the making of Iron, as has Devoured many Famous Woods,
and by credible report there has been lately in Sussex above 130. Hammers and
Furnaces for Iron, the hammers and furnaces spending each of them in every 24.
hours three or 4 load of Charcole more or less, which in a year, amounts
unto an infinite quantity, but because for lack of Water in the summer to blow
their Bellows all of them cannot work the whole year, we cannot give an
account so Exactly, yet a probable Estimate we may make how many load of Coal,
all the said Hammers and Furnaces may expend in one year: and to that end We
shall suppose, that one time with another they may all work two third parts of
the year, which is 243 Days 8 howrs: Each day containing 24 hours or day and
Night; and because all Hammers and furnaces spend not a like quantity of Coal,
we shall therefore take or compute the least or smallest Number for all, which
is 3 load of Coal in 24 hours for each furnace and Hammer; Then there is
spent in the 243 Days 8 hours: 1460 Load by one furnace and Hammer, which
amounts unto for the 130 Hammers and furnaces, 94900 Load in one year; Now if
there were so many load spent in one County, it is an unknown quantity that
has been spent throughout England; and besides this great Consumption of Wood
in making Iron, there have been many Glasse-houses which were likewise great
spenders, so that if there be not a restraint laid on all Hammers and furnaces
to provide other fireing, and not Wood or Charcole, England will soon find a
woeful want of that Commodity, and be sensible of that great Evil, wilful
Waste, without any care taken either to preserve or Maintain a stock of Wood by
new Planting; for there are too too many that except against Planting,
Objecting that it will prejudice the poor, by Diminishing Corn and Cattle: to
which is answered, that the greatest part of Woodland now in England, is
overgrowne with Dwarf trees, shrubs, Bushes and such like Incombrances which
are of small benefit, either to the Poor or Rich, Corn or Cattle; of which
Woods if there were but a third part cleansed or cleared by grubbing or
stocking up those encumbrances, and good Plants planted for Timber Trees and
Woods for fireing, one Acre of the said Wood-Land would produce more Timber to
the worth of it, and Wood for fireing then 10 Acres of the said Land does at
present; and then if the other 2 thirds be likewise Cleared, the Land will
breed and feed 5 times as many Cattle as now it does; How then are the Poor
hindered or Impoverished; but Secondly, if the one half of all Meadow, Pasture,
and Arable Lands now in use and Tillage throughout England, were Improved by
good Husbandry, Watering, Draining, Dunging, Marling, Liming, Sanding,
Devonshiring and such like helps; (Also by considering the Constitution of the
Ground, Whether best for Meadow, Pasture, or Plow, and what Corn or Grain
will best Thrive in such and such grounds; for that there is a natural
affinity or Enmity between grains and ground, Experience does teach; where
there is a Mutual agreement between Seed and ground the Increase has been an
hundred for one; and on the contrary scarcely the seed again that was sowed,
although the Land may be in strength; Also considering the Clime wherein the
Land lies, thereby to order your Husbandry Early or late in the year.) This
performed, the one half of the Land in England as was said before, will produce
double the quantity of Corn, that the whole which is now in Tillage does, as
also Breed and feed many more Cattle; And Consequently England will maintain
above Double the Number of People in a better Condition by the increase of
Trading; which will increase his Majesty's Revenues, and be more strength and
safety to the Kingdom; for it is the greedy Covetousness of most men,
Especially Farmers, to have much Land in their Occupation, when they cannot
well manure the fourth part, but wear out the strength and Heart thereof with
the Sithe and Plow; for Meadow Land will require soyling or Dunging as well as
Arable; Now if Land that have been improved as Arable, Meadow and Pasture, may
be yet improved higher, much more may those Lands that were never improved,
admit of it; which are many waste Lands in Common throughout England: We shall
instance in one County for all; which is that of Surrey; wherein there are many
Thousand Acres of Land, overgrown with Shrubs, Bushes, Heath, ^^urs, Goss,
Whinnes, and such like, All which if they were st^ckt up, the Land Hackt and
burnt in the place, and the ashes well spread all over the ground, every Acre
of Land thus husbanded would be worth 10. Acres as it now is; But because there
are several hundred families of Poor People that have a livelihood therefrom,
it is my great Design, That they should have the chief benefit by this
Improvement: We shall speak more particularly to the several parts as
follows: The Land being thus Cleansed by Devonshiring as is before explained;
In the second place, all those Lands that lie wet by reason of Inundation of
Water or Land Springs, etc. would be laid dry by Drayning. Thirdly the said
Lands that were Drayn'd, and also other Lands, except Arable, would be watered
or overflowed again at pleasure, as the Land may require, considering the
season of the year, either with water springing or running from or out of Rocks
or Hills of Chalk, Marle, Allom, or such like Mines, or from hills of arable
land; for great Rains will wash down the Dung or soil therefrom, and much
enrich those grounds it runs into. Let no man spare charges according to his
abilities in improving his Land; for I have known many men undone by building
stately Houses, and others by neglecting their Lands; but did never know or
hear of any that was undone by improving his Lands. Fourthly, this performed,
we will suppose the fourth part of the whole Land to be one enclosure, and the
same plowed and sowed with Corn; and that every poor Borderer that has right
of Common have 4 or 5 Acres more or less, as the said Common does extend in
largeness, and the number of the Poor belonging thereunto; and those Acres to
be set out by Mears or Bound-stones. Fifthly, another fourth part to be planted
with Seed or Plants for Under-woods, only allowing 7 or 8 Plants in each or
every Acre of Land to grow for Timber Trees, or one Acre out of every ten Acres
to be planted only with Timber Trees, allowing 40 Trees in each Acre; for the
Poor must have Houses to dwell in, as well as Bread and Firing. Sixthly, the
other two fourth parts, or the one half of the whole Land to be reserved for
Meadow and Pasture, and be in Common as the other Lands. This said half being
well ordered, will breed and keep twice as many Cattle as the whole Land did
before it was improved: And wherein now is the Poor wronged by planting Woods,
if Lands were thus improved? for those that have right of Common will have much
more Pasture, and provision is made for more Wood. And that there may be a
greater improvement of all and every part of the said Lands, my advice is;
first that the Arable Land after 2 or 3 years Crops of Corn at the most, be
well manured with Dung, Lime, Marle, Chalk, or such like helps; and then plowed
and sowed again: Secondly, that the Pasture Land be either Marled or soyled
with good Dung, and plowed and sowed with Clover, Treafoil, Centfoil, or some
other seed for Grass, and this to be performed presently after the burning of
the Earth; for Pasture Land being once in heart will increase by Cattle feeding
thereon: The richer the Land is the more Cattle it will keep; and the greater
number of Cattle, the greater quantity of Soil or Dung comes from them; also
the often or much feeding and treading on the land will both sweeten the Grass
and destroy the Moss which poor grounds are subject to, and all manner of
Weeds: for in green paths that are often trodden, nor Weeds nor Moss grow; and
Cattle will feed on such paths or places rather than on any other part of the
field; so that there is no better Husbandry to kill Weeds and Moss than to
enrich the Land, and keep the Grass short or low by Cattle constantly feeding
thereon. Thirdly, that the Woodland be planted with the seed or Plants of the
Ash-tree, Chestnut, Hasle-nut, Alder or Withey, because they are the quickest
growing plants, and will produce the greatest quantity of wood, good for
fireing and other necessary uses, as Hoops Hoppoles, etc. But where the Land is
wet or moorish, and cannot be drayned or laid dry; in those places Alder and
Withey are the best thriving Plants or Wood, and in the wettest parts of all,
Osiers or Alders: Those Lands that are planted for Timber Trees, as Oak, Ash,
Beech, Elm, may be made use of by feeding Cattle, so that they are kept from
cropping and rubbing against the trees while they are young; but if the Land be
delved or plowed and sowed with Corn, then it must be well soiled with good
Dung; for else the Plow will impoverish the Ground and starve the Trees. Now
for the carrying on so good and necessary a Work, if the Rich will lend their
Purses, and the Poor their utmost labors and industry, God will second all
with such an increase, that the moneys may be returned again with interest, and
the Poor plentifully provided for: And as it is my great request to God that
there might not be one Family in England want bread, so, if it lay in my power,
every foot of land in England should be improved that is capable of
improvement; for one foot square of good land may produce a quarter of a pint
of Wheat, which comes to by the Acre, there being 43560 square foot, 170
Bushels 5 quarts: yet he that is ingenious will not deny but that there may be
a Liquor prepared wherein to steep or soke Corn, that it being after set or
sown, may bring forth or produce above 100 for one, so likewise Earth may be
enriched to produce the like increase; yea, wonderful Crops beyond ordinary
sense and reason: therefore all hidden benefits must be sought; for ignorance
and idleness are always enemies to thrist. And those that are studious in
natural causes, know that by the exhalation of the earth, the moistness,
richness and fatness of the earth and soil is drawn forth, therefore the
careful Husbandman will not spread his Dung in the heat or middle of the
Summer, except he cover it with earth by delving or plowing. Now this richness
of the earth or soil is by the heat of the Sun drawn forth and rarefied into
air; and by reason of the coldness of the air the same is condensed into water,
and becomes Clouds; which said water so condensed is powered down again either
into the Seas to refresh and feed the Creatures therein, or on certain Lands;
and all this done by the wise Disposer, who in exchange rains down cold, thin
and barren waters as a token of his displeasure, or else withholds the Rain;
for earth is nothing else but thickened and hardened water; water thickened air,
air subtilized water, water liquified earth. But now because these wast lands
overgrown with Ling, Heath, Furs, Bushes, Shrubs, and such like, are for the
most part poor Clays or Sands; in some places mixed with Gravel, therefore to
all those who are resolved to be industrious, and whom it has pleased God to
place upon such barren Earths, my advice is, that after the land is cleansed
according to former directions, and also well plowed and hacked: If it be a
simple Clay, or mixed with other Earths, and the Clay most predominant, and the
Sea be not too far, that they thence fetch good store of the salt Sand, and
with it cover their ground, allowing at least 200 Bushels for each or every
Acre; after the land is thus sanded, then bestow about 70 Bushels of Lime, or
else 100 Cartload of the best and fattest Marle on every Acre so sanded, and
putting thereto 50 or 60 Cartload of good Dung likewise to every Acre; then
having well spread and mixed these several Manures, that they plow over the
land again, and after it is well hackt with a pair of strong iron Harrows, go
over the ground, tearing that which was plowed and hackt into smaller pieces,
which will not only mix the several Manures with the clay, but also raise and
increase good store of mould. If the land lie so far remote from the Sea, that
to fetch this salt sand will not equal the cost, in such cases they may lay
other earth, or the best and richest fresh sand, only adding a greater
quantity; for of this sand every Acre of land will require at least 100
Cartload; and likewise they must add a greater quantity of Lime and Dung, also
100 Cartload of Marle or Chalk. Now the Wheat seed-time being at hand, they
must plow up their ground again, and prepare the seed as follows: Make a
strong Brine of Bay Salt and water, put your Wheat therein, the quantity you
intend to sow the next day, letting it so lie ten or twelve hours, then drain
the brine from it, and having a Tub or Chest or such like, put the said Wheat
therein with good store of the best lime, stir and mix them well together, and
then sow the Wheat thus limed. Now as soon as the Land is sowed, forthwith
cover the seed very close by well harrowing it, and no doubt with the blessing
of God, you will have a plentiful increase, so that one years Crop of Wheat
will pay all charges with interest. But if the Land you would improve be a
barren sand, then being cleansed, plowed, and hacked as was the clay, you shall
lay or bestow 200 Cartload of the best slimy or fattest Marle or Mame on each
or every Acre of Land; and if you be near the Sea, then lay 50 or 60 bushel of
salt sand on each Acre; for fresh sand avails little on this kind of land:
but if you cannot come by salt sand, then on every Acre of land you may lay 60
or 70 bushels of lime, also 100 Cartload of good chalk: All this being
performed, add a good quantity of dung: you need not fear laying too much at
the first dressing on poor Land; but if you cannot get any perfect and rich
Marle or Mame, then may you lay a good quantity of rich Clay, or instead of
Clay a rich Lome, or which is better, the Earth called Fullers Earth; then plow
sow and harrow in the seed as you have been directed, that all the manures may
be well mixed. For as in Medicinal compositions, if the ingredients be
confusedly cast one upon another without care of mixture, melting or
dissolving, there will be but a corrupt and ill compounded Receipt; so he that
dresseth and manureth his ground, and does not by hacking, plowing and
harrowing mix the earth and the soil perfectly well together, he shall seldom
find profit from his seed. Now the causes of the unfruitfulness of barren
Clayes are from their cold and binding nature, whereby they stifle and choke
any thing that grows within them, and will not give them liberty to sprout; or
if it do, yet the cold presently starves the root, and makes the stem utterly
unable to bring forth fruit* the mixture of the sand takes away the toughness
and opens the pores of the earth or clay; the lime and salt bring heat, the
dung comfort and liberty; so likewise all barren sands are loose and light,
therefore their unfruitfulness arises from these two causes; First by reason
of their porishness or hollowness, and much rain or wet weather washes quite
away or down into the earth, deeper than the roots of the corn and grass, all
the goodness, heat and fatness which should nourish that which grows therein;
and although such Land be well soiled with dung, yet it will not last above one
Crop of Corn or two at the most. Secondly, what the Rain leaves, the Sun by his
heat draws forth out of the Earth from the roots of Corn and Grass. Now Marle
is not only an enemy to all Weeds, but gives a general virtue to all Corn and
Grass, and by its glutinous substance being incorporated with the sand, closes
the hollows and porousness thereof, so that what ever Soil or Manure be laid
thereon, it will last many years, and abundantly increase that which was
planted, set, or sowed therein: And if the said Marle be laid on Meadow or
Pasture, the land will be much enriched, and may so continue some hundred
years: And as the the Marle likewise the Clay, Lome, or Fullers earth will
work the like Effect on Arable land, yet not to so good purpose as the Marle;
Now although Dung be most proper for Pasture land, yet Marle is of special Use
and much differs from Dung in one particular, for Dung spends it self upwards,
and although it lie deep within the Earth, yet the virtue will Ascend, and if
it lie upon the ground in Summer, it will grow light and spungy, whereby the
goodness is drawn forth or consumed by the heat of the Sun, but it is the
Nature of Marle to work downewardes into the Earth, and it is dissolved only by
Frost; therefore the best season to lay it on the Land is about Michaelmas,
that so the Winter following may break and melt all the Stones or Cloats, and
being thus broken, the Rain will help to wash the same into the Earth; now
although Naturally sandy Earth is hott, yet these barren sands by reason of
their poverty, are very cold, therefore Lime and Salt are of great use, and to
good purpose laid on them and mixed together; wherefore you must not forget to
steep all seed except Rye, in brine as before mentioned, but you are to take
notice, that Oats will not require or endure so long to lie in steep as the
other Grain; Now to give a taste of the sweetness which Labor and industry
brings unto such as take pleasure therein; We shall suppose these barren Earths
before mentioned, were not worth above 2 shillings the Acre yearly Rent before
they were improved, and the charges of improving may come to twelve pounds the
Acre, which is tenn pounds more then the fee simple of the Land is worth; One
Crop of Wheat, if God bless the Increase, will sufficiently pay all the charges
with Interest; Then likewise may you receive two years crops more of Wheat, and
5 or 6 Crops without intermission eitheir of Rye, Barley, Pease, Beans, or
Oats, and be at no more charges about the Land then once Plowing and
Harrowing, seed, salt and lime to steep the seed; Now as salt is a great
destroyer of all Weeds, so likewise it is of great strength and virtue, for the
bettering all manner of Arable Land, and a great Nourisher of seed in the
Ground, if moderately used, like Blood in the Body of man, which carries the
vital heat and is in taste salt, as being a nourisher and maintainer of all the
inward faculties; now after 7 or 8 years sowing with Corn the said Land may be
worth above twenty shillings the Acre yearly rent to lie for meadow or Pasture.

To treat of all and every part of Husbandry, Would swell my Book into too
great a Volume, which is not my task at this time. I shall therefore return to
my intended work, and treat only of Planting Timber Trees.

Now although it has been Objected, that the Planting Forests and other waste
Lands will much prejudice the Poor, yet it is well known, that the Rich have
the benifit and are great oppressors of Commons by the multitude of Cattle they
feed thereon: having Land of their own to keep them in the Winter or when the
Commons are eaten bare, and the Poor for want of such Winter Provision have
little or no benifit at all, but are many times undon; and thereby accustom
themselves to be Idle, and Neglecting their constant labor, steal his
Majesty's Wood, and spoil his Timber, by Chipping, Shredding, Lopping and such
like, All which Spoils or Wastes being benificial unto the keepers, are
overseen, but not provided against as they should be; yet the Poor are not the
greatest offenders, they only break the ice and prepare it for others, who
almost every Day before Sun Rise and after Sun set make the sound of many Axes,
heard by their Lopping, Chipping, and Committing such like evils: There are
likewise other Wastes then all these, for whereas there are some thousands of
young Oaks and other trees which have been prefe^ved and succored by Bushes
growing about them, many of these Bushes being lately cut down as in in the
year 1664, These young trees being thereby left naked, are many of them cut
down and carried away: and as if a Total destruction was intended, the dead
trees devour the living; I mean many upon pretense only of Cutting down a
dead Tree have made another so to bear it company; for to my knowledge about
the Month of October last 1664; two Dead trees were sold by one of the Keepers
of the said Forest, to a Neighbor living in the next Parish, and the party
that was appointed to cut down or fell the said trees, Cut down two other
Trees which were not dead; And this is no new thing but has been often done
without doubt, though then I fear Especially, when there was a better
Opportunity offered by so great a number, as have been lately felled for the
use of the Navy and the Bishop of Winchester, The same Party that committed
this fact being one of the chief workmen employed for their felling. Nor may
any man think strange, that there should be such spoils made in those Days;
the Officers appointed to take care of the said timber being rather Farmers
then Keepers, or good Woodmen; Also there has been but one swaynmote this 40
years, nor a Wood Court to any effect, and consequently no Presentment these 4
or 5 last years, which only then can be made. But to proceed in my proposals.

Lastly, Whereas his Majesty's Forests have formerly flourished and abounded
with the best timber Trees in England, Nay I may safely say, for the Building
of Ships the World does not afford better, especially the Oak; which are now
utterly wasted and decayed

My humble Proposal is: that part of the said Forests, Especially of such as
lie within 20 Miles of any Navigable River, and are not so useful for the
Breeding his Majestys Deer, and that have but few Deer, be Planted as
aforesaid: I dare not undertake to Proportion the quantity of Ground to be
Planted in each Forest, not knowing his Majesty's Pleasure, also some Forests
are larger and of greater extent than others, and do more abound with timber
trees, neither can I speak Experimentally of all Forests, but that which is
best known unto me, and wherein I have daily walked as a Forest Officer, I
will at present discourse a little. That Forest then the care whereof has
been my employment, does not contain above 3 Thousand Acres of Ground in the
whole, yet it has so abounded with timber Trees, and that of such excellent
goodness, that it might be compared to any one Forest in England; but it is
now much wasted, and does more and more daily decay; for besides the Wastes
that have been committed within this 20 years, by reason of the unhappy Wars
and Rebellion, there was also felled and cut down Anno 1663 above eleven
hundred Trees, and but 600 of them employed for the use of his Majesty's Navy;
and since the time before the trees then felled were removed off the ground,
There was in the year 1664, a Warrant delivered unto the Regarders of the said
forest, to view and mark all the Decaying Trees, which are some of them
accordingly Marked, and by virtue of the said Warrant, most of the Trees in the
forest may be cut down, for they are generally Wasted and decaying but may
live and be serviceable an hundred years yet to come: and if his Majesty's
forest be Stocked with Dear, then the worst of these Decaying Oaks will bear
great store of Masts or Acorns, which is good for a Winter Dear, and of my own
knowledge and Experience, there are many very hollow Oaks that bear greater
store or more Acorns to the Number and greatness of Boughs then the soundest
tree in the Forest.

In the year 1665 the Commissioners of the Navy procured another Warrant from
his Majesty for the cutting down 2000 Trees more in the said Forest to Build
and repair his Majesty's Ships, and to effect the same, they sent down a
Purveyor to mark and fell the said Trees, which was accordingly performed; But
by several Reports of Workmen Employed about Cutting down the said Trees;
there was not above 15 or 16 hundred of them converted to the uses appointed by
his Majesty's Warrant, for several Gentlemen in the County and not far
dwellers from the Forest, Bought the Offall of 2000 trees for 750 Pounds, or
thereabouts, by which said Offall is to be understood if rightly taken the
Bark, and Boughs, and all that part of the tree only which is not used for
Shipping: but making an agreement with them that had power to sell, under the
name of Offall were taken in whole trees marked and cut down which were not
useful for Building his Majesty's Ships, though they might have been easily
perceived to have been unserviceable for that end by the surveyour that chose
them, or any Man of very indifferent Judgment, and so left as they ought
standing, but these had the ill fortune to be cut down, to make advantage by
their fall, some hundreds of them, whilst many other sufficient Timber trees
and most fit for the use aforesaid were left standing and are yet Growing;
Neither is this all, for I have been informed, that there were many Trees which
were cut to pieces as Offall which had Ship timber in them, and not unlikely,
whilst the workmen who were chiefly Employed about the Offall were known
Enemies to his Majesty's Woods and timber, and have lived on the spoil above
20 years: and to my own Knowledge have been presented some of them for the
same; But because there has been no swainmot Court kept within that time, they
have escaped the Lash: these men were also employed about Cutting down his
Majesty's trees, and the chief Hewer appointed by the Perveyor was as honest as
the rest, and being so, they had fit opportunities to commit such villainies as
are reported, and whereas the Officers as Regarders and Keepers, are sworn to
endeavor to prevent all Wastes Committed; the Keepers have been so much
employed about cutting down trees for their own profit, that they have not had
time to look to the preventing the spoils of others, and therefore care not or
dare not accuse others, being themselves Guilty, and some of the Regarders also
do more mind to buy Wood and timber for their own use and Profit, then they
do for his Majesty's interest and good of the Kingdom, in preventing Wastes
committed, and this is not all the Evil done to his Majesty's Woods: for the
Borderers dwelling about the Forest, taking notice of the Wastes committed by
Officers, take boldness to make likewise great spoils, and many of the said
Borderers have and do to this Day enclose his Majesty's Land, some one or 2
Acres some more some less; In which Enclosures or encroachments are and have
been sometimes 2, 3 or 4 Oaks Growing; the said Land so enclosed is fenced with
a dead Hedge the first year, and the Bushes within the Plot Grubbed up, and one
of the Trees; Also the said Land Delved and sowed with Corn; the next year if
no disturbance happen, a Ditch is made about the enclosure, and the Land sowed
again with Corn, and another tree stocked up; and so the work goes on till all
the trees are cut down, and in some encroachments fruit trees have been
Planted, and other Trees in hedge rows: as also Houses built of his Majesty's
Timber as if it were the Occupiers Inheritance, though but small Plots of Land
now, in comparison of what has been formerly, are taken in by way of
Inchroachment.

ENGLAND'S IMPROVEMENT REVIVED.
THE SECOND BOOK,
The Argument.
In this Book is treated the Planting Forest Lands, and other wast Lands, with
Plants for Timber Trees; also of all kinds of Earth Simple or Compound, Rich or
Barren; and the manner and way of improving the same, either by planting Seed
or Sets for Timber Trees or Underwoods; Likewise by draining or watering such
Lands that require the same: and Devonshiring or Burning those Lands grown over
with Bushes, Heath, Furs, Goss, or such like: Also the way of Improving all
the said several sorts of Earths by Lime, Marl, Mame, Dung, and many other such
like Improvements; likewise by Plowing, Delving, Trenching, or Plow-trenching
the said Land, and sowing seed for Corn or Grass: and of several Observations
and Directions therein.

NOw considering that his Majesty's Timber and Woods standing and growing will
not be a sufficient stock to mantain and keep in repair the Royal Navy for any
long continuance of time to come without a supply by new Planting those wast
and vacant places that have no Trees or very few growing, I shall humbly offer
my Judgment and Experience in this thing, and will lend my assistance to the
utmost of the ability God has given me for the Planting and thus improving
them; And because his Majesty's forests and other Wast Lands, do much differ
in goodness and largeness, and also some of them are better replenished with
Timber trees then others: and not knowing his Majesty's Pleasure, Either what
forest or part of the forest or what quantity of Ground shall be Planted, I
cannot set down the Proportion, But will suppose a Thousand Acres.

A skillful Arborist will make choyc of such a soil, where he may provide a
strong and sufficient fence, before he will be at the Charges of Planting; In
the first place then is to be considered, the making the fence about the Plott
of Land before mentioned, which was a Thousand Acres; and although there be
many Figures of Land I shall mention but one; for it is not my intent to
multiply Words; We will suppose the thousand acres to be a square piece of
Ground; The square then of this Plot or parcel of Land is 400 Perch or Pole,
Land measure, the Pole or Perch containing 16 foot and a half in length; for
although there are diverse Opinions risen, grounded upon long custom in many
places, of the length of a Perch, yet there is but one true Perch by Statute
appointed for the Measuring Land, which is as before mentioned: but for Wood
Measure or hedging and diching there is 18 foot allowed to the Pole or Perch;
the Reasons are because Under Woods which are thus Measured for sale, have in
many places sundry gals or void places, wherein grows little or no Wood, and
to supply these defects the Buyer Claims this supply by measure; What to make
this fence of, is the next to be considered: and because my great care and
endeavors are for the preservation of his Majesty's Timber; therefore I would
not have one tree cut down or felled for this purpose, although the Paling
thereof would be a sufficient fence but not of a very long continuance; all
fences therefore commonly are made of Wood, Brick, Stone, or Earth as dry Walls,
or Ditches, or Earth compounded, there are other fences as Motes or ditches of
Water, where the ground is level and springy, or the Water brought from some
Spring o^ River, but of all other according to my Judgment, the White thorn
Hedge is the best; for in 8 or 9 years it will make the best fence both for
height* to succor the young Timber trees or Plants for trees; as also for
strength to keep out all Enemies to the said Plants* and although the Planting
of this Thorn hedge is so well known to all Husbandmen, that there will not
seem to need many words to Demonstrate it, yet because I intend to direct you
hereafter to Plant Timber trees the same way, I shall take a little the more
pains in it; I shall not use much curiosity in pleasing every man's fancy in
the making this fence; as how many Rows of Plants or setting them upright, or
slope ways, or flatt, or the distance more or less, but shall give you my
particular opinion of it.

Now to begin the work, the Ground being viewed, Proportioned and measured,
that is to be Planted, We will suppose it as I said before to be a square piece
of Land, and to contain a Thousand acres, the square then is 400 Perch; the
whole Plot or the 4 squares contain 1600 perch about; which is the content of
the fence, but if the fence be measured by Wood, Hedge, or Ditch measure
allowing 18 foot to the Perch; then the one angle or square will contain but
366 Perch 12 foot, and the content of the whole fence by the said Wood measure
is 1466 Perch 12 foot, the fence must be thus made; First I would advise the
Ditch to be 6 foot wide or broad at Top, and 5 foot deep slopewise, so that the
breadth at the bottom or lower part of the Ditch be but 3 foot or there abouts,
according as the ground is stiff and binding, or hollow light and looss, for if
it be a light ground, the bank must be more sloping, or else it will founder
and fall into the Ditch again, and the repairing thereof will be the increase
of Charges; In the next place, care is to be had in providing Plants, wherein
you may please to take these observations following: First that your Plants be
not too great nor too small; for, there are several opinions concerning both
these sizes; The best size according unto my opinion, is to have them about the
bigness of an ordinary Man's little finger; Secondly that you have them drawn or
taken out of the Earth but a day or two before the Planting; if with
convenience it may Be; the same day is better, for although it is usual to
have Plants gathered a Week or more before they are Planted, yet it is a great
Evil and not to be approved of; Thirdly in drawing or taking your Plants out of
the Earth, let not the Bark or Roots be broken or bruised, 4ly in trimming or
preparing the Plants for Planting, my advice is, to cut off the top of the
Plant above 6 inches from the stem of the Root, and let it be cut slope ways
with a sharp Knife clean and handsome; but cut not the Roots, except there be
a superfluous Root that was broken off from some other Root, or that is bruised,
broken, or part of it dead, in such cases you may; see the Chack or body of the
Plant be clean without shoots, And although it has been and is a custom to cut
and trim the Roots, yet it is not to be allowed of, because every cut is a
Wound and the more Wounds the greater danger; The Plants being thus Proyned,
trimmed and fitted for Planting; after the first Turf laid with the grassy side
downwards; and the upper part of the Turf or clod of Earth which was the lower,
pared plain, near one third part of the thickness of the Turf, then lay on the
Plants in a rank or row containing in distance (or the distance between the
Plants would be) one foot of ground, and this Rank or row of Plants to extend
to the end of the Angle or square and so of all the Squares. In the laying of
the Plants in the ground, must be observed these 3 Rules; First let the Plants
be laid slopeing or slope ways that the top or head of the Plant may lie 4 or
5 Inches higher than the Root, or the level of the lay of Earth, Secondly let
not the top or head of the Plant lie above 2 Inches out of the Earth, Thirdly
let the slope side that was cut lie downwards or side ways, that the wounded
place may have the benefit of the Sun, as also that the Water may not rest upon
it, for in Winter, the Water being frozen on the place cut will be a great
annoyance unto it; and much Rain often dropping on the wound may penetrate the
Pith, and causing hollowness may much endanger them: After the first Rank, Row,
or Chess of the Thorn Plants laid or planted as aforesaid, then there must be
of the best earth laid on the roots of the said Plants, to the quantity of 6 or
7 inches deep; then a spadeful or spades depth of such earth as the ditch will
afford, or else another turff on the good earth: this being performed, and the
ground prepared as was formerly directed, then lay another row of Plants of the
same distance as the first, yet not over against them, but over against the
middle space between the first Plants: Order this second Row of Plants as the
first, and because the Bank will be great, there being much earth to be cast
out of the ditch, there may be another Row or Chess of Plants laid above the
second, over against the middle distance between the second Row, still
observing the distance of earth between and above the Plants, as you did in the
first and the second Rows; then cast or lay some of the best earth the Ditch
will afford, as aforesaid, on the roots of this third and last Row: This done,
cast up all the earth out of the Ditch on the last earth, making the bank firm
by clapping or beating the earth close with the Spade. Upon this bank must be
made a dead Hedge, so called because it is made of dead wood, as Bushes or
Frith, which is all sorts of small wood that are not Thorns. This Hedge is to
shroud or shelter the young Plants, as also to keep and preserve the Banck from
being trodden upon and thrown down by Cattle. Now in planting this and all such
like Fences observe this rule; mix not your white Thorn with any other Plant;
for although it be and has been a general Custom in England, to have several
sorts of wood growing in Hedge-rows, yet it is my opinion that they were not so
planted at first, but that this Island anciently being for the greatest part
overgrown with Woods of all sorts, which of late years have been otherwise
improved and converted into Pasture and Tillage: The Improvers, in the making
the several Boundaries or Enclosures, troubled not themselves to do them all
anew, of any one kind of stuff, but in their grubbing where they stood
convenient for such use, left remaining not only the stems and roots of trees,
but several whole trees young and old, which by their lopping or topping might
serve for necessary Reparations; particularly Hedgeboot and Plowboot when
occasion should serve, little valuing the substantialness of their Fences for
the future, so they would serve the present necessity; for I did never yet see
a sufficient strong Fence of White thorn, which is the best of all if thus
planted by it self, where there were trees or any other kind of Plants growing
or mixed with them; for trees will not admit of any kind of thorns to grow up
with them; and if there be so great an enmity between thorns themselves, that
the white and black will not thrive together, as if they naturally bore an
antipathy to each other for their colors sake; we shall not so much wonder if
we more sensibly perceive it when they are intermingled with other kinds; and
that the white and black thorn do thus disagree, has been my observation for a
long time, in several Hedge-rows where at first they were joined, but when they
came to grow up, the white has so over-mastered the other, that they have
^uite decayed, and leaving a gap in the place where they formely grew, have
rendered the Hedge thin, full of bracks and insufficient. Thus have you my
Judgment for the making of a good serviceable and profitable Fence; for within
10 or 11 years after the first planting, the thorns will be grown to that
height and bigness, that cutting them close near the ground, with part of the
offal or stuff may be made a sufficient dead Hedge, as before mentioned, on the
bank of the ditch, to shroud the second growth of the Thorns and Under-woods
(it being supposed the young Timber Trees will by that time be grown to the
height and greatness, they will not want the Hedge to shelter them.) This first
cutting of the thorn Hedge will cause the next growth to come more thick, and
make the Fence much more strong than before; the overplus of the offal, which
will be considerable, may be made into Brush Fagots good for Brewing, Baking,
or be sold or used to make or mend other Fences. Now the second cutting of the
quick or thorn Hedge aforesaid you may begin sooner than the first, as within 8
or 9 years, if the Quick-sets or Plants do well thrive, which they will the
better do, if you observe these rules following; First, let the Plants be well
weeded the first, second and third years after planting; Secondly, observe that
they all grow alike, and where they fail plant new plants in the vacant places,
which must be done betimes before the other plants grow too big; for in digging
or opening the ground to set or put in the new plants, you may cut, break, or
bruise the roots of the old, which is hurtful; or the roots of the old, being
grown great and entered deep into the ground, will so draw the moisture of the
earth to them downwards below the reach of the roots of new younger plants,
that they will thereby be in danger to be starved; or by over topping them;
besides the keeping away the benefit of the Sun from them they will be subject
to drop continually upon their cut or wound, and so quite destroy them: as for
the planting of several sorts of wood in Hedg-rows it is only for the benefit
of the lops and shreading of the said trees, and regarding not the strength and
goodness of the Fence; for although by plashing the boughs of trees, laying
them along the hedge, or on the bank of the ditch, Deer and Horse or such like
Cattle may be kept from leaping over; yet it is very weak to keep out Swine or
smaller Cattle from creeping under; First because those boughs cannot be laid
very close, and secondly they have not prickles or thorns, whereby they may be
a guard against such an enemy. And whereas it is the opinion of many men, that
planting trees in Hedge-rows does save ground, accounting Hedge-rows wast
places; if such men would but seriously consider of these observations
following, they would be of another mind; first, the trees planted in Hedg-rows
being often shred and lopped cannot live the tenth part of the age of trees
other ways planted; secondly they shall not grow to that greatness either in
body or boughs, as others do which come much short of them as to the time of
their growth; for a tree well planted shall be greater and larger every way in
twenty years, than those in Hedge-rows shall be in fifty; Again, consider the
uselessness and loss of ground on both sides of the trees along the Hedg-rows,
for so far as the roots and boughs of the trees extend; the ground will not be
good either for Corn or Grass; for the Grass, not having the benefit of the
Sun, will be sower, and of more use for purging than feeding Cattle; also the
roots of the trees, which usually extend as far under ground, as the boughs
above will hinder and endanger the Plow; or being great, and growing low into
the ground, will not only over-master and oppress the roots of thorns by
winding about them, but by sucking and drawing the fatness and moistness of the
earth which should nourish, utterly starve them; and the boughs by over-topping
will not only over-shade them, but with often dropping, as I said before, spoil
both Corn and Hedge. Now if Planters were but sensible of the loss sustained by
reason of bad Fences, and the small profit of trees so planted (all things
considered) they would soon alter their opinion; to give a reason for every
particular observation would take me up too much paper and time; only take this
general, of which I have made the experiment, and till any proof appear to the
contrary, or more profitable way be found out, my desire is that this may be
allowed. Thus have you directions for the planting and making the best Fence:
Now the charges cannot be certain by reason Plants are scarcer and dearer in
some Countries than others, as also the labor or hire of men; for in some
Countries good Plants may be bought for two pence or three pence the hundred
which will cost in other places five pence or six pence: also in some Countries
a good laboring man will work at hedging or ditching for eight pence or ten
pence the Summer day, and in other Countries not under twelve or fourteen pence
the day; we shall therefore compute the charges indifferently between the
highest and lowest prices, allowing for the Plants four pence the hundred, and
for the Laborers twelve pence the day.

A Pole or Perch then of Hedge or Ditch measure will take up to plant it well
54 Plants; there being 3 Rows or Chefs of Plants set or planted at a foot
distance, and if so, then the one angle or square of the 1000 acres formerly
mentioned containing 400 perch, will after the same rule require 21603 Plants,
which at four pence for each hundred comes to three pound 12 shillings. The
four angles or whole squares will need or require 86406 Plants, there being six
Plants abated for two of the sides or squares, they all at the same rate by the
hundred amount to fourteen pounds eight shillings. And now for the Charges of
the Workman: a good Laboring man may ditch and quick-set about the Spring or
fall of the Leaf a ditch of six foot broad and five foot deep; half a perch in
one day, allowing 18 foot to the Pole or Perch: A man also may make a good and
substantial Hedge sufficiently staked three or four Rod in a day; so that he
may cut, carry, or draw the Bushes or Frith for the Hedge, and make the Ditch
six foot wide, and five foot deep, being planted with three Rows or Chess of
Quickset and a good dead hedge on the Bank, and sufficiently finish the whole
work, and pay the charges of the Plants for three shillings the Pole, still
supposing the Frith and Bushes to be near at hand, and to be free except
cutting and carriage: Then the total charge of making the Fence about the
thousand acres at three shillings the Rod, the angles or squares containing
1600 Perch is 240 Pounds besides the Bushes and Frith for Stakes, not doubting
but that all his Majesty's Forests are well replenished with Bushes and Frith;
and that the same will be allowed gratis for so good a work. Now because
several Countries give diverse names for one and the same thing, that you may
the better understand what is meant by Frith, my meaning is, all small lops or
shreadings of trees, as also all Under-woods. Thus having made preparation for
the planting Timber Trees by preparing a sufficient Fence for the shrowding and
safety of the tender Plants, In the next place we shall consider of the
Original of Grounds and Plants: The Eternal God has been pleased to reveal
many things unto us exceeding fense and reason; as the first production of the
World, and the constitution of things invisible; and by his exceeding wisdom
saw that his invisible things might be expressed by visible images, wherein his
Power, Wisdom and Goodness might be revealed; therefore he proceeded in an
order and manner proper to every creature. The first Principle of this visible
world was matter but confused and dark, then secondly the Spirit of Life
diffused throughout the whole matter made it begin to stir, and insinuating it
self into all the parts, produced every Creature, introducing into every one
its own form; and to the perfecting all things which are and have been made in
the World, there was added Light which is the third Principle: this Light began
presently to display its threefold Virtue of illuminating, moving it self, and
heating; from the brightness and motion of the Light was the difference of
Nights and Days; the third effect of Light was from heat, which ratified and
purified the matter, but condensed it on both sides upward and downward, whence
came the division of the Elements, so that the waters above the Firmament, and
the waters below, the Earth as thick dregs came together. The Earth being
settled, God begins to fit and prepare it by the heat of the Celestial Light,
which began to beget fat vapors on the Earth, whereinto the living spirit of
the world insinuating it self, then began Plants to grew up in various forms.
We shall proceed to consider of the Nature of Grounds in general, and also in
particular of barren and fruitful Earth: Grounds are simple or compounded,
simple are Clays, Sands, or Gravels, compound where these Earths are mixed or
all mixtures of earth: Clays, Sands or Gravel may be all good, and very fit to
plant all manner of Trees in; and likewise they may be all very evil and
barren; for all Earth simple or compound does participate with the Clime
wherein it lies, as hot or cold, moist or dry: And where the ground or earth
participateth of all the Elements equally, there it is the more fruitful: All
grounds may be known as well by their several Characters as by the Clime or
situation of the Continent. Some grounds naturally produce Weeds, as Mallows,
Nettles, Docks, Hemlocks, or such like, which generally grow in every good and
fruitful ground; there is another sort of ground that has a different face or
character, such as bears Daisies, Clover, Charnock, Mustardseed, Rushes, etc.
this also may be a very good ground to plant in; but this is ever to be
observed; where weeds or grass does naturally grow strong and big, that earth
is undoubtedly most rich and fruitful: But although both these grounds may be
good for Corn or Grass, yet the Planter may be deceived by these outward faces
and characters, if he search not deeper into the Bowels of the earth; for it is
well known that many a Tree of great bulk and worth is and has been seen to
grow in a barren earth for Corn or Grass; and on the contrary there are and
have been seen many small Trees of little worth growing in strong grounds as to
the outward appearance, and those small trees of the age, or older than the
other of greater bulk; for that ground may be good for Corn and Grass, or the
planting of small Fruit Trees, which has but six or seven inches of good
earth, or the crust of the earth but six or seven inches deep. Another
character of barren earth is when you see instead of Grass which would be
green, rank, and thick, a pale thin small grass something bluish, also much
Moss; or when the ground is covered with Heath, Furrs, Whins, Gors, and such
like, these are apparent signs of great barrenness, especially if weeds or
rubbish be small; for as before is mentioned, what ever it be that numbers the
ground, the greater and ranker it is, it argues the richer ground. Thirdly,
there are other barren grounds which may be so adjudged by the site or clime
wherein they lie; as when the ground is far remote from the Sun or very near
the borders of the sea; for the storms and ill vapors arising from thence
poison and starve the earth, and are destructive to Plants and Trees; also when
the ground lies mountainous and high, and very stony and rocky, these are
signs of barrenness; yet the stony and rocky ground may have good earth
underneath, so that the Rock be not an entire stone, but have clefts and
passages unto the earth to plant the Seed or Plants, and being once planted and
thriving, will in time open a widen passage, and produce a Timber-tree of as
great a bulk and worth as other grounds void of stones. And this experience
tells us also, that Trees of small strength in comparison of the Oak, being
planted near a stone Wall, the roots have so swelled or increased, making their
own way by reason of a hard Rock some depth under ground, which the roots could
not enter, that they have lifted up the said wall, and in few years thrown it
to the ground. Fourthly, there is another character or figne of barrenness,
which is to be adjudged by the constitution of the ground: For it is well known
to them that are not ignorant of the Constitution of the World, that a Body is
composed of all the Elements, Earth, Air, Fire, Water; and although all these
Elements are simple Bodies of themselves; yet in all Bodies else are all the
Elements; for that Water does evaporate into Air, and that Water is made again
of Vapor, the Rain teaches us: and that earth and water also is rarefied may
be proved by many examples, and that fire the spirit infused working by heat in
all bodies is not to be denied; by this you see, that the constitution of a
Body participates of the four Elements, which is to say qualities; hot, cold,
moist, and dry: But to return again from whence I digressed. The constitution
of that ground where one of the four Elements does most predominate is an
apparent sign of barrenness, as when the grounds are either extremely cold and
moist, or else hot and dry: Now these cold grounds are generally Clays, except
such as are subject to inundations of water or land Springs, which are all cold
and may be unfruitful. These cold and barren Clays, as by the outward face and
character judgment may be given, generally produce Broom, Gorse, Moss,
Shrub-bushes, and such like; and the reason of their unfruitfulness is, first
from their tough nature and bindingness, in the Winter the Pores are so closed
that the rain or snow falling and melting cannot soak into the earth farther or
deeper than the pores are opened by the roots of Trees and Plants, or Corn and
Grass; wherefore lying at the roots it does benum and chill them; and thereby
hinders the growth, and indangers the stock through an extreme moistness, and
every extreme is death or dangerous. Secondly these barren earths will require
much more dung than better earths, and yet not last half the time, for by
reason of the stiffness and bindingness of the Clay the soil cannot incorporate
with it, so that both Corn and Weeds will soon draw away or spend the substance
thereof, and that which remains good above will exhale, or if the ground^ly
steep, then the rain will wash it away. Thirdly if the Spring or Summer be very
hot and dry, the natural toughness of the Clay does so fetter and lock the
roots or grain within the mould, that it will not give them liberty to sprout,
or if it does, yet the cold after much rain will presently starve the root, and
make the stem utterly unable to bring forth profitable fruit, as I have
formerly declared: next unto the Clay is Marle and Chalk grounds, they being
derived from the Clay: Marle is of several colors as are the Clayes and Sands;
Chalk is only a kind of white Marle; for it was Marle before it was Chalk, and
both of them earth or clay at first (only) became hardened and colored by
accident, as stones are coagulated with water and fire, which we may well
observe in Bricks and earthen Pots; for here Art imitates Nature; as also that
they are subject to Calcination, as Lime, Stones, Flints, and the like; but
because Marle has its original from the Clay, I shall leave it to be adjudged
by the outward appearance, as the clay ground is; excepting that there you will
find no Broom and Gorse, or such like weeds, for Marle is a great enemy unto
those kind of encumbrances. As the barrennese of Clay grounds are known by the
outward faces and characters, so also are Sands. This earth is of several
colors as the clay: those Sands that lie upon mountainous and rocky places are
generally barren, which may be perceived by the small, pale, mossy, and
yellowish grass which they bear: other Sands that lie lower in wet morish
Plains or bottoms are generally of color blackish, and produce a long sower
unwholesome grass, but where the ground lies dryer, the earth or sand will be
very white or yellow, and produces a short small bluish mossey grass: the
greatest part of these unfruitful Sands are much subject to Heath, Furs,
Brakes and such like. Now a great cause of the unfruitfulness of this barren
sandy grounds, is by reason of the porousness or hollowness of the earth, as
was said before; for although it be well manured with soil or dung, yet much
rain or wet will wash down the dung lower into the earth than the roots of the
Corn or Grass, which is the reason of Plow-trenching in sandy Countries. Now
the manner and way of Plow-trenching, (having here mentioned it) and because we
may have occasion further to mention it in our after planting is as follows:
First the Plow having cast up the furrow, taking a good stitch (as they call it
in husbandry,) after the Plow there follows 12 or 14 men with spades, who delve
or dig a spit or spade deep in the bottom of the furrow where the Plow has
gone, which they cast or lay upon the earth or ridge which the Plow first threw
up; then follows the next turn of the Plow, but that which is then cast up is
thrown into the Trench, the men left to fill it again: the men as before still
follow the Plow, and dig or cast up out of this second furrow another spades
depth of sand or earth, which they cast on the second ridge of sand that is
thrown up by the Plow; and so a third and fourth ridge, the delvers following
the Plow and the Plow them, during the days work; by which you may perceive
that the upper earth or sand is buried, and the undermost or fresh sand laid
uppermost: so likewise in delving, or more properly trenching, the ground is
delved two spit deep, the second spit or undermost earth is laid upon the first
spit or spadeful of earth. By this piece of Husbandry it is easily to be
understood that this barren sandy ground, being hollow, loose, and light, the
fatness or substance that should nourish the roots of the grain, is by much
rain within two years time washed or sunk so deep into the earth, that it will
not serve for any other season or seed time without more soil or new trenching:
And as much wet and rain is the cause of unfruitfulness of the hungry hollow
barren sands, so likewise is drought, for the earth being loose and hollow, the
Sun by his heat does draw up the moisture and richness of the earth and soil
which the Rain does leave. A third sort of simple ground being barren and
unfruitful, is the Gravel which is mixed with it, a hungry earth not much unlike
the gritty loose Sand: This ground if it lie high and mountainous, then the
outward face and character will appear as it did in the poor Sand and Clay: one
cause of its barrenness is from cold, the Gravel wanting good earth to warm and
nourish that which should grow in it: Also because in time of Drought the Sun
will scorch and burn up the fruit thereof, be it either Corn or Grass, etc. And
if this Gravelly ground lie low, then it is subject unto Land-springs, which
within the Earth wash away that substance and fatness from the Roots of corn
and grass, that should be their nourishment, also much Rain does likewise wash
away the fatness and goodness of the Earth, by reason of the roundness and
hollow looseness of the stones; so, that what with the waters within the
ground, and the Waters above, also the heat and scorching of the Sun, which
does dry up more easily its moisture; this kind of earth must of necessity be
unfruitful, neither is there any way to improve it but by gathering out the
Stones, laying store of good Earth and Soil in the room, and making draynes to
carry away the Water: I shall not advise any to begin this piece of Husbandry,
because the Charges will amount unto so much, and better Land may be purchased
at a cheaper rate. Now, as by the outward face and character, and by the Clime
and Constitution of all simple Grounds does appear the Richness and
Fruitfulness of the one; and the poorness and barrenness of the other, so
likewise by the same Rule, there may be judgment given of all Compounded
Grounds, or mixed Earths, as Sand, with Gravel, or Clay, or Loome, with Gravel
or Sand, or other Earths. By this which has been spoken concerning the Nature
of Grounds, either simple or compound, the Husbandman may have true Knowledge
to order and dress his Ground, and by purging and cleansing the same from those
faults that hinder the increase, expect a large and ample Crop of Corn or
Grass. But yet the honest Arborist may be at a loss in Planting of
Timber Trees, if he go no deeper then the outward face of the Earth, for almost
every Ditcher can speak by experience in making of a Ditch, that the crust or
good earth many times does lie but two or three inches deep, and the next Earth
proves a hard hungry Gravel about a Spades depth more, the next Spades depth,
or under the Gravel, it may be shall rise a cold barren Clay, and under that, 8
or 10 inches more, a good Loome or Sand; Also in rich Earths the Crust may lie
17 or 18 inches deep, and under that depth a hard Gravel, or Rock of Stone,
Quarry of Slate, or such like; There being as many faces, or characters of good
and bad earths under the ground, as above, or upon the Superficies, but this
must be tried by an instrument hereafter mentioned. There are other grounds
that have no crust or good earth above, but either a barren Sand, hungry
Gravel, or cold Clay, and such like, and yet within twelve inches depth have a
very good Earth; And that there are several Veins and sorts of Earths, good
and bad, of all these Qualities, he that diggeth Mines and Wells can averr:
Also, That there are several Veins of good and bad Earth upon the Ground,
Gardners and Plowmen can testify; There are likewise several sorts of ground
that may be good for Corn and Grass, or small Fruit Trees, and Bushes, yet not
good for the Planting of Timber Trees. First, such Grounds that have a good
crust or earth 12 or 14 inches deep, and under this good earth a cold wet
Gravel, being full of Land-springs, (which is Water running within the Earth,
and shows it self, or is discovered by breaking out, or spewing up in many
places) this and the like are not sound grounds to Plant Timber Trees in,
because after the Roots of the Trees have passed downwards deeper then the
good Earth, the young and tender shootes of the Root, that the sap causes every
year to spring forth, are by reason of the too much moisture and cold water
within the earth chilled and benumbed, so that they have not strength to enter
the earth underneath the Water, or if they do, the Water following also after,
does continually hinder them in their growth, and keep them from thriving, and
so consequently the Tree. Secondly, such grounds as have the same, or as good
earth as before mentioned above, but underneath a Rock or Quarry, extending
many Yards or Rods, are also not proper for Planting Timber Trees, for after
the roots of the Trees have grown deeper into the earth then the crust or good
earth as aforesaid, and reached unto the Rock, they cannot enter, and being only
maintained by the upper Roots that spread along the crust of the earth, can
never grow to any bulk, not having sufficient nourishment for all the Roots,
and thereupon necessarily want so much of their due growth; And although such
Trees may thrive 50 or 60 years, yet as they grow in height and greatness, so
much the more are they in danger of every Wind; because those Roots that
should grow deep into the earth, not only to support the Tree by nourishment,
and balance it by weight, but, as strong Cords, to bind it fast unto the
earth, are altogether hindered and disappointed of their true use, by reason of
their Rock or Quarry; also those Roots that touch the Rock, for want of
entrance will in a short time perish and decay, and not only to the hinderance
of the growth, but shortning the life of the Tree: This stoppage, or decay of
the Root, may be discerned several ways, first, the middle Boughs that
generally grow straight upwards, and proceed from the heart, will decay at top,
which may be known by the falling of the Leaf. Secondly, The Bark will grow
black. Thirdly, The Sap, which is as the Blood, having not its natural course,
by reason of the stoppage of the Root, will break out into Boyles, which are
great Bunches in the Bark, Body and Limbs of the Tree; All which evils will
hinder the growth and increase of the Tree, and in time cause it to be hollow.
Now, since it concerns every one that will be at the Charges of Planting, to
search into the Bowels of the earth, and not to be satisfied, or trust to the
outward face thereof, There should be provided for the same use or purpose an
Iron Augar, such as is used for the searching after Mines or Minerals: and
although this way of searching or trying the goodness of the Earth under
ground, will require labor and expenses, yet it will be of great concernment
and singular use; there being a vast difference between the Planting and Sowing
of Corn, and sowing and planting Seed or Plants for Trees; for the Husbandman,
in a years time after his Seed is sown, may know the goodness of the ground,
and amend the evils thereof; or forbear farther charges, and let it rest for
the feeding of Cattle; whereas the Planter must wait many years in expectation
to know the goodness of his ground, and only guess it at last, without any
certainty, only by the growth, or thriving of the Trees Planted.

Having briefly discoursed of unfruitful grounds, by reason of the Constitution
and Clime, or situation of the Countries wherein they lie, it will be needless
to speak of those rich and fruitful Clayes in Buckinghamshire, Leicestershire,
etc. and of the fruitful Sands in Surry, Middlesex and Suffolk; also those rich
and fruitful Gravels, and compounded or mixed Earths in Barkshire and
Hartfordshire, with many other Shires: All these fruitful Soiles, if there be
not those hindrances in the Bowels of the earth formerly spoken of, will
require no other charges then only the choice of good Plants, and care in
planting them: As for poor unfruitful Grounds having but a thin Crust, yet good
earth at the depth of 18 or 20 inches, the Seed or Plants that are to be
planted in such grounds, are to be nourished and maintained until their Roots
descend and reach unto that good earth, therefore not only choice Plants are to
be provided, but also good earth, thereinto to set or plant the Seed and
Plants: But of this it is necessary that you have more particular directions;
There is therefore not any of those Lands formerly spoken of, either fruitful
or barren, but may be very good for planting Timber Trees, except these few
following; First, all Lands that lie near the skirts and borders of the Sea,
for the Mists, Fogs and Winds that come thence will much endanger them, and
hinder their thriving. Secondly, All high and dry Mountains, for they do not
only want moistness of Earth, but are infested by great Winds, which frequently
blow in such places, and are very hurtful; and although there are, and have
been seen great Trees growing on high Hills, yet it is my opinion they were not
planted there by Man, but were the production of the earth, and an effect of
the first Creation. Thirdly, All Lands that lie flat, and are subject to
Inundations of Waters, for want of a Descent or Current to carry them off some
other way; for although moist earth is good for Trees, yet too much moisture,
as Water, lying long on the ground, or at the roots of Trees, is dangerous, if
not Mortal. Fourthly, All Moorish wet grounds, for although there are, and have
been many great Trees growing in such grounds, yet very seldom any sound, well
colored, or long-lived Timber-tree. Fifthly, All entire Chalk Grounds, for
such grounds are cold and dry, and not good for Trees; but if there be a
mixture of other Earth with them, then it may be good. Sixthly, All grounds
that are Rocky, or very Stony, either under, or above the Earth; for, although
Trees may thrive in such grounds, yet it will require much labor and charges,
and I am very dubious of any long thriving of Trees so planted. Now the Plott
of ground that I shall make choice of to Plant Timber Trees in, should be low
and plain, but somewhat ascending toward the middle of the Plott, that so the
Floods after Rain may run clean away, yet slowly, not rising higher, if
possible, then may be convenient to water the whole from some spring or River,
that in the summer, or drought it may be moistened, cooled, and refreshed, and
laid dry again at pleasure; which would not only produce Grass wonderfully, but
make the Plants and Trees grow more in seven years, then they will in other
grounds that have not these helps and conveniences in 15 or 16 years. The Soil
or Earth should also be a rich and fruitful Clay. Being now provided of a Plot
of Ground to Plant, and having proportioned the Fence, and computed the
Charges, the next thing to be considered is the choice of seed and Plants; Seed
is only the Image of the Plant or Tree gathered together into a very small part
of the Matter; Plants are the Production of Seed, for the universal spirit of
Life was infused, or put into the matter of the World by that great Herbarist
our Eternal God; and so insinuating it self through all the parts thereof,
introduced into every Creature its own form. Now the Spirit of life contracted
into this lesser form as aforesaid, is the seed of all Creatures, of what kind
soever they be, and whereby their several species are propagated in the World.
Having now propounded it to my self, as the end of my discourse, by Planting
Timber trees to supply the Wastes that have been committed in His Majesty's
Forests, and to show how other parts of the Kingdom, which now are but of
little use and profit unto the owners, may be improved; I shall in the next
place do something in order thereunto: But, because it would be tedious to run
over all the several sorts of Trees known to us in England, which upon occasion
may be made use of for Timber where no other can be had; I shall confine my
self to four sorts only, the Oak, the Elm, the Ash, and the Beech; And he
that can well Plant these, may likewise all other sorts of Trees, whether of
Pleasure or Profit; and because Seed, as I told you, is the Original of Plants,
we shall begin with the sowing of that; And to do it more effectually, follow
the course that it is to be supposed every careful Husbandman does, before he
begineth to Plant his Ground, viz. cleanse it of all encumbrances which may
either hinder his Plow, or choke the Seed; as Bushes, Stumps, or Roots of
Trees, which is performed by Grubbing; but, if Goss, Whin, Heath, or such like,
then it will be needful for such ground to be Hackt, or Devonsheared, so
called, because in that Country this work, or kind of Husbandry is much used;
And if any hard Gravel, Quarry of Stone or Rock be within the reach of the
Plow-share, it will be loss to Plow, and Sow, or Plant such Grounds with Seed
for Trees; but, having a true knowledge of the nature and condition of the
ground, it being thus cleansed of all Rubbish, and prepared ready for the Plow,
we shall proceed in the choice of our Seed; And, as it argues much weakness in
any man to want Seed at the season his Land should be sowed, so is it
unnecessary expense to provide much more then will serve the turn; for Seed is
generally dearer then that Corn of the same kind, which otherwise may be
better spent in the House; and, although it ought to be of the cleanest and
soundest Corn, yet the smaller is rather to be chosen then that which is very
large; Now, to bring this home to our purpose; of the foresaid Timber Trees,
there are but three usually produced by Seed, the Oak, Ash, and Beech, for the
Elm is renewed from Age to Age by Slips, Shoots, or Suckers, which sprout from
the Roots, it being a general Rule, that those Trees which bear little seed,
or seed of small use, the Slips and Suckers will grow sooner, and thrive better
then those of Trees bearing Seed: I can speak it of my own knowledge, that the
Chips of Elmes newly cut, and falling among long rank Grass, have in few years
taken root, and grown up to a reasonable Coppice, the reason thereof may be
from the Oyley and glutinous substance; or because the Spirit of a Plant or
Tree is dispersed throughout the whole body; and therefore however the matter
may be vexed by Chipping, yet the Spirit contains it self, and will remain in
that small portion of the matter that is cut off, rather then forsake it quite,
or else Slips and Succors could not grow to so great Trees as usually they do;
yet it is my opinion, that the Elm taken from Chips will not be long lasting,
or grow to any greatness, because there is but a very small portion of the
matter in comparison of that which is in Slips and Succors: Now the^e ought to
be great care taken in the choice of your Seed for Trees, because the defect of
them is not so visible as that of Corn. The Kernel of an Acorn may be
Worm-eaten, or half rotten and perished, and yet the husk or shell whole and
firm, as we see in Nuts; so likewise will the Seed of Beech, very few of them
prove sound and fit for our purpose; The Acorns which I would advise for Seed
should be of a middle size, or something better, and not of the largest; but
very full and hard, and the husk or shell smooth and shining; and in the water
those that soonest sink are the best Seed: The Beechen Mast, and the Ashen
Keys would be of the largest size, plump, and full of Kernel. We shall now
consider the Quantity of Seed to be set or sowed, which must be proportioned to
the ground that is to be planted, and the distance between the Plants. The
nearest distance that can be allowed to have good Plants, and most profitable
to be afterward transplanted, is 12 inches, or one foot; And, to save every
man a labor in counting the quantity of Seed and Plants to be Sowed and
Planted, I have thought my Pains well bestowed to do it here.

ENGLAND'S IMPROVEMENT REVIVED.
THE THIRD BOOK.
The Argument.
You have set down the manner and way of planting one Acre of land Statute
measure, that is 16 foot and a half to the Perch; with Seed or Sets for
Timber Trees and Underwoods, at several distances, as from 1 foot to 4 Perch:
Also the converting of the said Woods to several uses, with the Charges and
Profit in performing the same, and several Observations in planting the said
Woods: Also a Conjecture at the Growth and Age of Timber Trees, as Oaks that
are now standing and grow; which said Trees may be probably concluded to be the
Production of the Earth at the Creation of the World: together with Preparatory
Directions by plowing and sowing, with choice of Seed and Plants in order to
the planting a thousand Acres.

WE shall proceed in an orderly way, beginning with one Acre, and then having
given you the Distance for Sowing, Setting, or Planting Seed and Plants in this
Acre, will do the same in a Thousand: An Acre of Land therefore contains 160
square Perch, Rod or Pole, at 16 foot and a half to the Perch, which is 4840
yards, and at three foot to the yard is 43560 foot; so that one Acre of Land
will take up of Seed to Plant or Set at the distance aforesaid, being one foot,
43560 Acorns, Ashen Keys, or Beechen-Mast, or if planted with Plants, the same
number of Plants: Now because Seeds are not bought by Tale, but by Measure, I
shall give you also the number of them by the Bushel, which contains eight
gallons, and the gallon eight pints, Winchester-Measure; a Pint will hold or
contain 100 of the greater sort of Acorns: by this measure you will find 800
Acorns in one Gallon, then in one Bushel will be contained 6400, so that one
Acre of Land, containing 43560 foot will require so many seed of Acorns as come
to 6 Bushels, 3 Pecks, 3 pints, half pint and 10 Acorns; Always observing what
distance of Land is left between the outmost row of plants, and the fence or
bounds of the Land planted, and for so many foot, or every foot left in
distance, to deduct one seed or plant out of the Number given, and the
remainder will be your desire.

This first, or nearest distance of ground between the plants, is only proper
for the setting and sowing seed for Transplanting other Lands or plots of
ground, which must be performed by drawing the middle or inmost plants, leaving
the remainder thinner, or at a greater distance; And this work would be done at
2 or 3 years growth at the farthest, before the Roots touch, or are too much
entangled. The next distance in planting is three foot, or one yard, then have
you in this Acre of ground containing 160 perch, 4840 square yards, and the
same number of seeds or plants must be provided as there are yards, which, if
Acorns, come to in measure three pecks 40 Acorns; but th^s distance is too near
by one foot; however we shall improve the ground to best advantage thus,
suppose there be planted 4800 Ashen Keys, or plants, and 40 Acorns or Oaken
plants, the Oaken plants to be planted at 33 ^oot distance, and that they all
grow and thrive: The Ash may be cut at ten years growth, and sold for*
Hop^poles, worth 10 or 12 shillings the hundred, to be delivered in the Wood or
place where they were cut, then there will be 4800 poles, which is 48 hundred,
and at 10 shillings the hundred, they come to 24 pounds; but, if sold for 12
shillings the hundred, it amounts unto 28 pounds sixteen shillings, which is
a sufficient allowance for one Acre of Land, before only worth 20 shillings
yearly Rent, and will sufficiently defray all the charges in fencing and
planting; The Oaks are to grow for Timber Trees, which within a hundred years
will pay double the Purchase of the Land. The next, or second growth of these
Ashen stocks may be cut at 9 years; and, if they all thrive, the Sap will put
forth four or five shoots out of every stock, and from each stock may be chosen
two Hop-poles, then there will be 9600 Poles in the Acre of ground, besides the
Offal Wood; the Poles being sold at the lowest price aforesaid, amount unto 48
pounds; but, if sold for 12 shillings the hundred, then they will amount to 57
pounds 12 shillings: A third felling, or cutting of this Ashen-Wood may be at
eight years end, and then the shoots w^ll be so increased, that you may cut
three or four Poles from every stem or stock, we shall reckon of the least
number which is three; then have you from the 4800 Ashen Plants 14400 Poles,
which comes unto, at 10 shillings the hundred, 72 pounds; but, at twelve
shillings the hundred, 86 pounds eight shillings, besides that which is made of
the Offal Wood. This is a gallant improvement, if there were vent for many
Acres of Land to be thus Planted. Now, by the next time of felling or cutting,
the Oaken plants will be grown to handsome Trees: But, it is to be observed,
that as the Oaks grow in greatness, they will hinder the thriving and growing
of the Ash, which is now become under-Wood, and the Roots of the Ash w^nding
and twisting about the Roots of the Oaks, will much hinder their growth, and
this is the evil of Planting at two near a distance: A third distance in
Planting Timber Trees is one Perch; at this distance there may be made use of
the Ground that lies between, either for Corn or Grass: And if you intend to
sow Corn after the Land is Plowed, Sowed and Harrowed, you may set the Seed,
or Plants for Trees thus, At the distance before mentioned plant four Seed or
Plants four foot distance from each other in a square, then either about the
square-piece of ground, or about every seed or plant you must set up several
sticks, that the Mower or Reaper at the time of harvest do not cut off, break
or bruise the young Plants; also, that the plants may be weeded, and the ground
kept plain about them: Now, if you will not sow the ground, but keep it for
Hay, then there must be dug at the distance aforesaid a Plot of ground four
foot square, and in that Plot set or plant four seed or Plants as aforesaid, at
each corner one; you may let all these plants grow nine or ten years, and
about that time you may thus dispose of them at your pleasure; first, leave one
of the best growing Plants in each Plot to be a Timber-tree, then cut down the
other three and preserve the stocks for under-wood, as before mentioned, or
grub them up, that the Timber Trees may the better thrive; or, if you approve
not of their so long growing together, you may draw, or pull up three of the
four plants at three years growth, and plant them in other grounds: At this
distance and way of planting there will be planted in one Acre of ground 640
plants. Now all these plants that you appoint for Hop-poles, must be such, as
are most capable to produce those poles; for Oak, Elm and Beech are not of
use for poles, the reasons shall be given when we speak of planting Coppice, or
Groves for under-wood; Now of these 640 plants we will suppose 600 of them to
be Ash, and 40 Oaks, these Oaks to be planted at 33 foot distance, and to
grow for Timber Trees, at 9 or 10 years growth the Ashes may be cut down; then
have you 600 poles worth 12 shillings the hundred, and comes to 3 pounds 12
shillings, but at fourteen shillings the hundred is four pounds four shillings.
The stocks of these Ashes will live longer, and thrive better, also produce
larger and more poles then if planted at the last distance mentioned, because
they have more ground to feed them, and the hindrance, by touch of the Root,
will not be much prejudice for many years, by which means, at the second
season for cutting, you may have 1200 good Hop-poles, worth in the Wood or
place of cutting fourteen shillings the hundred, which do come to 8 pounds 8
shillings; but at the next or third season of cutting the said Ashen stocks may
produce 3600, which being sold for 14 shillings the hundred amounts to 25
pounds 4 shillings.

Now although the profit of this Acre by Poles does not amount unto so much as
the last planted at three foot distance, yet it is made up another way: First
we have in this last Acre the benefit of the ground for Corn and Grass:
Secondly the Trees and Under-wood will thrive better and grow greater in a
shorter time than the other: more might be said, but this at present may
suffice. And if you do not esteem of or like the way of planting for Hop-poles
or Under-wood thus amongst the Timber Trees, but would have the benefit of the
ground only for Corn and Grass, then you cannot plant at a nearer distance than
two Perch, which is 11 yards; and because all grounds have not depth of earth
alike; for the crust in some places will be 15 or 16 inches deep, and in other
places of the same ground but 5 or 6 inches, and yet good earth a greater
depth, Therefore my advice in planting all Grounds at any great distance is,
first to delve a Plot of land 4 foot square, and let the 4 angle points or
corners of the square lie North-east, North-west, South-east, and South-west;
that the Plants which are to be parted in those Plots may have the benefit of
the Sun all the day; this performed, then cast up a small trench or ditch a
foot deep if there be so much good earth, and 18 inches wide; let all this
earth be evenly laid on the Plot delved, the Clods hackt or cut small, and the
grass and weeds gathered or weeded out; this done, set or plant one seed or
plant about a foot from each point or corner of the square Plot, and in the
middle one, then you will have 5 Seeds or Plants in this Quadrat: Now at every
30 foot distance throughout the acre of Land delve or cast up such a Plot of
ground, so you will have 40 quadrats or square plots in the whole, and leave a
sufficient distance of land between the outmost Rows and the Fence: The Seed or
Sets planted in the whole ground are 200, which may all grow 3 or 4 years, then
leaving one of the best Plants of what kind of Timber Trees you please; pull or
craw up all the rest, which you may either sell, give away, or plan in other
grounds; the remainder will be 40. By this way or manner of planting you may
make as much benefit of the Acre of Land within a small matter, as if there
were not a Tree growing in it; and these 40 Timber Trees being all Oaks within
a hundred and fifty years may be worth 200 pounds, which is a good improvement,
requiring no more charges than the first planting, and not losing any benefit
of the land: And if this quadrat or square figure does not like you, there may
be dug or delved so many Plots of ground as aforesaid, round or circular,
and the ditch cast up as about the squares; then plant or set the four Seeds or
Plants equally about the Circle, and one in the middle, the four Seeds or
Plants pointing to the four quarters of the Wind, as has been directed. The
reason of this way of planting is to increase the mould or earth; for the
Plants to put forth their shoots in; also the being enclosed will preserve them
from danger in time of Harvest: you may set Beans in these plots of ground, but
not too near the Plants; and if you sow seed of the Furrs-bush about the edges
of the bank, The Furs will keep the Plants warm in the Winter, and preserve
them from being hurt by Cattle; and as the Plants or Trees increase the Furrs
will decrease, or after the Plants are grown up out of the reach of Cattle, the
Furrs may be cu^, and so destroyed, if the right^ season of the year be
observed.

Now there is another way of planting not inferior to any of these formerly
spoken of. We shall consider of the Acre of Land in length and breadth to be 40
perch long and 4 perch broad, the just content of an Acre at 16 foot and an
half to the pole or perch. The Plants to be provided for the planting this
ground may be of all the sorts of Timber Trees formerly mentioned; they should
be about the size of the Thorn plants, yet something greater, but not bigger
than an ordinary man's finger. The Plants being provided, you may begin to work
thus; on the North, North-east, or North-west side of this Acre of Land make a
Ditch 3 foot wide and 18 inches deep, the said Ditch to extend to the farther
ends of the plot, which is 40 Rod: After the first Turf is laid with the swarth
or grass side downwards, the upper side pared, chopped, and made even, and that
the Plants are cut and trimmed, lay them on as you were directed in planting
the Thorn hedge, only observing to leave the trunk or body of these plants one
inch longer than those of the thorns: Also the distance of ground between these
plants must be 3 foot. After the Plants are laid in an even rank or row with
the slope or cut side downwards, or sidewayes toward the South, and the head
of the Plants lying at least 7 or 8 inches higher than the roots; then cast or
throw up good store of the best earth on the roots; afterward all the earth
which you cleanse out of the Ditch, spreading it all over the Plants plain and
even: This bank is not to lie high as that of the Thorns, but level as other
grounds: There is in this row or bank 220 Plants; now allowing 4 foot of ground
that the first Plants and earth cast up as aforesaid does cover. The second
Ditch must be begun five foot distance from the head of the first bank, which
is 8 foot from the beginning of the first Ditch. This second Ditch or Row of
Plants will fall behind the first, and must be made and planted every way as
the first; and after the second a third, and so continue keeping the same
distance till all the Plot be planted: Then have you in the Acre of Ground 8
Rows, and 1760 Plants. The Trees that are thus planted will thrive and grow
wonderfully; between the Ditches and Banks you may delve and sow, or set Beans,
Pease, or any other grain or corn: This Acre of ground may be improved by
planting for Timber Trees and under-Woods for Hop-poles, as you have been
formerly directed. So much may serve for the improvement of one single Acre,
which being too little a Plot to take up the whole industry of a Man, or my
design: I shall now take in a greater quantity of land, and proceed to a
thousand Acres, which I at first intended.

The thousand Acres then does contain by the Rod, Pole, or Perch, at 16 foot
and a half to the Pole, 160000, which is in yards 4840000, and does amount unto
in feet, or by the fo^t 43560000: Now according to every one of these three
Numbers, only considering the distance between the Fence and outmost row of
Plants, as before mentioned, must the quantity of seed be provided, because you
shall not be put to the trouble in counting how many of these seeds a Bushel by
measure may contain, I shall give a particular account thereof, which take as
follows: The first number, the distance being Perches, will require 160000
acorns, which amounts to by measure, according to the former Rule in the one
Acre given, 25 Bushels; The second number, according to the distance of yards,
will require 4840000 acorns, which comes to by measure 756 Bushels one Peck:
The third or last number being feet will require 43560000 acorns, which will
come to by measure 6806 Bushel one Peck: As for the other seed, which are Ashen
keys and Beechen Mast, they may be also measured by the Bushel as the Acorns,
first counting how many of each will go or will be contained in one pint or
gallon: Having considered and computed what the charges both of seed and Plants
will amount unto, by knowing what quantity to provide, and how you may be
furnished to serve your occasions. The ground being in good season, and the
time of the year answering thereunto, you may proceed thus: The chief
Instruments which are useful for this work of planting is the Plow and Spade;
the Plow will dispatch the greater quantity of ground in a day, but the other
will make the best work; we shall compute the charges of both in his due place:
There is no certain rule to be observed in plowing ground in all places alike;
for according to the nature and climats of Countries, where much heat or cold,
moisture or drought; as is the Earth or Air, so must the arborist alter his
season; strong or stiff grounds will require great strength of Cattle; also the
season must be early in the year: in other Countries where the earth is warmer,
richer, and lighter, the Plow need not be of that strength which the former
ground did require, neither will the labor of man or beast be so much; And, in
such Countries the season may be latter, yet nevertheless for all these
Observations, he that has much work to do must begin betimes, especially if he
has not a sufficient strength of Men and Cattle: Now the Plowman ought to be
very careful in the plowing of his ground, how he shall lay his furrows, either
high round and close together, or low and flat; also what depth he shall plow
them, to raise and gain the greatest store of mould, for that is very
considerable in planting Trees.

I shall not give particular direct^ons or instructions in the Rules of
Husbandry, as concerning the manner of Plowing. Sowing, and Harrowing all kind
of Earths and Seed, and the several ways of laying the Furrows, as deep, or
shallow, near together, or more open, and the Reasons of each several way; as
also the means of improving barren grounds by diverse Manures or helps, by
fresh Earths, as sand on clay, and clay on sand, with many other mixtures of
Earths; also Mareling, Limeing, Stable-Dung, Mud out of Ponds and Ditches, old
Rags, and many more sorts, as also by grubbing, hacking, burning of Bate, or
Devonshireing, and the like; improving of Meadows and Pasture by draining and
watering, propagating Plants for Orchards and gardens, with the several ways
of gr^fting and setting slips and succors, etc. Also sowing, setting, or
planting seeds of all sorts, and increasing their production by several ways
of steeping or soking in Brine, or other Liquors; also Reaping, Mowing,
Hedging, Delving, Housing and Stacking Corn and Hay. The seasons for gathering
and preserving, or keeping all sorts of grains, fruits and seeds, with many
more particulars; for it is not my intent to speak any father of Husbandry then
will serve for this our present occasion of Planting.

The best time to begin Plowing for the planting Timber Trees, will be about
the latter end of February, or the beginning of March; if the Land require twice
Plowing, which all Hey or Pasture-grounds do, for the swarth must be first
broke, and torn to pieces with the Harrowes, or else cut with Instruments for
that purpose, called Hacks, made of Iron; therefore there must be a second
plowing, which will, by raising up new earth, increase, and make good store of
mould again; and by this twice plowing, the Weeds and grass will be withered
and destroyed, which are great enemies to young plants, as we have formerly
declared: Now, for the manner of Plowing, supposing the Land to be very good
earth for the purpose intended, and free from all Waters lying on the ground,
and other encumbrances; with a strong Plow, the share being of a good
sufficient length, and the Culter somewhat bending, Throw down your Furrows,
but if the ground be subject to waters, either by springs or floods in much
Rain, then you shall lay the furrows more high, near, and close together; and
that every one of these Lands lie highest in the midst, observing to turn the
swarth inwards or downwards unto the Earth, that the Roots of the grass and
weeds may be scorched and dried by the Sun and Wind, and so withered and
destroyed: But, if you will be at the charges, which is the best Husbandry,
then with the Hackers formerly mentioned you shall hew and cut to pieces all
the earth that was plowed up; also all Balkes that the Plow had escaped, for by
this work the weeds and grass will sooner wither and decay, and make the mould
finer; after the hacking you shall take a pair or two of strong Iron Harrowes,
and with them going over the ground break the Clods smaller: In the Month of
August you shall begin to Plow over that ground again which formerly you had
plowed, still observing what quantity of Land you have to plow, and your own
strength of men and cattle, and accordingly you may begin sooner or later; At
this second plowing let the Furrows be made deeper and greater then at the
first; Now, if the ground were a stiff Clay, or such like, then it would
require to be hacked again, which will thoroughly break the Clods, and increase
the mould, and by making the furrows great and deep, raise up more Earth which
had been untouched before. This work being fin^shed, you may then sow and plant
your seed, but before you begin, it must be considered what part of the Land is
most moist and dry, also in what part is the best and deepest mould, and where
it is most shallow and meanest; for you must order and dispose of your seed
according to their several qualities, the Elm will require the best and
deepest Mould, but bears no Seed^, therefore must be planted by Plants or
Setts: The Oak will require a moist deep Earth, but will not thrive if the
water lie long on the ground: The Ash will require a more dry kind of Earth,
and will grow in a shallower Mould; The Beech will grow and thrive in a dryer,
shallow and meaner earth then the Ash: And so having considered of these
particulars, and finding your ground to have these several sorts of Earths, you
must plant, sow, or set your seed and plants in that part of the ground where
they will best like or thrive: But, if th^re be no difference in the mold or
earth, then you may mix your Seed, and Sow it together; but if you set the
seed, then there may be a Row of Oak, and a row of Ash, and another of Beech;
or mix all of them in one Row as best pleases you; and thus may all other seed
or sets be sowed or Planted: The fittest time or season of the year for sowing
or planting this seed for Trees, is, when it is full ripe, and falls from the
Trees, which is about the latter end of October: But, it may be sowed or set in
other Months if well preserved. In sowing of your seed be careful you do not
sow too thick, for the thinner they are sowed, the better they will thrive; one
foot distance is the nearest they should be sowed or set; if the plants come up
closer then one foot, they must be drawn, or pulled up the first or second year
at the farthest; for those Plants that are planted at a foot distance, will be
larger and bigger at three years growth then others which are planted thicker
will be at five. Secondly, if they grow at that thickness longer then two
years, the Roots will be so knit and entangled one within the other, that, in
drawing of them you will break the Roots, they being tender, and so spoil the
plants which otherwise might be of use for the planting other grounds; or the
wast places in the same ground; for it is supposed, all the seed that was sowed
will not grow and thrive; and if they come up at no nearer then a foot
distance, yet there would be a sufficiten quantity to spare for the planting
other grounds, because within the space of one yard must two or three plants be
pulled up about the time beforementioned, that the rest may thrive the better,
and grow for use and profit, which they will not do at a nearer distance.
Again, If plants grow thick any long time, they will endanger the whole Plot of
Ground by starving each other: The first year after planting it is neither
proper nor profitable to draw them up for any use, because the substance of the
Kernels of the Seed will not be spent in the Roots, therefore in drawing up
such plants they cannot thrive, because they want part of the nourishment that
should increase their growth: Now, for my own part, I would not have them set
or planted nearer then four foot in any great quantity of ground, but would the
mean while have a Nursery of one or two Acres or thereabouts, as there may be
occasion, where they might grow at a foot distance, but nigher, even there it
would not be convenient; those that plant them nearer, or at even a foot
distance, in any great quantity of ground, have but these two Reasons; The
first is, for fear all that was set, planted, or sowed, should not grow and
thrive: Secondly, To have Plants to stock other or more grounds; but, by this,
they go about to make all grounds become Nurseries, and never consider, that
the Land is thereby exceedingly impoverished. But now briefly to answer both
these; To prevent miscarriage in the growth of Plants, there must be great care
taken to provide good seed, and that it be well searched and picked from all
that are defective: And for the other, a Nursery of about two Acres will stock
or plant a thousand at a distance sufficient for Timber Trees; besides, there
are many evils in sowing or planting at too near a distance, some of which have
been already declared; we shall only add two more: First, The Charge in Weeding
will be hereby increased unnecessarily; for, all Plants must be well weeded the
three or four first years, and growing so near only with Weeding-knives, or by
hand; whereas at a farther distance, a good laboring man with a Hacker
formerly mentioned, will Weed or Cleanse above an Acre in a day, and make better
work then seven Women, though they ply it never so hard. Secondly, At four foot
distance, which I propounded, the ground may be delved five or six years; and
between the Plants, Beans, Wheat, or any other kind of Grain may be set or
sowed, only to prevent the danger of the Sikle or Hook; in time of Harvest
there must be three or four sticks set up round the Plants, as we have told you
before; And, if no Corn sowed, there may be benefit made of the Grass, for the
Plants will require no more Weeding then half a foot round, to do otherwise, is
to be at great charges and expenses, and have little or no profit: It is not my
design or intent to dissuade any man from sowing Seed for Trees, I only speak
my judgment as to the distance. Now, immediately after you have sown your
seed, take a pair, or as many as you can well spare, of very strong
long-tooth't Iron-Harrowes (for in some Countries they use only Wooden ones)
with sufficient Men and Horse to order them, and so cover close all the Seed,
which you will the better do, by often going over the Ground, for by breaking
the Clots the Mould will increase, and become both small and more fit for that
purpose: After the Harrower has finished his Work, then let four or five Women
and Children, or more, as your Work may require (for, as they are fittest for
this Work, so they have less Wages then men) go all over the ground with
setting Sticks, and set, or put into the ground all the Seed they find still
remaining above, and cover it close; by which means it will be preserved from
Mice, Rookes, Crows, and other Vermin; for if the holes be not close covered,
they will devour, and carry most of it away in a short time; For, the Plowman
can speak by experience of several Hoards of Nuts, Beans, Pease, Acorns,
Beechen Mast, and such like, that have been cast up, a Pint or two together in
a hole in the ground, besides many hoards found under the Roots, and in hollow
Trees.

Having Discoursed of Plowing and Sowing your Seed, we shall now speak a little
of Planting; which may be divided into three parts;

First, Planting by Seed.

Secondly, By Sets; that is to say Sets from Seed, Suckers and Slips.

Thirdly, Transplanting young Trees.

Now a Plant is the production of Seed, and although all Trees do not bear
seed, yet they came from Seed, which Seed is the Spirit of life, infused into
the matter of the World, and was done the first day of the Creation.

Of Plants there are in general but two sorts, a Tree, and an Herb; yet the
variety of them, according to their species, virtues and colors, is so great,
that they can scarely be numbered. The spirit of a Plant is called Vegetable,
which puts forth its Virtue in Nutrition, Augmentation, and Generation; for
Plants being endued with an inward Vigor break out of the Earth, and spread
themselves in Plan^; from thence called Plants: Again, a Plant by its Roots and
Tawes, or Fibers, sucks in the Juice of the Earth; the Bole or Body attracting
the same does augment, or grow into a great Bulk or largeness, sending it to
the upper parts, which being there better concocted, breaks out in Seed; Plants
grow upwards, because the vapor included spreading it self, tends upwards; The
Bark, Leaves and Shells are but as the Skin and Garments, serving to defend the
body from the injury of heat and cold.

But to proceed: The best sort of Sets or Plants are such as grow from Seed, if
they be removed before the Body and Roots are grown too large, and that all the
Roots may be taken up without bruising.

The Second sort of Sets, and not much inferior, if there can be a good
quantity of Root taken with them, are Suckers which grow out of the Roots and
Tawes of Trees; those that grow out of the Roots cannot be clean taken away
without cutting the Roots of the Tree or Plant, which will both hurt the Tree,
and do little or no good unto the Plant; such as are grown out of the Tawes may
be taken away, and enlarged as you please with the Tawes and not hurt the Tree,
these Suckers are the best, and will soonest become great Trees: Slips are in
use for want of other Sets, but are the worst of all that have been mentioned,
because they have but little Root, and that which is, Receiving a main wound,
will in short time destroy the Tree; for, although it may grow 60 or 80 years,
yet it cannot well thrive, for the Roots will be so weak, that the Sap will be
unable to put forth new of any strength, unless in a long time; and every wind
will endanger it, by loosning the Roots, or else it will be soon nipt with
frost or drought, these Slips are also Suckers growing out of the lower part of
the Tree.

To apply all that has been said of plants and sets. There is not one point
more to be regarded then the choice of those that are good, the ground being
well plowed, hackt and harrowed, according to former directions. The best time
to transplant, or remove younger Trees, is at, or suddenly after the fall of
the Leaf, about the Change of the Moon; supposing at that time the Sap to be
most quiet: The fall of the Leaf is a Rule in all Countries, though there be
difference in its happening, as to the time of the year, as also in the time
that is to be accounted before and after it: In setting your sets or plants see
that you have a special care not to go lower then the Crust of the earth; you
may not fear to set them as deep as that will well allow: What is meant by
Crust of the Earth has been formerly declared; where the Crust is shallow,
there it must be helped by adding good Earth, otherwise such grounds, or that
part of the ground enclosed will not be fit to plant in; for, in the Crust or
good Earth, the Plants first shoot forth their Roots, and thence draw their
Sap, which does increase and strengthen them to enter, and pierce farther into
the Earth. Again, in setting, let the mold be small and moist, also shake the
Plant easily too and fro, that the earth may run among the Roots and Tawes,
then put it close, a little treading it with your foot to keep out the Air,
which is very hurtful; after the plants are set, if no Rain falls, they should
be watered now and then, which would make the Earth yield sap and nourishment,
and cause the Roots to grow and spread abundantly; Puddle-water would perform
the Work excellently, were it not chargeable: All Parched and dry grounds that
will not keep moisture, are very hurtful for young Plants, because every Plant
has a Body Pithy and porous, that the nourishing faculty of the earth may
enter and pass through, and feed all the parts; but, dry earth cannot pass
through the Tawes and pores of a plant, therefore the moisture of the earth
only nourishes: There are several Opinions about removing Trees and plants,
most of them argued from the Rising, Descending and pride of sap; some at the
removing will mark the North-side, and have the same set so again. Others there
are that yet do it as happily, observing no such Rule at all: There are some
that are of opinion, It is best to remove Trees and plants before the Fall of
the Leaf, and say, That the Sap descending will make speedy Roots: Again,
there are others that say, It is good to remove in the beginning of Summer: And,
a last sort, that strongly affirm, It is not good to Remove till after the
Fall; Several Countries have several Customs and Fashions answerable to the
place wherein they live, we shall therefore leave every one to their own
opinion. Yet it is not wisdom for a man to bind himself more strictly to that
or this Custom, then Reason shall be his warrant.

Now, we have good experience, that it is dangerous to remove when the Sap is
not quiet, by Trees that are removed in the Summer, for they seldom live long,
or, if they do live, they thrive not; for the life of the youngest plant shall
scarcely be saved; if removed in the pride of Sap; for, every remove gives a
main check to the stirring sap, staying the course thereof in the Body of the
plant; For, as the blood in a Man is always in motion and circulating,
although there be several kinds of that motion, as sometimes very slow, cool
and quiet, other times much stirring, and very hot, by reason of its swiftness.
Now, if the blood, which is the life, alters the usual course, diseases follow;
And, if it be stopped, it soon grows cold; and, if universally cold, Death
follows. So likewise, Sap is the blood of the plant, and every removing in the
pride of sap is a great stay, or stoppage unto it; like blood-letting in the
midst of summer, which is very dangerous, and never used but in extremity, and
oftentimes proves mortal; As it has been said, That drought and cold are
great enemies to Trees and plants, by staying of the sap: Therefore, in those
Countries that lie farthest from the sun, and that are subject to cold Winds,
the sap does not rise, nor is in pride so soon as in other Countries that lie
more warm and moist: Also, in those Countries that lie nearest to the Sun, the
sap does rise, and is in pride sooner then in any of the former, but does not
continue long, because of the excessive heat; by this you see, that one
Country, Climate, or Continent is not a rule for others to go by; And, as
heat, cold, moist and dry alter in several Countries, so they do likewise in
any one of them: for, as is the season of the year, either hot, cold, dry or
moist, so also the sap rises, and is in pride earlier or later, by that
occasion, in the same Country.

There are many Men of opinion, That the sap lies still all the Winter in the
Roots of Trees, and that toward the Spring it begins to stir, and after makes
its appearance by Leaves, and Fruit, or seed all the summer: Also, that the sap
rises and passes upwards only between the bark and Wood, with several more
Opinions: But, because it is not my design to Resolve Questions, I forbear to
mention any more at this time. The Sap, as it is the Blood and Life of the
Tree, has the Spirit of Seed included therein; and because every body being
composed of vapors is moved toward a greater Company of its Conaturals, that
vapor coming forth when the Seed is warmed tends upwards: But, because the
matter of the Seed is fat and glutinous, the vapor being infolded therein,
carries it upwards with it; and a part thereof being turned into the
nourishment of the Plant or Tree, as covering of Wounds, putting forth of Buds,
and the growth of the Tree; the rest being gathered together into a certain
place usually in the tops or boughs of the Trees, makes or becomes Seed: Again,
The sap does not pass upward only between the Bark and the Wood, as some would
have it, but also into and through the very substance of the Tree, both Bark
and Wood and all: And as for the Sap resting in the Roots more then in other
parts of the Tree, I cannot consent unto it; for, if the comparison of Blood
with Sap will be allowed, then, as the blood in Man's body is always in motion
throughout the whole Body, and rests not after it has circulated once only;
but, as it has been said before, in its motion is sometimes swift, other times
slow, and very still and quiet, but, never at a stand except in great
extremity, and that for a very small time; Even so must it be granted to be in
Trees: Now, to conclude this point; it is supposed by most men, that a small
time before the fall of the Leaf is the Stand, so called, or the turning of
the Sap, or rather, that the Sap is cool and quiet; for, it makes no stay,
except by reason of extreme drought or cold, at which time there is very small
or little appearance of life; therefore, because we do not know when the Sap is
quite turned, or turning, but by the fall of the Leaf, It is the safest way to
begin removing then, as also to sow, or Plant, and so you may continue all the
Winter, except in Frost and Snow; but, a Plant set about the fall of the Leaf
shall be larger at three years growth, then that which is set the spring after
shall be at four years; therefore the sooner you set or plant in Winter the
better.

Now, in transplanting it is but curiosity and trouble to mark every Tree and
Plant, to have the same side stand to the sun as was before; for every plant
that is right and well planted should stand free from shade, the second row to
stand over against the middle distance between the Trees of the first row, and
so throughout the ground, and all of them so planted, that they have the
benefit of the sun on all parts, as has been formerly directed: And, planting
at first thus, you need not care, or fear which de stands either to the North
or south: Now, if you Plant your ground with sets, let them be of seed if pose
sible, and not either of slips or succors; to buy sets is chargeable, also they
may be broken or bruised in drawing out of th- ground, or carriage, if you
trust unto such as either have not care, or skill in drawing them; therefore
let the sets be of your own, if possible: In choice of your sets, let the Roots
be sound and many, for as they are in number and goodness, so will the boughs
be: Lastly, if the tops be tall, or more spreading then the Roots, you may
proyn them, and cut off the tops, for every wound given when a plant is young
will recover firmly in a short time, as about six years, yet there will be a
hindrance in the growth of the Plant during that time; therefore considering
all these particulars, it is good to have sets of seed of your own, and at such
a distance as not to remove at all, for every remove is dangerous: Although
some of these observations have been formerly mentioned, and also are generally
known, yet are they but little put in practice; I am sure it would quit cost
for all the pains and expenses that should be undergone in order to it.

Now, if you intend to Plant a Plot of Land for Under-Woods only, or young
woods, for House-boot or Plow-boot, etc. and not let any of the Trees grow to
be great Timber; then as the Land is wet or dry, rich or poor, the crust deep
or shallow, you must sow, or set such seed or Plants which will best thrive in
those places: and, although Coppices, Groves, or Under-woods consist of all
sorts of Wood, as Oak, Ash, Elm, Beech, Maple, Chestnut, Birch, Asp, Alder,
Withey, Hornbeame, Hasle, Sicamore, Willow, and many others; yet, of all these,
we shall make choice but of six, the rest being not considerable to answer the
Charges this way in planting, which are Oak, Chestnut, Ash, Withey, Haslle and
Alder; Now, to give you the reasons of my choice, and why I look upon them as
the best and most profitable, are these;

First, They are quicker of growth then any of the other that I have omitted,
for the Chestnut, Alder, Ash and Withey, will be taller and greater at eight
years growth then any of them will be at twelve.

Secondly, They will thrive in such ground as many of the other will not; as in
much wet or moisture; also in dry and shallow earth.

Thirdly, They may be converted to such uses as will render them more vendible,
and yield greater prices then the other; For now, suppose you have an Acre of
ground to plant, and that there be in it all the sorts of Earth before
mentioned, then in the wettest part of the Land must you plant the Alder; This
Tree is not friendly to Pasture or Meddow, because the Root thereof is of such
a nature, that it draws to it self so much moisture for its Nourishment, that
the ground near it is good for no other use: the next that does require a moist
ground, although not so wet as the Alder, is the Withey; the Ash and Hasle
will grow in the dryest part, and in the shallowest Earth; the Oak and Chestnut
will require a good earth, and deeper Crust then the last two; Thus have you
the Nature, Quality, or Condition of the Plants, and where they best like to
grow; But, it is to be understood, the Richer the Earth is, and the deeper the
Crust, there they will best thrive. Now, because this Acre is but a small Plot,
we will therefore Plant it to the utmost bounds: Thus the Land lying length and
breadth, sixteen Perch long, and ten broad; the plants to be planted four foot
one inch and a half one from the other, which is the one fourth of a Perch; At
this distance there should be a square plot of ground delved or dug two foot
square; about half a foot from the end or point of the four Angles set a Seed
or Plant, such seed or Plants as will best thrive, according to former
directions; and, where the Crust is shallow, there should be made a trench
about the several squares a foot wide and deep, the Earth to be cast upon the
square Plot to increase the Mould; the whole ground being thus Planted, you
will have 2560 square plots, wherein is planted 10240 seed or plants; if they
all thrive, then about three years after at the season of the year for
transplanting, one of the best of these 4 Plants in each or every square plot
which does most thrive must be preserved, and the other 3 drawn or pulled up and
disposed of at pleasure, either to be planted in other grounds, else sold or
bestowed on your Neighbors, the Plant which is left must be removed and
planted in the middle of the Plot; this performed you will have remaining 2560
Plants. And you are to take notice that the Alder and Withey is not planted by
seed, but Sets or Plants; the Ash, Chestnut, Alder, and Withey will serve for
Hop-poles: the Oak and Hasle is the slowest and smallest of growth, and not
useful for Poles, but for Hoops and Hurdles for Sheep-pens and such like; the
Chestnut, Ash, and Withey are likewise very good to make Hoops for wet and dry
Cask, as Brewers, Grocers, Soap-boylers, and many more Trades: Now also all
these will make many necessary Implements of Husbandry, as Ladders, Rails,
Plow-stuff and handles for many Tools, besides Firing; the Chestnut is special
good Timber for Building, and many other uses; also the Oak and Ash; therefore
there may be 20 of these preserved to grow for great Trees.

To make the greatest profit of this Copice, Grove, or under-wood is to keep it
clean from all Bushes, Brambles, and other Woods, which it may be subject unto
if any old roots of trees be in or near the ground; also if any seed, as
Acorns, Ashen keys, Beech-mast, Slows, and such like be brought in and
scattered by Rooks and Crows among the long Grass or Plants; else by squirrels,
field-Rats or Mice, and hid in the ground, or under roots of Trees or Plants;
For if any of these seeds be suffered to grow, they will be Encumbrances, and
much hinder those that were rightly planted. These things being observed, and
that you keep the Plants clean by well weeding, about ten years after the
planting, this Copice or Grove may be felled, and every sort of Wood converted
to their proper uses, as Hop-poles, Hoops, and other necessaries of Husbandry,
which I shall have occasion more particularly hereafter to mention. Now in
felling this Wood be sure you cut it smooth, and close to the ground; and after
the stuff is sold and disposed of, be careful to cleanse the ground of all
Chips, Sprays, and small sticks; also see that you make the Fence firm and
strong, that no Cattle get in to tread on, break, or bruise the stocks of the
Plants; and when the sap puts forth new shoots, that they be not cropped or bit,
which does not only hurt and spoil the Crop for the next season of cutting, but
is very hurtful unto the stocks: if you be careful to prevent these evils about
8 years after the first cutting, you may cut again, and then will there be all
sorts of stuff four or five for one that you had at first cutting; about 8
years after this second felling it may be cut again, and then the increase will
be 7 or 8 fold: Thus will your Wood increase unto a hundred years, although not
in quantity, yet in goodness and greatness; so that this Acre of Land shall be
worth 10 Acres of the best Wood land that is of its own growing, or at a nearer
distance, planted and cumbred with Bushes or other Wood but little better. Now
if you will plant an Acre of Land with Oak, Elm, Beech, and Ash at a perch
distance, then may you have the benefit of the Land for other uses; and
preserving the Plants in growing, about 40 years after planting you may fell or
cut down the one half of the wood; taking the middle Tree throughout the
ground; some of them may serve for small Buildings, also for Laths, others to
make Axes for Carts, also fellows and spokes for Wheels, Tree-nails for
building Ships: The Elm stuff may be of use for Ships, also for the
Millwright, and to make Naves for Wheels if not too small; the Ash for broad
hoops for Coopers set-work, great Vessels and Fats for Brewers, Oars for Boats,
useful pieces for Plow and Cart, and many more necessary uses, besides Fireing:
But if these Trees appointed to be cut down may grow 40 or 50 years longer,
than they may be converted to several uses, besides the last mentioned, as for
the building small Ships, Tree-nails of all sizes, Planks, Inch-boards,
Quarter-boards, Quarters, Bouls, Trays, Dishes, Trenchers; and such like.

Having discoursed of sowing, setting, and planting Seed and young Plants for
Timber Trees and Under-woods in Copices, Groves or Spring Grounds; we shall now
proceed and give our advice for the transplanting Trees of greater age and
growth. It is no certain rule to judge the age of a Timber-tree by its bulk or
greatness of body, for there are many hollow trees, and others not hollow, yet
unsound, all of them much greater in the girt or body than sound thriving
trees, which are twice the age of those great imperfect trees, and worth five
times the value: Again there are young trees called suckers, that grow out of
the roots of older trees, which both hinder their own and the others growth,
because the roots are not able to maintain both; so that a Plant well planted
and thriving will be a greater tree and of better use and profit at 30 years
growth than those suckers will be at 50; but if such suckers were taken off in
time, and planted, there would be a double profit, for the tree from whence it
was taken will the better thrive, and also the plant may grow to be a great
tree. Thirdly, there are trees that grow out of or from among the roots of
trees that have been cut down many years; the roots of these young trees being
much twisted about and entangled among the other although dead, yet as we have
said formerly, every touch either of bough or root is hurtful, therefore such
trees are much hindered in their growth and thriving: Also all trees that grow
in hedge-rows or thickets, what ever the wood be, as thorns or other wood; such
trees cannot thrive or be long lived. Fourthly, some trees there are that grow
and thrive for thirty or 40 years, and then are at a stand many years; after
which time they thrive again, but generally decay and dye; the reasons are from
some stoppage or obstructions within the earth which the roots of those trees
met with, as either some great Land Springs or Current of water under ground,
or hard hungry Gravel Rocks of stone, Quarreys of Slate, Chalk, and such like,
which the roots of those trees did not reach unto until such a time of growth.
Now if the Current of water alter its course, and the Rocks or Quarreys be not
great, but that the roots grow beyond them, or through some cleft* then such
trees may thrive again. Although it has been said that the age of a tree
cannot be judged by its bulk or greatness, yet of those trees that have not
been lopped or removed, you may know their age by reckoning from the root up to
the top twig, every years growth being distinguished from other by a knot, if
the tree be not above 20 years old; yet this is not a certain Rule for all
trees, the knots of some of them being not easily to be discerned, therefore
their age is not certainly known but from the time they were first set or
plan^ed; or if you plant with slips or suckers, you must reckon from the time
the sap first put forth shoots; for if you transplant trees, and there being in
the bark knots or boyls, they may be of great age, and yet small of growth; as
knotted Cattle being starved at first, yet may live possibly, but not thrive:
Now if you cannot know the age of the trees you are to remove, then let your
choice be of such as are straight, smooth, and whose bark is well colored
without knots or boyls. Secondly let the roots carry proportion with the body
and boughs, that is round and spreading every way. Thirdly, let not the bole or
body of the tree be above 8 or 10 inches about if possible; for this size or
greatness will endanger life and growth; but the hazard will be much more if
they are of greater bulk, because they must needs be tainted with deadly wounds
either in the roots or top, or both, and after that are seldom or never good.
This evil in removing may be discerned within few years, by the tree bearing a
small hungry leaf, also by the blackness of boughs and bark. Again, another
danger in removing trees of such an age and greatness is, that if they be not
very well staked, the winds by often shaking the body will loosen the roots,
and break the young Taws or Fibers, which are not only the mouth as it were of
the Root, whereby it sucks and draws the moisture or nourishment from the
earth, but are as strings or ties growing farther into the earth, fastening the
roots and so the Tree; and these being broken will much hinder the thriving, if
not endanger the life of such Trees: Therefore all such great Plants or young
Trees transplanted are only useful for ornament; as Walks and such like, or
Pollards so called, because of the often poling or lopping of their heads; and
usually grow in Hedge-rows, or else in Copices or other wast places; for of
such trees the tops may be cut off at pleasure, and the bole or body left at
such a height as may be convenient for the place and use of the said trees.
Although these trees may not grow to become good Timber, yet they may live
bearing arms and boughs, useful for Plowboot, Houseboot and Fireing many
hundred years: And were it not for charges you may for these and such like uses
transplan or remove greater Trees than those last spoken of; the way and
custom^ is to take up the whole Roots with the earth about them, and so set or
plant them where there is a deep and good mould, for the roots and earth will
so balance the body and top, that not any of the boughs will require to be cut
off, only such as are useless, which would be proyned betimes: And although
trees of such growth and greatness be removed, they may thrive and grow for
Timber Trees, if the wast boughs be carefully taken off, and the wounds not too
great, but recoverable. Many more Observations may be added, but these may
suffice. Now in the planting or transplanting those trees formerly mentioned
there ought to be greater care taken than in younger Plants, for there is
greater danger; also the growing and thriving of them is more uncertain,
therefore we shall repeat over again some of our former Directions: First let
the trench or hole you dig to set the Trees in be so large every way that the
roots may lie at length and not be bruised or broken by bending or forcing into
the place. Secondly, set such trees in the deepest earth or crust, and so deep
as the good earth reaches, to prevent shaking by winds; also let the slope
side of the wound be toward the South. As for those fond opinions of several
men, that the roots of trees only grow and thrive in the crust of the earth as
their Element, it is not denied that the Earth is the Element for the roots of
all Trees and Plants, as the Water for Fish; but as Waters have several
distinct tastes, smells, colors, and operations; also several kind of Fish
haunt, delight, and thrive in those several Waters; as some in salt Seas,
others in fresh Rivers, others in muddy Pools or Ponds, as the Carp, Bream,
Chevin; and others in shallow running gravelly streams, as Trout, Roch, Dace,
etc. others in mud and holes in the earth, as Eels, Crawfish, etc. others in
Stony bottoms under the water, as Lobsters, Oisters, Crabs, etc. So likewise
the Earth has several distinct tastes, colors, smells, and operations; and also
several kinds of Creatures living therein: And the Roots of Trees and Plants
thrive and delight to grow in those several sorts of earth; and not only the
Roots of several Trees, but of one and the same Tree. We do acknowledge that
those Roots which grow in the Crust of the Earth most nourish the Tree, by
producing the greatest quantity of sap, and yet there are other Roots also that
grow downwards beneath the crust or good earth, through the several earths, and
are for special use, as ties and stays to keep it up, by binding it fast unto
the ground, as was said before, and likewise to nourish and feed both body and
boughs: Also those Roots that run in the crust put forth other Roots downwards
deeper into the earth; for were it not so those great and mighty Trees that
lift up their heads high into the Air could not stand. Thirdly, let the earth
be moist and mellow, that so falling between the Roots it may the better hold
them. Fourthly, in setting be sure you shake the Tree easily, that the earth
may fall and be dispersed every where among the Roots, and often treading it as
you cast it on the Roots gently with one of your feet, holding the Tree upright
with your hand, leaving no hollowness or vacant place for the wind to get in,
which is very hurtful. Fifthly, let not your Plant or Tree be bound or tied to
any Stake, or lean against any hold, but about every Tree set four Stakes, let
two of them be set deep into the ground, the other two upon, or very little
within the earth, that they may not reach the Roots of the trees; the 4 Stakes
may stand seven or eight inches from the body of the tree, and would be four or
five foot high above the ground, also braced above and below, about a foot from
the top and bottom with braces to keep or join them fast each to other; but if
the Plants or young Trees be in danger of being barked by any Cattle, as Deer,
Goats, Hares, Connies, or any other, then you must board it between the Stakes,
or add more Stakes, setting them close to the ground, but not drive them in:
about the body of the Tree above and below, over against the braces there must
be wound a good Wisp, Role, or Rope of Hay, containing in thickness 9 or 10
inches about: The Roles or Wisps of Hay resting or staying on the stakes and
braces will bear off the body of the Tree from beating against them in every
shake by wind from all parts or points from whence it does blow, and so
preserve the bark from bruising or breaking, and also keep the roots fast and
free from shaking. Now considering all the trouble and charges about
transplanting Trees of such greatness, it is better to plant by young Sets, and
best by seed, and not remove at all; for a Set or Plant so small as a man's
little finger, that does thrive, in 20 or 30 years shall out grow and be
greater in bulk and body than the greatest Tree before spoken of, both being
planted at one and the same time, except those last removed, as aforesaid, with
the earth about the Roots.

Although there have been sufficient directions for the planting of Timber
trees, yet all these directions are of little worth, if after the trees are
grown up you want skill to keep and dress them: for it is in a Tree as all
things else, that they are subject presently to degenerate without good
ordering: There be many men covet to have abundance of trees in a small plot of
ground that will not maintain a fourth part of them; for we may see by daily
experience many Woods that are so thick or overgrown with trees, where there
are 4 or 5 suckers growing out of the roots of one tree, and the whole Wood so
growing, the trees being tall and slender may so continue many hundred years
and be of little worth: And at th^s thickness neither Sun^ nor Air, or Rain can
profit, therefore neither themselves nor any thing under or near them can
thrive. And besides this great evil of suckers, which not only draw out the
heart of the tree from whence they grow, but also starve themselves; there are
many unprofitable boughs which must be likewise taken away; for all Ages and
Countries consent to pruining of trees, yet there are too many unskilful men
that know not those boughs which are to be cut off, or the time and season when
to take them away: Trees are very subject to make their shoots disorderly, and
the greatest trees, and those which grow in the richest earth are the most
subject to be over-loaden with wastfull boughs and suckers, which draw the sap
from the boal or body, and hinder the thriving; these being timely taken away,
the strength of all the sap will go to the Bulk, having recovered and skind as
it were the knots or wounds, will put forth a long and straight body of
profitable Timber, being great of bulk and of infinite lasting. Now these
superfluous boughs are such as grow low under the others, or the lowest of all,
called water-boughs, which by the over shadowing of them that are above, and by
their often dropping on them are much hindered and want sufficient sap to
maintain them, and therefore are better taken away. A second sort of suckers
are your Scyons, which grow straight up from some lower part of the tree from
pride of sap; these also receiving a great part of the sap much hinder the
thriving of the tree, and therefore may be spared as the water boughs. A third
sort are fretters, which are boughs, Arms, or branches growing so near
together, that when the wind blows, they by their rubbing against each other
wound their fellows, making galls, and breeding cankers, that in a short time
will be incurable and endanger the whole tree, therefore such boughs must be
taken away, for the longer they so grow, the worse they will be, and more
dangerous to be taken off, because the wound will be so great that the bark
will scarcely cover it again. Fourthly, in dressing Timber Trees, the chief
care must be to maintain a long boal or body, which should be 30 foot high
before the first Bough be put forth; this may be easily performed following him
upward with continual Lopping his under-growth and Water-boughes; and if he
puts forth any bud in those parts that were lopped, which the Sap may do the
next spring, or summer after; then rub off those Buds, or else Proyn them again
before they are grown too big; And, as the end and benefit of an Orchard is
much and good Fruit, so the end and profit in Planting Timber Trees is sound,
well-colored, Long, Large and Durable Timber, which is only to be accomplished
by careful Planting, good Ordering and Dressing your Trees in time, before the
Arms and Boughs be grown too great, for when a Tree is young you may bring it
to what form you please, for several uses in building Ships, as Beams,
Rudder-pieces, Crooks, Knees, Wale-pieces, or any other; But, it will be
needless to shape Trees for crooked Timber, for there will be enough for those
uses without the help of Art from the natural production of the Earth, by
reason of several hidden causes; since therefore the true ordering and dressing
of timber trees is so requisite, and the knowledge of superfluous Boughs very
necessary, I shall add a few observations whereby you may the better perfect
the work and know them.

First. There is no certain time of the year for all Countries to begin
Proyning; for, as the Clime is where the Trees grow, and the season of the year
more or less temperate and mild, so may you begin earlier or later: Frost and
Snow is no good season; any time may serve after the leaf is fallen till it
show again, if you observe the time of the Moon, which is about the change; the
best season is when the Sap is ready to stir, not when it is proudly stirring,
and, the older the Trees are, the sooner you may begin.

Secondly, The waste Boughs that you take away cut off smooth and close to the
Body or Arm, or any part of the Tree, striking upwards, if conveniently you
can, and leaving no bunch, that the Sap may soon cover the knot or wound; for,
such boughs which are not cut off close to the body, the Bark cannot not in
so good time cover the wound, but the heart of the knob which is left will slit
or crack, and the wind and rain entering in, will cause hollowness, which will
soon decay-that part; and, if many such wounds, then untimely death of the Tree
will follow.

This evil, of not close cutting, or lopping, we have daily experience of, for
there are many thousand Trees now decaying from that cause only, it being a
general custom in lopping Trees, to cut off Arms, Boughs or Branches,
sometimes two inches, sometimes four or five, sometimes more from the Body:
Now, as there is much danger to a Tree by small boughs thus lopped, although
but one time, much more is there in often cutting great Boughs, which make
great wounds not to be covered or cured; therefore all shredding and lopping of
Trees does much hinder their growth and thriving, which makes so many Dwarfs,
Pollards, and such like Shrubs, also so many May-pole-like-Trees, which are
more fit for that then any other use, except it be a course Timber for the
building Houses, making Posts and Rayles, or such like; These Trees may cumber
the ground many hundred years, and their growth scarcely be discerned: Now, it
is no wonder to see so much deformity in great Woods and Forests that lie far
remote from the Owners, whose too much trusting to unskilful and unfaithful
Servants is the cause of so many evil Trees; Nay, even this we see in Orchards
which are near at hand, and ordained for Pleasure as well as Profit; the ground
is covered and cumbered with a company of skragged and crooked Hags, which
never were, nor ever will be good; some running up into the Skies, without form
or substance in Body or Boughs; others Dwarf-like-trees, more Boughs then
Body or Roots; others like Hyd^opical Creatures, great in bulk, but weak in
heart, drinking in the moistness of the earth which swells the Boale, but the
boughs and branches are weak and fruitless: How many Moss over-grown-Trees are
there? How many others Bark-bound; Bark-Pil'd, Cancker'd, full of Galls and
Freters? and many more evi's, which are caused either by the first planting, or
want of dressing, or both; all which may be prevented by a careful and skilful
Gardner: Nor are these casualties incident to an Orchard only, but all-other
Woods, be they great or less.

Thirdly, If there be many Tops on one Tree, and that you would have it grow
for long Timber, then may you take off all but the Principal Top, and follow
him up by Lopping his under Boughs, as before directed: But, if you would not
have the Tree grow high, but great in Bulk, and well spread in Boughs, then
must you nip his top, or take it off.

Fourthly, If you find your Plants or Trees grow generally straight, and that
those few that are crooked prove not useful, you may reform them, or bring
either their Body or Boughs to what form you please if you begin betimes with
them: Now the manner and way of performing this is better to be done then
demonstrated, because the instrument that is to be employed must be framed and
fashioned answerable to the bent or crookedness of the Timber you have occasion
so to alter. There are other observations about the Dressing or Proyning trees,
these already spoken of being to be understood of young Plants not greater in
body then a man's wrist, but the same Rules may be observed in older Trees, so
that the Boughs that are to be cut off be not bigger then as aforesaid; for
there is no reforming Trees that are greater without much skill and labor; and
the wounds being great must have Plasters laid on them; As for Galls, Cankers
and Fretters I know no better cure then to cut off the Bough as before
mentioned: Thus considering the great hazard, labor and charges you put your
self unto by transplanting great Trees, also by suffering the Woods of Trees
that are already planted to grow out of order for want of timely dressing when
they were young; the best way to prevent it for the future is to follow some of
these directions I have offered, and not persist in an error wilfully upon no
other ground then because our Ancestors have done so before: if your Trees are
Mossy it proceeds from Poverty of the ground, which is one of the greatest
causes also of their not thriving; And if Corn and Grass spend the fatness of
the Earth, and will not thrive without a supply by Soil or Dung, much less can
trees that have such great bodies be sustained without some additional helps;
therefore when your trees are grown great, and have spread the ground, you
ought to lay good store of dung, yet according to the quantity of the Trees,
and strength or weakness of the earth, you must add more or less compost: If
all these Rules aforesaid were well observed and performed, England would
abound with the best trees in the World, both for sound, long-lived, and
long-lasting timber, and recover the Wastes that have been made, not only in
quantity, but goodness and greatness. In the History of the West Indies there
is mention made of a tree, whose trunk or Body was 87 foot about, which is 29
foot Diameter: It is my opinion there have been trees of as great a bulk or
body growing in England, for I have been informed of an Oak that was feld in
Hampshire about nine years since, which did contain in timber and Wood fifty
Load: Also of one Arm of an Oak, growing not far from Horsham in Sussex, that
was in the year 1664 blown down by Winds, containing thirteen Load of Wood and
Timber; And I measured the 26th of July 1664, in the Forest called Ales-Hoult,
an Oak now growing, whose trunck or body contains 36 foot compass, which tree
was girded or measured about five foot high from the ground; the Diameter
thereof is 12 foot: And, by many credible reports there have been greater trees
in England then any now growing; for the best timber trees become always a
Prey to such as know their use and profit. Now if such great trees which have
been growing in England did so far exceed in goodness and greatness the
generality of our best Timber Trees now living and growing, which trees by the
opinion of most Men are many hunnred years old, and yet have not lived a third
part of their age. These great trees then, if they had been carefully looked
unto by orderly dressing, proyning and soiling, might have grown to twice their
bulk and greatness, and have lived, if not cut down, many hundred years yet to
come. It is my opinion, that there are Oaks now living and growing which were
Trees and Plants growing from seed, or as suckers from the roots of trees the
next Summer or Spring after the Deluge; and I think I may truly say some were
the production of the earth, and grew by the Command of God at the first
Creation, not destroyed by the Flood: and there may be many reasons for this my
opinion: First, Trees are an Ornament to the Earth, and are to the Earth as the
hairs of a man's head, which without poison, intemperance, or some other
forcible cause, will dure with the body. Man's days are now much shortened by
reason of sin; for before the Flood we read the Age of men to be above 900
years: and although Adam by his transgression was the cause of our Mortality,
yet we have increased the Curse by evil Government, and are become degenerate
from the natural Diet of our forefathers. The men of those days did live, and
increase in all lust, idleness, gluttony, and drunkenness, answerable to this
wicked Age; no marvail then if thousands or millions of men die before they
have lived the tenth part of their age. But an Oak is a plant of solid
substance, feeding naturally as from the beginning, capable of, and subject to
any kind of dressing, that shall be applied unto it; not subject to diseases
occasioned by intemperance, as in Man; And although for Man's sins the Earth was
cursed to bring briers and thorns, yet we do not read that the lives of
Vegetives were therefore shortened, but that every Plant according to the spirit
of the species, by the good will and providence of God, lives to the time first
appointed at the Creation: If Man had not sinned he had not been subject to
mortality; it is therefore resolved upon good reason, that Trees may live
during the world, or until the dissolution of all things here below, not
coming under Man's transgression; for if Man, whose body is nothing in a manner
but tender rottenness, has lived above 900 years, much more may the Oak live
many thousand. But secondly, in all ancient History we read that the greatest
part of England was much overgrown with Woods, and it is well known that these
Woods have been cut down and destroyed in all Ages, and are wasting to this
day: But we do not read of planting any, except in these latter days by
Gentlemen for their private occasions: His Majesty's Forests, which are the
ancient Woods and Woodland in England, have not been planted, nor ever were by
Man; neither do we find that the oldest trees die and young grow up in their
room, nor that decayed trees are cut down except some few for Firing, but the
best and soundest trees, as has been said before; or that such old like
decayed trees are the oldest trees; and are so decayed by reason of age, but
chiefly by being often lopped, shredded, chipt and cut, either boughs or roots,
or by other accidents, as being overwhelmed and oppressed by bushes or other
trees growing too near them or otherlike, which may shorten the life of the
soundest trees, besides other encumbrances under ground, as Land-springs,
Watercourse, Rocks of Stone or Slate, which they meet with in their
subterranous passage. Thirdly, there are trees which are and have been ancient
Boundary trees, or Landmarks many hundred years, which now are and have been by
the memory of the oldest men living growing like trees. Fourthly, it has been
my observation in traveling abroad, that great Woods, or Woods of great
Timber Trees have been so environed with Bogs or moorish ground, that not any
Engine, Cart or Wagon could pass; neither has it been known that any of those
great trees have been felled or cut down: Other Woods I have seen containing
many miles very rocky, and they so high and rugged, that not any Cart or Wagon
could pass in many places, and yet both these grounds abounding with trees of
great bulk; also other parts of the Country have been generally full of Wood
and Timber Trees, and not much peopled, nor ever was: Neither is there any
Cart, Wagon, or other Engine thereabout in use to convey away Timber: And the
Wood and Timber generally used is young trees, with which they build their
Cabbins, Booths or Houses, being but of one story, framed in the Woods, and
drawn to the places where they make use of them, being made fast on both sides
of a horse, or else carried on men's backs: I have traveled through a great
part of these Woods, and as I well remember, the greatest part or quantity of
the dead trees I then saw were such as the wind blew down, many of them lying
rotting on the ground for want of use, the Country being full; and others that
were standing, but dead, I found were for the most part young trees, which did
either grow out of the roots of greater trees, or from seed falling in long
grass, and so growing altogether hindered the growth of each other, and shortened
their lives. I do not know any History that mentions either the planting,
felling, or cutting any of these Woods, nor the oldest man then living in those
parts could inform me. Fifthly, of my own knowledge in Lancashire, Shropshire,
and other parts, there are many Firre-trees taken out of the ground, some of
them 2 or 3 yards within the ground, and by all probability they have lien
there ever since the Flood; for no History, nor any Lease Conveyance or Deed in
writing does mention any such trees growing in those parts: also they are found
near the sea in moorish places, which is not a proper place for the Firr to
grow in: there have been many years since and of late several discoveries of
the said trees being found whole Bodies and Roots, and the Timber very sound:
Now if such trees have dured found so long after death, much longer might they
have lived if they had had the benefit of the earths moisture in their Roots
only. There may be several reasons for that which has been said of the
Firre-trees, I shall but mention one: At the Deluge the Waters continuing many
Months on the earth did much soften and mellow the ground, and at the time
appointed by the Command of God the waters were returned into their Channels by
a strong wind, as in Genesis 8. verse 1. which said wind, after the waters were
something assuaged, did blow down several trees: The Fur being tall, and the
Roots running shallow within the earth, were the sooner blown down, and left
floting on the water by reason of their porousness and lightness. Now when the
Waters were totally assuaged, where the last winds left them, there those trees
sunk into the Mud, and every Tide from the Sea casting up earth or sand did
cover them; and the Sea in after time falling off or leaving those shores, that
earth became dry, and produced grass, moss, weeds and such like, which did grow
over and hide those trees until such time that this Kingdom became more
peopled, and then these trees were discovered as aforesaid: Many more proofs
there are which much strengthens my belief in that which has been said
concerning the age of an Oak: But thus have we in a plain way and experimental,
given helps and directions for the planting Timber trees: many more
observations might have been added in the choice of seed and plants; the
several ways of planting, plowing, delving, sowing, and setting; the different
ways of dressing and proyning; also the several sorts of Timber trees, besides
those before mentioned; all sort of Underwoods with their names and characters:
But they being out of my Road at this time, I shall keep to my business, and in
the next place give an account of the charges and profit in planting a thousand
Acres of Land. Now the best Figure for this Plot of Land for profit and
pleasure is a Quadrat or four square of equal angle, because it encloseth a
greater quantity of Land with less charges then you can do in any other Figure;
also the Plants may be planted uniformly and in order: To perform this there
must be provided two Chains made of Wire, each of them containing 22 yards,
which is 4 perch, the breadth of an acre of Land, as it is usually measured;
for 40 perch long and 4 broad is an Acre; but if Woodland measure, then the
Chains must be 24 yards in length; one of the said Chains must be divided into
16 parts by 15 brass Rings, such as are used about Curtains, the said Rings to
hang loose in that part of the wire that joins the links together; this
performed the distance between the Rings will be one fourth of a perch which
is of Land measure 4 foot 1^; inch, but of Wood measure 4 foot 6 inches. At
each end of this Chain would be an iron wire Ring 2 or 3 times the compass of
the brass Rings: With this Chain all seed or plants which are to be set at one
perch, two perch, three perch, four perch, half a perch, and one fourth
part of a perch distance, may be orderly and speedily set or planted; and that
you may readily distinguish between the parts of the Chain, at the one fourth
part of a perch must be a single Ring, at the half of the perch 2 Rings, at
one perch distance 3 Rings, and at the middle of the Chain, which is a Perch,
4 Rings: but to plant at these distances you may also make use of a straight
Pole containing one perch in length, and divided into four parts. The second
Chain must be divided into yards and feet by brass Rings, as in the first
Chain; it will require 65 Rings, being the distance of feet; and at every third
foot, beginning at one end of the Chain, add one Ring more, there will then be
two Rings, which is the distance of yards: this being finished, the single
Rings distinguish the feet, and the double the yards, the Chain containing in
length 66 foot and 22 yards; but if wood measure, then the length of the Chain
will be 72 foot and 24 yards: with these two Chains you may plant Seed and Sets
at all the distances mentioned in the Book. Now if you will not be at the
charges to provide Chains, then may you make use of small Cords or Lines; and
instead of Rings there may be knots with several colored rags at all the
distances before mentioned; and if these Chains or Lines be not of a sufficient
length to dispatch much work, then may you lengthen them according to your use
or pleasure.

ENGLAND'S IMPROVEMENT REVIVED.
THE FOURTH BOOK.
The Argument.
You have Directions to plant a thousand Acres of Land, Woodland measure, 18
foot to the Perch, with Seed and Sets for Timber Trees and Underwoods at the
several distances before mentioned; and that is from one foot to four Perch.
Also here is set down the particular and total accounts of the Charges and
Profit of planting the said Land by plowing or delving, and sowing or setting
the same with Seed or Sets: As also of converting the said Woods to several
uses.

WE have formerly discoursed of the knowledge of several sorts of Land by
their Characters and Constitutions; also of the Clime or Continent wherein they
lie, and how you shall make choice of Land for planting Trees; the choice of
seed and plants; the seasons for plowing, sowing, and setting; transplanting
trees of great growth, with the several Distances of ground between the Plants;
and the Improvement of one Acre of Land several ways; and to plant with Seed
and Sets for Timber Trees and Under-woods; therefore shall not trouble you with
repetitions, but proceed.

Suppose therefore the thousand Acres of Land before mentioned, to be totally
planted, extending to the outmost bounds as it was measured without the Fence,
it contains 160000 perch at 18 foot to the perch. In the planting this ground
we shall mention only 5 several distances between the Plants.

I. Did. The first and nearest shall be one foot: at this distance you are
only to plant seed for the procuring Plants to transplant other Lands: we shall
suppose this thousand Acres also to be a strong rich earth; and every way
qualified for the planting all sorts of Timber Trees: This Plot of Land then
contains 400 perch square, or 7200 foot, but will require 7201 Rows of seed or
plants, and the whole ground will take up 51854401 single seed or plants.

Now if you will plant at this distance with seed for present use and profit,
my advice is to plant only these three sorts, that is to say, the Oak seed
which is Acorns, the Ash-tree seed called Ashen Keys, the Chesnut-tree seed or
Chestnuts: There being an equal number or quantity of the three several sorts of
Seed, set or planted, the Land will take up of Acorns 17284800, of Ashen-keyes
17284800, of Chestnuts 17284801. Now supposing that all these seeds grow and
thrive, about three years after the planting they will be of a sufficient
growth to be transplanted. The Oak and Ash Plants may yield 18 pence the
hundred, there being 345696 hundred, allowing five score to the hundred, which
amounts to 25927 pound 4 shillings: of Chestnut Plants there will be 172848
hundred and 1 Plant; and they may be worth two shillings and six pence the
hundred, and will amount to 21606 pounds 1 farthing: The total sum that all
the Plants amount to is 47533 pound 4 shillings 1 farthing: A good improvement
if there were Markets or vent for so many.

II. Did. But if at three foot distance you will reserve one of these Plants
to grow for Under-woods, and that you leave them equally mixed as they were
planted, then there will be for sale or to be sold of Oak and Ash 30726400
single Plants, or 307164 hundred, and at 18 pence the hundred amount to 23044
pound 16 shillings; of Chestnut 153632 hundred of Plants at two shillings six
pence the hundred come to 19204 pound. The total sum for all these Plants
amounts to 42248 pound 16 shillings; the remainder or the Rods or Plants
reserved are 5764801, which about eight or nine years after from the time they
were planted, you may fell or cut down, and convert them to their several uses
thus; the number of Chestnut Plants is 1921601, the number of Oak Plants is
1921600, the number of Ash Plants is 1921601. From the Chestnut Plants may be
chosen 214234 Rods of the size from 12 to 16 foot in length: for smart hoops
commonly used about wet and dry Cask of all sorts; and each Rod being carefully
slit will make two Hoops, worth, if delivered at London, six shillings the
hundred, allowing six score to the hundred; then there will be 428468 single
hoops, and being reckoned by the hundred they come to 3570 hundred 68 hoops,
and amounts at six shillings the hundred to 1079 pound 3 shillings 4 pence
halfpenny. There may also from the Chestnut Plants be gathered 1400566 Rods of
the size from 6 to 12 foot long, which will make 2801132 single hoops, and they
arise to 23342 hundred and 92 hoops, worth, if delivered as aforesaid, 4
shillings the hundred, they amount to 4668 pound 11 shillings 3 farthings: the
total sum for the Chestnut hoops amount to 5739 pound 14 shillings 5 pence one
farthing. Out of the Oak and Ash, containing 3843200 Plants, may be chosen
403700 Rods of the longer size from 12 to 16 foot, which may make, being
carefully slit as aforesaid, 807400 hoops, worth, if delivered at London, 4
shillings the hundred; and there being of them accounted as the Chestnut by the
hundred 6728 hundred and 40 hoops, they will amount to 1345 pound 14 shillings
8 pence. Also out of the said Oak and Ash plants may be chosen of the shorter
size from 6 to 12 foot 2125900 Rods, which will make 4251800 hoops, worth at
London three shillings the hundred, and there being of them 35431 hundred and
80 hoops, amounts to 5314 pound 15 shillings: The total arising of Oak and Ash
amouts to 6660 pounds 9 shillings 8 pence.

These aforesaid hoops are generally used about Oil or Wine Cask, Grocery ware,
Brewers, and such like: but it may be objected that all or every Rod appointed
for hoops, although carefully slit, yet may not make two hoops: Our answer is,
That all the Plants or Rods growing in the said Wood, is not appointed for the
making hoops; therefore out of the remainder of Rods or Stuff reserved for
other uses, there may be more Rods chosen to answer the insufficiency of those
Rods before appointed, or to make up the number of hoops according to the
accounts. Now the Remainder of Plants or Rods, not made use of for hoops, are
in number 1620401, of which although there may be many uses made of them, as to
make Hurdles for Sheepfolds, brading of Walls, and the like; yet we shall not
convert them to any other use than Firing, of which Rods therefore, and the
offal of the hoops may be made 1464 hundred of Fagots, allowing five score to
the hundred, and they being worth five shillings the hundred in the Wood,
amount to 366 pound. The total Improvement of the thousand Acres of Land
planted with the seed of Oak, Ash, and Chestnut at this second Distance amounts
to 55015 pound one penny one farthing.

2. Cut. Now about 8 years after the first Felling, you may fell or cut this
Wood again, and then every Stock will produce two or three Shoots: We shall
consider of the least number, which comes to 11529602 Shoots, out of the
Chestnut then may be chosen, there being 3843200 Shoots, 403700 Rods of the size
from 12 to 16 foot, which will make being slit as aforesaid 807400 of the same
size Hoops, and arise according to the former reckoning to 6728 hundred and 40
Hoops at six shillings the hundred, they come to 2018 pound ten shillings:
There may be chosen also of the shorter size from 6 to 12 foot 2825900 Rods,
which may make 56518^0 Hoops, or 47098 hundred and 40 Hoops, and amount at 4
shillings the hundred to 9419 pound 13 shillings 4 pence.

The Total for Chestnut Hoops amounts to 11438 pounds 3 shillings 4 pence.

From the Oak and Ash, there being 7686402 Shoots, may be chosen 859202 Rods of
the size from 12 to 16 foot, which will make 1718404 Hoops, and arise to 14320
hundred and four Hoops, amounting, at 4 shillings the hundred, to 2864 pound
one penny two farthings: Also from the said Oak and Ash may be chosen from 6 to
12 foot 5264000 Rods, they will make 10528000 Hoops, and arise to 87733 and 40
Hoops, which at 3 shillings the hundred amounts to 13160 pound: The total for
Oak and Ash Hoops amounts to 160024 pound three half pence: From the remainder
of Shoots, which is 2176800, and the Offal of the Rods for Hoops may be made
398600 Fagots, which arise to 3986 hundred at five score to the hundred; they
are worth in the Wood six shillings the hundred, and come in the whole to 1195
pounds 16 shillings.

The total Improvement by Hoops and Fagots at this second selling amounts to
28657 pound 19 shillings 5 pence half penny.

3. Cut. At the third Cutting of this great Wood, which may be about eight
years after the second, you will find the sap has put forth five or six shoots
out of each Stock; and at the next or fourth Cutting or Felling, which will be
about the term of 32 years from the first Planting, by reason of, or from the
goodness and richness of the earth, the Stocks will increase to such strength
and greatness, that every one may produce ten or twelve Shoots more larger and
of better growth than the former; for you may please to understand the often
cutting of this Under-wood or Coppice (yet not oftener than has been declared)
will cause the roots to extend or spread themselves farther into the earth, and
that will much increase their sap, and thereby they will be enabled to put
forth speedy, straight, sound, and strong Shoots; always observing that you
make choice of a good year and the best season when you begin to fell or cut
the Stuff. We shall only give you an account of the last or fourth Felling, and
according to our former Method shall reckon from the least number, which is 10.
The remainder or the Plants left for underwood were 5764801, and the Increase
which the Stocks do now produce arise to 57648010 Shoots or Rods to be cut
down. Out of the Chestnut then containing 19216004 Shoots, there may be chosen
of the longer size from each Stock one Rod, which does arise to 1921601 Rods,
and will make 3843202 Hoops amounting to 32026 hundred and 82 Hoops, and worth
at six shillings the hundred 9608 pound 1 penny: There may be chosen also of
the shorter size from 6 to 12 foot 8000000 of Rods, which will make 16000000 of
hoops arising to 133333 hundred and 40 hoops, and worth at 4 shillings the
hundred 26666 pounds 13 shillings 4 pence.

The total sum for the Chestnut Hoops amounts to 36274 pound 13 shillings 5
pence: The Oak and Ash Stocks, being in number 3843200, produce 38432000 Shoots
or Rods to be cut down, and out of them may be chosen of the longer size Rods
as before mentioned 2000000, and they will make 4000000 of Hoops, which arise
by the hundred to 33333 hundred and 4 Hoops, worth at 4 shillings the hundred
6666 pound 13 shillings 4 pence: Of the size from 6 foot to 12 may be chosen
also out of the Oak and Ash 16148005 Rods, which will make 32296010 Hoops
arising by account as before to 269133 hundred and 5 Hoops, and worth at 3
shillings the hundred 40370 pounds 3 pence.

The total sum for Oak and Ash Hoops amounts to 47036 pounds 13 shillings 7
pence.

Now although there may be many Necessaries of Husbandry gathered out of the
Offal, as Rods to make Hurdles for Sheepfold; also thatching Houses, brading
Walls, and the like; yet the quantity vented for such uses being so
inconsiderable, we shall convert the Offal to no other use than Firing as
before said. There may be then made of the 29578404 Shoots or Rods that are not
useful for Hoops, and the shreding of the 28069606 Rods converted into Hoops
226450^ Fagots, worth in the Wood 6 shillings the hundred, and there being of
them 22645 hundred at 5 score to the hundred, they amount to 6793 pounds 10
shillings.

The total Improvement at this fourth Cutting by Hoops and Fagots amounts to
90104 pounds 17 shillings.

Now if we should proceed to another season of felling, the increase would
overcharge the Markets, and bring the Prices for smart hoops down to so low a
rate, that there will be greater vent and more profit in converting the wood
into Firing; also by that time the Stocks will begin to decline or decay, they
being planted at too near a distance. But omitting that, we shall go on to
consider of some other ways to improve the thousand Acres of Land to be
planted as aforesaid.

III. Did. The next or third Distance therefore formerly mentioned is at 4
foot 6 inches, which is the one fourth part of Perch: This is the nearest
Distance I would advize to plant Under-woods; for the more liberty the roots
have to extend themselves, the greater nourishment they receive from the earth,
which does not only add many years to their time of living, but also much
expediate and increase their growth, whereby they will be enabled to produce a
more plentiful Crop for quantity, goodness and greatness at the time of
cutting, then if planted at a nearer distance. And because the Oak is of a
slower growth than the Chestnut, Ash, or Withey, and is not useful for
Hop-poles, nor any sort of Hoops, but those called smart hoops; we shall
therefore instead thereof plant the Withey, and leave out the Oak.

This Plot of Land then will take up or require, there being but one single
seed or plant planted at the distance aforesaid, of the Chestnut 854401 seed or
plants: Of the Ash 854400 seed or plants; and of the Withey 854400 plants; for
this kind of wood is not planted by seed. The Total of seed or plants to be set
or planted amounts to 2563201. Now it is to be supposed, as was said before,
that all these Plants grow and thrive, and then about 11 or 12 years after
their planting they may all be felled or cut down: And in felling you must be
careful to cut off the Rod or Pole sloping smooth and close, leaving the Stem
or Body of the Plant about 3 inches above the earth and not more, according to
former directions; Out of the Chestnut may be chosen 600000 Hop-poles, of which,
allowing 5 score to the hundred, arise 6000 hundred, worth in the place where
they are felled, if they grow within 4 or 5 miles from any great quantity of
ground where there are many hops planted, 14 shillings the hundred, and amount
to 4200 pounds; from the Ash and Withey may also be chosen 954000 Poles, which
arise to 9540 hundred, worth where they are felled, 12 shillings the hundred,
and amount to 5724 pound.

The total sum for Hop-poles amounts to 9924 pound.

From the Remainder of the Chestnut, which are 254401 Stocks may be chosen 63600
Rods for bark or ryne hoops, of the size from 10 to 13 foot long, they will
make 127200 hoops, and counting six score to the hundred, arise to 1060
hundred, worth to be delivered at London 15 shillings the hundred, and amount
to 795 pound. There may likewise be chosen from the Chestnut 190801 Rods of the
size from 6 to 10 foot, which will make 381602 hoops, worth at the place
aforesaid 10 shillings the hundred, there being 3180 hundred and 2 Hoops,
amount to 1590 pound 4 pence.

The total sum for both sizes of Chestnut hoops amounts to 2385 pound 4 pence.

From the Ash and Withey may also be chosen 24800 Rods of the size from 10 to
13 foot, which will make 49600 bark hoops, which arise by tale to 413 hundred
and 40 hoops, worth 10 shillings the hundred, they amount to 206 pound 13
shillings 4 pence. From the Ash and Withy may also be chosen 730000 Rods of the
shorter size from 6 to 10 foot, they will make 1460000 hoops, that is 12166
hundred and 80 hoops, and being worth 8 shillings the hundred amount to 4866
pound 13 shillings 4 pence*

The total sum for Ash and Withey bark hoops-amounts to 5073 pound 6 shillings
8 pence.

The total sum for all the sorts and sizes of bark hoops amounts to 7458 pound
7 shillings.

The Shredding and Offal of Hop-poles and Hoops, with the rest of the Stuff cut
down, will make 67280 shred Fagots, and allowing five score to the hundred,
there will be of them 672 hundred and 80 Fagots, worth in the Wood 8 shillings
the hundred, and amount to 269 pound 2 shillings 4 pence 3 farthings.

Now at this Distance the Land may be sowed with Corn between the Plants for
the term of 3 or 4 years and not rest; but you must be careful that after the
3 or 4 years Crops received, the Land be made good again by laying on it great
store of Soil or Dung; for if you weaken the heart of the Land by often plowing
or delving, the Plants cannot thrive or grow to raise any profit: Also by
making the ground poor, you will endanger the life of the Plants, and thereby
lose all your charges. It is my opinion, that Corn sowed among or between the
Plants the first three or four years after planting, will much help the
thriving and growth of them, so that neither Corn or Grass grow nearer the
Plants than one foot; for if you take a good and early. Seed season, the Corn
will be grown to a great head or height before the coldest of Winter, and by
that means keep the ground mellow, warm, and moist; and in the Summer will
shelter and shade the young tender shoots, which the Plants will put forth from
the scorching Sun.

Now the most proper seed for the ground considering the season of the year
when the Timber seeds are to be set or sowed, is Wheat; and because Woodland
measure makes a large Acre, which contains 920 square yards of Land more than
the Statute Acre, or Land measure; therefore we cannot allow less than 3
Bushels of Wheat to be sowed on every Acre; yet because at this Distance the
Plants will take up a great part of the Land, we shall therefore allow but 2
Bushels to an Acre, which comes to 2000 Bushels; the increase thereof may arise
to 20000 Bushels yearly, during such time the Land is sowed, as before
mentioned: And for that the price of Wheat is very uncertain, differing more or
less almost every Market day, we shall therefore value it to be worth one year
with another 5 shillings the Bushel, which amounts, for the 20000 Bushels, to
5000 pound: From the yearly Crop of Wheat there will arise 1000 Load of Straw
worth 5 shillings the Load, and 16000 Bushels of Chaff or Hulls, worth 3 pence
the Bushel heap and thrust: the total sum for Straw and Hulls amounts to 450
pound.

The total sum of the whole Improvement at this first felling, and three
years Crops of Wheat amounts to 34001 pound 9 shillings 4 pence 3 farthings.

About the same time or term of years the last stuff was allowed to grow, this
Wood may be cut again, and every Stock then will yield you 3 or 4 Poles or
Rods, because these Stocks are almost twice the age of those which were cut for
smart hoops, and therefore by consequence are greater, and have more abundance
of sap.

Eight or nine years after the second Felling you may receive a third Crop,
which, if well husbanded, will yield or return into your Purse above three
times so much as the first did.

4. Cut. Now at the next or fourth Cutting, which may be about eight or nine
years after the last, the Stocks being grown great and full, and in pride of
sap, you will find 10, 11, or 12 Shoots on each Stock; we shall reckon upon 10,
then there will be in the whole ground 25632010 Shoots or Rods. And because the
Chestnut is of more worth than either of the other, we shall therefore substract
and count the value of them particularly.

The number of Chestnut amounts to 8544010 Shoots or Rods. We shall suppose that
each or every Stock one with the other will afford us two very good Hop-poles,
there will then be of them 1708802, which arise to 17088 hundred and 2 Poles,
and are worth at 14 shillings the hundred 11961 pound 12 shillings 3 pence
farthing.

We shall also take from the Ash and Withy of each Stock 2 Poles, which will
make 3417600 single Poles, or reckoned by the hundred 34176 hundred, worth at
12 shillings the hundred 20^05 pounds 12 shillings.

The total sum for Hop-poles amounts to 32467 pound 4 shillings 3 pence
farthing.

From each Stock of Chestnut, which are 854401, there may be taken 2 Rods for
Bark hoops of the longer size formerly mentioned; they will amount to 1708802
Rods, and make 3417604 hoops, which allowing six score to the hundred, will be
found to be 28480 hundred and 4 hoops, worth at 15 shillings the hundred 21360
pound 6 pence: Of the said Chestnut Stocks may be taken 3 Rods from each Stock
of the shorter size, from 6 to 10 foot long, and of them there will be 2563203
Rods; they will make 5126406 hoops, that is 42720 hundred and 6 hoops worth at
10 shillings the hundred 21360 pound 6 pence.

The total sum for Chestnut hoops amounts to 42720 pound 1 shilling.

From each Stock of the Ash and Withey may likewise be taken 2 Rods of the
longer size from 10 to 13 foot, viz. from the whole Plantation 3417600 Rods,
which will make 6835200 single hoops, or accounted by the hundred 56960
hundred, worth at 10 shillings the hundred 28480 pound. From the said Ash and
Withey may also be chosen from each Stock 2 Rods of the shorter size, and there
will be found of that size 3417600 Rods, which will make 6835200 hoops, arising
to 56960 hundred, and worth at 8 shillings the hundred 22784 pound.

The Total for Ash and Withey Bark-hoops amounts to 51264 pound.

The total sum for all the sorts and sizes of Bark-hoops amount to 93984
pound 1 shilling.

Of the Remainder of Shoots or Rods, which are 9398403, and the Shredding of
the 16233607 Hop-poles and Hoops, there may be made 2000000 of shred Fagots 4
foot long, worth in the place where they are cut 8 shillings the hundred, and
counting 5 score to the hundred, they arise to 20000 hundred, which amounts to
8000 pound. Of the other Offal or remainder of stuff may be made 264800 Brush
Fagots worth in the Wood 6 shillings the hundred, and there being of them 2648
hundred, they amount to 794 pound 8 shillings.

The total Improvement by Hop-poles, Bark-hoops and Fagots at the fourth
Felling amounts to 135245 pound 13 shilshillings 3 pence farthing.

Now because in some Countries there may be good Land for planting these sorts
of Wood, which yet being far remote from Markets have no vent for the
Production, as Hop-poles, Hoops, etc. And the transportation being so
chargeable, that like many good staple and vendible Commodities in other parts
of the World for want of that convenience they happen to be but of little
profit to the Owners: We shall therefore count what the profit of Woods planted
in this Thousand Acres will be, converting it only to Firing, and other
Necessaries useful in all Countries; for Timber and Under-woods are so
generally wasted and destroyed every where, especially in this Nation, that it
is hard to judge where there is no want.

5. Fell. At the next or fith Felling of this great Wood, which because we
would have it grow to a good scantling or substance, may be about 14 years
after the last Cutting, the stocks being by that time more increased, and the
sap having put forth at least 15 or 16 Shoots, using our former method, we
shall take the least number, then there will be by reason of the increase from
the 2563201 Stocks 38448015 Shoots or young Trees cut down, out of which number
there may be made choice of 200000 of the greater and streightest, the lower or
but end of which being cut off from 8 to 11 or 12 foot long, there may be made
2 white hoops from each end, containing about 3 inches broad, and in thickness
3 quarters of an inch on the back or sap edge, and a quarter of an inch on the
heart edge, commonly called Bastard hoops; the number of them will be 400000,
which arise to 333 hundred and 40 hoops; they will be worth 500 pound: From the
said Butt ends may likewise be made 333 hundred and 40 hoops of the narrower
size, about 2 inches broad, which may be worth 20 shillings the hundred, and
amount to 333 pound 6 shillings 8 pence. There may also be chosen from the wood
felled 500000 Butt ends of a shorter size from 5 to 8 foot, of the breadth and
thickness of the former, each end will make of both sorts 4 hoops, the number
then is 2000000; these are worth both sizes one with the other 10 shillings the
hundred, and there being 16666 hundred and 80 hoops of them, they amount to
8333 pound six shillings 8 pence.

The total sum for White hoops amounts to 9166 pound 13 shillings 4 pence.

Out of this Fall of wood may also be chosen from each stock of the Chestnut 2
Rods, which will make Bark hoops of all the sizes from 6 to 13 foot; then there
will be made of the 1708802 Rods 28480 hundred and 4 hoops, they being most of
the longest size, and all of the best sort of Bark hoops, are worth one with
the other 13 shillings the hundred, which amouts to 18512 pound 5 pence.

The Ash and Withey may likewise yield from each Stock 4 hopes of the size
aforesaid, there will then be of them 56960 hundred hoops worth 8 shillings the
hundred, and amounts to 22784 pound.

The total sum for all sort of hoops amounts to 50462 pound 13 shillings 9
pence.

These White and Bark hoops are commonly used by Country Coopers about small
brewing Vessels, also for hooping all sorts of set work: As for those best
sorts of White hoops that are five or six inches broad, and worth nine or ten
pound the hundred; they are made of greater grown Timber than these Woods will
afford at so few years: But we shall have occasion to speak of them hereafter,
and therefore forbear further mentioning of them in this place. There remains
to be felled or cut down besides, or more then those used about hoops 32621613
Shoots or young Trees: Out of them may be chosen from each Stock 12 single
Billets, or so many as contain 12 notches; for according to the Statute every
Billet should be 3 foot long, and 7 inches and a half in compass; and if the
stick be great to bear 2 notches, the compass must be 10 inches, and if 3
notches, then the compass must be 14 inches; and so increasing as the Billets
are in greatness. The number of Billets chosen is 30758412: there goes to one
Load of these 500 notches or single Billets, then there will be 61516 Load
three quarters and 37 single Billets, worth in the Wood or place of felling ten
shilling the Load, which amounts to 30758 pound 8 shillings and 1 penny 3
farthings. There may also be made from each Stock 6 Ostra Fagots which would be
3 foot long, and in compass 24 inches; they ought to be round and not flat, for
so they are much less, though all one compass. Of these Fagots there will be
15379206, and counting five score to the hundred, they arise to 153792 hundred
and 6 Fagots, worth in the place where they are made 5 shillings the hundred,
in the whole 38448 pound 3 pence half penny. From the remainder of Shoots, and
the offal of the Hoops and Billets may be made 2000000 of shread Fagots 4 foot
long, worth 8 shillings the hundred, there being 20000 hundred, amounts to 8000
pound: from the Offal of the shread Fagots, and the other Brush stuff, may be
made 225400 Bavins or Brush Fagots, worth 6 shillings the hundred, and there
being 2254 hundred of them, their sum amounts to 676 pound 4 shillings.

The total Improvement at this fifth season of felling amounts to 126992 pound
10 shillings 2 pence farthing.

At all the after Fellings the growth of this Wood will be every time greater,
and the Shoots more in number than the last; for these Stocks will grow and
thrive above an hundred years.

Now at the next or seventh season of felling, the Product of this Wood being
converted to the best advantage, may return or be worth 200000 pound. Let no
man think this to be strange; for when Seed or Plants are planted at such a
distance as the roots may have room and liberty to spread and enlarge
themselves, and that the Shoots or young growth have Air and Sun, also all
encumbrances removed and taken away, such Underwoods or Woodland shall be of
more worth by the Acre than 12 Acres of ordinary Copices, Groves, or
Underwoods; therefore I have not set too high a rate on the Stuff or worth of
Wood, prized as aforesaid; neither counted the utmost Production or Increase of
growth. We have many examples in Fruits and Herbs, that are planted in Orchards
and Gardens, how far they exceed others of the same kind both in laregness and
goodness, as well as in taste, smell, color, etc. that grow wild, so called
because they proceed from the earth without the help of Man.

Now although Nature is before, and to be laid as a foundation to Arts, yet
Nature is the better perfected by Art, because Art does nothing but by the
strength of Nature; and to confirm your faith we shall give an account what
this Land amounts to by the year for each or every Acre: You are to take notice
the Wood is allotted to grow 14 years, the profit then made when those years
are expired amounts to 200000 pound, which is 14 pound 5 shillings 8 pence half
penny yearly profit for eve-Acre of the thousand Acres. In Holland there is
Land has been sowed with Flax seed, and the Crop thereof has been worth fifty
pound the Acre; but we shall come nearer home: There is Land in England sowed
with Wheat, that has yielded at Harvest 2 Load upon an Acre, which is 80
Bushels. Now this Wheat, if sold at the price Markets have given for 3 or 4
years past, which was 8 shillings the Bushel, then the profit of the Acre by
the year comes to 32 pound, which is above double the profit of the Woodland:
Suppose this Corn-Land yield but the one half of the former Increase, which is
40 Bushels of Wheat upon one Acre, then it comes to 16 pound. Again, if the
Land should yield the first Increase, and Wheat sold for 4 shillings the
bushel; for commonly great Crops or a plentiful Harvest cause low Markets: yet
then this Acre of Land is worth 16 pound yearly. This may be sufficient to
satisfy any reasonable man: We shall return to our Work. Now because it is a
general Custom in England at the felling of under-Woods, to reserve young Eats
or Standils to grow for Timber Trees; therefore in such Woods you are not to
leave them at a nearer distance than 4 Perch, which is 72 foot; for if you
leave them nearer, the said Trees will destroy and much hinder the growth and
thriving of the under-Woods, as has been formerly declared. Thus much may
serve to have here spoken for the first, second, and third Distance of ground
between Plants, also planting under-woods.

IV. Did. The next or fourth Distance is one Perch or 18 foot; At this
distance there may be dug or delved a Plot of ground either square or round,
the quantity to contain 4 foot square, or 16 foot of ground: At each point or
corner, or in the middle of the square sides, must a Seed or Plant be planted
either of Chestnut, Ash, Beech, or Elm; and if you plant of all these kinds an
equal number, there will then be 160801 square Plots, and 160801 Plants of each
kind, which amount in the whole ground to 643204 plants; these may all grow 30
or 40 years more or less time as there may be use for them, or so long as every
Man may please who shall be the Owner. At so near a distance the Trees will not
grow great in body as when they have more room, but straight, slender, and
tall; also they will have very few and small boughs grow on the insides that
are opposite each to other. To make these Trees grow in bulk or greatness; when
they are grown to that height which is best for your occasions, then nip or
cut off their heads or tops. Now about 30 years after planting, the three
fourth parts of these Trees would be grubbed or cut down, that the remainder
reserved for greater Timber may have the more room, air, and sun on all parts:
(And in felling) the former distance must be observed between them that are
left standing: those Trees that are felled may be converted to their several
uses as follows. The Butt or lower end of the streightest Ash and Chestnuts
that are best to slit, must be made choice of for white hoops, the size from 9
to 13 or 14 foot long: These hoops being of the best sort are to be made 5, 6,
7 inches broad, one inch thick on the back or sap edge, and about half an inch
thick on the other or heart edge; they are worth, if delivered at London, 9
pound the hundred. One end or length of the said young trees may make 10 good
hoops, and 12 trees or ends will make one hundred, allowing six score to the
hundred: Now the remainder of the said trees and the Offal of them which were
felled for hoops, may be converted to several uses. The Chestnut is good Timber
for building Houses, also for Quarters much used by Joyners and Frame-makers
about Stools and Chairs, Chests, Boxes, Bedsteds, and such like: both the
Chestnut and Ash are very good to make Wagons, Carts, and many other necessaries
of Husbandry: But it would spend much time in speaking to every particular; we
shall therefore value the Chestnut and Ash, one with the other, to be worth 10
shillings the Tree, there being 241202 Trees, they amount to 120601 pound. The
Elm and Beech being slow growers, will not be in so short a time of a
sufficient greatness for extraordinary uses; Out of the Beech may be made
Fellows, Axes, and Spokes for Cart-wheels, Quarters for Joyners, and Building,
used as the Chestnut; also Bowls, Trayes, Dishes, Trenchers, and such like. The
Elm will not be of that greatness to serve about building Ships of any
considerable burden, but for small Vessels, as Hyes, Ketches, and such like; as
also Pipes to lay under ground for the conveying of water, much used in and
about London; they may likewise be serviceable to Mill-wrights for making and
repairing Watermills; also to other necessary uses may both these sorts of wood
be employed, so that they may be worth one with the other six shillings the
Tree, and there being 241201 Trees, and being sold at the price, they amount to
72360 pound 6 shillings.

The total sum for all the foresaid Trees amount to 192961 pound 6 shillings.

The Trees that were left standing are in number 160801; now if they be
carefully proyned and looked unto, about 70 years growth, the Ash and Chestnut
may be worth 30 shillings the Tree one with the other, and there being of them
80401, they amount to 120601 pound 10 shillings.

The Elm and Beech about that time may grow to be worth 20 shillings the Tree,
the Elm being of substance to be used about the Hulls and Keels of small
Ships; also for Naves for Wagons, and Cart-wheels; many other uses may likewise
be made of them: The number of both sorts is 80400 Trees, and they amount to
80400 pound.

The total of all the 4 sorts of Trees amounts to 201001 pound 10 shillings.

The 3 years Crop of Wheat with the Hulls and Straw, according to our former
reckoning do come to 16350 pound.

The total of the whole Improvement by this way of planting at the fourth
Distance, amounts to 410312 pound sixteen shillings.

Now all men do not approve of planting Under-woods with or among Timber Trees,
nor that Trees should grow so near together, as in this last planting; neither
is it convenient that all Woodland should be so planted; for at so near a
distance they do not only hinder the growth of each other, but also take up
much land, which may otherwise be employed for the benefit of Corn and Cattle;
and therefore this Distance of one Perch is too near for great Trees; yet in
planting Seed or Plants there must be care taken that the distance of them be
such, that every Tree be not a noyance but a help to his fellows, as not to
hurt one another by any touch either of bough or root, and yet not so far
asunder but that they may shroud each other from the cold and winds; therefore
at this distance you may set your Plants, and when they are grown great, or
come so near as to hurt by any touch, then may you cut, fell, or grub^up the
middle Tree, and you will have the greater profit of the Land either to plow,
mow, or for pasture.

We shall now proceed and treat only of planting the Oak at one Rod distance:
Then may be dug or delved a Plot of ground 2 foot square; in the middle of
the said Plot you are to plant 3 Seed or young Plants a foot distance one from
the other, and about 2 years after the planting one of the best Plants is to be
reserved as a Standil or Storer, and the other 2 must be pulled or drawn up,
and disposed of either to plant other grounds, or bestowed on your poor
Neighbors if you have not sale for them: In this Thousand Acres of Land there
will be 160801 square Plots; in each of the said Plots is reserved to grow for
Timber 1 Oak Plant: Now you may plow or delve the ground between the Plants,
and sow with such Grain as will produce the best Crop; yet it must not be
plowed above 3 or 4 years for fear of hurting the roots of the young Trees, but
may be kept for Pasture or Meadow, and benefit made many years, if that you
help the Land by soyling it with good Dung. These trees may all grow till the
twigs of each tree touch their Neighbor; then must you grub up every middle
tree, which will be the second, fourth, sixth, and so reckoning throughout the
whole Wood, always observing to leave standing the outmost Row of trees about
the ground for several reasons, but for brevity sake we shall mention but
three: First those Trees being accustomed to the cold will the better endure;
Secondly they generally are the best growing Trees, because they have most
room, therefore receive more nourishment from the earth to increase their sap,
and so consequently their growth: Thirdly they shelter and succor the inmost
Trees from droughth, cold, and winds; and the inmost Trees will shelter them on
three sides. Now to proceed, these middle Trees must not be cut down or felled,
as we taught before, because after the Trees are gone or removed, the Land may
be plowed and sowed with Corn between the Trees, remaining as at the first
planting, and for many more years, therefore they must be very well grubbed or
stockt up that the roots may not grow again. The number of Trees that are to be
stockt up is 79600: This Timber may serve for ordinary building, and out of it
may be chosen small Ship-Timber, also Tree-nails of all lengths and sizes,
which are commonly used about all Ships. There may likewise be made from these
Trees Slip-boards, which must be of the Butt ends cut off 8 foot long, the said
boards would be 8. or 9 inches broad, and between 2 or 3 inches thick on the
sap edge; and one inch thick on the other or heart edge: These boards are to
make hoops by joining 4 or 5 more or less; they are commonly used about the
greatest size of Brewing Vessels. Such boards are worth, delivered at London,
ten pound the hundred. Out of this Timber may also be made Lathes of all sorts,
and many other useful Implements of Husbandry. Now considering all these
Improvements from the Oak, we shall value them to be worth one with the other
15 shillings the Tree, which amounts to 59700 pound: the rest or remainder of
trees, which are in number 81201, may be worth at 150 years growth five pound
the Tree, which amounts to 406005 pound.

The Land may be sowed with Wheat at or after the first planting three years
together, and every Acre will take up, the trees being thus planted at this
distance, 2 Bushel and a half, which amounts to, for the thousand Acres, 7500
Bushels; the product or increase of the said Wheat according to our former
account, which is 10 bushels for one, comes to, for the 3 years Crops, 75000
bushels, and at 5 shillings the bushel, amounts to 18750 pound.

The Straw and Hulls or Chaff; which will arise from the said Wheat, allowing
for every Load or 40 Bushels of Wheat 2 Load of Straw, worth 5 shilling the
Load, and 32 bushel of Hulls worth 3 pence the bushel heap and thrust, they
both come to 1875 pound.

The total sum for the first Fall of Timber, and the 3 years Crop of Wheat
Straw and Hulls, amounts to 80325 pound.

The total sum of the whole Improvement, besides the 147 years Profit of the
Land by Corn, Pasture, or Hay, amounts to 486330 pounds.

An Oak well planted, dressed, or proyned, and the Land well soyled with good fat
Dung, will be greater and of more value at one hundred years, than those
planted with or among Underwoods will amount to at 300 years.

V. Did. A fifth or the next Distance in planting the Oak is 2 Perch, which
is 36 foot: there will now be in the thousand Acres of Land at this distance
40401 trees, and you may make as much benefit of the ground either by Corn,
Meadow, or Pasture within a small matter as if there were not a tree there
growing. But at 150 years growth this Distance will be too near; for the
distance of ground between trees must be so far as two trees does overspread.
Now a tree that does thrive will spread about the time aforesaid 12 or 13
yards, which being added to 12 allotted to the opposite tree, makes 24 yards,
therefore about that time you must grub up the middle trees, as before
directed: they may be worth 5 pound the tree, there being 19800 of the said
trees, amounts to 99000 pound: the rest or remainder of trees being in number
20601, at 220 years growth may be worth 8 pound the tree, which come to 164808
pound.

Now at this distance there may be sowed between the Plants 3000 Bushels of
seed Wheat, and that is 3 bushels allowed for every Acre, the increase of the
said Wheat, according to our former reckoning amounts to 30000 Bushels, and the
3 years Crops after the same rate comes to 90000 Bushels, which at 5 shillings
the Bushel is worth 22500 pound.

The Chaff and Straw that will arise from the 3 years Crop of Wheat, counting 2
Load of Straw and 32 Bushels of Chaff from every Load of Wheat, and at five
shillings the Load for the Straw, and three pence a Bushel the Chaff, comes to
2025 pound.

The total sum for Wheat, Chaff, and Straw, amounts to 24525 pound.

The Total of this Improvement, besides the 217 years profit arising from Corn
and Cattle, amounts to 288333 pound.

Now trees thus planted, which have endured cold and droughth in the tenderness
of their age, must of necessity grow and thrive the best, or better than those
growing thick; so that such Oaks may grow in a short time, compared with the
years those trees do live, to be worth 20 pound the Oak valued one with the
other. Then the 20601 Oaks last valued or prized, if they grow to this price,
amount to 412020 pound: And the Total Improvement of the thousand Acres,
besides the profit arising from Corn and Cattle, amounts to 675833 pound.

Also at this last Distance there will be more room for the Plow, likewise the
Pasture for Meadow and feeding will be sweeter and more wholesome for Cattle,
the shade and dropping of trees being an Enemy to Corn and Grass.

And thus shall you have healthful and long lasting trees, whose tops will be
great, the boal or body smooth, clean, and free from boyles, great and well
colored Timber, being well dressed may grow 30 foot high, free and clear without
knob or bough, bearing 2 foot diameter at the top or height aforesaid, within
or about 150 years after planted; such Oaks will grow to an incredible price or
value. Now if there were in England 20000 Acres of Land thus planted, they
would be worth according to the last account of the thousand Acres 13516660
pound. This would be a good improvement for so many Acres of Land, which may
well be spared without any damage either to the Gentry or Commons: And the
poorer sort of People which depend on his Majesty's Forests, as Commoners,
should have much help thereby, as has been sufficiently declared.

Now although this quantity of Land make a great sound, and seems to be too
great for such a use, and may in the opinions of some be better employed for
Corn and Cattle, yet if we had no Wood in England, which every day sensibly
decays with us, Corn and Cattle could neither protect nor warm us. Also this
quantity of Land is but a small proportion to the many Woods that have been,
and now are in England, but utterly wasted and decayed, being overgrown with
Shrubs, Dwarf-trees, Bushes, and such rubbish, which will not well serve for
good Firing, and is of little worth or profit either to Rich or Poor, as has
been said: Therefore those Lands would be cleansed of all Encumbrances and new
planted. But if Woodlands cannot be spared because of the scarcity of Firing,
there are other Lands that may; for by the General Maps of England it is found
to contain 29568000 Acres of Land, besides that which is allowed for the
Highways: Out of this sum deduct 20 thousand Acres, their remain 29548000
Acres. Now that which is subtracted is so small a Proportion to so great a
Quantity, that it may with much safety be allowed; And to answer all Objections
which may be made against this Plantation, there are very sufficient Gentlemen
who will undertake to carry on and finish the Work, without putting either his
Majesty or the Nation to any charge. We have formerly made mention of a Statute
of the 35 Hen. 8. for the Preservation of Timber Trees, wherein it was
provided, That 12 Storers or Standils should be left upon an Acre at every
Fall; whereby we may undestand that in those days they were sensible of the
decay of Timber: Now if at that time there had been the same care taken, and
provision made for planting Timber Trees, according to the manner and way which
we have now declared, or for preserving the young then growing, there would
have been a sufficient supply, not only for present use, but what might have
continued for many hundred years to come, whereby his Majesty might be readily
furnished with Timber for building a far greater number of Ships than now he
has, and have for the annual profit of what might be sold, a considerable sum
paid into his Exchequer.

We have considered the Benefit and Profit which does arise out of the whole
thousand Acres of Land planted with Timber Trees; I shall now give you an
account what loss there will be of Ground, and so consequently of Plants and
Trees, by reason of the fence; for the generality of enclosed Land does not
hold or contain the exact measure as they are set down in ancient Deeds before
they were enclosed; as for example, If you lay out or measure 100 Acres of Land
to be divided or enclosed into 5 several parts or Enclosures with a Ditch or
Hedge, every Plot of ground will not contain 20 Acres within the Fence, but the
Fence must be likewise measured and included: This being so easy to
understand, it does not require farther demonstration.

Now in the account of loss of ground we shall mention but 2 Distances, and
they are 4 foot and a half, and 18 foot or one Perch. The Fence appointed to
enclose the thousand Acres of Land to be planted is a Ditch with a quick or
White-thorn Hedge, the Ditch to contain in breadth 6 foot, and 5 foot in depth.
Now the Bank or earth that is thrown out of the Ditch must lie within the
Enclosure, which Bank although it be laid or cast round and handsome, yet will
it take up or cover about three foot of ground, so that we must allow for Ditch
and Bank at least 9 foot, which is half a Perch, and so much less land we have
to plant, which amounts in the whole Enclosure to 799 square Perch: Also the
ground within the Fence, containing 399 Perch square, will now require or take
up at 4 foot 6 inches distance but 2544025 Plants, there being 19176 fewer
Plants than the thousand Acres will require, planted at the uttermost extent
without a Fence; therefore so much of the profit as the Plants deducted do
amount to, must be subtracted out of moneys received for Under-woods, which I
have forme^ly given an account of; then will you have the full profit of the
Land planted within such a Fence. Now at the next or second Distance, which is
18 foot, the Land will tak up but 158404 Plants, so that the loss by the Fence
at this distance does arise to 2397 Plants, and consequently so many Trees,
which must be deducted also out of the account of Profit for Timber Trees. This
last Distance is too near the Fence, and will more hinder the Quick hedge from
thriving than the former Distance, although those Plants are much nearer,
because they were planted for under Woods, and to be felled or cut down every
ninth or tenth year, so that the Thorn Plants will have the benefit of the Sun
until the other Plants be grown great and overtop them, and by that time they
will be ready to cut again: But the Plants preserved to grow for Timber Trees,
after they are grown great will by much shading and often dropping on the
Hedge, decay the same; and the older these trees grow, the more ground they
will require, and therefore prove greater enemies unto the Fence.

By this which has been spoken concerning the loss of ground by reason of the
Fence, may be understood my meaning in a former Section, where it is said, that
what distance of ground is left between the uttermost Row of Plants and the
Fence, according to the distance of Plants, there must be so many Seeds or
Plants deducted from the number planted in the whole extent of land without the
Fence. But this may be sufficient to show the loss of land by reason of the
Fence; and wherein by the way take notice, that it is not profitable to make
small Enclosures, except for drayning of land, or some other special occasion.

I have endeavored to give a true account of the Profit, or best way of
Improvement of Land by planting Trees for Timber and Wood. Now if this little
Address of mine toward the public find a suitable success to that of the poor
Widows, it is the Product of a good heart; and he that gives his all, may hope
for acceptance with all: The want of fortune is a Remora to my will, in the
service of my King and Country; therefore while I do what I may, it is agreeable
to charity to accept the Will for the Deed; and that you may the better know to
what advantage the Land is improved, we shall give an account of the Charges in
planting; the particulars of some part thereof have been formerly cast up and
brought to account, the general sums are as follows.

The Fence about this Great Wood, containing 1600 Perch Wood measure, (which
is 18 foot to the Perch, for by that Rod, Pole, or Perch are all the Hedges
and Ditches measured) will require 86466 Plants, which at 4 pence the hundred
amount to 14 pound 8 shillings 1 farthing: The Workmanship, in which is to be
considered making the Ditch, setting the Plants, cutting and shripping the
Stakes, drawing the Bushes, and making the dead Hedge, amounts to 225 pound 11
shillings 11 pence 3 farthings.

The total Charge of the Fence besides, or not counting for Bushes and Stakes,
amounts to 240 pound.

Now if you intend to plow this Plot of land, or sow and set the same with seed
for Timber Trees and under-Wood, if the ground be Pasture or Meadow, and not in
Tillage, it will require 3 times plowing and harrowing; but in case the Land
have been lately plowed and sowed, as at the last Seed Season, then twice
plowing may be sufficient: And because we treat of planting Forests and Wast
land, they are supposed to be Pasture or feeding land; also strong stiff Soils,
either Clayes, Sands, or Compounded, then will it require twice plowing and
harrowing, and once hacking.

Having formerly spoken of the manner and way how to perform this part of
Husbandry, we shall now compute the Charges of the first years expense in the
whole Plantation, which is as follows: Twice plowing, harrowing, and sowing,
to have it well done, will cost 10 shillings the Acre; A lusty Laboring man
will hack a quarter of an Acre of the said plowed Land in a day, and deserve 12
pence for his days work, which is 4 shillings the Acre hacking.

The total Charges for plowing, sowing, hacking and harrowing a thousand Acres
comes to 700 pound.

The First Distance.
THe Seed which this Land will take up to be set or planted with Acorns at one
foot distance, the whole extent of the Land being planted, and not counting the
loss of ground by the Fence, amounts to 51854401 single Acorns, or 8102 Bushels
1 Peck and 1 Acorn, according to my former account of 800 Acorns to every
Gallon, and at 2 shillings the Bushel they come to 810 pound 4 shillings 6
pence: Now if you sow the Land with the same seed, then there must be 2 Bushels
allowed for every Acre more than there was for setting, and the quantity to be
is 10102 Bushels 1 Peck and 1 Acorn; they amount to 1010 pound 4 shillings 6
pence.

The Charges for setting the Acorns, being formerly allowed at 4 shillings the
Acre, come to 200 pound.

The Charges for weeding the Plants, being also allowed at 10 shillings the
Acre, come to 500 pound.

The total Charge for Seed, also plowing, hacking, harrowing, setting and
weeding, amounts to 2210 pound 4 shillings 6 pence.

The total Charge for seed, also plowing, hacking, harrowing, sowing, and
weeding, amounts to 2210 pound 4 shillings 6 pence.

But if the Land be planted by setting Ashen Keys, of this seed there go 96000
into one Bushel, and will cost 12 pence the Bushel, and the Land will take up
540 Bushel 1 Gallon, 1 pint and a half and 151 single seeds, amounting to 27
pound 7 farthings.

The Charges for plowing, sowing, setting, and weeding is the same allowed for
the Acorns.

The total Charge for seed also, plowing, hacking, setting, harrowing, and
weeding amounts to 1327 pound 7 farthings.

And if you sow the Land with Ashen Keys, there must be half a Bushel allowed
for every Acre more than was for setting; the quantity to be provided comes to
1040 bushels 9 pints a half and 151 single seed, and they come to 52 pound 7
farthings.

The total for seed, also plowing, hacking, harrowing, and weeding amounts to
1152 pound 7 farthings.

This Land to be planted with Chestnuts will take up 51854401 single Nuts, and
they will cost 2 pence the hundred. there being 518544 hundred and 1 Nut, come
to 4321 pound 4 shillings.

But if the Land be sowed with the said Nuts, then every Acre will require 1500
more than was allowed for setting: The whole number will arise to 533544 and
one single Nut, and at 2 pence the hundred do amount to 4446 pound 4 shillings.

The total Charge for setting or planting a thousand Acres of Land at a foot
distance with Chestnuts, amounts to 5721 pound 4 shillings.

The total Charge of Land to be sowed with the said seed comes to 5646 pound 4
shillings.

To plant by setting a thousand Acres at a foot distance with Beech seed,
called Beech Mast, there going 76800 single seed into one Bushel, the Land will
take up 675 bushels 6 quarts and 1 seed, and at 3 shillings the bushel,
according to a former allowance, they amount to 101 pound 5 shillings 6 pence 3
farthings.

If the Land be sowed with the said seed, then there should be 2 pecks allowed
for every Acre more than was for setting, and the total number will arise to
1175 bushels 6 quarts and 1 seed, which at 3 shillings the bushel comes to 176
pound 5 shillings 6 pence 3 farthings.

The total Charge of the Land to be set with Beech-mast amounts to 1501 pound 5
shillings 3 farthings.

The total Charge of the Beech seed to be sowed on the said Land amounts to
1376 pound 5 shillings 3 farthings.

All sorts or kind of trees, the charges for planting them by seed may be
computed according to the rules we have set down.

Now if any man will be so indiscreet as to plant at this distance with Sets,
the thousand Acres will then take up 51854401 single Sets or Plants: I cannot
give you an exact account what they may cost by the hundred, because several
Countries have different Prices according to the goodness, plenty, or scarcity
of them; for in some places good Plants of Oak, Ash, Beech and Elm are sold
for 12 pence the hundred, and in other Countries such Sets are worth 18 pence
or 2 shillings the hundred; to have them no greater than a man's little finger,
we shall estimate them at 18 pence the hundred, and there being 518544 hundred,
that the Land will take up the same, amount to 38890 pound 16 shillings.

The Setting these Plants is worth 10 shillings the Acre, and comes to 500
pound.

The Weeding of them is worth 10 shillings the Acre, which likewise comes to
500 pound.

The total Charge for Plants, also Plowing, Hacking, Harrowing, Setting, and
Weeding amounts to 40590 pound 16 shillings.

But if you will plant with Chestnut Sets, these Plants may cost 2 shillings 6
pence the hundred, there being 518544 hundred and 1 Plant, and they come to
64768 pound 1 farthing.

The total Charge for Chestnut Plants, also Plowing Hacking, Harrowing and
Weeding amounts to 66468 pound 1 farthing.

We shall not here set down Wages or Sallary allowed the Keeper or Dresser of
this great Wood, but shall leave the same to the will of the Owner thereof. He
that undertaketh this so great a Charge ought to be an honest, laborious and
industrious Person. Thus have we considered and given a true Account of all the
Charges needful for plowing, sowing and planting Seed or Sets at one foot
distance.

By these total sums you may take notice, that it is cheaper to plant with
Seeds than Sets; also the great charge to plant at so near a distance as one
foot, which is only in use for Nurseries and transplanting other grounds, as
has been said.

The Second Distance.
IN the next place we shall consider of the Charges for plowing and planting at
3 foot distance; for you are to take notice, that we allow not of the sowing of
any kind of seed above or more than one foot distance; a thousand Acres of Land
then, allowing 18 foot to the Perch Woodland measure, contains 5760000 square
yards, and will take up (there being 3 Seeds set or planted a foot wide from
each other triangular, and at the end of each or every yard distance, as has
been directed) if Acorns, 17294403 or 2702 bushels one peck and 3 acorns, and
at the price formerly allowed, which is 2 shillings the bushel, they come to
270 pound 4 shillings 6 pence. The setting the seed at this distance, and the
Land harrowed, is worth 2 shillings 6 pence the Acre, and come to 125 pound.

The weeding one foot round and between the Plants, at 7 shillings the Acre,
comes to 350 pound.

The Total for seed, also plowing and all other charges, amounts to 1445 pound
4 shillings 6 pence.

If you set or plant Ashen-keys, the Land will take up of that seed 180 bushels
9 pints a half and 153 single seed, which at 12 pence the bushel, come to 9
pound 3 half pence.

The Charges of setting and weeding is the same with the Acorns, and do come to
475 pound.

The total Charge to plant with the seed of Ash amounts to 1184 pound 3 half
pence.

And if you plant Beech-mast, the Land will take up of that seed 225 bushels, 6
quarts, and 3 seed, which amounts to 33 pound, 15 shillings 6 pence 3 farthings.

The total Charge to plant with seed of Beech amounts to 1208 pound 15
shillings 6 pence 3 farthings.

To plant the said Land with Chestnuts will take up 17294403 Nuts, which come to
172944 hundred and 3 Nuts, at 2 pence the hundred they amount to 1441 pound 4
shillings.

The total Charge to plant with Chestnuts amounts to 2616 pound 4 shillings.

Now if this Land be planted equally with all the 4 several sorts of seed
before mentioned, that is of each sort alike number, then the Land will take up
as follows.

Of Acorns 675 bushels a half and 2 quarts, at 2 shillings the bushel, they
come to 67 pound 11 shillings 3 half pence.

Of Ashen-keys 45 bushels 1 quart and 601 single seed, at 12 pence the bushel,
comes to 2 pound 5 shillings 1 farthing.

Of Beech-mast 56 bushels 1 peck 3 pints and 1 seed, at three shillings the
bushel, come to 7 pound 8 shillings 10 pence halfpenny.

Of Chestnuts 4323601 single Nuts, or reckoned by the hundred, 43236 hundred and
one Nut, at 2 pence the hundred, amount to 360 pound 6 shillings.

The total Charge of plowing, hacking, harrowing, and planting the Land equally
with all the aforesaid several sorts of seeds, amounts to 1612 pound 11
shillings 1 farthing.

Now if the Land be planted at the same distance with Sets, it will take up
17294403 single Sets, arising in the whole to 172944 hundred and 3 Sets, which
being either Oak, Ash, Beech, or Elm, and rated at 18 pence the hundred, come
to 12970 pound 16 shillings 2 farthings.

The total Charge to plant with Oak, Ash, Beech and Elm Sets amounts to 14420
pound 16 shillings 2 farthings.

But if you plant Chestnut Sets, they are rated to cost 2 shillings 6 pence the
hundred, and amounts to 21618 pound 3 farthings.

And if the Land be equally planted with all the 5 several sorts of Sets before
mentioned, that is of each sort a like number, then the Land will take up as
follows; Of Oak, Ash, Beech and Elm Sets 138355 hundred and 22 single Sets,
and at 18 pence the hundred, they amount to 10376 pound 12 shillings 10 pence.

Of Chestnut Sets 34588 hundred and 18 single Sets at, 2 shillings 6 pence the
hundred, they come to 4273 pound 12 shillings.

The Charges for setting or planting the aforesaid Plants at this distance is
worth 8 shillings the Acre, which comes to 400 pound.

The Charges for weeding of them, at 7 shillings the Acre, comes to 350 pound.

The Total to plant with Chestnut Sets amounts to 23068 pound 3 farthings.

The Total to plant the Land equally with all the 5 several sorts of Sets
amounts to 16100 pound 4 shillings 10 pence.

The Third Distance.
THe next or third Distance is 4 foot 6 inches, or the fourth part of a Perch
Woodland measure. Now if the Land be planted as was the 3 foot Distance, that
is 3 seeds set triangular about 2 foot from each other; then the Land will take
up 7689603 single seeds, And

Of the Acorns, they will arise to 1201 bushel, 2 pecks, and 3 Acorns, which at
2 shillings the bushel are worth 120 pound 3 shillings.

Of the Ash seed or Ashen-keys the Land will take up 80 bushels 3 quarts and
603 single seeds, which at 12 pence the bushel comes to 4 pound 5 farthings.

Of Beech-mast, or seed of the Beech tree, the Land will take up 100 Bushels
one Gallon and 3 seeds, which at 3 shillings the bushel amount to 15 pound 4
pence half penny.

Of Chestnuts the Land will require 76896 hundred and 3 Nuts, which at 2 pence
the hundred amount to 640 pound 16 shillings.

The Charges for setting these seeds at this Distance is worth 2 shillings the
Acre, and comes to 100 pound.

A Laboring man skillful in such employments may Hack or Hoe the Weeds or
Grass a foot round the Plants, also weed the ground clean near unto them, and
dispatch one acre in 4 days; he will deserve for his labor 12 pence the day,
which amounts to 200 pound.

Of Sets or Plants the Land will take up, there being but one single Set
planted at this distance, 25632 hundred and 1 Plant; they are valued if of Oak,
Ash, Beech, or Elm, at 18 pence the hundred, and amount to 1922 pound 8
shillings.

But Chestnut Plants are rated at 2 shillings 6 pence the hundred, and amount to
3204 pound 1 farthing.

The Charges for setting or planting all the said Plants that were
transplanted, worth 4 shillings the acre, comes to 200 pound.

The Weeding of them is worth 4 shillings the acre, which amounts to 200 pound.

The total Charge to plant at this distance with the Oak seed, also plowing,
hacking, harrowing, setting and weeding amounts to 1120 pound 3 shillings.

The total to plant with Ash seed amounts to 1004 pound 5 farthings.

The total to plant with the Beech seed amounts to 1015 pound 4 pence half
penny.

The total to plant with Chestnuts amounts to 1640 pound 16 shillings.

The total to plant with Oak, Ash, Beech, or Elm Sets amounts to 2922 pound 8
shillings.

The total to plant with Chestnut Sets amounts to 4204 pound 1 farthing.

Now if this Land be equally planted with all the kinds of seed before
mentioned, then it will take up 7689603 single seeds, as we have formerly
declared.

Of Acorns 1922401, or 300 bushels 3 gallons and 1 Acorn, they come to 30 pound
9 pence, at the rate of 2 shillings the Bushel.

Of Ashen-keys 20 Bushels 1 pint and 900 single seed, which at 12 pence the
Bushel, come to 1 pound 1 farthing.

Of Beech-mast 25 Bushels 1 quart, and 1 seed, and at 3 shillings the Bushel,
they come to 3 pound 15 shillings 1 penny.

Of Chestnuts 192 24 hundred and 1 Nut, and at 2 pence the hundred, they come to
160 pound 4 shillings 1 farthing.

The total Charge thus to plant a thousand Acres of Land with the aforesaid 4
several sorts of seeds, amounts to 1194 pound 19 shillings 10 pence half penny.

And if the Land be equally planted with all the several kinds or sorts of
Plants before mentioned, it will then take up to plant them single 2563201
single Plants.

Of the Oak, Ash, Beech, and Elm, of each of them 512640 single Sets, or 5126
hundred and 40 single Sets, and they arise in the whole to 20505 hundred and 60
single Sets, and at 18 pence the hundred, they amount to 1537 pound 18
shillings 4 pence 3 farthings.

Of Chestnut Plants 5126 hundred and 41 single Plants, at 2 shillings 6 pence
the hundred, they come to 639 pound 16 shillings 1 farthing.

The Charges for Setting and Weeding all these Plants amount to 400 pound.

Wheat.
We shall now in this next place give you an account of the charges that will
arise by sowing Wheat at this distance between the Plants, and is as follows.

The Quantity of Wheat allowed to be sowed is 2 Bushels on every Acre, then the
thousand Acres will take up 2000 Bushels, and at 5 shillings the Bushel, as it
has formerly been valued, amounts to 500 pound.

The Charges for Weeding the Wheat, valued at 4 pence the Acre, comes to 16
pound 13 shillings 4 pence.

The Charges for Reaping the Wheat, Gathering Gripes, Binding the Sheafs, and
carrying the Corn into the Barn, is valued at 6 shillings the Acre, and come to
300 pound.

The Charges for Thrashing and Winnowing the Wheat, valued at 10 shillings the
Load, containing 40 Bushels, and reckoning 20 bushels to grow on every Acre of
Land, comes to 250 pound.

The Charges in Transplanting the said Wheat to Markets, valued at 5 shillings
the Load, and comes to 125 pound.

The total Charge for Sowing the Land between the Plants at this distance with
Wheat amounts to 1191 pound 13 shillings. 4 pence.

The total Charge equally to Plant a thousand Acres of Land with single Sets,
at 4 foot 6 inches distance; also Plowing, Hacing, Harrowing, and Sowing Wheat
between the Plants, with all other Charges about Plants and Corn, amounts to
4469 pound 7 shillings 9 pence.

But if the Land be planted at this distance, allowing the same number of Sets
as you did Seeds, then it will take up 7689603 single Sets.

Of the Oak, Ash, Beech, or Elm 76896 hundred and 3 single Plants, and at 18
pence the hundred, they come to 5767 pound 4 shillings 2 farthings.

Of Chestnut Plants, the Land will require the same number, and at 2 shillings 6
pence the hundred, they come to 9612 pound 3 farthings.

The Charges for Setting or Planting these Plants is worth 5 shillings 6 pence
the Acre, and comes to 275 pound.

The Charges for weeding them has been valued worth 4 shillings the Acre, and
comes to 200 pound.

The total Charge for Plowing, Hacking, Harrowing, Setting, and Weeding at this
distance; and this way of planting either Oak, Ash, Beech, or Elm Sets amounts
to 6942 pound 4 shillings 2 farthings.

The Total: this way to plant Chestnut Sets amounts to 10787 pound 3 farthings.

And if you equally plant all the 5 kinds of Sets in the same quantity of Land,
and the same number of Plants planted as was in the last Plantation, then the
Land will take up of Oak, Ash, Beech and Elm 6151682 single Plants, and they
arise to 61516 hundred and 82 single Plants, and at 18 pence the hundred,
amount to 4613 pound 15 shillings 2 pence 2 farthings.

Of Chestnut Plants 15379 hundred and 21 single Plants, and at 2 shillings 6
pence the hundred, they come to 1922 pound 8 shillings 1 farthing.

The Charges for Planting and Weeding, as they have been valued, amounts to 475
pound.

The total Charge equally to Plant with the aforesaid Sets or Plants of Oak,
Ash, Beech, Elms and Chestnut, amounts to 7661 pound 3 shillings 2 pence 3
farthings.

The Fourth Distance.
THe next or fourth Distance, to plant by plowing the Land, and there planting
Seed and Plants, is one Perch, containing 6 yards or 18 foot.

At this distance we have given directions to plant 4 Seeds, and they to be set
4 foot distant; making a square figure: thus performed, the Land will take up
of single Seeds or Plants 643204.

If you plant Acorns they will arise to 100 bushels, 2 pecks, and 4 single
seeds, and at 2 shillings the bushel, they come to ten pound one shilling.

Of the Ash Seed the Land will take up 6 Bushels 5 Gallons 2 Quarts half a Pint
and 454 single Seeds, and they come at 12 pence the bushel to 6 shillings 8
pence.

Of the Beech-tree Seed, there will be necessary 8 Bushels 3 Gallons half a
Pint and 204 single Seeds, and at 3 shillings the bushel they come to 1 pound 5
shillings 1 penny 2 farthings.

Of Chestnuts the Land will take up 6432 hundred and 4 Nuts, and at 2 pence the
hundred they come to 53 pound 12 shillings.

Now if the Land be planted with Sets as it was with Seed, or to the number of
Seed, then it will take up, Of Oak, Ash, Beech, and Elm, or either of them 6432
hundred and 4 Plants, and at 18 pence the hundred they amount to 482 pound 8 s.
3 q.

Of Chestnut Plants the same number, and at a shillings 6 pence the hundred,
they come to 804 pound 1 penny.

The Charges of setting or planting these Sets at this distance, at 4 shillings
the Acre, come to 200 pound,

The Charges for planting the seed at 12 pence the Acre come to 50 pound

The weeding of all the said Plants for Seed and Sets is worth 2 shillings the
Acre, and comes to 100 pound.

The total Charge of Plowing, Hacking, Harrowing, and all other Charges in
planting the Oak-seed, amounts to 860 pound 1 shilling.

The Total to plant with the Ash-tree seed amounts to 850 pound 6 shillings 8
pence farthing.

The Total to plant with the Beech seed amounts to 851 pound 5 shillings 3 half
pence.

The Total to plant with Chestnuts amounts to 903 pound 12 shillings.

The Total to plant with Sets of Oak, Ash, Beech, and Elm amounts to 1482 pound
8 shillings 2 farthings.

The Total to plant with Chestnut Sets amounts to 1804 pound 1 penny.

And if at this distance the Land be planted with single Sets, then it will
take up of Oak, Ash, Beech and Elm, or any one of them, but 160801 Plants, and
they being in the whole 1608 hundred and one Plant, at 18 pence the hundred,
comes to 120 pound 12 shillings.

Of Chestnut Sets the Land will likewise take up 1608 hundred and one Plant, and
at 2 shillings 6 pence the hundred, they come to 201 pound 1 farthing.

The Charges for setting these Plants at 18 pence the Acre come to 75 pound.

The weeding of them is worth 12 pence the Acre, and comes to 50 pound-

The total Charge to plant at this distance with single Sets of Oak, Ash, Beech
and Elm amounts to 845 pound 12 shillings.

The Total to plant with Chestnut Sets amounts to 1026 pound 1 farthing.

Now if all these seeds before mentioned be equally planted at this distance,
the Land will then take up 643204 seeds.

Of Acorns 160801, and they arising to 25 Bushels 1 Gallon and 1 Acorn, at 2
shillings the bushel, come to 2 pound 10 shillings 3 pence.

Of Ashen-keys, 1 bushel 5 gallons 3 pints and 301 single seeds, and at 12
pence the bushel, come to 1 shilling 8 pence.

Of Beech mast 2 bushels 3 quarts and 1 seed, and at 3 shillings the bushel,
they come to 6 shillings 3 pence 3 farthings.

Of Chestnuts 160801 single seeds, and arising in the tale to 1608 hundred and 1
Nut, at 2 pence the hundred, come to 13 pound 8 shillings.

The Charges of setting the Seed, and weeding the Plants have been valued, and
do come to 150 pound.

The total Charge thus to plant with Seed amounts to 841 pound 6 shillings 2
pence 3 farthings.

And if the Land be equally planted with the several kind or sorts of Sets
before mentioned, according to the number of seed it will take up

Of the Oak, Ash, Beech, and Elm 514563 single Sets, which arise to 5145
hundred and 63 Sets, and at 18 pence the hundred come to 385 pound 18 shillings
5 pence farthing.

Of the Chestnut 128641 single Sets, or 1286 hundred and 41 Sets, and at 2
shilling 6 pence the hundred, they come to 160 pound 16 shillings 1 farthing.

The Charges of Planting and Weeding the Sets, as they have been valued before,
is 300 pound.

The total Charge to plant a thousand Acres of Land equally with Sets or Plants
at a Perch distance, amounts to 1546 pound 14 shillings 5 pence half penny.

But if the said several sorts of Plants be equally planted, allowing only one
single Plant at this last distance before mentioned, the Land then will take up

Of Oak, Ash, Beech, or Elm 32160 single Plants of each sort, which amounts in
the whole for the 4 several kinds to 128640 single Plants, or 1286 hundred and
40 Plants, and at 18 pence the hundred, they come to 96 pound 9 shillings 7
pence farthing.

Of Chestnut Plants 32161, or 321 hundred and 61 Plants, and at 2 shillings 6
pence the hundred, they come to 40 pound 4 shillings 2 farthings.

The Charges for setting and weeding these single Plants have before been
valued at 125 pound.

Wheat.
Now at this distance there may be 2 bushels and a half of Wheat sowed between
the Plants on every Acre of Land, then the thousand Acres will take up 2500
bushels, and at 5 shillings the bushel, come to 625 pound.

The Charges for Weeding the Wheat, at 4 pence the Acre, comes to 16 pound 13
shillings 4 pence.

The Charges of Reaping the Wheat, Gathering the Gripes, Binding the Sheafs,
and Carrying the Corn into the Barn, is valued (because this Crop or Increase
is more than that sowed in the last or third Distance) at 7 shillings the Acre,
and come to 350 pound.

The Charges of Thrashing and Winnowing the Wheat, valued at 10 shillings the
Load, containing 40 bushels and reckoning 25 bushels the Increase, or to grow
on every Acre of Land, comes to 312 pound 10 shillings.

The Charges in Transporting the said Wheat to Markets, at 5 shillings the
Load, comes to 156 pound 5 shillings.

The total Charge of sowing the Land with Wheat between the Plants at this
distance amounts to 1460 pound 8 shillings 4 pence.

The total Charge equally to plant with single Sets of Oak, Ash, Beech, Elm,
and Chestnut at 18 foot distance; also plowing, hacking, harrowing, and sowing
the Land between the Plants with Wheat, and all other charges about Plants and
Corn, amounts to 2422 pound 1 shilling 11 pence 3 farthings.

You are to take notice that where we speak of planting for Uunder-wood, or
sowing Corn, the whole Enclosure of Land is to be plowed, and the charges of
plowing, hacking, sowing and harrowing is charged in every total account of
planting Seed or Sets for Trees or Under-wood.

The Fifth Distance.
THe fifth and last distance, which we intend to treat of concerning plowing
and planting Seed and Plants, is two Perch, containing 12 yards or 36 foot:
Seed and Sets thus planted will not have only the benefit of air and sun and
much earth for the sap to put forth their roots in, but save labor and cost,
and prevent many casualties in transplanting.

A thousand Acres planted according to former directions, that is, in a Plot of
ground 4 foot square at this distance, you may set 4 Seed, the Land will then
take up

Of Acorns 161604 or 25 bushel 1 peck and 4 acorns, and at 2 shillings the
bushel they come to 2 pound 10 shillings.

Of Ashen-keys 1 bushel 5 gallons 3 pints and a half, and 354 single seeds, and
at 12 pence the bushel, they come to 1 shilling 8 pence.

Of Beech-mast 2 bushels 3 quarts half a pint and 204 single seeds, and at 3
shillings the bushel, they come to 6 shillings 1 penny 3 farthings.

Of Chestnuts 1616 hundred and 4 Nuts, and at 2 pence the hundred, they come 13
pound 9 shillings 4 pence.

The Charges of setting the seed at this distance may reasonably amount to 6
pence the Acre, and in the whole comes to 25 pound.

The Weeding of the Plants is worth 12 pence the Acre, and comes to 50 pound.

The total Charge to plant with Acorns at this distance amounts to 777 pound 10
shillings.

The total Charge to plant with Ashen-keys amounts to 775 pound 1 shilling 8
pence.

The Total to plant with the Beech seed amounts to 775 pound 6 shillings 1
penny 3 farthings.

The Total to plant with Chestnuts amounts to 788 pound 9 shillings 4 pence.

And if all these several sorts of seed be equally planted, the Land will take
up of Acorns 40401 or 6 bushels 1 peck 2 quarts and 1 Acorn, and at 2 shillings
the bushel, come to 12 shillings 7 pence half penny.

Of Beech-mast 5 gallons and 401 single seeds, and at 3 shillings the bushel,
they come to 1 shilling 10 pence 2 farthings.

Of Ashen-keys 3 gallons 1 quart 3 quarters of a pint and 276 single seeds, and
at 12 pence the bushel, they come to 5 pence.

Of Chestnuts 404 hundred and 1 Nut, and at 2 pence the hundred, they come to 3
pound 7 shillings 4 pence.

The total Charge to plant with the 4 several sorts of seed equally planted,
amounts to 779 pound 2 shillings 3 pence.

Now if this Land be planted with Sets according to the number of seeds, then
it will take up

Of Oak, Ash, Beech, and Elm Plants of each or either of them 161604 single
Sets, or 1616 hundred and 4 Sets, and at 18 pence the hundred, they come to 121
pound 4 shillings 2 farthings.

Of Chestnut Sets 1616 hundred and 4 Sets, and at 2 shillings 6 pence the
hundred, come to 202 pound 1 penny.

The Planting all the said Sets at this distance is worth 12 pence the Acre,
and comes to 50 pound.

The Weeding these Plants is also worth 12 pence the Acre, and comes to 50
pound.

The total to plant at this distance with Oak, Ash, Beech, and Elm Sets amounts
to 921 pound 4 shillings 2 farthings.

The Total to plant with Chestnut Sets amounts to 1002 pound 1 penny.

And if all these several sorts of Plants be equally planted in the said
quantity of Acres, then the Land will take up.

Of Oak, Ash, Beech or Elm of each sort 32321 single Sets; of them altogether
129284 single Sets, or 1292 hundred and 84 Sets, and at 18 pence the hundred,
they come to 96 pound 19 shillings 2 pence.

Of Chestnut Sets 32320 single sets, or 323 hundred and 20 Sets, and at a
shillings 6 pence the hundred, comes to 40 pound 8 shillings.

The Charges for Planting and Weeding, as above, comes to 100 pound.

The total Charge equally to Plant the 5 several sorts of plants amounts to 937
pound 7 shillings 2 pence.

But if at this distance you plant only 1 single set, then the Land will take
up either of Oak, Ash, Beech, or Elm 40401 single Sets, or 404 hundred and 1
Set, and at 18 pence the hundred, they come to 30 pound 6 shillings.

Of the Chestnut 40401 single Sets, or 404 hundred and 1 Set, and at 2 shillings
6 pence the hundred, they come to 50 pound 10 shillings 1 farthing.

The Charges for planting these Sets at 6 pence the Acre come to 25 pound.

The Weeding of them is worth 4 pence the Acre, and comes to 16 pound 13
shillings 4 pence.

The total Charge to plant at this distance with one single Set of Oak, Ash,
Beech, or Elm amounts to 771 pound 19 shillings 4 pence.

The total to plant with Chestnut Sets amounts to 792 pound 3 shillings 4 pence
farthing.

Now if these single Sets be equally planted, the Land will then take up of
Oak, Ash, Beech, and Elm of each sort 8080 single Sets, of them all together
32320 single Sets, or 323 hundred and 20 Sets, and at 18 pence the hundred,
they come to 24 pound 4 shillings 9 pence 2 farthings.

Of Chestnut Sets 8081, or reckoning them by the hundred, they arise to 80
hundred and 81 single Sets, and at 2 shillings 6 pence the hundred, they come
to 10 pound 2 shillings 1 farthing.

The Charges for Planting and Weeding, as before, 41 pound 13 shillings 4 pence.

The total equally to plant with single Sets amounts to 776 pound 1 penny 3
farthings.

And if you sow the Land between the Plants with Wheat at this distance, there
will be 3 bushels allowed to be sowed on each or every Acre, in the whole 300
bushels, and at 5 shillings the bushel, it comes to 750 pound.

The Charges for Weeding the Wheat at 4 pence the Acre comes to 16 pound 13
shillings 4 pence.

The Charges of Reaping the Wheat, gathering Gripes, binding the Sheafs, and
carrying the Corn into the Barn, is valued at 8 shillings the Acre, and comes
to 400 pound.

The Charges of Thrashing and Winnowing the Wheat at 10 shillings the Load,
containing 40 bushels, and reckoning 30 bushels the Increase, or to grow on
every Acre of Land, comes to 375 pound.

The charges in transporting the said Wheat to Markets, at 5 shillings the
Load, comes to 187 pound 5 shillings.

The total Charge of sowing the Land between the Plants with Wheat amounts to
1728 pound 18 shillings 4 pence.

The total Charge equally to plant with single Sets of Oak, Ash, Beech, Elm,
and Chestnut at this distance, which is 36 foot; also Plowing, Hacking,
Harrowing, Sowing the Land between the Plants with Wheat, and all other Charges
belonging to Plants and Corn, amounts to 2504 pound 18 shillings 5 pence 3
farthings.

We might give you an account of the charges for Seed-wheat in every total Sum,
and apportion the quantity of Corn to the quantity of Land between the Plants;
for where the greater number of Plants grow, in that ground must the less
quantity of Corn be sowed; the difference is but small, and I am unwilling to
blot paper with more particulars than are needful, therefore at 3 distances
only you have a particular and total account of the Charges for sowing Wheat.

Thus have we endeavored to give a sufficient account of the first years
Charges by plowing, sowing, setting, or planting seed or Plants in this Plot of
good Land, being a rich Clay and moist Earth: But this must not be a Rule of
Charges to plant all Lands by; for several Countries have several Prices in all
Materials belonging to Husbandry; and as is the lightness and goodness,
stiffness and badness of the Earth, so are the Prices more or less: In rich
moist Sands or mixed Earths, which is likewise good ground to plant such plants
in, 2 Yoke of Oxen in such ground will plow more in one day than 4 Yoke in a
stiff heavy Clay or such kind of Earth. There are many wealthy Husbandmen in
Hartfordshire that plow the greater part of their Land with one Man and two
Horses, who both holds the Plow and drives the Cattle; and in other places one
Man and three Horses will plow an Acre and a half in a day, when in the same
Parish two Men and six Horses cannot plow so much: It has been my observation,
that in Common Fields some Plows with 4 Horses make a better days work than
others of a far greater strength, when yet there has been only the breadth of a
lay Bank between them, and from no other reason but the several kinds of Earth.

Now as we have given an account of the Charges in Planting by Plowing, Sowing,
and Setting Seed and Plants for Timber Trees and Under-woods, I shall likewise
give an account of the Charges in planting the same quantity of Land by Digging
or Delving; as the labor of Man and Cattle in Plowing is more or less,
according to the goodness or badness of the Earth; so is it likewise in
Delving, a man will earn more by delving some Land for a penny the Rod; than
other at 3 pence, yet both grounds alike plain and level, and without
encumbrances: Also it is to be considered, that to delve for sowing Corn or
ordinary seed, requires but one Spades grast in depth, but extraordinarily
where the upper part of the earth has been worn out, and that there is good
earth deeper: also to cleanse the ground from stones, or strong weeds which
have long roots and deep, or such like annoyances, then it will require two
Spades depth. There is no Plant that does usually grow in England requires a
deeper Mould than these we treat of; but because we suppose the Land that is
made choice of to be a well qualified earth, we shall therefore adventure at
one Spades depth to plant as aforesaid; and because it has not been plowed or
delved for many years past, or it may be never: also Woodland measure being
very large, it is worth delving four pence the Square, Rod, Pole, or Perch,
allowing 18 foot to the Perch, and one Perch square contains 324 foot of
ground. Having considered the charges in planting seed and plants by Plowing,
and also given an account of every particular charge as was thought needful;
we shall therefore in this following Account of Charges in planting by digging
or delving not trouble you with many particulars, but as briefly as may be,
speak to all those several Distances mentioned in our last Accounts.

The First Distance.
THis Distance is one foot; the Seed and Plants to be set at this thickness
will require the whole Plot of Land to be delved, and at 4 pence the Perch, it
comes to 2666 pound 13 shillings 4 pence, the Land containing 160000 square
perch, or 5184000^ foot.

Now the same quant or number of Seeds or Plants this Parcel of delved ground
will require as that Land which was plowed; also the charges of setting and
weeding will be the same, and likewise all other charges except plowing and
hacking.

The Charges for Sowing the seed, valued at 4 pence the Acre, comes to 16 pound
13 shillings 4 pence.

For Harrowing the Land, valued at 8 pence the Acre, comes to 33 pound 6
shillings 8 pence.

And to save the labor of looking back into the former accounts you shall have
the particulars as follows.

If the Land be sowed with Acorns the Account stands thus.
One foot distance. The Land delved.
li. s. d. For Digging or Delving the Land at 4 pence the Perch amounts to 2666
13 04 For seed Acorns containing 10102 bushels 1 peck 1 Acorn, at 2 shillings
the bushel 1010 04 06 For Sowing and Harrowing at 12 pence the Acre. 0050 00 00
For Weeding the whole Plot of Ground at 10 s. the Acre 0500 00 00 The total
Charge amounts to 4226 17 10

But if the Land be set with Acorns, then the Account will be as follows.
For Delving the Land at 4 pence the Perch 2666 13 04 For seed Acorns, 8102
bushels 1 peck 1 Acorn, at 2 s. the the bushel 0810 04 06 For Harrowing the
Land at 8 pence the Acre 0033 06 08 For Weeding the whole Plot of ground 0500
00 00 For Setting the seed at 4 shillings the Acre. 0200 00 00 The total Charge
amounts to 4210 04 06

By these two former Accounts of Acorns you may take notice, that the Charges
of sowing the Seed comes to 16 pound 13 shillings 4 pence more than the Account
of Charges for setting: Now those Plants that grow from the seed that was set
will thrive and grow much better and more certain than those from the seed
sowed; therefore whether the Land be delved or plowed it will be greater profit
to set the seeds than to sow them.

An Account of Charges if the Land be sowed with Ashen-keys.
For Delving the Land at 4 pence the Perch 2666 13 04 For Ashen-keys 1040
bushels 1 gallon 1 pint and 901 single seed, at 12 pence the bushel 0052 00 01

li. s. d. For Sowing the seed and Harrowing the land, at 12 pence the Acre
0050 00 00 For Weeding the Land at 10 shillings the Acre. 0500 00 00 The total
Charge amountto 3268 13 05

An Account of Charges the Land to be set with Ashen-keys.
For Delving the Land at 4 pence the Perch 2666 13 04 For 540 bushels 1 gallon
1 pint and 901 single seeds of Ashen-keys 0027 00 01 For Setting the seed at 4
shillings the Acre 0200 00 00 For Harrowing the Land, so covering the seed, at
8 pence the Acre 0033 06 08 For Weeding the Land at 10 shillings the Acre 0500
00 00 The total Charge amounts to 3427 00 01

An Account of Charges the Land sowed with the seed of Beech.
For Delving the Land at 4 pence the Perch 2666 13 04 For 1175 bushels 6 quarts
and 1 seed of Beech-mast at 3 shillings the bushel 0176 05 06 For sowing the
seed and harrowing the land at 12 pence the Acre 0050 00 00 For Weeding at 10
shillings the Acre 0500 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 3392 18 10

An Account of Charges the Land to be set with the seed of Beech.
For Delving the Land at 4 pence the Perch 2666 13 04 For 675 bushels 6 quarts
1 seed, at 3 shillings the bushel 0101 05 06 For Setting the seed at 4
shillings the Acre 0200 00 00 For Harrowing the Land at 8 pence the Acre 0033
06 08 For Weeding the Land or plants at 10 shillings the Acre 0500 00 00 The
total Charge amounts to 3501 05 06

An Account of Charges the Land sowed with Chestnuts.
li. s. d. For Delving the Land at 4 pence the Perch 2666 13 04 For 533544
hundred and 1 Nut at 2 pence the hundred 4446 04 00 For Sowing the seed and
Harrowing the land, at 12 pence the Acre 0050 00 00 For Weeding the Land or
Plants at 10 shillings the Acre 0500 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 7662 17
04

An Account of Charges the Land set with Chestnuts.
For 518544 hundred and 1 Chestnut at 2 d. the hundred 4321 04 00 For Delving
the Land at 4 pence the Perch 2666 13 04 For Setting the seed and Harrowing the
Land 0233 06 08 For Weeding the Plants at 10 shillings the Acre 0500 00 00 The
total Charge amounts to 7721 04 00

Now if this Land be planted equally with all the 4 several sorts of seed
before mentioned, that is of each sort a like number, the Account will then
stand as follows.

An Account of Charges the Land to be equally set with the 4 several sorts of
seed.
For Delving the Land at 4 pence the Perch 2666 13 04 For 2025 bushels and a
half and 2 quarts of Acorns at 2 shillings the bushel 0202 11 01 For 135
bushels 1 quart and 600 single seed of the Ash-tree at 12 pence the bushel 0006
15 00 For 168 bushel 3 pecks and 3 pints of Beech-mast at 3 s. the bushel 0025
06 04 For 129636 hundred of Chestnuts and one Nut at 2 pence the hundred 1080 06
00 For setting the seed, harrowing the land, and weeding 0733 06 08 The total
Charge amounts to 4714 18 06

An Account of Charges the Seed to be equally sowed on the said Land.
l. s. d. For Delving the Land at 4 pence the Perch 2666 13 04 For 2525 bushels
and a half and 2 quarts of Acorns at 2 s. the bushel 0252 11 01 For 260 bushels
1 quart and 600 single seeds of Ashen-keys, at 1 s. the bushel 0013 00 00 For
293 bushels 3 pecks and 3 pints of Beech-mast, at 3 s. the bushel 0044 01 01
For 1333386 hundred of Chestnuts and 1 single Nut, at 2 d. the hundred 1111 11
00 For sowing the Seed, harrowing the Land, and weeding the Plants 0550 00 00
The total Charge amounts to 4637 16 07

And if the said Land be planted with Plants or Sets at the same distance, it
will take up 51854401 single Sets, and the account is as follows.

An Account of Charges the Land to be planted with Sets of Oak, Ash, Beech, or
Elm
For Delving the Land at 4 pence the Perch 2666 13 04 For 518544 hundred and
one Plant either of Oak, Ash, Beech, or Elm, at 18 pence the hundred 38890 16
00 For setting or planting the Sets at 10 s. the Acre 00500 00 00 For weeding
the said Plants at 10 s. the Acre 00500 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 42557
09 04

An Account of Charges the said Land planted with Chestnut Sets.
For Delving the Land 02666 13 04 For 518544 hundred of Chestnut Sets and one
single Set, at 2 s. 6 d. the hundred 64818 00 00 For setting and weeding all
these said Plants 01000 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 68484 13 04

But if all the foresaid several Sets be equally planted, then the Account
stands thus.

An Account of Charges the said Land to be planted with all the Sets equally.
l. s. d. For Delving the Land 02666 13 04 For 414835 hundred and 20 Sets of
Oak, Ash, Beech, and Elm, at 18 d. the hundred 31112 12 09 For 103708 hundred
and 81 Chestnut Sets, at 2 s. 6 d. the hundred 12963 12 00 For setting and
weeding the said Plants 01000 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 47742 18 01

Now that you may the more readily peruse all the foresaid total accounts
belonging to this first planting in dug or delved Land, I shall here set
them down by themselves, and they are as follows.

The total Accounts of all the seed set or sowed at one foot distance.
Seed sowed, Acorns, the Total amounts to 4226 17 10 Ashen-keys, the Total
amounts to 3268 13 05 Beech-mast, the Total amounts to 3392 18 10 Chestnuts, the
Total amounts to 7662 17 04 All these seeds equally sowed, the Total amounts to
4637 16 07

Seed set. Acorns, the Total amounts to 4210 04 06 Ashen-keys, the Total
amounts to 3427 00 01 Beech-mast, the Total amounts to 3501 05 06 Chestnuts, the
Total amounts to 7721 04 00 All these seeds equally set, the Total amounts to
4714 18 06

The total Accounts of

Plants planted Oak, Ash, Beech, or Elm, the Total amounts to 42557 09 04
Chestnut Plants, the Total amounts to 68484 13 04 All these Sets equally
planted, the Total amounts to 47742 18 01

The next Distance is 3 Foot.
AT this Distance if you do not sow the Land between the Plants with Corn, then
there may be delved 2 foot square of ground at the ends of every yard or 3
foot, and therein set 3 seeds, as has been formerly declared. This performed,
there will be delved 5764801 square Plots, and they are worth delving 30
shillings the Acre. The thousand Acres thus planted will take up 17294403
single seeds, and the account will stand as follows.

li. s. d. For Delving the Land at 30 shillings the Acre 1500 00 00 For 2702
bushels 1 peck and 3 single seeds of Acorns at 2 shillings the bushel 0270 04
06 For setting or planting the Seed, and the Land raked, at 2 shillings 6 pence
the Acre 0125 00 00 For weeding the Plants, valued at 7 s. the Acre 0350 00 00
The total Charge amounts to 2245 04 06

An Account of Charges the Land planted with Ashen-keys:
For Delving the Land at 30 s. the Acre 1500 00 00 For setting the seed, and
raking the land at 2 s. 6 d. the acre 0125 00 00 For 180 bushel 1 gallon 1 pint
and 153 single seeds of the Ash-tree at 1 s. the bushel 0009 00 01 For weeding
the Plants at 7 s. the Acre 0350 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 1984 00 01

An Account of Charges the Land planted with the Beech-tree seed.
For Delving the Land at 30 shillings the Acre 1500 00 00 For 225 bushel
6-quarts and 3 single seed of the Beech, at 3 shillings the bushel 0033 15 06
For setting the seed and raking the land at 2 s. 6 d. the acre 0125 00 00 For
weeding the Plants at 7 s. the Acre 0350 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 2008
15 06

An Account of Charges the Land planted with Chestnuts.
l. s. d. For Delving the Land 1500 00 00 For 172944 hundred and single
Chestnuts at 2 d. the hund. 1441 04 00 For Setting the Seed, Raking the Land,
and Weeding the Plants 0475 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 3416 04 00

An Account of Charges equally to plant the 4 several sorts of Seeds.
For Delving the Land 1500 00 00 For 675 bushels a half and 2 quarts of Acorns
at 2 s. the bushel 0067 11 01 For 45 bushels 1 quart and 601 single seeds of
Ashen-keys at 1 s. the bushel 0002 05 00 For 56 bushels 1 peck 3 pints and 1
seed of Beech-mast at 3 shillings the bushel 0007 08 10 For 43236 hundred and 1
Chestnut at 2 d. the hundred 0360 06 00 For Setting the Seed, Raking the Land,
and Weeding the Plants 0475 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 2412 11 00

Now if the Land be planted with Plants or Sets at this distance as the seed
was planted, and the same number, then it will take up 17294403 Plants.

An Account of Charges the Land planted with Sets of Oak, Ash, Beech and Elm.
For Delving the Land 1500 00 00 For 172944 hundred and 3 Plants, either of
Oak, Ash, Beech or Elm, at 18 pence the hundred 12970 14 01 For setting or
planting these Plants, valued at 8 s. the acre 00400 00 00 For Weeding the
Plants at 7 shillings the acre 00350 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 15220 14
01

An Account of Charges the Land planted with Chestnuts Sets.
li. s. d. For Delving the Land 01500 00 00 For 172944 hundred and 3 Plants of
Chestnut, at 2 s. 6 d. the hundred 21618 00 00 For setting and weeding the
Plants 00750 00 00 The Total Charge amounts to 23868 00 00

But if all the foresaid 5 several sorts of Sets be equally planted in the said
Land, the Accounts will be made up as follows.

An Account of Charges the 5 several sorts of Sets equally planted.
For Delving the Land at 30 s. the Acre 01500 00 00 For 138355 hundred and 22
Sets of Oak, Ash, Beech and Elm, at 18 pence the hundred 10376 12 10 For 34588
hundred and 81 single Chestnut Sets, at 2 s. 6 d. the hundred 04273 12 00 For
setting and weeding the Plants 00750 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 16900 04
10

The Totals of the several Accounts of Charges for Seed and Plants set or
planted at 3 foot distance, and is as follows.
Acorns, the Total amounts to 2245 04 06 Ashen-keys, the Total amounts to 1984
00 01 Beech-mast, the Total amounts to 2008 15 06 Chestnuts, the Total amounts
to 3416 04 00 All the foresaid Seeds equally planted, the Total amounts to 2412
11 00

The Totals of the several Accounts for Plants planted.
Oak, Ash, Beech, and Elm Sets, the Total amounts to 15220 14 01 Chestnut Sets,
the Total amounts to 23868 00 00 All the 5 several sorts of Sets equally
planted, the Total amounts to 16900 04 10

The Third Distance.
THis next or third Distance of ground between Plants or Seeds is 4 foot and an
half, which is the fourth part of a Perch Woodland measure. Now if the
Thousand Ace^s of Land be planted the same way and order as was the last, or 3
foot distance, then at the ends of 4 foot 6 inches of Land in length must be
delved a Plot of Land 2 foot square, with a small Trench about the square Plot,
and therein set or plant 3 seeds: To perform this the Land will take up 7689603
single seeds; and the Plots be worth delving 14 shillings the Acre.

An Account of Charges, the Land set with Acorns.
l. s. d. For Delving 2563201 square Plots of Land, each Plot containing 4
square foot of ground; the whole Plot worth delving 14 shillings the acre 0700
00 00 For 1201 bushels a half and 3 acorns, at 2 s. the bushel 0120 03 00 For
setting the Seed, and raking the Land 2 s. the acre, and weeding the Plants 4
s. the acre 0300 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 1120 03 00

An Account of Charges the Land planted with the Ash-seed.
For Delving the Land at 14 s. the acre 0700 00 00 For 80 bushels 3 quarts and
603 single seeds of the Ash, at 12 d. the bushel 0004 00??? 01 or setting the
Seed, and raking the Land at 2 s. the acre 0100 00 00 or weeding the plants at
4 s. the acre 0200 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 1004 00 01 2/4

An Account of Charges the Land planted with Beech seed.
li. s. d. For 100 bushel 1 gallon and 3 seeds of Beech-mast at 3 s. the bushel
0015 00 04 For Delving the Land 0700 00 00 For setting the Seed, raking the
Land, and weeding the Plants 0300 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 1015 00 04

An Account of Charges the Land planted with Chestnuts.
For Delving the Land 0700 00 00 For 76896 hundred and 3 single Chestnuts at 2
d. the hund. 0640 16 00 For setting the Seed, raking the Land, and weeding the
Plants 0300 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 1640 16 00

An Account of Charges all the 4 sorts of seed equally planted.
For Delving the Land 0700 00 00 For 100 bushels 1 gallon of Acorns at 2 s. the
bushel 0010 00 03 For 6 bushels 5 gallons 5 pints and 300 single Ashen-keys at
13 pence the bushel 0000 06 10 For 8 bushel 3 gallons and 800 Seeds of
Beech-mast at 3 s. the bushel 0001 05 01 For 6408 hundred and 1 Chestnut at 2
pence the hundred 0053 08 00 For setting the Seed, raking the Land, and weeding
the Plants 0300 00 00 The Total Charge amounts to 1065 00 02

And if the Land be planted with Sets at this distance, as was the seed, and to
the number of seed, then it will take up 7689603 single Sets or Plants, and the
account is as follows.

An account of Charges the Land planted with Oak, Ash, Beech or Elm Sets.
li. s. d. For Delving the Land 0700 00 00 For 76896 hundred and 3 sets either
of Oak, Ash, Beech or Elm at 18 pence the hundred 5767 04 00 For planting and
weeding the said Sets at 4 s. 6 d. the acre 0425 00 00 The total Charge amounts
to 6892 04 00

An Account of Charges the Land planted with Chestnut Sets.
For Delving the Land at 14 shillings the Acre 0700 00 00 For 76896 hundred and
3 Sets of Chestnuts at 2 s. 6 d. the hundred 9612 00 00 For setting and weeding
the said Sets 0425 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 10737 00 00

An Account of Charges equally to plant the 5 sorts of Sets.
For Delving the Land 00700 00 00 For 61516 hundred and 82 single Sets of Oak,
Ash, Beech and Elm at 18 d. the hundred 04613 15 01 For 15379 hundred and 21
single Sets of Chestnuts at 2 s. 6 d. the hundred 01922 08 00 For Planting and
Weeding all the said Sets 00425 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 07661 03 01

An Account of Charges to plant only a single Set in every Plot of ground at
this distance, there being delved 2563201 square Plots.
For Delving the Land 0700 00 00 For 25632 hundred and 1 Plant either of Oak,
Ash, Beech or Elm at 18 pence the hundred 1922 08 00 For Planting the Sets at 4
shillings the Acre 0200 00 00 For weeding the land a foot round the Sets at 2s.
the Acre 0100 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 2922 08 00

An Account of Charges the Land planted with Chestnut Sets.
l. s. d. For Delving the Land 0700 00 00 For 25632 hundred and 1 Plant of
Chestnut at 2 s. 6 d. the hundred 3204 00 00 For planting and weeding the said
Sets 0300 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 4204 00 00

An Account of Charges, the foresaid 5 sorts of Sets equally planted.
For Delving the Land 0700 00 00 For 20505 hundred and 60 Sets of Oak, Ash,
Beech and Elm at 18 d. the hundred 1537 18 04 For 5126 hundred and 41 Sets of
Chestnut at 2 s. 6 d. the hundred 0641 01 03 For setting and weeding the plants
0300 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 3178 19 07

The reason why we allow a greater price by the perch for delving these square
Plots mentioned in the last two Distances, than was at first when the whole
Enclosure of Land was delved, is because these several parcels of Land require
much more care and time than the other.

Now if you intend to sow or plant Corn among the Plants at this last Distance,
then the whole Enclosure of Land must be delved, for the Plow will not have
room to turn between the Plants. In our former accounts of Charges for plowing
the Land, the seed we made choice of, as the best Corn to grow among the Plants
is Wheat, the quantity to be sowed upon one Acre was 3 Bushel: but because a
great part of the Land is taken up for the Plants to grow in, there is but 2
Bushels allowed for an Acre where the Plants are planted at this distance. I
shall give you only one Account of charges for Corn at this time, and likewise
in each of the other two Distances we are to speak of.

An Account of Charges the Land planted with one single Set in each Plot of
Land delved, either of Chestnut, Ash, or Withey, they being equally planted,
that is as many of one sort as of the other; and the Land sowed between the
Plants with Wheat.
l. s. d. For Delving the Land at 4 pence the perch 2666 13 04 For 17088
hundred of Ash and Withey Sets at 18 pence the hundred 1281 12 00 For 8544
hundred and one Set of Chestnut at 2 shillings 6 pence the hundred 1068 00 00
For planting the Sets and weeding them 0300 00 00 For 2000 Bushels of
seed-Wheat at 5 s. the bushel 0500 00 00 For sowing the Wheat and harrowing the
Land at 2 shillings the acre 0100 00 00 For weeding the Wheat at 4 pence the
acre 0016 13 04 For reaping, gathering Gripes, binding the Sheafs, and carrying
the Corn into the Barn at 6 s. the acre 0300 00 00 For thrashing and winowing
the Wheat at 10 s. the load, containing 40 bushels, and reckoning 20 bushels
the Increase to grow on every Acre of Land, and counting the number of Acres in
the Enclosure. 0250 00 00 For transporting the said Wheat to Market, if not
above 7 miles from the Barn or place of lading, 5 s. the load, 0125 00 00 The
total Charge amounts to 6607 18 08

Now because this Woodland measure is larger than the Statute Acre or Land in
Tillage, and the labor in sowing the Corn, Harrowing, Raking, Weeding,
Reaping, Gathering, Binding and Loading will require much care and time by
reason of the Plants growing so near together; therefore to make good the time
and answer the care, in our accounts of Charges, we reckon the whole Enclosure
of Land by the Acre, as if no Plants were growing therein.

And you may please to take notice that this account of Charges by Corn is not
a Rule for all Countries, because the Wages of Men and Cattle, and the prices
of Corn do much differ, as was said before; yet we have gone as near the most
usual rates as possibly could be; and which may serve for most Shires and
Counties in England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales, being not within our List.
Also the account of charges about Corn may be considered in, or added to any
other account of charges, my meaning is, That if the Land be planted with seed
of Trees, as Acorns, Beech-mast, or any other kind, the account of charges for
Wheat may be added in the Total, thereby to know the charges of planting Wheat
with the Seed of Trees. Secondly, where the Land is plowed and planted with
Sets or Seed of Trees at any distance the account for Wheat may likewise be
added to the Total; and you will know the charges to plant Wheat when the Land
is plowed, as where the Land is delved. This being easy to understand does not
require farther demonstration; I shall now according to my former method give
you all the Totals by themselves for Sets, Seed, and Corn planted at this
distance.

The Totals of several Accounts for 3 seed of one kind planted in each Plot of
Land delved at 4 foot 6 inches distance.
li. s. d. Acorns, the Total amounts to 1120 03 00 Ash-seed, the Total amounts
to 1004 00 01 Beech-seed, the Total amounts to 1015 00 04 Chestnuts, the Total
amounts to 1640 16 00 All the 4 sorts of seed equally planted, the Total
amounts to 1065 00 02

The Totals of several Accounts for 3 Sets planted in each Plot.
Oak, Ash, Beech, or Elm, the Total amounts to 6892 04 00 Chestnut Sets, the
Total amounts to 10737 00 00 All the five sorts of Sets equally planted, the
Total amounts to 7661 03 01

The Totals of several Accounts for 1 Set planted at the same distance.
li. s. d. Oak, Ash, Beech, or Elm Sets, the Total amounts to 2922 08 00
Chestnut Sets, the Total amounts to 4204 00 00 2/4 All the 5 sorts of single
Sets equally planted, the Total amounts to 3178 19 07 All the 4 sorts of seed
equally planted, and the land sowed between the Plants with Wheat the Total
amounts to 7672 18 10 One single Set either of Oak, Ash, Beech, or Elm in each
Plot, and the Land sowed with Wheat, the Total amounts to 9530 06 08 2/4 One
Set of Chestnut planted, and the Land sowed with Wheat, amounts to 10811 18 08
All the several sorts of Sets equally planted in each Plot one, and the Land
sowed with Wheat between the Plants, the Total amounts to 9786 18 04

This Account of Charges by sowing Wheat among the Plants does rise to so great
a sum, that it may discourage a young Planter; but if his patience would guide
him to the account of profit or improvement, there may be hopes of
encouragement again: And that no miscarriage may happen in so good a work, I
shall in this place state the Account of Charges and Profit by planting Sets
and Wheat in a Thousand Acres of Land, and the Plants planted 4 foot 6 inches
distant one from the other.

In Page 89 and 90 the total sum of Improvement by Ash, Withey and Chestnut
Plants planted at this distance last mentioned, and allowing 10 or 11 years
growth, amounts to the sum of 17651 pound 9 s. 4 d. 3 farthings. Also the Land
sowed with Wheat 3 years together, and the yearly increase arising to 20
Bushels growing on every Acre, and being sold for 5-shillings the Bushel does
come to 15000 pound; these two sums added together, the Total amounts to 32651
pound 9 shillings 4 pence 3 farthings.

Now there will arise from every Load of Wheat, which is five Quarters or 40
Bushels, 32 Bushels of Chafe or Hulls; Then the 1500 Load of Wheat will yield
48000 Bushels of Chaff, worth in the Barn or place of thrashing 3 pence the
bushel heap and thrust, which comes to 600 pound. Also every Load of Wheat will
yield 2 Load of Straw, worth in the thrashing place 5 shillings the Load, and
comes to 750 pound: Add all these sums together, and they amount to 34001 pound
9 shillings 4 pence 3 farthings.

The first years charges in planting the single Sets of Ash, Withey and
Chestnuts; also Wheat sowed as by the account in page 106 does come to 6607
pound 18 shillings 8 pence farthing.

The land between the Plants must be twice delved, and may be as often sowed
with Wheat, after the first years planting; whereupon all the former charges
about the wheat also will continue 2 years more; and the land to be delved for
the Wheat, there being 128355 perch a half and 14 foot, at 4 pence the perch,
comes to 2139 pound 5 shillings 2 pence; and the next or third years delving
amounts to the same sum, they both come to 4278 pound 10 shillings 4 pence
farthing. The Remainder of land which is 31644 perch a quarter and 67 foot, is
the land allotted for the Plants to grow in.

The two years charge for seed-Wheat, also sowing, raking, weeding, reaping,
gathering, binding and carting come to 2583 pound 6 shillings 8 pence.

Now at 10 or 11 years growth all the foresaid plants must be cut down; the
charges for cutting and converting them to their several uses, as shreading the
Hop-poles, making the Fagots, and such like, the workmanship may be worth 10
shillings the Acre, which comes to 500 pound. We shall also allow for making
the hoops, and transportation of them, 12 shillings the thousand, and there
being 1282 thousand and 2 hoops, comes to 1009 pound 4 shillings. We shall also
allow for the Rent of the Land, and Interest for the forbearance of the Rent 7
years, there being no Interest allowed for the Rent during the 3 years time the
land was sowed with Wheat, because of the profit of the Increase.

Now the land is valued to be worth 20 shillings the Acre yearly rent, then the
10 years Rent for the thousand Acres comes to 10000; pound the 7 years Interest
for the said Land, after the rate of 6 pound per Cent. comes to 503 pound 12
shillings 6 pence 2 farthings.

We shall also allow Interest for the moneys disbursed in planting, and is as
follows.

The Charges for Delving the Land which the Plants grow in, there being 31644
perch a quarter and 67 foot, at 4 pence the perch, comes to 527 pound 8 s. 1 d..

The 10 years Interest for this last Sum of Charges after the rate of 6 pound
per Cent. comes to 369 l. 15 s. 10 d..

The Moneys disbursed for Sets or Plants comes to 2649 l. 12 s. 1 farthing.

The 10 years Interest for the Moneys paid for the said Sets, comes to 1896 l.
1 s. 5 d..

Now the Land between the Plants containing 128356 square perch is worth 10
shillings the Acre to ly for Meadow after the 3 years Crops of Wheat is off the
Land, and there being 802 Acres and 36 Perch, comes to 401 l. 2 s. 5 d. yearly,
then the 7 years Rent of the said Land, which is about the time of the first
Cutting of the Plants, comes to 2807 l. 16 s. 11 d. This Sum is to be added to
the account of Profit or Improvement; and the total Improvement then amounts to
36809 l. 6 s. 3 d. 3 farthings,

The total Interest Money comes to 2769 l. 9 s. 10 d..

Now all these Sums of Charges before and last mentioned, being added to the
total Sum for the first years Charges, then the Total of all Charges for the
thousand Acres of Land, planted as aforesaid, amounts to 27748 l. 9 s. 6 d..

And if you substract this last total Sum of Charges out of the total Sum of
Profit or Improvement, then the Product or Remainder of the Sum subtracted
comes to which Sum is so much gained out of the thousand Acres of Land in 10 or
11 years, the Land planted as we have formerly declared.

I know not of any other Accounts of Profit or Charges worth the bringing or
charging to an account in this place: But you may please to take notice that
this Account of Gain or Profit is for the first Cutting of the Plants, they
being single Shoots, Poles, or Rods produced from Seed. The next Cutting, or
second Growth, every Stock may put forth 4 or 5 Shoots; and then the profit
will be double. Also this way of planting by Sets, and delving the land is much
more chargeable then plowing and planting Seed; for the total charge in
planting at this distance with the Ash and Chestnut Seed, and Withey Sets, the
Land plowed, and the Seed and Sets planted the way and manner as we have set
down in Page 114 comes but to 1897 pound 9 s.. But the total charge, the Land
being delved, and single Setts, and the Seed of Ash and Chestnuts, with Withey
Sets, as was said before, planted at the same distance, Page 136 and 137,
amounts to 5316 pound 7 s. 4 d. 1 farthing; substract the Sum of Charges for
plowing and planting out of the Sum for delving and planting, the rest or
remainde amounts to 3418 pound 18 shillings 4 pence; and being so much charges
saved by plowing and planting seed, may be added to the Account of profit as so
much gained.

Now it may be objected, that planting by Sets every Stock will produce 2 or 3
Shoots, and to plant with Seed there will be but one Shoot, and so consequently
one Pole or Rod; and at the time or season of cutting the Sets will produce
double the quantity of stuff more than the Seed: For answer we grant the
increase; but say that the Sets which should be planted being small, the many
Shoots may by hindering the growth of the Roots, and endanger the Stock, and
also hinder the growth of each other; for the Root must have time to grow and
enlarge it self within the earth; therefore there will not be a sufficient
supply of sap to maintain more shoots than one in so short a time as is allowed
to the first Cutting: Also for young Stocks to have many boughs will not only
hinder the thriving of the root by spending much sap, but as a poor Ewe which
may bring forth 2 or 3 Lambs, both sterves her self and those she brought
forth: We shall therefore advise to proyn or cut off all shoots but one from
every Stock, until after the first Felling or Cutting; for one good straight
shoot is worth 5 or 6 small stragged ones. These particulars being premised,
you shall have the account in brief; and it is as follows.

An Account of Charges and Grain by a thousand Acres of Land equally planted
with single Sets of Chestnut, Ash and Withey, and Wheat sowed between the Plants
at 4 foot 6 inches distance.
An Account of Charges.
l. s. d. Paid the first years Charges for planting 1000 Acres of Land with
plants of Chestnut, Ash, and Withey; also Wheat sowed between the plants 6607 18
08 For Delving at two several times 256711 perch 28 foot of Land 4278 10 04
2/4 For 4000 Bushels of seed-Wheat; also sowing, raking, weeding, reaping, and
all charges about the Wheat for 2 years season in sowing 2583 06 08 For cutting
the Plants, and converting them to several uses 1509 04 00 For 10 years Rent
for 1000 acres of Land at 20 s the acre yearly 10000 00 00 For Interest money
02769 09 10 The total Charge amounts to 27748 09 07

An Account of Profit or Improvement.
li. s. d. Received for Hop-poles, Hoops, Fagots, and other Necessaries for
Husbandry 17651 09 04 Received 3 years Crops of Wheat, containing 60000
Bushels, at 5 s. the Bushel 15000 00 00 Received for 48000 Bushels of Wheat
Chaff at 3 d. the Bushel 00600 00 00 Received for 3000 Load of Wheat Straw at 5
shillings the bushel 00750 00 00 Received 7 years Rent for 802 acres 36 perch
of land at 10 s. the acre yearly 02807 16 11 The total Improvement amounts to
36809 06 03 The total Charge amounts to 27748 09 07 Rest in Cash 09060 16 08

This last Sum, rest in Cash, is so much gained by planting a thousand Acres
of Land with Sets or Plants for Under-wood, and Wheat sowed on the Land.

Thus to state and balance all the Accounts in this Book will require more
time than is allowed; and the work is made so plain and easy, that every mean
Accountant may perform the same, and save me the labor; we shall therefore
proceed to the next Distance, and that is 18 foot in length.

The Fourth Distance or 18 Foot.
AT this Distance you have been advised to delve a Plot of ground 4 foot
square, and therein to set or plant 4 seed: To perform this the Land will take
up, there being 16080 square Plots, 643204 single seed, and is worth delving 4
pence the perch, and there being 7940 and 13 foot, comes to 132 l. 7 s. 1 d.

An Account of Charges the Land set with Acorns.
l. s. d. For Delving 7940 perch and 13 foot of Land at 4 d. the perch 132 07
01 For 100 bushels 2 pecks and 4 single seeds of Acorns at 2 s. the bushel 010
01 00 For planting the Seed, raking the Land, and weeding the Plants at 3 s.
the acre 150 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 292 08 01

An Account of Charges the Land planted with the Ash-seed.
For Delving the Land at 4 d. the perch 132 07 01 For 6 bushels of a pint and
279 single seeds of Ash at 1 s. the bushel 000 06 08 For setting the Seed,
raking the Land, and weeding the Plants 150 00 00 The total Charge amounts to
282 13 09

An Account of Charges the Land planted with Beech-seed.
For Delving 7940 perch and 13 foot of Land at 4 d. the perch 132 07 01 For 8
bushels 3 gallons and 4 single seeds of the Beech at 3 s. the bushel 001 05 01
For setting the Seed, raking the Land, and weeding at 3 s. the acre 150 00 00
The total Charge amounts to 283 12 02

An Account of Charges the Land planted with Chestnuts.
For Delvsng the Land 132 07 01 For 6432 hundred and 4 Nuts at 2 pence the
hundred 053 12 01 For Setting the Seed, Raking and Weeding 150 00 00 The total
Charge amounts to 335 19 02

An Account of Charges the 4 sorts of seed equally planted.
l. s. d. For Delving the Land 132 07 01 For 25 bushels a gallon and 1 Acorn at
2 s. the bushel 002 10 03 For 6 pecks 7 pints and 301 single seed of the Ash at
1 s. the bushel 000 01 08 For 2 bushels 3 quarts and 1 seed of Beech-mast at 3
s. the bushel 000 06 03 For 1608 hundred and 1 seed of Chestnut at 2 d. the
hund. 013 0^ 00 For Setting the seed, Raking and Weeding at 3 s. the acre 150
00 00 The total Charge amounts to 298 13 03

But if the Land be planted with Sets as it was with Seed, or to the number of
Seed, then it will take up at this distance 643204 single Sets; and the
accounts are as follows;

An Account of Charges the Land planted with Oak, Ash, Beech, or Elm Sets.
For Delving the Land 0132 07 01 For 6432 hundred and 4 Sets, either of Oak,
Ash, Beech, or Elm at 1 s. 6 d. the hundred 0482 08 00 For Planting and Weeding
the Plants at 6 s. the acre 0300 00 00 The total Charge amounts to 0914 15 01
An Account of Charges the Land planted with Chestnut Sets:
For Delving the Land 0132 07 01 For 6432 hundred and 4 Chestnut Plants at 2 s:
6 d, the hundred 0784 00 01 For Planting and Weeding the Sets 0300 00 00 The
total Charge amounts to 1216 07 02

An Account of Charges the 5 sorts of Sets equally planted.
li. s. d. For Delving 7940 perch and 13 foot of land at 4 d. the perch 132
07 01 For 5145 hundred and 64 of Oak, Ash, Beech and Elm Sets at 18 pence the
hundred. 385 17 06 For 1286 hundred and 40 Chestnut Sets at 2 s. 6 d. the
hundred 160 16 00 For Planting and Weeding the Sets 300 00 00 The total Charge
amounts to 979 00 07

Now if at this distance in each Plot of ground you reserve to grow for Timber
only one Plant, and pluck or draw up the other three, as has been directed; or
that you plant one single Set at this distance, making use of the Plots by
planting Corn therein; then the Land between the Plants may be plowed, and if
sowed with Wheat, the quantity allowed for every Acre, counting as formerly,
will be two bushels and a half; the Land then will take up, there being 950
Acres 59 perch and 68 foot, 2375 bushels 2 pecks, and at 5 s. the bushel
amounts to 593 pound 17 shillings 6 pence. The Plowing of this Land according
to our former accounts of Charges by plowing after the rate of 12 shillings the
Acre comes to 570 pound 4 shillings 5 pence. At this distance we shall allow
the Increase of Wheat to be 25 bushels growing on every Acre of Land.

The Charges of Weeding the Wheat, also Reaping, Gathering, Binding, Housing,
Thrashing, Winowing, Transporting to Markets, etc. allowing the same we did in
the Account stated, comes to 835 pound 8 shillings 4 pence; the particulars are
as follows.

An Account of Charges by a thousand Acres of Land planted with single Sets
either of Oak, Ash, Beech or Elm, and sowed with Wheat between the Plants.
li. s. d. For Delving 7940 perch and 13 foot of Land at 4 d. the perch 0132
07 01 For Plowing, Hacking, Sowing and Harrowing 950 acres 1 quarter 19 perch
and 68 foot of Land with Wheat at 12 s. the Acre 0570 04 05 For 1608 hundred
and 1 of Oak, Ash, Beech, or Elm Sets at 18 pence the hundred 0120 12 00 For
2500 Bushels of Seed-wheat at 5 shillings the bushel 06^5 00 00 For setting and
weeding the Plants as they have been valued 0125 00 00 For Weeding the Wheat at
4 d. the acre 0016 13 04 For Reaping, Gathering, Binding the Sheafs, and
Carrying the Corn into the Barn, there being more Corn than the last distance,
7 s. the ace 0350 00 00 For Thrashing and Winowing the Wheat at 10 s. the Load
containing 40 bushels, and reckoning the Increase 25 bushels to grow on every
Acre, and counting the numbers of Acres that is sowed 0312 10 00 For Carrying
the said Wheat to Market at 5 s. the Load or 40 bushels 0156 05 00 The total
Charge amounts to 2408 11 10

An Account of Charges the Land planted with single Chestnut Sets and Wheat
sowed between the Plants
For Delving 7940 perch and 13 foot of Land at 4 d. the perch 0132 07 01 For
Plowing, Sowing, Hacking, and Harrowing 950 acres 19 perch 68 foot 0570 04 05
For 1608 hundred and one of Chestnut Plants at 2 s. 6 d. the hundred 0201 00 00
For planting and weeding the said Plants at 2 s. 6 d. the acre 0125 00 00 For
2500 bushels of seed at 5 s. the bushel 0625 00 00 For Weeding the Wheat 0016
13 04 For Re^ping, Binding, and all Charges till brought into the B^rn 0350 00
00 For Thrashing, Winowing, and all Charges to the Market, as by the last
account 0468 15 00 The total Charge amounts to 2488 19 10

An Account of Charges the foresaid 5 several sorts of single Plants equally
planted, and Wheat sowed between the Plants.
li. s. d. For Delving the Land cont. 7940 perch and 13 foot 0132 07 01 For
Plowing, and Sowing with Wheat the other part of the Land 0570 04 05 For 1286
hundred and 40 single Sets of Oak, Ash, Beech and Elm 0096 09 07 For 3216
hundred and 1 Plant of Chestnut at 2 s. 6 d. the hundred 0040 04 00 For Setting
and Weeding the said Plants 0125 00 00 For 2500 bushels of Seed-wheat at 5 s.
the bushel 0625 00 00 For Weeding the Wheat 0016 13 04 For Reaping, Binding,
and all Charges till brought into the Barn 0350 00 00 For Thrashing, and all
Charges to the Markets 0468 15 00 The total Charge amounts to 2424 13 05

Using my accustomed Method, all the Total Sums will appear to your present
view, and they are as follows.

The Totals of the several Accounts for Seed set or planted at 18 foot distance.
Acorns, the Total amounts to 0292 08 1 Ash-seed, the Total amounts to 0282 13
9 Beech-seed, the Total amounts to 0283 12 2 Chestnuts, the Total amounts to
0335 19 2 All the 4 several sorts of Seed equally planted the Total amounts to
0298 12 3

The Totals for 4 Plants planted in each Plot of Land delved.
Oak, Ash, Beech, or Elm, the Total amounts to 0914 15 1 Chestnut Set, the Total
amounts to 1216 07 2 All the 5 several sorts of Sets equally planted the Total
amounts to 0979 00 7

li. s. d. One single Plant either of Oak, Ash, Beech or Elm planted in each
Plot, and the Land sowed with Wheat, the Total amounts to 2408 11 10 One single
Chestnut Plant planted in each Plot, and the Land sowed with Wheat, the Total
amounts to 2488 19 10 All the 5 sorts of single Sets equally planted in each
Plot one, and the Land sowed with Wheat, the Total amounts to 2424 13 05

You may please to take notice at the second season of Plowing. That that part
of Land that the Plow cannot reach or compass must be dug or delved.

The Fifth Distance.
THe next or last Distance of Land between the Plants we intend to treat of in
this Book, and at this time, is two perch or 36 foot.

Well grown and thriving Timber Trees planted in a thousand Acres of Land at
this distance will not only be profitable (as on every Acre of Land, there
growing 40 Timber Trees worth 10 pound a Tree, and amount to four hundred
thousand pound) but make a gallant show; and Corn growing on the Land, Cattle
and Deer feeding thereon were very pleasant to behold.

We have formerly advised to delve a Plot of ground 4 foot square at the end of
every 36 foot in length, and therein to set or plant 4 Seed or Plants; this
performed there will be sufficient room for the Plow to turn between the square
Plots, making good and quick work, not hurting either Plants or Trees; And the
Land planted according to former Directions, the Accounts will stand as
follows:

An Account of Charges the Land planted with Chestnuts at this last Distance,
and sowed with Wheat.
li. s. d. For Delving 40401 square plots of Land containing 646416 foot, or
1995 perch and 36 foot at 4 d. the perch 033 05 0 For Plowing, Hacking,
Sowing the Wheat, and Harrowing 987 acres and 3 quarters of Land at 12 s. the
acre 592 13 0 For 161604 Chestnut Seed, or 1616 hundred and 4 Nuts at 2 d the
hundred 013 09 4 For Seed-wheat, allowing at this distance 3 bushels to be
sowed on every acre, at 5 s. the bushel 740 16 3 For Setting the Chestnuts, and
Weeding the Plants at 18 d. the acre 075 00 0 For Weeding the Wheat at 4 pence
the acre 016 13 4 For Reaping, Binding, and Carrying the Corn into the Barn at
8 s. the acre 395 02 0 For Thrashing and Winnowing the Wheat at 10 s. the load
or 40 bushels, and reckoning the increase 30 bushels to grow on every acre 370
07 6 For Carriage of the said Wheat to Markets, if within 7 miles of the Barn,
at 5 s. the load or 40 bushels 185 03 9 The total Charge amounts to 2422 10 2

An Account of Charges the Land planted with Acorns and sowed with Wheat.
For Delving 1995 perch and 36 foot of Land at 4 d. the perch 033 05 0 For
Plowing 987 acres of Land, and sowing the said Land with Wheat 592 13 0 For 25
bushels 1 peck and 4 Acorns at 2 s. the bushel 002 1 6 For Seed-Wheat the Land
requiring 2963 bushels at 5 s. the bushel 740 16 3 For Setting the Acorns, and
Weeding the Plants 075 00 0 For Weeding the Wheat 016 13 4 For Reaping,
Gathering, Binding, and Carting the Corn into the Barn 395 02 0 For Thrashing
and Winowing the Wheat at 10 s. the load 370 07 6 For Carriage of the said
Wheat to Markets at 5 s. the load 185 03 9 The total Charge amounts to 2411 11
4

An Account of Charges the Land planted with the Beech-Seed, and sowed with
Wheat.
l. s. d. For Delving and Plowing the Land 625 18 0 For 2 bushels 3 quarts and
804 single Seeds at 3 s. the bushel 000 06 3 For 2963 bushels of Seed-Wheat at
5 s. the bushel 740 16 3 For Setting the Beech Seed, and Weeding the Plants 075
00 0 For Weeding the Wheat, and all Charges of bringing it into the Barn 411 15
4 For Thrashing the said Wheat, and all Charges to the Markets 555 11 3 The
total Charge amounts to 2409 07 2

An Account of Charges the Land planted with Ash-seed, and sowed with Wheat.
For Delving and Plowing the Land 625 18 0 For one Bushel and a half 11 pints
and 1104 single seeds of the Ash at 12 pence the bushel 000 01 8 For 2963
bushels of Seed-Wheat at 5 s. the bushel 740 16 3 For Setting the Ash-seed and
Weeding the Plants 075 00 0 For Weeding the Wheat and all Charges of bringing
it into the Barn 411 15 4 For Thrashing the said Wheat and all Charges to the
Markets 555 11 3 The total Charge amounts to 2409 02 6

An Account of Charges all the 4 sorts of Seed equally planted, and the Land
sowed with Wheat.
For Delving and Plowing the Land 625 18 0 For 404 hundred of Chestnuts and 1
single Nut at 2 d. the hund. 003 07 4 For 6 bushels 5 pottles and 1 seed of
Acorns at 2 s. the bushel 000 12 7 For 2 pecks 1 pint and 801 single seed of
the Beech at 3 s. the bushel 000 01 7 For 3 gallons 1 quart and 1401 single
seeds of the Ash at 12 d. the bushel 000 00 5 For Setting these Seeds and
Weeding the Plants 075 00 0 For Seed-Wheat containing 2963 bushels at 5 s. the
bushel 740 16 3 For Weeding the Wheat and all Charges of bringing it into the
Barn 411 15 4 For thrashing the said Wheat and all charges to the Markets 555
11 3 The total Charge amounts to 2413 02 9

An Account of Charges the Land planted with Sets, as it was with Seed, and
Wheat sowed between the Plants.
li. s. d. For Delving and Plowing, as by the particulars in former Accounts
625 18 0 For 161604 either of Oak, Ash, Beech or Elm Sets at 18 d. the hundred
121 04 0 For Planting the Sets and Weeding them 100 00 0 For 2963 bushels of
Seed-wheat at 5 s. the bushel 740 16 3 For Weeding the Wheat and all Charges
into the Barn 411 15 4 For Thrashing the said Wheat and all Charges to the
Markets 555 11 3 The total Charge amounts to 2555 04 10

An Account of Charges the same quantity of Land planted with Chestnut Sets and
Wheat sowed.
For Delving and Plowing the Land 625 18 0 For 1616 hundred of Chestnut Sets at
2 s. 6 d. the hundred 202 00 1 For Planting the Sets and Weeding them 100 00 0
For 2963 bushels of Seed-Wheat at 5 s. the bushel 740 16 3 For Weeding the said
Wheat and all Charges bringing it into the Barn 411 15 4 For Thrashing the said
Wheat, and all Charges to the Markets 555 11 3 The total Charge amounts to 2636
00 11

An Account of Charges all the 5 sorts of Sets equally planted, and Wheat sowed
between them.
For Delving and Plowing the Land 625 18 0 For 129284 of Oak, Ash, Beech, and
Elm single Plants 096 19 2 For 32320 Chestnut Plants 040 08 0 For Planting and
Weeding all the said Sets 100 00 0 For Seed-Wheat 740 16 3 For Weeding the said
Wheat and all Charges into the Barn 411 15 4 For Thrashing the said Wheat and
all Charges to the Markets 555 11 3 The total Charge amounts to 2571 08 0

Now if you plant a thousand Acres of Land with single Sets at the last
distance before mentioned, that is to say 36 foot space of ground left between
each single Plant, and 2 foot square of land delved for each Plant to grow in.
The Accounts are as follows.

An Account of Charges the Land planted with single Sets either of Oak, Ash,
Beech, or Elm, and sowed with Wheat.
li. s. d. For Delving 498 square perch 3 quarters and 9 foot of Land 0008 06
03 For Plowing 996 Acres 21 perch and 72 foot of Land 0598 02 06 For 40401
single Sets either of Oak, Ash, Beech, or Elm 0020 04 00 For Planting and
Weeding the said Plants at 10 d. the acre 0041 13 04 For Seed-Wheat and all
Charges bringing it into the Barn 1152 11 07 For Thrashing the said Wheat and
all Charges to the Markets 0555 11 03 The total Charge amounts to 2376 08 11

An Account of Charges the Land planted with Chestnut Sets:
For Delving, Plowing, Sowing, Hacking, and Harrowing 0606 08 09 For 40401
single Plants of Chestnut at 2 s. 6 d. the hundred 0050 10 00 For Planting and
Weeding the said Sets 0041 13 04 For Seed-Wheat, also Weeding the Wheat, and
all Charges into the Barn 1152 11 07 For Thrashing, and all Charges to the
Markets 0555 11 03 The total Charge amounts to 2406 14 11

An Account of Charges all the 5 sorts of Sets equally planted, and Wheat sowed
on the said Land.
li. s. d. For Delving and Plowing the Land 0606 08 9 For 323 hundred and 20
single Sets of Oak, Ash, Beech and Elm 0024 04 9 For 80 hundred and 81 single
Sets of Chestnut 0010 02 0 For Planting and Weeding the said Sets at 10 d. the
acre 0041 13 4 For Seed-Wheat 0740 16 3 For Weeding the said Wheat, and all
Charges bringing it into the Barn 0411 15 4 For Thrashing the said Wheat, and
all Charges to the Markets 0555 11 3 The total Charge amounts to 2390 11 8

It may be objected that on those Lands where there is planted the least number
of Sets, there ought to be a greater quantity of Corn sowed than where the
Plants are set thicker, and consequently a greater Crop or Increase of Wheat
expected; also an account given thereof, which is not performed or mentioned in
the accounts: For answer we say, That on those Lands where Corn is ordered to
be sowed, there is but one Plant allowed to grow for Timber, and at the ends of
each or every Distance of Land proportioned between the Plants: All the rest
are appointed for planting other Lands, and to be pulled or drawn up at or
about three years after the first planting. Secondly, in that short time or
term of years the Plants will be but of small growth, therefore not much
prejudice or hinder the growth of Corn; neither will the Corn hurt them if
ordered as has been directed. Thirdly, the difference is so small, that I shall
not blot paper by taking notice thereof; and to answer every Objection, nice
Scruple, or Question, is more fit for such that delight rather in Disputation
than Improvement: we shall therefore proceed, and according to our former
custom give you the Totals of the several Accounts mentioned by planting at
this fifth or last Distance, and they are as follows.

The Totals of several Accounts for Seed of Trees planted, and the said Land
sowed with Wheat.
l. s. d. Chestnuts, the Total amounts to 2422 10 02 Acorns, the Total amounts
to 2411 11 04 Beech-seed, the Total amounts to 2409 07 02 Ash-seed, the Total
amounts to 2409 02 06 All the 4 sorts of Seed equally planted the Total amounts
to 2413 02 09

The Totals of 4 Sets planted in each Plot of Land.
Oak, Ash, Beech, or Elm, the Total amounts to 2555 04 10 Chestnut Sets, the
Total amounts to 2636 00 11 All the 5 sorts of Sets equally planted the Total
amounts to 2571 08 00

The Totals of one single Set planted in each Plot of Land and Wheat sowed
between the Plants.
Oak, Ash, Beech, or Elm, the Total amounts to 2376 08 11 Chestnut Sets, the
Total amounts to 2406 14 11 All the 5 sorts of Sets equally planted the Total
amounts to 2390 11 08

We have not set down in all the Distance every particular Account of Charges
or Expense, being unwilling to repeat the same thing over and over again; but
refer the Reader to the Account stated in the third Distance, and Planting for
Under-woods.

All that has been spoken of Planting; Also the Accounts of Charges and Profit
are to be Understood as meant of the whole Land, or Utmost of the Plot,
containing a thousand Acres, the square whereof is 400 perch.

We might also here give an account of the Charges and Profit that may arise by
Planting the said Land enclosed with the Fence before mentioned; the ground
allowed for breadth of the Ditch and the Bank, or earth cast out for the thorns
to grow in, was 9 foot, which is half a perch; then the square of the Land
within the Fence to be planted contains 399 perch, and arises in the whole
Plot by the acre to 995 acres one perch: The loss of land by reason of the
Fence or the Land taken up by the Fence, being 4 acres 3 quarters and 39 perch.

Now the way and manner how this Plot or quantity of Land is to be planted, we
have already declared, and by the computation of one single Acre and a thousand
Acres, which I have demonstrated at large, may be known the Charges and Profit
arising by planting 5, 10, 100, 10000, or any number of Acres whatsoever.

I should here have concluded this most delightful Subject of Profit,
acceptable, if not to all, yet to the greatest part of the World;
notwithstanding to follow the advice of the Poet, who is willing that Pleasure
also have a share in all discourses of this Nature, and to render my labor, if
possible, agreeable to such over whom the first has no influence, unless
accompanied with the latter: I shall endeavor by joining both here, to make
the Desert you have already past only appear as a rugged Entrance into the
Pleasant Land; and by the Delights which I have reserved in my Garden of
Pleasure, hope to make you forget all the troubles and unevenness of your
former passage.

ENGLAND'S IMPROVEMENT REVIVED.
THE FIFTH BOOK.
The Argument.
In this Book are Directions set down how to plant 200 Acres of Land at well
for Pleasure as Profit, wherein there shall be pleasant Walks with Timber Trees
and Groves of Underwoods, and several Orchards and Gardens, with Fruit,
Flowers and Herbs both for Food and Physic, variety of Fowl, Bees, Silkworms,
Bucks, Does, Hares, and other Creatures of several kinds: And a short account
of the Charges and Profit of keeping a thousand Doe-Conies in Hutches, the
profit amounting to 450 pounds per annum; Also Fish Ponds and Streams of water
stored with many kinds of Fish, and stocked with Decoy-Ducks; And the Use and
Virtues of all the Plants growing in this Garden of Pleasure.

THe Figure of this Garden, or profitable and delightful Place, is a Quadrat,
the 4 Angles or square sides lying South-east, North-west, South-west, and
North-east, the length of one side or Angle containing 178 Perch 15 foot 11
inches: The whole Plot is to be enclosed with a Ditch and Quick hedge of
White-thorn, as has been directed, to fence in the great Wood: In the middle
of this Garden containing 200 Acres Woodland Measure, that is 18 foot to the
Perch in length, shall be erected a convenient Dwelling House, and other
useful Buildings for Corn and Cattle; the Front of the said House to stand
South-east, and the Site thereof to be enclosed for Yards, Gardens and
Orchards, we allow to take up 20 Acres.

On the North-east side of this our Garden, and 36 foot from the Fence or
outmost bounds, is to be planted to Row of Oaks extending to the ends of the
said Angles or square Sides; but observing to keep the same distance of 36 foot
from the Fence of the other Angles, or North-west and South-east Sides. This
first Row of Oak being set or planted, allowing 21 foot of land between each
Plant, there is to be planted another or second Row of Oaks 36 foot distance
from the first, and keeping the distance of 21 foot between every Plant in the
said Row: This performed, then 36 foot from the last Row of Oaks is to be
planted 2 Rows of Chestnut Plants, all of them keeping the same distance one
from the other, as the Oaks; and 36 foot from the last Row of Chestnuts must be
planted 2 Rows of Beech Plants; also 36 foot from the last outmost Row of Beech
may be planted 2 Rows of Walnut Plants, the said Beech and Walnuts are to be
planted at the same distance as was the Chestnuts; 4 perch or 72 foot from the
last Row of Walnuts you may plant a Grove or Thicket of White Thorn, the
breadth to be one perch, and the length extending as far as the Walnuts.

From the Thorns, the space of land between being 9 foot, is to be planted a
Coppice or Thicket of Ash and Withey Sets equally mixed; the breadth of the
said Plot of Ash and Withey Plants must be 4 perch, and the length 81 foot
shorter at each end then the Thorn Thicket.

Half a perch or 9 foot from the Ash Coppice shall be planted 4 perch of Land
in breadth with Hazel-nut Sets, and the length to be the same as that of the
Ash.

Leaving 1 perch or 18 foot space of ground from the Hazel Coppice, there must
be planted the breadth of 4 perch in breadth with Rasberry, Blackberry,
Barberry, Goosberry and Current Bushes; All these are to be planted equally in
several Beds, and the edges of the said Beds planted with Strawberries.

The whole Plot being planted, and equally mixed with all the several sorts and
colors of Berries, with convenient Walks between each Bed, and containing the
same length with the Nut-wood.

One perch distant from the said Plot of Berries is to be planted the same
length and breadth of land with Philberd Nut Sets.

Keeping the distance of 9 foot from the last Plot planted, the next to be
planted are Withey and Ash Sets, the length and breadth of the said Plot to be
the same as was last planted with Philberds.

Now as an Architect will lay a good foundation before he build, we have
advised first to plant; and as the first Plot planted of this our Grove was a
Thorn Thicket, so likewise must the last, or that opposite to the first; and
also both ends of this entire Enclosure, observing to keep the distances with
length and breadth of this last Thicket as that first planted; and also the
Thorns planted at the two ends of the Grove must be of the same breadth, and
join to the ends of the first and last Thorns planted.

About the middle of the last or South-west side of the Grove, and opposite to
the Dwelling House must be left unplanted a space of Land or Ground, on which
to build or set up a fair Gate for entrance into the Wood or Grove aforesaid;
also there must be left unplanted 72 foot of Land in breadth, beginning at the
said Gate or middle of the Thorn Thicket, and extending overthwart or cross,
dividing the Grove, which will make a Pleasant Walk, there being erected a
Fountain in the middle of the said Walk, whose streams dividing the Grove into
4 parts, will be of great use for the refreshing all things, as well
Vegetatives and Sensitives as Rationals; and at each end of the said Walk is to
be planted a Mulberry-tree.

These Directions being observed and performed, on the South-west side of the
House is to be planted the same quantity of Land with all the several sorts of
Plants aforementioned, keeping the same distance of 36 foot from the Fence, and
likewise the same distance of Plants according to the manner and way of the
first or North-east part of the Land planted.

These two Groves and Timber Trees in them are not planted only for Pleasant
Walks, but Harbor and feeding places for wild Peacocks, Turkies, Pheasants,
Blackbirds, Thrushes, Felfares, and all other useful Birds that live on such
food as there grows.

The Land disposed of as to the site of the House, Groves, and Woods planted
for Timber Trees arises to 120 Acres and a half, out of the remainder of Land
which is 80 Acres, on the North-east side of the Dwelling House, and flanking
the North point of the Kitchen Garden, and about the middle distance of Land
between the said point, and South-west side of the North-east Grove shall be
enclosed a square Plot of Land containing 10 Acres, with a Mote or Watercourse
18 foot broad.

About the middle of the ground thus enclosed shall be built a Shed or low
rooft House 4 square, answering the Figure of the Land enclosed, the walls or
sides of the said Shed should be 7 foot high built with brick.

The length of every square side must be 80 foot, and the breadth 10 foot
between the walls within the House; then the 4 square sides or whole House
contains 320 foot round: and the Plot of ground or Yard within the House,
allowing 18 inches for the thickness of the Wall, will contain 54 foot square.

Within this House we shall place 240 Conie-Hutches or Boxes, each of them
containing 5 Rooms one above the other, or 5 stories high; in which Rooms must
be kept 1000 breeding Do Conies, and 100 Bucks, every one of them in a several
Room; the remainder of Boxes are to be reserved to keep Weaned Rabbets. These
Hutches are so well known, that I shall not describe them; but in the way of
placing these Hutches within the Shed must be observed, that the back-sides
stand close to the wall on the top or upper Room, and the bottom, lower part or
foot to stand at least 6 inches from the said wall, and thus standing sloping,
the urin that falls from the Conies will pass or run sooner and cleaner away.
Now these Hutches thus placed on both sides the House, and set close one to the
other, will make 2 Rows round the House: The Floor of the said Cony-house
should be paved with Brick or Pible-stones, and under every Hutch must stand
an-earthen Pan to save the urin that comes from them; for if it be spilt on
the Floor it will taint the Conies, and do much hurt both to young and old.

There must likewise be provided 4 wooden Vessels of Firkin size, each of them
must stand on 4 wheels; these Tubs being filled with Bran and Grains, with a
small strength may be driven or drawed throughout the 4 quarters of the House
twice every day to feed the Conies, and by the use of wheels the work may be
dispatched in a short time with much ease.

In the middle of the Court or Yard within the Cony-house should be built a
small House 3 stories high, to lay in Provision for the Conies, as Hay, Grains,
Bran and Oats; also a Lodging Room for the Warrener.

Now whereas Tame Conies will usually breed 7 or 8, and sometimes more Rabits
at one Litter, and 8 or 9 months or times in one year, we shall breed but 6
months, and shall preserve or keep but 5 Rabits of every Do, and if she bring
above that number, the overplus shall be destroyed within 3 days after she
has littered; but they shall not be cast to the dunghill as of little worth,
for they will be a very good change of food for Musk or Civet Cats, or else
being thrown into the Mote will feed the Fish: And if any of the Does bring not
the number of 5 Rabbets at one litter, then from those Does that bring above
that number shall be taken so many as will make up the number of 5 for every
Do.

Now if these Conies be of a large kind, and that you keep them sound, and they
breed their Rabbets fat: also if you breed to kill in season, before the Field
Rabbets are or can be fit to serve the Markets, then every one of these House
Rabbets will yield 7 pence at 4 weeks old; for they will be twice as large, and
much fatter than any field Rabbet: Also the latter season when the field
Rabbets are spent, then every one of these house Rabbets will yield 9 or 10
pence to be sold at 3* months old. And if you give the weaned Rabbets Oats,
Hay, and Water, likewise Chalk with their meat, a better Rabbet cannot be bred
either for color, taste, or wholsomness.

But if any shall question the sale or vent of these Rabbets killed at the
seasons beforementioned, I can assure him it has been my care both to treat
with Warreners and Poulterers in London about the same, and they all condescend
to my Propositions, and also say that London Markets will take off or vent five
times more in one or both seasons, than can be bred of a thousand Does. We
shall in the next place give an account of the yearly Charges and Profit by
keeping a thousand breeding Do Conies and a hundred Bucks; also the breeding
and maintaining fit for Market 5 Rabbets of every Do, and so to breed six
times in one year, the account is as follows.

One Do breeding and bring^ng up fit for the Market five Rabbets six times in
one year, that is 30 Rabbets in the whole at six pence the Rabbet; it being an
indifferent price as to both seasons of killing, they come to 15 shillings
yearly; then the Profit of a thousand Does, according to the same rate, amounts
to 750 pound the year.

There are other Profits arising from these Conies.

First, the Excrement which comes from them, with the Offal of the Hay, which
being well husbanded, will make special good Dung or Soil for Land, and may be
worth 40 shillings the year.

Secondly, the Garbedge or Guts of the Rabbets sold every year, there being
killed from a thousand Does thirty thousand Rabbets; the said Garbedge being
cast into the Mote, the water although little above the quantity of an Acre,
yet will keep and feed more Fish, especially the Carp, then 4 Acres of other
water without the same helps.

Thirdly, in this Mote may be kept a hundred Spruce Ducks with the Offal of
Bran and Grains from the Conies. I have kept of the said Ducks, and they have
laid each Duck 50 Eggs in 50 days, every day an Egg; and resting 2 or 3 weeks
they have laid again; so that one Duck will lay 200 Eggs in a year; and they
being better for the use of Confectioners than Hen-Eggs, will yield at London 4
shillings the hundred; then the profit of one Duck yearly is 8 shillings, and
the yearly profit of a hundred Ducks amounts to 40 pound.

Now for the yearly profit by Fish, we shall stock the Mote with 400 Fry or
young small Carp, and at 5 years growth, the said Carp will be worth 12 pence a
piece, then the 400 Carps come to 20 pound, which is 4 pound yearly gains or
profit from the Mote or Watercourse, containing 171 square perch 8 foot or 36
inches.

Fourthly, upon the Land enclosed by water, as aforesaid, may be fed a
considerable number of Rabbets, which shall not be kept there so long as to be
of strength to dig or make holes or Burrows in the earth, not living only on
the Grass or Pasture, but shall have several Racks for Hay, and Troughs or
Mangers for Bran and Oats made and set up in the Court Yard within the
Cony-house, where there must be several holes or passage ways made through the
walls for the Rabbets to go in and out at, from their dry food, to feed, sport,
and air themselves in the Grass or Pasture: And because we shall not keep a
constant Stock of Rabbets on the Pasture; therefore at those several times and
seasons of the year, when the Land is not stockt with Rabbets, it may be
stocked with Sheep, to keep the Grass short and sweet; for Conies will not
thrive in long or sower Pasture: The keeping of Sheep is worth 3 pound yearly.
This way of keeping and feeding Rabbets with Bran, Hay, and Oats will not only
keep them sound, but the Land will keep ten times more Conies than the Pasture
would do of it self.

We shall now give you all the Accounts of Profit or Gain in one total sum,
and is as follows.

An Account of the yearly Profit by keeping a thousand Do Conies and a hundred
Bucks on 10 Acres of Land enclosed by Water 18 foot wide.
li. s. d Received for 30000 Rabbets at 6 pence the Rabbet 750 0 0 For soil or
dung made by the whole Stock of Conies 002 0 0 For 20000 Duck Eggs at 4
shillings the hundred 040 0 0 For the yearly profit by Carps 004 0 0 For Sheep
Pasture in the Warren 003 0 0 The total sum of Profit amounts to 799 0 0

I should have first set down and given an account of the Charge or Expense by
keeping the foresaid Conies, Ducks, and Fish: but because it is wisdom in Man
to know the end of his Journey before he set forth; also a Merchant would not
venture his Ship and Goods at Sea, did he not know the Markets would yield him
a profitable return; neither would the Husbandman be at charges in plowing and
sowing his Land, if he did not hope for a plentiful Harvest; and most men covet
to know the profit and gain of their undertakings before they will be at
charges or expense; therefore to please all men if possible, I have first set
down the Profit, and shall now in the next place give you an account of the
yearly Charges of keeping the Conies as aforesaid, and that is as follows.

As for the Charges of making the Mote, building the Houses, making the
Hutches, or buying the first Stock of Conies, and such like, they being all as
one entire Stock, which may last many years without repair; we shall not
therefore charge them to an account in this place.

The Enclosed Land for the Conie Warren being 10 Acres; we shall value at 20
shillings the Acre yearly Rent, which comes to 10 pound the year.

Two Maids will sufficiently tend and keep all the Conies, as making clean the
several rooms in the Hutches, and feeding the Conies twice every day, and will
deserve for their yearly wages each Maid 50 shillings besides their Diets.

The Warrener or Man that buys in the Provision, and orders the Does and
Bucks at the several seasons for breeding, also to sell and dispose of the
Rabbets, and such like employments, may deserve besides his Diet 10 pound
yearly wages. Now these three Servants may be serviceable about other
Employments some certain time every day: we shall reckon the Diet and Wages of
these Servants to be worth 45 pound yearly.

In the next place we shall consider what Provision will be needful for these
Conies, as also the weekly Expenses and total Sum.

The best food for them are Oats, Bran, Hay, and Water; but because Oats and
Bran are costly feeding, we shall therefore add unto them Grains, especially in
breeding time; for when the Does give suck they will require the moistest food,
but not any kind of Grass or Herb, for green food will not only rot them, but
also make them forsake their dry meat, which is most wholesome; and instead of
Grains you may give them Water in a little earthen Pot made for the same use to
stand in every Room one Pot, with fresh water every day.

Now whereas these tame Conies breed but 6 times or months in the year, those
Months they do not breed there will not be so great a quantity of food spent as
when they do, because the young Rabbets after they are two weeks old will feed
with their Dams, and that charge or expense of food may continue a week or two
as the Markets will take them off.

We shall compute the Expense of the whole Stock, old and young every week one
with the other throughout the year, and that is 100 Bushels of Grains, 30
Bushels of Bran, 20 Bushels of Oats, and 15 Hundred of Hay: This is the weekly
allowance which will sufficiently keep and maintain the whole Stock as
aforesaid.

And that we may bring all the particular Charges to one total account, we
shall reckon or value the Grains at 3 pence the Bushel, Wheat Bran at 12 pence
heap and thrust or double Bushel, the Oats at 16 pence the Bushel, 15 Hundred
of Hay at 2 shillings the Hundred: All these sums being added, the weekly
Expense for Food arises to 5 pound 11 shillings 8 pence; and the yearly Charge
according to the same rate comes to 289 pound 14 shillings 8 pence. Chalk mixed
with the Conies meat will keep them sound; there may be spent in one year 3
Cartload of the same, and is valued at 20 shillings the 3 load.

We shall now add or bring all the several Sums into one total Sum for the
whole year, not knowing of any more Charges considerable or worth the
mentioning in this place.

An Account of the yearly Expense by keeping a thousand Does and a hundred Buck
Conies on 10 Acres of Land enclosed.
l. s. d. Paid for the yearly Rent of 10 Acres of Land at 20 s. the Acre 010 00
0 For 3 Servants Wages and Diet 045 00 0 For a years Expense by Grains, Bran,
Oats, and Hay 289 14 8 For 3 Cart load of Chalk 001 00 0 To total Charge
amounts to 345 14 8

The Balance of our account is as follows.

The total Sum of Profit amounts to 799 00 0 The total Sum of Charges amounts
to 345 14 8 Remaining in Cash so much gained 453 05 4

There is no Creature in England or Ireland living or feeding on Grass more
profitable than Sheep; for to my own knowledge there are several Gentlemen that
have kept, some of them 5 thousand, others 10, 15, 18 thousand Sheep alive all
at one time in several Flocks, and those Gentlemen have gained great Estates
thereby.

Yet there is no Creature more subject to loss, for they are incident to very
many Diseases, by reason of bad and unsound soil, land, or grass which they
feed on; also idle unskilful Shepherds, so that I have known lost in one years
time 15 hundred, nay sometimes 2 or 3 thousand out of the several Stocks of
Sheep, as aforesaid, which have dyed of the Rot, and many hundred more yearly
lost by other Diseases: And because most Shepherds are very ignorant of the
several Diseases, therefore come they short in the Cure. To prevent mistakes we
shall here give a Catalogue of those that are most dangerous and mortal; First,
there are 3 kinds of Rot in Sheep, the one is taken when they feed on
Spear-wort, Penny-wort, Knot-grass, or any Weed that grows from Inundations of
water. The second is a hungry Rot, and that Disease is most incident to Field
Sheep or those kept on Commons. A third is the Pelt Rot, which comes by great
store of rain immediately after Sheep are new shorn. There is another cause of
Rot, and that is when Sheep in their feeding lick up little white snailes.
Besides these several Rots, Sheep are incident to the Staggers and Stu^dy, also
Worms in the Guts, loss of the Cud, Loose teeth that they cannot fe^d, Cramp,
Looseness, Pox Water in the Belly, tough Fleam, or Stopping, Overflowing of the
Gall, which causes Choler, and produces the Jaundice, and such like.
Lung-sick, Maggots, Redwater, Fever, ^cab or Itch, Wildfire, which is a very
infectious sickness, and will endanger whole Flocks. I might here set down or
prescribe several Antidotes against all the former Diseases, but it is not my
Task at this time. Now as Sheep are very profitable Cattle, and yet incident to
many Diseases, and therefore subject to loss; so are Conies, yet by the prudent
care of the Shepherd and Warrener, all these losses in both may be prevented;
for in Conies there are but 3 adherent Diseases, which are Fevers, Madness, and
the Rot; but they have many Enemies, as Tumblers, Lurchers, Greyhounds,
Mungrels, Foxes, Polecats, Stotes, Weasels, Wild-cats, House-cats, and such
like; also other Vermin, as Hauks, Buzards, Ringtails, Kites, Oules, Ravens,
Crows, and many more; yet a greater than any of these is Man with all his
Engines, as Guns, Bows, Snares, Ferrets, Hayes, Pursnets, and the like. Now
considering all these, a Warrener may charge to his account of profit and loss
at least the one third part of every years Breed of Rabbets; and if he save two
parts of three it will sufficiently pay the Rent of the Land, and return good
profit into his Purse.

We should here have set down the several Receipts to Cure and prevent the
Diseases in Conies, with the manner and way of keeping and feeding them; but
especially designing the Improvement of this little Plot by other ways as well
as that; I proceed,

On the South-west side of the Dwelling House, and flanking the South Point of
the Kitchen Garden, and about the middle Distance between the said Point and
North-east side of the South-west Grove, just opposite to the Warren* shall be
made the quantity of 10 Acres of Land or 40 Perch square of ground into a
Fish Pond; this Water shall be kept in the nature of a Decoy, but not
absolutely so, because it is an improper place, being among Woods, or the Wood
growing so near unto it; for the best decoy Ponds are in Champion Fenn
Countries.

In the middle of this our Decoy Pond shall be made an Oval or round Island
containing one Acre of Land, and in the middle of this Island shall be built a
round house 30 foot over or 90 foot about: This House shall be one intire-Room,
20 foot high, built with heart of Oak; the Roof of the said House would be
covered with the best sort of Slait: The other part of the House being built
thick with Timber, then the space between the said Timber shall be made up or
enclosed with strong Wire in the manner of a Bird-cage; and the use of the said
Cage or Aviary is to keep all kinds of singing and whistling Birds.

Through the middle of the Floor of the said House shall run a small stream of
Water which may pass in and out through a leaden Pipe: This water is not only
for the Birds to drink, but also to wash and bath themselves in, There must be
made likewise in this Aviary several Tables and convenient places with troughs
to put their several seeds and food in; also Perches or places to roost or
perch on, and they must be under the roof of the said House.

In 4 equal parts round the out side of the Aviary shall be built 4 Seats in
the form of an Arbor or half Arbor; the length of the said Seats would be about
6 foot; both ends of two of the Seats must be planted with Holly or Holme
Plants, and the other two Seats are to be planted with Ivy, and those Plants
are to grow up and cover the top of the Seats, by closing together, and so
become an Arbor.

Round the Island, and about 3 foot from the water side must be planted at
every 9 foot distance of land, 4 Holly or Holme Plants, and they must be set 4
square, and 18 inches one from the other. These bushes must be kept as shrubs
by often cutting of them, and not suffered to grow above 4 foot high; but the 4
Plants are to grow that they may join close together on the top, also round the
sides to the bottom or ground as one Bush, leaving only one small hole that the
Ducks may go in at to lay their Eggs. This performed the bushes will make a
gallant show, and are of good use to save the Decoys Eggs from Crows, Magpies,
and such like Vermin.

Round the outside of the Pond and Island would be planted with Reed, such as
usually grow on the sides of great Rivers, or in the Fenn Countries.

The Stock of decoy Ducks constantly kept in this Pond shall be about 60 pair;
the Eggs and Breed of them may be worth 20 pound yearly, besides that which may
be gained by other advantages they bring in.

Moreover this Pond shall be stored with 2000 young Fish or F^y of Carp, Bream,
Tench and Perch; but I shall advise to put in a greater number of Carps than
of all the other 3 kinds: if 100 Eels be cast in, they will not much prejudice
the other Fish: There may be likewise cast in good store of Gudgeon, Loch,
Dace, and Roch, which are good prey and food for the greater sort of Fish, and
will make good sport, and be a profitable Recreation for such as delight in
Angling. And because we have not feeding for these Carps as for those about the
Warren, therefore all the bottom and banks of the Pond would be paved with flot
grass, which naturally grows under water; for it is a great feeder of fish. Now
about five years after the Pond is stored, the Fish may be taken, and will
yield to be sold, if not above 30 miles from London, 80 pound; also there may
be left or reserved a sufficient Stock against the next Fishing season, which
may be about 5 years after.

Next to be considered and presented to view is a Dove-house, which would be
built in the middle of the Barn yard; this House is not to be stored or stocked
with ordinary wild or house Pigeons, but with those called Carriers; for we
shall have of our ordinary wild Pigeons breed in the Woods, as Ring-doves,
Stock-doves, Turtle Doves, and such like; but those called Carriers, the
original of them came first out of Asia, although many hundred, are now kept in
and about London; and because they are known but to few people, we shall tell
you why they are so called, and declare the use and profit of them.

In several Towns and Harbors bordering on the Seas, and now under the Command
of the Turk; to omit particulars we shall mention one for all: In Aleppo
several persons keep these Pigeons in Houses built for the same purpose, and do
make the same profit of them as is made by Post Horses; of these Pigeons there
is of several Colors, as white, black, and blew, as also all these colors
mixed, as black and white, blew and white, motley, dunn, and kite-colour.

Such Ships as trade in those parts, when they set sail or go to sea, the
Captain, Merchant, or any of the Company, may hire of these Pigeons one, two,
or three, or as many as they may have occasion for, according to their Voyage;
and in the Ship there is a Room built to keep them. Now in the Voyage at sea,
if the Ship encounter an Enemy; or that by ill weather they are forced ashore
on rock or sand, or spend a Mast, or have split a sail, or if any business be
forgot that should or may be done, and such like, then they or either of them
writing their will or mind in fine paper, provided for the same purpose, and
making it up as a Letter, do tie it about the body of the Pigeon under the
Wings, and turn her out of the Ship; now by nature these Birds being very
strong of flight, immediately make homewards from whence they came; and he that
keeps them, taking an account in his book what color, and the number are
delivered to every Ship, does often search his Dove-house, and the Letters he
finds about any of them are speedily sent or delivered according to directions.

Now the reasons why we stock our Dove house with these kind of Pigeons, is,
first because they have a greater and more plum round body than our English
Dove-house Pigeons; Secondly, they are stronger and quicker of flight,
therefore will get their food, if to be had in England; Thirdly, they are more
shy and subtle, and will eschew and free themselves from Snares, Nets, and Guns.

But many men object against Pigeons and say they are great devourers of Corn:
Our Answer is, that in Bedfordshire, Cambridgeshire, Northamptonshire, and many
other Countries where is the greatest Flights of Pigeons, there they have the
greatest Crops of Corn: Secondly Pigeons do not feed on Corn covered, except
part of it be visible: And though it be the opinion of most Husbandmen for want
of better Judgment, that Corn lying on the ground will take root, grow, and
thrive, as that under ground; which if so, then why do most Corn Countries,
excepting Clays. Marle, or other stiff grounds sow their seed under furrow, or
before the Plow, covering the seed by the Plow, as aforesaid; it is not only to
prevent Vermin from devouring and carrying the Corn away, which is very good
husbandry; but also they have experience, that if the seed^ly above ground, and
not well covered, although it may grow to blade, stem, and ear, yet shall not
kernel or produce seed; for in great drought the Sun will not only scorch the
Seed, Stem, and all above ground, but also draw up the moistness of the earth
deeper than such roots can extend themselves, because the seed lying above or
very shallow under the earth, is subject to all weathers. Much rain will be
hurtful by washing the fatness and good of the earth deeper into the ground
than the roots will reach unto; and now by reason of the foresaid accidents the
spirit of the seed is so much weakened that it cannot prosper as the other Seed.

The great enemies to new sown Corn are Field Rats and Mice, and Rooks, for
they will not only devour and carry away all above ground in sight, but scrape
and dig after that which is covered; and when the Corn appears in blade, then
both Rooks, Stares, Larks, and such like, will follow the blade to the root,
and so stock up and spoil many Acres; therefore when these Vermin are
destroyed, we shall likewise destroy our Pigeons, if before that time the
Judgment of their Enemies be not convinced: And whereas Rooks, Crows and
P^geons may do much hurt when Corn is ripe, at or before Harvest, yet the
Charges of one Man with a Gun charged only with powder may keep a thousand
Acres until out of danger. I shall add one thing more in the behalf of
Pigeons, they are not only a necessary wholesome food, but ready at all times to
be served in at a Gentleman's Table: And the Dung that comes from them is a very
rich Soil, which being sowed on Land before or immediately after the seed, will
p^oduce a greater quantity of Corn over and above what the Land would have
brought forth without it, beside what may have been devoured by the said
Pigeons; so that that Corn which lies loose on the ground as a prey unto all
Fowl, I do not count wasted if devoured by Pigeons.

We have now disposed of 140 Acres of Land, there does remain 60 Acres: Out of
the said remaining Land 40 Acres shall be made choice of for Pasture, which
will make of Statute or Land measure, 40 acres a quarter 16 perch and 196 foot.

This Pasture Land shall be made into 4 Enclosures, each of them containing 10
Acres and the odd measure: In these Grounds shall be kept 20 of the largest and
best sort of Northern Milch Cows, one of the least of which shall give 2
Gallons of Milk at one Meal, or 4 Gallons every day; and they shall be shifted
or changed into fresh Pasture every week.

The Remainder of the 60 Acres, which is 20 Acres 18 perch and 48 foot, shall
be made or enclosed into 2 severals, and they shall be plowed and sowed with
Corn: Each of these Fields will contain about 10 Acres and the odd measure
Statute measure: and because the Land is a strong rich earth, there shall be
sowed only Wheat and Pease, except some change of other seed for convenience,
which Corn may be continued or sowed 6 years together, and not let the Land
rest, that is two years with Wheat, the third year with Pease, the fourth with
Wheat again, the fifth with Pease, and the sixth with Wheat. And because the
greatness or rankness of the Stuble will hinder the Plow the second seed
season, you may burn it standing on the ground, or clear the Land of it
otherwise. The seventh year being the year of Jubily, according to the Command
of the great Husbandman, our Eternal God, the Land must rest; and in that time
there may be a sufficient Stock of Soil or Dung provided to enrich the Land
again: And the Land being sowed again the eighth year, may so continue from
time to time many hundred years.

Now although our Rules and Directions are very sound and certain, yet we doubt
not but to meet with many enemies, as some there are would quarrel with the Sun
for his heat and brightness, others with the Moon for being dark and cold. I
have not erected or dressed out this little Theater of Nature for Disputation,
but for Speculation and Contemplation; and if for my sincere endeavors to
satisfy curious expectation, you will but lend me your acceptance, I will take
the confidence to lead you through this pleasant Land, Garden, or Paradise, and
give you a view of every part thereof.

At the first Entrance on the South-east side, and opposite unto the
Dwelling House, you may behold a convenient Gate House, wherein dwells the
Woodward: passing through this Gate you may walk between 2 Rows of
Service-trees, through the first 10 Acre Close of Cow-pasture, to the Orchard
or Cherry-garden Gate; from this last Gate you shall be directed by 2 Rows of
Mulberry-trees unto the Garden Gate: On both sides joining unto the said Gate
is to be built a brick Wall 9 foot high, which wall shall extend to the breadth
of the Cherry Orchard, and so reach to the Courtyard Wall, and enclose the
Garden. The Cherry Orchard is 20 Perch square, but not any of the trees to grow
nearer then 18 yards of the Mulberry-trees, that there may be full view of the
Dwelling House.

The Apple-Orchard flanks the Cherry-Orchard and Flower-Garden on both sides,
and reaches to the Courtyard Wall: This ground is planted with the best sort
of Fruit, as Apples and Pears, also Syder-Apples, as Red-streaks and others,
and enclosed with a White-thorn Hedge: Round the said Fence on the outside
runs a small Brook or Water-stream 9 foot broad, which encompasses the whole
site of the House, and is stored with Trouts, Gudgeons, and others the best
sort of small Fish.

On the 4 Corners of the Orchard are raised 4 Mounts, each of them 15 foot
high, and the way which goes to the top is round the Mount ascending; the
outside of the Walks is planted with several sorts of Plum-trees, which shall
be kept by pruning to grow not above 6 foot high: The Ladies gathering of these
Plums may ascend to the top of the Mounts with ease and pleasure, whereby they
shall be received into green Arbors planted with White-thorn, which by often
cutting or clipping grows so close and thick, that neither wind, sun, nor air
will be offensive to them: Round these Arbors in the inside are Oken Seats, and
Tables of Marble in the middle.

Entering the Garden of Flowers, which Garden also is 20 Perch square, you may
behold on the North-east side a Vineyard or Plot of ground answering the
length of that side of the Garden, planted with Vine Sets of the best sort of
Grapes, that will thrive there; and that they may the better grow and ripen,
not only the earth is made by soil very rich, but a Frame made of the heart of
Oak Checker-work: the length of the said Frame is 20 perch, which is the length
of the North-east side of the Garden, but in breadth not above 9 foot. This
Frame is to stand on feet, the lower side, or the outmost legs to be not above
12 inches high from the ground, and the other or highest side about 8 foot: The
outmost or shortest legs must stand 5 foot from the Wall, and the innermost or
longest about one foot. The whole Frame must stand sloping, and the upper side
lean on the Wall. Now the Vine Sets are planted all along against and before
the lower part of the Frame, and do spread and grow equally all over the Frame
and not farther.

On the South-west side of the Garden, and round the other Quarters, excepting
where the Vines are planted, and about 2 foot distant from the Wall, is comely
to behold several Trees growing with the best sorts of Wall-fruit, which by
dressing or proyning are made to grow broad, and bear the same figure as if
they were fastened to the wall; but to support them from being shaken by winds,
they have Frames made round the body, and so reach to the boles or first arms
of the Tree; and about the body and arms are made great wisps of Hay, and so
that resting on the Frames on all sides, they are kept from any harm by winds,
as we have said before in transplanting Trees for Timber. These Fruit Trees
will receive the heat and reflection of the sun from the wall to ripen the
fruit, better than if they were nailed thereunto; also such Trees will live ten
times the age, and bear la^ger and better fruit than those planted close and
fastened to the wall; for such Trees as are fa^tned to any wall are subject to
many annoyances, as bark-bound, bark-bruised, or peeled, Cankers, and many
other evils: and besides these Diseases, there is but one side of the Tree has
the benefit of Air and Sun; therefore they cannot long live or thrive.

On the North-east and South-west corners or sides of the Garden, ranging even
with the Dwelling House, you may behold in each Place a hansome built House,
one of them is the Master of the Gardens Study, and the other a private
Retiring-place for his Lady.

Opposite, and not far from the 4 Corners of the Garden will appear 4 Oval
Grass-Plots handsomely kept; in the middle of each Plot a Wainscote Seat 6 foot
in length, covered over with 4 several kinds of Plants, as Ever-green and
Privet, Holly, Ivy, and Cypress, growing on the back side, and by proyning
brought into the form of an open Arbor, and each Arbor covered over with one
kind of Plants.

Now between these comely green Plots there will appear to your view 4 several
Knots, wherein grow all sorts of the best Flowers; and because there are as
many sorts or figures of Knots as Gardners have Inventions, the Knots here made
choice of, although old figures, yet such as are comely in this Garden, and
they are thus placed; the Trefoul opposite to the Crossbow, and the Oval Knot
to the Fret.

In the middle of the Garden is to be seen a comely Maze well framed, and
planted with a Hedge of several sorts of the best kind of Berries; the said
Hedge is not allowed to grow above 5 foot high; ^ and in the middle of this
Maze does appear a Fountain built with Marble, whose Crystal streams are very
serviceable in several Rooms of the House, being conveyed in Pipes under
ground: On the top of this Fountain you may behold an artificial Sun-Dyall made
so plain, that the time or hour of day may be discerned by good eyes without
entering into the Maze.

Round the Garden-wall and the Oval green Plots, the square Flower-Knots,
before the Wall-fruit, and round without the Maze, you may walk in very comely
large Walks made of fine sifted Gravel and Sand well mixed; from thence we
shall lead you through the Dwelling House into a comely Court Yard, and through
that into a Common Yard, being very large and spacious; in which Yard is built
several useful Houses with Barn and Stable: This Yard is so curiously paved
with large pible stones, and kept so clean and neat, that neither straw, stick,
nor loose stone shall be seen to lie therein. We shall not detain you longer
here, but direct you into the Garden of Herbs and Roots, not only for Food but
Physic.

This Plot of land lies behind the great Yard, and is in length from the
Garden Gate to the farther end of the whole Plot 30 perch, and in breadth 20:
The Fence is of VVhite-thorn, and the Water running round, as was said before.

In the middle of this great Plot, which contains two Gardens, is a handsome
Bowling-green 60 yards square, and at each corner of the said Green is a Seat
made of Oak in the form of an open Arbor, and planted at the back on both sides
with Fruit Trees, such as will best cover the said Seats as an Arbor: One Seat
contains on each side 3 foot, so that the whole Seat is 6 foot, and every Arbor
or Seat faces toward the middle of the Green.

About the middle of the South-east side of the Bowling-green, in the Kitchen
Garden, but joining to the outside of the ^ence, or bounds of the said Green,
is built a convenient House for the Gardener to dwell or Lodge in: the said
House having necessary Rooms to lay or keep this Roots, Herbs and Seed, or such
like.

On or at the North-west side of the Physick-garden, and near the Fence, is
built a Bee-house to contain 200 Stals, Stools, or Hives of Bees. The manner
and way of keeping these Creatures, and the profit arising from them is so well
known, that we shall not need farther than to mention them. And in the same end
or side is also built a convenient House to keep 10000 Silk-wormes; for we
shall have sufficient for them from the Cabages and Mulberry-trees.

At the Entrance into this Garden on both sides within the Gate grow two
Laurels, which being made to close at the top become an Arbor, having Seats
made to sit on; from thence a large Walk of sifted gravel on both sides,
planted with Medler Trees, directs you to the Gardeners House, on each side of
whose Door grows a Bay Tree; and if you will know the reason, because nether
Witch nor Devil, Thunder nor Lightning hurt a man in the place where that Tree
grows.

On both sides of the Gardens, and 6 foot distant from the Fence, you may
behold a single Row of several sorts of Plum-trees made grow by cutting or
proyning into several shapes or Figures, as a Heart running, Hounds hunting him;
other trees of several shapes of Wild beasts. For I formerly declared, that if
the work be timely begun as a Tree is young, you may bend, bow, or dress him to
any shape; and yet these Plum-trees thus dressed will thrive and bear a
sufficient quantity of Plums every fruitful year; for all Trees do not bear
alike every year.

After you are past the Lawrel-trees, on the right hand of the Walk will appear
4 large square Plots of land, they also lying 4 square opposite to each other:
In these Plots are to grow Parsnips, Carrots, Turnips, and Muskmelons, in each
Plot^a several; also in the middle space between the 4 Plots a small Oval
Grass-plot, and in the middle of the said Grass-plot shall grow a
Tamarisk-tree, and at each corner of the Squares a Goosberry Bush. On the left
hand of the said Gravel Walk shall likewise be 4 square Plots of the same
quantity of Land bearing the same figure, and over against those on the right
side, wherein do grow Artichokes, Cabbages, Colliflowers, and Garden Beans;
also in the middle space between the 4 Plots a small oval Grass-plot, and in
the middle of the said Grass-plot a Tamarisk-tree, and at each corner of the
Squares a Currant-bush.

The two Gardens being divided by a comely Border of the best sort of Roses, as
Red, Yellow, Damask, Velvet, double Province, and the sweet Musk-Rose; both
sides of the Border is powdered with Strawberries of all sorts, as red, white,
green, etc. On the right hand of this second Garden, planted with Physical
herbs, will appear to your view 4 large Oval Plots, containing the same
quantity of Land as the Plots in the first or Kitchen Garden, and lying
likewise in a square figure, also a small square Grass-plot in the middle space
between the 4 Oval Plots, and a Tamarisk-tree in the middle of the said
Grass-plot: within these Ovals do grow Saffron, Anniseed, Carroway, and
Coriander-seed in each Plot a several; they being all very good flowers for
Bees. Round each Oval Plot do grow 4 Barberry-bushes at an equal distance one
from the other. On the left hand or side of this last Garden are to be likewise
4 Oval Plots of the same bigness, and just opposite to the last, lying also in
a square figure, and a small square Grass-plot in the middle space between the
4 Oval Plots, with a Tamarisk-tree in the middle of the said small Grass-plot,
and 4 Barberry-bushes growing equally round each Oval; and within these Oval
Plots do grow Licorish, Asparagus, Tobacco, and French-Beans, in each Plot a
several. From the middle of the North-west side of the Bowling-green to the
farther end of the Physick-garden is a large Gravel Walk, where is growing on
both sides a single Row of Quince-trees: At the 4 corners of the Kitchen Garden
shall be g^owing 4 Fig Trees at each corner one; and at the 4 corners of the
Physick-garden, at each corner a Bay Tree. Round both the Gardens and between
all the square, and round the oval Plots is also a fair Gravel Walk.

In both these Gardens there are many Beds and Borders, wherein shall grow
several Roots and Herbs, as well physical as for food; but to speak to every
particular Plant would spend much time and paper; we shall only name them in an
Alphabetical order, and they are as follows.

Alexander Angelica Archangel Asarabacca Avens Adders-tongue Agrimony Alehoof
Bugloss Burrage Balm Bazil Beets Ladies Bed-straw Wood-Betony Bifoyl
Bishops-weed Birdsfoot Bistort One Blade Blite Briony Bugle Burnet Coucumbers
Chives Carduus Camomile Clarie Coast Roots Callamint. Campions Celandine
Centaury Winter Cherries Chervil Sweet Cicel Cich Peace Cinkfoyle Clowns
Woundworth Cocks-head Crowfoot Columbines Coltsfoot Costmary Comfry Sciatica
Cresses Croswort Cowslips Cleavers Dill Doves-foot Devils-bit Dandelyon Daisies
Dodder of time Dogs-grass Daffadowndillies Darnel Down or Cotton thistle
Ellycampane Endive Dwarf Elder Eringo. Eyebright Fennel Sow-Fennel Figwort
Filipendula Flow^deluce Flaxweed Flixweed Fleawort Fluellin Fumitory Fox-gloves
Garlic Germander Gout-wort Goldenrod Gromel Winter-Green Groundsel Hollyhock
Hart's-tongue Haukweed Henbane Herb Robert Herb True Love Hysop Horehound
Horstail Housleeks Hounds-tongue St. John's wort Julyflowers Wall Julyflowers
Kidneywort Knapweed Knotgrass Leeks Lavender White Lavender Lillies Ladies
Mantle Lettice Liverwort Loose-strife Louage Longwort Mallows Marsh Mallows
Madder Maidenhair Sweet Marjerom Marigold Masterwort Mesilot Dogs Mercury Mint
Money-wort Moon-wort Mother-wort Mous-ear Mugwort Mullein Mustard Mithridate
Mustard. Hedge Mustard Nepor Catmint Nightshade Onions Oneblade Orpine Penyreal
Pumpions Parsley Pellitory of the wall Peony Pepperwort Perwinckle Pimpernel
Ground Pine Plantain Pollipoddy Poppy Purffane Primrose Queen of the Meadow
Radish Horse Radish Ragwort Rosemary Rattle-grass Restharrow Rocket Winter
Rocket Rosa solis Rubarb Monks Rubarb Bastard Rubarb Rupture-wort Garden Rue
Meadow Rue Solomon's Seal Sage Wood Sage Sanicle Sarasens confound Sauce alone
Winter Savory Summer Savory Saxifrage white Burnet Saxifrage Scabious 3 sorts
Scurvey-grass Self-heal Smallage Sopewort Sorrel Wood Sorrel Sowthistles
Southernwood Spignel Spleenwort Sweet Sicily Succory Scerots Time Garden Tansie
Wild Tansie Star Thistle Melancholy Thistle Our Ladies Thistle Thoroughwax
Tormentil Turnsole Tutsan or Parkleaves Vervain Garden Valerian Violets Vipers
Bugloss Would or Dyers Weed Woad or Dyers Stuff Walflowers Wormwood Yarrow
There are many Plants, Herbs, and Seed brought out of other Kingdoms, which
are not here named, because it is well known to such as are studious in the Art
Herbary, that those Plants and Herbs that grow in several Kingdoms are most
wholesome and Medicinal to such as live in those Kingdoms; therefore we have not
any Plant or Herb in our Garden but such as naturally grow in England, as best
fitting with our English constitution.

Now all these Plants will not grow and thrive alike in one kind of earth: as
Parsnips, Carrots, and such like will require a light, loose, or rich sandy
earth; and Cabbage, Turnips, Beans, and such like, a rich clay or a moist rich
earth. Again some Plants or Roots having long shanks, will require a deep crust
of good earth, as Licorish, Parsnips, etc. Others a shallow crust of good
earth, as Onions, Turnips, and all sorts of round or short rooted Plants; also
some Plants best thrive in a very rich earth, and to have the benefit of the
Sun the whole day; others in meaner or poorer ground, and in the shade; some in
moist earth, others in dry; Therefore by the skill of the Gardner several kinds
of earth are to be provided, or such a composition of earth as will serve for
all kinds of Plants, and so comely and orderly placed in the Beds, Borders, and
Squares, and so intermingled, that one looking thereon cannot but wonder to see
what Nature, corrected by Art, can do: And that every Country Housewife may
improve her own private Garden, I have here set down these few following
Observations.

First in cold Countries or Earths, Plants or Seed are not to be set or sowed
so soon as in hot, but always observing to set moist and sow dry. Secondly,
the roots of Slips set must be twined if they will abide it. Thirdly, all Herbs
for Flowers should once in 5 or 6 years be renewed. Fourthly, all Herbs in
Drought should be often watered with Puddle water. Fifthly, seeding spoils most
Roots by drawing the heart or sap from them. Sixthly, gather all sort of Herbs
for use when they are fullest of sap, tender, and green, before they blow; but
when they are blown, then the flowers are best and must be gathered in their
prime: If you keep the herbs and flowers all Winter, then dry* them a little in
the Sun, and sew them up in brown paper, and hang them not far from the fire.
Seventhly, thin setting and sowing, so the Roots stand not above one foot
distance, is profitable; greater herbs would have more distance: Also set and
sow herbs in their time of growth, except at Mid-summer, and lay no dung to the
roots of herbs, for dung not rotten or melted is too hot for trees. I shall
also add for our good Housewifes Observation a few more Rules of another nature.

First, Angelica and Alexander are renewed with their seed, whereof they bear
plenty the second year and so dye.

Annis-seeds make their growth and bear seed the first year and dye.

Garlic, the heads parted into Cloves, and set the latter end of February.

Fetherf^w is renewed by seed.

Bugloss and Burrage renew themselves by seed yearly.

Carduus renews its self by Seed, and so dies.

Hysop young Roots are good Sets, but Slips better.

Artichoaks are renewed by dividing the Roots into Sets in March every third or
fourth year.

Ellycampany seeds yearly the Root may be divided and set.

Endive is renewed by seed, and may be removed as Cabbage.

Coriander renews it self by seed the first year and dies.

Cabbage seed the second year: sow them in October, remove them when the Plants
are about 8 inches long, set deep and moist before the full of the Moon.

Carrets are sown after January till May; they seed the first year, the second
year they dye.

Clary is sown; it seeds the second year and dies,

Chibals are set every 3 or 4 years, having their Roots parted.

Fennel may be sown or set, by dividing the Roots, in the Spring or Fall; it
seeds the second year.

Clove-July flowers may be renewed by seed or roots any time except Frost.

Lettice yields seed the first year and dies: sow betime and remove them to
make them cabbage.

Lavender would be removed about 6 years after planted by Slips twined.

Leeks seed the second year unremoved, then dye.

Onions the seed is sown in February.

Marygolds commonly come of seed; the Plants removed when they are about 3
inches long will make them grow double.

Pennyroyal; divide the Roots, and then set them.

Parsnips; sow the seed in February; in Drought tread the tops to make the
roots bigger.

Parsley, sowed several times in the Spring.

Pumpions, set seed a finger deep late in March, when they are grown up water
them often, and in frost cover them.

Rosemary; to set Slips presently after Lammas is the surest way; the seed sown
in hot weather may prove well.

Raddish may be sown in the Spring and Summer; steep the seed in milk 24 hours,
then set them.

Sage; set Slips in May; let it not seed it will last the longer.

Savory, seeds the first year and dies.

Strawberries; set Roots in the Spring or at Michael tide.

Saffron; it flowreth at Michael tide and grows all Winter; every third year
the Roots would be removed at Midsummer, for when all other herbs grow most
that dies.

Skerots; the Roots are first parted, and then set about Michael tide.

Sweet Sicil is renewed either by seed or the roots parted and set severally.

Time; both Seeds, Slips, and Roots* are good if it seed not, it will last 3 or
4 years.

Turnips are sown in April, May, or June; in the second year they bear seed.

To speak to every Herb would make my work very tedious, let these suffice.

We shall now give an account of the Land plotted out and allowed for the Site
of the House and is as follows. The Cherry and Flower Gardens are both of
them 40 perch long and 20 perch broad, and contain 5 Acres: The Orchard which
flanks, or is planted on both sides of the said Gardens, are each of them 40
perch long and 20 broad; they contain 10 Acres. The Physic and Kitchen
Gardens are 28 perch long and 20 broad; they both contain 3 Acres; for the
Yards and Ground the Houses are built on, is allowed 2 Acres; the Total of
Acres, being the Site of the House as aforesaid is 20 Acres.

Yet there is one Plant very useful and profitable not mentioned among all the
Plants, and that is the Hop; we shall therefore make choice of 2 Acres of Land
in a convenient place that may ly sheltered from the North, North by West, and
North-east winds, and plant the same the manner and way as follows.

The Hop* will not thrive either in too rich a ground, nor yet in too poor, nor
in too moist or very dry, but in a middle sort of earth; therefore if the
ground be over moist, then the hills must be made bigger and higher than
ordinary, about 2 foot high, and of compass answerable to the height, will be a
good size for most grounds; neither must the hills be made piked or sharp on
the top, nor yet too flat, and so retain or hold any rain or wet which shall
fall upon it; but you shall keep a due middle proportion convenient for the
Plants and Poles. Now these hills are not to be made entirely all of one Mould,
but there may be mixed with the natural earth Sope-ashes, and the earth which
lies under Dunghils, or very old rotten Dung. These three bodies being equally
mixed, the hills are to be placed in an orderly manner, making Allies between
them about 4 foot broad; and these hills must not stand all directly behind
each other, but the first Row being made, the next must be placed over against
the middle distance between the first Row of hills, and so the third over
against the second, and the fourth over against the middle distance of the
third Row, and so forward till both the Acres be planted, that the Sun may give
comfort to every Plant; and the best time to begin this Work is about October.
This being performed you shall then pare or hack up all the green swarth
through all the alleys between the hills about 2 or 3 inches thick, and with
the said swarth so pared up, cover all the hills almost to the top, turning the
green swarth next unto the earth of the hills, so as it may rot; then when the
Alleys a^e thus cleansed of the swarth, take good store of Fern, and lay the
same of a good thickness quite through all the Alleys, and round the sides of
the hills; and the said Fern having all the Winter to rot, will not only be a
comfort to the hills, and much preserve the Plants from many evils, but also
kill both grass and weeds; and being shovelled up together with the earth in
the Spring, will be a good Manure to replenish the hills, and make them prosper
exceedingly, also will save much charges in providing other Manure.

Now the hills being thus prepared, in October next following you may open the
hills in the tops, and set in every hill 4 Hop Plants, and they must be set
deep in the earth and covered all over at least 3 inches thick; and if with the
earth which covers the Plants you mix Ox blood and lime, it will not only
give great comfort and nourishment to the Plants, but defend and save the Roots
from Worms, other Vermin and Weeds. In the following Spring about April,
finding the small Cyons which will issue or grow from the roots of the Plants,
you shall th^n set up the Poles, which would be long and straight, either of
Ash, Chestnut, Withey, or Alder-wood; And in putting these Poles into the earth,
there ought to be care taken that they do not bruise or hurt the Hop-roots.
Secondly, the said Poles must be put a good depth in the earth that the wind do
not blow them down. Thirdly your care must be to place the Poles round the
hills at a good distance, that one Pole may not shadow the other, but so stand
that every Plant may have benefit of the Sun. The number of Poles that every
hill will take up or require must be answerable to the Cyons which grow or
issue from the Plants, allowing to every Pole one or two Cyons; and if the
Plants will thrive, then every hill will take up or require 4 Poles and not
above. These Cyons when the hills are poled must be twined about the several
Poles with the Sun, and loosely tied to the said Poles; and if the Plants put
forth more Cyons then the number allowed for each Pole, then the rest or
overplus must be cut off close to the Stock of the Roots; and if any Cyons do
grow afterward, they must be pulled away, that they may not run up the Poles,
Now although the Fern and Soap-Ashes formerly mentioned will by killing and
destroying all manner of Weeds, save much charges in weeding the Garden; yet if
any Weeds do grow they must be carefully pulled up, especially from the Plants,
or hoed, and with the earth laid up round the hills, and that the Sun may
destroy the Weeds, and the earth be a comfort to the Stocks or Plants.

We shall now return again into the great Yard, and view the Malt-house,
wherein is built an Artificial Kiln on which to dry the Hops, Malt, or other
corn with any kind of Fuel or Firing, and give no evil taste or smell either to
the Hops or Malt. Here you may also see many other necessary Houses, as to
Brew, Bake, the Dairy-house, and several other useful Houses for keeping
Pheasants, Partridges, and other Fowl to be spent in the Family, or sold at
Markets: but time will not admit of a longer stay in this place.

If you please to walk through the Court Yard, on the North east side 2 Rows of
Chestnut and Walnut-trees equally mixed will direct you to the bounds of the
Cony-Warren, where there will be a Drawbridge let down by which you may pass
over the water, and behold those profitable Creatures so little esteemed by
most people. Round the Warren, and near the Water are several small Hutches
made of boards for the Spruce Ducks to lay their Eggs in.

Passing over the Mote again, and walking through the pleasant Cow-pasture on
the North-east of the Warren, a Gate will be opened to receive you into the
Grove, and being entered, a large Walk will lead you to a Fountain in the
middle of the said Grove; From thence issue 4 streams of water. On both sides
of this large Walk are several pleasant smaller Walks, but of a greater length,
where you may chance to see many Pheasants running; and if it be the season of
the year, you may delight your self with those several sorts of Nuts and
Berries there growing.

Walking through the second Gate, situate at the North-east end of the large
middle Walk, you will enter into the great Wood of Timber Trees, where may be
seen 2 Herd of Deer containing 20 Brace of Bucks and Does, 3 Brace of Roe Deer,
and two Brace of Hearts and Hinds; all the Male Dear are gelt except those that
serve the Rut: And if you carefully look up into the Trees, you may chance to
see several wild Peacocks and Turkies at perch, and on the ground a brace or
two of Ha^es at squot: Also in this Wood is kept a lease of bastard Barbary
breeding Mares and a brace of handsome Geldings for present use, and in the
Stable a comely bastard Barbary Stone-horse to be a Stallion for the Mares; And
if it be the season of the year, and day, you may see 50 good Swine feeding on
the Mast that fall from the trees, there being a Swineherd tending on them.

On the South-west side of the Dwel^ing-House is also a Wood of Timber trees
and a Grove enclosed, containing the same number of Plants and Trees, and the
same quantity of Land planted as that on the North-east side. Between this
South-west Grove and the Dwelling House, just opposite to the Warren, is the
great Fish Pond or Decoy: by Boat you may over into the Island, in the middle
of which you may behold a stately Bird-cage or Aviary full of singing and
whistling Birds: round this Cage at an equal distance one from the other, are 4
Seats covered over with several Greens: There having rested your self, and
afterward walking round the Island, you may behold pleasant to your sight
several Holley or Hombe Bushes kept very neat and handsome for the Decoys and
other wild Ducks to lay their Eggs in, as those in the Warren made of wood for
the tame Ducks.

And taking Boat again you may walk into the Arable Land, and behold Gods
blessing by the great increase of Corn; and returning through the Pasture
Fields into the Dwelling House, you may rest and be refreshed with such food as
this pleasant Land does afford, and being satisfied, pause with your self and
consider, although this be not the Paradise we read of, yet it does much
resemble the same; for what was Paradise but a Garden and Orchard of Trees and
Herbs full of pleasure, and nothing there but delights; so is there here; for
first here is the Nightingale, the pretty Robin-red-brest, and the little Wren,
with all the musical Birds that both whistle and sing, with a pleasant Consort
of Wind music to usher in the Spring; and refreshing and easing those cares of
which we by our offense are all made Heirs.

In the Summer to furnish your Table a fat Buck will be in season, also young
Peacocks, Turkies, Phesants, Partridge, and many other Fowl which are at your
command, with variety of Fish and other Flesh, as Hares, Rabbets, and such
like: your Orchards and Gardens will afford you several sorts of Fruit and
pleasant Flowers both for colors and scent; and in the Groves and Woods most
stately Trees and pleasant Walks: What shall I say, a thousand pleasant
Delights are attendant in this Pleasant Land: And what is there of all these
few that I have reckoned which does not please the eye, the ear, the smell, the
taste, yea the other sense may also take great pleasure in handling such rare
Fruit and Flowers as are presented. In the Winter there will come in a new
supply to furnish your Delights at Table, and that is Felfares, Black-birds,
Thrushes, Quail, Rayl, Woodcocks, Snipes, Wildgeese, Duck and Mallard, Widgen,
and Teal, with many more: And the remainder of the Summer Stock now in season,
as Turkies, Pheasant, Partridge, Hares, Conies, and such like; and a hot Pasty
made of the flesh of a Barren Do will not be out of season, neither a fat Pig
and Gammon of Bacon. The Bees have labored all the Summer to provide Honey and
Wax for your Winter occasions; and the Dairy-Maids have not been idle, but
provided Butter and Cheese to serve your Family all Winter and Spring, besides
the Moneys made at Markets. The Kitchen Garden will also furnish your Table
with several sorts of Roots and Herbs, and the Physic Garden with Roots,
Herbs, and Seed to preserve your health. Now the pretty Silkworms are hard at
labor, spining Silk to cloth you; and if the Gardener be an Artist, he has
provided from the Grape both Sack and Claret to cheer your spirits: And in the
Bowling-green you may by Exercise add unto all these pleasures by refreshing
your senses keep your body in health. But to sum up all, if you did know the
yearly profit that does arise out of this pleasant land, you would find it a
sufficient overweight to all your pleasures.

I did intend here to set down the particular and total Charge thus to plant
200 Acres of Land, with the yearly profit that may arise from the same, as I
have performed in planting a thousand Acres with Timber Trees and Underwoods:
But this already swelling the bulk of my Book beyond my intentions, promise the
next opportunity, when I shall have an occasion to speak of something
concerning the whole Body of Husbandry, both to do that, and also to polish
these rough-hewed lines, laying down the best way of improving all kind of
Earths simple and compound, rich and barren. We shall now conclude this
Treatise with giving you the Virtues and Use of all Plants growing in this our
Paradise: And I shall begin with the first planted, and so in order proceed.

The Hawthorn.
THis Plant being well planted, and liking the ground, makes the best Fence or
Hedge that can be made by any Plant: The Seed or Berries are wholesome Winter
food for the Deer and spare Swine, also good food for Blackbirds, Felfares,
Thrushes and such like.

The Uses Physical.
The seed in the berries beaten to powder, and drunk in Wine, is very good
against the Stone and Dropsy; the Distilled water of the Flowers stays the
Lask, and if Clothes be wet in the Water will wonderfully draw out any thorn or
splinters that abide in the flesh, if applied to the place grieved.

The Blackthorn.
Sloes are very good Winter food for spare Swine, also Deer will feed on them.

The Uses Physical.
All the parts of the Sloe-bush are binding, cooling, and drying; and all
effectual to stay bleeding at the Nose and Mouth, or any other place: the
Decoction of the Berries either fresh or dried, or the Conserve, which is most
familiarly taken, is very good to stay the Lask of the belly or stomach, or the
Bloody Flux, and helps to ease the pains in the Sides, Bowels, and Guts: but
the distilled water of the Flowers, first steeped in Sack for a night and drawn
therefrom by the heat of a Balneum, Anglice a Bath, is a most certain Remedy
tried and approved to ease all manner of gnawings in the Stomach, Sides, and
Bowels, or any griping pains in any of them: To drink a small quantity when the
extremity of pain is upon them, the simple distilled water of the Flowers or
green Berries are good to wash and gargle the mouth and throat, wherein are
swellings, sores, or kernels; and to stay the defluxions of Rhume to the eyes
or other parts, as also to cool the heat and inflammations in them, and to ease
the hot pains of the head to bathe the forehead and temples therewith.

The Oak.
THe Timber of this Tree is the Walls and Bulwark of England, being converted
to the use of building Ships; also it is sound and long-lasting Timber for
building Houses, and for many other uses: The seed called Acorns are very good
food for the Deer, Swine, and Poultry.

The Uses Physical.
The Acorn-cups, and the Bark and Leaves do bind and dry very much, the
Decoction of the inner bark and powder of the Cups stay ^^^iting or flux of
blood in Man or Woman, and the involuntary flux of natural seed: The Acorns in
powder taken in Wine provoke Urin, and resist the poison of venomous Creatures:
The distilled Water, or Decoction of the leaves is a special Remedy for the
Whites in Women: The Oken Buds are good to be used against pestilential and hot
burning Fevers; it cools the heat of the liver, and breaks the stone: The
Decoction of Acorns, and the Bark made in Milk and taken resists the force of
poisonous Herbs and Medicines.

The Beech.
THe Timber of this Tree is used about Keels of Ships, also Quarters for
building houses, Fellows and Spokes for Cart-wheels, and all sort of Joynery
ware; also many Implements of Husbandry and firing. The seed called Beech-mast
is very good feeding for Swine to make them Porkers, and for Bacon; also good
food for the Deer, Wild Peacocks, Turkies, Ducks and other Fowl.

The Uses Physical,
The Water found in the hollow places of decaying Beeches will cure both Man
and Beast of any Scurff, Scab, or Running Teters, if washed therewith; the
Leaves of the Beech are cooling and binding, and therefore good to be laid to
hot swellings to discuss them: you may boil the Leaves into a Poultis, or make
an Ointment of them when time of year serves.

The Chesnut-tree.
THis Timber is very serviceable for building, it being of very long lasting,
also very good for Hoops and Hop-poles, Turnery ware and Joyners. These Nuts
are vendible at Markets, also special food to fat Hogs, and for feeding of
Dee^, Peacocks, Turkies, and other Fowl; and may be used in the Family being
well boiled or roasted in the fire.

The Walnut-tree.
THe Timber is very useful for Joyners and Turners, etc. These Nuts are
vendible in Markets, and will serve to crack in the house, being distributed
among the Servants, the overplus may be given to the Swine, for they will make
very good Bacon.

The Uses Physical.
The Bark and Leaves of the Tree being taken young do bind and dry, and taken
with sweet wine they move the belly downwards; but being old they grieve the
stomach in hot Bodies, cause choler and headache. The Kernels being taken with
Juniper Berries, Rue, Figs, and a little Salt in a Morning fasting is an
Antidote against any poison or infection; but when the Kernels grow old they
are more oily, and are not fit to be eaten, but are then used to heal wounds of
the sinews, Gangrenes, and Carbuncles: the said Kernels being burned are very
astringent, and being taken in Red-wine will stay the Hasks and Women's Courses;
and being mixed with Oil and Wine, the head being anointed therewith will stay
the falling of the hair. The Kernels being beaten with Rue and Wine helps
the Quinsie: the Oil that is pressed out of the Kernels is very profitable
taken inward like Oil of Almonds: To help the Chollick and expel VVind an ounce
or two thereof may be taken at a time. The distilled Water of the green husk
before they be half ripe, and drunk an ounce or two at a time, is of excellent
use to cool the heat of Agues, also to resist the Infection of the Plague, and
if some of the said Water be applied to the Sores, it will work more
effectually. The Distilled Water of the green husk being ripe, and when they
are shelled from the Nuts and drunk with a little Vinegar, is very good for
those that are infected with the Plague, so as before the taking thereof a vein
be opened: the said Water is also very good against the Quinsie, being gargled
and bathed therewith, and helps the deafness and pains in the ears. The
Distilled Water of young green leaves in the end of May is a singular Cure for
foul running Ulcers and Sores, being bathed therewith. The young green Nuts
taken before they be half ripe, and preserved with sugar, are very good for
those that have weak stomachs or Defluxions thereon. The next that follows are
the Plants planted in the Groves.

The Ash.
THese Plants being young are very useful for making Hoops and Hop-poles, and
when they are grown to Timber, they will serve for several sorts of Coopers
Ware, and other Necessaries and Firing.

The Uses Physical.
The Distilled Water of the young tender tops and the leaves of the Ash being
taken a small quantity every morning, is a singular Medicine for those that are
subject to the Dropsy, or to abate the greatness of those that are too gross
or fat: The ashes of the Bark made into Lie will cure those heads that are
leprous, scabby, or scald, if bathed therewith: The decoction of the leaves in
White Wind cures the Jaundice, and helps to break the Stone and expel it:
The Kernel within the husks, commonly called Ashen-keys prevails against
stitches and pains in the Sides, proceeding of Wind, and avoideth away the
Stone by provoking u^in.

The Withey.
THese Plants are very useful for making Hoops and Hop-poles when they are
young, and when they are grown great, they will serve for several Implements of
Husbandry, also Firing.

The Uses Physical.
The Decoction of the leaves, bark, and seed of the Withey being drunk in Wine
helps to stay thin, hot, sharp, salt distillations from the head upon the
Lungs causing a Consumption: The Leaves bruised with some Pepper and drunk in
Wine much helps the Wind-Collick: The Water gathered from the Withey when it
flowreth, by slitting the Bark, and setting a Vessel to receive it, is very
good for dimness of sight, taking away the films that grow over the eyes; it
also stays Rhumes that fall into them, and clear the face and skin from spots
and discolorings: The Flowers and Bark being boiled in White Wind, wine, and
drunk a good quantity; for you cannot well drink too much; it being a very cool
tree, is a Medicine that has an admirable faculty in drying up humors: The
burnt ashes of the B^rk being mixed with Vinegar takes away Warts, Corns, and
superfluous flesh being applied to the place.

The Hazel Nut and Filbud-trees.
THese Nut Plants at 8 years growth will make very good smart hoops; also there
will be besides the hoops many Rods very useful to make hurdles for Sheep-pens,
breading walls, and such like. The Nuts and Filbuds are good Marketable Ware,
and these Nuts mixed with the Walnuts and Chestnuts will feed Hogs wonderfully,
and make better Bacon than that called Westphalia.

The Uses Physical.
The dried husks and shells of the Hazel Nut to the weight of 2 drachmes taken
in Red-wine stays Lasks and women's Courses: The Milk drawn from the kernels,
or the parched kernels made into an Electuary with Mead or Honied water is very
good to help an old Cough: The Kernels being parched and a little Pepper put to
them, and drunk, digest the distillations of the Rheum from the head:
therefore the opinion of those that say that Nuts cause shortness of breath, is
most false; for how can that which strengthens the Lungs cause shortness of
breath.

The Barberry-bush.
THese Berries are vendible at Markets, also the Syrops, Conserves, and
Preserves of the said Berries are of great use in a Family, therefore they
ought to be ready in the house upon all occasions.

The Uses Physical.
The Fruit and Rind of the Shrub, with the Flowers of Broom and Heath and Furs
cleanse the body of Choler; the Berries get a man a good stomach to his
victuals by strengthening the attractive faculty: the inner Rind of the
Barberry-tree boiled in VVhite-wine, and a quarter of a pint drunk each
morning, does cleanse the body of Chollerick humors, and free it from such
Diseases as choler causes; such are Scabs, Itches, Tetters, Ring-worms,
Yellow-Jaundice, Boils, etc. It is excellent for hot Agues, Burnings,
Scaldings, heat of the Blood, heat of the L^ver, Bloodiflux; the Berries are as
good as the Bark and more pleasing; they may be kept all the year being made
into Conserves, Preserves, etc.

The Blackberry Bush.
THese Berries are good for young Turkies, Peacocks, and many other Poultry.

The Uses Physical.
The Berries or the Flowers are a powerful Remedy against the poison of the
most venomous Serpents, as well drunk as outwardly applied helps the Sores of
the fundament and the Piles; but the flower and fruit unripe are very binding,
and so profitable for the Bloody Flux or Lask, and are a fit Remedy for
spitting of blood: the distilled water of the branches, leaves; and flowers, or
of the fruit is very pleasant in taste, and very effectual in Fevers and hot
distempers of the Body, Head, Eyes, and other parts; also do cure Ulcers,
Sores, VVounds, Bloody Flux, Quinsie: Either the Decoction or Powder of the
Root being taken is good to break or drive forth Gravel and the Stone in the
Reins and Kidneys, the Leaves and Brambles as well green as dry are excellent
good Lotions for Sores in the Mouth or Secret parts: the Juice of the Berries
mixed with the Juice of Mulberries do bind more effectually, and help fretting
and eating Sores and Ulcers wheresoever: the Powder of the Leaves strewed on
cankrous and running Ulcers does wonderfully help to heal them: the Leaves
boiled in-Lye, and the head washed therewith heals the Itch and running sores
thereof, and makes the hair black.

The Rasberry-Bush, Virtues and use.
THese Berries do make wholesome Wine, called Rasberry Wine. The Conserves of
Rasberries are very good against many distempers of the Body; therefore useful
to be kept in house all the year: the Berries are very pleasant to eat with
Cream or Wine: the Syrop of the Berries is cooling and good for a sore mouth
and throat, and other diseases that come of heat; also they are vendible at
Markets, and good food for the young Peacocks, Turkies, and other Poultry.

The Gooseberry-Bush, Virtues and Use.
BEsides the ordinary eating of them they are of good use preserved, also baked
in Pies or Tarts; the overplus may be sold or given to the Swine and Poultry.

The Currant-Bush, Virtues and Use.
BEsides the ordinary spending of this fruit, there are Syrrups Conserves and
Preserves made of them very useful in a Family; what is not spent in the House
or sold, the little Birds will feed on, and in their season you may feed on
them, so that it is but converting Currants into flesh, and you may make a
sufficient Improvmement of them.

Straberries.
THis is a cool Berry, and very wholesome to eat in wine: what is not spent in
the Family or sold in Markets the Birds will be glad of.

The Uses Physical.
The Distilled water of the Berries is a sovereign Remedy and Cordial in the
panting and beating of the heart, and is good for the yellow Jaundice: The
Juice or Water is singular good for hot inflamed eyes if dropped into them:
The Leaves and Roots boiled in Wine and Water and drunk, do cool the Liver and
Blood, and assuage all Inflammations in the Reins and Bladder, allayeth the
heat and sharpness of the Urin, stays the Bloody Flux and Women's Courses, and
helps the swelling of the Spleen. The Berries when they are ripe are cold and
moist; therefore excellent to cool the Liver, the Blood, and Spleen, or an hot
chollerick Stomach; also to refresh and comfort the fainting spirits, and
quench thirst; they are good also for other Inflammations: yet it is not amiss
to refrain them in a Fever, lest by their putrefying the Stomach they increase
the Fits. The Juice or Water is of excellent use for all Pushes, Wheals, and
other breaking forth of hot and sharp humors in the face and hands, or other
parts of the Body, to bath them therewith: Lotions and Gargles for sore Mouths
or Ulcers therein, or in the Privy parts or elsewhere, are made with Roots and
Leaves.

We shall here add a Receipt or Medicine for Sore-eyes.
Take so many Strawberries as you shall think fitting, and put them into a
Distillatory or body of Glass fit for them, which being well closed, set it in
a Bed of horse-dung for twelve or fourteen days, and afterward distill it
carefully and keep it for your use. We shall now proceed to the Orchards and
Gardens.

The Service-tree.
THese Berries when they are ripe may be spent in the House, and some of them
sold, and what is left Birds and Poultry will help you away with.

Uses Physical.
Services when they are mellow are fit to be taken to stay Fluxes, Scowring,
and Costing; but if they be dried before they be mellow, and kept all the year,
they may be used in Decoctions for the said purpose either to drink or to bath
the parts requiring it; and is profitable used in that manner to stay the
bleeding of wounds, and at the Mouth and Nose to be applied to the forehead or
nape of the Neck.

The Mulberry-tree.
THe Leaves of this Tree are the chiefest food for the Silkworms, and about
that time the Leaves grow old and begin to fall, then these Worms begin to
spin, and will require no more food; and about the time the sap puts forth
leaves again, which will be about the next Spring following, the said old
Worms, having laid many Eggs, do die, and the said Eggs produce young Worms to
feed on the new or young leaves. The Syrup or Conserves of the Berries are very
useful in a Family, therefore are to be kept in house all the year. There is
Wine also made of the Berries which will cheer and comfort the spirits.

The Uses Physical.
The Berries being ripe and eaten open the Belly, and the unripe bind; being
dried they are good to stay Fluxes: The juice or the syrup made of the juice of
the ripe Berries helps all Inflammations and Sores in the Mouth, Throat and
Pallat of the Mouth when it is fallen down: The leaves beaten with vinegar is
good to lay on any place that is burnt with fire: A Decoction made of the bark
and leaves is good to wash the mouth and teeth when they ache; if the root be a
little slit or cut, and a small hole made in the ground next thereunto, in the
Harvest time it will give out a certain juice, which being hardened, the next
day is of good use to help the Toothache, to dissolve Knots, and purge the
Belly: This Berry will also sell at Markets, the overplus will feed the Swine
and Poultry

The Ch;rry-tree.
CHerries will vent at most Markets, and arise to a considerable profit, if you
can keep Crows and other Birds from eating them, there being many thousand
Acres of Land in England planted for the same purpose. Cherry Tarts may become
a Gentleman's Table; dried Cherries also preserved are very wholesome, and
useful to be kept all the year in a Family: the ordinary way of eating them I
need not tell you, but the best way is from the trees.

The Uses Physical.
Cherries as they are of different tastes, so they are of diverse qualities; the
tart and sour are pleasing to a hot stomach, procuring appetite to meat, and
help to cut tough phlegm and gross humors; but when these are dried they are
more binding the belly than when they are fresh, being cooling in hot Diseases,
and welcome to the stomach, and provoke Urin: The sweet Cherries pass through
the stomach and belly more speedily, but are of little nourishment: The black
Cherries bruised with the Stones and distilled, the water thereof is much used
to break the Stone, expel Gravel, and break the Wind: The Gum of the
Cherry-tree dissolved in Wine is good for a Cold, Cough, and Hoarseness of the
throat, mendeth the Color in the face, sharpeneth the Eyesight, provokes
Appetite, and helps to break and expel the Stone. The Winter-Cherry is of
great use in Physic: the distilled Water of the Fruit or the Leaves together
with them or the Berries green or dry, distilled with a little Milk, and drunk
morning and evening with a little Sugar, which by drawing down the Urin,
provoke it to be avoided plentifully when it is stopped or grown hot, sharp,
and painful in the passage; it is good also to expel the Stone and Gravel out
of the Reins, Kidneys and Bladder, helping to dissolve the Stone, and avoiding
it by Greet or Gravel sent forth into the Urin; It also helps much to cleanse
inward Imposthumes or Ulcers in the Reins or Bladder, or in those that void a
bloody or foul Urin. I shall here add another Receipt or Medicin helpful for the
Urin and Stone.

A Receipt for the Vrin and Stone.
Take 3 or 4 good handful of Berries or Winter-Cherries, either green and fresh
or dried, and having bruised them, put them into so many Gallons of Beer or Ale
when it is new tunned up, this Drink taken daily does ease the pains, and expel
Urin and the Stone, and to cause the Stone not to engender.

The Apple Tree.
THere is unspeakable Pleasure and infinite Commodity in an Orchard, beside the
use of the Fruit in Housekeeping, there is much profit made by Cider and
Perry; also Apples and Pears are vendible in all Markets: The Fruit or Apples
of an Acre of Land may be worth 40 pound one years Crop or Gathering; and the
better to inform your judgment, we shall suppose or allow but 40 Trees to be
planted in one Acre of Land, and about 50 or 60 years after the first planting,
if the Plants like the ground, and by dressing and proyning they well thrive,
each tree one with the other may bear or yield 10 bushel of Apples; for there
are Apple Trees that have yielded 20 bushels each tree at one season or time of
gathering; then the Profit of 40 trees or one Acre of Land thus planted amounts
by the year to 40 pound.

The Uses Physical.
Apples have sundry tastes, and thereby they may be distinguished; in the
general they are cold and windy: the best sorts before they be thoroughly ripe
are to be avoided; then to be roasted or scalded is the best way to take them,
and a little Spice or Carrowey seed cast upon them and taken after meat do
strengthen both Stomach and Bowels; especially in those that loath or hardly
digest their meat: Those that are sour and harsh used in that manner are
fittest: Sweet Apples loosen the Belly and drive forth worms; Sour Apples stop
the Belly and provoke Urin: Pippin and Pearmain help to dissolve Melancholy
humors, an^ to procure Mirth, and therefore fittest for Confectio Alkermes and
Syrupus de Pomis; all Apples loosen the Belly and pleasure the Stomach by their
coolness: the Distilled water of good and sound Apples is of special good use
to procure Mirth and expel Melancholy: A rotten Apple applied to eyes
blood-shotten or enflamed with heat, or that are black and blue about them by
any stroke or fall, and bound to all day and night helps them quickly. The
Juice of Crabs, either Verjuice or Cider is of singular good use in the heat
and fainting of the stomach, and against Casting, to make a Posset with, or to
take some of it alone by it self: The Juice of Crabs or Cider applied with wet
clothes therein to scabbed or burnt places cools, heals, and draws forth
the fire: The Ointment called Pomatum, if sweet and well made, helps the
Chops in the lips or hands, and makes smooth and supple the rough skin of the
hands or face parched with wind or other accidents.

The Pear Tree.
PEars are very useful in a Family either baked, roasted or dried; also they
will sell at Market better than any other Fruit; and if the Gardner have the
right art in making Perry, it will turn to a considerable profit.

Uses Physical.
Pears boiled with a little Honey helps much the oppressed stomach, as all
sorts of them do some more some less: All the sweet or lushious sorts, whether
manured or wild, do help to move the Belly downward; those that are harsh and
sour do on the contrary bind the Belly as much; those that are moist do in some
sort cool, but the harsh or wild sorts much more, and are very good in
repelling Medicines, as if the wild sorts be boiled with Mushroms it makes
them the less dangerous: the harsher sort of Pears do most cool and bind,
serving well to be bound to green Wounds to cool and stay the blood, and heal
up the Wound without further trouble or inflammation.

The Vine.
GRapes are vendible in Markets, and useful in Housekeeping the Profit being
well known to those that make Wines of them.

Uses Physical.
The droppings of the Vine when it is cut in the Spring being boiled into a
Syrup with Sugar and taken inwardly, is excellent to stay Women's Longings after
every thing they see, which is a Disease many Women with child are subject to;
the Decoction of Vine leaves in White Wind do the like: the Ashes of the burnt
branches will make teeth as white as snow, if you do but every morning rub them
with it: the leaves being boiled make a good Lotion for sore Mouths, and being
boiled with Barley Meal into a Poultis, it cools inflammations of wounds.

The Plum-tree.
AS there is great diversity of the kinds, so is there in the operation of
Plums, and are like Women, some better some worse: the moist and waterish do
soonest corrupt in the stomach, but the firm do nourish more and offend less.
Apricocks, Peaches and such like Plums may well become a Gentleman's Table; also
these and several other sorts being preserved and Syrup made of them, are very
useful in a Family. All Plums are vendible in Markets.

Uses Physical.
Plumtree Leaves boiled in Wine is good to wash and gargle the mouth and
throat, to dry the flux of Rhume coming to the Pallat, Gums or Almonds of the
ears: Plums that are sweet moisten the stomach, make the Belly soluble; those
that are sour quench thirst more, and bind the Belly: the Gum or Leaves boiled
in Vinegar and applied kills Tetters and Ringworms: the dried Fruit sold by
the Grocers under the name of Damask Prunes, do somewhat loosen the Belly, and
being stewed are often used both in health and sickness, to relish the mouth
and stomach, to procure appetite and a little to open the Body, allay Choler,
and cool the Stomach: The flowers of the Peach-tree steeped all night in a
little Wine, standing warm, strained forth in the morning, and drunk fasting,
does greatly open the Belly, and move it downwards: A Syrup made of them, as
the Syrup of Roses is made, works more forcibly than that of Roses, for it
provokes Vomiting, and spends Waterish and Hydroptick Humors by the
continuance thereof: The Flowers made into a Conserve works the same effect;
for Children and young People nothing is better to purge Choler and the
Jaundice than the leaves and flowers of this Tree, being made into a Syrup or
Conserve; two spoonfuls may be given at a time: the liquor that droppeth from
the tree, being wounded, is given in the Decoction of Coltsfoot to those that
are troubled with the Cough or shortness of breath, by adding thereto some
sweet Wine, and putting some Saffron also therein, it helps all defects of
the Lungs: Two drachms thereof given in the Juice of Lemmons or of Radish is
good for those that are troubled with the Stone.

An Excellent Receipt.
Take 50 Kernels of Peach Stones, and one hundred Kernels of Cherry Stones, a
handful of Elder Flowers fresh and dried, and three pints of Muscadine; set
them in a closed pot into a Bed of Horse-dung fourteen days, which after
distill in Glass with a gentle fire, and keep it for your use; you may drink
upon occasion 3 or 4 ounces at a time.

This Drink does wonderfully ease the pains and wringings of the Belly through
wind or sharp humors. The Milk or Cream of these Kernels being drawn forth with
some Vervain water, and applied to the forehead and temples does much help to
procure rest and sleep to sick persons wanting it: the Kernels of the Peach
being bruised and boiled in Vinegar until they become thick, and applied to the
head, it will procure the hair to grow again upon bald places, or where it is
too thin.

The Tamarisk Tree.
THis Tree is not only a comely Ornament in a Garden, but Cans and Cups made of
the Timber of the Tree are very wholesome to drink out of.

Uses Physical.
The Bark boiled in Wine or Vinegar and drunk, and applied outwardly, is very
powerful against the hardness of the spleen: The Leaves boiled in Wine and
drunk is good to stay the bleeding of the Hemorrhoidal Veins, the spitting
Blood, the Jaundice, the Colic, and the too much abounding of Women's Courses:
The Bark and Leaves boiled in Wine, the mouth and teeth washed therewith,
helps the Toothache, and dropped into the ears eases the pains: The Wood is
very effectual to consume the spleen, and therefore to drink out of Cups and
Cans made thereof is good for splenetick Persons, and is available to help the
Dropsy arising from the hardness and obstruction of the Spleen, as also for
the Melancholy and the black Jaundice that arises thereof: The Ashes of the
Wood does quickly help the blisters raised by Burnings or Scaldings by fire or
water.

The Fig Tree.
I Cannot say much to the use of our English Figs, when they are ripe they are
much eaten, and there will be no loss of them, because Poultry and Swine will
thrive by feeding on them.

Uses Physical.
Figgs taken when they are young and green are very wholesome to eat either
preserved or candied: the Confectioners know better how to order them than I
can inform. The dried Figs fold at the Grocers are very Medicinal besides the
common earing of them.

An Antidote against Poison or Infection.
Take two Figs, a couple of Walnuts, 20 leaves of Rue, 20 Juniper Berries, and
2 or 3 Corns of Salt: beat all these together into a Mass; take about the
quantity of a H^zel Nut every Morning fasting, and it will to admiration
preserve your Body in health.

The Medlar-tree.
THe Fruit of this Tree is useful in House, and vendible at Markets.

The Uses Physical.
The Medlar Stones made into Powder, and drunk in Wine wherein some Parsley
roots have lien infused all night, or a little boiled, do break the Stone in
the Kidneys, helping to expel it: The Fruit eaten by Women with child stays
their longings after unusual meats, and is very effectual for them that are apt
to miscarry to help that Malady, and make them joyful Mothers: The Decoction of
them is good to gargle and wash the mouth, throat, and teeth when there is any
defluxion of blood to stay it, or of humors which causes pains and swellings:
The dried Leaves in Powder strewed on fresh bleeding wounds restrains the
blood, and heals up the wounds quickly: If a Plaster be made with dried
Medlars beaten and mixed with the Juice of Red-Roses, whereunto a few Cloves
and Nutmeg may be added, and a little red Corral also, and applied to the
stomach that is given to casting or loathing of meat, it effectually helps.

The Quince-tree.
THis Fruit is known by good experience to be very profitable in Housekeeping,
being Pickled, Preserved, or made into Marmelade or Conserves.

The Uses Physical.
The Muccilage taken from the Seeds of Quinces boiled a little in water, is
very good to cool the heat and heal the sore Breasts of Women: The same with a
little Sugar is good to lenifio the harshness and hoarsness of the Throat, and
roughness of the Tongue: Quinces when they are green help all sorts of Fluxes
in Man or Woman, and Chollerick Lasks, Castings, etc. The Crude Juice of
Quinces is held a Preservative against the force of deadly Poison: The Oil of
Quinces or other Medicines that may be made thereof are very available to cool
any hot Fluxes, if the Belly or other parts be anointed therewith; it likewise
strengthens the Stomach and Belly, and the Sinews that are loosned by sharp
humors falling on them, and restrains immoderate Sweatings: The Cotton or
Down of Quinces boiled to Plague sores heals them up, and laid as a Plaster
made up with Wax, it brings hair to them that are bald, and keeps it from
falling if it be ready to shed: The Syrup of the Juice or the Conserve are much
of a binding quality, being consumed by the fire; if a little Vinegar be added
it stirs up the languishing Appetite, and much conducible to the Stomach
given to casting; some Spices being added it comfort and strengthens the
decayed and fainting Spirits, and helps the Liver oppressed that it cannot
perfect the digestion, and corrects Choler and Phlegm: If you would have them
purging, put Honey in them instead of Sugar; and if more laxative for Choler,
Rubarb; for Phlegm Turbith; for Watery Humors Scammony: but if more forcibly to
bind, use the unripe Quince with Roses and Acacia, or Hipocistis and some
torrefied Rubarb.

The Bay Tree.
THe Boughs of this Tree with Holly and Ivy are very comely to be set up about
Pews in Churches, also about several Rooms in Houses, therefore vendible at
Markets.

Uses Physical.
The Berries are very effectual against all Poison of Venomous Creatures, as
also against the Pestilence or other infectious diseases; and therefore is put
in sundry Treacles for that purpose; seven of them given to a Woman in sore
travail of Childbirth do cause a speedy Delivery, and expel the Afterbirth,
and therefore not to be taken by such as have not gone out their aim, lest
they procure Abortment, or cause labor too soon: They wonderfully help all
cold and rheumatick Distillations from the Brain to the Eyes, Lungs, or other
parts: A Bath of the Decoction of the Leaves and Berries is singular good for
Women to sit in that are troubled with the Mother, or the Diseases thereof, or
the stopping of their Courses, or for the Diseases of the Bladder, Pains in the
Bowels by Wind, and stopping of Urin. The Oil made of the Berries is very
comfortable in all cold Griefs of the Joints, Nerves, Arteries, Stomach, Belly
or Womb, and helps Palsies, Convulsions, Cramps, Aches, Trembling and Numness
in any parts, Weariness also and Pains that come by sore traveling; all Griefs
and Pains likewise proceeding from Wind either in the Head, Stomach, Back,
Belly or Womb, by anointing the parts affected therewith. A Decoction of equal
parts of Bay Berries, Cummin-seed, Hysop, Origanum and Euphorbium, with some
Honey, does wonderfully help Distillations and Rheums, and sets the Pallat
of the Mouth into its place: The Powder made into an Electuary with Honey does
help the Consumption, Old Coughs, Shortness of Breath, and thin Rheumes; also
the Meagrim; they mightily expel Wind and provoke Urin, help the Mother and
kill the Worms.

Thus have we given an account of the Use and Virtues of all Trees and Shrubs
planted within this Pleasant Land: In the next place we shall give you the
Virtues and Use of those Roots and Herbs, and only those that are most common
and useful in a Family.

Alexander, Virtues and Use.
ALexander is a timely Pot-herb; It warmeth a cold Stomach, and opens
stoppings of the Liver and Spleen; it helps the Strangury; it is good to
break Wind, to provoke Vrin, to move Women's Courses, and to expel the
Afterbirth: if the herb be boiled in Wine, or being bruised and taken in Wine.
The Seed is likewise effectual for all these things: Alexander Potage is very
good and wholesome food.

Asparagus, Virtues and Use.
THe Buds or young Shoots of this Plant are much sold and eaten in and about
London: The Shoots or Branches boiled in White Wind or Vinegar is prevalent for
them that have Arteries loosned, or are troubled with the Hip-gout or Sciatica;
and boiled in ordinary broth makes the Belly soluble and open: The Decoction
of the Roots in White Wind, and the Back and Belly bathed therewith, or sitting
therein as a Bath, or kneeling or lying down in the same has been found
effectual against Pains in the Reins and Bladder, Pains of the Mother and
Chollick, and no less effectual against stiff and benumbed Sinews, or those
that are shrunk by Cramps and Convulsions, and helps the Sciatica: The
Decoction of the Roots boiled in Wine, and taken, is good to clear the Sight,
and being taken fasting several Mornings together stirs up bodily lust in
Man or Woman: The Buds or Branches boiled in ones ordinary Broth provokes
Urin, being stopped it expels the Gravel and Stone out of the Kidneys.

Anniseeds, Virtues and Use.
ANnise-seeds are of an opening and cleansing quality, therefore very effectual
to break Wind, and open Obstructions, and are much used in Comfits.

Artichoaks, Virtues and Use.
ARrtichoaks are plentiful of fruit, and much desired; for they increase Sperm
and procure bodily Lust.

Angelica, Virtues and Use.
THe Stalks or Roots candied and eaten fasting are good Preservatives in time
of Infection, and at other times to warm and comfort a cold Stomach: The Root
also steeped in Vinegar, and a little of that Vinegar taken sometimes fasting,
and the Root smelled unto is good for the same purpose. The Root steeped in
Wine, and a Water distilled from the said Root in glass, and two or three
spoonfuls at a time eases all Pains and Torments coming of Cold and Wind, so
as the Body be not bound; and taken with some of the Root in Powder at the
beginning helps the Plurisie, as all other Diseases of the Lungs and Breast,
as Coughs, Pthisick and and Shortness of Breath: It helps Pains of the
Chollick, the Strangury, and stopping of the Urin, opens the Stoppings of the
Liver and Spleen. The Decoction drunk before the Fit of an Ague, that they may
sweat if possible before the Fit come, will in two or three times taking rid it
quite away: It helps digestion, and is a Remedy for a Su^fit: The Juice or the
Water dropped, or Tents wet therein, and put into old filthy deep Ulcers; or
the Powder of the Root, (in want of either) does cleanse and cause them to heal
quickly, by covering the naked bones with flesh: The Root taken in Powder to
the weight of half a dram at a time, with some good Treacle in Carduus Water,
it does resist Poison, the Plague, and all Epidemical Diseases, if the party
thereupon be laid to sweat in his Bed.

Alehoofe, Virtues and Use.
A Handful of the said Herb put into Drink that is thick with removing, or any
other accident, it will clarify it in a few hours; and if tunn'd up with new
Drink, it will so clarify it in a night, that it will be the fitter to be
drunk the next morning: The Decoction of it in Wine drunk for some time
together procures ease unto them that are troubled with the Sciatica or
Hip-gout, as also the Gout in the Hands, Knees or Feet: The Juice boiled with a
little Honey and Verdigrees does wonderfully cleanse Fistula's, Ulcers, and
stays the spreading and eating of Cancers and Ulcers. The Decoction of
Ground Ivy in Wine, and if you put to it some Honey and a little burnt Alum,
it is excellent good to gargle any sore Mouth or Throat, and to wash Sores and
Ulcers: The Herb boiled and drunk is singular good for exulcerated Lungs, and
being drunk tunn'd up in Beer or Ale, it in a short time eases all griping
Pains, windy and chollerick Humors in the Stomach, Spleen or Belly.

An Excellent Receipt for Sore Eyes.
The Juice of Celandine, Field-Daisies, and Ground Ivy clarified, and a little
fine Sugar dissolved therein, and dropped into the eye, is a sovereign Remedy
for all the Pains, Redness, and Watering of them, as also for the Pin and Web,
Skins and Films growing over the sight; it helps Beasts also.

Garden Beans, Virtues and Use.
BEans eaten are extreme windy meat, but if eaten with Bacon they are good
food, and useful in a Family; and if after the Dutch fashion, when they are
half boiled you husk them, and then stew them with sweet Butter, they are
wholsomer food: The Flower of Beans and Fenugreek mixed with Honey, and applied
to Fellons, Boyles, Bruises, or blue marks by blows, or the Imposthumes in the
Kernels of the Ears, helps them all; and with Rose-leaves, Frankincense, and
the White of an Egg being applied to the Eyes helps them that are swollen, or
do water, or have received any blow upon them, if used with Wine: The Ashes of
the Husks made up with old Hog's Grease, helps the old Pains, Contusions, and
Wounds of the Sinews, the Sciatica and Gout: The Water distilled from the green
Husks is held to be very effectual against the Stone, and to provoke Urin. Bean
Flower is used in Poultisses to assuage Inflammations rising upon Wounds, and
the Swelling of Women's Breast.

French-Beans, Virtues and Use.
THe ordinary French or Kidney-Beans are much in use, being sold in every
Market, and commonly boiled and eaten with the Husk; they are of an easy
digestion, they move the Belly, provoke Urin, enlarge the Breast that is
straightened with shortness of breath, engender Sperm, and incite Venery.

Balm, Virtues and Use.
A Syrup with the Juice of this Herb and Sugar would be kept in every
Gentlewomans House to relieve the weak Stomachs and sick Bodies of their poor
sickly Neighbors, as also the Herb kept dry in the House, that so with other
convenient Simples you may make it into an Electuary with Honey according as
the Disease is: The Herb bruised and boiled in a little Wine and Oil, and laid
warm on a Boil, will ripen and break it: The Leaves with a little Nitre taken
in Drink are good against a Surfeit of Mushromes, helps the griping pains of the
Belly, and being made into an Electuary is good for them that cannot fetch
their breath: A Tansie or Cawdle made with Eggs and the Juice thereof while it
is young, putting to it some Sugar and Rose Water, is good for Women in
Childbed, when the Afterbirth is not thoroughly avoided, and for their
faintings upon or after their sore Travel. This is an excellent Herb to revive
a fainting Heart, and drive away all troublesome cares and thoughts out of the
mind arising from Melancholy or black Choler; it is very good to help
Digestion and open the Obstructions of the Brain, and causes the Mind and
Heart to become merry.

Wood-Betony, Virtues and Use.
THis is a very precious Herb, most fitting to be kept in a Man's House both in
Syrup, Conserve, Oil, Ointment and Plaster: The Flowers are usually conserved:
The Green Herb bruised, or the Juice applied to any inward Hurt or outward
green Wound in the Head or Body, will quickly heal and close it up; as also any
broken Bone, Splinter, Thorn or other thing gotten into the Flesh, and old
Sores, or filthy Ulcers: The Powder of Betony mixed with pure Honey is very
good for all sorts of Coughs or Colds, Wheesing or Shortness of Breath,
Distillations of thin Rheum upon the Lungs, which causes Consumptions: The
Herb the Root, or the Fl^wers in Broth drunk or made into Conserve, Syru^,
Electuary, Water, or Powder, either of these ways taken, helps the Palsy,
Falling Sickness, Jaundice, Convulsions, Gout, or Shrinking of the Sinews,
Dropsies and Pains in the Head: The Decoction of the Herb made with Mead and a
little Penyroyal is good for those that are troubled with putrid Agues: The
Decoction made in Wine kills the Worms in the Belly, opens Obstructions
both of Spleen and Liver, cures Stitches and Pains in the Back or Sides, the
Torments and grip^ng of Pains of the Bowels and the Wind-Chollick, and mixed
with Honey purges the Belly: A Dram of the Powder of Betony taken with a
little Honey in some Vinegar does wonderfully refresh those that are
ove^wearied by travail, and helps those that piss or spit blood, or that are
Bursten or have a Rupture: The Juice dropped into the Ears destroys the
Worms, eases the Pains, and cures the running Sores in them: The Leaves and
Flowers are comfortable both in Meat and Medicine, and helps those that
cannot digest their meat, or sour Belchings, or continual Rising in their
stomach, using them either green or dry.

Burnet, Virtues and Use.
THis Herb is little inferior to Betony, for it is a most precious herb; the
continual use of it preserves the Body in health: The Juice taken in some
Drink, and the Party laid to sweat, is a special help to defend the heart from
noisome Vapors, and from infection of the Pestilence: The distilled Water, the
Juice, or Decoction of the Herb, or the Powder of the Root or Herb, they are
available in all manner of Fluxes of blood or humors, to stanch bleeding inward
or outward, Lasks, Scourings, the Bloody Flux, Women's too abundant Courses;
the Whites and the chollerick belchings and castings of the Stomach, and is a
singular good Wound-herb for all sorts of Wounds either inward or outward.

Burrage and Bugloss, Virtues and Use.
THese are both great Cordials, great Strengthners of Nature, exceeding good
Pot Herbs, good for Bees, and most comfortable for the heart and stomach: The
Flowers candied or made into a Conserve is good for those that are weak with
long sickness, and to comfort the heart and spirits of those that are in a
Consumption, or troubled with often swoonings or passions of the Heart: The
Distilled Water is effectual to all the purposes aforesaid, and helps the
redness and inflammation of the Eyes being washed therewith: The Juice of the
Herb made into a Syrup and taken, is good to defend the Heart, and help to
resist and expel Poison; also good to expel Pensiveness and Melancholy; it
helps to clarify the blood, and mitigate heat in Feve^s: The Root, Seed, and
Leaves are good to all the purposes aforesaid: The Seed and Leaves are good to
increase Milk in Women's Breasts: The Leaves, Flowers, and Seed, all or any of
them are put with other cooling, opening, cleansing herbs, to open
Obstructions, help the yellow Jaundice; and mixed with Fumitory, to cool
cleanse and temper the Blood, thereby it helps all spreading Scabs or Sores,

Carrets, Virtues and Use.
THey are useful in a Family, and that Powder-beef Eaters do well know; Carrets
break Wind, and remove Stitches in the Sides, provoke Urin and Women's Courses,
and help to break and expel the Stone; the wild kind is most effectual to the
purposes aforesaid: the Seed is good for the Dropsy, helps the Chollick, the
Stone in the Kidneys, and helps Conception, being taken in Wine.

Cabbages and Coleworts, Virtues and Use.
THese are our Country Housewifes Pot Herbs; they are much commended being
eaten before meat, to keep one from su^fetting, as also from being drunk with
Wine: The often eating of them well boiled helps those that are entering into
a Consumption: The Pulp of the middle ribs of Colewort boiled in Almond-milk,
and made up into an Electuary with Honey, being taken often, is very profitable
for those that are pursie and short-winded: The Decoction of Coleworts takes
away the Pain and Ach, and allayeth the Swelling of swollen and gouty Legs and
Knees, wherein many gross and watery humors are fallen, the place being bathed
therewith warm.

Caraway, Virtues and Use.
THe Roots of Caraways eaten as men eat Parsnips, strengthen the Stomach of
Ancient People exceedingly: Caraway Comfects once only dipped in Sugar, and
half a spoonful of them eaten in the Morning fasting, and as many after each
Meal, are a most admirable Remedy for such as are troubled with Wind: The seed
is conducing to all the cold Griefs of head and stomach.

Sweet Cicely, Virtues and Use.
THis is an excellent Sallet Herb; the candied Roots hereof are held as
effectual as Angelica to preserve from Infection in the time of a Plague, and
to warm and comfort a cold weak Stomach: The Root boiled and eaten with Oil and
Vinegar does much please and refresh an old cold Stomach oppressed with Wind or
Phlegm, or those that have the Phthisick or Consumption of the Lungs; the same
drunk with Wine is a Preservative from the Plague, expels Wind, and
procures an Appetite to meat.

Chamomel, Virtues and Use.
THe Oil made of the Flowers is much used against all hard swelling Pains or
Aches, Shrinking of the Sinews, or Cramps or Pains in the Joints or any other
part of the Body: The bathing with a Decoction of Chamomel takes away
Weariness, eases Pains to what part of the Body soever they be applied, it
comfort the Sinews that are over-strained, mollifieth all Swellings; it
moderately comfort all parts that have need of warmth, digesteth and
dissolveth whatsoever has need thereof, by a wonderful speedy property; it
eases all the Pains of the Chollick and Stone, and all Pains and Torments of
the Belly, and provokes Urin: A Syrup made of the Juice taken with Sugar is
excellent for the Spleen; also it most wonderfully breaks the Stone: The
Flowers boiled in Posset Drink provoke Sweat, and help to expel Colds, Aches
and Pains: A Syrup made of the Juice of Chamomel, with the Flowers and
White Wind is a Remedy against the Jaundice and Dropsy: The Flowers boiled in
Lie are good to wash the Head, and comfort both it and the Brain.

Clary, Virtues and Use.
THe fresh Leaves dipped in a Batter of Flower, Eggs, and a little Milk, and
fried in Butter, and served to the Table, are not unpleasant to any, but
exceeding profitable for them that are troubled with weak Backs, and the
effects thereof: The Seed or Leaves taken in Wine provokes to Venery; it is of
much use both for Men and Women that have weak Backs, to help to strengthen the
Reins, used either by it self or with other Herbs conducing to the same effect,
and in Tansies often.

Costmary, Virtues vnd Use.
THis Herb is very profitable taken when fasting in the Morning for the Pains
in the head that are continual, and to stay, dry up, and consume all thin
Rheums or Distillations from the Head into the Stomach, and helps much to
digest raw humors that are gathered therein: It is very profitable for those
that are fallen into a continual evil disposition of the whole Body, called
Cachexia, being taken especially in the beginning of the Disease: It is an
especial friend and help to evil, weak, and cold Livers.

Comfry, Virtues and Use.
THe Roots of Comfry being bruised and laid unto fresh Wounds or Cuts
immediately heals them, and is especially for Ruptures and broken Bones: It
is said to be so powerful to consolidate and knit together, that if it be
boiled with dissevered pieces of flesh in a Pot, it will join them together
again: The Root boiled in Water or Wine, and the Decoction drunk, helps all
inward Hurts, Bruises and Wounds, and the Ulcers of the Lungs, causing the
Phlegm that oppresses them to be easily spit forth: It stays the defluxion of
Rheum from the Head upon the Lungs, the Fluxes of Blood or Humors by the Belly,
Women's immoderate Courses. A Syrup made thereof is very effectual for all those
inward griefs and hurts, and the Distilled Water for the same purpose: The
Roots taken fresh beaten small and spread upon Leather, and laid upon any place
troubled with the Gout, do presently give ease of the Pains, also give ease to
pained Joints, and are good to be applied to Women's Breasts that grow sore by
the abundance of Milk coming into them.

Cowslips, Virtues and Use.
AN Ointment made of the Leaves and Hog's Grease, takes away Spots and Wrinkles
of the skin, Sun-burnings and Freckles: The Distilled Water of the Flowers and
Leaves works the same effect, and adds Beauty exceedingly: they remedy all
infirmities of the Head coming of wind and heat: The Flowers Preserved or
Conserved, and the quantity of a Nutmeg eaten every Morning is a sufficient
Dose for inward diseases.

Cinkfoyl, Virtues and Use.
THe Powder of the Leaves taken in White Wind or White Wind Vinegar about the
quantity of 20 grains at a time of the said Powder does seldom miss the cure of
any Ague: The Decoction of the said herb is as effectual: The Juice or
Decoction taken in Honey helps the hoarseness of the Throat, and is good for
the Cough of the Lungs: The Roots are effectual to help Ruptures or Burstings
taken either inwardly or outwardly, or both; as also for Bruises, Falls, or the
like.

Celandine, Virtues and Use.
THe Herb bruised and laid to the Rists cures all sorts of Agues: The Juice
dropped into the Eyes cleanses them from Films and Cloudiness which darkens
the fight: The Herb or Roots boiled in White Wind with a few Annise-seeds and
drunk opens the Obstructions of the Liver and Gall, and helps the
Yellow-Jaundice and the Dropsy: The Juice taken fasting is of singular good
use against the Pestilence: The Herb with the Roots bruised and heated with Oil
of Camomile, and applied to the Navel, takes away the griping pain in the
Belly and Bowels, and all the pains of the Mother: The Powder of the dried Root
laid upon an aching hollow or loose Tooth will cause it to fall out: An Oil or
Ointment made of Celandine is a speedy and certain Cure for Sore-eyes, they
being anointed therewith.

Clowns Woundworth, Virtues and Use.
A Syrup made of this Herb and Comfry will to admiration cure all inward
Wounds, Ruptures, Spitting, Pissing, or Vomiting Blood: An Ointment or Plaster
made of this Herb and Comfry will excellently and speedily cure any Vein
swelled, Muscle cut, or a Rupture, if a Plaster be applied to the place, and
by taking now and then a little of the Syrup.

Dill, Virtues and Use.
THe Herb or Seed being bruised and boiled, or the Decoction in White Wind and
drunk is a gallant Expeller of VVind, and Provoker of the Terms, and is good to
ease Swellings and Pains, also stays the Belly and Stomach from casting, and
eases the pains and windiness of the Mother.

Endive, Virtues and Use.
A Syrup of the herb is a fine cooling Medicine for Fevers. The Seed is
available for Faintings, Swounings and Passions of the Heart: The Decoction of
the Leaves or the Juice or the Distilled Water serves well to cool the
excessive heat in the Liver and Stomach, and in the hot Fits of Agues, and all
other Inflammations in any parts of the Body: This is also a very good Pot-herb.

Elecampane, Virtues and Use.
THe Roots and Herb beaten or bruised, and put into new Ale or Beer, and daily
drunk, clear, strengthen, and quicken the sight of the Eyes wonderfully: The
Decoction of the Roots in Wine, or the Juice taken therein, kills and drives
forth all manner of Worms in the Belly, Stomach, and Maw: The dried Root made
into Powder, and mixed with Sugar, and taken, is very effectual to warm a cold
and windy Stomach, or the pricking therein, and stitches in the Sides caused by
the Spleen, and to help the Cough, Shortness of Breath, and Wheesing in the
Lungs: The fresh Roots preserved with Sugar, or made into a Syrup or Conserve,
serves to the same purposes: The Root chewed fastneth loose Teeth, and helps
to keep them from putrefaction: The Decoction of the Roots in Wine being drunk
is good for those that are Bursten.

Eyebright, Virtues and Use.
THe Juice of Eyebright tunned up with strong Beer, that it may work together,
or the Powder of the dried herb mixed with Sugar, a little Mace and
Fennel-seeds, and drunk or eaten in Broth, or the said Powder made into an
Electuary with Sugar does powerfully help and restore the Sight decayed by Age:
The Juice or Distilled Water of Eyebright taken inwardly in White Wind or
Broth, or dropped into the Eyes for diverse days together, helps all
Infirmities of the Eyes that causes dimness of sight, also helps a weak
Brain and Memory.

Feaverfew, Virtues and Use.
THe Decoction of the Herb made with some Sugar or Honey put thereto, is used
with good success to help the Cough and stuffing of the Chest by Cold, as also
to cleanse the Reins and Bladder, and help to expel the Stone in them: The Herb
boiled in White Wind and drunk cleanses the Womb, and expels the
Afterbirth: A Syrup of the Herb works the same effect: The Powder of the
Herb taken in Wine with some Oximel purges both Choler and Phlegm, and is
available for those that are Short-winded, and are troubled with Melancholy
and Heaviness or Sadness of the Spirits: This Herb is chiefly used for the
Diseases of the Mother applied outwardly, or a Decoction of the Flowers in Wine
with a little Nutmeg or Mace put therein and drunk often in a day.

Fumitory, Vertues' and Use.
THe Juice of Fumitory and Docks mingled together with Vinegar, and the places
gently washed or wet therewith, cures all sorts of Scabs, Wheals, or Pushes on
any part of the Body^* The Juice or Syrup thereof, or the Decoction made in
Whey by it self, with some other purging or opening Herbs and Roots to cause it
to work the better, is very effectual for the Liver and Spleen, opening the
Obstructions thereof, and clarifying the Blood from faltish, chollerick, and
adust humors, and after the purging does strengthen all the inward parts; it is
good also against the Yellow-Jaundice, and spends it by Urin, which it
procures in abundance: The Distilled Water of the Herb is also of good effect
in the former Diseases, and conduces much against the Plague and Pestilence
being taken with good Treacle: The Powder of the dried Herb given for some time
together cures Melancholy, but the Seed is strongest in operation for all the
former Diseases,

Fennel, Virtues and Use.
THis is a very good Pot-herb, or for Sallets, and of good use to boil with
Fish; for it consumes the Phlegmatic humor which Fish most plentifully afford
and annoy the Body by; and therefore it is a most fit Herb for that purpose:
Fennel is also very good for Bees, and is much used in dressing Hives for
Swarms: The Distilled Water of the whole Herb or the Juice dropped into the
Eyes cleanses them from Mists and Films that hinder the sight: The Leaves or
Seed boiled in Barley Water and drunk is good for Nurses to increase their
Milk, and make it more wholesome for the Child: The Roots are of most use in
Physick-Drinks and Broths that are taken to cleanse the Blood, to open
Obstructions of the Liver and provoke Urin, and amend the ill color in the
Face: The Seed and the Root helps the painful and windy swellings of the
Spleen and the Yellow-jaundice, as also the Gout and Cramps.

Germander, Virtues and Use.
THe Decoction thereof taken for some days together drives away and cures
both Tertian and Quartan Agues: It is also good against all Diseases of the
Brain, as continual Headache, Falling Sickness, Melancholy, Drowsiness, and
Dullness of spirit, Convulsions and Palsies: The Juice of the Leaves dropped
into the Ears kills the Worms in them.

Gromel, Virtues and Use.
THe Seed being bruised and boiled in White Wind, or in Broth or the like, or
the Powder of the Seed taken therein: Two drachms of the Seed in Powder taken
with Women's Breast Milk is very effectual to procure a speedy Delivery to such
Women as have sore pains in their Travail, and cannot be delivered. The Herb
when the Seed is not to be had either boiled, or the Juice thereof drunk, is
effectual to all the purposes aforesaid, but not so powerful or speedy in
operation: It is an Herb of singular force as any other to break the Stone, and
avoid it and the Graveleither in the Reins or Bladder.

Goutwort, Virtues and Use.
THe very bearing of this Herb about one eases the pains of the Gout, and
defends him that bears it from the disease, therefore had not his Name for
nothing; but upon good experience is known to help the Cold-Gout and Sciatica,
as also Joynt-aches, and other cold Griefs.

Groundsel, Virtues and Use.
THis Herb is moist and somewhat cold withal, thereby causing expulsion and
repressing the heat caused by the motion of the internal parts in Purges and
Vomits, and is as gallant an universal Medicine for all Diseases coming of heat
as the Sun shines upon: The Juice taken in Drink, or the Decoction of the Herb
in Wine or Ale helps the pains in the Stomach proceeding of Choler: It is
good against the Jaundice and Falling Sickness being taken in Wine: A dram of
the Juice given in Oximel is good to provoke Urin, expels Gravel in the
Reins or Kidneys: It helps also the Sciatica, Griping of the Belly and
Chollick, helps the defects of the Liver: The Juice of the Herb, or the
Leaves and Flowers, with some fine Frankincense in Powder, used in wounds of
the Body, Nerves, and Sinews, does singularly help to heal them: The Distilled
Water of the Herb performs well all the aforesaid Cures.

Hysop, Virtues and Use.
HYsop boiled with Figs is an excellent Medicine for the Quinsie, or swelling
in the Throat, to wash and gargle it: The green Herb bruised, and a little
Sugar put thereto, does quickly heal any Cut or green Wound; and being taken
either in a Syrup or licking Medicine, it helps to expectorate tough Phlegm,
and is effectual in all cold Griefs or Diseases of the Chest and Lungs: Hysop
boiled with Rue and Honey, and drunk, helps those that are troubled with
Coughs, Shortness of Breath, Wheesings and Rheumatick Distillations upon the
Lungs: Taken with Oximel it purges gross humors by the Stool: It helps those
that have the Falling Sickness which way soever it be applied.

Hops, Virtues and Use.
THe Decoction of the tops of Hops open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen,
cleanses the Blood, loosens the Belly, provokes Urin, and cleanses the Reins
from Gravel: A Syrup made of the Juice and Sugar cures the yellow Jaundice,
eases the Headache that comes of heat, and tempereth the heat of the Liver and
Stomach.

St. John's wort, Virtues and Use.
THe Seed is much commended being drunk for forty days together, to help the
Sciatica, the Falling Sickness, and the Palsy: The Decoction of the Herb and
Flowers, but of the Seed especially; in Wine being drunk, or the Seed made into
Powder, and drunk with the Juice of Knot-grass, helps all manner of spitting
and vomiting Blood, be it by any Vein broken, inwardly by bruises, falls, or
howsoever: the same helps those that are bitten or stung by any venomous
Creature: Two drachms of the Seed made into Powder, and drunk in a little
Broth, does gently expel Choler or congealed Blood in the Stomach.

Kidney-wort, Virtues and Use.
THe bruised Herb, or the place bathed with the Juice or Distilled Water
thereof heals Pimples, Redness, the St. Anthonies Fire, and other outward
Heats and Inflammations: The Juice or the Distilled Water being drunk is very
effectual for all Inflammations and unnatural heats to cool a fainting hot
Stomach, or a hot Liver, or the Bowels: The said Water is available for the
Dropsy, and helps to break the Stone.

Liquoris, Virtues and Use.
THe Juice of Liquoris dissolved in Rose Water with some Gum- Tragacanth, is a
fine licking Medicine for Hoarseness and Wheesings: Liquoris boiled in fair
Water with some Maidenhair and Figs, makes a good Drink for those that have a
dry Cough, or Hoarseness, Wheesings, Shortness of Breath, and for all Griefs of
the Breast and Lungs, Phthisick or Consumptions caused by the distillation of
salt humors on them.

Lavender, Virtues and Use.
A Decoction made with the Flowers of Lavender, Horehound, Fennel and Asparagus
Roots, and a little Cinnamon is very profitably used to help the
Falling Sickness and the giddiness or turning of the Brain, to gargle the Mouth
with the Decoction thereof is good against the Toothache: Two spoonfuls of the
Distilled Water of the Flowers taken helps them that have lost their Voice,
as also the Tremblings and Passions of the Heart, and Faintings and Swounings;
not only being drunk, but applied to the Temples, or Nostrils to be smelt unto:
Lavender is of special good use for all the Griess of the Head and B^ains that
proceed of a cold cause.

Lettice, Virtues and Use.
THis is one of our good House-wifes Sallet-herbs, but the use of them is
forbiden to those that are short-winded, or have any imperfection in their
Lungs: the best way of eating them is boiled. The Juice of Lettice boiled with
Oil of Roses, or mixed therewith and applied to the Forehead and Temples
procures Sleep, and eases the Headache, proceeding of an hot cause: The Seed
and Distilled Water of Lettice are as effectual as the Herb: In all things
Lettice being eaten helps Digestion, loosens the Belly, quenches Thirst,
increases Milk in Nurses, eases griping Pains of the Stomach or Bowels that
come of Cho^ler.

Lovage, Virtues and Use.
THe Distilled Water of the Herb helps the Quinsie in the Throat, and helps
the Plurisie being drunk 3 or 4 times: The Leaves bruised and fried with a
little Hogs-Lard, and laid hot to any Botch or Boil will quickly break it: Half
a dram at a time of the dried Root in Powder taken in Wine does wonderfully
warm a cold stomach, helping digestion, and consuming all raw and superfluous
moisture therein, eases all inward Gripings and Pains, dissolveth Wind, and
resists Poison and Infection. To drink the Decoction of the Herb is good for
any sort of Ague.

Sweet-Marjerom. Virtues and Use.
THe Powder snuffed up into the Nose provokes sneezing, and thereby purges
the Brain, and chewed in the Mouth draws forth much Phlegm: The Decoction of
the Herb made with some Pellitory of Spain and Long Pepper, or with a little of
Acorus or Origanum being drunk is good for those that are beginning to fall
into a Dropsy, for those that cannot make water, and against Pains and
Torments in the Belly: The Decoction of Marjerom being drunk helps all the
D^seases of the Chest which hinder the freeness of breathing, and is also
profitable for the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen: It helps the cold
Griefs of the Womb, and the windiness thereof.

Mint, Virtues and Use.
THe Decoction of the Herb gargled in the Mouth cures the Gums and Mouth that
is sore, as also with Rue and Coriander causes the Pallat of the Mouth that is
down to return to his place, the Decoction being held and gargled in the mouth;
it also mendeth an ill-savoured Breath: the Powder of Mint being dried and
taken after meat helps digestion and those that are splenetick: taken with
Wine helps Women in their sore travail in Childbearing: it is good against
the Gravel and Stone in the Kidneys, and the Strangury; it is a safe Medicine
for the biting of a Mad Dog: the Herb being bruised with salt and laid thereon;
being smelled unto it is comfortable for the head and Memory.

Marigolds, Virtues and Use.
A Plaster made with the dry Flowers in Powder, Hog's Grease, Turpentine and
Rozin, and applied to the Breast strengthens and succors the Heart infinitely
in all Fevers: The Flowers either green or dried are used much in Possets,
Broths, and Drinks, as a Comforter of the heart and spirits, and to expel any
malignant or pestilential quality which might annoy them.

Mustard, Virtues and Use.
THe Seed taken either by it self or with other things, either in an Electuary
or Drink, does mightily stir up bodily Lust, and helps the Spleen and Pains
in the Sides, and Gnawing in the Bowels, and used as a Gargle draws up the
Pallat of the mouth being fallen down: The Distilled Water of the Herb when it
is in flower is much used to drink inwardly to help in any Diseases aforesaid,
but outwardly also for Scabs, Itch, or other like infirmities: The Decoction of
the Seed made in Wine and drunk provokes Urin, and resists the force of
Poison. We shall add an excellent Receipt or Medicine for Old People or Weak
Stomachs.

Take of Mustard Seed a dram, Cinnamon as much, and having beaten them to
Powder, and half as much Mastick in Powder, and with Gum-Arabick dissolved in
Rose Water, make it up in Troches, of which take about half a dram weight an
hour or two before Meals.

Motherwort, Virtues and Use.
THere is no better Herb to strengthen and drive melancholy Vapors from the
heart, and make a merry cheerful blithe soul, than this herb; it may be kept in
Syrup or Conserve: the Powder thereof to the quantity of a spoonful drunk in
Wine is a wonderful help to Women in their sore Travails; as also for the
suffocation of the Mother; it also cleanses the Chest of cold Phlegm, and is of
good use to dry up the cold humors, to digest and disperse them that are
settled in the Veins, Joints, and Sinews of the Body.

Sweet-Maudlin, Virtues and Use.
THis Herb taken in Whey or the Decoction, purges Choler and Phlegm, opens
Obstructions, and heals their evil effects, and is a wonderful help to all
s^rts of Day-Agues: It is astringent to the Stomach, and strengthens the
Liver, and all other inward parts: taken fasting in the Morning it is very
profitable for the pains in the head that are continual: it is an especial
friend and help to evil, weak, and cold Livers, and very profitable for those
that are fallen into a continual evil disposition of the whole Body called
Cachexia.

Mallows, Virtues and Use.
THe Roots and Seeds hereof boiled in Wine or Water is good for those that have
Excoriations in the Guts or the Bloody Flux, also for them that are troubled
with Ruptures, Cramps or Convulsions of the Sinews; and boiled in White Wind
for the Imposthumes of the Throat, called the King's Evil, and the Kernels that
rise behind the Ears, and Inflammations or Swellings in Women's Breasts. The
Juice of Mallows drunk in Wine, or the Decoction of them therein, does help
Women to a speedy and easy Delivery, and is special good for the
Falling Sickness: The Syrup and Conserve made of the Flowers are very effectual
for the same Diseases, and to open the Body being Costive: the dried Roots
boiled in Milk and drunk is special good for a Chine-cough: The Marshmallows
are more effectual than the ordinary.

Onions, Virtues and Use.
TO eat Onions fasting with bread and salt has been held with diverse People a
good Preservative against Infection; being roasted under the Embers and eaten
with sugar and Oil or honey much conduce to help an inveterate Cough, and
expectorate the tough Phlegm.

Orpine, Virtues and Use.
A Syrup made of the Juice with Honey and Sugar, and a spoonful or two taken at
a time is a speedy Cure for a Quinsie: The Leaf bruised, and laid to any green
wound in the hands or legs does heal them quickly, and being bound to the
throat helps the Quinsie; it helps also Ruptures and Burstings: The
Distilled Water of the Herb being drunk for certain days together is
profitable for Gnawings or Excoriations in the Stomach or Bowels, or for Ulcers
in the Lungs, Liver, or other inward parts.

Parsnip, Virtues and Use.
THe Root is very useful in a Family, being good and wholesome Nourishment, and
fatneth the Body much; the Seed hereof being drunk, cleanses the Belly from
tough Phlegmatic matter therein, eases them that are Liver-grown and VVomens
passions of the Mother. The Seed and Root of the VVild or Cow-parsnip boiled in
Oil, and the head rubbed therewith helps those that are fallen into a Frenzy,
also Lethargy or Drowsy evil and the Headache.

Parsley, Virtues and Use.
An excellent Receipt or Medicine to open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen,
and expel the Dropsy and Jaundice by Urin.

TAke of the Seeds of Parsley, Fennel, Annise, and Caraways of each an ounce;
of the Roots of Parsley, Burnet, Saxifrage, and Carawayes of each an ounce and
an half; let the Seed be bruised, and the Roots washed and cut small; let them
lie all night in steep in a Pottle of VVhite-wine, and in the Morning be boiled
in a close earthen Vessel until a third part or more be wasted, which being
strained and cleared, take 4 ounces thereof Morning and Evening first and last,
abstaining from drink after it for three hours; this is also good against the
Falling Sickness and the Stone in the Kidneys. The Distilled Water of Parsley
is good to give Children when they are troubled with Wind in the Stomach or
Belly.

Pennyroyal, Virtues and Use.
THe Herb boiled in Milk and drunk is very effectual for the Cough, and for
Ulcers or Sores in the Mouth: the Decoction thereof being drunk helps the
Jaundice and Dropsy, and all Pains of the Head and Sinews that come of a Cold
cause, and helps to clear and quicken the Eyesight: Pennyroyal and Mint
together put in Vinegar, and put to the Nostrils to be smelled unto, or a
little thereof put into the Mouth helps Faintings and Swounings; and being
drunk in Wine it eases the Headache and the Pains of the Breast and Belly,
stays the Gnawing of the Stomach, and inward Pains of the Bowels.

Pellitory of the Wall, Virtues and Use.
THe Juice clarified and boiled into a Syrup with Honey, and a spoonful of it
drunk in a Morning once a week, is a certain Cure for those that are subject to
the Dropsy: The Decoction of the Herb being drunk eases pains of the Mother,
it also eases those griefs that arise from Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen,
and Reins; the same Decoction with a little Honey added thereto is good to
gargle a sore Throat: The Juice held a while in the Mouth eases the pains in
the Teeth: The dried Herb made up into an Electua^y with Honey, or the Juice of
the Herb, or the Decoction made up with Sugar or Honey is a singular Remedy for
any old or dry Cough, the Shortness of Breath, and Wheesing in the Trhoat: A
Poultis made of the Herb with Mallows, and boiled in Wine with Wheat, Bran, and
Bean-flower, and some Oil put thereto, and applied warm to any bruised Sinew,
Tendon, or Muscle, does in a very short time restore them to their strength:
The green herb bruised and bound to any green wound for three days, you shall
need no other Medicine to heal it further.

Pepper-wort, Virtues and Use.
THe Leaves bruised and mixed with old Hog's Grease and applied to the place,
and to continue threon four hours in Men and two hours in Women, the place
being afterward bathed with Wine and Oil, and then wrapped with Wool or Skins
is very effectual for the Sciatica or any other Gout or pain in the Joints.

Purslan, Virtues and Use.
THis is a very good Sallet Herb, to cool any heat in the Liver and in hot
Agues nothing better, it also cools the Blood, Reins and Stomach: The Herb
bruised and applied to the Forehead and Temples allayeth excessive heat therein
hindering rest and sleep: The Juice is good to stay Vomitings, and taken with
Sugar or Honey helps an old and dry Cough, Shortness of Breath, and the
Phtisick, and stays immoderate Thirst: The Seed is more effectual than the
Herb to all the purposes aforesaid, and is good to cool the heat and sharpness
of Urin: The Distilled Water of the Herb is used by many (as the more pleasing)
with a little Sugar to work the same effects.

Rubarb, Virtues and Use.
THe Powder of Rubarb taken with a little Mummia and Madder Roots in some
Red-wine dissolveth clotted blood in the Body happening by any fall or bruise,
and heals Burstings: The Root steeped all night in White Wind, and a draught
drunk in a morning fasting, or a dram of the Powde^ of the dried Root being
either taken of it self (or with a scrup^ of Ginger made into Powder) in a Mess
of Warm Broth, or in a draught of White Wind, purges Choler and Phlegm
downwards very gently and safely without danger, cleanses the Stomach, Liver,
and Blood, opening Obstructions, helps those Griefs that come thereof, as the
Jaundice, Dropsy, swelling of the Spleen, Tertian and Day Agues, and the
pricking pain of the Sides, and also stays spitting of blood.

Rosemary, Virtues and Use.
THe dried Leaves shread small, and taken in a Pipe as Tobacco is taken helps
those that have any Cough or Phtisick or Consumption, by warming and drying the
thin Distillations which cause those diseases: to burn the Herb in Chambers
corrects the air in them: the Flowers and the Conserve made of them is
singular good to comfort the heart and to expel the Contagion of the
Pestilence; the Decoction or Powder of Rosemary taken in Wine helps the cold
Distillations of Rheum into the Eyes, and all other cold Diseases of the Head
and Brain, as the Giddiness, Drowsiness, Dullness of the Mind and Senses, dumb
Palsy or loss of Speech and Falling Sickness, to be both drunk, and the
Temples bathed therewith; it is a Remedy for the Windiness in the Stomach or
Bowels, Wind in the Spleen; helps those that are Liver-grown; it helps a
weak Memory, quickneth the Senses, helps dim Eyes and a stinking Breath; it
is very comfortable to the Stomach in all cold Griefs; helping both retention
of meat and digestion.

We shall here direct you to make a sovereign Oil or Balm to heal the Diseases
before mentioned.

Take what quantity you please of the Flowers, and put them in a strong Glass,
tie a fine linen cloth over the mouth, and turn the mouth down into another
strong Glass, which being set in the Sun, an Oil will distill into the lower
Glass; this preserve as precious for diverse uses, to touch the Temples and
Nostrils with two or three drops is the Dose allowed for the Diseases of the
Head and Brains, and a drop, two or three, as the cause requires, for the
inward griefs.

Rue, Virtues and Use.
An Excellent Receipt or Antidote against Poison or Infection, and to preserve
the Body in health.

TAke twenty leaves of Rue, a little Salt, two Walnuts, and two Figs, all of
them beaten together into a Mass with twenty Juniper Berries; take every
morning fasting the quantity of a Hazel Nut.

We shall add another Receipt, and it is a Remedy for the pains or griefs of
the Chest or Stomach, of the Spleen, Belly, or Sides by wind or stitches of the
Liver, obstructions of the Reins and Bladder by the stopping of Urin.

Take of Nitre, Pepper, and Cummin-seed of each equal parts, of Rue clean
picked, as in weight as all the other three: First steep the Cummin-seed in
Vinegar twenty four hours, then dry it by the fire or in an Oven, and then beat
them well together, and with Honey make it up into an Electuary: this will also
help to extenuate fat corpulent Bodies. A Decoction made of Rue, with some
dried Dill leaves and flowers, eases all pains and torments, inwardly to be
drunk, and outwardly to be applied warm to the place grieved: the same being
drunk helps the pains both of Chest and Sides, also Coughs, hardness of
breathing, the Inflammations of the Lungs, and the tormenting pains of the
Sciatica, and the Joints, being anointed or laid to the places; as also the
shaking Fits of Agues, to take a draught before the Fit come.

Roses, Virtues and Use.
OF the Red Roses are made many Compositions, all serving to sundry good uses;
the moist Conserve is both binding and Cordial; for until it be about two
years old, it is more binding than cordial, and after that more cordial than
binding: The old Conserve mixed with Aromaticum Rosarum is a very good Cordial
against Faintings, Swounings, Weakness and Trembling of the Heart,
strengthening both it and a weak Stomach, helps Digestion, stays casting,
and is a very good Preservative in the time of Infection: some of the younger.
Conserve taken with Mithridatum mixed together, is good for those that are
troubled with Distillations of Rheum from the Brain to the Nose, and defluxion
of Rheum into the Eyes; and being mixed with the Powder of Mastick, is very
good for the Running of the Reins, and for other looseness of humors in the
Body: The dry Conserve or Sugar of Roses is a very good Cordial to strengthen
the heart and spirits: The Syrup of dry red Roses strengthens a Stomach given
to casting, cools an overheated Liver, comfort the Heart, and resists
Putrefaction and Infection. Red-rose Water is better than Damask, being cooling
and cordial, refreshing and quickening weak and faint spirits, and used either
in meats or Broths. Honey of Roses is good to gargle the Mouth and Throat to
cleanse and heal them: the Cordial Powder, called Diarrhodon Abbatis and
Aromaticum Rosarum does comfort and strengthen the Heart and Stomach, procures
an Appetite, helps Digestion and stays Vomiting: Vinegar of Roses is of much
good use, and to procure rest and sleep; if some thereof and Rose Water
together be used to smell unto; but more usually to moisten a piece of Red-rose
Cake cut fit for the purpose, and heated between a double folded Cloth, with a
little beaten Nutmeg and Poppy-seed strewed on the side that must lie next to
the forhead and temples, and so bound to for all night; The Syrup of Damask
Roses is both simple and compound; the simple solutive Syrup is a familiar,
safe, gentle and easy Medicine purging Choler, taken from one ounce to three
or four: The Syrup with Agatick or the compound Syrup is more forcible in
working, for one ounce thereof by it self will open the body more than the
other, and works as much on Phlegm as Choler.

Rupture-wort, Virtues and Use.
THe Juice or Distilled Water of the green Herb taken in Wine and drunk helps
all Fluxes, Vomitings, Running of the Reins, the Strangury, Stone or Gravel in
the Reins or Bladder, also Stitches in the Side, all griping pains in the
Stomach or Belly, the Obstructions of the Liver and the Yellow-Jaundice: A
dram of the Powder of the dried Herb taken in Wine every day for certain
days together is effectual for all the Diseases aforesaid, and is found by
experience to be an excellent and speedy Cure for the Rupture.

Sage, Virtues and Use.
THe Juice of Sage drunk with Vinegar is very good against the Plague: Sage,
Rosemary, Honey-suckles and Plantane boiled in Wine or Water, with Honey and
Alum put thereto, is an excellent Gargle to wash sore Mouths and Throats,
Cankers, or the secret parts of Man or Woman.

A Medicine or Pills much commended for those that are in a Consumption.

Take of Spicknard and Ginger of each two drachms, of the Seed of Sage toasted
at the fire eight drachms, of long-Pepper twelve drachms; all these being
brought into fine Powder, put thereto so much Juice of Sage as may make them
into a Mass for P^lls, taking a dram of them every Morning fasting, and so
likewise at night, drinking a little pure water after them: It helps also the
Falling Sickness, the Lethargy, the Palsy, and all Defluxions of Rheum from
the Head, and for the diseases of the Chest or Breast, also all pains of the
Head and Joints that come of cold.

Winter and Summer Savory, Virtues and Use.
THe Conserves and Syrups of these Herbs are a very good Remedy against the
Chollick and Iliack passions, expelling Wind in the Stomach and Bowels, also it
is a present help for the rising of the Mother procured by wind: it cutteth
tough Phlegm in the Chest and Lungs, and helps to expectorate it the more
easily: The Herbs are both of them hot and dry, but the Summer Savory is more
effectual to all the purposes aforesaid; they are both of them very good
Pot Herbs.

Saffron, Virtues and Use.
THis Herb is a very good Cordial, and a notable expulsive Medicine against
Epidemical Diseases, as Pestilence, Smallpox and Measles, an excellent Remedy
for the Yellow-Jaundice; it quickens the Brain, helps difficulty of breathing,
Consumption of the Lungs, and exceedingly strengthens the Heart; but let not
above ten grains of the dried Flowers be given at one time; for an immoderate
quantity may hurt the heart instead of helping it.

Scurvy Grass, Virtues and Use.
THe Herb tunned up in new Drink, either by it self or with other things openth
Obstructions, evacuateth cold, clammy and phlegmatic humors both from the Liver
and Spleen, wasting and consuming both the swelling and hardness thereof: The
Juice of Dutch Scurvey-grass, if to be had, or else the English drunk in the
Spring every morning fasting in a Cup of Drink, or the Decoction thereof drunk,
is effectual for all the Diseases before mentioned, also to purge and cleanse
the Blood, the Liver, and the Spleen, and especially for those that have the
Scurvey.

Sorrel, Virtues and Use.
THe Roots of Sorrel in a Decoction, or in Powder, is good in all hot Diseases
to cool any inflammation and heat of blood in Agues pestilential or cholletick,
or other Sicknesses and Faintings rising from heat, and to quench Thirst, and
procure an Appetite in fainting or decayed Stomachs: A Syrup made with the
Juice of Sorrel and Fumitory is a sovereign help to kill those sharp humors
that cause the Itch; the Decoction of the Flowers made with Wine and drunck
helps the Black Jaundice, as also the inward Ulcers of the Body and Bowels:
The Seed and Herb is effectual in all the causes aforesaid: Wood Sorrel serves
to all the purposes that the other or Garden Sorrel does, and more effectually.

Smallage, Virtues and Use.
THe Juice of this Herb taken, but especially if made into a Syrup, opens
obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, rarifieth thick Phlegm and cleanses it
and the blood, and is singular good against the Yellow-Jaundice: The Juice put
to Honey of Roses and Barley-water is very good to gargle the Mouth and Throat
of those that have Sores and Ulcers in them, and heals all other foul Ulcers
and Cankers elsewhere if washed therewith: The Decoction of the Root in Wine,
or the Juice thereof taken in Wine is held to be stronger in operation than the
Herb to all the purposes aforesaid. Smallage Potage eaten in the Spring is very
effectual to purge and cleanse the Blood.

Succory, Virtues and Use.
THe Distilled Water of the Herb and Flowers is especial good for hot Stomachs
and in Agues, either Pestilential, or of Long continuance, for Swounings and
Passions of the Heart, for the Heat and Headache in Children. A Decoction made
in Wine and drunk, or a dram of the Seed in Powder drunk in Wine before the
Fit of an Ague, helps to drive it away: A handful of the Leaves or Roots
boiled in Wine or Water, and a draught thereof drunk fasting drives forth
choleric and phlegmatic humors, opens obstructions of the Liver, Gall and
Spleen, helps the Yellow Jaundice, the heat of the Reins and of the Urin,
also the Dropsy.

English Tobacco, Virtues and Use.
THe Herb bruised and applied to the place grieved with the Kings Evil helps
it effectually in nine or ten days; it also cures any fresh wound or cut, and
the Juice put into old sores both cleanses and heals them: The Juice made
into a Syrup, or the Distilled Water of the Herb drunk with some Sugar, or the
Smoke taken by a Pipe but only fasting: The same helps to expel Worms in the
Stomach and Belly, and to ease the pains in the Head, and the griping pains in
the Bowels: It is good to provoke Urin, and expel Gravel and the Stone in the
Kidneys, also to expel Windiness and other Humors which cause the Strangurie or
the Mother.

Tansie, Virtues and Use.
THe Herb bruised and often smelled unto, as also applied to the Navil, is very
profitable for such Women as are given to miscarry in Childbearing; or the
Herb boiled in ordinary Beer, and the Decoction drunk does the like: let those
Women that desire Children make use of this Herb; for if their Womb be not as
they would have it, this Decoction will make it as it should be: The Decoction
or the Juice drunk in Wine helps the Strangury and those that have weak Reins
and Kidneys; it also expels wind in the Stomach, Belly, or Bowels, and is good
to procu^e Women's Courses. A Tansie made with the Herb and Eggs helps to
digest and carry downward those bad humors that trouble the stomach.

Violets, Virtues and Use.
THe Syrup of Violets is effectual in the Plurisie and all Diseases of the
Lungs, to lenifie the sharpness of hot Rheums and the hoarsness of the Throat;
the heat also and sharpness of Urin, and all pains of the Back, Reins, and
Bladder; it is good also for the Liver and Jaundice, and to cool the heat and
quench the thirst in hot Agues; and if a little of the Juice of Lemmons be put
to it, or a few drops of the Oil of Vitriol, it is made thereby the more
powerful to cool the heat and quench the thirst: A Decoction of the Leaves or
Flowers made with Water or Wine, and drunk, or to ayply them Poultis wise to
the grieved place, eases the pains, also the pains in the Head: A dram
weight of the dried Leaves of the Flowers of Violets taken in Wine, or any
other Drink, a draught in a morning fasting does strongly purge the Body of
choleric humors, and asswageth the heat.

Valerian, Virtues and Use.
THe Decoction of the Root or Herb in Wine being drunk, and the Root being used
to smell unto, it is of especial virtue against the Plague; it also helps all
stoppings and stranglings in any part of the Body: The green Herb with the Root
taken fresh, being bruised and applied to the Head, takes away the pains and
prickings therein: The Root boiled with Liquoris, Raisins and Annise-seed is
good, and of singular use for those that are short-winded, and are troubled
with a Cough, it helps to open the passages, and to expectorate phlegm easily.

Wormwood, Virtues and Use.
TAke of the Flowers of Wormwood, Rosemary, and black Thorn of each a like
quantity, half that quantity of Saffron; boil the Flowers in Renish-wine, but
put not in the Saffron till it be almost boiled: A small quantity of this Drink
taken in a morning fasting cleanses the Body of Choler, provokes Urin, helps
Surfets, Swellings in the Belly, causes an Appetite to meat, helps the
Yellow-Jaundice, and does wonderfully preserve and keep the Body in health, it
being drunk for several days together. A draught of Woormwood-Beer, Ale, or
Wine helps a dull Brain, a weak Sight, a stinking Breath, and a bad Memory, if
a draught be drunk only in a Morning fasting; it is also good against a Surfeit,
procures an Appetite, and helps Digestion.

Wall-flowers or Winter-Gilliflowers, Virtues and Use.
THis is one of the best Flowers for Bees to gather both Honey and Wax from in
the Garden; A Conserve made of the Flowers is used for a Remedy both for the
Apoplexy and Palsy.

Woodbind, Virtues and Use.
A Conserve made of the Flowers of Woodbind helps Cramps, Convulsions, and
Palsies, and whatsoever griefs come of cold; It takes away the evil of the
Spleen, provokes Urin procures speedy delivery to Women intravail, and is
special good for the Lungs; also there is no better cure for an Asthma than
this: An Ointment made of the Flowers will clear the skin of Morphew Freckles
and Sunburning, or whatsoever discolours it.

It would spend much time, and make the work very tedious, to speak to every
particular Herb, we shall therefore refer you to several Herbals in print.

Now for all that has been said touching the Use and Virtues of all Plants as
to the cure of Man's Body being diseased, it is prudence to prevent or stop a
Disease before it comes; and to perform this we are to know what a Disease is,
and the first original cause.

A Disease then is the Corruption of an Entity in some part thereof, and a
disposition of its total Perishing, that is Death; therefore the Body, Mind,
and Soul have their Diseases: Secondly, the Diseases of the Body are various,
scarce to be numbered, and oft-times mixed. A Disease added to a Disease is
called a Symtome of a Disease. Thirdly, a Disease of the Body is either by
solution of that which is continued, or by distemper of Humors. Fourthly,
solution of that which is continued is either by a Rupture or a Wound: A
Rupture is prevented by bewaring falls and violent motion; a wound is avoided
by shunning those things which can cleave, cut, prick, rent, tear, bruise, or
hurt any way. The cure of a wound is desperate if any vital Member be hurt, as
the Heart, the Brain, the Liver, the Entrals, etc. for then the vital actions
are hindered, and soon after cease: Secondly, if any Member be cut off, it
cannot be set on again, because the spirit has not wherewithal to pass into
the part that is severed. Fifthly, the Distempers of the Humors, and the
Diseases that come from thence always proceed from one of these six causes,
either from Crudity, Inflation, Distillation, Putrefaction, Obstruction, or
Inflammation: First, Crudity in the Body is Nutriment not sufficiently
concocted, namely either Chyle or Blood, which comes first from the quality of
Meat and Drink when they are taken too raw phlegmatic and unwholesome, which the
Concoctive faculty cannot well subdue: Secondly, from the quantity, when more
Meat and Drink is put in than it is able to alter and assimilate; for hence
undigested and not assimilated humors burden the body like strangers, and not
pertaining thereunto: Thirdly, for want of Exercise, when the natural heat is
not stirred up, nor strengthened to perform its Office lustily in the
concoction of Meats; from such like Crudities diverse inconveniences follow; for
first, if the Crudity be in the stomach it causes lothing of food; for so long
as the first food is not digested, there can be no appetite to any other.
Secondly, if there be a viscous Crudity adhering in the Ventricle, or in the
Guts, being warmed, it takes spirit and is turned into worms, which gnaw^ng the
Bowels, stir up the evil vapors by their motion; whence also come Fantasies
very hurtfu^l to the Head. Lastly, Crudity under the skin in the blood or flesh
begets Paleness, and when it is collected and putrified, Scabs, Ulcers, etc.
Crudity is prevented by a temperate Diet, as to Food, Sleep, and daily
Exercise, and cured first by violent expurgation; secondly by strong Exercise;
Thirdly by the use of hot Meats and Drinks; Fourthly by comforting the Stomach
with such things as heat both within and without, Seventhly Inflation is much
and gross Vapors exhaling from the Crudities that are gathered together, and
stretching the Members; and that either without pain, as when it causes yexing
or belching in the Ventricle, panting in the Heart, giddiness in the Head; when
being prohibited to go any further, it is carried in a round laziness and
stretching in the whole Body, or else with pain, as when it causes aches in
the Bowels, straightning the spirits that lie between the Fibers, and sharp or
else blunt prickings in the Muscles according as it is more gross or subtle: It
is cured by strong Exercise, that the Vapor being attenuated may go out at the
Pores opened. Secondly by expurgation of the humors by which they are
generated. Eigthly Distillation is the condensation of crude vapors into the
Rheum, which is the cause of many Evils; for crude vapors getting up to the
head, when as by reason of the abundance and grossness of them they cannot be
expurgated by the ordinary passage, they become Rheum flowing several ways,
and causing diverse diseases; for first, if they run abundantly, and run at the
Nose they cause the Murte or Pose. Secondly, if the Distillation fall into the
Jaws it causes the Cattarrhe. Thirdly, if into the Kernels of the Jaws the
Quinsie. Fourthly, if into the Lungs difficulty of Breathing and the Asthma.
Fifthly, if the Distillation be salt and sharp, ulcerating the Lungs, it
causes the Cough. Sixthly, which if it be done often, and the Lungs be filled
with Apostemes it causes the Consumption; for when the ulcerous Lungs cannot
with dexterity enough perform their Office of cooling the Heart, the Vital is
generated more hot than it should be, which does not cherish but feed upon the
flesh and blood, and at length burns out the very Work house it self of the
Blood, which is the Liver, whence for want of Blood, which is as it were the
Food, follows the consumption of the whole body. Seventhly, if the Distillation
flow in abundance and gross down the Marrow of the Back, it causes the
Palsy, by hindering the Animal Spirit that it cannot be distributed by the
Nerves springing from the Backbone. Eighthly, if it fill the Nerves of the
Muscles only it becomes the Spasma, or Convulsion. Ninthly, if it flow subtle,
and penetrating the Nerves, it is at length gathered together in the
extremities of the Members, and there raises Pains, which in the Feet are
called the Gout, in the Hands Chiragra or the hand-Gout, in any of the Joints
of the Bones Arthritica the running Gout, in the Hip it is called Ischias or
the Hip-gout, or the Sciatica. Tenthly, if those kind of Runnings stay in the
Head they procure diverse diseases, as when they are subtle the Headache, too
raw and and phlegmatic the Lethargy, salt and choleric the Frenzy, gross
and mixed with a melancholy humor the Epilepsie or Falling Sickness: When as
the spirits diffused through the whole Body, making have to relieve the spirits
besieged in the Brain, make most vehement stirs, and fight till they either
overcome and repel the Disease, or else faint and are extinguished: But if the
gross phlegmatic humors have occupied all the vessels of the Brain at once, it
becomes the Apoplexy, that is a privation of all sense and motion, whence also
the vital fire in the heart is soon after extinguished.

All thse Diseases are both prevented, and also if they go not too far, cured:
first by Exercise; secondly by Rectification of the Brain by good smells;
thirdly by a thin hot and sulphury Air; fourthly, by thin light Meat and Drink:
And if these will not prevail you have liberty to go to the Physicians.

Ninthly, Obstruction is a stopping of the Bowels by thickened phlegm, whence it
comes to pass that they cannot execute their office; for example, when the
Entrals are stopped that they cannot void, it is the Volvuli or wringing of the
Guts, when the Liver is stopped the Dropsy; for the Chylus being not turned into
blood, flows through the Veins and Members, and is not turned into Members,
when the bladder of the Gall is stopped, the Yellow-Jaundice, when the Spleen,
the Black-Jaundice; for in the first the Choler, in the other the Melancholy,
when it cannot be voided diffuseth it self through the Blood; but when the Urin
Pipes, or the Veins, or the Bladder are stopped, that is by reason of the
breeding of Tartar, which they call the Stone, which stopping the passages by
its sharpness pains the Veins and Nerves.

The Cure is first by Purgations, secondly by Medicines, attennating or
breaking, cutting and driving out the gross humors before they are gendred or
knit.

Tenthly, Putrefaction is the corruption of some humors in the Body, as either
of Flem or of Choler, or of Melancholy, which putrefying in or out of their
Vessels produce Fevers or Ulcers.

The Cure is first Expurgation of the place affected, secondly a good Diet and
Daily Exercise, thirdly Motion.

Eleventhly, Inflammation is a burning of the Vital Spirit or of the Blood,
caused by the too much motion either of the Body by wearying it, or of the Mind
by Musing and Anger; or else by Putrefaction, or else by Obstruction; for it is
known out of Physics, that Motion does heat even unto firing, and that by
Obstruction does by Antiperistasis exasperate the heat included even in those
things that are watery and putrid, so that at length it breaks out violently.
When the blood is kindled within it becomes a Fever, when under the skin St.
Anthonies ^ire.

The General Cure is the Opening a Vein and Cooling; If you like not this way
the Physicians can better direct.

Thus have I cast into the great Treasury my Widows Mite, and if it shall be
instrumental for the encouraging the Industry of others, I shall think I have
well employed both my time and my labor; and if any shall be pleased to put
these Proposals of mine into practice, either as to a less or greater quantity
of ground, I doubt not but he will find I have been too sparing a Discoverer
both of the Pleasure and Profit, which are to be reaped thereby.

Having hitherto dicoursed of the Planting Timber Trees to make provision for
the building of Ships (the main strength and support of these Nations, as well
as the chief Instruments of Trade all over the World) I have to the five
foregoing Books added the following Treatise, wherein not altogether from the
purpose, I have set down the great Improvement which has been made by Shipping
to a Nation, the vast benefit of Trade, particularly of the Fishing Trade, in
order to which you have an Account of a Voyage to Orkney and Shotland, with the
Manner and Way of the Hollanders Fishing and Trading in those and the adjacent
Islands. This Discourse was printed by it self in the year 1662, and having now
an opportunity to reprint it, I have rather chosen to make it a part of this,
than let it go abroad in a second Edition alone, as it did in the first: It Is
the same word for word now as it was then; and this I have done purposely that
I might, if possible, satisfy all, and yet not be tedious.

ENGLAND'S IMPROVEMENT REVIVED.
THE SIXTH BOOK.
The Argument.
You have a Description of the Islands of Orkney and Shotland, with the manner
and way of the Hollanders Fishing and Trading in those Seas and Islands: Also a
Diurnal or short account of Coasting from London to those Islands, with a
discovery of several Rocks and Harbors on that Coast: Here is likewise set
down, that the Original of the Hollanders Trade, which is now much increased
and spread through a great part of the World, was and is from the Fish they
every year take on the Coast of England and Scotland. And in this Book lastly
is set down the great benefit that does arise from Trade, with a short
discourse, that the Traffic of Europe has been engrossed into the hands, and
carried on all along by the Venetians, Genoese, Portugals, Easterlings,
Hollanders and English; and that the falure and decay of the one was the
original rise to another. Also a Composition with the Hollanders made with King
Charles the First, to pay unto his Majesty one hundred thousand pounds yearly,
and a hundred thousand pounds ready down. With a particular Account of the
Herring, Ling, Cod, and other fish taken in the British Seas by the
Hollanlanders and other Nations every year worth ten Millions of pounds:

IN the year 1633, being then an Apprentice to Mr. Matthew Cradock of London
Merchant, one of the Society for the Fishing Trade of Great Britain, I was sent
to Sea by the Right Honorable the Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, and his
Associates, for the discovery of the Island of Shotland, the manner and way of
Trading, the Profits and Customs thereof, the settling a Staple, building of
Storehouses, the viewing the ground on shore for landing and drying of Nets,
making and drying of Fish, and the building of Block-houses for the security of
Trade; The manner of the Hollanders fishing for Herring with Busses, and other
Vessels for Ling and Cod, according to the Journal kept thereof, is as
follows.

We set sail from Gravesend the 27th of April 1633, and having Letters from the
Earl of Pembroke to Mr. William Dicks of Edinbourg in Scotland, we directed our
course toward Scotland; but by reason of soul weather we^e forced into
Harwich, and set sail from thence the 30 th Ditto; the wind not favoring us we
came to an Anchor in Yarmouth Road* and there going on shore were informed,
that the Hollanders Busses did drive at Sea for Herrings on that Coast, and
that from the Holms before Yarmouth to Bookness in Scotland, North North-East
is 96 Leagues, and from Bookness to the South end of Shotland North and by East
about 53 Leagues. The fifth of May we set sail from Yarmouth, and by stress of
wind were forced into Scarbrouh, and there going on shore were informed of the
Hollanders Busses fishing on that Coast, and that from Searbrough Northwards
toward Catness, in 45 Fathom or thereabouts, in that fair way is usually the
first Summer Herrings caught. From Scarbrough we set sail and came to an Anchor
before Leith in Scotland the 13 th Ditto, where going on shore, and from thence
to Edinburg, delivered my Letters to Mr. William Dicks, who was at that time
Governor of the Island of Shotland, and did receive the Revenue of those
Islands.

Having received my Instructions and Letters from Mr. William Dicks directed to
Mr. James Scot, who lived at that time in the North parts of the Islands of
Shotland, and was Agent or Deputy to the said William Dicks.

We set sail from Leith, and came to an Anchor at Casten in the Islands of
Orkney, the 22 Ditto: And because these Islands are very considerable as to the
Fishing Trade, I cannot pass them by without a brief description thereof, which
is as follows.

The Islands of Orkney are 31, and lie from the North and North-East Point of
Scotland; the first and Southermost Island is called Elhey, but the greatest
and chiefest Island of Orkney is called Maland, which lies Southermost from
the Point of Catness; on the North side of this great Island are the Havens,
where the Ships come to that Trade in those parts, and to the Island called
Lewis, and the Islands therebouts.

The Lewis Islands are the Islands on the West of Scotland, and those Seas,
being also very considerable as to the Fishing-Trade, I make bold to give
account thereof as follows.

These Islands lying Westward from Scotland, and to the Northward of Ireland
are in number 34.

There are four great Islands that lie near the main Land, but the greatest and
chiefest Island is called Lewis, which lies Northward from the foresaid
Islands; but the Northermost of all the Islands which lies toward the
Orkanes, about sixteen Leagues from Lewis, is called Rona; betwixt Rona and
Orkney lie some small Islands. The Island Lewis lies from Shotland South-West
or more Westerly about 58 Leagues; and from the South end of Lewis to the
North-West of Ireland is 27 Leagues: In and between these Islands are many very
good Sounds and Havens for Ships. Lewis with the Islands belonging to it ly
South and By-West, and South South-West about 29 Leagues.

I shall farther add to my boldness, and give you an account of the Islands of
Fero.

These Islands lie Northward from the Lewis Islands about 54 Leagues, and from
Shotland Westerly about 58 Leagues, and are in number 22. The Sounds and Havens
are many.

The Southermost great Island is called Sugdro: on the North side of this
Island are several good Sounds and Havens; but the best and chiefest of all the
Havens, and where all the Trade and Merchandise is, is called Tor-Haven, which
lies on the great Island Strone. But these Islands being out of my Road, I
shall return to my former Discourse on the Coast of Orkney and Shotland.

The South part of Shotland lies about 20 Leagues Northward from the Island
called Maland; but between the Islands of Orkney and Shotland lie two Islands,
the one called Fair-hill, and the other called Fulo; these two Islands lie
about 10 Leagues one from the other, Fulo lies North-North-East from Fair-hill.

The Island Fair-hill lies from the North-East point of Orkney about 9
Leagues, and the Southermost point of Shotland lies from Fair-hill North and
By-East about 8 Leagues, and from Fulo East and By-South about four Leagues.

Being informed of the manner of the Hollanders fishing for Herring, Ling, and
Cod, with Busses and Dogger-boats, in those Seas, and the Inhabitants of the
Islands manner and way of Fishing, we set sail from Casten, and came to an
Anchor by Sunbroug-head, being the South part of Shotland, the third of June,
and going ashore, spoke with the Good Man of Quandale, one of the chief of
those parts; the said Gentleman with other of the Inhabitants did inform me of
their manner of Trading with the Hamburgers, and others; and of the Hollanders
fishing for Herring on that Coast, also of their Dogger-boats that fish only
for Ling and Cod.

After I had received information from the Inhabitants of the several Islands,
and the manner of Fishing and Trading there, we set sail from thence and came
to an Anchor in Bracey-Sound, otherwise called Broad-Sound, a very gallant
Harbor, where many Ships may lie Land-lockt for all Winds.

Having informed my self by the Inhabitants of those parts of the manner of
their Trading and Fishing, and the Hollanders fishing for Herrings driving on
that Coast, we set sail from thence and came to an Anchor in Evey-Sound, the
Northermost Sound in Shotland on the 12 Ditto, and there going on shore, I
continued about 11 or 12 Months, and in that time traveling the greatest part
of the Island by Sea and Land, did thereby better inform my self concerning the
manner of Trading and Fishing by the Inhabitants, and the Hollanders at Sea,

The Land of Shotland lies North and By-East and South or South and West about
60 Miles. But there are many Islands belonging to Shotland, which I shall have
occasion to mention hereafter. That which is most considerable are the Sounds
and Harbors. On the West Side of the Southward Point of Shotland, there is a
good Harbor and Sound, called St. Magnus, and on the East Side near
Sunbrough-head is a fair Sand-Bay, where there is good Anchoring in ten or
twelve Fathom; to the Northward of this last Sound there is another Sound
called Hambrough-Haven, which is a lade-place for the Hamburgers and Scots.
About 9 or 10 Leagues from the Southward point of Shotland there is a Chanel
that runs through the Land, the South-part of the Land divided by the
Channel is called Swanberg, the other part so divided, or the North-part, is
called Laxford; within this Chanel aforesaid are several Sounds or Harbors,
but the best and chiefest Sound in Shotland is Brace-sound, or Broad-sound, as
before mentioned; out of this Sound the aforesaid Channel does run Northward.

On the North-part of Swanberg lies the high hill of Hanglix, from the said
Hanglix about 9 Leagues Northwards, lie some out-Rocks, called the Stars; to
the Northward of the Stars there is a very good Harbor, called Bloom-Sound; to
the Northward of this last Sound is another good Haven, called Hu^-Sound, being
the Northernmost, or North-East-Sound or Haven belonging to the Island, called
Ounst.

There are other Havens, or Sounds, which lie through the Land, between and
about that part of Shotland called Laxford, and the Island called Jello. There
are also other Islands and Sounds, which for brevity sake I forbear to mention.

The Merchants which Trade with the Inhabitants of Shotland are Hamburgers,
Breamers, Luberghers, Scots and English.

The chief Inhabitants of the Islands are Scots, the meaner or inferior sort
are a mixed People of Da^es and Scots.

The Islands of Shotland, as I have been informed, were given to King James of
blessed Memory, by the King of Denmark, with Queen Ann, being part of her Dowry.

The Commodities of Shotland which the Inhabitants do for the most part Trade
withal is Ling and Cod, which they take with Hooks and Lines in small Boats,
called Yalls, about the bigness of Gravesend Oats; the Ling they sell for 3 d.
a piece, being a Ling of the largest size, and is called a Gild Ling; if
smaller, then we have two for one, or three for two, and so proportionable. The
Cod is sold for 2 d. the Gild Cod, and is measured as the Ling. I bought of
Fishermen, the Inhabitants of the Island called Ounst, 11655 Gild Ling, and
834 Gild Cod, at 3 d. the Gild Ling, and 2 d. the Gild Cod; which Ling and Cod
were taken by the said Fishermen at several times in their small Boats, and
brought to my Booth, or place of abode every morning as they were caught; the
said Ling and Cod being very good and Merchantable, were salted aboard the Ship
that landed me, and within seven weeks after my landing, I sent her for London
with the said Fish to the Right Honorable the Earl of Pembrook, as by my Books
of Account, delivered into his hands, and left with him, may appear.

There is also other small Fish which the Inhabitants do catch with Angles
sitting on the Rocks, and in their small Boats with Hooks and Lines in the
Sounds, and between the Islands; and these small fish are very considerable,
for although they cannot spend them by reason of the multitude they take, and
have not industry to make use of them for ^ransportation, yet the Livers they
preserve, and with the Livers of the Ling and Cod, make Train-oyle; but if it
were improved, as taking them with Nets, the Train-oyl, I say, would amount to
a cosiderable sum. And if this increase of Trade were carried through the whole
Islands, it would be a great encouragement to all Merchants Trading into those
parts.

There were several other Merchants in the Island where I did inhabit, that
bought Ling and Cod of the Fishermen, so that the quantity which I sent for
England was not above the fifth part taken in that Island: with which the whole
quantity of fish that was bought by other Merchants throughout the whole
Islands of Shotland being added together, would amount to a very considerable
Sum or Quantity, to the lading of many Vessels, which might be much more
improved, and increase Trading thereby, furnishing the Inhabitants with Money
and Commodities.

In the Islands of Shotland there were Beeves and Sheep sold at a very
reasonable rate; I bought for my own use, and the Victualing the Ship sent to
London, three Oxen for 3 l. and at another time four Oxen for 5 l. which were
fat, and about the bigness of the small sort of Cattle we have in England:
There were also fat Sheep sold for 2 s. and 2 s. 6 d. per sheep; there were
also other Creatures for food, as Conies and Fowl. But desiring not to multiply
words, I forbear to mention them.

The Fuel or Firing in Shotland is Peat and Turf.

There may be Salt-pans set up there, and good Salt made to serve all the
Fishing Fleet. There are very good Shores for landing and drying of Nets, and
making and drying Fish.

There is no Night in the North of Shotland part of two Months in the year, as
June and July. In an Island North of Ounst, being not inhabited, but stockt
with wild Cows and Conies, I did kill with my Birding piece ten couple of
Conies in one night, shooting from a little before Sunset to Sunrising, and
it was as light as a Cloudy Winter-day.

I do not remember any Frost or Snow in Shotland; if any, it was not of long
continuance; the coldest weather is by reason of great Winds in the
Winter-quarter, the wind blowing so violent, that no ship dare look on the
North-Coast; so that the people of those Islands have little commerce with
other Nations in that Quarter. I can speak by experience, being blown down flat
to the ground by the violence of the wind, was forced to creep on my hands and
knees to the next wall, and going by the wall got into an house, or else must
have stayed by the wall till the violence of the Wind were over. Sometimes it
lasts half a day, and sometimes more.

There are several Towns in Shotland, so called, being about eight or ten
houses together, where they plow and sow corn, as Oats, which is their
chiefest Bread; and if my memory do not much deceive me, there was good Barley
growing in my time. But the Land might be much improved if the inhabitatants
were industrious; they are like unto the idle Irish, not improving any thing
either by Sea or Land, spending that in the Winter which they get in Summer;
although their Winter might be very profitable unto them, if they were
laborious and industrious, as the Hollanders are.

The Goods and Commodities that are vendible in Shotland are Hooks and Lines
for the taking of Ling and Cod, Nets for the taking of Herring, Strong-Beer,
Biscuit, Wheaten Meal, Salt, Pease, Fruits of all sorts, Strong-Water,
Monmouth-Caps, and many other particulars, which is not needful at this time to
mention.

The Inhabitants of the Island of Ounst usually have a Bark that they Trade
with to Norway, where they may buy Timber for Houses ready framed, also
Deal-Boards, Tar, Ships, Barks, and Boats of all sorts, and other necessaries
for their use.

With their small Fishing-Boats, called Yalls, they will Row into the Main
about two or three Leagues, more or less, where the Banks are that they lay
their Hook and Lines for Ling and Cod; in one of these Boats Rowing with two
men, and sometimes four according to the largeness of the Boat, they do usually
bring to Shore every morning that they go to Sea, about fifty or sixty Ling and
Cod.

There are many Barrels of Herrings taken by the Inhabitants, with their small
Boats, in the Sounds, and at Sea not far from Land, which are the gleanings of
the Hollanders Busses; for the Busses driving at Sea, break the Skull or Shole
of Herrings, and then the Herrings flee near the Shore, and through the Sounds,
where these small Boats, with those Nets they have, take them. But, if they had
better Tackling and Boats, they might take five hundred Barrels for one, which
would much enrich the Islands, and by increasing of Trade would augment His
Majesty's Revenue.

I was an eyewitness of the Hollanders Busses Fishing for Herring on the coast
of Shotland, not far from Ounst, one of the Northermost Islands; demanding the
number of them, was informed by several persons of quality, that the Fleet
consisted of 1500 Sail, and that there were about 20 Wafters, as they called
them, which were Ships carrying about 30 Guns a piece, being the Convoys of the
Fleet of Busses; which said Busses were of the burden of about 80 Tun.

There were also a small Fleet of Dogger-boats, which were of the burden of 60
Tun and upward, which did fish only with Hooks and Lines for Ling and Cod. Many
of these Boats and Busses came into several Havens or Sounds, to fit and trim
themselves. One thing was observable, that within 8 or ten days after the
Dogger-Boats went to Sea, they came into the Sound again so full laden as they
could swim. The certain number of Dogger-Boats I could not learn, but the
general report was about 400.

The Composition of the Hollanders, as I was informed after my coming into
England, was an Annual Rent of 100000 l. and 100000 l. in hand; and never
having been paid or brought into the Exchequer, as I could hear of, there is in
Arrearages above 2500000 l. an acceptable Sum, and which would come very
happily for the present occasions of His Majesty.

As for the Charges in Building, Rigging, and setting forth the Busses to Sea,
with Nets and other Materials for the Fishing, as also Dogger-Boats for Ling
and Cod, I refer to several Books in Print, as The Royal Herring-Buss Fishing;
and, A Narative of the Royal Fishing, both set forth by Mr. Simon Smith, who is
well experienced in those Affairs.

If God would please to put it into the heart of our Gracious King and his
Subjects to set out such a Fleet of Busses, as before mentioned, for the
Fishing-Trade, being in our own Seas, and on our own ground; and that the
Hollanders and all Strangers may be discharged from Fishing in those Seas; and
the Hamburgers, Breamers, and Lubeckers, and all Strangers, from Trading in the
Islands of Orkney and Shotland, and that only the Subjects of the three
Kingdoms may have the Trading and Fishing, it would make our King one of the
greatest Monarchs in the World, for Riches and Glory, and the Three Kingdoms
the happiest people in Christendom, and there would not be one wanting Bread;
but the hearts of the Subjects would be listed up with Praises to God and our
King.

For it is well known, that Trading is the life of all the habitable World, and
therefore much more of these Three Kingdoms, which are but Islands, and so
populous, that we are ready to devour one the other; and if Trading be not
increased and maintained amongst us, we shall in a short time be the most
despicable People in the World, and the derision of all Nations.

Having in thirty years experience in Traveling England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and other parts, observed, That without Trading no Nation can subfist,
which I humbly conceive I shall be able to make good against all opposers
thereof, which are enemies to your Sacred Majesty, and these three Kingdoms:
And that if there be not an increase of Trade powerfully carried on, we are an
undone People, as I shall make more fully appear by my ensuing Discourse.

Now it is well known to all, who are not quite ignorant of the course of Trade
and Merchandise, that the Traffic of Europe has been engrossed into the
hands, and carried on all along by the Venetians, Genoese, Portugalls,
Easterlings, Hollanders, and English; all which I shall briefly run through,
and show how the failure and decay of One, was the original rise to Another,
till the whole at present is divided between the Hollanders and us.

I shall begin with Venice, That City therefore and Genoa at first, two pretty
equal Commonwealths, by reason of that mutual advantage they had one of
another, and community of Trade to the same places, were counter-ballances one
to another; in one thing the Venetians than the Genoese, in another the Genoese
than the Venetians, being better supplied; for if the Venetians had better
Shipping the Genoese had richer Merchants, and a greater B^nk, and so they
continued: Till Venice disdaining to be confined in so narrow limits, as was
the compass of its City, increased its Dominion, and adding to its Power
greater Industry, utterly undid the Geno^se, undersold them in their best
Commodities, and so wore them out; which they could well do, being better in
this continuance of time provided, as to Men, Money, and all manner of
Provisions.

Hence they made themselves Lords of all the Trade of the Levant, comprehending
in it Turkey part of Africa, and Italy: and by multitude of Ships of their own,
transported the Commodities of those Countries into France, England, and the
Netherlands. They made their way also into the Indies, and all over Persia by
their Caravans, and by Egypt and Aleppo returned thence all kind of Silks and
Spices, and sold them at their own Rates, where ever they found the best vent,
and so they continued to do at excessive Rates, though not without excescessive
Gains, by reason of the difficulty of conveyance; till the Portugals discovered
the passage to the Indies by the Cape of good Hope, receiving in Exchange for
the Commodities so Bartered, the Staple Commodities of all the Countries they
traded to; Here in England they had for them Cloth, Tin, Lead, etc. and with
which we our selves, by our own Shipping, cheaper, and with greater gain might
have supplied Italy, Turkey, and the greatest part of Africa.

Hence also that State, at first confined to a few scattered Islands, on which
by degrees they built their City, whither before they only fled for security,
came to increase and grow to that height in which now it is, nay greater in
all probability; for by the decaying of Trade, their Power and Dominion has
sensibly decayed. By the greatness of their Trade they enlarged their
Jurisdiction, both upon the Levant Seas, and very high into the Main-Land, in
Lombardy, Graecia, on the Dukedom of Milan; conquered and purchased many
considerable Islands in the Mediterranean, as Candy, Zant, Cyprus, and other
places which lay convenient, both for strength and security of the trade and
Navigation of that Republic.

It would be tedious for me to recount how many Colonies they have dispersed
over the World, and that fear and jealousy other Kings and Empero^s have had
of its growing strength; how that City was thought to have a design upon the
Sovereignty of Italy, and the many combinations to prevent. And all this to
have compassed from so small a ^eginning, only by the extent of its trade, as
its neighbor Rome enjoyed it by strength of Arms.

After the Venetians and Genoese, the Easterlings or Hance-Towns were Master of
the trade and Commodities transported from Moscovy, Poland, Germany, Sweden,
Prussia, Denmark, etc. and with them, by their abundance of Shipping, served
England, France, Spain, and the Low-Countrie^. And that in regard of that
continual need we had of the Commodities of those parts or People, as Hemp, all
manner of Cordage, Sope-Ashes, Flax, Pitch, Tar, Masts, Corn, etc. They
received in return from us our Staple-Commodities, which by their own ships, at
their own Rates, they conveyed all over Europe, when we for want of shiping
could not: but did see their excessive gains, and yet were forced to be
content. Even here in England they had very great privileges, mighty
Indulgencies; and out of that necessity we thought we had of them, finding by
them the speediest vent for our Commodities, we embraced them into our bosom,
so that by degrees they began to be very potent upon the Northern Seas, and
upon every occ^sion were ready to turn our Enemies, the most dange^ous,
because, as it were, within our own bowels: Hence taking advantage, in their
shipping, the Saxons, Danes and Normans invaded England; and the Hance-Towns
were grown formidable both to Italy and France. But as their Trading decayed,
so did also their Strength; and their Shipping being wasted, they have
undergone the same necessity that others, once famous Cities of Mart, have
done, and have utterly lost all their Power and Strength at Sea.

The Portugals discovering the way to the Indies by the Cape of good Hope,
quickly became Engrossers of the whole Trade thither, and by the same stratagem
and device undermined at once the Venetian and all the Hance-Towns, whereupon
increasing with the strength of Spain, they made themselves the terror of all
round about them, and a very rich Nation and People within it self.

This was the first rise of the Portugals, who lying so commodiously for
Navigation, and a no less industrious than a very cautelous people in the
management of their affairs, proceeded so far, that Queen Elizabeth of blessed
memory jealous of them, fearing lest Spain should join with them, and of their
future greatness, continually increasing by reason of its Traffic into the
East and West Indies, for the security of her Self, and safety of all her good
Subjects, endeavored to make her self equal in strength, and counterpoise
them, if possible, by the enlargement of the Trade of Great Britain; and this
she prosecuted with so much vigor, and so successfully, that in a little space
England had as great a Trade and Power by Sea, as either the King of Spain, or
any Principality of Europe.

But before her time, in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, our own Merchants
discovered the Trade into Muscovy by the way of St. Nicholas, ever since which
time, in our own Shipping we have thence transported home all the Commodies of
that large and vast Country, formerly brought in by the Hance-Towns; their
Agents and Merchants.

And whereas a great part of those same Commodities, as Cavear, Tallow, Hides;
etc. are not vendible in England, and being bought must be again sold or
exchanged, Need and Use has found a better Vent for them in Italy, and other
parts of the Levant, whereupon first began our Trade there; a Trade, which
though it at first appeared very small and inconsiderable, increased in a few
years to that height of Improvement, that within 90 or 100 years, we have worn
out the Venetians out of all that mighty Trade they carried from those parts,
or in Turkey, and all over Christendom.

So that by this you easily see how Trade has flourished and decayed in Genoa,
Venice, the Hance-Towns, and Portugal, the whole being now fallen Betwixt Us
and the Hollander, either striving who shall use means most effectual for
advancing the general Trade of its Country; and though the Hollander has by
Art and Industry better improved his Interest, yet that wherein his Interest
most lies may obviously appear, and wherein, in that very particular, we may,
if we please, go before them, I shall thus endeavor to demonstrate.

The Hollanders have not at present, neither ever had any other means to rise
to this greatness of Wealth and Trade, but by betaking themselves to Fishing,
being a People of constant Labor, and unwearied Industry; a multitude in a
Spot of Land, which does not afford them any Commodities sufficient to be the
ground even of a mean Trade.

They first began, and all along have drove this Trade of Fishing, being their
Original of all Trade upon our Coast, and the Coast of Scotland, on which they
employ thousands of poor people besides others of a better Rank, making some
Mariners and Fishermen, others they keep at work about the making and mending
of Nets; others they employ as Merchants about the Transportation or Exchanging
of their Fish for other Commodities. So that in all Holland you shall scarce
see one Beggar, there being so many thousand things, or particular Trades or
Employments belonging to the Fishing Trade, out of which they may find a
livelihood.

They employ also hereby great store of Ships, and in the industrious
management hereof, make us in England at what rate they please buy our own Fish.

The great quantity of Herrings every year they take, they transport to
Dantzick, Melvin, Quinbrough, Leghorn, and other parts; and with the Returns
they make of them, buy Corn, Hem, ^lax, Pitch, Ta^, Clap-boards, and other
Commodities; and in Holland store them up in a Magazin, whence they again
disperse them into Italy, France, Spain, yea England, and all over Europe.

Fish, and the Fishing-Trade being the only Stock upon which they continually
live and spend, putting off most there where they find the best Rates; and this
has increased their Shipping and Wealth, that now they have lengthned their
Power all over the World, and in most Countries have a considerable Stock. And
this growing and increasing of theirs has been within the space of 70 or 80
years, and yet they are not come to their height; for every day they glory in
some new addition to their Sway. And if care be not taken of this their growth,
they will within few years not only be Master of our Seas but of our Trades too.

His Majesty has been graciously pleased ta take this into his Princely
consideration, and if it be seconded with the prudent management of those
Commissioners he hoth already employed in the carrying it on, I dare be bold to
say the Hollanders are at their Meridian.

For first of all, England is not inferior to the Netherlands, nay, we are
before them in all the advantages both of Art and Nature.

The situation of our Country is such, that for the convenience of all kind of
Marts the World has not the like, and being seated between the North and
South, so that it is fixed, as it we^e, by Art and Nature, the fittest Staple
for both Northern and Southern Commodities.

Secondly, our Ports and Harbors are fairer and safer, having good Anchoring,
and more in number throughout the three Kingdoms, than any Country in
Christendom can boast of.

And then thirdly, which exceeds, we have valuable Commodities, as to the
quantity and quality of them, such as are the enriching of all those that trade
with them.

So that if we are not our own Enemies, and will be but a little industrious,
one quarter of that will serve and be enough in England, which is but necessary
and scarce sufficient in Holland; adding thereto providence for the employing
our own Shipping, and not any Foreigners, we shall within few years have the
greatest power at Sea, and make our selves Master of all Trades; and the
Hollanders a Servant to that Wealth and Power, of which at present he is the
sole M^ster.

But for the quicker advancement of so great and noble a Work, there is
necessary to be a Protection and Favor of his Majesty to all manner of Trades,
so that they be not carried on by Strangers, and acted by them, as at present
it is in and about the City of London, there being thousands of them up and
down the Suburbs, French and Dutch, and others, who live as it were upon the
ruins of the poor freeborn Citizens, vending any unmerchandable Ware, and at
lower Rates than any other honest Tradesman can. And this I humbly conceive is
the reason why Trading has been so bad and dead in this great City for these
late years.

But the prudence of his Majesty is such, and under his prosperous Reign all
things so readily begin to run in their old Channel, that we doubt not but in a
little time Trading and Merchandise will do so too, and not be any longer the
burden of the Land for the lack of it, but of the Sea in bringing it hither.

After men comes money, and without this sure Foundation, we shall never be
able to make any Superstructure to stand.

There must be a Stock of Shipping, Money and Commodities; for Commodies in
Traffic will bring in more Money, and Money commands all Commodities, and to
attempt this without both, or at le^st one of these two, is like a Soldier
going to Battle without his Offensive and Defensive Weapons; with the one we
offend all our Enemies, the Engrossers of our Trade, and with the other we
defend our selves against their most powerful assaults.

In ancient times, Merchants and Tradesmen were very careful to provide and
lay up a Stock of Money for the building of Ships, and buying of Commodities to
Trade with. But in these latter years, as within 40 or 50 years, they have
disbursed much money in purchasing Land, and building stately Houses, minding
pleasure more than profit, and have neglected Trade, to the undoing of many of
them, and that great cause of the decaying of Trade.

Therefore to preserve and uphold Trade, I humbly offer unto his Majesty's
consideration, and His Honorable Council, that all Merchants and Tradesmen
within the Three Kingdoms may be restrained from purchasing Land above the
yearly value in rent of pounds.

This being effected, and the Fishing-Trade carried on, will within few years
make the greatest Bank of Money, and the greatest Trade in the Three Kingdoms,
to be equal, if not greater, than any Trade or Bank of Money in the World.

For hereby great and vast Sums of Money, which are now consumed in continual
Purchases, will be expended only in and about Trade and Traffic in general;
and the best security for this Money will be a settled Bank, which all will of
necessity use.

Having not read any of those Books which are in Print concerning the
Fishing-^rade, but referring to several Books that I heard of, and not knowing
the number of Busses allotted or appointed to be bought or built, neither how
they shall be dissposed of as to their Ports or Harbors; therefore I make bold
to offer my judgment.

That a certain number of Busses be bought or built, as also Dogger-boats; the
number of Busses to consist of 1000 or 1500, or thereabouts; for that some
years 15000 may as soon catch their Lading as 500, and therefore more
considerable as to the charges of the three Kingdoms; for a small number of
Busses will not do the work.

The Dogger-boats which Fish only for Ling and Cod, would consist of 400, or
thereabouts.

These Busses and Dogger-boats being fitted for Sea to proceed in their
Fishing, that then they be sent or appointed to several Ports or Harbors of
the Three Kingdoms, that lie most convenient for the Fishing.

And that the Counties or Shires that these Ports do belong to, be enjoined to
keep the same number of Busses and Boats perpetually well rigged and furnished
to Sea for the Fishing, as was delivered to them.

And if by reason that those Counties, which have the most and best Harbors,
and that lie most convenient for the Fishing-Trade, will bear the greatest
burden, by reason the greatest number of Busses will be sent to these Ports.

Then thirdly, I humbly offer, that the Undertakers of the said Counties have
allowance out of the main Stock or Bank of Money proportionable to their Charges.

And I do further humbly offer unto consideration, that there be a Corporation
made of all the Adventurers for the Fishing-Trade, and that Merchants and
Tradesmen be admitted into this Corporation.

And that this Corporation be armed with large Privileges, and ample
Immunities, for the Transportation of the said Fish.

I might also have told you of the Pilchard-Fishing, and for Ling and Cod on
the West and North-West of England, and that great Pilchard-Fishing, and
Fishing for Cod on the West Coast of Ireland, frequented by those of Biscay,
Galicia, and Portugal; but they are so well known that I forbear to mention
them.

The Islands that belong to Scotland, and lie on the North, North-West, and
West of Scotland, which are useful for the Fishing-Trade, are in number 94.

And whereas it is credibly reported, that above 220 Fisher-Towns are decayed
and reduced to extreme poverty, for want of Favor, Succor, and Protection: On
the contrary, by diligent endeavoring to make use of so great a blessing, as
is offered unto us by the Seas, we might in a short time repair those decayed
Towns, and add both Honor, Strength, and Riches to our King and Country.

The Premises being taken into serious consideration, it makes much to the
ignominy and shame of our Nation, that God and Nature offering us so great a
Treasure, even at our own doors, we do notwithstanding neglect the benefit
thereof.

By the foregoing discourse of Planting and Fishing my great design will easily
appear to all, to have been chiefly the advancing of Trade, for the improvement
of which no place in the habitable World lies more convenient and better
situated than this Isle, though no People seem more averse, some out of
negligence and listlesness, others wilfully ignorant: To do therefore what lies
in me to awaken the industry of the first, and condemn the froward peevishness
of the other, I could not conclude this Subject without giving the following
Account of some Observations in order hereto, collected out of a small Treatise
of Sir John Burrows, printed in the Year 1633.

THe Hollanders by reason of those multitude of Ships and Mariners, they have
extended their Trade to all parts of the World, exporting for the most part in
all their Voyages our Herring and other Fish, for the maintenance of the same
in exchange whereof they return the several Commodies of other Countries.

From the Southern parts, as France, Spain and Portugal for our Herrings they
return Oiles, Wines, Prunes, Honey, Wools, and store of Coin in specie.

From the Streights, Velvets, Sattins, and all sorts of Silks, Alomes,
Currants, Oils, and all Grocery ware, with much Money.

From the East-Countreys, for our Herrings, and other French and Italian
Commodities before returned, they bring home Corn, Wax, Flax, Hemp, Pitch,
^arr, Soap-Ashes, Iron, Copper, Steel, Clap-boards, Timber, Deal-board,
Dollers, and Hungaria Gilders.

From Germany, for Herrings, and other salt-Fish; Iron, Steel, Glass,
Milstones, Rhenish-Wines, Silks, Velvets, Rashes, Fustians, Baratees, and such
like Frankford Commodities, with store of Rixdollers.

From Brabant they return for the most part ready Money, with some Tapestries,
yea, some of our Herring are carried as far as Brasile.

Now, to carry on this great Trade, they have 700 Strand-boates, 400 Euars, and
400 Sullits, Drivers, and Todboates, wherewith the Hollanders fish upon their
own Coasts, every one of those employing another ship to fetch salt, and carry
their Fish into other Countries, being in all 3000 sail, also they have 100
Doger-boates of about 150 Tuns a piece, also 700 Pincks and Well-boates, from
60 to 100 Tun a piece, which altogether Fish upon the Coasts of England and
Scotland for Cod and Ling only, and each of these employ another V^ssel for
Providing salt, and transporting of their Fish, making in all 16^0 ships.

For the Herring season they have 1600 Busses at the least, all of them fishing
only upon our Coasts, and every one of these makes work for 3 other ships
that attend her; the one to bring in salt from Foreign Parts, another to carry
the said salt and Cask to the Busses, and to bring back their Herrings, and the
third to transport the said Fish into ^oreign Countries, so that the Total
Number of ships and busses plying the Herring-Faire is 6400, every ^uffe one
with another imploy^th 40 Men Mariners an F^shers within her own Hold, and the
rest ten Men a piece, which amounts to ^12000 Fishe^s and Mariners; All which
maintain above double so many Tradesmen. Women and Children a Land: Moreover
they have 4^0 other Vessels that take Herring at Yarm^uth, and there sell them
for ready Money, so that the Hollanders (besides 300 ships before mentioned
fishing upon their own shores) have at least 6800 ships only maintained by the
seas of Great Britain; by which means principally Holland being not so big as
one of our shires in England, have increased the number of their shipping to at
least 10000 sail; being more then are in England, France, Spain, Portugal,
Italy, Denmark, Poland, Sweden and Russia.

Besides these of Holland, Lubeck has 700 Great ships, Hamborough 600, Embden
1400, whereunto add the ships of Bremer, Biscay, Portugal, Spain, and France,
which for the most part Fish in our seas, and it will appear that 10000 sail of
Foreign Vessels, and above, are employed and maintained by Fishing upon our
Coasts.

By reason of those Multitude of ships they cannot employ less then 200000
Mariners and Fishers, out of which they daily furnish their longer Voyages to
all parts of the World; for, by this means they are not only enabled to brook
the seas, and to know the use of the Tackles and Compass, but are likewise
instructed in the Principles of Navigation and Pilotage.

Moreover, How mighty the Public Revenue and Customs of the Hollanders are
increased by their Fishing, may appear, in that above thirty years since, over
and above the Customs of other Merchandise, Excises, Licenses, W^ftage and
Lastage, there was paid to the State for Custom of Herring and other salt-fish
above 300000 pound in one year, besides the tenth fish and Caske paid for
Waftage, which comes at least to as much more among the Hollanders only;
whereunto the tenth of other Nations being added, it amounts to a far greater
sum.

We are likewise to know, That great part of their Fish is sold in other
Countries for ready Money, for which they commonly export of the finest Gold
and silver, and coming home recoyne it of a baser allay under their own ^amp,
which is not a small means to au^ment their Public treasure.

Also the gain made by private men must of necessity be exceeding great, as by
observing the particulars following will plainly appear. During the Wars
between the King of Spain and the Hollanders, before the last Truce, Dunkirke,
by taking, spoiling, and burning the Busses of Holland, and setting great
Ransom upon their Fishermen, enforced them to compound for great Sums, that
they might Fish quietly for one year; Whereupon, the next year after, the
Fishermen agreed amongst themselves to pay a Dollar upon every Last of
Herrings, toward the maintenance of certain Ships of War, to Waft and secure
them in their Fishing, by reason whereof there was a Record kept of the several
Lasts of Herrings taken that year; and, it appeared thereby, that in one half
year there were taken 300000 Lasts of Herrings, which at 12 pound the Last
amounts to 3600000, and at 16 or 20 pound the Last they are ordinarily sold,
then transported into other Countries, it comes between both Prises at least
to 5000000 of Pounds: Whereunto, if we add the Herrings taken by other Nations,
together with the Codd, Ling, Hake, and the Fish taken by the Hollanders; and
other our Neighbors upon the British Coast all the year long, the Total will
evidently arise to be above 10000000 of pounds yearly, or every year.

And, to Conclude, such is the Clear and Indubitable Right of our Sovereign
Lord the KING to the Superiority of the British Seas, that no Man can produce
Clearer Evidence for any part of his Estate: And, as those Seas (under God) are
the Principal Means of our Wealth and safety, so it does much concern all his
true subjects, who are bound by the Law of Grace and Nature, with Heart and
Hand to preserve and maintain the same with the Hazard of their L^ves, Goods
and fortunes.

FINIS.

