A Christian's Work AND TIME of WORKING. IN A SERMON Preached on the Death of
Mr. John Sorrel the Younger, of HYDE-HALL in Great Waltham in the COUNTY of
ESSEX.

By BENJAMIN SMITH, Vicar there.

Eccles. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might;
for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the Grave
whither thou go. -- (...)
(...)
(...)
Sophocles LONDON, Printed by T. James, for Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and
three Crowns in Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel. 1675.

To Mrs. Sorrel the Sorrowful Relict of Mr. John Sorrel the Younger, of
Hyde-Hall in Great Waltham, in the County of Essex.
MADAM:
NO Engagements could have been sufficient to have drawn me to appear in
Public in so madly Censorious an Age as ours, did I greatly concern my self at
what the World will say: For Writing is like a running the Gantlope, where a
man Exposes himself naked, and every man will be sure to have a lash at his
back. The Wit and Genius of the Age lies most in finding fault, and some men
will do it out of a dislike to the person, and some to the Work, and many, that
they may show their judgment (as they think) and make it appear that they have
wit enough to spy a fault. And therefore privacy is certainly the best defense
against the petulancy of the Tongue; for he that is not known nor heard of in
the World, is in no danger of being disturbed by the Censures of it. Had I
therefore valued the Censures of Men, I had chosen rather to have disobliged
you, by denying your request, than thus to expose my self, and run the hazard
that here I do. But I hunt not after Applause, (and if I did, I had never
sought it by publishing this Sermon.) Nor do I at all concern my self to think
what men will say, or how they will judge or condemn this Work. My work must
stand or fall according to my great Masters approbation; Why then should I
regard what the World says of it? since their Applause or Reproach can neither
add nor diminish in the acceptance of it with him. I have therefore Obeyed your
Commands, and at your Request this Sermon is now made public; and other
Apology than this I shall not go about to make for my self. I shall not tell
the World what a sense I have of your constant Civilities to me, nor plead that
the Obligations that your Kindness has laid upon me, made me unable to refuse
your Commands (though I must own that these have been the prevailing
Inducements with me;) for when I have said what I can, men will think what they
please, and I am very well contented they should do so.

Nor shall I go about to frame an Excuse for this Dedication, without first
asking your leave; for at whose door should I lay this Sermon now it is made
public, than at yours, to whose Commands it entirely owes its coming abroad.
I will not doubt of its Acceptance with you, for the sake of him who was the
occasion of it, a Person who though dead, yet retains that esteem in your heart
that cannot be augmented by the fairest Character that can be given of him, and
is sufficient to recommend to your Acceptance any thing that has any relation
to him.

Madam, I know too well the greatness of your Sorrow, and know that you are so
fully sensible of your Loss, that it would be but Cruelty to you, under the
notion of Respect to the Dead, for me to add more weight to your load, and
aggravate your loss, in saying what a one he was whom you have lost. The
greatness of the Affection you had for him, should make you the more contented
in being deprived of him, sense it is so much for his gain. The support that
God has given you under your great affliction, and the plenty of Mercies that
are still left you, are great Occasions and Engagements still to be thankful,
and should induce you to own this providence, though severe, yet as the
Chastisement of a Father, not as the Wound of an Enemy; he that called for this
mercy again, could have called for more, and have left you much more desolate
than you are. To continue lamenting your Loss, and to stand measuring the
length, and breadth, and depth of the Affliction, and to survey it in all its
dimensions, is but to look on the backside of the Book, where nothing is to be
learned; and which hinders you from looking in to read the Lesson that God has
written out for you by this providence. Your Work is to consider what God
designs in this his doing, and to labor to spell out the meaning of these
black Characters. The delight of your eyes is taken away with a struak, and
your greatest Comfort in this life has failed you: Trust then to such
perishing Joys no more, sit loose to the World and the blandishments of it,
and fix with all your might your thoughts and hopes upon him, who being
unchangeable, never fails, nor can fail them that put their Trust in him.
Remember him that is gone before, so as to prepare to Follow him; and let the
memory of his Piety and Virtues be ever before your Eyes as a fair Copy to
Write afte^, that since he shall not return to you, you may go to him, and
enjoy him once again, never to lose him more. Such as these, and many more, are
the proper Improvements of this dispensation; which that you may so improve, as
to reap the advantage of Spiritual health from this bitter Potion, is and shall
be the subject of his Prayers for you to the Throne of Grace; who is,

MADAM, Your Humble Servant, Benjamin Smith.
From Much Waltham Vicaridge, July, 1675.
A CHRISTIANS WORK, AND Time of Working.
John* 9. 4. I must Work the Works of him that sent me while it is Day; the
Night comes when no Man can Work.
AMongst all the Uncertainties that our Affairs in this World are liable to,
there is nothing that more justly deserves the name of Uncertain, than the Date
and Period of our Lives. Our Enjoyments indeed are fluid and brittle, and a
moment is enough to destroy the pleasure and grandeur of that state in which we
had laid up the Hopes of many Years happy Repose; but yet as fickle as these
are, they are not more uncertain (if so much) as the time in which we are
capable of using these Enjoyments. A time determined indeed, if we respect that
God in whose Hands the boundaries of our Times are, and who says to every man
as he said to the Sea, Hitherto shall thou come, and no farther, and here shall
thy proud waves be stayed: But if we respect our selves, to whom the time is
allotted, we find nothing in it that is sure and certain but this, that its end
will certainly come; but when, or how soon, there is none that knows. Our days
are but short if we suppose them to run to their utmost Extent, and therefore
David, Psalm 39. 5. compares their length to a Span; but of this little how
much is liable to be cut off by Accidents and Incertainties, or by the
determinations of an all-wise and overruling providence; that though we may be
sure that at their longest they are but as a Span long, yet no man can be sure
that they shall be so much as a Span long to him*

Both which brevity and uncertainty of our Lives, the Scriptures teach us,
while it compares our time to things that are soon done, or that are very
uncertain in their durance. The Shepherds Tent, or the Weavers shuttle are fit
Emblems of the shortness of our days, and St. James tell us, our life is even
a vapor; and the Prophet Isaiah proclaims, that all flesh is Grass, to show
how uncertain and unstable our continuance even in this short time is. And this
Incertainty of our Lives must needs be evident to him that shall but consider,
either the Principles we are composed of, or the Accidents we are liable to, or
the daily Experiences we have of it.

The Principles we are composed of are different in their Nature, and repugnant
one to another, hot and cold, moist and dry, by the Wisdom and Power of God are
tempered together in the dust that makes up our Frame; these discordant Humors
are always at variance amongst themselves, and there is an Intestime War
continually maintained, that threatens the ruin of the whole Frame. How easily
may one Humor get the upper hand of all the rest? and yet our safety consists
in the equal temperature of them; and if one prevail, the Body is destroyed by
the Tyranny and Praedominance of that one Humor: so that our Lives depend upon
the success of a scuffle, and are uncertain as the chance of War.

But besides these, how numerous and various are External accidents, who knows
what a Night may produce? or what may be in the Womb of a Morning? Who can say
that his path is secure, or that no Creature has received a Commission to day
to take away his Life, the very Inanimate Creatures are sufficiently armed
against our Lives if God does but give the Word, and the ways to effect it are
too many, and too different for our Wisdom or Prudence to foresee or prevent.

And to all this, the undeniable proof of Experience may be added, our days
are uncertain beyond dispute, for almost every day we have Instances that
confirm it. Death does not wait upon the course of Nature, nor observe the
order of Birth, but shoots his arrows hood-winkt among the Herd. He snatches
the tender Infant from its Mothers breast, and cuts off the Young Man in the
midst of his strength and days, as well as gathers the Hoary head (like a
Shock of Corn in his season) into the Grave. The Young and Old, the Weak and
Strong are huddled together in the Dust, and there is no Age or State that can
secure and make us free from Deaths arrest. Here he fells the full grown Oak,
and there he cuts up the tender Speers, and every days Experience makes the
Proverb good, viz. As soon goes the green Tree to the Fire as the dry.

What should man do then, whom Scripture, and Reason, and Experience daily
convince of the incertainty of his life? Or to what end is he made so palpably
sure that he is at no certain stay here? but that he might lift up his thoughts
to what is more firm, and improve the present Seasons (which only wear sure
of) to the obtaining an Eternal and Unchangeable state: For since this Life, as
uncertain as it is, is in order to a Future state, which once entered upon,
admits of no alteration; that our Lives are uncertain, does earnestly call upon
us to hasten our Work, and improve our time, that we may be ready for our
Change whenever it comes. That we must dye, and come to Judgment, makes it
necessary for us to prepare for death; but since we know not but that we may
dye to morrow, it is necessary that we provide for its coming to day.

This then is the Use we should make of all the Memento's we have of Mortality,
or of the incertainty or frailty of our Lives; and we should never see or hear
of any snatched away from us, but it should hasten us in our Work, and make us
more diligent to prepare for our turn; for who knows whose is next?

And to this end I have been desired to apply this sad and amazing providence
that has lately befallen one of the Chiefest Families in our Parish, that
seeing a Young Man cut off near the midst of his days, those that are left,
both Young and Old may lay it to heart, and be awakened, to consider by this
Instance how uncertain our time is, that they may be stirred up to mind their
Work in the present time, lest their End prevent their Preparations for it.

And to this end I have been directed to this Portion of Scripture, as giving a
sufficient Ground to build such an Exhortation upon.

I must Work the Works of him that sent me while it is day, the night comes
when no man can Work.

Words that are capable of a Twofold Application, as they are the Reason of
our Saviors practice, and as they are Rule of ours: As they are the reason of
our Saviors acting, so they were spoken by our Savior of himself, and have a
peculiar Relation to himself; but the Reason they are founded upon, makes them
a Rule to us, and from that they are an argument reaching ever to us to be
diligent and sedulous in our business.

Our Savior was sent into the World to work the great work of our Redemption,
and as he came into the world, and the Word was made Flesh, that he might dye;
so was he while he was upon Earth, to prove his Mission from the Father, and by
the works he wrought, convince the World that he was (...), the Messiah, he
that was to come.

And therefore having here found a Subject fit to manifest his power upon, and
by a Miracle to manifest his Mission, he does not stay to dispute or debate the
impertinent and erroneous Quaere of his Disciples, Who sinned, this man or his
Parents, that he was born blind? but denying both parts of the Question,
hastens to the Cure, and that upon this Reason, I must work the works, etc.
that is, I must take all opportunities to do the Works about which I am sent
into the world, and make use of my present time, for my death is coming, by
which these works must have an end. Where his reason of working while it is
day, being founded upon the general reason of approaching death, the words will
be found to be of equal extent with the Reason they are built upon, and are a
strong Argument for the like diligence to every one that is under the like
circumstances of Mortality: If therefore there be the same reason for us to be
diligent in minding and hastening our work that we have to do, that there was
for him to mind and hasten his, these words will be found to concern us, and be
to us as well as to our Savior an undeniable reason of diligence in our work
while we have life and time. And this a short Enquiry into the sense and
importance of the words will prove:

And in them we may consider these three things:

1. That our Savior had works to do, I must work the works of him that sent me.

2. That he took the present time, and laid hold upon every opportunity that
offered it self to do these Works in: I must work the works of him that sent me
while it is day.

3. That the Reason why he did thus, and so carefully laid hold on every
season to do his Works in, was, least the night should prevent him; the night
comes when no man can work.

1. The first Consideration I shall wholly wave, for thought it be worth our
Enquiry what the Works were he had to do, and by whom he was sent; and how he
that was in his own Nature God blessed for evermore, could be sent by any,
since being God he could have no Super^or to send him; and so upon the same
Reason how the works he did (he being God) could be the works, or by the
appointment of any other but himself, (which may all be answered by considering
the distinction of his Nature and his Office:) yet since the considering these
is not pertinent to my present purpose, the force of the words as to the
business in hand lying in his diligence in working, and in the reason he gives
of it, it may suffice to have observed that he had works to do, without entering
into any discourse concerning the nature of them, or the accounts upon which he
was obliged to perform them.

I shall pass therefore from this to what is more pertinent to the present
purpose, and consider.

2. That he took the present time to do his works in, and this is employed in
that expression, I must work, while it is day. (To wave here the curious
Criticisms and Conjectures of some upon the day here mentioned) by day here I
understand the time of this life here upon earth, and so our Savior saying, I
must work while it is day, the meaning is, I must be doing the works of him
that sent me* now while I am upon earth, now while I am in the flesh: So
Theophylact, the day is this present life. And Pis^ator to the same sense he
compares the course of his life upon earth to a day; and therefore is the time
of Life called a day, with an especial respect and relation to working. The day
is a time, and the only time for work, the night is appointed for rest, and so
is our life the only time of doing what is to be done in order to our Eternal
state; in death we rest from our Labors. Our Savior therefore would let no
opportunity pass of doing good while it was day, that is, while the time of his
life upon Earth lasted; and that for the Reason which he gives in the next
words, The night comes when no man can work.

And that is the thing which comes next to be considered, to give an account
why he was so diligent in working, and the Text tells us,

3. That the Reason why he did thus, and so carefully laid hold on the present
season, was, lest the night should prevent him; the night comes when no man can
work.

In what sense the night is here to be taken, is easy to understand, by what
has been said of the day, to which this answers. For if that means the time of
this life, then by Night must here be meant the time of death; for this Reason
then our Savior says he must work while he lived, because death was coming, in
which we have a twofold Reason couched:

1. From the nearness of it, the night comes; it is not said, it will come,
but it does come, in that implying that it was now approaching, and already
upon his Journey toward him.

2. From the effect of it when come, No man can work. As if he had said, I must
now do what I have to do while I have time and life, my time is not long, my
death comes, and is at hand; and when that is once come, these Works of mine
must cease; for in death no man can work: parallel to which Resolution and
Reason is the advice and argument of the Wise man, Eccles. 9. 10. Whatsoever
thine hand finds to do, do it with all thy might, for there is no work, nor
device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the Grave, whither thou go.

And having thus briefly cleared the sense and importance of the Words, and
considered the reason and foundation they stand upon, there is no man but at
the very first sight must needs conclude, that the Case is ours. We are under
the same Circumstances that he was, and the same Reason that prevailed with him
to diligence in his Work is much more urgent upon us.

Had he Works to do? so have we: Was death approaching to him, and was he
mortal as he was a man? certainly and undeniably so are we. If then it was a
good Reason for him to make have to do his Work, because he must dye,
undoubtedly the Reason is as strong toward us, for we must dye too; and after
death there is no more working for us in our Works, than there was for him in
his.

It cannot be denied then, but the words belong to us, and are a necessary Rule
of our practice, and a strong Reason to spur us on to diligence in the work we
have to do in this present Life. I shall therefore take them (since they cannot
be denied me) and apply the meaning of them to our practice in this Doctrinal
Proposition.

Doct. That we ought to be Diligent in doing our Work that we have to do, while
we have time and life; because Death comes, where no Work can be done.

A Lesson needful to be learned, because it is of great importance to us in
order to our Eternal welfare, and so much the rather needful because the
practice of too many tells us, that they understand not this Lesson, nor are
convinced of the necessity of it. Some do not understand their Work, and so,
though they take much pains, and are very busy, their Work turns to no
account, because though they have done much, they have done nothing at all of
what God sent them to do. Some understand not their time, and though they may
know their Work, yet always think it too soon to set* about it yet, and so
drive off and delay till their day be done before, they begin their work. Both
these ought to consider and weigh this truth, that we ought to be diligent in
doing our work, while we have time; the one to consider that we ought to be
employed about our work, and be doing what we were sent to do; and the other to
learn that we ought to lay hold upon time while we have it, and work while it
is day; and the Reason is the same to both, because of approaching death, the
night comes when no man can work.

That therefore I may offer somewhat toward the direction of the one, and the
awakning of the other, I shall consider, and speak to this Proposition, by way
of Enquiry into these three Things.

1. What is the Work we have to do?

2. What is the time this Work ought to be done in?

3. What is the Reason why those Works ought to be done at that time, and not
to be put off to any other?

1. What is the Work that we have to do?

That we have Works to do, may well be taken for granted, for it cannot be well
supposed, that man should have a time given him, and nothing to do with that
time, nor no employment for it assigned him. It cannot be well supposed that
man should be entrusted with many Tallents, and be endued with many excellent
and useful Faculties above other Creatures, and yet be designed to be more idle
and useless than they. And yet as unreasonable as this is to be supposed, there
are those in the World who had need be convinced of this truth; there are those
who had need be told that God has appointed employments to spend our time in,
and that they need not go hunt for diversions, nor invent ways to drive on the
wearisom hours that fly too fast away of themselves. There are those that had
need be told that God has given us a Faculty of Reason and Judgment for other
ends than to be able to pass a Censure upon a Garb or Dress, or to be able to
give a Judgment upon another Gate, Mien, or Behavior. In short, how many had
need to be told that God gave us our time for somewhat else than for Play and
Sport, for other ends than to pamper the flesh, and be wanton, and that when he
sent us into this World to live, he never intended we should pass our days
like Drones, and be lazy.

I must therefore in the first place consider the works that we have to do, and
all the Enquiry here will be, what Works those are in which this our time ought
to be employed. And this enquiry would justly deserve a longer time to be spent
in it then I have now to spare; for surely the most of men know not their
Works, or are hardly persuaded what their business is, or else they would never
neglect it as they do, nor weary themselves so much in doing nothing, or in
doing mischief, for want of a better employment.

Now the Text may serve to direct us what our Work is; for though the Works
that our Savior was sent to do, and the Works that we have to do, are vastly
different as to their own nature, yet in this they agree that both his Works
and ours are the Works of him that sent us. God is our Master, and we are sent
into the World upon his Errand, and he that gave us our Being, has also
appointed the design and end of it. We are sent into the World upon business,
not as some Youths are sent to Travel, to gaze upon the World, and see
Fashions, and gather up the Vanities of the Times, but as Ambassadors to
negotiate and transact some business for our Masters Honor, or like Factors to
Trade with, and improve our Talents for our Masters advantage.

And having said that our work that we have to do here, is the work of him that
sent us; I have said enough to prove the generality of the World to be idle or
worse employed. For how easily is it seen, that the works that most men spend
their time in, are such as they that do them, dare not ascribe to God as the
Author or Commander of them. God never sent us hither to make provision for the
Flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof; he never set us to scrape for Wealth, and
to seek for all advantages to be Rich or Great; he never made it our business
nor set us this for our work, to follow our inordinate affections through all
those dangerous and uncouth ways in which they hurry us on; he never sent us
hither to be vicious or debaucht, to be intemperate or unclean, to be ambitious
or revengful; nor to set the world on Fire with the Heat and exorbitancy of our
passions: and yet these are the works in which the most of the World employ
themselves.

The works of him that sent us bear his Stamp and Image upon them, and are like
to him that sent us to do them, they are such as become him to appoint who is
the Author of them, and such as will make us like unto Him, if we carefully
practice and do them.

He has sent us hither to learn to know him, and to be conformed to his Image
in Righteousness and True Holiness; he has commanded us to learn his will and
to do it, to be serviceable to him in our generation and to be useful to one
another in our several spheres and places; he has called us to mortifying the
lusts of the Flesh, to growth in grace, and all Christian virtues; he has
called us to meekness and gentleness, and to the mutual acts of love and
kindness one to another; to seek every one the welfare of another before our
own, he has enjoined us compassion and charity; and requires that we be
tenderhearted, and that we forbear and mu^u^^ly forgive one another: He has
command us to be peaceable and quiet, and rather to recede from our own right,
then to embroyle the world or disquiet our neighbors by our petty or inferior
Concerns. In short, he has made this our business, for which we come here, to
act in order to his Glory and our own Salvation, which two ends he has so
twined together, that they become inseparably one, and he that faithfully
labors for the one, cannot fail of obtaining the other.

These are the ends of our being, which he that made us has appointed; and this
is a rough draught and a short summary of the Works we have to do in this life.
Such as these are the Works that God has sent us to do, and whatso^ves actions
are contrary to these, are none of our Work, nay contrary to it; and when we
come to our account, will be found to be a deceiving our Master, an embezling
our time, and a contradicting the ends of our Creation.

But that we may have a more perfect Scheme, and a fairer draught of our work
before our eyes, let us consider man as standing in a two sold Relation, in the
one toward God, in the other toward man. The consideration of which two
Relations will present us with those general Hoods, under which the whole duty
of man is comprised. It is not to be expected that I should give a distinct
account of every particular work and employment that is appointed man to do in
this world, that cannot be the work of an hour, or be comprised within the
limits of one single Sermon, my design is only to give you those Heads unto
which our particular duties may be referred; and may serve as a Memorial to us,
by the help of which we may the better call to mind our particular Duties, and
be put in mind of the practice of them.

1. The first Relation we stand in is toward God, and that may be considered
two ways.

1. As we are his Creatures.

2. As we are sinners against him.

From both these different Considerations, different works arise, which are our
duty to do, and which it is necessary that they should be done before the Night
comes.

1. As we are his Creatures. And so there lies an Obligation upon us to do
whatsoever God has enjoined us, it being but Reason that he that made us should
have the full disposal of us; we look to have the use of what our hands have
made, and we being as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2. 10. The workmanship of God,
it were unjust and unreasonable to deny that God has the full power to appoint
and assign us what employment he sees fit. And therefore we are not to consult
our own Fancies, nor be guided by our own inclinations what we shall do, or how
we shall live now we are come into the world, but we must receive our Errand
from his mouth, and attend to him for directions how to spend our time. We
must look to the manifestations of his mind, and the Revelations of his will,
we must listen to what God has commanded; for what God has bidden us to do,
that is our work, and so we must employ our selves.

Now this being considered, that we are justly at Gods disposal by the Law of
our Creation, and none can claim any interest in us, nor any share in our time
or service, contrary to what God has appointed, it will further follow, that
being wholly his, and at his disposal, our whole time and abilities ought to be
employed in his Service, and for his Glory; for as the Scriptures refer our
Being to God, and every where teach us that he is the Creator of us, and all
things, so they farther instruct us, that the design of all things was his own
glory, which for us to deny at any time, or in any instance to be serviceable
to, is to frustate the ends of our Creator, and to contradict the design of our
being. Solomon tells us, Prove. 16. 4. That the Lord has made all things for
himself; and the Apostle gives us this strict charge, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Whatsoever
ye do, do all to the Glory of God, so that as all that we have, our being, and
the enjoyments we possess in it, are the bounty of God; so must all be referred
to him again, in an industrious employment of all for his service and glory. So
that to be idle and useless in the World, and to do no good, will be sound to
be against the design of our Creation, as really, though not it may be so much,
as is our employing our selves in evil and doing mischief; for when our Reason
will not permit us to imagine that God by his power should make us, and by his
daily providence preserve us and feed us with his bounty, and this for no other
ends as Ladies keep Dogs to lie and sleep in their Laps.

By the Law then of our Creation we owe our selves entirely to God, and as we
are his Creatures, we ought to be always employed in his Service. And so
universal Obedience is our duty and task, which though through our weakness, we
are not able to perform, yet it is our duty to will and endeavor it; for a
willing failieur in our duty, and a designed omission of any point and part of
our due Obedience, is not a frailty and infirmity of Nature, but contumacy, and
willful Rebellion.

And from what has thus far been said concerning our Employment, and that we
ought always to be engaged in this service of God, will appear the folly and
unreasonableness of those that talk of serving God hereafter, that neglect
their duty now, and talk of doing it another time; for these do not regard, nor
weigh that all our time is to be employed for God, and that he has set us our
work, and given an employment for every day of our lives. And therefore to say
I will serve sin now, and obey the lusts of the flesh to day, or (to put in
gentler terms) to say I will loyter and be idle now, or take my ease, and be
lazy to day, and will serve God to morrow, or set about my work hereafter, is
in effect tosay, God has set me thus much work to do, but I do not intend to do
it all, I will be sure to omit some of it now, and it may be I will do some of
it hereafter.

For if God commands me to serve him all the days of my life, (as by the very
Law of Creation he does) then am I bound to serve him to day as well as to
morrow; and if I neglect his service to day, I cannot any ways make him amends
by doing my duty to morrow, for what I may do to morrow, can be no more than to
morrow's service, that is no more than the work of one day, and so cannot
possibly in strictness and justice be any Reparation for my former neglect. So
that every day that we neglect, or defer our duty, or otherwise employ our
selves, we rob God of the service we owe him, and contradict the end for which
we were made, in that we do not the works of him that sent us.

2. We may be considered as sinners against God, and this we are as soon as we
are born, and as soon as we begin to be, we begin to be evil. By one man sin
entered into the world, and from him it passed upon all men, upon those that had
not sinned after the similitude of his trangression, even before we are actual
sinners as he was, there is a depravation of our Natures, an enmity in us
against God, and a perverse disposal, and inclination as soon as we are able to
act, to act amiss. David gives us an account, what in our first principles and
beginnings we are, while he says, Psalm 5^. 5. Behold I was shapen in
iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me; and Saint Paul tells us, what
the issue and effect of that Original depravation is, in stiling us, Ephesians. 2.
3. by nature the children of wrath. By nature we are sinners, and we are daily
such more or less by our practice; for what can be the issue and product of a
depraved nature, but a polluted and impure Conversation, Job 14. 4. For who can
bring a clean thing out of an unclean one? not one. And by this Original and
Actual Sin we are by nature from our very beginnings, and every day by our
practice, more and more the children of Wrath, and liable to the just Vengeance
of God our Creator.

This state and consideration super-induces a new Work that we have to do,
which though it was none of those which man was sent to do as he was made at
first, (for the Wise man bears witness, Eccles. 7. 29. that God made man pure,)
yet man having sinned, this is a work that God in mercy calls him to, and is as
necessary in order to his Eternal welfare as any he can be employed in.

And so the works that we have to do upon this consideration are to make our
peace with God, and to reform and amend our lives and ways, our work is now to
believe in Jesus Christ, and truly and seriously to repent us of our sins By
the Law of Creation God calls us to universal Obedience, and the first Covenant
was, Do this and live; but by the Covenant of Grace, we are called to believe
and repent; and this is the only remedy against the rigor and severities of
that Law.

This is a Work that is necessary to be done, and necessary to be done while it
is day; for if our peace be not made with God, we are irrecoverably lost, and
must needs be miserable for ever. Who shall secure us from the wrath of an
incensed God, or where, or with what hopes can we appear, or stand in the
judgment, if we have no advocate to plead our cause with the Father, and have
no interest in that satisfaction which Christ made to Divine Justice. No
Unclean thing can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, for an impure Soul is a
contradiction to the enjoyments, or society, or works of that state and place.
If our hearts are not purified by the blood of Christ, and a sound and sincere
Repentance, if our Lusts be not mortified, and our evil ways first reformed,
as it is impossible that so unclean a thing as such a man can be admitted into
a state of the greatest p^rity and bliss; so would it be impossible (could he
be admitted there) that such a one could take any delight in it. For since the
pleasure of every enjoyment consi^^s in the suitablness that it has to the
mind and nature of him that enjoyes it, how can Spiritual things be Joys to a
Carnal mind, or Heaven be a place of delight to an Earthly minded man? Wrap the
Swine in fine linen, and perfume him with sweet Odours, and you do him no
kindness in all this, he had rather be wallowing in the mire; and so would the
joys of Heaven be to a sensual, carnal, impure minded man, there being no
suitableness between his Affections and those Joys. Sin must then first become
a Burden to us, and be matter of sorrow and real grief; our Affections must
first be refined from sensuality and impure delights, before they can be made
capable of relishing such sublime Joys, and tasting the sweetness of a Society
and employment so all pure as that is. In short, we must be born again, and
that of the Spirit, before we can either enter into, or delight in the glories
and happiness of that place.

And as Repentance and Reformation are works thus necessary to be done, so to
be done, while it is day; it being the necessary work of every day, it is
necessary that we repent of every disobedience, for every sin unrepented of is
damning; and therefore since we daily sin, a daily Repentance and Amendment is
needful. And surely, he may well be said to be more then mad, that defers these
Works to another time, and will dare to delay his Repenting till too morrow;
for if we dye before our peace with God is made, and are snatched away before we
Repent, we are lost, we perish for ever; and yet to him that defers to do these
Works while he may, and will needs be putting them off till another time, it is
no impossible thing but that he may die before these Works be done. It Is
absolutely necessary that the work be done, it is absolutely as uncertain
whether he that neglects to day, shall have to morrow to do it in; common
prudence then should teach us in a matter of so great concern to close with the
surer side, and lay hold upon the time that we are sure of; not venturing our
Souls upon what may fail, nor deferring the means of happiness till too morrow,
which whether it will ever come or no, we know not.

That Repentance is a means of blotting out sins through Faith in Christ, is a
great Encouragement to our speedy setting about it; but they that think it so
easy to Repent, that they put it off to many years hence, or to Old Age, or a
Sickbed, may perchance be found to have been mistaken, both in the nature of
the thing, and the time of it; for surely it is not so short a work to Repent,
as some would make it, nor is the time that is future so certain to us, as that
we should venture so weighty a Concern upon it. It Is not every crying God
mercy, or saying that we are sorry; it is not a sigh and a dejected look that
God will accept for a true repentance; it requires a more inward work upon the
heart, and more severe mortifications than these are; and whether this be a
work so fit for a Sickbed, they would do well first to consider, that think of
turning this work over to such a time.

The sum of all is this, Repentance is a work incumbent on us as sinners, which
if it be not done before we die, we are miserable for ever; and therefore we
ought to do this work while it is day; it is dangerous ^o put it off till
another time, lest that time should never come; for if we refuse the time that
is present, we have no assurance of what is future. To which I shall add no
more, but that excellent Saying of St. Austin, Deus qui poenitenti tibi
promisit veniam, poenitentia tua non promisit crastinum. That is to say, God
indeed has promised pardon to him that repents, but never promised us too
morrow to repent in.

And thus much may suffice to have spoken concerning those works that arise
from that relation which we stand in toward God, whether as his creatures or
as sinners against him.

2. There is another relation we stand in as men, and that as we stand related
one toward another. From the former relation arose those duties which were due
from man toward God; from this arise those duties which are between man and
man, and due from one man to another.

And here, though the Subject be changed, yet the duties, as to the Author of
them, remain the same; and those works that we have to do upon this account,
are also the works of him that sent us. For whatsoever the duties are that are
to be performed from man to man, they are therefore to be performed, because
appointed by God, and enjoined us as ur duty by him, in whose power and right
it is to determine our work, for whomsoever it is to be done. And therefore is
our duty to man equally part of our works that we have to do here, because
enjoined us by the same authority that has the sovereign disposal of us. He
that has said, Luke 10. 27. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind;
the same has said, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

And this relation engages us in different works, according as our station in
which we stand in among men, may be different; for we may be considered,

1. Either in general as we are men.

2. Or as we are men placed by God in some certain relation and sphere to act
in. From both of which there are several duties incumbent on us, which we ought
to do; and for the neglect of which we shall be accountable before him who has
made them our work; and appointed us those things to do, in those stations
wherein he has set us.

1. We may be considered in general as we are men, and of the same nature with
the rest of mankind, and as we are such, there belong unto us those general
duties of love and beneficence, and of doing good mutually, as it lies in our
power one to another. Under this head may be reduced all the duties of the
Second Table, and as we are to be considered in this notion, that command of
the Apostle belongs unto us, Gal. 6. 10. As therefore we have opportunity, let
us do good to all men. We ought to concern our selves for their souls, by good
advice, and by seasonable reproo^s and admonitions, endeavoring to deliver them
from the paths of the destroyer, and taking the more care of our own ways;
lest our going astray should encourage and embolden others to do the like: and
our evil example, either destroy, or endanger our Neighbors soul. We are to
endeavor and desire their temporal welfare too, to safeguard their lives, if it
lie in our power; to vindicate their good names, and to communicate of our
substance to their support and relief, if they are in want. For we are not made
for our selves, nor sent into the world to live alone in the midst of the
earth; but as God has linked us in society with others, so has he commanded us
to be useful one to another; and this is to be serviceable to God in our
generation, by being serviceable to the glory of God in our several spheres and
places; and by being the channels to convey the goodness and mercy of God
toward others.

And therefore it was but a surly Answer of Cain's to God, Am I my brothers
keeper? For certainly God has made us so far keepers one of another, that if
any detriment comes to our neighbor, which it lay in our power to prevent; we
may justly be accounted before God as accessories at least to the evil.

And as churlish was that of Nabal to David's Messengers, Shall I take my bread
and my water, and my flesh, and give them to men that I know not whence they
be? For those that are really in need and straits, have a right to relief from
us; and God has not only made it a duty, but over and above declares it a
service that is pleasing to him; if we will believe the Apostle, who gives us
this account of it, Heb. 13. 16. To do good and to communicate forget not, for
with such sacrifices God is well pleased.

From whence these two Corolaries plainly offer themselves to observation;

1. In vain then do men boast of a negative righteoussness, and please or
satisfy themselves in that they can say they do no hurt, they are no knaves
no^ thieves, they neither cheat nor oppress any; when for all this it may be
they live like drones upon the earth, and are useless persons, and make no body
the better for them. There is a severe prohibition against doing wrong, and
they do well that obey that; but there is also a strict charge that we do good,
and they sin that obey not that. And indeed they that are only negatively
good, are not really so good as they imagine themselves to be; for in vain do
they boast that they do no wrong, since it is a wrong to withold good from
whom it is due. We ought not to wrong and oppress our poor neighbor, this must
be carefully observed, but yet there is more to be done for our poor neighbor
than this; for being poor, he is the object of our charity, and we must relieve
him. We ought not to wrong the fatherless nor pervert the cause of the widow;
but this prohibition means not only what it says but more, and we are
commanded to plead the cause of the widow, and to defend the fatherless. In
short, let that Sentence of our Savior be weighed, and the grounds it goes
upon, which is recorded Matthew. 25. 41, 42, 43. and this will be enough to spoil
the negative Christians confidence. For that sad and dismal sentence that is
there pronounced, is not upon the account of doing evil, but for not doing
good; they are not charged with oppression or extortion, nor condemned for
casting the Members of Christ into prison; but because they did not cloth and
feed the hungry and naked, and did not visit the Sick and Imprisoned.

2. In vain do men boast of a Religion toward God, that observe no Conscience
toward man: In vain do we keep up Religious Duties, and pretend to be strict
Observers of the Injunctions of our Maker in those Duties that relate more
immediately to his Worship, while we reject those commands that are enforced
upon us by the same Authority, although relating to a different Subject. That
Religion is in vain that makes it my duty to pray often and earnestly to God,
and yet never ties my Hands from injustice and fraud, but allows me to oppress
or deceive my Neighbor. That Religion is in vain that engages my tongue to
speak well of God, and employs it frequently in discourse of Religion, and
pious matters; but at other times leaves it at liberty to back-bite and
slander, to censure unchantably, or bitterly to reproach another actions, and
secretly to strike through and wound my Neighbors Repute and Good Name. And if
this seem to any to be too hardly spoken, as that of Saint James is my
authority, so let it be my answer, James 1. 26. If any man among you seem to be
religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's
religion is vain. And certainly, it is to no purpose to think to bribe or blind
Heaven by the diligent and sedulous performance of some Duties that we may be
either allowed or connived at in the gross neglect of others; righteousness
toward man is our duty, and is part of our work to do; if we neglect this, we
neglect our duty, and do not work the works of him tha^ (...) us, because as he
sent us to live in Holiness toward him; so he has also made it our duty to
live in righteousness toward our Neighbor.

And thus as we may be considered as men in general, there are works that are
incumbent on us in that relation; and as we are men, we have a service to do
for God to Man; and it is an equal Violation of the Law of God, to rob God, or
to wrong Man, since God has equally forbidden both. Much Sacrifice will not
expiate that sin, nor many prayers drown the voice of its cry; nothing but
repentance and a reformation of our Injustice and Immorality, nothing but a
ceasing to do evil, and a learning to do the contrary good, will procure our
acceptance with God; and therefore we have him in the Prophet expostulating
with his people, who were highly injurious toward man, and yet pretended to be
extremely Religious toward God. They even cloyed him with the fat of their fed
Beasts, and even darkened Heaven with the clouds of Incense; they observed
exactly their New Moons and Feasts, their Sabbaths, and Solemn Assemblies; but
withal practiced Injustice and Rapine, and Violence, and their hands were full
of Blood; they had no pity to the Poor, nor mercy to the Widow, nor regard to
the Fatherless Children; God therefore declares his dislike of their Religious
service, because of their defect in these moral duties, and calls them first to
the practice of them, and then promises to hear and accept them in the others.

Let us rea^^ and weigh the first chapter of Isaiah, from the 10th. verse to
the 21th. and there we shall f^nd our duty in this case, and find this made
good, that a Religion toward God without a Conscience toward man, is
defective, and in vain.

Our Work then that we are sent to do relates to Man as well as God, and that
as we are considered in general as men.

2. But we may farther be considered as we are men placed by God in some
particular Relation and Sphere to act in, whether as Magistrate or Minister, as
Master or Servant, as Husband or Wife, as Parent or Child; these and the like
several Relations and Places call for several Works from us, which are our
duties as so related, and as set in those places. Of these a care must be had,
for in these al^o we serve him that sent us; and he that is a faithful
Labourer, a good Christian will not, nay dare not neglect these.

The consideration of all which, shows that a Christians life was never
designed for Jollity or Idleness: Having given you a sight of thus much Work to
be done, without saying any more (...) ^^ve evidently proved, that we have no
time to spare in wh^^ we may lawfully sit still, and do nothing; our Work and
our Time are equally matched, for as long as we live we must be doing. Much
less can we find any time to do evil in, or to serve the flesh, or to be
instrumental to the carrying on of the designs of the Kingdom of darkness, for
God made us for himself, and gave us our time to be employed in his Service,
and it is no less than robbing of God, and being unfaithful in our trust, to
give any part of it to the service of another.

Thus much may suffice to have spoken of the Work we have to do.

2. The next thing to be considered, is the time when this Work ought to be
done, a thing almost as material to be enquired after as the Work it self; for
as some mistake, or are ignorant of their Work, so it may be more mistake the
true notion of their time, and therefore defer it because they think the time
not yet come to begin or set about it. This time the Text says, is while it is
day, and the meaning of that has been shown to be while the time of Life lasts,
for the Text plainly excludes Eternity from being a season for work; for it
tells us if this Life be at an end, so is our work too, the Night comes
wherein no man can Work.

Now since the time of this Life may be divided into three parts, past,
present, and to come, all the matter of our Enquiry will be, Which of these
three is our working time in which we ought to apply our selves to our business.

For that which is past, there can be no question made, whether that be a time
for Work which remains yet to be done, for it is elapsed and gone, and being
once lost, is irrecoverable; we may more easily recall the River that slides
insensibly by, hasting to the Ocean, than recover the days that are silently
stolen on toward Eternity; there is no use to be made of the time past, but
only this, by reflection upon what we have lost or idly misspent, to quicken and
awaken our selves to the more careful improvement of what remains. It Is
impertinent to wish that we had our time again, since that cannot be, all our
wisdom in this case is to lay the faster hold upon what we yet have.

This therefore being granted, that the time that is past is none of ours, and
cannot now be employed in Work, yet it may be hoped that what is to come may be
counted our own, and that we have a better hold of that: It Is true, at present
we are not disposed for Work, or are otherwise employed; but we are Young, or
hope to live long, or hope at least that we shall not dye yet; and so hope we
may have time enough for Work hereafter.

This is the usual Plea that men make for delaying their Work till the time to
come, and this is the ruiu of many a one, and a fatal Snare in which Satan
entangles many an unwary Soul, while he beats them off from what is present and
sure, and turns them over to what is future and contingent. He persuades them
it is too soon to repent and reform yet, that it is too early to sadden and damp
the jollity and briskness of their Youth, with the sad entertainment of sorrow
and repentance, or with the melancholy apprehensions of Death and Judgment;
another time he persuades them to be more fit for those things; and that Old
Age, or at least an Age more solid and stayed, more phlegmatic and serious than
the sprightliness of Youth, would be a season much more proper to mind, and
accomplish that work. But while unwary man listens to these charms, the fatal
hour steals on, and the night comes wherein no man can work: How many defer
their Work till Old age, that dye in the prime of their Youth; and how many
delay till too morrow, that never live to see that day? How many put off their
Repentance till they come to be sick, whom death never gives so fair a warning
to, but cuts them down unawares in the midst of their health and strength?
Delays are dangerous, and if they are any where so, then much more here, where
so great a concern as is our eternal welfare depends upon them. Wherefore
against the uncertain and dangerous hopes of men that refuse the present
season, and will stay for the time to come, before they apply themselves to
their Work, I shall endeavor to prove that the present time is the time in
which we ought to do our Works; and for the proof of this I shall offer these
three ensuing Considerations:

1. No man can be exempted from the service of God for any time. For since it
has been shown already, that God made us for himself, it will necessarily
follow, that there can be no time wherein it may be lawful for us to turn aside
from him, and to serve another; and if we must be always employed in his
service, then surely we must now in this present be doing of his Work, which is
a part of that time which he has given us to serve him in. 1 Cor. 10. 31. And
this the Apostle plainly proves, when he commands, Whats^ever ye do, do all to
the Glory of God; for if all our actions must tend to the Glory of God, then
all our time must be laid out that way; because our actions, and the time in
which they are done cannot be severed; and if all our time must be spent for
God, then without contradiction the present time must be so spent; this being
(as was said) a part of that time which is given us to serve him in: If then
any one could either prove or imagine it lawful to be employed at any time in
the service of Satan, or of our Lusts, then some reason might be shown why we
should not serve God now; but since it is horrible to imagine that any one can
have leave from God to serve his En^my, and since it plainly implies a
contradiction that it can be lawful to be employed in so sinful and unlawful a
service, it remains undeniably true, that God must be served with the present
time, and we must now be employed in doing his work, because all our time must
be laid out in his service, that is the present and the future time too; for
he that is bound to serve God all the days of his life, is certainly bound to
serve serve God to day, this day being one of the days of his life; and if we
must work the works of him that sent us, while it is day, that is, while we
live, if we live now, we must work now; and if at this present time it be day
with us, then at this present time while it is so, we must be working the Works
of him that sent us.

2. But let it be farther considered, that this present time is the only time
that is ours, or that we can be said to be sure of. What time is past is
certainly and irrecoverably lost, and that which is future and to come is ours
only by an uncertain hope; and as it is possible that it may be Ours, so it
under an equal possibility of never being so, for it being only possible that
we may live till too morrow, it is equally possible that we may die before. He
therefore that denies God the present time, by that very denial sins, and is
unjust, because he denies him what he is only sure of, and puts him off with
the promise of what is uncertain, and which he can never be sure he shall be
possessed of.

And therefore if it be our duty to serve God at all, it is undoubtedly our duty
to serve him now, because if we neglect the present time, in which we may do
it, it is doubtful and uncertain whether we shall ever live to see that day in
which we promised to do it. What the Poet made an argument for present jollity
and mirth, is much more strong and concluding in this case, Sera nimis vita est
^rastina viv' hodie, he would have us be merry too day, for fear it should be
too late to begin it too morrow; but how much more reasonably may it be urged,
let us apply our selves to our business now, it may be too late to think on it
hereafter.

We have not the command of our own time, nor has God given any man among us
the Lease of our Lives; we are all Tenants at Will, and must leave these
Tenements of Clay whenever it pleases God to out us, since then God has hid
from us the date of our Lives, we are mad as well as unjust to refuse the
present time, because we do not know that we have any other.

And this folly of neglecting to do our Work in the present time, might be
further urged, as from the incertainty of our Lives, so also from the
incertainty of assistance in our Work, or of acceptance of it when it is done.

Too day the Spirit strives, but we know not whither it will do so too morrow;
only we know that God has said, Genesis 6. 3. My Spirit shall not always strive
with man. There is a time beyond which God will strive no more, but will leave
us to our selves; and if God withdraw, though the day of Life may still last,
yet the day of Grace is done; and then though we may have a time to work, yet
there is no heart to improve it; but our time is as Solomon complains, Prove.
17. 16. A price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, that has no heart to it.

But farther yet: From whence can we gather Confidence, or be assured that God
will be content to wait our leisure, and that he will accept of those future
services that we resolve to pay him? Sure it is not for need that he has of our
service, that he is forced to wait till we are at leisure to serve him; for we
benefit our selves and not him in doing our duty, and all our endeavors can
add nothing to an Infinite Perfection. Eliphaz his Question to Job proves this,
Job 22. 3. Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art righteous, or is i^
gain to him that thou make thy ways perfect? and David plainly declares for
the same thing, when in express terms he says, Psalm 16. 2. My Goodness
extends not to thee. Upon what then do we presume, while we waste our present
time in the drudgery of sin, and then offer to God the dreggs and lees of our
days; we spend our strength and our prime that God delights in and requires,
and when we are worn out in the service of sin, and can follow it no* longer,
we then are willing to list our selves in the service of God for a protection.
How justly might God refuse us then, when no Master else will entertain us; and
since we refused his service in the time he called for us, reject us from being
his Servants when we apply our selves to him?

3. But let us consider once more and blush; let us see and be ashamed of our
unequal dealing herein. Whom do we prefer before God, and whose Yoke is it that
we choose to take up in the first place? We will serve God hereafter, and take
his Work in hand another time; let us see then to whom we dedicate the present
time, and who is it whom now we serve.

All our actions are by way of service to one Master or another, as they have
in them a tendency and subserviency to some end. The World is divided between
Christ and Belial, and all men are Retainers to God or the Devil.

Behold then whom we serve; If we serve not God, we are employed in the Devils
work and drudgery, we serve the lusts of the flesh, are slaves to our own
appetites, we run to Intemperance and Wantonness, we serve an ambitious design,
or a covetous mind, or things of this nature; and so under pretense of pleasing
our solves, do really serve, and are slaves to the Devil.

And is this a service to be chosen before that of the living God, that we must
serve these now, and put off God till hereafter? Are these so desirable
Masters, so good, so great Benefactors, that God must wait and stand by till
they are served in the first place? Is their service so Honorable an
Employment? Is it so rich and advantageous, that this must have the present
time? Is there so much pleasure in being slaves to an unsatiable Appetite, or
in being ridden by an untractable and exorbitant passion, that the Yoke of
Christ which is easy, and his burden which is light, must be refused, to make
way for this? Is the Devil so real a Friend, or our Lusts so really beneficient
to us, that these must have the prime of our days and time? Let us consider and
blush, let us see and be ashamed that we use our God so ingratefully here; it is
God that is the Author of our time and being, and his Goodness and Bounty
provides for us, and sweetens our being to us, even the present time, that we
lay out upon sin, is his Gift (though given us for better ends) and that the
time that is future comes up, and is present to us, is the effect of his
patience and mercy toward us; and yet this time which he gives us for his own
Service and Glory we rob him of, and lay it out in the drudgeries and bondage
of his Enemies. This is an ingratitude that we should be ashamed of toward
man, how much more should we be ashamed of it toward God, since here the
ingratitude is infinitely greater.

Shame then, if there be any in us, in these things, will prove that this
present time should be given to God; for if God has it not, let us but
consider who has, and this may be sufficient to make us blush and tremble too.

And this may suffice briefly to prove that the present time is the time in
which we ought to work the Works of him that sent us, we must work while it is
day.

3. The Third Thing to be enquired into, Is the Reason why we must thus work
these Works in the present time, and that as the Text gives it us, is, Because
the Night comes when no man can work; the meaning of which is, when death once
comes, it puts an end to all our working, and it will be too late to do then
what should have been done before.

A Reason that wants nothing but our serious consideration to make it
invincible; and surely we are not therefore lazy and negligent, careless or
remiss in our duty, because we want either Reasons or Motives that are proper
and powerful to stir us up to the doing of it, but because we want hearts to
weigh the force of the Reason, and are either stupid or inconsiderate, when we
have to do in matters of this nature.

I shall therefore, To quicken and help your consideration, before I consider
the reason it self, by a step or two lead you to the strength and force of the
Reason.

1. Let this then be considered, That we have Work to do for God in the time
that God has given us upon Earth; and therefore we are not at our own disposal,
and may not serve whom we please, or Work or let it alone as we find our selves
inclined; but our Task is set, our Work is appointed, and woe be unto us if we
do it not. For he that does not his Work, is idle and useless, and is an
unprofitable Servant; and how dreadful a doom is past upon him, let us hear
from the Lords own mouth* Mat. 25. 30. Cast ye the unprofitable servant into
utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth:

2. Let it be considered, That as we have Work to do, so we must come to an
account for our Works, and we shall be examined both what we have done, and
how. In plain terms there is a day of Judgment to come upon us all, and the
work of that day will be to proceed upon, and according to our Works. This the
Parable of the Talents proves, Matthew. 25. 19. this the Author to the Hebrews
tells us, Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed unto men once to dye, but after this the
Judgment. And this the Preacher concludes his Sermon with, as being Words of
great weight, and as being desirous to leave them well infixt in our memories,
Eccles. 12. 14. God shall bring every Work into judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.

An account we must come to, and that so strict, that none of our neglects or*
loyterings can escape unobserved; and a search so punctual and exact, that it
will produce the very hidden things of darkness, and bring to light what we now
hide so close from the eyes of men*

What then might be some comfort to the slothful Servant here, the hopes that
his Master may neglect or forget to call him to an account, can be no shelter
nor support in this case to him that neglects to do the Works that God sent him
into this World to do; for as his Work is set, so also a day of account is
determined, and every Soul, and the secrets of it shall be brought into
judgment.

3. Add to this, That when death comes, it will be too late to set about our.
Work, that being a state in which no Work can be done, and then we have the
full force of the Reason apparent; we have Work to do, and we shall be called
to an account whither we have done it, and if death comes, it cannot be done,
and therefore it follows, and the reason is too strong to be denied, that we
ought to do our Works while we have time and life, because of approaching
death, The night comes when no man can work.

And now having thus considered the strength of the Reason, wherein it lies;
let me consider the Reason it self in its parts, and urge the necessity of our
Working now, from such considerations as the Reason it self will allow: And
here I shall betake my self to the words of the Text, and consider the Reason
as it lies there; and so it may be taken into two parts, and yet either of them
retain the force of a Reason to urge us to the duty under consideration.

1. The night comes.

2. When it is come, no work can be done in it.

1. The night, that is death comes; in which these things are employed, which
may serve to heighten our diligence, and to hasten us in our Work.

1. The night comes, then death is certain, and will undoubtedly be with us,
for in that it is said it comes, it undeniably proves that there is such a thing
as death, since that which is not cannot come. And this is a thing not more
certain in it self, than it is evident and apparent to us, That we are Mortal,
and when our part is acted, must go off the Stage of this World, constant and
daily Experience teaches us, and proves it to us. This is the Path that is
daily trodden by all sorts, ages, and conditions of men, the Young and Old, the
Poor and Rich, Bond and Free, Male and Female, all meet together in the
Chambers of Death, and lie down to rest in the dust. This is the common fate of
Man kind, and that irreversible Decree past at the first Transgression, from
which no man ordinarily is exempt. Methuselah ran a long Course, yet after Nine
hundred sixty and nine years he dyed; and Abraham lived well, and was the
Father of the Faithful, and the Friend of God, yet after an hundred threescore
and fifteen Years he gave up the Ghost, and dyed.

And there want not daily Memento's of our Mortality, even in all those things
that are daily obvious to our eyes; the constant course of Winter and Summer,
and of Day and Night put us in mind of our putting off the Glories of this
Life, and of our sleeping in death. The Winter strips the Earth of her glory
and beauty, and leaves her naked, it hinders and determines her fruitful
seasons, and death takes down our Pride and Pomp, and ties our hands that we
cannot work.

At night we uncloath and go to bed, and how far soever we ramble in the day,
we then leave our Labors, and confine our selves to a narrower compass to take
our rest till morning: And in death we strip and lie down in the Grave, and our
Bodies take their long sleep till dooms day morning wake us again. Our great
Estates, and numerous Lands shrink up in death to six foot of Earth* and our
stately Seats, and ceiled Rooms, and costly Furnitures, give way to a
Winding Sheet, a Tomb, and a Coffin. Thus Night and Winter are fit Emblems to
us of Death, and serious Memonto's of our mortal state.

The certainty then of this should mind us of the work we have to do, and
engage us to be diligent at it; our time is stated, and nothing is more sure
than that its end will come, and death will overtake us; our Work is appointed,
and so is our time too; why then do we waste or trifle away that time which
has its limits fixed, and will certainly be determined by death? Why then do
we project great things for our selves here, which death will strip us of, and
turn aside from that work that God has appointed us to do; thereward of which
no death can deprive us of? This very Consideration that death is certain,
should make us more careful in our work, and sit more loose, and be more
indifferent to any advantages or enjoyments of this life. If our work be done,
death cannot rob us of the reward of that, but may be embraced as an advantage,
being a Rest from our Labors, and a refuge from every Calamity that here we
are burdened with, Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord,
from henceforth, yea says the Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors,
and their Works do follow them. But for all other things which are the
advantages of this Life, only death robs us of them all, and brings the Great
and Mighty into an equal state with the Poor, Ignoble, and Mean. The Grave
knows no difference, and the Worm knows no distinction betwixt finer and
courser flesh. He that marches to the Grave in a stately array, and with a
solemn pomp, and he that steals silently into the Chambers of death, and makes
no noise nor bustle at his going, both find an equal Entertainment in the dust,
and both have the same Kindred and Relations there, and both with Job must say
chap. 17. 14. To Corruption thou art my Father, to the Worm thou art my Mother
and my Sister: Our Greatness leaves us at the Grave, and no distinctions remain
after death, but such as a faithful serving of God, and a conscientious
industry in our Works may give us. Why then do we neglect our work that would
live with us beyond death, and are fond of things that perish as to us by it?
since the night comes, that is Death is certain.

2. The night comes, Then Death is at hand, it comes! Then it is hastening on
toward us, it is already in the way, and onwards in its journey to us.

And this the shortness of our Lives, (when they are at their longest) plainly
speaks. If once we are born, even by the course of Nature, we have not long to
live, and threescore years and ten, which is the age of a man, is but a poor
pittance of time, if it be compared to the Eternity that depends upon it. The
very first step that we set into this World, is onwards toward Death, and to
the Youngest as well as to the Old, it may be said death comes. Our Life is
compared to a Race, as swift, as short as that, the startingplace is from the
Womb, and the Goal is the Grave, and all the while between our Birth and
Decease, we are in our Race hasting on to death. As soon as our day begins to
dawn, the night also begins to hasten its approaches; and we do no sooner begin
to live, but we are going onwards toward death.

How should this Consideration then hasten us in our Work, and make us more
diligent and industrious, our time is short, and the end of it at hand, our
Work is great, and we have much to do; how unreasonable is it then for us to
loyter or be idle, and how much more for us to be doing of Evil, which must be
unravelled and undone again? All our time is little enough for our business,
there can be none to spare for evil ends, or for a foreign service; our End
draws on whither we mind it or no: Prudence then would teach us to ply our
Work, that the end of our time and our work may meet together. Let us always
then be well employed, that death may find us so when it comes, and that time
cannot be far off; The night comes, that is, death is at hand.

3. The Night comes: And this implies that the time of death is uncertain; the
night comes! Then no man knows how near death may be, all that is said of it,
is, that it comes; this makes the thing certain: but there is no determination
when it comes, and this leaves the time of it uncertain as to us. It Is true, it
may be coming, and yet may be a great way off, and it is as true, it may be at
hand, and just now at the door.

And this is a thing so daily made good to us by Experience, that it justly
becomes matter of great wonder, that men regard and lay it to heart no more; we
see daily men likely to live long, on a sudden cut down, and their days are
come to an end; when we thought they had been scarcely arrived at the middle of
them. And we have now another fresh instance of it set before us; and here is
one gone to his long-home, who according to the course of Nature had lived but
half the Age of a man.

And this still adds more force to the Reason, To be mindful of our business,
and to hasten our Work, for we know not how so on we may dye. Instances of
sudden and unexpected Mortality are not rare, which makes it the more to be
admired, that those that remain will flatter themselves with the hopes of a
longer time here, when they see so great experiences to the contrary. How mad
are we then that put off the doing of that Work which is so necessary to be
done, to that time which it is absolutely uncertain whether we shall ever have
or no. That our Work be done is necessary, that if we neglect the present time,
we shall have another to do it in is uncertain; so that we venture our Souls
upon a Contingency, and hang our Eternal Happiness upon that which may very
possibly fail us. A piece of Imprudence that were ridiculous in our Worldly
affairs, and yet men are not ashamed thus to act in a case that concerns
Eternity. The Plowman will take his Season, and the Mariner his Wind and
Tide; the Trades man will not let slip his Market; and every man thinks it
wisdom to take a good Offer while we may have it, for fear we should miss of
the like again; and yet in things of far greater Concern than these, we are not
aware that we egregiously play the fool's in turning off our business till
hereafter, and in letting slip the fair proffers and opporrunities of the
present season. So sad and miserable a thing it is to be blind in Spiritual
things, and to be habituated to Evil. An ordinary prudence would teach us to
act more like men, and to be more diligent in our Work in the time we have,
since we are not sure of any more, for the night comes, and death* is sure,
but the time is uncertain, and no man knows how soon it may come.

And thus the consideration of Death is and ought to be a Motive to us to
improve our time, and work while we may, for we must dye, and that ere-long;
and who knows how soon? but then we have to enquire into the reason or strength
of this Motive, which makes the consideration of death to come an Argument for
our present diligence; and that lies in these words, When no man can Work.

2. This is then the Second and strongest part of the Reason, When the night is
come, no Work can be done in it: We had need be diligent in our Work while we
have time, for if death comes it will be too late to do it, or to set about it;
we must work now in this life, or not at all. Psalm 6. 5. In death (says the
Psalmist) there is no remembrance of thee. All our Works there cease, death
puts an end to every contrivance and design, and whatsoever remains to do, when
we come to die, remains undone to all Eternity; for the state of death is an
unalterable state, As the Tree falls so it lies, and as death leaves us, so
judgment finds us; what we are then, such we continue for ever; for the night
being once come, no man can work.

Now our working may be considered as it is employed; either,

1. In doing what was never done before; or,

2. In mending what was ill done, and in both Cases, the night comes, when no
man can work; our state is fixed by death, and our works are at an end both
ways, and then we can neither begin any work, nor pollish, nor finish what was
before begun.

1. We work in doing what was never before done, but no man can work thus in
death. If we have not begun to serve God in this life, it will be too late to
set to that Work when we are dead, for that state and time is all appointed
for reward, and nothing at all for Work; it will be too late then to begin to
love or serve God, for then it will be only enquired what we have already done,
and not what we would now do. This is the time that is given us in order to
Eternity, and upon the improvement of this, the determination of that Eternity
whether it be to happiness or misery does depend.

After death succeeds the Judgment, and every man shall be judged according to
his Works; Our* Works then are done when we die, and after death nothing more
remains, but to receive our judgment according to them. This is the time of our
Work, that the time of our Wages; here is our Seed time, there is our
Harvest, Gal. 6. 7, 8. And whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap;
for he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he
that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.

This then strongly enforces upon us the duty of working while it is day, for
if we dye and leave our Work undone, there is no finishing of it in the Grave.
Let us weigh them, and consider how sad their state, how miserable their
condition must needs be who are prevented by death, and die and their work is
undone. Who can lie down in Everlasting burnings? and who can stand before an
incensed God? for our God is a consuming fire. How sad would it be to see a
Soul rouling in endless flames, and too late cursing its own negligence and
folly? how sad would it be to hear him wishing in vain for the time that was
idled away and misspent, and to see the anguish of his Soul, because his work is
undone, and now remains no time to do it? And let us suppose this to be our
case; for if we are not wise betimes, it will certainly be so: Let us suppose
our Souls in such a state as this is, that we may awaken our selves betimes,
and while we have yet a day upon Earth, may be wise to employ and lay it out
for God. For happy are they that see their folly betimes, and are betimes
convinced that that their work is yet to do, while the time yet lasts in which
it may be done. Sad and unspeakably miserable are those convictions which are
first found in Hell, for since they cannot there put us upon work, their
effects can be nothing but Eternal desperation.

Let us then be wise in time; let us remember that there is no work in death,
and withal remember that the night comes; and let this excite us to diligence
in our duty, and hasten us to work the works of him that sent us, while it is
day.

2. Work may be emplyed, in mending what is done ill or amiss. And in this
sense too there is no man can work when the night comes. It will be too late
then to review our works with hopes to repair their defects. Alas, the time for
these things is at an end, and it is now too late as well to mend as to make.

Repentance and Amendment are the works of this life, single repentance is part
of the misery of the next. Hell is full of Penitents, for there is none that
comes into that place, but does soon repent him of his former negligence, and
that he improved his time no better, that he minded no more the grand Concern,
and made no better provision for his eternal state; but this sorrow cannot end
in joy, nor this repentance be to salvation; for it is a repentance without a
reformation, and a sorrow for sin when it is too late to forsake it. As Death is
inexorable, and will not be deferred by entreaties, so is the judgment too, and
will not be altered by fruitless tears and vain promises of amendment. Let St.
Augustine read us our doom in this case, Venturum est judicium, crit and tunc
poenitentia sed infructuosa. The judgment is coming, and then men will repent,
but it will be fruitless. It will be so in respect of the product of fruits
meet for repentance, the forsaking of sin, and leading a new life; and
therefore it will be fruitless too as to the ends of repentance, or as to the
promises that attend upon our repentance here, the blotting out of our sins and
a remembering our transgressions no more. What we do must be done here, there
is no returning from the dead to reform; nor is there room for repentance and
reformation in the grave. Let the Papist talk of their Purgatory as a middle
state after death, where souls make satisfaction for their neglects in this
life, and being purified by fire, pass from thence to heaven. The Scripture
tells us of no middle state after death between heaven and hell, and of no
satisfaction but what Christ made by his obedience and sufferings When we die,
we are determined to one of the two, and all souls pass, either to eternal
bliss, from whence is no fear of falling; or to everlasting woe, from whence is
no hopes of returning. And what satisfaction soever can be made to divine
justice for sin, it must either be obtained by says in Christ, and that is
only attainable here; or else it is made by our sufferings after death, and
there no sufferings of ours can suffice, that are not eternal.

So that whatever can conduce to our eternal welfare, is only to be done and
obtained here; while we live there is hope, if death once seize us, our state
is determined, our work is at an end* it is necessary then that we work the
works of him that sent us while it is day; and that because the night comes,
when no man can work.

Let the use of all then be, to persuade us to remember and practice our duty
now in time, to improve the present season, and to use the day while it lasts;
and since we have heard that there is in death no doing the work that we left
undone, nor any mending that which was done ill; let all serve to stir us up to
diligence both at and in our work.

1. To diligence at our work; That is, Constantly to employ our selves in the
works of him that sent us; to let pass no opportunity of serving God either in
the duties of his worship or in doing good in our generations. Our work is
great, our time is short, we had need make haste and ply it hard. Death is
coming, and the period of our days is at hand, where it will be too late to
set about our business; let us then now work the works of him that sent us; and
happy is he, whom when his Lord comes he shall find so doing.

2. Let it stir us up to diligence in our work, To do well what we do; for
there is no amendment in the grave. Let us not think that any thing will serve
the turn, or that God will be put off with our work slightly done. As we must
do the works that God has appointed, so must they be done as he requires, or
else we may perish for failing in the manner of our duties, as well as for
neglecting them as to their matter. Death will be sad to the unbeliever, and
the lewd and prosane may well dread that day; but it will be as sad with the
hypocrite as with them, for the hypocrite and unbeliever shall have their
portion together. For he that has done his work only to be seen of men, or
barely to stop the mouth of conscience; he that works only for by ends, and
employs himself, though in the works that are required, yet for other ends than
God appointed, serves himself and not God; and becomes a slave to himself and
his own interest, and has not done the works of him that sent him; because he
did his works for other ends than God allows. The judgment is at hand, and as
we shall be judged according to our works, so shall our works be called into
judgment too, and be severely scanned what they are; and happy is he and only
he whose work will abide the trial.

And now to shut up all in the words of the Preacher, Eccles. 12. 13, 14. Let
us hear the conclusion of the whole matter; Fear God and keep his Commandments,
for this is the whole duty of man* For God shall bring every work into
judgment, with every secret thing; whether it be good or whether it be evil.

And thus I have done with my Text, but the occasion upon which it was chosen
administers farther* matter of discourse still. As I have spoken thus much to
you from these words, so I suppose it is expected I should speak something more
concerning the person whose Decease gave occasion to this Sermon.

You are not ignorant that my usual Custom heretofore in this Case has been
either to be silent altogether, or to say but little. For I confess my self too
little a friend to that common usage, to give a fair Encomium of a person whom
I knew not very well, merely because it has been a custom to praise Folks when
they are dead; and to conclude a Funeral Sermon with a Commendation. But I know
you expect that I should break both my Custom and my Silence here; and this I
am the rather inclined to do, because my acquaintance with him while he lived,
makes me able to speak truth and yet to speak well of him now he is dead.

And therefore I should think my self unjust both to him and you, should I be
silent here. Unjust to him, if I should deny to give him that Elogy which is
his due; and unjust to you, in denying to set before you so good a Pattern and
example for your Imitation.

It is I confess an agravation to our sorrow, and like grating upon a Sore, to
remember what a one we have lost; yet since he is lost to us, there is this
comfort in it, that he was such a one. It Is our sorrow that so good a man is
dead, for the greater is our loss; yet, it is an alleviation of our sorrow that
he was so good that died; since it is his unspeakable advantage.

His death indeed was sudden and immature, if we respect the time of his life,
having run but a little more then half the length of his Race; but yet I have
reason to believe that it was neither sudden nor immature as to his readiness
and preparations for it. For since death is never sudden indeed, and so
unwelcome, but to those that have not done the works of him that sent them
(they may well wish the night farther off that have all their work to do) I
have reason to say that upon this account his death to him, whatever it may be
to us, was neither sudden nor immature.

For to consider the works we have to do, either relating immediately to God,
or as they concern our Neighbor, we shall find him to have been a labourer in
both, and that no sluggish one* and a Workman that we hope is not now ashamed.

He was one that made a Conscience of honoring God in the duties of his
worship and service, and one whose attendance upon the ordinances we have
reason to believe, was for better ends then to make a show, and to be seen of
men. His attendance upon the public worship was frequent and constant, as
could be expected from one so remote; his hearing was with attention and
diligence, and his conversation showed that all was not lost that he heard, but
that the Seed sown was received into a good and honest heart. He was a constant
guest at the Table of the Lord, rarely if ever missing of any opportunity to
partake of that ordinance, a thing the more remarkable in our times, in which
that ordinance is fallen under a great neglect, and in most places this Table
is but very thinly set with guests. His behavior there was with that reverence
that became a creature in so near approaches to his God; and his deportment was
such, as was to me a sign of his previous preparation.

But all this was public, and what was obvious to the eye of the world, where
the Hypocrite may strain hard to make as fair a show. And as to him, I durst
not build my hopes upon this alone, if this were all the foundation I had for
them.

Let us follow him then from the place of Gods public Worship into his Family,
and observe his deportment there; and there we might see that he left not his
Religion at Church, as having no use for it any where else; but he made it his
Companion at home as well as here, and made it his business to serve God in his
house as well as at the Church.

Besides his joining in prayer with his Family, he had his stated times for
private prayer, which he constantly attended to by himself, and often took in
his Wife to be a partner with him in them. And his course and way of life, and
his discourse, as occasion was offered, showed that these exercises of Religion
were not counterfeit or forced, or were merely a mask put on for a show, but
that they proceeded from a principle of piety within, and from a heart seasoned
with grace, and a real desire after that which is good.

At the first entrance of that Disease into his Family, of which he died, I can
bear him witness The Small Pox.
that he took it as became a Christian to do; neither slighting the providence
nor slavishly afraid of it; neither despising the chastnings of the Almighty,
nor fainting under his corrections; but cheerfully casting himself into the
arms of Providence, contentedly resolved to abide by what God should determine
concerning him.

As to the time of his last Sickness which was but short, his Disease was such
as sometimes took away the use of his understanding; yet then, when his tongue,
that unruly member, was at liberty to walk at its own pleasure without the
guidance of the understanding, it was never heard to utter any thing that was
unworthy of, or unbecoming a sober or a Christian man: An evident argument that
it was so accustomed to the words of Soberness and Truth, that it knew not how
to go out of those paths, when left to range at its own liberty.

He was not without serious apprehensions of his approaching end; and then when
the hypocrites hopes fail him and all false grounds of hopes or peace vanish,
his comfort then stood firm; and though the Tempter was not wanting in his
assaults, yet he could not destroy his peace. He called to those that were
busy about him in helping him against his bodily distemper, Come let us
soberly think what Christ has done for poor sinners; and being told that the
ground of hope was in the infinite mercies of God through Jesus Christ, he
replied, There in is my comfort. And another time he told them, The Devil has
set upon me and has struck me to the heart, but I have overcome him and he is
gone from me.

And if we consider the other part of his work, in that relation that he stood
in toward man, the most part of you know as well as I, that it was such as no
man could blame. And without descending to particulars, it might be enough for
his commendation, but to observe that universal regret that is among all men of
all sorts, that had but any acquaintance with him, for the loss of him. For if
we consider him in those particular relations in which God had set him, as a
Son, as a Husband, as a Father; in those three he might well stand to very many
as a pattern of obedience, of kindness, and of care.

He was a dutiful Son, and possibly without injury to any, it might be added as
ever any man had; and that not only in his childhood and youth, but when he
was grown up, and became a Father himself. He never diminished his due respects
to his aged Father when he became a man and was at his own disposal; and by his
tenderness and care of his health, showed that he was far from their sordid and
unnatural mind, who think that life (though it be the life of a father) too
long, that stands between them and an Estate. He was the Staff of his aged
Fathers days, and the delight of his eyes, and was never known to be a grief
to him till now.

He was a kind and loving Husband to his Wife, and as God had blessed them with
a numerous Issue between them, so he had blessed them also with a mutual love and
complacency one in another; and that to such a degree, that what that Roman
said in his Funeral Elegy of his Se nunquam rediisse in gratiam cum Matre.
Mother, That for thirty years space he was never reconciled to her. Meaning
that there was never any difference between them that needed a reconciliation;
may be said truly of them: That for the space of fifteen years, which was all
the time they lived together, they were never reconciled; for that supposes a
difference to have benn: but in all that time there happened none betvveen
them. For it comes from the mouth of his own dear Consort (whom he has left so
much the more disconsolate, by the remembrance of so great kindness) that in
all the time they lived together, there was never any contradiction between
them in anger.

As a Father, he was tender over his children, careful of their Education, and
provident to lay up for them.

And now if we take a view of him in a large capacity, and as standing in a
wider relation, we shall find the same perfume of a good name, following him
still: I ^^ve consider him in general as a man, and at large, as a Citizen of
the World, we shall find that he did well become that station, and well
discharge the duties of that relation.

God had given him a plentiful estate, and he had withal a heart to enjoy and
use it, a blessing that does not (...) ways attend upon the possession of
riches; he lived comfort (...) upon what he had, and was never a slave to his
own possessions.

And as he did not rob himself (for I count every Miser a thief to his own
body) so neither did he rob the poor, neither in grinding them with oppression,
nor in withholding their hire, nor in being spare in his Contributions toward
their relief as he saw need; nor was he injurious to any other in any of his
dealings with them, no man being able to charge him in any instance with the
least tinctures of oppression, wrong, or fraud.

If we take him as to his carriage among men, we might see him of a meek and
quiet spirit, neither making contention nor delighting in it.

He was assable and courteous to his inseriours, and though he had fair
advantages above many others in this world, yet was not he proud, nor his heart
lift up to despise those that were meaner and below himself.

He was a friend that was faithful and trusty, and one that was willing to do
good, and to be helpful to others. His friend needed not to extort a kindness
from him by importunities, or repeated requests, but he was ready (where it lay
in his power) to prevent his asking, by doing him good.

As to his Morals, they were such as deserve a peculiar remarque in these
licentious times; wherein Diogenes, were he alive, might take his Candle and
Lanthorn again at noon day to go seek for a sober temperate young Gentleman. He
was one amongst those few that wanted nothing to make him run with the herd and
to be debaucht, as the most are, but an inclination to it. For he wanted
neither youth nor wealth; his years were not such as made him past those
extravagances, and he had a purse better able to bear it than many of them
have; and associates to allure to and encourage in such courses could not long
be wanting in so degenerous an age as ours. But yet for all these inducements,
he kept himself pure from the pollutions of the age wherein he lived; being
managed by a spirit free from that sordidness that rules too much now in the
most; that can relish no pleasures but what are sensual, and too plainly
brutish. I have heard him often take occasion to discourse concerning the
pleasures and advantages of a holy life, of the comfort and serenity of a good
conscience, against the clamors and troubles and scoffings of this World: And
to one that told him how much piety and virtue, and the serious practice of
religion was discredited in the world, and accounted ridiculous and foolish,
his answer was, Let them stay till the end, and see who is the fool then.

And to that end he is now arrived, where I question not but he enjoys the
benefit and reward of his works; and knows by experience, that (whatever the
mad world esteems it to be) it is neither ridiculous nor foolish to be sober or
pious; and that it is not only our duty, but also highly worth the while, to
work the works of him that sent us while it is day.

Thus far I have been able to speak of him from my own observations, and to
give this account of him from my own knowledge; having been beholding to the
relations of others but for three instances in all that I have said. Had I
called in help, or made it my business to make Collections, or studied to set
him out to the full, I might have given a larger Character, and a much fairer
Encomium of him; and yet perhaps not have said more than the subject would well
bear. But let this suffice.

But now, of what use is all this that has been spoken of him, or to what
purpose? Is it for his sake that is dead and departed from us? Alas he needs it
not, it is no advantage to him now, that we think or speak well of him: It Is no
addition to his glory above, that his ashes are perfumed with the odor of a
good name; or that his memory is valuable or precious amongst us.

The design of all this that I have said of him is your benefit, and he being
dead, yet speaks to you, and reads you a useful Lesson.

In that he so lived and so died, lived so well and died so soon; there is
matter of direction for your practice in both of them: in the one he is a
pattern, and in the other a monitor; and so both by his life and by his death
he speaks to you.

1. By his Life. Here is offered to you a fair pattern for your imitation; for
therefore are the dead commended, and a recital made of their virtues, that the
living may be provoked thereby and encouraged to do well. A good name is a
blessing that is promised to good actions; and the Wiseman tells us, Prove 10.
7. That memory of the just is blessed, when the name of the wicked shall rot.
But this, as I said, cannot reach to the state of glorified souls; the greatest
use of their good name, is for those that survive: that others may be
encouraged to do as they have done. This the Apostle calls upon the Philipians
to do, and this is our duty also as well as theirs. Phil. 4. 8. Whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are
of good report; if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, to think on
these things.

2. By his Death. And so while we see a young man taken off almost in the midst
of his days, it gives a fair warning to you that survive, to husband and
improve your time. This shows that it is dangerous to delay and put off our work
till another time, or to trust to Youth, or to hope for too morrow; for Youth
cannot secure us from death, and too morrow often fails those that stay and
hope for it. We see here that Death has inverted the order of Nature, and the
Father closing the Eyes of his Son, whom he hoped might have outlived him
long. The lesson then that his death reads us, is this, That life is uncertain;
and this should make us afraid to defer our work, lest the night should steal
upon us ere we are aware of it or prepared for it. Let every one of us
therefore resolve upon our work, and set roundly to it; let us take the present
time, which God allows us to work in, and requires to be spent in his service;
none ever complained in the end of beginning this work too soon; when many have
perished and been lost for ever; who always thought it too soon yet to begin.
Death draws on, whether we will provide for it or no; and whether we work or
loyter, the fatal hour still approaches; it cannot be far off to them from whom
it is farthest; and by this instance it appears it may be nearer than we are
aware of. Having then before us an example that proves the truth both of the
Text and Sermon, Let us work the works of him that sent us, while it is day;
the night comes, when no man can work.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 29. line 15. read implied; p. 30. l. 28. r. Life only,

Books sold by Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside.
A Morning Exercise against Popery.

The Young Man's Instructor, and Old Man's Remembrancer. A large Exposition on
the Assemblies Catechism. By T. Doolittel.

1. Forty six Sormons on the whole Eighth Chapter of the Romans.

2. A Practical Exposition on the Four select Psalms. viz. 4th, 42, 51, 63. The
whole being in 45 Sermons. Both by Tho. Horton, D. D, late Preacher at St.
Hellens, London.

Child's Delight, with Pictures for teaching English, to which is added an
English Grammar.

Reading and Spelling made easy, wherein all the words of our English Bible,
are set down in an Alphabetical Order, and divided into their distinct
Syllables. By Tho Lie.

Liberty for Captives. By Tho. Doolitel.

The Plain Man's Defense against Popery, wherein Popery is proved to be (...)
against Scripture; fitted for the meanest capacity. By a Chaplain to a Person
of Honor.

Two Disputations of Original Sin. By Rich. Baxter.

An Exposition on the whole Epistle to the Colossians. By John Dally.

A Treatise of Holy Violence for Heaven.

A Plea for the Godly.

The Duty of Self-denial. All three by Tho. Watson.

The Immortality of the Soul. By Tho. Wadsworth.

The Almost Christian. By Matthew. Mead.

Spiritual Wisdom improved against Temptation. By Matt. Mead.

A Method of Meditation. By Tho. White.

The Godly Man's Ark. By Edm. Calamy.

The Heart-Treasury, first and second parts.

Closet-Prayer. Both by Oliver Heywood.

A Treatise of Quenching the Spirit. By Theoph. Pawlwheel.

The Sinfulness of Sin. By Ralph Venning.

Mysterial Union between Christ and Believers. And, Sober Singularity. By
Rowland Stedman.

John Janeway's Life.

Saints Encouragement. Both by James Janeway.

The Spirit of Prayer. By Nath. Vincent.

A Plain Exposition of the Assemblies Catechism, By Tho. Lie.

Weaving Spiritualized; or, The Weaver's Pocket Book* By J. C. D. D.

Eighteen Sermons by William Whittaker, with his Funeral Sermon. By Dr. Ansley.

Reformation or Ruin. By Tho. Hotchkis.

The Life of Dr. Staunton, with a Dialogue between a Minister and a Stranger;
and a Discourse of Christian Conference.

Index Biblicus, or, A Table of the Holy Scriptures.

A Plain and Familiar Discourse concerning the Lords Supper By Rich. Kidder.

Antapologia, or, A Discourse of Excuses; setting forth the variety and vanity
of them. By Jo. Sheffield.


