TO THE Honorable House of COMMONS, Now assembled in Parliament: The humble
Remonstrance of John Smith, in behalf of the Inhabitants of MARGATE.
A Letter written by John Smith, Expenditor of Sea-works of the Town of
Margate: To the Right Honorable, the Earl of WARWICK.
Right Honorable,
KNowing your judgment, skill and experience to be great in Maritine affairs,
and your Power and Place enabling to redress this our condition and heavy
grievances, being a business of that concernment, as the neglect there of may be
of dangerous consequence to the whole Isle of Thanet, but surely, if not
speedily provided for, will bring suddenly an unavoydable destruction upon our
town of Margate through want of timely repair of the Jettee works, the Sea
there having of late done no little harm. I am the more bold to give you a
short relation of our present state and condition, and what has been formerly
done touching the same, hoping your Lordship will not suffer us any longer to
be wearied and wasted with a long and chargeable attendance, and we thereby be
subjected to apparent and sudden ruin; but you will afford us your assistance
for the saving of us and our poor town: Be pleased to know, that above thirty
years ago, sundry houses in Margate were taken away by the rage and
outbreakings of the sea; whereupon the Inhabitants did sue to the Lord Warden
of the Commissioners of Sewers, to have the town for the future secured against
such outbreakings, and for that end desired fifteen able Yeomen of the country
to take a view of the town, which was done accordingly, and thereupon all those
houses and lands which were in danger of the sea, were taxed and scotted for
the making and maintaining the works against the sea, which works upon the
setting up cost near 2000. l. and these scots and assesments were continued and
paid for twenty five years, and thereby through the blessing of God much good
has come to the town and whole Island there, there having not been any loss
either of houses or lands, while the scot was continued.

In the year 1641. I was made Expenditor of the works there, by the
Commissioners of the Sewers, allowing me a scot of two shillings in the pound,
of such houses and lands as were formerly scotted, and in danger of the sea,
for the maintenance and reparation of the works, and 36. l. taxed, and to be
levied out of the Peer, as appears by the Scot. But upon my suit to the
Chmmissioners, in respect I could not so well attend the same, as another,
without neglecting my calling; Another was appointed, viz. one James Heniker,
but he refused to take that office upon him, saying the same would undo him,
whereupon I was constrained to continue still Expenditor: But upon my demanding
a scot for the next year (for it was the custom to have one every year) for
repairing the Sea works; some particular men moved the commissioners to have
the scot given over, and that every man might defend himself against the sea:
but I told the commissioners, that could not be, without laying the whole
burden upon a few for all, for thereby what any did for his own safety and
defense, would be done and serve for others, which would prove the undoing of
them that so did it, and yet not be able to keep up the works.

Upon these differences, the Commissioners did wholly reject the said works,
the best and greatest part whereof, having had no reparation and maintenance,
by violent rage of the sea has been taken away since, as also many houses
there and highwayes, by the outbreakings of the sea thrown down and carried
away, to the undoing of many the inhabitants. Wherefore I; being Expenditor,
for the prevention of the loss of the town, borrowed 200. l. for which I yet
pay use, for defending a small part of that place, having for these four years
last, spent more to defend my self and the town against the sea, than all the
rents and profits of lands and houses will amount unto, and yet still subject
and in danger to lose the whole, for neglect and want of a fuller reparation;
so as if I be not speedily relieved herein, I shall be utterly undone thereby,
besides the loss of the town, and endangering the whole Island, making way for
our enemies entry there. Nevertheless all this time have I had my Rents sessed
to all assesments and taxes to the full, which I have paid, besides my free and
voluntary contributions in the beginning of the wars, even beyond and above
my ability: With the first I sent in all my Plate, being above 20. l. and
upwards: Afterward, when my Lord of Warwick came to Sandwich he being set in
the Town Hall with the Major and Brethren, and called the Townsmen before him,
to the end to see and understand how willing the Townsmen were to subscribe for
men and moneys; when the best and ablest man there did not subscribe for above
five men, and yet most of the subscribers did not send in their moneys, being
forty shillings for every man; Notwithstanding, I did subscribe for six men,
and according to my undertaking sent twelve pounds by a safe messenger of my
own charge: but in regard the greater part of the subscribers did not send in
their moneys according to their undertaking, my money was returned back unto me,
with which I bought a very good Gelding for the State, being the first man that
bought any horse for the public service there: seven months I kept this horse
upon my own charge, which cost me five shillings a week at the least: when the
Troop was made up, I furnished the Rider, of my own proper charge, with
pistols, saddle, and all other furniture fitting, and likewise provided and
gave the Rider sword, boots and spurs, with money in his purse for his further
encouragement, at which my doings some with us were not a little displeased;
neither was I afterward backward upon any occasion offered, to express my
willingness and readiness to advance the service of the Parliament.

But the eminent danger we were daily subject unto by reason of the
outbreakings of the sea, the greatest and best part of the Jettee works being
taken away; The which for want of due reparations, in January last I came up
with a Petition subscribed near with threescore hands, thereby desiring an
Order from the Parliament for some Timber out of some Delinquents lands, to
make up the sea-works, and to have the accustomed Scot continued for the
preservation of the Town of Margate, which Petition, upon reading, was very
well approved of, though I had attended five weeks before I could have the same
read, but at length with much solicitation I obtained the same; And your
Lordship, upon reading thereof, declared, how you conceived 200 Tuns of Timber
would be too little for the work: and thereupon your Lordship, with the rest of
the Committee, gave order to view the sea-works at Margate, but before I could
procure the Gentlemen appointed to meet to view the same, I was put to above
twenty several journies, to my no little travel and charge.

The Gentlemen appointed for that purpose, promising to come to Margate, I
provided a dinner of my own charge for them, but two only came, who told me
they could do nothing of themselves without another: Thereupon I entreated
them, though they wanted one of their number, they would give way to some
Workmen to measure the works, whereupon workmen were sent for, so I procured
three Carpenters, who measured 55 rods of work, which they cast up, and they
conceived every rod of work would take up five tun and a half of timber for
single work, and double work would ask as much more; It was two months before
I could get them together, after I was forced to make several journies to
Dover-castle to procure Major Boys Governor thereof to Margate, and going
often thither for that purpose, I happened to meet with Sir Henry Heyman a
Parliament man, with whom I made bold to lay open our grievance to him;
whereupon he was persuaded to go to Margate with me, and at my request he
desired and gained Major Bois to go with him: Upon view of the works, they
found the same was gone to ruin, and that the Peer of Margate was the cause of
the destruction of a great part of the Town, and this Peer was accustomed to
pay scot to the said works, but for these four years and upwards has not paid
one penny, yet some particular men make a benefit of the Peer money, which can
be proved by very able witness.

Our humble desire is, That there might be an account given every year to some
Justices of the Peace there, the respective Mayors of Sandwich and Dover for
the time being, and some of the Townsmen of Margate to be joined with them for
passing the accounts, and the one half of the profits of the overplus upon
their accounts may be allowed for the maintaining the said works; and whereas
our Scots were 2 s. the pound, we are willing for the ease of the town to take
12. d. the pound, and 1. d. the pound for goods shipped and unshipt, and 2. d.
for every chaldron of coals from the buyer, and some other things mentioned for
the ease of the houses and lands which are in danger as aforesaid. And seeing
the making up of the works will be a great charge, and if not timely done, will
endanger the town; We desire to have Timber from Hide, the Mayor there
certifying that he has wood will serve for that purpose (if order be given for
the same) to the value of 100 Tun and upwards: And likewise if we may have
Briefs granted for the free and voluntary collections of the well-affected in
the Island and other adjacent Counties, it will much conduce to the furtherance
of the works, and ease of the Townsmen of Margate, for otherwise we shall not
be able (without wronging the arrears of the scots, which will lie heavy upon
the inhabitants) to repair the works, and to raise the 200. l. for which I am
engaged, and crave allowance of. This done; And if I may have secured the Scots
for hereafter at 12. d. the pound, and have the profits of the overplus of the
Peer, and poundage of other goods shipped and unshipt, as in a schedule is set
forth: I will engage my whole estate, both lands and houses in Margate which is
worth near 1000. l. for upholding the sea-works there for ever; which not any
man (I believe) in all Margate, nor in the whole Island will undertake to do.

My Lord, I pray you consider of our present state and sad condition, I have
been the larger in the relation thereof, for that I would have your Lordship
not only informed of the truth thereof, and the danger we lie continually
under, but likewise to let you see what trouble and charge I have been at, and
how wearied and discouraged with attendance, often waiting on your Honor and
the Committee, with Council; but hitherto all I could do, ineffectuall, my
travel lost, and the fees and moneys given my Council, has served to no
purpose. By which doings and slow proceedings (if your Lordship afford not
help) I shall be utterly disabled further to prosecute this good work, and
every well affected will be discouraged either to engage or undertake the same
for the future; and what mischief may ensue thereupon, and how Malignants and
disaffected will be imboldned who have opposed us herein, I leave to your
Lordships consideration. When Major Boys gave me his warrant for 24 Tuns of
timber, which came to 36. l. being the arreare for one year due by the Peer
of Margate, the same was slighted: when afterward your Honor issued another
warrant to the same purpose (you being then at Wamouth castle) confirming the
Majors warrant, the same was likewise disregarded and disobeyed by the Peer
wardens of Margate, who would neither give us the timber, nor money in lieu
thereof, but disposed the same as they thought good themselves, some to their
private use, and selling some for sign posts, yea though we would have given
them ready money of our own for it, we could not have it, such is the malignancy
and disaffection of these to this good and public work. All which I hope your
Honor will see timely remedied and redressed, and will not suffer us to be
longer exposed to contempt, and such apparent destruction, nor further wearied
and wasted with a long and fruitless attendance. Therefore my humble request
unto your Lordship and the rest of the honorable Committee of the Admiralty,
is, That you will be pleased to give your order and present direction for what
you intend, and conceive fit to be done touching the whole business: And thereby
I, and many more shall have cause to bless God for you, and shall ever be
ready upon all occasions to express my thankfulness, and approve my self to be

Your Lordships in all respective obedience JOHN SMITH.
July 14. 1646.
The copy of a Certificate from the Mayor and Jurats of the Town of Dover.
TO all Christian people to whom these Presents shall come: JOHN GOLDER Gent.
Mayor of the Town and Port of Dover in the County of Kent, and the JURATS of
the same, send greeting in our Lord God everlasting.

Forasmuch as we hold it the office of Magistrates, and the duty of all other
persons, to certify and declare the truth, in all matters and things doubtful
or suspicious, whereby wrongs and injuries may be avoided, and truth take place
and be manifested, especially being thereunto requested: Know ye therefore,
that a great part of the Village of Margate in the Isle of Thanet in the said
County, a Limb of this Town and Port, is in danger to be overflowed and ruined
by the Sea, (the Works and Jetties about 25 years past made at the great charge
of the then Inhabitants there by Scots granted and allowed by the then
Commissioners of Sewers for those parts having been of late, for want of
repair, subverted and ruined by the rage and violence of the Sea) and thereby
diverse houses overwhelmed, foot and horse-wayes diverted, and other houses
likely to be carried to sea, to the impoverishing of diverse persons, and decay
of the said Village, if some speedy course be not taken for the repair and
making of other Jetties there. In witness whereof, We the said Mayor and
Iurats of the said Town and Port, the Seal of Office of Majorality of the same
Town and Port have caused to be set and put, the four and twentieth day of
December,

Anno Dom. 1645. Exam. per me Fra. Raworth, Com. Cler. Vil and Port Dover.

Right Honorable,
IN pursuance of your Lordships command, The Peer at Margate, and the defense
made by the Works at the Shore for the defense of the Town have been surveyed
by Sir James Oxenden Knight, Major Boys Governor of Dover-castle, and Henry
Crisp of Queeks Esquire

And we find,

That about 25 or 26 years since, there was a piece of work added to the said
Peer of Margate, which had proved very advantageous for the Peer, but
desperately ruinous for part of the said Town.

That before the making of the aforesaid new piece of Peerwork, it is not known
to any man living that ever there was any work at the shore for the defense of
any of the houses of Margate, or that there was any need of any such work; but
since the making of that new piece of Peerwork, there has been as much
Tymber-work set down by the Inhabitants at the shore for the defense of the
houses there, as by credible relation has cost them fifteen hundred pounds and
upwards, the which is now wholly ruined by violence of the sea.

Whereupon we conceive, that if the Peer be continued as now it is, the Town
must suffer; and if the Peer do not continue as now it is, the Peer will
quickly fail, and the Public suffer for want of trade.

The houses at Margate now in danger, are conceived to be near the fourth part
of the Town, and will require fifty five rods of new work, which will take up
five tun and a half to every Rod of single work (by the judgment of the best
experienced workmen) For which, they are humble suitors to your Lordships.

James Oxenden, Knight. Major Boys, Esquire Henry Crisp, Esquire


Right Honorable,
I Humbly desire that You will be pleased to consider the great charges I have
been at these four years, for the care of the Town of Margate, and that you
will give me a speedy answer.

1. I was constrained to hyre 200. pounds, to keep up a small part of the Town
for the preservation of it, paying interest for it.

2. I have been eight months, since I got my Certificate from Dover, and three
several journies to London, and many journies I made before I could get my
Report; and long waiting with great charges, with Counsels and other expenses,
which has cost me above six score pounds.

3. It is above an hundred pounds out of my way, by neglecting of my Calling,
upon this business.

4. There is not one man in Margate allows me a penny toward my charges: I
have waited these seven weeks in London with no little expenses; If I had set
out twenty Light-horses on my own charge, it would not have put me more to
misery: This public business has cost me for my own self above 420. pounds.

I desire your Honors that you will take some speedy course for Timber and
Moneys, otherwise the Town will suddenly come to ruin. And that your Honors
will be pleased to pass an Ordinance for continuing of the Scot, and for
payment of the arreares due upon the same to the Expenditor John Smith, And
that all such houses as are scotted toward the Sea, may be free from all other
assesments. And that your Honors be pleased to send six Brass piece of
Ordnance, and Ammunition for the preservation of that part of the Kingdom in
Margate, for it is a place of great concernment.

FINIS.

