THE TRUE PATRIOT's SPEECH TO THE People of Rome.
From SALLVST.
Indignatio and Dolor Omnibus,
Vis ad Resistendum Nelli aderat.
Vell. Paterc.
ROMANS,
THE Present Circumtances of our Affairs, the Power of the Prevailing Faction,
Your Tame Submission, the Loss of all Justice, and the Danger of Speaking
Truth, are such Discouragements, that I should be Silent, as well as Others, at
this Time, if my Concern for my Country were not above all other
Considerations. It Is hardly worth While, Fellow-Citizens, to put You in mind of
the Indignities You have received of late Years, and the ill Treatment the
Bravest Assertors of Your Privileges have met with, from some of the Nobility,
when We are now reduced so low, that a Few Great and Ill Men govern Us, whose
Right it Is, and whose Chief Business it Should be, to Watch and Keep such
Miscreants in Awe. However, for my Part, I have resolved to make War upon this
powerful and pernicious Cabal, and will use that Liberty, which, as a Freeman
of Rome, I am legally entitled to; but it is in Your Power only, to make my good
Endeavors effectually serviceable to You. I would not be understood to excite
You to any kind of Force: No; Let Us fight 'em with their own Weapons. The same
Engines which they have always made Use of, to raise themselves, will, I doubt
not, if rightly employed, even yet be sufficient to pull 'em down. Not long
since, We thought We had Reason to complain of the Squand'ring the Public
Money, and of the Exorbitant Riches, and Excessive Power, of some Particular
Persons; but Now, those Very Persons are so far from being contented to go off
with Impunity, that They have again worked Themselves into Power. They have
their Pontificates, their Governments of Provinces, and their Triumphal
Processions: They strut; They domineer; and treat Us with such Scorn, and
Insclence, as if They thought it not Robbery, but an Honor, to have cheated
the Commonwealth. Our Slaves, My Countrymen, Our purchased Slaves have Spirit
enough to disobey the unjust Commands of their Masters: Shall We, that were
Born Free, stand Still, and patiently suffer the Yoke to be put about Our
Necks? But, 'pray, Let Us consider, a little, what sort of Men These are, that
have thus seized upon the Government? Why, they are Men of Evil Principles, and
Worse Practices, Designing, Proud, Rapacious, Violent, and Unforgiving;
Determined, by all Methods, to prosecute their Interest, and postpone to That
all Regards to Religion and Honor. And this Society, this Cabal, What shall I
call it? This Iunto, are firmly and strongly united, by that Wicked Tie, of
having All been involved in the Same, or in Equal Crimes! However, if We had
been as Careful to Preserve our Liberties as They have been Industrious to
Wrest 'em from Us, Our Constitution had not been so Shocked and Unsettled as
it is now; nor would so many great Posts of the Commonvealth have been in the
Hands of the most Forward, instead of the most Deserving. Our Ancestors
ventured their Lives and their Fortunes, to preserve their Privileges, and to
keep up a proper Balance in the Government; And shall We Not stir One Step, Not
dare to run the Least Risque, to deliver down those Privileges to Our
Posterity, which We have received from those Ancestors? Surely, We ought the
More Resolutely to Contend for 'em, as it is More Dishonorable to Lose 'em,
than Never to have Had 'em. But, perhaps, it may be asked, What is it proper
for Us to do, in this Situation? Shall We address? Shall We impeach? I will not
take upon Me to prescribe to You a Particular Method of Proceeding; but I will
be bold to say, That Some Stand ought Immediately to be made, Some Stop, if
possible, to be put, to the growing Tyranny of this Iunto; that the Commons of
Rome may never have This Reproach, That They, who used to Oppose and Condemn
the Least Irregular Step, or Encroachment, even in their Kings, now Lie down,
Easy and Satisfied, under the Heavy'st, and Most Arbitrary Oppression, of Five
or Six of their Own Fellow Subjects! If We have not Spirit enough to rowze
Ourselves upon this important Occasion, Our Condition is very Wretched, and
almost Desperate; For, Whilst We are subdued at Home, faster than We conquer
Abroad; Whilst no Man is allowed a Place in the Senate House, that is not
thought, by These Masters, Less likely to Defend the Peoples Liberties, than to
Give up his Own; Whilst hardly any One can be secure from Punishment, that does
not deserve it; Whilst we give such Immense Taxes, without Appropriation; and
let 'em be distributed, without Account; Whilst We have not Courage enough even
to own our Fears; Whilst We are forced to magnify Successful Blunders: In a
Word, Whist we lavish our Treasure, and husband the War; a Man may venture to
prophesy, without being a Conjurer, That, unless the Gods are pleased to work a
Miracle for Us at Home, as they have done Many Abroad, the Time is not far off,
in which this Ancient and Noble Frame of Government will be Totally demolished;
and We, that have been so often Conquerors, shall be no longer Freemen.

Dixi C. MEMMIUS.

Amsterdam: Printed in the Year 1656.


