This is to all deer FRIENDS who keep faithful in their measures to the END.
MY dear friends,
the Father is well pleased in him who is meek, and lowly in the heart, and in
obedience unto him through the leadings of his spirit of power, in which the
Fathers love is manifest, which leads in the low ground, where the safe way of
everlasting peace is known, where all things are quiet, and still, where the
small still voice is heard, whereby the dead comes to live in the powerful
life, of the fathers love, which compasses about the seed as a Wall of
everlasting defense, whereby there is boldness and courage comes in, to Jacob
the worm, that its then able to stand, in that everlasting strength, which is
made perfect in weakness, and to the weak is only to be known, that the weak
then may say I am strong, feeling strength ministered forth from that which is
begotten of the Father, which never was comprehended by the earthly wisdom,
which is all scattered as the smoke before the wind, when he arises that was
laid in the earth, who has long been as a servant, and is now to be served,
that he may be Lord over all, who is a man of sorrows, and leads through the
suffering state, that by the obedience of faith, through the power of the Cross
which crucifies, and brings to the death that which is to die, that the vail
may be rent and the way into the holiest of all made manifest, and that
received in the new ground, which abides for ever, even that which comfort
the weary soul, and satisfies the longing spirit, and replenisheth the dry and
barren land, with the Rivers of the valley and the springs of the desert, that
the meek in the earth may rejoice for ever, and through the earth may grow as a
Lilly in Summer.

For plainly its the poor thing that receives the Gospel, and the meek of the
earth that shall inherit substance, and it is the thing that is low that will
last for ever, and the seed of the shepherd that shall be set on the throne,
and he that is low shall never fall, neither shall his footsteps at all be
moved, he leads the creature in the fathers fear, and guides the tongue in
wisdom, and its him alone that all are to wait for, to receive and continue
in, even him that is acquainted with grief, who never opens his mouth in
perverseness, but speaks life in wisdom through the power of the fathers love,
which overpowers the soul as an overflowing river of oil, which makes all well,
and heales the grieved spirit, which none ever comes to find, but such who
alone walks with him who humbled himself to the death of the Cross, and became
as a servant, though he was Lord over all, in him there is safety for he is the
Rock, and the sure hiding place, even out of the sight of the world, and from
the tempters power, for the Devil has nothing in him who is meek and low, in
whose mouth there is found no guile, and this is he that has been long set at
naught, whose tenders of love constrains obedience to himself because of the
beauty that is in him, which from them is hid, over whom the vailis, through
which they cannot see the comeliness of his love.

I rest, in the Fathers will your Souls friend, H. S.

Friends
the Lord is with us, and the God of Heaven is on our sides, and the Lord is
our defense, who has spoken life and peace to my soul, behold he will be with
us for ever, and the holy Arm of his precious dreadful strength shall no
Nation under Heaven prevail against; dwell all in the power of God, and the
blessing of the God of Heaven will be upon you all for ever.

THe spirit of the Lord came upon Saul and he then Prophesied, but after, for
his disobedience he lost the Kingdom, and was afraid of the shame before the
people, and the kingdom is rent from such who disobey the Lord, though they
were among the Prophets like Saul, who afterward went to the Witch: And the
witchcraft is near to all such as stand not in the counsel of God, to cause the
people to hear his word, and not their own, whose word feeds not the flesh
above the seed, but is as a hammer to break the Rocks in pieces, and it kills
and makes alive, and opens a way through the earth, for the prisoner of hope to
come forth.

And the spirit came upon Balam, who was reproved by the dumb thing, that he
was exalted above, and resisted, and he durst not go beyond the word of the
Lord, he durst not go beyond that which was quick and powerful in the heart,
nor overreach it, to do more or less, for the gaining of half a kingdom in
the earthly. And such as exceed Balam therein, May expect to be cut down also
by the true seed as he was, and so to fall among the rest of the enemies of the
Israel of God, who is dreadful in power.

And the spirit came upon Iehu, and also upon Iephthah, who after offered his
own daughter for a sacrifice, and the spirit came upon Sampson, and yet he not
standing in wisdom, was betrayed of his strength by a daughter of the
Philistines, who also afterward put out his eyes: And so the spirit may come
up in some, and yet afterward they lose that with which they should see, and
some there are that use their tongues as in the name of the Lord, upon whom the
spirit never came, (mark that.)

And after Saul had lost the spirit of the Lord that came upon him, he
prophesied by an evil spirit which troubled him, that he could not be quiet,
but troubled in himself, and yet prophecy to others with fearfulness, least
another should come to rule over him and his kingdom, who afterward destroyed
himself.

And Cayphas the High Priest prophesied, and he spoke not of himself, and yet
he was an enemy to Christ the power of God, and such as are got up high, like
high Priests, above the measure of the man of sorrows, speak from self, or
flesh, and are in that, by which he that is the light does suffer, and the
power is resisted, and the seed in others oppressed, and they not brought to the
living Minister within the vail, that abides a Priest for ever, but are in that
which will die, and many might be named, upon whom the spirit came. And Judas
also had obtained part of the Ministry.

But now consider, the spirit rested, and rests upon the branch of the root,
even the seed it self, for the spirit came upon many, but it rested, and rested
upon the seed only, which is but one, even the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, and counsel and might, and knowledge, and of the fear of the
Lord, in the fear of the Lord which is a fountain of life, which life all are
to feel, and not be kept from, by words without it, but to feel that which
comes from it and savor that: That Jacobs Tent all may know, which who so
dwells in is blessed, against whom there is no enchantment, and where the
Witchraft cannot enter, which leads from the straight and narrow way, to the
spirit and life, into a liberty to that which is fleshly, where that is kept
alive, which the word in the heart, as a hammer and a sword, should have broken
and cut down, for Paul was grieved with such, who at first could almost have
plucked out their own eyes for him, and after sought occasion against him, and
themselves to be made perfect in the flesh, and all flesh as grass is to be cut
down with the sword of the Lamb, and where the flesh is above, the spirit
suffers by it, and the vail is thickened, which keeps from the unity and out of
the life and power of God.

H. S.

THe Lord God of Heaven preserve all every where in the love, long-suffering,
forbearance, meekness, and gentleness, out of the strife or self-seeking: For
surely woe will come upon that spirit where ever the Lord finds it, and even
the Lord knows the desires of my heart in true simplicity has been, that his
righteous judgments might pass betimes upon every appearance thereof in my
self, and all others, and I believe that God will never prosper it in any,
therefore my exhortation in the everlasting love of the God of heaven is. That
you all every where live in true brotherly love, and remember Joseph's advice to
his brethren, that they fall not out by the way: The heavenly God of power, and
life and virtue, keep ye out of all this, in the life of wisdom and meekness,
where rife shall never inhabit, nor death enter within the walls of Zion, in
which their dwelling is, who keep themselves undefiled, and remains in the
fear of God, to whom I commit you all, and to the power of the word of his
saving grace, praying to the Lord for you that evermore you may continue in the
love of Christ.

Your friend and brother, Hum. Smith.

The END.
Printed for M. W.


