DIVINE LOVE spreading forth over all NATIONS, OR, The glorious day of unity,
peace and concord, tendered unto all the meek of the earth. Given forth from a
tender Compassion to the captivated Seed of the noble Plant of renown, which is
hid in all sober, humble, wise, and professed religious Emperors, Kings,
Princes, and People in all Nations, Kindreds and Tongues over all the whole
World, and from all sorts of people who know not the power of Truth in the
inward parts. That they all may come to have the hidden Treasure opened in
them, and be gathered into the glorious Life of eternal Peace.

By a lover of the souls of all mankind, a Servant of the God of Life, Truth
and Love, who for declaring openly against immoderation and unrighteousness of
men, am a prisoner in my own Nation of England at the City of Winchester,
where, to them that know not Love, am only known by the name of Humphry Smith.

This to go among them called Heathens, Gentiles, Jews, Turks, Infidels, and
all sorts of Nations upon the Earth.

London, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate.

HEarken and hear ye mighty ones of the earth, that love righteousness, and
all you prudent ones that can receive instruction, who have not yet hardened
your hearts as many have done, against a day of slaughter; even all ye, who are
willing to come to meekness, and receive understanding, that your souls may
live, who have an ear ready to be opened to entertain counsel, that the wisdom
of the most High you may attain unto, and come to taste of the virtue of the
substance of that which nourishes all things living, that the unsearchable
life of the unlimited power you may attain unto, and come to that which was in
the beginning, and partake of the life which over death is to reign, that to
the immortal Being you may be led: Be ye now therefore awakened, and feel the
operation of the breath of life in you, and let the virtue of the word of life
break through you, and the power thereof break through the earth, that you may
come to be over-shaddowed with the influences of divine love, and filled with
the sweet content of the riches of the life eternal, that nothing may stop the
river of healing oil, nor hinder the issuings forth of the pleasant streams of
living water, but that in it your souls may be refreshed, and your life grow up
as a fruitful vine, that under the wing of the most High you may be shadowed,
and rest in the shelter of a Rock.

For the Almighty power of the infinite Being is spreading forth it self, and
the eternal Excellency is giving forth it self unto the sons of men, that they
by humility in it may come to rest for ever, and come to the fullness of that,
which only gives satisfaction, without which there is no true peace, by which
immortallitie may be enjoyed for ever, and the life which only through death is
found, and that dominion, which through patience and long-suffering is
obtained, which only belongs to Kings and Princes, and such whom the King of
Kings delights to honor, who has eternal crowns of unspeakable glory, for
all that come to him in the humble simplicity and innocence of uprightness,
with that love which thinks no evil, which comes from that life, in which no
evil does stand.

For he that inhabiteth eternity has roared from the highest heaven, and the
Almighty, Wonderful and Terrible God over all, has thundered with the might
of his power, to the revealing of the hidden things of darkness, and
discovering the foundation of all worships practiced by all mankind upon the
face of the whole earth, and the ground of their revolting from that which was,
and was to be their life, that by it they might have lived for ever, who from
the holy life and virtue of all things being departed in their transgression
and rebellion against the light, whereby thick darkness have covered all
mankind, and brutishness in knowledge has happened unto many, and inordinate
affections have had dominion, and sotishness has blinded the mind, and the
things that are made in the earth has filled the earthly heart, that in it the
living power that made all things cannot have entrance, without which living
power received in the heart, there is not eternal peace, by the enjoyment (or
possess on) of all the things that are created in or upon the sea or earth,
neither is there any manner of worship that obtains life to the soul, until
therein man comes to be guided with that, by which the soul at first had its
life, by which man was made, which is light; for the eternal power who is
light, is breaking forth of darkness, and shining forth as the brightness of
the clear morning, that all the dark corners of the earth may be enlightened
with the beauty thereof; which light in the lowly and the meek may be felt,
who obeying it may know it shining more and more to the brightness of the day
of glory, whereby all Nations may come to taste of the virtue of the life, and
come to know the covenant of peace, which will heal all the breaches and restore
the unity of all nations, that one peaceable covenant over all nations may
spread as the morning cloud, and be all covered under that, which shadows over
all the upright in heart, who love the breathings forth of the holy life, and
keep their minds to the humble seed, continuing in the pure fear, thereby in
them to have the fountain opened, that they all may drink at the spring that
shall never be dry, whose souls comes to be as a watered garden, and their
inward parts as a vessel of oil, their hearts being enlarged with the abundance
of peace, and because of salvation rejoicing for ever, that all nations may be
at quiet, and every one feed under his own vine, and none destroy nor devour
one another henceforth for evermore.

For by the mighty wonderful operation of the power of the one light, which
shines in and overall, were all things made, and all mankind upon the whole
earth, from the life of which one light, was breathed into man, that by which
man might be kept in the unity, and abide in the oneness of Spirit, the which
though all mankind are gone out from, by sin and evil, yet that which is but
one in all, which was before man (and sin) does still in man remain, even the
light proceeding from the life, which was the life of man, without which he is
dead unto God, which light remaining in man a free gift from the God of life,
power, and love, by it may all mankind seek after the living God and find him,
who is not far from every one, but is near unto all that seek him, in the meek
lowliness in the heart.

And that all Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Judges, and all Nations, Languages,
Kindreds, Tongues, and People, upon the face of the whole earth, may come to be
restored into unity, peace and concord, and be united together in one bond of
love and peace, and never learn war any more, and that they may all come to the
true worship of the one God of life, power, and light, in and overall, and
never to have hatred one against another, concerning professed religious
worship, nor differ and strive about that, by which the souls of all mankind
come to be saved, nor about the way of attaining thereunto.

And that all Nations and Peoples may receive the virtue of the life it self,
by which man may come to live for ever, in that noble state of prudence,
innocence and wisdom, in the durable dominion of divine honor, ruling in the
excellency of the omnipotent power (of the most infinite God of life) over all
that, which at first in divine wisdom, was sub^ected under man, who then bore
the Image of the immortal God of power; and live in the glorious state of peace
and quietness, out of wrath, envy and trouble; and that man may be brought
into that noble state of uprightness, and come to be directed and guided with
that, by which he may be renowned for ever, and leave the memorial of his
righteousness for a sweet savor unto many Generations to come.

Therefore all ye wise and prudent, ancient and honorable, devout, zealous and
religious ones, let all your minds be turned from the varieties of conceptions
in the vain imaginations, and the vain thoughts of the dark mind, which leads
forth into the carnal conceivings of things without the pure substance of the
one immortal life, which in man lies hid, from all that carnal wisdom, which
naturally rules in man, who is fallen from the dominion and life of the God of
wisdom, whose delight is to dwell in his people, and reveal in them his
secrets, and make known unto them (by that which searches the heart) the
unsearchable riches of the mysteries of his will, instructing them, as a tender
father, in the perfect way of life, that unto them, who feel his power, an
eternal inheritance he may give, and at last receive them in the arms of his
love, with him to reign in the light of endless glory for ever.

Wherefore let all tongues be silent, and let every evil motion be denied, and
the passage of every vain thought be stopped, and let dread and fear possess him
that has done evil, and let the inward parts be searched with the light of
life, which is in the heart of every one of you; and let your minds be wholly
turned from all the visible carnal fading glory to the light of truth in you,
which being by you loved, will lead you into meekness, and into true humility,
which leads to, and goes before eternal honor, and brings to be honorable
in his power, who rules in the hearts of (Emperors and) Kings, who fear before
him, and he only who searches the heart is to be sought after, above all
things, and the operation of his mighty power is to be felt in the inward
parts, judging that which has kept man from the knowledge of his life, and
condemning and overturning that which has hindered man from the sense of the
feeling thereof in him; the which being turned unto, and loved, followed and
obeyed, will bring judgment upon that in you all, which has long kept you
from the dominion of pure divine glory and love, in the slavery of fleshly
worldly glory, which has more and more begotten you into that, which lusts
after the beauty which is to perish with them that die in it.

Now therefore awake ye all to righteousuesse, stand in aw and sin not, comune
with your own hearts, and be still, and in the cool of the day, and quietness
of your minds, listen ye then to the voice of the Word in your hearts, and
prize and tender that which moves in you, against that which is evil, and come
to be guided by that in you which is light, which comes from him who is the
God of love, whose love is already shed abroad in the hearts of many, which
constrains them to wait in his light to receive his power and further
discoveries of his will, who wills that all men should be saved from eternal
death and damnation, and not die under the horrible terrors of his fierce
wrath, nor perish in the darkness of unbelief, and rebellion against that
power which made man at first upright, and now from a fatherly pity does call
after all mankind, that they may return from evil, and come unto him, and be
saved from wrath to come, and find plenteous redemption in the life of his
power, and be gathered into the comeliness of his love, and translated into the
kingdom of his Immortality, and reign with him who sits upon the Throne of
unspeakable glory, ruling in and over all the kingdoms of men.

For behold the day star of the morning is risen, and his glitterings is
enlightening the dark parts of the World, and unto all Nations is it arising, to
declare in the hearts of many, the springing forth of the day of judgment upon
the vail and night of darkness, which has long covered that from man, by
which all mankind might come to see the fountain of endless love, which now
through judgment, by the brightness of the light is brought near unto all
people whose hearts are open to receive it, and the light of the morning star
(which arises in the hearts of the beloved chosen seed) is bringing to
judgment the hidden things of dishonesty, and in secret reproving the
double-mindednesse of man, that deceit, defraud and hypocrisy out of him may
be cleansed, and the ground of all vanity, tyranny and lust discovered and
removed, that death upon death, with judgment through the light may come, that
by the light, life and Immortality may come forth and arise in the strength of
immortal power, breaking through that which separated man from unity, peace and
truth, that unto it all nations may become subject, and by the force of its
lowliness be drawn together to the Hill of holiness, and rest together in the
heavenly felicity upon the mount of refuge for ever.

For the Son of Righteousness is risen with healings in his wings, and an
overshadowing power is with him, and they that come to the fruit of his love,
are filled with peace to their souls, and so comes to that which may be
received in the heart, and which is given to heal all nations, and spring up in
the midst of them as a tree of life, whose fruit shall never fail, whose years
shall never have an end.

And this glorious light of life and power of love is springing forth of
darkness in the hearts of thousands in the Northern parts of the World, and is
shining forth in the brightness of righteousness, toward the utmost parts of
the South, and unto all kinreds upon the face of the earth, reaching from the
East to the West, to declare and give the knowledge of immortal power, which in
the hearts of the humble, harmless and single-minded may be felt and received
if they rebel not against the light in the conscience, nor remain in the
strength of their own carnal knowledge, but be willing to come out of all that
which they must die unto, or perish with, and leave all that which never
brought them to the enjoyment of everlasting rest to their souls.

Now therefore all ye tall Cedars of the earth, whose heads are lifted up on
high over others, and whose minds are exalted above the principle of meekness
in your selves, this are you all to know, even that power of eternal life,
which is to rule in and over you, and see that by the greatness of your honor
and glory in this present World, your hearts be not thereby lifted up, in
pride, ambition and wrath, so as thereby to keep your selves from the attaining
unto a pearl of far more and greater price, and of a more durable substance,
for great is the riches, honor and dignity that is coming near unto you, if you
let not your hearts be hardened against it, in the strength and perverseness of
your own wills, despising the day of your visitation of love, and rejecting the
message of life to your souls, and contemning that, by which you might come to
live for ever, and have dominion over death and hell, and escape the torment
which all them fall into in the day of their death, who die out of the Covenant
of life and peace, the which Covenant, that you may attain unto, and come to
live in for ever, let love and mercy be received in you, and then brought
forth by you, and let humility and fear be placed in your hearts with it, in
tenderness to rule over others, and let the light in you (which lets you see
the thing that is evil) lead and guide you, to speak and do the thing that is
good, right and just; and let your words be few, sound, sober, and meek, and
hate not them, who from good will to your souls brings the reproof of life unto
you, or publish the word of repentance among you, or proclaim this message of
love and peace within your borders, let not such be harmed, for a day and time
of visitation is coming near upon you all, and happy may you be, if you receive
instruction and love the light.

And this is something of that voice and language which the power of life
filled my heart with, in love toward all people, and might have been in words
more at large declared among some of them, had I not been hindered by
hard-hearted men in this present unjust imprisonment, after I had given up my
body and life for that end, and therein to obey that power, by which I and all
men living were made, unto the which power, most men being dead, knows not
the life I now live, and therefore by them am I imprisoned, reviled,
reproached, and persecuted, with the rest of them who are in scorn called
Quakers.

H. S.

THE END.

