The Doctrine of the CHURCH of England, Concerning the Lord's Day, or
Sunday-Sabbath, As it is laid down in the Liturgy, Catechism, and Book of
Homilies. VINDICATED From the Vulgar Errors of Modern Writers, and settled
upon the only proper and sure Basis of God's Precept to Adam, and Patriarchal
Practice. WHERE An Essay is laid down to prove, that the Patriarchal Sabbath
instituted, Genesis 2. 3. celebrated by the Patriarchs before the Mosaic Law, and
re-inforc'd in the fourth Precept of the Decalogue, was the same day of the
Week, viz. Sunday, which Christians celebrate in memory of the perfecting of
the Creation of the World by the Redemption of Mankind.

Stand ye in the Ways and see, and ask for the old Paths where is the good Way,
and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your Souls.

Jer. 6. 16. LONDON; Printed for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXXIII.

THE PREFACE TO THE Intelligent Readers.
SAd and deplorable (Brethren) have been our Sabbatarian Controversies: For
while one Extreme pleads, there is no other ground for sanctifying the
Lord's Day, than there is for other Holy Days, to wit, Ecclesiastical
Constitution, thinking thereby to oblige Christians to as religious Observation
of other Holy Days as of Sunday: They aim at an Impossibility; seeing in many
religious Persons there is imprinted this common Sentiment, That the Lord's Day
ought to be discriminated from other Days. And this Principle so deeply
imprinted, as all Attempts to obliterate, do furbish it and make the writing
more legible: Yea, the circumjacent Cold of the Devotion of the contrary-minded
(as by an Antiperistasis) enflames the Zeal of Men seriously devout, beyond the
due Bounds, and pusheth them on to the very Brink, if not into the Gulf of
Judaizing in the manner of celebrating the Lord's Day: And on the other hand,
the looser sort observing, how some of those, that with most Earnestness press
the aforesaid Ground of Ecclesiastical Constitution, do themselves observe
Holy Days, think they have fully discharged the Office of good Religious
Christians, if they sanctify the Lord's Day, as they celebrate other Holy Days;
that is, by resting from their ordinary Callings, frequenting the
Morning-Prayer (to attend Evensong is a work of Supererogation) and trifling
away the remainder in pass-times. Now what has or can be the issue of this,
but Ignorance and Profaneness, and an Encouragement to profane Sundays instead
of sanctifying other Holy Days? But I love not to be querulous ( motos praestat
componere fluctus) I would much rather help toward the calming of this
boisterous Sea; in order whereunto I shall propound these Preliminaries.

1. That the Progress of Men's Devotion for Sundays above other Holy Days into
Superstition, ought by all means to be prevented; and the Jewish Yoke of the
strict Ceremonial Rest of their Sabbath (as well as their Sabbath Day it self)
ought to be taken off the Necks of the Disciples; because that Ceremonial Rest,
being a Shadow of good things to come by Christ, the retaining of the Shadow is
a denying that Christ (the Body) is come. And bodily Rest, as well as bodily
Exercise, is now under the Gospel unprofitable, except it be ordinated to
spiritual.

2. That yet a due Respect to the Lord's Day ought by all means to be
encouraged.

1. Because this seems to be the common Notion of serious Christians, and that
argues it to be an Infusion from that one Spirit, into which we are all
baptized, and by which, as their Intellectus Agens, or common Soul, all
Christ's living Members are animated.

2. Because this is one of the surest Nails, fastened by the Masters of
Assemblies, for the Support of Religion; especially in this Age: For this
Principle is that, that not only brings Men to Church to worship God and to be
instructed by him in the Ministry of the Gospel; but also obliges them in
Conscience to do something extraordinary in their Families on the Lord's Day,
toward the educating them in the Nurture and Fear of the Lord, beyond what
they think themselves bound to do on the Weekdays; so that if this were an
Error, it would be an happy Error, as being an occasion of bringing Men to
the Worship of God and Knowledge of the Truth. And truly, if I were persuaded,
that the other Opinion (that the Sanctification of the Lord's Day has no other
Ground than Ecclesiastical Constitution) were a Truth; I should think it a
Truth not necessary to be published. For if Men did not apply themselves to the
Service of God, and promoting the Interest of their Souls, with more
Seriousness of Devotion on the Lord's Day, than it is possible to persuade them
to, in keeping other Holidays (the common Practice of most, and the Principles
of the more Religious considered) Ceres and Bacchus would have more Service
from Christians, than the only true God. For how, I pray, are our very chief
Holy Days celebrated (such as Christmas, Easter, Pentecost) Sunday excepted,
but by Carding, Dancing, Revelling, Whitsun-Ales, etc? If God therefore had not
better Sacrifices offered to him, and Men's Souls better Sustenance administered
to them on the Lord's Day, Men would rob God of his Honor, and starve their
own Souls.

3. The first Error in the Digestion of Men's Thoughts touching this
Controversy, is the common Hypothesis of all modern Litigants, to wit, That the
Lord's Day comes in as a Successor in the room of Saturday: Upon which sandy
Ground it is not so easy to lay any solid Foundation for sanctifying the
Lord's Day. For if that Day which God, by his Example and Precept, first
sanctified for the weekly Sabbath be Saturday; that Day cannot be unsanctified,
and another adopted in its room, but by an Equal if not a Superior Authority
to that which consecrated Saturday. Now a Superior Authority to the Example
and Precept of God cannot be imagined: And that which is alleged by either
Party, for the unsanctifying Saturday, falls far short of Equality to it. For
what argumentative Force can there be in Christ's rising; his appearing to his
Apostles; the Apostles assembling on Sundays for the sanctifying that Day;
comparable to the express Command of God for sanctifying Saturday; much less
can the Constitution of the Church counter-ballance it. Briefly, they proclaim
Sunday, an usurping Intruder into the Privileges of Saturday, rather than its
legal Successor, who advance it into the Possession of Saturday's Crown (to be
the weekly Holy Day) upon no better claim than can possibly be deduced for it,
while they make it a younger Brother.

4. This Error in the first Digestion being incurable, must either be removed
out of the way of Men's Thoughts, when they are pitching them upon this
Argument, or they will be ever learning, and yet never come to the Knowledge of
the true Ground, for the sanctifying of the Lord's Day; but will endlesly draw
the Saw of Contention both ways. That the abovesaid Error therefore may be
obviated, I have laid down this contrary Hypothesis, viz. That Sunday-Sabbath
is elder Brother to Saturday-Sabbath: That being assigned for the weekly
Sabbath at the beginning by God's Precept to Adam, and in him to his whole
Posterity to the end of the World; and therefore extending to all Ages, and all
Mankind: And this being assigned to the Jews only for that short time, wherein
the Lawgiver was pleased to dispense with that Nation, as to this Law given to
all Nations, and that for Reasons sufficiently palpable.

5. This Hypothesis enervates the Arguments brought against the Divine
Institution of the Lord's Day, and furnishes Conscience with a solid ground,
of bearing a due religious Respect to it, without danger of Judaizing in the
manner of the Celebration thereof.

1. To instance in their Herculean Argument, drawn from the Gloss they put upon
that Text, Genesis 2. 3. as being spoke by Moses by way of Anticipation. If that
Day that God rested on, was not Saturday but Sunday, his sanctifying the Day he
rested on, could not have respect to the after-Institution of another Day; for
what Consequence can be in this, [because God at first rested on Sunday,
therefore he appointed Moses above two thousand Years after the Creation, to
command Saturday to be sanctified] comparable to what is in this [because God
rested on Sunday (the Seventh Day in the order of the Creation) he therefore
blessed it and sanctified it; that is, separated it by his Precept to Adam, to
be the weekly Sabbath.] Indeed the dream of a Prolepsis in this Text, charge
Moses with most gross Equivocation in the use of these words, [ and God
blessed;] except we fancy an Anticipation in those other Places of his Text,
where these words occur, as Genesis 1. 22. where, speaking of Fish and Fowl, he
says, [ And God blessed them, saying, be fruitful and multiply:] and verse. 28.
speaking of Adam and Eve, he says, [ And God blessed them, saying, be fruitful
and multiply.]

2. That this Hypothesis yields a solid Ground, for the conscientious observing
the Lord's Day (so as there needs not any new Constitution be made by Christ or
his Apostles for the observing of it) is manifest of it self. For if Sunday be
the Day that God separated at first, to be the weekly Sabbath to the
Patriarchs, and was accordingly celebrated by them, before the giving of the
Law by Moses; the standing part of the Fourth Command, obliging all Mankind,
must necessarily refer to that; (and that there is a standing part of that
Precept, for the Breach whereof we are taught to say, [ Lord have Mercy upon
us;] and for the better observing whereof we are taught to pray [ Incline our
Hearts to keep this Law] is the declared Judgment of our Church). And then the
Temporary and Ceremonial Part (both as to the Day and Mode of keeping it)
peculiar to the Jews, being part of those carnal Ordinances, that were imposed
upon them, until the time of Reformation, ( Heb. 9. 10.) vanish of themselves;
as being antiquated by Christ's Cross, and give way to the Ancient Patriarchal
Sabbath. And here now our Savior's Rising from the Dead, his frequent
Appearing to his Disciples on Sunday, the Practice of the Apostles and
Primitive Church, come in seasonably with their Auxiliary Force, to strengthen
my Hypothesis, and to support the Divine Institution of the Lord's Day. For
though, as to the first Consecration thereof, these Examples signify nothing,
nor are able to stand upon that old Ground, against the joint Assaults of God's
express Precept and Example for sanctifying Saturday: Yet upon the Ground that
I have laid, they are substantial and strenuous Seconds, to prove the
Restoration of the ancient Patriarchal Sunday-Sabbath, by the Antiquation of
the Jewish Ceremonial Saturday-Sabbath; though they are not of Authority, to
appoint a new Lord's Day, yet they are safe Guides, to point us to that old
Patriarchal Lord's Day, whereon the Lord rested, and therefore commanded the
Patriarchal Church-Catholick to sanctify it, as their weekly Sabbath; in
Conformity to, and in Communion with which Church, extending to all Places and
Ages; Our Savior, after the rending of the Vail, rose upon that Day, and upon
that Day celebrated religious weekly Assemblies with his Apostles, and taught
them to do the like, during those forty Days wherein he conversed with them,
betwixt his Resurrection and Ascension, speaking to them of the things
appertaining to the Kingdom of God.

3. Lastly, this secures us from falling into Jewish Superstition, in the
manner of celebrating our Christian Sabbath; for with the Jewish Day, the
Jewish manner of keeping that Day vanishes: So that the Christian Church is
not obliged to sanctify the Lord's Day, in those strict Formalities of bodily
Rest, and other carnal Observances imposed upon the Jews; but in the more
generous and man-becoming Exercises, of contemplating the Glory of God in the
Creation, completed by the new Creation of believing, acquiescing and
triumphing in God through Christ; of attending on Gospel Ordinances public,
private and secret; of visiting the Sick; relieving the Indigent; and eating
our Bread with Gladness of Heart, on that day above others; that being the
Christian weekly Festival, and the Day which God has made for us, to be glad
and rejoice in; neither need we macerate our selves with studying when to
begin, when to end the Christian Sabbath, at Even, Midnight, or Morning: For he
who (having set his Secular Affairs in such order, as they give no Interruption
to his Sunday-Devotion) goes to bed with God on Saturday-Night, and rises with
God on Sunday-Morning, and spends the Day in such like Exercises as have been
mentioned; may, after he has commended himself (and his Family if he have one)
to God, go to his Rest on Sunday Night (without danger of profaning the
Sabbath) at his usual time. Briefly, the usefulness of this Hypothesis is so
great and apparent, both as to putting an end to all Strife, even amongst the
most Litigious, and settling inward Peace in the truly Conscientious; as I was
something jealous, lest the prospect thereof might make the Arguments I bring
for proof of the Hypothesis, seem to have more weight, than indeed they have;
till I had communicated my Papers to several Persons of more quick
Understanding in the fear of the Lord, with this humble Request, That they
would weigh their Contents in the Balance of their impartial Judgments, which,
I heartily thank them, they did, and thereby gave me occasion to rectify some
Passages, and Encouragement to commit this Tract, as it now stands corrected,
to public view. If it shall please the divine Goodness, to make use of so mean
a Person as my self, toward the settling the Consciences of Christians upon a
safe Ground, and the binding up of those Wounds, which the Church has
received, in the House of her Friends, (as the poor tattard Captive Democedes
cured Darius, after that the Egyptian Physicians had, for seven Days and
Nights, by violent handling of his dis-joynted Foot, kept him without Sleep)
Let God have the Praise, who chooses the weak and foolish things of this
World, to confound the mighty and wise. And let him have your Prayers
(Christian Reader) whose utmost Design and Ambition is to be serviceable in
promoting the Eternal Interest of Souls, and the Peace of the Church.

Your Servant in our Common Lord. J. S.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THe Patriarchs had stated Assemblies for public Worship, Page 3.
Sect. 1. They had stated Places for Divine Worship, p. 4. Sect. 2. Stated
Ministers with Maintenance. Jacob's Vow. The Egyptian Priests-Lands. Cain's
Offering, p. 6.
CHAP. II. The Patriarchs had stated Times, proved from Genesis 4. 3. and Genesis 1.
4. p. 17. CHAP. III. These stated Times were weekly, p. 19. Sect. 1. The
Computation of Times by Septimanes, common to all Ages: Weeks of Years, Genesis
29. 27. Affronts Sacred Chronology, p. 20, etc. Sect. 2. And to all Nations.
Computation by Months and Years, of human Invention: by Weeks of Divine
Institution, p. 25. Sect. 3. At the End of Days, Genesis 4. 3. is the End of a
Week, p. 28. Sect. 4. Sons of God, Job 1. 6. not Angels, but Church Members, p.
30. Sect. 5. Sons of God different from Morning-Stars. What is the
Cornerstone, Job 38. p. 38. Sect. 6. The Sons of God Joh. 1. 6. proved to be
the same with the Sons of God, Genesis 2. 6. from the Proximity of the Times. Job
Contemporarian with Phaleg, proved from length of his Age. Job was Jobab the
Son of Joctan Daughter of Edom in the Land of Us, Lam. 4. explained by Jer. 25.
Job's Country, Arabia Petraea, p. 43. Sect. 7. Elihu wrote the History of Job.
p. 51. Sect. 8. Sons of God presenting themselves before the Lord, was their
Church-Convention on stated Days weekly, p. 56. Sect. 9. The Chimaera of a
Prolepsis, Genesis 2. proved, p. 61.
CHAP. IV. The Weekly Patriarchal-Sabbath was Sunday, p. 64. Sect. 1. The
Patriarchal Sabbath was not Saturday, proved from Testimony of Heathens,
Fathers, Scripture: which makes a vast difference betwixt the Sabbath of the
fourth Precept, and that enjoined the Jews by Moses, p. 64. Sect. 2. The
Sabbath of the fourth Precept and Mosaic, grounded upon different Reasons, p.
77. Sect. 3. The Patriarchal Sabbath was Sunday, proved by two Arguments.
Saturday-Sabbaterians silenced, p. 91. Sect. 4. The first Instance of
celebrating Sunday before the Institution of Saturday-Sabbath, Exodus 16. The
pointing of the Septuagint, refers the 15th day to their Morning. Why that
preferrable before the Hebrew, p. 97. Sect. 5. The Assembly Ex. 16. 2. a
Church-Assembly celebrated on course, instructed by an Ecclesiastical Minister,
p. 115. Sect. 6. This 15th Day was Sunday, p. 122. Sect. 7. The Saturday
following was the first Saturday-Sabbath that ever was kept, p. 126. Sect. 8.
The other Instance of a Sunday-Sabbath kept before the giving of the Law by
Moses, Genesis 12. The Tenth Day there mentioned was Sunday. It was on that day,
not the 14th, that Moses and Aaron spoke to the whole Church of the Israelites,
assembled, not by an extraordinary Call, but on Course, for Religious Worship,
p. 132.
CHAP. V. God rested on the seventh Day in his New Creation. Man restored by
Faith, p. 146. Sect. 1. Proved in gross from the Analasis of Genesis Chap. 1, 2,
3, 4. p. ibid. Sect. 2. Adam fell on the Day of his Creation, p. 151. Sect. 3.
He was restored the same day he fell. The Lamb slain from the Foundation of the
World. The Covenant betwixt God the Father and the Son, betwixt God and Adam
confirmed by Oath, how. Sect. 4. From thence God smelt a Savor of Rest, and
not before.
CHAP. VI. Saturday-Sabbath being the sixth Day in order of the Creation, was
instituted upon other Grounds than that of the fourth Precept. Where it has not
footing, but only in the Ceremonial Law, was to expire at Christ's death, and
give place to the Patriarchal, p. 179. Sect. 1. The Jewish Sabbath a
discriminating Badg, an Antidote against Idolatry, by worshipping the Sun. The
day of rest from Egypt, etc. p. 180. Sect. 2. Plain Intimations of its being
local and temporary, p. 181.

THE Patriarchal Sabbath.
CHAP. I. Sect. I.
The Patriarchal Sabbath, Instituted Genesis 2. 3. Celebrated by the Patriarchs
before the Mosaick-Law, and Reinforced by the fourth Precept of the Decalogue,
was the same Day of the Week (viz. Sunday) that the Christian Church celebrates
in Memory of the Creation of the World, and Redemption of Mankind.

FOR the Illustration and Proof of this Assertion it will be requisite that
Proof be made of these Particulars.

1. The Patriarchs had solemn stated Assemblies for Public Worship.

2. They had solemn Set Times for the Administration of Religious Worship in
those Assemblies.

3. These Set and Appointed Times were Weekly Sabbaths.

4. These Weekly Sabbaths were Sundays.

5. The New Creature, Man, Restored by Faith in the Promised Seed, was that
perfect Finishing of the Creation, that made all very Good, and that from which
God smelt so sweet a Savor of Rest on the Seventh Day, as therefore to bless
it.

6. The Mosaical Saturday Sabbath being the Sixth Day in order of the Creation,
was instituted upon other grounds than that mentioned in the Decalogue, and
having no footing in the Fourth Precept, but in the Ceremonial Law, was to
expire at Christ's Death, and give place to the Patriarchal.

CHAP. I.
That the Patriarchal Church had Solemn Stated Assemblies for Public Worship,
is manifest from their having Stated Places, Separate Persons, and Maintenance,
in order to the Administration of such Worship.

SECT. I.
THat they had Sacred Places known by the name of the Houses of God, the
Presence of God, etc. is plain from Genesis 28. 17, 22. This is none other but the
House of God: meaning the place of the Altar which his Grandfather Abraham had
Erected at his first arrival in Canaan, where his and Lot's Families used to
call upon the Name of the Lord, Genesis 12. 8. And he removed thence unto a
Mountain on the East of Bethel, and Pitched his Tents, having Bethel on the
West, and Hai on the East: and there he builded an Altar unto the Lord, and
called upon the Name of the Lord. And Chap. 13. 3. And he went on his Journey
from the South, even to Bethel, unto the Place where his Tent had been at the
beginning, between Bethel and Hai, unto the place of the Altar which he had
made there at the firct: and there Abraham called upon the Name of the Lord. In
both these Texts the Place appears to be the very same where Jacob had the
Visions of God, to wit, Bethel, betwixt Ai and Bethel, (that is) the House of
God betwixt the City Ai and the City Luz: for so was that City called at the
first ( Genesis 28. 19.) and afterward, Bethel, from the House of God adjacent:
as the Towns Kirby Kendal, Kirby Lunsdal, Kirby Steven, have their Names from
the Churches there built. Now that Abraham solemnized Public Divine Worship
here, ut Familiam suam in Pietate instrueret, that he might edify his Family
in Piety (to use the words of Batablus) may be rationally concluded from hence,
that he did not only Pray there (as our English Translation seems to limit it)
but also Preach, or call to the Audience in the Name of the Lord; for both the
Heb. and Septuag. lead to that sense, Vocavit in Nomine Domini, he Called or
Preached in the Name of the Lord: that is, he professed the true Worship of God.
(So Maluenda) Predicavit de Nomine Jehovae; he Preached of the Name of God. (So
Piscator and Ainsworth (Charah Clamare, to call to God, is to Pray: to call to
Men, is to Preach, says Ainsworth: and from Charah seems to be derived (...),
to Preach or Proclaim. Hence Jacob promised, that at his return, that should be
to him the House of God; that is, there he would worship God, as the Called.
Paraphrase, and Ainsworth explain that Text. Briefly, how could Jacob so
readily have hit upon this name [ House of God] if there had not been such
things in being, as Houses of God. It is further observable here, as Ainsworth
notes, that such separate Places were styled [ the Presence of God] and that it
was from the Presence of God in this sense, that Cain was thrust: and Satan
went out, Job. 2.

SECT. II.
That the Patriarchal Church had Public Ministers separated by calling to
officiate in these Public Places dedicated to Divine Worship, with public
allowance of Tithes for their Maintenance, is manifest;

1. From Abraham's paying Tithes to Melchisedeck the Priest of the High God,
who blessed him, Genesis 14. 18.

2. From Jacob's Vow to give God, at his return, the Tenth of all that God
should give him ( Genesis 28. 22.) for he was Priest himself to his own Family,
and therefore must have been both the Paymaster and Receiver of the Vowed
Tithes (and what would this have been but a plain mocking of God under a
splendid show of Devotion) except he had in his Eye an order of Priests of the
High God to pay them unto, whose Office it was to Serve at the Altar, and whose
Privilege it was to live of the Altar. That is a wild conceit of Oleaster,
that he either meant to consume the Tithes in Sacrifice, or that his Posterity
should pay them to the Priests in the time of the Law. This last is ridiculous,
for how could Jacob's Posterity (so many Generations after) pay the Tithe of
what God had blessed Jacob with: and the first is not much better; for the
distinction of Beast and Fowl into Clean and Unclean, could have no other
ground before the Flood (seeing all were prohibited as to Man's Eating, till
after the Flood) but God's commanding some kinds of them to be offered in
Sacrifice, and prohibiting other kinds: which declaration of God's Will was so
manifest to the Patriarchs before the Flood, as Noah knew every particular
kind, both of Clean and Unclean, and therefore took to him into the Ark, of the
Clean by Sevens, of the Unclean by Pairs (Genesis 7. 2.) and Sacrificed of every
Clean Beast and Clean Fowl at his coming out of the Ark (Chap. 8. 20.) It had
been therefore an abomination to God for Jacob to have offered the Unclean in
Sacrifice. Now it is apparent that God gave him Unclean as well as Clean: if he
himself has given a true Inventory of his Goods: for he not only sends his
Brother Esau word, that he had Asses, but sends him a Present of twenty
She-Asses (Genesis 32. 5, 15.) And Chap. 30. 42. we find Camels and Asses that God
had blessed him with: yea, that in his whole Flock he had not one that he would
own for his, but confessed it stolen from Laban, that was not spotted and
speckled, etc. Genesis 30. 33. [ Every one that is not speckled and spotted among
the Goats, and brown among the Sheep, shall be accounted stolen with me.] The
Tithe of these being all Unclean, Jacob could not offer in Sacrifice: it
remains therefore that he paid them to the Priests of the High God. And such
Priests could not be wanting in the time of Jacob; for we find them in being
many hundreds of years after, and yet before the giving of the Law; witness
Jethro, Moses's Father in Law, who was Priest of Midian (Exodus 3. 1.) and a
Priest of the High God, to whom he offered a Burnt-Offering and Sacrifices,
inviting Aaron and the Elders to eat Bread with him before the Lord, Exodus 18.
12. Where, before the Lord, can signify nothing else, but in the Place
appointed for Divine Worship: Moses being now incamp't at the Mount of God, so
called from the House of God, there Erected for the Worship of God, the
Tabernacle not being yet Built.

3. That the Patriarchal Church had such Priests who had Public Maintenance,
may be also proved from Genesis 47. 22. The Priests Lands were not sold in the
Famine; but they had Portions allowed them out of the Kings Storehouses.
Potiphara, Joseph's Father in Law, was one of those Priests, and had for his
Province, On, that is, Heliopolis (Genesis 41. 45. and was probably a Worshipper
of the True God, seeing it is hard to conceive that so Religious a Man as
Joseph would have married his Daughter if he had been an Idolater; considering
how dear such unequal Matches of the Sons of God to the Daughters of Men had
cost the Old World: (which Joseph could not be ignorant of) and how careful his
Great Grandfather Abraham, and Grandfather Isaac were to provide Wives for
their Sons out of Religious Families. Yea, if Joseph was the Egyptian Ox, their
most Ancient and Chief Deity, as the most Learned conceive: Egypt was not so
overwhelmed with Idolatry at this time, but that there might be many Priests
and Servants of the True God therein. For that Pharaoh who took Sarah into his
House, seems to have had a Religions Sense of the True God, by his
Expostulating with Abraham (Genesis 12. 18.) And which is most strange, Abimelech
King of Gerar, the Metropolis of Palestine, in the Tribe of Simeon, in the very
heart of those seven Nations whose Sins were ripe so long before others, seems
in his Discourse with Abraham touching Sarah, to give great proof of the
Uprightness of his heart toward God, and did understand the benefit of
Intercession made for him by the Prayer of a Prophet, for otherwise God would
not have urged him by that argument to restore Sarah to Abraham. Now how could
he have understood that, if the distinction of Prophets by Calling, and the
Custom of Persons separate by Calling, to put up Prayers for the People, had
not been in use in his Kingdom, which he therefore styles a Righteous Nation,
because the Fear of God (that is, the True Worship of God, says Grotius) was
there, contrary to Abraham's uncharitable and rash Censure (Genesis 20. 9, 10.)
Nay from this instance of the King of Gerar and his People, it is more than
probable, that the King of Egypt forementioned, and his People were at that
time the Worshippers of the True God. And though perhaps part of the Egyptian
Priests were in that degenerate Age employed in the Service of Idols, yet the
Institution of the Calling it self, and the Public Maintenance annexed
thereto, was truly Patriarchal, as appears,

4thly. From Cain and Abel bringing their Oblations ( Genesis 4. 3.) And it came
to pass, that in process of time Cain brought of the fruit of the ground, an
Offering unto the Lord, etc. Where I note,

1. That they brought their Oblations to Adam, who was Priest, that he might
offer them to God, as the Hebrew Doctors teach, (says P. Fagius.) And the Text
makes for this: for it is not said that they themselves offered them, but that
they brought them to be offered to the Lord; that is, by the hands of Adam, the
Priest of the Lord.

2. That they brought them to the Place appointed for Prayer, as Aben Ezra
observes, from whence it may be inferred, that they met together to worship God
in a Place destined thereunto, and that there were always Solemn Meetings of
Pious Men for the Worship of God; and from Cain's not having that due reverence
to this Sacred Assembly which he ought to have had, the Hebrew Doctors
conclude, That he who has not a due regard to Church Assemblies, shall have no
part in the Age to come, (P. Fagius.) And that those Oblations of Cain and Abel
were offered in a Public Assembly, is apparent from the dejection of Cain's
Countenance upon Gods rejecting his Offering: for if God had declared his
acceptance of Abel's Offering before Cain's, only in private to his own
Conscience, what offense could Cain have taken thereat? Nay, if God by some
visible token of his displeasure, had not shamed him before the Assembly, he
would have been no more affected with a private Check, then he was with that
which God gave him afterward, notwithstanding which he slew his Brother:
besides, the Apostle's Expression is a confirmation of this, Heb. 11. 4.
[(...)] God testifying of his Gift; for to what purpose is giving his
Testimony, if it be not in public. Hereunto assent the most Judicious Divines,
who conceive that God gave open Testimony of his acceptance of Abel's Offering,
by consuming it with Fire sent down from Heaven; so Fagius, Lyra, etc. so
almost all the Fathers, says Mede, Turinus, etc. and Ainsworth observes, that
it was usual for God to declare his acceptance of Men's Offerings, or rejecting
of them; the first, by sending Fire from Heaven to consume them to ashes; the
other by leaving the Sacrifice untouched. We have Instances of the first,
Levit. 9. 24. when Aaron made the first Oblation. 1. Chron. 21. 26. when David
Sacrificed on the Threshing-Floor of Ornon. 2 Chronicles. 7. 1. when Solomon
Dedicated the Temple. And of both, 1 Kings 18. in the Contest betwixt Gods
Prophets and Baals. And in this Case of Cain and Abel* where Cain's Sacrifice
was not touched by that Fire that consumed Abel's: See Mede, Turinus, etc. See
Viccars his Decupla, Psalm. 20. 4. Nay, some Hebrew Doctors, says Fagius, tells
us, that in that Fire falling from Heaven, and consuming those Sacrifices that
God accepted, there was the appearance of the Face of a Lion, God thereby
signifying that Men's Persons and Oblations are acceptable to Him only through
Christ, that Lion of the Tribe of Judah. ( See Fagius.)

3. The third Observation I make from this Text, is, That Cain and Abel had
Families and Substance distinct from Adam's; for Abel is commended for bringing
the Firstlings and Fat of the Flock; but it would have been no thanks to him to
have cut large shives out of his Fathers Loaf. Which is another argument that
this was a Public Church-Assembly, consisting of many Families.

4. The fourth and last Note I make upon this Text, is this: Seeing Cain's
Oblation was not consumed by Fire, which way could it be disposed of, but to
the use of the Priest that officiated. For it having been once dedicated to
God, could not be alienated, without Sacrilege; and therefore must fall to the
Portion of him that served at the Altar, that he might live of the Altar,
having nothing else of the Altar to live upon, but the Remainder of Oblations
of the Fruit of the Ground. Seeing all Oblations of Beasts and Fowl were whole
Burnt-Offerings: (and therefore by the way, it is a vain Question to ask, what
became of the Remainder of such Sacrifices) and seeing also that Man was then
confined to the Fruit of the Ground for his Food. To conclude, we see the
Patriarchs had stated Public Religious Assemblies, Celebrated in Stated
Places, separate to that use, and guided by Persons separate by Special Calling
to that Work, and maintained by Tithes, Oblations, etc. Now it is against all
Reason, to think that the Faithful paid Tithes to their Priests upon any other
account than that of their Sowing Spirituals in the Assemblies of the Faithful,
whose Temporals they reaped.

CHAP. II.
The Patriarchs had Solemn Set Times for these Public Ministers to Officiate
in those Public Assemblies.

THough this be sufficiently evident from the Premises; for it is not
conceivable how such Assemblies could meet, if they had not Stated Times when
to meet: yet I shall offer these things for the proof of it.

1. It is agreed on all hands, that Ketz, the word used (Genesis 4. 3.) [At the
end of Days] signifies a precise, fixed, and certain end. Whereupon says Paul
Fagius, I am altogether pleased with this Opinion, that this Text be understood
to speak of a Certain and Stated Time of Divine Worship. The Learned indeed
dispute what stated Time is here meant, Annual, Monthly, or Weekly; but that a
Stated Time for Religious Assemblies is here meant, is, I think, consented to
by all, at least, by Silence.

2dly. Genesis 1. 14. God Created the two great Luminaries to be [Lemognadim] for
Appointed Seasons of Holy Assemblies: ad Statas Solemnitates: Let them be for
stated Solemnities, that being the proper signification of the Hebrew word, in
the Opinion of some Hebrew Doctors, who therefore put this sense upon, Psalm.
104. 19. [He has appointed the Moon for certain Seasons] this is meant of the
New Mood and Festivals, by some of our Doctors, says Aben Ezra, in Psalm. 104.
19. And the Learned and Judicious Mede (reflecting upon this word in both the
Texts of Genesis and Psalms) observes that Festivals are pointed out by Course of
the Moon. Certum est pleraque Festorum ad Lunae motum descripta fuisse. As
New Mons, the Passover, Pentecost, Feast of Tabernacles. And as the Moveable
Feasts attend the motion of the Moon, so the Immovable follow the Course of
the Sun. It will be replied, perhaps, that Moses wrote this by Anticipation,
and that his meaning is, that after the giving of the Law, these great
Luminaries should be for pointing out Solemn Seasons. But that in the Interval
of above two thousand years, they should serve only to direct men to the proper
seasons for Planting, Plowing, Sowing, Reaping, Cutting of Timber, etc. as it
is absurd of it self, so it will be made appear to be false in our handling the
next General Head.

CHAP. III.
These Set and Appointed Patriarchal Times for Public Worship, were Weekly.

SECT. I.
FOr the Proof of this, let it be observed,

1. That the Computation of Time by Weeks, is common to all Ages, for it was in
use in the Patriarchal Age, long before Moses, as is manifest from that Speech
of Laban to Jacob, Genesis 29. 27. [ Fulfill now her week] Some Learned Men, to
evade that Mortal Stroke which this Text gives the Prolepsis, are pleased to
say, that by Week is here meant Seven Years, which Jacob was to serve after his
Marriage to Leah, before he had Rachel given to him for Wife: and that the
Interpretation of a Seven days Nuptial Feast, was invented by later Jews, and
is a manifest Violation of the Text, and Contradictory in it self. I shall
therefore in vindication of that sense of this Text that I give (to wit, that
by her Week, is meant the seven days of Leah's Nuptial Feast) offer these
things to Consideration.

1. [Fulfil her Week, and we will give thee this also] Here her and this are
contra-distinguish't. And by this is meant Rachel, as is manifest of it self;
and therefore by her, must be meant Leah; and by her Week, Leah's Week. Which
can be nothing else but her Nuptial Feast of seven days: for Jacob never served
seven years for Leah. Nay, he would not have served seven days for her, if it
had not been for the love he bare to Rachel.

2. [ And Jacob did so: he fulfilled her Week; and he gave him Rachel also to
Wife] This answers exactly to Laban 's Proposal: so that her Week, both here
and there, is Leah 's Week: and, the this also, there, is Rachel also, here.
The meaning therefore of Laban 's Proposal, can be no other but this, Fulfill
her Week; that is, the seven days of Leah's Nuptial Feast: Do not disturb the
Marriage Feast by renouncing Leah, and we will give thee Rachel also at the end
of the seven Nuptial days, upon condition that thou shall serve me yet other
seven Years; for seeing I have cheated thee of thy Wages for one seven Years, I
cannot think thee so great a fool, as to trust me for one seven Years more: and
therefore consummate thy Marriage with Leah by a voluntary lying with her the
remaining Nights of the Marriage Festival (for it was against thy Will that
thou lay with her this Night) And I will cast Rachel into thy Arms, and thou
shall have thy Wages in hand, before thou begin thy service of other seven
Years.

3. They that are for this Interpretation, are the Cream of Critics, who, for
Illustration, allege that Parallel Text, Judge. 14. 12, 15, 17. concerning
Sampson's Nuptial Feast of seven days, as the Custom of those Eastern
Countries. See Munster, Vatablus, Grotius, Lyra, Estius, Junius and Trem.
Syriach, Aben Ezra, David Kimhi, Jerome Ainsworth, Cornel. a Lapide,
Bonfrerius, Malvenda, Menochus, and Paul Fagius in his Collation of
Translations. But the reasons they bring against the other Interpretation, sway
more with me, than the authority of their great Names; from the rest I shall
Cull this one of Tirinus and Ainsworth, Viz. That it is utterly inconsistant
with Scripture Chronology. For Jacob lived only twenty years with Laban (Genesis
31. 41.) The first seven whereof he served before he Married Leah, and if he
had served other seven before he Married Rachel, the six remaining years would
prove too short a space of time for the Conception, Birth, and Suckling of the
Children that were born to him after his Marriage of Rachel. For the evincing
of this, note,

1. That it was the Custom of Patriarchal Matrons to Nurse their Children. (
Genesis 21.)

2. That Reuben, Leah's First Born, was not conceived till some considerable
time after the Marriage of Rachel: for it was in pity of Leah that God opened
her Womb ( Genesis 29. 31.) [And when the Lord saw that Leah was hated, he opened
her Womb, but Rachel was Barren] A Barren Virgin sounds harshly in Physics;
and Jacob's loving Rachel before he was Married to her, more than his Wife
Leah, sounds worse in Morals.

3. After Reuben, Leah bears three Sons more, and then cease Childbearing,
while Bilha, Rachel's Maid bare Jacob two Sons, and while Zilpa (after Bilha
had given over Childbearing) bare two Sons: after all which Leah bears two Sons
and one Daughter: and after that Rachel bears Joseph, Genesis 30. and is so far
gone in Child with Benjamin before she left her Father's Country, as in her
Journying thence she was Brought to Bed, Genesis 30. So that after Rachel's
Marriage, Jacob had twelve Children born unto him at single Births, and in
several years; for the Bearing and Suckling whereof, thirteen years space is
little enough. The Week therefore that Jacob fulfilled, before Laban gave him
Rachel to Wife, and he went in unto her (which was the Consummation of
Marriage) cannot, without manifest Contradiction of Scripture, be expounded a
Week of Years, but of Days; and that Week of Days can be no other than the
seven Days of Leah's Nuptial Feast: and this fulfilling of Leah's Week, did
both suit Labans covetous humor, who by this means put off two Daughters with
the Expense of one weeks Feasting; and secure Jacob from being defrauded of
Rachel, after other seven Years Service, as he had been the first seven years.
And lastly, secure Leah's Marriage, whom Jacob might have renounced in the
Morning, if his lying with her that night in-voluntarily, had not been seconded
with his voluntary lying with her the succeeding Nights of the Feast: No
Evasion here but the Sanctuary of a Prolepsis, Jacob got Children by
Anticipation.

This argument is so cogent, as to make room for these so many Births. From the
Premises it is apparent, that the distinction of Time by Weeks, was in use in
the Patriarchal Age, long before Moses.

SECT. II.
And as this Computation of time by Weeks was common to all Ages, so also to
all Nations; witness the Transcendent Encomiums given by Gentiles to the
Seventh Day. Hesiod. stiling it, (...) the Sacred Day: which Title Homer also
gives to it more than once, and says, that on that day all things were
perfected: With whom concurs Linus, affirming that [ On the Seventh Day all
things were brought forth Perfect, that it was the World's Birthday, the chief
of Days, and perfectly good] as Gataker quotes them at large: From whence may
be Collected,

1. That it is the only certain Computation of Time wherein all Nations
unanimously agree. For though the division of Time into Months and Years, be
universally embraced, yet, about the Compution of both, there have been as many
different Practices almost, as Nations; some reckoning to a Month more, some
fewer days, some reckoning to a Year more, some fewer Months; as the Romans
before Julius Caesar, had but ten Months in their Year; and even his emendation
of the Calendar was not exact. But for this, see Scaliger, De Emendatione
Temporum.

2. That which I infer from the Premises in the next Place, is this, That the
Calculation of Time by Months and Years was of humane Invention, as being
perfected by degrees; and though the Patriarchs before the Flood, in respect of
their Longevity, had a very great advantage of observing the Course of Sun and
Moon, yet they attained not to so perfect a knowledge thereof, as to settle and
fix an Astr onomical Canon, but left that to the Industry of future Ages: for
otherwise Noah would have communicated that Canon to his Posterity, and some of
them would have kept in memory, and have delivered down by uninterruped
Succession, a Tradition so universally advantageous to Mankind.

3. That the Computation of Time by Weeks was of divine Institution, as being
perfect at first (as all God's Works are, Deuteronomy. 32. 4.) communicated to, and
received of the whole Race of Mankind without dispute, or least difference in
Practice: till God was pleased to appoint the Jews another beginning of Weeks
(as also of Years) than he had instituted at the beginning. Now it is not
imaginable how the whole World could thus unanimously agree in this division of
Time by sevens of Days, if they had not received it by uninterrupted tradition
from the Patriarchs; nor from whence the Patriarchs could derive it but from
God's resting upon, and sanctifying the Seventh Day: Of the sense of which
Text, we cannot possibly have a better Interpreter than this universal Practice
of all Nations,

SECT. III.
Except what the sacred Text gives, to which I shall now apply my self, and
begin with Genesis 4. 3. [and in process of time] or, as the Hebrew has it,
Milkits Jamim, [at the end of Days.] Many Learned men, following the Hebrew
Doctors, understand by days, a year of days; others understand by days,
years. They that by days understand a year of days, conceive these Oblations
brought by Cain and Abel, to have been brought at the end of the year, when
they had gathered the Fruits of the Earth; that being a time when even the
Gentiles celebrated the divine Goodness by Sacrifices and Praises, as Ainsworth
observes out of Aristotle, Homer, Pliny, and the twelve Tables. But I must
crave leave to dissent, not so much upon the account of the authority of
judicious Mr. Gataker, as of the strength of the reason he brings for his
Opinion. At the end of days, (i. e.) says he, that is, on the Sabbath Day,
which concludes the days of the Week. For no other distinction of days had
hitherto been mentioned by Moses, than that which comprehends the Septimane,
Genesis 2. 2, 3. An Argument of more weight, if seriously considered, than it
seems to have at a transitory Glance, for

1. It is very probable, that Adam was so taken up with the Contemplation of
Gods Mercy to him, in Redeeming him by the Blood of the Promised Seed, that he
greatly minded not any other Computation of Time, but that which God had
appointed him, in Commemoration of his Perfecting the Work of Creation, by
making Adam a New Creature; (of which, more in the Sequel of this Discourse)

2. However, most certain it is, that hitherto no Division of Time but that, is
mentioned; and if Moses had intended here to express another Computation (as
suppose, that, by Years) Years had as soon been said as Days: and afterward he
Computes the Ages of the Patriarchs by Years: if such a Computation of Time had
been now in use, as a Year, why did not Moses mention Years here as well as
afterward.

SECT. IV.
The next Text I urge for Proof of this Branch of my Discourse, is Job. 1. 6.
and 2.

1. There was a Day when the Sons of God came to present themselves before the
Lord. And, Again there was a Day, etc. Or, the Day came about again, when the
Sons of God, etc. I wonder to find so many Learned Men Interpreting [ Sons of
God] in this Text, by [ Angels] herein following the Septuagint [caterva
Angelorum] But the best is, it will not go down with the most Judicious of
them, without the Salvo of a Prosopopeia; for when this question is put, How is
this Place according to this Exposition [the Sons of God, that is, the Angels]
to be taken? Literally, or Figuratively? Tirinus indeed answers, Literally:
from the authority of Athanasius, Salvian, and Lactantius. For Lactantius, I
think it not strange that he should interpret [ Sons of God] by [ Angels] in
this Text of Job, seeing I find him expounding that Text, Genesis 6. 2. by Good
Angels, as being of opinion that the Good Angels, who were set to guard them,
sell in Love with the Daughters of Men. The other Opinion mentioned by Lyra and
Estius, were more tolerable than this of Lactantius, to wit, That the Sons of
God, that is. Daemones Incubi, the Unclean Angels committed with the Daughters
of Men: but that it will be hard to find a Text where Devils are called the
Sons of God: and yet I am persuaded, we may as soon find a Text where that bad,
as where good Angels are styled the Sons of God in the Patriarchal Idiome; as
will be cleared by and by: for though Tirinus be for the Literal sense of this
Text, yet the rest who concur with him in their expounding [ the Sons of God]
to be [ Angels] will by no means allow that this Text be taken Literally.
Others (says Emm. Sa) accipiunt Parabolice, interpret it Parabolically. This
thing was not done as is here reported, but there is in the words a Prosopopeia
or Hypotyposis, says Mariana, Haec non crasse and ad Literam gesta. So
Grotius, Per Prosopopeian vel (...) indicat haec omnia, etc. So Scultatus: the
Divine Providence is here explained under the Form of humane Judgments, So
Cocceius. And though Pinda and Sanctius say, That no Inconveniency or Absurdity
is Entailed upon the Literal sense. Yet Mercer flys to the subterfuge of the
Figurative Sense, from those Absurdities that follow from the Literal: Satan
(says he) cannot properly be said to come into the Presence of God (for in
God's Presence is Fullness of Joy) nor can the good Angels be said properly to
present themselves before the Lord, one day rather than another, for they
continually are before him, beholding his Face.

But let them that expound, the Sons of God, Angels, agree the matter among
themselves how they please: I demand in the mean time a solid reason, or but
the shadow of one; why I must be tied to that Exposition of one Phrase, that
renders the whole Context absurd and unintelligible without the help of a
Figure, when I have an Interpretation at hand of that Phrase that renders the
whole Sentence, in every Letter of it, every way consonant to right Reason, and
the Analogy of Faith, and is not encumbered with any absurd consequence: for
Satan might come into the Presence of God, in this Sense, as he entered into
Judas while he was celebrating the Passover with our Savior and the rest of
the Apostles, John 13. 27. And God might discourse with him in this Assembly of
God's People without disturbing the Congregation, as well as he discoursed with
Moses while he stood before Pharaoh. Divine Revelations may well be
communicated to faithful men, even in the presence of bad men ( Mede upon Exo.
11. 1.) and why may not God as well discourse with Satan in the presence of
good men? Why therefore should we recede from this literal sense? especially
when we have the only Text besides this appertaining to the Patriarchal Age,
where the same Phrase occurs entire, without addition or diminution, to warrant
me to make that interpretation, from the plain and indubitable sense of that
Phrase in that parallel Text.

To explain my self more particularly; the only Text relating to the
Patriarchal Age, where this phrase, the Sons of God, occurs entire, is that,
Genesis 6. 2. the Sons of God saw the Daughters of men that they were fair, and
they took them Wives of all that they Chose. I know some of ours are so
enamored of Rabbinical Whimsies as to follow the Hebrew Doctors in their
interpreting [ Sons of God] here to be as Angels. But it is strange how any man
not prejudiced, and in his Right wits, can put that Sense upon the Text; seeing
the good Angels neither marry nor are given in Marriage ( Mar. 12. 25.) And
though we have stories not altogether improbable, of Incuby and Succuby, yet a
man may look his Eyes out, before he find a text where evil Angels are called,
the Sons of God. I therefore* expect the assent of all pious and sober-minded
men to the common exposition of these Words, to wit; That by the Sons of God
were meant the Posterity of Seth, the members of the Patriarchal Church: And by
Daughters of men, the female Offspring of Cain, the members of that Synagogue
of Satan, which he erected after his Apostasy and Departure from God's
presence: why then should not this text in Job be so interpreted the Sons of
God, that is the professors of the true Religion, the members of the true
Church, came to present themselves before the Lord, to tender their Homage, and
bring Presents, the Presents of themselves, and Devout Services into the Court
of the Lord, into the Lord's House: seeing this is exactly after the
Patriarchal style, and is not attended with any absurd consequence, as that
Interpretation ( by Angels) is, why should we not to choose expound one
Patriarchal Text by another, rather then by Texts relating to aftertimes? The
Jewish Church might, for Reasons then emerging, give Angels the Title of the
Sons of God. It Is no new thing, for various Ages to vary Phrases: But what is
that to the Patriarchal Churches style, especially seeing that in the verse
immediately preceding, there is mention made of Job's Sacrificing for his Sons,
of his sending for them after their Feasting, and Sanctifying; them that is,
says, Grotius, celebrating a Fast, and praying for them, that the Sacrifices
of atonement which he offered for them might be accepted of God. So that we
have here, the Sons of God, that is,

1. The members of the Church convened to present themselves before the Lord
with fasting, prayer and oblation of Sacrifices, and all represented as Job's
contiutal Custom. Thus was Job accustomed to do all those days, to wit, after
their Feastings; Also we find here stated days whereon they presented
themselves before God, for (...) in (...), supplies the place of a Pronoun
demonstrative, says Cocceius. And then immediately follows [ and there was a
day when the Sons of God]: can this day be any other than one of those days
forementioned, whereon Job convened his Sons by Nature (who were also God's
Sons by Grace) before the Lord: Or this Convention to any other purpose then
that, viz. to worship God; or they that here came to present themselves before
the Lord any other then they who presented themselves before the Lord on those
days. He must be obstinate that will not be convinced with what has already
been offered to Consideration.

SECT. V.
There is indeed one Text in Job, where this phrase occurs, with the Addition
of one word, where Angels seem to be called, the Sons of God, Chap. 28. 4.
where God thus challenges Job. Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of
the Earth? Declare if thou have Understanding, who has laid the Measures
thereof, if thou know; or, who has stretched the line upon it? Whereupon
are the Foundations thereof fastened? Or, who laid the Cornerstone thereof?
When the Morning-stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for Joy?
For the removal of this Remora, which at first did very much retard my mind in
coming to a positive conclusion; let it be observed,

1. That a twofold Ground of singing and Adoring God is here laid down.

1. His laying the Foundations of the Earth, his laying the Measures thereof,
his stretching the Line upon it.

2. His laying the Cornerstone thereof, whereupon its Foundations are fastened.

3. That it was at the laying of the Foundations of the Earth, etc. that the
Morning-stars sang together; by which Phrase nothing else can be meant, but the
Angels. For the Stars in these visible Heavens were not then created: and
though those Stars of Light are said to praise God; that is meant only of their
praising him objective, as occasioning rational and intellectual creatures to
praise the Maker of such resplendent Creatures. But the Angels of Light, those
Morning Stars, being created with the Emperial Heaven, though they did not
assist God (as the Hebrew Doctors fancied) yet they stood by, and looked on the
production of each Creature, adoring God's Workmanship therein, and sounding
out their own Joy and his Praises at the laying of the Foundations of the Earth.

4. But the chief Cornerstone upon which the Foundations thereof were fastened,
was neither its Center, nor the Waters, nor whatever else has either been
fancied to be its Foundation, or comprehended in that notion: but the
Foundation of its Foundations, that Stone that bears up all things, which was
then laid when Christ was tendered to fallen Adam, in the Promise of the Woman's
seed; which Promise our first Parents embracing by Faith, were, as
Living-Stones, built upon that sure Cornerstone, that tried Cornerstone, etc.
Names appropriated to Christ and him only, through the whole Volume of Gods
Book, at the laying whereof (when he was to be exhibited in the Flesh) Zech. 4.
7. it was prophesied there should be Shoutings [ He shall lay the Head-Stone
thereof with shoutings, Grace, Grace unto it] It was at the laying of this
Cornerstone in the Promise of the seed of the Woman, that the Sons of God
shouted for Joy. ( i. e.) in the strict literal Sense, our first Parents, now
made the Children of God by Adoption. If you Object, That here was but one Son
of God. I answer, both our first Parents are comprehended in this Term, Eve
being reckoned with Adam, who was the more worthy Gender. Thus Lucan, speaking
of the Entertainment that Ptolemy and Cleopatra gave Caesar, says, Discubuere
Toris Reges at summa Potestas Caesar: Meaning by Reges both the King and Queen
of Egypt. This is so pat as there needs no further Illustration of this Answer.
But you will say, this was a poor All to make a Chorus. I answer.

1. However these two Persons were all the Adopted Children that God then had.

2. If we take the Natural Son of God into the Chorus (who doubtless rejoiced
with our first Parents, as well as with Jerusalem) Isa. 65. 19. How many may we
reckon him for?

3. We may take Angels into the Chorus without prejudice to our Cause, and
include them within the Denomination of the Sons of God, considered as imbodied
in the Chorus, with the Adopted Sons of God in propriety of speech. As the
whole Church of Corinth is denominated Saints, from the better part, though
that probably was the far less part. Or as we call a Bay of Wheat unthrashed,
or an Heap of Wheat unwinnowed, a Bay or an Heap of Wheat: though there be in
the one incomparably more straw, in the other more Chaff, than Wheat. Even so
Men and Angels making up one Quire, to sing the praises of God, Redeemer, at
his first Appearance in the Promise, the whole Quire is denominated, from the
most chief and nobler part, the Sons of God. Yet I would not hear be
misunderstood as if in respect of their Natures I preferred Men before Angels
(no such arrogance ever entered into my Soul) but only in regard of the Office
and Part they bare in this Doxologie. Men (for whose Salvation Christ was
manifested in the Promise) leading the Chorus, and Angles condescending to
follow them as Ministring-Spirits. Briefly we have here the General Assembly of
the Firstborn (though but two) attended with an innumerable Company of Angels,
shouting to see the Cornor-Stone laid. And because the Firstborn are in the
Propriety of the Patriarchal Language, styled, the Sons of God: Therefore the
whole Quire is denominated from them, the Sons of God. So that we are to seek
for a Patriarchal Text, where Angels, when they are distinctly spoken of, are
styled, the Sons of God.

SECT. IV.
For the more manifest Proof of this, that the Text, Genesis 6. 2. [The Sons of
God saw the Daughters of Men, etc.] is the only text in the whole Bible whereby
this Text in Job ought to be interpreted.

Let us consider the Proximity of the Stories. The first beginning 120. years
before the Flood. (Genesis 6. 3.) and the latter not much above 100. years after
the Flood, the Flood happening Anno Mundi, 1657. and Phaleg, in whose days the
Earth was divided, being born, Anno Mundi, 1757, as the learned Usher Computes.
Now I humbly conceive Job was contemporary with Phaleg, or not long after him,
which I gather, first from the length of Jobs Age, compared with Phalegs, and
ground that Collection upon that common observation, that the Age of Arphaxad,
and those after him till Phaleg, reached but to the half of the Age of the
Fathers before the Flood, and the Age of Phaleg scarce to the half of the years
of the Patriarchs after the Flood, that lived before him: which was the common
standard of the Age of Plalegs Posterity, unto Nahor, who attained to little
more then half of the years of his forefathers. Now we may calculate Job's
Longavity to have exceeded Phalegs: If we consider,

1. That all his Sons were married, and had Familes of their own, before his
trial; say then he was thirty at birth of his first Child, he could not in
reason but be well toward fifty at birth of his last: Considering he had them
all by one Wife ( Job. 19. 17.) [intreated my Wife for the Childrens sake of
mine own Bodie] this had been a weak Argument if the Children of his Loins had
not been the Children of her Womb: and that she gave them suck her self; and
before the last of ten could reach to that maturitie as to have a Family of
his own, Job must be toward forty more; So that Job could be no less then
ninety at his trial.

2. After his trial the time wherein his Children were born to him, and
disposed of to Inheritances, could not be so few as forty.

3. And after this disposal of his Children, at what time he was an hundred and
thirty Years old, he lived an hundred and forty Years, and saw his Sons, and
Sons Sons, even four Generations. ( Job. 42. 15, 16.) So that Job lived, 270
Years; whereas Phaleg lived but, 239. The Jews say God doubled Job's Age
beyond the time that Men then lived. But Mercer has sufficiently confuted that
Conceit, and proved that God's giving Job twice as much as he had before, has
not respect either to his own Life, or the number of his Children, but only to
his Possessions.

2. The Antiquity of Job may be inferred from hence, that the Sons of Joctan
were the Conducters of several Colonies at what time the Earth was divided. Now
Joctan was Phaleg's Brother, and which of them was the Eldest is disputed, but
it is most probable to be Joctan, because it is said, the Earth was divided, in
the days of Phaleg: So that it seems Joctan's thirteen Sons were grown to Man's
estate, and fit to be Captain's of Colonies in the time of Phaleg: The youngest
whereof, Jobab, I take to be Job. Scultetus indeed fancies that Jobab (one of
Esau's posterity) mentioned, Genesis 36. 33. to be Job: I am glad I have the
suffrage of so learned a man in this particular, that Jobab is Job. But
Scultetus was led to this opinion of the later Jobab as himself confesses, by
the Authority of those Learned men, who think Job to have been an Idumean,
because his Country Vz, or Vts, is said to be the Land of the Daughter of Edom
(Lament. 4. 21.) Rejoice, O Daughter of Edom, that dwell in the Land of VZ,
the Cup also shall pass to thee. I answer in this last Clause, there is a
manifest Allusion to Jer. 25. 7. Then took I the Cup at the Lord's hand, and
made all the Nations drink it, etc. But in that Context, Vz is clearly
distinguished from Idumaea. verse. 20. All the Kings of the Land of Vz, and all
the Kings of the Philistines, etc. Edom, Moab, and Ammon. Who sees not that the
Land of Vz and of Edom are different? the meaning therefore of ( Daughter of
Edom that dwell in the Land of Vz) is this, that a Colony of Edom, expelling
the old Inhabitants thence, f^xt their Habitation in the Land of Vz. Now the
Arguments whereby I am induced to believe that Jobab the youngest Son of
Joctan, is Job, are these;

1. The Main Current of the most Judicious Expositers are of Opinion that Vz,
Job's Country, was Arabia Petraea. Now Arabia, says Bochartus, is the
Country where the Sons of Joctan at the division of the Earth, planted
themselves. Mihi Certum est hos Arabie faelicis, intima insedisse: I am sure,
says he (in his Phaleg) that these Colonies sat down in the very heart of
Arabia felix, for proof hereof he shows that the Arabians say their first
Founder was Joctan; and produces Memorials of the names of all his Sons
retained in the names of Arabian Cities, Rivers, Hills or Inhabitants. That of
Jobab for Instance, in Ptolomies, (...), or as Scultetus corrects it (...). But
perhaps Ptolomi's Text needs no Correction, seeing that People of Arabia might
be so called from Job, the abbreviation of Jobab, and he being the youngest,
his Brethren might abbreviate his Name.

2. He is said to dwell in the East, which if it be meant East from Judea it
can be no other then Arabia Petrea, which stands Eastward of Judaea; whereas
Arabia Felix stands full South. But seeing the Jews did not inhabit
Palestine till above 500 years after Job, his Country is here styled the East,
in respect of Arabia Felix, which lies West of Arabia Petrea.

3. According to this Situation of Vz, it has the Sabeans, a People of Arabia
Felix, on one hand, and the Chaldeans on the other hand: The one whereof Drove
away Jobs Oxen and Asses, the other his Camels.

4. Job was the greatest of all the men of the East (that is the most Eastern
part of Arabia, which denotes Arabia Petrea) and he being the greatest there,
must in reason be judged to have been the Captain of the Colonie there seated.

5. Job or Jobab being the youngest brother, his elder brethren might more then
probably seat themselves in the Richest part of Arabia, famous for the plenty
of Gold, Frankincense, etc. and he be forced to sit down in Arabia the Stony,
or perhaps chose that for his seat, as fittest for the breed of Cattle, wherein
lay his wealth. The Arabians, says Aristotle -- (Hist. 9. 50.) have some of
them 3000 Camels apiece; and from them they compute their Wealth (says Leo
Affrican Lib. 9.) For when they would express their Riches, they use to say, He
possesses so many thousand Camels. And this is another Argument that Job's
Country Vz, is Arabia, where the thirteen Sons of Joctan seated their Families.

3. That Job lived very early after the Flood, is, I think, demonstrable from
that Text, Job 31. 26. If I beheld the Sun when it shined, etc. and my heart
has been secretly enticed, or my Mouth has kissed my hand, this were an
Iniquity to be punished by the Judge. Whence it appears that Idolatry was in
Job's time, accounted by the Law of Man, criminal and punishable in the Humane
Court, which in the Days of Terah was set up by a Law, from the Effect whereof
Terah fled (says Josephus) from his Native Country, Vz, of the Caldees, being
condemned to be burnt for refusing to worship the Sun. From the Premises we
collect, that Job was the most ancient Practitioner of the Patriarchal Religion
after the Flood, that we read of (except Noah) and lived two hundred years
before the death of Noah; what then can be more incredible, than that so pious
a Person could so soon forget what the Patriarchal Church before the Flood
meant by this Phrase, [ the Sons of God.]

SECT. VII.
I have weighted all the Arguments produced for the Proof of the contrary
opinion, Viz. That Job lived not thus early in the New World as I affirm him to
have done. But there is not one of them worth answering, but that drawn from
Job 36. 14. They dye in Youth, and their Life is amongst the Unclean (the
Sodomites) according to the Marginal reading, Innuit his Sodomites, says
Grotius; he means here the Sodomites and their Destruction: intimating that
Job's Friends had heard of Sodoms Destruction., and therefore were younger than
Abraham. But if it had been Sodomites in the Text (as it is not) that would
have been no Argument that Job had heard of Sodoms destruction. For Sodom migh
the infamous for its Uncleanness many Ages before its destruction: seeing men
do not arrive at such an height of impudent sinning, but by degrees: neither
does God inflict such strange and exemplary Judgments, till his Long suffering
be tired out. Besides that, their Luxury and beastly Lusts might bring the
Sodomites one by one to an untimely Death, might fall under the observation of
their Neighbors, long before Fire and Brimstone from Heaven sell upon them all
together.

I have but one Note more to evince that the Text, Genesis 6. 2. is the most
proper Text to expound this of Job by, Viz. That the best account I find given
of the Penman of this Book of Job, is that which is grounded upon Job 32. 15.
they were amazed, they left of speaking they answered no more. When I had
waited (for they speak not, but stood still, and answered no more) I said, I
will answer also my part, I will show mine Opinion. Can any thing be more
apparent than that Elihu does not speak here to Job and his three Friends, but
of them; Who then can he speak to, but the Readers of this Book of Job? It is
certain, the Dialogue is here interrupted, For Jobs Words were ended (Chap. 31.
ult.) Causa perorata tacet; he having said what he could in his own defense,
held his peace. And Elihu here declares the Issue of his Reproof of Jobs three
Friends, to wit, their being silent as well as Job, to whom then does he make
this Declaration? Not to Job, that had been superfluous, for he himself was
both an Ear and Eye witness of their being silent by Elihu's precedent speech
to them: and besides he does not apply his speech to Job till (c. 33. 11.) [
Wherefore Job I pray thee hear my speeches, etc.] not to Job's Friends, for he
says, they were amazed; which is not the form of speech wherein we speak to
men that are present; It must be therefore to them that should read this Book
that he here speaks. Again it is in answer to Job's wish, that he offers
himself to him in God's stead ( Chapter 33. 6.) it is probable therefore that in
order to the gratifying of another, as an earnest wish of Jobs, he might write
Job's words, and by Consequence this whole History of his trial in a Book: (
Job. 19. 23.) O that my Words were Written, that they were Printed in a Book;
that they might remain for ever. And such a wish as he had renewed with very
passionate expostulations, immediately before Elihu began his speech to Job's
friends, and Job himself, Chap. 31. 3, 5. 10. That one would hear me, behold my
desire is that the Almighty would answer me, and that mine Adversary had
written (or as it is in most Translations) would write a Book surely I would
take it upon my Shoulders, and bind it as a Crown to me, as a Prince would I go
near unto him. Well, says Elihu I am here in Gods stead according to thy wish.
Now if Elihu had only discoursed with Job in God's stead as his adversary, and
not written that discourse in a Book, this had not been according to Job's
wish, who with the same breath requests that God would answer him, and record
that answer in a Book. Briefly, I cannot imagine how Elihu could more plainly
have intimated himself to have been the Penman than he does here. And indeed,
who more fit to write this Book then Elihu, who was present at the whole
discourse, an Interlocutor therein; an unbiast person, whose discourse God was
so far from blaming as he pursues Elihu's last argument to convince Job. And
besides all this, a person divinely inspiried. It was God's Spirit, the
Inspiration of the Almighty that gave him understanding, chap. 32. 8. and,
verse. 17. I will answer also my part: I also will show my Opinion (or, rather
my Wisdom, or my Science as Pagnine renders it; and the following words
enforce, for I am full of matter, the Spirit within me constrains me, etc.
Jeremie expresses the prophetic Spirit in like terms, chap. 20. 9. I said I
would not speak any more in his Name: but his Word was in my heart as a burning
Fire, shut up in my bones. And I was weary with forbearing; I could not stay.
Now if Elihu was the Penman of this Book. It cannot be imagined but that he
would keep exactly to the propriety of the Patriarchal Idiome; and therefore
cannot mean any other by [ the Sons of God] then are meant, Genesis 6. 2.

SECT. VIII.
The reverence I bear to the memory of those worthy persons who ininterpret
hat Convention in Job a Contention of Angels, has forced me to this expense of
time and pains, for the vindication of my leaving such good company. For I
thought it not good manners to answer so many men of so great and deserved a
Name as that Scolist did Bellarmine with a bare [ Bellarmin thou lyest] but
that I was bound to give reasons of my departure from them, and such reasons as
I hope will, upon second thoughts, satisfy sober and serious thinking Persons.
But the richness of the Mine will, I doubt not, counterballance the labor I
have bestowed in baring the ground to it, by removing the rubbish that lay upon
it. I will therefore now proceed to show what this Text in Job contributes
toward the proof of the Point in hand. In order to which,

1. I observe, that here is mention of a Public Church-Assembly, a Convention
of the Sons of God before the Lord. That being the Patriarchal Phrase whereby
they expressed the professors of the true Religion: Genesis 6. 2. as all Christians
confess, except such as are led by the Nose to follow the Jewish Rabbis: whom
God has so infatuated since their shutting out the true Light, as of all men
living, they are most ignorant of their own Law.

2. That this Convention before the Lord consisted not of Job's Family and his
Sons alone, but of the Religious also of Neighboring Families; as Liban is
said to call the men of the place to celebrate Jacob's marriage (Genesis 2. 9.
22.) for before the second convention Job was stripped of his Sons.

3. I note that in these Publick-Assemblies Job did not officiate as Priest,
though he did in his own Family: for this second convention before the Lord
falling out in the Days of his Mourning, makes it very probable that he did not
manage the Ministerial Work of that day; yea it seems more then probable, that
Job was not present at that convention: from chap. 2. 7. so went Satan forth
from the presence of the Lord, and smote Job, etc. Had Job been there, he would
have smote him there. But more clearly from the verse following; And he took a
Potsherd to scrape himself withal, and sat down among the Ashes.] This last
clause is better renderd in most other Translations, as Vatablus, Junius and
Tremol. etc. by sitting among the Ashes. And the plain sense of the whole
verse, is this; Job sitting among the Ashes (when Satan smote him) took what
was next at hand, a Potsherd to scrape himself withal. So that Satan found Job
not in the Church-Assemblie, but on the Ashes-heap (the usual posture of men
deeply touched with the sense of Affliction.) And therefore the sacred Offices
in that, and by consequence in other public Assemblies, were administered by
Public Persons, assigned to that holy Function.

4. We find here certain stated times for celebrating Religious Worship, A day
when the Sons of God presented themselves before the Lord, and that day
occurring again: and how could several Families convene (as I have proved there
did here) if they had not had Set Times for those Conventions.

5. As to our third Proposition now before us, let it be considered,

1. That seeing in Job's Time there was no other stated Days for Divine
public Worship save weekly, and those weekly Days instituted by God himself.
What Time for sacred Conventions can we imagine the Sons of God could pitch
upon, but that which their Heavenly Father had prescribed them by his example
and precept?

2. Had these Days of the Sons of God, their appearance before the Lord, not
occurred in a less space of time than either a Year or a Month, it is very
improbable that Satan would have had so much patience at Jobs patience as to
have deferred his making an Address to God for the enlargement of his
Commission, before this second Church-Assembly. Could that malicious Adversary,
who had, after the obtaining of his first commission stripped Job naked in one
day; whose finger did so itch to be scratching Jobs Body, that as soon as ever
the word [ he is in thy hand] was gone out of God's Mouth, immediately goes out
of God's Presence, and smites Job's body; could he (I say) forbear to make
suite for that Commission beyond the least division of time by Days, seeing
Job's Heroical patience could not but make every hour of that forbearance a
greater torment to Satan than he could inflict upon Job.

3. Origin from this very Text (in his Homilies upon Job. Chap. 1. verse. 5, 6.
etc. draws the same Inference. Those things (says he) that were afterward
commanded in the Law concerning the Sabbath, Job before the giveing of the Law,
did both observe himself, and taught his Children to observe. R. Abraham also,
as he is quoted by Genebrard, affirms, that Job observed the Sabbath. And
therefore Dr. Heylin might have spared his Exclamations against Beza, for
saying that Job did sanctify every seventh day at least: as if in so saying he
had only vented his own humor, and opposed the Ancient Fathers, from which
latter Callumny I shall clear Beza in the next Chapter.

SECT. 9.
And now having showed that the Patriarchs had stated Times for sacred
Assemblies, and that the Church in the time of Job, did in all probability
celebrate such Assemblies weekly. I may venture, with this Light in my hand, to
proceed without fear of stumbling, or straying, to that famous Text, Genesis 2. 3.
And God blessed the seventh Day, and sanctified it, because that in it God
rested from all his Works which he created and made. For the understanding
whereof, and applying it for the support of a weekly Patriarchal Sabbath: Let
it be observed,

1. That the conceit of a Prolepsis in these words of Moses, is clearly
overthrown by the Premises; for if the Patriarchs had stated days of Public
Worship, so long before Moses, that practice of theirs could not possibly be
grounded upon any other bottom, but God's resting upon the Seventh-day, and
therefore sanctifying it to be a day of Rest, by his Precept to Adam. Seeing
that their appointing stated days for such Worship on their own heads, would
have been no better than Will Worship, and such as God might justly have
expostulated with them about, saying, Who has required this at your hands? and
so much a greater affront to the divine Majesty, as they were further off from
all possibility of Ignorance of God's resting the Seventh day. Nay what
presumption had it been in the Patriarchs to have expected God's blessing upon
their celebrating other stated Days than God had sancti^^ed? And sure none can
imagine but that they waited upon God for his blessing upon their sacred
conventions. Thus the practice of the Patriarchs is a full Comment on this Text.

2. It being granted, that this Text is to be understood according to the plain
literal sense; then it will cast light upon those Patriarchal Texts, that have
been alleged, concerning their stated times for sacred Assemblies, and clearly
discover those Sons of God in Job, to have presented themselves before the Lord
on that Day which God had sanctified at first to that end. Let this at present
suffice for the proof of this third Proposition, which will be further cleared
in the handling the fourth, viz.

CHAP. IV.
These weekly Sabbaths observed before the Mosaical Law, were Sundays, not
Satterdayes.

SECT. I.
IN order to the vindication of this point from the charge of Novelty and
singularity; I shall first show from the Testimonies of Heathens and Fathers,
as well as from Reasons deduced from Sacred Writ; That the Jewish
Saturday-Sabbath was not the Seventh-day Sabbath of the Patriarchs.

ARGUMENT I.
Those Encomiums above quoted which Heathen Poets (who were anciently Divines
and Philosophers) bestow upon the Seventh-day, cannot be meant of the Jewish
Sabbath; partly because those ancient Poets, Hesiod, Homer, Linus, had not any
acquaintance with the Jewish Affairs (as Josephus contra App. lib. 1.
observes.) And therefore those Praises appertain to that weekly Day which that
part of the Gentile World that retained the old Tradition, observed. But
especially, because when the Jewish Sabbath came under the observation of the
Heathens, they made a mock thereat, [ they mocked at their Sabbaths] Lam. 7. 7.
And they who derided them were not the scum, but the most intelligent Moralists
such as Seneca (quoted by St. Aug. de Civ. Dei, 6. 11.) Septimam vitae partem
sic perdunt vacando, The Jews, says he, spend the seventh part of their life
in doing nothing. With him concur Plutarch (de Superst.) Rutilin (in
itinerario) in diriding the Jewish Sabbath: As also Juvenal (Sat. 14.) Cui
septima quaeque fuit lux -- Ignava, et partem vitae non attigit ullam. The
Jewish Seventh day is a day of Idleness, and contributes nothing to any part of
life. And Persius (Sat. 5.) At cum -- Herodis venere dies, etc. Labra movis
tacitus recutitque Sabbata palpes. Even whilst thou art celebrating (speaking
to a Jew) Festivals, the forethought of the Jewish Sabbath makes thee look
pale. These seem to deride the Jews for the manner of keeping their Sabbaths,
for leading thereon a Dog's life of hunger and ease: But Agatharcides, as
Josephus reports, cont. App. l. 1. styled the Jewish Sabbath it self, (...), a
corrupt or depraved Custom, as degenerate from that weekly Holy Day which was
anciently and universally observed.

Arg. 2. This may also be evinced by the Testimonies of those Fathers of the
primitive Church, who were nearest to the Apostles: Justine Martyr, (Dial. cum
Triphone) [Before Moses none of the Righteous observed the Sabbath] that is,
the Jewish Saturday-Sabbath: for the Question here discust betwixt him and
Triphon the Jew, was, Whether the Fathers before the Law celebrated the Jewish
Sabbath? Of which Question the Jew held the Affirmative, and Justine the
Negative. Tertullian (contra Judaeos) makes this Challenge to the Jews, [ Let
them show that the ancient Patriarchs did Sabbatize] that is, observe Saturday
as their weekly Holiday, for that they did celebrate that Sabbath day that God
instituted at the beginning, Tertullian himself confesses, ( ad Martionem
libr. 4.) hoc privilegium donatum Sabbato a primordio, etc. [This privilege
was granted to the Sabbath from the beginning, etc.] Ireneus. l. 4. c. 30. [all
the Patriarchs before Moses were justified without the Sabbath] Eusebius hist.
Eccles. l. 1: c. 4. [there was no observation of the Sabbath among the
Patriarchs, as also none amongst us] this cannot possibly be meant of any other
Sabbath than the Jewish.

1. Because Eusebius (in praeparat. Evang.) proves that the most ancient
Gentiles had knowledge of and veneration for the seventh day, out of Hesiod,
etc. which they could not have from the Jews with whom these NaNations had then
no Converse.

2. Because of that last clause [as also none amongst us] which cannot exclude
the Lord's day (for Christians celebrate that) but only the Jewish Saturday.
Grotius expounds these Testimonies, as if they only denied the Patriarchs to
have kept the Sabbath after the rigid mode of the Jews, grounding that opinion
upon Tertullian's Sabbatize: but that learned Man should have considered that
Tertullians curt Style, and his humor to coin new words, renders him the
unmeetest of all the Fathers to umpire the sense of others: since his own is,
in very many places, past finding out, save by the light of other Writers; and
therefore the other Fathers that writ upon the same Subject, ought rather to
interpret him than he them. But Grotius his haste to wrest these Testimonies
out of the hands of the Prolepsarians, makes this slip more excuseable, than
the course that Hamon L'Estrange takes to evade the dint of this Argument by
denying the competency of the Witnesses. For what humane Authority can be of
more weight in the esteem of indifferent Judges, than this of these Fathers
(who were as learned Defenders of the Christian Cause against Jews, Gentiles,
and Heretics, as the Church has been blessed with) especially in this case,
wherein they had to deal with most subtle Adversaries, and therefore it is to
be presumed that here they did not glance on the Question, but examined and
discussed it thoroughly; neither indeed could these great Defenders of the
Christian Cause have stood their Ground in maintaining the Christian Practice
of Celebrating Sunday for their weekly Sabbath, against the Assaults made from
God's Command to the Jews to celebrate Saturday, but by denying (as our Savior
did in the case of Divorce) that it was so from the beginning, when the
Pharisees urged him with this reply [why did Moses then command, etc.] Mat. 19.
7, 8. I therefore humbly conceive that there is no way of expounding these
Fathers consistent with the opinion of the Anti- Prolepsarians, comparable to
that which I have given, as being most natural and literal, as securing the
credit of these Champions of the Christian Cause against Jews, and consonant to
right reason and sacred writ.

Arg. 3. For that the seventh day enjoined the Patriarchs, was not that day
that was appointed the Jews, may be evinced from the distinction, that sacred
Writ makes betwixt that Ceremonial Law touching their Saturday-Sabbath, and
that Moral Law (given to all to sanctify the seventh day from the Creation)
expressed in the fourth Precept of the Decalogue: or if you please as Epiphanius
observes ( contra Ebionaeos) betwixt (...): [That Natural or Moral Sabbath
which was determined from the beginning. And (...), that Ceremonial or
temporary Sabbath determined under the Mosaical Law]: Now that sacred Scripture
does plainly difference these from one another, nay casts up a great Gulf
betwixt them, appears from hence.

1. The fourth Precept was delivered in the audience of all the People,
immediately by God's own Mouth on Mount Sinai (Deuteronomy. 4. 12.) But the Law of
Saturday-Sabbath was delivered by God unto Moses alone, and by him to the
Rulers of the Congregation, ( Exodus 16. 20.) This difference is intimated by
Pethaliah, Nehem. 9. 13, 14. [Thou came down also upon Mount Sinai, and
spakest with them from Heaven, and gave them right Judgment, and true Laws,
good Statutes and Commandments] ( verse. 14.) And thou made known unto them
thy holy Sabbath, and command them Precepts, Statutes and Laws by the hand
of Moses thy Servant.] Here the Decalogue is plainly discriminated from that
Law of the Sabbath, which was peculiar to the Jews.

1. By this, that the ten Commandments were spoken by God himself, speaking on
Mount Sinai. But the Law of the Sabbath, together with the rest of those
temporary Laws, were made known to the Israelites by the hand of Moses.

2. By his styling the Laws of the Decalogue [right, true, good]; but not
vouchsafing to give any of those titles to the Law of the Jewish Sabbath, and
other Ceremonials; which speak the first to be bottomed upon their own innate
Righteousness and Goodness, and therefore to be permanent and universal to all
Mankind; but the last to want these Properties, and therefore to have been
carnal Ordinances imposed on them, until the time of Reformation: ( Heb. 9.
10.) not to have been faultless, ( Heb. 8. 7, 8.) to have been Statutes that
were not good, and Judgments whereby they could not have lived, ( Ezekiel. 20.
25.) It is not unworthy of observation, that through the 20th Chapter of
Ezekiel, wherever it is said of his Statutes and Judgments, that if a Man do
them he shall even live in them; the Sabbaths that God gave them are excluded
from that privilege, and mentioned distinctly as separated, in regard thereof,
from the Moral Law. As verse. 10, 11. [I brought them into the Wilderness, and
gave them my Statutes, and showed them my Judgments, which if a Man do, he
shall even live in them. Moreover also, [I gave them my Sabbaths,] and verse.
21. [they walked not in my Statutes, neither kept my Judgments, which if a Man
do he shall even live in them, they polluted my Sabbaths.] If the Prophet had
not meant here to put this difference betwixt the Decalogue and the Ceremonial
Law (whereof that of the Saturday-Sabbath, with the rest of their Sabbaths,
monthly, yearly, etc. was the prime, and therefore mentioned in the name of the
other Ceremonials.) That in doing the Law of the Decalogue a Man may live, but
not in keeping the Ceremonial Law, whereof that of their Sabbath was a part. He
would have said, [Judgments, Statutes, and Sabbaths, which if a Man, etc.] Now
what can be more manifestly demonstrated, than the vast difference betwixt
these Laws is demonstrated to be in these Texts, which present that Law of the
Sabbath which God gave the Jews, to have been a Law that could not perfect him
that kept it as to Conscience; and therefore to have been temporary and
peculiar to the Jews.

3. By his saying of the first, that God gave them. Of the Jewish Sabbath, that
God made it known unto them, as a thing they were ignorant of before, which
cannot be applied to the Patriarchal Sabbath, to which the 4th Precept relates,
for they were acquainted with that by an uninterrupted Tradition from the
Patriarchs. But of that Sabbath that was instituted at the gathering of Manna,
to wit, their Saturday-Sabbath, which was then, and not till then first
instituted, and so strange that when the People had gathered a double portion
on the sixth day (the sixth day of their gathering, not of the ancient
Patriarchal Week) the Elders went and told Moses, as not knowing what that
meant, which a Child might have known, if Saturday, the day following, had been
their ancient Sabbath.

From the Premises may be gathered, not only that the Scripture puts a
difference betwixt the fourth Precept, and the Law for Saturday-Sabbath: by
declaring the first to have been delivered by God's own Mouth, the other by the
hand of Moses; But also, by attributing those Titles of True, Good, Righteous,
to the fourth Precept, which it gives to the other nine, and are incompatible
to the Law of the Saturday-Sabbath.

3. And by affirming the Law of the Jewish Sabbath to have been first published
at the gathering of Manna: whereas the Sabbath of the fourth Precept was made
known to Adam, and observed by him and his successive generations. To proceed
to other differences betwixt these Laws.

4. The fourth Precept was writ in Tables of Stone by God's own Finger, ( Deuteronomy.
4. 13.) But the Law of the Saturday-Sabbath with other Ceremonials were written
by Moses in a Book, Exodus 24. 4.

5. The two Tables were put into the Ark ( Deuteronomy. 10. 2, 5.) which was never
opened that we read of, save when the Philistines looked into it, and at
Solomon's translating it into his Temple: at what time nothing was found within
the Ark, save the two Tables, no not so much as Aron's Rod and Pot of Manna, as
Sanctius and others conceive, because Aaron's Rod and Pot of Manna were placed
not in the Ark, but Tabernacle, ( Exodus 16. 33.) Numb. 17. 10. or as others
think, because no part of the Law, but only the two Tables, were put under the
propitiatory, into the Ark: though the Pot, and Rod were placed there also (
Heb. 9. 4.) But that all other Laws (wrote by Moses himself) were placed on the
outward side of the Ark, is the common opinion, and substantially grounded upon
that Text, ( Deuteronomy. 31. 26.) [Take this Book of the Law, and put it in the side
of the Ark.]

6. God's placing the fourth Precept in the Decalogue, declares it to be of the
same nature with the rest of the Ten: for how can it stand with the Wisdom of
the God of Order (who forbad plowing with an Ox and an Ass, who prohibited the
wearing of Linsy-woolsy; and was so careful that the Male and Female Sex should
wear different Apparel) to shuffle a Ceremonial Law amongst his Moral Laws?
seeing that would have been a far greater Indecorum than the yoking of an Ox
and an Ass together; would have rendered the Decalogue a piece of
Linsie-woolsie, and have been the apparalling of permanent and transient, of
perpetual and temporary Laws, which in their own nature differ more than Male
and Female (that is, specifically) in the same garb.

SECT. II.
But that which makes the greatest difference betwixt these Sabbaths, is this,
The Sabbath of the fourth Precept, and that commanded the Jews, are grounded
upon different Reasons. The first in commemoration of the Creation, which is
common to all persons in all ages and places. The other,

1. That it might be a sign to discriminate the Jews from all other Nations,
Exodus 31. 13. [It is a sign between me and you that I am the Lord your God*]
that is, That I have taken you to be unto me a People and an Inheritance. (
Deuteronomy. 4. 20. (...). I am the Lord your God which have separated you from all
other Nations, ( Lev. 20. 24.) Now if other Nations had celebrated Saturday as
their weekly Sabbath, and not another day of the week, the Jews could not have
been discriminated from them by their observing the same day, this would have
been no part of the Wall of Partition.

2. The Jews weekly as well as their monthly Sabbaths, were Shadows of good
things to come, the Body whereof is Christ, ( Col. 2. 16.) If therefore the
Sabbath of the fourth Precept had been the Jewish Sabbath, it ought to have
been abolished when Christ the Substance is come, as well as other Ceremonial
Laws. But this is contrary to the sense of the Universal Church, which reckons
this one of the ten Commandments: And our Church has appointed this Precept,
with the rest of the Decalogue, to be pronounced at the Lord's Table, and
enjoined her Children to beg pardon for the breach of this, and Grace to
incline their Hearts to keep it; which would be the putting of a Cheat upon
them, if that Precept in the plain Letter of it were not still in force: and
the putting a figurative sense upon it would make it as unintelligible to
vulgar capacities as if it were in Latin: And so much the more hard to be
understood as the Church in her Liturgies and Catechisms (wherein she propounds
Milk to Babes) affects the greatest plainness of Speech. Upon which account
most serious Persons have been prejudiced against Calvin's Interpretation of
Christ's descent into Hell: that being an Article of the common Faith, and
therefore to be interpreted in the plain literal sense. Let me add, that the
Church no where declares her Sentiments more plainly, than in public
Liturgies: upon which Consideration St. Austin so often appeals from those
Testimonies of Fathers, which Pelagius urged, to the forms of Common Prayer.
And therefore tho a thousand private Doctors Opinion should thwart me, yet I
having the Opinion of the whole Church, declared in her Liturgies, for me; if
not in so many words, yet in her general practice, unavoidably inferring what I
maintain, to wit, that the fourth Precept of the Decalogue is still in full
force; this is sufficient to acquit my Assertion from the imputation of Novelty
or singularity, as being no other but what I drew from my Mother's (the Church
of England's) Breasts, not only by good consequence, as has been showed, but
in plain words: for in the Homily of the time and place of Prayer she tells us,
that [God expressly in the fourth Precept commands the celebration of the
Sabbath, which is our Sunday. But I have greater Authority than this of the
Church, even Christ himself: who could not endure that he should be thought to
come to destroy the Law; and assures us that not one jot or tittle should fall
from the Law, Mat. 5. 17. which all interpret to be meant of the Decalogue,
whose fourth Precept must therefore be concluded to have nothing in it that is
ceremonial, typical, and upon that account to be abolished, as instituting a
Sabbath to be a shadow of good things to come.

3. The Sabbath appropriate to the Jews, was commanded them to be a Memorial of
God's giving them rest from Egyptian Servitude, Deuteronomy. 5. 15. Remember that thou
wast a Servant in the Land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy God brought thee out
thence --: therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the Sabbath Day.
Observe here the difference betwixt the Law of the Sabbath given on Mount
Sinai, and this in Deuteronomy, tho it be repeated in the Decalogue. For this
Book containing an explanation of the Law, (whether Moral, Ceremonial, or
Judicial) and application of it to the particular state of the Jews: Moses in
this Text Judaizeth the fourth Precept, and therefore assigns, as the reason of
its institution (thus applied and limited) not God's resting on the Seventh Day
from his Work, which is common to all Mankind, but his causing them to rest
from their servil work under the Egyptians: which was peculiar to the Jews.
Which is a manifest Argument that the Sabbath of the Decalogue, engraven in the
Tables, was of larger extent than this mentioned in Deuteronomy; or else why
should the Reason of the one be universal, of the other particular? As also
that the Jews were obliged to the observation of their Sabbath, not from the
literal and primary sense of the fourth Precept, (as all Mankind are, and
always were, except the Jews, to whom God appointed another Sabbath) but only
from the equity of it: For seeing God had sanctified the precise Seventh Day,
whereon he had rested, to be observed by all Men; it was meet that the Jews
should keep holy one Day of seven, and that Day which God had peculiarly
enjoined them, viz. Saturday, tho that was not the Sabbath of the fourth
Precept, the Lawgiver having Right to dispense with his own Law. And this is
clearly the plain meaning of Moses his inserting ( verse. 12. [as the Lord has
commanded thee] or rather (...), had commanded thee] viz. before the publishing
of the Decalogue on Mount Sinai: and of his leaving out [(...) remember] the
first word of the fourth Precept, as it was delivered on Sinai; by which word,
mankind was called upon to call to mind the Patriarchal Sabbath: or rather his
transferring it to his mentioning their Egyptian bondage, verse. 15. [(...), and
remember that thou wast a Bondsman, etc.] As if Moses had said, perhaps you may
interpret the fourth Precept (repeating the Law of the Patriarchal Sabbath) as
either vacating that Law of the Sabbath he gave you a little before the
promulgation of that on Mount Sinai, viz. at the first gathering of Manna, or
as laying an obligation upon you to observe that also, so as you must keep two
Sabbaths in a week: for the prevention of either of which mistakes, now that I
am come to the mentioning of the fourth Precept, I will let you know, that
though indeed as you are Men, you are obliged to keep in memory the Rest of the
Creation; yet as you are Jews, a Nation separated to God from all Nations, God
has dispensed with you as to the precise day, and expects; that you should
keep that day which he has peculiarly appointed you to celebrate in
commemoration of his giving you rest from Egyptian Bondage, which was so severe
and afflicting, that in regard thereof it had been better for you that you had
not been created, or died as soon as you were born. Note from hence that the
fourth Precept, when applied to the Jews, ought to be interpreted, as
commanding one day of seven. But as it stands in the Decalogue, and appertains
to all Nations and Ages, it commands the celebration of the precise Seventh
day, whereon God rested: So directly contrary to Moses his Exposition of this
Law, does the common cry of modern Expositers go, who make it command A seventh
day to all, and The seventh day to the Jews. Observe how unaccountable these
Expositors make the Christian Practice of keeping Sunday, if that be not the
seventh day of the fourth Precept, but only one of the seven: seeing that
Precept enjoins the seventh on which God rested and, that upon this reason,
because God rested thereon: And how justifiable the Jewish practice was of
keeping Saturday, though that was not the seventh day whereon God rested, for
they had for their so doing a plain Divine Precept of their Ceremonial and
peculiar Law, dispencing in respect of the day with the Law of the Sabbath,
which was given to Adam and his whole Posterity from the beginning. Let it be
noted in the next place, that all the other nine Precepts, repeated here by
Moses, are the very same verbatim with those that were writ on the two Tables,
as they were spoken on the Mount: but the fourth Precept, as it is repeated
here, is not the same fourth Precept that was spoken by God's Mouth and writ by
God's Finger, but vastly different from that, both in its form and reason: and
both peculiar to the Jews, but neither of them applicable to other Nations. Not
the former: for as the Jews were a part of the Patriarchal Church (seeing God
had for that time of their Separation from other Nations assigned them another
day than that of the fourth Precept as it stands in the Decalogue) it was very
requisite that a Memento should be presixt before that Command to sanctify the
Patriarchal-Sabbath, which was to take place again when the Partition Wall
should be broken down, that they might then after so long an intermission call
to mind, or remembrance, God's primitive Seventh-day to sanctify it: And
therefore the fourth Precept in the Decalogue begins with Remember. But there
is no Remember prefixed before this Precept, as it is here repeated by Moses,
and adapted to the Jewish state, because as such they were to sanctify
Saturday, and to observe the Precept, as enjoining to them the Sanctification
of that Day as their peculiar Sabbath, only till the time of Reformation, and
then they were to forget it thus Judaiz'd, as well as the rest of their
Ceremonial Laws. At which time of Restoration this their new Saturday-Sabbath
would be grown old, and must come no more in remembrance, Isa. 65. 17. And then
the Covering of the Ark, where the two Tables of the everlasting Law was laid
up, being taken away, the Jews might read the fourth Precept, as it was
uttered from the Lord's Mouth, with a Memento before it, to put them in
remembrance of that seventh day whereon God rested. I would thank that Man who
will give me any better, or indeed any other Reason than this, why a Memento
should begin this Precept and none of the rest; seeing we ought as well
remember to observe them as this: or why Moses should prefix Remember before
the fourth Precept as it stands in the Decalogue, and not as he repeats it
here. Or why he should assign God's resting as the ground of the fourth Precept
there, and the Israelites resting from Egyptian Bondage, as the reason of it
here. Or lastly, how Moses can be acquitted from self-contradiction, from
adding to, and taking from the words of the Law, when in the twentieth of
Exodus, he says, God spoke thus, [ Remember, etc. for in six days the Lord
made, etc. wherefore the Lord blessed, etc.] And yet in this 5th of Deuteronomy. he
not only leaves out the [Remember] and the Reason of the fourth Precept in the
Decalogue, but assigns another reason, and yet after all tells them, [ These
words the Lord spoke unto all your Assembly in the Mount, and he added no more,
and he wrote them in two Tables of Stone.] How can Moses his Fidelity in this
case be vindicated but by this Salvo, That the other nine do indifferently
appertain to Jew and Gentile, and therefore they are repeated entirely as they
came from God's Mouth. But the fourth Precept for that time did not appertain
to the Jews (either as to the Day commanded to be sanctified, or the reason for
its Sanctification, but only in regard of its equity, in respect of the
proportion of time) but to all Mankind, save the Jews, at all times, and would
appertain to the Jews when Christ had made of that twain (Jew and Gentile) one:
and therefore Moses, to secure that entirely against that time, sets it down in
the Decalogue word by word as God spoke it: But when he applies that Precept to
the peculiar state of the Jews at that present, to whom God had (before the
promulgation of the Law on the holy Mount) appointed another Day for their
weekly Sabbath, than that whereon God had rested; it had been ridiculous to
have mentioned God's finishing his Work of Creation in six Days, and his
resting on the seventh, as the reason why the Jews should rest on that Day
whereon God wrought: and therefore he omits that, and assigns another reason
most proper and cogent, and repeats no more of the Precept, but what was common
to them and other Nations. And thus it is true what Moses says, These words the
Lord spoke in the Mount unto your whole Assembly, and he added no more; that
is, that you are at present concerned in. And as to the words expressing the
reason, God spoke them in the Preface to the whole Decalogue as the reason of
your being obliged, above other Nations, to keep all and every one of those
Laws; and my applying them to the Law of the Sabbath, is a faithful exposition
of both the Laws concerning the Sabbath; to wit, the Ceremonial, which concerns
you alone, and the Moral so far as it concerns you, that is, in the equity of
it. He spoke indeed more words, but not unto your whole Assembly in its present
Constitution, but as you shall be at the rending of the Vail; he would have you
hear that which I omit to repeat, for that time to come, seeing the pressing of
you upon that reason, to keep that Sabbath Day God has commanded you to
observe, would be a strong Argument against your keeping it.

SECT. III.
I could name other differences the Sacred Scripture makes betwixt the
Patriarchal and Jewish Sabbath: but these already mentioned are sufficient to
convince rational Men that the Jewish Saturday-Sabbath was not the Patriarchal
Sabbath commanded in the fourth Precept.

I come now to show that the Patriarchs celebrated Sunday for their weekly
Sabbath.

Arg. 1. And here first I urge the Premises. If Saturday was not the
Patriarchal Sabbath, either Sunday must be it, or it will follow that there
have been three several Sabbaths, one of the Patriarchs before the Law, another
of the Jews under the Law, and a third of Christians under the Gospel. A
consequence which a Mohammedan may perhaps not disgust, but I am sure it will
sound harsh in a Christians Ear.

Arg. 2. There can no other justifiable account be given of Christians
celebrating Sunday, but this. That the Jewish Saturday-Sabbath was Ceremonial
and Temporary, and therefore to give place to that day that was sanctified from
the beginning by God's Example and Precept; gave place, I say, to that at the
expiration of the Mosaical Law without any new Precept.

1. For if Saturday-Sabbath had been the day on which God rested, and commanded
Adam to rest on, and keep holy, it could not have been unsanctified but by a
Precept as manifest and of as great Authority as that was whereby it was
instituted, which I am confident can never be made to appear in the translation
of the Sabbath from Saturday to Sunday. And that which is alleged for this
comes far short: For what Argumentative force can there be in Christ's rising,
his appearing after his Resurrection, and celebrating religious Assemblies with
his Apostles ordinarily on Sundays, in the Apostles assembling on that day for
religious Worship; what force, I say, can there be in all this for the
unsanctifying of Saturday, and giving its Crown to Sunday, comparable to the
express Command of God grounded upon his own Example to sanctify Saturday?
Nay, what are Men's pleading such things as these for the change of the Sabbath
(upon supposition that Saturday was God's day of rest, and commanded by him to
be kept) but a setting up of their own conceits, and miscollected conclusions
(that because Saturday was instituted in memory of the Creation, and Sunday was
the day wherein Christ perfected Man's Redemption by his Resurrection, etc.
therefore Saturday must give place to Sunday) in direct opposition to God's
express precept; If Saturday be the day intended in the fourth Precept, or Genesis
2.

2. But then I would not have the Saturday-Sabbatarians crow as if I adjudged
the victory to them. For upon the ground that I have laid the Jewish
Saturday-Sabbath, being calculated particularly to that Nation, and therefore
Temporary and Ceremonial, must with other Mosaic Ceremonies be abrogated by
Christ's Death, and give place to the Ancient Patriarchal Sabbath on course
without any new Precept. And here now our Savior's rising from the dead, his
frequent appearing to his Disciples on Sundays, the practice of the Apostles
and primitive Church, come in seasonably with their Auxiliary force to support
the divine Institution of the Lord's Day --. For though as to the first
Consecration thereof, their Examples signify nothing, nor are able to stand
their ground against the Assaults of God's both Example and Precept: yet upon
that ground I have laid they are substantial and strenuous Seconds to prove the
Restoration of the Ancient Patriarchal Sabbath by the Antiquation of the
Judaick. What greater influence could our Savior's rising on Sunday have upon
that day to the sanctifying thereof, than his suffering on Friday, or his
Ascension on Thursday could have upon either of those days to sanctify either
of them for the weekly Sabbath?

3. But yet Christ chose to rise on Sunday, because God had sanctified that day
from the beginning. And therefore his Resurrection, and the Apostles
celebrating Church Assemblies on that day, though they are not of Authority
sufficient to appoint a new Lord's Day, yet they are safe Guides to point us to
that old Patriarchal Lord's Day whereon the Lord rested, and therefore
commanded the Patriarchal Church Catholic to sanctify it -- in Conformity
to, and Communion with which Church, extending to all Ages and Places (save
Judea, which never was any other but a particular Church, God having in all
Nations some that feared God and wrought Righteousness, and therefore were
accepted of him.) Our Savior after the rending or the Vail, and removal of the
Partition Wall, rose upon that Day, and upon that Day celebrated Religious
Assemblies, etc.

And this was sufficient to revoke the Sabbath to its first beginning (to which
all things were revoked by Christ, says Tertullian (in Monogamia) and to
intimate that Sunday was the Patriarchal Sabbath. It being manifest that the
Jewish Sabbath instituted not only four hundred, but three thousand years after
the institution of the Patriarchal, could not make that void, any more than the
Mosaic Law could vacate the Promise made to Abraham before that Law was given,
according to the Apostles way of Arguing, ( Gal. 3, 17.) [The Covenant that was
before confirmed of God to Abraham, the Law which was 430 years after, could
not disanul, that it should make the Promise of none effect.] And that
therefore that Mosaic Law of the Sabbath being made void, the Patriarchal must
of course take effect without any new Injunction. The necessity of which
Cousequence will be made more apparent by the next Argument. Viz.

SECT. IV.
Arg. 3. That the Patriarchs did celebrate the Sunday-Sabbath before the
Institution of Saturday-Sabbath, may be proved, if not demonstrated, from
Scripture-Instances.

It were indeed unreasonable to expect Mathematical Demonstrations in this
case, seeing Moses his History of the Patriarchal Religion is so exceeding
concise, as his Narrative thereof for above two thousand years may be in a
manner comprised in a Nut-shell. Yet if we diligently search, I doubt not but
we shall find Instances next to Demonstrations, in two places, viz. Exodus 12.
and Exodus 16. I will begin with the last, because it leads to the change of the
Patriarchal Sabbath to the Jewish: which seeing we all know to be Saturday, by
reckoning backward till we come to the day on which that general
Church-Assembly, mentioned ver. 2. was kept, we may certainly find on what day
of the week it fell.

Inst. 1 The first Instance therefore that I shall give of a Religious weekly
Assembly kept on course by the Patriarchs, on Sundays, is from Exodus 16. 1,
etc. And they took their Journey from Elim, and all the Congregation of the
Children of Israel came into the Wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and
Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second Month after their departure out of
the Land of Egypt. And the whole Congregation of the Children of Israel
murmured against Moses and Aaron.] For the right stating of the sense of this
Text, I must crave leave to rectify the Pointing, which, as it stands, refers
the sifteenth day to their marching, which ought to be referred to the time of
this Assembly: For of what use imaginable could it be to know the day of the
Month when they took their Journey, any more than the rest of their
Journeyings, except that from Mount Sinai (Numb. 10. 11.) for the space of
forty years? But as God at the Institution of the Passover had changed the
beginning of the Year, and appointed that Month to be the first to the
Israelites, which was not the sirst in respect of the Creation. So when he was
purposed to change the beginning of Weeks to the Israelites, and appoint that
Day their seventh which was the sixth in the Patriarchal Account, and of the
whole World beside the Jews: It was expedient to leave some plain Note and
Character of Time, whereby it might be known on what day of the Week the
Sabbath was kept before that change. Now this misapplication of the fifteenth
day may easily be amended, by having recourse to the Original, and the
Septuagint, thus, -- and they journeyed from Elim. And the whole Congregation
of the Children of Israel came into the Wilderness of Sin, which is between
Elim and Sinai, ver. 2. (...), [ And] or [ But] on the fifteenth day of the
second Month after their departure out of the Land of Egypt, the whole
Congregation of the Children of Israel murmured, etc. This is therefore the
first Collection I make from this Text.

That the whole Congregation are not said to March but to Murmur, on the
fifteenth day, their Sabbath Songs were turned into Howlings, like those, Amos
8. 3.

As to the Reason I assign why the day of the Month is named here, and not in
any of their Marching saving that from Mount Sinai; a Person eminent for
Learning and Place in our Church is pleased to except against it, by giving
this as the Reason why the day of the Month is here named, viz. lest the first
part of the verse should be mistaken as if they had gone from Elim, and come to
Sin the same day. Whereas they departed from Elim to the Red Sea, and came from
the Red Sea, into the Wilderness of Sin, Numb. 33. To this exception therefore
I here humbly offer these two things to consideration.

1. Moses, in Numb. 33. (where he purposely Records their Marchings in order,
and mentions that by the Red Sea immediately before their coming into the
Wilderness) does sufficiently prevent all possibility of mistaking the sense of
Ex. 16. except by such negligent Readers as in their reading his Writings, slip
over that Chapter in Numbers, which kind of Persons I suppose Moses was not
very careful to gratify.

2. This Reason is so far from preventing the supposed mistake, as it
necessarily leads to it: For read the Text thus: They departed from Elim, and
came into the Wilderness of Sin the fifteenth day: and this pointing makes
their departure from Elim, and coming into the Wilderness, to have been on the
same day. The first being the terminus a quo, the other the terminus ad quem of
their motion: Except we fancy they came into the Wilderness the fifteenth day
from no place. But refer the fifteenth day to their Murmuring, not Marching,
and both the extreme terms of their March stand firm, and there is space
enough betwixt them left for their intermediate encamping at the Red Sea. As if
a Man should say, I removed from London, and came to York the 15th day of
April: we would conclude that he came to York the same day he removed from
London. But if he should say, I came from London to York without specifying the
time, none would imagine but that he had lodging-places betwixt London and
York. So that this Exception furnishes me with one Argument more for my
applying the 15th day to their Murmuring not Marching.

The same eminent Person advises me to consider whether the Septuagint can
weigh down the Hebrew, Samaritan, Syriac, Arabic, Targum, etc. all which refer
the 15th day to their Marching.

I have considered this, and am very apprehensive what a difficult and envious
Task I undertake, if I should prefer the Septuagint above the Hebrew. I
remember how angry Jerome was with St. Austin, for preferring it before his
Hebraica Veritas, and what opposition the late attempt of Vosius has met with:
And yet I cannot but retain a singular honor in my heart for it.

1. As being better secured from being corrupted by the faithless Jews; when
the Hebrew, by reason of its being communicated many hundred years before the
Christian Era to the Gentile World, and deposited in Ptolomies famous Library,
whither the Philosophers flocked from all parts of the World, says Elian; the
divine Providence foreseeing what unfaithful Keepers of the divine Oracles,
that People to whom they were first committed would prove [when for their
rejecting Christ they became Loammi] provided that the Gentiles should come to
the light thereof by means of the Septuagint, so long before our Savior's
coming, the contemptibleness of whose appearance so enraged the Learned Party
of the Jews, who had the Hebrew Copies in their custody, (for the vulgar Jews
understood not Hebrew in our Savior's time) as in revenge they defaced his
Image drawn by their own Prophets, for representing him such as the Apostles
proclaimed him to be: whence proceeded those numerous Corruptions, mentioned by
Vossius and others.

2. The Apostles making so frequent, if not constant use of it in their
quotations of the old Testament, seems to me a Canonization of the Translation,
and a commending it above the Hebrew.

3. If the Hebrew be to be suspected, where it affronts the Septuagiut, it
ought to be so, especially in such Texts as have relation to their Sabbath.
Their idolizing of which might prompt them to disturb the Pointing of this
Text, Exodus 16. which according to the Septuagint, speaks it to be a younger
Brother to Sunday-Sabbath.

4. And for my preferring the Septuagint before the Hebrew in those Texts that
have relation to the Sabbath, I have the example of our own Church to be my
warrant; which adheres to that Version in the Translation of thef ourth
Precept, both in the Catechism, where she feeds her Babes with Milk, and in the
Office of Communion, where she reminds her adult Members of that part of their
Baptismal Vow, whereby they stand obliged to keep God's holy Will and
Commandments. Although the Hebrew, Geneva, Spanish, and that of Jerome, and all I
have perused, says L'Estrange, render it [ wherefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath-Day] except the Septuagint, which renders it, [ The Seventh Day,] although
our last Translation of the Bible follows the Hebrew. Although the Puritans (as
they were called) have called long and loud to our Church to rectify the
Reading, and conform it to the Hebrew, as knowing that their opinion of the
fourth Precept commands [a] Seventh, not [the] Seventh Day, is utterly
overthrown by rendering it, Wherefore the Lord Blessed [the] Seventh-day. And
although our Church has gratified their Clamours, in conforming the Epistles and
Gospels to our last Translation, yet in the forenamed versions of the fourth
Precept she adheres still to the Septuagint, and persisteth in teaching her
Children, young and old, that the Sabbath of the fourth Precept in the plain
literal sense of it, is the Seventh day, wherein God rested, and therefore
sanctified, and separated to be observed by us Christians in obedience to that
Precept, and in conformity to God's Example. Or, to give her sense of this
Precept thus translated in her own words, ( Homily of the time and place of
Prayer [God expressly in the fourth Precept commands the observation of the
Sabbath, which is our Sunday: And not only commands it, but also by his own
example does stir and provoke us to diligent keeping of the same.] And a little
after [this Example and Command of God, the Godly Christian People began to
follow immediately after the Ascension of our Lord Christ.] It was, you see, in
obedience to this Command, urged by this Example, that the Christians began to
celebrate Sunday in our Church's Judgment. In Obedience (I say) to this
Precept, in the plain literal sense of it: For sure the Church of England is a
more indulgent Mother, than to teach her Babes by Tropes and Figures, and
farfetch'd Consequences, what that holy Will of God is, to the keeping whereof
their Baptismal Vow obliges them, or to oblige them to say, Lord have Mercy
upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law, after the pronouncing of the
fourth Precept at the Lord's Table, if that did not stand entirely in every
tittle of it, according to its plain and primitive sense, in as full force now
under the Gospel, as any of the rest. Moses was faithful in God's House, and
therefore at his repeating of the Decalogue, and applying it to the Israelites,
he lets them know that they were not concerned in that Reason for sanctifying
of that Sabbath which God published on the Mount, to wit, [ because God rested
on the Seventh-day] but urges the keeping of their Sabbath, by another Reason
peculiar to themselves, to wit, their resting from Egyptian Bondage, Deuteronomy. 5.
which very Reason is an Argument that their Saturday-Sabbath was not the day on
which God rested, but local and temporary. And God's urging the sanctifying of
the Sabbath of the fourth Precept from his own Example, argues the day therein
commanded to be the day whereon God rested, and to concern all Ages and
Nations. The reason of it being common to all, and therefore to be our Sunday.
And this speaks the faithfulness of our Church, viz. her informing her Children
that the whole and entire both Precept and Reason, appertains to us Christians,
and therefore we are bound to beg pardon for the breach thereof, and Grace to
observe it.

I had never much Artificial, yet have so much Natural Logic, as to think this
a very strange Inference: God rested the Seventh-day, that is, Saturday:
wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, that is Sunday; and the common
Opinion to be void of Reason, viz. That the day commanded in this Precept is
gone, but the Precept remains: seeing all that is commanded is the sanctifying of
the day whereon God rested.

It may with every whit as much reason be said, the honoring of Father and
Mother is gone, but the Law commanding that Honor is still in force, as that
the day whereon the Command bids us rest, is gone, but the Precept commanding
that Day of Rest remains; as if that day enjoined belonged to the Jews, and the
Precept enjoining, to us. My resentment of such horrible absurdities
unavoidably issuing from the common Opinion, that Saturday is the Day whereon
God rested, and that Day which he commanded the Jews to sanctify, in the
fourth Precept: And yet that the Precept is still in force to us Christians,
obliging us to sanctify another day, Sunday; in Conjunction with the reverence
I bear to the sounder Doctrine of the Church of England, viz. That the fourth
Precept commands us to celebrate Sunday, upon the Account of God's resting on
that day, first put me upon that enquiry, whereof my Treatise of the Sabbath is
the result, viz. whether that Hypothesis could be proved from Scripture and
Reason; and if proved, whether it would secure unto us our Sunday-Sabbath,
without any new Institution by Christ's Precept, upon better grounds than can
be laid by the vulgar opinion; and such as free our Necks from the yoke of
those carnal austerities which attend the Jewish Temporary and Ceremonial
Saturday-Sabbath.

This Design I confess affronts the whole World of private modern Writers: but
I have standing on my side the Church of England which carried on the
Reformation of Christian Religion from Papal Innovations more pecately,
regularly, cautiously, and with a greater respect to Catholic Antiquity, than
any other Reformed Church did. And that which inclined me the rather to follow
her Conduct through my whole Tract of the Sabbath, was this; because I observed
that the Writers upon the fourth Precept have fallen into inextricable
perplexities, merely through this one mistake, That the Sabbath enjoined in
that Precept is Saturday, and not (as our Church teaches) Sunday. And that if
they had followed our Churches Clew, they would have found the way out of those
Labyrinths, wherein they have lost themselves.

For if Sunday be the Day whereon God rested, and therefore commanded in that
Precept to be sanctified after God's Example (and unless it be that day wereon
God rested, that Precept does not command the sanctification of it) how
naturally will these Consequences follow;

1. That Adam and the Patriarchs could not be ignorant of that Example of God,
which was laid down in the Precept, as the Reason why we are to sanctify it:
for if that reason oblige us who only hear it; It must much more oblige Adam
who after a sort saw it.

2. That the Law of the Saturday-Sabbath is not expressly commanded in that
Precept, but only reducible to it in regard of its equity and proportion of
time, viz. one of seven. And therefore Saturday-Sabbath may depart, and the
Precept continue in full force. Nay, that Sabbath, together with the Ceremonial
Precepts concerning it, must (as the rest of Mosaic Ceremonies) depart at the
rending of the Vail, and give way to the Sunday-Sabbath. And thus the Christian
Church is disburdened of those Austerities, about which there has been so much
wrangling amongst Modern Writers.

3. That there was no need of a new Gospel-Precept for the first Institution of
Sunday-Sabbath; and that therefore Christ's Resurrection, his Converse with his
Disciples, and their celebration of holy Assemblies on Sundays, do warrant us
to keep that day as sure and infallible Guides to the Old Patriarchal
Sunday-Sabbath, mentioned in the fourth Precept; which was to take place again
on course at the expiration of the Temporary and Ceremonial Sabbath, enjoined
the Jews for a time, as a badge to difference them from other Nations; but is
too sandy a ground whereon to build the Institution of a new Sabbath Day, in
direct opposition to the express Precept and example of God: And thus the mouth
of the Saturday-Sabbatarians is stopped.

But tho I might without deserved blame (being backed with so great
Authorities) prefer the Septuagint before the Hebrew, Exodus 16. 1. yet I
presume not to prefer the Text of the Septuagint before the Text of the Hebrew,
but only compare the Text of the Septuagint (which is utterly incapable of any
other pointing than what I urge) with the pointing of the Hebrew, which referrs
to the 15th day of their coming into the Wilderness.

And here the preference may, without disparagement to the Hebrew Text, be
given to the Septuagint; considering,

1. That it is a question amongst the Learned, whether the Pentateuch had any
Vowels, or so much as distinctions of Words, but was all as one word before the
Masorites.

2. That it is not agreed who those Masorites were that distinguished the Old
Testament into Sections and Verses, whether the wise Men of Tiberias, or those
of Ezra's Synagogue, etc.

3. And that the Hebrew Text without distortion is capable of the same pointing
that I urge, but the Septuagint capable of no other. And therefore to ask
whether the immovable pointing of the Septuagint should yield to the moveable
point of the Hebrew, is to question whether the Mountain should come to
Mahomet, or Mahomet to the Mountain.

4. I have the Suffrage of Learned Men to stand by me, in asserting that the
Quails fell and were gathered on the fifteenth day. For Bochart in his
Hierozoicon, Cornelius a Lapide, Menochius, etc. on Numb. 11. affirm that the
Quails mentioned, Exodus 16. fell on the fifteenth day of the second month, and
it is certain from the Text that the Quails fell on that day they murmured.

SECT. V.
The next Inference I draw from this Text is this, That this Assembly has all
the Characters of a Church-Assembly.

1. It is called (...), the whole Congregation, or Church of the Children of
Israel; to difference it from the People or mixed multitude that murmured at
Marah: Chap. 15. 24. that marched in one Body with the Israelites, and are
implied in the first clause of verse 1. They took their Journey from Elim. And
in that Chapter 15. 27. and they came to Elim, meaning the Israelites, with the
mixed multitude. And as they came to Elim: so here the same [they] are said to
journey from Elim; but when Moses gives an account of what fell out when they
came into the Wilderness of Sin, he shakes off the mixed multitude, and leaves
them out of his Discourse, by changing the phrase he used, when he speaks of
their Journeying, and saying, The whole Congregation of the Children of Israel
came into the Wilderness. And the whole Congregation of the Children of Israel
on the fifteenth day murmured. By which he intimates this Assembly to have
consisted wholly and solely of Israelites, and to have been of the same make
with that which St. Stephen calls the Church in the Wilderness, consisting of
our Fathers, as he styles them, he, and those he spoke to, being Jews, Act. 7.
28. Briefly, this was not a murmuring in their Tents, like that, Psalm. 106. 25.
and that Numb. 14. 2. at the return of the Spies; or that through their
Families, every Man at his own Tentdoor, ( Numb. 11. 10) where we have the
mixed multitude represented as the fomenters thereof: And therefore if they had
been of this Murmuring. Assembly in my Text, they would have been mentioned
here as well as there.

2. Here is the whole Church of Israel assembled on course before the Lord; for
Moses did not call them, but finds them together. Aaron indeed bids them come
near before the Lord, (...), before the face of the Lord: but all he meant by
that, was, that they should turn their faces toward the Pillar, the then token
of God's special Presence: for that was all they did in compliance with that
Injunction, ver. 9. [And as Aaron spoke unto them they looked toward the
Wilderness, and the Glory of the Lord appeared in the Pilar of Cloud.] And that
is an Argument they were already before the Lord, though not so as to face the
cloudy Pillar as they did in their Journyings, yet they were assembled before,
or about the Tabernacle, the ancient token of God's Presence. I mean that
little Tabernacle which they had, before the erecting of that which Moses
received the Pattern of in the Mount; and therefore brought with them out of
Egypt, to which they had used to repair for Divine Worship, for the sake of
public Prayer, so Mede, Rivet, Willet. It was, says Vatablus, a little
portable Chapel; this was it that Moses, after they had worshipped the Golden
Calf, took and pitched far off from the Camp, to which every one that sought
the Lord went out, Number. 33. 7. this was called the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, of the sacred Convention, so Junius and Tremelius: of the Church,
Pagn. The Hebrew word is Mogned, whence is derived Lemognedim, Genesis 1. which
signifies solemn stated Assemblies, as has been observed before. Toward this
they directed their Faces in their sacred Assemblies: and therefore Aaron
withdraws their Faces toward the Pillar of Cloud, verse. 11. where Moses stood
praying, while Aaron was speaking to the Congregation, says Mr. Mede upon the
place.

3 This Assembly has this Character of a Religious Convention, that it was
instructed by an Ecclesiastical Minister, Aaron the Priest; for Moses commanded
Aaron expressly that he should speak to them, ver. 9. Now if this had not been
Coetus Ecclesiasticus, a Church Assembly, it had been more proper for Moses
himself to have come with his Rod in his hand, and have spoken to them: for he
might with Authority have silenced their murmuring, as he did Numb. 11. 24.
when they murmured for want of Flesh: And as Caleb and Joshua stilled them,
Numb. 14. 6. after the return of the Searchers. It is said indeed verse. 6. that
Moses and Aaron spoke to them, but the meaning of that is no more than thus,
that Moses spoke mediately and Aaron immediately, Moses by putting words into
Aarons mouth, and Aaron by conveying those words into the Peoples Ears,
according to the instruction given, Exodus 4. 15. Thou shall speak to Aaron the
Levite, and put words into his Mouth, and I will be with thy Mouth, and with
his Mouth: and he shall be thy spokesman unto the People. It is also said verse.
8. That Moses said, etc. but that must have the same interpretation, or be
rendered by the Preterpluperfect tense [Moses had said] that is, had instructed
Aaron what he should say; and so must verse. 11. And the Lord had said to Moses;
for it is manifest that God had said that to Moses before: And the reason why it
is repeated over and over, that the Lord had said, and Moses had said, is to
show what part of that Revelation of his mind that God made to Moses, verse. 4,
5. was communicated at that time by Moses to Aaron, and by Aaron to the
Assembly, and what part of it was not then, but afterward communicated; It
being manifest that Moses did not acquaint them with the reason of God's
precept to gather a double portion on the Sixth day till they had gathered it.
It remains therefore, that seeing Aaron was not a Prophet, who received
Revelations immediately from God, but published Divine Revelations received by
Moses unto the People, (which is the proper Work of an Ecclesiastical Minister
in a Church-Assembly, 1. Cor. 14. 23, 24.) his being appointed by Moses to
speak, argues this Assembly to have been a Church-Assembly.

Howbeit, if what has been offered for the proof of this second Inference,
shall upon serious ponderation seem too light, the main Cause will suffer no
other detriment than the loss of one piece of an Argument; And indeed my main
aim in urging this Text was to find sure footing for calculating the time
backward unto the tenth day of the first month, Exodus 12. whereon undoubtedly
the Israelites kept a religious public Assembly on course. And that tenth day
will be demonstrated to have been Sunday. If it be made apparent that the
fifteenth day of the second month, whereon the Quails were gathered, be to be
reckoned the first of the six gathering days. And that is,

SECT. VI.
The third Inference I draw from this Instance, viz. that the fifteenth day of
the second month, whereon this solemn Church-Assembly convened on course, was
Sunday. And that it was so, will appear by computing the six gathering days
immediately preceding the Jewish Saturday-Sabbath, concerning which there is
this only Question, viz. Whether the fifteenth day be to be brought into the
Account of those six gathering days. For the resolution of which doubt, let the
divine Oracle be consulted, verse. 4. [I will rain Bread for you from Heaven,
and you shall go out and gather it --. And the sixth day you shall gather twice
as much.] and verse. 12. [ ye shall eat Flesh to the full this day at even]
intor duas vesperas, betwixt the two Evenings, i.e. betwixt three a Clock in
the afternoon, and the shutting in. This is that very time of the day wherein
our Savior was Crucified, Dead, and Buried: and therefore their gathering,
dressing and eating their Belly full of Quails does as properly belong to this
fifteenth day, as our Savior's Death and Burial unto Friday.

2. Observe, That the Precept to gather twice as much the Sixth day was given
before any mention was made of Flesh and Bread distinctly, and before Moses
knew what they were to gather, any further than was expressed by [ Bread rained
down from Heaven.] Now Bread implies ( ver. 4.) all kind of Victuals, as every
one knows that can say the Lord's Prayer, except such profound Clerks as are of
that Boy's humor, who when he came to the Petition for daily Bread was wont to
add [ and Butter too good Mother] And what satisfaction could it have been to
Moses to hear God promise Bread, when the People murmured for want of Flesh, as
well as Bread, if he had not conceived that both were comprehended under the
name of Bread. Besides, David, Psalm. 105. 40. called the Quails the Bread of
Heaven, which Psalm. 78. 27. he says God rained upon them from Heaven, the very
word that God uses, verse. 4. I will rain Bread from Heaven. Add to all this
that our Savior, ( Joh. 6. 55, etc.) alluding to this very History of Quails
and Manna, uses the same form of expression, [ The Bread that I will give is
my Flesh,] Bread therefore as well here as there includes flesh, and Bread,
Quails and Manna. And to put this beyond all possibility of doubt, the
Septuagint and vulgar Latin express what they gathered on the sixth day, (...),
cibos duplices: double necessaries, double Victuals.

Lastly, It was not for all kind of Flesh that they murmured; for tho their
Provision of Bread might possibly be spent, yet that they should consume the
Herds and Flocks they brought out of Egypt (where they left not one Hoof
behind) Exodus 10. 26. in one months space, is utterly incredible; or that in
that space they were grown so lean as to be unfit for Food, seeing they had for
that forty years long, Oxen, Sheep, and Goats, fit for Sacrifice, Act. 7. 42.
But for want of potted Flesh, and such potted Flesh as they had plenty of in
Egypt; And that was no other than Quails, which were so plentiful in Egypt,
that the Inhabitants could not consume them while they were fresh, (tho
Josephus affirms that Egypt was so populous as it contained 750 Myriades,
besides the Inhabitants of Alexandria) and therefore they potted them up for
the whole year, as says Atheneus, l. 1. c. 11. de Coturnicibus. Now can it in
reason be imagined that the Jews should make no account of that day, whereon
they gathered Quails, their beloved and longed for Flesh, that was Judaeis in
deliciis, says Phavorinus.

From all which it is manifest that the fifteenth day on which the Quails were
gathered, was the first of the six gathering days: The last whereof being
Friday the Eve of their Saturday-Sabbath, verse. 22. the first must needs be
Sunday, the fifteenth day of the second month whereon this Assembly before the
Lord was kept. And therefore before this following Institution of the Jewish
Saturday-Sabbath, Sunday was their weekly Sabbath. For the clearing of which, I
shall draw,

SECT. VII.
This fourth Inference from this Instance, viz. That the Saturday after this
fifteenth day was the first Saturday Sabbath that ever was kept.

This is apparent from ver. 22. [On the sixth day they gathered twice as much:
And all the Rulers of the Congregation came and told Moses.] Now there cannot
be imagined any other reason of their acquainting Moses herewith, but that they
might understand by him what was to be done with the overplus, and to what
purpose they were ordered to gather that proportion that day, seeing what had
been kept overnight stank the next morning, verse. 20. Vt ex eo cognoscerent
quorsum hoc fuisset Jussum; neque enim adhuc Dominus declaraverat se ob Sabbati
Religionem id praescripsisse, quod statim Moses explicat, as Mr. Mede and
Cornelius a Lapide observe: [They came to Moses to know of him wherefore this
was commanded, for the Lord had not as yet declared that he had prescribed this
double portion with a religious respect to the Sabbath, which Moses forthwith
explains] verse. 23. [To morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath, etc.] and verse.
29. [ See because the Lord has given you this Sabbath, therefore he has given
you on the sixth day the Bread of two days.] Philo Judaeus says, that the
Hebrews were taught by this, which was the birthday of the World, whereof their
Forefathers were ignorant; a very likely thing! that Abraham should not know
the Patriarchal Sabbath. L'Estrange will have it thus: That the Elders made not
strange at the Sabbath, but at the strictness of the Rest now commanded; But he
should have called to mind that nothing was spoken of that till after the
Elders were come to Moses. And if we duly weigh the Story, the Elders will be
found to have thought it strange, why the People gathered this double portion
on Friday, for the Elders knew that a double portion was to be gathered on the
sixth day, six days before: And therefore would doubtless have applied
themselves to Moses before now, for a resolution, if they had then questioned
for what end they were to gather double on the sixth day; and no other reason
can be imagined of that delay, but that their thoughts were suspended all that
while upon the sixth day of the Patriarchal-week, which is Saturday, till they
saw the People gather on the sixth day in the order of the gathering days; and
then and not till then they came to Moses, that he might resolve them whether
the Precept was to be interpreted of the sixth day in the order of the
Creation, which had hitherto been the preparation for the Sabbath, or whether
it was God's purpose to alter the Sabbath, and transfer it from Sunday to
Saturday, and that therefore Friday now must be their preparation day, or
(which comes all to one) whether the six days were to comense at the first
gathering-day, or the first of the Patriarchal week. And this seruple
propounded by all the Elders, that is, all the grave men of the Congregation,
who had been longest acquainted with the Ancient Sabbath; for Elders in the
Text does not imply a name of Office but of Age, Elders by Office not being
constituted till Jethro had advised Moses to constitute them, Exodus 18. 21.
These it seems had not themselves gathered a double portion, but thought the
younger sort timerarious in their account of days, and therefore acquaint Moses
with it, whom Moses thus resolves: [This is that the Lord has said, to morrow
is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord.] When did God say this, but in
his Precept to gather twice as much on the sixth day? So that here Moses
comments upon the Precept, telling them that thereby God appointed to the Jews
the morrow following to be thence-forward their weekly Sabbath. Whereas if they
had been used before to keep Saturday-Sabbath, the Rulers needed not to have
applied themselves to Moses for the resolution of such a question, as a Child
might have unriddled: for it cannot be imagined but the day before the
Patriarchal Sabbath was from the beginning, a preparation to it: whereon Reason
would tell Men that they ought to set their secular Affairs in such good order,
as they might not be distracted by them in the sacred exercises of the Sabbath,
which from the first was so to be sanctified, as no servile work was to be done
thereon. And seeing the Israelites at this time had no other servile work to do
but gathering, and dressing of Manna; if they had not been restrained from that
on the Sabbath, there would have been no difference betwixt that and other days
in respect of cessation from common work. And therefore upon that supposition
that Saturday was their ancient Sabbath, the Elders must have been Children in
understanding, if they perceived not the reason of the Precept, for gathering
twice as much on Friday. To sum up the whole of this Argument: This is the
first Saturday-Sabbath we find celebrated in the Wrold for 2453 Years at the
lowest account, and that the whole World should live to that age without a
Sabbath, is the most incredible of Incredibles. In order to the vindication of
the Patriarchal-Church from so black a Crime, I have endeavored to show that
Sunday-Sabbath was observed before the Institution of the Jewish
Saturday-Sabbath, from the first instance: And I shall give more clear and
unexceptionable proof thereof in the other forenamed instance, drawn from Exodus
12. 3. Speak ye unto all the Congregation of Israel, saying, On the tenth day
of this mouth they shall take to them a Lamb, etc.

SECT. VIII.
2d Instance. If we reckon backward from the 15th day of the second month,
which we demonstrated to have been Sunday, till we come to the tenth day of the
first month, we shall find that tenth day to have been Sunday, and to have been
celebrated by the Israelites, (and by consequence the Egyptians also) their
keeping thereon a solemn, religious, stated Assembly on course.

1. That this tenth day fell on Sunday, may be thus collected by a retrograde
calculation of days, from the fifteenth of the second month to the tenth of the
first.

Second month: Days 15, 8, 1.

First month; days, 24, 17, 10: were (...).

For the proof of this Account, wherein I assign 30 days to a month, I have the
plain testimony of Moses, Genesis 7. 24. compared with Chap. 8. 4. where the
beginning of the 150 days of the Waters prevailing above the Earth, is said to
be the 17th day of the month, and the end of those days the 17th of the 7th
month, that is, just five months, if we assign to each month 30 days. And Deuteronomy.
12. 13. [She shall bewail her Father and Mother a month of days.] This would
have been a Lesbian Rule, if their months had not consisted of an equal number
of days. And if the days of every of those months wherein the Waters prevailed,
had not been thirty, the space from the 17th of the second to the 17th of the
seventh month, would not have amounted to 150 days.

These Texs are so plain, as I wonder how so many Men of great and deserved
name came to be lulled (except by Rabbinical Sorcery) into so deep a sleep, as
to dream of the Jewish months having assigned to them, alternatim, 30 and 29
days; and to forsake Moses his conduct in so plain a path. An Error which the
industrious and learned Usher gives his Testimony against, in the Preface to
his Annals: The Year (says he there) of the Patriarchs, Egyptians, and
Hebrews, consisted of twelve equal months of thirty days aepiece. For that the
Hebrews used Lunary months before the Babylonish Captivity, is more than can be
proved from this so infallible an Evidence, that the Patriarchs reckoned thirty
days to the month, (what ever Innovation after-Ages introduced is not here
material.) A demonstrative proof may be drawn of the truth of the first
Instance also: that the 15th of the second month, ( Exodus 16.) fell on Sunday.
Thus, the first month days, 10, 17, 24. The second month days, 1, 8, 15, were
Sundays. And thus these Instances will mutually illustrate one another, as we
shall see in the remaining Inferences, also which we shall make from the second
instance of a Sunday-Sabbath

2. The next thing I infer hence is this, That on this Sunday, falling on the
tenth of the first month, Moses and Aaron spoke unto the whole Congregation,
concerning the Ceremonies and institution of the Passover, Exodus 12. 1, 2, 3.
[Speak ye unto all the Congregation, (the whole Church of the Israelites, so
Ainsworth) saying on the tenth day, that they take up a Lamb, etc.] So
Ainsworth (verbatim) after the He-Hebrew; saying that the Hebrew refers the
10th day to Moses and Aaron's speaking to them more distinctly, [ Speak ye --
on the tenth day. And they shall take up a Lamb.] And verse. 21. where Moses
speaks then to the Elders, saying, [ Draw you out a Lamb.] And verse. 22. Where
the Text says, [ They went and did as Moses and Aaron had commanded them.]
From these Texts it is clear as day, that it was the tenth day whereon this
Speech was made to the Church-Assemhly. For this term [ Then] can speak nothing
less: and the sequel implies, that at the breaking up of the Assembly they went
immediately and took up their Lambs the same day for the Passover, that was to
be kept the 14th day. Besides, seeing the taking up the Paschals on the tenth
day, was peculiar to this first Passover (as also were several other Ceremonies
of it) as the afterpractice of the Jews, and of our Savior himself, evinceth.
It had been madness to have bid them, on the 14th day, take up Lambs on the
tenth foregoing. And therefore I wonder to see wise Men, like so many Geese in
a mist, straggle in so much light, from the plain path of most obvious truth,
into that maze of vulgar error, viz. that Moses spoke to the Congregation on
the 14th day, touching the Institution of the Passover: especially when I
consider the weakness of the Argument inducing them into that opinion, this
being their Herculean; because it is said [ This night will I pass through
Egypt, and stay, etc.] But who, save one that has his Eyes in the ends of the
Earth, can overlook this easy answer; that that is spoken of the night of that
day, whereof there he speaks, not of that whereon he spoke.

From the Premises also appears the oversight of them, who prolong the three
days darkness, unto the 14th day, dreaming (as if they had been frighted out of
their Senses, by some of those Hob-Goblins which they fancy appeared to the
Egyptians during that darkness) that the Israelites took that opportunity, to
provide themselves for their Journey, of Egyptian Jewels and other necessaries.
This indeed had been a robbing of the Egyptians with a witness. But they must
have had Cats Eyes, if they could see where their Prey lay in that palpable
darkness. For, though the Israelites had light where they dwelt, yet I do not
think that they could find, in the dwellings of the Egyptians, light enough to
pilfer by, if they did not bring it with them, in their Eyes or Cloakbags, from
Goshan.

Lastly, How opposite is this to the whole series of the History, which tells
us that the Egyptians lent them freely, what they had occasion for: That Moses
was in high esteem of Pharaoh's Servants and all the Egyptians, who would have
lent, or given, the Israelites the Shirts off their backs, to have been quit of
them and their Plagues together.

3. From the foresaid Texts, and the circumstances of the story, it appears,
that this Assembly was not called togather, by special Summons upon an
extraordinary account; but met upon ordinary course. For

1. How could Moses (or any body else) convene them on such a sudden, who were
scattered throughout all the Land of Egypt to gather stubble?

2. Or is it probable that their Taskmasters would have permitted them to leave
their work, to assemble on such a Summons?

3. Or if the Israelites had obtained a play-day of their Taskmasters, is it
like they would have met together, upon the Summons of Moses, whom they looked
upon as a Person that came to make their bondage more heavy? Exodus 5. 21. and
to whose promises they gave no heed, the last time before this he had occasion
to speak with them? Exodus 6. 9. They must therefore either be assembled now
upon course, or by immediate inspiration of them, one by one, for there can be
no other subterfuge here. And there is no disputeing with Men that betake
themselves to such fastness.

Briefly, the matter stands thus: The tenth day, being the weekly Sabbath,
whereon they usually met to worship God; Moses and Aaron are commanded by God,
to take the opportunity of that Convention to speak unto them. And considering
the Circumstances the Jews were then in, it is more then probable, that these
Conventions were of the like nature, when they met with Moses, to chide and
curse him: And when Moses applied himself to them, with promises of a good
issue to his Message, and they regarded not; As also, that the Egyptians (and
by consequence all other Nations) celebrated the same day of the week, Sunday.

For can it be imagined, that the Jews in Egypt, who were kept so close to
their work, as to have their task set them, day by day (...), (which the
Samaritan Translation renders, Pensum quotidianum, their daily Task; Targum
Dnhelos, per singulos dies, every several day. And the Hebrew opus diei, in die
sua: the work of every day, in its proper day) would be allowed to rest from
their daily work on Sundays; if their Taskmasters, and the rest of the
Egyptians, had not themselves also rested on that day?

On the other hand, it was as much the interest of the Egyptians to have the
Israelites rest on Sunday, as it was to the Jews to have the Stranger within
their Gates rest on Saturday; because if the Strangers might have followed
their ordinary Callings on those days whereon the Natives rested from theirs,
they would have diverted the gain of that work from the Natives. Grotius in
exp. Decalogue.

4. The last Inference I draw from this second Instance, is, that this solemn
Assembly was for Religious Worship. Which the Premises, duly considered,
evince: For it was an Assembly upon course, celebrated by the Israelites, at
what time the Egyptians also rested: for what else can we imagine they met
together but to worship God?

And seeing their Bondage was so hard, that their Taskmasters would not let
them rest, while themselves were at their daily labor, it may be safely
concluded that on whatsoever day they had remission from their daily Tasks, so
as to meet together, the Egyptians also ceased from their works. I cannot see
what possibly can invalidate this Consequence, but the Dream of this Assembly's
being kept during the time of Darkness, when the Egyptians could not stir from
the place where they sat down: upon which supposition, indeed, the Israelites
might have had a convenience of meeting without check. But how weak their
Arguments are, who are of that Opinion, has been showed already: And I will
now show the Impossibility of it, from the plain order of the sacred History.
For it is thence manifest, that what passed in the whole 11th Chapter, was
after the end of the Darkness, and before Moses went from Pharoah's presence.
That is, as soon as Moses (Chap. 10. ult.) had answered Pharaoh, [Thou shall
see my face no more.] God tells Moses, while he yet stood before Pharaoh, that
he would bring one Plague more upon Egypt that would force Pharaoh to dismiss
them, not only with their own Goods, but with the Jewels, Silver, and Gold,
etc. of the Egyptians also. And Moses reports this Message to Pharaoh; and
then, and not till then, Moses goes out from Pharaoh in a rage ( Chap. 11. 8.)
Now it was after all this that God commanded Moses and Aaron to speak to the
whole Congregation (that should be assembled then) on the 10th day.

Besides, God's bidding both Moses and Aaron speak to the Congregation, argues
it to have been a Church-Assembly: Chap. 4. 15. Thou shall speak to Aaron the
Levite, and put words in his mouth; and I will be with thy mouth, and his
mouth. And he shall be thy Spokesman unto the People: And ( Chap. 7. 1.) Aaron
thy Brother shall be thy Prophet.

The meaning therefore of [ Speak ye, etc.] Chap. 12. 1. is, That Moses should
speak to Aaron, and Aaron speak to the People. Now why must Aaron speak to the
People, if they had not been a Church-Assembly; seeing he was not a temporary,
but standing Prophet; nor a Prophet who received Revelations from God, but
published to the People divine Revelations received by Moses? which is the
proper work of an Ecclesiastical Minister in a Church-Assembly, (1 Cor. 14. 23,
24.) But what is reported of this Assembly, Exodus 12. 27. that at its breaking
up [the People bowed the head and worshipped] puts it beyond all doubt, that it
was convened for Religious Worship. And yet let me add, as a joint-confirmation
of the whole premises, that it is scarce conceivable whence, in more likelihood
than from the Patriarchal Custom of celebrating Sunday-Sabbath, could flow that
most ancient and universal Idolatry of worshipping the Sun; as the most
generally beneficient and salvifick Deity? Or, from whence else could proceed
the change of the Name of the City On (where Joseph's Father-in-law the
Prince-Priest, or Metropolitan of all Egypt had his residence) into that of
Heliopolis, or the City of the Sun, but from the abuse and misinterpretation of
the Patriarchal Sabbath? conceiving that Planet, whose name that Day bore,
which was celebrated as the chief Day of the Week, to be the chief God. For
that the Sun was worshipped of the Egyptians, and all Nations, as the general
all-healing all-saving Deity, is affirmed by Diodorus, Macrobius, Agellius, and
all the Ancients, with unanimous consent, A quovis salubris subvenit animis
corporibusque mortalium. Macrob. Saturnal. l. 1. c. 20. And so decry the
Opinion of the Heathen, that the Sun was a God, because the Day called by his
Name was dedicated, of all the Days of the Week, to divine Worship: it seemed
good to the Christian Church, to give it a new name [ the Lords Day] as being
celebrated in memory of our Lord's Resurrection, who on that Day entered into
his Rest, and ceased from his Works, as God did from his. So that we have in
these two Instances, which fell within the space of five Weeks, an account
given of the Patriarchs keeping two Sunday-Sabbaths: whereas we hear not of
two Saturday-Sabbaths kept either by the Patriarchs or the Jews, in the whole
Old Testament, though that contains an History of the Church, for above 3500
years: I mean Saturday-Sabbaths circumstanced, as these Sunday-Sabbaths are,
with the nomination of the day and month whereon they were celebrated.

CHAP. V.
The new Creature (Man restored by faith in the promised Seed) was that
finishing perfection of the Creation, which made all very good; and from which
God smelled so sweet a savor of Rest on the Seventh Day, as to bless and
sanctify it.

SECT. I.
FOR the proof of this in general, let us consider the order of Time respecting
Moses his Narrative of Man's Creation Male and Female, and the immediate
Consequents thereof till they were turned out of Paradise: and thence we may
certainly collect, that Adam fell, and was restored on the sixth day.

1. That Eve was formed the sixth day, is without all doubt: And therefore the
History in the whole second Chapter from the end of verse. 3. in order of time
immediately follows the mention of God's creating them Male and Female, Chap.
1. 27. and precedes what is recorded from the beginning of Verse. 28. Chap. 1.
[And God blessed them, and said unto them, be fruitsul and multiply] though in
the order of narration it be set after: because Moses would not interpose so
long a Parenthesis in his breviate of the Creation, as the manner of creation
and disposal of the Female makes.

2. The whole third Chapter touching the Temptation, Fall, Promise of Christ,
and turning out of Eden, in time, precedes God's Grant to Adam and Eve, made,
Chap. 1. verse. 29. Behold, I have given you every Herb upon the face of the
whole Earth, and every Tree, etc. For while they were in Eden, they had leave
only to eat of the Trees of the Garden, and not of all them neither, Chap. 2.
17. They must therefore have starved after they were turned out of Paradise, if
God had not enlarged their Charter: And to find what that was, and when
granted, we must recur back from the end of the third Chapter (where God takes
away the Table he had furnished for them in Eden) unto the forequoted chap. 1.
29. where he spreads a larger Table for them, furnished with every Herb and
Tree upon the face of the whole Earth. For it is to be noted, that although
Beasts, and Birds, and Fishes, fall to it without saying Grace; and those that
live by prey sustain themselves, not only with Vegitables but Animals, without
asking other leave than their own natures give them -- yet Man as he had not
right to feed on Animals till God granted him that power after the Flood, Genesis
9. 3. Every moving thing that lives shall be meat for you, even as the green
Herb have I given you all things. So neither could he deprive Vegitables of
life, for the sustenance of his own, till God granted him liberty.

3. From this Grant therefore ( Chap. 1. 29.) we must continue the Story, if we
will bring it into due order of time, unto the end of verse. 3. chap. 2. [ And
God blessed the seventh Day, and sanctified it: because that in it he had
rested, etc.] And thence pass over the remaining part of the second and the
whole third Chapters, unto chap. 4. which from ver. 3. ( And in process of time
they brought Offerings unto the Lord) shows how the Patriarchs sanctified that
Day that God had sanctified.

It is most manifest from this plain Chronological account of the sacred
History, that Man fell, was restored, and thrust out of Paradise, the sixth
day. Cherubims being placed with flaming Swords to guard the Tree of Life,
leaving Adam no hope of life by the first Covenant: whither then could he look
for Life Eternal, but to the promised Seed in Faith, of whose Blood, and
acknowledgment of his own Sin, he offered by God's appointment, those Beasts in
Sacrifice, of whose skin's God made him and Eve Coats: that they appearing
before God in that, which was a Type of the Robes of Righteousness, and
pleading the Blood of the Covenant, might be found and accepted in Christ: in
whom alone God is well-pleased, and smells a sweet savor of Rest. Upon which
account he rested the seventh day, and Adam with him, in Christ.

To Adam' s celebrating the praises of his Redeemer on this Sabbath Day, the
Chaldee Paraphrase, or Targum of Jonathan ( who was fellow-disciple to Hillel
with good old Simeon, forty years before our Savior's incarnation, says P.
Fagius ( on Genesis 1.) seems to have respect: for thus that renders the title of
Psalm 92. [An Hymn which the first man Adam said for the Sabbath-Day] as
Ainsworth observes: Dicunt Rabboth quod Adamus hunc psalmum protulit quando
creatus, erat vesper Sabbati, and postea peccavit, and erat maledictus, and in
hora duodecima diei sexti, crat expulsas ab Edene. Deus benedictus venit ad
judicium mortis; Sabbatum super vevit. Et Adam Eucharistias quia erat liberatus
a judicio mortis, profert (Darash. R. Arama. Vicars decupla) carticum Adami
dicitur ab Hebraeis, quod talia dicere potuit. Adamus cum res adeo primum
conditas aspexit. Grot.

The Rabbis say that Adam made this Psalm on the Eve of the Sabbath, at twelve
of the Clock of the Day wherein he was created, and afterward sinned, and was
accursed, and driven out of Eden. The blessed God came to pass the Sentence of
Death upon him; the Sabbath came upon him. And Adam because he was set free
from the Sentence of Death, brought forth thanksgiving Offerings. That is,
says Grotius, because Adam may be supposed to have said such like words, when
he beheld the things that God created in the beginning.

SECT. II.
But all this together may perhaps seem too great a weight to hang upon the
single Pin of this one Argument, drawn from the Chronology of the History. I
will therefore more distinctly show the truth of each particular.

1. That Adam fell on the sixth day, seems evident from that Greek Proverb,
grounded upon the almost universal Consent of the Fathers: (...), Adam was
formed and deformed the same day; quoted by Hamond L' Estrange, p. 8. Which
universal Consent took its rise from Psalm. 49. 12. Hinc Colligunt Hebraei (in
Berescit Rabba) gloriam primi hominis cum eo non per noctisse. (Cartw. Mell.)
Broughton most confidently affirms that Adam did not continue in his Integrity
one hour, and affirms that all Jews are of that opinion (from the Authority of
Maimonides, and from that Proverb of modern Jews abovesaid.) He also says
that all the Greek Fathers are of the same opinion: Vna nocte integritate non
permanebat Adam, says Vicars; for which he quotes the Arabic and Persic,
Pentateuch. The Septuagint indeed renders the above-quoted Text ( Psa. 49 12)
thus: Man being in honor, understands not. As if it were the same with verse.
23. The Sir. Arab and Simmachus follow the Septuagint, but this reading
contradicts all Hebrew Copies, and the best Hebrew Doctors, David Kimhi, Aben
Ezra, etc. and ancient Fathers, as Jerome, etc. who render it thus [ Adam (or
Man) being in honor did not lodge there a Night] or [ Adam did not lodge one
Night in Honour] non pernoctavit] did not stay one Night in that Estate, for
(...), Jalin, the Hebrew Word here used, signifies properly to lodge or stay for
a Night, Genesis 31. 54. [Laban and Jacob tarried all Night in the Mount, and
early in the Morning departed] Genesis 32. 21. [Jacob himself lodged with the
Company that Night.] I might add that the Targum interprets Genesis 2. 15. [And
the Lord took the Man and placed him in the Garden of Eden] by a Syriack Word [
Sharah] which in Hiphil signifies to place in a lodging for a Night; thus is
this word used in the Syriack New Testament, Acts 20. 15. [And the next day we
came to Samos and lodged at Trogillium; and the next day, etc.] Luke 9. 12. [
When the day begun to wear away, the Disciples said, Send the Multitude away,
that they may lodge in the Villages,] Luke 2. 7. [ There was no place for them
in the Inn] in the Room they had taken up to lodge in for that Night, ( Shindler
Pentaglot.) So early began our Savior to have the Chastisment of our Sin laid
upon him in a way parallel to Adam's Fall; he with his blessed Mother being
thrust out of the Inn the Hour he was born; as Adam was thrust out of Paradise
the day he was created.

Thus our Savior gives his Suffrage to John 8. 44. where he styles the Devil [
a Murderer from the beginning:] for this term [ in the beginning] denotes the
six days of the Creation, and precisely terminates where God finished that
Work, as is apparent from Genesis 1. 1. [In the Beginning God made Heaven and
Earth]; that is, in the space of six days, wherein the whole Species of things
in Heaven and Earth had their beginning: Or, as our Savior explains it, Mark
13. 19. [In those days shall be Afflictions, such as was not from the beginning
of the Creation which God created;] the whole frame whereof, speaking of the
same thing he calls [ the World,] and the space wherein it was made [ the
beginning of the World] Mat. 24. 21. or, as it is rendered John 9. 33. [since
the World began, was it not heard, that, etc.] that is, since God finished the
Work of Creation: Thus [ the beginning] circumscribed the whole Work of
Creation, Heb. 1. 10. [Thou, Lord, in the beginning founded the Earth, etc.]
And though sometimes it may seem to denote the Duration before, when it is
spoken of God, Prove. 8. 22. [The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way,
before his Works of old] yet it no where extends its Signification beyound the
six days Work, when it is applied to the Creature: It was therefore within the
compass of the six days that this Murderer slew our first Parents.

2. That Adam was restored through the Promise of the Woman's Seed the same day
whereon he fell, is apparent from our Savior his being styled, Rev. 13. 8.
[the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World]; for this is of the very same
Latitude with [ the beginning] Heb. 1. 10. and Heb. 4. 3. [ Though the Works
were finished from the Foundation of the World]; that is, in the sixth day
distinguished from the seventh day, verse. 4. [For he spoke of the seventh day
on this wise; and God rested the seventh day from all his Works]: so that the
time specified by [ from the Foundation of the World] verse. 3. concludes with
the sixth day, before the seventh whereon God rested. Now, Christ cannot be
said to be slain then actually (for so he was not slain till the fullness of
Time, till the Hour appointed of the Father); nor in the divine Decree (for so
he was slain before the Foundation of the World) but only in respect of the
Promise then made to Adam: In which Promise he was exhibited as God-man; as
Man, in regard of the Serpent's brusing his Heel; as God, in regard of his
breaking the Serpent's Head. This leads me into a Flowery Field of Meditation;
wherein I must crave leave to expatiate and refresh my self after my tedious
Walk through dark and controverted Texts, in the pursuit of Truth; I shall
therefore offer here these things to Consideration.

1. When things are once put into a divine Promise, they are then in Scripture
Language said to be; for tho they attain not to actual Existence till long
after, yet the Promise gives them a real being, or metaphysical Essence, as
rosa in Hieme. Hence God says to Abraham, Genesis 17. 15. [ I have made thee a
Father of many Nations] when as yet Isaac (through whom he was to be the Father
of many Nations) was not yet conceived in the Womb, nor in human probability
ever like to be conceived in Sarah's Womb. From which Instance the Apostle
draws this Inference, that God calls things that be not (as to actual
Existence) as if they were (in real Essence) because he that promised was able
to perform it, and was then engaged to perform it upon the honor of his
Veracity; Romans 4. 17. so that it was as impossible that it could miscarry, or
prove abortive, as that God can lie. From which Promise we have a thousand
times greater Assurance to say the Lamb was then slain, then we have to say
(while the Fruit is only in the Root, and not brought forth) this is a Pippin,
this a Pearmain, etc. For this latter is grounded on a Lie, upon the
immutability of God's Covenant with Day and Night, etc. which though we cannot,
yet God can break, yea has broke, as when he made the Sun stand still in the
days of Joshua; go back at Hezekiah's Prayer, and suspended its Light at our
Savior's Passion; as the Fire did also its burning property in the Case of the
three Children: but the former is grounded on the Immutability of God's Promise
by Oath, and the most sacred Oath, even by Himself, than whom he has not a
greater to swear by. In respect of this Immutability the Hebrew Doctors, upon
Genesis 15. 18. have this Observation [He says not, I will give, but, I have
given; and yet Abraham had now begotten no Children, because the Word of the
holy blessed God is a Deed; therefore he so speaks Ainsworth. Thus the Son of
God was tendered to fallen Man, as the Lamb slain; he was in this Promise as
manifestly held out to Adam, as crucified, as making an Atonement for Sinners,
by the Oblation of his Blood, as he was, after his actual Crucifixion and
Ascension held out to the Galatians, (Chap. 3. 1.)

2. The Son of God in the Virtue of this his future Oblation of himself, and
Mediation by Merit, entered upon the Exercise of his Mediatory Office, by
Intercession, immediately upon Adam's Fall; he did not suffer the mortal Wound
to fester, but applied the healing Balm (flowing from his bruised Heel) to it,
while it was green: as soon as ever he saw Adam naked and in his Blood, he
poured clean Water upon him, cast his Garment over him, and entered into a
Covenant with him, and said unto him, Live. No sooner had Man made a League
with the Serpent and proclaimed War against God; but God was in Christ
reconciling the World to himself. In the Cool of the day (that is, in the
Evening of that Day whereon he fell) Adam heard the Voice of the Lord God (that
is, the Word or Son of God, as both Christians and Jews expound that place,
Genesis 3. 8. See Dr. Owen's Exercit. 10. 2.) calling him to Repentance by
Arraignment; to Faith, by the Promise of the Woman's Seed; yea, to Glory, by
presenting himself in the Form of an human Body, and that glorious Body, such
as he showed himself in at the Transfiguration, and has now at the Right Hand
of the Father. Dr. More Append. to Mystery of Iniquity. As when Job had wished
( Chap. 9. 34.) Let him take his Rod away from me, and let not his Fear
terrify me: Then would I speak and not fear him.] Elihu (according to Job's
wish) makes him this Offer [ Behold, I am in God's stead, I also am formed out
of the Clay. Behold, my Terror shall not make thee afraid, neither shall my
Hand be heavy upon thee; If thou can answer me, set thy words in order before
me, stand up, etc.] Job 33. 5, 6, 7. So the Lord pleaded with Adam by his Son
in the Form of God manifest in the Flesh.

I doubt not but the Son of God in human shape was all this seventh Day busied
in most holy Colloquies with Adam; but that he fully revealed himself to him
and Eve, showed him how and in what order he created all things, wished him to
meditate upon these Works, and in them to praise and acknowledge the true God,
his Creator; and taught him that after his Example every seventh Day all Labor
set aside, he should spend in the Exercise of Piety: Zanchy de Creatione Hom.
l. 1. Fuller upon these words [ They heard the Voice of the Lord God walking in
the Garden.] Genesis 3. 8. has this Observation, [By this Voice I understand
certain Words which God spoke with himself walking] Christ appearing to them in
human shape.

3. This his mediating to reconcile Man to God, argues he had upon the instant
of Adam's Fall, so far reconciled God to Man (by becoming his Surety, by giving
Bond to make Satisfaction, pay Man's Ransom at the day appointed, at the
fullness of Time) as the Father (upon Consideration thereof) would not take the
Forefeiture, but delegated the Son to treat with his Rebels, and offer them
Pardon (and a better State than that they were fallen from) on the Condition of
their accepting the Covenant of Grace.

For Christ did not take this Honor (of the Melchisedochian Priesthood) upon
himself, but was called of God an High Priest after this order. Heb. 5. 10.)
and made a Priest by Oath, by him that said unto him, The Lord swear, and will
not repent, thou art a Priest for ever, etc. Heb. 7. 21. He was sworn to this
Office of Mediation, and sent to manage it by blessing Adam, in turning him
from his Iniquity, before the beginning of Days (natural) on the sixth
Creating-Day, and will continue the Exercise of it to the end of Days (natural)
otherwise he would not be a Priest without beginning and end of Days. Heb. 7. 3.

4. That Adam did not defer his Repentance, but forthwith complied with the
gracious Terms that were tendered him, cannot be doubted, if we seriously
consider how utterly incredible it is, that he who was so ashamed of himself
and his Nakedness, should refuse to beg (at any rate) Raiment of Christ to
cover his Nakedness, Rev. 3. That he who was so confounded in himself, as he
ran to hide himself in the Bushes from the Presence of God, should stand
consulting whether he should accept or refuse Mercy offered. That he whose own
Conscience, and God greater than his Conscience, had condemned, so as he saw
his Soul drawing nigh unto the Grave, and his Life to the Murderers; should,
when God, not by a Servant, but his Son, sent this Message to him [ I have
received the Atonement, I have accepted the Ransom] Job. 33. reject the Benefit
of that Atonement, the Fruit of that Ransom. That he who had known what it was
to have Communion with God, should under the deepest and most deplorable sense
of its loss, not be ready to embrace the means of recovering that Communion.
Especially if we duly ponderate to what end those Beasts were slain, of whose
Skins God made them Coats of Honor, seeing Adam and Eve could not slay them
for Food; for the Flesh of Animals was not allowed Mankind for Meat till after
the Flood.

That their Flesh was offered in Sacrifice, is the common Tenet of most
judicious Divines; and that partly it was disposed of that way, seems very
probable; but the Scripture does more than hint two other ends of slaying those
Beasts, (which I wonder have not been taken notice of). The first for the
striking of the Covenant betwixt God the Father and the Son, when that Oath
which the Sacred Scripture so frequently mentions, past betwixt them; Psalm
110. 4. [The Lord swear, and will not repent.] This Oath past at Christ's
Initiation into his Mediatorship; [ Forasmuch as that was not without an Oath,
etc.] Heb. 7. 20. By this Oath Christ became, or was made the Surety of that
better Covenant, and more ancient than that of Moses.

These Covenants by Oath, for the greater solemnity thereof, were made thus:
Beasts being cut in twain, and the parts laid a sunder one against another, as
Shoulder against Shoulder, and Leg against Leg, with a space to go between. The
Parties covenanting passing betwixt the Pieces, made Oath, Genesis 15. 18. Jer.
24. 18. [The Covenant which they made, when they cut the Bullock in twain, and
passed between the parts of it] saying, Let me be struck, as this Beast is
struck, if I break this Covenant: whence came the Phrase of ferire foedus, to
strike or smite Covenant. Now this Oath was given and taken betwixt God the
Father and the Son, before Christ called to Adam, saying [ Where art thou?] for
otherwise he would have entered upon his Mediatory Office without an Oath; And
it is very probable that the Voice of God walking in the Garden, which Adam
heard before that Call, was the Voice of the Son of God passing through the
Parts of the divided Beasts.

The Second end of slaying Beasts, was for the striking of the Covenant betwixt
God and Adam, a thing usual in the Ratification of all other Covenants betwixt
God and Man; as that with Abraham, Genesis 15. 18. That with the Jews, Exodus 24.
5. [half of the Blood ( of the Sacrifices) was sprinkled upon the Altar] which
represented God [and the other half upon the People]; or the twelve Pillars,
representing the twelve Tribes, after they had consented to the Covenant at the
reading of the Book, saying, [ Behold the Blood of the Covenant which the Lord
has stricken with you concerning all these Words.] See Ainsworth on Psalm. 50.
5. [My Saints that have stricken a Covenant with me by Sacrifice:] But the
Apostle's Argument, Heb. 9. 16. [Where a Testament is, there must of necessity
be the Death of the Testator: For a Testament is of no force at all while the
Testator liveth] from whence he infers that [therefore the first Testament
was not without Blood] will with equal Firmness support this Inference.

That the first Covenant of Grace with Adam, was ratified by Blood: And that
the Testator must of necessity be dead in Type and Effigy as well at the
sealing of that as this.

And now in the third place, comes in that other use of the Flesh of these
slain Beasts, to wit, Adam's offering them in Sacrifice, as a Burnt-Offering
for the Lord. Thus at that mutual Stipulation betwixt God and Israel, (Ex. 24.
5.) They offered Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices of Peace unto the Lord. And at
God's covenanting with Noah he offered Burnt-Offerings, ( Genesis 8. 20.) in all
likelihood of the Beasts that had been first cut in twain: For this was a
Covenant by Oath, Isa. 54. 9. [I have sworn that the Waters of Noah shall no
more go over the Earth]: and therefore struck, not only by God's stretching out
his Right Hand and swearing (as the Hebrew Doctors conceive) but by passing
between the pieces of the Bullock, etc. that being the most ancient Patriarchal
Mode of ratifying a Covenant by Oath; and taken up from this Primitive Example
of God's Covenanting with Adam. Here we have an account of the disposal of the
Flesh of those Beasts, with whose Skins God apparelled Adam and Eve, fully
consonant to the holy Scriptures, and such as speaks Adam to have consented to
the Covenant upon its first proposal, and the New Creature (Man restored by
Faith in Christ) to have been brought forth into actual Existence before that
Seventh Day, whereon God rested.

5. And now, and not till now, the Heavens and the Earth were finished; and all
the Host of them, when this Captain of the Lord's Host, had his Commission
sealed, had mustered his Army, and administered Sacramentum Militare, the
Military Oath to his holy Elect, and faithful Ones; his Army on Earth was but a
small Company (consisting but of two) but it was terrible with Banners (the
Banner of Love over it, the Banner of defiance against the Enemy) who took this
Captain of their Salvation for so many, and beheld in these two such a Troop
coming (tho but of Sheep, yet led on by the Lion of the Tribe of Judah) as at
its first looking out in this Morning of the day of Grace, the ramping and
roaring Lion was Thunder-strook, prostrate, laid flat upon the Ground, and made
to creep upon his Belly; had none to side with him ever since save his own
profligated Angels, (that had forsaken their first Station) and a cripled crew
of Kaitiffs that were bowed together by Satan, and could not stand upright; a
Company of Monsters in human shape with two-legg'd Bodies, and four-footed
Souls; and had nothing left for Forage to himself and's Army, nothing to feed
on, but Dust (the carnal, sensual, devilish part of Mankind). Now, and not till
now, every Tree brought forth Fruit in its kind; when the true Vine began to
flourish, when the Tree of Life had thus put forth its Leaves and Fruit for the
healing of Mankind: Till God thus shined in Man's Heart to give the Light of
the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, he had not
commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, out of that more dismal Darkness
then sat upon the Face of the unformed Earth, even that wherewith Adam's Sin
had invelop'd the whole Creation, and made it a more confused Chaos than that
rude and indigested Lump, out of which it had been reduced. For hereby Adam
defaced the Image of God; so far lost the the Dominion of the Creature, as he
retained not so much thereof as the Rule over himself. Nay, the whole Fabric
of the World was loosned and ready to fall (this Keistone of the Arch being
crumbled into Dust) If Christ had not sustained the Weight of that ruinous
Building upon his own Shoulders* while it was a repairing, by God's making Adam
anew, and building him upon a new Foundation, even the Rock of Ages, that
precious and elect Cornerstone, at the laying whereof the Morning Stars sang
together, and all the Sons of God shouted for Joy. Job 38. 6, 7. [Wast thou by
when he laid the chief Cornerstone thereof, when the Morning Stars sang
together? etc.] Genesis 2. 4. [These are the Generations of Heaven and Earth, in
the day that Jehovah made the Earth and the Heavens.] The name of Jehovah is
here first given to God; which Name the Cabalists observe to imply the Mercy of
God; as Elohim* signifies his Justice; P. Fagius in locum; who observes also
that the word [ Tholedhoth] Generations, is no where writ perfectly but here,
and Ruth 4. 18. because these Generations only, to wit, of the World and the
Messiah (of whose Family the Book of Ruth treats) are perfect. Now was Man
twice formed, as is implied, verse. 7. And the Lord God formed Vai-jitzer,
duplex hic est, Jod ad significandum (inquit) R. S. duplicem hominis
formationem, hujus and futuri seculi post Resurrectionem. P. Fagius. Here is a
double Jod, to signify the twofold Generation of Adam; the first relating to
this World; the second to the World to come; that is, his Formation as Man, his
Reformation, as a new Man: And these Generations thus perfected, are said (
verse. 4.) to be made in one day; because the whole Creation was perfected by
Man's new Creation at the entrance of the seventh day.

6. Till all the Host of Heaven and Earth was thus finished, by the Formation
of the new Creature, and Introduction of the second Adam, God had not made
sufficient Preparation for his resting in his Works, as very good and
altogether adequate to the bringing about of his own glorious and gracious
ends: But now this Workmanship of God created in Christ for good Works: Ephesians. 2.
9. being made, Christ's personal being exhibited in the Promise, as adopted
into Man's Family, and Christ mystical being born of the immortal Seed of that
Word of Promise, and by Faith adopted into the Family of God; the Pleasure of
the Lord thus prospering in the Mediator's Hands, and Christ's seeing and
reaping the Fruit of the travel of his Soul; what could the issue of this be
but Satisfaction, Acquiescency, and Rest? Man renewed and restored into
Communion with God, through the Mediation of the Son of God, was in the
fore-Appointment of it, the mutual Pleasure of God the Father, and God the Son,
from all Eternity, ( Prove. 8. 29, 30, 31.) [When he appointed the Foundations
of the Earth, then was I by him --. I was daily his delight, rejoicing always
before him, in the habitable Parts of the Earth, and my Delights were with the
Sons of Men.] The Son's delight was among the Sons of Men in the habitable
parts of the Earth, before Man was created, or the Foundations of the Earth
laid, save only in the Decree and Appointment of God. And this rejoicing of the
Son was the Father's delight: And for this Pleasures sake, Heaven and Earth,
and the whole Furniture of both were created. [ Rev. 4. 11. Thou have created
all things, and for thy Pleasure they are and were created.] The whole World
(say the Jewish Doctors) was created for the Messiah; and the Messiah (say all
Christians) was exhibited for the Redemption of Mankind, from that state of Sin
and Misery, into which we fell through the Transgression of the Proto-plast.
This Redemption was tendered to Adam in the Promise of the Woman's Seed, and
accepted by Adam through Faith in that Promise, and that acceptance ratified by
a Covenant of Salt, by a Sacrifice salted with Fire, the Sacrifice of a whole
Burnt-Offering; which burning upon the Altar all Night unto the Morning. (Lev.
6. 9.) And figuring the Oblation of Christ's Body, and Adam's Oblation of his
Body, as a living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God through Christ, must
needs come up with Acceptance before God, and send forth a sweet Savor of Rest
unto God at the dawning of the seventh Day. The Talmudists say, that God
created Fire on the seventh day: I suppose they mean that Fire that came down
from Heaven on Adam's Sacrifice in token of God's Approbation. So that God
having perfected his Work on the seventh Day, even all the Work that he had
made, Genesis 2. 2. Or, all the Work that he created to make, verse. 3. Rested on
the Seventh Day, and sanctified it.

The Hebrews distinguish betwixt creating, forming, and making, thus; To
create, is the Production of any thing out of nothing; to from, is the
bestowing of Form and Shape upon any thing created; to make, is to perfect,
finish, and to adapt to its proper use, that that is created and formed. They
are all three used to this sense in one Verse, ( Isa. 43. 7.) I have created
him for my Glory, I have formed him; yea, I have made him; that is, every way
fitted him for the attaining that end for which I created and formed him. ( P.
Fagius in Targ. Onkelos). Now Adam, being created to bring forth good Works in
Christ Jesus: was not God's (...), his Workmanship fitted for the Production of
the end of his Creation, while he was either in a state of Innocence or of the
Lapse; which alone is sufficient to prove that Adam fell and was restored by
Faith in the promised Seed the day of his Creation: for otherwise, God could
not have rested; that is, have taken Delight and Complacency in all the Work he
created to make as very (that is, perfectly) good and completed for the
effecting the end of Creation, to wit, the glorifying of God by good Works done
in Christ. And therefore that seventh Day's rest on Sunday (where God saw all
very good, as good as Heart could wish) was the Rest of Redemption: And the
Jewish Saturday-Sabbath, the rest of the Creation uncompleated on the sixth
day, before Man was capacitated by Faith in Christ, to glorify God through his
Redeemer. Saturday and Sunday-Sabbath came into the World, not like Esau and
Jacob, but like Phares and Zara. The Jewish Saturday-Sabbath was not born
first, and afterward the Christian Sunday-Sabbath, catching the Jewish by the
Heel, supplanted it, and obtained the Blessing of Primogeniture: But the
Christian Sabbath, like Zara, first put out its Hand, and upon Sunday's Wrist
was tied the Thread, the Bond of God's Injunction to sanctify that Day; and the
Scarlet-Thred, the Bond of the Covenant of Grace, sealed in the Blood of the
promised Seed: for by binding is signified the imposing of the Law of hallowing
the Sunday-Sabbath; whence God's Laws are called Bonds and Cords [ Let us break
their Bonds asunder, and cast their Cords from us] that is, the Laws of God and
of his Christ ( Psalm. 2. 2, 3.) And a Bond or Cord of Scarlet Thread was to
Rahab a sign of the Covenant, confirmed by the Blood of Christ, Josh. 2. 18.
compared with Heb. 11. 31. [By Faith the Harlot Rahab perished not.] And the
Patriarchal Church unto the Flood (and all since the Flood, who adhered to that
Church) in their Sunday-Sabbath Celebrities had an Eye of Faith upon that
Scarlet-Thred bound to the Wrist of that Day. But when the villainous Subtilty
of such Politicians, as designed to make themselves absolute Sovereigns over
the Nations independent from God, had perverted that custom of worshipping God
in public Assemblies on Sundays, by inacting the Worship of the Sun on that
day that bare the name of that Planet, (making that Hand which God had set at
the end of the Volumn of his Book, as the Index pointing to the chief Contents
of that Volumn, the eternal Word making Propitiation through his Blood) to
point the contrary way, to the Worship of the Creature: Then the Scarlet-Thred
was drawn back out of the Jews sight, till the fullness of time; and now comes
forth the Jewish Saturday-Sabbath, more than 2400 Years after the Patriarchal
Sunday-Sabbath; which Saturday-Sabbath was not imposed upon any Nation but the
Jews; nor upon them in room of the Patriarcal, but upon other accounts, as will
be showed in the handling of the sixth and last Branch of our Discourse upon the
Sabbath.

CHAP. VI.
The Mosaical Saturday-Sabbath (fixed on the sixth Day of the Week in the order
of Creation) was instituted upon other Grounds than that mentioned in the
Decalogue; and having no footing in the forth Precept, but in the Ceremonial
Law, was to expire at Christ's Death, and give place to the Patriarchal Sabbath.
SECT. I.
THat Saturday-Sabbath (as well as the rest) was appointed the Jews to be a
Ceremonial Badg to difference them from all other Nations, who celebrated
Sunday as their weekly Sabbath, is so frequently affirmed in Sacred Scripture,
in these, or equivalent Terms, [ It is a sign between me and you throughout
your Generations, that you may know that I am the Lord that sanctifies you.]
As all that is requisite for the proof hereof, is to show that in those places
by God's sanctifying of them is meant, his visible separating them, from all
other People for his own Inheritance by a Covenant of Peculiarity. For evincing
of which, let it be considered, that in Ezekiel. 20. God's giving them Statutes
and Judgments (that is, Moral and Judicial Laws) is not said to be to this end,
that they might know that he was the Lord that sanctified them; as his giving
them his Sabbaths to be a sign between him and them, was, verse. 11, 12. and
verse. 19, 20. [I am the Lord your God; hallow my Sabbaths, and they shall be a
Sign between me and you, that ye may know that I am the Lord your God]: That
is, [That I have taken you to be unto me a People and an Inheritance, as ye are
at this day.] Deuteronomy. 4. 20. Levit. 20. 24. And yet more plain, Exodus 31. 13. it
is affirmed of all the Sabbaths Indefinitely, that the keeping of them is a
sign between God and the Jews, That he is the Lord their God, etc. and verse.
16. The Children of Israel shall keep my Sabbaths throughout their Generations,
by an everlasting Ordinance. It is a Sign betwixt me and the Children of Israel
for ever.

2. The reason why God would not have the Jews to celebrate the Sunday which
the Patriarchs and themselves, till the Institution of the Saturday-Sabbath
celebrated as the weekly Sabbath, but appointed them another day, was to secure
them from idolizing the Sun with the Heathens, who had perverted Sunday-Sabbath
from the Worship of God to the Worship of the Sun; from the Guilt of which
Idolatry in celebrating the Patriarchal Sabbath, Job purges himself; Job 31.
26, 27, 28. [If I beheld the Sun when it shined, and my Heart has been
secretly enticed, or my Mouth has kissed my Hand; this also were an Iniquity
to be punished by the Judge: For I should have denied the God that is above.]
That is, if I had worshipped the the Sun secretly in my Heart, it would have
been a denying of God: But if I had worshipped it openly, by kissing my Hand at
the sight of it, I had become obnoxious to the sentence of the Judge; where
note, that in Job's time (who lived some Generations before Abram) the World
grew propense to this idolizing of the Sun; but hitherto the Noachal Religion
was so prevalent, as the public Law of the Nations opposed its Incroachment, (
Mercer in locum) Vnde videatur Jobi conterraneos tum non fuisse idolatras, quia
dicit se non clam id fecisse nedum palam, non prodit statim in publicum ista
temeritas, nisi postquam cor plane occaecatum fuerit and consensus favorque
plurium accesserint. Job's Contemporaries and Countrymen were not Idolaters;
because he says, he did not worship the Sun either secretly or openly: such
Temerity as this does not forthwith appear in public, but after that the Heart
is altogether blinded and common Consent and Favor come to take its part.
However in Moses's time this idolizing of the Sun had universally prevailed;
and even in Abraham's time was backed by the secular Law in Vr of the Chaldees,
for the Contempt whereof in his refusing to worship the Caldean Emblem of the
Sun, Abraham, with his Father Terah, found Vr of the Caldees too hot for them.
By the way observe that the word which in this place of Job is translated the
Sun, [(...)] is that from whence Vr of the Caldees derived its Name; and the
Egyptians the Name they give the Sun, (...), ( Macrob. Saturnal. 1. 21.) Hence
Moses so frequently renews this Caution, that the Jews should take heed of
making any Representations of the Sun, or any of the Host of Heaven, ( Deuteronomy. 4.
19.) and ( Chap. 7. 3.) in special to the Sun and Moon, that they should not
inquire after the Nations way of Worship, [saying, How did those Nations serve
their Gods? even so will I do:] that is, after that manner will I serve God.
And in particular, not after their burning of their Sons and Daughters in the
Fire to their Gods: Deuteronomy. 12. 30, 31. Now the God to whom the Gentiles
sacrificed their Children was the Sun, whose Idol was called Moloch and
Milchom; Amos 5. 26. 1 Kings 11. 5, 7. as being Molech, or King of all the
Planets; and therefore by the 70 translated (...), the Prince; and by the
Phoenicians (Door-Neighbours to the Jews) called Beel-Samen, the Lord of Heaven
(as Sanchoniatho witnesses in Eusebius. Evang. Prep. l. 1.) And yet
notwithstanding all these Prohibitions, and God's discharging them from the
public Worship of himself on that day whereon the Heathens in their Apostasy
from the first Institution worshipped the Sun; the Jews imitated the Heathens
in this most barbarous Custom of burning their Sons and Daughters in the Fire,
the Representation of the Sun: Jer. 7. 31. and 19. 5. Psalm. 106. 37, 38. So
exceeding prone was that People to embrace strange Gods: And therefore they
stood so much more in need to have all Occasion thereto removed from them; and
especially such as God had instituted at first for the securing his own, but
were in process of Time perverted to the Introduction and countenancing of the
Worship of false Gods, as was the fate of the Patriarchal Sunday-Sabbath. Upon
the like account the Jews were prohibited very many other Customs, if not of
divine Institution, yet of Patriarchal Practice; yea, some of them seeming to
be the natural Results of the Law of Humanity: such was mourning at the
Funerals of dear and near Relations, wherein the Patriarchs exceeded even to
the Admiration of other Nations; Genesis 50. 10, 11. [And they wailed there with a
very great and heavy Wailing; and he (Joseph with his Brethren) made a mourning
for his Father seven days: And the Canaanites saw the Mourning, and they said,
This is an heavy Mourning to the Egyptians; therefore the name of that Place
was called, The Mourning of the Egyptians.] Yet this so natural a Duty was
prohibited the High Priest, for he must not mourn for his Father or Mother;
(Levit. 21. 11.) and that because he had the holy Anointing, and the holy
Garments upon him, which were holy only in Type. So that here the Law of Nature
must yield to the Levitical in this particular Case, where the High-Priest's
honoring of Father and Mother could do the Dead no good, but might be an
occasion of Evil to the Living; (by the way, this makes the Case of the
Highpriests wholly different from the Pharisees pleading Carban). But where
lay the Danger? Answer, in drawing the Jews to Conformity to the idolatrous
Heathens in their manner of mourning. Baruch 6. 31, 32. [And the Priests sit in
their Temples, having their Clothes rent, and their Heads and Beards shaven,
and nothing upon their Heads: They roar and cry before their Gods, as Men do at
the Feast when one is dead.] Hence all Communion with the Nations is so
pathetically forbidden the Jews, lest they should by that means be drawn to
Idolatry. So much less reason have we to wonder that God should appoint the
Jews another Day for their weekly Sabbath, than that which was instituted at
first to all Mankind, when the Gentiles had perverted the Celebration of that
Day to the instituting the Worship of the Sun. Upon the like reason at the
Restitution of Sunday-Sabbath (upon the expiring of the Ceremonial
Saturday-Sabbath) the Christian Church changed the name of Sunday into that of
the Lord's Day, that she might secure her Children from the Opinion of the
Heathen World, that it was in honor of the Planet of the Sun, that that day of
the Week which bore its name was separated for holy Assembles.

3. And now we need not go far to seek for a Reason why God appointed Saturday
to be the Jewish Sabbath; for that being the weekday immediately preceding
Sunday, and the whole Economy of Moses's Law, as of a thing imperfect,
pointing to good things to come: (Heb. 10. 1.) It was necessary that their
typical Day of Rest should be so placed in the order of the Septiman, as from
thence they might look immediately unto that Day of true Rest that was to come
at the rising of the Sun of Righteousness out of the Grave. But besides this,
the more special Reason of God's appointing them Saturday for their Sabbath,
was, because Saturday was the first day of Rest they had from Egyptian Bondage;
for they marched from Rameses on Friday, the 15th day of the 1st Month, and set
up their Booths at Succoth on Saturday, where they stayed two days, according
to the common Opinion of Learned Men, on the latter whereof Sunday, the
Premises considered, it may be presumed that they kept an holy Rest unto the
Lord according to the Patriarchal Custom; and that it was in that Assembly that
Moses repeated the Ordinances of the Passover, and separated the firstborn of
Males and Firstlings of the Flocks and Herds to be holy to the Lord.

SECT. II.
And that this Precept for Saturday-Sabbath did not vacate the Patriarchal,
either to all Nations, or to the Jews themselves for ever; but was only imposed
upon them as a Carnal Ordinance of divine Service until the time of
Reformation; (Heb. 9. 10.) Or until the Seed should come; (Gal. 3. 19.) and
those good things, the Body whereof is Christ, whereof it was a Shadow; God
gave the Jews many plain Intimations.

1. In his assigning their Deliverance from Egypt, and their resting from their
hard Labor in that Bondage, as the peculiar Reason of his commanding the Jews
to celebrate his Sabbaths; Deuteronomy. 5. 15. That thy Manservant, etc. may rest as
well as thou; and remember that thou wast a Servant in the Land of Egypt; and
that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence through a mighty Hand, and by a
stretched-out Arm: Therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the
Sabbath Day; whether weekly, monthly, or yearly, as also the Sabbaths of Years
and Jubilees; which Reason cannot reach other Nations, but is wholly
accommodated to the Jews, and to them only till the time of Restoration.

2. In his suspending the Reigning of Mannah on their Sabbaths, and letting it
fall on Sunday's Manna, being reputed by those that could not look under the
Vail, Angels Food, the Bread of Heaven ( Psalm. 105. 40.) its not falling on
their Sabbath was interpreted, that the giving of true Manna (that of which
whosoever eats shall live for ever) was reserved for Gospeltimes, and the
Restoration of the Patriarchal Sabbath; when he whom the Father sealed, would
give his Flesh for the Life of the World, that true Bread of Life (Joh. 6.)
that spiritual Food which was the desire of all that hungered after
Righteousness; of the Distribution whereof in the Ordinances of the Gospel,
when they heard Christ discourse, they cried out [ Lord, evermore give us of
this Bread:] Not so much as the Type of that Bread, which can give Satisfaction
and Rest to the Soul, was communicated on their Sabbath; and that was a plain
enough Indication that their Sabbath was not the true Rest.

3. In the very form of its first Institution, Exodus 16. 23. the Imposition of
the Name bewrays the nature of the thing [is the Rest of the Sabbath,
Sabbathon, Sabbath, the Sabbatism, the Sabbath holy to the Lord] so Ainsworth
reads it. But he is exceeding wide of the sense of the Hebrew Word [ Sabbathon]
in translating it [ Sabbatism,] except he takes Sabbatism for a Diminitive; for
Schindler in his Penteglot, and P. Fagius on the Chaldee Paraphrase, Exodus 31.
15. affirm that Sabbathon has the form of a Diminitive, which, says he, the
Hebrews form by adding [ on] to the end of the Primitive, as Isch, viz. Ishcon
virunculus; so of Sabbath comes Sabbathon, Sabbatulum: And Fagius observes,
that the Hebrew Doctors do thus distinguish these two words, that Sabbath
signifies the whole day from beginning to end; Sabbathon, that part of the Eve
before the just beginning of the Sabbath, which was taken from the profane,
and added to the sacred Time, by such as chose rather to overdo than to come
short. The Name therefore given Saturday-Sabbath at first was the [ Puny
Sabbath] [the demy-Rest] or the [ Eve-rest of the true Sabbath.] A Diminitive
Rest for Children under Age, preparative to that holy Rest suitable to Men
which was to succeed.

4. David speaking of another day of Rest than that which Moses had instituted
the Celebration of, and of another Rest than that which Joshua brought them
into the Possession of, made so clear a Comment upon the Precept of the
Sabbath, as well as of their Rest in Canaan, as from thence the Jews might have
collected, that both were but shadows of a better Rest, and better Day of Rest
approaching, by the same way of Ratiocination that the Apostle uses in the 3d
and 4th Chapters to the Hebrews. Touching the Rest of Canaan, it is not
material to my Business, and therefore I shall not speak of that but
occasionally. But what the Author of that Epistle argues, from David's
speaking of another day, so long a time after the giving of the Precept
touching Saturday-Sabbath, is of such moment toward the right Perception of
the Strenuousness of his Arguments for both, and of so great Concernment
toward the Illustration of that Point I am now handling, as I shall for the
clearing of the Apostle's Discourse on that Subject, commit to the Censure of
the pious and learned these Annotations.

1. The Rest of Joshua and the Sabbath of Moses, as reflected on by David, are
that Yoke of Heifers wherewith the Apostle plows to find out the Riddle of the
Lord's-day-Sabbath, and the not making them to draw equally, is the main reason
why Commentators make no better Work of St. Paul's Arguments touching another
Day; and why they make a balk or a bungle of the Christian Sabbath; though all
the Texts alleged, not only in their own most natural Tendency, but in the
Apostle's express Application of them, look directly thitherward. I will begin
with that which Beza confesses to be a most obscure place; Heb. 4. 3. [For we
which have believed do enter (...), into that Rest, as he said, [as I have
sworn in my Wrath, if they shall enter into my Rest,] although the Works were
finished from the Foundation of the World.] It is the Mis-translation of this
last Clause makes this Text unintelligible; but if Men did not shut their Eyes,
for fear of seeing the Light of the Christian-Sabbath dart in upon them from
hence; or cast the Vail of their own Pre-occupations upon the face of it, there
would be no Obscurity at all in it; for, take it as the Apostle gave it (if it
were writ by him in Greek) and it is as light as Day; (...), [ If they shall
enter into my Rest, (...)] equidem, scilicet, nempe, I mean, or, that is to
say, or [to wit, in the Works when they were finished from the Foundation of
the World.] (i. e.) They shall not enter into that Rest I took on the seventh
Day, when I saw all things that I had made, and lo it was very good: [For he
speaks in a certain place of the seventh Day, on this wise, [ And God did rest
the seventh Day* from all his Works,] as it immediately follows ( verse. 4.) by
which Quotation of what is said ( Genesis 2. 2.) the Apostle proves, that he has
given a right Explanation of David's Words, when he says, the Rest of God
there meant, is God's resting in the Contemplation of the Perfections of his
Works on the seventh Day; upon the account whereof he blessed the seventh Day,
[because it is there said of the seventh Day, that God rested from all his
Works.] And that he had rightly concluded from God's swearing Unbelievers out
of his Rest, that Believers, that is, Christians, had entered into it, seeing
the only Bar put in against entering is Unbelief; he proves ( verse. 5.) from
that place of David which the Apostle had taken for his Text, Chap. 3. and in
this place again, (that is, he speaks again of the seventh Day on this wise) [
If they shall enter into my Rest.] The reason of which Consequence the Apostle
gives, verse. 6.] Seeing then, some must enter in,] (for to what purpose else
serves the Promise of entering) [ and they to whom it was first preached entered
not in, because of Unbelief.] The Consequence is so plain, that it needs not be
repeated, to wit, that therefore they that have believed, are entered. And
again, or furthermore, verse. 7. [He limiteth a certain day, (...), saying to
David, to day, after so long a time, it is said, To day, if you will hear my
Voice:] That is, the Day that David speaks of cannot be the Jewish
Saturday-Sabbath, for the Jews were very zealous in keeping that carnal
Commandment (insomuch as he that did but gather a few Sticks was stoned to
death); and in recompense thereof had bodily Rest given them by Joshua in
Canaan; but it was many hundreds of Years after that, that David spoke of
another Day and another Rest; which he would not have done, if that had been
God's seventh Day's Rest, conducting them to the true Rest, [ For if Jesus, (i.
e.) Joshua, had given them Rest, then would he not afterward have spoken of
another Day] verse. 8. From all which Premises the Apostle draws this
Conclusion; [ There remains therefore a Rest to the People of God:] ver. 9.
(...), etc. [therefore the Sabbatism remains, or is left, or falls to the share
of the People of God] ( i.e.) to the Christian Church; according to that ( Romans
9. 25.) I will call them my People that were not my People. And now Sabbatism
is not so hard to be understood, but that the Signification thereof might
easily be found out, if Men could digest it as Platonism, Latinism, Graecism,
signifies the pure, natural, and genuine Imitation of Plato, of the Latin or
Greek Tongue; so Sabbatism is nothing else but the genuine Imitation of the
Sabbath; and (according to the Tenor of the Apostle's Discourse) of that
complacential Rest which God took on the seventh Day. It remains therefore,
that the Christian, or Lord's-day-Sabbath, is the most natural and genuine Copy
of God's Rest: But it is beyond my Intention to make a just Comment; I intended
these short Notes as Instances only to show how Men's disgusting the Notion of
a Christian-Sabbath, makes them cast up from their nauceating Stomachs, the
Apostle's Arguments undigested.

2. The next Bugbear that frights Men out of the plain way of Truth, is a
Conceit, that when they hear the sound of a seventh-day Sabbath, they think
they hear the Man-drakes Voice of the Jewish Sabbath: I need not here give
Instances of this, for they occur everywhere in all Men's Writings concerning
the Sabbath: And it is too too common an Opinion, that the Jewish Sabbath is
the seventh Day in the order of the Creation, and our Christian Sabbath the
First [ de Die autem primo Mundi constat inter omnes illum fuisse Diem
Dominicum,] Gregor. de Valentia, Tom. 1. Disp. 5. Quest. 3. Pun. 1. Quando
quidem Dies septimus ab eo fuit Dies Sabbati: Concerning the First Day of the
World it is agreed amongst all Men, that it was the Lord's Day, seeing the
Seventh from that was the day of the Sabbath: yea, his Conceit is, that it was
called Sunday from the beginning, because the Light created on the first Day
was the Light of the Sun, not yet endowed with its proper Motion, North and
South, which it received the fourth Day, but only with that of the Primum
mobile, from East and West. But I have sufficiently proved the contrary, to
wit, that the Jewish Sabbath was not the seventh, but sixth Day in order of the
Creation, but only of gathering Quails and Mannah. And that our Lord's Day, tho
according to the Jewish Idiom it be called the First Day (the first Day of
their Week after that God had appointed them to observe another beginning of
their Work as well as Year then was in use before) yet it is in reality the
Seventh Day of the Week, commencing that Account from the Creation, and the
same Day of the Week whereon God rested.

3. The last thing I shall name here, is as a remora to Men's arrival at the
true meaning of the Apostle's Discourse is a Tincture with that Spirit which
Luther's Aerij Daemones were of; or with that wherein they in the Corinthian
Church were immerst, who would be of Christ in opposition to Paul, and Apollos.
These Men's high-flown Minds will not stoop to the Contemplation of any
Sabbath Day, to be celebrated under the Gospel, in the visible Communion of
Saints; but hang hovering in the Clouds about a Day of Rest, purely spiritual;
nor of any Rest but everlasting; and in this humor so spiritualize the
Apostle's Arguments, as they leave nothing in them, after their Chemical
Operations, but thin etherial Vehicles, or flitting Elizian Shades. But can a
certain Day limited to the seventh, be an individuum vagum? or a limited Day be
the eternal Sabbath? What ever mean Thoughts such Men may have of the
Christian, or Lord's-Day-Sabbath; the divinely inspired Penman had such an
high Esteem of it, as he thought it a Subject worthy to be treated on, as being
a very sovereign means to prevent Apostasy, and to hold Christians to their
Profession: For that is the mark he aimed at, and concludes his Discourse of the
Sabbath with the mention of that as his aim, ( Chap. 4. 14.) as he had begun
that Discourse with an Exhortation of the same Tendency, viz. To hold fast
their Profession: Yea, it is the main Scope of the whole Epistle, to dissuade
the Hebrew Christians from forsaking Church Assemblies, as some had done, and
drawn back to the Perdition of their Souls; and to persuade them to a firm
adhering to Christian-Fellowship in the Administration of Sabbath-Ordinances.
On which Days also he strictly charge the Ministers to be instant in
preaching; calling that a Preaching in Season; and with the same Breath,
stiling Preaching in the Synagogues of the Jews on their Saturday-Sabbath,
Preaching out of season, (2 Timothy 4. 2.) That I do not by this Exposition of
them pervert the Apostle's Words, will be manifest, if,

1. We consider, that the Precept for Preaching presupposes an Audience of
Men. I think none will imagine that Timothy was bound by this Injunction to
preach to Stones, as they say Venerable Bede did once, nor to Sheep, Hogs and
Birds, as that goodly Saint (of the Pope's making) Anthony is fabled to have
done frequently.

2. That a public Audience could not be had, but upon stated Days of meeting,
either upon a civil account, as in Markets, etc. or upon a religious account,
as in the Jewish Synagogues every of their Sabbath Days, and in Christian
Churches on the Lord's Day (the first Day of the Week in the Jewish Reckoning.

3. That the Apostles took all Occasions of such public Assemblies to preach
the Gospel, besides their teaching from House to House.

4. That their Attendance upon the Administration of Gospel Ordinances to the
Church, would not permit them on the Lord's-Days to preach to Foreign
Assembles either of Jews or Gentiles, and therefore preaching to them was out
of season, being performed on Weekdays; Days that were not then, appointed of
God to be Seasons for sacred Solemnities; for even the Jewish Sabbath, though
it had been appointed to that Nation, for a time, to be their weekly Sabbath;
yet not it is grown out of Season, and the Patriarchal Sunday-Sabbath came into
season, whence Preaching on that day is styled Preaching in Season.

How much Light this Observation casts upon the Apostle's Discourse, and what
Darkness the vulgar Opinion, viz. (that the Apostle speaks of a spiritual and
eternal Rest) has drawn-over the Hearts of Men, in their reading this part
even of the New Testament, is apparent from this one Instance, verse. 10. [For
he that is entered into his Rest, has ceased from his own Works as God did from
his.] Learned Men are puzzled how to give such a Sense of this Clause, as is
coherent with the Context: But understand the Apostle to speak here of the
Christian Lord's-Day-Sabbath, and the sense is as clear as the Sun at Noonday,
and that sense admirably consonant with what precedes and follows, thus. It
remains therefore, that the Church in sanctifying the Lord's Day does most
properly imitate God's seventh Day Rest [ For he that is entered (...), into the
Rest of that same People of God to whom the Sabbatism appertains (for (...) not
(...), is the Antecedent to (...),) [ he also has ceased from his own Works,
as God did from his.] For as God rested on the seventh Day from his proper
Works as Creator, that being the proper Work of God the Father (who made me and
all the World) though as to other kind of Works the Father works hitherto.
Even so he that is entered into the Rest of the People of God (the
Christian-Sabbath) does therein most genuinely imitate God, in that he also
has ceased from his Works; that is, the Works of the Law of Moses, that being
the proper Notion of [Works] in St. Paul's Sense, whenever he makes
Comparison betwixt the Law and the Gospel. And the Works of the Law, being the
proper Works of the Hebrews, to whom this Epistle was directed, as differencing
them from all other Nations: He has cast off that Yoke of Ceremonies, which
neither we nor our Fathers could bear, and has taken the easy Yoke of Christ
upon him, that he may find rest to his Soul. And what an apt Introduction is
this to what is immediately subjoyned, verse. 11. [Let us therefore strive to
enter into this same Rest, lest any Man fall after the same Example of
Unbelief.] Let me therefore persuade you to imitate God in his Seventh-Day's
Rest, lest you imitate your Forefathers in Unbelief, and be excluded from
eternal Rest: From which fearful State, the best way to be secured, is to
attend upon Christian Lord's-Day's Assemblies and Administrations, where you
shall hear Moses in the Newness of his Spirit, not in the Oldness of the
Letter; you will see that Vail that Moses put upon his Face done away, if you
will turn unto the Lord; and will find the Word of God, as a sharp two-edged
Sword, drawn out of the Scabbard of Types and Ceremonies (wherein it could not
do any Execution upon the Soul) and so weilded, [as it shall pierce even to the
dividing asunder of the Soul and Spirit;] which is the plain Importance of
verse. 12. [For the Word of God is quick, etc.] that is, as it is dispensed in
Christian-Assembles; into which if an Unbeliever should come, while they are
prophesying (1 Cor. 14. 24.) that is, applying Old Testament Prophesies unto
Christ, and proving thence that Jesus is the Christ [ he is judged, convinced
of all] convinced of the Sin of Unbelief, ( Joh. 16. 8.) convinced and judged
of all; that is, all that prophesy one by one (1 Cor. 14. 31.) not only by the
prophesying of such as like Apollos are mighty in the Scriptures, ( Act. 18.
28.) but is so mightily convinced that Jesus is the Christ, even of the weakest
of them that have the Gift of Prophesying, that is, of applying the
Old Testament for proof of the truth of the Gospel; he is, I say, by this
powerful Word so convinced, as the Secrets of his Heart are made manifest, and
so falling down on his Face, he glorifieth God, and confesses that God is in
you of a Truth. (1 Cor. 14. 25.) By the Premises it appears, that the Apostle's
scope in his Discourse of the Sabbath, is to withdraw the Jews from the
Celebration of their Fruitless Sabbath, to the Observation of the
Christian-Sabbath: As also how well God provided for the Settlement of
publick-stated Assemblies in the Church, when the Jewish Sabbaths were
antiquated, by letting the Apostles see, that though the Law for that was out
of date, ( Col. 2. 16.) yet there remained a Sabbath to the People of God, viz.
That which was instituted from the beginning, and commanded in the Decalogue.
Had the Apostle indeed only decried that, and not established this; it might
have been thought, that the Church had been left to her choice, what Day of the
Week to have celebrated, as Calvin and the Prolepsarians conceive: But as if
the holy Ghost had purposely intended to obviate that Error, the admitting
whereof would unavoidably bring Confusion into the Christian World; he was
pleased to direct the same Apostle, whose Pen had canceled the Jewish, to write
in Vindication of the Christian-Sabbath; and to inform him, that seeing the
Partition Wall was taken down, there was a plain and open way made, for the
Restoration of the Patriarchal Sunday-Sabbath, that Sabbath in the sanctifying
whereof the greatest part of those Worthies mentioned ( Heb. 11.) had received
Grace to offer acceptable Sacrifices to God by Faith in the promised Seed, to
walk with God, to be upright before him in the most general Apostacies; to obey
his Call unreservedly, though they knew not whither. To exert such Heroic Acts
of Faith, Patience, Contempt of the World, Dependence on God, etc. as made them
the Wonders of that World which was unworthy of them, and Paterns to the best
of Christians. That Sabbath in the Celebration whereof, the Christian-Church
forsook the Jewish Synagogue, (then became the Synagogue of Satan) and betook
themselves to the Communion of the General-Assembly and Church of the
Firstborn, consisting of all those who from the Publication of the Promise of
Christ to Adam, had been begotten again of the immortal Seed of that
ever-induring Word administered to the Patriarchs, and all that adhere to the
Patriarchal Religion in all Nations and Ages; and administered without those
carnal Ordinances and unprofitable bodily Exercises, wherewith the Jews Sabbath
was encumbered, if not wholly taken up therewith. For the Jews that outwent the
Ox and Ass in keeping the Mosaical Sabbath as such, did not go beyond them in
the Strength of the Services thereof, which could not perfect them that
frequented them, as touching Conscience; but in the strength of the Ordinances
of the Patriarchal Sabbath; so that it was their doing Sunday's Work on their
Saturdays, that sanctified the Jews as to Conscience. Their own Sabbath's Rest
from Work sanctifying them only by the external visible separating of them from
other Nations; to the end that our Savior's Descent from Abraham might be more
conspicuous. And therefore as their Forefathers sell short through their
looking no further than Canaan; so those then Moderate Jews, to whom he writes,
would also fall short of Eternal Rest, if they did not look forward beyond
their Sabbath Day to Sunday, or the Lord's-Day-Sabbath; in the Ordinances
whereof Saving Grace is so plentifully dispensed, as the Eunuch, shall have no
cause to say, I am a dry Tree; nor the Sun of the Stranger to complain, I am
utterly cut off from God's People. If they take hold of God's Covenant, and
keep his Sabbaths now under the Gospel, tho they were excluded from the
Congregation of the Lord, under the Mosaical Sabbath; ( Isa. 56. 4, etc.) but
their Sacrifices shall be accepted upon his Altar, and he will make them joyful
in his House of Prayer. To this God of all Grace, who deals thus bountifully
with us Gentiles; even to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be given all
Praises, and Adoration, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Books printed for, and sold by RICHARD CHISWELL.
FOLIO.
Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fathers, in 2 Vol.

Dr. Cary's Chronological Account of Ancient Time.

Wilson's Complete Christian Dictionary.

Bishop Wilkin's real Character, or Philosophical Language.

Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity.

Isaac Ambrose 's Works.

Dr. Burnet's History of the Reformation of the Church of England, in 2 Vol.

-- Account of the Confession and Prayers of the Murderers of Esquire Thynn.

Burlace's History of the Irish Rebellion.

Bishop Sanderson's Sermons, with his Life.

Fowlis's History of Conspiracies, Treasons, and Usurpations.

The Laws of this Realm concerning Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Recusants. The
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance explained by diverse Judgments, and
resolutions of the Judges; with other Observations thereupon: By Will. Coley
Esquire.

William's impartial Consideration of the Speeches of the five Jesuits executed
for Treason, 1680.

Josephus's Antiquities and Wars of the Jews, with Figures.

QVARTO.
BIshop Nicholson on the Church Catechism.

History of the late Wars of New-Engl.

Dr. Outram de Sacrificiis.

Bishop Taylor's Disswasive from Popery.

History of the future State of Europe.

Dr. Fowler's Defense of the Design of Christianity, against John Bunnyan.

Dr. Sherlock's Visitation Sermon. at Warrington.

Dr. West's Assize-Sermon at Dorchester. 1671.

The Magistrates Authority asserted, in a Sermon, by James Paston.

Mr. James Brome's two Fast-Sermons.

Dr. Jane's Fast-Sermon before the Commons, 1679.

Mr. John Jame' s Visitation-Sermon, April 9. 1671.

Mr. John Cave 's Fast-Sermon on 30th of Jan. 1679.

-- Assize-Sermon at Leicester July 31st, 1679.

Dr. Parker's Demonstration of the Divine Authority of the Law of Nature and
the Christian Religion.

Mr. William's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, 1679.

-- History of the Powder Treason, with a Vindication of the Proceedings
relating thereunto, from the Exceptions made against it by the Catholic
Apologist and others; and a Parallel betwixt that and the present Popish Plot.

Speculum Baxterianum, or Baxter against Baxter.

Dr. Burnet's Relation of the Massacre of the Protestants in France.

-- Conversions and Persecutions of Eve Cohan a Jewess of Quality, lately
baptized Christian.

-- Sermon before the Lord Mayor upon the Fast for the Fire, 1680.

-- Fast-Sermon before the House of Commons December. 22. 1680.

-- Sermon on the 30th of January, 1681.

-- Sermon at the Election of the Lord Mayor, 1681.

-- Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Houblon, 1682.

-- Answer to the Animadversions on his History of the Rights of Princes, 1682.

-- Decree made at Rome 1679. condemning some Opinions of the Jesuits and other
Casuists. Published by Dr. Burnet, with a Preface.

-- A Letter giving a Relation of the present state of the difference between
the French King and the Court of Rome.

OCTAVO.
BIshop Wilkin's Natural Religion.

Hardcastle's Christian Geography and Arithmetic.

Spaniards Conspiracy against the State of Venice.

Several Tracts of Mr. Hale of Eaton.

Ignatius Fuller's Sermons of Peace and Holiness. 1 s. 6. d.

Doctor Sanway's Unreasonableness of the Romanists.

Dr. Ashton's Cases of Scandal and Persecution.

Dr. Puller's Discourse of the Moderation of the Church of England.

Dr. Henry Bagshaw's Discourses on select Texts.

Mr. Seller's Remarks relating to the State of the Church in the three first
Centuries.

Dr. Burnet's Account of the Life and Death of the Earl of Rochester.

-- Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England.

-- History of the Rights of Princes in the Disposing of Ecclesiastical
Benefices and Church Lands.

Dr. Sherlock's Practical Discourse of Religious Assemblies.

-- Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of Separation.

-- A Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet in Ansewr to Mr. Baxter
and Mr. Lob about Cotholick Communion.

Mr. John Cave's Gospel to the Romans.

DVODECIMO.
HOdder's Arithmetic.

Bishop Hacket's Christian Consolations.

An Apology for a Treatise of Human Reason: written by M. Clifford Esquire

Books lately printed for Richard Chiswell.
AN Historical Relation of the Island of CEYLON in the East Indies; an exact
Map of the Island, by Capt. R. Knox, a Captive there near 20 years. Folio.

Mr. Camfield of Episcop. Confirmation, 8o

Bp Wilkin's 15 Sermons, never before extant.

Mr. John Cave's 2 Sermons of the duty and benefit of submission to the Will of
God in Afflictions. Quarto.

Dr. Crawford's serious Expostulation with the Whiggs in Scotland. Quarto.

Dr. Salmon's Doron Medicum, or supplement to his new London Dispensatory.
Octavo.

Mr. Tanner's Primordia; or the Rise and Growth of the first Church of God
described. Octavo.

A Letter writ by the last Assembly General of the Clergy of France to the
Protestants, inviting them to return to their Communion; together with the
Methods proposed by them for their Conviction. Translated into English and
examined by Dr. Gilbert Burnet. Octavo.


