A DESIGNED END TO THE Socinian Controversy: Or, a Rational and Plain DISCOURSE
To Prove, That no other Person but the Father of Christ is God most High.

By JOHN SMITH.

Father, -- This is Life Eternal to know thee the only true God.

John 17. 3. LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXCV.

AN ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Reader is desired to take notice, that these Papers were written at
different times, as Matter did offer it self to the Author's Mind; and for that
Reason some Particulars are therein touched upon more than once; for which it is
hoped, however, that there will need little Excuse, since in relation to the
whole Design it may be pertinent enough. The Method also, for that Reason, is
somewhat unusual; but I have ventured however to let it pass as it is, since
not Method but Matter in such Cases is chiefly to be minded: and I doubt not
but that in one Part or other thereof, every Part of the Controversy will be
found to be both fully and fairly discussed: And I wish none that read it may
be of that evil Temper as to forbear the Acknowledgment of that Truth, which
yet in Conscience they dare not deny; like those Jews of old, who though they
believed in Christ, yet did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the
Synagogue; Joh. 12. 42.

A DESIGNED END TO THE Socinian Controversy.
That there is a God.
THAT there is such a Being as God, (by which is meant one Eternal Mind,
Essence or spiritual Power, who is the Original and first Cause of all other
Beings besides) is manifest; for it is not possible that any other Being
whatsoever could give a Being to it self: Certainly nothing can be more absurd
than to imagine that a thing can act any ways toward its own Production before
it is.

Hence it follows, that every one of these Beings is but the real Effect of
this first Cause that had a Being before it; and this first Cause of necessity
must have been Eternal, and without Beginning: since had there been once no
kind of Being at all, there then could never have been such a Being as God, no
nor any other Being besides; for doubtless, of nothing, nothing can be produced.

That this God is but one in Nature or Essence.
And as it is thus plain that there is a God, so it is utterly impossible that
there can be any more than one God: for whoever is truly God, must be
absolutely Infinite or Immense; that is, His Divine Essence must be boundless,
and fill all that endless and inconceivable Space that is without or beyond the
Limits of this World, as well as this World.

For it is impossible that any Being whatever can in any respect be greater than
God is, or contain him; for then he himself could not be truly Infinite, nor
excel in all Perfections. The Nature or Essence therefore of God is Infinite,
and in Extent is without Bounds; and it is self-evidently impossible for two or
more infinitely extended Beings to subsist together: which demonstrates by
Consequence, that God can be but one as to his Divine Essence or Nature.

And as right Reason does plainly teach this Truth, so do the Scriptures as
evidently declare the same: to instance in a few, -- The Lord he is God, there
is none else besides him, Deuteronomy. 4. 35. See now that I, even I am he, and there
is no God with me, Deuteronomy. 32. 39. There is none like thee, neither is there any
God besides thee, 1 Chronicles. 17. 20. I am the first, and I am the last; and
besides methere is no God, Isa. 44. 6. We know that an Idol is nothing in the
World, and that there is none other God but one, 1 Cor. 8. 4. -- To us there is
but one God, 1 Cor. 8. 6. I might add a great Number of other Texts that speak
to the very same purpose, but I think it is needless in a Case so plain.

That this one true God is but one in Person.
Now as it is thus plain, that God is but one, as to his Nature or Essence; so
it is evident likewise, that he can in no Sense be any more than one in Person:
for if, as some affirm, the Divine Nature did contain in it several Persons, as
does the humane Nature, then each of those must be truly Immense, truly
Almighty, and truly most Wise, else they could not each of them be truly God,
(as some have unwarily asserted, and the Trinitarian Notion supposes); for
whoever is truly God, must be every way thus qualified in all Respects.

For if that Person that is supposed to be God, be not truly immense, then some
other Being of necessity must be greater than he; for whoever is not Infinite,
must be bounded by some other Being, which in that respect does truly surpass
that bounded Being in Greatness: But (as I said before) nothing can in any kind
or respect whatsoever be greater than God is, or contain him; and by
Consequence he alone is truly Immense.

The Person that is truly God, must be also Almighty; that is, he must be able
to do more than any, or than all other Beings together can do: for doubtless
none is the most High, but he that in Might and Strength does transcend all
others. Touching the Almighty, says Job, he excels in Power, chapter 37. 28.

The Person also that is truly God, must be most wise and knowing: It Is
doubtless a Property essential to the true God, to know more than any other
Being besides can know: Of that Day and Hour, says our Savior, knows no
Man, no not the Angels which are in Heaven, neither the Son, but the Father
only; Matthew. 24. 36. Mar. 13. 32.

Now if that Person who is truly God, must be thus Immense in his Person,
Almighty in his Power, and most Wise in his Knowledge; then it follows by direct
Consequence, that it is impossible for more than one Person to be truly God: for
nothing can be more absurd, than to believe or affirm, that two or three
distinct Beings, such as all personal Beings are, can be each of them
unlimited, as to the extent of their personal Beings; can be each of them able
to do more than the rest can do, or that each of them can know more than the
others know.

Suppose, for Instance, two such Beings as A and B: Now if the Person of A can
do more than the Person of B, then the Person of B cannot do more than the
Person of A; for if he could, then would not A be able to do more than B, and
by Consequence he could not be Almighty.

Again, if the Person of A be most wise, and knows more than the Person of B,
then B cannot know more than A; for if he did, then would not A know more than
B, and so by Consequence would not be most wise: which evidently demonstrates,
that no more than one Person can be truly God, since no more than one can be
truly Infinite in all these aforementioned Divine Perfections.

That this one Person who is truly God, is him only who is the Father of Jesus
Christ.
It Is undeniably evident from the Old Testament, that the God of Israel, or the
Lord of Hosts, is the only true God: for thus it is written, Thou art God, and
thou alone, of all the Kingdoms of the Earth, 2 Kings 19. 15. There is none
like thee, neither is there any God besides thee, 2 Chronicles. 17. 20. Thou art God
alone, Psalm. 86. 10. Besides me there is no God, Isa. 44. 6. I am God, and
there is none else, Isa. 46. 9. Thou shall know no other God but me, Hos. 13.
4. Now as this is plain beyond Contradiction, so do all Christians generally
acknowledge, that the God here mentioned was him only who afterward was called
the Father of Jesus Christ.

And in the New Testament no Truth is more fully and plainly expressed than
this is: thus says our Lord himself, Father, -- This is Life Eternal, to know
thee the only true God, Joh. 17. 1, 3. The same do his Apostles affirm; Blessed
be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 3. Blessed be the
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1. 3. With one Mind and one Mouth
glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 15. 6. We give
Thanks to God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Col. 1. 3. He shall
deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, 1 Cor. 15. 24. Therewith bless
we God, even the Father, Jam. 3. 9. To us there is but one God, the Father, 1
Cor. 8. 6.

Now it is impossible that any one Article of the Christian Faith can be more
fully and plainly expressed in Scripture than this is; the Words can be
understood in no other Sense than what at the first sight they do plainly
signify, and they give the most satisfying Answer that can be given to any one
that shall ask who God is, namely, that he is only that most Divine Person who
is the Father of Jesus Christ: And if in this case plain Scripture is not to be
relied on, I see not of what great Use our Bibles can be to us.

Yet this so plain and evident Truth is commonly denied.
For a very great Number of professed Christians do notwithstanding believe,
that in the Godhead there be indeed more Persons than only one; and that Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, is God also as well as his Father. But of this Error
the former Arguments are sufficient to convince them: for if none be God but
the Father of Christ, then cannot the Son be truly God also, since he in no
Sense whatever can be said to be the Father of Christ, that is, of himself.

And certainly if Men would resolve faithfully to make use but of common Sense
and common Honesty, they could not but be convinced of the Absurdity of this
Opinion, by only reading so often as they do in the New Testament of Jesus
Christ his being the Son of God: for how can he be God himself, who truly is no
other than the Son of God? If he be the Son only, then it is plain that he is
not the Father also, who alone is God: for it is impossible, according to the
Notion we have of Sons, for any Being whatever to be the Son of himself. No
understanding Man, when at any time he hears mention made of the Son of a King,
is so idle in his Imagination as to believe, that thereby is meant the King who
is his Father; he certainly then must be very senseless, who can think that by
the Son of God is any ways meant God, that is, God most high.

Christ not the true God, because he himself has a God above him.
It Is also evident beyond Contradiction, that our blessed Lord cannot be truly
God, since both he himself and his Apostles do very plainly acknowledge, that he
has a God above him: for instance, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Mat. 27. 46. I ascend to my God, and to your God, Joh. 20. 17. Him that
overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, Rev. 3. 12. The Head
of every Man is Christ, and the Head of Christ is God, 1 Cor. 11. 3. Blessed be
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1. 3. The God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ knows I lie not, 2 Cor. 11. 31. -- That the God of our
Lord Jesus Christ may give you the Spirit, Ephesians. 1. 17. Therefore God, even thy
God, has anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness above thy Fellows, Heb. 1. 8,
9.

These Texts are very plain, and need no Interpretation to make them be
understood. Now if our Lord Christ have thus a God above him, then it is
evident, if any thing in the World be so, that he himself is not God most high.

Christ not God, because what he does is by a Power received from God.
This Truth Christ himself does plainly declare; I can, says he, of my own
self do nothing, Joh. 5. 30. All Power is given unto me both in Heaven and in
Earth, Mat. 28. 18. When the Multitude saw his Miracles, they marvelled, and
glorified God who had given such Power unto Men, Mat. 9. 8. Now these things
can in no tolerable Sense be said of him that is truly God: for he that is God
most High, has essentially in himself all kind of Divine Dignity and
Excellency, and cannot without the highest of Blasphemies be in any Sense said
to receive them of another.

But of our Lord it is recorded, that he neither said nor did any thing,
especially in the Work of our Redemption, but what he was commanded to say and
do by his Father; I have not spoken of my self, (says he) but the Father which
sent me, he gave me a Commandment what I should say, and what I should speak,
Joh. 12. 49.

Is he able to save the World? To this Power he was raised by God: Him has God
exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, Acts 5. 31. Can he give Power to
Believers to become the Sons of God? This Power he also has received: Thou have
given him Power over all Flesh, that he should give Eternal Life to as many as
thou have given him, Joh. 17. 2. Has he Power to raise from the dead? Even this
Power also he did receive: As the Father has Life in himself, so has he given
to the Son to have Life in himself, Joh. 5. 26. Has he Power to judge the World?
It Is God that does enable him to do this: This is he that was ordained of God
to be Judge of Quick and Dead, Acts 10. 42. I can do nothing of my self; as I
hear, I judge. Joh. 5. 30.

Moreover, it is thus said, The Glory which thou have given me, I have given
them, Joh. 17. 22. I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed
unto me, Luke 22. 29. The God of our Lord Jesus Christ has put all things
under his Feet, Ephesians. 1. 17. Now they must impose strangely upon their own
Understandings, that can (unrequired by the Gospel) believe him to be truly
God, even Infinite in all Perfection, of whom it is said so plainly, that
whatever Power and Dignity he has, is given him by another.

Christ not God, because God and He are plainly distinguished.
This Consideration alone of it self is a very strong Argument, to prove our
Lord Christ not to be really and truly God, since he is every where spoken of
as a Person that differs as much from God, as a noble Subject differs from his
Prince or King. Thus it is said of him, that God anointed him, Acts 10. 38. That
he offered himself up to God, Heb. 9. 14. That God raised him from the Dead,
Acts 2. 24. That he was exalted by God, Acts 2. 33. That he ascended to God,
Joh. 20. 17. That he sits at God's right Hand, Acts 7. 56. That God for
Christ's sake has forgiven us, Ephesians. 4. 32. That he has redeemed us unto God
by his Blood, Rev. 5. 9. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ has put all
things under his Feet, Ephesians. 1. 22.

I might collect a very great Number of other Places that speak to the very
same purpose, all which do evidently demonstrate, that the true God is not
Jesus Christ: for if Jesus were sent of God, and raised up from the Dead by
God, and sits now at God's right Hand, etc. then it is plain, that there is as
great a Difference between the true God and him, as there is between a Prince,
and him whom he is said to honor or employ.

'Twould be strangely absurd for a Man to affirm, that God can be sent of God;
that God can pray to God; that God can ascend to God; that God can sit at God's
right Hand; and that God shall deliver up the Kingdom to God, that God may be
all in all. He that can believe this possible, is fitted for the Reception of
the most ridiculous and absurd Errors that were ever found in the World.

Of that Account which the Scriptures give of the Person of Christ.
As from what has been said before, it appears very plainly what kind of Person
Christ our Lord is not; so 'twill be likewise necessary to show what the
Scriptures do declare concerning him as to what he is. Now if we consider well
the general Scope and Tendency of those sacred Writings, we shall perceive very
plainly that Christ, or the Messiah, according to the Promises, was really to
be of the same Nature with them, which he came to redeem; that as by Man came
Death, so by Man might come also the Resurrection of the Dead, 1 Cor. 15. 'Twas
by the Seed of the Woman that the Serpent's Head was bruised, Genesis 3. 15.

To Abraham the Promise was made, that in him and in his Seed all the Nations
of the Earth should be blessed, Genesis 28. 14. Moses tells the Children of
Israel, that the Lord their God should raise up unto them a Prophet like unto
him, Deuteronomy. 8. 15. Of this Man's Seed, (namely David 's) says St. Paul, has
God raised up unto Israel a Savior, Jesus; Acts 13. 23. In the Fullness of time
God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, Gal. 4. 4. From all which Places it is
manifest, that as to the personal Nature of Christ, he is the same as were
those humane Ancestors from whom he did lineally descend; In all things he was
like unto his Brethren, except in being a Sinner; Heb. 2. 17. Heb. 4. 15.

And accordingly we find him almost every where mentioned by that plain
Denomination and Term of A MAN; Ye seek (says he himself) to kill me, A MAN
who has told you the Truth which I have heard of God, Joh. 8. 40. After me
comes A MAN that is preferred before me, Joh. 1. 30. Jesus of Nazareth, A MAN
approved of God by Wonders and Signs which God did by him, Acts 13. 38. He has
appointed a Day in the which he will judge the World in Righteousness by THAT
MAN whom he has ordained, Acts 17. 31. There is one God, and one Mediator
between God and Men, THE MAN Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5. But THIS MAN, because
he continues ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood, Heb. 2. 7. But THIS MAN,
after he had once offered one Sacrifice for Sins for ever, sat down at the
right Hand of God, Heb. 10. 12. I could name a Multitude of others, but I think
it is needless.

Now to me it is strange that any should so much as imagine that the believing
and asserting of Christ to be truly an humane Person, should derogate from his
true Honor and Dignity, when the Gospel does so frequently assert him to be
such; whereas on the contrary, it is not said so much as once, that he is God
most high, or that he is one of that sacred Three which do constitute or make
up the true Godhead: These Unscriptural Titles are derived only from the mere
Opinions and Traditions of either deceived or deceiving Men, whose Eyes the God
of this World has blinded, so that they cannot see or discern the Truth.

The Primitive Confessions concerning Christ were;
Not that Jesus our Lord was God equal to the Father in all kind of Divine
Perfections, nor that he was God of the Substance of his Father, as he was Man
of the Substance of his Mother, as some have taught in aftertimes. All that
those first Confessions do contain was this, that he was the Christ, the Son of
God, and the Savior of the World,

This was the Faith of Martha; She said unto him, Yea Lord, I believe that thou
art the Christ, the Son of God, that should come into the World, John 11. 27.
This was St. Peter 's Faith, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, Mat.
16. 16. This was the Eunuch's Faith, I believe that Christ is the Son of God,
Acts 8. 37. This was the Faith of the Mariners; Of a Truth thou art the Son of
God, Mat. 14. 33. And the Faith of Nicodemus was, We know thou art a Teacher
come from God, for no Man can do these Miracles that thou do, except God be
with him, John 3. 2.

St. Paul is also said to preach Christ in the Synagogues, that he was the Son
of God, Acts 9. 20. He is said also to testify to the Jews, not that Jesus was
God, but that Jesus was the Christ, Acts 18. 5. We have seen and do testify
(says St. John) that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the World, 1 John 4. 14. Here Is no Trinity in Unity, nor God-man, nor Hypostatical Union, so
much as mentioned, nor any other of those hard and cramping Names with which
the Church of God has been since perplexed.

The undoubted Faith on which the Salvation of all Christians does depend,
Is no other than this: These things, says St. John, are written, that ye
might believe that Jesus is the Son of God; and that believing, ye might have
Life through his Name, Joh. 20. 31. If we confess with our Mouth the Lord
Jesus, and believe in our Heart that God raised him from the Dead, we shall be
saved, Romans 10. 9. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God
dwells in him, and he in God, 1 John 4. 15. Who is he that overcomes the
World, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God? 1 John 5. 5. These
are a plain Account of that Faith which now is indispensably required of every
Christian in relation to Christ.

The Scripture no where injoins us to believe, on pain of Damnation, either
that Jesus is God most High, or that he is indeed both God and Man, or that he
was Eternally begotten of the Father. It only teaches us thus much concerning
him, that the Man Christ Jesus is the Mediator between God and Men, 2 Timothy 2.
5. That he is the Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, 1 John 2. 2.
That it pleased the Father by him to reconcile all things to himself, Col. 1.
20. That there is no Salvation in any other, Acts 4. 12. That he appears now in
the Presence of God for us, Heb. 9. 24. And that he shall judge both Quick and
Dead, at the latter Day, Acts 10. 42. These are Fundamentals so plain, and so
undoubted, that all Christians do universally agree in the Profession of them,
as they likewise would do in all other Truths, were nothing but what is really
such imposed on the Faith of Believers.

Of the transcendent Dignity of Jesus Christ.
And now although from what has been said hitherto, it be plainly evident, that
the Godhead does consist but of one Divine Person only, even the Father of
Christ; and that Jesus, called otherways in Scripture the Son of God, is no
other than an humane Person: yet it is plain also that he is not a common Man,
but the chief and most transcendently Excellent of all humane Beings, yea in
Dignity above even the Angels.

For as his Conception in the Womb of a Virgin was miraculous, so were his Life
and Actions a Wonder: He made a perfect Conquest both of Death and the Devil;
and in that great Instance of Magnanimity has outdone all the renowned Heroes
both of Greece and Rome. And unto which of the Angels said God at any time, Sit
thou on my right hand? but to this Dignity is Jesus exalted, Heb. 1. 13. God
has crowned him with Glory and Honor, Heb. 2. 9. And anointed him with the Oil
of Gladness above his Fellows, Heb. 1. 9. Angels, and Authorities, and Powers
being made subject unto him, 1 Pet. 3. 22. He is ascended into Heaven in a
triumphant manner: and as he now sits there at God's right Hand in Glory, so at
the last Day shall he come down from thence, to judge Mankind, with such a
surprising Majesty as shall amaze and confound the World. It Is doubtless
impossible for any humane Understanding to conceive, or Tongue to express this
most excellent Man's transcendent Dignity; his Greatness must needs be very
extraordinary, who is thus set even above the Angels, is the Head of every Man,
and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth. 1 Pet. 3. 22. 1 Cor. 11. 3. Rev. 1. 5.

And now if to those foregoing Considerations we add that of his most admired
Love to us sinful Mortals, in making Peace for us by the Blood of his Cross,
Col. 1. 20. and in undergoing with invincible Patience all those Indignities
and Miseries which did befall him in this the Course of that glorious Work of
his, the opening for Men a new and living way to the Regions of Bliss: The
Consideration of this, I say, added to that other of his most transcendent
Glory and Power, ought evermore to raise up in us that Veneration which is
suitable to such most wonderful Instances of unconceivable Majesty and Heroic
Affection.

Yet it is not any way justifiable to honor Christ falsely.
As the Glory of God is not to be advanced by Falsehood, so neither can we truly
honor Christ by Lies; he desires no such thing at our Hands, neither at the
last Day will he reward us for affirming him to be that which indeed he is not:
they only give true Honor to Christ who own him for the undoubted Messiah, or
the Son of God, and do steadfastly both believe and obey his Gospel.

As for the other vain and ungrounded Opinions of Men concerning him, they no
ways conduce to the Glory of our Blessed Redeemer. It Is said indeed that we
should honor the Son as we honor the Father, Joh. 5. 23. But that word AS
does not import an equal Honor, no more than it does import an equal Holiness
and Purity, when we are commanded to purify our selves AS he is pure, 1 John 3.
3. And AS he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
Conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 15.

Besides, the word Honor is of a doubtful Import, and does oftentimes signify
only Obedience, as is evident from Ephesians. 6. 1, 2. where by honor thy Father
and Mother is clearly signified, obey your Parents. And accordingly Dr.
Clagget, in his Paraphrase on the Place, makes it to be an honoring the Son
with the same Faith and Obedience; implying, that we are as much bound to
believe and obey the Gospel of Christ in the New Testament, as we are the Law
of God recorded in the Old; that since he is made Judge of the World, to be
certain he will not suffer the Breach of his own Laws to go unpunished.

Doubtless we ought to be as careful of ascribing to Christ those Glories which
are his, as we are to give to God Almighty that Honor which essentially
belongs to himself: and no Man can think or speak too honorably of his
Redeemer, so long as he no ways does thereby rob God the Father of that truly
Divine Honor which is his indispensible Due. Our Lord who sought not his own
Glory, (John 8. 50.) will give us no Thanks for such Honors as do naturally
derogate from his Father's Dignity: but such is their Honor who make the Son
to be God; for then since but one Person can be truly God, they do assert by
Consequence that the Father is not so.

God has indeed highly exalted Jesus his beloved Son, and has given him a Name
above every Name, and has put all things under his Feet. But when all things
are said to be thus put under him, it is manifest that he himself is excepted
that did put all things under him, 1 Cor. 15. 27. So that notwithstanding the
great and mighty Dignities to which God has exalted Christ, yet he has still
reserved to himself this most supreme Royalty of being the God and Head of
Christ. God has given him indeed a Kingdom; but when the Intent of this
Government of his is accomplished, he shall again resign it back, that so God
in that after-state of Eternity may be all in all, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25, 28.

Answers to the principal Objections made against the Unitarian Doctrine.
AND now tho from what has been already said, no Man whose Understanding is not
inslaved by the Tyranny either of Self-conceit, Interest, or Education, can
doubt of so great a Truth as this is, namely, that no personal Being whatever,
besides the Father of Christ, is God most High; as also that other Branch
thereof, that Jesus our Lord, as to his Nature, is the same with them whom he
came to redeem. Yet since there have been many Objections raised against it, I
will endeavor as briefly as I can, to give them such reasonable Answers as
shall make these Truths beyond Exception.

Of the Names of God given to Christ.
Some object, that Christ of necessity must be God, since in several Places of
Scripture he is expressly called by the Name of God. I answer, a God he
undoubtedly is, and a mighty God too, according to the way of Expression used
in those ancient times; in which those were called Gods who either represented
God's Person, or acted in his Name and by his Authority: but he is not God
Almighty.

When the Jews did accuse him for making himself God, he thus vindicates his
Innocence; If, says he, they are called Gods to whom the Word of God came --
Say ye of him whom the Father has sanctified, and sent into the World, Thou
blasphemest, because I said I am the Son of God? John 10. 35, 36. Christ had as
good a Right to this Title as any of the rest, if not a better; and therefore
it could be no Blasphemy to appropriate the same to himself, had he done so:
but they lied, for he did not do it, he only said, that he was the Son of God,
calling God his Father.

Of the Mediation of Jesus Christ.
Others object, that if Christ were not God as well as Man, he could not have
been a fit Mediator between God and Man, since in such a Case, say they, he
ought no way to be exactly the Person concerned. A fit Mediator between God and
Man must neither be only God, nor only Man, but one who by Nature is between
these two, even God as well as Man.

I answer; It Is not necessary that a Mediator should be of such a middle
Nature, nor does the Scripture any where assert it: There is always supposed in
the Work of Reconciliation, one offended, another offending, and a third not
concerned in the Quarrel, interposing to make Peace between them. Now in this
Sense Christ, though but a Man, was a very fit and proper Mediator: Had he been
God, he had been the Party offended; had he been a sinful Man, he had been one
of that Party that gave the Offense; but being a Man perfectly righteous, he
therefore was fit to intercede between God and Sinners.

That Christ is our Mediator, is plain and evident; and it is as plain that he
is only a Man, and not both God and Man, as some assert: There is, says the
Scripture, one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus,
2 Timothy 2. 5. And it is most wonderful, that in a Matter so manifestly evident,
Men should dare to impose upon the World another Faith, or be induced to
believe contrary to so plain and evident a part of God's Word.

Of the Oneness of God and Christ.
Others object, that Christ Jesus must needs be God, because it is said, I and
my Father are one, John 10. 30. And again; There be three that bear Record --
and these three are one, 1 John 5. 7. To these I answer, that though it is said
they are one, yet it is not said what one they are; it is not said they are one
God. This is only the ungrounded Assertion either of some easy-minded, or else
of some heedlesly bold and daring Men.

Doubtless by that Passage, 1 John 5. 7. is meant, that these three are one as
to the Record which they are there said to bear; they perfectly agree in that
Witness which they give concerning Jesus his being truly the Christ, as the
foregoing Verses do plainly intimate.

As for that other Passage, John 10. 30. it is plain, that the Oneness there
meant is a Mystical or Moral, and not a Natural Oneness: And it is doubtless
explained by John 17. 11. where our Savior prays that his Disciples might be
one as he and his Father were one; that they, says he, may be one, as thou
Father art in me, and I in thee, that they may be one in us, v. 21. which
denotes an Oneness only in the same mutual Affection, for Believers can be one
in no other Sense but this: and look what Oneness there ought to be between one
true Believer and another, the same Oneness there is between Christ and God, an
inward Intimacy, like that between real Friends, of whom it is usual to say,
they are all one, one in Heart, and one in Mind; as those in Acts 4. 32. are
said to be.

Of the Equality of God and Christ.
Some object, that Christ must be God as well as his Father, because it is said,
that he thought it no Robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2. 6. To this I
answer, that Christ himself has told us, that his Father is greater than he,
John 14. 28. Hence it is plain, that if the Son be any ways equal to the Father,
yet it is really but in some Particulars; for were the Son equal to the Father
in every Respect, then 'twere impossible for the Father to be greater than he.

Whence it is clear that the Son cannot be equal to the Father in all things,
though in some things he may. For instance, as God can save Believers, so this
also Christ can do; but this Power of Christ is not an essential, but a derived
Power; Thou have given him Power over all Flesh, that he should give Eternal
Life to as many as thou have given him, John 17. 2. These are our Savior's own
Words; and it is plain, that he from whom he receives the Power, must in Power
be superior unto him: he is not therefore Almighty, and so by Consequence not
God most High, as the Objection would suppose.

Of Christ's being the Maker of the World.
Some object, that Christ is said to be the Maker of the Worlds, Heb. 1. 2. and
that all things were made by him, Joh. 1. 3. and therefore, say they, he of
necessity must be God Eternal. I answer, many things are spoken of Christ
figuratively, as he is called a Way, a Door, a Vine; and the Bread in the
Sacrament is said to be his Body. Now these, as those likewise which affirm him
to be the Maker of the World, are Figurative or Mystical Expressions, in which
one thing is said to signify another, as the Old Creation to set forth the New.

There are in the Scripture many dark and difficult Passages, hard to be
understood, as St. Peter expresses it, 2 Epist. 3. 16. which are doubtless true
in some Sense or other, could we be so happy as to hit upon the right: But in
the mean time, till this can be done, it is certain that that can never be the
right Sense which contradicts the clearest and the plainest parts of the Bible,
as well as the greatest and most certain Evidences of humane Understanding.

The general Current of the Scripture declares plainly, that Christ, or the
Messiah, was derived from the Seed of, Abraham; that he was the Son of David;
that he was made of a Woman. Wherefore it is self-evident that in a literal
Sense he could never be the Maker of the World, whose true Ancestors were
humane Persons, and who was born, or whose Being did first begin to be, some
thousands of Years after the World was made. All Scriptures therefore that
affirm Christ to be the Maker of the World, and to be the Maker of all things,
must be supposed to speak figuratively, and are no ways to be understood in
their literal Sense and Meaning.

In all such Cases as this is, it is safer to say, that we cannot understand
truly in what Sense these Scriptures are to be taken, than it is to conclude,
that they mean that which other more numerous and plain Places of Scripture, as
well as Reason, do make to be impossible.

Of the two Natures of Jesus Christ.
When we urge those Scriptures which say that Christ has a God above him; that
he could do nothing of himself; that he knew not of the Day of Judgment; that
he died to redeem Mankind. The Opposers reply, that this is meant only as to
his Manhood or humane Nature, but not as to his Divine Nature: for as he was
God, none was his Superior; he had all Power essentially in himself, knew all
things, and was truly immortal.

I answer; If Christ had really two Natures in him, so that thereby he had been
truly God as well as Man, the Person thus constituted or made up of two such
Natures, could never have died according to his humane Nature, if by his Divine
Nature he had been truly God too: for how could he in Person have been mortal
in one Capacity, if he had been on the contrary immortal in another? He also
could not possibly have been ignorant in one Capacity of what he knew in
another; nor could he have wanted any kind of Power, if in any of his
Capacities he had had all Power essentially in himself; one Capacity must needs
have supplied the Defects of the other, especially the stronger of the weaker.

Of Christ his being the Son of God.
It Is objected, that as Christ Jesus our Lord was begotten by God on the Body
of the Virgin; so he must necessarily be God of the Substance of his Father, as
he was Man of the Substance of his Mother. In Answer to this I say, that when
the Angel saluted the Virgin with the Glad-tidings of her being designed to be
the Mother not of God, but of the promised Messiah, he told her, that the Holy
Ghost should come upon her, and the Power of the Highest should overshadow her;
and that therefore that holy thing which should be born of her, should be
called the Son of God, Luke 1. 31, 35.

Now in the Relation of this Message these following Particulars are remarkable:

First; That Jesus our Lord is the Son of God's Power only, and not of his
Person; the Power of the Highest shall over shadow thee. 'T was of the Woman
only that he was made, Gal. 4. 4. (He was not generated, as some think, out of
his Father's Substance) and so by Consequence was the Son only of his
miraculous and Almighty Power.

Secondly; It is not said that therefore he shall be the natural Son of God in
that Sense, as one Man is the natural Son of another; but therefore he shall be
called the Son of God, or he shall so be, and be so reputed, because in this
one particular Instance God was to him instead of a Father, not a Father in the
way that Men are Fathers to their Children, but a Father in respect of the
Virgin's receiving a Power from God; thus in an uncommon manner to conceive in
her self a Son of Joseph and David, Ver. 31, 32.

From what has been said I think it appears plainly, that Christ his being God
of the Substance of his Father, is an ungrounded Conceit. The Generation of our
Lord Jesus may be better accounted for another way: for God the Almighty
Architect, and most-wise Contriver of the Creation, has reserved to himself a
Power to alter the Course of Nature whenever he pleases; and as of a Rib
taken out from the side of Adam he made a Woman, so by the same omnipotent
Power he did enable a Virgin Woman to conceive a Son. If God had Power out of
mere Stones to raise up Children unto Abraham, Mat. 3. 9. we ought not to think
it incredible, that in this miraculous manner he should out of the Posterity of
Abraham raise up this Seed so wonderfully to be the World's Redeemer.

Of the Power by which Christ did Miracles.
Some I find are strongly persuaded that none but a Person truly God could do
those wonderful Works that Christ did. To such I answer, that a Man who is no
God can do things that are miraculous, when God gives him a Power to perform
them. This is evident in those which Moses did, and in those also which were
wrought by the Apostles. The Works of Christ indeed were extraordinary, yet not
done by a Power inherent in himself, but by a Power derived from God: for
himself tells us, that all Power was given unto him both in Heaven and in
Earth, Mat. 28. 18. He was a Man approved of God (says the Apostle) by
Miracles, Wonders, and Signs which God did by him, Acts 2. 22.

This Power God did bestow on Christ, to be only an Evidence of his being the
true Messiah: Rabbi, says Nicodemus, We know that thou art a Teacher come from
God; for no Man can do these things that thou do, except God be with him,
Joh. 3. 2. The Works, says Christ, which the Father has given me to finish,
the same Works that I do, bear witness of me, Joh. 5. 36. His Works were an
evident Proof that he was no Impostor, but a true and most wonderful Prophet;
yet still he is said to be but a Man, a Man whom God was with, a Man by whom
God did Wonders.

Of the Incomprehensibleness of God's Nature.
Some object, that we must not think to comprehend the infinite Nature of God,
nor understand fully every Particular that does relate to his Divine
Perfections; for God is Incomprehensible, and may for ought we know be that
which yet we cannot plainly understand him to be, namely, three in Person,
though but one in Essence.

I answer; Some of God's Divine Perfections are self-evident, and it is
impossible that we can be mistaken therein: We are infallibly certain that he
must be Immense in Person, Almighty in Power, and most Wise in Knowledge. And
although we cannot know what God is in every Respect, yet at the same time we
may know certainly what indeed he is not; we know certainly that he is not a
Man, or that he was made of a Woman, as Christ was: We know certainly that he
is not mortal, or that he cannot die, as Christ did; and we know certainly that
he has not a God above him, as Christ had; and we know certainly that he has
not received any kind of Power from another, as Christ Jesus is said to do.

And as one Truth naturally infers another, so we do from hence assuredly
conclude that the Person of Jesus our Lord is not truly God; for he was made of
a Woman, Gal. 4. 4. He died to redeem us, 2 Cor. 5. 14. He had a God above him,
1 Cor. 11. 3. And he did receive all the Power he had of another, Joh. 5. 30.
Mat. 28. 18.

We also know certainly that if the Divine Godhead did consist of three
Persons, that then neither of the three Persons singly can be God. If all three
be but that one God together (as the Trinitarians assert) then no one of them
can be the true God by himself: for the same Denomination cannot properly fit
each Person singly, as does fit them when conjoined in one mutual Relation; for
then they might be said to be indeed three supreme Godheads, which is utterly
impossible.

We also know certainly that if any of the three Persons, said to be in the
Godhead, be God by himself, as we have proved God the Father undoubtedly is,
then all the rest are but superfluous and unnecessary, as to the Constitution
of a Godhead: for one Infinite, Almighty, and most Wise Person, is as
sufficient to all the Purposes of a Godhead, as ten thousand Deities: but if
three be but the one true God together, then no one of them can be that one
true God by himself alone.

Lastly, we may be infallibly certain that if Doctrines grounded on so many
numerous and great Evidences both of Scripture and self-evident Reason, as
these are, That God is but one in Person; That the Person who is truly God, is
no other than the Father of Jesus Christ; and that the most excellent of Men,
even Jesus Christ, was only a Man, be false; Then we cannot be certain of the
Truth of any other Principle in Religion: If the Evidences here collected do
deceive us, it is in vain to hope by any other Methods to find the Truth.

Of the Coming down of Christ from Heaven.
Some, as a Proof of our Savior's Godhead, urge those Texts of Scripture,
where it is said, He came down from Heaven; came forth from the Father, and
ascended up where he was before. To which I answer, that these prove not that
for which they are intended, since it is plainly inferred from other Scriptures,
that Christ, some time before he was sent to declare the Gladtidings of the
Gospel, was assumed or taken up from the Earth into his Father's more immediate
Presence, (as St. Paul was some time after into the third Heaven) there to be
instructed in the Mind and Will of God, and to be invested with that great
Dignity and Power of being a Prince and a Savior.

To this the Prophet Daniel's Vision plainly alludes; I saw, says he, in the
Night Visions, and behold one like the Son of Man came to the Ancient of Days,
and they brought him before him; and there was given him Dominion and Glory,
and a Kingdom, that all People, and Nations, and Languages should serve him,
Dan. 7. 13. And from the Words of our Savior himself it is plain, that he
ascended up into Heaven before he came down to declare his Father's Will to
Men; No Man, says he, has ascended into Heaven, but he that came down from
Heaven, Joh. 3. 13. But no Man but Christ ever came down from thence, which he
never could have done had he not first ascended up thither. And that he was
taken up to be instructed in the Doctrine he was to publish to the World, is
plain also; The Father, says he, that sent me, he gave me a Commandment what I
should say, and what I should speak, Joh. 12. 49.

The Redemption or Restoration of Mankind was a Work of prodigious Difficulty;
and God, who had foreordained our Savior for the Performance thereof, did for
his greater Encouragement present to his View the Glories, which before the
World was (Joh. 17. 5.) he had designed as a Reward for his Son the Messiah:
and 'twas doubtless this Fore-taste of the Divine and Heavenly Happiness that
animated him with Courage and Fortitude to encounter all the Difficulties that
stood in his way. Hence it is said, that he for the Joy that was set before him,
did endure the Cross, and despise the Shame, Heb. 12. 2.

Of the Eternity of Christ.
Some object, that Christ is said to be before Abraham, before all things, and
that he had Glory with God before the World was. This, say they, proves him to
be Eternal, and by Consequence God. I answer, it is impossible that Christ can
be the true and living God, since it is plain from what has been said in the
former part of this Work, that no Person is truly God but the Father of Christ,
and that Christ has a God above him.

It Is impossible for Christ to be Eternal; for if God be his Father, as all
acknowledge, then there was a time when the Son had not a Being: for to be a
Son, and to be equal in Duration with his Eternal Father that begot him, is
undoubtedly impossible. Besides, we are told plainly, that the Son was first
foreordained before he came to have a Being in these latter times, 1. Pet. 1.
20. Now no foreordained Being can possibly be Eternal, since he that did
ordain his Being, must be before him of Necessity; and none but the very first
of all Beings can be truly Eternal.

How could he have a Being before Abraham, since it is declared he was of the
Seed of Abraham? How could he be before David, when 'twas out of David's
Posterity that God raised up Jesus according to his Promise? And since Jesus
the Son of God was made of a Woman, Gal. 4. 4. he could not be more ancient in
time than his Mother that bare him.

If follows then that these Scriptures on which the Objection depends, are
purely figurative, and are not to be understood in their literal Sense and
Meaning: They declare indeed that Christ in some Sense or other was before all
things, before Abraham, and had Glory before the World was, but not in that
Sense which the Objectors suppose.

For it is not reasonable they should be understood in such a Sense as
contradicts both common Understanding, and the greatest and plainest part of
all the Bible; they are Places of the same Nature with those which St. Peter
affirms are hard to be understood, 2 Pet. 3. 16. and for that Reason must by
Interpretation be brought to such a Sense as is agreeable to the Analogy of
Faith, and the most general Scope and Design of the Holy Scriptures: that is to
say, that Christ was before Abraham, and before the World, etc. in the
Fore-ordination, Decree and Counsel of God, as in very Deed St. Peter
interprets them, when he says thus of Christ, that he verily was foreordained
before the Foundation of the World, but was manifest in these lust times, 1
Pet. 1. 20.

Of the Satisfaction that Christ made to God.
Some argue thus; That if Christ had not been God, the Sacrifice he offered, or
the Satisfaction he made for Sinners, would not have been of that Infinite
Worth which was necessary to satisfy the Infinite Justice of an offended God. I
answer. The Holy Scriptures do not any where declare this Doctrine, but on the
contrary they tell us, that as by the Offense of one, Judgment came upon all
Men to Condemnation; so by the Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon
all Men to Justification of Life. Romans 5. 18.

In which Words are contained the whole Doctrine of the Satisfaction of Christ;
and they imply thus much only, that God was so infinitely well pleased with the
unspotted Righteousness of his Son, that for his sake he entered into a new
Covenant of Grace and Mercy with Mankind, wherein he did engage himself to be
still their God, and to afford them new Means of becoming his People.

Thus did God in Infinite Mercy take all Men again into Favor for the sake of
one perfectly righteous Person, as in infinite Justice he had before included
all Men under Suffering for their first Father's Sin and Transgression: So that
as by Man came Death, the Punishment due to the Breach of the first Covenant,
so by Man came also the Resurrection from the Dead, 1 Cor. 15. 21. All which
was not the Effect of any equivalent Price which by Christ was given to God,
but of the Righteousness or Obedience, which he performed to his Father's
Command: for as by one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners; so by the
Obedience of one shall many be made Righteous. Romans 5. 19.

Had Christ given to God, or made in our stead such a Satisfaction as had been
equivalent to the Transgressions of all Men, in order to redeem them, how then
could Eternal Life be the free Gift of God? How then could we be saved by Free
Grace? and how could our Sins be said to be forgiven? for Gift, and Grace, and
Forgiveness, are not proper terms where an Equivalent has been received.

In the Scripture it is said indeed, that Christ has obtained Eternal
Redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12. That our Peace is made through the Blood of his
Cross, Col. 1. 20. That we were reconciled unto God by the Death of his Son,
Romans 5. 10. But it speaks not so much as one Word of an Equivalent.

But is it not said, say some, that we are bought with a Price, 1 Cor. 6. 20.
And that the Son of Man has given his Life a Ransom for many? Mat. 20. 28. I
answer, These are but improper Expressions, and are of the same Nature with
those which attribute Hands, and Eyes, and Ears to God, which only imply that
such Acts are done by God which Men usually perform by these bodily Parts: Even
so* Christ is said to ransom* us, and to buy us with a Price, because by his
Means we do receive Benefits equivalent to what they do who are set free from
any kind of Misery and Bondage, by the Payment of a Price to them in whose
Bondage they are.

I shall, as a Close to what I have to say on this Head, add, that the Justice
of God spoken of is satisfied in a manner different from that which the
Adversary supposes: that is to say, the Justice of God is satisfied in the
certain Punishment of Adam's Transgression. Adam was commanded not to eat of
the forbidden Fruit on pain of Death. This Command he transgressed; and it is
evident that the Punishment was accordingly inflicted, for Adam died, and all
his Posterity do die likewise. Now when the Penalty is thus inflicted, it is
plain that Justice is satisfied, and God in Equity can require no more: but had
not Christ obtained the Favor to restore us to Life after the Punishment was
thus inflicted, there had then been an End of Mankind for ever.

From hence it is apparent how idle their Fancy is who imagine Christ suffered
what all Mankind should have suffered, in order to free them for ever from
suffering the same. For it is plain beyond Contradiction, that we are not freed
from Death, the Punishment due to that first Transgression, for we all die; God
does exact the Forfeiture of every one of us, and by Consequence his Justice,
as to that Offense, is satisfied in all its Demands. But this, say some, is
false, for Hell was our Due as well as Death; and from that Christ has freed
every one that will believe. I answer, It Is strange that Christ should free
Believers from one part of the Punishment and not from the other: The
Scriptures no where reveal this Secret, and for that Reason we need not believe
it.

Hell is the Punishment which is due to the Breach of the second Covenant, and
not of the first; now neither has Christ freed us from this by any thing that
he has done and suffered for us. He by his Righteousness did indeed procure for
us a new Covenant, and this new Covenant of Grace proposes Life and Pardon on
condition that we will believe its Promises, sincerely endeavor to obey its
Precepts, and repent of Sin; and they are truly the Breakers of this Covenant
who live in a continued Course of Disobedience thereunto, and die at last in
final Impenitence. Now for such Sinners as these there does remain no
Sacrifice; Christ never died for the Redemption of such, and by Consequence can
no ways be said to suffer in their stead.

Of the Object of Divine Worship.
Some object, that Jesus must be God, because it is recorded that his Name, in
the most Primitive Times of the Gospel, was called upon; see Acts 9. 14. and
22. 16. I answer; It Is difficult to understand rightly what is there meant by
Calling on his Name: This is certain, that the Scripture no where injoins us to
make Christ the Object of Divine Worship; it does rather expressly intimate the
contrary. Our Lord forewarns his Disciples not to ask any thing of him after
his Ascension, but bids them ask the Father in his Name, Job. 16. 23, 24, 26.

And when our Lord taught his own Disciples to pray, he bids them say, Our
Father which art in Heaven, Mat. 6. 9. He does not direct them to say, O Christ
hear us: He tells the Samaritan Woman, that in the following times the true
Worshippers should worship the Father, Joh. 4. 23. 'Twas the Doctrine of St.
Paul, that in every thing by Prayer and Supplication we should let our Requests
be made known unto God, Phil. 4. 6. And his own Practice was according to his
Doctrine, I bow my Knee (says he) to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians.
3. 14. and in many other Places, God or the Father, not Christ, is mentioned as
the alone Object of Divine Adoration and Petition: And it is worth nothing, that
Christ himself, whose Example and Footsteps we should follow, prayed always to
his Father, and never did so much as once petition any other Person of the
supposed Trinity.

And as to Thanksgiving, it is plainly said to be the Will of God that we should
do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, giving Thanks to God and the Father by
him, Col. 3. 17. And in another Place we are commanded to give Thanks always
unto God and the Father, in the Name of Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 5. 20. And
accordingly we read in a great number of Places in the New Testament, how the
Apostles gave God Thanks through Jesus Christ.

Jesus our Lord is said in Scripture to appear in the Presence of God for us,
Heb. 9. 24. to be an Advocate for Sinners, 1 John 2. 1. To make Intercession
for the Saints, Romans 3. 34. To be the Mediator between God and Men, 1 Timothy 2.
5. The Minister of the new Covenant, Heb. 8. 6. All which proves him to be the
Person that pleads our Cause, that solicites our Acceptance, the great
Transactor and Manager of all Affairs between God and us; but it no ways
intimates any Divine Worship due to himself.

And indeed should we put Christ instead of the true God, and make him the
alone Object of Divine Prayer and Thanksgiving, in whose Name then shall we
approach the Throne of Grace? and by whom shall we render Thanks to God? who
shall be our Intercessor, our Advocate, our Mediator? For my part I know but of
one Mediator, and that is the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5. and he only is the
Mediator between us Men and the one true God, whom I before have proved to be
only the Father of Jesus Christ.

To make our Lord Christ therefore the Object of our Divine Addresses is as
much as in us lies to deprive him of his Mediatory Office, which also by
Consequence is to deny him to be the Son of God, even the Beloved in whom alone
we are accepted, Ephesians. 1. 6. Yea, and by this we deny also the Godhead of the
Father, in whose stead we do by this Means place Christ, than which there can
be nothing in this World that is more truly Antichristian: See 1 John 2. 22.

Now from the aforegoing Arguments it is evident, that whatever the Sense of the
objected Places are, yet they cannot mean that which the Objector intends,
since in vastly more numerous and plain Places the Scriptures make God and not
Christ to be the alone Object of our Divine Addresses.

Of the Novelty of the Unitarian Doctrine.
Some object against the Doctrine of God's being but one in Person, the Novelty
thereof, that it is but of Yesterday in comparison to that which asserts a
Trinity, which is, they say, of at least 1600 and odd Years standing. I answer,
that the Objector is greatly mistaken: for can that be a new Doctrine which has
the greatest and the most plain part of the Scripture for its Foundation? The
Doctrine of God's being but one in Person, is in the former part of this Work
proved to be expressly and plainly contained both in the Old and New Testament,
and by Consequence must needs be as ancient as the Scriptures are.

The long Continuance of the contrary Doctrine, if it were as ancient as the
Objectors affirm, is yet no Argument of its real Truth. We read that soon after
the good Wheat was sown, the Enemy began to sprinkle Tares in the Field; Mat.
13. 25. And the Mystery of Iniquity began to work even in St. Paul's time, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. So that it is no wonder that some Errors, as suppose this of the
Trinity, be almost of equal standing to the greatest Truths: for where God has
a Church, the Devil always has a Chapel. It Is not the long or short
Continuance of any Doctrine, as to its Profession, that makes it authentic,
but that Foundation of Reason and Scripture on which it is built: A Tenet is
not therefore true because of its long or general Belief, if at the same time
it contradicts Self-evidence, and the general Current of the sacred Scriptures.

Of Scripture-Mysteries.
Some object, that much of the Scripture is mere Mystery; and therefore since
all Scripture is the Object of our Faith, we must sometimes believe things
which we cannot comprehend. I answer, if we are to believe Mysteries when
clearly revealed, yet it does not from thence follow, that therefore we must
believe Impossibilities and Contradictions. A just God can never lay on us a
necessity of submitting to those Terms and Conditions of Salvation which we
cannot possibly understand. Hence it follows that such obscure Mysteries as
evidently do contradict other plain Truths, do no ways concern us, so long as
we are in the dark as to their true Sense and Meaning.

When a Mystery is plainly expressed in Scripture, as when it is said, a Virgin
did conceive a Son, or that all Men shall rise again, or that Christ shall judge
the World, and no other plain Scripture contradicts it, neither is it contrary
to humane Reason; we are then to believe it, tho it may be above our
Understanding to conceive which way the Power of God should enable a Virgin to
conceive, or in what manner our scattered Dust shall be recollected and
revived, or how our blessed Savior can be made fit for so great a Work as an
Universal Judge.

But if some Places in Scripture had said these things, but others more
numerous and plain had affirmed the contrary, or had it contradicted any
self-evident Principle of Reason, we might then have rejected the Belief
thereof as safely and with as good Authority as we now do that of the Popish
Transubstantiation, which by the way is as expressly contained in Scripture as
is that of the Trinity.

But for Mysteries of a more doubtful Nature, such as want the Qualifications
before expressed, they can no ways oblige our Faith, so long as their true
Meaning lies hid in Obscurity of Expression. There will be a time when all
secret things shall be revealed, and all hidden things shall be brought to
light, for which we must wait with Patience, and not pretend, as some do, to
explain even what is most hard and difficult, by such Notions as are purely
unintelligible; for this is but the more to confound their Minds which were at
a loss before.

It Is true, if any Man can rationally explain a Mystery, he then does good
Service both to God and Man; but this we are infallibly certain is never done,
when the Sense that is given of a doubtful Place of Scripture is contrary not
only to the general Current of the rest of the Word of God, but is also a
Contradiction to the most self-evident Sentiments of humane Understanding.

But some may say, If such Passages as these are so generally to be overlooked
in the Business of Religion, why then did God cause them to be recorded in the
sacred Scripture? I answer, that it may as well be asked, why God made so many
sorts of small, and as we think, useless Insects to live upon the Earth, since
we know not what Benefit they are of to the World? Doubtless God, who does
nothing in vain, made them for some great Ends, though our short-sighted
Understanding cannot perceive what those excellent Ends of his are: Even so
likewise will his Wisdom be manifested some way or other, by what to us is yet
hard to be understood in Scripture. And though we are ignorant of the true
meaning of many of the most obscure and doubtful Parts thereof, yet the Ends
and Purposes of God in causing them to be written, either are or shall in due
time be accomplished.

In the mean time we ought to magnify that manifest Goodness of God, who has
communicated to Mankind such a number of plain and evident Precepts as will be
fully sufficient for Salvation, if we carefully observe them. All are concerned
in the Business of Life Eternal, therefore has God given us Laws suitable to
our common Capacities: The Gospel of Christ was preached to the Poor, which
intimates that the Glad-tidings of Salvation did not consist of unintelligible
Mysteries, but of such plain and evident Notions as did fit the Understandings
of the lowest People.

Of Faith and Reason.
There are a sort of People in the World of several false Persuasions, who when
they can no longer maintain their Errors against the Power of true Reason, fly
to Faith as their last Refuge, and tell us, that it is by Faith only that we are
made able to overcome the World, 1 John 5. 4. And that therefore it is necessary
for Men to believe what yet they cannot comprehend.

To this I answer, That Faith indeed is the chief Duty of the Christian
Religion, because it is the Belief of God's Promises and Threatenings that does
engage Mankind to the Obedience of his Precepts: Few, I doubt, would be
religious, were there no Fear of Hell, nor Hopes of Heaven. It Is said, that all
things are possible to him that believes, Mark 9. 23. which in other Words
imports that no Difficulty nor Hazard, how great soever, shall be able to stop
them in their Christian Race: And in this Sense it only is, that Faith is said
to be the Victory that overcomes the World.

But though it is only a firm Persuasion of the Truth of God's Promises and
Threatenings that inspires the Faithful with Courage to overcome and conquer the
Temptations not only of the Devil, but of the Lusts of this World too; yet this
is no Argument that therefore we must assent to that which we see no Reason to
believe; for then we might be every whit as liable to believe things false as
things that are true.

Wherefore it behooves us to be very watchful and circumspect in avoiding false
Principles; for Error of any kind will rather make us Slaves to the Devil, than
enable us to overcome and conquer him. As therefore thou oughtst to embrace
Truth wheresoever thou do find it, so be as ready to relinquish Errors, when
by carefully examining into Religion thou have discovered them to be such: for
it is in every respect as Heroic an Act of Faith to believe our selves in the
wrong when we really are so, as it is to adhere steadfastly to a Truth undoubted.

Know then that no kind of Faith can be true that is certainly unreasonable,
for the Light of Nature is as much God's Law as Divine Revelation; and none
must ever think that God's Law can contradict it self. Right self-evident
Reason is the only Touchstone that Men have to distinguish Truth from Error:
and it is the Agreement even of Scripture with this Reason that makes us know it
to be the Word of God; it is not our Forefathers saying so, but the exact
Concurrence of the Witness of our Spirit and that Testimony.

And though some would persuade us not at all to trust to Reason in Matters of
Religion; yet it is observable that those very Men that exclaim most against it,
are yet necessitated to give Reasons of their own to prove, if 'twere possible,
that your Reason is not to be relied on: and certainly that Guide must needs be
most safe, whom the whole World, in some kind or other, do find it so necessary
to follow.

Of the true Nature of Religion.
It Is certain that the Laws of Religion are designed by God for the only Good
of Mankind; he forbids some things and commands others, only because the one is
prejudicial to Man's Wellbeing, and the other is absolutely necessary to his
Peace and Happiness. In order then to the true Happiness of this Life there is
required a suitable way of living, even such as respects the Universal Good of
the whole Kind; which, in short, is that which Men call a Life of Holiness, or
a Life perfectly free from every kind of Injustice or Mischief both to one's
self and others.

And as for the Heavenly State, that is a State of perfect Goodness and Purity;
and it is impossible that any one can take delight in that Divine kind of Life
hereafter which he hated here: And for that Reason could the Wicked be admitted
into Heaven, yet then would they be unhappy, by reason that there none of those
base and ignoble Pleasures would be found which their corrupted Minds on Earth
did love and admire. It Is then only a good Life on Earth that can fit us for
the Heavenly Inheritance.

Now this Goodness of Life, so necessary to Man's both present and future
Bliss, does not consist in Speculation but in Practice. Belief is of no other
Use than as it enacts Obedience; and that is the Reason that the Day of Judgment
is represented as taking no notice of the Opinions, but of the Practices of
Men. Have you fed the Hungry? Have you clothed the Naked? Have you visited the
Sick? Mat. 25. 36. At that great Solemnity the Inquiry will not be, What had
you in the World? or what did you profess? but what good Deeds have you done
therein? how has your Care been to promote the Universal Good of rational
Beings? Have you renounced the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the
Pride of Life? 1 John 2. 26. and lived soberly, and righteously, and godlily in
this present World? Tit. 2. 12. and done justly, and loved Mercy, and walked
humbly with God? Mich. 6. 8.

Now if it is the Goodness of our Practice that is the one thing necessary to
Salvation, then the disbelieving either a few doubtful, or else a few
unreasonable Opinions, can never be dangerous. Let us then (as to the Point now
under Examination) ask our selves but this one Question, Will the Belief of the
Doctrine of a Trinity make me a more merciful and righteous Man than I shall be
if I did profess the contrary? Will it make me love and honor God better? Will
it make the Service which I render to his Divine Majesty a more reasonable
Service? And if on serious Consideration you find it will not, then it is plain
that the Unitarian Faith, which denies a Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, is
much to be preferred, since it is not perplexed with such Contradictions to
humane Understanding, but depends on more plain and noble Evidences, and does
also in all Respects whatsoever effectually secure a good Life; which, when all
is done, is the very Soul and Life of Religion, and will stand by a Man when
Hypostatical Unions, and Mutual Consciousness, and Somewhats, will prove but
poor things to depend upon for Salvation.

There can be no Danger of Damnation for not assenting to such mysterious
Notions as Men can at no tolerable rate understand, such as is that of the
Doctrine of a Trinity, (which makes the Divine Power of the Godhead to reside
in three distinct Persons, whose Constitution is like that of a free State,
rather than the more Divine Government of a single Monarchy) if in the mean
time they believe heartily the plain Doctrine revealed in God's Word, and live
up truly to the undoubted Precepts which the Christian Religion commands, which
I am certain does no where say, that unless ye believe that three Persons are
truly God, ye shall certainly be damned.

Salvation and the Belief of the Trinity not inconsistent.
It Is objected as dangerous to believe the Doctrine of God's being but one in
Person, because we should hereby, as much as in us lies, exclude from Salvation
all those pious and just Men who in former Ages have lived and died in the
Belief of a Trinity. I answer; The Wisdom of the Unitarian Doctrine never was
so uncharitable as to suppose this; yet doubtless the Belief of a Trinity must
needs much lessen their future Happiness, though not wholly debar them of
Salvation: And therefore to persist therein, after due Admonition especially,
is very imprudent and dangerous.

It Is plain, that though those who believe a Trinity do believe more than
either God or Christ do require as necessary to Salvation, yet together or
therewith many Persons do also believe all the chief Fundamentals in Religion
that are requisite to save them; and therefore their Hope and Trust in God's
Mercy on one Hand, may out-ballance their Error on the other. If God winked at
the Ignorance of the virtuous Gentiles, how can we imagine that he should not
be gracious to the heedless and unwitting Errors of the humble and
contrite-hearted Christian?

If any Man (says the Apostle) build on the Foundation Hay, and Straw, and
Stubble, that is, Doctrine that will not stand the Test of Truth, he shall
suffer Loss; yet he himself shall be saved, but so as by Fire, 1 Cor. 3. 15.
that is, with great Difficulty he shall escape Damnation. If God should be
extreme to mark what is done amiss, no Man could stand in Judgment before him;
as it is in Psalm. 143. 2. and 130. 3. All Salvation is of the free Grace and
Mercy of God, who pardons Iniquity, Transgression and Sin, Exodus 34. 7. A good
Life will make great Abatements upon the account of a bad Faith; Mercy
rejoiceth against Judgment, Jam. 2. 13. and Charity shall cover a multitude of
Sins, 1 Pet. 4. 8.

But though it is possible for a Man to be saved in this Faith, who otherwise
has lived well, yet 'twill doubtless much lessen his future Happiness, for
Error of any kind is the fruitful Parent of many Mischiefs; it betrays us into
Absurdities, and involves us in many unwarrantable Words and Actions. As our
Faith is, so will our Practice be apt to be, and consequently Error in one
respect or other will be apt to make Men's Lives less innocent; and the less
innocent our Actions are, the less doubtless will our Reward hereafter be: For
the eternal Glories, compared to that of the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, 1 Cor.
15. will be in proportion to the Degrees of our Christian Perfection. They
therefore whose Religion is such only as will but just preserve them from
Damnation, must not expect so large a share of the Divine Recompenses, as by
God's Grace is due to the enlarged Capacity of the more exactly knowing and
undefiled Soul.

But notwithstanding what has been said on the Behalf of those otherwise good
Livers who have not been ignorant of the Truth merely out of Malice and Design,
I add, that in case Men of false Principles are told plainly that they are in
the wrong, and yet they still do obstinately persist therein, and refuse to
consider seriously the Arguments both of Scripture and Reason that are offered
to convince them; I see not how in any case it is possible for such to be saved:
for this is truly and plainly to reject the Counsel of God, and to do Despite
to the Spirit of Grace.

By what Nature the World was redeemed.
When Men have argued whatever they can about the Necessity of Christ his being
truly God, that so the Sacrifice he offered might be of Merit sufficient to
answer the Demands of God's most Infinite Justice; yet after all it must be
acknowledged, that our Peace was made with God, only by the holy Life and Death
of an humane Person: for nothing that is truly God can die or shed Blood, but
it is by Blood, even the Blood of a dying Jesus, that we are cleansed from all
Sin, 1 John 1. 7. And this his Death for our Redemption is an undeniable
Instance to prove, that his Person was truly humane.

Christ Jesus our Lord was undoubtedly filled with the Divine Spirit, for in
him dwelt the Fullness of the Godhead; but this did not make him God, any more
than a Believer shall be made God by receiving of his Fullness, Joh. 1. 16. or
by being Partaker of the Divine Nature promised to such, 2 Pet. 1. 4. It only
fitted him for the Work of Redemption: he by that eminent Inhabitation of the
Divine Spirit became able to surmount all Temptations to Sin; and 'twas only
the underfiled Obedience of his Life, even unto Death, that made the Sacrifice
which he offered unto God acceptable.

The Blood that was shed to manifest the entire Obedience of Jesus unto God,
was no other than the Blood of a most holy and excellent Man; 'twas not the
Blood of God, as some Men rashly do affirm: On the Cross he that thus died
cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Now for him to be God
that thus prayed to God, is, I think, impossible. Wherefore it is evident, that
he who thus died was not a true Deity; and yet 'twas by him that died that the
World was redeemed; for which blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who has thus
visited and redeemed his People, and has raised up a mighty Salvation for us,
out of the House of his Servant David, Luke 1. 68, 69.

A general Rule for answering all Objections.
Having considered and answered the principal Objections urged in favor of the
Doctrine which asserts Jesus Christ to be truly God, in opposition to that of
his being only the Man who is the Mediator between God and Men, 1 Timothy 2. 5. or
that which asserts that none is God but the Father of Christ, 'twill be
needless to confute those other little Objections which still remain; since
when the chiefest Strength that does uphold an Error is overthrown, it is not in
the Power of some little Props to maintain and support it: nevertheless, lest
the Minds of some should thereby be perplexed, I here lay down one general
Rule, by which all other Objections may be easily refuted, and that is this:

If any Principle in Religion be true, by the greater and by the plainer Number
of Evidences, it can never be false by a few in number, or by them that are
dark and doubtful.

If then the Arguments to prove the true God to be only the Father of Jesus
Christ, are more in number, and plainer to be understood, than those are which
are objected in favor of the contrary, you need then only to reply thus, that
the Proofs that make for it, are more both in Number and Weight, than those
that are against it; and that therefore 'twould be unpardonable to suffer such
Trifles to unsettle and shake your Faith.

Suppose a Man objects against the Doctrine of God's being but one in Person,
this Text, Let us make Man, Genesis 1. 26. and endeavor to prove from thence,
that God is more than one in Person, is it reasonable to suffer this to alter
your Judgment, when for that one Passage, Us, urged in favor of the Belief of
more Persons than one, you have ten thousand that mention God to be but only
one, in such Terms as these, I, thou, me, he, his? And as for the Terms of we,
they, them, etc. they are not mentioned in Scripture so much as once, as
applied to God alone.

If every single Objection that is started should be admitted to be of
Authority sufficient to invalidate the best and clearest Proofs; or if every
hard and doubtful Passage in Scripture were enough to overthrow all them that
are clear and plain, then all true Religion would soon be at an end: for some
plausible Exceptions may be made against the chiefest and plainest Truths in
Religion, otherwise so many false and erroneous Opinions would not have
obtained that Authority that they have in the World.

Indeed when we are told plainly, that we are in an Error, and Arguments truly
considerable are at the same time offered to undeceive us, we ought then to
suffer our selves to be convinced: for if what is thus urged carries with it so
much clear Evidence as makes it undoubted, the changing then of our Opinions
will not only be reasonable, but very honorable too, since nothing is more
ignoble and base than to be a Slave to Error, from which not any thing in this
World but Truth can free us.

Of the true Notion of the Holy Ghost.
It Is plain from the general Analogy of true Faith, grounded on
Scripture-Evidence, that the Holy Ghost is no distinct Person subsisting of
himself; for then it is clear, that our Lord could not be the Son of him who is
now called God the Father, or the first Person in the supposed Trinity, since
it is plain that the Virgin Mary's Conception was occasioned by the
overshadowing of the Holy Ghost, Luke 1. 35. which all Trinitarians acknowledge
to be the third Person, and not the first: It Is expressly said, that that which
was conceived in her was of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 1. 20. And that she was with
Child by him, Mat. 1. 18. Wherefore it is evident from these additional Words,
and the Power of the Highest shall overshadow thee, Luke 1. 35. that the Holy
Ghost is only that Divine and Invisible Power of God, by which he works his
Will and Pleasure in the World; and by Consequence, that God, and the Spirit of
God, are no more two distinct Persons than Man and the Spirit of Man are; for
to the one the other is compared in the sacred Scripture, 1 Cor. 2. 11. And as
the Members of Man's Body do secretly and wonderfully obey the Dictates of his
Will or Mind, so, and much more so, do all Creatures act, and are commanded by
the Almighty Power of God's Divine and most Wise Will and Pleasure.

When therefore all the elect People of God are said to be sanctified by the
Holy Ghost, it must be understood of that new Temper and Inclination of Mind
which God by his Divine and Invisible Power does work or cause in Men. When he
powerfully raises up in them holy Thoughts, and excites in their Minds new
Desires, he is then truly said to sanctify them by his Spirit: And when Men
wilfully reject those Motions to Goodness, which God by his Power does raise up
in them, they are then truly said to resist, and grieve, and quench his Spirit.

And whereas the Spirit is said to receive, and to be sent, from whence some
would infer its distinct Personality: it is replied, that these are but improper
Expressions, such as are before noted to be spoken of God and Christ; they are
Words fitted to our dull Apprehensions rather than to the true Nature of the
Spirit it self, even as God is represented as having the Actions and Passions
of a Man, and to come down from Heaven, when yet we know that he is already
every where, though our mortal Eyes have not Powers fitted to perceive him: He
that fills all things can no ways be capable of moving out of his Place. Such
Expressions as these therefore are plainly improper, and must not be understood
literally, or as at first sight they seem to express.

The CONCLUSION.
TO what has been said on this Subject, I will only add this one solemn
Protestation, that as what I here offer is grounded on the Dictates only of
plain and positive Scripture, and the most evident and perfect Reason, as I
humbly judge: So the Design of this its Publication is the alone Glory of God
Almighty, and the Church's Peace, which no ways can be established firmly but
on the Foundations of Truth.

And though I am sensible the Work is not performed with that Exactness as to
be in every part without Reproof, yet I am satisfied that in the main I have
therein managed the true Cause of God and Religion.

Nevertheless, I have a secret Distrust within me, that what I here offer will
not be kindly received: for my best Endeavors must not expect to find better
Success than did those of my blessed Lord and Master; who, though he spoke as
never Man spoke, and confirmed his Doctrine with such Miracles as did
demonstrate him to be a Teacher sent of God, yet was believed on but by a few:
The Praise of Men was then generally much more beloved than the Praise of God;
Joh. 12. 43.

And I doubt the Case is still the same; Men now seek their own and not the
things of Jesus Christ, Phil. 2. 21. They that love Riches will hardly run the
hazard of losing any temporal Preferment for the sake of Truth. Others will be
averse from acknowledging themselves in a Mistake, who before have been
honored with the Repute both of Orthodox and Learned Men; and those who have
been long prepossessed with the contrary Persuasion, will hardly relinquish it,
though the best of Reasons be offered to convince them of their Error.

In short, the Religion of Mankind generally is but a Self-righteousness, a Law
rather of their own making than of God's appointing. There are but very few
that in all things do either live or believe as the Gospel directs them: the
whole World does for the most part prefer some senseless Humor before sacred
Truth, and that immortal Bliss to which it would conduct them.

THE END.

