A SERMON Preached July 17. 1681. at the Assizes at Huntingdon, Before the
RIGHT HONORABLE, the Lord Chief Baron Mountague.

And Mr. JUSTICE WINDHAM, Judges of the Assize.

By Benjamin Smith, Rector of Boxworth in Cambridge-Shire.

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Three Crowns and Bible near
Mercers-Chappel in Cheap Side, 1682.

ERRATA.
PAge 8. Line 6. for concern; Read concerns; ibid. l. 15. r. This is a dubious
term. p. 9. l. 22. r. This f. Thus. p. 10. l. 33. r. the Saints, Colos. 1. 2.
To the Saints and faithful Brethren which are at Colosse. p. 24. l. 32. f. Qui
r. Cui.

Jude, ver. 3. It was needful for me to write unto you, and Exhort you, that ye
should earnestly Contend for the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints.


THere are no Contentions any ways so smart and severe as those that are
raised about Religion, and among those, it is observable, that none are so
inhumanely cruel, desperately malicious, or unnaturally mischievous, and
spiteful, as those that are raised against the true Religion, and the
Professors of it.

For false Religions have no better defense or security to themselves, than to
persecute the true; and if they could remove that out of the way, there would
then be none to detect their Error, or Convict them of falsehood. As Herod
burnt all the Genealogies of the Jews, that none might be left to show that his
Lineage was defective.

Besides, as the true Religion improves men's minds, and teaches them not only
true courage, and inspireth them with a greatness and generosity of Spirit; but
also makes men more gentle and kind, and advances Charity and Love to our
Neighbor to an excellent height: So on the other hand, all false Religions one
way or another, debauch the minds of men, and introduce the seeds of surliness,
and pride; of a contempt of others, and a disdain to be opposed, and rivets in
their minds a mercyless regard to those that differ from them.

Hence it follows, that if power and opportunity fall in successfully with
those Principles they embrace, that force and violence, and all the inhumane
ways of Compulsion are taken up as the proper and peculiar Methods, either to
defend and propagate their own Tenants, or to undermine the Articles and
Practice of the contrary Religion. For that Religion that wants the solidity
and loveliness of Truth, to defend or promote it, and cannot by its own native
virtue and beauty maintain its ground, and infinuate it self into the (...)
others, must necessarily have recourse to the (...) Methods of Force and Rage,
of Bloodshed an^ (...) that it may aw and scare men into a Compl^ (...) subdue
the Timorous; and take those out of the (...), whose minds being endued with
more generous Principles, know not how to truckle and submit to Falsehood.

Thus the Turk has turned his Swords into Ploughshares, (but in a sense far
different from that Evangellical promise) and prepares the Soil, and plants his
Religion, by the point of the Sword, and the dint and demonstration of Force
and Violence. And from hence it was, that the Christian Religion in all Ages
found such opposition both from Jew and Pagan, not by Reason and Arguments, but
by Rage and Persecutions, by Racks, and Geobits, by Fire and Faggot, and by all
the Arts and means that malice and fury, that spite, and inhumane Cruelty
could invent or devise; not to Convince, but to Ruin and Destroy men. Hence
was that continued series of those dreadful Persecutions, that raged so
horribly against the Christians, whilst the Empire was in the hands of
Pagan-Princes; they being hated, as our Savior foretold, of all men for his
Names sake. And if any Famine or Mortality, or any Evil occurrent had befallen
the Empire, the common Cry was, Christianos ad Leones; as if these had been the
certain cause of every common Calamity, or the Wrath of their Gods, could only
be appeased by the Blood and Ruin of innocent men.

But we need not go so far off, to make instances, nor search the Annals of
Heathen or Turkish stories, for a proof of what I say. The Fraud, and Force,
the Spite and Cruelty, that Rome, Christian-Rome has always persecuted us
with, abundantly shows with what Arts a false Religion is to be established,
and gives us as great an evidence, as any, that the Religion which they so
propagate, is not from God.

Historians tell us, that Romulus laid the foundation of those Walls in the
Blood of his Brother Remus, and the humor of it Cleaves to those walls still;
and though Rome be now called Christian, she still goes on to Found her Walls,
and establish her dominion in the Blood of her Brethren. And though old Rome
advanced her Empire over the world, by Sword and Slaughter, by a forcible
Conquest, and the invasion of other men's Rights, yet it was by Prowess and
Valor, and the Generous Methods of an open War. And in this, indeed, Rome is
Rome still, that she usurps, and encroacheth, that she battens in Blood, and
thrives by Confusion and Slaughter; but yet she is much departed from the
Generosity, and Gallantry of old Rome, in that they scorned to proceed, but by
open Defyance, and gave an Enemy warning to look to himself; but these thrive
by Treachery and Baseness, and steal upon us like a Thief in the night, and are
ashamed of no Arts, and baulk no Methods, how dirty, and indecent; how mean, or
unmanly soever, that may but any ways tend to promote their designs, and
advance (as they call it) the Catholic cause.

Hence an inhumane Cruelty, wherever they get an advantage, does constantly
attend their Success, the certain sign of a cowardly and degenerous mind; of
which the Parisian Massacre, the Irish Rebellion, and their Butcheries in the
valley of Peidmont, are lasting and undeniable Monuments. And all the advances
they have made, and the ground they have gotten, has most-what been, by Base
and Treacherous Plots, by Fire, and Poison, and Daggers; ways, that God,
(beyond Dispute) never appointed his Church to rise by, or to defend her self
with; and a Method of proceeding, that the Christian Religion does utterly
abhor and disown.

And all these, and more too, we have by experience found to be practiced by
them upon our selves, in this Nation. If not all in Effect, no thanks to them
who laid their Trains, and did their utmost; yet all this they have
endeavored to do, and would certainly have done, if the infinite mercy and
good Providence of God had not been our defense to their confusion. It was out
of this Shop, that all those Treacherous and Traiterous attempts against the
Life of that excellent Princess of ever blessed Memory, Queen Elizabeth, first
proceeded; From Rome they derived both their encouragement, and first
formation. From hence Lopez was set on to Poison her, Parry, Sommervile, and
others, to Stab her. A Practice that Heathen-Rome scorned to use, or own; but
Rome called Christian, makes these the chiefest of her Arts, and relyes on them
as her most successeful, and apposite Methods of vanquishing Princes. From Rome
the Spanish Armado received an encouragement, and the Apostolical Benediction,
and from the same source sprang that Plot of the Gunpowder-Treason; a design
which none but Rome could Foster, and which none but those who had put off all
sense of Religion, Mercy or Humanity, could ever invent or approve of; and
which the Savage inhabitants of the coldest Climes would be startled at, and
tremble to hear of. From the same place, our late dreadful confusions were
highly fomented: and that Sacred, and Royal Blood which so much sullied the
honor of our Religion, and still Cries so loud for Vengeance, was not shed
without their Concurrence, and Assistance; the mischievous and busy Jesuit,
being so wicked as to promote the design, and so impudent, as to Boast of it
when it was done.

But why should I mention former things, since of late they have given us the
Compendium, and Abstract of all their villainies, in that horrid and execrable
Plot, which is yet on foot; and which, in despite of all discoveries, and
opposition that can be made, they have the face and insolence still to push
forward, and mangage, with the utmost of a restless, and implacable vigor, and
malice. A design so horrid and ghastly in its Aspect, so contrary to all true
sentiments of Piety, Humanity and Allegiance, that I do not wonder that they
use all their Arts, either to stifle its Discovery, or to divert the Odium of
it from themselves upon others. And yet it is so suitable to their former
Methods, and so well adapted to serve and promote the ends of a false Religion,
that we have no cause to question who are its Authors, nor any reason to think
they will give over its Pursuit, so long as the faintest hopes remain that it
may take effect.

But this opposition against the true Religion, should make the Professors of
it the more watchful and resolute in its defense, that the endeavors of the
enemy to subvert the Truth, and Eclipse the light of the Gospel may meet with a
suitable resistance in the wisdom and vigilance of the Defenders of it, and
these last efforts of their languishing cause be baffled. If Rome so earnestly
seeks to corrupt the Faith, and by any Methods to impose a false a Religion
upon us; it is reasonable, and fair, that we oppose their Intrigues, by all
just ways, and according to Saint Judes exhortation here, Earnestly contend
for the Faith, which was once delivered to the Saints. An Exhortation, which if
it was useful in his days, cannot be needless now in ours: And since the Laws
are the Barriers and just defense of our Religion, as well as our Liberty; and
the true Faith is the common concern of every man; it cannot be unseasonable,
nor improper, at this time, when both Magistrates and People are met to enquire
into the importance and obligation of the words of Saint Jude, and to see what
he meant by it; and how far we are concerned in it, when he said,

It was needful for me to write unto you, and Exhort you, that ye should
earnestly contend for the Faith, which was once delivered to the Saints.

Which words contain

1. The Subject and Theme of his Epistle what he wrote about; and that is, to
Exhort you, That ye should earnestly contend for the Faith, which was once
delivered to the Saints.

2. The reason why he chose this subject, and wrote about this matter: It was
needful for me to write unto you. It was requisite and needful to manage that
subject; and the Fourth Verse gives a sufficient account of the necessity of
it: For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old
ordained to this Condemnation, ungodly men, turning the Grace of our God into
Lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. There
were some crept in, that began to subvert the Faith, and Sap, the very
foundations of it; Saint Jude therefore thought it needful for him to give
them notice and warning of it, the Faith was in danger; he therefore Exhorts
them to contend earnestly for it. For this is the Office of the Seers, to stand
and observe, and give notice of the approaching danger, that the flock may not
be surprised by any sudden invasion, nor seduced by the fly insinuations of
those that lie in wait to deceive, and creep in unawares. This was the danger
the Church then was in and which it has never since been freed entirely from;
this gave occasion to Saint Jude to manage this subject then, and makes it
still fit for the Ministers of the Gospel to press and urge: And to exhort you,
That ye should earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered to the
Saints.

Where there are these Two Things to be considered.

1. What it is they were to Contend for; and that is, The Faith once delivered
to the Saints. 2. How they were to contend for it; and that is, Earnestly.
1. What they were to contend for -- The Faith, etc. This certainly is a
subject well worthy of the Apostles greatest, and most vigorous Exhortations,
and the believers most earnest Contentions. This is that we should most
earnestly seek after; and having obtained it, they most diligently endeavor to
retain. It is that Precious Pledge of his Love, which the Lord Jesus Christ,
our dear Redeemer, delivered us to keep; and that, after he had endured all the
indignities and contemptuous affronts, and suffered the worst of things that
men could inflict, and shed his Blood to seal and confirm it to us. Nay, this
is that in which our eternal life consists, and the only way that our Savior
has laid down for us to go to Heaven in. This is that which Saint Jude calls
here in the beginning of this verse [the common salvation,] that Method and way
of Salvation, that was delivered for all alike, and alike concern; all to know,
to observe, and to walk in. Which, what it is, will more fully yet appear, by
considering the words which the Apostle here describes it by (viz.) The Faith
once delivered to the Saints.

Where it is expressed,

1. By its name, the Faith. 2. By a considerable distinguishing Circumstance,
once delivered to the Saints.
1. By its name, the Faith. This a Dubious term in it self, as being capable of
a different application; and signifies sometimes one thing, and sometimes
another. But the most usual distinction, and which is fully sufficient for my
present purpose, is that division of Faith, In Fidem qua Credimus, and Fidem
quam Credimus.

1. There is the Fides quo Credimus, the Faith by which we believe; and this is
no more than the internal assent and consent of the mind, to the Doctrines of
the Gospel, and the Revelations of God, which when it has that influence upon
the Soul, as to captivate it into a due subjection and obedience to the Laws of
God, and the Rules and Precepts of the Lord Jesus Christ, is that which is by
Divines, called a saving and justifying Faith; a Faith that works by love, and
is the fulfilling of the Gospel-condition; a Faith that receives and submits to
the Lord Jesus in all his Offices, and as he is offered in the Gospel.

This is an usual and frequent meaning of the word Faith in the New Testament;
and that which we should, by all means, Contend and endeavor to preserve
entire. That neither the pleasures of this life, nor the inclinations of a
Corrupt mind; neither the sly insinuations of lewd Companions, nor the interest
and Grandeur of this present World, divert us from it. That neither to comply
with the Lusts of the Flesh, nor to form or promote an Intrigue or design, we
should violate the Rules of a good conscience, or make bold with the Laws of
Jesus Christ. In short, that neither Debauchery, nor Dishonesty, nor Knavery,
should make us forget our obedience to the Gospel, or in any thing depart from
the Principles of that Religion which we profess. This is a Faith thus to be
Contended for and preserved; but this is not the Faith here meant in the Text.
For besides this, there is

2. Fides quam Credimus. And by that is meant the Gospel. And the Doctrines of
Jesus Christ, and his Apostles; the Message they brought, the Rules they gave,
the Means they prescribed in order to eternal Salvation, are very frequently in
Scripture called the Faith. This Acts 6. 7. And the word of God increased (or
got ground) and the number of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly,
and a great company of the Priests were obedient to the Faith. So Galat. 1. 23.
He that persecuted us in times past, now preaches the Faith, which once he
destroyed. And so again 1 Timothy 3. 9. Holding the Mystery of the Faith in a pure
conscience. And to name no more, so it is in this place, That ye should
earnestly Contend for the Faith once delivered to the Saints. Where it is not
the Faith whereby they believe, but the Faith which they believe, the Faith
delivered to the Saints to be believed, received and kept, that is meant. Not
an Assent to the Revelation, but the Revelation it self to which we give
Assent. The Faith here then is the Truth, the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Doctrines of Salvation, and those Rules and Means that guide us to eternal
life; or in one word, the True Religion.

And this is further set out,

2. By a considerable distinguishing Circumstance, once delivered to the
Saints. Every Doctrine is not to be Contended for, and every Religion is not
worth the keeping; and every thing that has by men, been delivered to men, is
not too tenaciously to be adhered to. The Faith, the Religion which Saint Jude
proposes to our Care, and endeavors to keep, is described by this, which
distinguishes it from all that are false, and sets the true, and current stamp
upon it, it is the Faith, the Doctrine, the Religion, (...), once delivered to
the Saints.

And this being the Mark, and distinguishing Character of that Faith and
Religion, which we must Contend for, it must the more carefully be enquired
into, that we may not miss our Mark, and Contend for what we ought to avoid.
There are therefore two things to be explained in these words, and we must
enquire who are the Saints, and what is to be understood by the (...) in the
Text.

1. Who are the Saints here, to whom the Faith was delivered? And here I think
the Answer is plain, and easy enough, that by Saints he means, no other than
those, to whom the Gospel was first preached, and who did receive it and
believe. [Sanctos (says one) usitato Scripturae modo vocat Credentes; he calls
the Believers Saints according to the usual Language of the Scriptures.] And
thus Saint Paul calls the Believers, and Embracers of the Gospel, the Saints
and faithful brethren which are at Colosse; and Philip. 1. 1. To all the Saints
in Christ Jesus that are at Philippi.

But then considering that it is Saint Jude the Apostle of our Lord that writes
thus, as is evident by the first verse of this Epistle, where he styles himself
[Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ and brother of James,] and by the
Inscription of the Epistle, which though it be not Canonical Scripture, yet is
the sense of the Ancient Church, which entituleth it (...), The Epistle of Jude
the Apostle. This Epistle then being written by him, and calling the Doctrine
of the Gospel, the Faith delivered to the Saints; that which in his time was
delivered and received, was preached and believed:

To us it sets the Mark and stamp of Antiquity, upon that Faith and Doctrine,
which he calls upon us to Contend for. And if we ask what is the Doctrine we
ought to receive, what the Faith we ought to Contend for? the Answer is in
Saint Jude; the Doctrine the Apostles preached, and the Faith the Ancient and
Eldest Christians received. This directly opposes all Novel Doctrines, and all
Religions that are late and upstart. Whatsoever is not derived from these
Ancient, and incorrupt Fountains, we are no ways obliged to maintain or Contend
for, as being none of the Faith delivered to the Saints.

And yet this is the quarrel between the Church of Rome and us. She has
notoriously and visibly corrupted the Faith, and departed in numerous
instances, from the true and old Religion; We desire to adhere to it, and to
separate the Precious from the Vile, and in Reforming our selves, have done no
more, than returned to what was truly Ancient, and have only recovered out of
the Rubbish of their Novel, Superstitious, and Idolatrous Doctrines, the Faith
that was once delivered to the Saints. For this they Charge our Doctrines with
Novelty, and call our Faith a New Religion; but to whom that Charge most justly
belongs, will be no hard matter to the impartial and unbiassed mind to
discover. Athanasius wittily derides the Arrians, that when they produced their
Confession of Faith in the Council of Rimini, they set down in the style of it
the Day, and the Month, and the Consulls when it was made, as from thence
dating the Beginning of their Faith, and fixing the first Original of their
Heresy, and showing thereby that their Faith was Late, and upstart. But what
would he have said to the Church of Rome, had he lived now? And how smartly
would he have rebuked their Novel Encroachments? the Body of whose Religion, as
it is now embraced, bears date from the Counsel of Trent; and there is not one
Article in their Faith, wherein they differ from us, but we can show, and prove
it, to be of a late foundation: Late (I mean) in comparison with the Truth, and
the Faith that was once delivered to the Saints. What Christ, and his Apostles
preached, and what the first and eldest Christians believed, and received, we
own and adhere to; but other things that are not found among these Doctrines,
or are repugnant to them, we justly renounce as New and Erroneous; though they
have contracted a venerable Rust by their Age, and seek to impose upon us under
the mask of Antiquity, and by the descent, and length of their Pedigree. Primum
quodque verissimum, is Tertullians Rule; and we desire to stand and be tried by
it, and would have nothing imposed upon us, that the Scriptures (the true and
Authentic Records of Antiquity) do not mention, nor own. The Doctrines which
the Apostles preached, the Rules of Life and Salvation which they gave, is what
we Contend for; for this is the Faith delivered to the Saints.

Let us now consider,

2. What is to be understood by the (...), the Once delivered in the Text.
There are two Senses given of it by Interpreters; both which may be taken in,
as being both indeed employed in the word.

1. Once may carry the sense of Conjunctim, and so the learned and judicious
Hammond paraphraseth it [preached uniformly to all by the consent of all the
Apostles.] This was that Doctrine that was One and the same, though preached by
different persons; this the Apostles all agreed in, and observed in their
preaching through the world; that though they were so far distant one from
another, yet they all preached the same thing, and made no Difference in the
Doctrine they Preached, in the Faith they delivered to the Saints.

How happy had it been for the World, and how much had it conduced to the peace
and Purity of the Church, and to the safety and security of the Souls of men,
if the Missionaries of Rome had observed and proceeded by the same Rule, and
kept to the Doctrine that was once delivered, and had taught none other things,
then what the Apostles by Common consent, and Harmony of mind, had preached.

Then had they never imposed so much False Doctrine upon the world, nor ever
preached things so vastly different, from the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles.

Then might the Church, in a great measure, have retained her Virgin-Purity
still, and had not been defiled, nor the world been disturbed by the insolent
Encroachments of Rome.

Then might Images (a very Fornication in Religion,) have kept their place
among the Batts and Moles, and in holes and Brambles, where the Prophet says,
the Is^. 2. 20.
Jews, upon their Reformation, should throw theirs; and had never crept forth
to see the light, to be adorned and admired, nay, to be set up and worshipped
by Foolish men.

Then might the Church have been left to pray and say, Amen, with
understanding, and to go to the Throne of Grace, in a way where all knew what
they were doing; and the Scriptures, those Fountains of living waters, had
never been sealed up under an unknown Tongue, from the eyes and use of those,
whose Duty as well as Interest it is, to peruse and understand them.

Then might the Church have enjoyed the Sacraments, as they were first
instituted for her use, and as our Lord appointed they should be received; and
the Cup had neither been taken away, nor the Bread been made a God, and a
Prodigious Idol to be worshipped, and eaten. Had they followed the Faith and
Doctrine of the Apostles, they would never have dared to Alter what our Savior
had Ordered, nor have presumed to deprive the People of the Cup, when our
Savior at the first institution of that Ordinance, said, Drink ye all of it.
Mat. 26. 27.


Then might Princes have enjoyed their Rights, and neither have been questioned
nor molested in their Thrones, by those who ought to be subject to them; and
then might the People have led their lives under them, peaceably in all
godliness and honesty, and had never felt the effects of those Firebrarnds,
which the Pope has thrown abroad in the world; nor ever been taught to rebel
against God and the King.

In short, then had that Mass of Corrupt, Superstitious, and Idolatrous
Doctrines, that have with so much confidence been broached, so highly to the
dishonor of Religion, and to the danger of Souls, never seen the light, nor
defiled the Church; had they kept to the Faith that was once delivered, that is
delivered conjunctly by all the Apostles one and the same.

2. Once delivered, carries in it the sense of Immutably. Once for all, as we
say, not to be changed or altered any more. God gave his people the Jews a Law,
and Ordinances, of his own appointment; but these were not to hold, but till
the Fullness of time was come, and then that dispensation was to cease, and be
done away, to make room for one more perfect and lasting; one to be so Once
delivered, as not to be delivered again in another way, or with any addition,
or amendment. And in this sense the Scriptures, use the word elsewhere, Psalm.
89. 35. (...), Once have I sworn in my Holiness, that I will not lie unto
David. That is, certainly, immutably, and without alteration. And this way both
Grotius, and Beza go. [Semel; Quia de ea Doctrina nihil sit imutandum. Once,
Because nothing was to be changed in that doctrine.]

And therefore every Substraction, or Addition to this Faith, thus Once
delivered, is a notorious Wrong to it; a Corruption of the Doctrine, and an
Encroachment upon the Authority of God Almighty, in whose power alone it is, to
make and establish an Article of Faith. And therefore do we appeal to the
Doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles, and desire to stand, and be tried by
that; for since it was Once delivered so, as not to be altered, the Church of
Rome having made both Additions to it, and Variations from it, stands justly
charged with that Novelty, which she would fix upon us. When our Savior
reproves the corrupt Practices, and Glosses of the Jews, he reduces them to
the true and Ancient standard, and tells them, from the beginning it was not
so. And upon many of the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, we may
write the same Remark, and show, that from the beginning it was not so.

We can tell by what steps the Papal Grandeur advanced, and by what unjust
Encroachments and undecent huffs and insolences, they enlarged their
dominions, and enslaved the Church, and imperiously trampled upon Princes. We
can tell them the Time, and prove it when they please, that the Bishops of Rome
were more tractable and humble, and that the world did not take them to be such
uncontrollable Pieces, as afterward they grew up to be. Gregory the Great
ownes the Emperor Mauritius, for his Lord and Master, and declares him to be
the Forerunner of Antichrist, that desires the Title of Ecumenical Pastor, or
universal Bishop. And he held the Chair in the end of the Sixth Century. But
the world is much altered with them since, as to both these points; and now
they assume a power of deposing Princes, and to dispose of the Kingdoms of the
earth at their pleasure. Now, it is an Article of their Faith, that the Pope is
Head of the Universal Church. A thing that was not thought to be so from the
beginning. For Saint Chrysostom in his Exposition of that place, [Rom. 13. 1.
Let every soul be subject to the Higher Powers, says, that the Apostle enjoynes
this to all, both to Priests, and Monks, and not to Lawmen only, (...), etc.
Although thou be an Apostle, although thou be an Evangelist, although thou be a
Prophet, or whatsoever else thou art.] And for the other Point the Council of
Calcedon determined, that the Sea of Constantinople should have Conc. calced.
^a^. 2^.
[(...), equal privileges with old Rome,] which they never had done, had the
Pope then been thought the Supreme Head of the Church, and Christ's only Vicar
upon earth.

Again, we can tell them, when the Worship of Images was first Authorized in
their Church, and it is notoriously known, that the Second Council of Nice, was
the first that determined for it, and that was past the middle of the Eighth
Century.

Their Prodigious Doctrine of Transubstantiation, (the peculiar Doctrine of the
Church of Rome) was first defined by Gregory the Seventh, but not completely
settled, nor the Name brought in till Innocent the Third, in his Lateran Council
in the year 1215. A thing utterly unknown to all the Fathers of the eight first
Centuryes, and a Name so strange and unusual, that a learned French Antiquary
observes, that no Ancient Dictionary, Mr. Spon M. S.
either Greek or Latin, has the word, or any other that so much as contains,
or expresses the Sense of it, not in two so Copious Languages.

And so for their gainful Doctrine of Purgatory, it is evident that the
Primitive Times, as well as the Scriptures, are ignorant of it, and utterly
strangers to it. And it is somewhat a puzling Question, that the forementioned
Antiquary asks Le Chese, (this present French King's Confessor) that if the
Doctrine of Purgatory be Ancient, and not of a late Coinage and Date, why in
all the Ancient Epitaphs before the seventh or eighth Century, we never meet
with an Orate pro anima, or a Requiescat in them? And yet now no Roman Epitaph
is made without them.

Their Half Communion, its well enough known, was first determined in the
Council of Constance, and they had the face to do it, with an non obstante to
our Saviors own Institution, and to the Practice of the primitive Church. And
though they grant, that Jesus Christ administered it to his Disciples in Both
Kinds, and in the primitive Church the Faithful used to partake of it so; yet
ad evitandum aliqua pericula, and scandala, to avoid some imaginary Dangers and
Scandals, they would venture to determine contrary to the Practice of the
Church, and the Institution of Christ. And this bold Council sat not, till the
Beginning of the Fifteenth Century.

And so (would my Time and your Patience serve) I could easily go over all the
Articles in difference between us; and either tell you the Time, when they were
first introduced, and the Council that gave them Authority; or prove, that
there was a Time long before them, when the contrary Practice was in use, and
when the Doctrines which we Contend for, in opposition to theirs, were received
and embraced.

Is this then the Faith once delivered to the Saints, that neither the
Scriptures nor Antiquity knew any thing of? Is this the Doctrine of Christ and
his Apostles, which is so lately crept forth, and that in Contradiction to what
they delivered on Record in Scriptures? These must therefore needs be the
effects of a Prodigious Insolence, for Men to take upon them to add to, or
alter what God has established, and first Themselves to depart from that
Faith, which was once (that is, immutably and unalterably) delivered to the
Saints, and then to require Others, under pain of Damnation, to go along with
them.

No Church or Society of men upon earth, either has or can have sufficient
Authority or power, to Coin new Articles of Faith, and give them a sacred
Stamp, and make them Obligatory to the Consciences of men. Every Church has a
sufficient Power in matters of Discipline for her own Government, and can make
Laws, and Cannons relating to Decency and Order, which the Members of that
Church are bound to Obey, not only for Wrath, but Conscience sake: and for
this we need not go to Rome, nor are we bound to stand to her Determinations;
we have all the just Rights, and Power of a Church, within our selves; and what
have we to do with Rome, or Rome with us? But to add more Articles of Faith to
the Apostles Creed, and to require those to be believed, and received with the
same Faith, and Assent of mind, that the others are (as Pope Pius the Fifth,
falsely so called, has impiously done) it is an intolerable Encroachment upon
the Authority of the Lord Jesus Christ, and a wide Deviation from that Doctrine
once delivered to the Saints, and so delivered, as not to be altered.

For this is the Faith, that we are concerned in, and the only Faith that we
are to Contend for; that which was delivered to the Saints, that which was
preached by the Apostles, and believed and embraced by the Saints, those
ancient and eldest Christians. What is Contrary to this we ought to reject, and
for this we ought to Contend; that we may retain, and preserve entire and pure,
the True Religion, the truly Ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic Faith.

And this for the First thing, What we must Contend for.

2. The Second thing in the words to be enquired into, is, How this Faith must
be Contended for?

And this is worthy our most serious Enquiry. For the Faith we must Contend
for, being a matter of so great Concern, the Manner of our Contending for it,
is of important Consideration also; for if we Contend not as we ought, or
otherwise than we ought, we may lose what we strive for, instead of obtaining
it; for it has been known, that some have so Contended for the Faith, and by
such Ways and Means, as have been a real Prejudice to it; and they have either
lost their Religion, or showed that they had None, while they Contended for it,
by unjust and irreligious Ways. And this indeed as much as any thing proves,
that the Religion which the Church of Rome Contends for, and would impose upon
the world, is none of the Faith, Once delivered to the Saints; in that she
uses such irreligious, and unconscionable Methods, to impose and Crow'd it
upon us by. It Is fit for the Turkish Alcoran to be presented upon the point of
the Sword, and false Religions have need of external Force and Violence, to
introduce and settle them in the world; but this is so contrary to the Progress
and Proceedings of the Gospel, and the Ways of its Advancement, that this alone
is a Disparagement to any Religion, that it needs such Arts and Methods to
establish it.

The Apostles went about doing good, and convinced the world, of the Truth of
what they said, by the power of Reason, and the evidence of Miracles from
above. But if any were so Obstinate, as to resist the Evidence by which they
spoke, and would not give heed to the Truth they delivered, they shook off the
dust of their feet, as a witness against them, and left them (as a just
punishment of their Obstinacy) to perish in their Unbelief; but we never read,
that they Cut their Throats, or fired that house or City, that would not
receive them.

When they were in their State of Infancy (as to their Faith) and did no^
understand Themselves, nor the Nature of that Faith and Religion, they were
afterward to preach, they were once indeed for fetching Fire from Heaven, to
consume the Samaritans, that would not receive their Master; but then they
would not have made the Fireballs themselves, but have used only, what God
would have sent them from Heaven. But how sharply does our Savior repress
their blind, and ignorant Zeal? Luke 9. 55, 56. But he turned, and rebuked
them, and said, ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of; for the Son of Man
is not come to Destroy men's lives, but to Save them. But now how Contrary must
that Religion be to that, which they preached, and our Savior ordained, which
requires so contrary Methods to introduce, and advance it. Rome says, Come to
us, for Salvation is only with us, and its necessary in order to it, to be
Subject to us, and to Believe, and receive all that we tell you; but if we
refuse, (as it is fit we should do) till we see better Reason (for Saint John
bids us not to believe every 1 John chap. 4. v. 1.
Spirit, but to try the Spirits) they instead of convincing us by Reason or
Scripture, or any other sufficient Argument, will dash out our Brains, and
fire our Towns; and thus Contend for the Faith, and plant their Religion, not
by the Bible but the Sword, and use all the ways of Pagan and Turkish Violence
and Cruelty, to subdue us to their Opinions, and make us believe.

Surely these are not of the temper of the Holy Jesus, who was Meek and
Merciful, however they may call themselves by his Name; and undoubtedly that
Religion can be none of his, which inspireth the minds of those who profess it,
with so much barbarous and bloody Cruelty. Can that Religion be true, which
must be settled and propagated by Violence and Mischief? and is that the Gospel
which makes its Entrance, by a direct Violation of all the Rules of Equity,
Honesty or Humanity? Is this the Religion of the Holy Jesus, which proceeds and
advances it self, by a direct Contradiction to his Practice, and a perfect
Violation of all his Laws and Precepts? And is this the Way of Salvation, for
men to do all that, for which God himself has told us, we shall be damned? Is
Murder, and Treason, is Sedition and Rebellion, any ways consistent with the
Sentiments of a true Piety? Or is this a Religion of God's Appointment?
Undoubtedly these things make it manifest, that such a Religion is not from
God, nor is the Spirit by which such men Act, either guided or inspired by him.

The True Religion, and the Faith once delivered to the Saints, teaches us, to
be Meek and Merciful, and to endeavor the Good of all men. To reclaim our
Brother from the Error of his way, by Patience, Long suffering, and Doctrine:
To bear with him, and instruct him, and not to dash out his Brains, if we
cannot Confute him. It teaches us to be Just and Honest, Sober and Peaceable,
Obedient and Submissive to the higher Powers, and not to Lie, nor Equivocate,
nor to break the Bands of humane Society, nor to disturb the Peace and
Government of Kingdoms, and to confound the world. That Religion must not be
good, that must be thus advanced, and therefore I said, that it being our duty
to Contend for the Faith, it is considerable, How we must Contend for it, lest
we should think it Lawful, to Contend in such a way, as the true Faith will not
endure, to be maintained and defended by; and so either lose, or at least
disparage our Religion, instead of preserving, and honoring the Faith, by our
undue and irregular Contentions for it.

And to Answer this, it must be considered, that Saint Jude writes to men, that
were in no place of Authority in the State; For as the Christian Religion was
already under Persecution, and hated by Jew and Gentile, so were the
Professors of it, of no Esteem then in the world; there was no Christian
Magistrate who bare the Sword, nay the Sword was in the hand of the Enemies of
Religion, and the Magistrates were those who opposed and persecuted the True
Religion. So that it cannot be supposed, that the Apostle can here mean by this
Contending for the Faith, any opposing force with Force, or a drawing the Sword
for the defense of the Gospel; for he writes to those who had nothing to do
with the Sword, and exhorts those who were Subjects and not Princes.

For we may assure ourselves, that those who preached and wrote, by the
Inspiration of the same Spirit, could not contradict one another; and Saint
Peter and Saint Paul, having both expressly commanded a Subjection Romans 13. 1,
2. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
to the Supreme Magistrates and Powers, and those very Powers being at that
time Enemies to the Gospel, and Persecutors of the true Religion, whom (for all
that) they command so express a Subjection to; it cannot be supposed, that
Saint Jude, any more than they, could think Religion a just pretense for
Rebellion; or when he bids the Christians Contend for the Faith, could mean by
it, an Opposition to the Rulers and Governors, that God had set over them.

And the constant Practice of the Primitive Christians, which in this Case is
the best Interpreter of Saint Judes Exhortation, evidently shows, that they did
not thus understand it. They loved and prized the Faith, more than their lives,
and cheerfully suffered, and dyed for the Testimony of Jesus Christ; but they
never raised a Rebellion for the Defense of their Faith, or disturbed the
State, or opposed the Government, for its Advancement. No History, either Pagan
or Christian, gives any the least Hints, of any Sedition they raised, or any
the least Opposition they made to the Civil Governors, in all the time of the
Pagan Emperors; even when the Persecutions raged with the greatest Heat
against them, and they were Tortured and killed with the greatest Barbarity and
Inhumanity, only for being Christians. Justin Martyr in his Apology for the
Christians to the Emperor Antoninus Pius, and Tertullian in his to the
Emperor Severus, both mention the peaceable, and quiet Deportment of the
Christians under their Government, which had been too weakly (not to say
impudently) done, if the Christians had been guilty of disturbing the State, by
Sedition and Rebellion.

Nor was all this a Patience per force; their Numbers were neither so small,
nor their Courage so low, but they might have created Disturbance enough, had
they thought it Lawful so to proceed. Tertullian tells the Emperor Severus in
that excellent Apology he presented to him, in the behalf of the Christians,
that their Numbers and Courage were sufficient, to have stood upon their
Defense, and to make their Party good against their Enemies, if they thought it
Lawful so to do. [S^ enim hosts apertos, and non tantum vindices occultos
agere vellemus, deesset nobis vis Numerorum, and Copiarum, etc. For if we had a
mind to proceed by open Hostility, could we want either Numbers, or Forces
sufficient? we are but of yesterday, and yet we fill all Places, your Cities,
Islands, Castles, Corporations, Councils; your very Camps, and Tribes, and
Companies; your Palace, Senate, and Courts of Justice: Sola vobis Templa
relinquimus, only your Temples are free from us. Qui Bello non Idonei, etc?
For what War should we be unfit or unprepared, though our Forces were inserior,
who so willingly lay down our lives, if in our Religion, it were not more
Lawful to be killed than to kill.] Nay, he says, that without a Rebellion they
could Ruin their Persecutors, only by withdrawing from them; and if so great a
number of men, should retire into some remote Corner of the World, their very
Recess would be a punishment to them. [Proculaubi^^ ^xpavissetis ad Solitudinem
vestram, ad silentium re^^^^, et Stuporem quendam quasi mortuae Urbis;
Doubtless (says he) you would be astonished, at the Solitude we should leave
you in, at the silence and stillness of your City, as if it had expired at our
departure.]

But Christian Fortitude in those days, ran in a stream quite contrary to
Violence and Resistance; and the Honor and Advantages of suffering for Jesus
Christ, and the Testimony of a good Conscience, were then thought to be so
great, that no dread of Death, nor probability of Prevailing, could tempt them
to such a Course. And of this we have an eminent Instance in the Thebean Vid.
Grot. de jure Bell. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Legion, which consisted of six thousand six hundred and sixty six men (all
Christians) who in the Reign of Maximian laid down their Arms, and were every
man cut off and Martyred, rather then they would sacrifice to Idols at the
Emperors Command.

And when the Empire was now turned Christian, and their Numbers mightily
increased, when all Offices and Employments, and all places of Trust were
happily lodged in Christians hands: Julian comes to the Throne, a professed
Apostate, one that renounces the Faith he had early imbibed, and openly
declares for Paganism, and sets up their horrid Rites, and Superstition again;
and yet no man opposes him by Violence and Arms, no Sedition, nor Mutiny is
raised against him, though the strength of the Empire was then in Christian
hands.

Prayers and Tears to GOD, and earnest Entreaties, and humble Apologies to the
Emperors, were the Ways and Methods, of the Defense of the Faith, in Ancient
times; and till the Popes had debauched the Minds of men, and for their own
Interest, taught them to despise the secular Power, we never heard of a
Rebellion raised in the world, upon the account of Religion, nor of the Defense
of the Faith, by Force and Arms. This is a way which the Religion of the Holy
Jesus abhors, and this is not the way, that Saint Jude here Exhorts, us to
Contend for the Faith in.

For though he uses the word (...), which does undoubtedly refer to those
Exercises, which were so famous, and so much in use among the Grecians, and are
called by them the (...), consisting of those manly Exercises of running,
wrestling, and Combating; yet it is as evident, that in the use of the word, he
does not refer to the Force and external Violence, used in those Cames; but to
the Diligence, Industry, Patience and Sufferance of the Combatants. Thus it is
plain Saint Paul uses the word, to signify the Patience, and Phil. 1. 30. ^
Tim. 4. 7.
Constancy of the Saints, in their spiritual Race and Combat, in their
sufferings and endurance of Labor and Persecution; and thus our Savior
applies it, Luke 13. 24. And I believe it will no where be found in the New
Testament, to signify the Resistance or Contention, of external Force and
Violence.

Not but that I think it Lawful for the Magistrate, to draw the Sword in
defense of the True Religion. For he is the Minister of God -- and bears not
Romans 13. 4.
the Sword in vain. If the Pope, as he has formerly done, should give away
this Kingdom to him that can catch it, or set any Prince a work (as he loves to
do) to force us into a Subjection to him; no doubt the King may Lawfully oppose
Force with Force, and defend his Kingdom from every Invasion; God has put the
Sword into his hand, to manage for the Defense of Religion, as well as of the
People. But then this is the Case of the Magistrate, whose the Sword is, and
makes nothing to those, who have none of that Power committed to them. To these
the Practice of our Savior, who refused to be rescued by Saint Peter's Sword,
and the Command he gave with the Reason of it, Mat. 26. 52. Put up again thy
Sword into its place; for all they that take the Sword, shall perish by the
Sword: is a sufficient direction and Rule, what they have to do, and shows them
how dangerous, and unlawful it is to be meddling.

How then must we Contend for the Faith? Surely in the head of all our
Endeavors, our Prayers and Tears ought first to be placed, as the Ancient Arms
of the Primitive Church, and those most successful Weapons, with which they
Encountered the Rage of the Enemy, and by which their Patience and Constancy
triumphed in the end. Our Faith is from God; and to whom therefore should we go
for its Defense, but to him who can with ease defeat the Designs of the Enemy,
and infatuate the Counsels of their best Contrivance; who as the Prophet says,
Frustrateth the tokens Isa. 44. v. 25.
of the Liars, and makes Diviners mad, that turns wise men backwards, and
makes their knowledge foolish. If he be among us, we need not fear all the
Efforts of Rome, or Hell; but if he forsake us, our Defense is gone, and our
Glory departed, and Ichabod may be written upon all our pleasant places.

But other Means are to be added to these also. And every one in his several
Sphere, must employ the Talent that God has given him; for God loves not the
Lazy Suppliant, nor will hear the Desires of those, that will always lie still
and Cry, God help.

The Magistrate must Contend in his Sphere, for the Defense of the Church, as
well as the Government of the State; the Preservation of the true Religion, as
well as the Peace, is within the exercise of his Authority, and ought to be
part of his Care: He Contends for it by a tenderness and Care over all its
Concerns, and by Restraints upon the Petulancy and Unruliness of men, who would
either Corrupt the Doctrine, or disturb and interrupt the Peace of the Church.

And here is also Your Sphere to Act (my most Honorable Lords) to whose Wisdom
and Skill the Execution of those Laws are Committed, by which our Religion has
hitherto been defended, and so happily flourished. I Shall not presume to
direct, or advise, or Exhort you; the Knowledge we have of Your Love to
Religion, and of your Faithfulness in Your Trust, will not suffer us to fear,
that You will be negligent, in the Defense of that Religion, which you Love so
well; or let those Laws which are so great a part of Your Trust, be baffled or
buried, on which the Safety, and Peace, and Security of our Faith, at this
time, so much depends.

The Minister must Act in his Sphere; and he Contends for the Faith, by
declaring the mind of God in Truth, and expounding sincerely the Oracles of
GOD. By opposing and convincing Gainsayers, and defending the Truth from
Heresy and Error, and the Sophistical Tricks of those, who lie in wait to
deceive, and as the Apostle says, Lead Captive Silly women, laden with 2 Timothy
3. 6.
sins.

And All men (as Christians) must Contend in a way, suitable to them as such,
by Knowledge and Practice, by Love and Sufferings, and all the Methods that are
Proper and Lawful, and suit with Christians, considered as such, in their
private Sphere and Capacity. And to these in this Circumstance it is, that
Saint Jude directs his Exhortation, and persuades them to Contend for the
Faith. That is, exhorts them to an earnest, and immutable Adherence to it, so
as not to forgo it, for all that the Enemy can do. Neither to be scared out of
it by Dread ^r Danger, by Violence or Death; nor to be cheated and wheadled out
of it, by the Insinuations of those that lie in wait to deceive, and [Creep in
unawares] that deprave the Faith, and corrupt the Doctrine of the Gospel, and
[turn the grace of God into Lasciviousness] or exchange the Truth of God, for a
Lie. And thus to secure our standing in the Faith, and to preserve that
Religion, and Purity of Doctrine, that God has blessed us with, no Ways are
more Suitable and Proper, or likely to be more Successful, than these.

1. To understand well, and be thoroughly informed, in the Principles and
Fundamentals of that Religion, which we profess. For the greatest, and most
successful Conquests, that in any age the Enemy has obtained, have ever been
upon those that are weak, and Unstable in the Faith: the Wavering mind hangs
trembling, in an equal Suspense between Truth and Falsehood, and these hardly
escape the Assaults, or stand the Shock of those, who lie in wait to deceive.
And therefore the Methods of the Enemy have usually been, to pick out those to
subvert, whom they see Ignorant and Unstable; as knowing these to be the most
liable, and likely to be brought to their Lure. And indeed, how should it be
otherwise; for they that are not well informed, in what they profess, may
easily enough be persuaded, that their Profession is Erroneous; and the Best
Religion may Easily be disparaged to them, that do not understand its Nature,
and have not enquired far enough into it, to discern the Beauty and excellency
of it.

And doubtless, this has given the Church of Rome, a vast Advantage against
us; who know well enough how to improve it, in that so many are strangers, to
the Principles of that Religion, which they profess, as having never been
Instructed in them, nor taken the pains to Examine, what it is they pretend to
believe. Too many have satisfied themselves, with being of that Profession, in
which they were born and brought up, without taking the trouble, to understand
what that Profession is, or to have any other Argument for it, than their
Education.

And therefore, when I reflect upon that Ignorance in Religion, that is growing
up, and that little Concern or Regard, that men have to be well versed, or
informed in the Fundamentals of it; instead of wondering, that Rome has gained
so many from us, I only wonder that they have gained no more. And I very much
fear, that if the time should ever come, that men might with Safety, or
advantage, change the Church of England for that of Rome; there are too many,
that would need but little Persuasion; and all because they so little Know the
Truth, the Beauty and Excellency of that Religion, which now they profess.

2. To Practice seriously and Conscientiously, what we profess. To hold the
True Faith in Notion, and to deny it in Practice, is to pull down with One
hand, what we erect with the Other; and to subvert and betray the Faith, that
we seem to Contend for. And indeed, it is not easy to suppose, that a man
should be resolute to Suffer for any Religion, nor stand any ways Vigorously in
the Defense of it, who will not submit to the Power of it, nor will let his
Life be regulated, nor his Lusts be mortified by it. To the Profane person, all
Religions are alike; and that which bids fairest for his Interest, or is most
suitable to his Inclinations, Carries it with him. It is the Practice of
Religion that renders it Truly sweet, and pleasant to the Professors of it;
and none but those, can heartily love the Faith, and be Zealously concerned for
its Defense, that have Experienced the Power and Influences of it, in
themselves.

To Practice therefore what we profess, is a considerable means of Defense, for
the Religion we own; for this engages God on our side, and lets the Enemy see,
it is in vain to Tamper, or be meddling. For to live up to the Principles of
our Profession, and to adorn our Religion with a suitable Conversation, is to
bring forth Fruit, and to glorify GOD; and where these are found, the End is
answered, for which the Gospel is bestowed; and so long the Candlestick shall
not be removed, while People rejoice, and walk in the Light. And therefore it
is observable, that the Removal of the Means of Grace, and an Eclipsing the
Light of the Gospel, has ever in all places been preceded by a Decay of Piety,
and an Inundation of Profaness. This pulls down the Wrath of GOD, and that
makes the Cunning, and Malice of men effectual; God will walk no more among
them, that walk contrary to him; and they that will Practice no Religion, may
easily enough be perverted to Any, how irrational or absurd soever it be. God
grant, that that Coldness, Looseness, and Profaness, that so universally
over-spreads this Nation, be not too sad a Prognostic, and preparatory to the
Departure of the Gospel from among us. For this our Savior Threatens the Jew,
Matthew. 21. v. 43. Therefore I say unto you, the Kingdom of God s^all be taken
from you, and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. Our
Provocations are too like theirs; God grant our Punishment be not the same too!

3. A Christi^n love, and Union among our selves: This is an excellent Means of
defense of the Faith, and a pertinent and prevalent Method of Contending for
it. By this we secure our selves from all Assaults without; and while Love
compacts and cements the Body, it makes it impregnable to all the fruitless
Attempts of the Enemy. Our Unity would be our Strength, as well as as our
Beauty; and if our Adversaries could not Create a Party, and form Divisions
among us, they would sit down in Despair of ever prevailing, and would be less
frequent and brisk in their Attacks.

But while we Bite and Devour one another; while we Rage, and Rail at, and
mutually Subvert, and Undermine each other; whilst fierce Debates, and
Unchristian Censures, and Spite, and Malice, and Wrath do swell the Spleen,
and Exasperate the Minds of men one against another; we reproach our Religion
by an unsuitable Deportment, and expose our selves an easy Prey, to the Cunning
and Malice of our Enemies. For the Gospel we Contend for, is a Gospel of Peace;
and the God we serve, is the God of Peace; and the Badge of Christ's Disciples,
is to love one another. If then to Contradict the Design of the Gospel, be the
nearest way to hasten its departure, in vain do men pretend a zeal of Religion,
in Bitterness and Animosity; or give out, they Contend for the Faith, while
they violate the Laws of Christian Charity, and Cast away the bands of Concord,
Love and Union. It is much to be feared, lest God in his just Indignation at
these things, should let in the Common Enemy among us, and Cure the Rancor, and
take off the edge of our spirits, and teach us more Kindness, and a more tender
regard one for another, by involving us all in the same common Calamity, and
judgment.

I Am sure nothing more weakens our strength, nor more roundly, or successfully
advances the Projects of the Enemy, than our fierce and unmerciful Contests
one with Another. We pull down our Defense with our own hands, and our selves
sap, and undermine those Walls, and Foundations, which they so much desire to
see Levelled with the ground. Hence it is, that Rome has always been
industrious, and vigilant to Create, and foment Divisions among us; for these
present them with those advantages against us, which all their own Prowess, or
Policy could never have procured for them: But a Christian Love, and firm Union
among our selves, would be no less their Terror, then their Confusion.

4. To suffer resolutely the worst that man can inslict, rather than forgo our
Profession, or deny the Faith. This is that manner of Contention, which I
conceive the Apostle Chiefly aims at in the Text, by the use of the word
(...), as I have already intimated; and this is that Way in which every
particular person may for himself, and in his own Sphere victoriously Contend.
This will render all the Attempts of men in vain, and whether they Fawn or
Rage, a mind resolved to endure the utmost, rather than forgo the Faith, will
weather the storm, and stand the shock, and come off Triumphant in the end. For
the Rage, and violence of men, may bind the Hands, or force the Body; but the
mind is free, and no Compulsions can debauch the Conscience. They Can reach
this Temporal life, and tear the heart out of the Body; but the Soul is beyond
their reach, and can never tear the Love of Christ, and his Truth, out of the
Heart that is not willing to part with it.

When therefore all other means of Contending for the Faith, either fail, or
are useless, through the Anger of GOD, or the Perverseness of Men, the good
Christian in his particular Sphere may Contend for it, and be sure to preserve,
and keep it entire and inviolate, by Patience and Constancy, and a mind
prepared to suffer, whatever the Rage, or Malice of Men can inflict. For he
that Can expose his Fortune to the Rapaciousness of Men, his Body to the
Tormentor, and his Life to the death, need not fear what man can do, but may be
sure to preserve his Conscience pure, and his Faith sound unto the end.

And though Flesh and Blood may Recoile, and fancy this Method least of any;
yet the Christian is supported, with the greatest reason that Can be, to
encourage him to it. This is the Path that our Savior trod before us, and
through Tribulation and Sufferings, the Captain of our Salvation was made
Perfect. He endured the Cross despising the shame, and is set down at the right
hand Heb. 12. 2.
of the Throne of God. This way those great and famous Worthies in the Gospel,
those Primi Pilares Fidei nostrae, the Ringleaders of our Faith, stood up for
the Faith, and Sealed it with their dearest Blood, [and they loved not their
lives unto the death.] And to the same Engagements Rev. 12. 11.
our Savior encourages us, and bids his Disciples, [fear not them which kill
the Body, but are not able to kill the Mat. 10. 28.
Soul.] And the Apostle proposes the example of our Masters Sufferings, as the
support of our Faith, and Courage in the greatest Trials. [For consider him
(says Saint Paul) that endured such Contradiction of sinners against himself,
lest ye be weary and faint in your minds.] This the Heb. 12 3
thing we Contend for, deserves at our hands, for the Faith is Precious, and
the Testimony of a good Conscience, out-weighs the Terrors of death, and the
Love of God is better than life it self: And this by our Covenant with God, we
engage our selves to; and we Cannot be Christ's Disciples upon Terms short of
these. He that loves his Life more then Christ, is unworthy to be a a Disciple
of Christ; and he that for Fear denies the Faith, denies Christ the Lord and
Founder of it. And though our Master does not always Call his servants to
Heaven, in a Fiery Chariot, and in Tribulation, and sufferings; yet he expects
that they should all of them be always ready, and resolved to go that way if he
calls them; and he will receive none that decline that way when he calls them
by it. For he has said [if any man come to me, and hate not his Father, and
Mother, and Wife and Children Luke 14. 26. 27
and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my
Disciple; and whosoever does not bear his Cross, and come after me cannot be my
Disciple.] Let us then rather dread losing the Faith, than our Lives; and
rather fear being discarded by our great Master, turned out of his Service, or
disowned by him, then to be vexed and worried, and killed by men. If God calls
us to suffer, let us not think [strange at the Fiery Tryal] as Saint Peter
calls 1 Pet. 4. 12.
it; but with Patience, and Courage obey the Call, and with a firm Mind, and
undaunted Resolution, hazard our lives, to save our Souls; and quit the World,
to preserve the Faith.

The Enemy is at hand, and lodged under our very Walls; what God may permit, we
know not; what they would do, is now sufficiently discovered and demonstrated
to every one, that is not of the Party, or willing to be imposed upon. It Is time
to think seriously of our Condition, and to fortify our minds with Courage and
Constancy against the impending Evil. It Is time that our Breaches were Healed,
and our Contentions among our selves were Banished, that we might all unite in
the Common Defense; and all Combine (as one man) to Contend earnestly for the
Faith which was once delivered to the Saints.

FINIS.

