THE PRESBYTERIANS Remonstrance and Declaration TO The People of this NATION:
AND Their Desires concerning the Parliament, His Excellency the Lord Genesis
Cromwell, and the rest of the Officers of the Army.

WITH A wonderful Prophecy, presented to M. Love in the Tower of London, the
same day that he was brought to the place of Execution.

By Mr. Smith the Minister, who on Monday night last, being the 22. of this
instant month, was buried in Saint Giles Cripplegate Church London.

LONDON, Printed for G. Wharton. 1651.

To the Reader.
IT is given in charge by the blessed Apostle Paul, That we mark them that
cause divisions, contrary to the Doctrine which we have learned, and avoid
them; Sure then, we should observe them that have it in design, to promote
union, according to the Doctrine we have received and acknowledge and embrace
them, and esteem them very highly in love for their works sake. Such is the
worthy Author of this ensuing Subject, who (with others of his brethren) looks
with a sad heart upon the heart-divisions of our times, and laments to see such
as are happily divided from the world, unhappily divided among themselves. The
work and labor of love, which he has here performed, is a labor for Love
that is the subject matter of his discourse; a lovely argument worthy the
handling, a precious grace most worthy the possessing; so much as we have of
it, so much we have of God; so much as we express of it, so much we express
of God; for God is Love. High and honorable are the Elegies and Encomiums
given of it in Scripture, such as set forth the excellency, and usefulness of
it; to account them then here, would be to anticipate what the following
Subject will more fully and fruitfully perform: This only would I say, it is
the spiritual Cement, by which believers, as Materials in a building* are
compaginated; that spiritual Ligament, by which* as members in a body, they are
united: And this is the happy agreement between Faith and Love, as touching
union that Love should y^eld it up to Faith, to be the blessed instrument of
our union with Christ our Head in a mystical way* and that says should yeeld^i
up to Love, to be the grace, that unites us one to another in a moral way.

The Author holds out love in the ensuing discourse, according to the guidance
of the Text he handles, under the notion of a way wherein we are to walk; a
good way it is, the good old way, or if you must have a new way, the Gospel
new way. The old Commandment is for it, the new Commandment is for it also. It
is a right way, a safe way, a plain way, a pleasant way, and in a good sense, a
broad way, large enough: were we in it, we should not need to justle and
shoulder one another as we do. Pity it is that such a way is not better known,
more traveled. But so it is, we may justly compl^ine, as of old, many walk,
but so as they wander from the right way. I say, as the Prophet of old, This is
the way, walk in it. Every step we take in this way, is a part of payment of a
debt we owe, which though we are required to be still owing, and never in
paying, we are too far in arrears one to another already; let us take heed
least our uon payment bring us under an arrest, and cast us into prison.

A wordmore, and the part^stall speak, We all profess to be for heaven, Love
must be our way to bring us thither, Love must be our business, when we come
there, the work in heaven to all eternity shall be to be reciprocally acting
and expressing love. Let us do that now which we hope to do for ever, But I
forbear to enlarge in this kind, referring you to the following discourse,
which I heartily commend to the perusal and practice of the godly: apply to
it, it will be found of precious use, to set us into the way wherein we are to
walk, to hand us up into that Chariot which is paved with Love.

Samuel Coleman.

The Presbyterians Remonstrance:
THe High Court of justice having denounced Sentence against M. Love, he was
remanded back again to the Tower of London, where M. Smith (a pious and
religious Divine) gave him a visit, saying; Ah, my dear Brother, and precious
Saint of Jesus Christ, The Lord strengthen you in this your day of temptation
and tribulation: and blessed be the name of the most High God, who has ordered
and disposed of all things, as seems most requisite and sitting in his Divine
Power and Wisdom; for, indeed, you know that it is the usual way of the Lord to
take away from off the Earth his precious Saints and Servants, before the
casting down of his judgments; and to remove those bright Stars (whom the World
are not worthy of) to a higher Orb. And truly thus much I dare divine, That
when you are gone, I shall not stay long after. Which propheticks proved true;
for immediately after the execution of M. Love, he was exceedingly troubled in
mind; And being asked the reason, of so sudden a change, and melancholy
disposition, He answered, It was the Will of God so to translate him; and that
he never should be well, till he was translated from an Earthly Tabernacle to a
Heavenly Paradise, to be singing Hallelujan with his brother in the presence of
an innumerable Guard of Angels, etc. Soon after it pleased God to afflict him
with a great Visitation, where he used these divine expressions in the presence
of many Friend, and others.

Mercy and peace, and love be multiplied.
For, says he, The Scripture tells us, That many waters will not quench love
Cant. 8. 7. And experience tells us, That much fire will not kindly love;
especially such fire as we have among us, the sire of contention, (I mean) much
augmented, inflamed, and blown up, by the bellows of unnecessary and
unprofitable Disputes; which are carried on with much heat, most men contesting
rather for victory then verity; few arguing for God, fewer according to God:
Hence is many different Opinions, which beget so many difference in Opinions
amongst us; That as in the primitive times the beloved Disciple was banished;
so in our times, the love of Disciples is banished; Sad times! When so sweet a
thing, so choice a grace, is so little set by: when men study more to gratify
Satan by dividing, then to please Jesus Christ by uniting; when instead of
helping we are hurting; instead of hearing with, we are binding of one another.
But the Lord manifest his love to you all, and teach you to manifest your love
to him, to the Truth, to one another, and to all the Saints; and grant, that
the Parl. his Excellency and Officers, may be Jethroes Justices, men of
courage, fearing God, dealing truly, and hating covetousness. Alas! We see that
the Ax is even laid to the Root, and many thereby have undergone an untimely
death: But happy are all those that suffer for the Cause of Christ; nay, thrice
happy are they who suffer for Him, that so willingly laid down his life for
them. O! consider, I beseech you, the torments he endured:

1. Jesus Christ died a shameful death, he died as a Malefactor, among
Malefactors, and yet innocent; Isa. 53. 12. He was numbered with transgressors.
Crucified between two Thieves, as if he had been the Captain or chief over
them, yet the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 2. 22. He did no sin, neither was guile
found in his mouth, though he were slaughtered, yet he was a Lamb without
blemish, and without spot.

2. Jesus Christ died an accursed death, and that not only according to man's
conceit, or opinion, but according to the decree of the divine Law, Deuteronomy. 20.
23. he that is hanged, is accursed of God: Which the Apostle brings in applying
it to Christ, Gal. 3. 13. Who was made a curse for us: for it is written,
cursed is every one that hangs on the tree.

3. Jesus Christ died a painful death, and this will appear in several
particulars: 1. He was scourged, Mat. 27: 26. When he had scourged Jesus, he
delivered him to be crucified. This scourging was painful; for Christ was not
scourged virga with a rod, but stagello with a whip or scourge, which pierced
the more, and put him to more pain. 2. His head was crowned with thorn, Mat.
27. 29. They platted a Crown of thorns, and put it upon his head: These thorns
pierced his temples, and this must needs aggravate his pain and misery. 3. His
hands and feet were nailed, which was very grievous, for those members being
full of nerves, and sinews, they feel torture so much the more. 4. He died a
lingering death, sudden death is not so painful as a lingering death; to be
dying, but not dead, is painful indeed; when he was nailed to the Cross he
was not presently dead. Secondly, Let us consider his inward soul-sufferings,
and these we shall look upon under three heads.

1. Consider what temptations he lay under, as soon as he was baptized and set
apart for his office, Satan tempted him, Mat. 4. But now he being ready to
depart the world, and to complete his conquest, Satan set upon him with fresh
force, this was in his Agony, Luke 22. 44:

2. Consider what sense of wrath he went under, he was wont always to have his
Father smiling on him, now he finds him frowning on him, discovering nothing
but anger and wrath, On him was laid the iniquity of us all, and the wrath
that was due to all the Elect for all their sin; yet all this Christ bears,
even all the wrath that the Father had to lay upon all the elect; yea, and he
cries out, Joh. 19. 28. I thirst: That i^, I thirst after the salvation of poor
sinners; I thirst after more wrath, if there be any more to be charged upon
them, I thirst to have it laid upon me; and then when there was no more to be
laid upon him, he cries out, ^etel^stai. It is finished; he would not off the
Cross till all were done, and then he gave up the Ghost. 3. Consider what
desentions he lay under, all comfort was gone, God seemed to have forsaken him;
Matthew. 27. 46. He cried with a loud voice saying, Eli, Eli, Lamasabachtheni, My
God why have thou forsaken me? Let misery be never so great, yet if we enjoy
the presence of God, it will make amends for all: hell would be no hell, if we
might enjoy Gods comfortable presence there: so let outward enjoyments be never
so great, yet without the presence of God they are nothing: heaven would be no
heaven, if the comfortable presence of God could not be enjoyed there: Here was
Christ's misery Judas betrays Pilat condemns, the Jews Crucify, and to make
up the measure, God forsakes him too. Oh what a sad thing was this!

Now, let us put all these together, and we must needs conclude, that Christ
loves us dearly. Jesus Christ the Son of God in whom was no iniquity; looks
upon us polluted creatures, that were his enemies; and is contented to suffer a
shameful, cursed, prinfnll death, and to be ^empted of Satan, to feel the
great wrath of his Fathers and to be forsaken of him also, and all this to do
us good, that we might escape these things, Oh inxpres-love. If Christ love us
dearly, then (...) love him entirely, we are not worthy of his love, but he is
worthy of ours. Did he so love us, as to give himself for us, and shall we not
so love him, as to give our selves to him. I beseech you by the mercies of God,
by the love of Chist that ye present you^selves a living sacrifice ^y him: Oh
that this love of Christ to us might constrain us to do, or suffer any thing
for him! Did Christ so great, so good: show such love to us, so weak, so
unworthy? and shall not we love one another? Did he that is God so holy, show
such great love to man so unholy, and shall not we love one another? Did he
that is so high above us, love us so low, so inferior to him, and shall not we
that are equals love one another? Did Christ give himself for us when he were
enemies and shall not we love one another whom he calls friends? Does Christ
love all that are godly, and shall not all that are godly love one onother?
This is the Apostles argument, 1 John 4. 11. If God so loved us we ought also
to love one another. Oh that it might be a prevailing argument with us, that it
might have such a power over us, as to persuade us to observe the text, To walk
(...) Love, as Christ has loved us.

FINIS.

