NO Faith or Credit To be given to PAPISTS.

BEING A DISCOURSE Occasioned by the Late Conspirators Dying in the Denial of
their Guilt. With Particular Reflections on the Perjury of UUill. Uiscount
Stafford, Both at his Trial, and in his Speech on the Scaffold In Relation to
Mr. STEPHEN DUGDALE, AND Mr. EDWARD TURBERVILL.

By JOHN SMITH Gentleman, Discoverer of the Popish Plot.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Cockerill at the Three Legs in the Poultry over
against the Stocks-Market. 1681.

To the Right Honorable Heneage Finch, Baron of DAVENTRY, Lord High Chancellor
of ENGLAND.
THE August Character which your Lordship bore, and the Lofty place which you
filled at the T^yal of my Late Lord Stafford, render it the indisp^nsible duty
of your Servant, with the humblest prostration to deposit these Pape^s at your
feet. And if ever my Lord Chancellor Finch had a Theater adopted to these
Qualifications of Nature and Acquisition which he is endued with. It was then
that he was furnished with an Illustrious occasion of displaying and
celebrating of them. And the most indelible Records of succeeding times, will
transmit to the admiration, as well as instruction of future Ages, with what
Wisdom and Justice you acquitted your self, and what Honor to the Envy -- of
such as may be called to Sit there in the like capacity, you entailed upon that
High and Reverable Court. The Speech which accompanied the Sentence pronounced
upon the Criminal before you, did at once declare the Courage, as well as the
Righteousness of him that spoke it. And for any now to doubt of a Popish
Conspiracy against the King, the Protestant Religion, and the Government
Established by Law in England, is not only to Arraign the most impartial, as
well as the greatest Tribunal under Heaven, but to contradict a person who
contrary to a thousand Secular Byasses, proclaimed the Sentiments of his own
Soul, in publishing the Sentence of that tremendous Judicature. Only let me
with all becoming humility, suggest to your Lordship the Sensations and
Resentments of the Papal Party, namely, That by the Condemnation of this one
Conspirator, you have not only Impeached, but in effect convicted the whole
Body of the Romish Faction in England; And for your Lordship henceforth to hope
to skrene your self from the effects of their Exasperation and Rage, but by a
zealous prosecution of them according to the demerit of their Crimes, were not
only to abandon your self to the neglect of your friends, but the Triumph of
your Enemies. For among all the sins which are enrolled for venial by the Roman
Church, there is no provision of pardon for him that condemns a Votary to the
Triple Crown, or adjudgeth those to the Gibbet, whose obedience to the
Infallible Chair obliged them to destroy Heretical Kings and Kingdoms. Nor was
it to the diminution of your Glory, that you made your Eloquence, wherewith at
other times you have blazoned many great and Noble Subjects, vail in that
Oration to the strength and uncontrollableness of Reason. And did not the
Formalities of Law require the Attestation and Testimony of Oral Witnesses, the
Arguments demonstrative of a Horrid Conspiracy, wherein the Papists are imbarkt
and involved, -- which enliven that great and solemn Speech, might without the
accession of any other Evidence, be sufficient to ground a Verdict upon of a
most execrable Treason against the whole Papal Community in these Kingdoms. The
Nation is now instructed upon whom to charge the Burning of London, and that
from the mouth of him, the Authority of whose Decrees give for the most part, a
terminative and final decision in more dubious cases; only let me subjoyn, that
you have hereby kindled those sparks in the hearts of all English men, as well
as Londoners, as nothing but the shedding the blood of the Authors, and
Instruments of that Conflagration by the hand of Justice, will be ever able to
quench or extinguish them. My Lord, that true Christian and Protestant Charity,
which taught you to give that Viscount an Interest in your prayers to God for
the pardon of those Crimes above, which the Law could not remit here below, and
who withal, neither begged, nor put any value upon them, will, I hope,
influence your Lordship to forgive the confidence of this Address.

Your Lordships most dutiful and obedient Servant, JOHN SMITH.

Reflections on the Sincerity of the Papists, Occasioned by the SPEECH of
William Late Viscount Stafford, On the Scaffold at Tower Hill.
1. IT IS matter of no small surprise, that not withstanding the Discovery of a
horrid Popish Plot against the King's Person, the Protestant Religion, and the
Government Established by Law, yet the Nation after the Expiration of two years
since the first Detection of it, does still lie as much exposed to all the
dangers which it threateneth, as the first hour when it was revealed. And that
which increases the amazement is, that neither the advantages which we have by
enjoying a Protestant King, nor the Counsels and assistance which three several
Parliaments have faithfully and cheerfully contributed, have been hitherto able
to secure our Religion, Lives and Liberties, from the hazards which this Papal
Conspiracy travelleth with, and would involve us under. But that which is most
of all astonishing, is the endeavor to discredit the belief of the Plot, and
this after it has not only been so fully and legally made evident by the
Papers and Letters of some of the Conspirators, the positive and concurring
Testimonies of many Witnesses; the Murders and Assassinations committed upon
several Magistrates, as well as others, for discharging their duty in the
detecting of it; but after it has been put beyond all rational contradiction
as well by the votes and resolves of so many Parliaments, as by the conviction
and Execution of diverse of the Traitors. And when the hiring and suborning
infamous persons to defame and weaken the credit of the witnesses, and the
tampering with some of themselves to corrupt and make them retract their
Depositions, had failed them in the accomplishing what they proposed unto
themselves, they thereupon persevere to foment and cherish a disbelief of the
Plot, by arguments derived from the Curses and Imprecations, whereby those that
were convicted of, and executed for it, did in the affirmation of their
Innocence, affront the Justice of the Nation with their last and dying breath.
For having found all their other Arts, and their manifold subornations, to
issue only in the prejudice of their Cause, and the punishment of those whom
they had employed; they are therefore forced to stake the Reputation of their
Religion and Church, and the Safety of their whole Party, upon the Oaths and
Curses, whereby those that were condemned, have in the contempt and defiance of
the clearest Evidence, and most Impartial Justice, endeavored to outface us
into a persuasion that they were guiltless, and suffered unjustly.

Now, though this may affect some easy and weak persons, with an opinion that
they died not so criminal as their Indictment and Sentence bore; yet it can
make no impression upon men acquainted with Books, or conversant and
experienced in the affairs and transactions of the world: Seeing it is easy
for such to know, that false Asseverations and Oaths are not only consistent
with, and justified by the Principles of the Papal Religion, but that they are
agreeable to what Popish Traitors, and other Malefactors within the Roman
Communion, have practiced upon less important Motives and Occasions; and that
likewise in their last hours when they were immediately after to appear before
the Divine Tribunal. And if the Romish Party in England, were not Judically
left to betray the highest Folly, as well as perpetrate the greatest Villainies,
it were not possible that after the two Learned Answers, which were published
against the Speeches of the five Jesuits, who suffered, June the 20th 1679. And
notwithstanding all the Infamy which has thereby redounded to their Cause,
they should still take Sanctuary in Falsehood and Perjury. But having no other
Vindication of their Innocence to betake themselves unto, they must either
acknowledge their Guilt to the eternal Reproach of their Religion, and the
hazard of their total Extirpation out of His Majesty's Dominions; or they must
successively as they come to be arraigned and executed, retreat to false and
horrid Oaths and Imprecations, for the preserving the credit of their Church,
and the protecting their friends from the punishments to which this Hellish
Conspiracy has made the greatest number, as well as the most considerable of
them obnoxious. Accordingly the Late Viscount Stafford has for the honor of
Mother Church, and the promoting the blessed Design of overthrowing the
Protestant Religion, and destroying such as profess it in these Nations, been
prevailed with to shut up the Course of a Traitorous and Criminal Life, with
most stupendous and astonishing Perjury, by assuming the Impudence to protest
and swear that he was Innocent of what he was brought to suffer for. And all
this after that the most Righteous and Impartial, as well as the highest and
most August Court in the World, had on the fairest Trial, and most convincing
Evidence that ever Offender was convicted or sentenced upon, found and
pronounced him guilty.

2. Now, though the Principles of the Papists be such, and the Ties they are
under from their interest so strong, that there is no hope or probability left
that any regard to Truth or Justice should influence the consciences of any in
that Communion to act otherwise, should they be brought to tread a Scaffold, or
mount a Ladder upon the score of the Present Plot, yet we will not Despair but
that the Infamy which by uncontrollable Evidence we shall fix and entail upon
the memory of the Late Viscount Stafford, may prevent such as hereafter may
come to suffer for this Conspiracy, from the indiscretion of dying like Fools,
and men regardless as much of their Names here, as of their Salvation
hereafter. But if that Infatuation and Obstinacy which has hitherto prevailed
over the Minds and Consciences of those of the Papal Faction, should so
powerfully continue upon them, as to render that part of my Design
unsuccessful, yet I comfort my self with the hopes of being able so far to
undeceive and instruct the rest of mankind, as to preserve and secure them from
giving faith and credit to Papists in any thing they shall say or swear for the
future; especially when their Personal Interest, or that of their Church
depends upon, or is concerned in it.

And indeed this Plot is already both so far unvailed and laid open, and so
demonstratively confirmed and proved, that none pretending to the name of a
Protestant, can bring into question either the Truth or Execrableness of it,
unless he be really a Papist, and assume the appellation of a Protestant only
as a safe and fashionable Vizard. Moreover, the Vindicating the Justice of the
Nation, and the clearing the Integrity and honor of that high, and so much to
be renowned Court of Judicature, before whom the Late Viscount Stafford was
arraigned, and by whom he was with so great solemnity pronounced guilty and
condemned, is a matter worthy of our utmost Zeal and Diligence, and the due
performing whereof we shall always esteem a piece of the greatest usefulness
we were capable of applying our selves unto in this World.

In fine, by discoursing this matter as it ought, and placing things in that
light and clearness which are due to them, we hope to render the Conviction of
those other Traitors, who either already are, or may come hereafter to be
Impeached upon the account of this Conspiracy, not only less liable to private
Censures and Obloquies, but more easy and dispatchable. For there are some
persons, who though they fully believe a Plot, that from the reverence which
they would be thought to bear to the solemn Appeals which the Accused make to
God of their Innocence, are withheld from giving that entire credit to the
Witnesses for the King, which the Authority of the Deponents Oaths, the
coherence of their Testimonies, the intrinsic Evidence of their Depositions,
the correspondence of one part with another, and many material and
circumstantial proofs seem to exact from them. But though not only weak and
well meaning men, but persons of great prudence and circumspection, and
thoroughly acquainted with all the measures according to which Justice is to be
administered, and public Trials of Offenders transacted, may suffer themselves
to be imposed upon by audacious Asseverations, before the guile and falsehood of
them be discovered; yet if they continue in their credulity after that the
highest blasphemy against whatsoever is and should be preserved sacred, comes
to be detected and laid open, they must not take it amiss if the generality of
mankind not only charge them with easiness of belief, and folly, but father
upon them Accusations that are more Gross and Criminal. Nor is there any
character so black, but that they deserve their names should be eternally
loaded with it, who not only suffer themselves to be wheedled by Asseverations
destitute of all grounds which should command respect and deferrence, but which
through the palpableness of their falsehood ought to raise a detestation and
horror in the minds of all those who maintain any veneration for God, whose
name is so audaciously and sacrilegiously prostituted to the attestation of
lies and perjuries.

3. And seeing the Papists have hitherto produced nothing toward their
Vindication from the Plot, that is material or consistent with it self, but
that those who have been brought to suffer for it, have asserted their
Innocence and denied their guilt when in the Immediate prospect of Death and
Eternity. It will not therefore be an unfit remarque in our very entrance on
the discourse of this matter, that their criminalness is not only made Evident
by the Testimony of many persons, who through the hopes they enjoy of the
continuation of their lives are capable of being tempted by the Expectation of
profit and greatness, but that it is confirmed and established upon the
Authority of Expiring and dying persons, who as they felt and saw themselves
out of all hopes of enjoying the pleasures of Life any longer, or compassing
riches or advancement to their friends or posterity, so they ought to be judged
delivered from the Impression of all sublunary Allurements in what they said,
and no man can suppose that any thing else should influence them to speak
falsely: Accordingly Mr. Bedlo in the view and approach of Death, affirmed both
upon the Faith of a Christian, and as he hoped for Salvation, that he had
wronged no man by his See his Examination in his last Sickness, p. 10.
Testimony, but that whatsoever he had testified concerning the Plot was true.
Shall the Advocates for the Conspirators, account themselves mightily
advantaged in weakening the Credit of the King's Witnesses, from this that there
is not that Faith to be given to men not only in the possession of Health, but
having all Legal security of their Lives, as there is to persons who both know
that they must immediately die, and that they are to appear before the great
and righteous God, who has threatened to punish all Falsehood and Perjury with
unconceivable torments? And shall not we esteem our selves mightily confirmed
as to the truth of the whole Evidence concerning the Plot, by finding that so
considerable a Witness both in detecting the parts and degrees of it, as well
as those that were engaged in its contrivarce and prosecution, should so
solemnly seal what he had before deposed with his last and dying Breath? Here
is one that has declared their Guilt, in the same Circumstances wherein the
advocats for Rome glory so much, that the condemned affirmed their Innocence.
So that all their Harangues concerning the Credit that is due to the
Asseverations of dying persons, are much more applicable to our Belief of the
Plot, on the dying Testimony of Mr. Bedlo, than it is possible they should be
to the weakening our Faith about it, upon their affirming themselves Guiltless,
who were so Legally Convicted and Condemned for it. For their Concernment to
Preserve the Reputation of their Religion, Secure the Liberties of many of
their Party, and the Hopes which they might flatter themselves with, to save
their own, together with a Desire of Recommending their memories to the
favorable Opinion of future Generations, may be conceived Sufficient Grounds
and Inducements to influence them to a Denial. Whereas Mr. Bedlo had no
Concernment of his own, no Expectations of advantage to accrue to his Friends
or Relations, no hopes of avoiding approaching Death, which might be conceived
to prevail upon him, to breath out his last words in the Affirmation of their
Guilt. Besides, the Principles of their Religion are such, as do both
countenance their Denial, and Justify them in it; whereas the Principles of
the Protestant Religion, wherein this Gentleman Dyed, do both prohibit and
condemn the asserting every thing that is false, let the Motives be never so
great and important. The disparity between the Asseverations of the one and of
the other, is so considerable upon this single and alone Account, that should
it be admitted that their Circumstances were the same in all other things, as
well as in that of Death immediately in their view, yet there can be no just
Competition between the weight and Authority of what they said in the
Attestation of their Innocence, and what he affirmed in the Confirmation of
their Guilt. And it is remarkable, that he not only Dyed in the profession of
the Protestant Religion, which precludeth all hopes of pardon to any that shall
persevere in malice, hatred, lying and slandering; but that during his whole
Sickness, he was in the Exercise of all seeming contrition and remorse, and so
far as any one could judge, in the practice of sincere and unseigned
Repentance, for all the sins whereby he had offended God, or injured Men. So
that upon all that can rationally sway or determine our belief, entire credit
ought to be given to Mr. Bedlo, upon the Declaration he made of their Guilt in
the Juncture and Circumstance of Dying; whereas there is nothing that can be
justly or rationally alleged, which without abandoning our selves to weakness
and easy Credulity, can obtain from us the giving the least Faith to them,
notwithstanding their affirming their Innocence in expiring Circumstances. And
therefore though the Public has sustained great loss by the removal of a
Witness, that could have not only testified against so many of the
Conspirators, but so particularly, and with so many corroborating
Circumstances; yet the Deposition which he made in his last Sickness, whereby
in the prospect of approaching Death, and in the belief and sense of his speedy
appearing at the Tribunal of God, he confirmed and ratified upon Oath all that
he had declared before, has done more to establish the Credit of the Plot, and
ruin the Reputation of the Papal Party in the minds of all unbiassed men, than
ever he could have effected by never so many reiterated Testimonies against
them at Bars, and in Courts of Judicature.

4. Nor in the next place ought any man to be surprised, that such of the
Traitors as nave been convicted and condemned for this Hellish and Damnable
Plot, should Die professing their Innocence as to what they were condemned for;
seeing they bound and obliged themselves by such Oaths which they account most
solemn, and vowed by whatsoever according to the Principles of their Religion,
is esteemed more sacred than other, that they would never discover the
Conspiracy which they were engaged in. For all those to whom this Bloody Design
was See Ireland's Trial, p. 10. p. 28. Dugdal's further Information, p. 16.
communicated; and especially such who were to be assisting in it, had taken an
Oath of Secrecy, and the Sacrament upon it, as all the Witnesses do inform us,
never to reveal or disclose what they were either engaged in, or acquainted
with. And the tenor of this holy and Catholic Oath, by which they most
sacredly and indispensibly bound themselves, was this, as it was found very
happily amongst Mr. Rusten's Papers, a Priest, in Sir Thomas Gascoyne's House.
I A. B. being in the presence of Almighty God, the Blessed Mary Ever Virgin,
the Blessed Michael the Archangel, the Blessed The Papists Oath of Secrecy by
Mr. Robert B^leron, printed by Order of the House of Commons.
St. John Baptist, the holy Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul, and all the Saints
in Heaven, and to you my Ghostly Father, do declare, and in my heart believe
the Pope, Christ's Vicar General, to be the true and only Head of Christ's
Church here on Earth; and that by virtue of the Keys of binding and loosing
given his Holiness by our Savior Christ, he has power to Depose all Heretical
Kings and Princes, and cause them to be killed: Therefore to the utmost of my
power, I will defend this Doctrine, and his Holinesses Rights, against all
Usurpers whatsoever; especially against the now pretended King of England, in
regard that he has broke his Vows with his Holinesses Agents beyond Seas, and
not performed his promises in bringing into England the holy Roman Catholic
Religion. I do renounce and disown my Allegiante as due to the said pretended
King of England, or obediente to any of his inferior Officers and Magistrates;
but do believe the Protestant Doctrine to be heretical and damnable; and that
all are damned who do not for sake the same; and to the best of my power, will
help his Holinesses Agents here in England, to Extirpate and Root out the said
Protestant Doctrine, and to destroy the said Pretended King of England, and all
such of his Subjects as will not adhere to the holy See of Rome, and the
Religion there professed. I do further promise and declare, That I will keep
secret and private, and not divulge directly or indirectly, by word, writing,
or circumstance, whatsoever shall be proposed, given in charge, or discovered
to me, by you my Ghostly Father, or any other engaged in the promoting of this
pious and holy Design: And that I will be active, and not desist from the
carrying of it on: And that no hopes of rewards threats or punishments, shall
make me discover the rest concerned in so pious a work: And if discovered,
shall never confess any accessaries with my self concerned in this Design. All
which I do swear by the Blessed Trinity, and by the Blessed Sacrament, which I
now purpose to receive, to perform, and on my part, keep inviolable: And do
call all the Angels and Saints in Heaven, to witness my real intention to keep
this Oath. In Testimony whereof, I do receive this most holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist.

Now besides that there is nothing more probable or fuller of moral Certainty,
than that; in a business, should it be discovered, of so fatal Consequence to
their Religion and themselves, they would use all Imaginable ways and means to
bind the Consciences of those that were trusted with it from revealing and
detecting what was committed unto them; so the Methods which they took in
Promoting former Plots and Treasons, and for the prevention of their Discovery,
having been by the prescription and imposition of an Oath of Secrecy, may give
us all desirable Assurance that they were equally careful to ^^^der the
detection of this, and that accordingly they made use of some solemn Oath of
secrecy to that purpose. And that by the Engine of such an Oath they have
endeavored to setter the Consciences, and stop the mouths of their Proselytes
and Accomplices heretofore, we are abundantly Informed in a book styled A true
and perfect Relation of the whole proceedings against Garnet the Jesuit and his
Confederates, which was Published by Authority Anno 1606 where we have the Sum
of the said Oath thus conveyed unto us and recorded; viz. You shall Swear by
the Blessed Trinity, and by the Sacrament you now purpose to receive, never to
disclose directly or indirectly, by word or circumstance, the matter that shall
be proposed to you to keep Secret, nor desist from the Execution thereof, until
the rest shall give you leave. Which Oath was administered by Gerrard the Jesuit
to Catesby, Percy, Wright, Winter and Fawkes, in the Second year of the Reign
of King James, and by Greenwell the Jesuit to Bates in the same year, though in
the following month. And as this was an unquestionable Copy for our present
Conspirators to write after; so we may easily inform our selves from hence, by
virtue of what ties those found guilty of the late Plot dyed in the
asseveration of their Innocence; for if we do but suppose them to have lived in
the practical belief of their own Religion, or that they were possessed with
any hopes of attaining happiness in the way of it, we must then persuade our
selves, that they would not depart out of the world in the violation of an Oath
which they had so solemnly taken, and which the principles of their Faith does
not only approve of, but makes the keeping of it meritorious. As to other
Oaths, they might be easily dispensed with, both to make and break them, but
there was no Expectation of any dispensation for, or absolution upon the
violation of this Oath. For can it be so much as once apprehended, that after
they have brought persons under a bond which they esteem so sacred and
unviolable, they should then indulge and allow them to transgress against an
obligation so necessary to the compassing of their ends, and in the punctual
observation whereof they have stated so much of their Religion and the future
happiness of their Proselytes? To act dissonantly to this Oath which so
admirably framed and calculated for the good of Mother Church, and the grandess
of the triple Crown, were a perjury not to be expiated; but to forswear
themselves in subserviency to the gainful and Religious ends of this Oath, is
at once not only venial, but worthy of Immortal Glory. I readily grant, that
partly by the Antecedent Oath of Secrecy which they had so ceremoniously and
augustly taken, and partly by the circumstances under which the papal cause and
faction labored when they came to dye, they were brought into a strait or
dilemma of perjuring themselves on the one hand, or upon the other. But now,
can we reasonably think that they would perjure themselves by detecting the
Plot, when they knew that upon so doing, they were both by the principles of
their Faith, and the Sentence of their Church, to stand adjudged to Eternal
Torment? And ought we not rather to assure our selves, that under the security
which they had of happiness in the keeping inviolate their first Oath, they
would in defiance of all Truth, attest God above, and call Men below to
witness, they were altogether Innocent of what they were charged with. For
against the dread and apprehension of all that this might render them obnoxious
unto, they might secure themselves by a dispensation beforehand to do it, or
provide for their salvation by an Absolution afterward, or trust to their
Martyrdom in so holy a Cause for the expiation of so small a Crime, or at the
worst they could but expect that their punishment in Hell for so beneficial a
perjury to the Church, should be only for a season; and that the prayers of
Catholics, the superlative prevalency of Masses, and the boundless and
unquestionable Power of Christ's Vicar, who has both the Keys of Heaven and
Hell, would soon release them thence, and translate them to happiness.

5. But that we may the better understand how far Papists may lawfully not only
endeavor by bare Affirmations to impose falsehoods upon the world, but forswear
themselves for the good of the Catholic Church, and the grandeur of the Papal
Chair; we will briefly unfold and lay open how far they allow themselves, and
are justified by their Writers and Ghostly Fathers to do so, in subserviency
merely to their own credit and reputation, or at most, in order only to their
own personal safety. And without enquiring, till afterward, upon what maxims
of Divinity, the Roman Casuists indulge their Disciples and Converts to do so,
we shall at present produce an Instance or two, and those very remarkable, by
which it will appear, that this is allowed by the Ghostly Fathers, and
practiced by the Members of the Papal Communion; the first then shall be that
which Robert Perkins gave an Information of upon Oath, and which Sir Robert
Atkins* one of the Judges at Stafford Assizes 1679. took as follows.

This Informant says, That about seven or eight years since Mr. Arthur This is
to be had Printed by it self, being fold by Rich. Baldwin in Boult-Court near
the Black Bull in Old Baily.
Fox (then Servant to the present Lord Aston) came to him, and to another of
his friends, and told them that there was a Bastard-child laid to his charge,
by one of his Lords Tenants Daughters, and did acknowledge to them that he did
several times Lie with her, and that by the best computation of time he could
make, he had just grounds to believe she had done him no wrong in this her
charge; and that he verily believed himself to be the Father of the Child, and
therefore came to them as his particular friends, for their Advice in the case,
how to prevent the noise and scandal, and great charge that was like to ensue
hereupon, and desired them to treat with the Young Woman's Father and Mother
about it, and to offer them a certain sum of money to free him from all future
charge from, or by reason of this business. In pursuance of this request this
Informant and his friend addressed themselves to the Young Woman, and to her
Father and Mother. The Young Woman with the greatest Asseverations and
Protestations did affirm, that she had never Layn with any man whatever, but
the said Mr. Fox, and that he was the real Father of the Child. Then they came
to a Treaty with her Father about ascertaining the charge, and agreed that Mr.
Fox should pay thirty pounds, to be for ever discharged from the said Child;
part of which sum was accordingly paid. When they returned to Mr. Fox, and had
acquainted him with what agreement they had made for him with the Father and
Mother of the Young Woman, he seemed exceeding well satisfied therewith, and
returned them many thanks, owning himself very much obliged to them both, for
their great care and pains in transacting this Affair for him, and bringing it
to an Issue so much to his content.

Mr. Evers the Priest belonging to the Lord Astons house, was abroad whilst
this business was in agitation, but returning in few days before all the said
thirty pound was paid, was informed by Mr. Fox himself what agreement was made
for him by this Informant, and his friend as aforesaid. Mr. Evers having thus
understood the whole case told Mr. Fox that what he had done was not sufficient
to take off the scandal from their Church, for to his knowledge this story was
much talked of abroad, and that with very severe reflections upon the Roman
Catholics in general; and therefore as his Ghostly Father, he would advise him
what was to be done in order to the taking off so great a scandal from their
Church, and added that he had consulted Mr. Peter's another Priest, about it,
and that they were come to a resolve what method should be used, and therefore
required him to prepare himself for Confession. Accordingly Mr. Fox came to
Confession to the said Mr. Evers, and owned the whole matter as aforesaid; then
Mr. Evers told him again, he continuing upon his knees, that the scandal which
was hereby brought to their Church, was very great, and therefore for the
taking it off, and preventing further scandal for the future to their Church,
to my Lord Aston, or to himself; Mr. Peter's and he had agreed upon this course;
viz. that he should go immediately to his Lord Aston, and on his knees before
his Lord and Lady, with solemn Oaths and Asseverations deny that ever he had
any thing to do with the said Young Woman in that nature, and that he was
altogether innocent of the Crime laid to his charge; and that after this he
should go up to the Chapel where the Congregation was met, and there in like
manner deny it with the like Asseverations, and to confirm them in the belief
of it, he should then before them receive the Sacrament. When Mr. Evers had
finished these Instructions, he gave him Absolution before he rose from his
knees, telling him, That if he observed these Instructions, he was absolved
from the said Crime, and therefore innocent of it altogether, and might so
declare himself as aforesaid. All which Instructions in every particular the
said Mr. Fox punctually observed. His friend aforesaid being in the Chapel
when he disowned the Fact with solemn Oaths, and received the Sacrament upon
it. Here we have not only an instance what little credit is to be given to the
Oaths and Asseverations of Papists, but how they prostitute what themselves
account most sacred, namely Confession, Absolution, and the Sacrament of the
Eucharist to their base and secular ends. And if the preserving the Reputation
of one Fellow, or the avoiding the Censures which might be reflected upon the
Papal Religion, because of sin of one of the Members of their Communion, which
the Doctrine of their Church pronounces at worst to be but venial, could be
esteemed motives and inducements weighty enough, and sufficient, for the
Authorizing of Perjury, and the profaning the Institutions of their Religion;
can we then judge it strange, or ought we to entertain it with any surprise,
that for the saving not only the honor of their Church, but the Estates and
Lives of so many of their Faction in England, from the Just Imputations and
deserved Punishments, which so horrid a Treason as that now charged upon them,
must both render their Religion and Party obnoxious unto, they should not only
allow, but oblige their Votaries, to use the like Imprecations and Oaths
toward the wheedling the unthinking and credulous sort of Protestants into a
belief of their Innocence.

The second Instance I shall give of the Freedom they assume unto themselves of
abusing the Faith of Mankind by Oaths, and how for they are from reckoning it
any crime to forswear themselves for the advantage of the Catholic Cause,
shall be that of a Soldier lately admitted into one of the Companies of the
King's Guards under the Command of a Captain, who is well known to be an
abhorrer of such practice. This Fellow having taken the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, the only Legal Test whereby the Government has provided for the
distinguishing betwixt Protestants and Papists among persons of that degree and
Employ, was nevertheless suspected by some of his Companions, who knew what
Religion he had been of before, to be still a Papist, and that he had only
swallowed those Oaths for ends which he was willing to conceal, but which
according to the Romish Religion, might sanctify a profanation of the name of
God. Accordingly having resolved for their own satisfaction, and their better
instruction what that vile Religion countenanceth men in, to have a watchful
and observant Eye over him, they were so fortunate as the last February, to
trace him to the Portugal Ambassadors, where they saw him not only present at
Mass, but kneel at the Elevation of the Host. Which from the Regard which they
bear to His Majesty's Honor, did so inflame their Zeal, that they immediately
seized him after he was come out of the Chapel; and having carried him whither
they thought fit, they first stripped him to the middle, and then poured a Pale
of Water leisurely down his body, as a testimony of their Resentment, and as a
kind of Military correction. To this I might subjoyn the known Story of one
John Cummin, who having swallowed the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, in
order to his being Listed also in His Majesty's Guards, was lately seized upon
Duty in the Tower, and Committed to New Prison, not only as a Papist, but as a
Priest; and though there was not Legal Evidence to Evince the last, yet the
first is indubitable. However, we see that the Papists can forswear as well as
dissemble their Religion, when it is so much for the Interest of the Catholic
Cause, as the winding themselves into the Guards, must needs be esteemed. And
as we have reason to believe this not the only person who has had a
Dispensation to take the aforesaid Oaths, in order to the furthering the holy
Designs of the Infallible Chair; so no man can be so ignorant, as not to
understand that through their being Listed under His Majesty's Ensigns, they
are ready for the Subversion of our Religion, and the Destruction of our Lives,
whenever they hear of the King's Death shall come, which they have so long
waited for, and used so many ways to hasten. And besides, this Justifies the
Jealousies of those Noble and Renowned Peers, who in their Address to His
Majesty January the twenty fifth last, told him that they had reason to fear
and apprehend that neither Lords nor Commons will be in Safety at Oxford, but
will be daily exposed to the Swords of the Papists and their Adherents, of whom
too many, is to be feared, are crept into his Guards.

6. And whereas some may possibly imagine, that though men may be influenced to
perjure themselves, while in a probability to live and enjoy not only the
beneficial fruits of their perjuries, but may be ready to delude themselves
with hopes of repenting of their Villainies afterward, if they shall at any
time arrive at such a persuasion of mind, as to think it necessary; we shall
therefore in the next place give an account of some condemned for crimes, less
dangerous to the Papal Cause, should they be acknowledged, than Treasons
against the King and Government are likely to prove, who yet trusting to the
blessed provisions of their Religion, and in an Implicit Obedience to their
Ghostly Fathers, have ventured the going boldly off the Stage, affirming and
swearing their Innocence, when they knew their own guilt. The Relations were
sent to the Right Honorable the Earl of Essex, in a Letter from Dublin bearing
Date the fifth of March, 1679. and Printed at London for Langley Curtis, 1679.
The first contains an account of one John Curphy, a Papist, who at Lent Assizes
seven years before, was tried before Baron Hene (then His Majesty's Serjant)
for Burglary committed in the County of Monaghan, and being found guilty, was
condemned to dye. And that the said Curphy denied the fact with great
confidence and asseverations of his Innocence at the Gallows, and (...) turned
off the Ladder persisting in his denials, but that the Rope breaking by chance
after he had hung some little space, and he coming again to himself, thanked
God who had given him time to declare the Truth, and not go out of the world
with a lie in his mouth, and then confessed himself guilty of the fact for
which he was condemned. Adding, that a Priest had given him Absolution, upon
condition not to discover any thing, nor to declare his accomplices; and that
he needed not doubt of his salvation, the fact not having been committed
against God's people, meaning as he supposed the Papists. So that no doubt had
but the Rope been strong enough, he had in the esteem of our Papal Notaries and
Agents, died as Innocent of the Burglary for which he was condemned, as the
late Conspirators did of the Plot against His. Majesty's person, the Protestant
Religion, and the Government Established by Law. But there fall out sometimes
unhappy accidents, that no humane wisdom could foresee, which contribute to the
unfolding and detecting the tricks and villainies of these vile men the Priests,
-- who have prostituted all that is Religious and Sacred, to a subserviency to
worldly ends and designs. Yet it were unreasonable that we should in the face
and defiance of all Evidence demonstrative of the guilt of persons, suffer our
selves to be imposed upon to a belief of their Innocence, unless convinced of
their criminalness by the interposure of a thing so wonted and fortuitous, For
though it was the lot of this Curphry to be made participant of a providence so
merciful to himself, and so instructive to us of the base and wicked Artifices
of the Papal Clergy, and with what obduracy and implicitness the Laity resign
themselves to their hellish and imperious dictates; yet we must not expect that
every malefactor amongst them, who upon the Authority of their Ghostly Fathers,
and security of Absolution, ventures dying with his mouth full of falsehoods and
blasphemous Execrations, should be reprieved by so unusual a method, or
thereupon awakened to an acknowledgment of their guilt. And for this one
person, that has been trusted with such an opportunity of confessing, how many
may we conceive to have ended their Lives in a guilty silence. And of this we
have two Instances afforded us in the aforesaid Letter to the same Honorable
Peer, whereof one is, that there being a special Commission directed to Mr.
Justice Johnson, to try several Malefactors for Murders and Robberies,
committed in the County of Canan; there were thereupon two of the Duffies, and
one of the Plunkets, all Irish Papists, indicted: The Duffies confessed that they
were guilty of the crimes laid to their Charge, and gave the same Evidence
against Plunket, upon which and other most undeniable circumstances, he was
condemned, having also at his first apprehension owned to Sir John Edgworth,
that he was guilty: But yet when he came to suffer for the fact, he died
absolutely denying it, and that with curses upon himself, and renunciation of
Salvation, if he were not innocent.

We may be sure by whose Influence, and upon what Inducements, and in the
Confidence of what security he did it, in that one Brady a Priest had accosted
the Duffies in Prison, who were also condemned for the same fact, using
arguments to induce them to recant their Evidence, and renounce their Testimony
against Plunket. And though his Importunities and Ghostly Authority was
unsuccessful upon them, the one of them that suffered, (the other being
reprieved) persevering in his accusation of Plunket, and in the confessing,
that himself was guilty of the crime for which he was condemned, yet we may be
justly confident, that his applications prevailed with Plunket, and that
through Bradys persuasions, he dyed obstinate in the denial of what was not
only proved against him, but what himself had before acknowledged. The other
instance mentioned in the same Letter, is a Narrative, how that one Neile O
Neile an Irish Papist, being tried before Sir Richard Reynell one of the Judges
of the King's Bench in that Kingdom, upon a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, for
a murder committed at Rathrum in the County of Wicklow, and the fact clearly
proved upon him, for which he was accordingly condemned; did nevertheless,
notwithstanding the fullness of the Evidence against him, and that he himself
had both in Prison, and at his Trial, owned the fact to several persons, at the
Gallows utterly deny it.

7. But that it may more evidently appear, that there is nothing in the Exit
and manner of the late Traitors taking their farewell of the world, that should
surprise any true English man, or thinking Protestant, we shall endeavor to
give an original Copy of it in the Practices of others, who suffered for the
like crimes in a former Reign. And we will at present take it upon the
acknowledgements of our adversaries, that there was such a Conspiracy as the
Gunpowder-Plot. Though by the way it may be observed as an argument of what
sincerity the Romish Party is of, and how that all they say or print, is only
accommodated to the posture of times and seasons, and calculated in
subserviency to depending Designs, in that many of the Papal Communion have had
the Confidence to obtrude upon the World oftener than once, that the Gunpowder
Conspiracy was only a State Trick and Contrivance, to make them seem guilty and
criminal, who were truly innocent.

But besides that none of all those who were then convicted and executed for
it, did so much as ever pretend, that they were wheedled into it by the cunning
and dexterity of a public and Protestant State-Minister; so it must be
acknowledged, that they were well disposed and prepared by virtue of Romish
Principles, and thoroughly inclined of themselves to the committing of Treason,
otherwise they had never entertained nor complied with so horrid an overture,
as the destroying at once, the King, Parliament, and Kingdom. But that which I
shall insist upon, is the denial of their Guilt upon their Examinations, and
the falsehood of their asseverations at their very death, though there was
unquestionable Evidence both of the Treason, and how far the whole Papal Party
was interested in it, not only by the seizure of some of them, when ready to
accomplish the execrable villainy, and by the insurrection of others in Arms, to
have protected themselves from the Law, and commenced a Rebellion, but by the
discoveries which had been made from their own scanty and partial Confessions
upon Examination, and by the freer discourses which they were overheard to use
one to another in Prison, when they little apprehended that there were any near
to observe what they said. And I shall the rather insist upon this, because
they who have been condemned for the late Plot, and such who have undertaken
the justification of their Innocence, are pleased to tell us, That those
executed for the Powder Treason did confess their fact at the time of their
execution, whereas they that have been See the new Plot p. 74. and the
Compendium p. 75.
executed for the present Conspiracy, have at their deaths denied the fact, and
resisted all temptations of Pardon and Reward. Nay the late Lord Stafford was
pleased to allege at his Trial, that as it was so horrid a thing, that it
cannot be expressed or excused: So he had been told, that all who See the Trval
of William Viscount Stafford, page 53. and p. 200.
were engaged in that wicked fact, were heartily sorry for it, and repented of
it before they dyed; and that he never heard any of the Church of Rome speak a
good word of it, and that the men concerned in it, did all acknowledge and
confess it, and begged pardon of the King, and God, and all good men for it,
and that therefore he thought it was not the interest of Religion, but a
private Interest put them upon it. In which words there are no fewer than four
egregious Falsehoods, which whether they be excused upon the account of the
smallness of his Converse with men and Books, or upon the score of the weakness
of his aged memory; or whether they be not chargeable upon the badness of his
Conscience intoxicated by ill Principles, I leave the Reader to judge and
determine. The first is, That he never heard any of the Church of Rome speak a
good word of it, Whereas Widdrington assures us, that Garnet had his Picture
soon after his Execution, set up in the Jesuits College at Rome, with this
Inscription over it, Verus Christi Martyr. And if this be not enough to
convince after ages, what Opinion the Jesuits have, and still maintain of that
Plot, we will farther add, that both Ribadewira has reckoned Garnet,
Southwell, and Oldcorn, all Gun Powder Traitors, among the Martyrs of the
Society In Catalog. Scriptorum societ. Jesu. p. 377. in Biblioth. script.
societ. Jesu.
of Jesus. And Alegambe has likewise inserted Garnet's and Oldcorn's names
amongst the Martyrs of the Catholic Church, and that Order. Yea not only
Father Parsons, Rector of the English College at Rome, speaking of Father
Garnet, says, He was an innocent man, and suffered In his book against the
Oath of Allegiance, called. The Discussion of the Answer, p. 22, 23.
unjustly, and that he lived a Saint's life, and accomplished the same with a
happy death. But the Pope himself preferred Greenwell and Gerrard, two of the
Conspirators that escaped, the one to be a Confessor in St. Idem Apology. p.
151.
Peter's in Rome, and the other to be his Penitentiary. Now whether these were
Testimonies of a detestation of the Plot, or Evidences of the approbation,
which nothing but its miscarriage, Prevented their declaring more publicly, I
leave all mankind to judge. The second is, That he has been told, that all who
were engaged in that wicked act, were heartily sorry for it, and repented of it
before they died. Whereas Thuanus tells us, that some of the Traitors having
escaped to Calice, and being pitied, and assured by Hist. An. 1605.
the Governor, of the French King's favor, and that though they had lost
their own Country, they might be received there; how that one of them thereupon
replied, that the loss of their Country was the least part of their grief, but
that which sensibly afflicted them, was that they could not accomplish so brave
and generous a design. Nay, Sir Everard Digby, even when a Prisoner in the
Tower for the Plot, styles it, in one of his Papers Pap. 4. Pap. 9.
since come to light, a good Cause, and that if it had succeeded, there would
not have been three worth the saving, that should have been lost, and that he
had some friends who would have been in danger, but that he had prevented it.
The third is, That he thought it was not the Interest of Religion, but a
private interest put them upon it. Whereas not only Faux declared, that he was
moved into it only for the sake of Religion and Conscience, because he thought
the King not to be his lawful Sovereign, seeing he was an Heretic. But Sir
Everard Digby professed upon his Trial, that it was not ambition, See the
Proceedings against the Traitors.
nor discontent with his Estate, nor malice to any in Parliament, but zeal for
his Religion, and the hopes of restoring it in England. The fourth and
principal thing wherein my Lord Stafford did either mistake himself, or greatly
prevaricate, was in these words, That the men concerned in the Powder Plot, did
all acknowledge and confess it, and begged Pardon of the King, and God, and all
good men for it. Nor shall I here insist upon this, that I do not see how it
was possible for my Lord Stafford to be assured, that all the Persons who were
in it, were known and found out, or that he could ever thoroughly understand,
whether even those that confessed after their apprehension, did not conceal
much more than they discovered. But I shall confine my self to two things,
whereof the first is this, that the conspirators, when under Examination, did
with Oaths and Asseverations deny what themselves had full knowledge of, and
whereof the State had sufficient Evidence: For Garnet having by the pretended
favor of his Keeper, an opportunity allowed him to discourse with Hall, and
being the next day charged by several Lords of the Privy Council, with diverse
things which had passed betwixt them two, in that conference, he See the
Proceedings against the Traitors.
not only denied the whole upon his Soul, and the word of a Priest; but with so
many repeated Protestations, and terrible Execrations, that my Lord of
Salisbury who was then present, said, it wounded all their Lordships hearts to
hear him. And yet, when confronted by Mr. Fauset, who was both a learned
person, and a Justice of Peace, and by Mr. Lockerson one likewise of known
Reputation, who had overheard all they said, having conveniently placed
themselves before hand to that purpose, and withal understanding that Hall had
confessed what they had discoursed, he then acknowledged what with so many
asseverations he Ibid.
had immediately before denied, and begged mercy of the Lords, saying, he had
offended if Equivocation did not help him. And that we may not Abboti Antilogia
p. 110.
think Equivocations and Perjuries peculiar only to the Jesuits, we have an
Example of the like carriage in Sir Everard Digby, who being upon his first
apprehension examined, did with most solemn Protestations, and all kind of
Execrations, deny his being privy to the Powder Plot; and yet being afterward
confronted by the Testimony of Faux, who had confessed, that being at Sir
Everards house in the Country, some months before the intended Session of
Parliament, that Sir Everard having taken him aside, told him he was afraid the
Powder in the Cellar was grown dank, and that some new must be provided, lest
that should not take fire; he did thereupon not only acknowledge it,
notwithstanding all his former Execrations to the contrary, but when he came to
be indicted, he confessed it upon his Arraignment. Whence we evidently see,
that they not only with horrid Oaths and astonishing Asseverations, denied what
they knew themselves guilty of; but that the Confessions they made did not
proceed from any tenderness of Conscience, or remorse for what they had been
engaged in, but were extorted from them by the uncontrollableness of the
Evidence, and by improving the confessions of some of themselves to oblige
others to an acknowledgement.

The second thing I would have observed in the Gunpowder Conspirators, is that
several of them went out of the world in the same manner that our late Traitors
did, denying diverse things to their last, which they knew themselves to be
guilty of. And of this to avoid prolixity, I shall give but two Instances; See
the proceedings against the Traitors.
one whereof shall be that of Francis Tresham Esquire who not only gave it under
his hand, but took it upon his Soul, and as he hoped for Salvation, within
three hours before his Death, that he had not seen Garnet the Provincial of the
Jesuits in sixteen years before; and yet Garnet himself afterward declared
that they had enjoyed frequent conversation with each other within less than
the space of three years; and that he supposed Mr. Tresham meant to equivocate
in denying it. Where was now the sense of the Omnisciency of God? or the dread
of the future Tribunal? which the Advocates, for the late Traitors derive their
Topics to persuade the world of their Innocence from. Alas! the reputation and
Interest of the Catholic Cause, and the Confidence they reposed in
Equivocations, Dispensations and Absolutions, had stifled all such Impressions.

The other Instance shall be Sir Everard Digby, who not only endeavored to
clear all the Jesuits from being any ways concerned in that Treasonable See
his Papers published in the end of the late Editions of the proceedings against
the Traitors.
Plot, but gloried in the venturing his Salvation and Happiness upon it;
Whereas they themselves, to the eternal reproach of that poor Gentleman's
memory, confessed and acknowledged it. And as if this had not been enough to
witness his own insincerity, and to instruct future Generations what little
Faith is to be given to Papists, either living or dying; he with the same
Impudence, and to his very last denied that ever Father Wally (i. e. Garnet)
had been at Coughton with him, or that he knew Darcy to be See the proceedings
compared with Digby's Papers.
the same with Garnet, or understood that he was a Priest. Whereas it appeared
that he was not only very well acquainted with him, but even Garnet himself
confessed that he had been at his house. Let our many pleading Orators for the
late Traitors, continue now to argue from the Confessions of the Gunpowder
Conspirators, that they acknowledging their guilt, while the others dyed in the
denial of theirs; as those were criminal, so these must be innocent: Whereas we
cannot desire a more convincing proof, how little the Oaths and Asseverations
of Papists in the very circumstances of dying are to be depended upon, than the
assurance which we have from Authentic Records of the behavior of those
engaged in the Gunpowder Plot, whom we have mentioned. And that no danger
which might arise to particular Romanists, may be conceived to have discouraged
our late Conspirators, I shall subjoyn the case which Catesby propounded,
namely, Whether for the Promotion of the Catholic Cause against Heretics (the
necessity of time See the Proceedings against the Traitors.
and occasion so requiring) it were lawful among many nocents to take away some
innocents? To which Father Garnet with the greatest seriousness and utmost
fixedness of Judgment answered, That if the advantage to Bellarmin's Opinion
Published and approved of by the holy See.
the Catholic Party, were greater by taking away some Innocents together with
many Nocents, then doubtless it was lawful to kill and destroy them all: So
that if we do but apprehend, that they were possessed with the least
probability of prevailing in the issue, the lives of multitudes of their own
faction, that would have been last in the Interim, were to be esteemed a small
price, for so great a commodity, as the re-establishing Popery in England, the
rooting out the Protestant Religion, and destroying of Heretics.

8. But to make a nearer approach to the present Plot, can there be a greater
Evidence of the Papists readiness to forswear their own guilt, than the many
Examples of hiring and suborning persons to perjure themselves, to make the
Innocent Criminal. A design more horrid in itself, and more destructive to
Government, and the safety of Mankind, than for one that is guilty to protest
his Innocence with the highest Execrations: For by the Arraignment of one
innocent person upon a countenanced subornation, all who deserve the same
character are virtually indicted, and the whole Law becomes perverted from its
true end, which is to justify the guiltless, and is turned into an Engine to
condemn the Innocent. And it will prove of such fatal consequence, should it be
connived at, or allowed, that all the ligaments of society will become
dissolved, and all obligations not only between man and man, but betwixt Rulers
and People finally cancelled. For who can be so innocent, that it is not in the
power of a suborned Villain to slander; or so Loyal, whom on the encouragement
of a Reward, and at the suggestion of a prompter, he will not brand for a
Traitor. And we may be sure that they who are so void of all Conscience, as to
undertake so horrid an Employment, will be furnished with Impudence to swear
any Charge that their Masters dictate and prescribe unto them. And what a
damnable Religion must that be, that at once inspires them to seek the
destruction of Protestants, and justifies them in all kind of subornations and
falsehoods for the accomplishing of it. Now besides many Instances not yet come
to light of this treacherous and Romish Practice, we have several accounts of
their endeavors of this kind, which deserve our observation and remark. The
first is that of Netternille, an Irish Papist, his attempting to corrupt Mr.
William Brooks, one of the Aldermen of Dublin, and Captain Bery, to swear what
should be prescribed unto them, for the fixing of scandalous Crimes on Dr.
Oats, and Mr. Bedloe, and charging See the Narrative of this Deposition.
the Plot on Dissenting Protestants. The next is, Readings Attempt upon Mr.
Bedloe, to have obtained of him the renouncing all the material part of his
Depositions against the Lords in the Tower, for which he promised See Reading's
Trial See the Trial of Mr. Tasbrough.
him in Money and Estate a great Reward. The third is Mr. Price's and Mr.
Tasbrough's laboring to persuade Mr. Dugdale to recant whatsoever he had said
concerning the Plot, and to call the Almighty God to witness that no motive had
induced him to retract the Testimonies he had given, but remorse of Conscience
for the Mischiefs which he had done, though they were in the mean time to give
him a great sum of money in hand, besides a further Reward which they assured
him of afterward. The fourth is their suborning Thomas Knox, and John Lane to
swear such Crimes against Dr. Oats, as they supposed would not See the Trial of
Knox and Lane, and Dr. Oats's Printed Narrative.
only weaken the Credit of all his Evidence, but bring him under a sentence of
Death, and so rob the Nation of the most considerable Witness in reference to
the Plot. A fifth is Longmores and Draxtons endeavoring to bribe Simon Wright,
to declare upon Oath, that Mr. Dugdale had promised to protect him, and give
him money as one of the King's Evidence, if See my Lord Staffords Trial, p.
158. See Coll. Mansfield's Narrative, and Mr. Dangerfield's Narrative.
he would swear against Sir James Symons, and Mr. Gerrard. The last which I
shall mention, is their Employing Mr. Dangerfield to charge a Plot on the
Presbyterians, wherein they intended to involve most of those that appeared
active and zealous for the Protesant Religion, and English Liberty. And to
conclude Instances of this nature at present, I shall only add two Depositions,
which may serve to instruct us that they still persevere in the Practice of the
same Villainy. The Tenor of the first is as follows.

The Examination of Edward Howcott of the City of Lichfield, taken at the said
City, the first day of Jan. 1680/1 before me Francis Bailey, one of The City of
Lichfield.
His Majesty's Justices of the Peace forth County of the said City.
The said Examinant upon his Oath says, That Joseph Salt of Utoxeter
Feltmaker, about the month of June last, told this Deponent that one John
Murrall a Barber in Rugby, in the County of Stafford, would have had the said
Joseph Salt to have gone with him to London, and be a witness against Mr.
Stephen Dugdale, one of the King's Evidence in the late Horrid Plot, the said
Murrall pretending as the said Salt told this Deponent, that he knew as much of
the Plot as Mr. Dugdale did; and if he would but testify three or four words
which Murrall would direct him to swear against Mr. Dugdale, he should live
better than ever he did in his life, telling the said Salt, that he now lived
meanly, but if he would do what he desired him, he should never want whilst he
lived; for in this Juncture of time the Oath of a Protestant would be better
accepted than twenty Oaths of a Papist. And further this Deponent says, That
the said Murrall had sworn him never to confess what he said to him, and
threfore Salt said, He would be hanged, and drawn, and quartered, before he
would discover the saying of Murrall. And this is not only sworn by Edward
Howcott, but by his Wife Mary Howcott, and by one Edward Blakesly, who were all
present when Salt declared and acknowledged as is above deposed. The second
Information declarative also of the like Practices, is that of Thomas Lander of
Shutborrow in the County of Stafford, as it was taken upon Oath the 24 of
December. 1680/1. before Edmund Warcupp Esquire one of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace for the County of Middlesex, etc.

This Informant says, that having been employed as a workman several times at
the house of my Lord Aston, at Tixall in the County aforesaid, he was solicited
by Mr. Francis Hind Steward to the Lord Aston, to become a Witness against
Stephen Dugdale, any way to invalidate or take off his Evidence in relation to
the Popish Plot, and he served this Informant with a Supena to come up to
London for that purpose, at the late intended Trial of the late Lord Aston in
June last past. But before his coming up, the said Hind, Francis Aston, Son to
the Lord Aston, Thomas Sawyer servant to the said Lord Aston, sent for this
Informant into a private room in the said Lord Aston's house, and there told
him, That if he would swear such things as should be dictated to him by the
Persons aforesaid, to invalidate or take away the Evidence of the said Mr.
Dugdale, he should have such reward, as should be to his own content, and not
want for Money or house, as might become a man of better quality than himself.
Can any man now have horror enough for that Religion, which does at once both
authorize and sanctify such subornations and treacheries; or can we without
abandoning our reason, but believe, that they who labor to suborn, bribe, and
persuade others to swear falsely for the safety of Persons to whom they have no
relation, and the hopes of some small rewards which they propose unto them;
will be ready to perjure themselves for their own sake, the advantage of their
posterity, and the interest of the Catholic cause, and whole Papal party. He
that swears falsely, or labors to have another to do so, for the taking away of
his neighbors life, will not scruple to perjure himself, in order to avoid
infamy upon his name, and to divert ruin from his own person and offspring:
For however offensive it be to God, to preserve ones self by unlawful means; it
is both much more provoking to the Lord, and prejudicial to the World, first to
frame, and then support a Plot, by Perjury, wherein so many thousand innocent
persons must have suffered, as in all probability would have done, in that
which Mr. Dangerfield was suborned and employed about.

9. As all the Conspirators have been engaged in the same Treason, and
influenced thereunto by the same Principles; So it is not unreasonable to
conceive, that they should be all instructed to act a like part in the denial
of it; for they that could enter into so bloody a design, as to destroy their
lawful King, ruin their native Country, and cut the throats of many of their
Kindred, as well as of their friendly and innocent neighbors may very well be
supposed to reckon themselves discharged from all those ties of Divine Laws and
Obligations of Conscience, which should restrain them from lying and Perjury:
But the holy God who sometimes leaves men to such wickedness and obduracy, for
ends always righteous but often hidden, seldom fails to display his Power and
Wisdom, in affording such means and opportunities of detecting their Villainies,
as may be improved and managed to the preserving the Peace, and securing the
safety of Nations and Societies, if Magistrates and People be not wanting to
themselves. And accordingly has the allseeing Majesty overruled, and strongly
infatuated the minds of all the Traitors who have suffered for the late Plot,
that though they have had the impudence to deny their guilt, yet they have left
Evidences of it, either in their own Papers which have come to light, or in the
very particulars which they have alleged for the asserting of their Innocence.

For to begin with Coleman, it is to be rationally believed, that having
established a correspondence with the French King's Confessor, in order to so
mighty a work as the Conversion of three Kingdoms, and the utter subduing of a
pestilent See Coleman's Letters in his Trial, p. 69. and Published since by Sir
Geo. Treby.
Heresy, which had domineered over a great part of this Northern World a long
time; should immediately give over all foreign Correspondence subservient to
so blessed a work, after the writing of those Letters 1675. Alas! it was enough
that he discovered what he knew his own hand attested by his Servants, would
betray and detect him in; but this man of so seigned Candor and Ingenuity,
thought it meritorious as well as lawful to deny whatsoever he saw could not be
proved against him by his own Papers. And had not his former Letters been
taken, he would have denied all kind of Correspondence with the Confessor, as
well, and with much more probability, than that any such communication was
afterward maintained betwixt them. Nor Secondly would the Consult April 24.
1678. have ever been acknowledged, but that it was mentioned in a Letter
written by one Peter's a Jesuit to one Tonstal of the Sea the Trial of the five
Jesuits.
same Society, to meet at the said Consult, which Letter was taken among
Harcourt's Papers, when his Chamber was searched: For had it not been for the
finding of that Letter, they would have confidently denied the whole thing; and
I am sure with more reputation to their wisdom, than by the endeavoring now to
impose upon the World, that the said Consult was only upon the score of a
trivial Meeting. For had that been all the reason for their Assembly, what
necessity was there for these words; Every one is also to be minded not to
hasten to London long before the time appointed, nor to appear much about the
Town till the Meeting be over, lest occasion should be given to suspect the
design. Finally secrecy as to the time and place is much recommended, to all
those that receive summons, as it will appear of its own nature necessary.

The whole strain of the Letter intimates, that there was more then to be
transacted, than it is for their Interest to have known. What less does the
Judication of design, which was to be industriously concealed, and the giving
an account that the nature of the thing, which they were to meet about,
required the utmost secrecy, impart and signify to all Impartial men than what
Dr. Oats had declared to be the business of that Consult, long before this
Letter was found. Thirdly, When some things which men have affirmed with the
highest Asseverations, shall be found notoriously false, it is a just ground of
suspecting their Truth and Integrity in other things, though the Evidence upon
which we disbelieved them be not so apparent and palpable. Now, did not Gavan
acquit all the Jesuits save Mariana from allowing King-killing Doctrine; and
that in near as positive and emphatical, as those wherein he expressed and
declared his own Innocence with reference to the Plot, because the Jesuits
(says Gavan) are so falsely charged for holding King-killing Doctrine, I think
it my duty to protest to See Mr. Gauans Speech before his Execution at Tyburn.
you with my last dying words, that neither I in particular, nor the Jesuits in
general, hold any such Opinion, but utterly abhor and detest it. And I do
assure you, that amongst the vast number of Authors which among the Jesuits
have Printed Philosophy, Divinity Cases, or Sermons, there is not one, to the
best of my knowledge, that allows of King-killing Doctrine, or holds this
position, that it is lawful for a private person to kill a King, although a
Heretic, although a Pagan, although a Tyrant; there is not I say one Jesuit
that holds this, except Mariana the Spanish Jesuit, and he defenas it not
absolutely, but only problematically, for which his book was called in, and
that Opinion expunged and censured.

Let us now join Issue with Gavan on this point, and refer it to the Readers to
judge of this Jesuits sincerity and truth in all the rest that he said, by his
falsehood in this particular. What! not one Jesuit that allows the King-killing
Doctrine? when Father Campian tells us expressly, That all the Jesuits have
entered In Epist. ad conciliarios Reginae Augliae, p. 22.
into a Covenant to destroy all Heretical Kings, by whatsoever ways and means
they are able best to effect it? What! not one Jesuit but Mariana, that
maintains this, and that his Book was called in upon that account, whereas that
Book of Mariana was never called in by the Authority of the Alegambe in
Biblioth. script. societ. Jesu, p. 258.
Church. And that Sanctanellus is known to have written a Book containing the
same principles, which was therefore condemned to be burnt by the Parliament of
Paris? What! not one Jesuit that holds it lawful for a private person to kill a
King, although a Heretic, although a Pagan, although a Tyrant! whereas not
only Suarez assures us, That a King being In defens. fidei lib 6. n. 14, etc.
Aphorism. p. 115. de Instit. Tom. 4. T. 3. disp. 6. Vid. Less. de Instit. lib.
2. c. 9. dub. 4.
deposed by the Papal Sentence, he may be slain by any private person; but
Emanuelsa, Molina, and many others do affirm, that the Pope having
Excommunicated and Deposed a Prince, any one may thereupon kill him, and be the
Executioner of the Judgment pronounced by the Universal and Infallible Father.
It were easy to produce a large Catalogue of Jesuits, who have all written in
Justification of the same Opinion, but that these are enough to demonstrate how
little credit is to be given to the Dying Speech of this audacious and impudent
Person, who having the confidence to tell the world, that if he should say any
thing falsely at that season, he must expect nothing but eternal damnation,
should nevertheless endeavor to impose so grossly upon the world, and that in a
matter of fact which is so obvious and palpable. Nay, this very Gavan, who
renounceth all King-killing principles, did nevertheless tell Mrs. Skipwith
that the Queen might lawfully kill the King merely for violating her Bed; yea
that she was bound See Mr. Sergeants and Mr. Morrices Informations.
to do it, and that if she did not, she was guilty of his greater damnation in
suffering him to continue in sin. And when we doubt but that he who thought it
lawful to advise the Murdering of his Prince for Adultery, would much more
pursue the destroying of him for Heresy. But when men have renounced all fear
of God, and regard to truth, and do only consult what may be most subservient
to the wicked Designs which they have had in agitation, and the Accomplishment
whereof they would transmit, with as much hopefulness and security as they can
to others; it is righteous with the Lord, whose name they so daringly profane,
to suffer them to betray and discover themselves beyond all excuse and
palliation in some one particular, that the easy and credulous part of mankind
may be cautioned and instructed to distrust as well as suspend believing them
in all the rest.

Nor are Coleman and Gavan the only persons, who in the Asseveratious of their
Innocence, have betrayed their guilt, and left evident footsteps of their
falsehood, when they pretended by all that might obtain credit among men, to
speak nothing but truth. For Mr. Harcourt, a man whose Age and Experience
should have rendered him more wary, though his Religion did not teach him
Integrity and Candor, has been left under the same Infatuation, and in
reference to some particulars of which he would have acquitted himself, has
discovered as much folly as villainy. For whereas among other things deposed
against him, to prove his being guilty of the Plot, Mr. Dugdale testified that
he had seen a Letter written with Father Harcourt's own hand to Father Evers,
declaring the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and dated the very night
wherein it was done, being the 12th of October 1678. and that upon this
Intelligence he had declared at one Elds, who keeps an Alehouse in Tixall, on
Monday October 14. that a Justice of the Peace who lived at Westminster was
murdered in London.

Now as it was not possible that he could have notice of it there so soon, but
from one that was accessory to it, and a Conspirator in it, not being known in
London till the Thursday following; is there any thing more probable, than that
he arrived at the certainty of it, in the way and by the means which he
declares. This all the Papists seemed sensible of, and therefore attempted to
prove by some witnesses in whose presence this news was said to be reported by
Mr. Dugdale, that there was no such thing said by him, or heard by them. They
have Wit enough to understand, that there was no other way to prevent peoples
believing their being guilty of that horrid Murder, or to discharge Harcourt
from a suspicion of having given the Information that it was effected, but by
affirming that there was no such Intelligence arrived there, till the Saturday
sevennight after. And on the confidence that they could bribe the persons in
whose presence it was said to be told, to testify the contrary; and that there
could be no other Evidence given of it but Mr. Dugdales bare Affirmation; Mr.
Harcourt not only assumed the confidence to deny it upon his Trial, but to
declare at his See the Speeches of the five Jesuits.
Death, That as he hoped, by the merits and passion of Jesus Christ, for
salvation, that he was as innocent as the Child unborn, of what was laid to his
charge. And yet two Gentlemen of known worth, and unquestionable reputation,
namely, Edward Birch Esquire and John Turton Esquire have deposed upon Oath that the
aforesaid Murder was commonly discoursed of about Tixall in Staffordshire,
before it was known here in London, that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was killed;
nay, as if this were not demonstrative and convincing enough how the
Intelligence behoved to reach thither, and by whose means that Loyal and
Protestant Magistrate was so barbarously Massacred; there are other two
persons, viz. James Ansell of Haywood in Staffordshire, and Mr. William Hanson
of Wilnal in the same County, who testify likewise See my Lord Staffords
Trial, p. 134, 135.
upon Oath, that Mr. Dugdale published the News of the said Murder, in their
hearing at Elds, the Alehouse-keeper in Tixall, on Monday morning; and as they
are of unspotted fame, though of no great Rank or Quality, so they inform not
only as to the time, the house, and the particular place in it where this was
declared, but they mentioned diverse other circumstances corroborative of the
Truth of what they say. And whereas my Lord Stafford thought himself so secure
of overthrowing Mr. Dugdale's credit in reference to all he had testified
besides, by detecting him a Liar in this particular, that he not only charged
him with Perjury in it, but bore himself most confidently in, when upon his
defense of having fully disproved this part of his Evidence; it will not be
amiss to consider the Witnesses he produced, and what they alleged for the
invalidating Mr. Dugdale's Testimony in this matter.

Now the Persons he relied so much upon, for this service, and whose Authority
he ascribed so much unto, as to have expected, that all men should have
submitted to what they said with an implicit faith, were Mr. Phillips
Incumbent at Tixall, and one Mr. Sambitch who being reported to have been
present when Mr. Dugdale communicated the foresaid Intelligence, declared in
Court that there was no such thing spoken or related in their hearing. But sure
it is more rational to receive the Testimony of those who depose an
Affirmative, than those who take upon them to justify a Negative, and
especially after the Expiration of two years since the thing was said: And it
is likewise more agreeable to all the measures of Justice, that they are rather
to be believed who deposed upon Oath, than they who did not. And for one of my
Lords two Witnesses, namely, Mr. Sambich his deafness might excuse him, in
saying he heard no such thing, though at the same nearness to Mr. Dugdale when
the words were spoken, as Mr. Hanson or Mr. Ansell were. And besides though his
deafness hindered his hearing Mr. Dugdale when he communicated that morning the
news of the Murder, nevertheless he had so far arrived at the knowledge of it
some time or other that day, that he acquainted Charles Chetwyn Esquire with it in
the Afternoon, as the said Charles Chetwyn Esquire deposed upon Oath at the Trial
of the Jesuits, and upon the occasion I have mentioned this Gentleman. I shall
crave Liberty to rectify one mistake in the Printed Relation of that Trial,
which is, that whereas Charles Chetwyn Esquire swore, this was told him by Sambich
on Monday, as Edward Smith Esquire and Bencher of the Middle Temple, and Justice
Warcup, who were both present at the said Trial, are ready to depose; yet
through the fault either of the Printer, or of him that took the Trial, Tuesday
is set down in the Published Account.

But to proceed to Mr. Phillips, the other witness produced to detract from the
credit of Mr. Dugdale in this matter, where we desire to observe, that together
with the denial of his having heard any such words, he denied likewise his
being at that Alehouse either that day, or the following, which as none about
Tixall who know his constant custom of visiting Eld's once or twice a day, can
easily believe; so he appears plainly to be a very bold and venturous person in
taking upon him to say that he was not such a day in a house where he used
constantly to resort, and this after such a compass of time wherein without
reflection upon the weakness of his memory, he may be supposed not to remember
what he either did, or where he was so long before. But besides this, we have
something else to add, whereby the Authority of this Parson against a
Protestant is everlastingly blasted and supplanted. For whereas he thought to
recommend his Testimony by pretending himself a Minister of the Church of
England, there is an Information given upon Oath before Justice Warcup against
him, that he the said Phillips declared his readiness to renounce the
Protestant Religion, and forsake the Communion of the Church of England,
providing a competent Annual Provision could be settled upon him for the
maintenance of himself and his Wife and Children: And pursuant hereunto he
employed a friend to treat with my Lord Aston about it, who being very fond of
a Proselyte of such a character, undertook to charge himself with the care of
him and his family: But at the same time under the influence of Father Evers
counsel, he advised him to continue his station for a season where he was; for
by pretending himself still a Minister of the Church of England, he remains
better qualified, and more capacitated to promote the Romish Interest, than if
he should immediately pull off his Mask, and vouch himself openly for a Papal
Convert.

And surely no man can believe him to be a competent witness against the Credit
and Reputation of a Protestant, that is first willing to abjure his Religion
upon so base motives, and then proceeds upon as ill inducements to dissemble
the Profession of a Religion, which he has declared himself unsatisfied in,
and ready to renounce. He that is not afraid to deal falsely in a matter of so
great importance as Religion, will not scruple to transgress the rules of
Justice, and prevaricate from the lines of Truth in moral Concernments. And
especially when the acquitting himself as he did, may be supposed his
Probationership for his plenary admission into the bosom of the Roman Church,
and the Compensation he was to make for the annual Pension that was to be
settled upon him; nor ought it to surprise any Protestant or True Englishman,
that they have been able to muster up some few persons to detract from the
esteem of Mr. Dugdale, if we do but consider the Methods they have used by
Bribery and Subornation to effect and accomplish it; or that they have
proceeded further than to lessen his Reputation, namely, by offers of money to
engage men to destroy him; and in reference to the first I shall produce the
Testimony of Simon Wright one whom I briefly mentioned before; this person
being known to have been well acquainted with Mr. Dugdale, for that he used in
quality of a Barber frequently to trim him, was accordingly applied unto by Mr.
Plessington, and proffered seven hundred pounds See my Lord Stafford's Trial,
p. 141, 142.
if he would appear as a Witness to take off his Evidence; or if he would
destroy and assassinate him. And for his security as to the obtaining of the
money if he would have complied with the proposal, both Mr. Reeves an
Apothecary in Chancery Lane, and Mr. Deway the Scriviner tendered him their
several obligatory notes. Yea they framed a Paper for him, wherein he was to
testify that Mr. Dugdale had suborned and hired him to swear against Sir James
Symons, and Mr. Gerrard, two Persons accused about the Plot, which Ibid. p.
142, 158.
they prevailed with him by money and promises to set his hand unto, and would
have persuaded him to make an Affidavit upon it before a Justice of Peace; the
tenor of which Paper being directed to Sir James Symons, was as follows; I
can, bless God, with a safe Conscience, declare upon Oath, that Mr. Dugdale
has been unkind to me in taking his opportunity of my poverty by reason of a
private meeting of us two by his appointment. He did at that time preffer Ibid.
p. 158.
if I would swear against you and Mr. Gerrard, he would protect me as one of
the King's Evidence, and I should not want money. And now as this Paper alone
is sufficient to detect the ways and methods they have used for overthrowing
the Reputation of Mr. Dugdale; so the Providence of God is to be acknowledged
in the infatuation of my Lord Stafford, who to the blasting of the Papal Cause,
and the evidencing of his and others guilt, in the present Conspiracy produced
it. For being in their hands, it was in their power to have suppressed it, as
it appears by the Testimony of Wright they did another Paper of much more
consequence, to which Ibid. p. 158.
also they had suborned, hired, and wheedled him to set his hand.

And as if it had not been enough to endeavor to corrupt persons to swear
falsely against him, they have dealt with some to assassinate and kill him, as
appears not only by the Informations of the aforesaid Simon Wright, who was to
have stabbed him, and by the Informations of Thomas Lander, who they would have
persuaded to put fire to the Room where Mr. Dugdale lay, and to burn him in his
Bed; both which Informations are published lately by Thomas Symmons at the
Prince's Arms in Ludgate Street, but also by the following deposition of Simon
Ansell.

The Information of Simon Ansell, as it was taken before one of His Majesty's
Justices of Peace in Staffordshire, and transmitted to Edmund Warcup Esquire etc.
This Informant says, That he was at my Lord Astons Black-Smiths to have his
Horse shodd there, and that in the mean time Mr. Francis Aston eldest Son to
the Lord Aston, came to the said Black-Smith's Shop, and calling to this
Informant, took him apart, and told him, that if he would he might with ease do
his Father and him the greatest kindness imaginable: He this Informant answered
he would use all possible means to serve him and his Father; if you do, said
Mr. Francis Aston, and be true as to what I shall instruct you, you shall have
that piece of ground which you hold of my Father in Brinsh Rent-free for seven
Years, and Ten Pounds in present Money besides. He this Informant answered,
that he would be true and faithful to him and his Father, and desired to know
what they would have him to do: Mr. Francis Aston then told this Informant,
that Mr. Dugdale was coming into the Country, and that he would have him the
said Informant go from place to place with the said Dugdale, and to watch his
opportunity till he could find a convenient place to kill the said Dugdale,
being his Fathers greatest and only Enemy: And that the surest way of
accomplishing this, was to charge a Pistol with a brace of Bullets: and as this
Informant should find convenience to shoot him in the back, saying he will so
certainly kill him: And withal he advised me that thereupon, that I should ride
to the next Town in a great fright, and tell there, that Dugdale and I, being
riding on the Rode together, were met and assaulted by two men, one of which
shot Mr. Dugdale and killed him: And this, said he, will both oblige my Father,
my self, and all our Friends for ever, and also remove all suspicion from your
self, considering what the Papists think themselves allowed to do against the
Enemies of their Church.

And considering how the Nation is filled with men of ill Principles and
profligate lives; it is no wonder that they have been able to produce some
persons to detract from the Credit of the Kings Evidence, but it is rather to
be accounted matter of wonder, that they have not found Instruments to
assassinate every man of them.

But to proceed, these Conspirators whom we have already mentioned, are not the
only persons who have left uncontrollable Evidence of their guilt, when with
the highest Confidence they asserted their Innocence; for Mr. Ireland also had
the Fate to betray himself in the same way of Indiscretion and Folly; for
thinking to have invalidated the Testimony of Dr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe; he
affirms, he protests, he calls God to Witness, that he was in Staffordshire,
from the fifth of August, till the fourteenth of September: Whereas they had
sworn that he was, and that they had seen him at Lonaon within that time. And
as if it had not been enough to have insisted upon it at his Trial, he sealed
it with most solemn Asseverations at his death And yet it has appeared since
by the Testimony of Mr. Jennison, a person of an ancient and considerable
family, and of an unquestionable Reputation, and Mr. Irelands own Relation and
Kinsman; that Dr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe's Credit deserved not to be impeached on
this account; (nor by any other Asseverations or Oaths, by any of the Papal
Communion offered against them, or either of the King's Evidences) seeing as he
affirms, he had both seen and Conversed with him at his Lodging in
Russel Street on the 19th. of August, and this he not only affirms upon the
Word and Oath of a Gentleman and a Christian, but by such particular and
undeniable Circumstances, that there is no man of sense but must acknowledge
himself convinced, that the Jesuit dyed with a Lie in his Mouth; He that has
(or will) read his several Narratives concerning this, and what I have observed
in mine in reference to it, will soon see that Ireland discovered his being in
Town, not because he was not there, but because the Errand he came, and
Employed himself about was so black and detestable, and with all so positive
sworn against him, that he knew no way to vindicate himself from it, but by
swearing point blank that he was not so much as upon the spot where these
things charged upon him were said to have been transacted. But because there is
no Sore -- and men live to be further confirmed and established in these very
things, whereof they are already sufficiently persuaded. I shall subjoyn one
Testimony more of an honored and worthy Gentleman and a Kinsman of Mr.
Ireland, who also saw and discoursed about several things with him in London,
when he so positively calls God to witness that he was elsewhere, which
confirms Mr. Jenisons, Dr. Oats, and Mr. Bedlow's Evidence; The Gentleman is
desirous for a season to have his Name concealed, but is a Person of known
worth, and will be ready to Confirm what is here said before any Magistrate
when called thereunto. And whosoever considers, not only the many reproaches
fastened upon the Names, but the attempts made upon the Lives, of several of
those who have concerned themselves in detecting and obstructing this Hellish
Plot, will think it no matter of surprise or amasement that Gentlemen should be
shy in concerning themselves in it, especially when the life of their Prince,
or the safety of the People does not so much depend upon it, but that all which
their Discovery will amount unto, is only the detecting the Perjury of a Romish
Priest. Nay is it not come to that, that it is very little less than a
dishonor to be a Discoverer, even where the Kings life is eminently in danger?
So that if you would in some Company, design the Exposing of a man, you can not
do it with a greater Emphasis, and more to the general gust, than by
proclaiming him an Evidence: Which as it may serve for an Apology, why this
Gentleman conceals his Name, so I do here pledge my Faith, that the World is
not shamm'd by a Counterfeit Information, but that what is here subjoyned, is
no more, than what a Person of entire Credit and very good Quality, will be
ready to Justify; Namely, That this Gentleman, being about the beginning of
Bartholomew Fair 1678. going up Holborn, with an intention to carry a Lady and
a Relation of his to the Fair, to entertain her with what the place could
afford, or at least what she would principally have a mind to see, he
accidentally met with Mr. Ireland who was also his Relation, and between whom
and him there had intervened a long Acquaintance. And that Mr. Ireland of whose
Company, because of their different Principles he was never fond, not only
accosting him, but being importunate to drink with him, he accordingly attended
him into an adjoining Alehouse at the Sign of the Three Pipes. Where they not
only continued almost an hour together, but had much Discourse concerning
Religion: And that Mr. Ireland by way of sounding his Inclination to the Papal
Church, asked him, whether if their Religion were Established by Law and
publicly owned in England, he would not then embrace it, and come over to
their Communion; To which the Gentleman replied, That the Popish Religion was
so repugnant to the first Principles of Reason, that he could never abandon his
understanding so far as to espause or entertain it, but that if things should
come to that pass as Mr. Ireland suggested, he would submit to the Government
in Popish hands, but not to Popery. So that there can be nothing more evident,
than that Ireland was in London; when he calls God and Angels to witness, and
pawns his Salvation upon it, that he was in Staffordshire. Who could have
believed that a Person not only pretending to be a Christian, but of a sacred
Order in the Church, and trusted with the Dispensation of Sacred Mysteries, and
assuming the Conduct of the Souls of Men, durst have had the boldness and
impudence to dare Heaven, and affront the Omniscient Majesty, as well as abuse
Mankind, in so horrid a manner. This is a new way of leaving the World with
hopes and expectations of Happiness, to renounce all right to, and interest in
future blessedness, if Dissimulation and Perjury may not entitle them to it. We
may justly conceive, that they think themselves dispensed with to Blaspheme the
Name of God, whenever their doing so is subservient to the benefit and
advantage of the Church of Rome. And that they reckon, such impieties will not
only be forgiven them, upon the account of the End which they are perpetrated
for, but become Sanctified and commence Meritorious. However, I think he
forfeits his Discretion, as well as proclaims himself unworthy the name of a
Protestant, that can believe the Asseveration of a Priest or Jesuit in
reference to his own Innocence, after we have so demonstratively detected Mr.
Ireland, as well as those we have already mentioned, to be such horrid
Impostors. And we may also gather, with what Resignation the Popish Laity
subject themselves to the Commands of their Ghostly Fathers, being so ready to
Sacrifice their Souls to Eternal Punishments, in their protesting that to be
true which they know to be false, rather than to dispute or decline obedience
in whatsoever they require of them. For by the amazing prevarication in the
first Principles of Morality, which we find those that they had mustered up
from the Country, guilty of in this matter, we may very well conclude that
they had implicitly trusted both their Reputations and Souls, into the hands of
their Priests; And that they account it a Criminal Matter to enquire how they
dispose of them.

. 10. Having thus far Detected not only the villainous Perjuries of Romanists
which are of a more ancient date, but made some fresh Reflections upon, and
given ample Discoveries of the blasphemous falsehoods; that several Executed for
this late Plot, have dyed guilty of; We now proceed to lay open the
unparalleled Impudence, and brazen Impostures of the late Viscount Stafford.
And the first thing we shall take notice of is this, that he renounceth in his
last breath all hope of Salvation, if ever he were guilty himself, or knew of
any that were, of the Crimes whereof he was Accused. And yet by a Letter
directed to my Lord Aston, which was found in his Study at Tixall when
searched, and to which was subscribed Stafford, and the Letter dated from
Stafford October 8. 78. the Plot is both confessed under his own hand, and his
particular Interest and Cooperation in it acknowledged. The words of which
Letter were as follows. My Lord the Plot is discovered, and we are all
undone. And I am going into Shropshire to stifle it as much as I can; and I
pray do you the same in Staffordshire. This Letter was seized by Captain Thomas
Lane a Justice of Peace and Deputy Lieutenant in Staffordshire. And accordingly
he Deposed before the Committee appointed as Managers for the Trial of my Lord
Stafford, and was ready to have proved it openly in Court if he had been called
thereunto. But those worthy Gentlemen, that were entrusted by the House of
Commons to prosecute the Impeachment of Treason against Stafford, did upon some
prudential Considerations decline the mentioning of this matter; And the rather
because they had other sufficient Evidence for the Convicting of that Criminal.

And they were not willing to make any Critical Enquiry, how this Letter under
my Lords hand came to be suppressed or lost, as it seems it was, from its not
being Communicated neither to the Committee of Secrecy, nor to the Committee of
Managers of the Trial. But this Mr. Lane Deposes, That having shown it to Mr.
Mosely a Gentleman of Quality in the foresaid County, and to diverse others who
have attested the same before a Committee of Parliament, he did transmit it to
one of the Clerks of the Council, and that he received a Letter concerning the
receipt of it from one of the Clerks. Had the Plot succeeded this late Lord
would have been proud of it, and endeavored to derive glory to his Family from
it; but being discovered, and it appearing so full of horror to all the sober
part of Mankind, they have no way left for the preventing the ruin of
themselves and Posterities, but, though to the loss of their Souls, to disclaim
and abjure it. Alas! We needed no Witnesses to tell us of a Plot carried on by
the Papists for many years past against our Religion; the Caballing of the
chief Factors of the Romish Party, the raising Money upon their Estates at
home, and promoting Collections amongst the Papal Zealots abroad, the putting
themselves under the Conduct of Foreign Councils, and the industriously
providing and furnishing themselves throughout the whole Kingdom with Horse and
Arms, were so many uncontrollable Evidences of it to all Persons of ordinary
Converse and Observation. And the Depositions of such as have come in to make
detection of this Conspiracy, do so correspond with what most men have seen and
took notice of, that the utmost they amount unto, is only to afford us a legal
proof of that, whereof we had before a moral assurance. Can it be imagined that
Coleman, Throgmorton, Leyborn, should only be acquainted with so great and
important a Design: and that Powis, Bellasis, Arundel, and Stafford should be
ignorant of it. Who knows not that the former were too inconsiderable to give
either Authority to so weighty an undertaking, or yield that assistance which
was necessary to the effecting and accomplishing of it. None below those of the
highest Quality in the Papal Party, were furnished either with Wisdom to
conduct it, Interest to obtain Foreign Countenance unto it, or Treasure and
Power to possess the meanest with the least hope of success. Could Coleman
judge that their Design made so happy an advance, that they should quickly see
the ruin of the Protestant Party; as his Letter to the Nuncio bearing date the
9th. of August testifies; If there had not been a general Confederacy among
all the Papists in England, to cut off and extirpate those modern Heretics: Or
is it possible to fasten any other sense upon Father Irelands Letter from St.
Omers, wherein he tells his Correspondents here, that all things were in a
readiness there, as soon as the Blow should be given here, but that they had
both projected the murdering of the King, and having once accomplished that, to
proceed immediately to the extirpation of the Protestants. I should not have
published the foregoing Letter, but that the safety as well as the Honor of
the King, and the Vindication of the Justice of the Nation upon this Traitorous
Malefactor, exacted it of me. And I wish some Persons may be advised and
instructed, how they behave themselves in reference to Papers and Informations
which arrive with them for the future, seeing they may hereby find and observe,
that their carriages and transactions lie not so hid and concealed, as they may
to their own ruin at last, though to our danger at present, believe and
imagine. But let us in the next place consider how many Witnesses have
testified my Lord Stafford's share and part in the Plot, and you will possibly
be astonished, how he durst shut up his dying Speech in saying with so little
concernedness with relation to the righteous Tribunal he was immediately to
appear before; I do with my last breath truly assert my Innocence, and hope
the Omniscient All-seeing just God will deal with me accordingly. Were they not
so many, that for any to hope to be acquitted upon bare denying what such a
number have Deposed, were to make the Conviction of Malefactors and Criminals a
thing wholly impossible. And were they not all Papists and purposed so to live
and dye, if the consideration of this Plot had not filled them with horror
concerning a Religion that justified so Execrable a Conspiracy. Nor was it
originally any hatred against the Popish Religion, that made them accuse the
principal Members of the Roman Communion of those Villainies and Crimes; but it
was the Treasons which the Roman Catholics were engaged in, that made them
renounce that Religion which put them upon it, and whose Principles made it
Meritorious to prosecute it with Fire and Sword. Besides, these Witnesses were
Persons whom this Lord is never said to have disobliged, so that they can not
be thought to have accused him out of Malice and Revenge; And which is very
material for obtaining belief to their Testimony, they were wholly Strangers
one to another till after the Discovery of the Plot, so that the charging my
Lord Stafford and others with such and such Crimes, was not any contrivance
among themselves, nor a thing they can be supposed to have concerted between
them. And if we consider the nature and quality of their Evidence, it is such
that it is impossible any man should have ever ventured upon the giving of it,
unless it had been true, and that they had personal and particular knowledge of
all the Circumstances of it. For they not only declare all with the greatest
plainness and distinctness, but whenever there was any attempt to distract or
entangle them by cross Questions, they both persevere to answer with the
greatest presence and sedateness, and by their Replies to reflect further light
and certainty on what they said before; For as the particulars they insisted
upon, are too many for the most fertile Imagination to have invented, so as to
be able to make them cohere, much less to cause one of them support and
fortify another; So notwithstanding the number of the things they have
Deposed, and that there was no previous acquaintance amongst them, yet they
have in nothing contradicted one another, nor has any one by endeavoring to
support the truth of what himself said, undermined or supplanted the certainty
of what others have alleged. Or can it be supposed that though they had been
never so wicked, and would not have scrupled the destroying the lives of
innocent Persons in order to profit and advantage, that yet they should not
only be such fools but so perfectly mad, as to assault the lives of so many of
the chiefest Peers of the Nation, and so befriended not only in their numerous
Relations, but in the interest which they had as well in his Majesty as those
of greatest Authority about him. Surely nothing but an assured knowledge of the
things which they inform concerning, and a conscientious desire to prevent the
mischiefs which these great persons in combination with others, were hastening
to involve the Nation under, could have ever prevailed with them to expose
themselves to so many visible dangers, as they must needs have foreseen, the
accusing so many Peers, would make them obnoxious and liable unto.

. 11. But this is not the only particular wherein we shall detect and lay open
this false and perjured Person, and therefore we hasten to a second thing
wherein this late Viscount has prostituted his Conscience by asserting that
for a truth, which we shall prove by undubitable Testimony to be a gross and
impudent falsehood. And it is some advantage that we can deal with the Papists
on a subject, that relates wholly to matter of Fact; for here both the meanest
and those of the narrowest Understanding, are as capable of being Umpires
betwixt us and them, and of comprehending what is proved, or what is not, as
those of a more elevated Condition, and improved Abilities. This Lord then
having both protested upon his Trial, that he never spoke with Mr. Dugdale but
once, and averred it upon his Death and Salvation, that he never spoke unto See
his Speech upthe Scaffold.
him of any thing save about a Footboy, or Footman, or Foot-race, and never
was then alone with him; We shall therefore by some of the many undeniable
Depositions which we could produce, demonstrate that he has been often with
him, and that at times and seasons when there could be no occasion to discourse
of any such affair or business betwixt them, And this Viscount See Page 78.
having also upon his Trial solemnly attested God, that he detested Dugdale, as
so mean a Knave, that often and often, when dry at my Lord Aston' s Table, he
would not call for Drink when he saw him by him, but often refused to take
Drink at his hands; I shall therefore prove by the Testimonies of several
Persons whose Credit can no ways be impeached, that the time was, when he had
another kind of value for Mr. Dugdale, and that he has withdrawn from the
Society of very considerable Persons to converse with this very Dugdale, whom
he is pleased to represent as so mean a Knave, and that he frequently declined
to take Drink at his hands.

The Information of William Skeleton late of Horecross in the County of
Stafford, now of St. Martins in the Fields in the County of Middlesex Gent.
taken upon Oath this 17th. day of January 1680. before me Edmond Warcupp Esquire
one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace in the said County and City.
Middle. and Westminster. ss.
THis Informant says, that he waited on Robert Howard of Horecross in the said
County of Stafford Esquire to the House of the Lord Aston at Tixall in the said
County of Stafford, on the 12th. of September 1678. and then and there saw
William late Lord Viscount Stafford talking with Mr. Stephen Dugdale. And on
the 13th. day of the said month of September 1678. this Informant stepping by
accident into a Room there called the little Dining Room or little Parlour,
some time before Dinner, he then and there saw the said William late Viscount
Stafford, and the said Stephen Dugdale, talking and discoursing together in
private, no other person then being in the said Room besides themselves,
whereupon this Informant soon withdrew lest he should interrupt their
Conference. And this Informant is most assured of the Premises, by a certain
Memorandum, which he then wrote down in his own Pocket Book, which at the time
of this Information is produced. And he likewise saw the said William late
Viscount Stafford, and the said Stephen Dugdale, discoursing together in Tixall
Park in the Buck season of the same year 1678. no other Person being with them,
while the Gentry then Assembled, were hunting the Buck in the said Park. And
this Informant further says, that as he was walking in Tixall Hall about the
18th. or 19th. day of September 1678. he observed the said William late Lord
Viscount Stafford go into a Room called the great Parlour, or the Dining Room
which adjoined to his Lordships Lodging Chamber, and immediately the said
Stephen Dugdale followed him into the said Room, and this Informant saw them
two alone discoursing together, but how long they continued there, or what
their Discourse was, he knows not. And by these and other Observations, this
Informant did believe that the said Stephen Dugdale, was in good esteem, and in
some trust with the said late Viscount Stafford. And he further says, that the
said Stephen Dugdale was then Steward to the Lord Aston, and had great Power
and Command in the said Lord Astons Family at Tixall, and bought and sold all
things relating to the Family or Estate at Tixall, and was the Chiefest man in
the Lord Astons Family, and paid the Wages of Laborers, and had a very good
Name and Reputation among the Gentry of that Country, as well Papists as
Protestants, and was frequently termed Honest Stephen Dugdale. And this
Informant further says, that he has observed the said William late Lord
Viscount Stafford, own the said Stephen Dugdale with respect, calling him Mr.
Dugdale at Dinners and Suppers before the said Lord Astons face, both when they
did eat in private, and when they did eat in public with other Gentry and
Persons of Quality in the said House, to which there was great resort in that
year. And this Informant likewise observed the said Stephen Dugdale was well
respected and very civilly treated by the said William late Lord Viscount
Stafford in other Companies and Places, where they Occasionally met. And
further says not,

William Skeleton.
Jurat' die and Anno supradict' coram me,

Edm. Warcupp.


Vera Copia Ex' per me,

Edmond Warcupp.



The Information of Walter Collins of the Borough of Stafford Gent. taken upon
Oath the 19th. day of January 1680. before Tho. Blacks, and Sampson Byrch, his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said Borough.
Stafford Borough ss.
WHo says, that in or about the year of our Lord Christ 1678. he saw the late
Lord Stafford, and Mr. Stephen Dugdale, walk together in the Court Yard
belonging to Tixall Hall, between the Gate House and the said Hall, about the
space of a quarter of an hour, and that no other Person did walk with them, or
was in hearing of them.

Wall. Collins.
Jurat' die and Anno predict' coram

Tho. Blake, Sam. Byrch.


Signed in presence of William Southall.

Thomas Jordan of Little-Haywood in the County of Stafford Gent. one of the
High-Constables for the said County,
Staff. ss.
Says, that in the Summer time in the year of our Lord One thousand six
hundred seventy and eight, on a Thursday, being a Bowling day at Tixall in the
said County, he this Informant saw the Lord Stafford and the Lord Aston stand
together on the side of the Bowling-Green, a distance from the rest of the
Company there, and out of their hearing: And while their Lordships stood at
that distance, this Informant saw Mr. Stephen Dugdale go to their Lordships and
stand with them in that place out of hearing of the rest of the Company about a
quarter of an hour, and their Lordships and Mr. Dugdale did Discourse together
all that time as this Informant verily believes, (this Informant being in their
sight all that time, but not in their hearing.)

Thomas Jordan.
15 die January 1680. Signed then in the presence of Thomas Whitbey, Edward
Foden.

The Information of William Suelson of Great-Haywood Nailer, taken upon Oath
before Sir Bryan Broughton Knight and Barronet Jan. 13. 1680.
WHo says, that about Michaelmas was two years, he saw the Lord Stafford
walking alone with Mr. Stephen Dugdale upon Tixall Bowling-Alley: And this
Informant says, that he knew the Lord Stafford as well as the one hand from
the other, for he has often seen him at Tixall.

William Suelson.
Jurat' coram me,

B. Broughton.



The Information of Richard Parkin of Shutburrough in the County of Stafford
taken upon Oath in Stafford before James Jews of the Borough of Stafford, and
Thomas Blake and Sampson Byrch Justices of the said Borough.
Staff. ss.
WHo upon his Oath says, that in the Summer time in the year of our Lord
Christ 1677. he saw William late Viscount Stafford, and Mr. Stephen Dugdale
together by themselves and none else with them in the Court at Tixall betwixt
Tixall Hall and the Stables there. And also that he this Informant saw the said
Lord Stafford, and the said Mr. Dugdale together, and none else with them upon
a Hempland belonging to Walter Eld of Tixall.

Rich. Parkin his [A] Mark.
Signed in the presence of William Southall.
15. Jan. 1680. Jurat' coram

James Jews, Tho. Blake, Samp. Byrch.


Vera Copia.



The Information of Tho. Creswell of Little-Haywood Cordwayner Januar. 11. 1680.
Staff.
WHo says, that in the Summer time in the year of our Lord 1676. he was at
Tixall to ride Horses, and about a month before Michaelmas the Lord Stafford
took him to be his Page, with whom he lived a year and a quarter, within that
time my Lord Stafford was three or four times at Tixall, and stayed sometimes
two or three nights together, and three or four mornings he has sent this
Informant to see for Stephen Dugdale and bid him come to him for to speak with
him: And this Informant says, that he has seen him at the least three times
go into the Parlour to my Lord Stafford and his Gentleman, and as soon as Mr.
Dugdale came in, his Gentleman came out, and he remained single with the Lord
Stafford, and at several other places he has seen my Lord Stafford with Mr.
Stephen Dugdale.

The Information of Sampson Rawlins of Tixall in the County of Stafford Tailor.
Staff.
WHo informs, that in the latter end of Summer in the year of our Lord 1678.
the Lord Stafford being then at Tixall, he this Informant saw the said Lord
Stafford and Mr. Stephen Dugdale walk together in Tixall Hall, and after some
time they had been together walking themselves, the said Mr. Dugdale went and
fetched the Lord Aston to the said Lord Stafford.

The Informations above written were taken upon Oath the 11th. of January 1680.
before Henry Vernon Esquire one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the
County of Stafford, in the presence of me,

William Southall.

The Information of Thomas Robinson of Ingestry in the County of Stafford
Husbandman, taken upon Oath the two and twentieth day of January in the year
1680. before James Jews Mayor of the Borough of Stafford, and Sampson Byrch
Justice of Peace for the said Borough.
Staff. ss.
THis Informant says, that in the month of September 1678. he this Informant
being then at Tixall Hall, he saw William late Viscount Stafford and Mr.
Stephen Dugdale come together and none else with them out of a Garden belonging
to Tixall Hall, and afterward they both walked together themselves in the
Walks nigh to the said Garden, but what Discourse they had this Informant knows
not. And at another time after the time aforesaid, the said late Viscount
Stafford came to Tixall Hall on Horseback, and the said Mr. Dugdale meeting his
Lordship, and after he had saluted him and showed his obedience to his Lordship
they both did walk themselves together into Tixall Hall and none else with them.

Thomas Robinson his Mark.
Jur' apud Stafford vicesimo secundo die Januarii Anno Regni Caroli secundi
nunc Ang. xxxii. coram nobis,

James Jews Mayor, Sampson Byrch.



The Information of Ann Hinckley (Wife of Samuel Hinckley of Penckrich in the
County of Stafford Cordwayner) taken upon Oath the ninth day of Febr. 1680.
before Richard Congreve Esquire one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace for the
County aforesaid.
Who says, that in or about the month of August one thousand six hundred
seventy and eight, this Informant went with her Husband to Tixall in the said
County, to speak with Mr. Stephen Dugdale, and coming to one Elds House in
Tixall, her Husband desired her to go into Tixall Hall to look for the said Mr.
Dugdale, and when she came into the said Hall, she saw the said Mr. Dugdale
with an ancient Gentleman in the said Hall, standing both together and talking,
and after some time this Informant asked one Joseph Tarbox (who stood with this
Informant) who that Gentleman was, who told her it was the Lord Stafford, And
she saw at that time the said Lord Stafford pull a Paper out of his Pocket, and
gave it to the said Mr. Dugdale to read, and after Mr. Dugdale had looked on
the said Paper, he gave it again to the said Lord Stafford, And she further
says, that she continued in sight of the said Lord Stafford and Mr. Dugdale
above the space of half an hour, and during that time there was no person with
them: And she further says, that afterward Mr. Dugdale came to this
Informant, and bid her go to one Dorothy Aldridges in Tixall aforesaid and he
would come to her, which she did, taking her Husband with her, and being there
with Mr. Dugdale, he the said Mr. Dugdale after some Discourse, told this
Informant that he must go again to the said Lord Stafford, for he had earnest
business with him: And further says, that both in the said Hall and the said
Aldridges House she heard Mr. Dugdale say, that the Person he was talking with
was the Lord Stafford.

Anne Hinkley, [A] her Mark.
She is a Papist.


Die and Anno predict' Jurat' coram me,

Rich. Congreve.



The Information of John Boulton of the Borough of Stafford Sadler, taken upon
Oath at Stafford aforesaid before Tho. Blake and Sampson Byrch his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for the said Borough, on the 19th. day of January 1680.
Stafford Borough. ss.
Who says, that in the Summer time about the year of our Lord Christ 1678. he
saw the Lord Stafford on a Bowling-day on the Bowling-Green at Tixall amongst
many Gentlemen, and saw Mr. Stephen Dugdale come to the said Green, and saw the
Lord Stafford go from the other Gentlemen and meet the said Mr. Dugdale, and
ask him where he had been; Mr. Dugdale answered he had been at Haywood and had
got some Betts about a Race; after which this Informant saw the said Lord
Stafford and Mr. Stephen Dugdale withdraw themselves at a further distance from
the said Company, and there continued without any other Company than themselves
for the space of almost a quarter of an hour.

John Boulton.
Jurat' die and Anno predict' coram

Tho. Blake, Sam. Byrch.


Signed in the presence of William Southall.

The Information of Semer Ansell of Shutburrough in the County of Stafford
Skinner, taken upon Oath in the Borough of Stafford the two and twentieth day
of January 1680. before James Jews Esquire Mayor of the Borough of Stafford, and
Sampson Byrch one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said Borough.
Staff. ss.
Who says, in the Summer time in the year of our Lord 1678. he saw William
late Lord, alias Viscount Stafford and Mr. Stephen Dugdale talking together at
a place called Ruffecroft-Gate in Tixall and no other Person with them, and
they both continued together themselves there above a quarter of an hour in the
sight of this Informant, who stayed to speak with the said Mr. Dugdale, and
within few days after he this Informant saw the said late Lord Stafford and Mr.
Dugdale together themselves and none else with them in the place called the
Hall in Tixall for the space of above half an hour, and afterward both of them
went together into the great Parlour into Tixall Hall.

Semer Ansell.
Jur' apud Stafford xxxii. die Januarii Anno Regni Caroli secundi nunc Ang.
xxxii. coram nobis,

James Jews, Sampson Byrch.



Now though these be but a few of the many Depositions which we could have
produced to this purpose, yet they are enough to detect the Imposture and
Perjury of the late Viscount Stafford, and to convince the World what little
Credit is to be given to a Papist in the solemnest appeals which he makes to
God, and that in those very Circumstances, when the worst of men are usually
found to be candid and ingenuous. For whereas Mr. Dugdale has been represented
as an infamous Person, and one that neither my Lord Aston, nor any other
Gentlemen put the least confidence in, or esteemed worthy of common Respect; it
is made fully evident by these Depositions, that he had not only more than an
ordinary Reputation in my Lord Aston's Family, the management of my Lords
chiefest Concernments being entrusted with him, but that he was highly valued
by the whole Country for Candor, Integrity, Justice and Truth, beyond what
other Papists under all the Recommendation of Birth, Breeding and Inheritance
could arrive unto. And as to be accounted and styled Honest Mr. Dugdale was the
greatest honor that a virtuous ambition could make him aspire unto, so his
Temper and whole Conduct, since called forth to appear on a more public
Theater, do proclaim him every way worthy of that Compellation. And this
Character which he obtained in Staffordshire does so correspond with what we
have seen and observed of him in London, that all impartial men do readily
acknowledge the justness of it. And whereas my Lord Stafford protested in the
presence of God, that as he was never with him alone, so he never spoke to him
but once, and that only concerning a Footman; Here are proofs neither to be
distrusted nor contradicted, that he had both frequent conversation with him,
and admitted him into those privacies which others were debarred and shut out
from. And indeed by the familiarity he entertained him with, and the
sequestring themselves from all other Company whenever they discoursed
together, we may easily imagine what was the Subject they treated about. For
what else should recommend another Persons Servant to those Privacies which my
Lord Stafford vouchsafed Mr. Dugdale, or prefer one of so mean a Rank to be
selected from among the company of the best Gentlemen to be discoursed with
apart, but that there was some important Design on foot of which they two were
particularly conscious. And could this in probability be any other, than the
mighty Affair of destroying the King, and overthrowing the Protestant Religion,
which the whole Papal Party had so long designed, and were at that time filled
with the highest confidences of accomplishing.

. 12. The next thing that lies before us is the consideration of this late
Lords renouncing all knowledge of Mr. Turbervill, and with what solemnity he
abjured the having so much as at any time seen him. For having at his Trial not
only declared, that he never saw him before in his life, he repeats it in his
Speech See Page 50.
upon the Scaffold, and withal avers upon his Death and Salvation, that he
never spoke one word to Mr. Turbervill, or to his knowledge ever saw him until
his Trial. Some possibly may be ready to believe that my Lord Viscount Stafford
had the gift of forgetfulness, and that the Papists by a peculiar Donation
remember nothing that may either asperse themselves or the interest of the
Catholic Cause. But as they can not tell us where such a privilege is
bequeathed unto them, so we shall make it appear by irrefragable Testimonies
that he was well acquainted with Mr. Turbervill, and that the spring of this
misadventure in denying it, was not the weakness of his Memory, but the badness
of his Conscience. Nor shall I insist upon the Testimony of Mr. Mort, who being
produced at the Trial of my Lord Stafford, deposed, that being acquainted with
Mr. Turbervill at Paris, the said Turbervill (did to the best of his
remembrance) tell him that his Brother who was a Monk had introduced him into
the favor of my Lord Stafford, and that once being in company with Mr.
Turbervill, the said See the said Trial Page 151.
Mr. Turbervill withdrew from him to speak with that Lord, and that he the said
Mort walked about Luxemburg-house till his return. For though this Testimony
does mightily strengthen Mr. Turbervills Evidence, being agreeable in several
circumstances with what he declared; yet forasmuch as the whole is to be found
in the Printed Relation of my Lord Staffords Trial, together with the great and
convincing improvement which an excellent Person made of See Page 181.
it, I shall therefore decline enlarging upon it, and shall proceed to advance
two other Depositions demonstrative of this late Lords insincerity and
falsehood in renouncing before God and men the having had any former knowledge
of Mr. Turbervill.

The Information of John Showter Gent. one of the Clerks in the Crown-Office in
Chancery, taken upon Oath this 3th. day of January 1680. before me Edmond
Warcupp Esquire one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace in the said County and
City.
Middl. and Westminster. ss.
THis Informant says, that about six or seven years ago he did frequently
resort to the Chapel at Tart-Hall to Mass, the then House of William late
Viscount Stafford, and one of those times he met there one Mr. Glassie, who
asked this Informant a List of the Names of the Justices of the Peace in
Shropshire, which List some few days afterward this Informant carried to
Tart-Hall and delivered it to the said Glassie, who in kindness invited this
Informant to drink a Glass of Wine in the Cellar, and two other Gentlemen went
to drink with them, and after some time this Informant asked the said Mr.
Glassie, who a Tall thin Gentleman was, who was then one of the Company, who
answered his name was Turbervill, and that he belonged to the Lady Molineux,
and this Informant cannot positively say that Mr. Edward Turbervill now
produced was the same Person then in his Company, but believes he may be the
same by his stature and thinness, only his Hair did then look like a Perriwig,
and was much longer than it is now. And he further says that he verily
believes, he saw the said Mr. Turbervill at least forty times in the said
House, up and down so commonly, that he believed the said Turbervill to be one
of the Lord Staffords Family, and did likewise see him several times at Mass at
the said House.

John Showter.
Jurat' die and Anno supradicto coram me,

Edmond Warcupp.


Vera Copia Ex' per me,

Edmond Warcupp.



The Information of Colonel John Scott, taken upon Oath the 13th. day of
February 1680. before me Edmond Warcupp Esquire one of his Majesty's Justices of
the Peace in the said County and City.
Middl. and Westminster. ss.
THis Informant says that he was at Paris in France in the month of November
1675. and there met William late Viscount Stafford (whom this Informant was
well acquainted with) in a Cedan, in the Street called Rue de Neuf Fosse, about
the 18th. or 20th. of the said November, who called to this Informant, inviting
him to his Lodgings which he then said was in a Street called La Rue de
Pornoung at a Corner House at the lower end of that Street, the upper end
whereof is fronted by Luxemburgh-house, to which Lodging this Informant went
the next day, and was introduced into his Lordships Chamber, who complained of
a lameness which the Informant judged to be the Gout, and this Informant
visited him several times afterward in his Chamber which was a lower Room in
the said Corner House, about the latter end of the said month of November 1675.
when a certain Person came in whom this Informant took to be one of his
Lordships Domestics, and told his Lordship that one Mr. Turbervill would speak
with him, whereupon this Informant having no other business but visit and
respect, and believing his Lordship might have some business with that
Gentleman offered to withdraw, but his Lordship would not permit it, saying,
Mr. Turbervill might come another time, but before answer was returned the said
Gentleman came into the Room, which his Lordship perceiving, said, Mr.
Turbervill you have not so much have, or so much to do but I may see you again
to morrow, upon which the said Gentleman bowed his body and retired. And this
Informant further says that Mr. Edward Turbervill now produced is very like to
the said Gentleman in Stature, whom the said Lord Stafford then called Mr.
Turbervill, but this Informant cannot positively say he is the same man by
reason he had so short an Interview, and his Hair is shorter than that
Gentleman's was, but he believes him to be the same Gentleman he saw in my Lord
Staffords Room as aforesaid, and this Informant was so much satisfied that Mr.
Edward Turbervill is the same Person that he saw in Paris in November 1675.
that he offered Justice Warcupp a day or two before his Lordships Execution to
go with him to the said Lord in the Tower, or with any other Person to
endeavor to Convince his Lordship that one Turbervill, and probably Mr. Edward
Turbervill was the same Person he saw at Paris in November 1675. as is
aforesaid.

John Scott.
Jurat' die and Anno supradict' cor'me,

Edmond Warcupp.



Nor let any object that these Gentlemen are not positive that the Mr.
Turbervill who testified against my Lord Stafford, is the same person whom they
saw in the places forementioned and referred unto; seeing all the peculiar and
descriptive accidents which they observed in the one are found in the other;
except that his Hair differs in length and cut (which any man's may do in two
days time) from what it then did. Nor are they able to assign any other
Gentleman of that Name, unto whom we may apply what is here Sworn and Deposed.
And the modesty with which these Persons do express and deliver themselves,
instead of detracting from the probability of their Testimony does greatly add
to the weight and moral certainty of what they say. If this therefore be true,
that my Lord Stafford not only frequently saw Mr. Turbervill, as his being a
kind of Domestic in his House, as Mr. Showters Deposition does imply, but that
he treated him with that familiarity which Colonel Scotts Information does
import: there can then be nothing more evident than that my Lord Stafford was
wholly regardless of the truth of what he said, and that he died guilty of a
high profanation of the Name of God, and in a desperate contempt of all that
should be preserved sacred, by taking it upon his Salvation, that he never
spoke one word to Mr. Turbervill, or to his knowledge ever saw him until his
Trial. And if he could assume the impudence to aver that he never saw Mr.
Turbervill, when the acknowledging of it, would of it self have derived no
danger upon him, we may very reasonably believe that notwithstanding his being
never so Criminal, he would abjure the Treasons which Mr. Turbervill charged
him with, it being so much his interest to do so. So well assured was Colonel
Scott that this very Turbervill who gave Evidence against my Lord Stafford at
the Bar, is the same Person whom he heard my Lord call by that Name in his
Lodgings at Paris, that he offered to go with Justice Warcupp to the Tower to
convince the said Lord of it, and this Mr. Justice Warcupp is not only ready to
testify to any that shall enquire of him, but has been pleased to declare it
in the Paper that is here subjoyned.

I Do humbly certify, that Colonel John Scott did according as he has Sworn
in an Information hereunto prefixed, offer me in a Coffee-House commonly called
Richard' s Coffee-House near Temple Bar, a day or two before the Execution of
William late Viscount Stafford, to go to him in the Tower for the purposes
contained in the said Information: But I told him, I had no access to the said
Lord, and therefore advised him to wait on the Right Honorable William Lord
Howard of Escrick, who being the Kinsman of the said late Viscount Stafford,
might have access to him in the Tower, and his Lordship being a great lover of
Truth, would without doubt upon his the said Colonel Scott' s application to
his Lordship, go with him to the Tower before the Death of the said William
late Viscount Stafford. Witness my hand this 24. of February 1680.

Edmond Warcupp.

. 13. Having laid open the Perjuries as well as the Insincerity of this late
Lord in reference to Mr. Dugdale and Mr. Turbervill, that which we are next to
apply unto, is, how far his word ought to be relied upon in reference to the
Characters which he fastens upon Dr. Oats, and how far we are to give credit to
him in his renouncing the having seen the Doctor before he appeared at the Bar
to testify against him. Various have been the endeavors to stain and eclipse
the Reputation of Dr. Oats, but all of them have been overruled unto, and
issued in the raising his Honor and Esteem. They very well knew that could
they but once undermine and supplant the credit of that Person, the detracting
from the credit of all the other Witnesses would be a province which with some
probability of success they might then go about and attempt. For as all the
rest do but confirm and explain what he at first revealed and detected, so were
the Papal Party but once able to convince the World that he were an Impostor,
most men, though it would be never so contrary to the Rules of Justice, would
immediately entertain suspicions of all the rest.

And if we may believe the Papists in the Account and Reports which they
divulge either of the Doctors Intellectuals or Prudentials, we can not
apprehend that he was able to invent and frame this Plot, and consequently that
the most which his Parts are adopted unto, is only to be a Discoverer of what
more Politic heads had contrived and projected. And by how much they think to
reproach him by detracting from the comprehensiveness of his Understanding, or
the discretion of his Conduct; by so much do they assure all the World that
this Conspiracy was not invented or forged by him. And though I very much
question whether any that reflect upon his Conduct, would have comported
themselves so well under his Circumstances and Provocations; yet his very
failours and infirmities are useful to confirm us that he found this Conspiracy
laid and formed to his hand, and that the mere disclosure and detection of it,
is all that can be ascribed unto him, or that he can be allowed to bear himself
upon. Besides it is not to be thought that any one would pretend to discover a
Plot of his own framing, till he had before hand secured persons that should
vouch and confirm all that he should say. For as the whole that a single
Testimony could amount unto, was only to awaken the Government to a
watchfulness in reference to it self, and an enquiry into the actions, and
after the Papers of those that were complained of; so he could not be
unsensible that the very bringing under a suspicion of Treason, Persons of that
Quality and Temper that he had taken upon him to accuse, would infallibly bring
him into manifold dangers, and expose him to eminent hazards. And yet it is
plain, that this honest Doctor whom the World does so traduce, was so far from
concerting with any before hand, the matter which he appeared about, that he
knew not whether there was one man whom fear or conscience would influence to
confess, acknowledge, or any way confirm what he had said. Besides were the
Doctor an Impostor, as the Papists represent him to be, he has acted with as
much imprudence as falsehood, in taking upon him to depose such a vast number
of Particulars, and all of them relating to matter of Fact, whereas could he be
but disproved in any one of them, there would be reason and cause for
disbelieving him in all the rest. And if we do but consider how impossible it
is to lay so many Accusations against any sort of men, and those declarative of
things done at different times and distant places, without leaving some one
particular incoherent with the rest, if not inconsistent with the whole; we
must necessarily conclude that the Doctor is no Impostor, seeing among all the
things which he has Deposed, there is not any one that interfers with, or
weakens the belief of another. Whereas had this Plot been a forgery of the
Doctors, it had been as effectual to the design of ruining the Papists, and
more fafe for himself as well as more agreeable to common prudence, to have
charged them only with two or three Articles importing a Conspiracy against the
King, the Government, and the Protestant Religion, and not to have ventured to
give a History of so many years Transactions of the Papal Party, name so many
Consults, instance in so many matters of Fact, and mention the places and
persons where and by whom such Designs were debated and resolved upon. Besides,
some of those whom he undertook to Charge and Impeach have been found by their
own Papers which were seized, not only to be guilty of all he charged them
with, but of a great deal more than he pretended to know or accuse them of. And
some others whose Conspiracies fell not within the Acircle of the Doctors
knowledge, and of whom therefore he presumed to say nothing; have been detected
by their own Letters to be guilty of the Plot; which is both an argument of the
Doctors Modesty and Conscience in not Impeaching men at peradventure merely
because they are Papists, and an infallible assurance of his sincerity in
reference to all whom he has Impeached, and a convincing proof of the truth of
those things which he has deposed against them. Moreover, whatsoever he has
said that is either any way material in it self, or most severe against the
Romish Faction, has been confirmed by others whom he had neither foreknowledge
of, correspondence with, or influence upon, yea, these very things which were
most improbable, and of the truth whereof his Friends were most suspicious, and
concerning which his Adversaries have taken occasion to Ridicule and Expose
him, namely his intimacy with, and his esteem among the Jesuits, his having
been in Spain and in favor with the Archbishop of Tuam, and his integrity in
reporting my Lord Castlemain to be in Sacred and Religious Orders; have all of
them been confirmed by other Witnesses, and his Credit fully cleared and
vindicated in those matters that were most unlikely to be true, and which
occasioned some to take so great advantage not only to traduce but lampoon him.
And whereas there was one particular wherein they ventured their whole cause
toward the overthrowing his Reputation, namely, that he was at St. Omers all
April, May, and till toward the latter end of June 1678. and consequently
could not have been at the Consult in London, April 24 as he had positively
Deposed and Sworn; it is remarkable that the Striplings who were brought from
St. Omers to testify that he had not stirred out of that College all those
months, differed greatly among themselves, some affirming that he left St.
Omers the 10th of June, others saying that he came from thence about the latter
end of it, and one proffering to swear that he was there in July, who being
told that he varied from the rest, cried out, he was sure he was there till
after the Consult, which served to discover what they were pre-instructed to
speak unto by the Jesuits, whose Morality can dispense with a thousand lies,
when the interest of the Catholic Church, or the preserving the honor of
their Society, does bespeak a kindness at their hands. But besides there were
no less than seven Witnesses of unsuspected credit, and who cannot be supposed
to have been under the impression of any inducements influencing them to appear
in favor of Dr. Oats, that deposed upon Oath his being in London both in
April and May, the time that the Popish Youths had averred his being at St.
Omers. And whenever Mr. Dudley's Depositions (who is both a Papist and a
Gentleman of good Quality and of an ancient Family) which lie at present before
his Majesty, having been transmitted to one of the Secretaries by the Justices
of the Peace who took them in the Country, come to be published and
communicated to the Kingdom; it will then more fully appear what a horrid Plot
has been carried on by the Papists against the life of the King, the
Protestant Religion, and the safety of his Majesty's best and most Loyal
Subjects, and how much the Nation is indebted to Dr. Oats for the timely and
seasonable detection of it, and by consequence for preventing the Execution of
their Hellish Treason against his Majesty, and the glutting their brutish rage
in the blood of his Innocent, and at that time secure an unapprehensive People.
And it is to be hoped that if this unthankful age should not reward him in some
proportion to what he does deserve, that yet our Posterity will, if not erect
Monuments unto him, at least Record him in History, as a signal Instrument whom
God has made use of and honored to save his Country. And I am not yet sunk
into that despondency, but that I both hope to see him receive the
acknowledgements, and participate of the rewards which the Kingdom owes him,
and that some elegant Pen will Enroll his Memory in the Registers of Time, and
thereby leave a Pattern to succeeding Generations of the Loyalty which Dr. Oats
has expressed to his Prince, and of the Compassion and Duty which he has
testified to his Native Country, which had it not been for him, would not only
have been involved in blood, but buried in its own ruins. And in the mean time
the Credit which not only a great and impartial Prince, but the whole Kingdom
in its Representatives in four successive Parliaments, and the highest as well
as the lowest of the judicial Courts of the Kingdom, have after the strictest
and most critical Enquiry given unto him, is enough to vindicate his sincerity,
and to leave an indelible Stamp of Truth upon all his Depositions. Nor can the
asseveration of any Papist whose Conscience allows him, and whose safety makes
it needful for him to protest his Innocence, tho he know himself guilty, lessen
the Reputation of this honest and plain hearted Doctors Testimony, who in the
face of a thousand Temptations to the contrary, and in the prospect of
innumerable hazards, swears that they are horrid Criminals.

. 14. Having dispatched all I intend from matter of Fact, toward the
convincing the World that there is no faith in Papists, and that we bewray a
very great weakness in giving any credit unto them; I shall in the last place
enquire into those Maxims of their Religion, by which Lying and Perjury are
legitimate, and made lawful unto them. And here I shall premise two things,
whereof the first is this, that in whatsoever cases they may lawfully speak
that which is false, they may likewise without the hazard of making themselves
guilty of Perjury swear it. The Parsons Mitig. cap. 11. sect. 9. Lessius de
jure and Justit. cap. 42. dub. 9. Sanctius Select. Disput. 46. p. 330. And
therefore Father Garnet gave it under his hand, that every Speech which by
Equivocation might be saved from a Lie, the same Speech might without Perjury
be confirmed by an Oath, or by any other way, though it were by receiving the
Sacrament. See Casanbons Epist. ad Front. Duc. p. 202. The second thing I would
premise is this; That howsoever a matter may be unlawful and sinful, if
measured with respect to the Rule, it is nevertheless safe in the practick and
may be done without sin, if it be but justified or countenanced by the Opinion
of one Doctor. And this they style, the Doctrine of Probability, avowing, That
whatsoever is supported by the Authority of any one Catholic Writer, is good
and lawful for any man to venture upon the practice of, though both the
generality of other Casuists, and the Person who is concerned immediately in
the case depending, be otherwise minded. See Layman lib. 1. Tract. 1. cap. 5.
Escobar in Praefat. Theologiae, Problematicae, Filutius Mor. Quest. Tract. 21.
cap. 4. Bonacina, Tom. 2. Disp. 2.. 4. Accordingly if any Priest pronounce it
lawful to kill the King, or to swear falsely to take away the life of a
Protestant, or to call Heaven and Earth to witness that he himself is innocent
of a matter, whereof he knows he is guilty; all these and a thousand such
things may be done upon the Authority of our Father, and that without deriving
any guilt upon the conscience of him that does them. Now these two things being
suggested, I shall in the first place enquire by what Maxims they have provided
that a man may speak dissonantly to what he knows and believes, and yet not
lie. Secondly, I shall call over some of their Theological Principles, by which
a person may lie and yet not sin. And thirdly, I shall recount some of the
blessed provisions of the Catholic Church, by virtue of which in case one has
both lied and perjured, yet he does no ways endanger his salvation.

. 15. There are various Maxims provided by the Roman Casuists, according to
which those in the Papal Communion may speak otherwise than they believe, and
yet not to be chargeable with Imposture or Lying, or to have transgressed any
command of God, whereby one man is obliged to speak truth to another.

(1.) When a Person expresses himself in words significant of things and
thoughts, but yet intends not to signify any thing by them. Thus say they, One
may pronounce a whole Oration articulatly, and yet properly not at all speak;
and if he do not formally speak, he does not, says their Casuists, lie.
Praeter modos AEquivocandi supra positos addunt aliqui quartum ut nimirum, si
quis de re aliqua interrogatus verba exterius proferat, in quibus plena and
integra continetur responsio, qui tamen haec verba profert intendit vel per
aliqua illorum, vel etiam per omnia non loqui. Unde inquiunt qui his utitur
quantumvis verba illa sunt falsa, non tamen mentitur quia non loquitur, nec
quidquam intendit per ea significare, sed mere illa profert materialiter, and
animi gratia, seu ad exercendam vocem, aut quid simile. Citante Comptono Tom.
Poster. Disput. 24. Sect. 3. These aliqui or some whom our Author cites,
though he pretend to differ from them, are sufficient according to the Doctrine
of Probability to justify this in the practick, and to acquit him that does it
from sin. As if words were not invented to be the signs of things, and the
conveyancers of the thoughts of him that uses them! How shall we know but by
men's speaking proper and significative words, that they intend to represent
things, and communicate their minds unto us? And if once men may be justified
in speaking words without designing to intimate any thing by them, all converse
among men is rendered cousenage and mere cheat. And if when any one utters
words which are apt to be declarative of such a matter, and proper to represent
his mind who speaks concerning it, and which the hearer can no otherwise
construe than as expressive of such a thing and purpose; I say if the speaker
may salve himself from lying by pretending that he designed not to signify any
thing by those words, there is not that abuse imposeable upon men by speech,
that here is any way left for them to escape or avoid. For example, suppose
that one charged with a Crime, make a long harrangue in terms materially fit to
vindicate his innocence, and which in the acceptance of every hearer can not
be otherwise interpreted, than as a justification of the speaker from the Crime
charged upon him; and though he be highly Criminal and his Hearers merely
abused by believing him guiltless, he has not according to this Maxim of
Jesuitical Morality told a lie, because he never designed that the words which
he used should signify any thing, but only pronounced to exercise his lungs
and make a noise.

2. When one tells a falsehood and knows it to be so, but supposes that none
will believe him in this case, say some of our Papal Casuists, he does not lie.
For a lie say they, is, Verbum falsum cum intention fallendi, A falsehood
uttered with an intent to deceive, Filucius Tom. 2. Tract. 40. cap. 2. And
therefore if he that speaks think that no body will believe him, he cannot be
supposed to have a purpose to deceive and consequently is not to be said to
lie. Thus let what a person speaks disagree never so much with the mind of the
speaker, yet if it can be but supposed that the hearers will not believe what
the words are expressive of, there is no lie in such case. So that let a man be
but of a broken credit, he is of all persons securest from lying, though he
never spoke a true word from one end of the year to the other. And according to
this Doctrine the Papists are least in danger, of all men in the World, of
lying to Protestants, notwithstanding every thing they say to them be false,
seeing they may very well suppose that Protestants will not believe them, as
indeed nothing but folly and simplicity can lead them to do it. And by this
Principle of Popish Divinity, I can make a shift to justify that the late
Romish Traitors who have suffered did not lie in their last Speeches, though
all that they said and sealed with Oaths and Protestations was false, because
they might very well imagine that we had reason to know them better than to
believe them.

3. When though all that a Person audibly says be false, yet if with something
to be added to, which is concealed in the mind of the speaker, it may be
rendered and made true, in that say the Roman Casuists the Person does not lie.
Quando verba exterius prolata sunt falsa, juncta nihilominus verbis quibusdam
internis quae quis in mente retinet, faciunt sensum verum. Count. Carlet. Tom.
2. Disp. 24. Sect. 1. Non est mendacium cum quis utitur Restrictione tacita,
Less. de jure and justit. lib. 2. cap. 47. Dub. 6. Qui habet justam causam
celandi mentem suam tacita Restrictione, non peccat etiamsi alienu sensu juret,
quod intellige si necessitas vel utilitas juramentum exigat idem ibid. Dub. 9.
Thus says Sanches, a man may swear that he has not done a thing though he
really have, by understanding within himself, that he did it not on such or
such a day, or before he was born, Op. Mor. lib. 3. cap. 6. And this is what
they call the Doctrine of Mental Reservation, than which alone there is nothing
more needful to avoid lying, though a person never speak truth to his
Neighbor. For example, if one should ask another whether he knows any news, he
may by this art though he know never so much, yet both affirm and swear that he
knows none, providing he have but this reserve in his mind, viz. to tell him;
Or if a Priest be asked whether such a one did not in Confession acknowledge
such a Sin unto him, he may notwithstanding that the person did so, yet deny it
and that with an Oath, providing that he have but such a mental reserve as
this, namely that it was not confessed to him as a mere man but as God. Thus if
any Papist be examined concerning a Design against the State which he not only
knows but is a Conspirator in, he may nevertheless swear that he knows of no
such Design, understanding in himself that he does not know it as a thing which
every Porter in the Town is acquainted with. Now if lawful thus to abuse the
faith of mankind, it was to no purpose to forbid lying, seeing every one that
is not an Idiot may save himself in the most solemn asseverations of a
falsehood, by some secret reserve in his own mind. And while this Doctrine does
obtain, it is impossible to know whether a Papist at any time speaks truth. One
resolved to poison his Prince, may yet swear that he never designed any such
thing, reserving in his own mind that he did not purpose to do it with Henbane.
So one fully resolved to stab his Sovereign, may yet deny it with all the
Asseverations and Oaths imaginable, and never all this while be guilty of
lying, providing he have but such a reserve as this, in his mind, namely, that
he did not intend to do it with a Lath. To what useful purposes, may this
sacred knack of mental Reservation serve the Romanists especially while the
necessity of the Papal Cause, or their own Personal safety render it expedient.

(4.) As if this were not secure, nay to avoid lying, though a Person never
speak truth, they have found another which they reckon more safe, namely, when
one has said that which is false aloud, he shall whisper to himself that which
being joined to it will serve to make and render it true, Filutius Moral.
Quest. Tom. 2. Tr. 25. Cap. 11. N. 331. Thus having sworn aloud that he was not
at such a Consult, he may add by way of whispering to himself with the
Secretary of State. Or that after he has said aloud I swear, he then whispers
that I say, and so proceeds aloud that I was not in a Conspiracy against the
King and the Government. Thus they speak truth only to themselves, but lie to
all others.

(5.) When though what one says be false in the intention of the speaker, and
he knows that the heavens will be imposed upon by such a form of speech, yet if
through some ambiguous, or aequivocal terms the proposition be capable of a
true sense, in that case say the Casuists there is no lie. See Count. Carlet
ubi prius, and Lessius de jure and justit. lib. 2. cap. 46. Filutius Tom. 2.
Tr. 25. Cap. 11. And is that which they call AEquivocation in a proper sense,
and by which the Papists have sought themselves by lying in innumerable cases,
wherein they have been found to abuse the faith of mankind. Nor is it to be
imagined what feats this may do, when one has his mind and memory furnished
with ambiguous terms. But so much has been said against the Papists on this
head, that I shall satisfy my self in having barely mentioned it.

. 16. And as they have Theological Maxims by which a man may speak dissonantly
to what he knows and believes and not lie, so in the second place, they have
found out Methods and laid down Principles according to which a person may lie
and not sin.

(1.) First, when a person tells a falsehood and knows that the world will be
imposed upon by it, yet if in the telling of such an untruth he does not direct
his intention to the deceiving of any body, in that case say the Roman
Casuists, though the party lies yet he does not sin. The Papists have found a
mystery which will allow men in committing all the villainy in the World, and
yet secure them from sinning, and this they call the directing of the
intention. For example, if a man say the Papal Casuists wilfully kill another
that either has, or may hereafter injure him, it is not Murder providing he
did it not out of malice or revenge, but merely to repel an injury done him, or
prevent one that may be done him. By which Maxim I know what account to give of
Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey's death, namely that though the Papists killed him, yet
they were far from murdering of him, unless they who did it were such fools, as
not to know how to direct their intention to the securing the Popish Cause,
without designing revenge for his being so busy to defeat and obstruct them in
their designs. Thus by this directing of the intention, it is no sin to
calumniate another falsely, or to charge him with Crimes which may both reach
his life and his honor, although you know him altogether innocent of what you
accuse him of, providing the end you purpose in doing so be some such good
thing, as the preserving your safety or the reputation of the holy Catholic
Church, and not the defaming or destroying the party whom you slander and
accuse. Thus the giving a false Testimony in Court upon Oath, is no sin, if you
can but direct your intention in doing it to the saving of one that he has a
kindness for. Thus one may say and swear that which is most false, providing he
do not direct his intention to the deceiving men, but only to hinder them from
doing hurt, namely, their preventing the Plot from going on, or their hanging a
Popish Lord or Jesuit who had conspired against the King, the Protestant
Religion and the Kingdom. By this I think I Am able to salve the St. Omers
Youths from having sinned in their lying Testimonies at the Old-Bayley: For the
Striplings did not formally design the abusing the Judge or Jury, or the
discrediting Dr. Oats, these things would have proved but accidental
consequences of what they deposed, had their Testimony been believed; seeing
alaz all that they intended was the bringing off their Friends and the
supporting the Credit of their Church. And the command of God forbids only a
false Testimony against my Brother, but not a false Testimony for him. And thus
we know easily how to vindicate the late Papal Martyrs from having sinned in
their last lying Speeches; for poor innocent men they did no ways intend to
deceive, but only to prop up the credit of the Popish Cause and hinder the Plot
from being believed. Welfare Diana who tells us in the third part of his
Casuistical Divinity Tr. 6. Resol. 3. That in his Casibus, animus affirmantis
aut jurantis non debet esse fallere proximum, sed occultare veritatem quam
manifest are non expedit.

(2.) If they lie and forswear themselves from a custom and a habit which they
have acquired of lying and perjury, in that case to lie or swear falsely is not
according to the greatest of our Modern Casuists any mortal sin, and as some of
them say any sin at all. Consuetud. blasphemandi, ne vel peccatum, nec falsa
juramenta ita prolata. Escobar Tr. 1. Ex. 3. N. 36. 48. Talis non peccat, nec
proprie blaspemat Laiman lib. 1. Tr. 2. cap. 3. So that for a Papist to acquit
himself from sinning by lying Oaths and Asseverations, it is but before hand to
habituate himself never to speak or swear what is true. And the more profligate
and obdurate any person has been in daily blasphemies and perjuries, the more
secure he is from sinning in doing so, especially if the advantage of the Papal
Church require such a courtesy at his hand, as to blaspheme the name of God,
and perjure himself. Nor is it strange that a Lord who had contracted as great
custom of sinning, as most men of this age had done, should venture to dye with
a lie in his mouth upon this blessed security of the supreme Directors of
Conscience, that the custom of lying had made it no sin for him to do so.

(3.) A Lie according to the Morality of the Romish Divines is in such cases no
sin, when he that delivers it, though he confirms it with never so many
Asseverations to be true, is not bound to speak truth. Sylvester Sum. verb.
Mendacium, with many others. Now they assign several cases, wherein those of
their Communion are not obliged to speak truth; (1.) If the Pope should forbid
them to speak what they believe and know, and on the contrary command them to
Lie. In that case the Authority of the holy Father legitimates lying, and to
speak truth becomes a Crime, Si Papa erraret praecipiens vitia, and prohibens
virtutes, Ecclesia credere tenetur vitia esse bona, and virtutes esse malas.
Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. lib. 4. cap. 5. (2.) If they be prohibited by their
lawful Superior to speak truth, and enjoined by him to affirm a falsehood, the
latter becomes thereby sanctified, and the first commenceth an offense and is
rendered a sin. For whatsoever a Superior commands, those under his conduct are
bound implicitly to obey, and how unlawful soever the thing which he requires
may be in it self, yet obedience in that case hallows the action. See Ignatius
Epist. de virtute Obedientiae ad Lusitanos Sect. 11. And what a door this sets
open to lying, if any Ghostly Father think it convenient either for his own
safety, or the interest of the Church to require, may be easily imagined. (3.)
It becomes legitimate for them to lie, and they are not bound to speak the
truth, if any one Doctor or Casuist interpose his judgment that it is safe in
the practick, and for the advantage of the Church that they should aver a
falsehood. This follows upon their Doctrine of Probability, for according unto
that, whatsoever any one Casuist affirms to be lawful, a person may venture
upon it without running any hazard of sinning. And is it to be conceived but
that some Priest or other will in this juncture, not only give liberty for a
Member of the Roman Communion in England to lie, especially when their Cause
can not otherwise subsist, but that he will frame lying Speeches for them,
which as occasion is, others shall pronounce? (4.) They are not obliged to
speak the truth, when they are before an Uncompetent Authority. And such are
all Heretical Magistrates, in reference to Roman Catholics. Or if they be
speaking to Heretics, it is the same thing, for they are not under any
obligation to entertain them with what is true. Alaz, they may cheat such
without dishonesty, violate Oaths made unto them, without perjury, rob them
without theft, kill them without murder, and surely much more may they lie unto
them without the violation of the measures of Truth and Justice. For they whom
they may meritoriously destroy, they may innocently deceive. And by the same
Principle that no faith is to be kept with Heretics, no faith nor truth are
due unto them.

(4.) Lying in a Papist is no sin, when he has beforehand a Dispensation for
it. For the nature of a Dispensation is, that it does not change the quality of
the Fact, but makes it cease to be sin to him who has a Dispensation for it.
And surely if a Papal Dispensation may make Incest lawful, it may make Lying
and Perjury lawful also. But so much has been said on this Subject by others,
that I shall wave enlarging on that particular.

Sect. 17. And as if it had not been enough to obtrude Maxims on the World, by
which a man may speak dissonantly to what he knows and believes, and yet not
lie; and by which a man may be guilty of lying and perjury and yet not sin;
They have also made provision that what they themselves both acknowledge to be
a lie, and confess to be a sin, yet that it shall no ways endanger the
Salvation of him who contracted such a guilt. And surely what the Papists may
do without the hazard of future blessedness, and in subserviency in the mean
time to many great and secular ends, they will not much scruple the doing of
it. Now the provisions which that tender and compassionate Church has made for
her Children, by virtue of the benefit of which they may be as wicked as they
can desire, and yet be in no danger of the Vindictive Justice of God, or
Eternal Punishments, are such as these.

(1.) She allows them the benefit of Absolution. Now the nature and end of
Absolution is not to render a thing to be no sin which in it self is a sin, but
the making that which is sin not be punishable by the Divine Tribunal. It does
not make a man to be free from having done that which he has done, but it
secures him from the Justice of God though he did it. Though a Papal Pardon
does not make that not to be which is, yet it renders the Person as safe as if
it were not, or never had been. And guilt implying an obnoxiousness to
punishment, they reckon that being by absolution discharged from all
obnoxiousness to punishment they are no more guilty than if they had never
committed such a Fact. And so they aver themselves to be as Innocent as the
Child unborn, not of the Fact, but with respect to the demerit of it. How far
this Popish Engine has served the interest of the Papal Party, and emboldned
them to deny that which they were justly accused of, has been abundantly
declared by many learned Pens, and therefore my further pains about it, are
superseded by the foregoing labors of others.

(2.) The second provision of this kind made by the Church of Rome, for the
Votaries of the Triple Crown and the Subjects of the Infallible Head, is that
of Indulgences, by which whole Orders and many Families as well as Individual
Persons, are pardoned not only of all the sins that they have committed, but of
all that they shall commit as well for ages as years to come. No doubt but they
who could give Indulgences of all sins to such as heretofore fought in favor
of the Pope, and the Court and Church of Rome against Emperors or Kings that
quarrelled with his Highnesses Usurpations, or that listed themselves under the
Papal Banners for the extirpation of Heretics; but that they will be as ready
to give Indulgences of the same form and extent, to such as are engaged for the
rooting out of the Northern Heresy which has so long tyrannised over these
Kingdoms.

(3.) To this we may subjoin their Doctrine of Purgatory, Supererogations,
Masses for the dead, which are all calculated to secure the everlasting
happiness of Papists though they dye in known sins.

(4.) Of Alliance to this, is their opinion concerning the virtue and Power of
the Eucharist, which being received though only with attrition, justifies any
one that is in Mortal Sin. And for securities sake they may keep it by them,
and administer it to themselves, if they should fail of an opportunity of
having another to administer it to them* And this course took Mary Queen of
Scots.

(Lastly.) Their Doctrine that Martyrdom does Ex opere operato confer grace, is
highly useful and subservient to the same purpose. And what a blessed condition
are our Tyburn and Tower Hill Martyrs in, though the last things they did was
the forswearing of themselves and the invoking God to bear witness to falsehood
as an authentic and solemn Truth. And it is but hanging or losing ones head
for the interest of the Triple Crown, and all is safe. And may many of them
have the good fortune to go this secure way (as they believe) to Heaven.

FINIS.

