OF THE UNEQUALITY OF NATURAL TIME, WITH ITS REASON and CAUSES. TOGETHER WITH A
TABLE OF THE TRUE AEQUATION OF NATURAL DAYS. Drawn up Chiefly for the Use of
The GENTRY, in Order to their more true Adjusting, and right Managing of
Pendulum Clocks, and Watches. By John Smith, C. M.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Watts, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1686.

A TABLE of Equations, FOR REDUCING The Unequality of NATURAL DAYS TO A MEAN
and EQUAL TIME. Designed chiefly in order to the more true Adjusting, and right
Managing of Pendulum CLOCKS and WATCHES. By JOHN SMITH, C. M.
Day. Janua. Sec Febru. Sec. March Sec. April Sec. May. Sec. June. Sec. July.
Sec. Aug. Sec. Sept. Sec. October. Sec. Nov. Sec. Dec. Sec. 1 Natural days
longer than the mean day, and Clocks gain. 24 0 Natural days shorter than the
mean day, and Clocks lose. 17 Natural days shorter than the mean day, and
Clocks lose. 17 3 Natural days longer than the mean day, and Clocks gain. 11
Natural days longer. 7 Not. days shorter than the mean, and Clocks lose. 9
Not. days shorter than the mean, and Clocks lose. 20 Not. days shorter, Clocks
lose. 14 Natural days longer than the mean, and Clocks gain. 9 Natural days
longer than the mean, and Clocks gain. 29 2 23 Natural days shorter than the
mean day, and Clocks lose. 2 17 16 3 11 7 9 20 14 10 30 3 22 2 18 16 1 12 7 9
21 13 10 30 4 21 4 18 15 0 12 6 11 21 13 10 30 5 20 4 18 15 0 12 6 12 21 13 11
30 6 19 4 18 14 Not. days longer than the mean day, and Clocks gain: 1 13 6 13
21 13 12 30 7 18 5 18 14 2 13 6 13 22 12 12 30 8 17 5 18 14 2 13 5 14 22 11 13
30 9 16 6 18 14 3 13 4 14 22 10 15 30 10 16 8 18 13 3 13 4 15 21 9 17 30 11 16
8 18 13 3 13 3 15 21 8 17 30 12 16 9 18 12 4 13 2 15 20 7 18 30 13 16 9 19 12 4
13 2 16 20 7 18 30 14 15 10 19 11 5 13 1 16 20 6 19 31 15 15 10 20 11 5 13 0 17
20 6 20 31 16 14 11 20 10 6 12 0 17 20 5 21 31 17 13 12 20 10 6 12 Not. days
shorter. 1 17 20 4 22 31 18 12 13 20 10 6 11 2 18 20 3 23 30 19 11 13 20 10 6
11 3 18 19 3 23 30 20 11 13 19 10 7 11 4 19 19 2 24 30 21 10 14 19 9 8 11 4 19
19 0 24 30 22 9 14 19 7 8 11 4 19 19 0 24 30 23 8 15 19 7 9 10 4 19 19 0 25 30
24 6 15 19 7 10 10 5 19 18 Longer. 1 25 29 25 5 15 19 6 10 10 5 20 17 2 25 28
26 4 15 19 5 11 10 5 20 17 2 25 28 27 3 16 19 5 11 10 5 20 16 3 26 28 28 3 17
19 5 11 9 6 20 16 4 26 27 29 2 19 4 11 9 7 20 15 6 27 27 30 1 18 4 11 8 8 20 15
7 27 25 31 0 17 11 9 20 8 24 Clocks gain this Month Clocks lose this Month
Clocks lose this Month Clocks lose this Month Clocks gain this Month Clocks
gain this Month Clocks lose this Month Clocks lose this Month Clocks lose this
Month Clocks lose this Month Clocks gain this Month Clocks gain this Month Sum
Min. Sec. Min. Sec. Min. Sec. Min. Sec. Min. Sec. Min. Sec. Min. Sec. Min. Sec.
Min. Sec. Min. Sec. Min. Sec. Min. Sec. 6 26 4 29 9 37 5 16 2 47 5 43 0 6 8 23
9 41 2 20 9 38 15 9

This Table contains those Seconds of Time that each natural Day is either
longer or shorter than the mean or equal day, or such a one as contains in
length the just time of 24 hours; from which Mean Day the Natural ones
differing almost continually in length, this Table shall still give you the
difference between them, and (by inspection only) inform you what quantity of
time each natural day is either more than 24 hours long, or less.

Note, That upon each particular day, a Clock that is well adjusted to a mean
or 24 hour day, shall then either gain or lose just so much time, as that
natural day is either longer or shorter than the mean day:

Therefore, if a Clock, having been first set right to the Sun the first day of
any particular Month, shall either gain or lose in that whole Month so much in
time as the whole sum of Equations for that Month amounts to, (which you shall
find noted down at the bottom of every particular Column) then is it well
adjusted to the mean, Equal or 24 hour Day; but if it have not either got or
lost so much as the whole sum of Equations for the whole time it has gone in
does amount to, then must its motion be regulated as occasion requires, by
skrewing up the Bob to make it go faster, in case it has not got enough; or
else letting the Bob down lower to make it go slower, in case it has not lost
so much as the whole sum of Equations do amount to for the time it has gone in.

OF THE UNEQUALITY OF NATURAL TIME, etc.
THE Vibrations of a long and weighty Pendulum, although it be justly esteemed
to be the most exact and steady of all Natural Motion; yet is it not capable of
regulating the Index of a Clock to such a pitch of Perfection, as continually
to point out the same time that shall be given by the Sun on the Lines of an
exact and true Dial.

The truth of which is sufficiently made evident by the most exact and critical
Experiments: For, let all the moving parts, of a Pendulum Clock, be contrived
with the greatest Skill and Judgment, and then made up by the most cunning and
curious Hand, and after all this be adjusted by the utmost Care and Diligence
of Man; yet shall not the Motion of it correspond so continually with the Hours
given by the Sun, but that in some considerable quantity of Time you shall be
sensible of gain or loss in the Motion of it.

The true Reason of which Variation proceeds not from any Defect that may be
attributed to the Motion of the Pendulum, (of whose exactness we are by many
curious Experiments sufficiently sensible;) but rather from an Unequality
legible and easy enough to be discovered in the diurnal Motions of the Sun.

Vulgarly, for the most part, the Sun is indeed accounted to be the Standard
and Measure of all equal Time, and Men generally esteem Natural Days to be all
of one length, as containing the just time of 24 Hours; but upon a more exact
and curious Scrutiny, these vulgar Suppositions are found to be false: For,
neither is the Sun's Motion found to be exact, being in appearance to us,
sometimes swift, and at other times more slow; nor are the Days themselves,
accounted from Noon to Noon, of equal lengths, some Days containing more Time
than some, and others less; there being a natural necessity, that the unequal
Motions of the Sun should produce such inequalities in the lengths of those
natural Days that are bounded by it.

For a natural Day being composed of that space of Time, in which any one Place
or Point of the Earth is moved in its diurnal Motion Eastward, from the
Meridian Sun of any one Day, to that of the next; it will follow, that these
Days can never be equal, unless the Sun in that space of Time be so moved in
her annual Orb, as to cut out equal Divisions on the Aequinoctial upon the
Meridian of every Day; which Divisions so intersected, are by the Learned
termed, the Right Ascensions: For whenever the Right Ascension either of Sun or
Star is mentioned, we are to understand by it, those Degrees of the
Aequinoctial that are intersected by that Meridian, on which either Sun or Star
have then their place.

But that the Sun between each Meridian does not move such just and certain
Spaces in her own Orb, as thus to intersect equal Divisions on the Aequi-nox,
upon every Meridian, needs no other evidence than what either Calculation it
self affords, or Globes by an occular Inspection demonstrate to us. By
Calculation, if an exact Table of Right Ascensions be composed, for the
Meridian, or Noon-time of each particular Day, there will be found almost a
continual difference in the length of those Intersections that are made by the
Sun on the Aequi-nox, upon every Meridian; so that there will by this means be
found nothing but an almost continual unequalness in the Right Ascensions*
Which will be the more apparent, if you make an Estimation of the Right
Ascensions of about 10 Days together, and compare that with those of the same
Number. The like will appear plainly, if tried on the Globe; for if you mark
out on the Ecliptic any 10, or more Day's Motion of the Sun, according to his
true place found out in an exact Ephimeris, and passing these 10, or more Days
motion under the Meridian, noting what Degrees on the Aequmoctial are then
traced out, which compared with the Degrees traced out, by making the same
number of Day's Motion in some other part of the Ecliptic, to pass the
Meridian, and the difference of Right Ascensions included between those two
equal number of Days will plainly appear.

All which Irregularities, or difference in Right Ascension, proceed from two
principal Causes: 1. From the different Positions: And, 2. From the different
Centres of those Orbs in which, and according to which the Sun and Earth do
move; from whence arises a natural necessity, that between two such regular and
equal Motions, whose Position is thus oblique, those appearing differences
should still arise; for though both Sun and Earth, the one in his annual the
other in it is diurnal Revolutions, be rationally supposed to be regular and
equal in their own Motions; yet in regard of the different Positions of their
Spheres, the Right Ascensions that are made by them cannot be equal; it being
impossible that the Sun, when near Aries and Libra, where he moves cross the
Equinoctial, should then in any particular number of days make so great an
alteration in Right Ascension, as he must do near the two Tropicks, where both
Equinoctial and Ecliptic run parallel one to the other; and accordingly by the
best Tables of Right Ascension, it is found that the Right Ascensions of 10
days motion of the Sun near the Tropic of Capricorn, shall arise to above 11
degrees 30 minutes, whereas that of the same number of days near the
Equinoctial Point of Aries shall scarcely amount to 9 degrees.

Moreover, from the eccentricity of these Orbs, another irregularity does
happen in the Right Ascensions, for the Center of the Earth, upon which it
turns round in it is daily Revolutions, being not the same with the Center of
the Suns Orb, it follows that the apparent Equinoxes pointed out by an
imaginary line drawn through the center of the Earth, and intersecting the
Ecliptic, shall divide that Circle into two unequal parts; from whence it
arises, that the Sun must spend more days in passing through one half of the
Ecliptic, than he does in passing through the other; and accordingly by
experience he is found to move through that part between Libra and Aries in 179
days, but in passing between Aries and Libra he takes up 186, which is 7 days
more; so that in that part of the Year between September and March, he seems to
us to be swift in motion, but in the other part between March and September his
apparent course is more slow; which seeming swiftness and slowness of the Suns
motion, is the cause that the Right Ascensions near both the Tropicks are not
alike, but differ much, as do also those that are nigh the Equinoxes: for the
Right Ascension of 10 days motion near the Winter Tropic, is more by 60
Minutes, than that of the same number of days near that of the Summer one; so
also the Right Ascension of 10 days time near Libra, amounts to above 30
Minutes more than those of the same number of days near Aries does.

Having thus plainly demonstrated that natural days must needs be unequal, and
laid down the Causes from whence those unequalities do still arise; I suppose
it may now be concluded to be extremely unreasonable, for those that are so
Nice and Curious as some are, to expect an exact correspondence between the
times given by the motions of a Clock, and those divisions of it that are made
by these unsteady motions of the Sun on the Lines of a Dial; for if from the
Reasons before laid down, there be in nature a necessity for those differences
of Right Ascension before asserted, and that the days which they bound, must
differ also in length, correspondent to what those differences in Right
Ascension do amount to; how then is it possible that those exact and regular
motions of a Pendulum, to what pitch soever it be set, should agree with these
motions of the Sun, and truly divide those days that are not so regular as it
self is: For,

Suppose a Clock should be adjusted to the hour at a time when natural days
are shortest, as about the middle of March, this Clock with the same pitch of
motion, shall in June or December finish it is diurnal Revolutions sooner than
the day shall do, by reason the natural days are now longer than those of
March, to which the Clock had been formerly adjusted; and by consequence it
shall now gain upon every day, just so much time as these days in December are
longer than those of March. So on the contrary, if a Clock be adjusted to go
true with the Sun in the Month of December, at which time the natural day is
always longest, this Clock when natural days are shorter, as in March or
September, shall not finish it is daily Revolutions so soon as the day it self
shall be accomplished, and by consequence go each day so much too slow, as
those days of March or September are more short than them to which the Clock
before had been exactly adjusted.

Since therefore there is no tolerable exactness in thus adjusting Clocks to
the Sun it self, because being thus adjusted at times when days are either
shortest or longest, their gaining or losing will be the more extreme in the
contrary parts of the year: for Example; Clocks adjusted to the Sun in March
shall upon most days in December gain almost 50 Seconds, which in the Months
time shall amount to near half an hour; and on the contrary, if adjusted to go
true with the Sun in December, it shall in March lose the same time, and so for
any other, according as days do differ in length.

That Clocks therefore may be reduced to a more exact pitch of motion, that
their gain or loss may never be so extreme, it will be necessary to adjust
them, so as that their motion may be agreeable to that of a middle day, or such
a one as is a mean between natural days that are most long, and those others
that are most short; to which pitch if a Clock be once adjusted, it is gain or
loss shall then be the less sensible (for gain and lose it will still)
amounting in December but to about 15 Minutes in the whole Month, and in March
to but about 9, which is vastly more exact than when it shall happen to be
adjusted to the longest or shortest of Natural days, or to any other that is
not equal to a mean or middle day, of which there are but few, which in the
Table are expressed by the Character Sol.

But to this exact pitch of motion, that may thus correspond to a mean day (the
greatest exactness that a Pendulum is capable of being brought to) there is no
way certainly to adjust a Clock without the help and assistance of a Table of
Equations, that give the daily differences between a mean day and those which
are either longer or shorter than the mean day is; which Equations having
formerly been computed by the Worthy and Ingenious Mr. Christian Hugens de
Zulechim, (who is reported to be the first that ever applied the Pendulum to
regulate the motion of a Clock) and not long since Printed in number 49.
Philos. Trans. I have made bold, in regard of its exactness, to transcribe in
it is more natural form of an Equation, by only expressing the Equations
themselves, without adding them together, and substracting, as Mr. Hugens has
done for a particular use, to show the nature of a Pendulums going, when set
right the first of February, and let go the whole year round, without setting
afterward.

Now for their sakes that desire to know the manner of Composing such a Table
themselves, that thereby they may the better understand the nature of it; they
may Note, that the Equations are to be found out, and a Table composed in the
manner following: First find out a mean Right Ascension, by dividing the 360
degrees of the Equinox into 365 parts, and a quarter, equal to the days of a
year, and the product shall be the mean Right Ascension desired, which will be
found to be about three Minutes 56 Seconds (according to Sir Jonas Moors
account of it in his Mathematical Compendium) then by the help of an exact
Ephemerides (here lies the difficulty) let the natural Right Ascensions of the
Sun be computed by Calculation, for the Meridian Position of the Sun for every
day, to Minutes and Seconds; which having done, compare the daily differences
of these Natural Right Ascensions with the mean one, by still substracting the
lesser from the greater; and what remains shall be the Equations desired; still
noting down either the excess or defect, that is, whether the natural be more
than the mean or less: as for example; Suppose the Right Ascension between the
Meridians of the 1st. and 2d. of January be found to amount to 4 Minutes, 20
Seconds, this compared with the mean Right Ascensions, 3 Minutes, 56 Seconds,
and by substracting the lesser from the greater, the remainder will be found to
be 24 Seconds, and so much the Natural Right Ascension does then exceed the
mean one; this 24 Seconds is the Equation for that day, it being from noon to
noon 24 Seconds longer than a mean day is; and shows you, that a Clock when
well adjusted to a mean day, shall then gain 24 Seconds, because it finishes
it is Diurnal Revolutions sooner by 24 Seconds than the day it self does: on the
contrary, when the Right Ascensions of Natural days are less than the mean
ones, as they are about the middle of March, by almost 20 Seconds, this 20
Seconds being the Equations belonging to such a day, shall show you, that upon
such a like day a well adjusted Clock shall then lose 20 Seconds; for the mean
day to which it is adjusted being longer than the natural one by 20 Seconds,
the Natural Day shall be finished sooner by 20 Seconds than the Clock at that
time shall accomplish it is diurnal or daily Revolutions, and by consequence it
shall then lose 20 Seconds. The Equations thus found for every particular day,
and a Table composed of them, shall resemble that which is here inserted, whose
Use we now come to show more particular in some Cases.

For Explanation, take notice, that the first Column contains the days common
to every Month, the other 12 Columns that belong to the several Months
themselves, contain those Seconds of time that all natural days are either
longer or shorter than the mean day. Note, that in four parts of the Table are
placed this Character, which denotes the times wherein natural days having
before been longer than the mean day, do then begin to be shorter; or having
before been shorter, do then begin to grow more long: Note also, that those
days upon which this Character is affixed, have no Equation, they being equal
in their length to the mean day; as for the words inserted among the Columns,
they are at sight to inform you, that the Equations in those parts of the Table
are either more or else less than the mean day, as the words themselves do
fully express; they also note, that where the Equations are more, there Clocks
shall gain each day so much as the Equation belonging to it does then express;
but if the Equations are less, they then shall lose; and how much this gain or
loss for every particular Months time shall amount to, is by continual addition
of the Equations belonging to each day summed up, and the quantity of time it
amounts to, set down apart at the bottom of every Column.

Note also, that since Clocks do either gain or lose, during the whole number
of days included between those days on whom this Character is affixed, the
whole quantity of time either got or lost does amount to the sums that follow,
viz. Between the 1st of February and the 4th of May, the time that a well
adjusted Clock shall lose, amounts by continual adding the Equations together,
to about 19 Minutes, 29 Seconds; between this 4th of May and the 15th of July
it shall gain about 9 Minutes 43 Seconds; from the 15th of July to the 23d of
October, it shall lose 22 Minutes 9 Seconds; from the 23d of October to the
last of January, it shall gain 31 Minutes 55 Seconds: All this is to be
understood of a well adjusted Clock, set right to the Sun at the beginning of
each time of either gaining or losing.

By this Table, if you would adjust a Clock to a mean time, which is the
greatest exactness to which it is possible to be brought, do thus: First set it
true to the Sun, and note the day, then let it is motion be continued without
setting a new, for about 30 or more days: Observe then the time that it has
got or lost by the Sun, then sum up the whole number of Seconds included in
the Table, between those two days of first setting and last Observation
(allowing 60 Seconds to a Minute) and if the gain or loss of your Clock be
equal to the sum of time that it should have gained or lost by the Table, then
is it well adjusted; but if it have not, then must its motion be reduced to a
more near agreement, by shortning the Pendulum in case the Clock have gone too
slow, or letting the Bob down longer in case it have gone too fast: Then set it
anew, and try it for about 30 days more, and then comparing its loss or gain
with the sum of those Equations contained in the Table, as before you did, let
the Bob be again rectified as the nature of it is motion requires; and continue
to do thus, till you find its gain or loss exactly to correspond with the sum
of time given by the Equations contained in the Table, for the time that the
Clock has gone.

When it is thus well adjusted to a mean time, it will be so exact, as that,
being set right at any time of the Year, and so let go the whole Year about, it
shall come right with the same Dial by which it was set the same day
Twelvemonth; but ^n all other parts of the Year it shall still differ from the
same Dial. For Example: If set right the first of February, and so continued in
Motion the whole Year about, it shall continually be too slow the whole Year,
either more or less, till the same day on which it was set: The reason of this
is plain enough; for from the first of February to the 4th of May, it shall
continually lose to the quantity of 19 Minutes, 29 Seconds; then from the 4th
of May to the 15th of July, it shall gain; but this gaining amounting to but
about nine Minutes, 43 Seconds, it shall still be too slow by 9 Minutes, 46
Seconds; because its gaining now shall not be so much as it lost before, by 9
Minutes, 43 Seconds: Then again, from the 16th of July it shall lose afresh
till the 21st of October; which second loss amounting to about 22 Minutes, 9
Seconds, this added to the time that it was too slow on the last account, shall
amount to 31 Minutes, 55 Seconds, and so much it shall be too slow on the 21st
of October; from whence it shall gain afresh till the last of January, to the
quantity of 31 Minutes, 55 Seconds; which being equal to what it was before too
slow, shall cause it to come right to the same Dial with which it was set
twelve Months before, although it went too slow the whole Year beside.

Again, let a Clock be set right the 23d of October, it shall from thence gain
time till the last of January; and this gain shall amount to 31 Minutes, 55
Seconds; then from the first of February to the 4th of May, it shall lose 19
Minutes, 29 Seconds, which being less than the 31 Minutes, 55 Seconds, which
before it had got, by about 12 Minutes, 26 Seconds, it shall still be too fast
by 12 Minutes 26 Seconds: Then from the 4th of May, to the 15th of July, it
shall gain anew to the quantity of about 9 Minutes 43 Seconds* which added to
the time it was too fast before, shall amount to 22 Minutes, 9 Seconds, and so
much it shall be too fast on the 15th of July; from which time till the 23d of
October, it shall lose this 22 Minutes, 9 Seconds, and by Consequence come
right to the same Dial with which it was set twelve Months before.

Thus shall one and the same Clock, with the same pitch of Motion, go always
too slow if set at one time of the Year, and always too fast if set at another
time, if it be let go the whole Year about.

Moreover, if set at some other times, and then continued in its Motion for a
Year, without setting anew, it shall both gain and lose, be sometimes too fast*
and sometimes too slow: For if a well adjusted Pendulum be set right to the Sun
the 4th of May, by the 15th of July it shall be 9 Minutes, 43 Seconds too fast:
From this 15th of July to the 23d of October, having lost 22 Minutes, 9
Seconds; from which substracting the 9 Minutes, 43 Seconds that it was before
too fast, there remains 12 Minutes, 26 Seconds; and so much it shall be too
slow on the 23d of October; from which day it shall begin to gain, and continue
so to do till the first of January, by which time the Clock having got 31
Minutes, 55 Seconds, which amounting to about 19 Minutes, 29 Seconds above what
it was too slow on the 23d of October, it shall by Consequence be now 19
Minutes, 29 Seconds too fast; from whence to the 4th of May, it shall lose what
now it is too fast, and so come right to the same Dial with. which it was
before set.

Again, set a Clock to the Sun the 15th of July, and if it be well adjusted, it
shall by the 23d of October be 22 Minutes, 9 Seconds too slow; from whence to
the last of January, it being to gain 31 Minutes, 55 Seconds, it shall be then
9 Minutes, 46 Second* too fast; from which time to the 4th of May, it losing 19
Minutes, 29 Seconds, it shall then be 9 Minutes, 29 Seconds too slow; which
time by the 15th of July shall again be got, and so the Clock shall come right
to the same Dial.

Thus, by this Table, are these great Varieties discoverable in the Motion of
the best adjusted Pendulum, according to the different times of the Year that
it is set in; that the same Pendulum set right upon the first of February,
shall go always too slow till the same day twelvemonth; but if set right the
23d of October, it shall the whole Year round be still too fast, till the same
day on which it was set: The same Clock being also set to the Hour on the 4th
of May, or the 15th of July, shall on the following Year be sometimes too fast,
and at other times too slow. These are all strange and unaccountable things to
such as understand not the Nature of the Unequality of Time, from whence all
these Varieties do still arise, and are scarcely to be demonstrated to the
Understanding by any other way, than by this or some other Table of the
Aequation of Time.

Since therefore there is a necessity for setting Clocks anew to the Sun, at
some times, that they may be kept as near as possible to the apparent time
given by a Dial; I advise that this setting may be, if possible, the first day
of every Month; so may you the better discern by the Time set down at the
bottom of every Column, whether your Clock have gone right to the mean time,
and be as exact in his Motion as it is possible to bring him to: For if it be
exactly adjusted, it will then either gain or lose near that time that is set
down at the bottom of every Month, those Sums being nothing else but the
Aequations of the whole Month added together into one Sum, as before I
directed, when I gave you the Method of adjusting a Pendulum to the true or
mean time: But in case you cannot set it right the first day, then must you be
at a little trouble to add together the Aequations your self, at such time as
you come to set it anew; but when the Clock is well adjusted, there needs
little of this trouble, being assured that it is brought to the nearest pitch of
Motion it is capable of; and that when it is at any time found to differ from
the Sun, it must be looked upon as the natural Consequence of the Unequality of
Time, and not any Deficiency in the Motion of the Clock.

I speak this of those long and curious Pendulums that vibrate within the
Compass of 2 or 3 Inches; for the less Compass a Pendulum takes, the more
steady is it is Motion, not being so subject to rise and fall, as others are,
that vibrate in a larger Compass. As for those shorter Pendulums of a Foot
long, or under, although they may go very steady for the most part, if Frost or
foulness hinder not, yet are they not at all intended in this Discourse, their
Motion being apt to an Alteration in some Cases; for a short Pendulum that goes
well when clean, shall go faster than the mean time when foul, because the
Pendulum is by the foulness hindered from taking its wonted Compass: The same
effect does Frost produce; for by congealing the Oil in the Pevets, its freedom
of Motion is interrupted, so that the Pendulum not fetching it is wonted
Compass, shall go too fast; but those long and curious Pendulums of 40 Inches,
that fetch not above three Inches compass, they are so exact, that being once
adjusted they shall always keep the same time, if their motion continue; for
if the Pendulum should fetch a smaller compass, their Motion would cease, and
themselves stand still.

When such a Pendulum as this is well adjusted, you may trust to it, as to it is
correspondence in Motion with the mean time, and only give your self the
trouble sometimes to set it a little forward or backward, according to what the
unequality of Time has made it to differ from the same Dial with which you did
use to set it; which times of setting may be, as I said before, once in a
Month; yet if the Table be well noted, you shall find, there be some times in
the year in which a good Clock may go a longer time without any material
difference from the time given by a Dial: For Example,

Suppose you set a Clock right to the Sun the first of January, this Clock if
let go till the first of March, shall then be but two Minutes four Seconds too
fast; for though it gain in January six Minutes, no great matter, yet losing in
the next Month about four Minutes, it shall at the end of that Month be but two
Minutes to fast; nay, if let go another Month, as to the last of March is, it
shall then differ but about seven Minutes, which is no great matter. Moreover,
if you set a Clock the first of May, it shall, if let go till June, lose but
two Minutes thirty five Seconds in the whole, though it shall at the beginning
of May be about five Minutes to slow, which is no great matter; so also if it
be set right the first of June, it may well go without setting till the first
of September; for though it gain five Minutes in June, yet losing eight Minutes
in August, it shall then be but about three Minutes too slow in this three
Months time; but at some other times, as from February to May, if a Clock were
let go 'twill be extremely out, losing above eighteen Minutes; so also in
November, December and January, in which time it will gain above thirty Minutes.

By the Table you may also readily find out, what difference there is between
the lengths of any two days in this manner: First, If the days are both
shorter, or both longer than the mean day, then substract the Equation in the
Table belonging to one day from the Equation of the other, and the remainder
shall show their difference in length. But if the days be one longer than the
mean, and the other shorter, then add the two Equations together, and the sum
shall be the time that they differ in length: Thus the tenth of January will be
found to be thirteen Seconds longer than the tenth of May; also the fifteenth
of September will be found to be fifty one Seconds shorter than the fifteenth
of December.

Note, That if men be very nice in keeping a Clock true to the Sun, they should
then make use, if possible, of but one time on the Dial that they set it with,
and that pretty near noon; for few Dials being drawn exactly true, great
mistakes may arise, when a Clock is set to one hour and then compared with
another; and by reason of refractions great errors may also arise; for the Sun
by Refractions being made to appear higher than really she is, there can be no
certain account taken of the time till near Noon, where Refractions cease: And
when all this care is taken, in regard it is so very hard to distinguish
Minutes by the shadow of a Dial, you will be much more exact if you do thus:
Let two plain and flat plates or boards, about ten Inches square, be joined so
close together that a Sixpence may but just go between; let them be fixed so,
that this Cranney between them may respect the true South; this will give you
the time to less than half a Minute, by observing the first moment that the
Suns beam is darted through it, and cast upon some dark body that is plac^d on
the North-part to receive the light; so that having thus the exact time, when
the Sun comes to every Meridian, it will be found a much better way to adjust
Clocks by such a device as this, than by the truest Dial.

One use more, and that a Principal one, I shall add, that is this: When a
Clock is once well adjusted to the mean or equal day, you may then by this
Table keep it right to the time given by the Sun, although you never set it
right to a Dial, nor see the Sun above once a Year; to perform this do thus:
set your Clock right to the Sun the first day of any one Month, and then the
Table still giving you the time it should lose or gain in that whole Months
^ime, it is then but setting it forward or backward the first day of the next
Month what it either has got or lost in the Month immediately preceding, and
it will then be right with the Sun as if it had been set by a Dial, and so from
Month to Month you may (by still setting it either forward or backward
according to what the Table tells you it will gain or lose) keep it true to the
time given by the Sun, though it should never shine so as to give you an
opportunity to set it by a Dial above once in the whole Year; but be sure your
Clock be first well adjusted, or else there may be some error: Note, that for
this purpose it will be very convenient to Paste the Table it self on a board,
and then putting it into a handsome Frame, let it be hung up near the Clock,
that you may have ready recourse to it on all occasions, especially for this in
particular; for without the assistance of such a Table as this, I know no way
in the World to keep a Clock right to the apparent time, in case Clouds should
intercept the Beams of the Sun for any long time together.

FINIS.
BOOKS Sold by Joseph Watts, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard.
JOsephus's Wars of the Jews. Fol. The Trials of Thomas Walcot, William Hone,
William Lord Russel, John Rouse, and William Blagg.

The Confession, Prayers and Meditations of John Stern, published by Doctor
Burnet and Doctor Horneck.

The Earl of Danby's Case, and Answer to Sir Robert Howard, and his Answer to
the Examination of his Case, and Reply.

The Bishops of England may, and ought to vote in Cases of Blood.

Baxter against Baxter.

A serious Expostulation with the Whiggs in Scotland.

Dr. Jane's Sermon before the Commons, April 11. 1679.

Dr. Perinchief against Toleration.

Fowler's Catechism of the Church of England poetically paraphrased.

Cave's Sermon on the 30th of January.

James's Visitation Sermon, and on the 24th of December, 1682.

A Disquisition upon our Saviors Sanction of Tithes, Mat. 23. 23. Luke 11. 42.

Stubbs's Justification of the Dutch War, In two parts, with Figures.


