To all that want Peace with God; To the SHEEP Everywhere not brought home; to
the thirsty breathing Soul, and to the Seed, though in Captivity, among, and in
the midst of all PROFESSORS; Greetings of Love, Mercy, and Peace, from God the
Father of the Living.

By way of EXPOSTULATION, In the Demonstration of his Spirit, plainly
published, Concerning the way of life, and of the gradual comings forth of
Death through the Law, and the vail, unto the living Substance, received of
them, who follows the Spirit, in its several manifestations, through the
dispensations unto him that distributeth a portion of the Word of Faith unto
every Man.

From a Servant of the Lord, Humphry Smith.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Blackspread Eagle and
Windmill, in Martins near Aldersgate, 1660.

To all that want peace with God; to the Sheep every where not brought home; to
the thirsty breathing Soul, and to the Seed, though in Captivity, among, and in
the midst of all Professors; Greetings of Love, Mercy, and Peace from God the
Father of the Living.
Where the bowels are not shut up, nor the heart darkened, and where that does
not bear rule, which stops the ear, and closes the eye; and where prejudice
and rebellion against the Light, with the wisdom of the flesh, through that
knowledge which puffs up, has not wholly eaten up, devoured, got over, and
wholly overcome that tender principle, which once moved in the heart, toward
that being of the living substance. There may my words take entrance, and unto
such, who feels that which breaths to God, and who are willing to be satisfied
concerning the living truth of his Son, and who would receive the truth if they
knew it, and do yet more desire after the power of God, than all the temporal
things that are seen, and who are yet come no further, than the reading of the
Law, the Priests, the Tyths, nor that Religion that makes nothing perfect, and
who are come no further than the outward Baptism, or shadow, or Figure, or such
things, which are to be left behind, Heb. 6. or who are come no further than
the Supper, or the Death, and so not yet saved by his life, nor drunk of that
which saves, and is to cleanse from all that, which seperateth from God; after
whom, and the incomes of his love immortal, whosoever truly desires, and is
willing to receive the power of his life, and come in Covenant with the Lord;

Such may lend me an ear a little, and you are them who may receive some
benefit hereby; for behold I write in plainness of the things of God, my heart
being enlarged with abundance of his peace, in which there is good will toward
men, that you might come to draw near to the Witness; the Testimony whereof, is
within the vail, which vail is over the heart, 2 Cor. 3. 15. and is not done
away, but as you come to be in him, who is given for a witness, Isa. 55. 4. by
believing in the Light, John 12. 36. and so to have the witness in you, 1 John
5. 10. and you to be in it; and that you may come to participate of Gods in
dwellings, and feel the oil which will last for ever; therefore I proceed thus:

How can I but look back a little with an eye of pity over those, who yet are,
where once I was, when the darkness was over the earth, and the cloud of error
compassed me as well as others, surely I cannot now be so unmindful of them
that are yet lost, as not to have compassion upon the Outcast of Israel, or to
conceal from them these things of so great concernment, but rather as the Lord
of my life has opened to me, will I ^each forth my hand toward the weak, and
utter my voice to the prisoner of hope, and show unto the meek in the earth,
how the invisible God has led his seed, and is leading his remnant through,
and out of the varieties of things, unto the one thing it self, from whence the
various things, gifts, and m^nistrations does come.

Now, that which is chiefly in my heart, to write for the seeds sake, is,
First, Something concerning the Ministration of Moses, (when he was upon
earth.) Secondly, Concerning the Ministration of Christ, (whilst he was upon
earth.) Thirdly, and chiefly, Concerning the Ministration of the Spirit.

First, Concerning Moses Ministration, (when he was upon earth) which was to
last till Shiloe came, or until the time of Reformation.
AS concerning Moses Ministration, to wit, the Law, Condemnation, or Death,
with the Priests Offering, and worldly Sanctuary, and an outward Tabernacle,
and daily Offerings for sin, and Storehouses for the Levites, Strangers,
Fatherless, and Widows, having the Ark of the Testimony within the vail, and
the mercy seat covered, and the golden pot, and the people to seek the Law at
the Priests mouth, whereby their knowledge is preserved, and many profit much
thereby, and come day by day, and year by year unto that which they esteem a
place of holy worship, and Ordinances of God. And notwithstanding the Priests
of Moses Law, were made by the Law of God, yet that Priesthood changes, and
the Law changes, and the very glory of all this passes away; for this d^d
once seem glorious unto me, and many more which o^l^ discovered sin, though it
made nothing perfect, and with much delight was the reading of the Law and the
Prophets hearkened unto, and the daily confession of sin, (but the vail is over
the heart whilst Moses is Preached) and sacrifices morning and evening with the
long prayers, which the comers thereunto, were not at all: hereby made perfect,
as pertaining to the conscience, though it had a shadow of good things to
come, yet the glory thereof comes to be done away. Then how much more will the
very glory of the most glorious appearance of that Ministry perish, and be done
away, which comes short of this, and has not so much as the image of this,
which was as a shadow. O weak and beggarly things, that are found among those
Priests now, and their followers, who come short of Moses Ministry, for he
directed them to Christ the substance, and so his Ministration comes to be done
away, as Christ comes to be received; for Moses did not seek to uphold his
Priests, or Law, or tithes, or any thing else, when Christ should come, who is
the end of the Law, but did write of him, and notwithstanding his Ministry and
Priests, he said, he that would not hearken unto him, should be cut off, and
said, the Lord will raise up (mark the words) raise up, the Lord shall raise up
a Prophet, and when the Prophet was come, he said, I am the Light, and I am
me^k and low in heart, and this is to be raised up which is meek, for to them
that sat in darkness Light has sprung up: and the soul that hearkneth not to
the Prophet, which springs up shall be cut off, for truth springs up out of
the earth, and Christ is the Truth, and he said, I am the Light, which is the
horn of salvation that God raises up, to be a Light to lighten the Gentiles,
and is the salvation of Israel; and so the soul is to hearken to that which God
raises up, and that is it which condemns sin (under it) who is like unto
Moses, whose Ministry discovers sin, and so Moses directed unto Christ, (who
puts away the sin) and Paul said of the glory of Moses Ministration, that it
was no glory, in respect of the glory of the Ministration of the Spirit, and
the glorious Ministry of the Spirit was received, after he who had a body
prepared, had suffered the crucifying of his body, and the Prophets searched
diligently to see the glory that was to be after the sufferings of Christ, 1
Pet. 1. 10. 11.

But the thing intended, That Moses when he was upon earth, directed unto
Christ, and gave commandment that they should hearken unto him, (who said, I am
the Light) and this is one Tittle of the Law, that the light be hearkened unto,
who is the end of the Law, and the sustance, and he that offends herein, is
guilty of all; and this is that in which all the large Ministrations of Moses
is included, that Christ the Light the true Prophet be hearkened unto and
obeyed, that by hearing and obeying his voice, (or the word in the heart) they
might come from under the Law and the Priests, and that which waxes old, unto
the life and obedience of him, who abides a Priest for ever, even the Lord of
that glory, which lasts for evermore.

Secondly, Concerning Christ and his Ministration, (when he was upon earth) and
his work which he finished.
ANd when he comes, which Moses commands to hearken unto, even Christ the
true Prophet, the Light of the World, the living Minister, the end of the Law,
who had a body prepared to do the will of the Father, which was in him the man
Christ Jesus; he says, follow me, and he took up his Cross and passed through
the death and the vail; and so being made perfect through sufferings, attained
that glory, which he had with the Father before he had a body, which body, was
prepared to do the Fathers will, whose will was, that all men should be saved;
therefore Christ tasted death for every man, and rose again for the
Justification of those that believe in him, who said, I am the Light, and is
sat down at the right hand of God, who is a Spirit eternally in the Heavens,
ascended up out of the sight of them, which gaseth after that body, which is
gone out of their sight, even he, Christ, the Ministry, hid from ages and
generations, now made manifest to destroy the works of the Devil, being meek
and low in the heart, he says learn of me: Then not of the Priests, nor any
longer of Moses, for the Law is the Schoolmaster to Christ, who being come,
calls one from the Custom, another from going to bury the dead, another from
questoning and reasoning what this man, or another should do, that he might not
stand looking out at others, but himself to follow the Light, saying, follow
thou me.

And those that followed him when he was upon earth, saw his miracles, and
heard his parables, and eat of the outward bread and were filled, (though many
now eat and are not filled) and they had his body among them, and they came to
the Baptism and the Supper, but Christ himself Baptized not; and when he was
upon earth he said, I go to the Father, and I go to prepare a place for you,
and he said, whether I go ye know; and he said before, follow me, and except a
man deny himself and take up his Cross and follow me, he cannot be my Disciple;
and he said, my sheep hear my voice, and they followed me, and he entered within
the vail, (and the vail is over the heart) and was made perfect through
sufferings, and is sat down in the Majesty on high, glorified with God the
Father, and the Father was in him, even the fullness of God, and that which may
be known of God is manifest in thee; and he said, he had finished the work that
the Father gave him to do, and so the Fathers will was accomplished and done,
for which the body was prepared; he said, now glorify me Father, with the same
glory which I had with thee from the beginning; and he that spoke in the body
abides for ever, who sad, a body have thou prepared me, which body being
crucified, he took up his life again, and then those that did know him thiree
days before, knew him not, and he ascended, and a cloud received him out of
the sight of certain men, who never found him unto this day, for he remains
out of the sight of most that profess him, and as the lightening in the Clouds
of Heaven does he come again, and every eye shall see him, that condemns sin;
and the Kingdom of Heaven is within you, and yet the blind cannot see, nor the
deaf hear.

And this was he that Moses commanded to hear, who said, he that is with you
shall be in you, and he that was with or without, was to go away; and that
which was to be received within, he said should abide with them for ever, and
the Spirit of truth, was to lead into all truth, for though the body was
prepared to do Gods will, yet they by it were not led into all truth, but
sometimes understood it not, though he spoke Spirit, and Life; and moreover
they went away and some fled from the truth, and Peter denied him that was the
truth; and so such as have got a profession of the truth without them, and not
the Spirit within to lead into all truth, such fly in the day of trial, from
that truth they profess, and some deny it rather than suffer with, or for it,
and herein, them called Baptists also, have not come short; and some of them
have bowed to the Beast, and so it is with many who profess Christ, and truth
without them, even as with those who understood not the Parables; nor could not
cast out the unclean Spirits, so that Christ was and is grieved, when he has
been so long with, and professed, and followed without, and yet not come to
that faith which purifieth the heart, whereby to cast out the unclean within,
as thou may read in thy self.

And therefore Christ, when he was upon earth, did often speak unto them, of
what was yet to come, and I do seldom read or take notice, that he did so
often Preach, and repeat any one thing unto them, as that of the Spirit to
come, saying that it (mark the Spirit) would lead into all truth, and seeing
their weakness, and unbelief, Mar. 16. 14. he by the often repetition thereof,
did as it were the more chiefly to engage their hearts to wait for, and seek
after the incomes of that which should comfort them, and abide with them, when
his body was gone from them, whether they could not come; and to this one thing
does he direct them in various expressions, as of his going to the Father, and
coming again, and says he, I will pray the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter, even the Spirit of truth, whom the World cannot receive,
John 12. 16. and many things Jesus did, which if it should be all written, the
world might not contain the books, John 21. 25. and many things he spoke unto
them, Acts 2. 40. and ^et there was something to come to be waited for, and
after to be received, which was more than all this, for said he, these things
have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you; but the comforter, mark the
word, but intimates something greater, or more than what was spoken to them,
whilst he was with them, for he says, he that is with you shall be in you,
John 14. 17. and said, but the comforter which is the holy Spirit, whom the
Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things (mark what that is,
that teaches all things) and brings all things to your remembrance
whatsoever I have said (and so that is within which brings the words of
spirit and life to remembrance) John 14. 25. 26. and having spoken of other
things, he says again, But when the comforter comes, even the Spirit of truth,
John 15. 26. and if I go not away, the comforter will not come, but if I depart
I will send him unto you, John 16. 7. and I have many things to say unto you,
but you cannot bear them now, howbeit when he, the spirit of truth is come, he
will guide you into all truth, John 16. 12, 13. here it may be seen that they
who followed Christ without, and not received the spirit within, could not bear
what he had to speak unto them, and also, it may be seen that when the Spirit
was come, it would be better with them.

And much more might be mentioned, how Christ foretold, what was to come, and
be received, and revealed in that day, John 16. 23. when the spirit should be
poured forth according to the Prophets; all which plainly declares, and most
evidently sets forth, how Christ in his Ministry, when he was upon earth, did
most thiefly direct, unto the ministration of the spirit of Truth, which was
then yet to come; and that they might not run to teach others (as many do now)
before they had received the spirit of truth in themselves, by, and with that
to be led into all truth, but might receive the power of truth in themselves,
from the life thereof, to convert others into the same, therefore said he
further, after he was risen again, but tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem until
you be endued with power from on high, Mark 24. 4. so that, though they had
seen his body before, and had now seen him after his resurrection, yet that,
and all the rest was not enough without the power, and the spirit, which was to
come, which they were to wait for, and so now men should tarry, wait, and stand
still, to see the salvation of God, and until they receive the spirit, for it
is the spirit (not the body) which searches all things, and shows plainly of
the Father.

And by this before written in short, I have a little endeavored, to show unto
the meek and single bearted, That Moses when he was upon earth, directed unto
Christ; As in these words,

The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet, from the midst of thee, of
thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him shall ye hearken, Deuteronomy. 18. 15.

And Christ when he was upon earth, directed unto the Spirit, which was to
come, in the like words, saying,

These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you, but the
Comforter which is the holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, he
shall teach you all things, John 14. 25, 26.

And then, what if I did write after the manner of men, and say, if Moses were
now upon the earth, and Christ in his own body upon the earth, and Moses with
all his Priests, Tyths and Offerings, and Religion, which discovers sin, but
makes nothing perfect, which Paul profited much in; if he I say, should command
and exhort all people under his Ministry, to go to Christ, and hear him.

And if Christ were now upon earth, and notwithstanding his outward Miracles,
Circumcision, Baptism, Supper, and Death, yet he should command and exhort all,
(that come through the Law or Ministration of Moses unto him) to look, and
tarry, and wait for another Comforter, That they might receive the Spirit in
them, and say unto them, that that should teach them all things, and lead them
into all truth.

Then whether or no, people were to continue following Moses Priests, with
their Tyths, and long prayers, and still be seeking the Law at their mouth, or
to come to Christ, to seek the Gospel? for Moses himself did not say, that they
should seek the Gospel at the Priests mouth: And then, when did the Priests
ever preach the Gospel?

And then, whether those obey not Moses, who leave the Priests and come to
Christ, (the Light) and whether such when they are come to Christ, should
always be looking and following after his Body, Miracles, Baptism, or Supper,
without them, or tarry and wait to receive the Spirit within them?

And then, which of these now, should all people that profess Christ, be led by
in these days, either Moses, or the person of Christ, or the Spirit of Truth?
And, whether such as have received, and are truly indeed led by this Spirit of
truth, and know that to be their Teacher, and follow it, and are ruled,
governed, and guided by it, according to the command of Moses and Christ, do
not hereby obey the command of Moses and of Christ, and fulfill their Doctrine?
And whether any other people or professors whatsoever, do obey the command of
Moses and Christ, but only such? And whether this be not a thing of great
concernment to be known and learned, by all which profess Christianity?

But why then do people follow these Priests of England any longer, which are
contrary to Moses, and also to Christ; who have no Storehouses, but suffer the
poor to want within and without, and the Widow and Stranger ready to perish,
and moreover devour, and can never have enough of the spoil of others men's
goods?

And why do others dispute about, and talk of the Body so much, which they
never saw nor knew? And is it not better be silent, and know God, who dwells in
his people, and the Spirit of Truth, which he requires in the inward parts, and
to feel after God, even the life in themselves, because the Apostle said, they
were saved by his life, being before reconciled by his death, Romans 5. 10. and
until the life came, there were many things, which they were not saved from by
his Body, for the Body was before the death, and the death which reconcileth,
was passed through, before the life was received again to save and justify.

And why then, are people so much busied about that which was before the
reconciliation, (and so therein much short of the life) and for outward Bread,
Wine, and Water; Are not these, things which are seen? And are not the things
that are seen temporal?

But Christ the true Prophet being come, of whom Moses did write, who is the
end of the Law, and so the end of that Ministry, whereby that is done away for
the weakness and unprofitableness thereof, and Christ coming after John, of
whom John bare witness, that he was before, and greater, and came after him;
and Christ also having finished that which he himself came to do; and likewise
so largely and often exhorted to wait for another Comforter, even the Spirit.

Then what Ministration is it, that now stands and remains, which is
according both to Moses, Christ, and the holy Scriptures? and what Ministration
is to be expected or waited for, but the Ministration of the Spirit? And
whether all they be not compassed about with a cloud of error, who are
upholding that Ministry of the Law, (or a worse) which Christ is the end of,
and the Apostles said was done away; and likewise such as are upholding, and
keeping up that which Christ said he had finished? And, whether the upholding
of such things now, be not quite opposite, both to Moses Christ and Scriptures?

And being that Moses, nor indeed his true Ministers of the Law, are not upon
earth, neither that Body of Christ, (which by the Professors was murdered at
Jerusalem) visibly to be seen upon earth; then what was it that those have to
follow, who have not received the Spirit to be led by? and if they will say,
they have the writings of Moses and the word of Christ; I say if that be all,
then they that forsook and denied Christ, had more than them; for they had the
words from his own mouth, which was Spirit and life, and yet they understood
not; (and then what do those understand who have not so much as they had?)
therefore after he had suffered, and rose again, he opened their understandings.

And so, what is all their Religion worth, who are not come to the Spirit? And
whether Moses Ministration being ended by Christ, and Christ also having
finished his work, are not all people in the first place, now to wait for the
Spirit, and to receive the Spirit by it, then to be led into all Truth; and so
being first led into the Truth, then in the same Truth to worship God in the
spirit, who is a spirit? And whether there be now any true worship standing,
which God accepts but only this? And whether this alone be not agreeable to
Moses, Christ and Scriptures? And then whether all other worship now upheld, be
not contrary to this true worship of God, and contrary to Moses, Christ, and
Scriptures; and indeed chiefly opposite to the spirit of God, whereby he is
grieved? And if so, whether all such worship, way, practice, performances,
duties, and Ordinances, (so called) be not better left undone than performed,
until Gods Spirit be received to guide therein?

Thirdly, Concerning the Ministration of the Spirit, which abides for ever.
MOses and his Ministry were visible, and Christ in the form of a servant (and
so like unto Moses) was visible, and so was his miracles, and that which is
visible to the natural eye, the carnal mind can come to profess, and contend
about, but the blessed eye, which God opens with the Light, comes to see,
the one done away, and the other finished by Christ, the Light and Life.

And the Spirit is that which first moved, and yet moves, and moved unto, and
led through the visible Ministration; and this spirit is invisible, as it is
written, the invisible only wise God, whom no eye of flesh has seen, or can
see. and this moving invisible spirit of God which is without limit or end, is
that which all people should be led unto, by all its outward visible
appearances, ministrations, and dispensations, and this spirit was that which
gave forth and ordained the ministration of the law, which was glorious in its
time, though to be done away: but how much more glorious is the ministration of
that spirit of life it self, from which the ministration of the Law came, which
spirit abides for ever; And the Second Adam is made a quickening spirit, and
the spirit which is the word was with God, and was God, before the body of
flesh was made, and that spirit abides for ever, as is heard out of the Law,
he shall abide for ever, and this is that which ever lives to intercede.

And, this for ever blessed invisibe spirit was before time, and is to be, when
time shall be no more, and is without limit; an eternal lively substance,
giving life from it self, and secretly covering it self from the carnal part of
man, not seen nor understood, but by such as by its secret motions comes to be
led to see through that which shadows it forth, and by the Image, Form,
Shadow, or Figure, to discern the substance, which is the life, where
immortality dwells; for in the most innermost and secret of all, is the life
of all, being covered over with that in which it lies; through the which it
breaking forth in any discovery of it self, is that whereby the beholders might
be drawn through the discovery to it self, which in the discovery broke forth;
for the discovery was still too short of that from whence it came, and that
which was discovered forth in any shadow, Form, or Image, was not to be
Idolized, nor set up, for the every thing or substance of life, from whence it
proceeded; and herein has been much mistake, by such, who came not by that,
which opened in the visibles, to that from whence it came, in that, to have
their understandings opened, and thereby to be made sensible of that which is
eternal, by it to be brought in, where its indwellings abides forever, whose
breakings forth in the visible (which was to draw to that invisible) refreshed
the ^^ul invisibly, in an unexpected manner, and time; but being (after) sought
for in the visibles (and not in the eternal) Withdraws it self out of the
visibles, and out of the sight and reach of that which seeks it there, that
thereby, that which is to live for ever with it, may come through all that
which it appeared in, unto the very thing, and invisible substance it self
which is the life of all, and the true center of the living motion which moves
of it self, and gave forth all things good, as they proceeded from it, by
virtue of its gradual, and various motions; and this being come, opens it
self in them that find it, and live therein, and this makes Darkness Light
before the people whose dwelling is with God; and the crooked comes to be made
staight by the thing it self, and dark sayings of old comes to be opened, and
secret things revealed.

But to write more plain for the sake of the weak, of this glorious indwelling
spirit, which in the fullness of time comes forth in flesh laying hold of the
seed of Abraham, the most glorious appearance that ever was, being thus
appeared was the express image of God, who dwells in his people, whose bodies
are flesh and earthly tabernacles; but by the operation of the sanctifying
cleansing spirit, which the Father sends, are made fit habitations of God,
and so coheirs with Christ, and members of his body, flesh, and bones; which
Spirit quickneth to God, and being thus received and obeyed, is felt to live
for ever, though the shadowings forth of it be done away, and this is eternal
and never ends, but abides with such for ever; and the ministration of it,
is life it self to the soul, and more to be valued, and desired, than all that
ever was seen before it.

And as the Lord took of that spirit which was upon Moses, and put it upon his
brethren, the Elders of Israel, whereby they might Rule, and judge with him; so
says Christ, the Father shall take of mine, and give unto you, even of that
spirit of Love, Life, Power, Valor, and Virtue, which was upon and in him
(that was like unto Moses) is ministered into, and put upon such as are truly
his brethren, and friends, whereby with him they (thus gifted, sanctified, and
qualified) judges the world, for all judgment is committed to the Son, and of
that which the Son has (and is committed to him) does the Father give unto his
members, and so from Christ the head, they come to receive power over the
World, and its Way, Worship, and Fashions, and over unclean spirits. And that
is an unclean spirit which will lead into any sin, and it is an unclean spirit
in which sin stands, and which pleads for the continuance, and upholding of
that which is unclean, and that is of the World, which the Saints judges.

And as those Elders of Israel (who were of the Church in the Wilderness) were
not made fit to Judge, nor Rule in outward matters by all the writings and
words of the law (though received by disposition of Angels) until the Lord
himself took of that Spirit which was upon Moses and put upon them.

So those that profess to be Elders in the Church now, or any other person
whatsoever, are much less made fit to Rule, or Judge in spiritual matters, by
all the reading and professing Moses writings, and Christ's words, and the rest
of the holy Scriptures (though they were given by the inspiration of God) until
the Lord take of that spirit, which was upon, and in Christ (who is like unto
Moses) and give unto, and pour it upon, and minister it in unto them. And this
is done in Gods way (which is secret) and time (which is in his own hand) to
those whom he accounts worthy thus to honor, and who truly waits for it,
as a wayfering man for a resting place, and as a Captive for deliverance.

And though Christ (after his resurrection) said, All power in Heaven and in
Earth is given unto me, Go ye therefore and teach, yet they were to tarry until
they had the power in themselves, and when that was come, which they were to
tarry, and wait for, then with that they went and so taught the Nations, from
the sensible feeling of that which taught them how to teach, and all thing
else, when the same Spirit and power was upon them, which was before committed
unto him; and so the coming forth of it from him into them, and filling them
therewith, was to them in that work of the Ministry most effectual, like as the
virtue going forth of Christ healed the woman; so the power and virtue of the
holy spirit, coming forth from Christ, being sent of the Father, and received
by the Disciples (who with much desire waited for that*) empowered them to do
that which before they were commanded to do, after they were endued with power
(or had the power in them) and so what they were commanded to do, they were to
wait to receive power in themselves, from God to perform; and Christ did
intend to give them power to do that which he commanded: and as he commanded
them to go and teach, he also required them to tarry ( and so not to go) until
they had received power so to do, and so it was the power of the Holy Ghost in
them, which made them Ministers* and these were, and such are, truly Ordained
Ministers: And after they had received power from on high, even the spirit (or
life) of truth, and were filled therewith, and so had it in them, then they
went to do that which was commanded them, then they went to teach the Nations,
and converted thousands, and turned sinners, and brought souls to God, and
then they were called Christians, and then were people brought to be of the
true Church which Christ builds, upon that which flesh and blood reveals
not.

And this is the entrance into the Church of God, 2 These. 1. 1. the receiving
of the spirit, and in this God is worshipped, and not else for this has
excluded all, other worship, and those only are the true worshippers, who comes
in thus by the door, which is Christ, the light and spirit of truth, sent into
the heart from God.

And if all the prudent learned Divines (so called) in Europe, or all, or any
of the wisest Orthodox men (so called) in any other quarter of the whole World,
can prove (by the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament) any other true
worship of God (who is a Spirit) now extant among men, and to be performed
(especially among them called Christians) with acceptance to God, but only
that, which the spirit of truth leads such unto, as receive it; then let them
bring it forth that we may see it, and prove it by plain undeniable truth of
Scripture; or otherwise I shall look upon their proofs, words, ways, actions,
practices, performances, duties, and several worships as things of no value.

Or if there be any other entrance into the true worship of God than this
Spirit that God sends (or the Light which leads to it) or if there be, any
other worship which God does, or will accept to be after this, spoken or
prophesied of in the Scriptures of truth; whereby this shall ever be done away,
or ended from being the true, only, and alone worship of God, whilst men have
a being upon earth; then let the wisest of the Sons of men bring it forth, and
produce there strong reasons therein, that we may plead together, and that the
entrance into, and the true worship it self of the only true invisible God, may
be declared over all the World, for the satisfaction of every tender heart
concerning this.

For this I am satisfied in, that Christ Jesus (who is the end of the Law, and
who finished his work, when he was upon earth) is made a quickening Spirit, and
is the way and truth of life, which brings into the worship of God, and he is
the beginning and the end, and he leads to the beginning of Gods Worship, and
he is the end, and the Rest of all the faithful, in whom all the promises are
yea and Amen; and without him all is as nothing, and all that come before him
are thieves, and robbers, and he it is that abides a Priest for ever, and his
spirit of truth is it which all people, and professors whatsoever, should first
wait to receive, thereby to be led into that true spiritual worship, which
alone God accepts; lest they, and their worship, and building fall together,
in a day when there is none to deliver.

And then thus I will Query. If Christ's own dear Disciples who had forsook all
and followed him, (not Priests or Baptists) did not come to receive this
spirit, by hearing all the words which he spoke unto them, but by waiting after
the words were ended; then, whether those that have not forsaken all (nor so
much as the worlds fashions) do now come to receive the Spirit by Reading,
Hearing, or Professing the same words of Christ, now written, or any other part
of Scriptures?

Or whether a proud man has received this Spirit, or a liar, or a profane
person, or any wise, or prudent man whatsoever, by any means or way of his? and
whether any such ever did, have, can, or may by any industry, or other way, or
means, attain to this spirit which leads in the true Worship of God, but as
it is freely given forth from God? and then, whether all people are not to be
led by that spirit (which God freely gives) into the Worship of God; because
Christ said, the spirit should lead, which indeed does lead into all truth and
nothing else does so? And they that has not received this from God to lead
them, are not yet come to be led by that which the Sons, and Children of God
were, and are, led by.

And the Ministration of the Spirit, which all are now to be taught by, is
inwardly to be known, in the nearest, secret invisible manner, and is more out
of the sight, comprehension, and reach of man's wisdom, than any other
Ministration; and it is given forth from the clear fountain it self, unto the
souls satisfaction of man, when he is come to the end of words; or having heard
much, or all the words that can be spoken of it, remains unsatisfied, in a
restless longing desire to find, receive, feel, and enjoy the thing it self,
which the words declared of; and that which satisfies the true thirsting soul,
comes clearly from God to the refreshing of the inward parrs of man, and
filling of the empty, barren, hungry spirit, which cannot be satisfied without
Gods in-dwellings; and thus the disciples were led along, and at last, in a
foolish way to the great Professors they waited among them in Jerusalem, and
the Lord had regard unto them, and sent his own Spirit unto them, and then they
were filled with the Holy Ghost.

And the secret invisible hand of God, whose power was and is felt in my heart,
having out of the sight of flesh and blood, in the hidden counsel of his secret
will, led me by the virtue of the opperation and drawings thereof, through
those things, which thereby I come to leave behind, and to receive and feel
that which now goes before, and is my leader, in whose Covenant of life
eternal, my soul is now satisfied; and so by good experience of the Lords
leadings, and from an experimental knowledge, and sensible feeling, and present
enjoyment of the incomes of the Spirit of Truth and Life, which fills the
inward parts with the holiness of it self, and gives power to do the things
required before of God, even from the right and good understanding thereof, is
this written; That where it meets with the like condition in a weary Traveller,
it may answer its own, and be helpful to the weak and feeble, that such may not
give over pressing forwards, nor faint in their long travail, though many
Mountains on which they did nourish themselves for a time, will not yield them
Bread now; yet that they may with me, and the rest of the followers and friends
of Christ, (past and present) always continue following the Spirit as it
leads, until the inward man be filled therewith; and so power and strength from
God come to be known, and received in every particular.

For thus it is with Christ's followers now, they are not satisfied until they
are filled with that which they heard of, and their souls thirsted after, and
so it was with them then, and they were filled with what they wanted before;
and then, from that which they were filled with, they spoke forth; and so they
did teach the Nations, and brought people under the power of God, and Baptized
them into that, and dipped them into the Name of the Father, and brought them
under that which saves from sin, and plunged them into the holy Spirit; and as
they Teacht they did this, Baptising as they did Teach, and plunging them (as
their doctrine went forth) into that which washes and purifieth the Conscience
from the filth and guilt of sin, of which the outward Baptism was a Figure of
this which saves; and so their Doctrine was from an inward life, and proceeded
from that which was invisible; and so reached to that which wanted life in the
Hearers, and so brought up the power of God over them, and them under it, and
into it; for the word is Into; and they were to bring People into the Name,
(not water) and they were to bring or Baptize them into the Name, as they did
Teach, Go ye and Teach, Baptising into; Baptising is in the present Tense, when
they did Teach; and so here the spiritual and inward Baptism goes along with
the preaching of the Word of life, which is inward, and brings man to an inward
enjoyment of God, being Baptized into his Name, which is a strong Tower, which
preserves from the power of the Devil; and we all who are brought into this,
and are come in here, are all by one spirit Baptized into one Body, and so
worship God in the spirit, having the heart sprinkled from an evil Conscience,
by the washig of Regeneration in the Ministration of the Gospel of peace,
whereby there is a drawing nigh to God, (being brought into his Name) and a
free access to the Throne of that Grace, which saves from, and out of all
filthiness of flesh and spirit.

THE END.

