ALL THE WORKS OF THAT Famous Hiandamp;s;torian SALUST.

Containing, 1. The Conspiracy and War of CATALINE, undertaken against the
Government of the SENATE of Rome. 2. The War which JUGURTH for many years
maintained against the same STATE. With all his HISTORICAL FRAGMENTS. TWO
Epistles to CAESAR concerning the Institution of a COMMONWEALTH and one
against CICERO: With Annotations. To which is prefixed the Life of SALVST.

Made English according to the present Idiom of Speech.

Printed for R. Wild, at the Map of the World in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1692.

portrait of Sallust

To the READER.
AMong the several Histories that Salustwrote when living, by which he acquired
the Title of Prince of Historians, there are none that have reached our times
entire, nor many Ages before, but only the Conspiracy of Catiline,and the War
of Jugurth. The rest were stifled, as some conjecture, by the Admirers of
Cicero and Livy, Mortal Enemies to the Fame of Crispus. The Orations also in
his Fragments and his two Epistles to Caesar are without all doubt his own; So
that there is nothing to be questioned but his Declamation against Cicero. Yet
that stands fair too in the Opinion of Jerome and Fabius. But let the Nicer
Critics dispute that point; certain it is, that Salustis one of the greatest
LatinAuthors Extant, both for Style and Language. Of whom Quintilian says, That
Livy was fitter to be read by Boys, then Salust,as being the Nobler Historian
of the two, whom rightly to understand both Age and Judgment were required.
Conformable to which, L. Vivesspeaking of this Famed Historian, Salustsays He,
the most florid Writer of theRoman Achievements, is very frequently thumb'd by
Schoolboys, but in my Opinion much more deserves to be handled by Men of riper
years and understanding.

There are two things, for which Salustis applauded and admired above all
others, except Thucidides of whom he was an imitator; Fidelity and Conciseness.
As to the first, Vibius Sequester and St.Jerome gave him the Encomiums of Author
Certissimus; and St.Austinstiles him an Historian of ennobl'd Truth.

His Conciseness and the Gravity of his Sentences acquired him by the unanimous
consent of all the Learned Men of Martial's Time, to be Romana Primus in
Historia: and Quintillian affirms the Salustian Brevity to be such, that
nothing can be more perfect to a Learned Ear.

Nevertheless, and although these curtailed Sentenses, these unexpected Cadences
of Periods, this obscure brevity of Salust, might well be apprehended and
understood by them whose mother Language was the Latin Tongue, yet they that
are not accustomed to the natural Idiom of any Speech, will find it a hard task
to unravel the Sense of Sentences including much in little. As if these Mystic
Authors made it their strife to imitate Nature, that holds her most precious
Treasures in the Earth, to make us delve and labor before we can come at 'em.
And therefore I cannot choose but laugh at those who tell me it is an easy thing
to Translate Salust, Translate! there is no such thing to be done. For to
Translate him word for word into English, were to set the two Languages
together by the Ears: You may as well make Brains and Stairs to Rhyme, as make
that sense in English which is sense in the Original. As may be seen by those
Hide-bound Transtionss of Heywood and Cross; especially the latter; so pitiful,
that the very Ribbs of verbal Deformity appear through the slender skin of the
Translation: especially when they come to the knotty Orations and Moral
Excursions of their Author. For his compacted Latin is like a solid piece of
Gum that must be melted into English Phrase, before it will dlate it self.

But nothing plagued me more then to observe that insipid clutter which that
impertinent and trifling Chiurm of Pedants make, that call themselves
Expositors: a sort of Pismires, whose laborious toil produces nothing but the
most Chaffy and Husky part of all Learning. They fill the Text with Stars and
little Letters; but when you think to meet with a Clue to guide ye through the
Labyrinth of the Obscurity; Heavens! How your expectations are deceived!
There Is nothing but a scuffle about the Genitive or the Ablative case, whether
Locupletum or Locupletium; whether Locupleti or Locuplete; whether ac or et.
When you look for the unravelling of a dark sentence, Satis, cries Thomas a
Didimus, is absent in four Manuscripts. Apage At, cries another in great Wrath:
another as furiously sends Que to the Gallows, or to use their own words, ad
Gemonias Scalas. Another storms, and says it must be written Plancia and not
Plautia with a Dipthong: another will have it right or wrong ab Numidis, and
not a Numidis; another though it cost him a fall will have it Arteis and not
Arts; Omneis and not Omnes. Another finds that his changing ne into nec will
do the business, and then he crows out like a Cock of the Game, Heureca,
Heureca, as if he had made a new discovery of a Fifth part of the Earth: with a
thousand more such Fopperies as these. As if it were not better to cite the
variations of Manuscripts, for others to make a judicious choice, or else to be
careful in Correcting the truest Edition, without such a deal of triffling
Ostentation, and bringing all the Old Roman Engines upon the Stage of an
Annotation to defend an Autem or an Etiam, in hazard of Eternal Extirpation,
All this while not a word of the Authors meaning: not the least Dark-lanthorn
Light into the Obscurity of the Sense. Besides when that there is a gapp
indeed, there like Hounds at a fault, they sinell about, and snuff up their
Noses in the Air, but all to no purpose; they are got into a Wood, and the Game
is lost.

Thus finding little aid from them, after a more serious Study and Meditation I
found Salust to be the best Expounder of himself: only that it would take up a
little more Time and Industry. Both which produced at length this new Attempt
to make the choicest of the Latin Historians more moderately familiar with the
English Tongue. Wherein however I do not think my self so absolute, but that I
am ready to submit to any other, who may think to gain a better Credit by
correcting what I have done amiss.

The Life of C. Salustius Crispus.
C. Salustius Crispus (not to trifflle as Vossius and others do, whether
Salustius were spelt with a double or single L) was born at Amiternum (formerly
a Great City of the Sabines; now Sto Victorino a smallage in that part of Italy
called La Sabina) the next year after Catullus was born at Verona, or the same
Year that Athens was taken and Sacked by Sylla 's Army.

He was descended of the Noble Family of the Salustii, which for a long series
of years retained the splendour of its ancient Dignity. It is by all allowed
that from his Childhood he had his Education in Rome, and that his Genius led
him to the milder Studies of the Liberal Arts. But happening to live in those
unfortunate times of Faction and Popular siding, when Virtue and Learning
wanted their due Encouragements (His Inclinations being depraved in a City so
corrupted) he was easily vanquished by voluptuous Allurements. So that being
called to public Employment, so soon as his years rendered him capable of it,
he suffered many Misfortunes, through the Iniquity of the Times; in regard the
Commonwealth was then turmoyl'd and beset with Sylla 's Party.

However this is certain that Salust had a ready Wit, and was well versed in
all kind of Learning, though his chiefest Excellency lay in writing History.
Wherein he was much beholding to Atteius Philologus the Grammarian, who
furnished him with an Epitome of all the Roman Achievements to pick and choose
what he pleased himself.

He was a Tribune of the People the same year that Clodius was slain by Milo,
Seven hundred and two from the building of the City; at what time Pompey the
Great was Consul alone for several Months without any Colleague. In that
Tribuneship, wherein hs got no repute at all, he was a great Enemy as well to
Cicero as Milo; for that being taken with Fausta, the Daughter of L. Sylla, he
was ordered to be well scourged by Milo; and not so discharged neither, till he
had paid a sum of Money. For which Gellius brings the Testimony of M. Varro, in
a Book which he Entitled de Pace. And several other Authors, among the rest the
Author of the Invectives against Salust ascribed to Cicero, says, That he was
expelled the Senate for his Fornications and Adulteries, by Appius Claudius
Pulcher, and L. Calpurnius Piso, then Censors in the year from the City built
703. Of which expulsion Dio likewise makes mention. Suetonius also in his Book
of the Famous Grammarians, relates how he was Lampoon'd by Leneus the
Enfranchiz'd Bondsman of Pompey the Great, who never scrupled to call him
Glutton, Whoremaster, Varlet and Debauchee; a Monster of Contrarieties in his
Life and Writings: In Confirmation of which, Lactantius says of him, That he
was a slave to his Lusts, and defiled his own Sentences by the wickedness of
his Life. So hard a thing it is for a Man to say well and do well.

However by the favor of Julius Caesar, when he came to have the Power in his
own hands, he recovered his Senatorian Dignity, was made Questor; and then
Praetor; in which Employment he was commanded by Caesar, then bound for Africa
against Scipio, to sail with part of his Navy to the Island of Cercina, to
fetch Corn. Afterward, when Juba was killed, and his Kingdom reduced into a
Province, Caesar left him with an Army Proconsul or Deputy Lieutenant of
Numidia; where, by Peeling and Polling the Country, he so well lined his
Coffers, that he bought a whole Forum or Marketplace in Rome, where now stands
the Temple of Sta Susanna; The Village of Now Villa d' Adriano.
Tiburtum, and those Gardens which still to this day retain the Name of
Salustian. Caesar forgave him his depredation; but he could never wipe of the
Ignominy of being so sharp a Reprover of other Men's failings, who was so
Vicious himself.

He Married Terentia, Cicero 's Wife, after her being Divorced from her
Husband; and at the Age of threescore Years, some say threescore and two, died
presently after the Murder of his Patron, Julius Caesar; and was Buried in the
same place where he was Born; leaving behind him those living Monuments, that
will preserve his Memory so long as Learning endures.

THE WAR OF CATALINE, BY Caius Sallustius Crispus.
IT behooves all Men that labor to excel all other Creatures, to make it their
chief Endeavor not to wast their Lives in Silence like the Brute Beasts,
formed by Nature prone to the Earth, and only Slaves to their Bellies. But our
whole strength and vigor is soated as well in the Mind as in the Body. We make
more use of the command of the Mind than of the service of the Body. The one we
share with the Gods, the other is common to us with the Beasts. Whence it
appears to be a nobler way to purchase glory rather by our Ingenuity, than our
Strength of Body; and because the life it self which we enjoy is but of short
continuance, to render our Memories the longest that we can. For the Spendor of
Form and Riches is frail and transitory; but Virtue is accounted Illustrious
and Eternal. It Is true the Contest has been long among Mortals which most
prevailed in War, vigor of Mind, or strength of Body. For first, before we
begin, it behooves us to consult, and after deliberation, nothing more requisite
than speedy Execution. Thus both defective of themselves, the one becomes
effectual by the assistance of the other. Therefore at the beginning Kings (for
that was the first Title of Sovereign Dignity upon Earth) predominant in
several places, some made use of their Parts and Ingenuity, others exercised
their Bodies. Then also was the Life of Man without Ambition; while every one
was pleased with what himself enjoyed. But after that in Asia Cyrus, in Greece
the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, began to subdue Cities and Nations, that they
made Ambition of Dominion the cause and foundation of War; and measured the
extent of Glory by the spaciousness of their Territories, then Danger and
Business taught the world that War was chiefly managed by Wit and Ingenuity. So
that if the Virtue and Magnanimity of Kings and Emperors were alike in Peace as
in War, Human Affairs would be less subject to inconstancy; nor should we see
such Changes, such Revolutions, nor such Topsy Turvies in the world. For Empire
is easily preserved by the Arts, by which it was at first acquired. But when
Sloth, instead of Industry; when Ambition and Pride, instead of Equity and
Moderation, invaded once the Breasts of Men, then their Fortune with their
Customs underwent a universal change. Thus is Empire always translated to every
one that is most excellent from the Inferior and less Brave. The toyls of
Plowing, hazards of Navigation, and expense of Building, all submit to Virtue,
as being obedient to her Instigations. But many Men addicted to Luxury and
Sleep, Illiterate and void of Education, consume their Lives like Travelers
upon the Road; to whom, quite contrary to Nature, their Body is a Pleasure, but
their Soul a Burden. Now their living and their dying, I look upon to be the
same, as being both buried in Silence. But he it is, who seems to me to live
and enjoy a Soul, who finding himself employment, labors for the Fame of some
great Action, or some noble Science. Though in such a vast variety of business,
Nature chalks out distinct and various Roads for differing Undertakers. Among
the rest it is highly Commendable to act well for the Commonwealth; nor is it
absurd to speak well in its Honor; for thus may Fame be purchased both in
Peace and War; since many are applauded that acted themselves, and many that
wrote the Achievements of others. And for my own part, although I never
thought the same Renown attended the Writer as the Accomplisher of great
Affairs, yet it seems to be no such easy task to commit to writing Public and
Memorable Transactions. First because that Deeds require Words to equal their
Grandeur: for that most People believe the Reprehensions of Crimes and
Miscarriages, to be the Reprimands of Envy or Ill will: where the Author
insists upon the Virtue and Honor of good Men, there, whatever every one deems
easily performed he patiently endures; but whatever is extraordinary, that he
accounts as Fiction. For my part from my youth, my Inclinations carried me to
Public Affairs, where I met with many Crosses and Obstructions of Misfortune.
For Modesty, Abstinency and Virtue were over ruled by Insolence, Profuseness
and Avarice. Which though my disposition abhorred, as unaccustomed to the
Practices of Evil, yet among so many Vices, my weak and tender Age could not
resist the strong Corruptions of Ambition. And though averse to the lewd
Customs of the Age, yet the same Ambition tormented me as well as others, with
thirst of Fame and envied Greatness. Therefore, when after many Miseries and
Dangers, my thoughts came once to be at Rest, and that I had resolved to spend
the Remainder of my days remote from Business, my Intentions were not to
consume a happy leisure in Sloth and Vanity, nor to waste my time upon those
meaner and more servile Employments of Husbandry and Hunting; but returning to
the same designs and purposes, from whence unruly Ambition had before withdrawn
me, I determined briefly to write the several Transactions and Achievements of
the Roman People, as they occurred most worthy the Remembrance of Posterity: So
much the rather, as knowing my self no way engaged by Hope or Fear, nor any way
biased by prejudice or Interest. In pursuance of which Determination I shall
endeavor a concise, and to the utmost of my Ability, a sincere Relation of
Cataline's Conspiracy. For that same perpetrated Act of Villainy do I esteem
most Memorable, as well for the novelty of the Crime as of the Danger. Of the
Manners and Inclinations of which Person it will be expedient in the first
place, to give a short Account before I begin my Relation.

L. CATALINE, descended of a Noble Family, was a Person of Great Strength and
Vigor both of Body and Mind; but of an Evil and Vicious Disposition. From his
early Adolescency nothing was more grateful to him than Civil War; Slaughter,
Rapine and Domestic Discord were the Pastimes of his Youth. He had a Body
enured to Hunger, Cold, and want of Sleep beyond Belief. Daring beside, and
Crafty, Inconstant, able to counterfeit and dissemble what he pleased himself;
greedy of other Men's Proprieties, Prodigal of his own; Ardent in his Desires,
and Burning in his Lusts; sufficiently Eloquent, but his stock of Prudence very
small; A vast Mind that always Thirsted after things Exorbitant, Incredible,
and two High above his Reach. This Man, after the Domination and Tyranny of L.
Sylla, nothing would satisfy but an unreasonable desire of invading the
Commonweal. Nor by what means he might obtain it, so he might grasp a Kingdom
to himself, did he at all regard or value. But every day his Thoughts were more
and more turmoyl'd, himself grown wild through his Domestic Wants, and the
Guilt of his Crimes. Both which he had accumulated by his Depraved and Vicious
Life, augmented moreover by the corrupted Customs of the City; which two the
worst Distempers of a Commonwealth, and most directly opposite one to another,
Luxury and Avarice, infected at that time. For which reason, the Subject it
self seems to require, since opportunity has put us in mind of the Vices of the
City, to go a little Back, and take a short view of the Constitutions of our
Ancestors; after what manner they governed the Commonwealth, how they left it,
and how being altered by Degrees, from most beautiful and famous, it became
deformed and flagitious.

The City of ROME, as I have gathered from Tradition, at first the Trojans
built and then possessed; who under the Conduct of Eneas, Fugitives from their
native Country, wandered up and down without any certain Habitations; with whom
also joined the original Offspring of the Land; a savage sort of People,
living at their full swinge of Liberty and License without Laws or Government.
These after they were mustered together within the same Walls, of differing
Race, and different Language both, and no less different in their Manners and
Ceremonies of living, incredible it is to think how easily they embodied. But
when their Power, enlarged with Number of Citizens, with Constitutions and
Extent of Territory, began to seem sufficiently prosperous and prevalent, as
generally it happens among Mortals, Envy sprung from Opulency. The neighboring
Princes and States disturbed 'em with Invafions; few of their friends would
stir to their Relief; the rest dismayed with fear kept far enough from danger.
The Romans therefore sedulous at home and no less diligent abroad, make have,
prepare, encourage one another; march forth to meet the Enemy, and with their
Arms protect their Liberty, their Country and their Aged Parents. Afterward,
when they had foiled all Danger, and repelled it from their own Walls, they
lent their Succor to their friends and Allies; and established Amity and
Leagues among the neighbors more by giving than receiving benefits. Legitimate
was their Form of Government; and the Title of their Form was Regal. Certain
Persons selected, whose bodies were infirm with years, but active Brains were
vigorous in wisdom, consulted for the Common Good; who either for their Age, or
the Resemblance of their Cares, were called Fathers. Afterward, when Regal
Dominion, made choice of at the beginning for the preservation of Liberties,
and enlarging the Territories of the Commonwealth, degenerated into Pride and
Tyranny, changing their Custom, they set up Annual Governments, and became
subject to two Supreme Commanders. For by that means they thought to prevent
the Pride of Dignity from growing too exorbitant. But at that time every one
began to advance himself more and more, and to show the sharpness of his Wit
upon all Occasions. For Kings are still more jealous of the virtuous than the
wicked; and always that virtue which displays it self in others is most
formidable. But the City, so soon as once it had recovered its Liberty,
incredible it is to think how suddenly in grew into Renown; such was the
universal desire of Fame and Glory. Immediately the Youth of the City were no
sooner able to endure the Hardships of War, but in the Camp continual Labor
taught 'em the practice of Military Discipline; while their delight was only in
their burnished Armor, and their Warlike Steeds, contemning Effeminate
Lewdness and Voluptuous Riot. To such men therefore Labor was no unusual
thing, not any Cliff seemed steep and rugged, nor armed Enemy frightful: their
virtue subdued all things; while the chiefest Contests among them were only for
Fame and Honor. Every one hastened to give his Enemy the first Blow; to scale
the Wall, and be conspicuous in the Action. In such Achievements they placed
their chiefest Riches, their greatest Honor, and most Illustrious Nobility.
Covetous of Applause they were, but liberal of their Money; Vast Fame, but
moderate Wealth was their desire. I could call to mind in what pitched Fields
the Roman People with a small handful of Men have over-thrown most numerous
Armies of their Enemies; what Cities Fortified by Nature they have wrested from
the Defendants by bare fighting, but that I fear so great a Task would draw me
too far from my design. Nevertheless Fortune assuredly prevails in every thing,
she Celebrates or Ecclipses all things more according to her own will and
pleasure than adhering to truth. The Actions of the Athenians were sufficiently
great and magnificent, in my Opinion; however somewhat less than Fame reports
'em. But in regard that there it was so many Writers flourished, matchless for
their Ingenuity, the Athenian Achievements are those which are celebrated
above all others over all the World. And the Virtue and Courage of those that
performed those great Actions are deemed to be as great as those high soaring
Wits had with their Eloquence extolled 'em to be. But the People of Rome had
never that abundance, because that the most prudent were still most publicly
engaged: no man exercised his Wit without his Body; every one chose rather to
act than speak; and that his deeds of Merit should rather be applauded by
others, than that he should be the magnifier of other Men's Exploits. And
therefore both in Peace and War good Customs were religiously observed. There
was most of Unity, the least of Avarice. Right and Justice among them prevailed
by Nature more than through the Terror of the Law. Their Quarrels, their
Discords and their Contentions were only with their Enemies; Citizen with
Citizens contested only for pre-eminence in virtue: Magnificent in their
Adoration of the Gods, thrifty in their Houses, and faithful to their Friends.
By these two never failing means, in War by daring Boldness, and when at Peace
by Justice, they preserved both themselves and the Commonweal. Of all which
things I have these signal Proofs to produce, for that in War, they more
severely punished those, who disobedient to command adventured to fight the
Enemy, or latest left the field when ordered to retreat, than such as durst
forsake their Colors, or give ground to their Adversary. On the other side, in
Peace they rather chose to oblige by beneficial Indulgence, than constrain by
Fear: and having received an Affront they rather chose to pardon than to
prosecute.

Thus while the Commonwealth enlarged it self by Labor and Justice, Kings
vastly Potent were subdued by War, Barbarous and Populous Nations were tamed by
Force: Carthage jealous of the Roman Empire was utterly ruined; All Seas and
Continents lay open; Fortune seemed to rage and ranverse all the world. They
who had undergone all sorts of Labor, Dangers, Hardships and Uncertainties of
chance, Leisure and Riches so much desired by others, to them were but a
Burden and Affliction. First therefore Thirst of Money, then of Rule
increased. They, were the Materials of all ensuing mischiefs: for Avarice
subverted Fidelity, Probity, and all other virtuous Practices: in stead of
these it taught 'em Pride, Cruelty, to neglect the Gods, and to put all things
to Sale. On the other side Ambition enslaved her Captives to Treachery; to
conceal one thing within their breasts, and utter quite the contrary with their
Tongues: to estimate friendship and hatred not as they are in themselves, but
according to the dictate of Interest: and to carry rather an honest Countenance
than an honest Intention. These things at first insensibly grew up, and
sometimes were punished. But when the Contagion once began to spread, the face
of the whole City was altered, and that Government which was the justest and
the best, became not only Cruel but intolerable. But first of all Ambition more
than Avarice employed the thoughts of Men. A Vice that approaches the nearest
of the two to Virtue. For that the sedulous and slothful are equally covetous
of Glory, Honor, and Dominion. However the one takes the Right Course to
obtain his lawful ends; the other wanting virtuous means, by fraud and
treachery aspires to what he never deserved. Avarice, Toiles and Labors after
Money; of which no wise man ever coveted the Superfluity. That Vice, envenomed
as it were with poisonous mixtures, effeminates the body and the Masculine Soul
of all Mankind: it is always unlimited and insatiable; neither does abundance or
penury exhaust it.

But after L. Sylla, having by force of Arms laid violent hands upon the
Commonweal, turned good beginnings into ruinous events, then there was nothing
but rending and tearing; one must have a House, another Lands; the Victours
observed no bounds, no moderation, but fowl and heinous were there Cruelties to
their fellow Citizens. To which we may add, that L. Sylla, contrary to the
Custom of our Ancestors, obliged the Army which he had Commanded in Asia,
thereby to render it more affectionate and faithful to his Interest, by a
Toleration of all manner of Luxury, Debauchery; and the delightful Quarters
where they wallow'd in pleasure and ease, had soon softn'd the fierce and
martial Dispositions of the Soldiery. And then it was that the Roman Army
first began to be in Love, to drink, to admire Pictures and embossed Goblets of
Gold and Silver, to commit public and private Robbery, to Plunder the very
Temples, and to Pollute all things both sacred and Profane. Therefore those
Soldiers, after they had once obtained the Victory, left nothing remaining for
the vanquished: For Prosperous success never leaves tyring out the Minds of
wisest men with her Importunities, least they themselves, their Manners being
corrupted, should moderate their Conquests, or know which way to consult for
the best.

When Opulency thus began to be in high Esteem, and that Renown, Dominion,
Power attended upon Riches; Virtue began to grow Numb and Stupid, Poverty to be
derided, and Innocence to be taken for Ill will. Therefore from the Source of
Riches, Luxury and Avarice together with immoderate Pride first assailed the
Roman Youth. And then their business was to catch and snatch, consume, despise
their own and covet other Men's; to cast off shame and modesty, make no
distinction of Divine or Human, nor any reckoning of thrift or moderation. It
might be worth the while for him that first has viewed so many Houses and
Palaces, reared up as big as Villages, to visit the Temples, which our
Ancestors, the most Religious of Mortals, erected to the Gods. You find 'em
much the lesser Fabrics; yet they adorned their Temples with Piety, their
Houses with Fame and Honor; nor did they deprive the Vanquished of any thing
but only the Liberty of doing wrong. But these men, quite the contrary, of
Mortals the most slothful, most wickedly, and ingloriously wrest from their
Friends and Allies those things which their Courageous and Victorious Ancestors
left their very Enemies, as if doing wrong were the true Exercise of Dominion.
For wherefore should I call to mind those things, which, unless to such as have
beheld 'em, are hardly Credible, that is to say, great Mountains levelled, and
whole Sea's built over by several Private Persons, that in so doing seemed to
me to make a May Game of their Riches? since what they might have honorably
enjoyed, they made such have in scorn to fling away. Nor is the Rage of
adulterous Lust, of Brothel-haunting and other Bestialities less prevalent,
while Men as Women suffer, and Women make public Prostitutions of their
Chastity: to satiate their Riot, they ransack Sea and Land: They sleep ere need
of Rest requires: Nor will they stay in expectation of Hunger or Thirst, of
Cold or Weariness; but all those things their Luxury prevents. And those
Exorbitances inflamed the Roman Youth, when once their Patrimonies failed, to
seek for new supplies, by Acts of Horror and Impiety: for when the Mind is
seasoned thoroughly with evil Courses, it never fails of loose desires; and for
that reason so much the more profusely raves after extravagant Gain and wild
Expense.

In so great and so corrupt a City, Cataline, a Piece of Pomp most easily to be
obtained, walked the Streets attended by whole Troops of Dissolute Ruffians and
Debauchees that followed his Heels, like so many Guards of his Body. For
whoever he were that void of shame, an Adulterer, a Glutton or a Gamester had
dissipated his Paternal Fortunes either with his Hand, or kindness to his
Belly, Venereal Member, or run himself up to the Ears in debt, to purchase the
Pardon of his Villainies: all Parricides, Sacrilegious Persons, Convicts after
Sentence, or such as feared the Judgment of the Law for their Misdeeds;
moreover such whose Hands or Tongues earned 'em their Bread by Perjuries or
Shedding Civil Blood; and lastly, all whom Villainy, Penury, or guilt of
Conscience agitated with Continual Terror, These were Cataline's Familiars and
Favorites. Or if any Person blameless and free from miscarriage happened to
light into his friendship, by daily Practice and repeated Allurements, he soon
was taught to be alike and equal to the Rest; for above all he coveted the
acquaintance of young men, whose disposition's being soft and yielding, were
easily entangl'd in the snares of crafty Temptation. For still as he observed
the Flame of their youthful Inclinations, some he dazzled with the Charms of
Curtezans; while others were won with Dogs and Horses. Nor did he spare for
Cost or to expose his own Reputation, so he might render 'em obnoxious and
faithful to himself. I know there were some People who shrewdly suspected, that
the Young Gentlemen frequenting Cataline's House, were somewhat too undecently
lavish of their Chastity: But that Report was raiss'd and believed, rather upon
other Grounds, then that any Person could affirm it upon knowledge. Cataline had
been Guilty of several Nefarious Fornications, as having Debauched a Lady of
Noble Extraction, and a Vestal Virgin, besides sundry other Crimes, of the same
Nature, which he had Committed in Contempt of Gods and Men. At length, falling
in Love with Aurelia Orestilla, who had never any thing in the World to Commend
her in the Opinion of any honest Man, besides her Form, because she delayed to
marry him for fear of her Son-in-Law that was of Age, it is certainly believed,
that he murdered the Young Man, and extinguished the Family to enjoy an Impious
Wedlock. Which Fact of his seems chiefly to me to have been the Cause of
hastening his Villainous Design. For his Polluted Soul abominable both to Gods
and Men, could take no rest awake or asleep; in such a manner did his
Conscience perplex and terrify his restless and destracted Mind. Therefore was
his Complexion pale and wan; his Eyes hollow, his Pace sometimes swift,
sometimes slow; in a word, Madness and Fury displayed themselves in every
Lineament of his Countenance. And for the Young Gentlemen whom he had thus
debauched, he was not wanting so to instruct 'em, as to make 'em serviceable to
all his pernicious purposes. For out of them he culled False Witnesses and
Forgers of Wills and Deeds. Them he taught to despise their Credit, their
Fortunes and all manner of Danger. And when he had thus ruined their Honor,
and their Modesty, then he Commanded other greater Villainies. And if he could
not meet with a present Opportunity for Mischief, they were to circumvent and
massacre the Innocent as if they had been guilty; merely to keep their thoughts
and hands in ure; while their Tutour rather chose to exercise his Cruelty
gratis, then to lie idle in drowsy wickedness. Confiding in such Friends and
Associates as these, Cataline began to consult how he might grasp the Sovereign
Power, and subdue the Commonweal: so much the rather because he knew his own
Retinue to be so vastly every where in debt, and for that the most of Sylla's
Soldiers having spent their ill got Plunder, and calling these Victorious
days to mind, when they wallow'd in Rapine and Massacre, both the one and the
other thirsted after Civil War. In Italy there was no Army. Pompey was waging
War in the remote parts of the World; he had great hopes, if he stood for the
Consulship, of obtaining it. The Senate were careless and minded little
business; all things were quiet and a kind of Calm of Affairs: which were all
seasonable Opportunities for Cataline.

Therefore about the first of June, Lucius Caesar, and Caius Figulus being
Consuls, first he discourses 'em in private one by one, encourages some, of
others he feels the Pulses, urges his own Power, the unprovided Condition of
the Commonwealth, and the vast rewards of a Successful Conspiracy: and when he
had sufficiently tented every one in particular, he summons 'em all together,
whom he knew to be most in want and daringly bold. Upon this summons there
appeared of the Senatorian Order Publius Lentulus Sura, P. Autronius, Cassius
Longinus, Caius Cethegus, P. and Ser. Sylla, the Sons of Servius; Lucius
Vargunteius, Q. Annius, M. Porcius Lecca, Lucius Bestia, Q. Curious. Moreover of
the degree of Knights, M. Fulvius Nobilior, Lucius Statilius, Mar. Gabinius
Capito, and Caius Cornelius. Besides those there were also many out of the
Roman Colonies, and Municipal Towns, who were of Noble Extraction at home. Nor
were there wanting a good number of other Accomplices, who more privately and
closely favored and abetted this design, excited rather by the Hopes of
Domination, than through any want or necessity. However, the Greatest part of
the Younger sort, especially the Nobly descended, wished well to Cataline's
Proceedings: who having sufficient wherewithal to live in Pomp and Luxury, yet
rather chose Uncertainties for Certainties, and War instead of Peace. There
were also some at the same time who verily believed that M. Licinius Crassus
was not ignorant of the Design, in regard that Pompey, whom he hated, then
Commanding a numerous Army, he minded not what Party he supported in Opposition
to his Power: Confident moreover, That if the Conspiracy prevailed, he should
easily be able to make himself chief Head of the Faction. Yet some few there
were, who joined in a Conspiracy against the Commonwealth before: of which
design it is my purpose now, as truly as I can, to give a plain and unbiased
account.

L. Tullus, and M. Lepidus being Consuls, P. Autronius, and P. Sylla being
designed Consuls, being accused of using indirect means to attain their Honor,
had undergone the Punishment of the Law. A little after that, Cataline being
condemned for Bribery, was forbid to stand for the Consulship; so that he could
not give in his Name within the days appointed by the Law. At the same time
there was also Cn. Piso, a Young Gentleman of Noble and Ancient Extraction,
most daringly Arrogant, Needy and Factious, whose wants and wicked course of
Life, spurred him forward to disturb the Commonwealth. With him Cataline and
Autronius having consulted together upon the Fifth of December, agreed upon the
First of January ensuing to Assassinate Lucius Cotta, and Lucius Torquatus, the
two Consuls, in the Capitol. Which done, they themselves, after they had seized
upon the Fasces, or Ensigns of Consular Dignity, were to have sent Piso with an
Army to take Possession of both the Spanish Provinces. But this Plot having
taken wind, they deferred the Execution of the Murder till the Fifth of
February following, but contrived in the mean time the Massacre, not only of
the Consuls, but of most of the Senators; so that had not Cataline been too
hasty to give the Signal to the rest of his Confedrates, since the first
Foundations of Rome were laid, never had an Act of Villainy so execrable been
perpetrated within her Walls. But the Conspirators not meeting so early as they
ought to have done, that Opportunity was lost. After this, Piso was sent
Treasurer or Questor into the hither Province of Spain, with Praetorian Power,
Crassus conniving at it, because he knew him to be a bitter Enemy of Pompey's.
Neither was the Senate averse from decreeing him the province, as being
desirous to remove from the City a Person of his Vicious Principles. Besides,
they thought that many good men might rely upon him; for that Pompey's
greatness began already to be formidable. But Piso, in his Journey toward his
Province, was slain by certain Spanish Horsemen that he carried along with him
in his Army. Some there are who report, the Barbarians could not brook his
unjust, his haughty and Cruel Commands: though others say, that those Horsemen,
having been long patronized by Pompey, and being become his faithful Clients,
had by his connivance made that attempt upon Piso: for that the Spaniards had
never enterpriz'd so foul a fact before; although they had suffered formerly
many more Severities of Lordly Imposition: However it were, we shall leave the
Question undetermined: and so let this suffice concerning the first Conspiracy.

Cataline, when he saw the Persons, by me already mentioned, to be Assembled
all together, though he had frequently discoursed the Point with every one
apart, however, deeming it more advantageous to his Design to bespeak and
encourage'em all together, withdrew into the remotest part of the House, and
there excluding all others that were not absolutely concerned, he made 'em an
Oration to this Effect.

Were I not sufficiently assured of your Courage and Fidelity, in vain this
Opportunity had happened; in vain had I conceived these Noble hopes of Absolute
Dominion; nor should I go about to grasp at uncertainties upon the weak support
of Sloth, or fickle Irresolution. But because I have found ye stout and
faithful to me in many and most desperate Attempts, therefore it is that my
undaunted Bravery has begun the Greatest and Noblest of Designs: as also for
that I understand you have no other Felicity or Miseries but what are still the
same with mine; for to have still the same desires, and the same disaffections,
that is the only firm and perfect Friendship. Now what it is I have been thus
revolving in my mind, you have already severally heard. And I must tell ye,
that this Resolution of mine is every day still more and more enflamed, when I
consider what our future Condition of Life must be, unless that we our selves
redeem our own endangered Liberty. For when the Commonwealth is once reduced
under the Power and Jurisdiction of a few, then shall Kings and Tetrachs be
their Slaves and Tributary Vassals. People, Nations must pay Them their Taxes
and Impositions: all others, as well the Brave, the Stout, the Noble must be
the Vulgar Herd, dishonored and without the least Authority, in subjection to
Them, to whom, did but the Commonwealth retain it is perfect Health and Vigor,
we should be a Terror: while they engross to themselves all Favors, Honor,
Dignity and Riches, or else bestow 'em where they please, but leave us nothing
but Dangers, Repulses, Condemnations and Poverty: which how long will ye at
length endure, most Courageous of Men? Is it not far more glorious to dye
Magnanimously and Bravely, then Ignominiously to lose a miserable and
contemptible Life, after ye have been the sport and scorn of others domineering
Pride? But by the Faith of Gods and Men the Fault's our own; The Victory is in
our hands; Our years are in their Prime; Our Courage undaunted and Vigorous;
They, on the other side, grown old and feeble with Age and Wealth. We only want
but to begin, the rest would follow. For who among the Race of Mortals, endu'd
but with a Masculine Spirit, would ere endure, that they should wallow in
wealth, which they profusely lavish in rearing Palaces upon the Sea, and
levelling Mountains, while we are pinched at home with want of necessaries?
That they should have their Change of Sumptuous Houses, while we can no where
find a Cottage of our own to harbor our Misery? They purchase Pictures,
Statues, Sculptures and Embossments of all sorts to pamper their Eyes; pull
down, build up again, and by all manner of extortions hale and torture Money to
themselves, unable still with all their Luxury to subdue their Wealth; we
Starve at home, abroad our debts ore-whelm us; miserable our Condition, and our
hopes more desperate: Then what remains for us besides a wretched Life? Why
sleep ye therefore? Behold that Same, that very Liberty which ye have so often
sighed for: Moreover Plenty, Splendor, Honor, show themselves in view: For
all those things does Fortune offer to the Victors. Let the Enterprise it self,
the Opportunity, the Dangers, your own Wants and the magnificent Spoils of War
inflame your Courage beyond my Oration. And whether you make use of me as your
Commander or a Private Soldier, my Valor nor my Person shall be absent from
ye. For these are still the things which I intend to act in Common Consultation
with ye; unless perhaps my Courage fail me, and you prove more prepared to
serve, then to Command.

These things were heard by People abounding in Misery, but to whom not any
hope survived: and though they looked upon it as a sufficient recompense to be
disturbers of Public Tranquillity; nevertheless the greatest Part desired him
to declare the Conditions of the War; what rewards the success of their Arms
might Challenge; how their wants and how their expectations might every way be
satisfied. Then Cataline promised 'em New Tables, or the Cancelling of their
Debts, the Proscription of the Wealthy, Offices, Priesthoods, Rapines, Plunder,
and all those Advantages which War and the Victors Fury render lawful. Moreover
he assured 'em that Piso possessed the Hither Province of Spain, that in
Mauritania P. Sitius Nucerinus was lodged with an Army, Both privy to his
design. That C. Antonius stood for the Consulship, and as he hoped would happen
to be his Colleague, his Familiar Friend, and a Person under the burden of
utmost Indigency. That being Consul with him he would then begin to act.
Moreover all whom he thought Honest he loaded with Invectives and Reproaches:
then calling every one of his own Confederates by their Names, some he
applauded, others he put in mind of their Penury, several of the danger of
Punishment and the ignominy that attended 'em; and many of Sylla's Victory,
especially those who had tasted the sweets of Pillage and Rapine. Then
beholding a cheerful unanimity in their Countenances, after he had admonished
'em to be mindful of strengthening his Party against he stood for the
Consulship, he dismissed the Assembly. Some there were, who at that time
reported, that Cataline, after he had concluded his Oration, when he took the
oath of secrecy from his Confederates, caused Human Blood to be mingled with
the wine, and then to be given about to every man his Cup. Of which, when after
the Repetition of the Curse, they had all sipp'd, according to Custom at the
Solemn Sacrifices, then he revealed the depth of his design, and told 'em the
reason of his urging such a Ceremony, which was to engage 'em to the greater
Secrecy and Fidelity one among another, while sodder'd thus together, equal in
Guilt, and equal in their Fears. Yet some there were who deemed these Stories
feigned, and many things invented besides by those, who believed, that the
Antipathy conceived against Cicero, which brake out soon after, might be
asswag'd by improving the hainousness of their Crime, who had suffered
punishment. However it is my Opinion, That had the Crime been so great as was
reported, it could not have escaped our knowledge.

But notwithstanding these precautions, there was in this Conspiracy Quintus
Curious, a Person of no mean Parentage, though infamously branded with all manner
of Lewdness and Villainy, whom therefore the Censors had expelled the Senate as
a Public Nuisance.

This Person was a Man no less vainglorious than insolently bold: He neither
could contain the Secrets which he heard, nor conceal the Crimes which he
himself committed. Among the rest he had been long familiar with Fulvia, a
Woman however of Noble Descent, to whom at length when he became impertinent
and troublesome by reason of his Indigency, that could no longer present and
treat her as he was wont; of a sudden, as if he had commanded all the World, he
began to promise her whole Seas and Mountains; at other times threatening her
with his drawn Sword, unless She complied with his desires; and in short, to
behave himself after a more Lordly and Domineering manner then formerly. Fulvia
therefore, having sifted out the cause of this unsual swaggering of her
Paramor, never went about to conceal a danger that so nearly threatened the
Commonwealth, but suppressing her Authors name, recounted to several whatever
She had heard concerning Catiline's Conspiracy. This Rumor first of all stirred
up the Favor and good Will of most Men, to procure the Consulship for M.
Tullius Cicero. For before that time the greatest part of the Nobility burned
with disdain, and thought the Consulship defiled by admitting a Person but
newly known to the World, though otherwise of soaring and egregious Parts, to
that degree of Honor. But when Danger was so near their doors, Malice and
Pride were laid asleep. Therefore upon the day of Election M. Tullius and C.
Antonius were declared Consuls. Which was the first thing that shook the
Abetters of the Conspiracy. However, Cataline's Fury was nothing abated; but
every day made new Progresses to advance his Design; making Provision of Arms
in all Convenient Places all over Italy: and taking up Money either upon his
own or the Credit of his Friends, sent it away to one Manlius, then dwelling or
residing at Now Fiesoli, two Miles from Florence.
Faesulae, and afterward Captain General for the War.

At the same time he is reported to have purchased to himself several Men of
all Sorts and Conditions; nay, and some Women too, who first of all had
maintained themselves at a prodigious Rate by the Prostitution of their Bodies;
but afterward, decay of Youth and Beauty limiting their Gains, though not their
Luxury, had vastly run themselves in Debt. By their Assistance Catiline thought
to solicit and inveigle the City Rabble, to set the houses on fire, and
either to gain or murder their Husbands. In this Number was Sempronia, who had
frequently Committed several Facts of Masculine boldness. This Woman was for
her Birth and Beauty, in her Husband also and her Children sufficiently happy;
well acquainted with the Greek and Latin Learning; Sung and Danced with much
more exactness and elegancy then was necessary for a Woman professing Chastity.
With many other Graces also that heighten Lasciviousness was she endowed; but
still she prized all other things above her Modesty. Whether she were more
Prodigal of her Money or her Reputation you could not easily discern; and such
was the heat of her Lust, that she more often courted Men, then Men Her. False
to her Promise, to her Trust Forsworn, and Driving headlong wherever the
Torrent of her Luxury and Poverty carried her. Otherwise a Woman of no mean
Wit: for she made Verses, jested facetiously, could vary her Discourse to
Modest or Obscene according to her Company: and in a word had all the Charms of
Speech and Breeding.

All this Provision thus far made, Catiline nevertheless put in to be Consul
the next year, hoping if he were elected, that he should govern Antonius at his
own pleasure. Nor was he Idle in the mean while, but laid all Ambushments
imaginable for Cicero, who on the other side wanted neither craft nor subtilty
to guard himself; for from the beginning of his Consulship, making great
Promises by Fulvia's means he had brought it to that pass, that Quintus Curious
had already laid open to him Catiline's Designs. And besides that, he had made
sure of his Colleague Antony, by confirming to him the Grant of his Province,
that he should not dissent in any thing from him to the Prejudice of the
Commonwealth. He had his Guards of Friends and Clients also always within
call.

Therefore so soon as the day of Election was past, and that Catiline had not
only missed of the Consulship, but also failed in all the Snares and Plots
which he had contrived against Cicero, he resolved upon a War, and to make
trial of all Extremities, since what he had Clandestinly attempted, had proved
so difficult and unsuccessful.

Therefore he dispatched away C. Manlius to Fiesoli, one Septimius Camertes
into the Now called La Marca D'Ancona.
Country of Picenum, C. Julius into Apulia; and some one way, others another,
as he thought every one might prove most serviceable to him. In the mean while
himself at Rome had many Irons in the Fire, to get the Consul Murdered; to order
the firing of the City, to seize and fill convenient Posts with Armed men; some
he commanded; others he encouraged, to the end they might be always ready and
prepared: Day and Night in a continual Hurry; restless, waking, and yielding
neither to want of sleep, nor labor. Lastly, When after many meditated
Mischiefs, nothing succeeded, again in a tempestuous Night he summoned the
Ringleaders of the Conspiracy by M. Porcius Lecca. Who being met, he chid 'em
first for their Remissness, then gave 'em to understand, how he had sent
Manlius before to head such Forces as he had got together ready to take Arms:
Others to other convenient Places: and that he was prepared to go to the Army
himself, so soon as he could but get Cicero murdered; for that mainly
obstructed his Designs. Thereupon, when all the rest were in a kind of
amazement and tottering in their Resolutions, C. Cornelius, a Roman Knight, and
with him L. Vargunteius, a Senator, promising their Assistance, they agreed to
go that Night, with an armed Retinue, as if it were upon a Visit to Cicero; and
ere he were aware to Stab him unprovided in his own House. Presently Curious,
when he understood the Danger that so nearly threatened the Consul, by Fulvia
gave him swift Intelligence of the sudden Plot upon his Life. So that the
Assassinates not being permitted Entrance into the House, they undertook in
vain a Fact so Heinous.

In the mean while Manlius Sollicits the Rabble in Tuscany, where want and the
smart of former sufferings had prepared the People for Change; for that under
the Tyrannical Usurpation of Sylla, they had lost their Lands and all their
Goods. Nor did he leave uninveigl'd the very Thieves and Robbers, who were very
numerous in that Country; and some that Sylla himself had planted there by way
of remuneration, who by their Luxury and Prodigality, had wasted what before
they had got by Plunder and Rapine.

When Cicero had Intelligence of these Proceedings, startled at the
Apprehension of a double Mischief, and finding he could no longer, by his
single care and assiduity, Protect the City from menacing Contrivances, nor
certainly knew how numerous Manlius's Forces were, nor what his Councels drove
at, he reports the whole Matter to the Senate, which had been tossed already to
and fro in common Rumor and vulgar Discourse. Thereupon, as usually was done
on all Important Occasions, the Senate decreed, That the Consuls should take
care, least the Commonwealth received any Damage. Which Power, the greatest
that could be, was granted by the Senate to the Supreme Magistracy, according
to the Roman Custom; to raise Armies, carry on the War, and by all ways
whatever to suppress and curb both Subjects and Allies: and both at Home and in
the Field to Exercise both Sovereign Empire and Judicature. Otherwise, without
the Command of the People, no Consul has any Authority to act in those Affairs.

Some few days after, L. Senius, read certain Letters in the Senate, which he
said were brought him from Fiesoli; of which the purport was, That C. Manlius
had taken Arms with a numerous Multitude, about the beginning of November. And
some there were, as is usual upon such occasions, that talked of great
Prodigies and Wonders: Others discoursed of frequent Assemblies in several
places, of Arms carried to Capua, and that the Slaves would rise in Apulia.
Thereupon by a Decree of the Senate, Q. Marcius Rex was dispatched away for
Fiesoli, and Q. Metellus, Surnamed Creticus, was sent into Apulia and the
neighboring Parts. Both these returning to the City, were debarred their
triumphal Entrance, through the malice of some few Detractors, whose Custom it
was to put all things to Sale, whether honest or dishonest. But for the
Pretors, Q. Pompeius Rufus, Q. Metellus Celer, the first was sent to Capua, and
the latter into Picenum, or La Marca D' Ancona, with Power to raise an Army
according to the Importance of the Occacasion and the Danger. Moreover if any
one should make any discovery of the Conspiracy on foot against the
Commonwealth, Rewards were promised; to a Servant his Liberty, and Two
Thousand Five Hundred Crowns; To a Freeman, a General Pardon and Five Thousand
Crowns. They also farther decreed, That the Families of the Gladiators should
be separated and distributed into Capua and such other Municipal Towns, that
were most wealthy and populous; That at Rome the Guards should be doubled
through the whole City; and, That the inferior Magistrates should take charge
of the Watches. These things put the whole City into such a Consternation, that
the Countenances of the People were quite altered; instead of Jolity and
Wantonness, the effects of long repose, all Men were seized with sudden Sadness
and Perplexity: all in a Hurry; all in Fear; not knowing whom to trust, or
where to be secure; neither at War, nor in Peace, but every one measuring his
danger by his fears. Nay the very Women too, to whom the Terrors of War, in
such a Potent Commonwealth, were altogether unusual, bemoaned themselves;
spread their suppliant hands to Heaven; bewailed their tender Infants; inquired
the News; dreaded all things; and laying aside their Pride and Pleasures grew
distrustful of their own and the safety of their Country. But Catiline's cruel
fury acted still with the same Vigor, notwithstanding the Preparations of
Military opposition, and that he himself were impeached upon the Plautian
Statute by L. Paulus. But then to show how well he could dissemble, or else to
justify himself, as if the Quarrel had been picked out purpose to teaze him, he
went into the Senate. At what time M. Tullius, the Consul, either dreading his
Presence, or incensed with Anger, made a splendid Speech, highly to the benefit
of the Commonwealth, which afterward he published to the World. But so soon
as he sat down again, Catiline, who was a person well prepared for all manner
of Dissimulation, with a dejected Countenance and suppliant Tone, besought the
Fathers not over rashly to credit vain Reports concerning him; that the Family
was such from whence he was descended, and such the Life which he had lead from
his Youth, that he had all things great and good to hope for: Nor to believe
that he, a Person of Patrician Quality, whose own and the services of his
Ancestors had been so beneficial to the Roman People, stood in need of a ruined
Commonweal, especially when M. Tullius forsooth preserved it, an Adventitious
Citizen of Rome. Which words being closely followed with other Reproachful
Invectives, all humm'd him down, and called him Enemy and Parricide. Then in a
Rage, Because, said he, Thus circumvented, I am driven headlong by my
Adversaries, I Will extinguish the Conflagration of my Fortunes with Ruin. And
so saying he flung out of the Senate, and made directly home; there musing and
revolving many Mischiefs in his Mind: for that he saw his Plots upon the Consul
had no success; and understood besides, that the City was sufficiently guarded
from all Attempts of Fire. And therefore deeming it his wisest course to
augment his Army, and before the Legions were enrolled, to be beforehand with
many things that might be useful to him in the War, with a few Attendants in a
Tempestuous Night, he posted to the Manlian Camp. But first he left strict
Orders with Cethegus, Lentulus and others, whose daring Boldness he
sufficiently knew, to strenghthen the Power of the Faction by all the ways they
could; to hasten the Destruction of the Consul, to provide for Slaughter,
Conflagration, and all the dismal Executions of War: and that he himself in a
short time would appear before the Walls of the City. Now while these things
were thus acted at Rome, C. Manlius sent certain Commissioners selected out of
his own Number, to Q. Marcius Rex, with Instructions to the following Effect:

We call both Gods and Men to witness, Noble General, That we have taken up
Arms, neither against our Country, nor to terrify others with the fears of
danger; but only to protect our Bodies from Oppression. Who miserable,
indigent, and overwhelmed with Violence and Cruelty of Usurers, are most of us
divested of our Country, but all despoiled of our Reputation, and our Fortunes.
Neither is it permitted any of Us, according to the Custom of our Fathers, to
have the benefit of the Law; nor after the loss of our Patrimonies, to enjoy
the freedom of our Bodies. Such was the severity of the Bankers and the Praetor.
Yet your Forefathers in Compassion to the Roman People by their Decrees
relieved their Wants: and lately, in our Memory, by reason so vast a a number
were every where endebted, by the consent of all good Men, three parts of the
Silver Credit were abated, and only a fourth part paid in Brass. Nor is it the
first time that the Common People themselves, either affect Dominion; or
provoked to Arms by the Pride of the Magistrates, have revolted from the
Fathers. But neither do we desire Empire or Wealth, the general Causes of all
the Wars and Contests among Mortals: it is only Liberty we see, which no man of
Courage ever loses, but his Life together with it. We conjure both Thy self and
the Senate, that you will consult the good of your unfortunate fellow-Citizens;
that you will restore us the benefit of the Law, which the Injustice of the
Praetor has wrested from Us: and that you will not impose that dire Necessity
upon Us, to seek which way to perish, chiefly in revenge of our own Blood.

To this Q. Marcius returned for Answer, That if they had any thing to Petition
the Senate, they should lay down their Arms, and repair in an humble manner to
Rome. That the Senate and the Roman People were endu'd with that Meekness and
Compassion, that never any Supplicant in vain implored their Assistance. On the
other side Catiline, while he was upon the Road, sent Letters to all the
Consular Personages, and the chiefest of the Nobility, That being oppressed
with false Aceusations, because he could not withstand the Faction of his
Enemies, he had therefore submitted to Fortune, and was retiring, a willing
Exile, to Marseilles: not that he was guilty of so great a Crime; but for the
Repose of the Commonweal; and that no Sedition might arise from his contending
with the Public. But Q. Catulus read other Letters in the Senate, quite
different from these; which he affirmed to be delivered to him in Catiline's
Name, and of which the following Copy gives the sense.

L. Catiline to Quint. Catulus, Greeting. Thy singular Fidelity, being assured
of the thing it self, so grateful to me in these my threatening dangers; gives
me the Confidence of this Recommendation. These three Periods are acknowledged
to be very imperfect in the Original.
Wherefore I have determined not to ground any Defense upon new Consultations;
yet I have decreed to propound satisfaction, as no way conscious of offending:
which in good truth it is not improper for thee to know. At length provoked
with Slights and Contumelies; for that being deprived the fruits of all my
Labor and Industry, I could not obtain the Dignity I stood for, according to
my innate disposition, I have undertaken the public Cause of the Unfortunate.
Not but that I could pay my own Debts by the Sale of my Lands; and for what I
stand engaged for others, the Liberality of Orestilla has been such as to take
care to discharge it out of her own and her Daughters Revenues; but because I
saw unworthy Persons advanced to Honor, my self neglected and thrown by,
through jealousy and counterfeited suspicion. For that reason I have pursued
those Hopes for preserving the remainder of my Reputation, which, considering
my Condition, I deem to be sufficiently honest. While I was about to have
written more, Intelligence was brought me, That Force is preparing. I recommend
Orestilla to thy Care, and deposite her in Trust with thee, Conjuring thee for
the sake of thy own Children, to protect her from all Injury. Farewell.

But Catiline himself after he had staid some few days with C. Flaminius in Now
Campo Pendente.
Reatinum, to to Arm the Neighboring Parts, already solicited and drawn to
his Party, he Marched directly to the Camp, to join Manlius with the Consular
Fasces, and other Ensigns of Supreme Authority born before him.

When these things were known at Rome, the Senate pronounced both Catiline and
Manlius open Enemies. To all the rest of the Multitude, those only excepted
that were convicted of Capital Crimes, they prefixed a certain day, before
which time, if they departed from their Arms, they should incur no Penalties.
Farther also they decreed, That the Consuls should proceed to a Muster, that
Antony should follow Catiline with his Army, and that Cicero should stay to
take care of the City. At that time, the vast Dominion of the Roman People
seemed to me beyond extremely miserable. To whom when all the Conquered World,
from the Rising to the Setting Sun, paid Homage and Obedience; when they
wallow'd at home in Plenty and Tranquillity, which Mortals deem their chiefest
Blessings; that among Them there should be such a Crew of fellow-Citizens, so
fatally, and with such obstinate Fury bent to ruin themselves, their Fortunes
and the Commonweal. For after two Decrees of Senate, among so vast a
Multitude, neither did so much as one, assured of great Rewards, make the least
Discovery of the Conspiracy; nor any one desert the Camp of their Rebellious
Leader, Catiline. Such was the violence of the Distemper, which like a
Contagion had infected the Minds of all those People. Neither did this
Pestilence spread it self, to alienate the Affections of those alone, who were
guilty of the Conspiracy; but even all the Commonalty, covetous of Innovation,
applauded Catiline's Proceedings. But this they seemed to do according to their
usual Custom. For always in a City, they who labor under Penury, envy the
better Fortune of others; extol the Wicked; abominate the ancient
Constitutions, covet Novelty, and detesting their own Conditions, study Change
of all things: they are nourished, void of Care, by Tumult and Sedition; For
that want is easily supported and cherished with public damage. But many
Motives carried headlong the City Rabble. First of all, who ever they were
that in any corner of the Country, surpassed in Impudence and Debauchery;
whoever had wasted their Patrimonies by expensive Lewdness; And lastly, all
whom Villainy and Crimes the most Enormous had Out-lawed from their Native
homes; all these together emptied into Rome, as into the Common Sewer of all
Disorder. Many others remembering Sylla's Conquests, while they beheld some
raised from Soldiers to the degree of Senators; others so Wealthy, that they
lived like Princes in the height of Ease and Plenty; promised every one to
themselves the same Enjoyments from successful Victory. Moreover the Younger
sort, that wrought hard for a poor Living in the Country, finding the sweets of
Private and Public Liberality, preferred the City Ease before severe and
painful Labor. However both Them and all the rest, the Public Calamity
supported. So that it is the less to be admired that Men so badly. Principl'd,
so wrapped up in Expectation, should be as little careful for the Common good, as
for themselves. And then again, all those whose Parents upon Sylla's Victory,
were proscribed, who lost their Estates, and were deprived of their Right of
Freedom, had the same Interest in the Success of the War. To which I may add,
that whoever sided with any other Faction than that of the Senate, rather
desired to see the Commonwealth disturbed, than grow too Potent. And this was
a Mischief, that many years after this time returned again to the City. For
when the Tribunitial Authority was restored to. Cn. Pompeius, and M. Crassus,
Young Gentlemen having got the Supreme Power into their hands, whose Years and
Courage were full of mettle and fury, by calumniating the Senate, they began to
put the Vulgar into a Ferment; then by Gifts and Promises more and more to
inflame 'em: and so became Eminent and Powerful themselves. Against them the
greatest part of the Nobility contended with all their Might, under color of
defending the Honor of the Senate, to support their own Greatness. For to
conclude in few words, Whoever in those times disturbed the Public Peace, made
use of specious pretenses; while some made a show of Protecting the Privileges
of the People, and others pretending to advance the Authority of the Senate,
had all their different Aims to promote their own Interest: neither did they
observe any Limits of Moderation in their Contests, both exercised cis'd their
Victories with Cruelty. But when Pompey was sent against the Pirates, and soon
after against Mithridates, the Authority of the People fainted, and the Power
of a few increased. These few disposed of Magistracies, Offices, Provinces and
all things Else. They, not to be controlled, and flourishing lived free from
fear; yet terrifying the Tribunes with their Sentences and Condemnations, to
prevent their exasperating the People against their Proceedings; to which
purpose they were compelled to abate of their former severities. But so soon as
first the hopes of introducing Change in dubious Affairs was offered, then the
old Contest set their thoughts and courages at work: So that had Catiline been
Victor in the first Battle, or that the Combat had been equal, certainly a most
Prodigious effussion of Blood, and Calamity had afflicted the Commonwealth:
neither would it have been in the Power of the Victorious to have made any
advantage of their Conquest; for that whoever had been more prevalent would
have wrested the Supreme Dominion and the Public Liberty from the weary and
enfeebl'd. However there were several without the pale of the Conspiracy, who
at the beginning went to join with Catiline. In which number was Fulvius, the
Senator's Son; who being Apprehended upon the Road, and brought back, his
Father commanded him to be put to death. At the same time Lentulus also abiding
at Rome in pursuance of Catiline's Orders, made it his business to solicit
all such Persons, whose loose manner of Living, or decayed Fortunes rendered 'em
fit for State-Innovation; not only Citizens, but all sorts of Persons whatever,
that might be useful in the War. To that purpose he gave Commission to one P.
Vmbrenus to tamper with the Ambassadors of the A People which then Inhabited
that part of France, of which the chief Cities are now Geneva, Chambery,
Vienne, andamp;c.
Allobroges and if he could, to draw 'em in to be Confederates in the War.
Believing, that in regard they were both publicly and privately vastly in Debt;
besides that the Gauls were naturally a Warlike People, they might be easily
inveigl'd to lay hold of the Opportunity. This Vmbrenus having traded much
among the Gauls, was known to most of the Chief Princes of the Cities, and
likewise knew Them. Therefore without delay, so soon as he beheld the
Ambassadors in the Forum, or Place of usual Concourse, after some few Questions
concerning the Condition of the City, and as it were bewailing the Public
Calamity, he began to ask 'em, what they thought would be the Issue of such
destructive beginnings. In answer to which, when he heard 'em complain of the
Covetousness of the Magistrates; accuse the Senate, as from whom there was no
hopes of redress; and making Lamentations, that only death could terminate
their Miseries; But I, said he, will show ye a way, provided ye will be but
Men, how ye may avoid all these great and Terrifying Misfortunes. The
Allobroges, their Expectations thus screwed up, besought Vmbrenus to
compassionate their Condition; assuring him, there was nothing too desperate or
difficult which they would not most readily undertake, provided it might
conduce to discharge their City out of Debt. Thereupon he carried 'em to D.
Brutus's House, as being near the Forum, and not altogether a stranger to the
Conspiracy, because of Sempronia, for that Brutus him self was not then in
Town. Moreover he sent for Gabinius, to the end that Credit might be given to
his words. In his hearing he says open the whole Conspiracy, names the
Confederates, together with several others, who were no way concerned, to give
the Ambassadors the more Encouragement; and having so done, after they had made
him fair Promises, he sent 'em to their Lodgings.

However the Allobroges when they came to consider, were long uncertain and
hesitating what Course to take. On the one side, there was a Ponderous Debt, a
prompt Inclination to War, and a charming Prospect of great Gain from the hopes
of Victory. On the other side there was greater Wealth and Power, the safer
course, and for uncertain hopes assured No less then 200000 Sesterces, which
amounts to 750000 l.
rewards. And long they rolled and tumbled these Considerations in their Minds;
but at length the Fortune of the Commonwealth obtained the Victory. Therefore
away they go to Fabius Sanga, and to him as Patron of their City, discovered
the whole Plot, as far as it had been laid open to them. Cicero being informed
of this Discovery by Sanga, gave order to the Ambassadors to dissemble strongly
their Approbation of the Conspiracy; that they should apply themselves to the
rest, and to do their utmost endeavor to assure themselves of their Names and
Persons.

At the same time there were also some Commotions in the Lombardy and Piemont.
Hither and France it self.
Farther-most Gaul, as likewise in La Marca d' Ancona.
Picenum among the Calabria.
Bruttii and in Now Puglia.
Apulia; but they proved to be only Tumults and no more. For the Persons whom
Catiline had sent thither, acted without any consideration like so many Mad
men; and with their Midnight Assemblies, their disposing to and fro of Arms and
Darts, their Hurrying and Bustling about, occasioned more of Terror than
Danger. So that Q. Metellus Celer the Praetor, when he understood by the Senates
Decree, the Reason of their Deligence, Apprehended and Imprisoned a great
Number of those Busy fellows; and the same did also C. Murena in the Hither
Gaul, being Lord Lieutenant of that Province.

But at Rome, Lentulus with the rest of the chief Ringleaders of the
Conspiracy, having as they thought a sufficient strength about 'em, resolved,
that so soon as Catiline was advanced as far as Fiesoli with his Army, Bestia
the Tribune of the People, in a set Speech should inveigh against Cicero's
Proceedings, and lay the odium of a most terrible War upon the best of Consuls;
which being the Signal, the next Night the whole Body of the Conspirators was
to rise, and every one to act his Part: Though they were reported to have been
thus ordered to their several Posts. That Statilius and Gabinius, with a
considerable number, should set fire to twelve convenient Places of the City:
to the end that in the Hurry of that Tumult, there might be the more easy
access to the Consul, and such others as were designed to be murdered. That
Cethegus should beset Cicero's House, and by main force make way to his Person.
Others were to attempt others; and the Sons of the Families, of whom the
greatest part were of the Nobility, were to murder their Parents; and thus when
all the whole City was in a general Consternation, dismayed with Fire and
Sword, the next work was to force their way through the Guards, and march
directly to meet Catiline. In the midst of these Preparations and Counsels,
Cethegus often complained of the sloth and slackness of the Confederates: that
by hesitation and delay, they lost great Opportunities; that in dangers of that
Nature, Execution not Consultation was required: and then proffered, if only a
few would stand by him, since others were so faint and tender hearted, himself
to lead the way into the Senate House: for being naturally fierce, choleric,
and prompt of hand, his chiefest Confidence was in Expedition.

In the mean time the Allobroges according to Cicero's Instructions, being
introduced by Gabinius, met the rest of the Conspirators; at what time they
required from Lentulus, Cethegus, Statilius and Cassius an Oath which they
might carry Signed to their Magistrates and fellow Citizens; for that else they
would never be induced to engage in such a weighty Enterprise; which they,
suspecting nothing, readily gave. Cassius also promised to be with 'em in a
short time, but left the City a little before the Ambassadors. But when they
went, T. Volturcius of Crotona was ordered to attend 'em, and to procure a
mutual Confirmation of the League between the Allobroges and Catiline, and an
Exchange of the Articles on both sides. He also sent a short Letter by
Volturcius to Catiline, to this effect.

Who I am thou will understand by the Messenger I have sent thee. Be sure to
consider the vastness of the Danger wherein thou art; and remember that thou
art a Man. Consider, what thy Affairs require; and beg Assistance from all,
even from the Lowest.

Moreover he had Instructions to admonish him by word of mouth, that seeing he
was adjudg'd an Enemy by the Senate, for what Reason would he refuse the worst
of Slaves? that all things were ready in the City according to his Orders; and
that he should not delay to make his Approach a little nearer.

Having thus far in this manner proceeded, upon the Night appointed when they
were to go, Cicero, who was informed of every thing by the Ambassadors, gave
Orders to the Pretors, C. Pomptinius, and L. Valerius Flaccus, to surprise the
Ambassadors and their Train so soon as they, arrived at the Mulvian Now Ponte
Molle two miles from Rome.
Bridge; unfolded to 'em the Reason, why they were sent, and bid 'em act in
other things as they saw occasion. They being Military men that understood
business, having Posted their Guards without the least disturbance, as they
were commanded, beset the Bridge; so that when the Ambassadors, together with
Volturcius came to the Place, presently there was hideous bawling and tearing
of Throats on both sides. But the Gauls understanding the Design, yielded
forthwith to the Pretors. Volturcius at first encouraging the rest, defended
himself a while with his Sword from the Multitude; but finding he was deserted
by the Ambassadors, after he had with many Imprecation's adjur'd Pomptinius,
with whom he was acquainted, to serve him with his Interest, at length fearful
and distrustful of his Life, he surrendered himself to the Pretors, as if they
had been Enemies.

This being done, an exact Relation of all things was sent to the Consul; who
at the same time was no less over anxious than over joy'd. He rejoiced, for
that the Conspiracy being now discovered, the City was wrested from the Jaws of
danger. But his trouble was no less extreme, seeing so many Eminent Citizen's
the detected Authors of so foul a Crime, what was to be done. Their Punishment
was grievous to him, and their Impunity the ruin of the Commonweal. But at
length recovering his Resolution, he commanded Lentulus, Cethegus, Statilius,
Gabinius to appear before him; also Ceparias of Tarracina, who it seems was
gone for Apulia, to raise the slaves; the rest attended without delay. The
Consul himself, taking Lentulus by the hand, because he was a Praetor, lead him
into the Senate; the rest he ordered to be sent to the Temple of Concord under
strong Guards. Thither he summons the Senate, and before a great Appearance of
that Order, causes Volturcius and the Ambassadors to be brought in; and
commands Valerius Flaccus to bring in the little Packet of Letters which he
had received from the Ambassadors.

Volturcius being Examined concerning his going out of Town, and the Letters,
what was his design, or what the cause of his Journey; at first framed several
fictitious stories, and shifted off the Conspiracy; but being commanded to
delare the Truth upon the Public Faith, he unfolded all things as they were
transacted; that he was some days before drawn in by Gabinius, and Ceparius;
but that he knew no more than the Ambassadors; only he had heard from Gabinius,
that P. Autronius, Ser. Sylla, L. Vargunteius, and many others were involved in
the same Confedracy. The Gauls confessed the same things. But as for Lentulus,
who dissembled and veiled the Truth, they convinced him not only by Letters,
but from several brags that he was wont to make in Public, That the Kingdom of
Rome was ascertained to three Cornelii by the Prophesies contained in the
Sibilline Books. That Cinna and Sylla had had their Turns, and that he was the
Third, whose Fate it should be to rule the Roman People: Moreover that from the
Burning of the Capitol, the twentieth Year was now arrived, which the
Soothsayers from several Prodigies had foretold, should be deeply died with
Civil Blood. Therefore the Letters being read, after the Criminals had all
acknowledged the Seals to be Lentulus's, the Senate decreed, That Lentulus,
being degraded from the Magistracy, and the rest, should be confined in free
Prisons. Therefore Lentulus was committed to the Custody of P. Lentulus
Spinther who was The Ediles were Officers who had charge of repairing the
Temples and public Houses, and look`d after the Weights andamp; Measures.
Edile, Cethegus to the care of Q. Cornificius; Statilius to C. Caesar;
Gabinius to Marcus Crassus; Ceparius (for by this time he had been apprehended
upon the Road and brought back) to Cn. Terentius the Senator.

And now the Conspiracy being detected, the Common People, who before, out of
their usual desire of Change, had too much favored the War, now vearing about,
cursed Catiline's Designs, applauded Cicero to the Skies, and as if they had
been snatched from the Jaws of Bondage, by their Gestures and their Countenances
filled the Streets with Joy and Exultation. For other Acts of War would rather
afford 'em the Advantages of Plunder, than bring detriment to Them; whereas
they looked upon firing of Cities to be cruel, excessive and chiefly pernicious
to themselves; since all their Riches consisted in their Cloths and
Housholdstuff.

The next day after, one L. Tarquinius was brought before the Senate, who was
reported to have been apprehended upon the Road, going to Catiline. This Man
promising to make great Discoveries of the Conspiracy, if he might be assured
of his Pardon; and being thereupon commanded by the Senate to declare his
knowledge, informed the Senate the same things which Volturcius had done,
concerning the Firing of the City, the Massacre of all the honest Party; and
the March of the Enemy; and farther, that he was sent by M. Crassus, to give
him an Account of what had happened, least he should be deterred to hear that
Lentulus, Cethegus, and so many others of the Conspirators were in Custody; and
to advise him so much the rather to hasten his March to the City, as a means to
revive the Spirits of the rest, and the better to secure 'em from the danger
they were in. But when Tarquinius named Crassus, a Person Illustrious by
Extraction, vastly Rich and most eminently Potent, some deeming the thing
incredible, others, though they thought it true, yet because at such a
Conjuncture, the Power of so great a Man was rather to be appeased and
qualified, than exasperated, the most part obnoxious to Crassus, upon the score
of their Private concerns, unanimously cried out, That the Witness was
Perjured, and demanded a Reference upon the whole Matter; therefore by Cicero's
Advice, it was Decreed in a in full Senate, That the Evidence was looked upon as
false, that Tarquinius should be laid in Irons: and that he should never be
admitted more to give his Testimony, unless he discovered the Person who had
put him upon inventing such a falsehood. Some Persons at that time were of
opinion, that this same Evidence was contrived by P. Autronius, to the end that
Crassus being Impeached, might be the more ready to Protect the rest by his
Power, when involved in the same danger. Others reported that Tarquinius was
Suborned by Cicero, least Crassus, undertaking the Patronage of wicked
Miscreants, according to his Custom, should join with Them to disturb the
Public Peace. And I have afterward heard Crassus himself declare, that the
Affront, though of so high a Nature, was put upon him by Cicero.

At the same time neither Q. Catulus, President of the Senate, nor C. Piso
could either by Favor, Importunity or Bribes prevail with Cicero, that C.
Caesar might be falsely accused either by the Allobroges, or any other
Evidence: For they were both his Mortal Enemies. Piso, as being But being
defended by Cicero himself.
Condemned upon an Impeachment of Bribery, under pretense that he had unjustly
punished with death a certain Piemontane. Catulus burning with Revenge, for
that upon his standing for the Supreme Pontificate in his Hoary years, C.
Caesar a young man had carried against him. And now they thought they had an
Opportunity put into their hands, for that Caesar, partly through his excessive
Liberality in Private, and partly through the Profuseness of his Public
Presents, had run himself deeply in Debt. But when they could not persuade the
Consul to such a dishonorable Compliance, they themselves by running
personally from place to place, and spreading false Reports of what they had
heard from Volturcius and the Allobroges, had heaped no small Odium upon him,
insomuch that some of the Roman Knights, who guarded the Temple of Concord with
their Partisans in their hands, whether moved thereto by the Greatness of the
Danger, or the Inconstancy of their own Affections, to make their zeal for the
Commonwealth the more remarkable, threatened him with their naked Weapons as he
came forth of the Senate.

While these things were transacted in the Senate, and that Rewards were
decreed to the Ambassadors of the Allobroges and Volturcius, Lentulus's
Enfranchiz'd slaves, and some few of his Clients taking several Roads, made it
their business to solicit Handicraft Tradesmen and Slaves, and incense 'em to
his Rescue; while others sought out every where for the Ringleaders of the
Rabble, who for Money were wont to perplex the Commonwealth. Cethegus also by
Messengers, besought his Family and his Enfranchiz'd slaves, all fellows culled
and exercised in Insolence, to make a Body, and by force of Arms to break in
upon him. The Consul therefore understanding how these Plots were laid, having
placed his Guards as the time and the occasion required, after he had summoned
a Senate, made a Motion what should be done with those Prisoners that were
under Custody. For not long before a full Senate had adjudg'd 'em to have acted
against the Commonwealth. Upon that Motion therefore D. Junius Silanus, being
first of all desired to deliver his Opinion, in regard he was at that time
designed Consul, had declared, That not only they who were in Prison, but also
L. Cassius, P. Furius, P. Vmbrenus, and Q. Annias, so soon as they were
apprehended, should be put to death. Though afterward being mollify'd by Caius
Caesar's Oration, he had protested his Compliance altogether with Tiberius
Nero's Vote, which Report he did not think however fit to have been made till
the Guards were doubled. But Caesar being asked his Opinion by the Consul,
delivered himself in these words.

It behooves all Men whatever, Conscript Fathers, who deliberate in dubious
Affairs, to be void of Hatred, Friendship, Anger and Compassion: for where
these things obstruct, the Mind can never have a perfect Prospect of Truth:
neither was there ever any man who at the same time, could indulge his private
desires and the public good. When we fortify our resolution, it grows vigorous;
If Passion possess us, that prevails, and Resolution languishes I want not
plenty of Presidents, Conscript Fathers, to show what Kings, and People upon
the Motives of Anger or Pity, have ill consulted in the main. But I rather
choose to cull out what our Ancestors have done in Opposition to their
Passions. In the Macedonian War, which we waged with King Perseus, the City of
the Rhodians, mighty and magnificent, and grown up to that height by the
Assistance and Support of the Roman People, became treacherous and injurious to
Us. Yet when the War was ended, and that the Rhodian Ingratitude came to be
debated, our Ancestors, least any might say hereafter they had begun a War in
thirst of Riches, rather then sensible of suffered wrongs, they dismissed the
Rhodians home unpunished. Also in all the Punic Wars, when frequently the
Carthagenians, both in Peace, and by breach of Treaties, had perpetrated many
abominable Acts, never did they, when opportunity offered, do the like; they
rather sought what might become their own Dignity, then what they might justly
retaliate upon them. This therefore, you are to take care of, Conscript
Fathers, that the Impious Crime of Lentulus and the rest, do not sway your
Passions more prevalently then your honor; and that you be not more indulgent
to your Anger, then your Flame. For if there might be found a punishment to
equalize their Misdeeds, then I approve your Counsel newly taken; but if the
vastness of their Crimes surpasses all our Invention, it is then my Judgment,
that we make use of those which are provided by the Law. Most of those Persons,
who before me, have declared their Opinions, have sedately and nobly
compassionated the Condition of the Commonwealth: they have numbered up the
Cruelties of War, and what most usually befalls the vanquished: Rapes of
Virgins, and Young Boys; Infants torn from the Embraces of their Parents;
Mothers of Families at the Lustful pleasure of the Victors; Temples and Private
Houses robbed and and plundered; nothing but Fire and Sword; All placed lastly
strewn with scattered Arms and Carcasses, besmeared with Blood, and filled
with Lamentations. But by the Immortal Gods, what did that long Oration drive
at? was it to raise your Antipathy to the Conspiracy? that is to say, who e're
he be, whom so prodigous, and so terrible a Fact cannot exasperate, that same
Oration shall incense. It cannot be so; neither does any Man look slightly upon
his own Injuries: nay, many bear 'em with less Patience then they ought to do.
But, Consceipt Fathers, there is one sort of Liberty to some allowed, another
sort to others. They who lead their Lives in Obscurity, if at any time they
commit an Error in heat of Anger, few take Notice: their Reputation and their
Fortunes are alike. But they who being arrived to large Command, live in the
soaring height of Greatness, are always in view, and their actions are beheld
by all men. So that in Fortunes most conspicuous, there is the least of Liberty;
there is no permission to Love or Hate, much less to be in Wrath. What is called
Anger among others, in Government bears the name of Pride and Cruelty. I must
confess, it is my Opinion, Conscript Fathers, that all the Tortures in the World
are far inferior to their Crimes. But most Men still remember what was last;
and in the sufferings of the most Impious, forgetting the Fact, discourse of
nothing but the punishment, if more severe then ordinary. As for Decius
Silanus, a Man most Brave and Stout, I am certainly convinced, that what he has
said, he has spoken out of his Affection to the Commonwealth; and that he is
biased neither by Favor nor Enmity, in a concern of this Importance; so well
I have been acquainted with the Conditions and Moderation of the Person. But
his Judgment in this case seems to me not cruel, no, (for what can be thought
cruel when inflicted upon such Men) but without president in our Commonwealth.
For certainly, Silanus, either Fear or Injury orerul'd thee, being the designed
Consul, to decree an unusual sort of Punishment. To talk of fear is altogether
now superfluous, seeing that by the propitious diligence of our most
Illustrious Consul, such numerous Guards are up in Arms. As to the Punishment,
I shall say no more, then what is obvious from the thing it self; that in
Sorrow and Affliction, it is death not torment that surceases all our Miseries:
that puts an end to all the sufferings of Mortals: beyond that, there is no
room for Care or Joy. But wherefore, by the Immortal Gods, did thou not add
this farther to thy Sentence, that first they should be rigorously scourged?
Was it because the By which no Roman Citizen could be Whipped.
Porcian Law forbids it? However there are other Laws that Privilege condemned
Citizens from loss of Life, commanding only Banishment. Or was it because it is
more grievous to be Whipped then to be put to Death? Pray, what can be too
grievous or severe for men to suffer, once Convicted of so great a Crime? But
if it be the slighter punishment, why so observant of the Law in the Lesser
Infliction, when thou have broken it in the Greater? But who dares question
what shall be Decreed against Parricides of the Commonwealth? A time, a day to
come; nay. Fortune her self, that at her pleasure governs all the World: Then,
whatever happens will deservedly befall 'em. But as for you, Conscript Fathers,
consider what ye decree against these Men. All bad Examples derive their
Original from bad beginnings. For when the Government shall fall into the hands
of the Ignorant and Unjust, that new Example will be transferred from the
worthy and fit, to the unworthy and unfit to rule. The Lacedaemonians having
vanquished the Athenians imposed upon 'em Thirty Persons to manage the Public
Affairs. These, first of all, began to put to death, though uncondemn'd, the
worst of Men, and only such as had deserved the General hatred: at this the
People rejoiced, and cried it was justly done. But when this Liberty augmented
and grew bold, then Will and Pleasure reigning, Good and Bad were put to Death
without distinction, and the City under Bondage and Oppression, paid severely
for their foolish joy. In our remembrance, Sylla then Victorious, caused
Damasippus and others that were grown up to the prejudice of the Commonwealth,
to beput to Death; and, Who did not applaud the Fact? Such as they, they cried,
Men Impious and Factious, that with Sedition did nothing but dicturb the Public
Peace, deserved a Public Execution. But that very thing was the beginning of
horrid Calamity and Bloodshed. For as every one had a fancy to this or that
Neighbors House or Farm, his Furniture or his Clothes, he took care to get him
Listed in the number of the Persons that were to be proscribed. And thus, they
who rejoiced at the death of Damasippus, soon after themselves were dragged to
Massacre. Nor was there any end of Slaughter, till Sylla had gorged his
followers with the wealthy Spoils of the Innocent. Not that I am jealous in the
least of M. Tullius, or fear the same Confusion in these times. But in a
spacious Commonwealth, there are men of various Inclinations and Designs. At
another time, and by another Consul, that has an Army at his heels, something
may be believed that may beget misunderstanding. And when the Consul once by
virtue of this President has drawn his Sword in pursuance of a Decree of
Senate, who shall then limit his Ambition, or moderate his Passion? Our
Ancestors, Conscript Fathers, never wanted either Counsel or Courage: nor was
their Pride so great, but that they could imitate Foreign Customs when they
found 'em Advantageous. Their Military Weapons and Darts they borrowed: from
the Samnites; and most of their Ensigns of Majesty from the Tuseans. Lastly,
whatever they beheld proper and useful either among their Enemies or their
Allies, that they put in Execution with an eager Industry, choosing rather to
imitate then to despise. Therefore at that time, they only Scourged offending
Citizens, and those that were condemned for greater Crimes they put to death.
But when the Commonwealth increased in Power, and Factions became Potent
through multitude of Citizens, then the Porcian Law and other Statutes were
ordained which only punished Capital Offenders with exile. Which is the Reason,
Conscript Fathers, that I take to be of highest Importance, why we should not
make any Innovations in our Counsels. For certainly their Wisdom and Virtue was
greater, who raised so vast an Empire from such small beginnings, then ours who
hardly can preserve what they so bravely won. Would we therefore have the
Prisoners set at Liberty to increase the number of Catiline's Army? No, but
this is my Opinion, that their Estates be put to Sale; their Persons kept in
durance apart, in the several Municipal Towns, which are most responsible for
their forth-comming: that after this, the Senate be no farther moved, nor the
People tampered with in this Matter, and that whoever shall do otherwise, the
Senate shall adjudge him to act against the Commonwealth and the Public
Safety.

After Caesar had made an end of speaking, some by word of mouth, others to
various Opinions variously delivered their Assents. But M. Portius Cato, being
asked his Judgment, made the following Oration.

I am quite of another Opinion, Conscript Fathers, when I consider our Affairs
and our Dangers, and ponder in my mind the Judgments of some Persons. They
seem to me to have discoursed concerning the punishment due to those Persons
who have raised a War against their own Country, their own Parents, their
Religion and Liberty. But the Conjuncture admonishes us to debate, rather how
to preserve our selves from their Attempts, then what Penalties to inflict upon
'em. For other Mischiefs we may prosecute when acted; this, we must take care
to prevent; least after it has done the fatal Execution, it be too late to
consult Opinions. But by the Immortal Gods, I appeal to you your selves, who
always had a greater value for your Houses your Manors, your Statues and your
Pictures, then for the Commonwealth, if you have a desire still to hold fast
those things whatever they be, which you embrace and hug with so much Affection
and Content; whether this be a time of leisure for your Pleasures: therefore
for shame awake at length, and save the Commonwealth. Neither our Tributes,
nor the Wrongs of our Allies, but our Liberty and our Lives lie now at stake.
Frequently, Conscript Fathers, I have delivered my self in this Assembly: often
have I complained of the Luxury and Avarice of our fellow Citizens; and for
that reason have contracted the Enmity of many Men. I who never pardoned in my
self the least Error of my own Thoughts, could not easily forgive the
Misdemeanors of Passion and Ambition in others. Of which though you took little
Cognizance, yet such was then the same Condition of the Commonwealth, that
it is united Power could brook your negligence: But now the question is not
whether we shall be able to support our selves by good and laudable Customs;
nor how large, nor how magnificent the Roman Empire is; but whether these
things, whatever they be, shall be ours, or that our Enemies must be allowed
their share. In this case, shall any man talk to me Mildness and Pity?
Certainly we have long since lost the true Significations of words. Since the
Prodigal disposal of other men's Estates is called Liberality; and Boldness in
evil Enterprises goes by the name of Fortitude. And between these two Extremes
the Commonwealth is seated. Well then, since their good Natures are such, let
'em be Liberal of their Friends Estates; let 'em be merciful to those that rob
the Public Treasury; let 'em not be prodigal of our Blood; and while they are
so sparing to a few notorious Villains, go about to ruin all honest Men. Well
and Learnedly has C. Caesar discoursed of Life and Death in this Assembly;
deeming, as I believe, those things to be Fables, which are taught us
concerning Hell; that the Wicked are reserved in Places horrid, dark and
frightful, at a distance from the Just. Therefore it was his Opinion that their
Estates should be put to sale, and their Persons be sent to the particular
Municipal Towns, least if they should be kept in Rome, they might be rescued by
their Confederates in the Conspiracy, or by the tumultous Rabble. As if all the
profligate Villains were only at Rome, and not dispersed over all Italy; and as
if audacious boldness were not like to be more prevalent in places where there
was less power to oppose it. Wherefore certainly this advice was very
frivolous, if he have any fear of them, as dangerous Persons; but in the
general Consternation of all Men, if he alone be not afraid; the more it
concerns me to look both to my self and you. Therefore when you shall make any
Decree concerning P. Lentulus and the rest, assure your selves the same Decree
will reach both Catiline's Army and all the Conspirators: the more sedulously
and vigorously you act in those Affairs, the more their Courage will be
daunted; but if they find you once remiss and timorous, there is nothing then
will stop their Fury. Never believe our Ancestors enlarged our Commonwealth
from small to great by force of Arms. For were it so, it would be much more
spendid now, since we are much more numerous in Allies and number of People;
far better provided with Weapons and Horses: But other things were those that
made them Great; all which we want: Sedulity at home and just Command abroad: a
Mind in Consultation free, nor favoring the Crime, nor obnoxious to Passion:
Instead of these, we flourish in Luxury and Avarice; in public want, and
private opulency: Wealth we applaud, but follow Sloth: between the Good and Bad
there is no distinction: but Ambition enjoys all the Rewards of Virtue. Nor is
it a thing to be admired; because you never advise together for the common
Good, but separately consult your own Interests: because at home you serve your
Pleasures, and here enslave your selves to Profit or Favor. From whence it
comes to pass that Violence invades the empty Commonwealth. The most
Illustrious of our Fellow-Citizens have conspired to burn their Country; to
revolt and war they inflame the Gauls, the mortal Enemies of the Roman Name;
and the General of the Rebels himself is with his Army almost at our doors. And
do ye now at such a time as this sit lingering and staggering what to do with
Enemies apprehended within your walls? My Opinion is, ye should take pity of
'em. They are young men that have offended through Ambition; and therefore give
'em their Liberty and their Weapons to boot; but assure your selves, this
Clemency and Compassion of yours, if they have liberty to use their Armies,
will turn to all our Sorrows. It Is true, Misery is a grievous thing, but you
are not afraid of it. Yes, most of all; but through Sloth and want of Courage,
you sit staring one upon another, expecting help from the Immortal Gods, who
often have saved this Commonwealth in all her greatest Dangers. But the
Assistance of the Gods is not obtained by Female Importunity and Supplication:
Prosperity attends on watchfulness, activity, and well consulting. When we
abandon our selves to Sloth and Pusillanimity, it is in vain to implore the
Gods, who are offended and angry. Among the rest of our Progenitors, A. Manlius
Torquatus, caused his own Son to be put to death, because he had fought the
Enemy contrary to his Command; so severely was the valiant Youth chastised for
his overhasty Courage. And do you hesitate what to decree against the most
cruel of Parricides? Oh! but it is pity to punish 'em, considering their former
virtuous Lives: However, I Will give ye leave to be merciful to Lentulus's
Dignity, if ever he were merciful to his own Chastity, his own Honor; if ever
he spared the Gods or Men. Pardon Cethegus's his Youth, because this is but the
second time he has rebelled against his Country. For what do I talk of
Gabinius, Statilius and Ceparius, who had they had the least Grain or Sense of
Virtue and Reputation, would never have engaged in such Designs against the
Commonwealth. Lastly, Conscript Fathers, were there any room for an Oversight,
readily would I brook that you should be corrected by the Matter of Fact it
self, since you so little regard my words; but we are every way surrounded.
Catiline with his Army is advanced to the very Passages of the Apennine; other
Enemies we have within the Walls of the City, and even in our Bosoms; no
private Preparations can be made, no secret Consulations taken: For which
reason, we must use the greater diligence. Therefore it is my Opinion; since the
Commonwealth is now upon the Brink of Danger through the Sacrilegious
Machinations of profligate and impious Wretches, who being detected by the
Discoveries of Volturcius, and the Ambassadors of the Allobroges, have
confessed their joint Confederacy to murder, burn, and utterly destroy their
Country and their Fellow-Citizens, together with other enormous Cruelties and
public Havoc by them intended, That capital Punishment be inflicted upon Them
confessing, as if they had been actually convicted of the Crimes.

So soon as Cato sat down, all the Consular Personages, and the greatest part
of the Senate applaud his Opinion, and extol his Courage to the Skies; while
others are upbraided with the Name of Cowards; but Cato is looked upon by all
as great and famous; and a Decree of Senate passes in compliance with Cato's
Opinion. And here, as being a person who have heard and read much more of what
renowned Atchievments the Roman People have performed both in Peace and War, by
Sea and Land, by chance it came into my Mind to consider, what it was that
upheld the management and accomplishment of such glorious Actions. I knew, That
frequently with inconsiderable Bands they had vanquished numerous Legions of
their Enemies: That with small Forces they had waged War against potent
Princes; moreover, That they had many times experienced the Violence of
Fortune: That for Eloquence, the Greeks; in Military Glory, the Gauls were
superior to the Romans. But after many serious Reflections and Considerations,
it was plain to me at length, That the surpassing Courage of a few Citizens had
brought all things to pass; and thence it fell out, That Poverty overcame
Opulency, and Multitudes were vanquished by a few. But when the Commonwealth
was once corrupted by Luxury and Sloth, then the Commonwealth by her own
Vastness supported the Vices of her Commanders and Magistrates; for that, like
a Woman that has done bearing Children, for several Intervals of Time, Rome
could not show a famous Person: But in my Memory there were two Great Men of
different Dispositions and Manners of Living, yet in Virtue both surmounting;
M. Cato, and C. Caesar; whom therefore, since so fair an Opportunity offered, I
could not think it became me to pass by in silence, before I had given a true
Character, as far as my Wit would reach, of the Genius and Nature of Both. For
Nobility of Descent, for Years and Eloquence, the difference of Equality was
very small between 'em. In Magnanimity likewise equal, as also in Glory,
thandocirc; treading different Paths to purchase Fame: For Caesar's Bounty and
Munificence made him great; Cato, his Integrity of Life. The first, his
Clemency and Compassion rendered Illustrious; the other was admired for his
Severity: Caesar, by giving, relieving, pardoning; Cato, by bestowing nothing,
got Renown: In the one, the Miserable found a Sanctuary; the other was a Terror
to the wicked: The one for his easy Temper, the other was applauded for
Constancy of Resolution. Caesar had made it his business to labor and watch;
intent upon the occasions of his Friends, to neglect his own; to deny nothing
that was worthy giving; thirsting after great Command, an Army and a new War,
that so the Luster of his Courage might shine brightly forth. On the other
side, Cato studied Modesty, Temperance, Decency, but Austerity above all the
rest: He never contended for Riches with the wealthy, nor with the Factious for
Command: but who was most courageous with the Stout; most modest with the
Bashful; and with the most abstemious, who more temperate and continent? He
rather chose to be, then seem to be good; so that the less he courted Honor,
the more she followed him.

Now then so soon as once the Senate had approved the Opinion of Cato, the
Consul, believing it the safest way to take the advantage of the Night
approaching, for fear of any unexpected Accident in the mean time, commanded
the Who were a sort of High-Sheriffs, who had the Charge of the Prisons, and
were to see Malefactors punished.
Capital Triumvirs to make ready the Place and Instruments for Execution. He,
after the Guards were set, brings Lentulus himself to the Prison, as the
Praetors also did the rest. Within the Javl there is a certain place called The
Dungeon, so called, because it was added to the Prison by K. Tullus.
Tullianum; after a small Ascent to the left hand about Twelve Foot under
ground, being walled about on every side, with an Arch of Stone over head; but
nasty, dark, offensive to the Smell, and frightful to the Sight. Into this
Dungeon Lentulus being let down, the Lictors or Executioners, according to
their Orders, strangled him with a Halter. Thus fell that great Patrician,
descended from the Illustrious Family of the Cornelii, that frequently had held
the Consular Dignity of Rome, meeting that fatal End which the Course of his
Life, and his Actions justly merited. In the same manner also Cethegus,
Statilius, Gabinius and Ceparius were executed at the same time.

While these things are thus transacted at Rome, Catiline, of all the Men which
he had raised himself, and those that Manlius had mustered together, made two A
Legion consisted of six Thousand Men.
Legions, and filled up his Every Cohort consisted of 555 Foot, and 66 Horse.
Cohorts proportionable to the Number of his Men. Then as Volunteers or Friends
came in to him, he made an equal distribution of their Number; insomuch, that
in a short time he completed both his Legions, whereas before he had but Two
Thousand in all. Of these, not above a fourth part were armed with Soldier
like Weapons; the rest supplied by Chance and Fortune, carried either Country
Pikestaves, Javelins, or Stakes made sharp at the end. But when Antonius
approached with his Army, Catiline keeping the Mountains, bent his March
sometimes toward the City, sometimes toward Gallia, carefully avoiding Combat
with his Enemy; for he was in hopes of numerous Reinforcements, so soon as his
Confederates had accomplished their work at Rome. In the mean time, he refused
the Assistance of Slaves and Servants, of which, a great Number had resorted to
him at the beginning, confiding in the strength of the Conspiracy; and deeming
it might also disadvantage his Interests, to have intermixed the Complaints and
Cause of Free Citizens with For if a Servant were discovered in a Muster of
Roman Freemen, he was presently thrown headlong from the Tarpeian Rock.
Slaves.

But afterward, when News was brought to the Camp that the Conspiracy was
discovered, and that Lentulus, Cethegus, and the rest were executed, the
greatest part, whom hopes of Plunder, and desire of new revolutions had
inveigl'd to the War, dropped from him: with the rest Catiline swiftly retires
through the rough and difficult Passes of the Hills, into the Territory of the
Now Pistoia.
Pistorienses, with a Design to steal away privately under the shelter of the
Woods and Mountains into Lumbardy: But Q. Metellus Celer lay with three Legions
in the Territory of Picenum, rightly conjecturing Catiline's Intention,
considering the distress of his Affairs. Therefore having intelligence of his
March, by certain Fugitives, he presently raises his Camp, and posts himself at
the foot of the Mountains, where Catiline must come down in his March for
Hither Gallia. Nor was Antonius far behind, as he that followed the nimble
Fugitives with a numerous Army through more level and less encumbered ways.

Catiline therefore, when he perceived himself enclosed with Hills and numerous
Enemies, that all things had failed his Expectations in the City, and that
there was no safety in flight, nor hope of Succor, believing it his wisest
course in such a condition, to try the chance of War, he resolved to hazard his
Fortune with Believing that he being privy in part to the Conspiracy, would
have yielded him an easy Victory.
Antonius: And to that purpose, at the Head of all his Army he made this
Oration to his Soldiers:

I am convinced by Truth of History and Experience, fellow Soldiers, that
Words afford no addititon of Courage unto Men; or that a Generals Harangue
renders a sloathful Army stout, no Cowardly numbers Valiant. Only what Courage
is by Nature or generous Practice inherent in the Soul of every Man, so much
displays it self in Battle. The Person whom neither Glory nor Dangers can
excite, in vain we seek with Speeches to inflame: for Consternation stops his
Ears. However I have called ye here together, partly to inculcate some few
things into your Breasts, but chiefly to unfold the cause of this my sudden
Resolution. You understand too well, fellow Soldiers, how great a Calamity the
sloth and negligence of Lentulus has brought upon himself and Us; and how I am
debarred from Marching into Gallia, in Expectation of considerable Succors.
And now you likewise know, as well as my self, what is the desperate condition
of our Affairs at present. Two Armies of the Enemy, one from the City, another
from Gallia lie posted in our way. To stay longer in these Parts, had we never
so great a Desire, scarcity of Provision and other Necessaries will not permit.
And wheresoever we design our March, we have no other way but what our Swords
must open. Wherefore I exhort ye, be resolute, and still prepared for vigorous
Encounter, and when ye are ready to join Battle, that you carry Riches, Honor,
Grandeur, your Liberty and your Country in your hands. If we vanquish, all
these things will be secure, plenty of Provision, Municipal Towns and Colonies,
will be at our Devotion. But if through Cowardice we turn our Backs, then all
the World will be our Enemies; no place nor friend will shelter them, whose
Arms could not protect 'em. Moreover, Fellow Soldiers, the same necessity
binds not them, that strictly obliges us. We Combat for our Country, our
Liberty and Lives, it is only a superfluous kindness in them to defend in fight
the Usurpation of a few; the reason wherefore you should be more daringly
mindful of your Ancient Virtue. You had your choice to spend your ignominious
Lives in shameful Exile; or else to live at Rome, your Patrimonies and Fortunes
lost in Expectation of other Men's Estates. But because these things seemed base
or not to be endured, you determined to follow these resolutions. If these your
last determinations please not, the more need of Courage at this time. For no
man but the Victor, Exchanges War for Peace. And to expect Security in Flight
when we have thrown away our Weapons that were the Protection of our Bodies,
that is a piece of Real Madness. Always in Battle they are most in Danger who
are most afraid, for daring Boldness guards ye like a Wall. When I consider
your Persons, Fellow Soldiers, and put an estimate upon your Actions, my hopes
of Victory are exceeding Great. Your Valor, Age and Stoutness, all encourage
me. Moreover, your Necessities which renders even Cowards Valiant: nor will the
nature of these narrow passages permit the Enemy to surround us with their
numbers. However if Fortune frown upon your Valor, beware, that unrevenged you
do not lose your Lives, or choose to be taken, and be massacred like Sheep,
rather then fighting like Men, to leave the Enemy a Bloody and mournful
Victory.

Having thus spoken, after he had made a little Pause, he commanded the
Trumpets to sound, and leads down his Men in good order into a Champion ground.
Then, sending away all the Horses, to the end, the danger being equal, the
Soldiers might be the more encouraged, himself a foot Embattles his Army, as
his number and the Nature of the Place would permit. For finding that the Plain
lay between Mountains on the Right, and rugged and steep Rocks on the Left, he
made a Front of Eight Cohorts. The rest he drew up more close in Reserves. Out
of these he brings all the choice Centurions and Honorary Reformades, together
with the stoutest of all the Common Soldiers well Armed, into his first Array.
To C. Manlius he gave the Right, to a Commander of Fiesoli the Left Wing.
Himself with his enfranchiz'd Bondmen, and some of Sylla's old Soldiers, that
had been distributed into Where being suddenly before enriched by Plunder,
they had as soon by Prodigality consumed their Fortunes.
Colonies, he posted himself next to the Eagle, which as they said, had been
the Standard which Marius made use of in the Cimbric War. On the other side, C.
Antonius being then sick of the Gout, because he could not be present at the
Battle, gave the Command of his Army to his Legate, M. Petreius. He placed the
Veterane Cohorts, which he had raised of a sudden, in the Front; and behind
them, the rest of his Men for a Reserve. Himself Riding about from Rank to
Rank, calls every one by their Names, encourages, and entreats 'em to be but
mindful, that they fought against unarmed Robbers, for their Country, their
Liberty, their Altars and their Household Gods. This Man, an old Soldier, who
had been for above thirty years together, either a A Tribune seems to be a kind
of Major of a Regiment. For it was his Duty to see the Soldiers Exercised, and
well Disciplined, and to attend the Consul for Orders.
Tribune, or A Prefect supplied the Legates place in his absence.
Prefect, or The Legate was a kind of Adjutant General to the Consul.
Legate or Praetor, and all along acquitted himself with great Honor, knew most
of the Soldiers, was acquainted with their stoutest Actions, and by bringing
'em fresh to their Memories, greatly inflamed their Courages.

Now then Petreius having diligently observed the Enemies Array, and given out
his last Orders, by sound of Trumpet Commands the Signal of Battle, and the
Cohorts at the same time to move slowly forward. The same did the Enemy; but
when they were so near to one another, that the Lighter armed might well begin
the fight with their Missive weapons, the Legionaries never stood to throw
their Piles were a sort of Darts like a Boar-Spear, about two Cubits and a half
long in the wood, and a Cubit and a half in the Iron head, which was heavy and
sharp, and being thrown with Art, would strike through any Armor; with this the
Legionaries began the fight at a distance and then closed.
Piles as they were to do, but running with a hideous shout on both sides to
the Combat, began a close fight foot to foot with their Swords. The Veteranes,
mindful of their Pristine Bravery, bore vigorously upon the Enemy; nor did
their Opposites make a Timorous Resistance, so that the Combat was sharp on
both sides. All the while Catiline, with the most active and smartest of his
followers kept still in the head of his Men; succored those that were
overpowered, supplied the places of the wounded with fresh Men; frequently
charged in Person, and performed all the Duties of a stout Soldier, and
experienced Commander. Petreius therefore perceiving that Catiline made a
stouter Resistance then he expected, orders the Pretorian Cohort to Advance and
Charge the very thickest of the Enemy; and then it was that all things went to
wrack on Catiline's side, his Men being every where disordered, and every where
put to the Sword: which done the Legate flew upon both the Enemies Wings at the
same time with the same fury. Manlius and the Faesulane fell among the first.
But as for Catiline, when he saw his Army routed, and himself left naked with a
small Remainder, remembering his Descent and his Ancient Dignity, he threw
himself into the thickest of his Enemies, and was there slain with his Sword in
his hand.

But after the Battle was over, then you might see the wonderful Audacity and
Resolution that had reigned in Catiline's Army. For generally the place which
every one had stood on when alive, the same when dead he covered with his Body.
Some few indeed, whom the Pretorian Cohort had routed in the middle, lay more
dispersed, yet all had received their wounds before, and no man turning his
back. Only Catiline was found at a distance from his own Men among the Carcases
of his Enemies, with some remainder of Life, retaining in his Countenance that
Fury and Fierceness of Mind which inspired him when alive: and the last thing
remarkable is this, that of that whole Number, neither in the Fight nor in the
Pursuit was any Freeborn Citizen taken Prisoner, so equally merciful had they
all been to their own and the Lives of their Enemies. Nor can we say that the
Army of the Roman People enjoyed a Victory to be rejoiced at, or at the expense
of little Blood. For not a Man of forward Bravery, but either fell in the
Battle, or was carried off desperately wounded. So that of many, that either
out of Curiosity or greedy of Plunder, going to view the Field of Battle,
turned up the Carcases of the Slain, there were hardly any but either knew
their Friends, their Guests, or their Kindred: and some there were who knew
their Enemies. Thus Joy and Sorrow, Mourning and Gladness variously affected
the Victorious Army.

The End of the Catilinarian War.
C. Crispus Sallustius's JUGURTH OR, JUGURTHINE War.
1. FAlsely does Human kind complain of the Condition of Life, as if it were
too frail and short, and rather under the Dominion of Chance then Virtue. For
entertaining contrary thoughts, we shall find that there is nothing greater,
nothing more excellent then Man himself, and that he neither wants power nor
length of years, but only Industry. For the Captain and Commander of human Life
is the Soul, which while it journeys with an eager pace toward Glory, through
the paths of Virtue, is sufficiently prevalent, powerful and eminent, not
needing Fortune's aid; which neither can bequeath or take away from any Man his
Probity, his Industry, or any other virtuous Endowments. But if enslaved to
lewd desires, we plunge our selves in Luxury and Corporeal Pleasures; by
degrees accustomed to pernicious sensuality; when we have once misspent our
Parts, our Strength, our precious Hours in Sloth and Oscitancy, the Infirmity
of Nature is then accused, for that the Guilty lay the blame of their folly
upon the difficulty of Business. Whereas if Men were but as sedulous in
laudable Professions, as they are eager in the pursuit of things unprofitable,
and many times extremely hazardous, they would rather govern then be governed
by Fortune; and would advance themselves to that degree of Grandeur, that
instead of being Mortal, they would become Eternal in Glory.

2. For as all Mankind is compounded of Soul and Body, so do also all our
Affairs and all our Studies follow, some the nature of the Body, others of the
Soul. Therefore lovely Form, superfluous Riches, strength of Body, these in a
short time all decay; but the glorious Achievements of Wit and Parts, are like
the Soul, Immortal. Lastly, as there is a beginning, so there is an end of all
the Blessings of Body and Fortune; all things rising set again; and as they
grow, grow old. But the Soul, Incorruptible, Eternal, the Guide and Ruler over
all Mankind, acts and possesses all things, not possessed it self. And the
depraved humor of those Men is so much the more to be admired, who abandoning
themselves to the felicity of bodily Pleasures, consume their days in Luxury
and Idleness, and suffer the Wit of Man, then which there is nothing more
sublime, nothing more boundless in human Nature, to grow stupid and lie fallow
through sluggishness and want of careful Manuring. More especially since the
Gifts and Sciences belonging to the Mind, are so many and so various, by which
we may arrive to highest degree of Reputation.

3. Yet in the midst of this Diversity, neither Magistracy, nor Empire, nor any
Administration indeed of Public Affairs to me at this present seem so eagerly
to be thirsted after: for Honor is not bestowed on Virtue: Neither are they
that by Fraud have obtained Advancement, safe; or for their eminent Authority
the more honest. For, for a Man to rule his Country or his Parents by force,
though he have Power, and be never so much a Corrector of Misdemeanors, yet is
it troublesome to the Sufferers; especially since all Mutations of Affairs
portend Slaughter, Exile and other Effects of Hostile Violence. Vainly
therefore to take pains, and acquire nothing else by restless toil but Hatred
of himself, is Extremity of Madness; unless there be any so possessed with a
slavish and pernicious desire to surrender their Honor and their Liberty to
the Power of a Few.

4. But among the Crowds of Business, which are proper for the Exercise of the
Wit, the Remembrances of great Transactions seem chiefly beneficial. Of the
Excellency of which Application, since many have discoursed, I deem it not fit
to be repeated: least some besides, may think it Insolence in me, by Praises to
extol the Study which my self affects. It Is true, that I believe there may be
some, who, because I have determined to live remote from Public Affairs, may
give the name of Idleness to this same Toil of Mine so great and profitable:
though surely none but such, whose chiefest Industry it is to court the Mobile,
and to ingratiate themselves by Popular Banquets. Who if they again consider,
both at what time I obtained the Magistracy, and who they were that could not
gain that Honor, and afterward what sort of Men were brought into the Senate,
certainly they will be then convinced, that the Change of my Judgment proceeded
rather from Desert then loytring Drowsiness, and that greater Advantage will
accrue to the Commonwealth from my Leisure, then the Business of others. For I
have frequently heard, that Q. Maximus and P. Scipio, the most renowned Persons
of our Commonwealth, were wont to say, That when they beheld the Statues of
their Ancestors, their Minds were ardently inflamed to Virtue; not that the Wax
or the Figure had such an efficacy in its self; but only that the flame was
kindled in the breasts of those Illustrious Persons by the remembrance of past
Transactions; nor could be extinguished, before their Virtue and Courage had
equaled the Fame and Glory of their Predecessors. Quite otherwise, who is
there now adays that does not strive to outvie his Ancestors in Riches and
Expenses, rather then in Probity and Industry? Upstarts also, who formerly were
wont by their Virtue to anticipate Nobility, now by Stealth and private
Bribery, contemning worthy means, press forward to Commands and Honors. As if
Pretorships and Consulships, and all high Employments whatever, were Noble and
Magnificent in themselves, and not to be esteemed and valued according to the
merit of those Persons that enjoyed 'em. But I have been too free, and ran too
high, in detestation of the corrupted Manners of the Commonwealth. I now return
to the Design in hand.

5. A War I am about to Write, which the Roman People waged with Jugurth King
of the Where now lie the Kingdoms of Constantina and Bugia, both contained
within the Kingdom of Argier: to which also belongs the Gulf of Estora,
formerly Sinus Numidicus.
Numidians. First because it was a great and furious Contest, and Victory
various on both sides: and in the next place for that then it was, the first
Opposition was made against the Nobility. Which Contention made a Confusion of
all things both Divine and Human, and proceeded to that degree of mortal Rage,
that only War and the Devastation of Italy, put an end to their Intestine
Animosities. But before I enter into the beginning of this Story, I must look
back a little into Antiquity, to the end that all things may be more clearly
displayed in orderd to the better understanding of the rest.

In the second Punic War, when Hannibal, Captain of the Carthaginians, had
broken the Strength of Italy, more then ever any one, since the Grandeur of the
Roman Name, Massinissa, King of the Numidians, being admitted into a League of
Friendship by P. Scipio, Sirnam'd Africanus for his Valor, had performed many
noble and famous warlike Exploits. In recompense of which, the Carthaginians
being vanquished, and Syphax taken Prisoner, whose Power was great, and his
Dominions in Africa spacious at that time, the Roman People freely bestowed
upon the King what Cities and Countries they had then subdued by force of their
own Arms. For which reason he continued in his Friendship to Us advantageous
and sincere, till his Life and Sov'raignty ended both together. After that, his
Son Micipsa obtained the Kingdom, and reigned sole Monarch, Manastabales and
Gulassa his Brothers being carried off by Sickness. To him were born in lawful
Wedlock, Adherbal and Hiempsal, with whom he bred up Jugurth, the Son of his
Brother Manastabales, and gave him Royal Education in his Palace,
notwithstanding that Massinissa had left him only in a private Condition, in
regard his Mother was no more then a Concubine.

6. Who, when he arrived to years of maturity, surpassing in strength, lovely
to behold, but far more vigorous in Parts and Wit, would not be corrupted by
Luxury and Ease; but according to the Custom of that Nation, enured himself to
Riding, Darting, and to outrun his Equals, to outdo all, and yet to be beloved
by all. Sometimes he spent his time in Hunting, and was still the foremost, or
among the foremost that first wounded the Lion or any other wild Beasts: thus
performing most, but speaking least of himself. With which, although Micipsa were
well pleased at the beginning, as believing Jugurth's Courage would be an
Honor to his Kingdom; but when he found, in his declining years, and while his
Children yet were small, the sprightly Youth improving daily more and more,
then violently disturbed with Jealousies and Fears, he began to revolve many
things in his Thoughts. The Nature of Mortals, greedy of Dominion, and
precipitately prone to gratify their Ambition, terrified him; besides the
opportunity of his own and his Childrens Age; enough to overturn the Loyalty of
meaner Courages: Add to this the Affections of the Numidians kindled toward
Jugurth; which made him anxious whether to contrive the Death of such a man or
no, to remove all Occasions of Sedition or War.

7. In the midst of these Difficulties, when he saw that a Man so acceptable to
the People, could neither be destroyed by Force nor Treachery, in regard that
Jugurth was. a Person prompt of his hands, and covetous of Military Honor, he
resolved to expose him to danger, and to try his Fortune that way. Therefore in
the Numantine War, Micipsa designing to send the Romans a numerous Assistance
both of Horse and Foot, and hoping his destruction, either by dating too far,
or through the severity of his Enemies, he gave him the Command of the
Numidians, which he sent into Spain. But it fell out quite contrary to his
Expectations: for Jugurth, a Person indefatigable, and of a piercing Wit, when
once he came to understand the Disposition of Scipio, then General of the Roman
Army, and the Enemies manner of Fighting, by his extreme Labor and Diligence,
by his modest Obedience, and frequent exposing himself to Danger, arrived to
such a degree of Reputation, that he was not only greatly beloved by our
People, but equally formidable to the Numantines. And indeed, a thing most
extraordinary, and rarely to be met with in one single Person, he was not only
strenuous in Battle, but safe and shrewd in Counsel: Of which, the one from
foresight generally begets Fear; the other from dating and inconsiderate
boldness, usually produces Rashness. The General therefore for the most part
made use of Jugurth in the execution of his most difficult Enterprises, took
him into the number of his Friends; and daily more and more augmented his
Respect and Favor toward him; as being one whose Counsel and Courage seldom
failed. Besides all this, he had a large Soul, and a Genius most industrious,
by which means he had contracted a most familiar Friendship with many of the
Romans.

8. At that time were several Upstarts and Noble Persons in our Army, that
preferred Wealth before Justice and Honesty, factious, powerful at home, and
among our Allies more eminent for their Riches then Virtue; who by ostentatious
Promises, did not a little inflame the hopes of Jugurth, that so soon as
Micipsa dropped into his Grave, himself should reign sole Monarch of Numidia;
That he was a Person accomplished for Sovereign Rule, and that all things were
put to Sale at Rome.

After this, when Numantia was levelled with the Ground, and that Scipio had
determined to dismiss his Auxiliaries, and return home, he took Jugurth along
with him magnificently rewarded, and laden with Encomiums, into the Pretorian
Pavilion, before the whole Assembly of the Chief Officers; and there admonished
him in secret, rather publicly then privately to continue his Friendship with
the Roman People; lest by ill bestowing his Bounty, he might happen to purchase
with danger, from a few, that which belonged to many: That if he took the right
Course, Glory and the Kingdom would drop of themselves into his Bosom; but that
if he made too much haste, his own Money would throw him headlong into Ruin.

9. After these Admonitions, he dismissed him with certain Letters which he was
to deliver to Micipsa, to this effect:

Thy Jugurth's Courage has been highly conspicuous in the Numantine War, which
I am assured will be acceptable News for Thee to hear. By Us he is highly
respected for his Merits; and that he may have the same Esteem from the Senate
and People of Rome, we shall mainly endeavor. I congratulate thy Happiness for
our Friendships sake; for thou enjoy'st a Subject worthy of thy self, and thy
Father Massinissa.

The King therefore, when he found true by the Generals Letters what he had
heard before by Report, smitten as well with the Courage, as the Loveliness of
the Person, allayed his Anger, and resolved to try whether he could vanquish
him by Acts of Grace and Favor: To which purpose he adopted him, and by his
last Will left him Coheir of the Kingdom with his Sons; and some few years
after, wasted with Age and Sickness, perceiving the Conclusion of his Days at
hand, he is said to have used the following Admonitions to Jugurth in the
hearing of his Friends and Kindred, as also of his Two Sons, Adherbal and
Hiempsal.

10. When thou were young andamp; helpless, Jugurth, after thou had lost thy
Father, without Hopes or Maintenance, I took thee into my Kingdom, believing
thou would prove equally grateful both to me and to my Children, should I
have any, for favors heaped upon thee: Nor was I deceived in my good Opinion:
For, to omit thy other many great and famous Explots, lately returning from
Numantia, thou have honored both Me and my Kingdom with Martial Reputation;
and by thy Prowess have made the Romans, Friends before, most friendly to Us.
In Spain the Name and Luster of our Family is again renewed; and which is the
hardest Task for Mortals to perform, thou have vanquished Envy with Renown. Now
then, because that Nature puts an end to my Life, by this Right Hand, by the
Truth of the Kingdom, I beseech and conjure thee, That these Young Men, by
Birth thy nearest Kindred, and Brothers through my Favor, may be always the
dear Objects of thy real Affection; and that thou will not forsake the
Friendship of thy own Flesh and Blood, for the Alliances of Strangers. Neither
Armies nor Treasures are Guards sufficient to defend a Kingdom, but Friends;
which thou can neither compel by Force, nor purchase with Gold: They are only
to be gained by Duty and Fidelity. But where should Friendship then be most
sincere, if not between Brother and Brother? Or where shall he find a Friend
among Strangers, that is an Enemy to his own Relations? I leave yet a Kingdom
strong and durable, while virtuous and unanimous; but weak, and of short
continuance, if wicked and perverse. For by Concord small Beginnings thrive;
through Discord the most Sinewey Establishments shrink to nothing. Till then
these Striplings are grown up, Thee, Jugurth, it behooves, their Senior both in
Years and Prudence, to take care, that nothing may disturb this happy Union.
For in all Contentions, the more powerful though he recieve the Injury, yet
because his Force is greater, seems to do it. And as for your parts, Adherbal
and Hiempsal, respect and reverence so great a Man as this; imitate his
Courage; and let it not be said, That I adopted better Children then I first
begat.

11. To all this, Jugurth, although he knew, That what the King had uttered, was
all but craftily dissembled, and that he had other Designs in his Head,
nevertheless observing the Season, he answered as if nothing but Submission and
Duty had inspired him. Within a few days after Micipsa dies. Whom, when they
had magnificently Interred with all the Royal Pomp befitting his Dignity, the
three lesser Princes met together, to consult among themselves concerning their
Affairs. At that time, Hiempsal, naturally fierce, and contemning Jugurth's
mean Descent by the Mothers side, placed himself upon Adherbal's Right Hand, to
prevent Jugurth's sitting in the middle, which is accounted the chiefest Place
of Honor among the Numidians. Nor would he give way to Age, till tired with
his Brother's Importunity, he was forced to change his Seat. There, after they
had discoursed many things concerning the Government of the Kingdom, Jugurth,
among other passages, throws in a word by the By, That it was but reasonable
that all the Decrees and Acts for the five Years last past, should be made
void; in regard that during all that time, Micipsa being wasted with Age, had
not had the right Use of his Understanding. To which Hiempsal made Answer, That
the Proposal pleased him well; for that it was but three years ago, since he
had obtained his share of the Kingdom by Adoption. Which Expression descended
deeper into Jugurth's Breast then they that heard it were aware of: Therefore
from that time, turmoyl'd with Indignation and Fear, he toyls, provides, and in
perpetual agitation of Thought, sets all his Trains and Engines at work by
Treachery to ruin Hiempsal: Which in regard they had but slow Success, and yet
his cruel Mind could no way be appeased, he resolved to accomplish his Design
whatever it cost him.

12. At the first Meeting of the three Princes already mentioned, in regard
they could not agree, it was adjudg'd requisite, That the Treasures should be
divided, and that the Limits of their Territories should be settled. For the
Execution of which Decrees, a Time was prefixed, but first of all for the
distribution of the Money. Now it happened that Hiempsal had hired a House in a
Town called Thirmida, which belonged to Jugurth's chief Gentleman-usher, but a
Person greatly caressed andamp; beloved by himself. This Officer, so
opportunely in his Service, Jugurth loads with rich Presents; and constrains
him to go, under pretense of viewing his House, and get false Keys made to all
the Doors (for the true ones were in Hiempsal's possession) and to let him know
when all things were ready; for that then he would come with a sufficient
Strength. The Numidian fulfilled his Commands, and as he was instructed, in the
Nighttime let in Jugurth's Soldiers; who were no sooner rusht into the House,
but several ran to seek out the young Prince; some killed those that were
asleep; others slew all they met; all the private Corners were ransacked, Doors
broke open, nothing but Noise and Tumult every where; at length Hiempsal is
found in a Cottage belonging to a young Woman his Servant, whither at first in
fear, and ignorant of the Country, he had fled for shelter. The Numidians, as
they were commanded, carried his Head to Jugurth.

13. But the Report of such a Bloody Fact was soon spread over all Africa, so
that all that were under the Dominion of Micipsa, were in a dreadful
consternation. The Numidians divide themselves into two Parties: More adhered
to Adherbal, but to the other the more strenuous in War: Therefore Jugurth arms
all the Forces he could raise, and adds to his Territories several Cities, some
by Force, others by willing Surrender, and prepares to make himself Master of
all Numidia. Adherbal, although he had sent Ambassadors to Rome, to inform the
Senate of the Murder of his Brother, yet confiding in the Number of his
Soldiers, resolves upon a decision of the Quarrel by the Sword. But when the
Business came to Battle, constrained to quit the Field, he fled into the Roman
Province, and thence made haste to Rome. Then Jugurth, having accomplished his
Designs, and now Lord of all Numidia, revolving more at leisure, in his Mind,
the Fact he had committed, began to dread the Roman People, nor had he any
hopes of appeasing their displeasure, but in the Avarice of the Nobility, and
his own Money. Therefore within a few days he sent his Ambassadors to Rome,
laden with Gold and Silver, with his Instructions, first to cram the Purses of
his old Friends, then to purchase new; and lastly, by scattering their Bribes,
to make: sure of all they could, for fear of haesitation.

Upon this, when the Ambassadors came to Rome, and had dispersed their Presents
according to their Master's Instructions, among the King's Friends, and others
that bore the greatest Sway in the Senate, there was such a Change ensued, so
that whereas no man before had more incurred their displeasure then Jugurth, no
man was more in their favor.

14. Thereupon, when the Ambassadors thought their Game sure, a Senate was
appointed to hear both Sides; and then it was that Adherbal, as we have heard,
thus delivered himself:

Conscript Fathers, Micipsa my Father, upon his Deathbed, gave me in charge,
that I should look upon the Kingdom of Numidia, so far as concerned the
Administration only to be mine, but that the Right of Jurisdiction and Dominion
was vested in your selves: and that I should make it my business both in Peace
and War, to be as serviceable as possible I could be to the Roman People. That
I should value and respect you as my Parents and nearest Kindred and Relations:
which if I did, I should find in your Friendship, Armies, Riches and the safety
of my Kingdom. These Instructions of my Father, while I was meditating
carefully to put in Practice, Jugurth, a Man of all men upon the Face of the
Earth, most Impious, contemning your Authority, me Massinissa's Grandchild, and
consequently by Lineal Descent an Allie and friend of the Roman People, has
expelled his Kingdom and deprived of all his Fortunes: I must confess,
Conscript Fathers, since Fate had destined me to these Calamities, I could have
wished that rather for the sake of my own, then the services of my Ancestors, I
might have implored your Aid; and that the People of Rome might have owed me
those favors which I had no need of, that then, if occasion required, I might
have reaped the advantage of my Debts. But in regard Integrity is not secure of
it self, neither was it in my power to foresee what sort of person Jugurth
would prove, I fled to you for Succor, to whom, which is my worst misfortune,
I am constrained to be a burden, before I could be useful. Other Princes
either vanquished in War, have been admitted into your Protection, or in the
tottering condition of their Affairs, have sought your Alliance. Our Family
engaged in Amity with the Roman People, in the time of the Carthaginian War, at
such a Conjuncture, when their Fidelity rather then their Fortune was to be
desired. Whose Offspring, Conscript Fathers, my own self, t^^ Grandchild of
Massinissa, permit not to implore your Aid in vain. Had I no other reason for
my Suit, but only my Misfortune, that deserves Commiseration; lately a Potent
Prince, no less Illustrious in Birth and Fame; now disfigured with Calamity,
reduced to Poverty and begging Aid of others, yet it became the Majesty of the
Roman People to prohibet Injury; and not to suffer any Man whatever to enlarge
his Kingdom by Sacrilegious Acts. But I, alas, am here expelled those very
Confines, which the Roman People bestowed upon my Ancestors, from whence my
Father and Grandfather assisting your Victorious Arms, ejected Syphax and the
Carthaginians. Your Favors, Conscript Fathers, are wrested out of my hands;
and you are contemned in the wrongs I suffer. Wretch that I am! Are thy
kindnesses come to this, Father Micipsa, that he whom thou made equal with
thy Children, and sharer of thy Kingdom, that he should be the first to
extinguish thy Race and Lineage? Shall our Family never be at quiet? Always
must Boodshed, Exile and Slaughter be our Portion? While the Carthaginians
flourished, there was some reason for our suffering; the Enemy close by our
sides; you our Allies far distant: all our dependence was upon our Swords. But
when that Pest was exterminated out of Africa, we enjoyed a gay Tranquillity:
for then we had no Enemy, unless whom you commanded so to be. But now upon a
sudden, Jugurth, advancing himself, through unsufferable audaciousness, and
vaunting in Villainy and Pride, having murdered my Brother and his nearest
Kinsman, has first siez'd the Kingdom as the booty of his Impiety; then when he
could not ruin Me by the same Treachery, yet expecting nothing less then
Violence and War, within your own Empire, he has stripped me as you see of House
and Home and Native Country, and sent me hither an exiled Beggar, overwhelmed
with misery, and any where more secure then in my own Kingdom. I was of the
same opinion, Conscript Fathers, with my aged Parent, when I heard him often
repeating, that they who inviolably embraced your Friendship, underwent indeed
much hardship, but of all Men upon Earth were most secure. What was in our
Families Power to do, they did; still your Auxiliaries in your Wars: and it is
in your Power that we may be as well secure in Peace as others under your
Protection. My Father left two Brothers of us, and Jugurth the third he thought
would have been rivetted to us by his continual kindnesses. The one of these is
Butchered, the others Impious Clutches my self could hardly escape. What shall
I do? Or whither, unhappy as I am, shall I repair? All my expectancies of
support from Consanguinity are lost. My Father, by necessity of Fate, has
surrendered himself to Nature: My Brother, He whom it least became, has
impiously robbed of Life. The rest of my near Kindred, Relations and Friends,
one sort of ruin some, another others have destroyed; taken by Jugurth, part
nailed upon the Cross; and part exposed to the Fury of Wild Beasts; the small
remainder closed up in Darkness with mourning and lamentation, lead a Life far
worse than Death. Were all things, which either I have lost, or which instead
of proving necessary have fallen out averse and contrary, had been still
unhazzarded and safe; yet if any thing had happened unforeseen, I should
however have addressed my Supplications, Conscript Fathers, to your selves, to
whom, considering the Grandeur of your spacious Empire, belongs the care of all
justice and Oppression. But now an Exile from my Country, from my House and
Home, by all deserted, and indigent of necessary subsistence, to whom shall I
make Application or whose Aid invoke? Nations or Princes, who all, because in
League with you, detest our Family? Is there any Place left for my approach,
where there are not more then many Hostile Monuments of my Ancestors? Can any
Person take Compassion upon Us, who at any time was once your Enemy?
Massinissa, Conscript Fathers, gave us those Instructions, that we should pay
fidelity to none, but to the People of Rome: that we should accept of no new
Alliances or Leagues, there being superfluity of safety in your Friendship: and
that if the Fortune of this Empire should happen to change, that we should fall
together with it. By your Courage, and through the favor of the Gods, you are
mighty and opulent; all things prosperous, all things obedient to your
Commands: whereby you have the Power to take Cognizance of injured Allies. Only
this I fear, least some there may be, whom Jugurth's private Correspondence,
closely carried, hurries topsy turvy; who as I am well informed, with all their
Might endeavor, solicit, and weary with their Importunities particular
Persons, that nothing be decreed against the Person absent, ere the Cause be
heard: that I counterfeit words, and dissemble Flight, when I might stay in my
Kingdom if I pleased. But I wish to Heaven I might see the Traitor, whose
Villainy has plunged me into these Calamities, dissembling here the same Things;
and at length that either You or the Immortal Gods would be mindful of Human
Affairs; to the end that He, who is now become Haughty and Illustrious by his
perpetrated Crimes, tormented then with all imaginable tortures, might receive
the dismal reward of his Impiety toward the Parent of us both, in the murder
of my Brother, and rendering me thus miserable. And now Brother, to my Soul most
dear, although thy life was robbed untimely from Thee, and by him whom it
behooved most charily to have preserved it, yet I am apt to think, thy Fate
affords us an occasion rather of Joy then Lamentation. For together with thy
Life, it is but a Kingdom thou have lost; thou have escaped the terrors of
Flight, Exilement, Indigency, and all those miseries that weigh down my Soul:
While unfortunate as I am, thrown headlong from my Native Kingdom into so many
disasters, I am only a Spectacle of Human uncertainties; Uncertain what to do,
whether to prosecute thy wrongs, my self a suppliant for Succor; or whether to
take farther care of my Kingdom, whose Power of Life and Death depends upon the
Charity of Strangers. I wish to Heaven that Death might be the virtuous end of
all my Grandeur; least I should seem contented, were it but only to live, if
tired with my Misfortunes, I should sink under the burden of the Oppression.
Now therefore, Conscript Fathers, impatient of Life, yet not permitted to die
without disgrace, for your own, for the sake of your Children and your Parents,
by the Majesty and Grandeur of the Roman People, vouchsafe your Succor to Me
unfortunate; stop the Career of Injustice, and suffer not the Kingdom of
Numidia, which is your own, to consume and pine away, while harrass'd by
Impiety and the Effusion of our Blood.

15. When the King had made an end of speaking, Jugurth's Ambassadors, relying
more upon the profuseness of their Presents, then the justice of their Cause,
answered in few words,

That Hiempsal was by the Numidians put to death for his Cruelty; that
Adherbal, having begun a War without any provocation, when he saw himself
vanquished came to complain, because he could not do the wrong he intended: and
therefore Jugurth besought the Senate, that they would not think him any other
Person, then what he was known to be at Numantia; nor prefer the Stories of an
Enemy, before his own apparent Deeds.

Which said, they both withdrew. Immediately the Senate took the business into
Consideration. At what time the favorers of the Ambassadors and several others
corrupted by Dependency, made slight of Adherbal's Complaint, highly applauded
Jugurth's Virtue; spared neither for Affection or Words, but labored with all
their Might imaginable, for the Villainy and Treachery of a Stranger, as if it
had been for their own Honor. On the other side some few there were, to whom
Justice and Equity were of more value then Riches, who were of opinion that
Adherbal was to be supported, and that the Death of Hiempsal was to be severely
revenged. But among all the rest chiefly Emilius Scaurus, Nobly descended,
indefatigable, factious, ambitious of Power, Honor and Wealth, but one that
cunningly knew how to conceal his Vices. For he, perceiving the notorious and
scandalous Bribery of the King, fearing, as often it happens in such cases, least
a Pollution so licentious should bring an Odium upon him, checked his inordinate
Desires, and kept his Avarice within bounds.

16. However in the Senate that Party carried it, which preferred Reward and
Favor before Truth. A Decree was therefore made, That Ten Commissioners should
divide Micipsa's Kingdom between Adherbal and Jugurth; In which Commission L.
Opimius was the Chief: a Person of great Eminency and then Potent in the
Senate; for that being Consul, after C. Gracchus and M. Fulvius were slain, he
had prosecuted more severely the Victory of the Nobility, and gratified their
Indignation with a great slaughter of the Plebeians. This Person, though at
Rome he had not found him favorable to his Interests, Jugurth received with
all the caresles imaginable; at length profuse in Gifts and Promises, he so
brought it to pass, that Reputation, Fidelity, Justice laid aside, he preferred
the Kings profit above all things. With the same Baits the Numidian tempted the
rest of the Commissioners and the greatest part swallowed the Silver Hook; only
some few valued their Credit above Gold. In the Partition, that Part of Numidia
which Borders upon Mauritania, far the better Country both for the Richness of
the Land, and Number of Inhabitants, was assigned to Jugurth. The other more
beautiful for Prospect, then beneficial, as being full of Havens, and
replenished with fair and sumptuous Buildings, fell to Adherbal's share.

17. Here the Occasion requires, That we should give a brief Description of the
Situation of Africa, together with a slight Account of those Nations, with
which we were either at War, or joined in Alliance: Though as to those Places
and Nations, which by reason of the Heat, the Rudeness of the Country, and
Vastness of the Deserts, are less frequented, I find but little Discovery made;
the rest I shall dispatch in as few words as may be.

In the Division of the Terrestrial Globe, most Geographers have allowed a
Third Share to Africa, though some few there are who acknowledge no more then
Two Parts, Asia and Europe; affirming that Africa belongs to Europe. It is
bounded to the West by the Streights, between our Sea and the Ocean; to the
East, by a steep Descent, which place the Inhabitants call: Now Porto d' Alber,
formerly a City, now a small Village upon the Coast of Barca, in the Dominion
of the Turks.
Catabathmos. The Sea adjoining Tempestuous, and ill furnished with Havens; the
Soil fruitful in Corn, and abounding in Pasturage, but naked of Wood; the
People healthy, patient of Labor, and generally long-lived, unless cut off by
War, or destroyed by wild Beasts, as being seldom injured by Diseases: only
they are pestered with several sorts of venomous Creatures. And now what Race
of Mortals first inhabited Africa, who succeeded them, and how they came to be
intermixed one among another, although it vary from that Report, which
generally prevails among most Men, nevertheless according to what was
translated for our Use out of the Punic Books, which were said to be King
Hiempsal's, and as the People of that Country believe it to be, I shall
concisely declare.

18. The People that first seated themselves in Africa, were the Getulians and
Libyans, rude and barbarous, whose Food was the Flesh of wild Beasts, or the
Grass upon the Ground, like so many Herds of Cattle. They were neither governed
by Customs, Laws, nor under any Command; roving and wandering, where Night
constrained, there they took up their present Quarters. But after that Hercules
died in Spain, as the Africans believe, his Army, composed of several Nations,
having lost their Leader, while many sought to lay the Foundations of
particular Dominion, shattered into several Parties. Of that Number, the Medes,
Persians and Armenians, crossing over into Africa, took possession of those
places that lie upon our Sea: But the Persians nearer to the main Ocean; who
made use of the Keels of their Ships, the Bottoms turned upward, for Cottages;
for that there was no Timber in the Country, nor had they any convenience of
buying or exchanging out of Spain, by reason that the wideness of the Sea and
ignorance of the Language prevented Commerce. These, by degrees, by
intermarriages intermixed the Getulians among themselves: and because that in
search of convenient Habitations, they sometimes tried one Country, then
another, they called themselves Numidians. And as yet, the Buildings of the
wild Numidians were oblong, and bowed on both sides, like the Keels of Ships.
With the Libyans, the Medes and Armenians joined; for these lived nearer the
African Sea. The Getulians more under the Sun, not far from the scorching
Heats; and these built themselves Towns betimes. For being separated only by a
narrow Straight from Spain, they had settled a Trade one among another. Their
Name also the Libyans by degrees changed, calling them instead of Medes, Maurs,
according to the Pronunciation of their Barbarous Idiom. As for the Persians,
they grew potent in a short time; and afterward retaining the Name of
Numidians, by reason of their Multitude, they left their Parents, and took
possession of those Places which being next to Carthage, are called Numidia.
Then both together, confiding in each others Strength, they compelled their
Neighbors, either by Force, or through Fear, to submit to their Jurisdiction;
thereby gaining both a Name and Reputation to themselves; but They the greater,
that advanced as far as our Sea; for that the Libyans are not so warlike as the
Getulians. Lastly, The lower part of Africa was for the most part possessed by
the Numidians; while all the rest being vanquished and subdued, acknowledged
only the Name and Government of the Victors.

19. Afterward, the Phoenicians, partly being too numerous at home, partly
through desire of Dominion, having prevailed with the People, and others no
less covetous of Novelty, to follow 'em, built Now by the French called Bone;
by Arabs Bened el Vgueb, in the Kingdom of Argier.
Hippo, Now Mahometta, in the Kingdom of Tunis.
Adrumetum, Now Lebeda, in the Kingdom of Tripoli.
Leptis, and other Cities upon the Seacoast: Which being afterward much
enlarged, some served for Srength, and some for Ornament. For as for Carthage,
I think it proper rather to say nothing at all, then to be too concise, Time
calling us another way. Therefore from Catabathmos, which Place divides Egypt
from Africa, observing the Tide of the Sea, the first City is Now Caicoan in
the Kingdom of Barca.
Cyrene, a Colony of the Island of Thera, now Gozi in the Aegaean Sea; then the
two The one now called Le Secche di Barbary, and the other Golfo di Capes.
Syrtes; between which Leptis, and then the Now Porto di Sobia; or Nain; so
called from two Carthaginian Brothers, that suffer' themselves to be there
buried alive for the Good or their Country.
Altars of the Phileni. Which was the Limits of the Carthaginian Empire next to
Carthage. All the other Countries as far as Mauritania, the Numidians possess;
and next to Spain, are the Moors, Beyond Numidia the Getulians inhabit, some in
Cottages, others more barbarously roving from place to place: Beyond them lie
the Ethiopians. and then the Deserts all parched up by the scalding heat of the
Sun. Therefore in the Jugurthine War, the Romans by their Magistrates governed
most of the Punic Towns, and the Territoties of the Carthaginians, which they
had latest won. The greatest Part of the Getulians and the Numidians, as far as
the River Now Molochath.
Mulucha, were under the Dominion of Jugurth.

Over all the Moor's King Bocchus reigned, to whom the Romans were little
known, unless it were by Name; neither was he known to Us, by any Occasion
either of War or Alliance.

20. After the Commissioners had divided the Kingdom, they returned home. At
what time, when Jugurth saw that he had obtained the full Reward of his
Treachery, contrary to the Fears of his Heart, believing it certain, as he had
learnt by his Friends at Numantia, that all things were vendible at Rome; as
also encouraged by the Promises of those whom, but a little before he had
glutted with his Presents, he bends his Thoughts upon Adherbal's Kingdom. He
himself stirring, and warlike; the Person he designed upon, peaceful, and
effeminate, of a mild Temper, and cut out for an Object of Injustice; rather
fearful, then to be feared. Unexpectedly therefore Jugurth enters his
Territories with a great Army, sweeps the Country both of People and Cattle,
burns the Houses, and in an Hostile manner approaches most of the Cities with
his Cavalry. Then with all his Booty he marches back into his own Kingdom,
believing that Adherbal thus incensed, would revenge the Injury done him; which
would be a fair Pretense for a War. On the other side, Adherbal, because he
knew himself to be no way equal to his Adversary; and for that he trusted
rather to the Friendship of the Romans, then in his own Numidians, sent his
Ambassadors to Jugurth, to complain of the Injuries he had done him; who,
though they returned with only contumelious Usage, yet he determined to suffer
all Indignities, rather then begin a War, wherein he had had such ill Success
before. However, Jugurth's Ambition abated never the more for that, as one that
had already devoured his Brother's Kingdom in his Heart. And therefore not now;
as before, by way of Inroad, but with a great Army he began the War, and openly
to lay claim to the whole Empire of Numidia: wherever he came, he laid waste
City and Country, drove all before him, encouraged his own, and struck terror
into his Enemy.

21. Adherbal, when he found it was come to that height, that he must either
abandon his Kingdom, or maintain his Right by Force of Arms, constrained by
Necessity, raises an Army, and marches to meet Jugurth. Thus both Armies met by
the Seaside, not far from the City of Now Constantina.
Cirta; but in regard it was then toward the Evening, they did not fight that
day; but when the Night was far spent, and that Daylight began to glimmer,
Jugurth's Soldiers, the Signal given, fall pell-mell into the Enemies Camp,
where they kill, rout, and put to flight the scarce awake Numidians, ere they
could put themselves into a posture of Defense: Adherbal, with some few
Horsemen gains the City of Cirta; and had it not been for the great number of
Italians that kept off the pursuing Enemy from the Walls, in one day between
two Kings a War had been begun and endeed. Jugurth therefore surrounds the
Town, and prepares with his Vines were Hurdles, eight Foot high, seven broad,
and sixteen in length, covered over with raw Hidess under which the Soldiers
made their Approachs to the Walls of a City
Vines, Towers and Engines of all sorts, to storm the Walls. Making the more
haste to anticipate the Ambassadors, which, as he heard, Adherbal had sent to
Rome before the Fight. However, so soon as the Senate had intelligence of the
War, three young Men were sent into Africa, with Instructions to attend both
the Kings, and to let 'em know that it was the Pleasure and Decree of the
Senate and People of Rome, that both should lay down their Arms; and for any
Controversies that were between 'em, That they should suffer the Law, not War
to determine 'em.

22. The Commissioners arrive in Africa, which they made the more haste to do,
in regard that while they were preparing for their Journey, News was brought to
Rome of the Battle fought, and the Siege of Cirta; though the Truth were very
much minced, and favorably reported. To whom, when Jugurth had heard their
Message, he made Answer, That there was nothing more awful nor more sacred to
him, then the Authority of the Senate: That from his Youth he had so
endeavored to regulate his Behavior, that he might gain the Applause of all
good Men: That his Courage, not his evil Deeds had rendered him grateful to
Scipio, the greatest Person in the World: That for the same reason, and not for
want of Children, he was adopted into the Kingdom by Micipsa: but that the more
he had well and strenuously behaved himself, the less could he frame his Mind
to brook Affronts: That Adherhal had Treacherously laid Wait for his Life,
which when he understood, he only opposed him with open Force: That the People
of Rome would neither Act justly nor as became good Men, to forbid him the
Right of all Nations: Lastly, That he would in a short time by his Ambassadors
give the Senate an Account of all his Proceedings.

22. Jugurth when he thought the Commissioners were departed out of Africa, and
found that by reason of the natural strength of the place, he could not take
Cirta by Storm, surrounds it with Trenches and Breast-works reared up several
Towers, which he stuffed with Armed Men: left no thing unattempted Day and Night,
either by Force or Stratagem; at the same time alluring and terrifying the
Defendants with Rewards and Objects dreadful to the sight; inflaming the Valor
of the Assailants by continual encouragements; and sedulously performing all
things requisite upon such an occasion. Adherbal therefore, finding all his
Fortunes reduced to the last Extremity, the Enemy pressing furiously on, no
expectation of Relief, nor hope of spinning out the War for want of
Necessaries, among the rest that fled with him to Cirta, he made choice of two
brisk Men of undaunted fidelity, and partly by large Promises, partly by
raising up their pity of his low Condition, prevailed with 'em to break through
the Enemies Guards in the Night time, to the next Shore, and thence with all
imaginable speed to make for Rome. The Numidians in a few days accomplish his
desires, and Adherbal's Letters were read in the Senate to this effect.

Not any fault of Mine, but Jugurth's violence, Conscript Fathers, constrains
me so often to implore your Aid: whose Ardent Thirst to drink my Blood is so
extreme, that he regards neither your selves nor the Immortal Gods: nothing
will gratify his impatience but my destruction. Therefore now five Months
together have I, the Friend and Allie of the Roman People been closely
Besieged; not will my Father Micipsa's Kindnesses, nor your Decrees afford me
any Succor. My misfortune disswades me to write any more of Jugurth; before
this time also, having had experience, how little Fidelity is reserved for the
Miserable. However I am satisfied, that his desires are far beyond what I at
present am; nor does he hope Your friendship and my Kingdom both together: and
which he deems of most importance, there is no Man but may easily discern. For
First he murdered Hiempsal my Brother, then chased me from my Native Kingdom.
What were our private Injuries, was no concern indeed of Yours: but now with
Armed Force he usurps your Kingdom; and Me, whom you appointed Governor of
Numidia, he closely keeps penned up in Misery. How much he regarded the
Commissioners Message, my dangers fully evince. What remains, but only your own
Power to remove him. I must confess, I could heartily wish, that what I have
written and all my former Complaints in the Senate, had rather, then, been
feigned and idle Stories, then that now my misfortune, should verify my words.
But seeing I was only born to be the Sport of Jugurth's wicked Insolence, I
deprecate neither Calamity nor Death, but only the Tyranny of my Enemy, and the
Torture of my Body. Provide as you please your selves for the good of the
Kingdom of Numidia, which is your own; But by the Majesty of the Empire, by the
Fidelity of you Friendship, wrest me out of Impious hands, if yet there be
remaining among ye, any remembrance of my Grandfather Massinissa.

24. This being read, some were of opinion that an Army should be forthwith
sent into Africa, and that Adherbal should be speedily relieved; and that in
the mean time, they should consider what was to be done with Jugurth, for
disobeying the Commissioners. But Jugurth's Party labored might and main,
against the passing such a Decree. Thus the Public good, as it happens in most
Affairs, was overcome by Private Favor. Nevertheless they sent into Africa
some of the Senior Nobility, who had been advanced to the highest Honors.
Among the rest was the above mentioned Scaurus, a Consular Person, and then
President of the Senate. They, because the the Senate were in a heat, and
besides being earnestly importuned by the Numidians, took Shipping in three
days and soon after Landed at Now Biserta in the Kingdom of Tunis.
Vtica, whence they sent Letters to Jugurth, that he should repair forth with
to the Province; for that they were sent to him by the Senate. He, when he
heard that Men of that Note, whose Authority was great in the Senate, were
arrived contrary to his Expectation, at first distracted between Fear and
Ambition, was virously turmoyl'd. He dreaded the Anger of the Senate, should he
disobey the Ambassadors; on the other side his Mind blinded by Ambition,
hurried him to complete the Outrage he had begun. However the worst Result
obtained the Victory in his covetous Inclinations. To that purpose, surrounding
the whole City with his Army, he endeavors by main force to break into the
City; chiefly hoping that while the Besieged were divided to defend many Posts
at once, some lucky Chance would give him either by force or Stratagem a
Victorious opportunity. Which not succeeding to his mind, and finding he could
not effect what he intended, which was to get Adherbal into his Clutches,
before he met the Ambassadors, least by longer delay he should incense Scaurus,
with a small Retinue He hastened into the Province. But notwithstanding he was
sharply reproved, severely rebuked, and smartly threatened in the Name of the
Senate, unless he raised his Siege; nevertheless, after much Altercation to no
purpose, the Ambassadors departed without effecting any thing.

26. The News of which arriving at Cirta, the Italians, whose Courage had
defended the Walls, not doubting but that after a Surrender, in Consideration
of the Roman Grandeur, they should be secure and safe, persuaded Adherbal to
surrender himself and the Town to Jugurth, upon Quarter for his Life: and that
for other things the Senate would take care. Upon which, though he knew nothing
more false then Jugurth's word, nevertheless because he knew himself in the
hands of those, who if he refused had power to constrain him, he submitted to
the pleasure of the Italians, and yielded up the Town. Presently Jugurth, in
the first place tortures Adherbal to death; then he slew all the Numidian Youth
and Merchants promiscuously, as they fell in the Soldiers way.

27. Which after it was known at Rome, and that the matter came to be debated
in the Senate, the Kings Stipendiaries interposing, partly by favor, partly by
unnecessary wrangling, qualified the hainousness of the Fact. So that unless C.
Memmius, Tribune of the People Elect, a Person vehement, and a great stickler
against the Power of the Nobility, had not informed the Roman People, what
contrivances were a brewing, that Jugurth's Villainy might be pardoned, all the
Heat and Passion of the Senate had vanished into nothing, through delay of
Consultation. But the Senate, Conscious of their miscarriage, were afraid of
the People, and therefore according to the Sempronian Law, Provinces are
decreed the succeeding Consuls: the Consuls Elect were P. Scipio Nasica, and L.
Bestia Calpurnius. Numidia fell to Calpurnius, and Italy to Scipio. Thereupon
an Army is raised to be Transported into Africa; Money, Provision and
Ammunition decreed for the support of the War.

28. Of which when Jugurth had intelligence, contrary to his Expectation, as
one who was fully persuaded that all things were to be bought at Rome, he sends
Ambassadors to the Senate, his own Son, and two of his familiar Friends, with
the same Instructions as he gave to those which he sent after the Murder of
Hiempsal, that they should not spare to tempt all Persons whatsoever with their
Money. Upon their approach near Rome, Bestia moved the Senate whether it were
their Pleasure that Jugurth's Ambassadors should be admitted within the Walls
of the City: who thereupon made a Decree, that unless they came to surrender
the Kingdom and the King's Person, they should depart Italy within ten days:
which Decree the Consul ordered to be carried to the Numidians; so that they
were forced to return without performing any thing. In the mean time,
Calpurnius having got his Army in readiness, chooses for his Legates, Persons
noble and factious, whose Authority might guard him, should he happen to commit
any miscarriage; in which number was Scaurus, whose Qualities and Conditions we
have already described. For indeed the Consul was endu'd with many excellent
Qualities both of Body and Mind, though pestered all, and incumbr'd with
Avarice. Patient of Labor, a sharp and penetrating Wit, sufficiently
provident, a good Soldier, resolute in danger, and most wary of Stratagem. The
Legions were Shipped from Now Reggio.
Rhegium for Sicily, and thence for Africa. And then it was that Calpurnius
having made Provision of Victuals, smartly entered Numidia, takes a great
number of Prisoners, and several Cities by main force.

29. But when Jugurth by his Ambassadors began to dazzle him with Money, and
then to lay before him the difficulty of the War which he had undertaken, his
Mind, sick with Avarice, easily suffered an Alteration. However he did nothing
without Scaurus, whom he made his bosom Companion and sharer of his Counsels.
Who though at first he fiercely opposed the Kings Interest, when most of his
Faction were corrupted; yet at length the vastness of the sum was such, that it
drew him from Honor and Justice to vile Depravity. All this while Jugurth had
only purchased a Cessation of War, believing in the mean time that he should
make a better progress either by Price or Favor. But when he understood that
Scaurus was come in for a share, encouraged then with all the hopes imaginable
of recovering Peace, he determined to treat in Person upon the particular
Conditions. To that purpose as it were for a security, Sextius the Questor is
sent by the Consul to Vacca, a Town belonging to Jugurth, upon pretense of
receiving an Imposition of Corn, which the Consul had openly commanded the
Commissioners to get ready provided; the Truce being continued under a daily
expectation of surrender. The King therefore, as he had resolved, arrives in
the Camp, where after he had made a short Speech in the Council of War, in
excuse of the Crime that was laid to his charge, and formally petitioned that
he might be admitted to surrender, the rest he transacted in private with
Bestia and Scaurus. And then the next day, the opinions of the Council being
demanded in a huddle and overruled by the Consul, his Surrender was admitted.
However according to the Imposition of the Council, Thirty Elephants, Cattle, a
great number of Horses, and no inconsiderable sum of Money were delivered to
the Or Treasurer at War.
Questor. After which Calpurnius departs for Rome to be present at the Election
of new Magistrates, while all was quiet both in Numidia and our Army.

30. But after Fame had spread abroad the Proceedings in Africa, and how things
had been managed, at Rome there was nothing discoursed of in all Places and
Meetings, but the strange management of the Consul; among the Commonalty
terrible disgust; The Fathers troubled, and at a kind of Loss; nor did they
know well what to do, whether they should approve so scandalous a Misdemeanor
or disanul the Consuls Decrees. But such was the Power of Scaurus, who was
reported to be both Bestia's Confederate and Adviser of the Act, that it
stopped 'em very much in the course of Honesty and Justice. Yet C. Memmius
whose freedom of Speech, and inveteracy against the Nobility we have already
mentioned, while the Senate sat wavering and hesitating, encouraged the People
by Popular Harangues to Revenge; exhorts 'em not to desert the Commonwealth nor
their own Liberty; laid open many haughty and cruel Acts of the Nobility, and
sedulously kindled up the Indignation of the People by all manner of ways.
Which gives me an opportunity since the Eloquence of Memmius was at that time
in such high esteem, and so powerfully persuasive upon all occasions, to recite
one among so many of his Orations; more especially what he discoursed in a
particular Assembly, presently after the return of Bestia in these words;

31. Many things dislwade me, Gentlemen, why our Affection to the Commonwealth
should not be so highly preferred above all other things. The Power of Faction;
your patient Sufferance; no Justice; but more especially, for that there is
more Danger then Honor attends upon Innocence. For it grieves me to utter what
I am about to speak, That for these fifteen years, during which time you have
been the Laughter and Contempt of the prevailing Power of a few, how
shamefully, how unrevenged your Champions have perished, as if your Courage
were infected with Sloth and Oscitancy; who neither at this time rowse up in
opposition of your criminal Enemies; and are also now afraid of those, to whom
ye ought to be a Terror. But yet in this unhappy Condition of Affairs, my Zeal
constrains me to oppose the Predominancy of Faction. I shall certainly make
trial of that Liberty, which my Parents left me as part of my Inheritance, but
whether in vain, or to the purpose, that is only in your Power. Neither do I
persuade ye, as frequently your Ancestors have done, to arm your selves against
these Violences. There is no need of Force or Tumult; for you will find they will
run headlong after their usual manner. Tiberius Gracchus being slain, whom they
accused of designing Regal Sovereignty, grievous were the Bloody Executions of
the Roman People. After the Murder of C. Gracchus and M. Fulvius, many of your
Quality and Degree were slaughtered in Prison. Neither did the Law, but their
Ambition put a stop to both those cruel Havocks. Yet certainly the Reparation
of the Government should rather have consisted in restoring the Commonalty
their Privileges. Whatever cannot be sufficiently punished, without shedding
the Blood of Fellow-Citizens, let it be done by Law. Of late years you tacitly
murmut'd to see the public Chequer robbed; to see Kings and Free People pay
their Tribute to a few of the Nobility; Supreme Dignity at their Command, and
Riches most exorbitant in their possession; yet took little notice of their
exercising these unequal Usurpations with impunity. And thus at length the
Laws, your Dignity, all things Divine and Human were delivered up into the
hands of Enemies; yet neither are they that acted those Enormities ashamed or
penitent; but trample over your Faces magnificently, boasting their chief
Pontificates, their Consulships, and many their Triumphs; as if they looked upon
those things as Honors, and not Rapines rather. Servants bought with Money,
brook not the unjust Commands of their Lords and Masters: And will you,
Gentlemen, born to Empire, patiently endure Servitude? But who are They, who
have thus got Possession of the Commonwealth? The most abominable among Men;
their Hands besmeared with Blood; insatiably covetous, most injurious, and the
Same most lofty. By whom Fidelity, Honor, Piety; lastly, All things honest and
dishonest are put to Sale. Some of 'em have placed their chiefest Safety in
murdering the Tribunes of the People, others in inflicting unjust Punishments;
but the greatest part in committing bloody Violence upon your selves. Thus, by
how much every one acted most facinorously, so much the more secure he thought
himself. They transferred their Dread from their own Crimes upon your
Remissness. And all these the same Desires, the same Hatred, and the same Fears
combined together. But this same Friendship among good Men, is Faction among
the wicked. But had you the same care of your Liberty, as they are vehemently
inflamed with Love of Dominion, upon my word, neither the Commonwealth would be
laid waste, as now it is, and the most worthy, not the most audacious would
reap the benefit of your Favors. Your Ancestors, to obtain their Right, and to
establish their Dignity, twice in a divided Body from the Nobility, fortified
themselves upon the Aventine Mountain: and will not you with all your might
endeavor the Recovery of that Liberty which you received from them? and so
much the more eagerly, by how much the greater Ignominy it is to lose what once
you have achieved, then never to have won it? It may be asked me, What is my
Opinion then? That they be severely punished who have betrayed the Commonwealth
to the Enemy; not by strength of Arms, nor force, which had been more unworthy
for you to have done, then dishonorable for them to suffer, but by the
Examinations andamp; Confession of Jugurth himself: for if he have surrendered
himself, certainly he will be obedient to your Commands: but if he contemn your
Orders, then you your selves may judge, what that same Peace or Surrender is,
from whence Jugurth obtains the Impunity of his Crimes; whence some few
Powerful Noblemen heap such Treasures to themselves,; whence so much Loss and
Shame befalls the Commonwealth. But perhaps you have not had enough of their
Lordly Domineering; and those then these Times please your humor better, when
Kingdoms, Provinces, Laws, Privileges, Judgments, War and Peace, all things
Divine and Human were in the power of a few; but You, that is to say, the
People of Rome, to your Enemies invincible, and Lords of sundry Nations,
thought it a sufficient happiness to breath. For who among ye durst refuse to
be a Slave? But for my part, though I do think it the most heinous thing in the
world for a man to have an Outrage done him, and yet the Malefactor go
unpunished; yet could I willingly endure, that you should pardon the most
abhorred of Men, provided they were Citizens, did I not think your Clemency
might prove pernicious. For They, whatever vexation and interruptions they may
meet with, will never lay to heart their doing mischief, unless they be
deprived of the power of acting, but your Fears will be eternal, when you find
that either you must be Slaves, or vindicate your Liberty by force of Arms. For
what hope is there either of Fidelity or Concord? They resolve to domineer, and
you desire your Freedom; they to do Injustice, you to prohibit 'em: Lastly,
They use your Allies as Enemies, and your Adversaries as Friends. Can there be
Peace and Friendship in Minds so diametrically opposite? Wherefore I desire and
exhort ye not to suffer an outrageous piece of Violence to go unpunished. The
public Treasury is not robbed; nor Money violently extorted from your Friends,
which though offenses of a high Nature, yet now adays are looked upon as merely
Trifles. Noandmdash;the Authority of the Senate is betrayed to a most bitter
Enemy; the Commonwealth is set to sale both at home and abroad, which unless
they be narrowly examined, unless the Guilty be brought to condign Punishment,
what remains, but that we must live in Servitude to those that have committed
these notorious Crimes? For to act without fear of punishment, that is to be a
King. Not that it is my meaning you should be glad to see your Fellow-Citizens
were all involved in equal Crimes; but that you should distinguish, and be
careful how ye pardon the wicked, lest thereby you occasion the destruction of
the Good. Besides that it is much more beneficial to the Commonwealth, to
forget a kindness then an injury: For good men only grow more careless if
neglected; but bad men more audacious. To which we may add, That if Offenders
were but duly punished, you would not stand so frequently in need of
Tribunitial Aid.

32. By these, and such like Reasons often urged, Memmius persuades the People
of Rome, That Cassius who was then Praetor, might be sent to Jugurth; and that
he should bring him to Rome upon the Public Faith, to the end that by the
Confession of the King, the Misdemeanors of Scaurus, and the rest, who
absconded upon the score of taking Bribes, might be made manifest.

While these things were thus transacted at Rome, they who were left by Bestia,
to command the Army in Numidia, following the Example of their General,
committed many and most facinorous Enormities. Some there were, who corrupted
with Gold, delivered back the Elephants to Jugurth; others sold the Fugitives;
others robbed and spoiled the Provinces that were at Peace: Such a violent rage
of Avarice had cankered their very Minds, like a general Contagion. But Cassius
the Praetor, the Choice being reported by C. Memmius, to the Terror of the
Nobility, goes to Jugurth, and persuades him, fearful, and guiltily mistrustful
as he was, in regard he had surrendered himself to the Roman People, to make
trial rather of their Clemency, then their Force; and privately gave him his
own Word, which he thought to be equal to the Public Faith. Such was the high
Reputation of Crassus at that time.

33. Upon that, Jugurth contrary to the Grandeur and Majesty of a Prince, comes
to Rome in pitiful and sordid Habit: And though he were endu'd with a vast
Courage and Confidence above measure, being confirmed by all whose Power or
Impiety had encouraged him to act what he had done, however he made sure of M.
Bebius Tribune of the People, to the end that by his Impudence he might be safe
from all dangers of Popular violence. But Memmius, summoning an Assembly of the
People together, though the Commonalty were hainously incensed against the
King, and some commanded him to be laid in Irons; and others, unless he
revealed his Confederates, threatened him with Capital Punishment, according to
the Custom of their Ancestors; yet consulting more their Honor, then to
gratify their Fury, he made it his business to qualify their Heats, to appease
their Indignation; and lastly to convince 'em that the Public Faith was to be
observed. Then silence following and Jugurth being produced, Memmius made a
Speech, wherein he rips up all his Misdemeanors both at Rome, and in Numidia,
lays open his Crimes committed against his Father and his Brothers; telling him
withal, That although the People of Rome, were well informed already who were his
Agents and Assistants, yet they were desirous of farther proof, and discovery
from himself; that if he confessed the Truth, he had great Encouragement to
rely upon the Clemency and Faith of the Roman People; but that if he would not
be ingenuous, he would do his Confederates no kindness, but would certainly
ruin himself and all his Hopes.

34. When Memmius had made an end, and that Jugurth was commanded to answer, C.
Bebius the Tribune, whom Jugurth had largely Bribed, as we told ye before,
commands the King to hold his Tongue; and although the Multitude who were
present at the Assembly, being highly incensed, threatened the Tribune not only
with their Looks and hideous Clamors, but with all those other acts of Violence
that Anger makes use of; yet nothing could deter his Impudence, so that the
People brake up their Assembly contemned and scorned: on the other side,
Jugurth, Bestia and the rest, whom that same Examination strangely disordered,
resumed fresh hopes, much more enlivened then they were before.

35. There was at that time at Rome a certain Numidian, by name Massiva, the
Son of Gulussa, and Grandchild to Massinissa, who because he was an Enemy to
Jugurth, when the three Kings were at variance, upon the Surrender of Cirta,
and murder of Adherbal, fled out of Africa. This Man was persuaded by Sp.
Albinus, who was Consul the next year after Bestia, with Quintus Minucius
Rufus, in regard he was Descended in a direct Line from Massinissa, to lay
claim in the Senate to the Kingdom of Numidia, while Jugurth's fears and the
abomination of his Crimes lay heavy upon him. The Consul, thirsting after War,
was clearly for creating any disturbance rather then lie idle. More especially
because Numidia was fallen to his Lot, as Macedonia to that of Minucius. So
that when Massiva began to bestir himself, and Jugurth found he was not safe
enough in the Protection of his Friends, for that in some their Guilt of
Conscience; in others their lost Reputation and Apprehensions of Mind had
extinguished the heat of their Solicitations, he orders Bomilcar, his near
Kinsman, and his intimate and trusty Agent, with a round sum of Money, the main
Instrument with which he had brought to pass all his mischievous Designs, to
procure certain Russians to watch Massiva, and hurry him out of the City, with
all the privacy they could; or if that Plot failed, to murder him outright.
Bomilcar swiftly puts in Execution the Kings commands, and by fellows that
understood their Trade, observes his walks, his goings out, and commings in,
his haunts, and seasons of being abroad; and then, when every thing was fixed,
he lies perdue. At what time, one of those that were hired for the Murder,
somewhat over hastily setting upon Massiva, struck off his Head: so that being
apprehended, at the persuasions of many, and chiefly of Albinus the Consul
himself, he makes a Confession; upon which Bomilcar, who accompanied Jugurth to
Rome, upon the Public Faith, is adjudg'd Guilty, rather by the Law of Nature
then of Nations, by which he seemed to be exempted from Punishment. But as for
Jugurth, though no man were so well acquainted with the Fact as himself; yet
would he never give over laboring against the certainty of Truth, until he
found that the Abhorrency of the Fact had got the upper hand of Favor and his
Gold. Therefore though upon the former Information, he had given in Fifty of
his friends as Sureties for Bomilcar's forthcoming, however being more mindful
to secure his Kingdom, then careful to discharge his Bail with honor, he
privately sent away Bomilcar into Numidia, afraid least Popular fears might
shake the Loyalty of the rest, if once they heard that he were put to death:
and he himself within a few days after followed, being commanded by the Senate
to depart Italy. Of whom it is reported that as he was upon the Road still in
view of the Walls, he frequently turned his head not saying a word, till at
length, casting a wistful look upon the City, he brake forth into this
Exclamation; Adieu fair City to be sold, and ripe for ruin, could it find a
Chapman.

36. In the mean time Albinus, the War being thus renewed, sends away
Provisions, Money and other necessaries for the Soldiers, into Africa, and
swiftly also follows in Person, that before the Election of new Magistrates
which grew on apace, he might conclude the War, either by force of Arms, upon
Composition, or by any other means. On the other side, Jugurth spun out the
time, to the utmost of his power, pretending sometimes one, sometimes another
Excuse for his delay, promised Surrender, and then dissembled his fears;
sometimes he retires, and by and by, for fear of discouraging his own Men, he
makes a stand: thus lingering out the War, and sometimes with proposals of Peace
he eluded and baffled the Consul. And some there were who thought Albinus was
not unacquainted with the Kings designs, for considering the Have he made at
first, they could not believe but that the War was rather prolonged through the
Remissness of the Consul, then Policy of the Enemy. But the season being spent
in vain; and the day of Elections at hand, Albinus, leaving his Brother Aulus
Propretor in the Camp, departed for Rome.

37. At that time was Rome most terribly harrass'd by the Mutinies and
Contentions of the Tribunes, P. Lucullus, and L. Annius, Tribunes of the
People, who notwithstanding the Opposition of their Colleagues, obstinatly
endeavored to continue in the Magistracy. Which contention Prorogued the
Elections for a whole Year. Upon which delay, Aulus, who was left Propretor in
the Camp (as we have already declared,) building fair hopes, either of putting
an end to the War, or by the terror of his Army to extort some considerable sum
of Money from the King, in the Month of January, draws his Army out of their
Winter Quarters into the Field; and with long Marches in a sharp Season,
presents himself before the Walls of Suthul, where the Kings Treasure lay.
Which although, in regard of the hardness of the weather, and the Situation of
the place, it could neither be taken nor besieged; for that a Boggy Plain, by
reason of the Winter showers, now become a spacious Marish, surrounded the
Walls, that were built upon the Point of a Craggy Rock; yet either in a
Bravado, to terrify the King; or blinded with eager hopes of gaining the
Treasures of the Town, set up his Vines, opened his Trenches, and in a word,
omitted nothing that might further his design.

38. On the other side Jugurth, perceiving the vanity of the Legate, andamp;
his want of Military experience, craftily to heighten his Madness, sent
Messengers to him, with offers of submission, while he himself as it were to
avoid his fury, leads his Army through the Woods and Places of most difficult
access. Lastly upon hopes of Agreement he had so charmed Aulus, as to make him
raise his Siege and follow him still feigning flight, into Countries with which
he was not in the least acquainted; that so his oversights might be less
subject to disclosure. In the mean time he employed most active and cunning
Gamesters, Day and Night to sound the Army; and to Bribe the Centurions, and
Captains of Horse, either to revolt, or upon Signal given to desert their
Stations; which when he had accomplished according to his desire, of a sudden
in a Tempestuous night, he surrounds Aulus's Camp with a vast multitude of
Numidians. The Roman Soldiers, amazed at such an unusual Alarm, some stood to
their Arms; some ran to hide themselves; others heartned up the Timorous; some
stood quivering; while the Enemy thundered in upon 'em on all sides. The Sky
all over-cast with Clouds and darkness; the danger doubtful; nor could the most
daring well resolve which was the safest course, whether to fight or fly. In
this hurry, among those whom the Kings Gold had poisoned, the Ligurian Cohort,
with two Troops of Thracians, and some few Common Soldiers revolted to the
King; and the He was the chief of all the Centurions of the Legion, and had the
guard of the Eagle: as being the Captain of the Triarij, one of whose weapons
was a dart, in Latin called Pilum.
Primipile Centurion of the third Legion gave admittance to the Enemy at that
Quarter, which he had undertaken to defend: and there all the Numidians poured
in like a Torrent. Shameful was the flight of our men, of which the greatest
part possessed themselves of the next Hill, leaving their Arms behind 'em.
Night, and the eagerness after Plunder prevented the Enemy from making that
advantage of their Victory they might have done. The next day Jugurth entering
into a personal Parley with Aulus, told him, that though he had him safe with all
his Army Surrounded with Famine and the Sword, yet considering the Inconstancy
of humane Affairs, he was content upon condition of a League and Peace by him
Confirmed, and that they should depart Numidia within ten days to save their
Lives, first passing under the The Yoke was two Spears fixed in the Ground, and
a third fastened overthwart from one to the other, like a Gallows, under which
the Soldiers were to go one after another, and was the greatest Ignominy that a
vanquished Enemy could undergo.
Yoke. Which Conditions though grievous and highly dishonorable, yet because the
Soldiers tottered under the Fears of Death, were accepted, and a peace
concluded amply to the King's desire.

39. But when this Fatal News arrived at Rome, Fear and Mourning invaded all
the City; part bewailed the Honor of the Empire; others not accustomed to the
various Events of War, trembled for the mistrusted loss of their Liberty. But
all were offended at Aulus, especially they who had been often Famous in the
Wars, for that he, having stifl his Arms in his hands, had sought to save his
Life, rather with dishonor, then by Dint of Sword. Therefore Albinus fearing
least the Miscarriage of his Brother might procure him Hatred, and Danger in
the next Place, consulted the Senate concerning the Validity of the League.

In the mean time new Recruites were listed to reinforce the Army; and aid was
sent for from their Associates and the Latins; and this with all the
Expedition imaginable. Moreover the Senate, as it was but reasonable, pass a
Decree, that no League could be valid but by their Command and the Consent of
the People. The Consul, though forbid by the Tribunes to transport his new
Levies, in a few days, arrives in Africa. For all the shattered Army having
quitted Numidia, by agreement wintered in the Province. When he came thither,
tho he burned with an eager desire, to prosecute Jugurth, and revenge his
Brother's Disgrace, yet understanding that the Soldiers, besides the
discouragement of their Flight, were debauched by dissolute Licentiousness,
arising from superfluous Plenty, and want of good Government, he determined to
lie still that Year.

40. In the mean while, at Rome, C. Mamilius Limitanus, Tribune of the People,
publishes an Edict of the Commons, for calling to a strict account all those
Persons who had countenanced Jugurth to contemn the Decrees of the Senate; also
such as in their Embassies or Generalships had been corrupted by his Bribes;
such as had delivered back either Elephants or Fugitives; and lastly all that
had capitulated with the Enemy, either of War or Peace, without Warrant.
Against this Edict, some conscious to themselves, others mistrusting danger
from the Odium they had drawn upon themselves, because they durst not openly
make opposition, they pretended to be well pleased, both with this, and all
other Edicts of that Nature. But underhand by their Friends, especially the
Latins and Italians, they endeavored to give it all the obstruction they
could. On the other side, the Commons, it is incredible to think how earnest
and intent they were, with what noise and clamor they Commanded, decreed and
urged the Execution of their Edict; more out of an Antipathy against the
Nobility, against whom those Mischiefs were contrived, then out of any true
Zeal for the public good. So violent was the Rage of both Parties. Therefore
while the rest were struck with fear and dread, M. Sc^urus, who was Bestia's
Confederate, as we have already related, between the Insultings of the People,
and the Frights of the Nobility, the whole City at the same time being under a
strange Consternation, finding there were three Commissioners intended to be
ordained for Execution of the Inquisition, so ordered it that he got himself to
be one of the Number. Besides, the Inquisition was urged with that violence and
exasperated malice accompanied with clamor and rude Licentiousness, that
whatsoever severities the Senate had exercised in former times upon the People,
they were now in their prosperity, no less insolent in their revenge.

41. This custom of Bandying Parties among the People, of Senate-Factions, and
all other wicked and corrupt Practices derived its Original in Rome, from Idle,
ness and Superfluity of those things which Mortals deem their chiefest
Felicities. For before the destruction of Carthage, the People and Senate of
Rome managed the Public Affairs with Unity and Moderation: no contentions for
Honor and Superiority among Fellow-Citizens: Hostile Fears retained the City
within the bounds of Just and Honest. But when those Fears were once removed,
immediately Wantonness and Pride, the bad Effects of Prosperity, took place. So
that what they wished for in their mean Condition, after once they came to
enjoy Tranquillity and Ease, was a Burden and Disturbance of their Quiet. For
then the Nobility began to turn their Superiority into domineering Pride, the
People their Liberty into Petulancy: Usurpation, Rapine, tearing this way,
rending that way, and every one for himself, was then the public Mode. So that
the whole being rent into two Factions, that which lay in the middle was sure
to be torn in pieces. But the united Faction of the Nobility was most
prevalent, the Strength of the Commons disjoynted, and scattered into
Multitude, could do little: And thus the Commonwealth, as well in times of
Peace, as War, was managed at the Pleasure of a Few. The Public Chequer, the
Provinces, all Offices, Honors and Triumphs were at their disposal; the People
were kept under by Poverty and Military Duties. The Generals with a few shared
all the Spoils and Booty taken in War. All this while the Parents and Children
of the Soldiers, as every one lay nearest Neighbor to the Potent Nobleman,
were thrust out from their Habitations. Thus Avarice in League with Power,
invaded, polluted, and made prize of all things, regarding neither Measure nor
Moderation, trampling Morality, spurning Sanctity under their feet, till it
threw it self headlong into Ruin. For so soon as there were found among the
Nobility some that preferred true Honor before usurped Dominion, then the City
began to be all in Combustion, and Civil War, like a Confusion of Heaven and
Earth, began to break forth.

42. Thus, after Tib. and C. Gracchus, whose Ancestors, both in the Punic and
in other Wars, had much advanced the Honor of the Commonwealth, began to
vindicate the Liberty, and disclose the wicked Miscarriages of a few; the
Nobility, guilty, and struck with Terror of Punishment, sometimes by the
assistance of their Allies and the Italians, sometimes of the Roman Knights,
whom Hopes of being admitted into equal Society, had drawn off from the
Commons, opposed the Proceedings of the Gracchi; and first they slew Tiberius;
then in a few years after, Caius, together with M. Fulvius Flaccus, treading
the same steps; the one a Tribune of the People; the other a Triumvir for the
Transportation of Colonies. Though, to speak Truth, the Gracchi were too
immoderate and vehement in the pursuit of Victory. Since it is the wiser way to
yield in a good Cause, then illegally to revenge an Injury. Therefore the
Nobility, prosecuting that Victory, as they pleased themselves, what by the
Sword, and what by Exilement, destroyed a great number of People: procuring for
the future more of Terror, the Power to themselves. A sort of rigorous Policy
that many times becomes the Ruin of great Cities, while the Citizens strive to
vanquish one another, they care not how, and prosecute their Revenge to the
utmost extremity upon the Vanquished. But should I go about to discourse
particularly of the Heats and Animosities of the Factions, and all the
Encroachments of bad Customs into the City, Time would sooner fail me then
Matter; And therefore I return to the Business in hand.

43. After the Peace agreed by Aulus, and the ignominious Flight of our Army,
Metellus and Silanus being designed Consuls, shared the Provinces among
themselves; by which means Numidia fell to Metellus, a man altogether for
Action, and though an Enemy to Popular Factions, yet of an untainted and
unviolable Reputation, and so acknowledged by both Parties. At his first
entrance into his Office, after he had settled all Affairs wherein his Colleague
and he were equally concerned, he wholly bent his Mind upon the War which he
was to undertake. To that purpose, not daring to confide in the Old Army, he
listed New Soldiers, sends for Auxiliaries from all parts, makes provision of
Armor, Weapons, and all other Instruments of War; stores himself with all
manner of Provisions, and all things requisite in a dubious Contest, often
subject to the want of fresh Supplies. Toward all which great and vigorous
Preparations, the Allies, the Italians, and Foreign Princes, nay the whole City
it self largely contributed, even to emulation, both Forces and Money. So that
all things being now in a readiness, to his own content, he puts to Sea for
Numidia, filling the City full of fair Hopes, knowing him to be a Person of
great Virtue, and more especially bearing a Mind impregnable to the Assaults of
Gold: Which they looked upon then as a great Matter, considering, how before
that time, through the Covetousness of our Governors in Numidia, our Forces had
been foiled and weakened, and the Strength of the Enemy augmented.

44. When he arrived in Africa, the Army was resigned to his Command by
Spuricus Albinus the Pro-Consul; debauched and out of heart, neither daring to
look Danger in the Face, nor endure Labor; prompter of their Tongues then
Hands; preying upon their Friends, but a Prey to the Enemy; under no Command or
Discipline. So that the new General was more troubled to reform their corrupted
Manners, then any way encouraged to expect Assistance or Service from their
licentious Numbers. Metellus therefore determines, though the proroguing the
former Summer-Elections, had shortened his Time, and that he knew the Eyes of
his Fellow-Citizens were all upon him, not to meddle with the War, till he had
first enured his Soldiers to Labor and Hardship, according to the Discipline
of their Ancestors. For Albinus being terrified with his Brother's Disaster,
and the Overthrow of the Army, after he had resolved not to stir out of the
Province, during so much of the Summer-Season as he commanded the Army, kept
his Soldiers in standing Camps, and never dislodged, but when Stench or Want
of Forage compelled him to remove. And then also, neither were the Watches
observed, and Sentinels placed according to the Custom of Military Discipline.
But every one at random left his Colors, and wandered where he pleased; the
Sutlers and Camp-Boys intermixed with the Soldiers, roam'd about the Country
day and night, laying waste the Fields, pillaging the Villages, driving off
great Booties of Prisoners and Cattle, which they exchanged with the Merchants
for Wine and other Commodities. Moreover, their public Allowances of Corn they
sold, and bought their Bread every day as they used it. Lastly, whatever
Scandals of Sloth and Luxury could ever be uttered or devised, were all to be
really found in this our Army, and more if possible.

45. In the midst of these Difficulties I find Metellus to be a Person no less
prudent and politic, then expert in Affairs of War; such was his Temperance and
Moderation, between an eager desire of Reformation and Severity. For by his
first Edict, he prohibits all the Incentives and Pandarisms to Idleness; That
no man within the Camp should sell any Bread or Flesh ready dressed; That no
Sutlers or Camp-Boys should follow the Army; and That no Common Soldier should
presume to keep either in the Camp or upon a March, any Slave, or Beast of
Carriage: what else remained, he limited according to the Rules of Discretion.
Moreover, he often dislodged his Camp, marching sometimes one way, sometimes
another, and (as if the Enemy had been at hand) still fortified himself with
Trenches and Breastworks. He frequently relieved the Watches, and often went
the Rounds himself with the Legates. And when he was upon a March, sometimes he
would be in the Front, sometimes in the Rear, and often in the middle, to
prevent the straggling of the Soldiers from their Colors: and when they
marched in a full Body, they were ordered to carry their Provision, as well as
their Arms: and by prohibiting, rather then by punishing Miscarriages, he
reduced the Army to perfect Discipline.

46. In the mean while Jugurth, when he heard by his Spies, the Courses which
Metellus took, as also being ascertained from Rome of his Integrity, he began
to mistrust the Issue of his Affairs, and then at length began to think of
making a real Composition. To which purpose he sent his Agents to the Consul,
with Offers of Surrender, and full Commission to desire only his own and his
Childrens Lives, but refer all other things to the good will and pleasure of
the Roman People. But Metellus was not ignorant by former experience, that the
Numidians were a perfidious Nation, inconstant in their Humor, and always
inclined to Novelty. And therefore discoursing the Agents every one apart by
themselves, and sounding 'em by degrees, when he found 'em sincerely pliable,
he persuades 'em with large Promises to deliver up Jugurth into his hands
alive, if possible, or slain, if otherwise it could not be accomplished; but
what farther Message they had to carry to the King, he openly informs 'em at a
Public Audience. After this, he enters Numidia with a well resolved and
powerful Army; where contrary to the countenance of War, the Houses were full
of People, and the Fields of Cattle and Husbandmen. Then out of the several
Towns and Villages the King's Officers came forth to meet and congratulate the
Consul, professing themselves ready to furnish him with Corn and Carriages for
his Provision, and in a word, to do whatever he commanded. But notwithstanding
these fair shows, Metellus was never a jot the less circumspect, marching in
the same order and wariness, as if the Enemy had been at hand, sent his Scouts
and Forlorns every way round about; believing all pretenses of Surrender to be
only Wiles and Stratagems to draw him into Mischief. And therefore he marched
himself at the Head of his Army with some of the nimblest Cohorts, and a select
Band of Archers and Slingers. The Rear C. Marius, his Legate, brought up with
his Horse: and upon each Wing he had divided the Auxiliary Horse at the Command
of the Tribunes of the Legions, and Captains of the Cohorts; to the end that
the light Armed Foot and the Horse being thus intermixed, they might be able to
withstand the Enemies Cavalry, which way soever they make an Impression. For
Jugurth was so politic, so well acquainted with the Situation of the Country,
and the Art of War, that whether he were more dangerous absent or present,
treating Peace, or actually in War, was hard to be resolved.

47. There stood not far from the Road which Metellus took in his march, a Town
belonging to the Numidians, which was called Whatever it were, there is now no
footsteps of it remaining.
Vacca, the most famous for Trade of any in the Kingdom; and greatly frequented
by the Italian Merchants. Here the Consul, as well for a Trial whether they
would obey or no, as also considering the Advantages of the Situation, places a
Garrison. Moreover he commanded the Inhabitants to furnish him with a Quantity
of Corn and other Necessaries useful in War; believing, as it was most rational
to think, That the great Concourse of Merchants, and plenty of Provision would
be a great Assistance to his Army: besides that the Place lay convenient for a
Magazine of necessary Preparations for the future. In the midst of these
Transactions Jugurth sends again submissive Messengers, and much more earnestly
then before sues for Peace, with Offers to Metellus, to surrender all things to
his Mercy but his own and the Lives of his Children; whom the Consul, as he did
the former, sent back again with Temptations to betray their Master; but as to
the Peace which the King desired, he neither gave any positive Grant or
Refusal; delaying on purpose, in expectation of the Agents Promises.

48. But Jugurth, when he compared the Words and Deeds of Metellus together,
and found himself matched at his own Weapons of Delay and Dissimulation, while
Peace was dissembled in Words, but actually a sharp and vigorous War in the
Bowels of his Kingdom; one of his chiefest Cities in the Enemies Hands, the
Country discovered, and the People staggering in their Allegiance, constrained
by the Necessity of his Affairs, he resolves to fight it out. And therefore by
his Spies having thoroughly discovered and observed the March of the Enemy,
conceiving great hopes of Victory from the Opportunity of the Place, he raises
all the Force he could make of all sorts of People, and so by private ways, and
shorter Cuts, he gets before Metellus's Army. There was in that part of
Numidia, which upon the Division of the Kingdom, fell to Adherbal's share, a
River rising Southward, which was called Muthul, from whence, at the distance
of about a Thousand and Twenty Paces, a great Mountain showed it self, wild by
Nature, and altogether untilled and uninhabited: from the middle of which,
there grew as it were another Hill to a very great height, covered over with
wild Olives, Mirtles, and such other sorts of Trees as delight in barren and
sandy Grounds. All the surrounding Plain for want of Water, lay desert; only
those parts that bordered upon the Stream, which were thick set with Bushes and
Hedges, full of Cattle and Husbandmen. Upon this Hill, which ran cross the
Highway, as we have said, it was, that Jugurth drew up the Vanguard of his
Army thinly Marshalled, giving Bomilcar the Charge of his Elephants, and some
part of his Forces, with full Instructions what to do. He himself with his
Cavalry, and some selected Battalions of Foot, plants himself nearer the
Mountain; then riding from Troop to Troop, and Rank to Rank, he exhorts,
encourages, and conjures them not to forget their pristine Valor and
victorious Conquests, but bravely to defend themselves and his Kingdom from the
Avarice of the Romans: That they were to deal with only such as they had forced
to pass the Yoke already: That their Captain only, not their Courage was
changed: That his Care and Foresight had prevailed against all Accidents, as
became an expert Leader: That he had taken the upper Ground, and intermixed 'em
so, Veteranes with the raw and undisciplined, to the end that they might not be
afraid to grapple a few in number with many, or less expert, with their
Superiors in War: therefore that they should be all in a readiness, and forward
to assail the Romans upon the Signal given: That this was the Day which would
either prove the end of all their Toyls by glorious Conquest, or the beginning
of unavoydable Calamities. Then culling out by Name every particular Person,
that for their Martial Deeds he had either enriched with Gold, or advanced to
Military Honors, he admonishes 'em to be mindful of his Favors, and bids 'em
encourage others with the same Expectancies. Lastly, as if he understood the
particular Genius of those he spoke to, some he promises, others he threatens,
but emboldens and encourages all by all the ways imaginable. All this while
Metellus, ignorant of the Enemies Approach, is discovered marching with his
Army down the Hill. Who suddenly descrying an unusual sight, began to consider;
for the Numidians kept themselves and their Horses snug within the Trees and
Bushes, which nevertheless were not so high as to shelter 'em sufficiently from
being seen; and yet the nature of the Place was such, that they could not fully
be discovered, besides that they had cunningly hid all their Military Ensigns.
But in a short time the Truth being fully found out, and the General made a
steady halt, Then hastening to embattel his Army, he changed the Order of his
March, and in the right Wing which was next the Enemy, he places three Bodies
of Reserves. Between the small Divisions he disperses the Slingers and Darters,
and plants all his Cavalry upon the Wings. Then after some few Exhortations to
the Soldiers, for shortness of time would not permit him to use many words, he
brings his Army thus Embatell'd into the Plain, only that the first Ranks
changed their ground in Marching.

49. But when he perceived that the Numidians lay still, and would not come
down from the Hill, fearing lest his Men should be distressed for want of
Water, he sent Rutilius before with some of the nimblest Cohorts and part of
the Horse, to the River to secure a place for his Camp, believing that the
Enemy would then power down upon him, and by Charging him in Flank, endeavor to
prevent him; and because they durst not rely upon their own Courage, would seek
to tire out his Men with heat and drought. After Him, the Consul followed,
slowly descending the Hill, as the nature of the Place would give leave. Marius
brought up the Rear; himself marched with the Cavalry upon the Left Wing. On
the other side Jugurth, when he found that the Rear of Metellus's Army was just
past by the Front of his own Men, places a Guard of two thousand Foot upon the
Mountain, from whence Metellus had descended, to prevent the Enemy from
regaining it, and fortifying themseves in that place, should they be put to a
retreat; then giving the Signal, he flew upon the Romans. The Numidians soon
made havoc in the Rear, while others Charge in the Flank, some upon the right,
others upon the left side: they press on, and lay about 'em, every where
endeavoring to break the Ranks of the Romans; among whom, they who with
greatest resolution labored to come to a close Fight, were disappointed by the
uncertain Assaults of the Enemy, who fought and wounded at a distance those
that could reach to revenge themselves. For the Horsemen had been instructed
before by Jugurth, that when they were pursued by any of the Roman Troops, that
they should not retreat in a Body, but scatter several ways; by that means, if
they could not deter the Enemy from pursuit, they were in a Condition, being
Superior in number, to Charge 'em when dissipated on all sides, Rear, Front and
Flanks: and then a gain, if the Hill were more advantageous to secure their
Flight then the Plain Fields, that then they should retire thither, where their
Horses accustomed to scour through the Bushes, could not be followed by our
Men, easily encumbered among the Shrubs and Thickets.

50. All this while the Event of things looked but with an ill Aspect;
uncertain, various, bloody and miserable; dispersed from their own, some fled,
others pursued; neither Ensigns nor Orders observed; wherever danger
attacque'd any Man, there he made resistance, Arms, Weapons, Horses, Men,
Enemies and Friends lay all intermingl'd together; nothing was acted by Counsel
or Command, but Fortune governed. And now the day began to be far spent, and
then the Issue was also uncertain; But at length, both sides being spent with
toil and heat, Metellus observing the Numidians fury to abate, rallies his Men
together by degrees, reduces 'em into Order, and places four Legionary Cohorts
against the Enemies foot: To those Cohorts, of which the greatest part, weary
and tired, had possessed the upper Grounds, Metellus gave good words, and
desired 'em not to desert their fellow Soldiers nor suffer an Enemy half
vanquished to wrest the Victory out of their hands; that they had neither Camp
nor Fortification to retreat to, but all their hopes was in their Swords.
Neither was Jugurth idle, he rode about, exhorted; entreated, renewed the
fight, and in person with the select Guards of his Body, tried all places,
relieved his own, pressed furiously upon those that waver'd; and against those
he could not move, he fought at a distance. Thus these two famous Generals
bestirred themselves, in Courage and Experience, in their Forces not so equally
matched. For Metellus had the more valiant Soldiers, tho the Ground was
disadvantageous; Jugurth had all Advantages of his side but only Soldiers. At
length the Romans understanding they had no place of Refuge, and finding that
the Enemy would not hazard a close Fight, besides that it was now toward
Evening, by the Generals Command they briskly charge up Hill; and then it was
that the Numidians having lost their footing, were soon routed and out to
flight, few were slain, in regard that the swiftness of their Heels, and the
Country unknown to the Roman, protected their Lives.

51. In the mean time Bomilcar, to whom Jugurth had given the Command of his
Elephants, and part of his Infantry, as we have said already, when Rutilius was
Marched past him, brings his own Men into the Champaign ground by degrees; and
whilst the Legate hastened to the River, whither he was sent before, orders his
Army with great silence, as it behooved him, not neglecting however by his Spies
to observe the Motions of the Enemy in every place. So soon as he understood
that Rutilius was Encamped in a careless posture; and found that Jugurth was
engaged by the hideous Noises that reached his Ears from the Battle, fearing
least the Legate when he understood the cause, would hasten to the Assistance
of his own Party, he extends the Front of his Army, which before, upon distrust
of their Courage he had drawn up thick and close, and to stop the March of the
Enemy, Marches directly toward Rutilius's Camp. The Romans of a sudden
perceive a prodigious Cloud of Dust; for the fields being thick set with low
Trees hindr'd a clear Prospect: and believes at first that it was raised by the
Wind; but afterward when they saw it continue, and approach nearer and nearer
to themselves, then readily conjecturing what the matter was, they betake
themselves to their Arms, and range themselves before the Camp according to
command. When the Enemy drew near, both sides join Battle, with a hideous
clamor and noise: The Numidians stood fast, so long as they thought there was
any hope in their Elephants, but when they saw them entangl'd among the Boughs,
and by that means overthrown and surrounded by the Romans, they betook
themselves to their Heels, and throwing away their Arms, by the benefit of the
Hill and the Night, which was then at hand, escaped with little Execution. Four
Elephants were taken, the rest to the number of forty killed. But the Romans,
though tired with their March, with raising the Fortifications of their Camp,
and the heat of the Battle; yet because Metellus staid longer then was
expected, they March forward Embattl'd, as they were, and with an extraordinary
Resolution to meet him. For the Craft of the Numidians will admit of nothing
negligent or remiss. At first, through the darkness of the Night, when they
came within hearing one of another, being taken for Enemies, there was nothing
but fear and hurry one among another. And through imprudence, a fatal Accident
had like to have happened, had not the Forelorns on both sides rectified the
mistake. But then their fears were changed of a sudden into joy. The Soldiers
merrily call to one another, relate and hearken to one another Exploits; and
every one extols his own Valor to the Skies. For such is the Condition of
human Affairs, that after Victory Cowards have leave to boast, but ill success
casts a reproach on the most Valiant.

52. Metellus stayed four days in the same Camp; orders the wounded to be
carefully looked after; those that had well deserved in the Battle, he well
Rewards according to the Military Custom, applauds 'em all in general, and
gives 'em thanks in a Public Assembly. As to what was behind, which would now
prove easy, he exhorted 'em to behave themselves with equal Courage; that they
had already fought sufficiently for Victory, their other Toyls woul'd only be
for Booty. In the mean time he sends the Fugitives and other proper Spies to
bring him News where Jugurth was, what he was doing, what force he had about
him, and how he brook'd his loss. But Jugurth had retired himself among the
Woods and Places strongly fortified by Nature; there he levied an Army more
numerous that he had before; but such as had neither Mettle nor Strength. Which
happened so, for this reason, because unless it were the Royal Cavalry, not one
of all the Numidians accompanied the King in his Flight, but every one took his
own Course, as his Fancy lead him; neither is it accounted any shame for a
Soldier so to do, as being the Custom of the Country. Metellus therefore, when
he found that the Kings Courage was not yet cooled; but that the War would be
renewed, which could not then be managed but as Jugurth pleased himself:
Moreover that he fought upon unequal terms with an Enemy, to whom it was less
prejudice to be vanquished, then to overcome his Men, he determined to fight no
more pitched Battles, but to carry on the War after another manner. Therefore
he Marches into the Richest Parts of Numidia, harrasses and lays wast all the
Country, takes and burns several Castles and Towns either slightly fortified,
or else without any Garrisons; puts all the Young men to the Sword, all other
things he gives free Booty, to the Soldiers. These severe Proceedings cause
several to send Pledges to the Romans; Corn and all other necessary Provisions,
are plentifully supplied, and where ever need required, there he placed a
Garrison. Which manner of Warlike management terrified the King much more then
the ill success of a Battle. For that be, whose hopes of safety were all in
flight, was now constrained to follow: And he that could not defend the
Territories that were left him, was now forced to wage War in the Conquests of
another. But in this distress and exigency of choice, he took that course which
seemed to him to be the wisest.

He orders the Body of his Army still to lie in the same place: He himself with
a select number of Horse follows Metellus: and in regard his Nocturnal Marches,
and unfrequented ways were not subject to quick Discovery, he frequently met
with the Roman Forragers and Straglers; of which the greatest part were slain
or taken; nor did one escape unwounded: which done, before Assistance could be
sent from the Camp, the Numidians were vanished to the next Hills.

55. In the mean time there was extraordinary rejoicing at Rome, upon the News
of Metellus's success; that he had governed both himself and the Army according
to the Custom and Discipline of their Ancestors; that in a disadvantageous
ground he had obtained the Victory by his Valor; that he was Master of the
Enemies Country, and had constrained Jugurth, vain-gloriously puffed up and
grown insolent through the Cowardice of Aulus, to hide his head in Deserts, and
to place all his hopes of safety in Flight. Therefore the Senate ordered
Supplications to the Immortal Gods for the success of their Arms: The City
trembling before, and solicitously dreading the Event of the War, were all in
Festivals and Jollity; and Metellus's Fame spread far and near. For this reason
he labored more vigorously after Victory: He leaves no stone unturned; yet
provident all the while how he fell into the Ambuscado's of the Enemy; mindful
that after Glory Envy follows. Therefore the greater his Reputation was, so
much the more Careful and Vigilant also was he; neither after the last Attempts
of Jugurth, would he suffer the Army to forage at random: and therefore when
he wanted either Corn or Fodder, he sent several Cohorts, and all the Cavalry
to guard the Forragers. He himself led one part of the Army, and Marius the
other: the Country was laid wast, rather by Fire then driving of Booty; they
Encamped in two several Places, not far distant one from the other. When there
was occasion for reinforcement they joined both together: and when they
designed to clear and ravage the Country, and spread the Terror of their Arms,
then they acted asunder. At the same time Jugurth followed close at their
Heels, but still keeping the Mountains. Where ever he could perceive the Enemy
bent their March, there he destroyed all the Forage and poisoned the Wells and
Fountains, of which there was great scarcity. Sometimes he would show himself
to Metellus, sometimes to Marius; by and by fall upon the Rear; neither engage
in Battle, nor suffer 'em to be at rest; only to obstruct the Enemies designs.

56. Therefore the Roman General, when he saw himself tired out by a crafty
Adversary, that would not be drawn to a fair Encounter, he determined to
Besiege a great City called Now Zamora a 120. miles from Carthage, and a 100.
from Mahometia.
Zama, in that Quarter of the Country, the Key and Bulwark of the Kingdom,
believing as it was but rational, that Jugurth would come to relieve the Place,
and so give him the Opportunity of a Battle: But he being informed by the
Fugitives of Metellus's designs, with long Marches gets before him; encourages
the Townsmen to defend their Walls, and leaves 'em all his Fugitives to
reinforce their Garrison; which were a sort of People the stoutest and most
resolute of all the Kings Forces; as being under a constraint of being
faithful: and having thus settled his Affairs, away he slips into the most
private lurking holes he could meet with. Soon after he understood that Marius
was upon his March, being commanded with some few Cohorts to Convoy a
considerable quantity of Corn from Formerly a Colony of the Assyrians from
Succoth Benoth, or rather of the Phoenicians; called also Sicca Venerea, by
reason of a Temple therein Dedicated to Venus: but now utterly demolished,
without any footsteps remaining. Though some will have it to be the Town now
called Antoangues.
Sicca. Which was the first Town that revolted from the King after his Defeat.
Thither Jugurth hastens in the Night time, with some select Troops of Horse,
and Engaged the Romans as they were just Marching out at the Gate; and at the
same time cried out to the Inhabitants to fall upon the Cohorts in the Rear;
withal encouraging 'em, for that Fortune had put into their hands a noble
Opportunity; which if they laid hold on, he should for the future enjoy his
Kingdom, and they their Liberty in Peace and Tranquillity. So that had not
Marius fallen on with all the fury imaginable, made his way out of the Town,
and broke through the Enemy at the same time, either all or most of the
Inhabitants, had changed their Fidelity: so mutable and inconstant is the
Numidian Faith. But Jugurth's Soldiers being a while supported by the presence
of their Prince, when they felt the smart strokes of the Enemy, who pressed in
hard on the thickest and most forward, with the loss of some few, betook
themselves to speedy flight; and Marius comes safe to Zama.

57. This Town was seated in a Plain, rather fortified by Industry then Nature,
provided with all Necessaries, and stored with Men and Ammunition. Metellus
therefore having prepared all things in readiness so far as the Time and Place
would permit, surrounds the Walls with his whole Army, and gives Orders to the
Legates what Posts to take. Then upon the Signal given, a hideous Clamor fills
the Skies on every side: but all their noise nothing terrifies the Numidians;
they stand resolute and fixed without any Tumult; andamp; so the Assault
begins. The Romans played their parts as they thought best themselves; some
fought with Slings and Darts at a distance, others make close Approaches, some
to undermine, and some resolved to set their Ladders to the Walls, and make a
speedier trial of their Swords. On the other side, the Numidians power down
Stones, pointed Stakes and Darts upon those that were nearest, together with
flaming Firebrarnds all besmeared with Pitch and Tar. Nor could their Fears
protect those that kept farthest off: For the Darts continually discharged from
the Engines, or else flung out of Hand, both reached and wounded the greatest
part: Both the Timorous and the Valiant underwent the same danger, though not
with equal Reputation.

58. While both Sides vigorously thus dispute for Zama, Jugurth of a sudden,
and when least expected, falls upon the Roman Camp, and forcing the Turn-pike,
breaks in upon our Men. Who being amazed with sudden Fright, shift every one
for themselves according to custom; some fly, some betake themselves to their
Arms; and a great many are either wounded or slain. Of all the Number, not
above Forty, remembering they were Romans, embodied together, betake themselves
to a Rising Ground, and made it good, notwithstanding the Force of the
Assailants; the Darts thrown at 'em they returned again, which from a few
lighting upon many crowded together, did never fall in vain: if the Numidians
durst approach 'em, then they showed their Courage, with a strange Fury
routing, killing, putting all to flight. At the same time Metellus in the heat
of the Assault, hearing a great Noise and Tumult behind him, turned about his
Horse, and perceiving a Rout, and that they that fled, made toward him, he
readily conjectured what the Matter was. Thereupon he sends away all his
Cavalry forthwith to the Camp, and after them Marius with the Cohorts of the
Allies, conjuring him with Tears in his Eyes, by the Friendship that was
between 'em, and by the Honor of the Commonwealth, not to suffer any Disgrace
to stain the Victories of his Army, nor to leave the Enemy ere he had had his
full Revenge. Marius vigorously performed his Command. So that Jugurth being
encumbered with the Fortifications of the Camp, while some threw themselves
headlong over the Rampire, others crowding through the narrow passages to get
out, hindered one another, with the loss of many of his Men, retired to his
Fastnesses. Metellus also at the same time, not able to prevail, in regard that
Night drew on, retreated with his Army to the Camp.

59. The next day before he returned to the Assault, he drew up all his Cavalry
before the Camp on that side where he expected a second Attempt from Jugurth,
and commanded 'em there to keep a strict Watch. The Turn-pikes and Places next
adjoining, he commits to the Guard of the Tribunes; and then surrounding the
Town, as he did the day before, gives a second general Assault. Presently
Jugurth makes a second Attempt likewise upon our foremost Men; who being
somewhat terrified at first, are soon disordered; but the Reserves fly speedily
to their Relief. Nor could the Numidians have longer withstood their Force, had
not their Foot, being intermingl'd with the Cavalry, made a great Slaughter at
the first Charge. For being assisted by this intermixture, they did not, as it
is usual in other Charges of the Horse, sometimes press forward, sometimes give
Ground; but fell in pell-mell, Horse Head to Horse Head, thereby incumbring and
disordering the Ranks, at what time the Foot breaking in, had almost routed the
Enemy.

60. At the same time the Dispute was no less desperate at Zamara. Where every
Legate or Tribune was posted, there most vigorously they performed their
Duties, no man confiding more in another, then in himself. On the other side,
the Townsmen made a strenuous Resistance, they fought to wonder, and provided
against all Accidents; more eager to wound others, then mindful of their own
Safety. Hideous and different were the Cries of both Parties, Encouragements,
Shouts of Joy, and bitter Groans of Lamentation; the Clattering of Weapons
filled the Skies; and Showers of Darts fell thick on every side. At length they
who defended the Walls, when they perceived the Fury of the enemy a little to
slacken, stood still upon the Battlements to behold the Fight between the Roman
andamp; Jugurth's Cavalry; and as Jugurth either prevailed, or lost Ground,
sometimes you should see 'em overjoyed, then again all in consternation. And as
far as they could be seen or heard by their fellows, some they besought, others
they encouraged, making Signs with their Hands, and Motions of their Bodies,
like men avoiding or darting forward their missive Weapons. Which when Marius
perceived, for he had the Charge of that Quarter, on purpose he slackened his
Fury, and dissembled a Mistrust of the Event, suffering the Numidians to have
an unmolested Prospect of their Princes Bravery. But at length, while they were
busily gazing upon their Fellows, Marius attacks the Walls with a more then
ordinary violence. And the Soldiers by the help of their Scaling Ladders, had
almost gained the Battlements, when the Townsmen embodying of a sudden, plied
'em with Stones, Fireworks, and other Missive Weapons. Our men made stout
resistance at first, but after two or three of the Ladders were broken, they
that stood upon 'em were miserably mortified; the rest, few safe, every one, as
best they could, shifted for themselves, and very few escaping unwounded, the
most part hurt and maimed, quitted the Assault: at length Night parted the
bloody Fray.

61. When Metellus found such ill Success of his Enterprise, and that neither
the Town could be taken, nor Jugurth drawn to fight, but where he had the
advantage of Ground or Ambuscado's, and that Summer was spent, he raised his
Siege from before Zama, and placed Garrisons in those Cities which had revolted
from him, and were either naturally or artificially fortified; and the rest of
the Army he quartered in that part of the Province which borders upon Numidia.
Nor did he spend that Time as others were wont to do, in Ease and Luxury, but
finding Force so little prevailed, he therefore betook himself to Stratagem: To
this purpose, with fair Words and large Promises he attempts Bomilcar. This was
he who accompanied Jugurth to Rome, and after he had given Sureties for his
forthcoming, upon the Murder of Massiva, secretly made his Escape, for fear of
being put to death; and therefore by reason of his intimacy with Jugurth', had
the fairer opportunity to betray his Friend. The first thing Metellus did, was
to bring him to a private Meeting: in the next place he gave him his word, That
if he would deliver Jugurth into his hands alive or dead, the Senate should not
only grant him Impunity, but his own Demands. The Numidian is easily persuaded,
being not only naturally treacherous, but also misdoubting, lest if the Romans
should make a Peace with his Master, he might be excepted out of the Articles,
and delivered up to condign punishment.

62. He therefore, upon the first Opportunity he could meet with, coming to
Jugurth, and finding him troubled, and bewailing his Misfortunes, with Tears in
his Eyes beseeches and conjures him, that at length he would take pity of
himself, his Children, and the miserable Estate of the Numidian People, so well
deserving at his hands: further he put him in mind, That still in all
Encounters they were vanquished; the Country was laid waste, numbers of his
Subjects carried away Captive, or slain, and the Treasures of the Kingdom
utterly impoverished; That he had sufficiently tried his Fortune, and the
Courage of his Soldiers; and therefore that he should take heed, lest while he
delayed, the Numidians did not consult for their own Safety. By these and other
Arguments of this Nature, he mollifies the King's Inclinations to a Surrender.
Commissioners are therefore sent to the General, to let him know, That Jugurth
was ready to obey his Commands, and without any Composition to surrender both
himself and the Kingdom to his Generosity: Metellus presently sends for all
that were of Senatorian Degree, from their Winter Quarters, and advises with
them, and such others as he thought convenient. Thereupon, according to the
ancient Custom, by his Messengers He commands Jugurth to send him two hundred
pound weight of Silver, all his Elephants, such a number of Horses, and such a
quantity of warlike Ammunition; which being done, he commands all the Fugitives
to be delivered up in Chains. The greatest part of them were also sent
accordingly; only some few upon the first Report of a Surrender, immediately
fled to King Bocchus into Mauritania. Thus was Jugurth despoyl'd of his Arms,
the Flower of all his Forces, and his Money. But when he was summoned to appear
before the General, then residing at Tisidium, then he began to change his
Mind, and through Guilt of Conscience to dread what really he deserved. At
length, after he had wasted many days in hesitation, sometimes as it were tired
with his Misfortunes, deeming all things to be endured before the Calamities of
War; then again reflecting with himself, how terrible a Fall it would be from a
Kingdom into Slavery, at last he makes choice of War. At Rome, the Senate being
moved concerning the Provinces, decree Numidia to Metellus.

63. At the same time Marius being by accident at Vtica, and there making his
Offerings to the Gods for his Success in the last Expedition, the Soothsayer
told him, That the Signs portended great and wonderful Events in reference to
himself, and therefore whatever he had in his Mind, he might boldly act, in
confidence of the Favor of the Gods; That he might venture Fortune as often as
he pleased, for that he should prosper in all his Undertakings.

64. Some time before this, a violent Ambition of the Consulship had harrass'd
his Thoughts. For the Achievement of which, beside the Antiquity of his
Family, he stood fair in all other respects Industry, Probity, Military
Experiennce, a vast Courage in War, great Frugality, a Contemner of Pleasure
and superfluous Wealth, only impatient of Honor. He was born and bred up
during all the time of his Childhood at Now Arpino in the Terra di Lavoro in
the Kingdom of Naples.
Arpinum, where he first learnt to undergo the hardships of War, wherein he
spent his Youth, serving all along for Pay; not in the Study of Grecian
Eloquence, or City Courtship: and thus in a short time he attained to a
perfection in virtuous Exercises. And therefore when he first stood for the
Military Tribuneship at an Assembly of the Commons, most People not knowing his
Face, when once they heard his Name, he presently carried it by the Voices of
all the Tribes. From that Office he advanced himself still higher and higher by
degrees, and in all Employments so behaved himself, that he was always deemed
worthy of a Nobler then that he possessed at present. But till that time,
notwithstanding his matchless Bravery (for still Ambition hurried him headlong)
he durst not stand for the Consulship. For then the Commonalty disposed of
other Offices, but the Consulship the Nobility shared successively among
themselves. No upstart Person never so famous, never so celebrated for his
great Atchievments, was thought worthy, but rather a Defilement of that Honor

64. Marius therefore, when he saw that the predictions of the Soothsayer
tended the same way that his Ambition carried him, desired Metellus to spare
him from the Army, that he might have liberty to stand for the Consulship; who,
though he were a Person in whom Virtue, Honor, and all other Qualities, noble
and desirable, were brightly eminent, yet were they accompanied with a
disdainful Mind and lofty Pride, the common Failings of the Nobility. Moved
therefore at first with the Novelty of Marius's Demand, he wondered at his
Design, and as it were in Friendship advised him not to act so preposterously,
nor to advance his Thoughts above his Fortune: That all things were not proper
to be desired by all men; That it became him to be contented with his present
Preferments, which were sufficient. Lastly, That he should consider well before
he made a Request of so high a Nature to the People of Rome, that might be
lawfully denied him. After he had given him these and many more Admonitions of
the same Nature, yet could not divert Marius from his settled Intentions, he
made him answer, That so soon as the Public Affairs would permit, he would
grant him his Desires. And afterward when Marius urged him with greater
importunity, it is reported, That he should advise him, not to be too hasty,
adding withal, That it would be time enough for him to stand for the Consulship
with his Son; who at that time was a private Soldier in his Fathers Pavilion,
about twenty years of Age. Which Taunt of Metellus not only vehemently incensed
him to prosecute the Honor which he affected, but also against Metellus
himself. For that reason he followed the Dictates of his Ambition, and his
Wrath, the worst of evil Counselors: All his Words and Actions now tended to
Popularity: The Soldiers which he commanded, he permitted to live more loosly
then before: Among the Merchants, of which there was a great number at Vtica,
he scattered many scandalous and ostentatious Reports concerning the War: That
if he might have the Command but of half the Army, he would in a days time have
Jugurth in Chains; and that the War was on purpose spun out by the General, as
one that being a Person vainglorious, and of Princely Pride, too much affected
Power and Command. Which the Merchants more readily believed to be true, for
that by the continuance of the War, their Trade was very much hindered; and to
a Covetous Mind all Procrastination seems a Crime.

65. There was at that time in our Army a certain Numidian, by Name Gauda, the
Son of Manastabales, the Grandchild of Massinissa, whom Micipsa by his Will
had left the next Heir of the Kingdom, full of Diseases, and for that reason
somewhat crazed in his Senses: to whom Metellus, upon two Requests, that
according to the Custom of Princes, he might have his Chair set next the
General's Seat, as also a Troop of Roman Horse for the Guard of his Body, had
denied him both: The Honor, because it represented that Majesty, which the
Romans termed Regal, and could not endure to suffer always in their sight: The
Guard, because it looked disgracefully for the Roman Horse to attend upon a
Numidian. This Person therefore thus repulsed, and vexed in his Mind, Marius
attempts, and emboldens him to take his Revenge upon the General for the
Affronts he had put upon him, as he should direct him. He magnifies the Man
distempered in Mind through bodily Distempers, with flattering and glozing
Speeches, puts him in mind of his being a Prince, a great Person, the
Grandchild of Massinissa: That if Jugurth should be taken or slain, the
Kingdom of Numidia fell immediately to him by right of Inheritance; which would
suddenly come to pass, if he might once be sent as Consul to manage the War. By
this means he persuades the Numidian, the Roman Knights, the Soldiers, and
Merchants, some by his own Authority, others upon hopes of sudden Peace, to
write to their Friends at Rome, and in their Letters sharply to inveigh against
the dilatory Proceedings of Metellus, and at the last to desire Marius for
their General. And thus it came to pass, that by the fair Suffrages of many Men
the Consulship was labored for in his behalf. Besides it so happened,
seasonably for him at that time, that the Nobility being curbed by the By which
it was provided, that when the Nobility in the management of warlike Affairs
had any ill success, that the Commonalty should have power to elect new Men.
Manlian Law, the Commonalty had Power to advance new Men: allthings fell out
luckily for Marius.

66. In the mean time Jugurth, after he had falsify'd his promise of
submission, and renewed the War, with great Industry makes vast preparations,
uses all expedition, Levies an Army; those Cities which had revolted from him
he solicites with Rewards, or regains by Terror; fortifies his strong Holds;
replenishes his Stores with Ammunition and Warlike Furniture; entices the Roman
Slaves to revolt, and those that were in Garrisons he tempts with ready Money:
Lastly he leaves no stone unturned, nor suffers any Soul to rest in quiet; but
casts about every way to procure disturbance. At Vacca therefore, where
Metellus, when Jugurth first began to treat of Peace, had placed a Garrison,
wearied with the Importunities of the King, and never truly alienated in their
Affections from him, the chief Inhabitants of the Town conspire together among
themselves, (for the common People according to their usual Custom, especially
the Numidians, naturally fluctuating and inconstant, seditious, and despisers
of Harmonious Concord, were still thirsting after Novelty, and Adversaries to
Peace and Tranquillity) and having laid their Plot sure, agree upon the third
Day, which happened to be one of their most Solemn Festivals, and strictly
observed over all Africa, and therefore gave them an opportunity to assemble
without suspicion, under pretense of Sport and Pastime. Thereupon when the time
came, they invited to their Houses the Centurions, Colonels and the Governor
himself F. Turpilius: all those they slew in the midst of their Cups, except
Turpilius: which done they fell upon the Soldiers, straggling up and down
without their Arms, being then obliged to no duty, by reason of the day. The
same did all the Rabble, part instructed before hand by their Superiors, others
out of their natural Affection to disorders; to whom Tumult and Novelty, though
they neither understood the Cause nor Motives, were things pleasing and
delightful. The Roman Soldiers surpised thus of a sudden, uncertain and
doubtful what Course to take, fled in a pannick fear to the Castle belonging to
the Town, where their Ensigns and Targets lay: but the Garrison of the Enemies,
having shut the Gates before, prevented their Flight, and to add to their
Misfortune, the Women and Children flung down Stones and such other Materials
as the place would afford, continually upon their Heads from the tops of the
Houses. Thus there was no avoiding the uncertain Mischief, neither was it in
the power of the stoutest to make resistance against the weakest: Valiant and
Cowards, strong and feeble fell all together, and many were slain. In the heat
of this Massacre, while the Numidians were exercising their utmost fury, and
all the Gates were shut, Turpilius made a clever escape untouched, whether it
were through the Civility of his Host, or upon a Composition of Ransom, or by
accident, we never could discover. This is only to be said, that because in
such a Calamity, he preferred an ignominious Life before an unblemished
Reputation, he appeared to be a wicked and detestable Coward.

68. When this fatal Butchery at Vacca reached Metellus's Ears, pensive for a
while, he retired from Company. But when his wrath and sorrow once were
interblended he hastens withal expedition to revenge the Outrage. To that
purpose, he draws forth the Legion that wintered with him, and as many of the
Numidian Horse as he could, just about Sunset. The next day; about One in the
Morning, he arrived at a certain Valley surrounded with little Hillocks: there
he rests his Soldiers tired with a long Nights march, and murmuring to go any
farther: but he gave 'em good words, told 'em that Vacca lay not above a mile
off; that it was their duty to endure patiently the remainder of their Toil,
until they had fully revenged the Deaths of their Fellow-Citizens, the bravest
but most unfortunate of Men: and then largely lays before 'em the Temptations
of Plunder. And having thus inspired 'em with new Courage, he places his Horse
in Front, and causes his Foot to March in close Order, and to hide their Ensign.

67. The Vaccensians when they perceived an Army marching toward 'em, at first
believing (as indeed it was) that Metellus was at hand, shut up their Gates;
but then again, finding no wast committed upon their Lands, and beholding the
Numidian Horse that Marched in the Front, confidently assured it was Jugurth
himself, they poured forth with loud Acclamations to meet him. But then, upon
the Signal given, Horse and Foot fell on pell mell; some put the rabble to the
Sword; others flew to the Gates, while others seized upon the Towers. Thus
provoked Fury and hopes of spoil prevailed above their instant Lassitude. For
the Vaccensians enjoyed the pleasure of their perfidiousness not above two
days: while their City, large and oppulent, becomes a Sacrifice to Plunder or
Revenge. As for Turpilius, who was Governor of the Town, as is before related,
he being Tried by a Council of War, and having little to say for himself, was
by Metellus Condemned to be first well Scourged, and then to have his head
struck off: for he was no more then a That is to say an Italian only. Otherwise
he could not have been whipped by the Portian Law.
Citizen of Collatia.

70. At the same time Bomilcar, by whose persuasions Jugurth began to incline
to that submission, which he afterward through fear abondon'd, being suspected
by the King, and he no less suspicious of him, projected new disturbances; to
seek the Kings destruction by Treachery; Night and Day to tire his restless
thoughts; and lastly after he had tried all ways, he draws into the same
Conspiracy one Nabdalsa, a Nobleman, vastly rich, and greatly beloved in his
Country; who frequently in the Kings absence was wont to Command the Army, and
manage all Affairs, when Jugurth was either weary, or intent upon more
important business: which got him not only great Honor, but infinite Wealth.
Thereupon, by an agreement among themselves, a day is appointed for execution
of the Treason. But how it was to be done was left to time and opportunity.
After this agreement Nabdalsa returns to the Army which he had under his
Charge, and lay near the Winter Quarters of the Romans, to prevent their
wasting the Country without opposition. But he, being terrified with the
Enormity of the Fact, and dissuaded by his fears, and not meeting again
according to appointment, Bomilcar wavering between the eager desire he had to
expedite his Treachery begun, and the dread of his Associates discovery, yet
unwilling to quit his first design for new Contrivancies, by trusty Messengers
sends him a Letter, wherein he upbraids his negligence and irresolution; calls
the Gods to witness by whom he had sworn; admonishes him to beware lest
Metellus's Bribes did not turn to his perdition; tells him withal, that
Jugurth's destruction was at hand; only the Question was, whether he should
perish by theirs or the Courage of Metellus.

71. When these Letters were brought, Nabdalsa by accident, being weari'd with
hard exercise, was a Bed. So that after he had read the Contents, at first a
thousand cares distracted his thoughts, and after that, as is usual with men
disturbed in Mind, sleep seizes him. There attended upon him at that time, a
certain Numidian, that carefully looked after all his business, highly caressed
by him, and partaker of all his Secrets, but the last. Who hearing that a
Letter was brought to his Master, and believing it some business that concerned
him according to his usual Custom went into the Chamber; and as his Master
soundly slept, he takes the Letter, that lay carelessly upon his Pillow, reads
it, and understanding the Treachery, hastens forthwith to the King. Nabdalsa,
waking soon after, and first missing both the Letter and his Servant, then by
his Guards understanding how things stood, immediately he posted after the
Discoverer, thinking to overtake him, but finding that to be labor in vain,
away he goes to Jugurth, and in hopes to make up the breach, tells him, That
what he intended to have done, the perfidiousness of his Servant had prevented;
and with tears in his Eyes, by all the friendship he had for him, and by all
the faithful services he had done him, besought him not to think him Guilty of
so foul a piece of Treason.

72. To which the King, contrary to what he had in his heart, returned a soft
and mild Answer, That Bomilcar and several others, whom he had discovered to be
Confederates in the Conspiracy, having suffered according to their deserts, he
had qualified and subdued his Indignation, that no further trouble might arise
from any farther scrutiny. But from that time forward, Jugurth never enjoyed a
quiet minute day or night. All Persons, Places, Times and Seasons were
suspected by him. All the night long he sculk'd from place to place, beneath
the Majesty of a Prince: in the day time starting out of his slumbers, he would
lay hold of his Sword, and disturb all that lay near him; so like to Madness
were the fears that turmoyl'd his thoughts.

73. Metellus therefore when he was informed by the Fugitives of Bomilcar's
death, and the Discovery of the Conspiracy, makes all the speedy preparations
he could, as for a War but newly begun. And for Marius, daily importuning him
for his dismission, he discharged him, as not deeming a Person that bore him a
Grudge, and otherwise distastful to him, would do him any service. At Rome
also; the Commons understanding what the Letters had dispersed abroad in
reference to Metellus and Marius, entertained with equal violence the Reports
of both. The Generals Nobility, which before was an Honor to him, was now a
disgrace: and the meanness of the other's Parentage procured him favor.
However the Partialities of the Factions were so moderate, as never to question
their Virtues or their Vices. Moreover, the Seditious Magistrates exasperated
the the Common People; in all their Assemblies, they accuse Metellus, as worthy
of Death, but the Courage of Marius they magnify as far above his desert.
Lastly the Rabble were so incensed, that all the Handicraft Tradesmen and
Ploughmen, whose Estates and Credit lay all in their hands, leaving their Shops
and Husbandry never omitted a public Meeting to cry up Marius, postponing the
daily supply of their own Indigences to his Advancement. Thus the Nobility
being cowed and dismayed, the Consulship, after many tempestuous contentions,
is decreed to an Upstart. And after that, the question being put to the People
by L. Manlius Mantinus, whom they would have to carry on the War with Jugurth,
in a full Assembly they commanded Marius.

74. At the same time, Jugurth, having lost his friends, the most of which he
had put to death himself, the rest, part out of fear, had made their peace with
the Romans, or were fled to King Bocchus, knowing that a War could not be
carried on without Assistants, and deeming it dangerous to hazard the fidelity
of Strangers, after he had found his old Acquaintance so unfaithful, was
variously tossed and tormented with unquiet thoughts: neither the Design, nor
the Counsel, nor the sight of any Person could please him: every day he altered
his Commanders, and varied his Marches, sometimes toward the Enemy, sometimes
into the Deserts; Sometimes he looked upon flight as his securest Refuge; and
then again he had some glimmering hopes of success: yet still in doubt, which
less to trust, whither the Courage or Fidelity of his People. And thus which
way soever he turned himself, Adversity still frowned upon him. At length in
the midst of these uncertainties and disastrous Reflections, Metellus shows
himself with his Army. Presently Jugurth marshals his Numidians as the time
would give him leave, and the fight begins. Where the King was present in
Person, there for a while was some resistance; all the rest of his Army, upon
the very first Charge were routed and put to flight; leaving their Ensigns,
their Arms, and a considerable number of their fellows in the Possession of the
Romans. For in all Battles the Numidians were more beholding for their safety
to their Heels then to their Swords.

75. After the loss of the Battle, Jugurth, now more then ever despairing of
success, with the Fugitives and part of his Cavalry, betakes himself into the
Desert; and from thence to Now utterly unknown, and the place of its Situation
forgot.
Thala, a large and stately Town, where most of his Treasure, and all the
costly Wardrobe beonging to his Children lay. Of which when Metellus had
Intelligence, though between Thala and the River adjoining to his Camp, he knew
there was nothing but vast and sandy Deserts for Fifty miles together, yet in
hopes of putting an end to the War, if he could but make himself Master of that
Town, he resolves to break through all the difficulties, and to overcome Nature
her self. To this purpose he orders all the Beasts of Carriage to be laden with
the Baggage, except only flour for ten days, which the Soldiers were to carry
in their Snapsacks: he also makes great Provision of Leathern Bottles and Casks
for his Water: He picks up all the Cattle he can find in the Neighboring
Parts, and them he orders to be laden with an infinite number of wooden
Vessels, which they found in the Numidian Cottages. Moreover he orders the
Borderers that had surrendered themselves after the flight of the King what
quantity of Water he expected at their hands, and appoints 'em a day and place
where they should be ready: and then fills his own Vessels from the River,
which we have already mentioned: and thus furnished with all things necessary,
he Marches directly for Thala. When he came to that place where the Numidians
were Commanded to tarry for him, after he had pitched his Tents and fortified
his Camp, such violent showers of Rain are reported to have fallen on a sudden
from the Sky, that there was Water enough and to spare for the whole Army.
Provisions also were plentiful beyond expectation; in regard the Numidians, as
is usual while the awe of a new Conquest continues, had been extremely double
diligent. Upon the Soldiers, also the Rain had wrought a Superstitious effect,
while the seeming Miracle gave new boldness to their Courage; believing that
now the Immortal Gods took care of their Persons, and favored their
Enterprise; and thus the next day, they arrived before Thala, contrary to
Jugurth's expectation. The Townsmen, who thought themselves secure by reason of
their inaccessible Situation, amazed to see themselves so unexpectedly
surpised, were nevertheless industrious to prepare for stout Resistance, and
with the same alacrity did ours prepare for the Aslault.

76. But Jugurth now believing there was nothing impossible to Metellus, as one
against whose Industry no Arms or Weapons, nor inequality of Ground would
prevail, but had overcome even Nature her self, with his Children, and the
greatest part of his Treasure deserted the Town, and fled away in the Night;
nor did he afterward tarry in any one place above one day or a Night at most.
Nevertheless that he might not seem to abandon the Town, he pretended urgency
of Affairs and new Designs, but indeed because he was afraid of Treason, which
he thought to prevent by a speedy retiring himself: for that such contrivances
of Treachery were hatched by leisure and opportunity. On the other side
Metellus, when he saw the Townsmen resolved to defend themselves, and that the
Town was also strongly fortified as well by Nature as by Art, he entrenches his
Army round about the Walls, and then places his Vines, and Engines in such
places as he thought most proper. Behind them he also raises Bulwarks, and upon
them Towers to desend the Soldiers and Pioneers. On the other side, the
Townsmen labor might and main to frustrate his Approaches, neither was any
thing of Art or Industry omitted on either side. At length after much toil, and
several Combats and Onsets, the Romans, forty days after they sat down before
it, became Masters of the Town only, in regard the Fugitives had set Fire to
the Plunder. For they, when they perceived the Walls began to totter through
the fury of the Battering Rams, and that their Affairs were in a desperate
Condition, carried all their Gold, Silver and other precious movables into the
Kings House, where after they had stupify'd their Senses with Wine and good
Cheer, they set Fire to the House, and burnt themselves and all that was in it,
of their own accords inflicting upon themselves the same punishment, which they
dreaded at the hands of their Enemies.

77. But at the same time that Thala was taken, certain Messengers sent from
Leptis to Metellus, arrived at the Camp, beseeching him to send 'em both a
Garrison and a Governor. That there was one Hamilcar among 'em, a Person of
Noble Extraction, but Factious, who went about to raise disturbances in the
City, and solicited the People to revolt. Neither was the Power of the
Magistrate, nor the Authority of the Law sufficient to put a stop to his
Proceedings: and that unless he made great haste, the Safety of the City, and
their Allegiance to the Romans would be in great danger. For the People of
Leptis at the first beginning of the Jugurthine War, had sent to Bestia the
Consul, and afterward to Rome, requesting Amity and a mutual League. Which
after they had obtained, they continued just and faithful, and whatever they
were commanded by Bestia, Albinus or Metellus to do, they diligently and
sedulously performed; and for that reason the General readily condescended to
their Desires: sending 'em a Garrison of sour Ligurian Cohorts, and C. Annius
for their Governor.

78. This Town was built by the Sidonians, who being forced to abandon their
Native Country by reason of Civil Discord, came by Sea into those Parts; seated
between two vast Banks of Sand, and derives its Name from the Nature of the
Place. For upon the utmost Limits of Africa, two Bays extend themselves not far
distant one from another; unequal in Bigness, but in Nature both alike. The
Parts next the Land are very deep; the other Parts, as the Wind lies, sometimes
deep, sometimes shallow; for when the Sea runs high, and the Wind blows hard,
the Billows drive the Sand and Ouze, together with the massy, loose andamp;
rocky stones before 'em: and thus the whole Surface of the Bottom changes with
the violence of the Wind and Tide: and therefore are they called Syrtes, from
drawing the Stones and Sands from one place to another. The Language of the
City is now quite altered by their vicinity to the Numidians. The most of their
Laws and Religious Ceremonies are Sidonian; the more easily retained, because
they live remote from the King's Court. Besides that beween them and the
inhabited Parts of Numidia, lie vast and unfrequented Deserts.

79. And now since the Affairs of Leptis have drawn us into these Parts, it
will not be amiss to rehearse an Action of two Carthaginian Brethren, of which
the Place it self puts me in mind; there being few that more deserve the
Remembrance of History. At what time the Carthaginians were Masters of the
greatest part of Africa, the People of Cyrene likewise were both powerful and
opulent. The Country between is sandy, and altogether level, not so much as a
River or Mountain to ascertain the Limits of their Territories; which was the
occasion of an outrageous and lasting War between 'em. After many Armies
defeated, many Sea-Engagements with great Loss on both sides, when they had
almost ruined one another, fearing at length, both Victors and Vanquished,
their becoming a Prey to a Third Enemy, they make a Truce, and then an
Agreement, That upon such a certain day they would send their Ambassadors from
home, and wheresoever those Ambassadors met, that Place should be the certain
Bounds of both their Dominions. To this purpose, two Brothers being sent from
Carthage, both called by the Name of Philaeni, they made all the speed they
could; the Cyrenians traveled flowly: but whether it were through negligence,
or by chance, I am not able to say. Yet in those Places a contrary Wind is no
less troublesome to a Traveller then at Sea. For when Tempestuous Gusts blow
hard, and brush those level Sands, naked of all manner of Coverture, the Dust
andamp; Pebbles so terribly molest the Sight and Faces of Travelers, that not
daring to open their Eyes, they are no longer able to proceed in their Journey.
Howere it were, the Cyrenians finding they had loyter'd behind, and fearing
Capital Punishment for their Negligence, at their Return, quarell'd with the
Carthaginians, and accused 'em of setting forward from home beford their Time;
made a hideous Bustle, ann resolved whatere it cost 'em, not to reture home
Losers. Whereupon, when thy Carthaginians proffered to accept of ane Condition
that was but reasonable, thr Greeks made this Proposal, That eithes the
Carthaginians should suffer themselve to be buried alive in that Place which
they claimed for the Limits of their Empire, or else upon the same Condition,
That they would travel forward as far as they thought fit. Whereupon the
Philaeni, accepting the Proposal, surrendered themselves and their Lives for
the Good of the Commonwealth, and were buried alive without more ado. In
remembrance of which pious Act, the Carthaginians erected Altars, which they
consecrated to the Memories of the Two Brethren, besides other Honors which
were decreed 'em at home. Now I return to the Matter in hand.

80. Jugurth, after the Loss of Thala, thought nothing sufficiently secure
against the Conduct of Metellus; and therefore crossing vast Deserts, with a
small Retinue, at length he comes to the Getulians, a fierce and barbarous sort
of People, and at that time unacquainted with the Roman Name. Of these, he
musters together a vast Multitude, and by degrees accustoms 'em to keep their
Ranks, to follow their Ensigns, to obey Commands, and several other Points of
Military Discipline. Moreover, by great Gifts and larger Promises he procutes
the Favor of such as had the Ear of King Bocchus, and by their Assistance
addressing himself to the King, he persuades him to undertake a War against the
Romans. Which Bocchus was the more easily inclined to do, in regard that at the
beginning of the Jugurthine War he had sent his Ambassadors to Rome, to desire
a League and Friendship with the Romans. Which Overture, most advantageous at
the beginning of that War, some few obstructed, blinded with Covetousness, and
according to their usual Custom, putting all things to Sale, both honest and
dishonest. Besides, Jugurth but a little before had married the Daughter of
Bocchus. But that same Tie of Relation is little valued among the Moors and
Numidians; because they marry several Wives, some Ten, and others more,
according to their Estates, and Princes consequently a far greater Number: So
that being thus distracted with variety, the King advances none to his Society
particularly, but looks on all as equally vile, and equally inferior.

81. Therefore at the Rendezvous by both appointed, both Armies meet; and there
both Princes giving and taking mutual Oaths of Fidelity and Constancy, Jugurth
in a set Speech, the more to exasperate Bocchus, tells him, That the Romans
were unjust, immensely covetous, the common Enemies of all Mankind; That they
would make the same Pretenses serve for an occasion of War with Bocchus as with
him, and other Nations, Ambition of Rule; as having a perfect Antipathy against
Monarchs. That at present Himself; a little before the Carthaginians, and King
Perseus were the Objects of their Fury; and that hereafter the Power and
Opulency of any Prince would be a sufficient Provocation for the Romans to
quarrel with him. This said, away they bend their March for Cirta, for that
Metellus there had stowed his Booty, Captives and his Baggage. Thence Jugurth
considered, That either the taking of the Place would be worth his while; or if
the Romans attempted to relieve it, he should have the opportunity to fight
'em. For it was his Policy, to make haste; to engage Bocchus beyond the Hopes
of Peace, lest by delay his Mind might vary, to accept of any Conditions rather
then enter into a War.

82. But the General so soon as he had Intelligence that there was a League
between the two Kings, would not rashly, not upon every slight occasion proffer
Battle, as he was wont to do after he had overthrown Jugurth; but having
fortified his Camp not far from Cirta, there he waits the coming of the Kings,
believing it his wiser course to fight upon Advantage, after he had made Trial
of the Courage of the Moors, as being an Enemy with which he had never yet
engaged. In the mean time he had Advice by Letters from Rome, that the Province
of Numidia was given to Marius: for he had heard before that he was elected
Consul. The News of which so strangely moved him beyond all measure, and put
him so beside himself, that he could neither refrain from Tears, nor moderate
his Tongue: a Man so excellent and so accomplished in all other things, yet not
able to brook his inward Vexations. Which some attributed to his Pride, others
to the Generosity of his Naturet that could not suffer an Affront: but many to
his Indignation, that the Victory now as good as won, should be wrested out of
his Hands. But we are satisfied, that Marius's Honor more tormented him, then
the Injury done to himself, and that he would not have taken it so impatiently,
had the Province when taken from him, been bestowed upon any other then Marius.

83. Metellus therefore sick of this Distemper, and because he deemed it a
folly for him to procure Triumphs for another at the haxard of his own Life,
sends Ambassadors to Bocchus, to caution him, how he quarreled with the People
of Rome, without any provocation: That now he had a fair Opportunity to obtain
the League and Alliance which he had before desired, and which would be far
more advantageous to him then War; That though he might rely upon his great
Power, yet 'twas not the safest way to hazard Certainties for Uncertainties;
That a War was easily begun, but not so soon ended; That the Beginning and
Conclusion of it were not at the disposal of the same Person, That any Coward
might begin a War, but the End of it was at the pleasure of the Victor only;
and therefore that he should consult his own, and the welfare of his Kingdom,
and not adventure his flourishing Prosperity in the same Bottom with Jugurth's
Misfortunes. To which the King in mild and gentle Terms returned for Answer,
That Peace was his desire, only he pitied the miserable Condition of Jugurth;
so that if he might be included in the Articles, all things would be soon
concluded. Again the General in Answer to Bocchus's Demands, sends other
Commissioners; some things he approved, others he refused; and thus by sending
to and fro, Time wasted, and the War was spun out without a Blow struck, to the
great satisfaction of Metellus.

84. But Marius, as I said before, being made Consul by the vehemence and
tumultuous Affection of the Commonalty, so soon as the People had commanded him
to undertake the Province of Numidia, if before he hated the Nobility, now he
began to show himself much more fierce and domineering; sometimes affronting
particular Persons, sometimes all in general; boasting that he had carried the
Consulship from Them, as the Spoils of a Conquered Enemy; casting forth many
other Expressions, great of himself, but full of bitter Sarcasms in derision of
their Honor. In the mean time his chiefest Care was to make ample provisions
of all things needful for the War, to require a Re-inforcement of the Legions;
to demand Aid of all the Neighboring Princes and People in Alliance with the
Romans; to cull out of Latium all the stoutest persons he could pick, most
known to himself in particular Services, few by Report; and by fair Words and
Promises to procure all the old Soldiers that had been discharged upon the
score of Age and long Service, to resume their Arms, and accompany him in the
Expedition. Nor durst the Senate, though they mortally hated his Demeanor,
contradict him in any thing; but joyfully decreed him all Supplies, whatever he
demanded, in hopes that the Commonalty when they came go be pressed, would
refuse to serve, and so that Marius would lose the Fruits of the War, or the
Affections of the Vulgar. But it fell out quite otherwise. For such an eager
desire of going with Marius, had possessed the greatest part, while every man
believed he should return enriched with Plunder; and victorious home, that
these Considerations and Expectancies dragged them headlong after the Consul;
besides that, Marius did not a little inflame their Courages with a set Speech.
For after all his Demands were decreed him according to his hearts desire, and
he had completed his Musters, as well to curry Favor with the Commons, as to
fret and gall the Nobility, he summoned an Assembly of the People, where he
thus delivered himself.

I am well assured, most worthy Romans, that most men do not observe the same
Method in procuring Places of highest Trust at your hands; or manage 'em after
the same manner when obtained. At first, they are industrious, humble and
moderate; then waste their days in Sloth and Pride; but I am of vanother
humor. For by how much the whole Commonwealth is of greater value then a
Consulship, or Praetorship, with so much the greater Care ought the one to be
governed, then the other eagerly su'd for. Nor am I ignorant how great a burden
I bear upon my Shoulders through your obliging favor. To provide for War, to
be frugal of the public Treasury, to compel those to bear Arms, whom you are
unwilling to offend, to have an Eye upon all things both at home and abroad;
and to discharge all these duties among so many envious, thwarting, and
factious Spirits, is a task, most worthy Romans, far more difficult, then most
men are aware of. Nevertheless if others miscarry or commit any foul
Misdemeanor, the Antiquity of their Descent, the famous Exploits of their
Ancestors, the Wealth of their Kindred and Relations, multitude of Tenants and
Followers, all these things are their Security and Protection, while my
Relyance is only upon my self: so that of necessity I must support my self by
my Valor and my Innocence; since all other Dependances of mine are weak and
inconsiderable: And this I likewise understand, most worthy Romans, that the
Eyes of all Men are fixed upon me; that good and just Men love me; as one whose
Actions have tended to the good of the Public benefit; only the Nobility ly at
lurch to procure my disgrace. For which reason it behooves me the more
industriously to labor, that you be not deceived, and that They may be
disappointed. From my Childhood until now, I have hitherto so lived, as to be
inured to all sorts of Hardship and all manner of dangers. What before your
favors bestowed, I acted gratis, it is not my design, most worthy Romans, now
to forego, as having received my wages. It Is a difficult Thing for such Men to
tempt their passions in great Authority, who only to advance Ambitious ends
dissembled Honesty: but in Me, that have always lead my Life in virtuous
Exercises, to do good is now by Custom become a second Nature. You have
commanded me to wage War with Jugurth, a thing which the Nobility took most
hainously. I beseech you to consider with your selves, whether you think it
proper to alter your Resolutions, or to send some one culled out from this same
Crowd of Nobility, a Person of ancient Descent; a Person whose Family is
honored with many Statues, but himself a Man of no Conduct or Experience; such
a one as being ignorant what he has to do in such a weighty undertaking, shall
tremble, make a bustle, and at length choose out some paltry Confident, to be
his Instructor and Adviser. For so it generally falls out, that He whom you
have ordered to Command, is to seek for another to command himself. Yet I could
tell you of some Men, most worthy Romans, who after they have been chosen
Consuls, have then began to study the Actions of their Ancestors, and the
Military Precepts of the Greeks: Preposterous People. For the knowledge of
Government in time succeeds Election, but in reality and practice ought to
precede it. Compare me now, most worthy Romans, an Upstart of Yesterday, with
their presumptuous Pride. What they are wont to hear and read, part of these
things my self has seen, and others personally performed: what they have learnt
from their Books, the same have I by Military duty. They contemn my sudden
Rise; and I their Cowardice. They upbraid me with my Fortune, I them, with
their Enormities. Though I believe one Nature common to us all, Yet I esteem
the stoutest to be still most Generous and Noble. So that if the Question could
be put to the Ancestors of Albinus, or Bestia, which they would have rather
chosen for their Offspring me or them, what think ye would be their Answer,
but that they desired the best of Children? Therefore while they debase Me,
they throw the same Contempt upon their Ancestors; who raised their Original
Nobility, like my self, by their Virtues. They envy my Honor; let 'em also
envy my Innocence, the Hardship and the Dangers I have undergone. But Men
corrupted with Pride, so lead their Lives, as if they disdained your Honors;
but sue for 'em, as Persons that had always lived uprightly and justly.
Certainly they are mistak'n, who expect at the same time to enjoy two such
contrary satisfactions, the delights and pleasures of sloathful Ease, and the
rewards of Virtue. And when they make Speeches either to your selves or in the
Senate, spend the greatest part of their Time in magnifying their Ancestors,
believing themselves the more famous for repeating their loud Achievements;
whereas quite the contrary, the more Illustrious was their Renown, the more
sordid and degenerate are they. For to say truth, the Renown of Ancestors is a
Light that shines upon their Posterity, and suffers not their Evil deeds to be
obscured in Darkness. This is a thing I want, most worthy Romans; but that
which is more noble, I can speak of my own Actions to my self. Now consider,
how unjust they are. What they arrogate to themselves from the Virtue of
others, they will not allow me for the sake of my own: because forsooth I have
no Statues, because my Nobility is but of Yesterday; which certainly is more
worthy for me to have won, then for them to have corrupted. I am not ignorant,
that were they now to answer me, they have Eloquence enough, and would be
flourishing with their lofty strains and high flying Language. But
understanding how in all places, for this your favor conferred upon me, they
wound and tear both mine and your Reputation, I could not refrain speaking my
mind; least any one should traduce my Modesty as an effect of Guilt. Though in
my Opinion, these Orations can do me no prejudice. For if true, they must speak
well of me; if false, my Life and Manners evince the contrary. But because your
Consultations and Decrees are accused, because you have vouchsafed me the
highest Honor, and the most important of all our present Affairs; I beseech ye
consider over and over again, whether you have any cause to repent. It Is true,
I cannot, as a security and pledge for my worth, produce the Statues, or
Records of the Triumphs and Consulships of my Ancestors: but if need require, I
can show ye Spears, Ensigns The reward of a Horseman, that dismounted his
Adversary.
Gold Chains, and other such like Military guerdons, besides several Scars in
my Body. These are my Statues, this is my Nobility, not left, but which I have
purchased by Inheritance, with many hardships and dangers. My words perhaps are
not so Elaborately studied: That I value not. Virtue sufficiently displays it
self; but words want artifice to fucus over vile and shameful Actions. Neither
did I ever learn Greek. For I had no desire to learn a Language that so little
contributed to reform the Vices of those that had it so readily at their
Tongues end. But I am learned in those things that are much more beneficial to
the Commonwealth; I know how to fight an Enemy, to take Towns, to fear nothing
but Infamy; to endure cold and heat; to lie upon the Ground; and at the same
time to undergo both want and labor. This Learning also I shall teach the
Soldiers: neither shall I harrass them with hard and continual Duty, and yet
indulge my Self: neither will I purchase my Honor by their Labor. This is a
profitable and civil Government. Whereas to live in ease, and wallow in
Effeminacy thy self, and terrify thy Army with continual rigor, this is to play
the Tyrant not the General. By these Actions and such as these, your Ancestors
immortalliz'd both themselves and the Commonwealth. On which the Nobility
relying, though far different in their Manners, despise Us, with emulation
tracing their renowned steps; and claim from you all Honors as their due and
not by merit: But their lofty Lordships are very much out of the way. Their
Ancestors left 'em all things that were within their Power, Wealth, Statues,
Pedigrees and undying Memories, but they did not leave 'em Virtue, neither
could they. That, is a gift neither to be given or received. They say I am a
Slovenly fellow, and one that wants Breeding; because I know not how to
instruct a Bill of Fare; maintain no Buffoons and Zanies about me, nor give
more Money for a Cook then I do for a Bavly: all which I must confess, most
worthy Romans. For I have been taught by my Father and other venerable Persons
that nicity and spruceness belong to Women; but that toil and labor better
become Manhood: and that all Heroic and generous Spirits, ought to value Fame
above Wealth, and take a greater pride in their Arms then in their Household
Furniture. Therefore let 'em always follow their Pleasures and Delights; let
'em keep their Misses, let 'em Drink and Revel; as they spent their Youth, so
let 'em employ their old Age in Banquets and Riot, devoted to their Bellies;
and the most shameful part of their Bodies; let 'em leave Sweat and Dust,
Industry and Toil to Us, that prefer those hardships far before the effeminacy
of Junketting. But that they will not do: For when unworthy Bruits as they are,
they have dishonored themselves, with all manner of Debauchery, nothing will
satisfy 'em but the Rewards of the Brave and Virtuous. So that Luxury and
Sloth, the worst of evils never prejudice their Adorers, which is a great piece
of Injustice, but frequently prove baneful to the Commonwealth. Now then having
as far as my own Modesty would permit me, though not in so many words as the
heinousness of their abuses required, made answer to the objections of the
Nobility; give me leave to speak somewhat concerning the State of the
Commonwealth. In the first place, most worthy Romans, hope well of Numidia;
You have now removed all those things which hitherto protected Jugurth,
Avarice, ill Conduct and Pride. Then you have an Army there that understands
the Country; but however more Stout then Fortunate. For the greatest part of
'em have been very much harrass'd through the Covetuousness and Rashness of
their Captains. And therefore all you that are arrived at Soldiers Age, labor
with me, take the Commonwealth into your own hands, and let no Man be
discouraged at the Calamity of others, or the foolish Pride of preceding
Generals. I shall be as well your Companion in danger, as your Counselor in
all your Marches and Battles, and take the same care of you as of my self. Nay,
by the Assistance of the Gods, I make no question, but all things are already
ripe for us to share, Victory, Booty, Honor: which though they were doubtful
or remotely distant from our expectations; yet it behooved all good Men to
succor the Commonwealth. For never Sloth raised any Man to Immortality:
neither did ever any Parent wish, that his Children might live eternally, only
that they might live a virtuous and honest Life. I would say more, most worthy
Romans, were it in the Power of words to inspire the Timorous with Valor; for
to the strenuous, I think I have already said enough.

86. This Oration thus Concluded, finding the People all in fury and mad to be
at work, with all imaginable speed he puts his Provision, Money and other
necessaries aboard, and with these Preparations sends away Aulus Manlius
before. In the mean time he falls to listing Soldiers, not according to the
ancient Custom, out of the several Ranks and Degrees of the People, but only
Volunteers, and such as paid neither Scot nor Lot to the Commonwealth. Which
way of proceeding, some imputed to the want of able Soldiers, others to the
Ambition of the Consul, because he was cried up, and advanced by that sort of
People: for to a Man that aspires to Power and Command, the more indigent are
still the fittest Instruments upon several occasions; in regard they have
nothing to care for of their own, and therefore look upon all things to be just
and honest, by which there is any thing to be got. Marius therefore, putting to
Sea, with something a larger Number then was Decreed him, landed in a few days
at Vtica. The Army is delivered over into his hands by P. Rutilius the Legate.
For Metellus avoided the sight of Marius, that he might not see those things
which he could not endure to hear.

87. But the Consul having recruited the Legions and auxiliary Cohorts, marches
into a fruitful Country, where he might be sure to find Booty enough. There he
gave all the Pillage to the Soldiers. This done, he takes in all the Castles
and Towns that were but slightly fortified either by Art or Nature, and least
able to make defense, and has several slight Skirmishes with the Enemy, some in
one place, some in another: and all the while he ordered the raw Soldiers to
stand and look on; to behold the Routed killed or taken; and thereby taught 'em
how the most Valiant were still in most Safety; That the Sword was the only
Protection of their Country, their Liberties, their Wives and Children: and how
Honor, not Riches, was the noblest Aim. Thus in a short time both Raw and
Veteranes became all one, and the Courage of all was equally alike. But the Two
Kings, when they understood of Marius's arrival, retired several ways into the
Fastnesses of the Country. This was Jugurth's Design, in hopes that the Romans
might be surpised so soon as they thought themselves a little more secure. For
that the Romans, like most other People, grew careless and remiss in their
Guards, when once their Fears were over.

88. In the mean time Metellus arriving at Rom^, contrary to his Expectations,
was joyfully received: and so soon as once their Passion was over, equally
beloved as well by the People as by the Senate. But Marius indefatigably and
with extraordinary Prudence minded both his own Business, and the Motions of
the Enemy: he was still considering what was advantageous, what was prejudicial
to both: he had his Spies continually abroad to observe the Marches of the
Kings; thereby to prevent their Designs and Ambuscadoes; suffering no remisness
in his own, nor any security in the Army of his Enemy. By which means he often
met in his Marches with the Getulians and Jugurth ravaging the Territories of
our Allies, whom he as soon defeated, and not far from Cirta, forced the King
himself to leave his Arms behind him. Which being only brave Exploits, but no
way conducing to the Conclusion of the War, he determined to besiege all such
Towns as either through the strength of the Garrison, or the situation of the
Place were of importance to the Enemy, and prejudicial to the Romans. By which
means Jugurth must be despoyled of all his Garrisons if he lay still, or else
must come to a Battle. For Bocchus had often sent him word that he was for his
part desirous of a League and Friendship with the Romans; and that he should
not need to fear any thing of Hostility at his hands. But whether he dissembled
in this particular, to the end his unexpected Onset might give the greater
Blow, or whether out of natural instability of Mind, it were his Custom to make
frequent Exchanges of War and Peace, could never be certainly known.

89. The Consul however, according to his Determination, visits all the Towns
and strong Holds: some he takes by force, some through fear surrender; and
others upon the Offers of large Rewards set open their Gates. At first he dealt
with those that were less considerable, hoping that Jugurth, coming to the
Rescue of his Subjects, would give him the opportunity of a Battle. But
understanding that he was gone a great way off, and busily intent upon other
Affairs, he thought it time to bestir himself in greater and more difficult
Enterprises. On the other side of the Country, beyond several wide and spacious
Deserts, lay a large and strong Town by name Now Capi, lying not far from the
Bay called Golfo di Capes.
Capsa; Of which the Libyan Hercules is said to have been the Founder. The
Inhabitants enjoyed great Privileges under Jugurth, free from Taxes, and
therefore most faithful to him: being not only guarded by their Walls and a
strong Garrison, well furnished with all sort of warlike Ammunition; but much
more by the difficult situation of the Place. For excepting those Fields and
Pastures that lay round about the Town, all the Country round about lay barren,
desert, and unmanur'd, wanting Water, and much infested with Serpents; whose
Fury, like that of all other Creatures, is the more exasperated through
scarcity of Food; besides that, the pernicious Nature of those Serpents is by
nothing more provoked then by Drought. Marius was inflamed with an eager desire
to take this Town, as well for the Service of the War, as for the Difficulty of
the Enterprise: besides that Metellus, highly to his Honor, had won the City
of Thala, not much unlike this Place, both for Strength and Situation; only
that not far from the Walls of Thala there were several Springs: They of Capsa
had but only one Well of Fountain Water; all the Out-parts supplied themselves
as the Rain happened to fall. Which both there, and in all Africa, that lies
remote from the Sea, and more uncultivated, is the more easily endured, for
that the Numidians for the most part feed upon Milk and the Flesh of wild
Beasts, wanting neither Salt, nor any other Sawces to whet their Appetites.
Their Diet only served 'em to prevent Hunger and Thirst, not for Luxury, nor
yet to please their Palats.

90. The Consul therefore having made a full Enquiry into every thing, relying
certainly upon the Favor of the Gods; (for humane Wisdom could never provide
against so many Difficulties; especially there being but small store of Corn in
those parts, in regard the Numidians delight more in Pasturage then Tillage,
and what they had upon the Ground, by the King's Order was secured in their
strong Holds; besides that, the Fields were at that season parched up, without
any Crop at all, for it was toward the latter end of Summer) however he makes
sufficient Provision out of that Plenty which he had; ordering the Auxiliary
Horse to drive before 'em all the Cattle, which they had made Booty of upon
their last Incursions. A. Manlius the Legate, he commands to march with the
Light-Armed Cohorts to Laris, where he had secured his Money for the Soldiers
Pay, and his Provisions, giving out that he would march that way himself within
a few days, and meet him there. And thus concealing his Design, he sets
forward, directly for the River Tana.

91. Upon his March, he made an equal distribution of his Cattle among the
Soldiers, so much to the Foot, and so much to the Horse: of the Hides he
caused Bottles or Water-Bags to be made. This he did, no man knowing his
Design, to prevent the waste of Corn, which was to stand him afterward in
stead. Upon the sixth day, by that time he came to the River, he had an
infinite number of Water-Bags ready made. There pitching his Tents, and
slightly fortifying his Camp, he ordered his Soldiers to their Repast, and
commands 'em to be ready to march so soon as the Sun began to set, leaving all
their Baggage behind, only loading themselves and their Beasts of Carriage with
Water. Then at his time appointed he sets forward, and having marched all
Night, he makes a Halt all the next day. Thus he did the second Night; and the
third Night, long before Daybreak, he came to a Place full of Hillocks, not
above two Miles distant from the Town; where, as privately as he could, he lay
close with all his Army. But in the Morning, when the Numidians, least dreaming
of an Enemy, began to stir abroad about their Occasions, he commands all the
Cavalry, and the swiftest of his Foot to fly to the Town, and seize the Gates.
Immediately he himself followed, strictly commanding the Soldiers to refrain
from Pillage. Which when the Townsmen perceived, their dangerous Condition,
unspeakable Consternation, Calamity unlookt for, and besides all this, a great
part of the Inhabitants without the walls, in the power of the Enemy,
constrained 'em to a speedy Surrender. Nevertheless the Town was laid in Ashes,
andamp; the Numidian Youth were put to the Sword; all others sold, and the
Booty divided among the Soldiers. Which severe Act of the Consul's, against
the Law of Arms, neither his Avarice, nor his Cruelty urged him to commit. But
because so strong a Place that lay so necessary and convenient for Jugurth, was
no less difficult of Access to the Romans: the People fickle and perfidious,
neither to be ^urb'd by Fear, nor kept in Obedience by mild Usage.

92. Marius having thus performed an Exploit so considerable without any loss
of his own Men, as he was great, and in high Repute before, so was he now ten
times greater, and more famous then ever. Not only what he acted with Prudence
and Foresight, but whatever proved by Fortune successful, was all ascribed to
his Virtue and Conduct. The Soldiers under gentle Command, and enriched
withal, extolled him to the Skies: the Numidians dreaded him as if more then
Humane: in a word, both Allies and Enemies believed, that either he was
inspired with a Divine Foresight, or else, that he acted altogether by the
immediate Assistance of the Gods. The Consul therefore upon this Success,
hastens to several other Towns; of which, some he takes after a small
Resistance of the Numidians: others he finds deserted by the Inhabitants,
dreading the sad Fate of the Capsensians, all which he lays in Ashes: nothing
but Slaughter and Lamentation over the whole Country. Thus having made himself
Master of several Places, and most without the Loss of my Roman Blood, he
undertakes another Enterprise, not so toilsom as that of Capsa, yet no less
difficult. Not far from the River Mulucha, which separates the two Kingdoms of
Jugurth and Bocchus, stands a Rocky Mountain, of a prodigious height, in the
midst of a large Plain, upon the Top of which, where there was Space enough,
stood an indifferent Castle; to which there was but one, and that a very narrow
Ascent. For every way else it was by Nature so perpendicularly steep, as if it
had been the Labor of Art and Industry. Which Castle, because it was one of
the Places where the King's Treasure lay, Marius resolves to win, whatever it
cost him. But here his Fortune befriended him above his Conduct: For the Castle
was furnished with a strong Garrison, and all manner of warlike Ammunition and
Provisions, a Fountain of Water, but no way assailable by the help either of
Bulwarks or Towers, and as it were, standing in defiance of all sorts of Engines
whatever: besides, the Passage to it was narrow and steep on both sides. The
Vines by which we make our Approaches, were brought and set up with vast Labor
and Danger; for no sooner were they raised to something of perfection, but they
were presently destroyed with Fire and Stones. The Soldiers could neither
stand to their Labor, by reason of the steepness of the Place; nor work secure
under the covertures; they that were most forward and courageous, were slain or
wounded, others were dismayed and discouraged.

93. Marius therefore after the Toil and Labor of many days consumed in vain,
perplexed and pensive, began to consider whether he should draw off, or wait a
favorable opportunity, since his Fortune had been hitherto so prosperous.
Which while he was pondering for several days and Nights together, chafed and
fuming in his Mind, by chance a certain Ligurian common Soldier in the
Auxiliary Cohorts, going out of the Camp to fetch water, not far from that side
of the Castle which was opposite to that part where the Assaults and Defenses
were made, spied several Periwinkles creeping among the Rocks. Of which when he
had tasted one or two, desirous to have more, he was got up by degrees, ere he
knew where he was, to the top of the Rock; where observing nothing but Silence
and Solitude, after the custom of humane Curiosity, desirous to see what he
never had seen before, he stands and listens. By chance there grew in the same
place a Holm-Tree, which had made its way through the Stones, stooping forward
at first, then winding back, and shooting up to a considerable height, as it
is the Nature of all Vegetables. By the help of whose Boughs, and the Stones
jutting out from the Wall, the Ligurian clamber'd so high, that he discovered
the whole Platform of the Castle, and perceived how the Defendants were all
busily employed where the Assailants forced 'em to make Resistance. After he
had thus taken a sufficient view of all things that he thought requisite, he
returns the same way he got up, not in haste, but leisurely observing and
taking notice of every Particular conducing to his purpose. This done, away he
comes to Marius, informs him of the Accident, and advises him to attempt the
Castle on that side; and promises to lead the way, and be foremost in the
Danger. Immediately Marius sends away with the Ligurian some of those that were
then present, to examine the Truth of his Information; who, according to their
several Fancies, upon their Return, reported the Enterprise, some to be easy;
others, difficult. However, the Consul began to pluck up a good heart; and
liking the Design, picks out of all, his Trumpets and Cornets, five of the
nimblest and most active he could meet with; and appoints 'em for their Guard
four Centurions with their Companies, commanding 'em to follow the Ligurian's
Instructions: and appoints the next day to put the Enterprise in execution. And
now the time appointed being come, and all things fixed, away they go to the
Place: at what time the Centurions, according to the Directions of their Guide,
changed both their Arms and their Apparel, and went with their Heads and Feet
bare; to the end they might the better look about 'em, and clamber with more
ease. Their Swords and their Targets, which after the Numidian Fashion, were of
Leather, as well for Lightness, as to prevent their ringing against the Stones,
they tied at their Backs. The Ligurian also clambering foremost, fastened Ropes
to the Stones and Stumps of Trees and Shrubs that grew about the Rock, for the
Soldiers to ease themselves in climbing: others that were not so well versed
at the sport, he pulled up by the Hand; and where the Ascent was more steep
then ordinary, he ordered 'em to climb without their Arms, and carried their
Arms after 'em. Those Places which seemed most difficult and dangerous he
chiefly tried; and by often ascending and descending the same way, then by and
by giving room, and stepping to another place, he encouraged the rest. At
length long and very much tired, they got to the Castle, as it were abandoned
on that side; for that all the Garrison, as at other times, were facing the
Enemy. Marius, when he understood what Progress the Ligurian had made, though
he had plied the Numidians all that day, yet then encouraging his Soldiers,
appearing foremost himself without the Approaches, andamp; running under the The
Testudo was when a Body of Soldiers serri'd to their close Order, andamp;
stooping with their Bodies, covered their Backs with their Shields, to bear off
the Stones and other Instruments of Mis. chief that were thrown upon 'em: and
then moved forward under that shelter like a Tortoise in her Shell.
Testudo, against the Wall, not only shook the Foundations below, but with his
Slings, and other Missive Engines, kept the Enemy hard at work above. On the
other side, the Numidians having often burnt and destroyed the Roman Vines,
were grown so hardy, that as if they had no need of Walls, they would
frequently in the daytime leap over the Battlements upon the Rock, and
standing there, defy the Romans, call Marius Coward in his own hearing, and
threaten the Soldiers to make 'em Jugurth's Slaves, with all the Bravado's of
prosperous Insolence imaginable. At last, while Assailants and Defendants were
eagerly exasperated in sight, the one contending for Conquest and Honor, the
other for Safety of their Lives, on a sudden the Trumpets and Cornets began to
sound behind their Backs; and first the Women and Children that came to be
Spectators of their Husbands and their Fathers Manhood; then such as were next
the Walls, and lastly, the whole Company, as well those that were armed, as
those that had none, betook themselves to flight. Which the Romans observing,
charged more furiously with their Slings and Engines, some they wounded, others
they slew, and made Steps of their dead Bodies out of eagerness to ascend the
wall: neither was there any one that made a stop for greediness of Spoil. Thus
Fortune found a Salvo for the Rashness of Marius, and procured him Honor from
the Error of his Conduct.

95. In the heat of this Action, L. Sylla the Questor, arrived at the Camp,
with a great Body of Cavalry, which he was left at Rome to raise in Latium, and
among the Confederate Allies. Now therefore since the opportunity puts us in
mind of so great a Personage, it will not be amiss, briefly to say something of
his Conditions and Education. For we shall have no occasion in any other place
to make any farther mention of his Actions. Besides that L. Sisenna, who of all
others that have written of him, has with greatest Industry and Fidelity
pursued his History, seems to have been too sparing of his Commendations. Sylla
therefore, was descended from a Noble Patrician Family, but gone to decay, and
near extinct, through the Sloth of his Ancestors. He was equally skilled and
accomplished both in the Greek and Latin Learning; of a lofty Courage, addicted
to his Pleasures, but more greedy of Honor; luxurious at his vacant hours, yet
his Pleasure never took him off from Business; only he might have better
consulted his Reputation in the choice of a For he married Valeria, one that
over-wantonly courted him in the public Theater.
Wife. He was eloquent, subtle, nothing coy of his Friendship, but easily
familiar; but for dissimulation, and disguising his own Thoughts, the Depth of
his Wit was incredible: liberal in his Gifts, but especially of his Money.
Before the Civil War, the most happy Person living, his Fortune never
surmounted his Industry; so that it was a Question which many could never
decide, Whether he were more Fortunate or Virtuous. For as for his latter
Actions, I am at a loss whether to repeat 'em with greater Grief, or greater
Shame.

96. Sylla therefore when he arrived in Africa, and came once to be conversant
in Marius's Camp; in a short time proved to be one of the most sedulous and
expert of all the Roman Commanders. Moreover, he treated the Soldiers affably
and kindly: liberal to many that asked him, to others of his own accord: in
those things much more forward and willing then to pay his own Debts. He never
demanded whatever he lent: making it his Study, rather that others should be
beholding to him. His Custom was to jest and be merry, and sometimes to be
serious with the meanest. He loved to be present with the Soldiers in all
their Duties of working, marching and watching: neither would he all the while,
according to the Custom of depraved Ambition, speak ill either of the Consul,
or any other Person. Neither in Direction or Execution of any Orders, would he
suffer any man to be before him, but was generally the foremost himself. And
these were the Ways and Means by which he endeared himself both to Marius and
won the Affections of the Soldiers.

97. In the mean time Jugurth, after he had lost Capsa, and several other
Towns, strongly fortified and of great importance to his Affairs, besides a
vast Treasure, sent Messengers to Boccbus, to hasten his Army into Numidia; for
that now was the Time to decide the Controversy by Battle one way or other.
But when he perceived him to procrastinate and spin out the time, then full of
doubts, he began to consider the Advantages of Peace and War; and as before,
renewed his former Practices of Bribing his chiefest Favorites. He also
promises the Moor himself a Third Part of Numidia, upon Condition the Romans
were either chased out of Africa, or that the War were so concluded, that he
might enjoy the full extent of his Kingdom. With this Temptation Bocchus
allured, hastens to Jugurth with a numerous Power of Men. Thus the two Armies
being joined, as Marius was Marching to his Winter Quarters, about what time,
scarce the tenth part of the day remained behind, they fell on furiously,
believing the approaching Night, would be to them a Security were they
overthrown; or if the Victors, could be no Impediment, because they were well
acquainted with the Country: on the other side assuring themselves, that
whether Victors or vanquished, the dark Night would be equally troublesome to
the Romans. So that the Enemy was upon him ere the Consul had Intelligence of
the approach of the Army; and before the Legions could be Embattell'd, or the
Baggage disposed of and secured; before he had time to give the Signal, or give
out his Orders, the Moors and Getulian Cavalry had charged our Men, not ranged
in order, nor drawn up in warlike manner, but at a venture in single Troops and
scattering Parties. The Romans thus surpised with sudden Fear, and
unprovided, yet calling to mind their wonted Valor, some betook themselves to
their Arms, others defended their fellows while they made themselves ready: The
Cavalry mounted, and hastened to stop the Enemies Career; so that the Fight
looked rather like a Rancounter of Free-booters then a Battle; observing neither
Ensigns nor Ranks, Horse and Foot mixed one among another; some giving ground,
others being slain: many, while stoutly engaged with their Adversaries, had the
Enemy upon their Backs; neither Valor nor Steel were a sufficient Protection;
for that the Enemy was more numerous, and made their Attacks on every side. For
remedy whereof the Romans as well Veteranes as the raw Soldiers being
instructed by their fellows, as Chance or Place gave them an opportunity, threw
themselves into Oval Bodies, and so facing the Enemy every way substain'd their
Fury with a much more safe resistance. All this while, Marius, thus hard put to
it, was nothing at all dejected, nor showed the least sign of fear more then at
any other time; but with his own Lifeguard which he had made choice of, not
for favor but for their Bravery and Stoutness, flew from one place to another,
relieving those that were over power'd, and sometimes charging the Thickest of
the Enemy, instructing 'em by acts of personal Examples; since as a General all
Commands were vain in such a terrible Confusion. And now by this the day was
well nigh spent, and yet the Enemy abated nothing of their Fury, but according
to Jugurth's instructions relying upon the darkness of the night, rather
pressed on more eagerly. When Marius taking resolutions from the necessity of
his Affairs that he might have a place of Retreat orders his men to take
possession of two small Hills that lay close adjoining one to another. Upon the
least of these Hills, which was not spacious enough to pitch his Camp, there
was a large Fountain of Water; the other more for his purpose, for that being
high and steep, it wanted the less fortification. Therefore upon the first he
commanded Sylla to keep a strict Guard with the Cavalry all the Night; He
himself takes care to rally his Men, and to disingage 'em from among the Enemy
who were in no less confusion then the Romans. Which done he retreats in a full
Body to the second Hill. The two Kings being thus discouraged by the difficulty
of the place from making any farther attempts however would not leave the
Consul so, but lay all Night surrounding both the Hills with their extended
Multitude. All the Night long the Enemy made great and many Fires, were merry
and jocond, skipp'd and daunc'd about and made several strange noises with
their feet and throats, after their Barbarous Custom. The Kings themselves
were pufft up, and full of high thoughts, because they had not been constrained
to fly, but like Victors lay Besieging the Romans. But all these things were
easily descernible by the light of the Fires to our Men from the higher ground,
and gave them no small encouragement.

99. Marius therefore emboldened to see the Enemies defect of Discipline,
commands a most exact Silence in his own Camp; not suffering the Trumpets to
sound upon relieving the Watches, as they were wont to do, but as soon as Day
began to peep, when the Enemy tired with their Jollity were gone to their
repose, and all in a profound Sleep, of a sudden he causes all the Tributary
Trumpeters, and all the Trumpeters of the several Cohorts, Troops and Legions
all to sound together, and the Soldiers at the same time with loud shouts and
Military clamours to rend the Air, and pour out of the Camp upon the Enemy. On
the other side, the Moors and Getulians, wakened with the unusual and horrid
noise, could neither fly, nor stand to their Arms; neither resolve nor prevent.
In such a manner were they stupify'd and har'd with noise, clamor, tumult,
terror, fright, amazement, want of succor, and the Inundation of the Enemy:
and at length all routed and put to flight; most of their Arms and Military
Ensigns taken, and more slain in that Battle then in all the Encounters before:
for being scarce awake, and scared out of their Wits, they had not sense enough
to fly.

100. Marius thus a Victor, according to his first determination, hastened to
his Winter Quarters, which he resolved to take up in the Sea Towns, for the
convenience of Provision. Yet in the height of his success never the more
negligent or puffed up, but as if still the Enemy had been in the field he
Marched with his Army divided into four Battalions. Upon the Right-wing Sylla
lead the Horse; the Left was guarded by A. Manlius with the Slingers and
Darters, and a Cohort of Ligurians. In the Front and Rear he placed the
Tribunes with certain Bands of light Armed foot. The Fugitives, as being little
valued, and exactly acquainted with the Country, were put upon the Forlorns to
to observe the Motion of the Enemy. The Consul, confined to no Place, as if
there had been no other Overseers but himself, had an eye every where, was
present with all, praised or reproved according to Desert. He rode about
completely armed, and made it his business to keep the Soldiers from
straggling; no less vigilant, then as if he had been upon a March, to fortify
his Camp, to set the Sentinels to order what Cohorts, what Auxiliary Horse
should be upon the Guard without the Trenches, which to watch upon the
Brest-works, within the Fortifications; and go the Rounds in Person, not so
much mistrusting disobedience of his Commands, but that the Soldiers might be
the more willing to endure hardship, when they beheld the General himself so
painfully sharing their laborious Toil. And indeed Marius may be said both then
and at other times, during the Jugurthin War, to keep his Army in awe rather by
shame, then severity of Punishment, which many attributed to his Ambition; but
others more soft in their censures, ascribed to his being enured to Hardship
from his Cradle, which made him take pleasure in those things, which others
looked upon as Tribulations. However it were, this is certain, He was no less
profitable and successful to the Commonwealth, then if he had been the severest
Commander in the World.

101. Upon the fourth day, being not far from Cirta, the Scouts came all
thundering into the Body of the Army: which was a certain sign the Enemy was at
hand. But because they had been all several ways, and all brought the same
Intelligence, the Consul uncertain which way to Embattel his Army, would not
change any thing of his Order, as being already prepared to attend the Enemies
coming with a Front every way.

By this means he disappointed Jugurth's Expectations; for having divided his
Forces into four Battalions, he made full account, that one or other of the
Four, would have an opportunity to fall upon the back of the Enemies. In the
mean time Sylla, who was first Attacqu'd, after some few Exhortations to his
Men, with several single Troops, joining Horse head to Horse head, he and
several others, charge the Moors: the rest keeping firm in their Places, cover
their Bodies from the Darts, that were flung at a distance; and if any of the
Enemy came within their reach, he was sure to pay for his venturing. While the
Horse were thus engaged, Bocchus with the Forces which his Son Volux had
brought to reinforce his Army, and which were not in the last Fight, having
stayed by the way, charges the Rear of the Romans. Then was Marius in the
Front, where Jugurth found him play with a numerous Body; but the Numidian,
understanding that Bocchus had charged the Romans in the Rear, privately with a
small Company conveighs himself to the Foot, and their cries out in Latin,
which he had learnt to speak at Numantia, that our Soldiers fought to no
purpose, for that he had slain Marius but a little before with his own hand,
and at the same time brandished his Sword all besmeared with the blood of a
Common Trooper, whom after he had long fought him hand to hand, at length he
slew. Which when the Soldiers heard, they were more astonished at the Cruelty
of the Fact, then the Relation of the Messenger: at what time the Enemy
resuming fresh Courage, press in more eagerly upon the Romans. And indeed they
were within a very little of betaking themselves to their Heels, when Sylla,
returning from the Rout of those which he first encountered, and charging the
Moors in Front, put Bocchus immediately to flight. As for Jugurth, while he
labors to support his own Men, and to keep the advantage of a Victory almost
gained, being surrounded on every side by the Horse and all his followers
slain, breaks through the thickest of his Enemies alone. Marius in the mean
time, having put the Horse to flight, hastens to the Relief of his own Men, who
as he was told were ready to give ground. But then the Enemy being utterly
broken and routed on every side, hideous was the Tragic Spectacle that
presented it self over all the Field; Pursuing, flying, killing, taking: many
wounded, bleeding, striving and staggering along, till fainting, down they
fell: the surface of the Earth, as far as you could see, all strewn with
Weapons, Arms, and mangled Carcases; and all the spaces between filled up with
clotted gore.

102. Thus the Consul after two great Victories obtained, arrived at Cirta:
where about five days after the last Battle, he was attended by Ambassadors
from Bocchus, who in the Name of the King their Master, request the General to
send him two Commissioners of his most faithful Friends, with whom he had a
desire to treat of several things that concerned both his own and the welfare
of the Roman People. Thereupon the Consul presently orders L. Sylla, and A.
Manlius to go along with the Ambassadors. These Gentlemen though they were sent
for by the King, and ought first to have heard his proposals, yet they were
clearly for speaking first, either to abate his Courage, if they found him
incensed against the Romans, or else render him more pliable to their
Conditions, if they perceived him inclinable to Peace. Whereupon Sylla, to
whose Eloquence, not his years, Manlius gave the precedence, in few words
delivered himself to this effect.

King Bocchus, more then ordinary has been our joy, for that the Gods have
inspired the Breast of such a Man, at length rather to make choice of Peace
then War, nor any longer to contaminate thy Dignity, by intermixing Interests,
thy self the best of Men with the worst of Caitiffs, Jugurth: while we at the
same time are freed from a bitter necessity of prosecuting as well Thee
beguiled and led astray, as Him debauched in Villainy, Besides that from the
very Infancy of their State, the Romans have always deemed it much more noble
to covet Friends then Slaves: as thinking it more safe to Rule the wilingly
submissive, then such as they constrained to forced Subjection. Nor can any
Mortal reap a greater benefit from our Friendship then thy self: as being in
the first place far remote: So that the occasions of injury can seldom or never
happen, but the opportunities of mutual assistance will be as equally balanced
as if we were near at hand: In the next place we have Subjects enough; but
neither we nor any Potentate living, can boast to have more friends then are
needful. And I wish to Heaven thou had followed those determinations at the
beginning; for certainly by this time thou had reaped far greater Advantages
from the Roman People, then hitherto thou have suffered prejudice. But in
regard that Fortune governs the greatest part of human Affairs, and since it
has been her Pleasure, Thou should make trial as well of our Force as of our
Favor; now, since she affords the Opportunity, make have to embrace it, as
thou have begun, proceed. Thou have many and fair Advantages, to redeem thy
former oversights by succeding Kindnesses. Lastly, let this descend into thy
Breast, that the Roman People were never outdone in Gratitude. For what their
Courage is in War, thou know thy self.

To this Bocchus briefly returns a fair and plausible Answer, in extenuation of
his former Errors, That he did not take Arms with any Hostile design, but only
to secure the Kingdom: for that he could not brook, that Part of Numidia,
whence Jugurth had been expelled, being his own by right of War, should be laid
wast by Marius: besides that having sent his Ambassadors formerly to Rome, his
friendship was rejected; but that now laying aside all past Grudges, with the
good liking of Marius, he would send another Embassy to the Senate. But after
he had obtained leave, the Barbarian altered his Resolutions overrul'd by the
Importunity of his Friends, whom Jugurth understanding of Manlius and Sylla's
being sent to the King, and mistrusting their Errand, had Bribed with great
Presents.

103. Marius in the mean while, haing disposed of his Army into their Winter
Quarters, with the Light Armed Cohorts, and part of the Cavalry takes a swift
March toward the Deserts, to besige the Royal Tower, where Jugurth had placed
all his Fugitives in Garrison. And then again it was, that Bocchus, either
considering with himself what had befallen him in the two last Battles, or else
being better advised by his Friends and Favorites, whom Jugurth had left
unbrib'd; or else scorned his Pensions, out of the vast variety of his Kindred
and Relations, of which he had a numerous Train, he picks five, the most Trusty
and the most able he could make choice of. These he sends his Ambassadors first
to Marius, and from thence, if he thought fit, orders likewise to go in the
same Quality to Rome: with Plenipotentiary power upon any Terms to put an end
to the War, and in all other Matters to act and conclude at their Discretion.
They make have to the Winter Quarters of the Romans. But being met upon the
Road by certain Getulian Free-booters and robbed of all their Equipage, frighted
as they were, and meanly habited, they fly to Sylla's Quarters, whom Marius
upon his March into the Deserts, had left Praetor in his room.

These Men did Sylla treat not as vain and fickle Enemies, but Genteelly and
Bountifully supplied their wants. So that the Barbarians finding Sylla so
munificent and so friendly withal, readily altered their Opinion of the Roman
Avarice. For in those very days many there were that understood not the reason
of expensive Liberality; only a Man was accounted munificent, because his
Bounty seemed his voluntary Act, and all Gifts were looked upon as
Retalliations, or in expectation of Kindness. Therefore they discover Bocchus's
Instructions to Sylla, and withal beseech him to stand both their Friend and
their Adviser. They extol the Strength, the Integrity, and Grandeur of the King
their Master, not omitting any thing that might be advantageous to their
Negotiation, or to gain the good will of the Praetor. Nor did Sylla scruple to
promise 'em all Assistance, but gave 'em full Instructions how to manage their
Affairs, how to behave themselves as well toward Marius, as before the Lords of
the Senate, and thus recruited and directed, they waited about forty days for
the Consuls return.

104. At what time Marius not succeeding in his Design, returned for Cirta;
where being informed of the arrival of the Ambassadors, he sends for them, and
Sylla, together with L. Bellienus the Praetor from Vtica, as also from all other
Parts, for all that were of the Senatorian Degree. In their presence he makes
known the Commands of Bocchus to his Ambassadors, and gives 'em leave to repair
to Rome; but in the mean while the Consul demands a Cessation of Arms. These
Proceedings were approved by Sylla and the greatest Part: some few were more
hot and furious in their Opinions, ignorant of Human Affairs, which being
inconstant and subject to a thousand Accidents, often alter for the worse. At
length the Mows having obtained all their desires, three of 'em set forward
toward Rome with Octavius Bufo, who being Treasurer at War, had brought the
Money into Africa, which was to pay the Army. The other two returned back to
the King; and gave him an account of their Proceedings; in Conclusion highly
magnifying Sylla's great civillity and kindness. At Rome, after the Ambassadors
had submissively confessed the Kings oversights, as being lead away by the
Insinuations of Jugurth, and humbly desired a League and mutual Amity, the
following Answer was returned.

The Senate and People of Rome are mont to be no less mindful of Kindnesses
then Injuries. But as for Bocchus, because they find him Penitent, they pardon
his Offense. A League and Friendship shall be granted him, when he deserves it.

These things being made known to Bocchus, by Letters he desires Marius to send
Sylla to him, that according to his pleasure and good liking, there might be a
final Conclusion of all differences. Thereupon he was dispatched away with a
Guard of Horse and Foot, the Balearic Which were taken from the Islands of
Majorca and Minorca; accounted the best Slingers in the World; for that they
never missed their Aim, and slung their Darts with that force, as if they had
been sent out of an Engine.
Slingers; together with the Archers, and the Pelignian Cohort, with their
Which were only a Sword a Javelin, and a light Buckler.
Light Arms, for expeditions sake: with those slighter Arms as well defensive
as offensive, no less secured, then by Arms of greater Force, from the Darts of
the Enemy, which were as slight and easily avoided. Upon the Road, after they
had traveled five days, of a sudden Volux showed himself in the open Field
with about a Thousand Horse, who riding scattered and without any Order, not
only seemed to be more then they were, but begot a kind of mistrust of Hostile
Treachery both in Sylla and all the rest. Thereupon every one began to make
ready, to fix their Weapons, and put themselves into a Posture of defense.
Something of Fear, but more of Hopes, as being Victors, and to fight against
those whom they had often vanquished. But in the midst of this hurry, the
Vancurriers that scouted before, returning brought word, that all were friends.
Then Volux coming up called to speak with the Questor, and told him, that he
was sent by his Father Bocchus to meet him and attend him as his Convoy. So
that the Moors and Romans joined together and Marched all the next day without
any mistrust one of another. But in the Evening so soon as the Camp was
pitched, Volux with fear and disorder in his Countenance, comes galloping to
Sylla and informs him, that he was ascertained by his Spies, that Jugurth was
at hand, and therefore with great Importunity entreats and beseeches him
privately in the dead of the Night to consult his own safety by speedy flight.
But Sylla with an undaunted Courage denies that he feared the Numidian whom he
had so often vanquished; that he was sufficiently assured of the Valor of his
Soldiers; and though certain destruction star'd him in the face, he would
rather stand his ground; then deserting those that were committed to his
Conduct, by shameful flight endeavor to spare a frail and uncertain Life,
which perchance soon after, sickness might deprive him of. However he follows
his advice to dislodg by Night: and to that purpose orders the Soldiers to
take their Suppers, make a great number of Fires, and at the first Watch
without Noise or Tumult to be ready to March. The next morning by Sun rise, the
Soldiers being weari'd with traveling in the dark, Sylla pitches his Tents;
at what time the Moorish Scouts bring Intelligence, that Jugurth lay within two
Miles before 'em. Which news being spread in the Camp, our Men were not a
little terrified, believing themselves betrayed by Volux, and brought into an
Ambuscado. And some there were who cried out that such a Piece of Treachery
ought not to escape unpunished, but that they should revenge themselves upon
the Traitor with their own hands. But Sylla, though he thought the same,
however he protected the Moor from any Injury: encourages his Men to behave
themselves Valiantly; that it was not the first time a few Courageous and brave
had Fought against a Multitude with Success; that the less they spared
themselves in Battle, the more secure they were; and that it no way became any
Man, who had Arms in his hands to expect safety from his unarmed feet; or in
the midst of certain danger to turn the naked part of his Body toward the
Enemy. After that, invoking the mighty Jupiter to be a witness of the Treachery
and Falsehood of Bocchus, he commands Volux to depart the Camp, as one that
might assist the Enemy. He on the other side with tears in his Eyes, beseeches
the Legate not to have such mistrustful thoughts of him; that there was nothing
of deceit in Bocchus, but that all proceeded from the subtilty of Jugurth, who
had by his Spics discovered his March: and therefore, in regard that Jugurth
had no great Forces with him, besides that all his hopes and welfare depended
upon his Father, desired him to believe the Numidian durst not make any open
Attempt, where the Son of such a Father was present. For which reason he
thought it the best way to March boldly through the middle of his Camp: and
that for his part, he would accompany Sylla alone, either sending his Moors
before, or leaving 'em behind in the same Place. This Counsel, as it happens in
cases of the like nature, was approved, and so marching forthwith, because they
came of a sudden, while Jugurth was doubtful and hesitating what to do, they
passed without any opposition. After that, within a few days they arrived at
their Journeys end.

108. At the same time a certain Numidian, Aspar by Name, was very frequent and
familiar with Bocchus, being sent before by Jugurth, cunningly and closely to
pry into Bocchus's secret Resolutions. Besides him, there was also another,
whose Name was Dabar, the Son of Massugrada, and Kinsman of Massinissa by the
Mother's side (for his Father was the Son of a Concubine) highly caressed and
favored by the Moor, for his many excellent Endowments, whom Bocchus had also
upon many occasions before found very faithful to the Romans. Him therefore he
sends to Sylla, to let him understand, That the King was ready to perform
whatever the Roman People commanded: That he himself should appoint the Day,
the Place and Time for Conference: That he intended to keep all his
Consultations with him entire and private: That he had no reason to be afraid
of Jugurth's Ambassador: for that he was sent for on purpose, to the end the
Common Good might be debated with more freedom; there being no other way to
prevent the Frauds and Wiles of Jugurth. But in my Opinion Bocchus kept the
Treaty afoot both with Romans and Numidians, rather out of a Punic Piece of
Treachery, then upon those Pretenses which he publicly spread abroad: and that
he had frequently Combats in his Mind, whether to deliver up Jugurth to Us, or
Sylla to Him; while his Natural Inclinations pleaded against Us, but his Fears
persuaded for Us. However it were, Sylla made Answer, that he should say little
before Aspar; the rest privately, none or very few being present. He likewise
tells Dabar what Answer he expected. After this, both meeting according to
appointment, Sylla tells the King, That he was sent by the Consul, to know
whether he were for Peace or War. Then the King, as it was agreed between 'em,
desired him to return again the Tenth day after, That he could determine
nothing at that time, but that then he would give him his Answer. Thus both
departed to their several Camps. But when the Night was far spent, Sylla was
privately sent for by Bocchus, and faithful Interpreters made choice of on both
sides. Or rather, Dabar, with consent of both Parties, a Person of clear
Integrity, was sworn to interpret truly between 'em: and then the King thus
began.

110. I never thought it would have come to pass, that being a King, the
Greatest of all within this Continent and of all the most Powerful that I know
of, should ever have been reduced to be obliged to a private Person. And truly,
Sylla, before I knew Thee, I have succored many that su'd to me, others of my
own accord, never in need of Relief my self. This Diminution of my Dignity
which others are wont to lament, makes me rejoice. It is my Happiness to stand
in need of thy Friendship, then which there can be nothing dearer to my Soul.
Of this make Trial: Arms, Men, Money, whatever thou have a mind to, take and
use: and as long as thou liv'st, never think thy Friendship sufficiently
remunerated: which I shall always deem a Debt that never can be repaid: for in
my Opinion it is less dishonorable to a Prince to be overcome by force of
Arms, then in Munificence. Now as to the Affairs of your Republic, in the
behalf of which you here are come to Treat, thus much in short. I never made
War upon the People of Rome, nor ever consented to a War. Only in defense of
the Confines of my Kingdom, the Armed I opposed with Arms. But let that pass:
Continue as you please your selves, the War with Jugurth. I will never so much
as stir over the River Mulacha, the Bounds between me and Micipsa, neither will
I ever suffer Jugurth to pass it. Moreover if there be any thing farther that
you require of me fit for me to grant, or you to ask, you shall not return with
a Repulse.

111. To this Sylla, as to what concerned himself, made Answer concisely and
modestly: in reserence to the Peace, and the Common Affairs, he discoursed at
large. Lastly, He gave the King to understand, that the Senate and People of
Rome would not take it for any obligation what he had last promised, as being
much superior to him both by Sea and Land: That there was something to be done,
that might seem to show him more zealous of their Welfare then his own
Interest. Which he had an Opportunity to do, as having Jugurth in his Power:
who, if he were by himself surrendered up to the Romans, there could not be a
greater Obligation laid upon a grateful People: besides that the League, the
Friendship, and that part of Numidia which he now su'd for, would then be
freely offered him. At first the King made a kind of slight Denial; pleaded
Kindred, Affinity, and the League between 'em: then pretended his Fears of
incurring the Hatred of the People, to whom Jugurth was dear, the Romans no
less odious, should he falsify the Confidence reposed in him. At length
overcome by Importunity, he submits, and promises to do whatever Sylla desired
him. Then they settle all things which were thought necessary to make a show of
including the Numidian within the Peace, which he most earnestly desired, as
being quite weary of the War. And so the Plot being laid, they take their
Leaves for that time.

112. The next day the King sends for Aspar, who was Jugurth's Agent, and tells
him, That Dabar had fished out of Sylla, that the War might be composed upon
Conditions: and that therefore he should do well to know the King's Mind.
Thereupon, he hastens with great Joy to Jugurth's Camp. From whom after he had
taken full Instructions, away he posts again, and in eight days returns to
Bocchus, and assures him, that Jugurth was ready to yield obedience to whatever
was imposed upon him; only that he durst not confide in Marius: for that
formerly Articles of Peace concluded with the Roman Generals had been voted
ineffectual. And therefore if Bocchus intended the Welfare of Both, and desired
a firm Ratification of the Agreement, that he should make it his Business, that
they might meet all three together, under pretense of concluding the Peace, and
then that he should deliver Sylla into his hands; for that when he had such a
Person at his disposal, the League would of necessity be confirmed by the
Command of the Senate and People of Rome; who were not wont to suffer a Person
of his Dignity, (not enslaved by his own Oversight, but in the Service of the
Commonwealth) to lie long in the Power of the Enemy.

113. This the Moor, revolving daily several Imaginations in his Mind, at
length promised to do. But whether Fraud or Ingenuity were the Motives that
occasioned his delay, we never could be fully satisfied. For as the
Determinations of Princes are quick and hasty, so are they no less inconstant,
and frequently repugnant one to another. Soon after, the Place and Time being
fixed where they were to meet all three together for the Conclusion of the
Peace, Bocchus sometimes sends for Sylla, sometimes for Jugurth's Agent;
entertains both with equal. Civility, and promises to both the same thing: on
the other side, they are both well pleased, and both alike full of successful
Expectations. But upon the Night preceding the Day appointed for the
Conference, the Moor, sending for his Friends, and by and by altering his
resolutions, and dismissing 'em again, was a long time in a great Agitation of
Mind alone by himself; by his Looks the going and coming of his Color, by his
Actions and Gestures showing no less Disturbance of Body then of Mind; which
during the silence of Utterance, he displayed in the alterations of his
Countenance. However, at length he sends for Sylla, and by his Direction lays
the Plot to entrap the Numidian. To which purpose, when the Day was come, and
that News was brought him, that Jugurth was not far off, as it were to honor
his Confederate, accompanied with some few Friends together with our Questor,
he rides up a little Hillock in view of those that lay in Ambush: Whither the
Numidian approaching with some few, the most of his Kindred unarmed, upon the
Signal given, he is surrounded by the Ambuscado. The rest were all cut in
pieces; Jugurth in Chains is delivered to Sylla, and by him guarded to Marius.

114. At the same time, two of our Generals, Q. Coepio and M. Manlius fought
with bad Success against the Or rather the Cimbrians.
Gauls. Which put all Italy into a great Consternation. For not only of ancient
times, but even in our days, the Romans held this for a Maxim, that all other
Enterprises lay prostrate to their Courage, but that with the Gauls they
contended for Safety, not for Honor. But after the Numidian War was at an end,
and that the News arrived, how Jugurth was coming in Chains to Rome, Marius was
again made Consul in his absence, and the Province of Gallia decreed him. About
the middle of January, with great Honor he made his Triumphal After which
Jugurth was thrown naked into a Dungeon, where in six days he starved himself
to Death.
Entry into the City: and from that time forward the Hopes and Welfare of the
Commonwealth were all entirely fixed in Him.

The End of the Jugurthine War.
FRAGMENTS Out of other HISTORIES OF SALUST.
The Oration of M. Aemilius Lepidus, Consul to the People of Rome, against
Sylla.
YOUR Clemency and Integrity, most Worthy Romans, which have rendered ye so
great and famous above other Nations, create in me a more then ordinary fear of
the Progress of L. Sylla's Tyranny, least while you nere suspect in others,
what in your selves you deem abominable, you be beguiled and circumvented
(especially since all his hopes are grounded upon Villainy and Perfidiousness,
and that he does not think himself otherwise safe, then by proving far worse
and more detestable then you can fear him to be, that so your Miseries may
exempt ye, his Slaves as he accounts ye, from the care of your Liberty) or if
ye provide for your selves, that ye may be employed rather in fending off your
apparent dangers then in revenge of offered violence. The Pensioners of his
Guard, Men that make a great Figure in the world, and no less eminent for
imitating the worthy Examples of their Ancestors, I cannot too sufficiently
admire, to see how they enslave themselves, to tyranize, over you; choosing
Both out of a natural inclination to Injustice, rather then uprightly and
legally to live in Freedom. Most noble Offspring of the Brutus's, the
AEmilius's, and the Lutatii; born to subvert those things which their
Forefathers purchased by their Virtue and their Courage. For then, what else
did They defend, but their Liberty and their native Mansions from the Violence
of Pyrrhus, Hannibal, Philip and Antiochus, that we might not be obedient to
any but our own Laws? All which, this same cruel Romulus, as if wrested from
Foreigners, holds fast in his own Possession; not satiated with the slaughter
of so many Armies, nor of the Consul, nor of so many others of the Principal
Nobility whom the Fortune of the War had destroyed; but then more cruel, when
prosperity turns the hearts of other Men from Fury to Compassion: The only
Person in the World, since the memory of Man, that ever invented punishments
for those that were to come; who were certain to be wronged before they were
born: and became most wickedly secure in the Inhumanity of his barbarous
proceedings, while you, for fear of more grievous servitude, were deterred from
the recovery of your Liberty. But you must to work, and make head against this
Torrent, least your spoils come once to be at his Command. It Is now no time to
dally, or to stay for Succor in answer of our Prayers. Unless you hope, that
either a weary, or ashamed of his Tyranny, he will venture to quit with danger,
what he has ravished into his Possession by violence. But he has gone so far'
that he accounts nothing Honorable but what is safe, and deems all things just
and honest that serve to uphold his Usurpation. Therefore that same Rest and
Tranquillity with freedom, which many good Men rather chose then labor
accompanied with Honor, are now quite vanished from the World. At this time we
must either serve, or domineer, Most worthy Romans, be afraid our selves, or be
a terror to others. For what is more to be expected? What is there, either
Human or Divine that has escaped without Pollution? The Roman People, ere while
the Lords of Nations despoiled of all Command, their Glory and their
Privileges, without life or motion, and contemned as useless, have hardly left
'em the allowances of Slaves: a great number of our Allies and all the Latins,
whom you for many and important services, made pertakers of your Franchises,
are now prohibited by one; and a few Life Guard-Pensioners possess the
hereditary Habitations of the Innocent Commonalty, as the wages of their
Villainies. Our Laws, our judicial Proceedings, the Public Treasures, the
Provinces, nay Kings themselves, are all at the Disposal of one man's Will: in
a word, absolute Power of Life and Death lies prostrate at the Pleasure of a
single Tyrant. Ye have beheld at the same time human Victims offered to his
Fury, and the Sepulchers of the slain besmeared with Civil Blood. Does there
any thing then more remain for Men to act; then either to dissolve the
Injustice, or to dye Courageously? For Death has still determined the same end
to all Men, though environed and immured in Steel; nor is there any Man that
waits the last constraint of Fate, afraid to dare, unless effeminately abject.
But I am Seditious, as Sylla terms me, because I seem to affect the rewards of
Tumult and Faction; and a promoter of War, for redemanding the Privileges and
Rights of Peace. That is to say, because you never will be otherwise secure, or
safe in your Empire, till Vettius Picens, and the Notary Cornelius have made a
wastful sale of other Men's Estates acquired by Pains and Industry: unless you
approve all the Proscriptions of the Innocent, because they were wealthy; the
Tortures of Illustrious Men; the City laid Desolate by Banishment and
Slaughter: and the Estates of your Afflicted Fellow-Citizens, either sold or
given away in Recompenses, like the Cimbrians spoils.

But he Objects against me Possessions bought with the Plunder of Persons
proscribed. Which was indeed the most enormous of all. his own Committed
Crimes, that neither my self, nor any man else could be safe, if we acted
fairly and honestly. However what I then purchased out of fear, when I had
paid down my money, I restored to the Right Owners: Neither is it my design to
make a prey of any of my Fellow-Citizens. Certainly, those Calamities might
have been sufficient, which infected with the same Fury, we suffered for a
while; Roman Armies sharply encountering one another, and Foreign Weapons turned
upon our own Breasts. Let there be end of all these Injuries and Oppressions.
Of which Sylla is so far from repenting, that he gloried in what he had done,
and might he but have been permitted, would have far more greedily perpetrated.
Neither now do I fear, what your Opinion is concerning him, but how far you
dare adventure: least while ye stand gaping one upon another, who should lead
ye on, ye be prevented (not by his Forces, which are inconsiderable and weak,
but by your own Cowardice) ere you are prepared to anticipate him, and be so
far happy as you shall dare to act. For setting aside the Debauched Pensioners
of his Guard, who takes his part? Rather, who does not desire a Change of all
things, excepting Victory? Surely not the Soldiery that have only spilt their
blood to enrich Tarrula and Scyrrus, the worst of Slaves: Certainly, not they,
before whom Fusidius was preferred when advanced to several Offices; a Beastly
male-Chambermaid, a defilement and Scandal to all Honors. And therefore I have
a great Confidence in the Victorious Army, who after all their Wounds and
Hardship, have only gained a Tyrant. Unless they went about to subvert the
Tribunitial Authority, which their Ancestors erected by force of Arms; or to
wrest out of their own hands their Laws and Privileges. Rarely well repaid
indeed, when sent back again to the Bogs and Woods, they found their wages, I
mean contempt and hatred, to be at the Disposal of a few. Why then does he
March with such a Body, and so elated in mind? Because Prosperity wonderfully
obscures and mantles Vice. But when this Prosperity begins to fail, then as
formidable as he was before, as much will he be afterward contemned and
scorned unless pretense of Peace and Concord give him Confidence, which has
appropriated Names to his Villainy and Parricide. For, says the Tyrant, the
Roman People otherwise can have no end of War, unless the Commonalty, expelled
from their Inheritances, to Him become a Civil Booty; unless the Right and
Arbitrament of all things be at his disposal, which formerly belonged to the
People of Rome. Which if you acknowledge to be Peace and Concord, approve the
most pernicious plagues and grievances that can befall the Commonwealth:
embrace Leisure with Servitude; and transmit to Posterity a President, that
once the People of Rome were deluded and fooled at the expense of their own
Blood. For my own part, though as you see, By this same High Command I have as
much as in reason I can well desire, to keep up the Grandeur of my Ancestors,
to support my own Reputation, and to secure my self, 'twas never my design to
Study my Private Interest, as preferring a dangerous and hazardous Liberty
before quiet servitude. Which if it be your opinion likewise, resume your
wonted Courage, and with the Favor of the Gods follow the Consul M. Aemilius,
your Captain and Leader, for the recovery of your Liberty.

The Oration of L. Philippus against Lepidus.
THere is nothing which I more eagerly desire, Conscript Fathers, then the
Tranquillity of the Commonwealth; or that it should be defended when in
danger, by the Stoutest and most forward of its Members. In a word I heartily
wish, that all wicked enterprises may prove the ruin of the Contrivers. On the
other side, all the whole Frame of Government is unhinged by Factions; and
these Factions encouraged by those whom it rather became to endeavor their
total Suppression and Extirpation: and what the worst and most extravagant of
Men's decree, the most virtuous and most prudent are obliged to execute. A War
at present you believe unreasonable, yet you must take Arms, because forsooth,
it is Lepidus's pleasure; but perhaps there may be some that love Peace best, yet
can endure War. Good Gods! that Men should rule this City, yet lay aside all
Care of Governing. M. AEmilius, of all Flagitious Caitiffs the most wicked, and
whether more Villain or more Coward cannot well be determined, has got an Army
to oppress your Liberty, and he that was contemned has made himself more
formidable while you sit whispering together, and regardless of the sayings and
the Prophesies of the Sybills, seem rather to wish for Peace then to defend it:
not understanding, that by the Lenity of your Decrees you lessen your own
Authority, and render him exempt from fear. And that deservedly: since he has
obtained the Consulship by Rapine, and a Province together with an Army, to
carry on Sedition and Faction. What would he have received for his good
Services, whose vile misdeeds ye have so liberally rewarded? It was perhaps,
because that they who even to the last, gave up their Votes for Legates, Peace,
Concord and the like, were favored and promoted by him. No; for They,
despised, and thought unworthy of the Commonwealth, were looked upon as only
fit to be made Booty of; as suing again for Peace with the same fears which
they had about 'em when they lost it. Truly at the very beginning, when I saw
Hetruria in Rebellion, the proscribed Persons recalled, and the Republic rent
and torn with Bribes and Pensions, I thought it high time to hasten, and with
some few others followed the advice of Catulus. But they who extolled the
Aemilian Family for their good Services, and magnified the Roman People for
augmenting their Grandeur by Pardoning and Clemency, never discerned that
Lpidus also was a Branch of the same Stock: when he took up Arms as a private
Person to subvert their Liberty, every one laboring after wealth, or the
Protections of great Personages, destroyed the Public Interest. And then was
Lepidus a mere Robber surrounded with Camp-Boys, and some few Ruffianly
Bravoe's: among whom there was not one that did not value a days wages above
his life. Now he is a Proconsul in high Command, not purchased; but conferred
upon him by your selves, with Leiutenants as yet Legally obedient: and to him
resorted Men of all Degrees the most corrupt and vicious; inflamed with lust
and want: whirled to and fro with the Guilt of their Crimes: people never at
rest but in Sedition; in peace most turbulent: sowing Tumult upon Tumult, and
War upon War; the Pensioners of Saturninus formerly, afterward of Sulpitius;
then of Marius and Damasippus, and now of Lepidus. Besides Hetruria up in Arms,
and all the Embers of extinguished Wars now breaking forth again: Both Spains
Solicited to Insurrection, Mithridates the next Neighbor to our Tributaries,
by whom we are as yet supported, watches round about an Opportunity for
Invasion: so that there is nothing but a proper Captain wanting to subvert the
whole Body of the Empire. Which I beseech and implore ye, Conscript Fathers, to
consider; and that you will not suffer Licentious Villainy like a pestilence, by
contagion to infect the sound. For when Rewards attend the wicked, there is no
man easily will addict himself to virtue gratis. Do ye think it fit to wait
till with a new embodied Army they once more invade the City with Fire and
Sword? Which seems much more like and nearer to its present Condition, then
from Civil War to Peace and Concord. A War which he has inflamed in contempt of
all things both Divine and Human; not for any wrong done either to himself or
at least as he pretends to others, but for the Subversion of our Laws and
Liberties. For he is tortured and harrass'd in his mind with Ambition, and
dread of ill success, void of Counsel and Restless; Trying this, attempting
that, he fears Tranquillity, hates War, foresees a Curb upon his Luxury and
Licentiousness, and in the mean time makes an Abusive Advantage of your
Remissness. Which I know not what to call, whether Fear, or Sloth or Madness.
While every one singly seems to pray that the threatening mischief, may not like
Lightning dart upon himself, but no man stirs an inch to prevent the gathering
Cloud. I beseech ye consider how the Natural Order of things is ranvers'd.
Formerly public Contrivances of mischief against the State were secretly
carry`d on; the Remedies openly provided; and by that means good Men had the
Advantage of the Wicked: Now Peace and Concord are openly disturbed, but
secretly defended. They who delight in War and public Calamity are up in Arms,
and you in fear and Consternation. What are your Hopes? unless perhaps you are
asham`d, or look upon it as an irksome Toil to do your Duty. Do the Commands of
Lepidus, appease your Indignation? Who tells ye, `tis his pleasure that every
Man should have his own, yet has nothing but what belongs to other Men: who
would have all Claims of War cancell`d, yet all the while compels by force of
Arms: who desires the Freedom of the City to be confirmed, yet denies the
Citizens their Franchises of which they were deprived; who for Concords sake
would have the Tribunitian Power restored to the Commons, from maintenance of
which all our Discords have derived their Original. Most villainous and impudent
of all Mankind, can thou be thought to mind the wants, the grievances and
lamentations of thy Fellow Citizens, who can call nothing thy own, unless
what forcibly thou have gained by Plunder and Rapine? Thou stand for a
second Consulship, as if thou had resigned the First. Thou seek'st for Peace
by that same very War, by which it was disturbed when fairly once obtained:
Traitor to Us, faithless to Them; the Enemy of all good People; regardless both
of Gods and Men whose Laws Divine and Humane thou have violated by Treason and
Perjury. Who being what Thou art, I advise thee to continue thy Resolutions,
and not to quit thy Arms; nor to keep Us in continual Cares and Anxieties, thy
self so restless when Seditions are delayed. Neither Provinces nor Laws nor
Household Gods allow thee for a Citizen? Go on then, as thou have begun, that so
thou may the sooner meet with thy Reward. But as for You, Conscript Fathers,
how long will you by tedious lingering suffer the Commonweath to be in jeopardy,
and only talk of taking Arms in its Defense? Soldiers are daily listed against
ye; vast sums both publicly and privately extorted: The Laws commanded to be
serviceable to Ambition, Will and Pleasure, while you sit voting Lieutenants,
and considering what Decrees to make. And upon my word, the more earnestly you
sue for Peace, so much the sharper the War will be, when he finds himself more
strongly suported by your fears, then by the Justice of his Cause. For they
that tell ye they abominate Tumults, and the Slaughter of their Fellow
Citizens, and for that reason detain ye unarmed from opposing Lepidus in Arms,
believe you will more readily, suffer what the vanquished must endure, when ye
so loosely brook what might be in your power to chastise. Thus they dissuade
him from Peace with you, and you from War with him. If these things please ye;
if such a Lethargy benum your Senses, that forgetful of Cinna's Devastations,
upon whose return to the City, all Majesty and Degrees of Dignity were trampled
under foot, you will nevertheless surrender up your selves, your Wives and
Children to Lepidus, what need of more Decrees? to what Purpose the Assistance
of Catulus? in vain both he and all good men take care to support the
Commonwealth. Do as you think fit; sue to Cethegus and other Traitors for their
Protections, that long to glut themselves with new Rapines and Conflagrations,
and to brandish once more their naked Swords against their Household Gods. But
if Liberty and Justice be more acceptable; Let your Decrees become your
Grandeur; and fortify the Commonwealth with men of Virtue and Courage. There is
a new raised Army at hand; moreover Colonies of Veterane Soldiers, all the
Nobility, most expert Commanders, and Fortune ready to attend the Best. In a
short while the Forces already mustered together will disband and melt away
through our Remissness. Wherefore it is my Opinion clearly, since Lepidus of
his own head is Marching to the City with an Army composed of Russians and
Enemies to the Commonwealth, in contempt of the Authority of this Senate. that
Appius Claudius, as In Latin Interrex, who was a great Officer created by the
Romans in troublesome Times when the Grand Elections could not proceed through
the Sickness or Rebellion of the Consul: whose Dignity lasted only five days,
at the end of which he surrendered his Dignity to another.
King pro tempore together with Q. Catulus, and others that are at present in
Command, be appointed to guard the City, and to take care that no Detriment
befall the Commonwealth.

The Epistle of Cn. Pompey to the Senate.
IF as your Enemy, and the Enemy of my Country, and your Household Gods, I had
undergone as many Hardships and Dangers, as from my early Adolescency the most
Barbarous of your Foes have been vanquished under my Conduct, and your Security
thereby established, you could not have enacted any thing against me in my
absence more severely, then your present Unkindness, Conscript Fathers, makes
me sensible of. Me, whom exposed to a most cruel Enemy, 'ere scarce my Age was
capable of Action, together with an Army most deserving, as much as lies within
your power you have betrayed to perish for want of Food, the most miserable of
all Deaths. Was it with this Design the Roman People sent their Sons to War?
Are these the Guerdons of our Wounds, and Blood so often shed for the Honor of
our Country? Tired out with writing and sending Messengers, I have wasted all
my private Wealth and Hopes, While you for three Years time have scarce allowed
me a single Years Expense. I call the Immortal Gods to witness, whether you
think me to be a Bottomless Exchequer, and whether I am able to Support an Army
without Food or Pay. I must confess indeed I hastened to this War with a more
eager desire, then prudent Consideration; as one who having from you received
the Title of General, in forty days levied an Army, and from the Alps drove
back the Enemy already pressing upon the Neck of Italy, into Spain. Through
them I opened another Passage, more then ever Hannibal did, and more convenient
for our Marches. I recovered Gallia, the Pyrenaeans, Lace^ania Parts of
Cataloma.
and Jergetum, and with raw Soldiers, and much fewer in number stood the first
shock of Victor Sertorius; and surrounded with a cruel and barbarous Enemy,
wintered in the field, not in warm Quarters, nor of my own choice. But why
should I enumerate Battles, or winter Expeditions, Towns levelled with the
Earth, or taken by Composition? Deeds are more prevalent then Words. The
Enemies Camp surpised nere the River Now Xucar.
Subro, the Battle by the River Durius Duero.
and C. Heremius chief Leader of a Potent Adversary, vanquished, and his Army
with the City of Valencia utterly ruined, are sufficient Testimonies of the
Truths I utter: For which, most grateful Fathers, you repay Us with want and
starving Hunger. So that the Condition of mine, is no better then that of the
Enemies Army. Neither of the two are paid; and both ready to March Victors into
Italy. Of which I put ye in mind, and beseech ye to take care That I may not be
constrained to take private Resolutions in the midst of these Necessities. The
hither Spain, of which the Enemy has no part, either our selves or Sertorius
have laid wast even to utter destruction, unless some Maritime Towns which are
rather a burden and a charge to Us. The last year Gallia supplied the Army of
Metellus with Corn and Money. Which now, by reason of bad and blasted Harvests
is scarce able to support it self, And for my own part, I have not only wasted
my particlar Estate, but lost all my Credit. Our last Hopes are in your selves,
who unless you relieve our distresses, must expect no other, then what I now
foretell ye, and which I never shall be able to prevent, that the Army will
March from hence, and with it all the whole War of Spain must be removed into
Italy.

The Oration of Marcus Licinius, Tribune of the People, to the Commonalty of
Rome.
IF, Worthy Romans, you were not well acquainted with the difference between
the Rights and Privileges which you inherit from your Ancestors, and that same
servitude designed by Sylla, my Discourse would then require a longer time, and
it behooved me to instruct ye for what Oppressions, and how often the Armed
Commons made a separation from the Fathers. Now it suffices only to encourage
ye, and first to lead the way, which I esteem most proper to redeem our
Liberty. Nor am I ignorant, how vast a Power and Interest among the Nobility, I
am about to pull down from domineering Usurpation, my self alone, without
assistance and unguarded: only with the shadow of Magistracy: and how much
safer it is for a whole Faction to act in Combination, then for Persons
innocent to move singly by themselves. But besides the good Hopes which I have
in you, This has overcome all my fears, that the Misfortunes of Contending are
far more satisfactory to a generous Courage, then never at all to have
contested. Tho all others who have been created Tribunes to secure your
Franchises, have turned all their Power and Authority to your prejudice, over
swayed by Favor, Hopes, or by Rewards; and rather chose to sin for Hire, then
do justly Gratis. For these reasons they all submitted under the Domination of
a Few, who by their Reputation in War have got Possession of the public
Treasure, Armies, Kingdoms, Provinces, and make your spoils their Tower of
safety: while you, the Multitude, like to many Sheep surrender your selves in
Vassalage to this and the other Paramounting Lord, dispoyl'd of all those
Blessings which your Forefathers left you. But perhaps it is, because as
formerly you gave your Suffrages for Rulers, now you give the same for Masters.
Therefore all your Tribunes flock to them; and if it be your chance to recover
your own again, you shall see 'em upon the Turn of the Tide return to you
again. For few have the Courage to defend what best they like; the the other are
the stonger Party that fight in their own wrong. But can you dream of meeting
an Obstruction when unanimous and resolute, from those that feared ye when
remiss and negligent? unless you think that Cotta, a Consul of the middle
Faction, restored some certain Privileges to the Tribunes for any other reason
then out of fear: for tho L. Sicinius, first adventuring to open his Mouth in
behalf of the Tribunitian Power, was disappointed while you only muttered at
it, yet they that opposed him first began to dread your Hatred, 'ere you would
be brought to resent the Oppression. At which I never can sufficiently admire,
most worthy Romans. For you knew it was a vanity to tire your Expectations.
After the Death of Sylla, who imposed that heavy Bondage, you thought that then
the end of all your Mischiefs was at hand? But there sprung up a far more Cruel
Catulus. A Tumult brake out when Brutus and Aemilius Mamerous were Consuls; But
then C. Curio played the Tyrant, even to the fatal destruction of the innocent
Tribune. You saw last year how furiously Lueullus threatened L. Quinctius, and
wrought him from his Purpose. And lastly now, how I am plagued and harrass'd
among 'em! A needless Trouble, would they but once surcease their Usurpation
before you made an end of serving: Especially, seeing whatever are the
pretenses for their civil Broils, the main Contest on both sides is for
Dominion over you. Those other Figments of Licentiousness, Hatred or Avarice
are but Flashes that extinguish in a short Time. Only one thing continues
permanent, the end at which both sides with ardour drive at: and that is to
dispoilye perpetually of the Tribunitial Power, the only Buckler which your
Ancestors provided to shield your Liberty, which I admonish and beseech ye to
consider: and that you would not, odly changing the Names of things to favor
sloth, call Servitude Tranquillity; which it were not now a Season to enjoy, if
Wickedness have vanquished Truth and Honesty; but had been, had You been
altogether lulled asleep. Now therefore mind your Business: for unless ye
overcome, since all Oppression is by its weight the more secure, they will be
sure to press more bard upon ye. What Is my Opinion, then, some one will say?
First then, you must lay aside your present manner of Behavior; Tongues let
loose at random, Hearts of Mice; no longer mindful of your Liberty, then in the
Public Place of Meeting. Neither do I exhort ye to those Masculine Proceedings,
as when your armed Ancestors obtained Patritian Magistracy to be conferred upon
the Tribunes by the free and unextorted Votes of the Senators: although, most
worthy Romans, it be in your Power that what you suffer commanded now for
others, you may either dispose or not dispose of for your selves. Expect ye
then great Jupiter, or some other Deity to be your Adviser? Those high Commands
of the Consuls and Decrees of the Fathers you confirm by Execution; and hasten
of your own accords, that License that is made use of to your prejudice. Nor do
I advise ye to the revenge of Oppression, but rather to sit still and be quiet
upon that Account. Neither desirous of discord as they recriminate upon me, but
wishing an end of all disorders, do I repeat and recall to your Memory their
Miscarriages; which is no more then the Law of Nations allows me: yet if they
obstinately persist, it is neither Force of Arms, not a Secession that I
encourage; only I exhort ye, that ye will no longer afford 'em the Advantage of
shedding your Blood. Let 'em rule, and manage the Government after their own
manner, let 'em hunt after Triumph; Let 'em prosecute Mithridates, Sertorius,
and the remainder of the Exiles, to dignifie their Illustrious Statues. Let not
them incur the hazard and the danger that have no part of the Profit: unless
you think your Services repaid by that same sudden Frumentarian Law. A mighty
purchase, to value your Liberty at Five Bushels of Wheat, which is no more then
the Allowance allotted to the Prisoners in the Common Goal. For as that same
sorry Pittance keeps 'em from starving, yet decays their strength; so neither
is so small a Portion sufficient to support Your Families; but frustrates the
slender hopes of every Coward. Which, tho large and munificent, considering it
to be the Hopes of Servitude, yet what a piece of sottishness it is to be
deluded, and to be thankful for your own dues, so parsimoniously scattered
among you? For any other way they neither could prevail, nor durst they strive
against ye all in General. Nor are you less to guard your selves against their
cunning Artifices. For therefore it is they give ye good words on purpose to
amuse and put ye off, till the return of Pompey. Whom though they reverence and
dread at present, and carry about exalted upon their Shoulders, yet when those
fears are over, you shall hear, how they will rend and mangle his Reputation.
Neither are these Assertors of Liberty, as they pretend themselves, ashamed to
acknowledge their own weakness, so many without one, neither daring to forgive
an Injury, nor being able to defend their Rights. For I am certainly convinced,
that as for Pompey, a young Gentleman of such high and early Renown, will
rather choose to be your Chieftain with your own Consent and Approbation, then
associate with them in Tyranny and Usurpation; and that you will find him no
less forward to assert the Tribunitian Authority. However worthy Romans, in
former times, 'twas the Custom for particular Citizens to have Protection of
many; never did the entire Body of the People rely upon one single Person:
neither was it in the Power of any one particular Man to dispose by Gift, or
tear away such Privileges. Therefore we have said enough. Neither is it a
matter closed up in Ignorance. But I know not what Stupidity has seized your
understandings, that neither Honor, nor vile Oppression can move ye: you have
made a base Exchange of all your former Bravery, for a little present Idleness;
believing you enjoy sufficient Liberty, because your Backs are spared or else
because you are admitted to the Public shows, the Munificences of your wealthy
Lords and Masters, Privileges indeed not granted to the Country Peasants; who
are slaughtered and crushed to death between the Contentions of the Potent; or
bestowed in free Gift upon the Magistrates in their Provinces. Thus a few both
fight and vanquish: But the Victory, whatever happens, lights heavy upon the
Commons: and daily will do more and more: while they are so industirous to
defend their Usurpations, you so negligent to redeem your Liberty.

A Copy of a Letter sent from Mithridates King of Pontus, to Arsaces King of
the Parthians.
KIng Mithridates to King Arsaces, Greeting. All men who are invited to a
Confedracy in War, ought well to consider with themselves whether at that time
it be at their choice or no to live in Peace; then whether what is by the Sword
contended for, be honorable, safe, and just, or wicked and illegal. It Is true;
Thou might perhaps enjoy perpetual Peace, were thou not so near a Neighbor
to the most wicked and vexatious of Enemies; and were it not for that same high
Renown that will attend thy prosperous success in subduing the Romans. Nor had
I otherwise adventured to crave thy Alliance, out of a vain hope to recover my
loft Affairs, by blending my Misfortunes with thy Triumphs. Now, that there
should be no delay of this Conjunction, if thou will but rightly consider the
Conjuncture of Affairs, the storm of a new War at this time threatening
Tigranes, and my own unfortunate Condition, are at present the greatest
Arguments that may be. For He, surrounded with his fears, will accept of an
Alliance upon any Terms. And for my self, my adverse Fortune, after many
Losses, has rendered Me more fit to give the best of Counsel upon all Occasions.
And what the Prosperous wish for most, Me you shall have daily before your Eyes
a President, what to embrace, what to refrain in all your future Conduct. For
there is one and the same cause of warring against the Romans common to all
People, Nations and Princes, a profound Ambition of Empire and thirst after the
Riches of the World; which was the only occasion of their first War with Philip
the Macedonian King. While the Carthaginians pressed hard upon 'em, they
craftily diverted the Relief of Antiochus with a feigned Concession of all
Asia. Yet no sooner was Philip vanquished, but Antiochus was despoiled of all
his Territories on this side, If the Talents were of Silver, it makes the sum
one Million two hundred and fifty thousand pound Sterling: if of Gold, Four
hundred and fifty hundred thousand pound.
Taurus, and ten thousand Talents to Boot. Then Pereus, whom after many Bloody
Conflicts with various Fortune, when he had betaken himself to the Sanctuary of
the Samothracian Gods, these crafty Contrivers of Treachery, seduced into their
Clutches; and because they had granted him his Life by Articles murdered him
for want of sleep, while Guards were put upon Him, that would not suffer him to
take a wink of Rest. Eumenes, whose Friendship they pretended so highly to
value, they betrayed to Antiochus, the Price of Peace: Attelus, the Guardian
only of a subjugated Country, after they had rendered him ridiculous by their
Taxes and their Contumelies, of a Sovereign Prince they made the meanest of
their Slaves; and having forged an impious Will, led his Son Aristonicus in
Triumph like an Enemy, because he only laid claim to his Paternal Inheritance.
Asia is by them entirely usurped: and lastly Nicomedes being dead, they have
laid violent hands on all Bithynia, though the Son of Nysa, to whom they had been
pleased to give the Title of Queen, were then without doubt among the Living.
For wherefore should I name my self? with whom though every way distinctly
bounded from their Empire by Kingdoms and Tetrarchies, because reported
opulent, and one that would not be a slave, they found a way to quarrel, and
set upon Me Nicomedes, not ignorant of their Impiety, and as it happened
afterward, before attesting, that only the Cretans and Ptolemy lived free and
uncontrolled at that Time. However in revenge of that Injustice, I expelled
Nicomedes out of Bithynia, recovered Asia, the spoils of King Antiochus, and
rescued Greece from ponderous Servitude. My farther Progresses the basest of my
Vassals Archelaus put a stop to, by betraying my Army; and they who either
through Cowardice or wicked subtlety, withdrew the Assistance of their Arms,
thinking to be secure by the Hardships I endured, now reap the fatal harvest of
their Treachery. Ptolomy, well bribed, can find no just occasion for a War. The
Cretans already assaulted are to expect no other Issue, but utter devastation.

Assuredly, for my own part when I understood, that by reason of their
Intestine Broils, Battle and Bloodshed rather were delayed, then peace
confirmed, contrary to the Opinion of Tigranes, who too late approved my
Counsel, and notwithstanding thy remoter distance, while my Neighbors were
their Slaves and Vassals, yet I undertook a second War: at what time I
overthrew by Land M. Cotta the Roman General nere Now Scutari by Constantinople.
Chalcedon; and by Sea despoiled 'em of a goodly Fleet of Ships. But sitting
down before Cyzicum, and lingering there with a numerous Army, Provision failed
me, without the least Relief of all my Allies: and more then that, the Winter
debarred me the benefit of the Sea. Thus without any molestation of the Enemy
was I constrained to retreat into my own Kingdom, no less unfortunate in the
Loss of the best of my Soldiers, together with my Fleets, that were Shipwrackt
within sight of Para and Now Penderachi under the Dominion of the Turks.
Heraclea. But then having recruited my Army Cabira The Royal Seat of
Mithridates of which there remains no footstep at this time.
after several Conflicts between Me and Lucullus, both Armies labored under
pressing Necessities. However Lucullus had at his devotion the Kingdom of
Ariobarzanes, as yet untouched by War: I retreated into Armenia, all the
Countries round about Me, being utterly destroyed and laid wast. At what time
the Romans following not alone, but their Custom of subverting all Kingdoms,
because the Nature of the Country would not suffer Multitudes to engage in set
Battles, they boasted the rash imprudence of Tigranes for a Victory. Now
consider, I beseech thee, whether if we should be subdued, it would be
advantageous any way to thee to make a more powerful Resistance, or whether it
be thy Opinion, that then the War will be at end. I know thee to be vastly
Opulent, and stored, to infinite abundance, with Men, with Arms and Money. And
for that Reason it is we covet such an Associate in the War; They, such an Enemy
for booty. But it is the judgment of Tigranes, while his Kingdom remains entire,
that the War may be made an end of against an Enemy far from home, with little
labor, by the Valor of my own well disciplined and experienced Soldiers:
since we can neither vanquish, nor be vanquished without hazard and prejudice
to thy self. Can thou be ignorant, that the Romans, after the Ocean had set
limits to their Western Conquests, turned the fury of their Arms upon these
parts? That from the beginning they never had any thing but what they got by
violence, not so much as their Wives and Houses, much less their Lands and
Empire? A medley of Vagabonds, having neither Country nor Kindred, born to be
the Plague and Destruction of the whole World. Whom neither Laws divine nor
human, no fear of Gods or Men can restrain from Ransack, Ravage and Destruction
both of Friends and Allies, whether remote or neighbors, Powerful or Indigent;
professed and mortal Enemies of all Mankind, that are not Vassals to
themselves; of Sovereign Princes more especially. For only few desire Liberty,
the greatest Part are contented with just Masters: So we are suspected to be
their Rivals, and dreaded perhaps least we should prove the future Chastizers
of their Insolences. But thou, the Monarch of Seleucia, the biggest of Cities,
and Sovereign Lord of Persia, what can Thou from Them expect, but Treachery
at the Present, and War hereafter? The Romans draw their Swords against all
Nations, and People, yet most keenly sharpened against those, who being
vanquished yield the richest spoils. By daring and deceiving and raising War,
they are become Potent. By such havocks and destructive Courses as these, they
will either extirpate all before 'em, or perish themselves; which Latter seems
not so improbable to happen, if thou from Mesopotamia, and We from Armenia
surround their Armies, wanting Provision and destitute of all Assistance; and
only secure by some strange favor of Fortune, through our own Divisions or our
Cowardice. And then will that Renown attend Thee, having succored once two
mighty Kings, to have subdued the grand Robbers of the Nations. Which I
admonish and exhort thee to do, unless thou had rather to our perdition, a
while prolong thy single Empire till they have leisure to subdue thee, then be
a Conqueror by our Alliance.

The Oration of C. Cotta the Consul to the People.
MAny dangers, most worthy Romans, have befallen me in Peace, and as many
Misfortunes have I met with in War; of which, some I have been forced to
undergo, others I have warded off by the Assistance of the Gods and my own
Virtue. In all which, neither my Courage was wanting to my Business, nor my
Industry failed my Resolutions. Adversity and Prosperity made an Alteration in
my Estate, but not of my Natural Inclinations. On the other side in these
Calamities all things deserted me, when Fortune left me. Moreover Old age,
cumbersom of it self, re-doubles my cares: considering my self in that
miserable Condition, that it is not permitted Me to hope for so much as an
honest death. For if I have been the Parricide of your security, and being born
by Restoration from Exile, have dishonored my Household Gods, my Country and
the highest Degree of Magistracy, what Torment can be thought sufficient for Me
living, or what punishment after my Decease? From my first years of
Adolescency, your Eyes were still upon me both a private Person, and a Public
Magistrate: They who desired it had all my Elocution, my Advice, my Money at
their Service; nor did I ever make a Crafty use of Eloquence to uphold the
Knacks of Law, or Exercise my Parts in Mischief. But covetous of private
favor, was forced to bow under the weight of ponderous Animosities for the
good of the Commonwealth. At what time depressed when she was quite subdued,
and expecting daily nothing but utter ruin, You, most worthy Romans, restored
me to my Country, and my Household Gods, with accumulations of Dignity. For
which excess of Favors, I could not show my self too grateful, should I for
every single Kindness expend as many Lives. For Life and Death are only Claims
and Rights of Nature; but for a Man to live blameless among his
fellow-Citizens, entire in his Fortunes and his Reputation, that is a gift
kindly as well bestowed as acceptably received. You have made us Consuls, most
worthy Romans, now that the Commonweath is in a most distracted Condition. For
the Generals in Spain demand Money, Soldiers, Arms and Provisions: and it is
but what necessity constrains 'em to: For that by reason of the revolt of our
Allies, and the Flight of Sertorius among the Mountains, they neither can come
to blows, nor get the necessary supports of Nature. The Excessive Power of
Mithridates compels us to maintain great Armies both in Asia and Cilicia.
Macedonia is crowded with Enemies. Nor are the Maritime Coasts of Italy, and
the Provinces less infested. In the mean time our Tributes being small, and by
reason of the Wars, but ill and uncertainly paid, hardly defray a part of the
Expenses: So that we are forced to lessen the number of our Ships that used to
carry and convoy our Provisions. These things whether they befall Us through
fraud or negligence do you consider; and as you find it, punish the Offenders.
But if it be a general Misfortune and Calamity that attends Us, wherefore is it
that ye enterprise things both unworthy of your selves, of Us and the
Commonwealth. For my own part, whose years are near the Precipice of death, I
do not wish one minute longer of Life, if that might prove the least Advantage
to your safety: not deeming this same freeborn Body of mine can more be
honored, then by submitting to its dissolution for your welfare. Here then
behold the Consul Caius Cotta ready: ready to do what often our Ancestors have
done in times of dubious War. I freely devote and offer up my self a Victim for
the Commonwealth. Of which, to whom you afterward shall recommend the Care,
your selves be circumspect. For no good Man will be covetous of such an Honor,
when either he must give an account of the success of Peace or War by others
carried on, or suffer ignominious death. Only remember this, that I was not cut
off for acts of Villainy or Avarice, but willingly surrendered up my Life in
gratitude for exceeding favors. For your own sakes therefore, most worthy
Romans, and by the Glory of your Ancestors I conjure ye, a while to be patient
in your adversity, and consult the welfare of the Commonwealth. Great is the
Care and many are the toils that accompany supreme Command; which in vain ye
refuse, yet seek the Opulency of Peace; when all our Provinces, Kingdoms, Seas
and Lands are harrass'd and tired with the Calamities and Hardships of War.

Two * Orations to C. Caesar attributed to Salust.
* MAny Learned Men have made a Question whether these Orations were really
written by Salust or no. But Douza, one of his Commentators stiffly maintains
'em to be the Genuine Productions of the same Author. Nor are the Arguments he
brings without great probability and reason. For he alleges not only the
Consent and Agreement of the Vellum Originals but the congruity of style and
censorious Notions, natural only to that Satirical and Grave Historian. Further
he asserts that there is not that Purity of Latin in Tacitus, besides the vast
difference between the Writers of the Flavian and Julian Times. Whereas it is
objected that there is not the same conciseness in these Orations as in the
rest of Salust's Writings, that seems of little moment, since there can be
nothing more concise nor more agreeable to Salustian brevity then the Style and
Language of these Orations. But the same Commentator mislikes the Title of
Orations: and that not without just Cause, since the Author himself gives them
the Appellation of Epistles. Forsitan, says he, Impera tor, perlectis Literis,
decernes, andamp;c. So that allowing these two small Pieces to be the Works of
Salust and no other we shall only alter the Title, and call 'em,

Two Epistles concerning the Ordering of a Commonwealth, directed to C. Caesar.
The First Epistle.
IT was the Common Opinion that formerly the Roman people by Fortune had
Kingdoms and Empires, in her Gift, besides those other things which Mortal Men
so greedily thirst after; because they are frequently possessed by Persons
without Desert, conferred as it were at Will and Pleasure, and never any Man
could boast 'em stable and permament to himself. But experience has taught us
how true it is what Appius tells us in his Verses, That every Man is the
Architect of his own Fortune. A sentence more especially verified in Thee, who
have so far out-gone all others, that Men are tired first with applauding thy
Achievements, ere thou art weary of performing Deeds deserving Praise. But
virtuous Acquisitions like sumptuous Edifices, are still to be preserved with
sedulous Industry; least through negligence they run to decay, or fall to the
ground, while the foundations fail. For no Man willingly surrenders Empire and
Command to another; And though he be Just and Mild who is in Power, yet because
it is at his Choice to be rigorous and tyrannical, he is dreaded. This comes to
pass, because the most that are in high Authority take wrong Measures,
believing themselves so much the more secure, by how much the more
pusillanimous and servile the People are whom they Command. But quite the
contrary to this ought chiefly to be aimed at; that is to say, being Virtuous
and Brave thyself, thou should endeavor to Command the best of Subjects: for
he that is lewd himself impatiently brooks a Ruler. But thou have a more
difficult Task then all that were before thee, to settle what thou have won by
force of Arms. For thou have waged a War more soft and gentle then the Peace of
others: besides the Victors demand their Booty; and the vanquished are thy
fellow-Citizens. In the midst of these difficulties there is an honest Medium
to be found out, that the Public Welfare may be established not by force, as a
Foreign Enemy is curbed, but which is more noble and much more difficult, by
the profitable Arts of Peace. Therefore is this a Matter of such importance, as
summons together all Men, as well those of great as of moderate Wisdom, for
every one to give the best advice he can. And indeed it is my Opinion that as
the Victory is composed, the settlement of all other things will be the same.
Now therefore that thou may more readily and firmly order this Establishment,
accept of some few Notions that occur to my mind.

Thou had a War, most Noble Emperor, with a Man Illustrious for his Birth,
of vast Riches, most greedy of Superiority more Contrary to the Opinion of
Lucan and Cicero, who say that Pompey had a good Cause, but that Fortune and
the Gods were against him.
Fortunate then Wise. Of his Party were but few: some through their own
Injustice became thy Enemies; others whom Affinity or other Obligations drew to
his side. For never was any man a sharer with him in the Supreme Authority,
which if he could have endured, the whole, Terrestrial Globe had never been so
violently shaken with War. The Inferior Multitude, more out of Custom then
judgment flocked after him as, the more prudent Person.

At the same time, upon the scandalous rumors daily spread abroad, inflamed
with hopes of Usurping the Commonwealth, many men contaminated with Lewdness
and Luxury, resorted to thy Camp; and openly threatened those that were at Peace
with Murders, Rapines, and all the worst of Outrages to which their impious
Minds could prompt 'em. Of whom the greatest part, when they saw that neither
their debts were paid, nor Fellow-Citizens by thee despoiled and harrass'd like
Enemies, deserted Thee: only some few remained, who thought the Camp would be a
safer Place then Rome, where they were continually Dunn'd and Prosecuted by
their Creditors. But for the same Reasons, incredible it is to relate, both the
Quality and the Number of Persons that troop'd after Pompey; whom All that were
in debt made use of, during the whole time of the War, as of a most sacred and
inviolable Sanctuary.

Therefore since now both War and Peace fall under thy Consideration as the
Victor, to the end thou may gently and mildly surcease the one, and that the
other may be just and permanent, meditate seriously with thy self, at whose
disposal the Composition is, and what is most proper to be done. For my part I
am apt to believe all cruel Dominations more oppressive then Diuturnal, not
that any one single Person can be dreaded by many, but that the same fear
returns from many to himself. Such a Life wages a continual and doubtful War
within a Man; for that being neither safe before, behind, or on either side,
always thy Lot will be to live surrounded with fears and dangers: on the other
side they who have tempered the Severity of Command with Humanity and Clemency,
to them all things have appeared with a joyful and smiling Prospect; by their
Enemies more cheerfully obeyed and reverenced, then others by their own
Subjects. Be there any who for this advice will deem me a Depraver of thy
Conquest, or count me a well Wisher to the Vanquished? Perhaps, because it is
my Judgment that what both we and our Forefathers have granted to Foreign
Nations, naturally our Enemies, are equally to be allowed to Fellow-Citizens;
and that neither Slaughter with Slaughter, nor Blood is to be atoned with Blood
after the manner of the Barbarians. Has Oblivion cancelled those Cruelties,
that before this War were condemned in Pompey and Sylla's Victory? He slew
Domitius, Carbo, Brutus, and others that were Weaponless; not slain in Battle,
according to the Laws of War, but Butchered afterward when Suppliants with the
greatest Impiety imaginable: the Commonalty of Rome were Slaughtered like Sheep
in the Public Palace ordained for the Reception of Ambassadors. Heavens! What
hugger mugger Funerals of Citizens, what sudden Massacres committed in the very
Arms of Parents and Children! What flights of Women and Infants! What
devastations of Houses! Before the Victory by Thee obtained, nothing but
Outrage, nothing but Cruelty enraged. To which the same Persons exhort and spur
thee on: insinuating as if the Contest between you two had been, which should
have the absolute disposal of Oppression and Injustice: that thou did not
recover, but win the Commonwealth by force of Arms, and for that reason, the
stoutest and the oldest of the Soldiers were still ready to take Arms against
their Fathers, Brothers, nay their very Children; that so the most wicked of
Mortals, from the Miseries of others, might have wherewithal to supply the
Expenses of their Gluttony and exorbitant Lust, or rather to be the Scandals
and Reproaches of thy Victory; as being such, whose Debaucheries were a
Contamination to the Praises of good Men. For I cannot forbear to mind thee,
what was their Behavior and their Modesty, even when it was For Caesar
witnesses, that in Pompey 's Camp the Tents of the Captains were spread with
Persian Carpets and great Cupboards of Plate exposed to view, That the
Pavilions of Lentulus and others were covered with Ivy; perfect demonstrations
of their Luxury and confidence of Victory.
dubious which way Victory would incline and how, when the Enemy was in the
field those very Persons abandoned themselves to Strumpets and Luxurious
Banquets, whose Age in times of Peace could not without Reproach have pretended
to the Taste of such immoderate Pleasures. Thus much concerning War.

Now as concerning the Establishing a secure Peace; which is the present main
Design of Thee and all thy Followers; Consider I beseech thee in the first
place what it is thou art about to consult: for so, by separating the Good from
the Bad, thou will proceed in the open way to Truth. It Is my Opinion, since all
things that have a Beginning must have an End, that whenever the Fate of
Romes destruction shall happ'n to approach her Walls, Citizens shall be engaged
in Civil Broyls with Citizens; at what time exhausted and languishing for want
of Blood, they will become a Prey to some Prince or Nation. Otherwise not the
whole Globe of Earth, nor all the People of the World united and mustred
together, can either move or bruise this Empire. Therefore the Blessings of
Concord are to be established upon sure Foundations, and the Mischiefs of
Discord to be expelled. That will so come to pass, if you remove the License of
expensive Riot and Rapine. Not recalling antiquated Constistutions, which upon
the general Corruption of Manners are now become contemptible; but if you limit
the Expenses of every particular Family to the Condition of their Fortunes. For
now, it is the prevailing Custom for Young men to think nothing more brave and
generous, then prodigally to wast their own and the Estates of others; to deny
nothing to their Pleasures, or that they take for Gallantry and Magnanimity;
despising Continency and Reservedness, as the Effects of Cowardice.

Therefore a Haughty Disposition, once launched into destructive Courses, when
his accustomed Allowances fail, flies out, inflamed with inconsiderate fury,
sometimes upon Allies, sometimes upon his Fellow-Citizens; unsettles the
composed Order of things, and by Old Practices of Villainy seeks for New
Disturbances. Wherefore let not the Usurer for the future be sufferr'd any
longer; that every one may mind his own affairs. That Is the true and Plain way,
to Officiate in the Magistracy for the Benefit of the People, not the Profit of
the Creditor; and to show Magnanimity in augmenting not diminishing the
Commonwealth.

It Is true, I know how difficult a thing this will be to accomplish at first;
especially with those who thought, when Conquerors, to have lived with greater
Liberty and License, not under a more strict Control. For whose safety if you
rather provide then to uphold their Luxury, you will secure both Them and Us
and our Allies in a firm and lasting Peace. But if you still connive at the
same Practices and Debaucheries of our Youth, assuredly that High Renown of
thine, and that Great City of Rome, will in a short time fall to Ruin both
together.

In the last place, Prudent Men make War for the sake of Peace, and undergo
hardships in hopes of rest and leisure. Until you fix and ascertain that
Tranquillity what matter is it, whether we are vanquished or Victors. Wherefore
in the name of all the Gods, hold fast the Helm of the Commonwealth, and boldly
break through all Contending opposition as you were wont: for either you must
heal us, or all Men else must lay aside all thought of Cure. Neither does any
Man incense ye to cruel Punishments, or dismal Executions, by which a City is
rather depopulated, then reformed; but rather to restrain the vicious Practices
and luxurious Debaucheries of the young Nobility and Gentry. That will be real
Clemency, to have put a curb upon their Folly and false Pleasures, that
Citizens may not come to be deservedly expelled their Native Country; to have
established Peace and Concord; not to have been always a Conniver at their
present Enjoyments, which sudden Sorrow follows at the heels; indulgent to
Vice, and remissly permitting Offenses. And indeed such is my Courage, that it
chiefly relies on that which scares and daunts most undertakers, the Difficulty
of the Business. And because you are now to reform the Disorders both of Sea
and Land and restore Tranquillity to the whole World (for such a soaring Mind
can never stoop to little things) the greater the care, the greater will be the
recompense. Therefore your Care is mainly to be expended, that the Commonalty,
corrupted with Bribes, and public distributions of Corn, may be so employed and
kept from Idleness, as neither to have Leisure nor Opportunity for Public
Mischief: but that the Young Men may be enured to Probity and Industry, and not
to hanker after vain Expense, and Riches. Which may be effected, if you take
away the abuse and Reputation of Money, the chiefest Plague and Destruction of
Human Kind. For often revolving in my Mind, by what means the most renowned Men
attained their Greatness; what things had raised People and Nations to their
most flourishing Estates; and lastly what had occasioned the Ruin and
Destruction of mighty Kingdoms and Empires, I still observed that the same
things were good, the same things Evil; and that always the Victors were
Dispisers, the Vanquished always Covetous of Money. Neither can any Man exalt
his grovelling Thoughts, or Mortal as he is, attain Divine Perfections, unless
neglecting the Delights of Gold and Bodily Enjoyments, he forbear to Flatter
and pamper the Vanity of his Mind, to gratify perverse Desire; but rather
exercise it in Labor, Patience, wholesome Precepts, and magnanimous
Achievements. For to build a City House, or Country Palace, and furnish 'em
with Statues, Pictures, Persian Hangings, and other sumptuous Ornaments; and
tomake a Splendid Show of all things but Himself; This is not to enjoy Riches
as an Ornament, but for the Owner to make himsef a Reproach to his Wealth.
Moreover they, whose Custom it is twice a day to stuff their Paunches, and not
a Night to sleep without a Curtezan, when they have oppressed with servitude
the Mind which ought to Command, in vain expect to make use of it as duly
exercised, when lame and drowsy. For through Imprudence they precipitate
themselves and most of their designs. But these and all other Mischiefs will
cease with the Adoration of Money, when neither these Gaudy Pomps, nor any
other Things so much thirsted after by Magistrates and Vulgar are any longer
set to sale.

Morever care is to be taken that Italy and the Provinces may be more secure:
wherein there is not so much difficulty neither. For the same Men lay all the
Countries desolate, deserting their own Habitations, and through Oppression
seizing those of other Persons. Moreover let not the Stipends of the Soldiers,
or their years of service be either unjustly or impartially numbered. While
some are Which occasioned that terrible Sedition in Germany, mentioned by
Tacitus in the first of his Annals.
compelled to serve out thirty Stipends or Years of Duty, others scarce obliged
to one. And let the Corn, which was formerly the reward of Sloth and
Cowardice, be distributed through the Municipal Towns and Colonies, to the
dismissed Veteranes returning home after the expiration of their Stipends. And
thus as concisely as I could I have declared my thoughts of what I deemed
either advantageous to the Public, or to your Honor; and now it may not seem
amiss to speak something in Justification of this presumption.

Most men have wit enough, or think they have, to censure others; and every one
is forward and quick to find fault with the deeds and sayings of other Men;
their Mouths are scarce wide enough, nor their Tongues sufficiently nimble to
troul out the hasty Conceptions of their Envy or their private disgust; Though
notwithstanding all the Blasts of their censorious Descants, I do not at all
repent me of the Enterprise; rather it would have been a trouble to me to have
been silent. And now the Best of my wishes only remain behind that whatsoever
thou shall decree, the Immortal Gods may well approve, and Crown with happy
Success.

The Second Epistle to C. Caesar, concerning the ordering of a Commonwealth.
THis Epistle shows the great Familiarity between Caesar and Salust, and seems
to have been written before his expedition into Spain against Petreius and
Afranius, or at least in the seat of the War.

I Am not ignorant, how difficult and dangerous and Attempt it is to give
Counsel to a Prince or Emperor. or indeed to any Man, who sits in the Upper
Region of great Authority; Considering that they can neither want Advisers, and
that no man is sufficiently circumspect or prudent to foresee future Events.
Besides, oft-times it so falls out that precipitate and evil Counsels are
attended with more prosperous success, then the most grave and serious of
delivered Opinions, by reason Fortune rules the World at Pleasure. I must
confess, when I was Young, my Inclinations lead me to the management of Public
Affairs; and my greatest Care and Study was to understand the depth of those
Mysteries. Not only that I might appear great in Offices and Employments of
high Dignity, which many had obtained by wicked and corrupt means; but that I
might be acquainted with the true State of the Commonwealth both at home and
abroad, and what her intrinsic strength might be of Warlike Provisions, of Men
and Money. At length revolving many things in my Mind, I determined to prefer
your Dignity before my own Reputation and Reserv'dness, and to run any hazard
that might be advantageous to your Honor. Nor did I make this Resolution
rashly, or in Adulation of your good Fortune; but because in you I observed,
one particular Excellency above all the rest, to be egregiously admit'd; I
mean, a greater Courage always in Disaster, then in Prosperity. But this is
still no more then what is yet more manifest from other men, who are tired with
applauding and admiring your Munificence, before you are weary of performing
Deeds deserving Fame Immortal. And I am firmly persuaded there is nothing so
sublime or so profound, but what is within the easy reach of your thoughts. Nor
have I sent ye my Opinion and Judgment concerning the ordering of a
Commonwealth, as having a higher conceit then becomes me of my Advice and
Parts; but because I thought it necessary in the midst of Military Toyls, in
the hurry of Battles, Victories and high Command, to retrieve back your
thoughts, sometimes to the Consideration of Civil Affairs.

For if it be your only design to secure your Person from the violence of your
Enemies, or how to retain the favor of the People, that you may be able to
cope with the Consul, you harbor thoughts unworthy of your Courage. But if
your Magnanimity still continue such, as from the beginning disturbed the
Faction of the Nobility; recovered the Roman People out of heavy Bondage into
Liberty; that during your Pretorship, unarmed and naked as you were, out-brav'd
and daunted the insulting Fury of the Enemy; and both at home and abroad
performed so many and such far famed Exploits, that your very Adversaries have
nothing to object against ye but your Greatness; vouchsafe to accept these few
Notions of Mine, touching the Grand Concerns of the Commonwealth, which you
will find to be true, or at least not far remote from Truth. For since that
Pompey either through oversight, or else because he cared not what he did to
obstruct your Proceedings, fell into such a Fatal Error, as to put Weapons into
the hands of his Enemies, by the same means that he brought all things out of
Order, the same Courses must you take to restore Tranquillity to the
Commonwealth.

In the first place he resigned his absolute Power of disposing of the Imperial
Revenue, the Public Expenses and the Penal Laws into the hands of a Few
Senators: but as for the Roman Commonalty, in whom the Supreme Power was
vested before, he left 'em without so much as the Relief of Common Justice. For
Causes and Actions are still committed to the determination of the three
Orders, yet the same small Number of Tyrants are above all, govern all, place
and displace as they think fit; They circumvent and oppress the Innocent; and
advance their own Tools and Favorites to Honor. Neither Iniquity nor Scandal,
nor the most heinous of Crimes are any obstruction, to debar their assuming
Offices of Trust and Dignity: Whatever is commodious and profitable they haul
and tear away by violence: Lastly, as if the City were taken by Assault,
absolute Will and licencious Domineering are the only Laws they will endure.
And yet it would not grieve me much thus servilely to be enthralled, according
to their usual Practice, had they obtained the Victory by their Bravery and
Valor. But it perplexes me to see the most sloathful among Mortals, all whose
Vigor and Courage lies in their boasting Tongues, insolently exercising a
Tyranny offered 'em by Chance, and through the Remissness of another. For what
Civil Sedition and Dissension ever extirpated so many and such Illustrious
Families? Or whom did ever Victory so precipitate and render so enormously
Outrageous? L. Sylla, who had some pretense as a Victor, to plead the Laws of
War in justification of his Cruelty, though he knew his Interest, could no way
better be secured then by the Capital Punishment of his Enemies; yet after he
had put some few to death chose rather to restrain the rest by Clemency then
Fear. But now, besides Cato, L. Domitius and others of the same Faction, above
Forty Senators, and many Young Gentlemen of great Hopes have been slaughtered
like Victims on the Altar; and yet the most cruel of all Mankind, cannot be
satiated with the Blood of so many miserable Fellow-Citizens. Neither Orphans,
nor aged Parents, not the Moans of Men; nor the Lamentations of Women could
mollify their inexorable Inhumanity: but every day more violent then other, and
raging both in Word and Deed, some they degraded from their Dignities, while
others were expelled their Native Country. Nay what shall I say of You your
self, whose ignominious fall the basest of Men, were it permitted 'em, would
purchase with the loss of their own Lives? Whose Tyranny is not so great a
Pleasure to 'em (though it befell 'em unexpected) as your high Dignity a Grief
and Disturbance to their Minds. Men that would rather choose to bury their own
Liberty in your Calamity, then that the Empire of the People of Rome should by
your means of Glorious be made the most Glorious in the World: So much the more
then it ought to be your daily care to fortify and establish your own Interest.
For my part what my own thoughts are, I will not be afraid to utter: it is in
your prudence only to make Trial of what you think most probable and beneficial.

The City, according to what I have heard from my Ancestors, I take to be
divided into two Parts; the Fathers, and the Common People. Formerly the Chief
Authority rested in the Fathers; but the greater Force by far was in the
People. Thence frequent Secessions in the City, and still the Power of the
Nobility lessened; but the Privileges of the People were enlarged. By that
means the Commonalty lived in Freedom, because the Power of no Man was above
the Law: the Noble surpassed the ignoble not in Wealth or Pride, but in
Reputation and valiant Exploits. Every one alike humble at the Plough or in
War, wanting nothing of honest and necessary accommodation, thought he had
sufficient to serve himself, enough to serve his Country. But when expelled by
degrees from their Possessions, Laziness and Poverty compelled 'em to seek
uncertain Habitations, then they began to thirst after other Men's Estates, and
to set to sale, both their Liberty and the Commonwealth. Thus insensibly the
People, then the Lords of many Nations, dwindl'd into Contempt; and instead of
Empire in Common, every particular Person procured his own Slavery.

This Multitude therefore, first infected with ill Manners, then dispersed into
sundry Trades and Courses of Life, no way united among themselves, seems to Me
by no means fit to manage the Commonwealth. But being intermixed with new
Citizens, my mind gives me, that so, they may be all awakened and roused up to
Liberty; while the one would be careful to preserve their Freedom, the other
glad to shake off the Fetters of their Servitude. These Citizens thus blended,
old and new together, my Judgment is, you should distribute into Colonies. By
which means your Militia will become more Numerous, and the Common People,
honestly employed, will forbear crowding after Mischief and Sedition.

But yet I am not ignorant, when this is put in Execution, what Storms and
Tempests the Nobility will raise; how they will rage and clamor, that things
are turned Topsie Turvy; that the ancient Citizens are enslaved; and lastly
that there will be a change of the Government, from a Free State into a
Monarchy, when by the favor of one single Person an infinite Multitude shall
be admitted sharers of the City Privileges. However I am firmly convinced that
he admits a wicked Crime into his Bosom, who to the disadvantage of the Public
welfare strives for the favor of a Private Faction. More especially where the
Public good redounds to particular Benefit, to hesitate in such an Enterprise,
I look upon to be the greatest mark of Sloth and Cowardice immaginable.

It was always the Design of M. Livius Drusus, in his Tribuneship, to contend
with all his might, for the Nobility: nor did he intend at the beginning to
have acted any thing of Importance but in pursuance of their Decrees. But
certain Factious Persons prizing Fraud and Malice above Honesty and Fidelity,
when they understood that by the Means of one Person so great a Benefit would
accrue to such a vast number of People, every one, Conscious to himself of his
own wicked and Treacherous Disposition, had the same ill Opinion of Drusus as
of themselves. Therefore afraid, least by so great a Favor he should get the
sole Power into his hands, contriving all they could to hinder him, they broke
the Neck of his and their own Designs together.

Therefore, Noble Emperor, it is your Business to make a more Industrious
Provision of Friends and Guards, all Persons of approved Integrity. It Is no
great difficulty for a Man of Courage and daring Boldness to suppress an Open
Enemy; but the best of Men as they scorn the Contrivance, so are they less
easily induced to suspect, and consequently shun occult and treacherous
Stratagems.

For this reason when you have introduced those new Members into the City,
because the Commonalty will be then recalled, study to your utmost the
Introduction likewise of good and laudable manners; and by Concord to Unite the
new and old together. But a far greater Benefit will accrue to your Country,
your Citizens, your self, your Offspring, and lastly to all Mankind, if you can
but quench that Immoderate Thirst of Gold, or at least abate it to that degree
that the Season of Reformation will bear. Otherwise it will be impossible to
regulate either private Misdemeanors or public Abuses, either at home or
abroad. For where the raging Desire of Riches has once got Footing, neither
Discipline, nor Virtuous Industry, nor Generous Ingenuity can ever Flourish;
but early or late, at last the Soul will Flag, and Languish under the Burden
of loose Temptations.

I have often heard what Kings, what Cities and Nations once grown Opulent,
have lost great Empires, which when Indigent, they won by their Courage: which
is no Miracle at all. For when a stout man sees another weaker then himself
more Illustrious for his Wealth; more cring'd to and courted, he is chafed at
first; and with a thousand Agonies torments his mind: At length, as every day
more and more Desire of Glory vanquishes Honor, and Opulency overcomes Virtue,
the Mind revolts from Truth to Pleasure. For Glory is cherished by Industry;
take that away, Virtue of it self, becomes bitter and unpleasant. Lastly, where
Riches are in high Esteem, all things good and sacred then are undervalu'd,
Fidelity, Integrity, Shame and Modesty. For to Virtue there is but one, and that
a steep and rugged Passage: to Money, every Body chooses the Road that likes him
best; for Wealths acquired as well by honest as by evil Practices.

Therefore in the first place take away the Reputation and Authority of Money:
for no Man will make a Judgment this or that way in Point of Life or Honor;
when it is apparent that neither Pretors or Consul are created according to
their wealth, but as they Merit. However in the choice of Magistrates let the
Election of the People be free. Where the Judges are approved by few, it is an
Argument of Royalty; to choose 'em for Money, is dishonest. Wherefore I could
wish that all the Judges were of the first Classis, but more in number then at
this time. For neither the Rhodians nor any other Cities ever repented of their
Determinations, where Rich and Poor promiscuously, as they came into Court,
debated as well the most Important as the slightest Affairs. But as to the
Creation of Magistrates, I think I may without absurdity commend the Law, which
C. Gracehus propounded to the People in his Tribuneship, that the Centuries
should be summoned out of the five Classes, without any premeditated Choice or
Order; by which means being alike equal in Dignity and Wealth, they would
strive to excel one another in Virtue; and these I deem to be the chiefest
Remedies against Riches. For all things are applauded or desired, according to
the Use which is made of those things: Rewards are the incentives to
Wickedness; take away the Hire, there is no Man will do an evil Act for nothing.
But Avarice is a Savage, cruel and intolerable Monster; wherer'e it bends its
Bulky force, it tramples and lays waste whole Cities, Fields, Temples, Houses;
turns all things both Divine and Humane into a Chaos and Confusion; neither
Armies nor Walls can withstand its Fury: in a word it robs all Mankind of their
Reputation, Chastity, Children and Parents. But take away the Glory of Money,
and that impetuous Force of Avarice will soon be vanquished by good Manners.
And tho all Mortal men both just and unjust, know these things to be true,
nevertheless you will have a sharp Combat with the Faction of the Nobility;
whose Wiles and Stratagems if you can warily escape, the rest will succeed of
course, according to your Wishes. For these Men, had they but so much Courage,
would rather emulate, then envy the brave and generous. But being totally
possessed with Idleness, Stupidity, and Cowardice, they make a noise, detract
and look upon the Reputation of another to be their Disgrace. But wherefore
should I make more words as if I spoke of Men that were unknown to the World?
The Fortitude and Valor of M. Bibulus made open way to the Consulship; one
that scarce had the use of his Tongue; and for his Parts, more wicked then
crafty. How far can such a one presume to dare, to whom the Consular Dignity,
the highest of Commands was but a mere Disgrace? Can greater Abilities be
ascribed to L. Domitius, a Man that has not a Member, but what is contaminated
with Villainy and lascivious Intemperance? A boasting Vainglorious Tongue;
Hands embru'd in Blood; Heels nimble and speedy in flight; besides his other
Incontinences not proper to be named. Cato's the only Person among 'em, whose
Parts are not to be contemned, a Crafty, Talkative, Double-dealing Fox, the
Effects of Grecian Education: but neither Industry, Virtue or Vigilance are to
be found among the Greeks. For can it be imagined, that they who have lost
their Liberty through sloth at Home, should be able to instruct others to
command? The rest of the Faction are a Crew of noble Drones; who Statue-like,
besides the Name, can Challenge nothing else of worth but Form and Feature. L.
Posthumous, and M. Favonius seem to me like the superfluous Lading of some
great Fly-boat, which if the Vessel arrive safe in Harbor, may be some way
useful, but in a Storm are the first undervalu'd things thrown overboard. And
now, having thus far, to my own thinking, sufficiently discoursed the Point of
renewing and reforming the Commonalty, I shall speak somewhat of what may seem
proper to be done in reference to the Senate.

So soon as I grew Ripe in years and understanding, I was not so much for
Exercise of Arms, or managing of Horses, but rather for the studious part of
Learning: that is to say, finding where my strength lay, I betook my self to
the Labors of the Brain. During which retirement, by reading and hearing much,
I found that all Kingdoms, Cities, Nations, were prosperous so long, and
flourished in Command, while they were guided by True and uncorrupted Counsels:
but that when those Counsels came to be tainted once by Favor, fear or
Interest, soon after their Power decayed; in the next place, they lost their
Dominion, and lastly were enslaved. And therefore it is my absolute Opinion,
that whoever is advanced to a more Conspicuous and Illustrious degree in his
City, above all things, ought to be more especially careful of the public
Welfare. For all the rest are only safe in their Liberty, so long as the City
is secure: They who by their Virtue have acquired Riches, Honor, and
Authority, when they perceive the Commonwealth in a declining Posture, they
are presently alarmed, and their restless Minds are vexed with various Cares
and Toyls: they are presently for defending their Honor, their Liberty or
their Estates: they bestir themselves, they are here and there, all in a hurry;
The more they flourished in Prosperity, the more grievously and impatiently
they brook Adversity. Therefore when the Commonalty obeys the Senate, as the
Body submits to the Soul, and respectfully execute their Commands, it behooves
the Fathers to be able in Council; for subtilty and cunning are superfluous in
the People. Our Ancestors therefore, when low reduced by dangerous and cruel
Wars, after they had lost their Men, their Horses, and their Money, were never
weary of contending with their Swords in their hands for the Empire. Neither
want of Treasure, nor the prevailing Power of the Enemy, nor threatening
Calamity could subdue their generous Courages, but that what they had won by
their Valor they resolved to defend to the last drop of Blood. Which they did
rather by sage and prudent Counsels, then fortunate in Battle. For among them
there was but one Commonwealth: for the Welfare of that they all consulted:
Faction was contrived and sowed among their Enemies. All Men exercised their
Bodies and their Wits for the good of their Country, not to advance their own
private Interest.

But now the Case is altered; the Nobility, possessed with sloth and Cowardice,
knowing neither what Hardship, Enemies or Warfare mean, meditating nothing but
Faction at home, proudly Lord it over all the Nations. Thus the Fathers, by
whose prudence the tottering Estate of the Commonwealth was formerly
reestablished, now under Oppression, are driven fluctuating this way and that
way, with the Tyrannick blasts of Will and Pleasure; sometimes they decree one
thing, then another: as if they thought there were no other public Good or
Evil, but what the private Grudges or the Arrogance of their Lords and Masters
dictated. Whereas if all had equal Liberty, or the Decrees were rendered less
Authentic: The Commonwealth would grow more powerful; the Nobility less potent.
But because it is impossible to please all Men, or to level the Degrees of
Quality and Birth, while the Nobility enjoy the Acquists of their virtuous
Ancestors, Honor, Dignity and numerous Tenants; on the other side the
multitude are for the most part ignorant and illiterate, let 'em be free in the
Delivery of their Opinions. Thus the Power of others no way reaching
themselves, and consequently less discernable, will be the more easily brook'd.
The good as well as the bad, the Coward and the Valiant, all are desirous of
Liberty. But the more silly sort of Men, which are the greatest part, desert it
out of Fear: and while the conflict is dubious, before the Victory be won,
basely submit their Necks as vanquished to the Yoke of Servitude.

Therefore in my Opinion, there are two ways to restore the dignity of the
Senate: First, that the number of Persons being augmented, they may be ordered
to deliver their Votes in Of these Tables two were to be given to every
Senator; in the one of which were written these two Letters U. R. or, Let it be
as you ask: in the other a great Roman A. They that liked the Decree threw into
a little Chest for that purpose the first Tablet; they that disliked it the
latter with the A. that is, Antiquo, I deny it. The Tables thus cast in were
numbered, which and which, and then the difference of both sides set down in
another void Table in little Pricks or Dots: Thus neither could any Man recall
his Vote; nor could it be known who was for or against the Decree.
Tables.

The Tables will be a means that every Man may be bold to use his Freedom: In
multitude there will be more assurance, and ampler Benefit. For now adays it
falls out so, that many being taken up in hearing public Controversies, others
employed in soliciting their own and the private Affairs of their Friends,
there are few that attend the Concerns of the Public. Besides that many times
it is not business so much, as the Commands of their domineering Superiors,
which deter 'em from making their Appearances. The Grandees forsooth, with some
few of the Senatorian Order, Chips of the same Block, They are the Men that
whatsoere they please to approve, revoke, anull, decree, and then at Pleasure
put in execution. But when after the number of the Senators shall be augmented,
they shall be forced to give their Votes by Tables, you shall find they will
lay their Loftiness aside, when they must be obedient to those, over whom
before they Tyrannously domineered.

Perhaps, most noble Emperor, upon reading these Letters, you may desire to
know, what number of Senators I think sufficient, and how they may be
distributed into sundry and various Employments; and because it is my Opinion
that the Judgments of the first Classis ought to be abrogated, what number of
Judges, what Method of Election may be most convenient? To every one of which
particulars, it would be no difficult thing to return an Answer; but it behooves
Us first to discharge our selves of the grand Concern of Counsel, and to
ascertain the Truth of what we have delivered in that Point. If you resolve to
make use of this Method of proceeding; there will be little Difficulty in what
comes after. It Is my desire, that my Advice may be both wholesome and
profitable. For then according to your Success my Reputation will extend it
self. But that which I am much more zealous for at present is this; that the
Commonwealth may be relieved and regulated as soon as may be, let the Manner
and the Methods be what they will, Liberty is that which I more highly prize
then Honor. And therefore, most renowned Emperor, I beseech and beg it of ye,
that since the Gallic Nation is so happily subdued, you will not suffer the
mighty and invincible Empire of the Roman People to consume away with Age, or
by Discord and Dissension to be dissolved. For should that come to pass,
assuredly neither Day or Night would ease the Anguish of your Mind; but still a
restless Fury, that were would give ye leave to close your Eyes, would be the
Torment of your latter days. For I am certainly Some think these Exhortations
of Salust to Caesar, proceeded from his believing him addicted to the Epicurean
Sect, as Cato seems to inimate in his Speech against Catiline.
convinced, that the Lives of all Mankind are observed by the All-seeing Eye of
the Divine Deity: that there is an account taken of all the good or evil Deeds
of Men: and that naturally various rewards attend the good and bad. Perchance
they move with a slower pace; yet every man hopes according to his Conscience.
Certainly had your Country and your Progenitors the Liberty to discourse ye,
they would use no other then these Expressions. Oh Caesar, we most valiant Men
begat thee in a most noble City, to be to Us our Honor and Protection, a
terror to our Enemies. What we, with many Hardships and Dangers won, that we
delivered to thee as soon as born, together with thy Life; the most renowned
Country upon Earth; the most illustrious Family in all that Country: a virtuous
Education, and Riches honestly obtained: moreover all the Dignities of Peace,
and the rewards of War.

For these most extraordinary Kindnesses we do not require from thee, any Act
of Lewdness or Impiety; but to restore our Liberty subverted. Which being once
performed, the Renown of thy Virtue will swiftly fly through all the habitable
World. For as yet, tho thy Atchievments have been famous both in Peace and War,
however thy Glory is but equal with that of many other illustrious Persons. But
if thou do restore almost from utter Ruin, a City the most celebrated for its
Name and large extent of Empire, who will be more renowned, who more
illustrious upon Earth? But if otherwise it befall this Empire through thy
lingering Sickness or Death, who so stupid not to dread the Devastations, Wars
and Slaughters that will ravage all the Nations of the World.

Thus if you have an honest Intention to gratify your Country and your
Ancestors, succeeding Ages enjoying the fruits of your Labors, and living in
Peace and Liberty, will pay their acknowledgments to Your Virtue, and your
Death will prove far more Illustrious then your Life, For the Living sometimes
Fortune, sometimes Envy worries; but when Life has paid the debt of Nature,
Detraction ceasing, Virtue more and more exalts it self. And thus what I
thought necessary to be done, and advantageous to Your self as briefly as was
possible, I have laid open; beseeching the Immortal Gods, that whatsoever
course you take, all your endeavors may be Crowned with prosperous Success for
your own good and the welfare of the Public.

The Declamation of C. Crispus Salustius against M. Tullius Cicero.
I should not easily be induced to brook thy scurrillous Reproaches. Marcus
Tullius, if I thought it were not rather the distemper of thy Mind, then thy
Judgment that provoked thee to this Petulant Humor. However, because I find,
thou have neither Moderation nor Modesty, I will vouchsafe thee an Answer; to
the end that if thou have taken any Pleasure in Obloquy, thou may be quit of
it, by being sharply told thy own. Where shall I complain? To whom shall I make
my Moan, most noble Conscript Fathers; that the Commonwealth is rent in pieces,
and obnoxious to the Treachery of every Audacious Sycophant? Must it be to the
People of Rome so corrupted with Bribes and Exhibitions, that they put both
themselves and all their Fortunes to Sale? Or to you, most noble Conscript
Fathers, whose authority is the scorn of every lewd and wicked Rakeshame? More
especially when M. Tullius defends the Laws and Judicial Proceedings of the
Roman People, and Governs in this Senate, as if he were a Branch of the
Renowned Scipio Africanus, and not an Upstart, an Inn-mate, and but lately
admitted to the Privileges of this City. Think thou, Marcus Tullius, thy
Words and Actions are unknown to the World? Have thou not so lived from thy
Childhood, as not to believe any thing a Defilement to thy Body, which another
took delight in? Did it not cost thee the loss of thy Chastity to learn that
Scolding Eloquence of thine from M. Piso? No wonder then that thou putst it as
ignominiously to sale, as thou did lewdly purchase it. But I am apt to
believe, thy Domestic Splendour elevates thy Thoughts: Thy Sacrilegious Wife,
besmeared with Perjury: Thy Daughter a Whore, that goes snips with her Mother,
more gamesom and obedient, then is decent, to a Father: Thy House thou gottest
by Violence and Rapine, fatal to thee and thine; as if it were to let us
understand, how strangely this City is ranvers'd, while thou the most vile of
Men, Usurp'st the Habitation of M. Crassus, once a Consular Person.

Which being so, yet Cicero makes his Braggs, that he has sat in Council with
the Immortal Gods; and thence that he was hither sent a Guardian, and Protector
of the City; not to give him the Title of Hangman, who derives his Glory from
the Public Calamity: as if thy Consulship were not the Cause of that
Conspiracy; and the Commonwealth half ruined, when she had Thee for her
Preserver.

But perhaps those things advance thee more, which in Consultation with thy
Wife Terentia, after thy Consulship, were acted by thee for the Public good:
when at home ye contrived the Judgments of thy Which enacted the choice of
Judges from among the Common People, fifteen out of every Tribe.
Plautian Law; condemning some of the Conspirators to death; and fining others.
When one built up the Tusculanum for thee, another the Pompeian Country Palace;
another purchased thee a City House. But he that could do nothing, he was sure
to be accused; either he came to storm thy House; or he had plotted to Murder
the Senate; in short, thou had evidence enough against him. If I accuse thee
falsely, give an account how thou came by such an Estate; what were thy
Gettings by bawling and wrangling at the Bar? where thou had the Money to
erect those sumptuous Edifices, the Tusculanum, and the Pompeianum? Or if thou
have nothing to say, who can be so silly as to doubt, thou did rake thy
Wealth out of the Blood and Bowels but of thy fellow Citizens?

But perhaps this Upstart of Arpinum, descended from the Family of C. Marius,
imitates his Courage; contemns the private grudges of the Nobility; takes care
of the Roman People neither terrified by Threats; nor coax'd with Favor. But
is this an Argument of his Amity and Verture? A very probable Story: the most
inconstant of Men, a Cringer to his Enemies, contumelious to his Friends;
sometimes of this, sometimes of that side; faithful to no body; a Shuttlecock
of a Senator; a Mercinary Patron; no part of whose Body is free from the
Contamination of Lewdness: a vain Tongue, rapacious Hands, an Abyss like
Throat, and speedy Heels to run for his Life: qualities so lewd, that it is a
shame to name 'em. Yet being such as we have here described him, this very Man
is not ashamed to boast and cry O Fortunate Rome, re-born when I was Consul
Fortunate when thou were Consul, Cicero! rather unhappy and miserable, which
suffered the most cruel Proscription of her Citizens; when thou, in the
Distractions of the Commonwealth, constrained'st all good Men, dismayed with
fear to obey thy Tyranny; when all Penal proceedings, all the Laws were in thy
hands; when after thou had abrogated the Porcian Law, and made a Rape upon
our Liberty, Thou had assumed to thy self the Power of all our Lives and
Deaths.

But it is not enough that thou have done what thou have done unpunished; thou
put'st us always in Mind of it; and throwest it in our Teeths: we are not
permitted to forget our Slavery. Prithee, Good Circero, be contented with what
thou have acted; Pride thy self in what thou have accomplished: it is enough
that we have been the sufferers. But why should thou still load our Ears with
what we hate, thy odious Name? Will thou persecute us with thy presumptuous
surquedry?

Arms yield to Gowns, and Laurels to the Tongue.
As if thou had performed those things of which thou boasts, not armed, but
with thy hands in thy Gown sleeves; or that there were any difference between
thee and Sylla the Dictator, but only the Title of Command.

But why should I talk any more of thy Insolence? whom Minerva instructed in
all the Sciences, the Mighty Jupiter admitted into the Council of the Gods; and
Italy when banished, brought back upon her Shoulders. I beseech thee, dear
Romulus of Arpinum, who have surmounted in Valor all the Paulus's, Fabius's,
and Scipio's, what Office do thou hold in this City? what Faction Suits with
thy Humor best? What Friends, what Enemies have thou? The lewdest in the City
are thy Friends, thy Enemies all those that love the Commonwealth. The Persons,
whom fain thou would have betrayed in the City, thou courtest like a
Courtesan. Else, returning out of Exile from Dyrrachium, wherefore did thou
follow them? They who were Tyrants formerly, their Grandeur now delights thee:
They who were thy Patriots before, are now Madmen, and Lunaticks. Thy Tongue
is oiled for Vatinius: Sextius is a Knave. Thou make nothing, sawcily to
wound the Reputation of Bibulus: but Caesar's extolled. Him whom thou could
have eaten once, obsequiously now thou fawn'st upon. Thou think one thing
sitting, another standing; of the Commonwealth: a Hairbrain'd Fugitive, that
knows not where to put his Confidence.

The END.

