I Do Appoint Robert Boulter to Print this my Narrative, Entitled, A Further
DISCOVERY of the late Horrid and POPISH-PLOT, etc. and that no others Print the
same. JOHN SMITH. October 12. 1679.

THE NARRATIVE OF Mr. John Smith OF Walworth, in the County-Palatine of Durham,
Gent.

Containing a further DISCOVERY Of the late Horrid and POPISH-PLOT. With an
Account of 1 st. The inconsistency of the Popish-Principles with the Peace of
all States. 2 ly. Their Destructiveness to all Protestant Kingdoms. 3 ly. The
Encouragements upon which the Papists undertook so Hellish a Design against
England. 4 ly. The Progress they had made in it. 5 ly. The Reasons of their
endeavoring, more especially the Death of His present Majesty. 6 ly. With a
Vindication of the Justice of the Nation upon the Traitors already Executed.


LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Robert Boulter at the Turks-head in
Cornhill, 1679.

To the KING.
AS I owe my Allegiance, and have Dedicated my Life to Your Majesty; so I
desire with all Humility in my self, and Zeal for Your Happiness, to offer up
these Papers unto You.

Many of Your Subjects are capable to present You, with what is more suitable to
the Greatness of Your Understanding; but nothing can be laid at Your Feet which
more nearly concerns the Preservation of Your Sacred Person, the Safety of Your
Crown, and Security of Your Royal Dignity.

The danger of Conspiracies lies in their being concealed, none ever perished
by a detected Plot, but such as have wilfully abandoned themselves to be
destroyed. And therefore, while some of your Subjects, to defeat the Hellish
Machinations of the Papists against your Majesty and People, are contented to
expose themselves, not only to secret Assassinations, but to the vowed Revenge
of a disloyal and desperate Party; It is hoped, that you will not at once both
desert your Self, and de-relinquish the care of three Kingdoms, as well as
Sacrifice those Loyal Souls, to gratify implacable Enemies. Sir, It Is past the
Malice and Strength of your Adversaries, either to destroy your Life, or
subvert your Government, unless (which God avert) you join in the Conspiracy,
by some Personal accession. And against dangers that you voluntarily expose
your self unto, there is no promise that the immense Wisdom, or Almighty Power,
should interpose to save you. The Conspirators find it convenient to alter the
Methods of accomplishing their Treason; but they remain unchangeable in their
Traitorous Designs. But Sir, it is in your own Power, not only to Reign in
defiance of their violent Attempts, but to render your People happy while you
live, and relinquish them safe when you dye. For to all this there is no more
required, but your harkening to the Advice of your Parliament; who as they are
best able to Counsel you, so their own interest, and the welfare of those they
represent, will always oblige them to it. Might your Popish Adversaries but
once divide betwixt you and your People, and dispossess you out of the hearts
of your Subjects; the next thing will be (having left you none to stand by you)
to wrest your Crown from you, and deject you from your Throne. As it is
impossible you should miscarry while you and your People agree, so no humane
means can prevent the Destruction of these Kingdoms, and the Unhappiness of
your Royal Self and Family in their Ruins, if through the Clamours of the
Popish Party you should be divided from your People as represented in
Parliament, and to be withdrawn from harkening to their Advice.

Your Majesty's Most humble, and most loyal Subject, JOHN SMITH.

TO THE READER.
HAd the many Discoveries of the Plot already communicated to the World, served
either to dismay the Conspirators from their further proceeds, or to awaken the
Nation proportionably to its danger, The Conveying of this to the knowledge of
the Kingdom, had been wholly forborne. It Is true, that the offering this
Information to His Majesty and the Council, was an indispensible Duty, which
could not be superseded without Disloyalty to the Government: but the divulging
it to the Kingdom, is to be resolved into that Lethargy as the motive of it,
which too many still lie under. Shall it be said that our supine folly and
unreasonable unbelief, promote our ruin beyond what the malice of our Enemies
was able to accomplish? Shall their Address in impudent Pamphlets, wheedle a
company of easy and silly Souls, to disbelieve what the King, the Council, and
two Parliaments (being first assured themselves) have both recommended it to
the Faith of these Kingdoms, and consigned it over to Posterity, as an
unquestionable certainty. It is not without astonishment, that I observe how a
generation of men, whose interest makes it necessary, and whose principles
makes it lawful, to Lie, are able by mere impudence, to outface the fullest
Evidence, and most uncontrollable Convictions of their Guilt.

Reader, Thou will therefore find in these following Sheets, not only a further
Attestation given to prove a Hellish Conspiracy against His Majesty, the
Protestant Religion, and the Government by Law Established; but thou will meet
with some account, both of the Advantages which did facilitate them in their
designs, and of the several steps which they had taken to accomplish them. And
if after all this, the Protestant Inhabitants of these Nations will suffer
themselves to be destroyed, (by continuing their Divisions) notwithstanding
such fair warning, I will only say, that they deserve to perish without
Compassion and Pity.

A further DISCOVERY Of the late Horrid and Popish-PLOT.
WHat disturbances and fatal mischiefs, the claim and exercise Romish Faith:
the Histories of foregoing Ages do sufficiently inform us. The alone demurring
to the Usurpations of the Roman Pontife, has derived from the pretended
Infallible Chair, the Excommunication of Princes, the discharging Subjects from
their Allegiance, the Alienation of Crowns and Kingdoms, the interdicting the
performance of all Divine Services in Nations, which according to their own
style, were in all things else Catholic. For besides the manifold instances
which all parts of the Western World afford us to this purpose, such as Gregory
the seventh, his Excommunicating Henry the fourth; Sylvester the third, his
Anathematizing Henry the fifth; Gregory the ninth, his cursing Frederick the
second, Emperor of Germany. And Innocent the third, his Excommunicating Philip
August, and setting his Kingdom under an Interdict; Benedict the thirteenth,
Charles the sixth, and Boniface the eighth, Philip the Fair, Kings of France:
I say, besides these, and many other Foreign instances of this nature, the
Kingdom of England alone has afforded us too many woeful proofs of the Papal
Usurpation, and falsely pretended Jurisdiction over Temporal Monarchs, and their
Dominions. So that toward the recommending the Romish Religion, and the
Authority of the Sea of Rome, to the love of my Countrymen, I need only put
them in mind of the Entertainment that William Rufus, Henry the second, King
John, and Henry the eighth, Princes of this Kingdom, met with from the
Universal Father. For even that Prince whom I mentioned last, not only lived
and died himself in the Romish Faith, but put to death all such as were
Arraigned for being otherwise minded; So that the only reason why he was
Excommunicated by two Popes one after another, his Kingdom interdicted, his
Subjects absolved from the Fealty they owed him, and a disposal made of his
Crown to others, who were entrusted with the Exemption of the Papal Censure,
was nothing but his declining the Authority and Jurisdiction of the Pope, and
his vindicating those Rights which by our ancient Law appertained to the
Imperial Crown of this Land.

Let Princes and People be never so zealous in all other points of the Roman
Faith, if they do but dispute the Universal-Jurisdiction of the Triple Crown,
they expose themselves to Depositions, Interdicts, and whatsoever else it
pleases his Holiness to denounce against them. It is but for a Monarch or State
to thwart the Capricio, and cross the humor of the Pope, or disoblige the
Court of Rome, and they immediately run the hazard of being destroyed, under
the very Countenance and Allowance of those Doctrines which have the stamp of
Articles of Faith. The Interdict of the State of Venice by Paul the fifth, the
Murder of Henry the third of France, and the Assassination of Henry the
fourth, likewise of France; were some of the late Commentaries upon the
foregoing Principles, and Items to the world, that though they did not think
fit to act up to them at all times, yet they reserved them in their Petto, to
be made use of upon occasion. And it may not be altogether unworthy of our
observation, that the Murder of Henry the third by James Clement a Dominican,
was not only magnified in a solemn Oration by Sixtus the fifth, which was
afterward Printed and Published at Rome, but it has been lately translated by
some Romish Priest, or other, with the Latin in one Column, and English in
another; and that in all likelihood to inflame some Papal Votary to the like
attempt upon His Sacred Majesty.

in ordine ad spiritualia, upon which alone he might (as heretofore he has
done) Anathematize our Kings, Divest them of their Royal Power, and not only
Absolve their Subjects from Fidelity and Obedience, but Commissionate and
Empower them to make War upon their Sovereigns; and both to Depose and Murder
them, under the encouragement of meriting Heaven by so doing. I say it is not
unworthy of our reflection, what other latent claims (besides these) as he may
be likely to revive of an absolute and uncontrollable Temporal Jurisdiction
over these Kingdoms. The King of England, says Bellarmine, Lib. cui Titulus
Tortus, p. 19. See Baron. ad Ann. 1172.
is subject to the Pope by a twofold right, first by reason of his Apostolic
Power, and secondly, by right of proper Dominion. For as to England he may be
ready to plead, if not King Henry the second his submitting his Crown to the
Pope; yet King John's resignation of it into the hands of the Popes Legate, and
receiving it again as a Feudatory to the Sea of Rome. And for Scotland, he may
possibly revive that title which so long ago as Boniface the Eighth, Matthew.
Westminster. lib. 2. Polyd. Virg. lib. 17. Hist. Angl.
he pretended over that Kingdom; namely, That the Kingdom of Scotland belongs
of right to the Church of Rome, and that it is in the Popes power alone, to
give it to, or take it from whom he pleases. And lastly for Ireland, who
knows but that they may start, as a pretense for a temporal Jurisdiction over
that Nation, Henry the thirds swearing homage to the Pope for it, and obliging
himself to pay a Tribute in recognition of the Papal right. Its true, these
things are impertinent and ridiculous in themselves; yet were Popery
re-established in England, and the people brought under the conduct of the
Jesuits, who as they labor most effectually in the perversion of the Nation,
so being the Janissaries of the Holy See its easy to apprehend how far they may
mis-improve them toward the serving the interest of the Pope, in case any
difference should arise either between the King and him, or any other Foreign
Prince that his Holiness, for secular ends shall think fit to befriend. Surely
its with respect to these pretensions, that Bellarmine so solemnly declares,
ubi supra.
That these Kingdoms are the Diminions of the Church; and that the Pope is our
natural and direct Lord; and the King at best but his Vassal. And it was in
pursuance of this right that Gregory the thirteenth Commissioned Tho. Stukeley,
an English Rebel against Queen Elizabeth, to conquer the Kingdom of Ireland for
his Holiness's Bastard-Son James Boncompagnon. And by virtue of the same
pretension did Innocent the tenth, during the late Wars, usurp a Royal Power
over that Nation, and accordingly gave forth all kind of Commissions by the
hands of his Nuncio.

And if diverse principles of Popery are unfriendly to the safety of Monarchs,
Kingdoms, even where their Religion is Nationally received and submitted to; we
cannot imagine that the Peace and Security of these Nations, who not only are
of a different Religion, but declare against them as Antichristians and
Idolaters, should be better provided for, if occasion serve to do mischief. For
besides the liableness of all Protestant Princes and People to the fatal
consequence of the foregoing Doctrines of the Papal Usurpation and Jurisdiction
over all Nations, they have others particularly and especially calculated to
Authorize and Justify their destruction and ruin. Such, as that we are all
Heretics, and thereupon are not only de jure Excommunicated by the Lateran
Council under Innocent the third, but de facto, pronounced such for ever by
Paul the fourth, anno 1558. And as if that were not sufficient, we are in de
Bulla Coenae Domini, read commonly on Maunday Thursday, solemnly Cursed. And
thereupon the Papists in the several Dominions where the Protestant Religion
obtains, are not only discharged from all Allegiance to Princes, but all
Catholics are obliged by the strictest bond of Conscience, and under the
penalty of the utmost hazard of their Souls, to depose such Heretical Princes.
They are so far from being guilty of murder, says Urban the third, that kill
any who are Excommunicate, that they are bound to exterminate Heretics, as
they would be esteemed Christians themselves, says the Decree of the Lateran
Council under Innocent the third. Yea, by the late Bull of Clement the tenth,
for any Papist to be Loyal to an Heretical Prince, is publicly declared to be
a crime; and such are solemnly cursed in the view of all the world, for that
which the principles of Reason and Revelation, and without which no Government
is safe, oblige them unto. De Laicis lib. 3. cap. 22.
Bellarmine speaks intelligibly when he says, That Heretics are to be
destroyed root and branch, if it can possibly be done; but if it appear that
the Catholics are so few that they cannot conveniently with their own safety,
attempt such a thing, then it is best in such a case to be quiet, least upon
opposition made by Heretics, the Catholics should be worsted. In 2.2. Th. qu.
12.
Hereupon Bannes has no other Apology to make for the English Papists, that
they do not forcibly rise against the King and his Protestant Subjects, but
that they are not powerful enough for such an undertaking and therefore the
Attempt would be to their own prejudice and damage. So that upon the whole,
Protestants do only hold their lives at the courtesy of the Papists, till they
be in a condition by number and strength to destroy and extirpate them. Good
natured people that forbear to kill us, forasmuch as one of our lives may cost
three of their own. And yet though at sometimes they seem to judge it
convenient, either to conceal the foregoing principles, or to suffer them for a
season to lie dormant by them: yet in reality such has been their faithfulness
to their Doctrines, that they have never suffered us to be any considerable
while without some testimony of the good will they maintain for Heretics, and
how ready they are to do all those meritorious offices of killing and
destroying us, which their Religion obliges them to do. I shall not mention
here, the vast numbers of Christians that have been butchered by the sentence
of the Roman Inquisition, of which it is reported that Paul the 4 th should
say, that the Authority of the Sea of Rome depended upon that office, and that
it was settled in Spain by the inspiration of the holy Ghost. But surely he
meant not that which came down from Heaven, but that which was sent from Rome
in a Cloak-bag. Nor shall I insist upon the infinite slaughters of such as
professed Jesus Christ in sincerity, by Crusado's and sanctified Wars, though
Authentic Authors tell us, that in France alone there were slain ten hundred
thousand persons in the persecution raised against the Waldenses, upon no other
account but their dissenting from the Church of Rome. Neither shall I dwell
upon the Parisian Massacre, by which in a few days there were murdered above
forty thousand persons, and that for no other cause, but because the Church of
Rome had adjudged them Heretics; but I shall rather call over some of the
attempts against these Nations, commenced upon, and justified by the foregoing
principles of the Papal Church, in reference to those who differ in Religion
from them. No sooner was Reformation established in England under Edward the
sixth, than diverse Rebellions in several parts of the Land, were by the
influence of the aforesaid Doctrines, and the instigation of Priests and
Friars, raised against the King and Government, as every one may read in our
vulgar Chronicles. The number of those Rebels may be guessed at by the lists of
the killed and taken at some of the defeats given unto them; And if we will
believe our Histories, there were above five thousand slain and taken
Prisoners, of those that rebelled in Cornwall and Devon-shire; and above five
thousand slain, of those that rose in Norfolk and Suffolk, besides those which
were taken Prisoners there, and who were cut off and apprehended in suppression
of the Rebellion in Yorkshire. Now this excellent Prince being dead, and Queen
Mary Established on the Throne, though she was not of a bloody, or of an ill
disposition in her self, yet her Religion obliged her to those Cruelties, which
have at once left an indelible stain upon her memory, and given us to fear what
we may expect if the Government should at any time fall into the hand of one
infected with the Papal Doctrine. For though her Reign was but short, yet there
were in the compass of a few years, two hundred seventy seven publicly burnt,
besides near as many more who perished by imprisonment, torment and famine. And
all these merely for Religion, not so much as one of them being chargeable with
any traitorous Machination against the Government. Upon her removal by a
natural death, and Queen Elizabeth succeeding on the Throne, the Reformed
Religion was again re-established in the Kingdom. And whereas notwithstanding
the severity which had been expressed to her self, and the cruelty which had
been exercised upon those of the same Faith with her; She not only buried all
resentments, but was willing to suffer the Papists to live quietly, both in the
enjoyment of their Estates, and the private exercise of their Religion: yet it
is not to be expressed by what ways of Assassination, Conspiracy, Rebellions at
home, and Invasions from abroad, they endeavored to destroy Her Person,
overthrow the Government, and make the Kingdom a Field of blood. In pursuance
of what by their Religion they owe to Heretics, Pius the 5 th did not only
solemnly Excommunicate and Damn her self and all her Protestant Subjects, but
likewise cursed all the Papists that should give any Obedience to her, or her
Laws. That whole Bull proceeds upon her being a Heretic, and for being so, the
holy Father deprives her of all Dominion and Dignity, absolves all her Subjects
from any Obligation of Allegiance; and includes them under the same Curse,
though Papists, that should yield any Subjection to her. Here was a Paraphrase
upon the Principles of the Romish Religion toward Heretics, which the Papists
from time to time exemplified by practices suitable to the Doctrines of their
Faith, and the infallible Commentaries of the Roman Mufti. For I may
confidently say, that the Treasons of one kind and another that were contrived
against her, and her Protestant Subjects, were more for number, than the years
of her Government. But all their Machinations and Attempts, being by the
infi^ite wisdom and goodness of God, detected, disappointed and defeated; and
She laid in her Grave, accompanied with the Tears of her People: The like
Conspiracies continued against King James who succeeded her. For as they had
endeavored by a Book published under the counterfeit name of Doleman, but
wrote by Parsons, by communication with Cardinal Allen, and Sir Francis
Inglefield, to disprove at least Sully his Title to the Crown: so they obtained
two Breve's from Clement the 8 th to exclude him, unless he would swear to
promote the Romish Religion. Nor is it any matter of amazement or surprise,
that the Roman See should act in that manner to King James, forasmuch as
Gregory the 14 th had a little before by two Monitory Bulls declared Henry the
4 th incapable of the Crown of France, and that upon no account, but because he
was a Heretic; yea (which may be a little more startling to those who are not
acquainted with transactions of this nature) notwithstanding that Henry the
third was both a loyal Son of the Church of Rome, and had been a bloody and
severe prosecuter of the Hugonots, and had more adored the Pope than ever any
King of France did, yet the Pope did both covenant and agree with the Duke of
Guise, to depose the said Prince, and to transfer the Crown from those to whom
by the Laws of France it was to descend; and to settle it on the said Duke and
his Posterity, only with this proviso, That he would cause the Estates of
France to acknowledge the Jurisdiction of the Roman See, and without
modification or restriction, to abolish the Liberties and Privileges of the
Gallican Church. But to return, King James being in defiance of all Papal
contrivances, Established in the Throne; The first fruits of their Loyalty to
an Heretical King, and the first Evidence of their Principles to such as
renounce the Communion of the Church of Rome, was to welcome him with a Plot,
contrived by Watson and Clarke two secular Priests, but wheedled into it by the
Jesuits (as I have heard themselves often declare) and afterward^ discovered in
revenge, for their writing two Books; the one styled, Quodlibets, and the
other, Important Considerations. I know the Jesuits and their Factors have of
late the impudence to say, that they were drawn into that Conspiracy by Gray,
See Compend. of the Plot, p. 73.
Cobham, and Rawleigh, Protestants; who having been Queen Elizabeth's old
Favorites, disliked King James his succession to the Crown; and that Watson
acknowledged his infamous death to be a Just Judgment for his Factious
Writings, and designs against their Order and Society. Things as wholly false
in themselves, so recorded by no authentic Historian of the times when they
were transacted. But to pass this: That Plot miscarrying, the Jesuits, the
great Crafts-masters in all Conspiracies, designed another, and that such a one
as might every way correspond to the Principles of the Roman Religion, and bear
proportion to the good will which by virtue of those principles, they bear to
Heretics. And accordingly they contrived the blowing up the King, Lords, and
Commons; the whole Kingdom, as well in Epitome, as in its Representatives. And
this they did merely in pursuance of what their Religion obliged them unto,
being withal quickened to the design by the two Briev's received some years
before, but hitherto kept dormant to operate upon a convenient occasion, and
good opportunity. But being disappointed in that also, (through its having been
discovered by means that I now enquire not into) and the Prodigiousness of the
Conspiracy, having awakened England to a more signal watchfulness, and
effectual care for its own preservation, as it had astonished the whole world,
Pagan as well as Christian, where the report of it arrived; the Kingdom had
some reprieve for a few years, from the public workings of the Popish
principles, in the Catholic Service, and office of destroying and murdering
Heretics. But even in that interval wherein they seemed to lie most dormant,
they gave us instances enough how acceptable those Heretic murdering
Doctrines are at Rome. For while all the world stood amazed at the former
attempt, and many of the Papists abroad seemed to express their detestation of
the Principles which produced it, The Pope and Court of Rome took all
imaginable care to have the Traitors magnified and honored. For Garnet the
Provincial of the Jesuits, though by his acknowledgment under his own hand, he
dyed for Treason; yet had his name inserted into the English Martirology, and
his Bones were reserved for Relics, and his Image erected over Altars: and
two Jesuits who had been principal Conspirators in that Hellish Plot, and had
by misfortune escaped the Halter, which was the reward due to them for their
barbarous Conspiracy; were upon their arrival at Rome, both of them advanced to
be the Popes Penitentiaries. And moreover, when the King and Parliament for the
security of the Kings person, and preservation of the Government, and the lives
of his Subjects, were forced to enact and impose on the Papists the Oath of
Allegiance; Paul the 5 th published diverse Bulls against it, and both Becanus
and Bellarmine, besides many more, wrote expressly in opposition to the taking
of it. But the next impression of their Faith in its suitable and proper works,
made amends for their laziness and barrenness during that interim: for through
the influence of the same principles, and being animated by the Pope, they
murdered above two hundred and fifty thousand in Ireland, without any other
inducement to it, save that they were Protestants; and that in killing of them
the Catholic cause was promoted. For at no time did the Irish enjoy more
liberty as to their Religion, and more tranquillity as to their Persons and
Estates, than immediately before they broke out into that horrid Rebellion. Nor
was that quiet and security they possessed, the fruits only of a connivance,
but the effects of many Acts of Grace, which had a little before past in favor
of them. And as there was no alarm given of this, either by foregoing Citations
to return into the bosom of the Mother Church, nor by any solemn publication of
their being Excommunicated, nor by any proclaimed Crusadoes, or a holy War;
least the secure Heretics being numerous, and not willing to part with their
lives tamely, might have been roused to self-defence; so this barbarous
massacring of so many thousand persons, who had laid innumerable obligations
upon their Popish Irish Neighbors, can be resolved into nothing but the
principles of the Romish Religion, and the Obligations that Papists are under
by virtue of their very Faith, to root out Heretics, when a convenience
offers. And take possession of their Estates, which by the Decree of the
Lateran Council under Innocent the third, are forfeited to the Roman
Catholics; and which not only may, but ought to be seized, whenever it comes
within the Circle of their Power to accomplish it. There are many other
instances which might be re-collected of their readiness to be as kind and
merciful to Heretics, as their Religion not only instructs, but obliges
them, were it not that this damnable and hellish Plot, which has been for some
years last past, and still is, carried on for murdering the King, subverting
the Government, and rooting out the Protestant Religion, supercedeth all
further need of insisting upon those things.

To make then a nearer approach to the present Plot, the Agents of Rome having
with the utmost diligence, as well as all imaginable craft and art, especially
since the Restoration of His Majesty, projected and pursued the re-introduction
of Popery into these Kingdoms, and the Extirpation of Heresy, (as they are
pleased to style the Protestant Religion) they were at last (as they
apprehended) come within view of infallibly compassing their design. Now there
were some things which afforded them advantages for the attaining these Ends,
which at no time since the Reformation, were they before now possessed of the
assistance of. The first was, That Interest at Court, and universal esteem
through the whole Kingdom, which the pretented Loyalty of many Catholics,
during the late unhappy War betwixt His late Majesty, and many of His People,
who acted under the influence and supposed Authority of a Parliament;
reconciled and gave unto them. This, together with the Assistance which some of
the Papists, contributed to the escape of his present Majesty, and the seeming
readiness of many of them, to cooperate with others, in his Restoration, gave
them not only a share in the peace and quiet which these Kingdoms were restored
unto; but procured a further degree of respect to them, than had been either
usually, or universally shown them since the Reformation. And though I would
not endeavor to lessen their Loyalty at any time, when they might but seem to
pretend to it; yet to deal plainly, I know very little reason for their
pretenses of Loyalty to King Charles the first, more than to His Majesty who
now happily Reigns: yea, I know very much why they ought at least to supercede
all right of merit on that foot of account. For not to insist upon what
preceded the unhappy War; though antecedently to that, we are told of a
Conspiracy to destroy the Kings Life, whereof the discovery was found in
Archbishop Land's Library, See Prynt Discovery of a Popish Plot by Haberfeld.
being declared by Andreas ab Haberfeld to Sir William Boswell, Ambassador then
at the Hague, who revealed it to the Archbishop. But I say, not to dwell upon
this, nor upon that, that I am now to say, namely, that it is affirmed, and
that with all the moral certainty imaginable, that the Romish Emissaries were
both the principal Authors of that Uniformity with England, which was pressed
upon Scotland, and also prime sticklers to prevent its being entertained there,
and all to foment a War betwixt the two Kingdoms. The Priests names have been
oftener then once published to the world, who were sent by Cardinal Richlieu
into that Kingdom, to raise and inflame differences betwixt the two Nations.
And the motives upon which that great Boutefeu of Europe was so earnest to
kindle a War in His Majesty's Dominions, are sufficiently understood, by all
who are not wholly strangers to the affairs of that time. But there are two
things which overthrow all their pretenses of Loyalty to his late Majesty, of
which they so confidently boast, and have made so large advantages. One is
their commencing that bloody War in Ireland, in the massacring so many of His
Majesty's Protestant Subjects; which as it increased the Jealousies, that the
like might be designed against those of the same Religion, in this Kingdom; so
the making all Assistances (by the War which they had begun there) from thence
impossible, gave confidence to the Parliament to be the more peremptory in
those demands, which His Majesty finding it necessary to refuse to comply with,
proved the causes of that unnatural War which fell out among our selves, and of
all the fatal consequences of it. And as a further Testimony of their Loyalty
to that Prince, they not only renounced all Allegiance to Him, and banished His
Lieutenant, but assumed the Royal Authority to themselves, owing only a
dependence upon the Pope and his Nuncio. The second is, that accession which
they had to the murder of His late Majesty. For as the principles upon which
those seem to have acted, who publicly destroyed the King, are not only
countenanced, but most especially taught by the Doctors and Casuists of the
Church of Rome; so the effects of those principles are to be charged as well
upon them that teach Doctrines of such pernicious consequence, as upon them
that practice them. Hear then what the greatest Authors in the Romish Church
declare to the purpose before us. De Laicis lib. 3. ca. 6.
The Power of a Nation, says Bellarmine, is settled in the whole multitude as
its true and proper Subject; and accordingly they may change a Kingdom into an
Aristocratical, or Democratical state, whenever they find cause for it. De
jure and Instit. lib. 2. cap. 6.
If a Prince be a Tyrant, says Lessius; he may be deposed, or declared a
public enemy by the Commonwealth; and thereupon it may be lawful to attempt
any thing against his Person. When the Commonwealth, De Rego, lib 6. ca. 6.
says Mariana, cannot other ways secure and preserve its own peace and safety,
it may by a right inherent in it self, declare the King to be the common Enemy,
and then destroy him with the Sword. Thus we plainly see, that whatsoever
others did, the Jesuits had first taught them the principles upon which they
might justify the doing of it. But this is not all, for over and above this,
they have not only been openly charged to have had a hand in the contriving and
actually compassing the late Kings death; but the person that does thus accuse
them, undertakes the Justification of it, either before his present Majesty, or
before any one who can legally require it of him. And which is an evident
demonstration of their Guilt, notwithstanding all the interest which they have
had of late years, from which they might at least promise themselves Justice,
if they could not expect Favor; yet though challenged to bring this matter to
a hearing, they have not so much as once dared to attempt it. Yea the late King
himself, was informed a little before his death, that the Jesuits at a general
meeting in France, in revenge for his condescending in the Treaty at the Isle
of Wight, to pass some Bills in prejudice of them, and the Romish Religion, had
unanimously resolved by the power, interest, and influence that they had in and
upon the Army, to bring him to Justice, and get him Executed. Accordingly when
the stroke was given, both one that was a Romish Priest, and a Confessor,
namely, Sarabras, brandished his Sword, and proclaimed, That now their greatest
Enemy was cut off and destroyed. I suppose that the Judgment of Sir William
Morris late Secretary of State, will bear some weight with all English men, as
well upon the account of his great Integrity, as the many opportunities he
enjoyed beyond others, of satisfying himself in a matter of this importance;
See Moulins Vindicat.
hear then what he declares in a Letter to Dr. du Moulin, August the 9 th.
1673. This I may say safely, and will do it confidently, that many Arguments
did create a violent suspicion, very near convincing Evidences, that the
irreligion of the Papists, was chiefly guilty of the murder of that excellent
Prince, the Odium whereof they would file -- to the account of the Protestant
Religion. However, the Papists having not only escaped Legal Arraignments upon
this account, but having since the Kings return, been esteemed by some, His
late Majesty's best friends; they have thereupon arrived at more respect, as
well as enjoyed more peace in their Persons and Estates, than they were in
possession of at any time since the Reformation. Nor do I believe that there is
any Protestant that would have envied them the security they enjoyed, or the
favor they had attained to, provided they had not abused them to the
destruction of His Majesty's Person, the supplanting of His Government, and the
extirpating the Religion which was Legally established. But alas, good and
peaceable Souls, such an opportunity of promoting the Catholic interest, was
not to be lost. They might now carry on their designs for the Triple-Crown,
none daring to suggest any thing to bring them under a jealousy, who would not
be immediately aspersed, as maligners of the Kings best friends. And it is not
to be apprehended what improvement of that little stock of credit, which some
of the Popish Gentry had gotten by their being on the late Kings side in the
last War; the Jesuits, Priests, and Friars, made to the furtherance of the
subjugating these Nations again to Rome, For now were all the principles of the
Papal Religion (by which those that espouse it, are obliged to root out
Heresy, and Establish the Jurisdiction of the Pope) inculcated from day to day
upon persons of one quality and another of the Papal Profession.

A second thing, which gave them no less advantage for the carrying on Queen
Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles the first, the Dissenters from the
Established way of the Church of England, were but few, in comparison of those
who were for Episcopacy, and the Rites and Ceremonies required by Law in Divine
Worship. So that there being then little jealousy of any danger to the Church
of England, from the Protestant Dissenters, how zealous soever they might even
in those days be for their way, the watchfulness of the Dignitaries of the
Church, and the labors of the inferior Clergy, were chiefly exercised and
laid out in reference to the Papists. But those who style themselves
Non-conformists, being now multiplied to that degree, as that they seem to bear
a much nearer proportion to the other party, than heretofore they did; The main
care of the Over seers of the Church, has thereupon much abated toward the
Papists, and been exerted toward them. (2) The Animosities between the
Protestants thus divided into two parties, were become higher, and their mutual
exasperations grown fiercer, than heretofore. For partly through the ill
entertainment which the Bishops and the conformable Clergy met with in the late
times, and partly through the ill entertainment which the Bishops and the
conformable Clergy met with in the late times, and partly through the
retaliation they have measured to Protestant Dissenters, since they had the
Authority of the Law, and assistance of the Government to befriend them, they
are wonderfully inflamed in mutual heats toward, and disgust of one another.
Of which it is easy to imagine, what manifold uses the Factors for the Roman
See, have made to the furthering of their own designs, which tend equally to
the ruin of both. For as the pretense of these Divisions, has served as a
plea to proselyte such who know not that the Divisions of the Church of Rome
are more numerous, and their feuds more irreconcilable; so the subtle
Ministers of the Papacy have, by winding themselves into all Companies, if not
the mustering themselves in all parties, endeavored both to heighten the
differences, and to make their Animosities against each other, not only hotter,
but more immortal. And while the one party of Protestants has been crying out
of Schism, and the other party of persecution; the Papists have to the reproach
of both, been undermining that common Faith which they equally center in, and
carrying on a design of destroying the one as well as the other, being in their
account both equally Heretics. I would be loath to believe, that through the
grandeur which the Clergy are exalted unto the possession of in the Church of
Rome, that therefore our Protestant Bishops and other Dignitaries of the
English Church, should think them the less dangerous; but this I know, that
those vulgarly styled Phanaticks, have judged themselves highly justified in
their clamours against the Conformable Clergy, in that they are so severely
treated, while in the mean time, no difference in any fundamental Doctrine from
the Church of England, can be objected unto them. And as the Jealousies which
the differences betwixt dissenting Protestants, have caused, have made every
overture, though for the preservation of Religion in general, and the safety of
the Nation, (wherein they are both alike interested) if proposed by one party,
to be suspected by the other; so the distrust which these Divisions have caused
in one Protestant toward another, has in no small measure emboldned the
Papists to hope, that in whatsoever they should attempt, there could be no
confederation among Protestants, either to resist or oppose them, And though I
cannot say it upon my own knowledge, yet I have cause to believe it from the
reason of the thing, as well as upon the Testimony of Mr. Dugdale, that they
were the more confident in their design privately to Assassinate the King, as
hoping when they had so done, to have Fathered it upon the Phanaticks. And as
they might very rationably believe, that would the Nation have been so possessed,
they would have avenged it upon that party, even to the extirpating of them; so
they assuredly knew, that thereby their own design of destroying the Episcopal
Protestants, would have been rendered much the more facile.

third thing that equally contributed with the former, to the introduction of
Popery into these Kingdoms, was the general profaneness which has greatly
overspread these Nations, beyond what at any time heretofore has been
observed. For besides that every profane person is truly of no Religion, and
therefore indifferent to seem to be of any, as interest and temptation sways
him; so no man can care much to be of that Religion, which not only condemns
all the ways he is resolved upon, but the more because he is of such a Religion
that does not allow them. And withal there is this further whereby such men
are disposed for Popery more than others, viz. That it can both allow them in
all the sins which they have a mind to, and secure them from the fears of
Eternal punishments in the practice of them. For partly by making many things
which Christ has forbid, and men from the power of their Lusts, and the
influence of their interest have a desire to commit, to be no sins: and partly
by making such things which the Gospel styles enormous crimes, to be but venial
offenses, which even in the Justice of God do deserve Eternal punishment; and
partly by that security from future wrath, which they propose to them who are
guilty of the most daring and prodigious Enormities, through their Doctrines
referring to Pennances, Absolutions, and Papal Indulgencies; They had all
imaginable grounds of confidence, that no profane Protestants (whatsoever
others did) would withstand them in their designs of introducing a Religion
which had so carefully provided for them.

Now being furthered by these several advantages for the introducing steps
which they had actually taken, and the progress which they had made for the
final compassing of those direful and tragical designs. And their first
remarkable advance, was their merciless and cruel burning of the City of
London, whereof as they were evidently proved the Authors, and Instruments, by
many Depositions taken by Order and Authority of Parliament, Anno 1667. so it
has been further testified against them by Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe, with an
enumeration of many particulars, clearly demonstrative beyond all control, of
their Guilt in that particular. And though they were prevented and disappointed
of what they further intended at that time, and whereunto the burning of London
was only designed as a Prologue; yet the compassing the devastation of the
City; was in it self alone, no small attainment in the matter of their
Catholic and main project. For besides the greatly impoverishing the whole
Nation, as well as the Inhabitants of the said City thereby; the re-building of
London, and the providing of Bread for distressed Families, was subject enough
to employ the thoughts and cares of most men for diverse years, without
affording them leisure to watch, observe and provide against the Designs of the
Papists. Besides, it may not be improbably conceived, that through Londons
lying in Ashes, and the whole Kingdoms being distressed through the influence
which this Metropolitan has upon all parts of the Nation; both the War which
His Majesty was then engaged in with the Dutch, was the less vigorously
prosecuted, and they emboldned to that which they perpetrated in burning some
of the Royal Navy in His Majesty's Chambers. And which has been more fatal,
from this Fountain of Distress that the Kingdom labored under, as an effect of
the burning of London, was the French King encouraged to the aggrandising
himself, by those Conquests which he made upon the Spanish Provinces in the
Netherlands. And His Majesty, whose Wisdom sufficiently instructed him, that it
was the interest even of His own Dominions, to have the balance of Europe kept
even, found himself disabled from giving that Check and Opposition to that
Princes designs, which we may very well conceive that otherwise he would have
done.

A second step, which the unwearied Enemies of the Protestant Religion French
King in their Councels, and their having in a great measure engaged him to
assist them with Money, and what else might be convenient for the executing
their Designs and Attempts. As the Jesuits heretofore labored in nothing more
effectually, than the advancing the King of Spain to the universal Monarchy of
Europe: So that Crown, being by various ways and means, (not here to be
insisted upon) much weakened, and rendered wholly incapable of aspiring any
further in that matter; The pragmatical and treacherous Jesuits, have of late
years entirely applied themselves, to the serving the interest, and promoting
the grandeur of the French Monarch. And when time, the revealer of truth, shall
have discovered the mysterious workings of those Sons of pride and deceit, it
will then appear how they have both kindled those flames of War, which have for
some years past laid many flourishing Provinces in Europe wast, and rendered all
the Neighboring Kingdoms and Lands, fields of Blood; but that they have by the
interest which they have obtained in all Courts, influenced some Princes to a
Neutrality, and others to an open Confederacy with France; so that the French
Monarch is now justly become the dread of all his Neighbors. But that which I
am observing is this, namely, that the French King being arrived at that
formidable greatness which he now stands in, the Plotters and Contrivers of the
ruin of England, drew him into their Councels, See Colemans Trial, and therein
his Letters.
and obtained promises of Assistance toward the rooting out of Heresy, (as
according to the Roman style they call the Protestant Religion) and nourishing
a misunderstanding betwixt His Majesty and His People. And as they do conceive
this to be a great advance toward their main project, otherwise they would
neither have so labored to compass it, nor bear themselves so much upon it,
having gained that point; so in case that other means for the enslaving of
these Nations, and subversion of Religion, should fail them, which at present
they nourish their hopes with the success of, we may rationally look for no
better consequences and effects from what I have mentioned, than that the King
being Excommunicate, and the Nation cursed with him; Lewis the 14 th should be
entrusted to execute the Papal Bann. And that Innocent the 11 th having made a
donation of these Kingdoms to him, as Pius the 5 th did to Philip the 2 d. King
of Spain, he should with a strength proportionable to the extent of his own
Dominions, and the greatness of his preparations for less designs, endeavor to
take possession of them, as Philip the second once did. And how ready they will
be to animate the French King to contribute the assistance of his Treasure and
Arms, for the rooting out of English Heretics, we may justly fear and presume
from the Councels they give him in reference to his own Subjects, that are of
the Reformed Religion. Politics of France, cap. 5.
For in a late Book, to the maxims of which the conduct of his whole affairs
seems very much adapted, he is not only informed, that his Ancestors never
failed to be Protectors of the Apostolic See, and the Church, but that they
turned their Arms, and exposed their Lives against the Albigenses; they
vanquished them, they destroyed them, they imprisoned the poor men of Lions.
And he is further told, that both by principles of Christianity, and maxims of
Policy, it is necessary for him to reduce all his Subjects to one and the same
belief; and that the Edict of Nantes, as being extorted from his Predecessors
by violence, and with Sword in hand, ought to be no obstruction in the
execution of so blessed a design, but that the said Edict is to be revoked, or
at least neglected. Now his compliance with this advice against the Protestants
in France, evidenced in many instances, See Persecution of the Protestants in
France.
whereby he has endeavored to extirpate them and their Religion, though by
degrees, and in the ways of Fraud and Art, as well as by Power and Force; may
at once and instruct us what measure and favor his Heretical Neighbors are to
expect from him, if incited against them by the Pope, and invited to the
Undertaking by the English Papists. If neither the advancing his Granfather
Henry the Great to the Crown, nor the securing himself in his Royalty, when
sought to be dethroned by the Prince of Condy, deserve or obtain better measure
of Requital, that what the Hugonots in France daily meet with; what may these
of the Protestant Religion in England look for from a Prince, that besides his
knowing the pretensions of the Kings of England to the Dominion of France, and
his remembering the Conquests that our Ancestors made upon that Monarchy, and
his sensing that his present Majesty's Council and Arms have hindered the
Carrere of his late Successes, I say what may we look for from a Prince, who
besides all this, is at once encouraged by the Pope, invited by the Roman
Catholics in England, and inflamed by his own ambition and pride, as well as
animated by his zeal to the Catholic Cause, to turn his Formidable
Preparations against these Lands? But to conclude this, I do particularly
affirm that the success of the French Arms abroad, has emboldned the Papists
in England in their designs of Subverting not only Religion, but the Government.

A Third great step, they had made to the subjugating these Kingdoms to
Idolatrous Religion, and the Tyranous yoke of the Roman Court; was their
preventing the Presumptive Heir to the Crown. For howsoever they can here
affirm with all the Asseverations imaginable, especially when in conversation
with credulous and easy Protestants, that the Duke of York is still of the
Established Religion, only that he is a Prince of more generousness, than to
comply with the Capricioes of a Parliament, in renouncing this, or Swearing to
that, as they shall in an humor Enact: Yet they not only know and believe the
contrary, but both make their boasts of it, and erect their further hopes upon
it. Father Anderton Rector of the English College of Jesuits at Rome, Father
Campion Minister of the same College, and Father Green Procurator for their
Order at Monto Portio, have often told me when I was in Italy, that the Duke of
York was of their Religion. And as the Perversion of his Royal Highness gave
them nearer prospects of their Establishing their Superstition and Tyranny,
once again in these Kingdoms and Dominions; so it contributed to, too
effectually to the bringing over many of all Ranks and Qualities to them. For
as I have, when abroad, frequently heard the Jesuits glory, both in the
acquisition of such a Convert, and that many Gentlemen through his example had
renounced Protestancy and embraced the Roman Catholic Doctrine; so the thing
carries a self Evidence in it, nothing being more familiar in the observation
of Ages, than that the influence of a Person of the rank, quality, and legal
hopes of his Royal Highness, should sway vast and large numbers of people, to
espouse the Persuasion that he had taken up. There is a great part of mankind
that seems to own this or that Religion, who yet do it not upon any rational
grounds, or motives of conviction, but with respect of Secular interests,
wordly advantages, and accomodations. And persons of this Figure, being in
truth of no Religion, will not publicly avow themselves, but vigorously impose
that upon others, which appears suited and calculated unto their carnal an
worldly Ends. And the Atheistical Principles, which I am afraid too many have
imbibed from a great pretender to Philosophy and Politics, namely that all the
obligations of the Law of God upon the consciences of men, may be violated by
the Authority of the Sovereign in his own Dominions, and that no person is
accountable at the Tribunal of the Lord, for renouncing Christianity it self,
and much less for the disclaiming Protestancy, providing he has the command of
a Ruler to authorize him in what he does: I say I am justly apprehensive that
these and the like abominable Notions, which many have sucked in from Mr. Hobbs,
do not only dispose men to be of the Roman Faith, if at any time the Sovereign
proves to be so, but that not a few under the mere prospect of what is likely
to be, have judged it most convenient to antidate themselves of that Religion,
which they foresee that in a little time they must be of. Moreover it is not
easy to be conceived how the Duke of Yorks being a Papist, has encouraged
vast numbers of Romish Emissaries to come over hither, afforded them security
while here, and emboldned them in their addresses to all ranks and degrees of
Persons. And as the City and Country never swarmed so much with all sort of
Romish Ecclesiastics both Secular and Regular, as since the perversion of his
Royal Highness; so by their accosting the hopes of some, and addressing the
fears of others, from the Duke's being a Papist, they have (and that upon my
own personal knowledge) prevailed upon many to conform to -- his Example. For I
very well remember, that Father Campian being returned from England to Rome,
where I then was, did not only confirm them that were here, in the belief of
the Duke of Yorks being a Papist, and of his having been often at Mass, but
withal affirmed that through his Example, many Gentlemen were not only turned
Roman Catholics, but Jesuits. Surely it was upon a due knowledge, as well as
mature deliberation, that the Great Senate of the Nation

April 27. 1679. Resolved Nemine Contradicente,

That the Duke of York 's being a Papist, and his hopes of Coming to the Crown
such, has given the greatest Encouragement to the present Conspiracy, and
Designs of the Papists, against the King and the Protestant Religion.

Rome; but through the interest of the Duke of York, and the universal
influence he had both at Sea and Land, and likewise at Home and Abroad, they
obtained diverse of these persons who were most zealous for the Papal
Jurisdiction, and in whom they could best confide, to be advanced and preferred
into places of Power and Trust. And of this there needs no further Evidence
(though many more instances might be assigned) but the advancement of my Lord
Clifford to be Lord High Treasurer, and Sr. William Godolphin to be his
Majesty's Ambassador in Spain, and my Lord Bellasis to be Governor of Hull.
It Is true that by the late Tests -- which His Majesty and the Parliament have
provided for such as were to be Employed in public Trusts (that Papists might
be the better and more effectually known and distinguished from Protestants)
There are both some removed, who had been advanced to places of Trust,
Authority and profit, and some others kept from arriving at those stations in
the Commonwealth, and in the attaining that place and interest in the manage of
public Affairs, which they not only aspired after, but stood recommended unto.
Yet give me leave to say, that there are some that have taken these Tests, who
notwithstanding continue still Votaries to the Church of Rome, and are only
Protestants in Masquerade. For as it was for the Credit of the Roman Church,
that some should rather resign their employes and places, than renounce the
Papal Jurisdiction, or any part of the Tridentine Faith; so it being their
interest (at least for a while) to have it concealed what persons universally
were Papists, and it being also for their advantage, to have some of their
Party continued in public Offices, without suspicion of their Religion, the
better to promote their further designs, they have accordingly made provision
for the one as well as the other. And as the losses which some of the party
have appeared willing to undergo, upon the Foregoing occasion, have served to
enhance -- the reputation of their Church; so others being best qualified by
their taking -- the Tests for the enjoying Preferments and Revenues under the
present Government, are not only Spies upon the Councils of the Nation, but
Vipers nourished with the profits of the Land, to betray and undermine the
Government. And whereas some may think that no person cordial in any --
Religion, should for Secular accommodations and worldly Advantages, offend
against God, and endanger their own Souls, by Renouncing their Faith, and
forswearing that, upon which they superstruct all their hopes for Salvation:
The Church of Rome has by more methods than one, secured such, not only from
all fear and hazard of future wrath, but from all danger of sinning against God
by so doing. And as to this purpose the Doctrines of Papal Absolution and
Indulgence, are admirably suited, supposing their should be sin in such a case;
so the Doctrines of Equivocation, Mental Reservation and Authoritative
Dispensations, are no less calculated for preserving them from all Guilt --
notwithstanding their taking the Oaths, and making the Declarations which the
Law requires.

Having now made these happy proceeds, as they thought, toward the Protestant
Religion and the Established Government, there remained only for the
Accomplishment of these, and all other their Execrable Designs, but the
destroying the Life of the King. And there are these ensuing Reasons which not
only justify such endeavors in all that are furnished with Evidence, for the
making a further detection, but which do indispensably oblige them not to
conceal any thing that may serve to unravel and unvail the Conspiracy.

(1.) The vindication of the Justice of the Nation on those Traitors that have
suffered, does bespeak and require this at every man's hand. For though the
utmost Candor imaginable, was extended to the Criminals, and the stricktest
scrutiny by interrogations in favor of the Malefactors, exercised toward the
Kings Witnesses, and the several Juries that were Impannelled for their Trial,
were of the most knowing, honored; and Impartial Persons that either the City
of London, or the neighboring County could afford; yet all these have not been
sufficient to prevent the arraignment of the Justice of the Kingdom, for
Condemning those Conspirators. For not to mention what their surviving Friends,
do as falsely as reproachfully give out in favor of their Innocence in all
Companies; the very Press (almost to the Ignominy of the Government that
suffers it) has swarmed with Pamphlets in justification of their having died
Guiltless. Such Pamphlets, are the Letter to both Houses; the sober and
seasonable Queries, in order to the Choice of the New Parliament; the second
Edition with Additions, etc. The Jesuits Plea, in answer to a Letter, entitled
Lying allowable with the Papists to deceive Protestants: The Plot of the
Papists, to transform Traitors into Martyrs: The Compendium of the late Trials,
in relation to the present Plot: besides diverse other Prints equally
scurrilous, as well as filled with pernicious Reflections upon the Honor and
Justice of the Nation, so that every man of Sense, is surprised at their
impudence, and every person of Loyalty, roused to a zeal of vindicating the
King and Kingdom, from the obloquies of Injustice cast upon them. And though
the Kings Witnesses do intend publicly to vindicate themselves from the
Calumnies with which they are aspersed, and will, I doubt not, perform it both
to the universal satisfaction of the Nation, and the utter confusion of their
Adversaries; yet let me offer these two or three Remarks upon the foregoing
Pamphlets, which I judge not only sufficient to baffle them, but eternally to
expose them to contempt, as so many infamous Libels. First then, what credit
ought to be given to him, that shall dare publish in the view of all the
Nation, That not one Person accused in this pretended Conspiracy, So the New
Plot to Transform, etc. p. 15.
did either fly or abscond (except only the Priests who were obnoxious to the
Law for their Priesthood) when in the mean time (besides many others of all
ranks and qualities, who upon their being some of them accused, and others
suspected, have withdrawn themselves) the four Villains who are charged for
conspiring to Assassinate the King, do notwithstanding his Royal Proclamation
requiring their appearance, either by flight or concealment absent themselves.
Secondly, who pretending to be either a good Christian, or a faithful Subject,
can have any Faith for such a person, who is not afraid no more than ashamed,
openly thus to slander the King himself, namely That though he be both most
concerned, and has had the best opportunities of examining the Discovery of the
Plot, Letter to both Houses, p. 2.
yet he is so far from believing it that he openly laughs at it. Vile Impostor!
that dares thus accuse the King both to the World, and his own People. How
often has His Majesty told us in his Royal Proclamations, that he is fully
convinced of a Hellish and Popish Conspiracy, against his own Person, the
Protestant Religion, and the Government: And yet this impudent Generation of
Romish Votaries do not blush to affirm; that He laughs at it as a fabulous and
Romantic Story. Does not the King in his Proclamation October. 30. 1678. call it
a Bloody and Traitorous design, of Popish Recusants, against his Majesty's
Person, and Government, and the Protestant Religion? And does he not by his
Proclamation Nov. 20. 1678. declare that the Popish Priests and Jesuits,
lurking within this Realm, have contrived, and set on foot diverse traitorous
Plots and Designs, against His Majesty, his Government, and the Protestant
Religion by Law Established? And does he not also by his Proclamation for a
Fast, March 28. 1679. declare, that through the impious and malicious
Conspiracies, of the Popish Party, there is a Plot not only intended, to the
Destruction of his Royal Person, but the total Subversion of the Government,
and of the true Protestant Religion within the Realm by Law Established? And
does not my Lord Chancellor in his Speech to both Houses of Parliament, March
the 6. 1678/9. assures us, That his Majesty's Royal Person has been in danger,
by a Conspiracy against his Sacred Life, maliciously contrived, and
industriously carried on by the Seminary Priests, and Jesuits, and their
Adherents, who think themselves under some obligation of Conscience to effect
it, and having vowed the Subversion of the True Religion amongst us, find no
way so likely to compass it, as to wound us in the Head, and kill the Defender
of the Faith? And besides what the last Parliament declared to that purpose,
did not the House of Commons of the Parliament which was then sitting when the
Plot was first discovered, with the Approbation of the House of Lords, resolve,
That that House was of Opinion, that there has been, and still is, a Damnable
and Hellish Plot, contrived and carried on by Popish Recusants, for
Assassinating and Murdering the King, and for Subverting the Government, and
rooting out and destroying the Protestant Religion. So that now upon the whole
matter, He that dare assume the boldness to tell us, that the King laughs at
the Plot, as a ridiculous and ill contrived Story, does Brand the King, the
Lord Chancellor, and Two Parliaments for a company of Impostors. And if this be
not enough to stigmatize such Rascals for the worst of Slanderers, and
overthrow their credit with all Mankind, surely nothing in this World can be
alleged more effectual to do it. Thirdly, need we more to satisfy us, that
there is any thing to be expected from men of a Papal Complexion, by lies and
calumnies, if we will but consider, that after they had inhumanly murdered Sr.
Edmund-bury Godfrey, fastened diverse slanders upon him before he was found, and
afterward endeavored to impose plain impossibilities upon our Faith, namely
that he had killed thimself, when the place where he lay, the manner of his
laying, and many other circumstances uncontroulably demonstrated the contrary;
so at last, one of these scandalous and villainous Scriblers dare now solemnly
avouch, That he was an entire Friend to the Popish Party, and that he had
performed the utmost service in their behalf, Compendium of the Trials, p. 69.
that friendship it self could suggest. Can there be any thing said more
effectual at once to convince this Fellow of being a Slanderer, or to disabuse
those men of little understanding, that are inclined to believe him in any
thing he says, than that he should offer to obtrude upon the Faith of
Englishmen; that Sr. Edmund-bury Godfrey was a Papist, or at least a very
friend to the Papal Party? It were to abase the patience of all who knew that
worthy Gentleman, and are masters of Sense or Honesty, to offer to prove that
Sr. Edmund-bury Godfrey was a Protestant, or that he was far enough from
supposing himself enrolled in the number of the friends of the Popish Faction.
Alas poor Gentleman! as he little dreamed that a professed Member of the Church
of England, and a liberal Asserter of the Protestant Doctrine, and constant
Reliever of the necessities of those that were of the Reformed Religion, but
one (as himself frequently related) that expected to be the first Martyr under
the Popish Rage, should be consigned down to Posterity as the Cordial friend to
those avowed Enemies of his own Religion, or a principal Confident of those
Bontefeus of the Kingdom, for whose peace and safety he was a watchful
Magistrate. Nothing allied to truth can be expected, from such who after they
had barbarously Murdered an innocent Gentleman, do by robbing him afterward of
his honor, credit and reputation, assassinate him a second time. It is a great
effect of the Divine Wisdom, to give up Impostors to the venting some palpable
falsehoods, that the easy and credulous World may be the better fortified
against those other reports, which they cannot so easily disapprove. For they
who are found wilful and evident Slanderers in some things, ought not to be
credited in any thing unless it be accompanied with better Credentials, than
the authority of their Testimony. These few Remarks are sufficient to take off
the credit of those Popish Scriblers, that have attacked the Reputation of the
Kings Witnesses, and slandered the Justice of the Nation, so a reply being
preparing to all the particular instances in which they are slandered, may
discharge me from calling those Pamphletters to a further Account.

Yet forasmuch as I do not think it enough to have these Advocates to their
Religion, but that the Doctrines of their chief Casuists, instruct and
encourage them to be so. And this I shall perform in a brief consideration of
two Particulars. First, in that they teach the Members of their Church, to be
under no obligation to speak Truth either to, or of Heretics; but that they
may calumniate them without the fear of guilt or Divine wrath. It is the common
opinion of the Jesuits in all their Scholastic and Casuistical Writings, that
it is no sin to Calumniate those who speak ill of them or the Roman Church.
They are under no moral Obligation to Heretics; but may cheat them without
dishonesty, violate Oaths made unto them without perjury, rob them without
theft, kill them without murder, and lie to them, or concerning them without
the violation of the measures of Truth or Justice. Nor is it any ways strange,
that while they may meritoriously destroy us, they should with innocence defame
us. For by the same Principles, that no Faith is to be kept with Heretics, no
Faith is due to them. When we meet with such Maxims, as that Servants owe no
fidelity to Heretical Masters, nor Children obedience to Heretical Parents, nor
Wives conjugal duty to Heretical Husbands, nor Subjects loyalty to Heretical
Princes; ought we after this to be surprised, upon finding it established as a
received Doctrine at least of the Jesuits, that they may innocently slander and
defame Heretics of whatsoever quality and degree? And as by the knowledge of
their Principles in this matter, I can make a shift to understand Balsec,
Cocleus, Sanders, etc. -- in their virulent and slanderous Books, against
Calvin, Luther, and other blessed Reformers, without finding my self obliged to
believe them in any one word they speak, to the defamation of those whom they
accuse; so by the same means I judge my self conducted not to give credit to
any Papist, speaking to the prejudice of an Heretic, unless I be otherwise
assured of the Truth of what he declares. But secondly, if you will add to
this, that they are countenanced by the maxims of their Divines, to defame any
one of what Religion soever he be, that does them an injury, we may then be
fully armed against all Impressions of disbelieving the Plot, that the late
Scriblers are designed to raise or beget. In all the Casuistical Divinity of
the Jesuits, there is hardly a case wherein they do so unanimously conspire and
agree as in this, That it is lawful to invent crimes to ruin their credit who
speak ill of them. And this they have not only declared in their Books, but
maintained in the Theses, which they have proposed to be disputed in their
Schools. See the Mystery of Jesuits. Let. 15.
I know that which surprizeth many, who know not the Rules and measures the
Papists act by, is the men not only pretending to some Religion themselves, but
entrusted with the conduct of the Consciences of others, should publish and
divulge such and such things, if they were not true; when alas! the Principle
they act by, is not whether the thing they affirm be true, but whether it be
for their advantage, honor, and secular interest to have it believed. De
Justit. lib. 1. Tr. Disp. 12.
I do maintain says Dicastellus -- That Calumny when it is used against a
Calumniator, (i. e. one that does them or their Order a mischief) though
grounded on absolute falsities, is not for that any mortal sin, either against
Justice or Charity. That is is only any mortal sin to Calumniate falsely,
Theolog. Fundamen. N. 1151. Lib. 9. Decol. 2. Sect. 2. De Justit. lib. 2. c. 9.
to preserve ones honor, is no doubt, says Caramuel, a probable opinion. It
is a probable Opinion, that we may lawfully slander that person, by charging
him with crimes that are false, against whose Testimony we are not able
otherwise to defend our selves, says Sambourin. Nor is it any ways strange
that they should hold it lawful to Calumniate any one that accuses them,
seeing they declare it lawful to kill such a one. We may without mortal sin,
says Lessius, kill an accuser, See also Escobar. Morus. Theolog. Tract. 1.
Exam. 7. cap. 2. Amicus de Justit. Disp. 36. Sect. 5. Vbi supt. Sect. 7.
though the crime whereof he accuses us be true, so it were secret. It is
lawful even for an Ecclesiastic or Monk, says Amicus, to kill that person
who threatens to produce great crimes against him or his Order. Now having
established Maxims by which they make it lawful not only to Calumniate,
without endangering their Salvation, but destroy those that injure them; is it
any thing strange that they should practice what they esteem lawful,
especially when their doing it is so necessary, not only to the preservation of
the credit and safety of their Order, but of their Church, and all their Party
in England? Can any man imagine, but that having made it lawful to Calumniate,
they should at this time, if ever, act accordingly, there being no way left to
vindicate themselves, or discredit their Accusers, save the making their
recourse to lies, slanders and revilings. I desire in reference to all they
say, to bring the business to this issue with them; either their Casuists teach
such Maxims, or they do not. As to their teaching them, let them deny it if
they dare, I both assign the Men that do so, and the places where. And besides
those I have mentioned, shall be ready if called thereunto, to produce many
more concurring in the same Doctrine. And seeing they do teach these Maxims,
let them if they can, give but any Rational person satisfaction, that any
credit is due to such, who may lawfully act (as every Papist may) upon these
Principles. Let them not then offer to abuse the World any more, by Discourses
demonstrative of the Unlawfulness of lying and Calumniating, by arguments from
natural light, and Divine Revelation, seeing neither Scripture, nor the light
of Reason are the measures which they Govern themselves by. And all Treatises
of that nature are but fresh instances of their lying and deceiving, while they
are declaring it unlawful to do so. And let me add this, that the late
Pamphlets most adapted to impose upon the World, a belief of the credibility
and sincerity of the Jesuits, such as the Letter to the Two Houses; the Jesuits
Plea; and the New Plot to transform Jesuits into Martyrs, etc. Do overlook all
those Maxims of their Casuists, which have been advanced against them, by the
Authors both of the Impartial Consideration of the Speeches of the five
Jesuits; and of the Letter entitled Lying allowable with Papists to deceive
Protestants: and do only insist upon other Principles, which by their Maxims
they are not obliged to govern themselves by. And whereas they are pleased to
ask us, whether we take those who have been either Condemned, or only
Arraigned, to have been Atheists, that they should do that, which not only the
Principles of the Gospel, but the common Sentiments of Mankind not only forbid
under the greatest penalty, but teach us to detest? I answer that I take them
to have been worse, namely Jesuits, or their Disciples, who under the names of
Christians, to the reproach of Religion, as well as the debauching of Mankind,
and ruin of all Societies and Government, have established that as lawful,
which the Gospel threatens with eternal Wrath, and with all states punish
either with the Gibbet or the Pillory.

A second Reason, why it is not only every ones duty, but at this time are
greatly deceived, that think the Papists have laid their design, alas they do
more industriously than over pursue it. The Case is so stated, that there is no
retreat, and rather than miss their hopes, they are resolved to stake lives,
fortunes, and all upon a venture. They have labored too long to bring things
to the pass they are in, to loose in a moment the fruits of all their toyls and
endeavors. Though the Protestants should be willing to forgive them, yet they
know that they have proceeded too far to rely upon Mercy; and therefore their
guilt lightning their fears, makes them desperate. The death of Traitors who
have suffered, instead of dismaying the Party, has greatly enflamed them to
revenge. They know too well, that many more both deserve, and may meet with the
like measure, and rather than tamely suffer it, they will all run on in the
same fortune. They are at present negotiating with all Foreign States for
Assistance, and he must needs be a stranger to conversation, that has not
heard of the liberal Contributions providing for them in all Popish Countries.
The boldness they every where express, is not the effect of their Innocence,
but of their Villainy and confidence of Success, through the Aids which they
look for. Nor has their slandering the King to his People, and their
misrepresenting many of his Protestant Subjects to him, any other tendency but
to prevent mutual confidence between them; which if they can but hinder, its
impossible, as things stand, that they should miscarry in their design, or that
either His Majesty or his Protestant Subjects should escape. To tell us by one
hand, that the King laughs at the Plot as a matter wholly fabulous; Seasonable
Queries, p. 1.
and by another, that the Two late Parliaments were a Company of Factious Men:
What design can this have? but to beget a distrust betwixt His Majesty and his
People, and deprive us of that mutual confidence in one another, which is so
absolutely necessary to our Preservation. When I have told you (as I shall
anon) that the Kings Person is more in danger than any of his People, it may
serve to promote your confidence in the Government, and to unite among your
selves in order to His Majesty's Preservation. For as His Majesty has most
just cause to apprehend the designs of the Papists against his Life, so we may
not only fear, but too groundedly conclude, that both our Religion, and Civil
Liberties, with whatsoever else is dear unto us, will become a Sacrifice to the
lusts of the Romish Party, if they succeed in their Conspiracies against his
Life. Whoever he be that makes profession of the Protestant Religion, and will
not seem to believe there is a Plot, nor acknowledge the Nation to be in
danger, he ought to be listed under one of these three Ranks of Men. First, he
is either of the number of those weak Fools, whom God has given riches to, in
consideration for having denied them understanding. For there are a kind of
silly Coxcombs, that are first pusled, and then missed by Insinuations, which
none but Knaves would suggest, and Idiots be swayed with. Or secondly, he is
reduceable to them, whose fears make them both dissemble and ready to deny what
they too well know; for there are a great many, whose dread prescribes to their
reason and Conscience. Now these apprehending it impossible to prevent the
Designs on foot, though they were not at first in them, and possibly intend not
actually to be, yet having a mind to preserve themselves, they are therefore
not only willing to connive at that, which they judge impossible to be
defeated, but to make an interest with the Conspirators, in serving them as far
as they can, without running the hazard of the Halter. Or thirdly, he may be
numbered amongst them, who rather than a Company of discountenanced Protestants,
should be a little indulged, they will sacrifice the very Protestant Religion
to the pleasure and lusts of the Papists; Through an apprehension which they
have, that should the Plot be believed, the Nonconformists may meet with some
degree of Favor in order to their better encouragement to engage among others
for the defense of the Government; they are resolved so that they may have the
pleasure of seeing them destroyed, to expose (at least as far as in them lies)
the Nation to be ruined with them. Nor can I apprehend why the late House of
Commons comes -- to be aspersed by some public Scriblers, as well as in
Coffee-house Twatlers, unless it be that they did not think meet, whilst they
were providing for the security of the Kings Person, and safety of the Kingdom
from the Conspiracies of the Papists, at the same time to Enact new Laws, and
those written in Blood, against persons of the same Religion with themselves,
and who do only differ from them in some few Rites and Ceremonies, nowise
essential to the Protestant Religion. He can therefore be no friend to the
Protestant Religion, to the King, or to the Government, that when our Ruin is
conspired by a company of desperate Popish Enemies at home, and threatened by a
Combined Power of Papists from abroad, endeavors then to disunite and weaken
us, by groundless Aspersions and Calumnies cast upon men, sound in all the
Fundamentals of the Protestant Doctrine, and ready to venture their Lives and
Fortunes as soon as any, for the defense of His Majesty and the Government. And
therefore among other reasons for my contributing all I can to the further
Detection of the Plot to the Nation, (having first discovered what I know of it
to His Majesty and the Privy Council) I do plainly deliver this to be one, that
they who question it from principles of Weakness and Simplicity, may be more
fully informed, and they who endeavor to shame it upon base, corrupt, and
perverse Considerations, may be taken notice of and esteemed Abetters of the
Popish Conspirators in their most Hellish Designs.

And that the Light I arrived at concerning the Design against His Protestant
Religion in these Nations, may be conveyed to others with the more
Intelligibleness, as well as the greater Credibility; it is convenient that I
should intimate these three things. (1.) That I was originally a Protestant,
being both trained up in that Faith, whilst a Child here at home, and further
instructed in the Reformed Doctrine whilst at Geneva abroad. But being
Traveling in France, I was by the art, craft, and unwearied persuasions of
Abbot Mountague, and Mr. Thomas Carr, perverted from the Protestant Religion,
and allured into the Communion of the Romish Church. And as none are so
industrious in Foreign Nations, to debauch his Majesty's Protestant Subjects,
whom they occasionally there meet with, as the English, Scottish, and Irish
Papists, residing in those Parts; So the various methods they take to inveigle
those, whom they have opportunity to meet with and address, are not easy to be
expressed. For by suting their Temptations sometimes to the Necessities, and at
other times to the lusts and Ambitions of those they accost, they prove more
successful in their Attempts for Seducing young Travelers, than can readily
be imagined. For if they be persons of Quality, they allure them with hopes of
esteem in Foreign Courts, the favor of Access to, and Correspondence with
Princes and Potentates abroad, and especially with promises of being Exalted at
home upon the Alteration, which they give themselves out as prepared to
introduce into these Nations. And if they be Persons of Scholastic abilities,
then they assault them with assurances of Preferment, and that they shall not
only be accomodated and esteemed sutably to their Parts in their Colleges
abroad, but that they shall be made Dignitaries of the Church here, upon the
Revolution that is ready to take place in these Kingdoms. And if the Persons
are indigent then they attack them with offers, not only to supply their
present wants, but to provide for them even to their own wishes and desires for
the future: Yea, if those they meet with, chance either to be Malefactors, that
have fled beyong Sea for their crimes, or Bankrupts who have withdrawn thither
to escape their Creditors, unto such they offer either a Sanctuary in their
Monasteries, or to recommend them to some Grandee that may employ them
agreeably to their inclination and humor. So that what in one way and what in
another, there are none come within their Circle, whom they have not
Temptations prepared for, and futed unto. And I wish that the sad experience of
their success upon my Self, as well as the many conquests I have seen them make
of others; might not only influence Parents to be less forward in sending their
Sons beyond Sea, but awaken the Government to provide, if not against the
thing, yet against the dangers that attend it. Secondly, I would intimate this,
that being after manifold persuasions, perverted from the Protestant Religion
and induced to Espouse the Faith of the Church of Rome. I was accordingly
received with great Ceremony into the said Church by Cardinal Grimaldi,
Archbishop of Aix in Provence. It Is true, they do not think meet to celebrate
the reception of every one that goes over to them, with so much solemnity, but
yet it is not without many and considerable reasons, that they think meet
sometimes to do it. For though in effect they have only cause of glorying over
the ignorance, weakness or lusts of the Party they have Proselited; yet they
would have it pass for a Triumph over the Religion which he has forsaken. And
though all that they can truly boast of, be the ensnaring some Person, that
neither understood the Religion which he relinquished, nor that which he
espoused, but was merely captivated with the hopes of Pleasure, Profit, and
Preferment; Yet, Protestancy must be brought upon the stage as weary of it
self, and the Popish Religion must be recommended to the Ignorant multitude,
from the Victory it has obtained over such a thinking, learned and
conscientious Man. Thirdly, I would suggest this, that being received into the
Bosom of the Romish Church; I went thereupon to Rome, and was entertained in
the Jesuits College. Where, by my continuance four years, and running through
my whole course of Philosophy, and at last taking Orders of Priesthood, and
through my being sometime Prefect of the Study, I enjoyed these opportunities
of knowing their Sentiments, and Doctrines concerning Protestant Princes, and
of their Designs against these Nations, with their hopes of Reenslaving them,
which I shall now declare. Nor will it, I hope, be reckoned a piece of
Immodesty; and I do affirm that partly through my success in my Scholastic
Exercises, and partly through the favor I had with Cardinal Rochi, Major Domo
to the Pope, to whom I had dedicated all my Theses, and partly from the
familiarity I had with all the principal Fathers of the Jesuits in the English
College, I had not only the advantage of Hearing what was publicly said,
either in Schools or Refectory, but was allowed Access to private Discourse
with the most Eminent Fathers in the College, where I had their Opinions
concerning the King of England, and an account of their Purposes toward Him,
and the Kingdom, inculcated to me.

These things being briefly premised and intimated, That which I have Rome, I
frequently heard the Jesuits both teach in Schools, and preach in Pulpits the
Doctrine of the Pope's power to depose Kings. So that according to them no King
does Reign, but at the pleasure of the Pope. And from hence we may learn these
two things. (1.) That it is not only lawful, but necessary in order to the
preservation of the peace and safety of the Kingdom, that all who have imbibed
these Doctrines, should be accounted Traitors, and accordingly proceeded
against, though never convicted to acting up to them. The Principle it self is
the highest of Treasons, and therefore there needs no further Over-act, for the
condemning such Criminals. So far as the Popish Religion has only an influence
upon the future state of men, it was never punished with death in England; it
is only upon the foot of those Doctrines, which instruct and countenance them
to overthrow the State and Government, that Romish Priests are justly made
liable to suffer. And therefore the Priests who were lately Executed, without
being Arraigned for any thing, save for their being so, and their withdrawing
His Majesty's Subjects from the Religion by Law Established, were as real
Traitors, as those who were convinced for Conspiracy against the Kings Life.
(2.) I would further infer from the foregoing Doctrine, that no security can be
had of the Loyalty of any Person that is so possessed. For so long as he holds
that any one has Authority to depose the Prince, under whose Government he
lives, it is impossible that such a Prince can be secured of the fidelity and
allegiance of that Subject. And it is very remarkable, that whereas some of the
Irish Papists since His Majesty's Restoration, had in a Remonstrance prepared
for the persuading the Government of their Loyalty, only acknowledged (though
they had not sworn it) that King Charles is their Lawful King, and the Pope
has no power to Depose him, how thereupon they are told from Rome, that they
had renounced the Catholic Faith, and that they were fallen under the
Condemnation of the Apostolic See. For as the Popes Nuncio at Brussels by a
Letter dated July 21. 1662. informs them, how that their Remonstrance being
examined at Rome by Cardinals and Divines, was found to contain Propositions
condemned by Paul the Fifth, and Innocent the Tenth, and that the Pope was so
far from approving it, that he did not so much as permit, or connive at it, and
therefore condemned it in this Form, that it could not be kept without breach
of Faith, according to the Decrees of Paul the Fifth; and that it denied the
Popes Authority in matters of Faith, according to that of Innocent the Tenth.

I do further declare, that during my abode at Rome, I heard the Jesuits Nor
was this the Opinion only of one or two, or of such as might be esteemed Rash
and Giddy, but it was the common Doctrine of all the Jesuits there. And I do by
all that may obtain credit with Mankind, testify that I have heard it Asserted
by Father Anderton, Rector of the English College of the Jesuits at Rome,
Father Campion, Minister of the said College, Father Robert Southwell Assistant
to the General of the Jesuits, Father Buckley Pentionary for the Pope, Father
Green Procurator for the Jesuits at Monto Portio within fifteen Miles of Rome.
And from this I desire to make these three Remarks. (1.) That every Protestant
Prince is hereby exposed to the mercy of any one, that under the encouragement
of meriting Heaven, will take the boldness to Assassinate Him. For all such
Princes, both by the Decrees of their Councils, and the Cannons of their
Church, as well as by the Bulls of diverse Popes, are not only pronounced
Heretics, but actually Excommunicate: Nor are the Jesuits singular in this
Opinion, that it is lawful to kill Heretical Princes, for the Pope himself by
a Decree in their Canon Law, has taught and declared the same. Causa. 23. q. 5.

Canon Excommunicatorum.


We do not esteem them Murderers, says Pope Urban, who shall happen to kill
any Excommunicate person, out of an ardour and zeal to the Catholic Church
their Mother. Secondly, I would observe from hence, what opinion we are to have
of all that the five Jesuits declared upon their Salvation in their late dying
Speeches. God was equally invoked to be a Witness of all they said, and their
Salvation was alike pawned upon the truth of one thing, as well as another. And
whereas then we find them evidently Tardy by their saying that there is not one
Jesuit (except Mariana) that holds it lawful for a private person to kill a
King, See Gavans Speech.
although an Heretic, although a Pagan, although a Tyrant; we may very
rationally suspect their sincerity and Truth in all the rest. What! is there
not one Jesuit but Mariana, who maintains King-killing Doctrine? Yes, I do
affirm that I have frequently heard Anderton, Campion, Southwell, etc. in their
daily Discourses, Lectures, and Sermons at Rome teach the same. And, though all
that know me will receive more upon the credit of my Word, than this comes to,
yet to put it out of doubt, that the Jesuits died Liars; I shall convince the
World of their Teaching the King-killing Doctrine from their public Writers.
Was not Cardinal Tolet a Jesuit, and does he not declare, That Subjects are not
bound to maintain unviolate their Oath of Allegiance to an Excommunicate
Person? Lib 1. Instruct. c. 13.

Lib. 5. de Romans Pontif. c. 8. Tom. 3. in Th. Disp. 1. q. 12.


Was not Cardinal Bellarmine a Jesuit, and does he not affirm, That the Pope
has the same right and power over Kings, as Jehoiada had over Athalia? Was not
Gregory Valentia a Jesuit, and does he not teach, that the Pope may deprive
Heretical Kings of all Dominion and Superiority over their Subjects? Was not
Creswell a Jesuit, and does he not affirm, that if a Prince be not of the
Romish Religion, he loses all Right and Title to Govern, and his Subjects are
discharged from all obligation of Obedience, and that he may be proceeded
against as the Enemy of Mankind? Was not Franciscus Varona Constantinus a
Jesuit, and does he not in his Apology for John Chastel, Part 2. c. 2
who wounded Hen. 4. of France, tell us, That it is lawful for a private man
to murder Kings, and Princes condemned of Heresy? Is not this a Point so
evident, that De Harlay, the first President of the Parliament of Paris, who
both knew the Doctrine of the Jesuits, and had seen the woeful Effects of it,
in the murder of Two Kings of France, publicly avow it to be their common
Opinion in all their Writings, That the Pope has a right to Excommunicate
Kings, Vide Thuan. lib. 130 ad Ann. 1604.
and that thereupon their Subjects may with Innocence assault and destroy them?
Have Englishmen learned from the Jesuits the guilt of Forgetfulness, so as not
to remember that Cardinal Allen wrote a Book to prove that Princes
Excommunicate for Heresy, not only might, but were to be deprived of their
Kingdom and Life? And was not William Parry provoked thereby to kill Queen
Elizabeth, which though before he had promised at Rome to do, yet he was
Hesitating in his mind about it, till encouraged by that Book? Or is it past
into Oblivion with us, that Father Gifford instigated one John Savage to kill
the same Queen, and that upon the Bull of Pius 5. And which is remarkable at
the same time, that they might be the less suspected, and the Queen the more
secure, they wrote a Book, wherein they admonished the Papists in England not
to attempt any thing against their Princess, but to fight against their
Adversaries only with the Weapons of Christians, viz. with Tears, See Cambdens
Life of Queen Eliz.
Spiritual reasonings, Prayers, Watchings and Fastings. To all this I shall
only add, that going in the company of Capt. Richardson to visit Mr. Thomas
Jenison the Jesuit, then in Newgate (but since deceased) the said Mr. Jenison
acknowledged in Discourse, That the Jesuits both held for lawful, and taught
in their Writings, that an Excommunicate King might be lawfully either Deposed,
or Murdered; but that he himself would not have accession to the practice of
these Principles. Thirdly, I desire to recommend this further to the Reader,
viz. That though it be both the Doctrine of the Court of Rome, and commonly
maintained by the Jesuits in their Writings, that it is lawful to kill an
Heretical Prince, yet it is not usual to press it upon their Youth, and
inculcate it to their Scholars, but upon the prospect of some great occasion.
They have it always ready in the Books of their Scholasticks and Casuists, to
teach their Votaries what may lawfully be done, but it is not their custom to
urge it in their Common discourse, nor to recommend it to their Disciples in
private or public Conferences, but with respect to something of that Nature to
be speedily transacted. Thus when they had a purpose to murder Hen. 4. of
France, Father Generet a Jesuit, instructed John Chastell in this King-killing
and Heretical Doctrine. See Anti-Coton.
And Father Fair did the same by Francis Veron, to dispose him for the same
Design. Yea, when they were ready to perpetrate that barbarous Villainy upon
that Generous Prince, the very Sermons of the Jesuits were all framed to
instigate men to so Bloody an attempt, so that Ravilliack, when examined about
the Causes, why he stabbed the King? answered, that they might understand them
by the Sermons of the Preachers.

I do further declare, that during my residence at Rome, I heard the Jesuits
England was an Heretic, and so in Form condemned. And when I was leave to the
College and return to England, which was about June 1676. the said Fathers did
both severally and together Teach and Instruct me, that I was not to pay
Obedience to an Heretical or Excommunicated Prince. Now whereas there are
diverse other Protestant Kings and Princes in Europe, beside the King of Great
Britain, that which both then gave me amazement, and has also cost me some
thoughts since, is, why only the King of England should be upon all occasions
represented as an Heretiek, and that no other Protestant Prince should be so
much as once mentioned under that Character. Nor am I able to resolve it into
any thing but this, that it was likely to be more for the advantage of the
Church of Rome to have the King of England murdered, than any other Prince
besides. For whatsoever ill will they may bear to them all, yet they are not so
foolish as to undertake a thing that carries a hazard of scandal and danger in
it, if the success in the Attempt may not recompense the difficulties in the
Achievement. Now there being no Prince of the Reformed Religion at this day in
the World, whose Death would turn so much to the profit of Rome, as that of the
King of England, it is the less to be marvelled, that they should be contented
to allow others to live, and are only sollicitous to get him removed. And the
gain which they promise themselves from the Death of his Majesty, arises from
a Consideration of these three things. First, That the Duke of York, the
pesumptive Heir to the Crown, is a Papist. And ought it then to be a matter of
any surprise, that to further and hasten his Succession, they should conspire
the destruction of His Majesty, who is the only obstacle in the Duke's way to
the Throne? Are we so unacquainted with the History of our own Nation, as not
to know how upon the like hopes from Mary Queen of Scots, being next Lineal
Successor to Queen Elizabeth, the Romish Party did from time to time contrive
and design the death of that Excellent Princess of ever Blessed Memory? And was
it not the sense which our Ancestors had of this, that influenced them to enter
into an Association through the whole Kingdom (even in an Interval of
Parliament) wherein they mutually obliged themselves, in case the Queen should
be taken off by any undue means, to avenge it upon the Papists? And this
Association was so far then from being apprehended a Seditious or Illegal
Bandying of Persons together, that the Parliament that assembled the Year
after, did not only Approve it, but Ratify it into a Law. Well do the Papists
know, that should they loose this Advantage, (which they have from the Duke's
being a Papist, and of such legal hopes of the Crown) for the Reestablishment
of their Religion, they may never enjoy so fair and probable an Opportunity
again. They perceive the King as likely to live as the Duke, and therefore
reckon it absolutely necessary, to Anticipate the Course of Nature, and not
trust matters of so great Consequence, as the seeing these Nations once more
subjugated to Rome, to such a contingency as the Kings Dying in a natural way,
before the Duke. And that which Mr. Dugdale divulgeth every where to this
purpose, deserves a serious Remark; namely, That the Jesuits having calculated
the King's and the Duke's Nativities (which by the way is Treason by Law) and
finding that the King would in a course of Nature outlive the Duke, they
thereupon agreed and resolved to have him cut off by violence. The having a
Popish King again in England, would be of so great concernment to the Sea of
Rome, that we may easily conceive (especially seeing the Principles of their
Religion do befriend them) that they will not boggle at the Murder of his
Present Majesty, to compass and effect it. And whatsoever security the
Protestants may flatter themselves with, as to their Religion, from the
Promises which his Highness may make unto them, yet this may serve to undeceive
them, that not only the Council of Constance has determined that no Faith is
to be kept with Heretics, Vide Crab. Tom. 2. p. 4. Cochl. Hist. Hussitar. lib.
5.
but that Martyn the 5. told Alexander Duke of Lithuania, that if he kept his
Oath with such, he sinned mortally. -- Secondly, the advantage which they
reckon upon the Kings Death, arises not only from the consideration that the
Presumptive Heir is a Papist, but that he is more zealous for that Religion,
than Princes of the same Religion, either are, or use to be. It is of great
concernment to their Interest, to see a Papist (how lukewarm and indifferent so
ever in that Profession) exalted to the English Throne. But to have a Prince of
burning Zeal and Ardour for the dignity of the Triple Crown, to be advanced to
sway the English Scepter, is of far greater consequence to them than most
Persons are willing to apprehend. I know that there are some Monarchs of the
Faith of the Church of Rome, that are not of the Faith of the Court of Rome,
and therefore though they give all due protection and encouragement to the
Romish Religion, yet it is still without suffering it to undermine the State,
or to introduce the Papal Jurisdiction. Though they countenance their Subjects
in the Papal Worship, yet they are not willing to see them inslaved to the
Popes Usurpation. But whether the Duke of York, should he once arrive at the
Crown, would think it enough to allow the Pope only his power in Spirituals,
without granting him the right which he challenges in Temporals, I cannot
tell; but this I can say, that the hopes which the Jesuits have, of seeing the
whole Papal Jurisdiction established by his means, and as fruits of his Zeal to
the Holy See, over these Kingdoms, is a great motive to precipitate his
advancement to the Monarchy, and for their conspiring the Destroying of His
Majesty, who is the only Remora in the way. Thirdly, the advantage which they
count upon by the Kings Death, arises not only from their Assurance of the
Presumptive Heir's being a Papist, and one of zeal and ardor for the Papal
Chair, but that he is moreover under the conduct of the Jesuits. For I do
remember, that Father Campian, and Father Anderton, did not only frequently
declare, that the Duke of York was of the Romish Religion, but that he was
brought over by their Body, and that they had the greatest influence over Him.
And as this was the common discourse in the Jesuits College at Rome, so it was
received with great joy and acclamation by the whole Society. Now as there can
be nothing more fatal to any State, than to have the Prince under the Conduct
of the Jesuits; so the power they pretend to have obtained over the Duke of
York, has its share in the animating them to hasten his Reign, and in order
thereunto to destroy His Majesty. And to this purpose I shall here add, what I
heard some of the Fathers say. For Father Campian having intimated that many
set themselves against the Establishment of the Popish Religion in England, he
added, that nevertheless it must flourish again in that Nation, and we are do
the great Work, and restore it. And Father Warner (upon whom I had a Bill of
Exchange from Rome, he being Procurator for the Jesuits at Paris, having paid
me the Bill) did thus declare himself unto me, Religion must be set up in as
high a manner, as ever, in England, and we must be the Promoters of it, though
many set themselves in opposition to us. Blessed Promoters and Restorers of
Religion! who conspire the Murder of Kings, and Overturning of Kingdoms in
order thereunto. And are they not fit men to have the Guidance of the
Consciences of Princes, who, besides all the other ill Principles which they
are imbued with, are more sworn Vassals to the Jurisdiction of the Pope, than
any other Order of the Roman Church?

I do moreover declare, That when I was about to leave Rome, and England, both
Father Anderton, Father Campian, and Father Green, assured me that there would
suddenly be great Alterations in Church and State in this Kingdom; And that
there was but one Man in the way (meaning the King) who might be soon removed
out of it. Yea, the same Fathers informed me, That they were assured from the
most Eminent persons of this Nation, that their Religion should be Established
again in these Dominions, in as great Glory, as at any time heretofore, and
whosoever opposed the Establishment of it, should be removed. And I do withal
remember, that waiting upon Abbot Montague at Paris, as I was in my return
homeward, the said Abbot after he had congratulated the seeing me in a
Religious Habit, and told me that being of the Order of Secular Priests, I was
in the Apostolical way of Teaching; he further subjoined, That I should
suddenly see great Changes for the better, both in Church and State in England,
and that I should receive signal Employment there. So that now from all this,
these Four things do immediately fall under the view of every Person that is
but so much as capable to understand Common Sense. ( First) That the Kings
Life, is judged the only obstruction to the Reenslaving these Nations to Rome,
and that so long as he lives, they do utterly despair of subjugating these
Kingdoms to the Papal Tyranny. Which as it should make His Majesty's Life the
more dear to all his Subjects; So it should influence Himself from that regard
which he has so often Solemnly professed to bear to the Protestant Religion, to
be the more careful of his own Safety. ( Secondly) notwithstanding their
despair, of being ever able to impose their Faith and Worship upon these
Nations, whilst His Majesty lives; yet they are at the same time confident of
seeing this all accomplished. Which is in effect, as much as if they had told
us, that they were resolved and prepared to remove Him, and that by some horrid
Attempt upon His Life. ( Thirdly) That the Confederacy against the Protestant
Religion, and these Kindoms is powerful and strong. For neither any Foreign
Combination, nor the Encouragement which they can have from so small a Number
as the open and avowed Papists in the Land amount to, could ever give matter
for such Towering hopes, nor administer ground for so high a Confidence; no less
than the Engagement of many of the most Eminent Persons of the Nation, (to use
their own Phrase) could be Foundation sufficient to erect so vast Expectations
upon. And as it is the Interest of the Kingdom to have these (hitherto unknown)
Persons detected, so it should be the Prayer of all, and the Endeavor of those
Chosen to sit in the Great Senate of the Nation, that the Kingdom may be
secured from their Treacherous Designs. ( Fourthly) That understanding the Size
of the Persons, who have renounced their Allegiance to His Majesty, as well as
the Religion by Law Established, instead of being thereby Intimidate, we would
grow sensible of the dangers which threaten us, and provide Remedies to
withstand them. And seeing there are some Persons, of the foregoing Bulk and
Character, actually Impeached, let us by Prayers and Entreaties solicit His
Majesty, that he would not abandon Himself, His Government, and People, to the
hazards, which a further Procrastination of their Trials may occasion. For if
they be Innocent, besides the honor of being Vindicated, not only from the
Suspicions they lie under, but the Treasons they are charged withal, they will
reap the happiness of being restored both to their Liberty, and the good
Opinion of their Fellow Subjects. And if they be Guilty, it is both His
Majesty's Interest, as well as the Nations, and what his Subjects may expect
from the Justice he owes His People, as well as the Grace he has hitherto
exercised toward them, that such villainous Conspirators, as would subjugate
these Kingdoms to Popish Idolatry and Slavery, may undergo the severest
Punishments, which by Law are due unto their Crimes.

Rome and Paris, namely, That He being removed, who alone stood in the Gap,
their Religion must needs flourish again in these Nations. Forasmuch as the
Duke of York and the Queen were of their side. Now though this way seem to such
as know not how to knit two Thoughts together, matter of no great moment, yet
to Persons accustomed to use their Understandings in a rational train of
Discourse, it suggests that which may give us a very sad apprehension. For
besides* as I have already observed, that the Duk's being a Papist is the
Fountain of all Attempts upon the Kings Life, and the alone rise of all the
Danger which His Person is daily exposed to; There is something further, and
that of a most Tragical Consideration, wrapped up as the sense of those
Expressions. For supposing the Duke to be a Papist, and that he should come to
the Crown (which God by the Prolongation of His Majesty's Life avert) yet
without a trampling upon all our Laws (our Religion being incorporate into
them, and settled by them) Popery cannot flourish again in these Nations.
Protestancy is not only now the Religion of the Kingdom, but it is become a
part of the Polity, and an Essential Ingredient of the constitution of our
Legal Government. Nor can any (as matters are by Law Established) supplant
Religion, which is our legal Right, without Overthrowing all those Laws which
secure us of it. So that to tell us that through having the Duke on their Side,
were the King once Dead, their Religion should be exalted to its greatest
height, and flourish in these Nations as much as at any time heretofore, is in
Effect to say that our whole Government shall be Changed, and all those Laws
subverted, which Entitle us to the Protestant Religion, and protect us in it.
What Provision His Majesty, and his Two Houses of Parliament, may think fit to
make, to give the Nation security in this matter, as it is to be left to their
Wisdom, so it is our duty quietly to acquiesce in what they Agree about, and
Enact to this purpose. But if there be any Sense in what I have related from
the Jesuits Mouths, they intend not that Protestants shall enjoy much benefit
by any Law that shall be made to such an End. They may improve it indeed to
facilitate in the minds of short-sighted People, the Duke's Accession with
quiet to the Crown; but they have told us beforehand, that our Religion shall
be never the more secured unto us by a Law of that kind. It is needful for the
Papists at this time to talk of such a Law, to promote that which they
themselves first aim at, but having under the favor of it once compassed that,
it will be as needful to destroy it, that they may accomplish the rest.

Having related whatsoever may give light to the Horrid Plot against England.
Being then after diverse Years absence, come into my Native Country about
December 1676. and being recommended as a Secular Priest, to Minister and
Officiate in the Family of John Jenison Esquire, in the County Palatine of
Durham. The first thing that I did, was to recollect the Disloyal and
Traitorous Doctrines, which I heard the Jesuits Teach at Rome, and elsewhere.
For as these Principles had given me such a disgust against their Order before,
that though highly tempted and frequently importuned to be One of that Society,
I absolutely refused it, and chose rather to be a Secular; so the reflecting
upon them at leisure and with sedateness of mind, after I became settled at Mr.
Jenisons, heightened my Abhorrency of them. For it is an easier thing to divest
a man of the Principles of Supernatural Revelation, than to eradicate out of
him the Principles of natural Religion. We may be sooner brought to Renounce
the Doctrines of Faith, than the measures of Justice betwixt Man and Man. And
there are some who would more easily let go all the Articles, upon which future
Happiness depends; then bid farewell to those Dictates of Natural Light, upon
which the Government of Kingdoms and the peace of Societies hang and bear. And
to deal freely, as I sooner observed the falsehood of the Romish Doctrines,
which relate to Magistrates, than of those which concern Jesus Christ, and
Salvation by him; so the conviction I was under of the Erroneousness of the
former, was that which led me first to examine, then to doubt of, and at last to
renounce all the latter. For as I plainly perceived, that no man can be loyal
to his Prince, and faithful to the Government he lives under, and withal
maintain the Universal Jurisdiction of the Pope, viz. his right to Depose
Kings, and Absolve Subjects from their Allegiance: so I suddenly came to
understand, that no one can be a Papist, but he who holds them. For to disclaim
them, is to disclaim both the Infallibility of the Pope, and the Authority of
General Councils; which is in effect to abjure the whole Popish Religion, as
having no other foundation but the Decrees of Popes, and Canons of Councils.
Being then settled (as I intimated) at Mr. Jenisons House, and having called
over all the Traitorous Positions I had heard the Jesuits teach, and having
found them agreeable unto, and justified by their public Writings; I thereupon
made it my business to exclude both all Jesuits, and all other Priests
Jesuitically inclined, from coming to the said House, or wheresoever else Mr.
Jenison had to do. For though I was not yet so far enlightened my self, as to
think of Converting that Family from being Papists, yet I was resolved to
preserve them from being Traitors, and accordingly to hinder all such from
coming among them, who might infect them with Disloyal Principles

an Universal Collection of Moneys, which I observed to be made among the
Papists. I was my self solicited by Mr. William Gascoyne, and other Secular
Priests to assist in it; but I not only declined Cooperating in such a
business, but diswaded Mr. Jenison, and all others I had the Conduct of, from
contributing Money upon any occasion. It Is true, the Pretense was to repair the
College of Doway (which is penal by the Law, should it be granted that the
Money was so applied) but I have reason to apprehend, that under the Umbrage of
repairing a College, they were providing for the Ruin of a Kingdom. For the
Collections were Universal in all the Northern Parts; and not only the Gentry,
but most others of the Popish Religion in those Counties contributed their
Proportions, some to Five pounds, some to Ten pounds, and some to Twenty
pounds. He must be of a very shallow Understanding, that can once imagine, that
so great Treasure as this would come to, should be all sacrificed to the Repair
of a College. No, it must have been some greater Design, that so large a supply
of ready Money was intended for. I grant that my own refusing to assist in that
Affair, together with the Jealousies they had conceived of me, for excluding
all the Jesuits, and such other Priests as were tainted with their Principles,
from admission into Mr. Jenisons House, gave them sufficient reason to conceal
the disposal of it from me. But this I know, that all the Moneys which were
collected, were either paid, or to be paid to Mr. William Stephenson a Priest.

Though the many foregoing passages (which I have truly reported) Papists had
in Persons near His Majesty to get the Jesuits, and much less the Romish Party
Convicted upon this General, and withal, single Evidence. And therefore I
found it necessary for a season to conceal these things, lest I should not only
miscarry my self upon attempts to Detect them, but withal enrage the Papists
to precipitate their Designs upon the Sacred Life of the King. However I
resolved to be watchful over all Opportunities, whereby I might attain a more
perfect insight into their Hellish and Mysterious Conspiracies. And as in this
interim, the Plot came to be discovered by Mr. Oats, so an occasion presented
it self in a Conference thereupon betwixt Mr. Robert Jenison and me, which not
only contributed to my own more perfect satisfaction in reference to their
Bloody Designs, but has given rise to Mr. Jenisons own Discovery. And as it is
convenient that the World should know the sense and tenor of that Discourse
which past betwixt Mr. Jenison and me, so I think it fittest to deliver it in
the words of the Information, which I gave in to one of His Majesty's Justices
of the Peace.

Middls. West. ss. Part of the Information of John Smith of Walworth in the
County Palatine of Durham Gentleman, taken upon Oath the 8. day of September
1679. before me Edmund Warcup Esquire, one of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace in the said County and City.
THis Informant says, that Mr. Robert Jenison came to his Fathers House in
September 1678. where, after he had been some days; Sr. Edward Smith came to
Walworth, and produced a Letter, signifying a Discovery of a Popish Plot in
London, and upon enquiry who were in it, Ireland and Whitebread were named.
About three or four days after which, Mr. Robert Jenison before his Father,
Sisters and this Informant, said, he believed there was something of a Plot,
for that he had heard Mr. Ireland say, 'twas an easy matter to take off the
King. Whereupon this Informant asked him, what that Ireland was? Who answered,
he was a Jesuit, and his Cosen. And Mrs. Katherine Jenison his Sister asked,
when he saw Mr. Ireland? Who answered, a little before he came out of Town, at
his Lodging in Russel Street, which was on the Day that himself came from
Windsor, and the same Day that Mr. Ireland came Post out of Staffordshire, and
that he then found him pulling off his Boots. Mrs. Katherine Jenison then asked
him, how her Aunt in Staffordshire did? Who replied, Mr. Ireland said she was
well, and that he had been with her in Staffordshire at that time. This
Informant then asked him, what a kind of Man Mr. Ireland was? Who answered,
that he was a fine countenanced, smiling Man, and swore if he be Guilty of this
Plot, I will never trust a Smiling Man again. Thereupon this Informant asked
him what he thought of him? Who answered, I doubt there is some Guilt in him,
because he had enquired of him, when he came from Windsor, how the King
diverted, and how he went attended? Whereunto he answered, in Hawking and
Fishing, attended only with three or four Persons; Mr. Ireland replied, he
wondered He would go so slenderly Guarded, He were easily taken off; and then he
paused. But sometime after, Mr. Robert Jenison repeated, that he feared there
was something in that Plot, for that Mr. Ireland said to him at another time,
that there was but One in the way, and were He remomoved, the Catholic
Religion must flourish again in England. Whereupon this Informant said, those
were damnable suspicious things, which Mr. Ireland had spoken about the King.
And thereupon old Mr. Jenison rose up, and swore Mr. Ireland was a Rogue, and
so left the Room, and determined the discourse at that time. But some time
after in this same Month, this Informant walking on the Leads with Mr. Robert
Jenison, discoursing of the Jesuits being in the Plot, the said Robert Jenison
told this Informant, that Mr. Ireland had at another time told him, that Sr.
George Wakeman was a Fit person to Poison the King, being the Queens Physician,
and a Papist, upon which this Informant said, he hoped the King would not take
Physic of any Papist, in regard they might be Jesuitically inclined; and the
Jesuits were against Monarchy in Temporal Princes, though appointed by God
himself. Upon which the said Mr. Robert Jenison asked, are the Jesuits against
Monarchy? Whereto this Informant replied, you may easily judge that by their
taking off many Kings and Princes, and by their holding it lawful for the Pope
to deprive Kings of their Kingdoms, and to dispose of them at his pleasure, so
that though a King be Anointed of the Lord, and one that should not be touched
by violent Hands, yet not only His Kingdom, but His Sacred Life lie at the
Popes pleasure. Mr. Jenison answered, does the Pope allow of this? This
Informant answered, yes, they have often practiced it in this and other
Kingdoms, and thereby brought more Schism and Division into the Church, than
ever was before such Damnable things were practiced by the Pope and his
Emissaries. Whereto Mr. Jenison replied, you Seculars are generally against the
Jesuits, and in many things against the Pope. Whereunto this Informant replied,
if you please to consider the Frauds and Devilish Artifices the Jesuits use in
their practice and teaching their Politic Interest, and industrious
Self-seeking, all under the Hypocritical zeal and Characters of Religious,
though none so Irreligious, you would not admire why all Secular Priests are
against them, and the Pope for upholding them, and their Practices, and
Principles Mr. Jenison replied thereunto, he believed they were Crafty men;
upon which this Informant asked him* how he came now to say they were Crafty
men, having formerly spoke so much of their Sanctity? He replied, because he
considered several odd and suspicious Expressions Mr. Ireland had spoken to
him. Whereupon this Informant replied, you will not only give the King and
Country satisfaction, in Declaring the odd and suspicious Expressions of
Ireland, who is now imprisoned for the Plot, but also discharge the duty of a
Christian, and Obligation of a Subject, urging many other reasons to persuade
Mr. Jenison to make a full Discovery to the Council. Whereunto Mr. Jenison
replied, he doubted the Jesuits would prove as Black as their Habits, adding
that his Brother Mr. Thomas Jenison the Jesuit, told him there was a Design in
hand, in which if he played his part, he might with ease and safety raise his
Fortune; and that he answered his Brother, he would use all lawful means; and
that he thereupon replied, the means were not only Lawful but Meritorious,
otherwise their Body, and the Chief Catholics of England would not be therein
concerned as now they were. Whereupon this Informant asked him, what he
understood by his Brothers discourse, and whether he did not understand that
the Jesuits, and Papists, had some design against the King and Religion? Who
answered, he might well understand and suspect they had some such Design in
hand. And thereupon this Informant again pressed him to make a full Discovery
to the Council, when he came to London, if his Evidence were judged material.
And this Informant told him, that he held himself bound in Conscience to
discover all that he heard from him, if he omitted to do it himself, urging
that his Evidence would at least wise, be fortifying to others Testimony. And
this Informant very well remembers, that coming about a Week afterward with
Mr. Robert Jenison from Mr. Fenwick's House at Baywell, Mr. Bows met them, and
drew Mr. Jenison aside, all discoursed together some time, after which, Mr.
Jenison singled out this Informant, and told him, that he believed his own
Brother Mr. Thomas Jenison, would be Hanged, and several other Persons of
Quality, who were concerned in this Horrible Design. Thereupon this Informant
asked why? Who answered, a Handful of Jesuits could not carry on such a Design
without the assistance of Persons of Note and Power, and the Pope himself must
be in, because of his Purse; and he believed the Plot was Universal, because
his said Brother had told him, the Greatest Catholics in England were
concerned in that Design, wherein he would have had him to have played his Part.
Declaring he had reason to believe, it was to destroy the King and Government.
Whereunto this Informant replied, can you swear it? Who answered, I will not
swear it now, and thereunto this Informant replied, will and can are two
things. Mr. Jenison further added, he was once in Company of Five or Six
Jesuits, and that all their discourse was then tending to the Destruction of
the King and Government, all agreeing to the selfsame end, but himself, but
that he had not contradicted them in regard he was young, and inferior in
Scholarship. And this Informant asked him what he meant by Persons of Note and
Power engaged in the Plot? He answered, the Chiefest Catholics in England,
but refused to name them, saying in passion, do you think I am privy to it? But
added, by God, they will have a Bout with the Duke, whereby this Informant did
believe there was a Hellish Plot, and that the greatest Catholics in England
were in it, and that Mr. Robert Jenison knew more of it, than he did at that
time lay open. And this Informant speaking something of the Popish Emissaries
engaged in the Plot, meaning the Jesuits and Monks; Mr. Jenison asked him,
whether he was not a Popish Emissary? Whereunto this Informant replied, No, he
did abhor the Name, and that he was a Preacher after the Ancient, Apostolical
Way, which teaches all to fear God, and honor the King, and to be obedient to
all Superior Laws and Magistrates. To which Mr. Jenison replied, the Jesuits
hold it lawful to Depose and Murder any Heretic Kings, and to dispose of
their Kingdoms. And this Informant further says, that Mr. Jenison told him
also at Walworth, that Mr. Ireland had lent him Twenty pounds, which he desired
the Informant to send him to London to pay Mr. Ireland again.

This being the Narrative of the Information, so far as it relates to this
Purpose, which was given in by me to Edmund Warcup Esquire, one of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, and City of
Westminster. I shall only make these few Remarks upon what is here declared.

(1) It strongly and most effectually serves to Corroborate all the
Depositions which Mr. Robert Jenison has made. For all these Discourses past
betwixt him and me, whilst he was a Papist, and before ever he had entertained
a thought either of Changing his Religion, or Informing concerning the Plot. He
must be very obstinate, as well as an incredulous Person, that can after this
deny Mr. Irelands being in London in August, seeing the very Party that
conversed with him told it to so many credible Witnesses, within so few days
after. And which is most remarkable; all this was declared to his Father,
Sister, and my self, when neither he nor any alive could apprehend, that ever
there would be an occasion of bringing this Circumstance upon the Stage. And
this being therefore so demonstratively made out, none but Conspirators or
Abettors of this Conspiracy, can either bring into question the Truth of the
Plot, or give credit to Papists in any thing they say. Nor can there be a
greater Evidence of the Combination of the whole Papal Party to destroy the
Nation, then, that rather than the Design should miscarry, they will sacrifice
their Souls and Consciences in the justification of a most palpable Lie.

(2.) It may both induce us to believe, that Mr. Jenison has more to discover,
than he has yet declared, and also oblige us to give all credit to what he
shall further say. For it is plain from many passages which dropped from him,
that his Acquaintance with the Conspirators, and his knowledge of their
Devilish Machinations, are more considerable than as yet he has divulged. It Is
true, he has neither done wisely, nor with that simplicity which became a
Christian, either in delaying his Informing at first, or in those Reserves
which he still maintains. Yet if we will observe the influence he was under,
partly from the regard he bore to the credit of the Romish Religion; (which
himself then professed) partly from the love he had to many of the Papists, as
his Kinsfolk and Friends, partly from the concernment he had for his own
Reputation, which he knew upon his Discovering, would be assaulted; not to
insist upon the apprehensions he might entertain, concerning the danger and
hazard to his Life which would ensue; we may be not only the less surprised at
his backwardness to discover, but admire the overruling power of God in
conquering his passions and jealousies so far, as that he should make any
Discovery at all. And besides the Divine Wisdom, which can serve it self both
of our sin and folly, has turned it to wonderful advantage, that he informed
not sooner. For had he appeared before the Trial of Mr. Ireland, there would
never have been any such thing mentioned, as Ireland's being in Staffordshire
all the month of August. No, it was from an Opinion, that none who knew of his
Being in London would appear against him, (save Mr. Oats) that gave him the
confidence of betaking himself to that Shift. And the Confounding them since in
this particular, has both been, and will hereafter prove of wonderful
Consequence.

(3.) The discourses mentioned in the foregoing Depositions, may serve to
testify my own Innocence, as to any thing that relates to this Horrid Plot.
For though I had prevailing Reasons to persuade me to believe, that there was a
design carrying on against the King, the Protestant Religion, and the
Government of the Kingdom; yet I neither directly nor indirectly had Accession
to it, nor assisted in it. Yea, so soon as I arrived at that measure of knowing
it, as Mr. Jenisons Conferences with me helped me unto, I did from thence
forward, not only by all means promote his coming to Inform, but threatened the
having himself (in case he continued obstinate and refractory) apprehended and
proceeded against. For besides those Letters of mine, to that purpose Printed
by himself in his own Narrative; I wrote him many more upon the same Occasion;
which, as they had the success upon him, which I aimed at, so having been
designed for no other end, but what is already accomplished, I shall not
trouble the World with them.

FINIS.
Page 13. l. 21. read perverting. p. 14. l. 10. dele not. p. 18. l. 47. for
only r. not. p. 19. l. 48. r. indispensably.


