A COLLECTION Of the several Writings and Faithful Testimonies OF THAT
Suffering Servant of God, and Patient Follower of the Lamb, Humphry Smith, Who
Dyed a Prisoner for the Testimony of Jesus, in Winchester Common-Goal the 4th
day of the 3d Month, in the Year 1663.

I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith;
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the
Righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not only to me, but to them also
that love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. LONDON: Printed and Sold by Andrew
Soul, at the Crooked-Billet in Holloway-Lane, near Shoreditch, 1683.

George Fox HIS TESTIMONY CONCERNING Humphry Smith.
NOW concerning our dear Friend and Brother Humphry Smith, who formerly had
been a Preacher, and a Man of Note; but when it pleased the Lord to call him by
his Grace, and reveal his Son in him, he came to be an able Minister of Jesus
Christ, and freely did preach the Gospel, as he had received it freely; and was
cast in Prison for the Testimony of Jesus at Eversham in Worcestershire, where
he suffered very much in Oliver's days, about the year 1655. and besides,
several other Goals, that it may be party said of him, as it was of Paul, who
had been zealous among the Letter-Professors, and who had then esteem of him;
but when he came to possess Christ Jesus, and to preach him, then they hated
him and persecuted him. Yet through the Eternal Power of the Lord, he was
upholden through his Sufferings, and traveled through many Hardships for the
Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and did convert and turn many to the Lord Jesus
Christ that had been outward Professors, as he himself had been, to the
Possession of Christ; so that he did see and was comforted in the Fruits of his
Labors in Christ and his Grace. And at last he was cast into Winchester-Goal,
where he ended his days and finished his Testimony in an hard Imprisonment, who
there dyed in the Lord, and rests from his Labor, whose Works follow him:
Whose Memorial is blessed among the Righteous in the Lords Heritage; for he was a
worthy Soldier and Follower of the Lamb, and kept his Habitation in Christ
Jesus, in whom he now sleeps.

G. F.
London, the 8th of the 11th Month, 1682.
A TESTIMONY Concerning the Servant of Christ, Humphry Smith DECEASED; With
Respect to his Life, Testimony and Service for the Lord in his day.
ALthough I have not read all the Books and Writings given forth in Truths
behalf by our dear Friend and Brother Humphry Smith, and therefore cannot
knowingly give particular account thereof, as to all his Writings, though many
sound and weighty Experimental things I am sure he has written, yet from the
knowledge which I had of him, his Conversation and Testimony, and the living
Society I had with him for some time before his Course was finished, I have
this Testimony nakedly and in the sight of the Lord to bear, That he was a man
fearing God and hating Iniquity, fervent and zealous against Deceit and
Hypocrisy, and endued with a heavenly Gift and Gospel Testimony, which he
faithfully bore in his day, according to his Ability, and the Lord was with
him, and he was well beloved among his People. He endured the Cross, and bore
Afflictions patiently; and he was a great Sufferer in diverse Goals and
Persecutions for the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and his Testimony which he
declined not. And he was (in the Name of the Lord) instrumental and helpful
with other faithful Brethren and Servants of Christ, to break through rough
Oppositions, perverse Gain-sayings and Persecutions of many Adversaries to the
Life of Christianity, even in those days of great Hardships and deep
Sufferings, not long after the first breaking forth of the Gospel Day to many
in this Age; and in diverse parts of our professing Nation, the Exercises, deep
Sufferings and Trials of that day and time, many now have not known the
sharpness of, since which the Lord has been with his faithful Servants all
along, and prospered his Work among the sincere Receivers of his Truth in the
love thereof; and the Lord our God has crowned the Labors of his faithful
Witnesses, whose Days are ended in Peace, among whom this Honest and Upright
hearted man Humphry Smith had his Share and Portion, and has his Crown that
fades not, and his Inheritance Everlasting, in the Kingdom of his and our
Heavenly Father, among the Spirits of Just Men in Glory, I am really satisfied,
as knowing the End of the Upright Man to be Peace, and that in the sight of the
Lord the Death of his Saints are Precious, as their Life is Acceptible: And I
pray God that all Friends, and all those that yet remain with a Testimony for
him and his holy Truth, may be preserved in (and with tender Regard unto) the
same Footsteps of the faithful and blessed Flock to the end of their Days, as
those that truly have respect to the Recompense of Reward and Kingdom that is
set before, which will remain and stand us in stead when our Days, Times and
Years here are expired and gone.

George Whitehead.
London, the 4th of the 8th Month, 1682.
THE Faithfulness of the Upright MADE MANIFEST. Being a Testimony concerning
the Life, Death and Sufferings of a precious Servant of the Lord, called,
Humphry Smith, Who dyed a Prisoner for witnessing unto the living Truth, in
Winchester Common-Goal, the 4th day of the 3d Month, 1663.
ARE thy famous Works ever to be forgotten? Are thy Noble and Valiant Acts to
be blotted out of the Memory of the Righteous? Is thy holy, innocent pure Life
to be buried in Oblivion, as not to be remembered by us any more? Are thy
Sufferings, with all thy valiant Engagements with the Enemies of thy God to be
blotted out of the Record of the Children of the most High? Oh! what says my
Soul? Nay, nay, let it be had in living Remembrance among the Followers of the
Lamb, and let it be written upon the Tables of their Hearts, even to all
Generations.

And as concerning this man, he from his Youth upwards had desires after the
Lord, and he was often checked by his Father because of his Solidity; he
mourned mightily after the Lord while he was yet a Child, yea, and panted after
the God that made him: He followed the zealous Professors, and increased
mightily in that Knowledge which stands in the Comprehension, yea, exceeded
many of his equals; but at last the Lord separated him for his own glory, and
sent him forth in his own Power and Eternal Name, so he led him by the hand
through the Wilderness, and bore up his head above the Waves which sought to
destroy him; he became a Talk and a Byword unto them with whom (before) he had
his Conversation; yea, they sought to destroy him in a moment, but yet the Lord
led him in the way, and gave him the threshing Instrument that belongs to Worm
Jacob, despised of men, and he threshed and beat the Hills to Dust, and rooted
up the Disobedient that desisted Gods coming; he spared not, but cut on the
right hand, and slew on the left, and made the Arrows of his Quiver to strike
into the Bowels of Gods Enemies; but the preached Peace to the Captive, and
uttered his Voice to the Prisoners of Hope, which lay groaning for Deliverance;
he was sent to publish Salvation, and to cry the acceptible year of Redemption,
though the Rulers of the Earth dealt very hardly with him, and the Priests
cried, Away with him, he is not worthy to live; the Professors envied him
because of his upright dealing; and the Profane hated and reviled him because
of his Innocent Life; he was often times cast into several nasty Prisons; he
was diverse times whipped with Cords; he was haled before Magistrates that had no
pity nor compassion of him; he diverse times ventured upon hard service, and
broke through an Host of Wicked and Unreasonable men; the Priests fell before
him like Tow, and the Professors were scattered like Chaff, the Wicked and
Profane were even confounded and amazed when his Arrows so sharp did enter
within their dark Dwellings; but to the Seed he uttered his Voice, and it
dropped like Wax into the Bowels of the tender hearted: Verily the
consideration thereof does even melt my heart, and makes me to say, Oh! how
delightsom was the pleasantness of thy Beauty! and how desirable was the
habitation of thy Dwelling? and how prevalent were thy Prayers, and thy
Supplications with thy God? who answered thee every Morning, and satisfied thy
Soul every Moment, which made thy Cup to overflow, and the pleasant Streams to
run over its Banks, because of the fullness thereof; and Woe to him that lifts
up a Tongue against thee, and let him not be reckoned among the Congregations
of the Righteous, that slanders thy Innocent Life, let him be smitten with
Terror that whisper's or speaks Evil of thee in a Corner; for I know the Lord
loved thee, and has taken thee from the Evil that is to come upon the
Inhabitants of the Earth, and out of this dark World that is not worthy of thee.

But to proceed; he was visiting Friends in and near London, and he told some
of them there-a-wayes, That he had a narrow Path to pass through; he also said,
(several days before he was taken up) he saw that he should be imprisoned, and
that it might cost him his Life; and taking his leave of Friends in them-parts,
he set forward in the Will of the Lord Westward, and having a Meeting at Alton,
some envious men hearing thereof, sent Armed men to the House where he was,
commanding him forth, and having him before Humphry Bennet and John Norton,
Deputy-Lievetenants of the Country, both great Enemies to Gods Truth, and
though he gave a good account of his business, which was to visit his Son,
which was a Child farther Westward, yet they without pity or compassion, equity
or justice committed him to the stinking close Prison at Winchester; but to
leave them without excuse in the day of the Lord, which hastens to come upon
them, he wrote unto them, signifying how illegally they had dealt with him;
also sent them back an Answer to that which they charged against him, likewise
showing that they laid nothing to his charge but what was charged against Gods
Servants in the days of old, and moreover proved unto them, that they had
acted contrary to the King's Laws, Declaration and Word; yet though all this
and much more might be written, both of his Usage in the Prison, and likewise
how close a Hole it was, sometimes other Prisoners, Fellons or such taking his
Food from him, and other Abuses which he bore very patiently, which will be too
tedious at present to relate; and likewise John Norton and Humphry Bennet
sending men and robbing him of all his Papers, rifling his Pockets, Boxes and
other places, yet he was very quiet, and lay down content; but the next
approaching Sessions being come, he laid something of his suffering Cause
before some of those called Justices, and at that time some of them were
willing to have released him, but some others of them being contrary minded,
saying, That it was the Deputy-Lievetenants of the Shire that committed him,
and because they were not there they would not meddle with the thing: So the
innocent Sufferer was let continue a Prisoner till the next Assizes, and he
then laid the thing before Judge Terril, who before had been pretty moderate to
Friends, and the Judge gave him this answer, That if he would give Bail for his
good Behavior and Appearance at the next Assizes (though no evil Behavior at
all was laid to his charge) which when this innocent Sufferer heard, and being
satisfied that he was not guilty of the Breach of any Law, neither was there
any that laid any thing to his charge, he was content to remain there, rather
than to do such a thing; and so remaining there from Sessions till Assizes, and
from Assizes till Sessions, and until that Assizes a whole year was over; then
Judge Terril came again the Western Circute, which Humphry Smith hearing of,
wrote unto him, signifying how contrary to any known Law he had been dealt
with, and requiring Justice, and that true Judgment might proceed from him, and
leaving him without excuse he sent it to him, which he understood he read, and
about the latter end of the Assizes he was called for, where having diverse
words with the Judge, he again said, That if he would give Bail for his good
Behavior and Appearance at the next Assizes, he should be released; which he
answered thus, That he had lain in Prison so long, and nothing of evil
Behavior laid to his charge; and likewise saying that if any man there should
convince him of any evil Behavior, he should willingly acknowledge the same,
unto which they were all silent; then the Judge said, If he would meet no more,
and promise not to break the Law, he should be released; unto which he answered
thus, I think it is sufficient that I suffer if I do break the Law, and not to
suffer because I cannot promise not to break it, saying also, That he knew no
Law that required any such thing; so it being near the time of their breaking
up, he was put aside, and others called, and soon after they dismissed the
Court for that Assizes at that Bench; but as the Judge was passing forth,
Humphry Smith being at the Bar among the Fellons, he spoke these words unto
him, Friend, remember I have been above a whole year in Prison, and no breach
of any Law proved against me; which the Judge heard, but passed away and said
nothing to it. So he was had back to Prison again, where having been not above
three weeks, but he fell sick, first it took him like an Ague, and afterward
with the Fever following it, and in a short time it grew very violent upon
him, insomuch that in five days time he was so weak that he could scarcely help
himself, then he also sent a Letter unto Judge Terril, signifying his Illegal
dealing with him, and also gave him to know, that he was very Ill, but there
was little done in the thing; so he grew weaker and weaker, so that two men did
turn him in his Bed; and in the time of his Sickness he spoke several precious
words to Friends, signifying unto them, That he was given up in the will of the
Lord, either in Life or Death; and as he lay under a great sit of the Fever,
he said; My heart is filled with the Power of God; and then said, It is good
for a man at such a time as this to have the Lord to be his Friend; Another
time he said, Lord, thou sentst me forth to do thy Will, and I have been
faithful unto thee in my small measure which thou have committed unto me; but
if thou will yet try me further, thy will be done: Also, he said, I am the
Lords, let him do what he will. And near the time of his departure, he cried
earnestly unto the Lord, and said, O Lord! hear the inward Sighs and Groans of
thine Oppressed, and deliver my poor Soul from the Oppressor: O Lord, hear me!
O Lord, uphold and preserve me; (I know that my Redeemer lives) Thou art
strong and mighty, O Lord! with several other precious words. Also, about the
same time he prayed unto the Lord, That he would deliver his People from their
cruel Oppressors; and that those that were convinced or brought forth by him,
that the Lord would be their Teacher. He lay very quiet and still, and not any
unsavory word proceeded out of his Mouth all the time of his Sickness, but he
behaved himself like a Lamb, and he was very sensible unto the last Moment; he
was faithful unto the Lord in his day, and a Crown Everlasting is upon his
head, which shall rest upon him when all his Oppressors shall gnash their
Tongues for pain and vexation of Heart (as some of them have felt already) yea,
and the full Cup of the Lords Indignation is preparing for all them who delight
in Cruelty: He was very meek, and of a quiet Spirit, very loving to all that
had the least appearance of the Light springing up in them; yea, if any knew
not the Light which condemns the sin, then in the Meekness of the Love
everlasting, he would open unto them the way thereunto, and labor mightily to
bring them to the knowledge of it: Oh! how great was his love to the eternal
Truth, which abounded in his heart! and how would he groan for the lost Sheep!
surely his Love was more than my Tongue can express; and his Courage did abound
in a great measure; he delighted not in vain Janglings nor Disputings of men of
Corrupt Minds, but in the simplicity of the Gospel of Peace, which is his Crown
forever and ever. What shall I say? his Life is swallowed up in Immortality,
and is no more to be seen in the visible, yet he reigns over all Whisperers,
Back-biters and Slanderers of his innocent Life forever.

Thou Renowned Judge in Israel, thou Valiant Soldier of the Lambs Host, Peace
is thy Portion forever, Blessings will fill thine House, and Fruitfulness will
attend thy Seed, as they abide in the Counsel of him who was the Bishop of thy
Soul.

N. C.

BUt O you Rulers of England! what shall I say unto you? Must you needs be made
a perpetual Reproach unto all that come after you? And is your delight wholly
in Persecuting of the Innocent? O Cruel Men! O Merciless Men! Will nothing but
the Lives of Gods dear Servants satisfy your bloody Wills? Surely the Lord God
will visit you in his Wrath, and sweep you away in his sore Displeasure; yea,
in the dreadful Flames of the Burnings of his Vengeance will he cast you: Oh!
you Unsatiable, Vigorous, Tyrannical, Idolatrous Men! What! is Cruelty your
Delight? And is it Blood that you thirst after, as after Wine, which will not
satisfy your Lustful Desires? And is it nothing but the eternal Truth which
you would not have so much as come into your Coasts, worse than Barbarians? How
do you evilly entreat those who come in the love of the Lord, to preach
Repentance in your Streets? and you take away the Lives of such who come to
publish Salvation unto poor Sinners? Surely your Unjust Dealings are come up
before the God whom you so much contemn in his Servants, and your Unrighteous
Actions against them whom he has sent in his own Name, are pierced into the
Bowels of the God of the Humble hearted, who will surely plead with you in his
Indignation, and utterly destroy you in his Wrath, if you Repent not speedily,
and humble your selves under his Righteous Judgments: Wherefore, I say, Repent,
Repent, for the Consumation is at hand, yea, the swift Vengeance of the Eternal
God is nigh to be revealed upon all the Disobedient, and the utter Woe and
Calamity of all the Merciless (with the cruel hearted) is coming, (yea, nigh to
come) which shall make a final End of all the Rebellious and Stiffnecked Ones,
whose Hearts are hard as the Adament; Wherefore, Awake, Awake, sleep not in
your Wickedness in this day which is coming as a Thief in the Night upon you,
but arise up from Cruelty, and shake your selves of the Garments of the
Pollution of Blood, which has stained you: Cleanse your selves of your
Idolatry, and clear your selves (if you can) of the Lives of Gods Servants,
which have dyed in your Prisons; but if you cannot, then known be it unto you,
That God will not spare the best of those that have had a hand in these things
(and shall persist therein) but will destroy them utterly, and Curse them from
his Presence for evermore; and in this I shall be clear of all your Blood, when
it comes upon you.

Nicholas Complin.
Written the 21th of the 4th Month, 1663.
William Jenings's Testimony concerning Humphry Smith.
THis is my Testimony for that man of God ( viz.) my dear ancient Friend
Humphry Smith, who dyed a Prisoner for the blessed Truth in Winchester Prison;
I being, with diverse more Friends, in Prison with him (for the Truth's sake) a
long time before, and also at his departure, have this to say of him ( viz.)
That he was a man whose deportment and behavior amongst us in Prison, was
comely, yea, even as a Father that takes care for his Children, even so was his
care and oversight over us; he was a faithful Overseer indeed, and one that
minded the Lords business, and certainly its well with him: He was kept very
sensible in his sickness whereof he dyed, and was not heard to speak one
unsavory word, although his exercise was not small, through much weakness; and
in the time of his weakness, near his death, his cries were to the Lord, for the
preservation of his People, who were dear and near unto him: so that he left a
good savor behind him; for even such as were not Friends in the Prison (where
he dyed) were made to speak well of him, he was so innocent in his Conversation
toward all People.

William Jenings.
South-hampton, the 11th of the 12th Month, 1682.
The Testimony of Nicholas Gates concerning Humphry Smith.
DEar Friends, Brethren and Sisters in Christ Jesus, and all tender hearted
People, to whose hands these Testimonies of our dear Friend Humphry Smith may
come, these few words arose in my heart to signify concerning him, I having
had good experience of his Labors and Travails in the preaching of the Gospel
of Christ Jesus, with many more, who were often comforted and refreshed in the
sense of the Lords blessed Power, which attended him in the living Testimonies
he did bear concerning that Gift of God which is to be known in man; he was a
faithful Labourer in the work and service of the Lord, and a patient Sufferer
under the many Trials that did befall him in his day; he never murmured at the
Exercises that he met withal, through Wicked and Unreasonable men; he
constantly testified of and unto the Light of Christ in the inward parts of men
and women, directing all to that of God in their own hearts, affirming, with
the holy Apostle, who said, That which was to be known of God, is manifest in
man: He was very powerful, through the help of the Lord, to the convincing of
many, and turning them to the Light of Christ in themselves; his Testimonies
yet live in the hearts of many, though he be outwardly removed from us; and
many have cause to praise the Lord, in that he raised him up, with many more
Brethren and Sisters, to testify of and concerning the Light of Christ within
man, by which we are made nigh unto the Lord, who were afar off; To whom be
Praises and Thanksgiving forever.

Nicholas Gates, senior.
Alton, the 10th of the 12th Month, 1682.
James Potler's Testimony conc^rning Humphry Smith.
GOd having raised up Humphry Smith, with many other Brethren, to publish and
make known his Name in this the Land of our Nativity, after a long and tedious
Night of Apostasy; and though the Name of the Wicked shall Rot, yet the
Righteous shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance; and many are the seals of
his Ministry, that were begotten to a lively hope in Christ Jesus, through the
Word of Life in him; besides, the many Testimonies left upon Record by him,
which though he be taken away, yet live in the hearts of many, bearing
Testimony that he was of God, and that his Word dwelt plentifully in him; yet I
being a Sufferer with him for more than a years time in that straight noisome
Prison at Winchester, and in my measure sensible of his faithfulness to God in
that work and service which God had called him to: I say, the Love of God in my
Heart to his Truth, and to my deceased Brother, constrains me to give in my
Testimony in few words, with others of my Brethren, to the many Testimonies
left by him, That he was a man that loved the Lord with an upright heart, and
that it was as Meat and drink to him, to do the will of God, delighting more in
it than in his daily Food, being diligent and laborious in his day and time,
desiring to spend and be spent for the Gospels sake: He was a man very bold and
valiant for the Truth, and for the Testimony thereof suffered many sharp and
hard Imprisonments in several Prisons in this Nation, besides very much cruel
and inhumane Usage by Wicked and Unreasonable men. He was released out of
Prison, that time which I was Prisoner with him, but was afterward taken from
a Meeting at Alton (where much of the Lords heavenly Presence was manifested
through him) by a company of rude Soldiers, and had before some Magistrates,
and committed to the same Prison at Winchester again, where, after he had been
continued some time, it pleased the Lord to visit him with sickness, which with
much patience he passed through; yet in all the Lord was good unto him, and
preserved him in Peace, and Contentedness, and Submission to his Will,
magnifying the Name of his God through all, being kept sensible, and in good
and perfect Memory to his decease.

JAMES POTTER.
Winchester-Prison, the 8th of the 12th Month, 1682
Edward Waldren's Testimony concerning Humphry Smith.
I Hearing that the Work and Testimonies (left upon Record) of that true and
faithful Servant of the Lord, (in whose work and service Humphry Smith was
found unto the last) are printed in one Volumn, I found much stirring and
freedom to write this Testimony concerning him, that it might be inserted in
the Book, he being a man that I greatly loved, having Acquaintance with him,
and by him first convinced of the unchangeable Truth and Way of the Lord,
through the powerful Operation of the Spirit and Word of God that dwelt
plentifully in the heart of this faithful Servant of God, who loved not his
Life to the Death for his Testimonies sake, by which he overcame, and was found
faithful to the end, which he finished with joy, as by his last words spoken to
some Friends, does manifestly appear a little before his decease or laying down
of the Body, in this close, strait, nasty, stinking Prison or County-Goal in
Winchester, to the which I this day and time belong, and am a Prisoner under
the sentence of Praemunire, for nothing else but obeying the Doctrine and
Command of Christ Jesus, because for conscience sake only toward God I cannot
Swear at all. Humphry was the first in scorn called a Quaker, that ever had a
public Testimony for God in the Town of Andever, it being a great Meeting, in
which by his powerful clear Testimony several were convinced, though he was
then opposed by rude Soldiers. Not long after he was cast into this Prison,
some of those that were convinced by his Testimony, that had a love raised to
the Lord, and some knowledge of his Way and Truth; some of these in Andever
being thereby led forth to visit Humphry in Prison, both Priests and Professors
began to stir, and be in a rage against; and at the breaking forth of Truth in
that Town, I then being weary of Priests and separate Professors, seeing their
Pride, Avarice, Evil Lives and Conversations, though under a specious pretense
of God and Godliness, but void of the saving knowledge of both; I being
sensible that this was my Condition, and finding and feeling the Judgments of
the Lord, and the weight and burden of Sin and Iniquity, (being in the bondage
of Corruption, like them I had been among) under all groaned to be delivered
from under the weight and burden thereof, into the glorious Liberty and Freedom
of the Sons and Daughters of God; and being unacquainted with the Way of the
Lord, or how to do his Will, or to have any entrance into the Kingdom that
consists in Righteousness, Joy and Peace in the holy Ghost, which the Priests
and Professors could not teach, but were almost as ignorant as those that in
time past had not heard of any such thing, and void of the saving knowledge of
Jesus, the way of God, and could not say, that he was the Christ by it; I then
hearing that in this Prison was that faithful Servant of the Lord, and having
longing desire to see him, went with some of Andever that used to visit him,
there being that day a Meeting in the Prison, which day I hope shall never be
forgotten (by me) nor that faithful and able Minister of the new Testament,
knowing that which only and alone is made alive by the Spirit, and quickened and
reached unto by the Ministers thereof, which Humphry Smith was one, to the
turning of many from Darkness to the Light, from the Power of Satan to the
Power of God, by which alone People come to receive Remission of sins, and an
Inheritance among them that are sanctified; through the great Mercy and
Loving Kindness of God was he an Instrument in convincing and turning me off
and from the Worlds Bypath and crooked Ways of the Wicked, (which were and
are Darkness, in which there is no Peace to them that walk therein) to the
Light of Jesus, the Way of the Lord and Path of the Just, which is a shining
Light, which shines more and more to the perfect Day, and to the fear of the
Lord, which ever was and is the beginning of Wisdom, and will be forever (to
all that do abide therein) a Fountain of Life to depart from the Snares of
Death. I have cause forever to praise the Lord, in the behalf of this tender
innocent, faithful man to God's Truth and People; his Memorial cannot pass into
Oblivion by any that had a true knowledge of him, (dear Humphry Smith) whose
Health was impared, him suffocated, and visible Body destroyed by this bad
corrupt Prison; though thou wast here destroyed, thou art greatly rewarded, God
having proved thee and found thee worthy for himself: The Memorial of the Just
is blessed; the Righteous shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance, and the Name
of the Wicked shall Rot; but they that were and are wise shall shine as the
Brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn many to Righteousness, as the
Stars forever and ever.

Edward Waldern
Winton-Prison, the 8th day of the 11th Month, 1682.
Humphry Smith's Testimony concerning his Father.
COncerning my dear Father, who to his unspeakable gain, but to my great sorrow
and loss, the Lord took from me to himself, whilst I was young, besides the
natural and dutiful Remembrance of so dear a Father, I and many others who knew
him, can say of him, The Righteous shall be in Everlasting remembrance; in
which I may say, by way of Introduction unto many who never knew him, and have
since received the Truth, unto whom these his works may come, for their
encouragement to read them, That the Lord of the Harvest, who among other
faithful Laborers, sent him forth into his Harvest, did sanctify and prepare
him to so good a work, and prospered it in his hand, so that many were turned
to God by him, notwithstanding the great Opposition of Malicious, Cruel and
Ungodly Men, by whom he suffered, more especially in Cromwell's time,
Imprisonment, Dungeon, Whipping, and much Affliction and Hardships; but being
zealous for the glory of God, and the good of Souls, he valiantly endured it
all, and broke through the Ice-like hardness of envious Professors, who having
been first somewhat warmed by that which formerly stirred up good desires in
them after God, but not keeping thereto, became the sooner and harder frozen.
And as his diligence was great in this great work, so was their Envy great, in
endeavoring to hinder him therein, by many long and hard Imprisonments, which
brought great Sicknesses upon him; yet upon all occasions he was given to
Hospitality, apt to teach, and in his place taking care for the Church of God.
As his Admonition was tender, so his Reproof was sharp, not neglecting the one,
nor refraining the other, but dealing with every one according to their
Condition; not sparing me his only Son, any more than another, having in his
last Letter to me, written a little before his Death, these words among many
tender Expressions; And now although, as I said before, thou art my only Son,
yet if thou refusest the Instructions of thy Father, and shall reject the
Counsel of God, and not walk in Gods holy fear, nor keep in the way of Truth,
then let the Judgment of Friends pass upon thee, let the Law of God seize upon
thy Conscience, etc.

The last time I saw him was about a year before he dyed, at which time he gave
me such Advice and Warning, as thereby I perceived I should never see him
again; so great a sight of things and men had he, that I may truly say, he had
the necessary Gift of Discerning of Spirits, with frequent Visions and
Revelations from God, by which he foresaw and prophesied of many things, some
whereof he saw fulfilled, others are since, and the rest will certainly be
fulfilled in their appointed time; some of them are herein extant, dispersed
among his Works, which are now printed for thy benefit ( sober Reader) it being
agreeable to words he wrote to me in a Volumn of Books he caused to be bound
for me, That I should keep that Book safe, and not spoiled any way, that in
years to come, Ages may read and see my love to the Seed.

This in short I have written concerning him, knowing there be many still
living, who have a larger Testimony in themselves concerning him. And some who
were his Fellow Laborers in the Word and Doctrine, whom he did (and I do)
love, and in Honor Prefer, counting them worthy of double Honor, some of them
having more knowledge of him, are able, as they see meet, to give a larger
Testimony concerning him.

I shall conclude, desiring that my self, and all the Children of faithful
Parents, may walk in the good Way they walked in, and not like that Generation
mentioned, Judges 2. 10. Who arose after the Death of Joshua and the Elders,
which knew not the Lord, nor yet the Works which he had done for Israel; but
that we may follow the Lord fully and faithfully, and he may raise up in us the
same Love, Zeal, Diligence and Valor, as he did in our Parents, is the
earnest Desire of

Humphry Smith.
Saffron-Walden in Essex, the 13th of the 9th Month, 1682.
Dear Friends;
BE pleased to take notice, that dear Humphry Smith was a man that suffered
many long and crue^ Imprisonments for his Love and Testimony he bore to Gods
blessed Truth and People, in his day, which occasioned part of his Writings to
be scattered about in Manuscript, and not found till part of this Book was
printed, whereby some few of them are mis-placed, as to the years in which they
were written; but the following Table of Contents will direct to the particular
Heads of such collected, and here printed.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS, Or Chief Heads contained in this VOLUMN.
THe Sufferings of the Saints at Evesham; Or a short Description of the first
Ground of the Persecution of the Servants of God. Page A Warning to the
Priests, Magistrates, Rulers and Inhabitants of Exon, page 1. Some of the
Effects of the Priests Ministry in Devonshire, p. 6. The first and second
Priesthood declared according to the Scriptures, p. 10. An ALARM sounding
forth unto all the Inhabitants of the Earth, as a Warning before the Vials of
Everlasting Wrath be poured forth upon them, p. 19. A sad and mournful
Lamentation for the People of these Nations, p. 28. Idolatry declared against,
p. 46. Man driven out of the Earth and Darkness, by the Light, Life, and Mighty
hand of God, p. 52. I. Concerning my Call out of the World, or my going out
from my House, Country and Employment, p. 55. II. Concerning my public
Preaching, p. 62. The Wandering Star discovered, or something in Answer to a
Book called, The Quakers Blazing-Star, or The Worlds Wonder, p. 68. A Word to
all Professors, p. 86. The just Complaint of the Afflicted (against the Rulers,
who oppress the Innocent) to be delivered to the Judge of the Sessions at
Winchester, after page 92. To them who have lately believed in the Light, and
are waiting to receive the Life, p. 93. The Two striving within, p. 98. The
Love of God declared, and Satan's Wiles discovered, p. 102. The Ground,
Foundation, Beginning, and Father, and Children, and Compass, and End, and the
Effects of all the Harpers, Musitioners, Singers and Dancers, p. 108. Divine
Love spreading forth forth over all Nations; Or, the Glorious Day of Unity,
Peace and Concord, p. 116. To all Parents of Children upon the face of the
whole Earth, p. 123. The true and everlasting Rule from God discovered, and
that which proves all things published from the Spirit of Truth, p. 135. A
Testimony of the true Prophet, who was to come, is come, and there is not
another, p. 155. An Invitation from the Spirit of Christ, p. 164. The sounding
Voice of the dread of Gods mighty Power, p. 167. To all that want Peace with
God, To the Sheep every where not brought home, To the thirsty breathing Soul,
and to the Seed, though in Captivity among and in the midst of all Professors,
p. 175. I. Concerning Mofes's Ministration, p. 177. II. Concerning Christ and
his Ministration, p. 179. III. Concerning the Ministration of the Spirit, p.
185.
The Vision of Humphry Smith which he saw concerning London, in the year 1660.
p. 195. To the great Flock of the imprisoned Servants of God Almighty, p. 201.
A Warning to New-England's pretended Christians, p. 207. The Lamb and his day
proclaimed, p. 211. Six Proposals stated for the Honor of the KING; I. By his
Subjects Unity one with another, p. 214. II. By his Subjects submission (
actively or passively) unto all his Laws, p. 216. III. By his Subjects
faithfulness unto him, p. 217. IV. By his Subjects Vprightness in their
Traffic with other Nations, p. 218. V. By his Subjects departing from that
which dishonors both God, the King and themselves, p. 218. VI. By his
Subjects being the peculiar chosen People of God, p. 220.
To the Lambs of Christ, p. 223. To such in whose hearts the spirit of the Lord
is beginning to move his Truth to declare, p. 226. Sound things asserted, 1. In
the Kings own words; 2. from late Experience; 3. From Scripture-Truth; 4.
According to Reason and Equity. p. 229. Forty four Queries propounded to all
the Clergymen of the Liturgy: Also, eleaven Reasons why these Queries are
proposed, p. 236. An Epistle to all the Meetings in Dorsetshire, p. 258. To the
despised, rejected and persecuted Lambs of Christ in the County of Dorset, p.
263. One Hundred and Forty four Lines of secret inward Melody and Praise to the
Lord, p. 269. Hidden things made manifest by the Light, in a plain distinction
between Condemnation and Temptation, p. 272. Concerning Temptation, p. 279. A
Direction in the way to that within the Vail, by which Temptations are
overcome, p. 285.
The Meditations of an humble Heart, p. 290. To the espoused Virgin, p. 293.
Something how the Marriage of the underfiled Lamb; and Virgin came at first to
be, P. 295.
To all dear Friends who keep faithful in their measures to the end, P. 297. To
the meek and open hearted Lambs and Flock of Heaven, P. 301. The Cause of the
long Afflicted and sore Oppressed, sent forth from Winchester Prison, P. 309.
The Answer to the Mittimus, P. 310. A Copy of a Paper sent to the Sessions, P.
312.
To the Sons of men, P. 317. To Friends at Ailsbury (Prison) and in them parts,
P. 323. To the the Young and Tender, and to the late Convinced People of God,
amongst the rest of the Elect and already Chosen, P. 328. Concerning Tithes, P.
335. To my nearly related Friend Elizabeth Smith, P. 363.
THE Sufferings, Trials and Purgings Of the SAINTS at EVESHAM; Who by their
Obedience to the Lord in their Measures, do overcome their Enemies, by their
daily suffering under them.
Or, A short Description of the first Ground of the Persecution of the Servants
of God, occasioned by the Priests, and the continual Proceedings of the
Magistrates against them called Quakers.

AS the Priests were always Enemies unto Christ and his Disciples, so do they
continue persecuting the Saints, laying Snares for the Innocent, and smiting
with the Tongue, Jer. 18. 18. and stirring up the Rulers and the rude
Multitude, making Uproars and Insurrections against the Saints, as they did
against Christ and his Ministers; for the chief Priests, assembled with the
Scribes and Elders of the People, consulted how they might take Jesus by
subtilty and kill him; yet they would not do it on the Feast day, lest there
should be an Vproar among the People, Mat. 26. 3, 4, 5 But the chief Priest and
Rulers in Evesham, after their Consultations (how to ensnare the Innocent) did
come on the first day to ensnare us, but (standing in the counsel of God) we
were preserved from their first Snare which they laid for us (I having notice
of it before) in bringing the whole multitude to provoke or entrap us; the
which when they could not do, though hundreds of them gathered together about
the Door, (where I and many of the Servants of the Lord were) like those that
gathered together about Lot's door, Genesis 19. 4, 5. yet none of them could
provoke us to words, nor had they any way to ensnare us then, as afterward
will appear.

And after the chief Priests had hired Judas for thirty pieces of Silver to
betray Christ, Mat. 26. 15. and after Judas had brought again the thirty pieces
of Silver, then the chief Priests took the same Money for the which Judas had
sold Christ, and with it they bought a field of Blood, Mat. 27. 6, 7, 8. So the
chief Priests have purchased (unto themselves and all their Generation) with
the price of Blood a field a Blood, to bury all those that are strangers to the
Covenant of Grace: So Gog, who makes War with the Saints, has a place of
Graves in Israel, Ezekiel 39. 11. and ver. 19, 20. and the dead are burying the
dead; for both Priests and People are profane and dead in Trespasses and in
Sins, their hands being guilty of the Blood of the Righteous. And after Christ
was betrayed by the means of the Priests, (and when Pilate, who would have
released him) they taught the People to ask for a Murderer, and and destroy
Jesus, Mat. 27. 20. (and such teachings the Priests do use now) And after Jesus
was by their means crucified, and after he was risen, then they consulted again
with the Elders; and they gave large Money unto the Soldiers to tell Lies, and
taught them so to do, that their murdering Actions might be hid, and the
Disciples falsely accused, Mat. 28. 11, 12, 13. And the Servant is not greater
than his Master, whom they have called Beelzebub, much more them of his Household.

And as the chief Priests have consulted against, and crucified Christ, and
denied him in the Resurrection, so they still continue persecuting and
consulting against his Members, harmless Lambs and faithful Ministers; and
there is little Persecution in England but the Priests have a hand in it, if
not the first Actors of it, as thou George Hopkins Priest of Evesham had in
all the barbarous Persecution there; for after I and other Friends kept
Meetings in private at Bengard in this Borough of Evesham, and none did make
Insurrections against us, neither did we give offense to any, therefore thou
could not find any ground at all to ensnare us by. Then upon the 19th day of
the 6th Month, 1655. on that day did thou with the Magistrates, and the
rest, seek to ensnare us, it being the First day of the Week, and I being at
Bengard, at an appointed Meeting, and thou being in thine accustomed
Steeple-house in Evesham, both parts of the day, as thy custom was; and after
thou had done, according to thy custom, then thou and the rest came from that
Steeplehouse, to the Steeple-house in Bengard, and with thee did thou bring
the whole Congregation, both the called Justices and Magistrates, and rude
People several hundreds, the like seldom heard of. And that thou came on
purpose to entrap us and stir up Persecution, and smite with the Tongue, will
appear by these things following:

1st, Thou wast not use to come to that Steeple-house, neither did thou come
there in the like manner before.

2dly, In thy coming that day on which I was there; for I was there but seldom
upon First days.

3dly, In that thou had thy Congregation with thee in thy Steeple-house at
Evesham, where thou might have said any thing to them then and there, as well
as to bring the same Congregation to another Steeple-house to hear the same man.

4thly, There were no People in Bengard, but did or might come to hear thee in
thy accustomed place, as they were used to do.

5thly, In that thou have not been in that Steeple-house since that day, it
being now fifteen weeks.

6thly, In that when thou wast come there, thou did speak evil of things thou
did not know, and back-bite others. And those thou did bring with thee,
even this one Congregation, to them distst thou say, O foolish Galatians! who
has bewitched you that you should not obey the Truth? And I say unto thee, if
thou had not bewitched them, they would not have obeyed thee (but the Truth)
to come there to hear thy Lies; for many there thou did declare, as to thy
face was proved by Robert Smith, for the which he was imprisoned eleaven weeks.

7thly, It will appear by thy Sorcery which thou did then vent forth, making
that thy ground in Gal. 3. 1. thy heads thereof in short (as it was brought to
me in writing, witnessed by many, and not denied, but confessed with thy own
Mouth since to me) are as follows: Thou did liken that which is called
Quaking, 1st, Unto Witchcraft; 2dly, In three Respects worse than Witchcraft:
3dly, Unto Pharisees, who ware Hats like Morters: 4thly, To Papists in some
things, and in some things worse; And thou say, Some sold their Bibles, and
others cast them behind their backs. For the which thou wast declared to be a
Liar at the Sessions. Lastly, Thou did conclude thy Sorcery with stirring up
them called Justices and Magistrates, to put the Oath of Abjuration in
execution; telling them, That if men might refuse to swear, out of tenderness
of Consciences, then that might be a Cloak long enough for all the Jesuits
that might come into England. And after thou had done, (and returned) not
meeting with any opportunity to ensnare me, being I did not speak to any of
you, but continued with Friends until Constables came that night and took me
out of the House, and brought me before thee, and two others that are set to do
Justice (but since I and many more have seen them and the Mayor to be most
barbarous Heathens) And when thou could not entangle me in my words, whereby
to send me to Prison, at last you tendered the Oath of Abjuration unto me, who
am bound for Conscience sake not to Swear at all, but to abide in the Doctrine
of Christ, Mat. 5 34. Therefore at last I was sent to Prison, though thou at
that time wast twining like the Serpent, to wash thy hands like Pilate, as if
thou had not been the cause of my Imprisonment; for thou did say, Thou
did believe that I did refuse to Swear out of tenderness of Conscience, and
bid the Justices do their Wills by me: And thou did see their Wills were to
send me to Prison, because I could not Swear, unto the which thou had before
stirred them up. So Pilate said of Christ, I am innocent ^f the Blood of this
Person, whom Pilate himself acknowledged to be just, and could find no cause of
Death in him, yet he delivered him up to be crucisied, Mat. 27. 20, 24, 26. And
when we were first brought into the House then John Nickles, one of the
Constables, smote Thomas Cartrite on the head, and the Justices stood by and
cared not for it; and afterward our Hats were taken off our heads, and thrown
among the feet of the People: Then they asked me from whence I came? I
answered, from Egypt. Then there was a Laughter among them, both Priest,
Justices and People; for the Fools heart is full of Laughter. And after they
had continued so, I was moved of the Lord to speak to them thus; O People! is
there no fear of God before your Eyes? Did ever the Saints of Christ live in
Laughing, Mocking and Wantonness?

Then the Priest, to uphold them in it, said, That Elijah did Mock Baals
Priests.

Answ. Though he did so, yet it is not convenient to bring that Scripture to
justify the People in Mocking.

Then Theophilus Andrus said, He has spoken enough already; what need we have
any further witness? Therefore make him a Pass to go to Egypt again, and let
him be whipped out of the Town; for there is an Act of Parliament against such as
wander up and down under the Name of Egyptians.

Then some asked, When I came from thence? others mocked. So I was a sport unto
them, as Sampson was unto the Philistians, Judge. 16. 25. and I stood silent;
but at last the Lord moved me to speak, saying, Why People are you altogether
blind in the things of God? Of Egypt and Sodom I was, where our Lord was
crucified, Rev. 11. 8. and in Darkness and Bondage did I dwell, being a Child
of Wrath as well as others; but the Lord by his living Power has brought me
from the Land of Darkness to the Light, and from Bondage to the Land of Rest,
and into the Liberty of the Sons of God.

Then Theophilus Andrus said, Speak on, for I never heard the like of this
before. But I was not to be subject to their Wills, but to stand in the counsel
of God.

Question; But you have had some outward Being or Family, had you not?

Answer; I had a Farm of 30 l. by the year, at little Cowrne, in the County of
Hereford, not thirty Miles off this place; but I have now left part of it, and
my Wife and Children are in the rest; and there I was a great Professor and a
public Preacher in many places thereabout daily, and then I was owned by the
Justices and great men of the Earth, and many Hundreds did resort to hear me,
where I came, and I was then beloved of many; for the World loves his own. But
now I come to witness the Power of that which then I did but profess, and now
am I hated by the World. And after other words from them called Justices, and
others, and they could not entangle me in my words, then the Priest with the
subtilty of the Serpent, seeing they could not ensnare me, he then began, like
those that came to Christ and feigned themselves just men, that they might take
hold of his words, and deliver him to the Power, Luke 20. 20. And like as the
Saduces came to entangle him concerning the Resurrection, saying, Moses says
thus, but what say thou? So the Priest George Hopkins, among his many subtle
Questions, said, Thus Solomon says, The just man falls seven times; What say
you? or the like. And there is not a man upon Earth that does good and sins
not: How do you expound that?

A. I am redeemed from the Earth.

Q. But do you not walk on the Earth?

A. I walk in the Light, which leads out of the Earth.

Q. But are you not upon the Earth?

A. As for this outward Body being upon the Earth, Enoch was for a time upon
this outward Earth, yet he walked with God.

Q. But do you walk with God?

A. They that are led by the Spirit of God are the Sons of God, as God has
said, I will walk in them.

Q. But Solomon says, There is not a just man upon Earth, that does good and
sins not: Now therefore answer to the Question, do you sin, yea or nay?

A. He that is born of God sins not.

Q. But are you free from sin, yea or nay?

A. If I were not free from sin, will it therefore follow, that no man is?

Q. Do you believe that any man can be free from sin whilst he is here?

A. Yea, I do believe it.

Then the Priest said, it was a Popish Tenure, and he could show me a Book that
the Papists do hold, That men may be free from Sin in this Life.

Then I said, the Papists do hold, that there is a God, and that Christ dyed
for Sinners, and so do I: Therefore if the Papists do hold a Truth, must I deny
it because they hold it? or must the Truth therefore be called a Popish Tenure
because they hold it?

The Priest said, Nay but in such things as these, that are in dispute between
the Papists and us, which is, That men may be free from Sin, and that they are
justified by Works wrought in them.

I answered, It is God that works in us, both the will and the deed, who has
wrought all our works in us and for us. And I have heard that the Papists do
hold, that there is a Purgatory (which I deny) to be purged in from Sin after
Death; but I seldom hear that they did hold, that men might be free from sin
here. And if they are free from sin whilst they are here, then they need not
hold, that there is a Purgatory to purge them after.

Then I asked the Priest, if men should be free from sin whilst they are here?

The Priest said, Nay.

Then I asked him, if men should be purged from sin after Death?

The Priest said, Nay.

Then I said, if thou will not have men cleansed from sin neither before Death
nor after Death, then when will thou have them cleansed?

The Priest said, What if God will forgive men, and cleanse them from their sin
at the very time of their Death, as Christ did the Thief on the Cross?

Ans. Thou art not to question what God will do, or may do in that; but can
thou prove by Scripture, that God does so? And if thou will say, the Thief was
purged from sin when Christ spoke to him, then that was before his death.

So when the Priest was almost taken in his own Snare, then the Serpents Wisdom
began to twind out of that, and asked me How I was justified?

But I seeing his subtilty, was not careful to answer him in that matter, Dan.
3. 16. but stood silent, as Christ did before the high Priest, Mat. 26. 62, 63.
So then there was a stir among the People, because I was not hasty to utter
words before the Lord; but after the Priest had urged very much, then I said,
Thou do wait to ensnare me; and if I should say, that I was justified by
Faith in the Blood of Christ, thou would but seek to entangle me in it.

Then the Priest asked, If I were justified by the Blood of Christ?

Ans. Yea.

Qu. Are you justified by that Blood of Christ that was shed at Jerusalem?

A. By the Blood of Jesus Christ (the Son of the living God, who was the
express Image of his Fathers glory, in whom dwelt the fullness of the Godhead
really, who suffered at Mount Calvery by Jerusalem, for Sinners) am I justified.

Q. But are you justified by the Blood of Christ without you, or within you?

A. Though Jesus Christ has shed his Blood for Sinners, yet I remained in my
sin until I came to witness the Blood of Christ in me.

Q. Are you not justified by the Blood of Christ that was shed for you?

A. If the Blood of Christ was not shed, then Sinners could not be justified by
it.

Then the Priest said, You do not answer me plainly, whether you are justified
merely by that Blood which was shed upon the Cross, or merely by something in
you.

A. What! would thou have me say, that all Swearers, Liars and Drunkards
(that live and dye in their sins) are justified, because Christ shed his Blood
upon the Cross?

The Priest said, Nay.

Then I said, The Blood of Christ that was shed upon the Cross I do not deny;
but though he has shed his Blood there for Sinners, yet none come to be
justified, or have benefit by it, as to Salvation, but those that the Blood and
the Life of Christ is raised up in; for they that have not the Spirit of Christ
are none of his, and such are not justified by him; and though he has shed his
Blood upon the Cross, yet the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God:
And would thou have me say more, but that thou waitest to ensnare me?

Then the Priest gave over that also, and went to entrap me in another thing,
and said, One of you that are called Quakers, and is a Teacher among you, did
bid me give over deceiving the People, in telling them, That the Scripture is
the Word of God: Now do you own the Scripture to be the Word of God?

A. The Scriptures I own, and witness to be a true Declaration, Luke 1. 1.
spoken forth by holy men of God, as they were moved by the Spirit, 2 Pet. 1.
21. and they are those that testify of Christ, John 5. 39. to be the Light of
the World, John 1. 9. and the Word of God, Rev. 19. 13.

Q. Are not the Scriptures the Word of God?

A. The Scripture says, God is the Word.

Q. Are not the Scriptures necessary to Salvation?

A. They are useful for Doctrine, for Exhortation and Reproof.

Q. But are they necessary?

A. They are useful.

Q. Are they not necessary?

A. They are necessary to stop the Mouths of Gainsayers.

Q. But are the Scriptures a necessary means unto Salvation?

A. Jesus Christ is the only means of our Salvation, and there is no other Name
given under Heaven by which men shall be saved.

Q. But are men saved without Scriptures?

A. Now the Scriptures are written, and what is written, is written for our
Learning; therefore we are not without it, but Enoch walked with God, Noah
obeyed, and Abraham believed, before Scripture was; and they that are come unto
Christ, are come unto that which was before Scripture was.

Q. How did you come to know any thing but by the Scripture?

A. Although I had the Scripture, yet I never knew Christ, of whom the
Scripture testifies, until he was revealed in me.

Q. Did not you come to your Knowledge at first, by hearing some Minister?

A. I never profitted by any of them, but lived in Wickedness, so long as I
followed them.

Q. But if ye own the Scriptures to be true, and spoken from the Spirit of God,
why will you not own it to be the Word of God?

A. Bring me any one Scripture, that says, the Scripture is the Word of God,
and I shall own it; but the Letter kills, the Spirit gives Life, and the
Word of God is quick and powerful, sharper than a two edged Sword; then I took
my Bible and laid it down on the Table before them, and said, See, this has no
Power in it, neither can it stir: Then the People laughed at me again; then I
said to them, Be silent for shame, for I speak soberly; and this Bible is not
sharper than a two edged Sword: and if this Bible be the powerful Word of God,
then the vilest Person in England may buy the powerful Word of God for Four
Shillings.

Thus when the Priest had sought in these, and the like Questions to ensnare
me, and found no better ground; then he turned to them called Justices, and
said, Sirs, you see that though they deny Popery in the general, yet you see
they hold it in the particular, as I have made it plain before you, in that he
holds a Man may be free from Sin, and to be justified by Works wrought
within; and if this Popery be suffered to creep in, then you may conceive the
danger that may follow in this whole Nation; therefore I shall leave it unto
you; and you know that I came not here until you sent for me, therefore it is
not of my procurement. So after he had betrayed me as much as he could into
their Hands, like Judas, then he would have washed his Hands like Pilate.

And after I was sent to Prison to the Goalers House, for refusing to Swear
that which afterward they blotted out of my Mittimus, and after two days
being at the Goalers House, where the mighty Power of God appeared, to the
silence and amazement of all the beholders, as they were amazed at the
Apostles, Acts 2. 7. For several times after I had prayed, the People were
shaken, and the Word of God was spoken with boldness, Acts 4. 31. then I was
sent to the main Goal, where the People were exceeding mad against me, as Saul
once was against the Saints, Acts 26. 11. And the Rulers stretched forth their
Hands to vex us, like Herod, Acts 12. 1. And the Town was moved, and the People
ran together, Acts 21. 30. And the Multitude, with the Magistrates, Acts 16.
22. Being cut to the Heart, some gnashed on me with their Teeth, Acts 7. 54.
And the Multitude of the Town was divided, and there was diverse assaults made
against us, both of the Heathens and the Rulers, who sought to vex us
despightfully, as they did, Acts 14 4, 5. Some threw Stones in the Prison the
wait of five pound, and threw Dirt and Water on my Lodging, and spit on me, and
I hid not my Face from shame and spitting, Isa. 50. 6. And Pist at me several
times, and once they Pist on my Food, and they made diverse Assaults and
Insurrections against our Meetings, but Friends feared none of these things,
Rev. 2. 10. but in patience endured all their bitter Persecutions. At last they
were ashamed, and so were the Rulers, who were far worse then the rude People;
For though Friends met in the Street by the Prison daily, yet the Meeting was
not broken by the rude People, but by the Magistrates, who were at last more
quiet, and then Friends met as peaceably in the Street, as if they had been in
a private House; so they met thrice every Week, besides on the Market-dayes;
after the Market was over, the People of the Country did come there in Peace,
and receive the Word with gladness, and the Ignorant began to be convinced, and
the Gainsayers Mouths stopped, and much People received the Truth in love,
whereby the Meetings were increased, and the Work of the Lord began to prosper;
thus we continued for four Weeks together day by day in Peace, and then there
arose up a new Mayor, which knew not the righteous Seed, as there arose up a
new King in Egypt, Exodus 1. 8. And he saw the People of God increase, was vexed
at it, as the world was always vexed at the increase of the righteous Seed; so
that Mayor Edmond Young, said, He would break our Meetings, or else his Bones
should lie in the Dirt. The which he did upon the 14th day of the 8th Month,
being the first day of the Week, on the which in the Morning Friends met in
private, and not in the Street, and as two Friends of the Town were going to
that Meeting, the Mayor laid Hands on them, and put them in Prison; and in the
latter part of the day Friends met in the Street, where they used to do, where
they were without any disturbance, until the Mayor came with Officers, and
said, It was an unlawful Assembly; and said, If there were above eight Persons
met together, it was an unlawful Assembly; And presently laid Hands on Friends,
and pulled, and thrust, and kicked, and put many in the Prison and in the
Stocks, and put me and two more in the Dungeon; and when he saw that Friends
were not afraid of him, neither did any run away, then he said, He wanted
another Prison for the Women (for he had imprisoned Men in four several places
that time) when this was done, he commanded his Sargeant to make proclamation,
and command in the Name of the Protector, That every one should depart thence
on pain of Imprisonment; when he wanted more Prisons to put them in. Thus he
broke our Meetings, who harmed not any, nor resisted his Violence; and then he
said, If we would meet in Houses or in the Fields, he would not molest us: Yet
on the next First day he saw one of the Town going alone to a Meeting, that we
had then appointed in a House, and him he put in Prison.

And so I being that Day put in the Dungeon, where I now am (as once before I
was put in for Praying) then he endeavored to keep all People from me, and for
several Days and Nights we were denied having Candles in this dark Dungeon; at
last he sent us each man a Pennyworth of Bread, and a half Pennyworth of Beer
a day, the which the Jailer said, was the Towns allowance; but we still denied
it, and sent him word, That if we should not have Food for our Money, or from
our Friends, then we should be without it. So at last, when we could have Bread
from our Friends, and Water, then we did eat and drink, and praise the Lord,
whose presence is with us.

Thus he much endeavored to bring us into slavery unto his corrupt will, which
was according to the Words of Robert Atkins, that sat Judge at the Sessions,
who then said to me thus, You have been kept very high all this while; but I
shall take a course ever I go hence, that you shall be kept shorter. And the
Mayor Edmond Young, caused a Trap-door to be made into the Dungeon, locked
down, and all our Bedding and Bed-cloathes, that Friends had sent us, to be
taken from us, and will not let our Friends have it again. Joshua Frensham (a
Prisoner) having much pain with his Teeth, did something earnestly desire, that
whilst he was a Prisoner he might have the use of a Pillow that was taken away,
(which was his own) but it was denied. On the second day after we were put in
the Dungeon, a Friend brought some Straw for us to lie on, and the Jailer would
not suffer it to be brought into us, because he would not give him Money to
unlock the Doors.

Once I sent to the Mayor to have Liberty for some man or Friend to fetch out
our Dung from us, and he denied it, and sent for a Constable to put that Friend
in the Stocks that came to ask it: And before I came in the Dungeon, sometimes
our Boxes and Writings were taken from us, and sometimes our Stools that we had
to sit or write upon, and our Candles. Besides, eight Friends being Prisoners
at the Goalers House, were much abused by him, the which I shall forbear to
write; only thus he said unto them, If they would not pay four Pence a Night
for each man's Lodging, and eight Pence a Meal for each man's Diet, then they
should go all to the main Goal; Which they refused to satisfy his Will in;
neither were they used to eat of his Diet, being all Towns men: But sometimes
he would not suffer their Wives, nor any other Friend to bring their Diet to
them, nor yet to come into them; Then a man gained leave of him that dwelt next
the Jailer, and so went through his House, and brought Food to the Prisoners,
which when the Jailer saw, he threatened that man which had let him through, and
took the Beer from them, intending by such Actions to force them to his will,
which they would not be subject to; therefore he brought them all to the main
Goal, and then he said unto us, That if he might have his will, he would Hang
us all: And he had said before, He might do what he would unto us, for we
should have no benefit of the Law, neither durst any Lawyer plead for us. Then
were them eight kept in the Goal, and we three in the Dungeon under them, five
days to our own Dung; as I and some of us have been kept in this Prison and
Dungeon, with our own Dung in the same Room from time to time, for this
fourteen Weeks.

And as for the Prison, it is not 12 Foot square; and but one Goal hole
belonging to it four Inches wide, where we took in our Food and Straw to lie
upon, and were forced to burn Candle every day (when we have it) by reason the
Prison is so dark, and so close, and so many in so little room, and so little
Air, with the stink of our own Dung, all which might have occasioned the Death
of some ever this time; and one they kept with me in the Dungeon until he had
been sick, and after turned him once in the Night out; and some others have not
been well, by reason of the exceeding closeness of the Prison, whereby
sometimes the stink of the Prison has been so strong forth in the Street, that
People could not endure to stand by it; sometimes when the days were hot, the
Breath of some Prisoners was almost stopped, and lay for several days like men
asleep; and when days are at the coldest, we have not room nor place either to
make Fire, or to walk to keep our Bodies warm.

Yet there is a large Prison over our Heads, where they do sometimes imprison
many of our Friends; but that large Prison they will not let us be in, neither
could we, (nor Friends for us) prevail to have Liberty to walk in that Prison
sometimes by day, and to come down into the other Prison by Night.

Therefore let all People (whose Hearts are tender toward the Lord) take
notice how we are not only deprived of outward Liberty (without the breach of
any Law) but are also kept in a most barbarous condition, worse than Thieves or
Murderers, as the Jailer has said, That if we had been in for Theft or Murder,
he could have let us have more Liberty, than now he durst, because of the Mayor.

One day two Countrymen were passing by the Prison with their Teams, the which
Men came and enquired, What we were imprisoned for? And the Jailer being by,
enticed them into us, and then he locked the Door again, and went his way; so
the men were constrained (by reason of their Teams) to send several Messengers
with entreating Words to the Jailer, to come again, and then they were forced
to agree with him for to let them forth for Money, the which they presently
paid.

Another time one of the Town came in the Prison to see us, when the Jailer was
there, and the Doors open, and the Jailer locked the Door, and kept him in that
Day from his labor, and that Night; and his Wife nor her Friends could not
prevail with the Mayor nor the Jailer to let him out without Money.

Also, James Wall, a Prisoner, who had served seven Years an Apprenticeship in
the Town, and a Freeman thereof, and has born several Offices, being a
Shopkeeper, having for seven Years kept a standing in the Market place, until
since he was Prisoner, that the Mayor Edmond Young forbad his Wife, neither
would he let her stand that time where he was used to do, nor in any place of
the Market; Then she went to him concerning it; and once he said, she should
have a standing for two Pence; but after he began to speak suttilly to her,
saying, I hear that your Husband does abuse you. She answered, My Husband did
never abuse me; but as for that Judgment which he now holds, I could not own,
but now seeing it is so much persecuted makes me own it, because the Way of God
was always persecuted. And when the Mayor heard that, and saw he could have no
occasion against her Husband by her Words, then he said, She should not have a
standing for 5 l. Also two of James Wall's Chapmen came to him, with whom he
had dealed much, and their Accounts were large, and some Money he owed them,
who went to the Mayor and proffered what Bale he would desire for him, to come
forth one day to perfect his Accounts. But they could not prevail with him; but
the Mayor said to them, If they would have a Warrant to seize on his Goods,
they should. But the men said, They had no reason so to do (for the Mayor he
seeks to ruinate others also.) On that day we were before the late Mayor,
George Kemp; I said, I own Magistrates that are for the Punishing of
Evildoers, and the Praise of them that do well: He answered, You will find no
such in England (and I am sure I find no such in Evesham.)

On the 17th of the 9th Month, Margerat Newby and Elizabeth Quorte came to
this Town in obedience to the Lord, who had a Meeting on the morrow (being the
First Day) in private at Edward Pitway's, and after the Meeting ended, about
the fourth Hour, in the latter part of the Day, they came to the Prison to
visit us that were in it, and as they were returning, the Mayor laid violent
Hands on them, and put them in the Prison above us, and then caused them to be
put in the Stocks that are in that Prison, which Stocks are made worse then
ordinarily, with places to put in both Hands, in which Stocks an Hours
punishment is very bad; and after a Constable had put them in, the Mayor went
up unto them, to see if they were punished bad enough, and caused them to be
removed as far asunder as might be, that they might not one help or ease
another, if they could; and so, left them with both their Legs therein, with
two holes distance between their Legs, in a most barbarous and shameful manner,
and beastly words he used to them; and so went thence and locked the
Prison-door, that no Friends could come nigh them, it being a freezing night,
in which manner they were kept the space of 15 hours at least; the like
Punishment seldom heard of: I have thoughts that Paul's forty Stripes save one;
was not so bad. And after they had been in that manner all that time, then the
Mayor caused them to be taken out, and sent presently in the Cold out of the
Town a back way, without any stay for any outward Comfort. And the same
First Day at Night, a Friend that came to the Town the day before, being at the
Prison hole, was put in the common Stocks by the Mayor's order, not showing him
any reason why they did; and after he had been in the Stocks all that freezing
Night in the Street, then the Mayor sent him out of the Town by the Jailer; but
when the Jailer had left him, he returned to the Town again along the Road-way,
it being the Market day, and came to the Prison to us, and then went to the
Mayor, to know what offense he had to charge him with, that he had thus
punished him for: But the Mayor having nothing to accuse, but was wroth, and
sent him to the Stocks again, where both his Feet were put in; and then they
sent for Robert Vens, who did go along with the Friend forth of the Town, that
had been in the Stocks all Night; and when Robert Vens came before them called
Justices, Samuel. Gardenar and Robert Maiten, the one of them said, What shall
we do with this Fellow? The other answered, Put him in the Goal. But at last
they sent him to the Stocks, and he knows no reason why they did it, but for
going with the other Friend out of the Town; and when he had been in the Stocks
five hours, then they sent for him to see what the Jailer had to charge him
with, for any words that he might speak, when he went with the other Friend; so
when they had punished him, they went to enquire what offense he had done, and
finding none, they let him go.

When this Persecution begun in Evosham, and the Corruption of the Magistrates
did so plainly appear, some of the Inhabitants intended to send two men to the
Protector to acquaint him, and they writ something to that effect to send by
them, the which Writing was subscribed with about fifty Hands to it, that by it
the Protector might know what corrupt men were in Authority in this Town; but I
said unto them, That they might put themselves to much trouble, and yet not
speak with the Protector; therefore if they would not otherwise be satisfied,
they might put some four Hands to it, and send it to Print; and then I should
endeavor to have it sent to the Protector, that he might be left without
excuse: So they sent it to Print with twenty Hands to it, which was entit^led,
A Representation of the Government of Evesham, from many of the Inbabitants
thereof, directed to the Protector, etc. And at the Sessions after, many of
them were fined, and some were both fined, and have been ever since Imprisoned
in the Protectors Name, for declaring to the Protector the corruption of those
that are put in Authority under the Protector, who act contrary to the
Protector's Laws, against those that have been faithful. And there is not any
Friend at any time that can by any means since the Sessions, gain or have for
Money a Copy of our Indictments.

And let all People take notice, that all that is printed in this Book, is all
but a short Declaration to what might be printed, of the Persecutions of
Priests, Magistrates and People of this Town against the Saints.

From the Dungeon in Evesham, by, him that is known to the World by the Name of
Humphry Smith.

A WARNING TO THE Priests, Magistrates, Rulers A Inhabitants OF EXON That they
may be Preserved from the Wrath at hand.
With some of the Effects of the Priests Minstery in Devonshire, whose Fruits
have exceeded many, and are now brought to light, that the simple may return
from them (who profit not) unto Christ the Light, who reaches all to profit,
and is come to teach.
YOU who are this day fasting for Strife and Debate, that you may smite with
the Fist of Wickedness, and that you may exalt your selves in Pride, vain Glory
and Oppression one over another, and persecute and imprison the Just, and be as
Lords over Gods Heritage, exercising Authority one over another, seeking honor
one of another, each man seeking his own Interest, and not the good one of
another, pleasing your selves in lying Vanities, corrupting your selves in
those things which the Righteous Law of God forbids, sporting your selves in
this the day of the Lord, which is stealing upon you all as a Thief in the
night, so is he coming upon you unawares, who are this day mocking God and your
own Souls, and are with, and in Cain's nature, offering a Sacrifice to God, but
the just Witness of God in the particular is murdered, and you with your
Sacrifices are shut out from the Lord God of Sabboths, whose Rest you come not
into, but are feeding upon the Serpent's Food, which is to know and not obey,
and the young Serpents are nourished, and the old Serpent's Head is not broken,
Iniquity lodges in the Heart, and Wickedness rules in the inward Parts. From
the Image and Life of God you are all fallen, and are gone astray from your
Maker, and are erred from the right way, and gone a Whoring after your own
Inventions, and have committed Fornication with strange Flesh, the Thoughts of
your Hearts are Evil, and on your Beds do you imagine Mischief one against
another; and by Deceit and Defraud have you filled your Houses with the
Treasures of Egypt, and Darknese is in your Dwellings, even thick Darkness
that may be felt, and from your Eyes are the things of God hid, and a Vail is
over you, and the Seed is in Bondage, the partition Wall is yet standing, and
you are found without among the Dogs, and the Sorcerers, and the wild Beasts of
the Field, in the Nature of the Wolf, subtle, and devouring both the Lamb-like
Spirit within, and the Lambs without; the Flock of God is scattered, and the
Thorns choke the Seed; the fruitless Trees are not cut down, the Brambles cover
the Ground, and Fruit to God is not brought forth, but wild Grapes and Leaves,
and Airy Imaginations in the Subtilty above the Light, where the Serpent is
twining to keep his hold, and this is the Reasoning in man's Will, which is not
brought to the Cross, neither are the Corruptions of the Flesh crucified, but
you go on in your Sins from day to day, and even hate to be reformed. Was Sodom
and Gomorah guilty of any Sin that is not found this day among you? Are you not
drinking down Iniquity as the Ox drinks down Water? Nay, do you not even say
in your Hearts, that you are delivered to commit all these Abominations? Woe, Woe
unto you, the Lord God of the whole Earth has a Controversy you, his
Judgments are as swift as lightning, he is coming and is come to try you, and
to weigh you all in the just Balance; and now all your Coverings are too
narrow, all you who have made Lies your Refuge, and turned the Grace of God
into Wantonness, sporting your selves in this the mighty Day of the Lord, and
are found in Excess, Pride, Drunkenness and Gluttony, ye painted whited Walls,
gilded Tombs, painted over with Saints words, but Enemies to the Saints Life,
even for you am I made to take up a Lamentation for the Woe and Misery coming
upon you, by reason of your Haughtiness, and the Stoutness of your words,
through the hardness of your Hearts, which are not circumcised, nor purified by
Faith, but in them Perverseness, and the Love of this World has gotten a room
instead of God, and so the old Bottles are full of stinking stuff, and the Inn
is filled with the Guests of this World, and there is not room for Christ, the
Light, Life and Son of God, to be born up to take away the Sin of the World,
though you profess him, and talk of him, yet you complain for lack of Power,
whereas we bear Testimony, That he is come, who is the Power of God, and unto
him that saves from Sin is all Power committed, both in Heaven and Earth, in
whom, and by whom alone this Sonship is received, and the Victory over the
World, which knows not God, among whom you are seen, in the Light that comes
from Christ, the Son of God, who made all men of one Blood to dwell upon the
face of the Earth, and upholds all by the Word of his Power, in whom we live,
move, and have our being, as the Poets have written, and as the Wise and
Learned of the Earth have said, who came not to feel after and find him before
whom the Hills tremble, and the tall Cedars bow, he who is coming to turn your
Waters into Gall of Wormwood, and your Coverings into burning Pitch, and his
Jealousy will smoke like Fire against you, who are as Stubble ready dried, cut
off from the stock and withered: Woe unto you Workers of Iniquity, is not your
day at hand, that you must depart forever, and be no more seen? Has not Hell
enlarged her self for the double-minded Ones? Yea, now is the day wherein the
Wrath of God shall be revealed from Heaven upon all Unrighteousness of men, who
hold the Truth of God in Unrighteousness. This shall come upon all you who have
chosen your own way, and are departed from the living God.

Is not this the Fast that the Lord has chosen, to loose the Bands of
Wickedness [ Observe] Wickedness is a Band, which must be broken before man
comes to offer up living Sacrifices well pleasing unto God, who requires to
let the Oppressed go Free, and that you break every Yoke: Consider, is the
oppressed Seed of God let go Free? the Seed to which the Promise belongs, or is
not the Iniquity born upon the Shoulders of him that is the Light, whereby he
is pressed down? And are you not laying heavy burdens upon the neck of the
Poor? Is not the Poor Oppressed, and the Rich live in Oppression? Is not the
Fatherless, the Widow and the Stranger oppressed within your Gates? Have you
not evil entreated the Servants and Messengers of the Lord of Hosts, whom he
sent to Warn you? and some to be Signs and Wonders among you, as Isaiah, who
walked naked and barefooted, Isa. 20. 3. 1 Samuel 19. 24. that you may see your
Nakedness, and repent of your Loftiness, and come down from your high
Mountains, where you are making your Nests above the Stars of God in your Airy
Imaginations from the first Wisdom of the first man, from the Earth, Sensual
and Devilish, where the Prince of the Air rules in all the Sons of
Disobedience, who are wise to do Evil, and subtle foxes in that Knowledge which
puffs up, and there you stand like strong Oaks, and fed Horses, fatted for
the day of Slaughter, whose Sins are ripe unto Judgment, whose measure of
Wickedness is even at the full, and you your selves the Servants of Sin, fitted
for the Wine Press of the Wrath of the Lord God Almighty, who is coming a swift
witness against you, and from his presence you shall not fly. Therefore prepare
to meet the Lord, for the day is at hand that your Iniquities shall be rewarded
upon your own Heads, and you shall receive from the Lord the just Reward of all
your Doings, and every man's Heart shall be made manifest in the sight of God,
and by the Witness of God in every man's Conscience, shall God be acknowledged
to be Just, by which the Mouth of Proud Flesh shall be stopped, and the
Conscience shall be awakened by the Witness of God, that did always testify
against Deceit, Sin and Hypocrisy; and when the endless Judgments of God are
upon you, and his everlasting Torments have taken hold upon you, then shall my
Witness in every man's Conscience witness for me, that in love to your Souls I
was moved to write this for a Warning to you all, that to the Cross you might
come, to the true Light of Christ, that lights every man that comes into the
World, that all men through him might believe, even in him that is the Light,
the Corner Stone refused by all you wise Builders, who build above the Light,
which to you this day is a Stone of stumbling, and a Rock of offense, even
Christ the Light, the true Teacher, that in secret condemns for Sin, who is the
Heir, and is now come, whom all you Wicked Husbandmen that have not brought
forth Fruit unto God, are now slaying in your own particulars, and persecuting
in us, his Members, that if possible you might murder the Heir, Christ the
Light, and so the Inheritance be yours. But it is in vain for you to kick
against the Pricks, the Light in your Consciences, which checks in secret for
Sin, is and will be your Condemnation, whilst you fight against it, and hate
it, and the measure of the Breath of Life will kindle a Fire in your Bowels,
like a stream of Brimstone forever, which shall never be quenched, nor depart
from you Wicked and Ungodly men, whose Sins have exceeded many, and whose ways
are right in your own Eyes, and hate to be reformed, and despise, stone,
persecute and imprison them whom the Lord has sent to warn you, whose blind
zeal is like Jerusalem's, from whose Eyes the things of God are hid, and your
Madness like unto Readiness, who thought to do many things against the Name of
Jesus Christ, the Light.

And do not many of you fight against the Light, and so are found Fighters
against God, who is now come to try you, and to search you, and according to
your deeds shall you all receive?

And now, who among you will hear this? Who among you will regard? Are you not
covered with a deep sleep, that so the Destroyer may come upon you unawares?
Who has an Eye now to see, and a Heart to understand? Who will regard this,
and return from the Evil of his ways? Who will lay it to heart? unto him is the
day of Grace offered, let him return, and that with speed, and let the rest
look for their Portion according to the words written.

Let not this be slighted, for it was written for a Warning aforehand, unto you
all, upon the 30th day of the 8th Month, 1656. by a Servant of Jesus Christ, a
Prisoner at Exon, known by the Name of Humphry Smith.

Some of the Effects of the Priests Ministry in Devonshire.
YOu that have been the Teachers and the Leaders of the People long, you, who
say, the Priests Lips preserve Knowledge, and they shall seek the Law at his
Mouth; now consider, what have you taught the People, and what have they
learned of you? Is it not to persecute the Innocent? and to hale out of your
Synagogues? and to stone and to beat them whom the World knows not? whom the
Lord has sent as Lambs among Wolves into the Towns, Villages, Marketplaces
and Synagogues to witness and declare in the Name of the Lord against all
Unrighteousness; and preaching Repentance unto all, even to them of the highest
place of Worship, and to a Crooked and Perverse Generation, who have been long
learning of you, that connot your selves cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2. 14. neither
are they by you brought to the knowledge of the Truth, so as that they need not
any man to teach them, but are still learning, and are not come to the
knowledge of God, whom to know is Life Eternal, but are found this day in that,
in which the knowledge of God is not, and in that nature which murdered Abel,
and stoned the Prophets, and crucified Christ, and slew his Apostles; and yet
you all pro-fess the Scriptures, but upon you the Scriptures are fulfilled, who
are in these days haling, and causing to be haled out of your Synagogues, and
persecuting from City to City the harmless Lambs of Jesus Christ, who says
unto his, These things shall they do unto you, because they know not the
Father, nor me, John 16. 2, 3.

Does not your evil Savor come up into the Nostrils of the Lord? And is not
your Nakedness seen by all the Children of the Light, who walk in the Light?
Are not both you and your Hearers a Seed of Evil Doers? And are you not fierce
Despisers of them that are good? And do you not daily cry out against those
that are dead unto Sin, and alive unto Righteousness? And do you not even hate
him that walks in the paths of Peace, and the steps of Innocence? Is not there
a noise amongst you against the Lambs of Christ's? Are you not stirring up the
Rulers against them, as your Forefathers did, Acts 4. 1, etc. and c. 5. 17.
John 11. 47. Are you not seeking to your earthly Magistrates to defend your
Profession with their carnal Sword, which must be by Persecuting and
Imprisoning the Lambs of Christ, who break not your Magistrates Law, nor yet
the Law of God; and if you have ought against us, you should come and declare
it before our faces, or let us have liberty to speak when the Lord moves any of
us to come to you; but fill ye up the measure of your Fathers, the chief
Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, in whose steps ye are found, read Mat. 23. who
denied Christ the Light, and called him a Deceiver, and one that had a Devil,
and the Carpenter's Son, and stirred up the Rulers and the rude People to
Crucify him, and they themselves gave their Voice against him, whom they had
hired Judas to betray, and after his Resurrection they hired Soldiers for
large Money to declare Lies of his Disciples and him, who was just, and
afterward were Enemies to his Innocent Lambs, who had waited in Obedience to
Christ the Light, and so received that Spirit of Truth whom the World cannot
receive, by which they were endued with Power to go forth into the Towns,
Villages and Synagogues, declaring against the false Worships even of Priests
and People, though they had Latin, Greek and Hebrew, and Moses preached among
them every Sabbath day, yet were they in the false Worship, and deniers of
Christ the Light of the World, and his Ministers and Servants, who were foolish
and contemptible in their Eyes, as we are this day in the Eyes of you, who are
in the ways of your Fathers, consulting with the Rulers against such as come in
the Name of the Lord to declare against your Oppression and unjust Practices,
and such are brought by you and your Hearers to suffer Imprisonment, and loss
of Goods (if not Death it self) even by ^tn and those that you have been long
teaching, and are of ^ght Church, as it is called, by whom the Church in God
does ^ not as is witnessed in Devon-Goal, wherein many of the Serva ever the
living God have been kept Prisoners, who have not Truth, the Law of God nor
Man; and this is done by thosne Light, taught no better by you Priests of
Devonshire: Is ^a^ed by you; to your Ministry to bring forth such Fruits in the
generality of your Hearers? Did they ever imprison any for Conscience Sake, who
were taught by the Ministry of Christ the Light, to deny Ungodliness? And are
not your Hearers in Ungodliness, the which we bear Testimony against, and all
Ungodliness? Therefore we suffer this day by the Seed of Evil Doers, who have
taken many of the Servants of God in the Highways, as they were going to visit
the Members of Christ in Prison, and took twenty Shillings from one of them,
who was going to relieve the Members of Christ in Prison, and sent him to
Prison also. Another had ten Shillings taken from him; and others had their
Writings and other things taken from them. Some others were put out of your
Synagogues, brought before Magistrates, and sent to Prison, and one dyed in
Prison; and this is done by you, and your Hearers, ye Priests of Devonshire! Is
it not a shame to your Ministry to bring forth no better Fruits, in this your
Gospel Profession? and the Fruits of your Gospel-Hearers, to lay wait, as he
that sets Snares, and set a Trap to catch men, ( Jer. 5. 26. to the end) and
send them to Prison for going to visit Prisoners, whose Relief from them was
taken. Was ever the like heard of in the days of the Prophets or Apostles? Who
but those that are as blind as you will follow you any longer? For now, as
every simple man may see the Fruit of your Ministry, which has plainly
appeared in most Towns and Ports of Devonshire; at Tiverton, they that depart
from Evil, are made a Prey of, and many Abuses they receive, and the Abusers
not punished, but some that have been abused were also cast into Prison, and
they who came to visit them, were also persecuted; and they that came in the
Name of the Lord, were there persecuted, put out of the Synagogues, and
imprisoned. At Tarington, the Servants of the Lord, that preached Repentance,
and that came for the good of (...), were Evil entreated, and Snares laid for
them, and (...); and the Priest of Tarington said, That Paul was a (...) that
it was his Duty to Swear: This hs affirmed more than (...). At Plymouth the
Servants of the Lord several times (...) inhumane Persecutions, the like has
been seldom heard (...) by those that are called Christians.

(...) might be said, and other places named, with the Fruits that your
Ministry has brought forth; but in this, you may be known by your Fruits to
all that love the Light of Christ, who says of the false Prophets, By their
Fruits ye shall know them.

And now is Christ the Light come to deliver his Flock from your Mouths, and
he will bring back the lost, and gather home the scattered that have been long
devoured by you, the many Pastors, who have not brought home, to Christ the
Light, the lost Sheep, but with Force and with Cruelty have your ruled over
them, who have been scattered by you Shepherds that cannot understand, Isa. 56.
11. who feed the subtilty in your Hearers, and not the simplicity, neither have
you ministered to the Spirit in Prison, nor yet received your Ministry from him
that opens the Prison Door. And row your day is come, the Hireling must fly
into the Holes, and yet shall you not be hid: And now your carnal Preaching,
through your carnal Imaginations and Conceivings from the Letter which kills,
to a carnal People, for carnal Ends, in carnal idol Temples, high Places of
beastly Worship: This you are now seeking to uphold with carnal Weapons, in the
hands of carnal Men and Magistrates, who send the Lambs of Christ into Prisons;
and all this will avail you no more than it did avail the chief Priests, your
Fathers, who took counsel together, how to take Jesus Christ the Light by
subtilty, and kill him, and gave their Voice against him: And are not you
giving your Voices against Christ the Light, ca^^ing it Natural, as they called
him the Carpenter's Son? But fill ye up the measure of your Fathers, ye blind
Guides of Devonshire, that upon you (at whose hand the Blood of Souls will be
required) may come the Curses spoken of in Mal. 2. 1, 2. For now is Christ the
Light made manifest, the second Priesthood, who is made a Minister, not after a
carnal Commandment, but after the Power of an Endless Life, even him that is
the Light, and the true Shepherd that teaches all to profit, the Everlasting
High Priest, that leads up to God, who committed all Power unto him that is
the Light of the World, which, whosoever believes in, and obeys, shall not abide
in Darkness, as you and your Hearers do who are ever learning, but never come
to the knowledge of the Truth, which makes Free: But such as follow him, who is
the Light, the Way, the Truth, the Life, the Corner Stone refused by you; for
to you he is a stone of stumbling; even he that is the Rock of Ages, the Power
of God, the Wisdom of God, the Son of God, the Light of the World, which whosoever
follows, shall have the Light of Life, and in him receive Power to become the
Sons of God, and so come by the light to the Teachings of the Father, and
receive the Anointings, that they will not have need of your teachings.

For the Pastors are become Brutish, and have not sought the Lord, therefore
they shall not prosper, and all their Flock shall be scattered, Jer. 20. 21.
And as Troops of Robbers wait for a man, so the company of Priests Murder in
the way by consent; for they commit Lewdness, Hos. 6. 9.
Written by a Servant of Jesus Christ, a Witness against Deceivers, a Prisoner
at Exon, called Humphry Smith.

THE First and Second Priesthood Declared, according to the Scriptures; That
both Priests, Professors and People may come to see with the Light of Christ,
which Priesthood this belongs to.
THe First Priesthood and its Ministry stands without, and consists of the
outward things.

The Second Priesthood and its Ministry stands within, and consists of the
inward Work; and Paul who was made a Minister of the Spirit, which is within,
he said, Work out you Salvation with fear and trembling, 2 Cor. 5. 6. Phil. 2.
12.

The first Priesthood being made in the time of the Oath, under which
Priesthood the Swearing is upheld, and the People continue in the Swearing and
in the Strife.

The second Priesthood is made with the Oath, the Confirmation thereof is the
End of all Strife, Debate and Dissension, and the End of the Lust, from whence
the Wars, Fightings, and vain Janglings does arise: And the Confirmation of
this Oath, and the second Ministry, which is confirmed by this Oath, puts an
end to all Oaths and Swearing, the Word of the Oath being come, and become
Flesh, which Word was before the Oath, and the World, and since the Law, which
Word is the Son, who says, Swear not at all, Heb. 6. 15, 16. and Chap. 7. 20.
Mat. 5. 34. James 5. 12.

The first Priesthood and its Ministry under the first Covenant had a command
to receive Tithes of the People; yet they were not to sue People at the Law, if
they did not bring the Tithes, but were to receive the Tithes and Offerings;
when they were brought, their command was to receive them: And these Tithes
were given unto the Stranger, unto the Fatherless, and to the Widow, that they
might eat and be filled, as well as the Levite and the Priest, Deuteronomy. 26. 12,
13. Now that Priesthood must needs be of Antichrist, which is not agreeable to
the first Priesthood, and it is also contrary to Christ, Luke 10. 4, 5, 6, 7. 2
Cor. 6. 3. and so on 2 John 9. 1 John 2. 22.

The second Priesthood and its Ministry is of the New Covenant, where the Law
is changed, by which the first is made; and this is not of the World, neither
upheld nor maintained by the things of the World, neither is made by a Carnal
Commandment, but by the Power of an Endless Life, Heb. 7. 16. Mat. 10. 7, 8, 9.
Gal. 1. 12. and 16.

The first Priesthood was after the Flesh, where the Lusts were not crucified,
whence the Wars and Fightings come, where the likenesses were found among such
as were not come to the Substance; for Abraham came from the Wars, and gave the
tenth of the Spoils unto him who was made like unto the Son of God, Heb. 7. 3.
Chap. 8. 5. Genesis 14. 18.

The second Priesthood (who is of the Spirit, who comes of Abraham according to
the Flesh) is the Power of God, and the Substance of the former Likenesses;
which Substance being come, it puts an End to the Wars, and so an end to the
Spoilings, and also an end to all that which causes the Spoils; and if so,
then an end to that of which Tithes were first given; and so the Substance of
the Likenesses being come, the Blessing is received in him, and the
Multiplyings known, and the Increases of God witnessed, and the Spoils divided
at home, the strong man being bound, and his Goods spoiled, Heb. 12. 22, 23,
24. 1 These. 3. 12. Col. 2. 17, 18, 19.

The first Priesthood is of the first Covenant, which makes nothing perfect,
and stands without, as in Tables of Stone, and diverse Ordinances written by
Moses, a Minister of that Law which condemns, and yet is glorious in its time,
2 Cor. 37. 8, 9. Heb. 7. 9.

The second Priesthood is of the New Covenant, which is written in the Tables
of the Heart, by a Mediator of a better Covenant, in which Covenant there is a
coming to be presented Perfect in the Head, unto which, by the Ministry of the
Word of Life, they come to be joined, 2 Cor 3. 2, 3. Jer. 31. 33. Heb. 8. 6.

The first Priesthood stands in diverse Washings and Carnal Ordinances, until
the time of Reformation, until which time the outward Ordinances yet stands,
and the outside Worships yet are, which Worship being daily performed, yet the
daily comers to these Ordinances are not made perfect, as pertaining to the
Conscience, Heb. 9. 10.

The second Priesthood is Eternal, purging the Conscience from dead Works,
whereby also the Spirit of Truth is received, and so the worship in Spirit and
in Truth is known, which worship the Lord delights in; and such seek the Lord
and find him, and he is merciful to their Iniquities, and their Sin he
remembers no more, but they are blotted out as a thick Cloud: And so being made
free from Sin, and become the Servants of Righteousness, then Fruit and Service
is brought forth and performed unto God, well-pleasing in his sight, Heb. 9.
14. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Romans 6. 22.

The first Priesthood stands in diverse and carnal Offerings for Sin, and
Confessions of Sin Morning and Evening, and yet the Sin not taken away, Heb. 7.
22. Chapter 10. 1. and 11.

The second Priesthood stands in one offering for Sin, whereby the Sin is taken
away, Zach. 13. 1. 1 John 1. 7. Rev. 1. 5. Ron. 6. 2. and 7. and 18. Heb. 10.
17.

Under the first Priesthood the Vail is over the Heart, and they that are there
cannot see to him that is the end of the Law, who is made under the Law, to
redeem them that are under the Law, 2 Cor. 3. 13, 14, 15.

Under the second Priesthood the Vail is rent, and the broken Heart is known,
with whom God is; and so him that is entered within the Vail is seen, even him
that is the end of the Law and the Prophets, Heb. 9. 24. Chapter 10. 20.

The first Priesthood has the Shewbread, which the carnal Eye may see, and the
natural Man perceive; and so the Worship stands in outward show, in some form
and place where the Life is not, and such may worship they know not what, being
not come to the Truth which makes free to worship in, Heb. 9. 1, 2. John 4. 22.

The second Priesthood has the Bread of Life which comes down from Heaven, and
gives Life; the which Bread being not in outward show, was not only hid from
the Scribes and Pharisees, who had the Oracles of God outwardly, but also from
them that profess Christ without them only; for there is a time wherein Christ
is known after the Flesh, therefore says Christ, He that is with you shall be
in you, John 14. 17. Chapter 6. 35. and 60.

The first Priesthood, though made by a Law of God, which Law stands outwardly,
the Priests being Ministers of the Law and not come to Christ, but now the
Priests are out of his Doctrine, Mat. 23. and so are found themselves
Transgressors of the same Law which they teach to others; therefore the Lord
declares against such, saying, Wherefore ye Priests, this Commandment is for
you; If you will not hearken, I will send a Curse upon you, and I will Curse
your Blessing, and spread the Dung of your solemn Assemblies upon your Faces,
Mal. 2. 1, 2, 3. Mich. 3. 10, 11. Jer. 10. 21. Hosea 6. 9. Isa. 56. 9, 10, 11,
12. R^^. 2. 21, 22, 23, 24.

The Ministry of the second Priesthood witnesses the Righteousness of the Law
fulfilled within, and so comes to the freedom from the Law of Sin and Death,
and so comes to receive a Blessing from God, not a Curse Romans 7. 6. Chap. 8. 2,
3, 4. Heb. 6. 7.

The first Priesthood, who offers daily for the Poeple and themselves, thought
it be much, and consists in many Words and outward Ceremonies, yet this is
not able to make him that does in Perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, but
the Guilt remains still upon the Conscience both of him and his followers,
Heb. 9. 9. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. and 14.

The second Priesthood, who has forever Perfected them that are Sanctified, he
is of the heavenly Mansion, of the which there are many in the Fathers House,
whose House are we, who are of the Body, which is the Church, which is raised
up by the Ministry of the second Priesthood, to sit together with Christ in the
Heavenly places, where the Unclean cannot come; but the living Service and
Prayers are offered up through the Eternal Spirit, Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22, 23.
Chap. 6. 2. Heb. 3. 6. John 14. 2, 3.

The first Priesthood and its Ministry consisted in reading of the Law that was
written in Tables of Stone, and Writings which are without, and in preaching of
Moses in the Synagogues every Sabbat^-day, the Vail being over the Heart, and
the end of the Law not seen, nor him known that is made under the Law, Acts 15.
21. 2 Cor. 3. 13, 14, 15, etc.

The second Priesthood and its Ministry consists in ministering Life to the
Seed in Prison, and opening the Prison-doors, that the Seed of Abraham may
spring out of the barren Womb, and feel the Power of the Son of God breaking
down that which the Law had power over, and so to bring to him that is the end
of the Law, and to behold with open Face the Glory of him that takes away the
Sin, and brings in everlasting Righteousness, Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3. Dan. 9. 24. 2
Cor. 3. 18.

The first Priesthood had the Letter, but afterward resisted the Holy Ghost,
yet profess Moses and the Prophets Writings, and make a Gain thereby, but
resist the Holy Ghost and the Spirit of Prophecy, the Heart being
Uncircumcised, Acts 7. 51, 52. Jude 11.

The second Priesthood and its Ministry is of the Spirit, with the power of the
Holy Ghost, and the same. Spirit that guided Moses and the Prophets, and all
the holy men of God, and so comes to that from whence that was given forth,
which was preached in the Synagogues every Sabbath Day, Isa. 44. 3. Isa. 59.
21. 2 Pet. 11. 21.

In the time of the first Priesthood the Cherubims cover the Mercy-seat, and
the Lord communeth with him that is the Minister of the Law above the
Mercy-seat, which Mercy-seat being both covered and under, and the People being
both stiffnecked and hard hearted: So the Power stands above ministering the
Law, which is to judge and cut down that which causes the hardness of the
Heart, which is covered with the Vail through the transgression of the Law,
under which the Mercy-seat is, and the Testimony lies under it, Exodus 25. 31.
Let him that reads understand, Matthew. 24. 15. Heb. 9. 5.

In the time of the second Priesthood the Testimony and Witness of God is
raised up, and the Mercy-seat opened, and the hardness of Heart broken, and so
the Wall that is separated between him: and his Testimony comes to be broken
down, and the Fountain of living Mercies opened, and the Soul refreshed with
the hidden Manna; so the Seed of Abraham comes to be raised up through the Vail
by the power of him who is the living Minister within the Vail, made under the
Law, to redeem the Soul from under the Law; and so as this is read in the work
of it, and so felt and understood, the Promise of the second Covenant, under
the Ministry of the second Priesthood, is witnessed, even as it is written, I
will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall
be my People, 2 Cor. 6. 16. Jer. 31. 33. Heb. 8. 8. to the end. Chap. 9. 12.
Isa. 57. 15.

In the time of the first Priesthood there is much talking of the Ordinances,
and many are pleading from the Letter for the Ordinances, which say, They are
to last forever, (as Circumcision was) and also many are crying, The Temple of
the Lord, The Temple of the Lord; and yet the Temple is made [by such] a den of
Thieves, and a habitation of Dragons, and wild subtle devouring Beasts of the
Field, who have stolen up another way (in the Serpents wisdom) than by Christ
the Light and the Door, and so resist the Holy Ghost, being yet in their Sins,
and their Faith vain, and their Minds and their Consciences being defiled, and
they not come to the Doctrine of Repentance, the Mountains being not leveled,
and the burning Light not felt, nor the Wilderness not yet found, nor the way
opened for the Seed, neither yet seen him that takes away the Sin of the World;
and yet such are crying, The Ordinances, The Ordinances, and the Commands,
which say, they are to last to the end of the World; and yet they themselves
not come to the beginning of the World, nor to feel the power of the Word
separating the Light from the Darkness, nor yet to feel the entrance into the
true Circumcision; and so the Vail remains over the Heart that they cannot see
to the end of the Commands, Figures and Ordinances, which are a shadow of good
things to come, but the End and Substance is Christ, the Light, Life, and
Cornerstone, at which they stumble, Col. 2. 17. 1 Pet. 3. 21.

In the time of the second Priesthood the Kingdom is witnessed, which is not in
Words, but in Power, where the proud Boasters are shut out, and the Unclean
enters not, nor the vain Janglers, who come with their carnal Weapons from the
Letter without, to fight against the Lamb, whose Commands are written in the
Heart, where the Holy Ghost is by such resisted, who are not come to the second
Ministry, where all things are complete in him who is the Head, the Beginning
and the End, in whom the Circumcision made without Hands is witnessed; so the
Vail is taken off the Heart, and the end is seen, even he that takes away the
Sin of the World; and so all Trespasses come to be forgiven unto them that are
buried in the Baptism, and so dead unto Sin, whereby also the Handwriting of
Ordinances was against us, comes to be blotted out and nailed down to the
Cross, whereby the Principalities and Powers are spoiled by the Power of the
Word that becomes Flesh, whereby those things that were in show are triumphed
over, and nailed down to the Cross, through which the Life comes to be raised,
and so Christ Jesus the Son of God comes to be revealed and made manifest,
being quickened in the Spirit; and so no more to know Christ after the Flesh,
but in that which is raised up through the Cross, unto which the shows and
shadows of things are nailed down: So the Doctrines of Baptism and Repentance
from dead works are left behind, and those things that are left behind are
forgotten, and there is a pressing forwards to Perfection by the Ministry of
the second Priesthood, wherein every man is to be presented Perfect in Christ
Jesus, in whom there is a growing from Grace to Grace, and a changing from
Glory to Glory by the same Spirit, having received of his fullness, Col. 2. 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Romans 6. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Heb. 6. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 3. 22. 2
Cor. 3. 18.

In the time of the first Priesthood, the outward Blood was to purify, the
transgression being without, and the law without; And so, here is the outward
Washings, with the outward Water, and the set days of Purification; and these
things were to be done often, because of the continual Transgression of that
Law which stood without, which came to be fulfilled; and did not Christ Jesus
suffer without the Gate, Heb. 9. 23. Col. 2. 23. And the Law being without has
the shadow, and yet not the Image, therefore far short of Christ the Substance,
Heb. 10. 1.

In the time of the second Priesthood, the heavenly things themselves are
purified with better sacrifices then these, Heb. 9. 23. which served to the
purifying of the Patterns, and the heavenly things themselves, being purified
with the living sacrifice; so the way into the Holiest of all is known, which
is not manifested under the first Priesthood, Heb. 9. 8. And so there is an
entrance made into the Believers Rest, Heb. 4. 3, and 10. Rev. 14. 13. where
the seed of Abraham sits down in the Father's Kingdom, which consists of
Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. and so as there is
a coming to feel the Power of the second Ministry, preaching to the spirit in
Prison, 1 Pet. 3. 19. 1 Cor. 1. 24. and so to quicken them that were dead in
sin, Ephesians. 2. 1. by whose quickening Power the seed comes to be raised up,
together with Christ the Head, who sits at the Fathers right Hand in the
heavenly places, Ephesians. 1. 20. which are purified and prepared for the
faithful, Ephesians. 2. 5, 6. John 17. 21, 22, 23, 24. And as the heavenly things
of the heavenly places are purified, and the entrance into the Rest ministered,
so Christ comes to be seen exalted at the Fathers right Hand, in the heavenly
places, above all Principalities and Powers (which are spoiled) Christ being
the Head over all things, Ephesians. 1. 21, 22. And so there is a ruling over all
that which stands in outward show, the which Christ made a show of openly,
triumphing over them in it, Col. 2. 15. And if there be a triumphing over these
things which are in show, before the entrance into the Holiest of all be made,
how much more are the outward shows triumphed over, and the Principalities
spoiled, when the way into the Holiest of all is made manifest by the Power of
him who is gone into the Heavens, and is on the right hand of God; Angels,
Authorities, and Powers being made subject unto him, 1 Pet. 3. 22.

In the time of the first Priesthood, the Rule and Covenant were without; and
such as come on further, resist the Spirit within, yet profess the Scriptures
without, but resist the Inspiration which gave them forth, and yet are zealous
for their Rule without, being yet blind, like Saul, even persecuting them in
whom the Spirit of Truth bears rule, which Spirit they being not come unto (to
open the Eye, and lead them into all Truth) are found out of their Rule, which
they so much talk of: Read and see James 1. 26. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Tit. 3. 9. Ephesians.
4. 29, 30, 31, 32. and chapter 5. 11. 1 John 3. 4. and chapter 2. 4. John 12. 36. Mat.
5. 28, 29, 30, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44. and Chapter 23. 26, 27. 1 Timothy 2. 9. 1 These.
5. 5, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. 2 Cor. 13. 11.

In the time of the second Priesthood, a measure of the Spirit of Truth is
owned and received within, which whosoever follows, walks not in Darkness, John 8.
12. the which leads into all Truth, and orders and rules the Creature in the
fear of him who is the God of Order; whereby the strong holds are broken down,
and every Thought comes to be subjected unto Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. who rules
over all, and upholds all things by the Word of his Power, Heb. 1. 3. who has
given to every man a manifestation of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 7. and a
proportion of Faith, Romans 12. 6. Christ being all, and in all, Gal. 3. 28. Col.
3. 11. and as every man has received Christ, Job 9. 9. so to walk in him Col.
2. 6. according to the same Rule already attained, Mat. 25. 21. and to mind the
same things already received that is the cause, Phil. 3. 16, 17 and mark them
that walk so, and not go beyond the measure of what they have received, but be
faithful in it, as good Stewards of the manifold graces of God, Tit. 2. 10. and
such as walk according to that Rule, grace, mercy and peace be to them, and to
all the Israel of God, 2 Cor. 10. 12, 13. Written by a Servant of Jesus Christ,
the only High Priest, and Minister of life, for whose sake he suffers in
outward Bonds at Dorchester, this 28th day of the 1st Month, 1657. who is
despised, persecuted and imprisoned by the World; called, Humphry Smith.

AN ALARM Sounding forth unto all the Inhabitants of the Earth, ASA Warning
before the Vials of the Everlasting Wrath be poured forth upon them.
THe Lord of Hosts, whose Name is Holy, whose Way is Everlasting, whose Truth
endures forever, whose Power is Unlimited, whose Mercy endures forever, whose
Judgments are just and true, and all his Ways are equal; whose Presence is
Dreadful unto all the Double-minded, whose bright Appearance is as a fierce
Whirlwind of Fire, and his Voice as the Terribleness of many Thunders; all the
Bowels of the Earth are ripped open by the Dread of his Powerful Voice; and all
the created Earthly things pass away as if they had not been, because of the
Presence of the Almighty, and the fierce Terror of the Lord of Glory, who is
now arising as a Giant unto the Battle, and as a mighty man of Valor unto the
War, who a long time has held his peace, and hid his face; But now, says the
Lord, will I arise, and roar like a Lion, and utter my Voice like a man of War;
yea, I will arise as a Lion out of a Thicket, and a young Lion out of the
Forest; and I will Thunder from Heaven, and Darkness shall be upon the Earth;
and with the Fire of my Jealousy shall the Wicked be consumed, and the Ungodly
as the Smoke that vanishes forever.

Wherefore come all ye Brambles of the Earth, and gather your selves together,
all ye Briars, Thorns and Thistles, and all ye strong Oaks and tall Cedars;
yea, all ye fruitless Trees, that long have cumbred the Ground, behold, the Day
is at hand that you shall be consumed forever; and as the Stubble ready dry
before an unquenchable Fire (that is kindled with the Fierceness of the Wind of
the Nostrils of the most High) so shall all the Brambles of the Earth be.
Wherefore assemble your selves together, O ye Heathen, and stand up to
Judgment, O ye Princes and Rulers of the Earth, and prepare to meet the Lord,
whose Trumpet is sounding an Alarm out of the holy Mountain, to gather the
whole Host of the Heathen to Battle, and the People who know not God, to the
Slaughter of the great King. Arise ye Idol-shepherds, awake, ye Blood-thirsty
Rulers, stand up together, ye fatted Bulls: Let all the wild Horses stand to
the Battle, says the Lord of Hosts, that I may pour out my Indignation like
Fire upon them, and Consume them as in a Moment forever, that I may give you
Blood to drink, and fill you with Torment for evermore; for thus says the
Lord, Once more more will I arise and Confound mine Enemies, and ease me of
mine Adversaries; and I, even I, will fill the Heathen with Horror, and all
mine Enemies with the Blackness of Darkness; a Fire will I kindle in the Bowels
of the Scornful, and in the Proud shall the Flames burn forever; and all the
Earth shall know, that I the Lord, in the midst of them, am Mighty in Power,
and that none is able to deliver out of my hand. Therefore shall the Shepherds
Howl forever, and the Priesthood of England be Confounded, and covered with a
perpetual Shame; the Nations afar off shall hiss at them, and the Ages to come
shall call them Accursed; for the day is at hand, that not a Tongue of all the
Dogs of Egypt shall be lifted up against the Seed, that long has groaned
under the Bondage of cruel Oppressors, who bite with their Teeth, and imagine
Evil upon their Beds, and lay Snares for the Souls of the Innocent, and watch
for Iniquity to devour the Simple.

Therefore shall these things come upon you, an unbelieving Generation, whose
Hearts are hardened, Ears stopped and Eyes closed and many of you sealed up unto
the great Day of everlasting Destruction, which upon you the seed of Evildoers
is stealing unawares: Neither shall you believe the things that are hastening
upon you, and declared unto you; for the Prophets and Seers are covered, a deep
sleep is upon the brutish Pastors, and the Vail is upon the Hearts of all who
are under the old Covenant, and many of them are given up to the hardness of
their Hearts, and their Consciences are seared, and such have yet a measure of
Wickedness to fill up, and then upon them the Vessels of Wrath fitted for
Destruction, shall the Flames of everlasting Burnings be poured forth forever
from him that sits upon the Throne.

Wherefore, Woe to the Inhabitants of the Earth forever, Woe to the Proud and
Lofty Ones, Woe to all the Hard Hearted, Abominable and Unbelieving, the Devil
is come down among you, the old Drogon is Head in you, the God of the World
has blinded your Minds, the subtilty of the Serpent has deceived you, and now
Woe is your Portion, you are undone forever; your King is the Angel of the
bottomless Pit; Gog and Magog are your chief Captains; Cain is your Father;
Nimrod the mighty Hunter, the builder of Babel, is your elder Brother; the
great Whore is your Mother; Ishmael and you are of one House; Pharaoh and Haman
are your Companions; Judas, the betrayer of the Just, is near unto every one of
you: and the Life of the Just cries for Vengeance upon your Head; the glittering
Sword of the Most High is drawn to cut you down forever; the Ax to the very
Root shall now come, and Root and Branch shall be cut off forever.

Wherefore all ye Sorcerers, Witches and Sons of the Whore, with all
Blasphemers, who say, you are Jews, and are not come to the true Circumcision,
but Servants of Sin, and so the Synagogue of Satan, and all you false Prophets
who feed at Jezabel's Table, and not at the Table of the Lord, nor never drunk
of the Blood of the New Covenant, to cleanse you from all Sin, but are daily
drinking the Cup of Fornication: Now come all together, the Standard of the
Lord is lifted up against you, and you shall have to drink forever the Cup of
the Wine of the fierceness of the everlasting Wrath of the Lord Almighty, and
he will plague you with the Beast and the Whore together for evermore, and your
Seed shall be cut off the Earth, and your Children from among the Living; your
Memorial shall Rot for evermore, and your Name blotted out from under Heaven;
and all that hear of you shall Hiss at you, and an astonishment and a hissing
shall you be unto all People.

Where are Queen Maryes Judges and Bloody Persecutors, who sought to drive down
all by their Devilish power, who were as high in Wickedness and cruel
Oppression, as any of you, who are this day thirsting for Blood? Where are your
Cardinals, Jesuits, Friars, Monks, Abbots, Abbeys and Nunneries? Where are your
Altars and Crosses, etc?

Even as there has been an Overturning of these, so shall the Offspring and
Residue follow after; and then shall the Priests howl, and the Lamentation of
the Shepherds be heard in all the Land, and the Great men, and the Rich men,
and all the Mighty of the Earth shall lament bitterly; for their Torment shall
come in one day, and there shall be none to deliver: Then shall your high
places of Worship be left desolate, and the Temple of the Beast destroyed
forever, and all the Idols burnt with Fire, and the Abominations of Molech
confounded forever, and the Whoredoms of the Whore punished with an everlasting
Destruction, and all them that have committed Fornication with the painted
Harlot, shut up in the Bed of Torment, and in the Wine Press of the ^ierceness
of the Wrath of the Almlghty for evermore.

In that Day shall the Songs of your Temples be turned into howling forever,
the place of your Worship laid desolate, and the Dung of your solemn Feasts
spread upon your Faces; your Rottenness shall appear, and your Unsound parts be
made manifest; the Skirts of the Whore shall be discovered, and all your
Nakedness, that long in secret have committed Fornication with her, shall now
appear to your everlasting shame.

And this shall come upon you as a Whirlwind, and overtake you as a Thief in
the Night; and when you cry Peace, then shall Destruction upon Destruction come
suddenly, and you shall not escape: Torment shall take hold upon you, and
Anguish shall seize upon your inward parts, a Fire shall be kindled in your
Bowels forever, which shall burn, and none shall quench it.

Oh, who shall stand in this Day! or who shall be able to endure the Terror of
the Wrath of the Almighty! Surely all the Ungodly shall be as the Grass that is
cut down in the heat of Summer, and all the Unrighteous as Fuel fitted for the
Fire. Oh! Whither then will the Sinners fly for Help, or the Wicked for a
Refuge? Where shall the Liar stand? or how shall the Proud endure? What shall
be the End of them that know not God? And where will they be hid that obey not
the Gospel of his Son? Why! certainly into the Lake must they be turned, and
with an utter Overthrow shall be condemned forever, as it is written, The
Wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all that forget God.

Therefore lament, O ye Inhabitants of the Earth, for the Lord is become your
Enemy by reason of your Sins; he is raining Snares as thick as Hailstones upon
you; and the Wise men shall be taken in their own Craftiness, Judges led away
Fools, Princes laid in the Dust, Diviners turned Mad, and a Curse will come
upon all your goodly things: Y your Glory shall vanish as the Dust, and your
Beauty shall be as the Dung upon the Earth: Your Riches shall eat you up as a
Moth does a Garment; your chiefest Delights will be your greatest Torment: For
the Lord is making the Earth empty, and Woe to the Inhabitants thereof for
evermore; no Deliverer in it shall be found, neither yet any to comfort you;
therefore shall the Young man VVeep and VVail, and the Strong man Cry bitterly;
In that day the Priests shall Howl, the Honorable Lament, and the Ancient go
Mourning all the day long: For the Lord is changing Times and Seasons, and the
Iniquity of the People is ascended up, and the remembrance of the Wicked is
come before him, and once more will the Lord shake his Hand against the Wicked,
as in the day of Sodom, and overturn the Oppressors, as in the day of Pharaoh,
and shake the Heavens, the Earth, and the Sea; and this shall be known when the
Lord passes through the Earth with his grounded Staff, and Battles of Shakings.

And in that Day shall your solemn Meetings be confounded, your high Places
left desolate, and your goodly Temples defaced: Bats and Owls shall then build
in your Steeple Houses, and they shall be for the Fowls of the Air to lodge in
the Night, the unclean Beasts, and Spirits of Devils do, and shall resort
thither; a Den for Dogs shall it be made: Your Bells shall come down after your
Organs, and your Temples shattered as the old Abbeys; and a perpetual Shame
shall come upon all them that have been, and are upholding the outward Temple
made with Hands, wherein God dwells rot, and they themselves a Den of
Thieves, and full of Rotteness: Therefore Astonishment of Heart shall come
within, and Destruction and Overturnings without, Fear on every hand, and
Amazement shall come upon all Flesh; then shall the Vine-dressers be ashamed,
and them that preach Peace to the Wicked shall no longer be hid.

Wherefore all you that have been Parliament-Members, and all Judges, Mayors,
Justices and Constables, and all other Officers and People whatsoever, that
have been upholding the Wicked and oppressing the Just, and have been hatching
Mischief against, and acting all manner of Cruelty you could invent upon the
Servants of the Most High God; behold, the Lord will kindle a Fire in your
Bowels which shall burn in the Night-season, and with all your striving against
it, and vain hopes, shall you not be able to quench it; and when you should go
to your Graves in Peace, even then shall the Pangs of Hell lay hold upon you,
and utter Darkness shall compass you in on every side: Oh! Fierce, Furious, and
with unspeakable Violence will the Plagues of God come rolling in upon you When
I was sick in Prison, for a long time so weak, as neither I, nor any Friend
then with me, ever know any one, and recover strength in the Body again; at
which time I gave up my Life, and took my leave of Friends, and lay down in the
Fathers love not feeling sorrow or pain, Friends hardly then knowing whether I
breathed or not; in which time I saw things unutterable: And though Heaven was
opened, and two Angels by my sides to bear me away into everlasting Rest, yet
was I left only for this end, For the work of the Lord amongst the Sons of men
for a time; and so came into the Body again, having seen before the way that
all the Wicked shall go out And this I eternally witness to ^e true; and now
this Paper is written as a Warning from the Lord by one that came as from the
Dead, and yet many of you will not believe
like the unmerciful mighty Waves of the Sea, Which none can stop; For verily
and plainly I have seen the way that all the Wicked shall go, and the place
that they shall abide forever, and none of their greatness in the world shall
save them from it. And I have seen the place where the Innocent (whom you hate)
and all that dye in the Lord shall sleep in the Infiniteness of fullness of the
Fountain of the Fathers unspeakable Mercy, and unlimited Love, where they shall
rest in the fullness of God forever and ever; and the entrance thereinto is
easier, and more to be desired, than to fall into a sleep, (the sting of Death
being taken away:) And this I know, and testify what I have seen, and so warn
all you (the Enemies of the Lamb's dear Members, and your own Souls) of the day
that is coming upon you, and the Vials of Wrath that therein will be poured
forth upon you, who when have felt Torment in your selves, have then let Wrath
arise up in you, whereby you have been filled with Envy against a harmless
People, upon whom then (to get ease of that Torment) you have acted that
Cruelty, which afterward the Light of Christ in your own Consciences has
condemned you for, and the same will condemn all you forever that Repent not.

And these things will certainly come to pass, and then shall all the Heathen
know, that the Lord is the same that ever he was, and that he has heard the
Cry of the Oppressed, and seen the Affliction of his People, and taken notice
of all your secret Contrivances against them who are born of, and led by the
Spirit, who are as the sound of the Wind unto you, that know not whence they
come, nor whither they go, who now suffer by you with Christ, and shall reign
with him forever and ever, when he who is their Life, shall appear to confound
Zion's Enemies forever, and overturn the very Foundations of the Wicked, though
never so great and high, and bring down the Mighty from their Ungodly Seats,
and overturn the Inventions of the Wicked, and pour forth Everlasting Judgment
upon the Beast, and all them that bear his Mark, or worship his Image: And when
the Whore shall have Blood to drink, and the Mouths of her Merchants stopped
forever, and all them that love and make Lies their Refuge, with all the
Unclean and Unbelieving (who receive Honor one of another) and all the
Blood-thirsty turned into the Lake, then shall Righteousness spread over the
Nations as the Morning-due, and Holiness as the Light of the Sun in Summer, and
Judgment run down as Water, and Peace spring up as a Fountain that overflows
and is never dry.

In that day shall the poor of the Flock be gathered, and the Outcasts of
Israel return; Deliverance shall come to the Captives, and Joy to them that
have Mourned; the Wilderness shall then rejoice, and the Desert be glad for
evermore; Springs shall arise in the Desert, and a Fountain shall be opened in
the Wilderness; the Standerd of the Lord shall be lifted up on High, the
scattered in the Desert, and the Meek of the Earth shall flow unto it: Nations
shall turn unto the Lord of Hosts, and People be gathered to the Banner of the
Most High; they shall feed together as the Lambs in the Morning, and be
satisfied as the Flock in Summer; and then shall Zion's Mourners be comforted
and filled with Joy forever; then shall they shout aloud for Joy, with
Halelujah for evermore, when the Smoke of the Torment of the Whore (her Lovers
and her Brats) ascends up as the Smoke of Sodom forever and ever.

Then shall Glory; Honor and Praise arise from them that were beheaded for the
Testimony of Jesus, the Light of the World, and unto him that sits upon the
Throne; and the captives shall come out of their Captivity, and the Prisoner
out of the Pit; and every Bondman shall be set at Liberty, and those that are
at ease and Liberty in the Flesh, shall be Bound with Chains of Everlasting
Darkness forever and ever, and they shall be tormented day and night in the
presence of the holy Angles, and in the presence of the Lamb (who is Light)
even all them who will not that he should reign, who is the Lamb and the Light;
and then shall they see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who wandered up and down, and
were Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth; these, with all their Seed then shall
they see in the Kingdom and Dominion of God, and they themselves shut out; and
so the Parable of the Rich man and Lazarus shall they know fulfilled.

Wherefore Woe, Woe, Woe to the Inhabitants of the Earth, and all you the Enemies
of the Lamb, by reason of the Judgments that are yet to come; for your Proud
Flesh, which is as the Flesh of Horses, shall be as Dung upon the Earth, and
your Flesh is to be given unto the Fowls of the Air to feed upon; for the Day
of the great Slaughter is at hand, and the Battle of the great King shall be
set in order, and every Battle of the Warrier is with confused Noise, and
Garments rolled in Blood; but this shall be with Burning and Fuel of Fire, and
Blood shall all them have to drink, who are found in Babel the great Whore,
that long have made the great men of the Earth Rich, in whom the Blood of all
the Saints is found, from Abel unto this day, wherein she and her Children are
thirsting for the Blood of all them who believe in the Light.

Written upon the seventh and eight days of the 2d Month, by him who suffers
by some of Gogs Army in the House of Correction, and common-Goal of Hampshire,
with the rest of the Lambs of Christ, who is the Captain of my Salvation, who
has armed me with the whole Armor of God, and clothed me with the Armor of
Light, whereby he has enabled me to stand in the day of Battle against all the
Fiery Darts of the Devil, and the Oppressions of Pharoah's Host; and yet have
nothing to Glory in, but in the Lord, having received all from him, who
teaches my Hands to War, and my Fingers to Fight, and that not with Carnal
Weapons, but with Spiritual, and deny all Carnal Fightings, Qurrellings and
Wars, that arises from the Lust, and learneth of him who makes War in
Righteousness, and joins with him in the Battle against the false Prophet, the
Whore and the Beast, and all those that have his Mark in the Hand, or in the
Forehead, who rise up against them that have their Father's Name written in
their Foreheads, who is Light, in whom I have believed, and by whom do expect
Deliverance in his due time (with all his suffering Seed) out of outward Bonds,
in the which I bear my Testimony against all his Enemies, without Respect of
Persons, or Flattering Titles to any, but in Love to the Souls of all, though
never so Dreadful to that in all, which does the Soul destroy; to the which I
am never to be reconciled, but stand a Witness against, until the Just under
that arise and witness for me, whose Love is only to the Seed of God in all, by
which I am known, read and understood, in the Light: and of the other, called,
Humphery Smith.

A Sad and Mournful LAMENTATION For the People of these Nations, but especially
for the Priests and Leaders of them; and the more because of that which is
coming to pass.
And let all People read it (and let it have entrance into their Hearts) in the
fear of God; for it is of much Concernment both for Priests, Rulers and all
People, it being the deep Meditations of my Mind, and the true Openings with
the Light, and Revelation of God in my Heart, sundry times when my Spirit has
had secret conference with the Lord, at such times as I have been absent from
men, or in the Night season, in a true Mournful state of Pity toward the Souls
of all Mankind, for the Eternal good whereof this is written.
In Winchester-Prison, and House of Correction, being a colse Prisoner in a
filthy Hole, the 16th day of the 11th Month, 1658.
by me that have him to be my Life, who is a man of Sorrows; that of men am
called, Humphry Smith.
MAny Days and Nights, and Times, and Seasons, for many Weeks and Months, of
late Years, have many deep and serious Considerations been in me, and many
Meditations in my Mind and Heart, in the true fear of the living God, and often
times in quietness (waiting on the Lord God of Abraham) has my Spirit had
secret and private, yet plain Conference with the Lord, concerning the Teachers
and Leaders of the People, even the Hireling Priests of England (and other
Nations) and the Followers of them. And when I have weighed all in an equal
Balance, I have found that it has been in pure Love to the Souls all Mankind,
and without Prejudice or Envy to them, their Bodies or Persons, as they are the
Creatures of God; and the eternal Witness of God, in his Covenant of Life,
has, and does, and will justify me herein forever.

And when I have looked back upon the Teachers, and seen what a stir and a
noise is made among them about God and Christ, and Faith in his Blood, and
Redemption and Justification by him, and all proceeding from that nature in
them, which is at Enmity with God: And when I have seen how many Thousand
Thousands, and Hundreds of times ten Thousands following of them, and
Contending, Fighting, Stoning, Whipping and Imprisoning for them, and are
guided, or rather blinded by them: And when I have seen what care is taken for
them, and to uphold them, by the great Rulers of the Nations, even Protector,
Council, Parliaments and Justices (besides many Thousands of brutish People
that are stoning and fighting for them) that they might be upheld and
maintained, yea, even in Excess and Fullness, from the Peoples hard Labors: And
when I have seen how many Hundred Thousand Pounds every year, they have
received from the People: And when I seen, that notwithstanding all this, the
People are still in Transgression, and so under the Wrath of God, and yet know
not how to come out of their Sin, which separateth from God, but that many
Thousands dye in their Sins, and many more are pleading for Sin, and many end
their days in a Bed of Torment, gasping, struggling, grovelling and raiging in
unquietness, under the horrible Terrors of the unutterable fierce Indignation
of the Wrath of the Almighty, and so go down into the Pit forever, as many have
done, not knowing a resting place in the peaceable stillness of God's Covenant
of Life and Peace.

Oh! when (I say) I have beheld, and deeply considered these things, and many
more which might be named, and seriously pondered them in my Heart, from a true
sense of God's Pity to the precious Souls of all Mankind; and from a true
Understanding of the Terrible Wo^s, Wrath, Horor and Perplerity of Spirit that
then comes upon such who thus due in their Sins, not reconciled to God, even
then has my heart been broken within me, and mine Eyes as Fountains of Tears,
and a sad Lamentation night and day has come upon me, and a true M^^rning for
the slain of the People, who thus are cut off from God, and separated from the
Land of the Living. O Woe is me! because of these things my Soul has been
oppressed, and my Spirit grieved; and to the Lord alone has a grievous Cry
ascended up, and I have said, Oh that I could Mourn and Weep yet more in secret
because of these things!

And when I have looked upon the Priests and People, I have seen plainly and
truly from the Lord God, That the Spirit of Error and Ignorance in them, has
been and is the very cause of all this Disorder, and Soul-Perishing state, that
is in and upon the Sons of men, and their continuance therein; then has my
Spirit said within me, The Soul that sins it must dye, but the Lord will
require their Blood at the hands of those that have caused them to Err: And the
Lord has said unto me concerning these Priests and Teachers, My hand is
against them.

And when I have looked farther back, and considered them who were made
Ministers by a known Law of God, that they were declared against by the Spirit
of Prophecy, and that they were such Shepherds that could not understand,
being greedy, and could never have enough, Isa. 56. 10, 11. and that they were
brutish Pastors, Jer. 10. 21. and as Murderers, and Troops of Robbers; and
that the Lord had cursed their Blessings, and made them base and contemptible
in the Eyes of the People, Mal. 2. Then said I, Ah! what state then are these
men in, who are not made Ministers by a Law of God, neither yet sent forth by
Christ, Mat. 10. but are out of his Doctrine, Mat. 23. and so Enemies unto him,
being known by their Fruits, Mat. 7. 15, 16. and are made Ministers by the Will
of men, and upheld by carnal corrupt Laws, and the Imprisoning of hundreds that
are come out from them, that we may not partake in the Plagues with them, who
are seen to be of Babel, Rev. 18. 4. in whom is found the Souls of men, and the
Blood of all the Saints, from Abel unto this day; and they have been upheld by
the devouring of Widows Houses, the robbing of the Fatherless, the spoiling of
the Goods of Hundreds, the Imprisoning of many until Death, the Rifling, and
Robbing of whole Houses, as may be witnessed in the County of Kent (by a Paper
entitled, A Horrible thing, and the Record of Sufferings for Tithe and many
other parts in the Nation: And when I have beheld these things, I have said in
mine Heart, Those Ministers (or rather Deceivers) are far short, and much worse
than them in the Prophets days, who were made Ministers by a Law of God,
though they became as Robbers and Murderers.

And then have I also lamented the hard hearted blindness of many Rulers, in
these days, who have been worse in their persecuting of those, who from the
Spirit of God do declare against these Ministers made by the Wills of men, than
the Rulers in the days of the Prophets, who did not so Persecute them, that
declared against those who were made Ministers by a Law of God: And surely, I
have said, did not these Priests bewitch the Rulers that they cannot obey the
Truth? Gal. 3. And so cause them to obey them, or be as it were Slaves or
Pack-horses to them, even making their boast in Print, that they are still
spurring on the Magistrate, as Richard Baxter, Priest of Kidderminster, has
written. But I say, were not the Magistrates blinded by them, and therefore
uphold them by their corrupt Laws, even giving them Treble Damages, they would
soon fall and come to naught; for they are already fallen under the
Magistrates, and come creeping to them in the Serpents Wisdom, upon their
Bellies, which is their God, for more Dust, or Earthly Treasure, Money, Goods,
and Earthly things: But the Bishops and the Priests in their days, were
exalted above the Magistrates; and the Priests have yet that Spirit of Pride,
from which they write, as if they rid upon the Magistrates, and spurred them
like Horses; and this has been so, but it may be otherwife: And I have seen
how the Beast, the Whore and the false Prophet uphold one another, and ride one
upon another, and the Priests spurring up the Magistrates (its their own words)
and all making War with them that are sanctified, rising up against them that
are anointed, who need none to teach, and compassing about them whom God has
loved, who are of the City where the Lamb is the Light, and need not the light
of the Sun nor the Moon.

And when I have thus pondered the state and condition both of Priests, Rulers
and People, and compared them and their state with the Priests, Rulers and
People in the days of the Prophets, and seeing the condition of these to be
much worse, and many things more that might be named, and that the latter end
of many is like to be miserable; and that the Name of God is blasphemed by
such, who say they are Christians, and are not, like them, Rev. 2. 9. and that
they are in the Blasphemy, though Rich men, who do oppress the Poor in Spirit,
and cause them to be drawn before the Judgement-Seats, James 2. 6, 7. even then
has the consideration of these things often times brought a deep Mourning upon
me, and Sorrow has filled my Heart. But when on the other hand, I have seen
the Work of the Lord secretly going on in a hidden manner, opening the Eyes and
Understanding of many Rulers in the Nation; and that many who are, and have
been in Authority amongst Men, and in the Army (have already, and) are
believing in him who said, I am the Light, and is the Lord of Glory, though as
a Lamb dumb, and a man of Sorrows, not pleading his own Cause, nor having
whereon to lay his Head, but Sick and in Prison; and that many devout and
honorable Women, (as in Acts 17. 12.) are also coming, and come to the Faith
which purifies the Heart, and Respects no man's Person, without which Faith in
the Heart walked by, its impossible to please God.

And when the Eye of my Mind has been fixed upon that Object, then has my
Soul magnified the Lord therein, and my Spirit has rejoiced because of him
that brings, and is bringing Salvation; and because of Righteousness, Peace
and true Judgment that the Lord is setting up over all, in the Hearts of many
Rulers, and Devout and Honorable among the People, that in Righteousness,
throught Humility, they may come to be renowned with Honor forever.

These things on that hand (and much which is coming to pass for an Everlasting
Good among the People, and is revealed in the Light and Foreknowledge of God)
has given some ease to my Wounded and Troubled Spirit, and the Refreshings of
my Father's Love has bound me up in the Covenant of Life, with the tender Seed
in those whom the Lord is drawing by his Love, through Humility, to the durable
Honor and Riches which will never fade: Surely herein has my Soul been made
as a watered Garden, with the Influences of my Father's Love, so that living
Praises over all has ascended up to him, whose Name is blessed for evermore,
because he works, and none can let him.

But when I have looked back again upon the Priests, and the many hundred
Thousand Souls, that are kept in the Witchcraft ( Gal. 3.) Rebellion, ( Job 24.
13.) gainsaying, blindness and ignorance, and the daily murdering of the
Souls of so many, then because of the Shepherds, who destroy the Flock, there
has been in me a Lamentation, and a Cry: Oh the Priests, the Priests! surely
Vengeance is prepared of God for them, Wrath, Indignation, Cursing, ( Mal. 2.
2. 2 Pet. 2. 14.) Bitterness, Torment, Perplexity, Astonishment of Heart,
Endless Misery and Shame amongst men, from the wrathful Vengance of the
wrathful Terrors of God, will come upon them in a Day unaware, and their Houses
shall be left unto them desolate; and they shall become a Byword among the
People, as I have already written, from the dreadful Indignation of the Lord
God of Hosts, in a Book entitled, An Alarm, even so shall it come to pass
upon them; behold, it is hastening the Lord God of Hosts has spoken it, and his
Word shall not fail, neitheir shall his Decree be changed.

And when these things have come upon me, even as a Flood of mighty Waters,
then have I said in the Grief of my Heart, alas for the Priests! The Priests,
even the Leaders of the People, where will they hide themselves in this day of
sierce Wrath, and siery Indignation from the Jealous God of Majesty that is
near at hand? Oh! how will Shame cover their Faces? and how will their
Countenances fall like Cain? and how will they Curse like Shimei, even their
God (and their King) who is the God of the World (and their Belly is their
God?) and how will they seek Repentance with Tears like Esau, who might have
said, He was of Abraham? And how will they Repent too late like Judas, who had
obtained part of the Ministry, Acts 1. 17. and yet denied him that was the
Light, and betrayed him who comes to make an end of Sin, and was a Devil, and
hanged himself, and yet had obtained part of the Ministry. Alas for the Priests
of England! Are not they worse then Judas? Did not he bring again and restore
the Silver which he had taken? And can the Priests of England do so? Nay, they
have wasted it upon the Lust and Pride, even abundance; so that if they
themselves, and all that they have left, with their Wives and Children, should
be sold at the utmost value (though I not desire it should be so) yet thereby
could they not restore the tenth part, nor one part in a hundred, of the Silver
which they have taken; nor bring again the Money, as Judas did, which they have
gained.

Therefore have I said, Surely a sad Day will come upon them, when they become
a Byword, and a hissing to all People, and are turned out of their Parsonages,
Glebe-Lands, Tithes, Treble Damages, and old Mass-Houses, as their Fathers the
Bishops, and Deans, and Quiresters, and Singing-Men and Boys, were turned out
of their Pomp and Pride, vain Glory, Covetousness, Exaction and Tyranny, and
out of their Bishoprics, Denaries, and the like: And when also that Gods
Witness shall arise in them to confound them within, and the Light of Christ
condemn them for their Deceit and Hypocrisy, Tyranny, Pride, Idleness, fullness
of Bread, Extortion, and all manner of Wickedness; Oh the Priests, the Priests
have said, What a Day will this be unto them! Surely then, as I said, and say
again, That the Shepherds shall Howl, and a bitter Lamentation of the Priests
shall be heard in all the Land, yea, the noise of their bitter Cry sounds
already in my Heart; and behold, I have seen their Woe, which is near at hand,
their Wives also shall be left as Widows, and their Children as Fatherless,
and from the pitiful Benovelence of the People must they be kept from Perishing
in their Bodies; but alas for their Souls! who shall deliver them? And herein
moreover is their State and Condition the more Miserable, because they will not
regard this, neither would they at all be warned by them whom the Lord has
sent amongst them; and because they will not see when the hand of the Lord is
lifted up, neither regard the Word of his Power, therefore for their Envy to
the Lords People shall they be ashamed, Isa. 26. 11. that upon them it may be
fulfilled, which is written, Behold, I work a Work in your days, ye Despisers,
which you shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto you, Acts 13.
41.

Therefore have I considered, in the very depth of my secret Meditations, what
shall be said or done in these things, when the Priests have violated the Law,
and made void that which is Perfect, and the Leaders of the People rebel
against the Light, Job 24. 31. and harden their Hearts against Reproof, and
will not be warned, that they might escape the Dreadful day at hand; therefore
have I said, Ah! surely the Lord will root them up, Head and Tail, Branch and
Root in one day: Ah! fruitless Trees, said I, have not you your selves yet
brought forth the first Fruits of the Spirit, which is Love? And are not ye
your selves yet come to that which fulfills the Law of God, to wit, Love? And
are not all without it as sounding Brass, having the Tongues, and the like,
making a Noise among the People, like sounding Brass, and pleasing their
Fancies as tinkling Cimbals, 1 Cor. 13. And have you been all this while sowing
to the Flesh? And are you the men who deny him that makes an end of Sin, and
his Blood which cleanses from all Sin, and the Faith which purisieth the
Heart? And are you the men who deny the true Light of him, who said, I am the
Light, which lights every man that comes into the World? Are you the men
that deny the Son of God, and will ye not that he should reign, that is of the
Seed of Abraham who wandered up and down? And is it you that are saying one to
another, and to the Rulers of the Earth, concerning him that is the Light, This
is the Heir, come let us Kill him? And would you not that he should Rule, who
condemns Sin, and saves his People from their Sins, and makes an end of Sin?
Surely, have I said, even therefore will the Lord reward you, according to the
Fruit of your own Ways; and as you have denied him, so must you be condemned by
him that is the Light, Job. 3. 19. And as you have been, and yet are (with
Pilate, and others) of Babel, in the many Languages and Tongues, upon which the
Whore sits; and as you have been, and yet are of the Nations, which are drunk
with the Wine of the Fornication of the Whore, the great Whore, Mystery
Babylon, that sits upon many Waters, and has corrupted the Earth; and as you
have been drunk with the Blood of the Saints, and made rich by the Robbing and
Spoiling of the Houses and Goods of many (even as Troops of Robbers, Hos. 6. 9.
Forty in one Troop lately at Dorchester, feeding their Belly, their God.) And
as you have devoured Widows Houses, and been drunk with the Wine of the
Fornication of the Whore, and the Blood of Saints; even so shall you have Blood
to drink, and even so must you drink the Cup of Astonishment, and fierce
Indignation of the Lord God Almighty, and he will plague you false Prophets,
with the Whore together, and the Beast and you must be taken alive, and cast
into the Lake of Fire which burns forever and ever.

And when I have waited to see the end of these things, and pondered this in my
Heart, in the Uprightness of Innocence and pure Simplicity of God; then has it
been said in me, Where then will the Memorial of this Priesthood of these
Nations, who came up since the Apostles days, and were descended from the
Bishops, that were commissionated by the Pope, and established by the Sea of
Rome! And what a Howling, and a bitter Lamentation will come upon many in that
day, when Mystery Babylon, the Mother of all these painted Harlots, comes to be
overturned forever? How then will the Great men, and the Rich men, and the
Mighty Ones of the Earth, Mourn and Lament, because of the Desolation of the
Whore (with whom they have all along committed Fornication) and to see these
her Children (the painted Harlots, the Priests of England, who are covered with
Saints words) even dashed to pieces with the Light, which is the Stone that is
falling upon them, to grind them to Powder? Alas! alas! say they, how many were
made Rich? And how many of our Children were like to be made Rich by being bred
up under the Skirts of this Woman, who has a Golden Cup in her Hand, holding
it forth to all that will come to her? And how many young men began to love
her? Pov. 7. Alas! say they, were not many of our Children looking at the
Golden Cup, and and growing up under her Wing at Oxford and Cambridge, and in
diverse other Schools and Nurseries, where the Languages and Tongues are, even
Multitudes, upon which the Whore sits, Rev. 18. 1, 15. who has the Golden Cup,
at which the Kings, and the Great Ones of the Earth have drunk abundantly! And
must this Woman be laid Desolate? And must her Children be dashed to pieces
against the Stone? (the Light) therefore is the Cry great, and the Lamentation
will be grievous, when the Iniquity is come to the full, the Sin ripe unto
Judgment, the Beast fully fatted for the Day of Slaughter, and that come to
pass, which is ha^^ning suddenly, though few can receive these things
(unexpected by many) revealed in me, and the more are they, and many other
People hardened and blinded herein, because the Priests are so high, so great,
and so strong, and upheld by the strength of such Laws, even exceeding and
doubling in their Power and Authority, the Laws that were made for the
upholding of their Predecessors, the Jesuits and Popish Priests, in the days
of Queen Mary, whose Law was but three Months Imprisonment, and now it is six;
and then the Law was but for the Tithes, and now it is three times as much, and
so they are more higher exalted than ever, and our Task is doubled and trebled
upon us; and besides, they cry out, We are Idle, and wander up and down.

But let me Reason a little; Was it not suddenly after their Bondage in Egypt
was doubled, that the Lord overturned the mighty strength of the Oppressors
forever? and was not the cry of the oppressed great, because the Task was
doubled upon them, who were in Bondage before? And were we not before in
Bondage, under Bishops, and Priests, and Kings, and Tithe, and is it now double
and trebled? And is the little finger of the Priests become heavier then the
Bishops loins? And will not God visit for these things? And does not this show
that the day of Overturning is at hand? But say people, How can these things
be, they seeming to be established more then ever? Yet I reason again with
such; Who would beforehand have believed, that the Bishops, who were far
greater then they, should have come tumbling down so soon, with perpetual Shame
and Reproach; and their Common-Prayer-books taken away, with the Priests
Idolatrous Surplices, and manv such things? And has the Lord began with them
the Head? And will he not go on to finish his Work, in Confounding, and utter
Overturning the Tail and Dreggs of them which are yet left behind, and are like
unto unnatural children, denying their Parents, the Bishops and the Pope; and
yet creep into their Mass-houses, and live upon the same Maintenance, which
their Parents provided for them, and yet call the Pope, Antichrist, (and he is
so) their great Father, who set up the Bishops, that established them in their
Tithe, 'Parsonages and old Mass-houses; and so the Pope being an Antichrist,
and they come from the Bishops, set up by the Pope, then it follows, that they
are the Dreggs of Antichrist; and if their own words, Writings, Way,
Maintenance and Practices be but as it is, and does appear, then herein I do
them no wrong: And these things have I also thus considered, and leave to the
consideration of such, who are not willing to remain in blindness, that seeing
the Bishops are overturned, though they were above the Magistrates, the Priests
may also soon be turned down by the Magistrates, seeing they are fallen under
the Magistrates already; and they set them up, and put them in, and turn them
out at their pleasure, and may soon turn them down when they are weary of being
spurred by them.

And as I have considered these things in the meditations of my Mind, so have I
also considered the Words and Ways of these Priests of England, Ireland,
Scotland, and other Nations, and what ado and a stir they have kept, against
those Priests that caused Christ to be crucified; and how he suffered by them:
And when I have weighed and considered the Actions of them Priests that did so,
and the Words and Actions of these Priests, against them Priests, and the Ways
of one and the other, I have then found, that these, in many things, are worse
then them, though they were very bad; and so both to be denied, as I have
considered according to Scripture: Thus;

The Priests, the Readers of the Law, which discovers Sin, but makes nothing
Perfect, and the Scribes and Pharisees had the Scriptures, and a large zealous
Profession thereby, but when Christ the living Minister came, who was the
thing, or the Substance of which the Scripture declared, from which they had
the Profession; he being come, they knew him not; and therefore for a time the
Scribes, Pharisees and Priests disputed, reasoned and contended with him, and
sought to entangle him in his words, and did seek occasion against him, that
they might deliver him to the Rulers, and he disputed among the Doctors; but
when much People believed on him, they cried out, The whole World is gone after
him, John 12. 19. Mat. 22. 15. But when he, who is the Power of God, had raised
Lazarus from the dead, and out of the Grave, then the chifest of the Priests
and Pharisees held a Council against him; then they began to stir, and the
Beast began to rage; and they said, This man does many Miracles, and if we let
him alone, all men will believe on him, and the Romans will come, and take away
both our Place and Nation, John 11. 47, 48. And so says the Priests now; If we
let him alone, who is the Light, all men will believe on him, and we shall
loose both our Place and Nation; for who will fight for us (say they) if all
men come to believe in the Light? which lets men see that Wars and Fighting
comes from the Lust, which Lust wars against the Soul, James 4. But one of
their own Generation, even a chief Priest, told the rest, They knew nothing at
all, John 11. 49. (the Priests who deny the Light know nothing at all) and so
these chief Priests and Pharisees, who knew nothing at all, sought the Life of
the Lamb, and to take him, verse 57. And the chief Priests also consulted to
put Lazarus to Death also, John 12. 10. And so, the Priests now seek to kill
that which Christ the Light, the Power of God, has raised from Death, out of
the Grave; for now the very thing it self is come to Life out of Death, and
this Torments them exceedingly, even more then all the Words, Forms, Disputing
and Professions whatsoever that was before it.

And it was at the Passover, the Worship and Feast of the Jews that the Priests
sought to kill him that had raised the dead. And when Jezabel, whose blood the
Dogs must lick, at whose Table the false Prophets feed, when she intended to
murder the Just, and take away the Life of the Innocent, and give his
Possession to another, she made a Feast, and that which feasteth the one thing,
Murders the other: And at the Jews Feast, the one or the other was to be
releast; and at the time that they keep the Passover, who are the Jews
outwardly, then he suffers who is the end of the Law and the Prophets; and so
at the Feast of their Passover the chief Priests sought to kill him that was
led as a Lamb dumb, and Satan entered in Judas, and after that, then Judas went
out from Christ the Light; and when he went out it was Night, and then was the
Son of man to be glorified; but Judas who went out from him that is the Light,
went to the chief Priests and Captains; and they were glad when Judas was come
among them, who was a Devil, and the chief Priests made a Covenant with him
that was a Devil, and gave him Money to betray him who is the Light; And he
that took the Money. had obtained part of the Ministry, and he was a Devil; and
now such Ministers that take both the Money, Body and Goods, are worse then
Judas, whom the Priests say, was a Bishop, (or a chief Priest) because it is
written, His Bishop-rick let another take, Acts 1. 20. And suddenly after the
chief Priests, had made a Covenant with him that was a Devil, was the Jews
Passover, at which time, he that comes to make an end of Sin was betrayed, and
then Judas (who departed from him that is the Light, and was become a Devil)
betrayed the Son of God, and had him led away to Ciaphas the High Priest, and
the chief Priests and Elders, and all the Council sought false witness to put
him to death, Mat. 26. 59. And the chief Priest rent his Clothes, and accused
him of Blasphemy, in whom there is no Sin, and they all said, He is worthy of
Death, who said, God was his Father. And when the chief Priests had caused him
to be brought before Pilate, and Vehemently accused him of many things, yet
Pilate would have released him; and when the chief Pirests and Elders saw that,
and that one should be released at the Feast, and that it might not be the man
of Sorrows, that is not of the World, but the Murderer and Thief, that had
stole, therefore the Priests and Rulers then persuaded the Multitude, That they
should ask Barrabas the Thief, the Murderer, and destroy Jesus the Image of
God, that comes to condemn for Sin, Mat. 27. 20. And so to this day, at the
time of the Feast, the Thief, and that which Murders is at Liberty, and that
is destroyed which comes to save from Sin.

But the Govenour said, Why, what Evil has he done? And Pilate washed his
Hands, and confessed him to be a Just Person; but the chief Priests and Scribes
stood and vehemently accused him, Luke 23. 10. But Pilate said the third time,
Why, what Evil bath he done; I have found no cause of Death in him: And yet the
Priests even forced Pilate, to do that which was Unjust. And do not the Priests
now even force the Magistrates, to persecute those that they find nothing in
them worthy of Death or of Bonds? And so the Priests having provoked and
instigated the People thereunto, they cried, Away with him, (that is the Light)
and Crucify him, (that makes an End of Sin) and the chief Priests also gave
their Voice with them against him; and so the Voices of them, and of the chief
Priests prevailed to have him slain, murdered and crucified, who is the Power
of God, that had raised the Dead, in whom Pilate could find no fault, neither
yet Herod; and when he was crucified, who is the Light, that condemns for Sin,
then the chief Priests and Professors kept their Feast, and their Passover with
the Shewbread, or Unleavened-Bread, which the carnal Eye might see, and the
murdering Priests feed upon, and then they may talk of their Ordinances,
having slain him that is given for a Witness, Isa. 55. 4. And so, such as slay
the Witness within, are talking of the Ordinances without; and they cried, Away
with him, (that is the Bread of Life) and they Crucified him (at whose presence
the Devils were tormented) and in the time of their Feast and Passover (who had
the Oracles of God) the Witness of God lay slain; this may be read within; and
upon their Sabboth-Day, even the Day of their Worship (who worship in the High
Places) that which came to save from sin, lay in the Grave, and they were
reading that which discovered sin, but make nothing Perfect, and him in whom
there is no sin, was in the Earth, in the time of their Worship, and he that
was the Light in the Earth, was Perfect, but that which they read in the high
Place made nothing Perfect; and the place of Holy Worship is to be laid
desolate, and where Christ (the witness) is not risen, the Sin is not taken
away, and there the Faith is vain. He that can receive it, let him.

But after the Feast, he that is given for a witness arose again, and so before
the Feast of the Passover of the Jews and Professors, they murdered the
Witness; and for a time, while the Witness lay slain, they kept the Passover
with outward Bread, in an outward Temple, offering the outward Sacrifices, but
after the Feast was over, and their outward Worship for a time ended; then he
that is given for a Witness unto the People, arose again; and so that which
leads to Feasting, murders the witness of God, yet when the feasting is over,
and the outward Profession and Worship ended for a time, then he that is the
Witness arises, even the Light of Christ in the Conscince and condemns for
sin, and then the Priests and Professors were, and are worse then before: And
when some of the Watch came, and declared that he was risen, who is given for a
Witness [Mark, they that are upon the Watch, are the first that know the rising
of the Witness] then the chief Priests, who had mocked him, Mark 15. 31. (the
chief Priests were Mockers) assembled with the Elders, and took counsel again;
for then they were more tormented than before, and that which they feared, came
upon them; for they said, this would be worse than that before, therefore they
said of him, This Deceiver said, After three days I will rise again;
Therefore, said they, let a Watch be set, lest his Disciples steal him away,
and say, He is risen, and so the last Error be worse than the first. And so the
Priests called the Resurrection of Christ Error, and Christ the Light, a
Deceiver; and these Priests now say, The Light deceives, or, is Natural, and
not sufficient. But Christ the Witness being risen again, the chief Priests
gave large Money to the Soldiers, to tell Lies of him and his Disciples, and
caused them to deny the rising of the Witness, as the Priests do now; for the
Witness is in Man, 1 John 5. 10. And said the Priests, If this come to the
Governor's Ear, we will persuade him, and secure you, Mark 27. 62, 63, 64.
Chap. 28. 11, 12, 13. And so, the chief Priests gave some Money to have him
betrayed and crucified; but they gave large Money to have the rising of him,
who is the Witness, the Resurrection and the Lite denied, after he was betrayed
and crucified; and so them Priests gave their Money to have him betrayed, by
him that is a Devil, and gave large Money to the Soldiers, to deny the
Resurrection of him, and to tell Lies, and the Devil is a Liar from the
beginning, and the Father of it. O horrible Abomination and Cruelty! that ever
the Priests, the Leaders of the People should do such things as these, and to
be found themselves the worst of Men, or rather as Beasts! as it is written, I
said in my Heart concerning the state of the Sons of Men, that God might
manifest them, and that they might see that they themselves are Beasts, Eccles.
3. 18.

And these things may be a warning both to all Governors, Officers, Soldiers
and People, that they may never more be deceived by, nor join to have a hand
with the Subtle, Treacherous, Deceitful Priests, (against the Innocent) who by
their subtilty did and do overcome both Governors, Judges, Rulers, Soldiers
and People, and so crucified the Lord of Glory, and make it their business ever
since to keep People from believing in him, who said, I am the Light, believe
in the Light, John 8. 12. chapter 12. 35, 36, 46.

But mark and consider; Were those Priests Wicked herein? And were they
Murderers and Abominable? Then have I considered, how much worse, and how far
more Abominable are these Priests of England, and other Nations thereabouts,
who do seldom give People large Money to tell Lies, after they have taught them
so to do (unless it be when they hire them to tell Lies and Swear too, in
bearing false Witness for them, against the Innocent) but they commonly force
People to give large Money to them for teaching them to tell Lies, and to deny
and murder the Witness in themselves, which Witness comes to be received by
believing in the Light, John 12. 36. chapter 1. 11, 12. 1 John 5. 10. And seeing
these Priests do now get large Money, or take it by Force, for telling the
People many large Repititions in their Pulpits, one year after another, How
Christ was caused to be crucified and murdered by the other Priests, who gave
Money to have it done; and the People know that already.

And when I have considered, how many Hundred Thousand Pounds a year these
Priests do receive, and take by force, for telling the People, how Christ the
Light suffered under the other Priests; and how he that condemns sin in the
Flesh, and saves from Sin, was called a Deceiver by the other Priests, then
have I said, surely these Priests are worse than the other; for they gave their
Money, even large Money, but these take Money, and Money that is much more
large, and take it by Force too, even Treble Damage, or three times Treble what
they demand, and Rob whole Houses, and have got the Rulers to uphold them in
it, ( never such Robbers!) and take Tithe by force from such as hear them not:
And the first Priests that I read of in Scripture, who would take the Tithe or
Offerings by Force, were the Sons of Belial, and knew not God, 1 Samuel 2. 12,
16. and they said, If you will not give it us, we will take it by force. And
so, they that took the Tithe or Offerings by force, were Sons of Belial: And
such Sons of Belial now, who know not God, do not only take the Tithe and
Offerings, but they take even Three times, or Sixteen times as much in some
places, and sometimes the Persons of men besides. And those Priests formerly
did give their Money; and Simon Magus would have given Money for the holy
Ghost, but now these Priests force People to give them Money for their Meanings
of the Letter: And when I have seriously considered these things, I have even
stood as a man amazed, saying, Who would, or how could I formerly have
believed, that these Priests of England were so far worse than them Priests
that made a Covenant with a Devil, and that caused Christ to suffer? Or who
would have believed, that they were worse than Simon Magus, in compelling
People to give them much Money for their Meanings from the Letter? whereas he
would have given his Money freely for the Spirit; but the Spirit they have not
to sell, but if they had, what would they not do for the love of Money, which
is so rooted in their Hearts? would they not do as Judas did, who sold him that
was his Master? but I do not believe they would bring again the Money as Judas
did, though he was a Devil.

And who could have believed, that these Priests of England were so far worse
than the Sons of Ely, who were Sons of Belial, and knew not God; for they would
take but the Tithe and Offerings by force, but these Priests take the Tithe and
Offerings, and much more, and the Bodies of Men and Women also, and keep them
in Prison until Death, for whom they do no Work, and who desire none of their
Ministry? And if they herein be not worse than the Sons of Belial, let all
sober-minded judge, and consider this thing with me, that the first Priests
that caused their Servants to take the Offerings by force, knew not God; then
say I, Alas! alas! for the Priests of England! are they so much worse than
those that knew not God? How does their Shame appear? And who could have
believed, that these Priests were worse than Judas, that was a Devil, who
brought the Money again that he had received? But when do these Priests bring
again the Money and Goods which they have received and taken away by force?
(though Judas did not take his Money by force) And how hard are these words to
be received by such who have not yet come to see and understand these things?
And how unwilling will the Priests themselves be, to believe the truth of this
which I have thus weighed, and considered, and pondered in the Meditations of
my Mind? What horrible things from the Pit of Darkness are these, that the
Priests should be worse than Judas! for after he had betrayed the Innocent, he
confessed, He had sinned, and brought back the Money, but the Priests said,
What is that to us? And are not these Priests worse than they; for these do not
only cause the betraying of the Innocent, and say, What is that to us? but they
take Money, and force People to give them large Money, for betraying that which
is Innocent in them, by their Subtilty and Craftiness, whereby they lie in wait
to deceive; and when they have betrayed the Innocent Principle of God in
People, by telling them, It will deceive them, yet they will not bring the
Peoples Money back, as Judas did, nor so much as confess they have sinned
therein, but are Impudent: O hard hearted and unreasonable Men! (have I said)
What shall be said unto them? Surely they are the worst of men, and it had been
good for them they had never been born, or had a being upon the Earth. Did the
Prophet Mourn over, or Cry aloud unto them that spent their Money and Labor
for that which satisfies not? Oh! what shall I then say or write, or how shall
I cry loud enough or mourn enough yet more in secret, or sound a Trumpet to
these dead sleepy Priests, who compel People to give them so much Money, or
spoil their Goods, or imprison their Bodies till Death, for that which is so
far from satisfying them, that their Souls are murdered thereby, and the
innocent meek thing in them betrayed, and the Witness denied? Oh! who can
withhold from declaring this? And who can but write it in a Book, that they may
see the State which they are in, and that People may know them by their Fruits,
which did never so plainly appear as now?

And when these things came upon me, in the deep Meditation of my Mind, and
Conference in my Spirit, what a Condition was I often in! and how was my Soul
overcome with Sorrow, my Spirit with Heaviness, and mine Eyes with Tears? When
did the Prophets ever see such a Generation of Priests as these? And what
manner of Lamentaion shall I take up because of these things? Surely I will cry
aloud unto the Lord in secret, and my Soul shall pour forth Intercession to my
Maker, and with Tears, as streams of Water, will I beg at the Throne of the
Most High for the slain of the People that are killed all the day long; and in
this have I believed, that the Lord will hear my Cry, and pity the People that
are destroyed for lack of Knowledge, that the Witness of God in them may arise,
and that the Prisoner of Hope may come to Deliverance.

And in this have I not been hasty as to utter their Shame ( for I was my self
a Preacher in the Pulpits) but in a Mournful state often times many Months or
Years, have I born this Burden; neither have I now uttered or written this out
of Prejudice toward the Persons of any men, but in the Mournful state of my
long burdened and grieved Spirit, from the true sense of the Sad, Shameful and
Miserable state that is coming upon them, and the Eternal Woe and Misery that is
like to follow after for evermore. The which I desire they may escape by speedy
returning from the Way that they are in, now it is so plainly made manifest to
be so exceeding Evil.

H. S.

IDOLATRY Declared Against.
THe Great and Mighty God, who made the Heavens, and the Earth, and the Sea,
and made all men of one Blood upon the face of the whole Earth, and breathed
into man that which is of his own Life, that by it man might seek after him,
and find him who is Infinite, Incomprehensible, Eternal and Glorious, even he
dwells not in Temples made with Hands, Acts 17. 24. neither is he worshipped
in one high place or another by any of the Professing Jews, who deny his Son,
of whom he gave Testimony, That in him he is well pleased: Neither is there any
Worship or Service accepted with him, but that which comes from them who are
led and guided by the Spirit of Truth, and in it Worship the Father, who is a
Spirit, and delights not in those Oblations that are Vain, proceeding from
the vain Minds of such who take his Name in Vain, of whom he says, In vain do
they Worship me: And of all such, I say, their Faith is Vain, who are yet in
their Sins, and found among the Gentiles, who sacrifice unto Devils, and not
unto God, being Children of Wrath, and Strangers to the Covenant of Promise,
whose Prayers the Lord abhors, whose vain Bablings cast an ill Savor in the
Nostrils of the most High; and their coming together is not for the better, but
for the worse, even to feed and nourish the young Serpents, and to increase in
that Knowledge which puffs up, and increases sorrow, the which knowledge the
(Hireling) Priests Lips preserve, which the Devil once taught, saying, Ye shall
be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil; and all they who increase in this Knowledge,
increase in that in which the Knowledge of God does not stand, neither can be
received; and so the Woe from the Lord God will come unto all them that continue
their seeking the Living among the Dead, crying for their place of holy Worship
(which is to be laid Desolate) and living in Unrighteousness, and in all
Ungodly Practices, without the fear of God, and talking of him with that Mouth
which is full of Cursing and Bitterness, the Heart being not turned to God, nor
the Mind unto the Light of his Son, who are themselves in the Jaws of Satan,
and are sometimes made sensible of the Power of the Devil working in them,
stirring them up to Wrath, and moving them up to Envy, Pride and
Unrighteousness, and the Lusts of the Creatures, and the Vanity of the Mind,
but feel not at all the Power of God to work in them the newness of Life, and
his pure Image, who made man Holy and Upright; neither are they willing to
receive that Power in them by which they might come to overcome their Sins, and
be led up to him who is the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, whom all the
World, (not knowing) is ignorant by Worshipping, and denying his Son (who
makes an end of sin) and Contemning the Just One, who is a man of Sorrows, and
denying him who is led as a Lamb dumb, and slighting him who is the Light, and
refusing him who is the living Minister, not made by a carnal Commandment, but
by the Power of an endless Life, who teaches all to profit (who learn of him)
and none teaches like him, who says, Learn of Me; then not of another, not of
a Hireling, not of one that pleads for Sin, but of him that makes an End of
Sin, whom God the Father has given a Light to the Gentiles, a Covenant to the
People, that all men through him might be saved, who has spoiled
Principalities and Powers, and all Authorities; and now all Dominions and
Authorities are to be subject to Him, who said, The true Worshippers shall
Worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth: And Truth is that which makes Free;
but the Worshipping the Unknown God in a Synagogue, Idol Temple or
Steeple-house, does not make Free, neither makes an end of Sin, but all them
that are there, are in their Sins, and have not received Power to Overcome
their Sins; but are following such Teachers, which Peter said, should come in
the latter days, who cannot themselves cease from Sin; And these Teachers,
Peter said (and so say I) that they are cursed Children, beguiling such
unstable Souls, who are carried about with airy windy Doctrines, after the
cunning Crastiness of men, who still lie in wait to deceive, against whom we
bear Testimony, from the Spirit of Truth, which guides us, not to handle the
Word of God deceitfully, nor to make Merchandise of the People; neither come we
with Flattering Titles, but in the Power of the Lord, and in the Demonstration
of his Spirit of Truth, do we declare against all Unrighteousness of Men,
whether Priests, Rulers or People, without Respect of Persons; and we declare
his Name in the World, who is the Light of the World, and publish him among the
Sons of men, who is Gods Power, that saves his People from their Sins, who is
the true Prophet, whom all are to hear, that all might come to learn of him,
and be guided by him in the Way of Everlasting Peace, that so such as are
Strangers to the Covenant of Grace (being yet in their Sins, and are the
Outcasts of Israel) might now come to be taught of the Lord, and hear the
powerful Voice of his Son, and not follow Strangers any longer, nor the dumb
Idol Shepherds, who are become Brutish, Jer. 10. 21. and cannot understand,
Isa. 56. 11. that from them all, such who fear the Lord might be gathered,
Ezekiel. 34. and may come to know the one Lord, whose Name is one, and the one
Truth, and the one Way, and the Worship of the one true God, and not follow
them any longer, who are Strangers to the Life of God, nor such as cannot cease
from Sin, who are all in the Curse, being not reconciled unto him, who was made
a Curse, and so they come not to receive that by which the Curse is taken away,
and such are without God in the World; and of such the Lord has said, You have
we aried me with your Sacrifices; And so say I to you now, you have wearied the
Lord with your Words; and yet many are saying, Wherein have we we aried him? I
say, in this have you wearied the Lord, in that you say, such as do Evil are
Good in the sight of God, Mal. 2. 17.

Therefore thus I declare unto you, who are yet in your Sins, meeting together
in the Idol Temples, Your Service is not the Service of the true God, neither
is your Worship that which the Lord accepts, for he accepts none but the
Worship in Spirit and in Truth, not in one high Place or other, but your
Worship is in some High-Place, Idol-Temple or Steeple-House, where all manner
of Viperous Beasts are round, and unsanctified Persons meet together, who
commit all Abominations, and live in all manner of Filthiness, and yet lean
upon the Lord, and say; Is not the Lord among us? no Evil shall come unto us:
Whereas they are an evil and an adulterous Generation, adulterated from the
Spirit of Truth, in which the true Worship stands, and are ignorantly
worshipping in a Temple made with Hands, in which God dwellcth not, neither is
his Power there received to overcome the Sin; and so the People are wearying
themselves for very Vanity, and traveling to bring forth Death, and laboring
for that which profits not; neither do they come to meet the Lord in the way of
his Judgments, nor find the Path of Life, where the Unclean can never come;
neither yet do they know the Bread of Life, nor drink his Blood, that cleanses
from all Sin, nor come to be translated into the Kingdom of the Son of God, but
remain in that Ground which was eursed by reason of man's Rebellion, Genesis 3.
17. Heb. 6. 8. which Ground being not removed with the mighty Power of God, the
Blessing cannot be received, nor the Understanding opened to know and receive,
that which the Natural Man perceives not, the Eyes of their Minds being
darkened, through the Ignorance that is in them, the Vail being over the Heart,
when that is read every day of their Worship, which discovers Sin, but makes
nothing Perfect; which Worshippers did and do, Crucify him that comes to take
away the Sin.

But now he is come, who has forever perfected those that are sanctified; and
he that sanctisieth, and they who are sanctified, are all of one; But they that
are not sanctified are not of the one, but are in the many Opinions, in the
Lusts of Ignorance and Ways of Unrighteousness, being not come to the one
Faith, which purifieth the Heart, nor to know the one Baptism, one Church, one
Way, one Truth, one God, the Father of him who is the one Light, which
lightneth every man that comes into the W^rld; of the which Light, which is
but one, there is given a measure to every one of you, which Light shines in
Darkness, though not by it comprehended; which Light will let you see that you
your selves are out of God's Covenant in the World's Worship, not reconciled to
God, upholding Idol Temples and Heathenish Customs, with Bells, and such things
which the People of God never used, but did and do deny forever, and exhort you
and all others to leave worshipping the Beast, or upholding that which is not
the true Worship of the true God, practiced by men of Sin in Steeple Houses
every First Day.

Wherefore all People every where, leave your Idolatry, which you have learned
and received by Tradition from the former Papists and Heathen, who worship the
Work of their own Hands, and bow down to their own Inventions, as you long have
done, and for this many Hundred Years have been learning, and yet are not come
to the Truth, neither to believe in it, but remain in Unbelief and Ignorance,
and your long time of Ignorance God winked at, Acts 17. 30. But now Light is
come, in which God is calling to you, and all men every where to Repent and
forsake your Idolatrous Worship, which by you, a sinful Generation, is
practiced in a Steeple-house one day in seven and Catn's Nature remaining in
the inward parts, from the which Idolatry, all that sear the Lord God of
Abraham are now to come from the Uncleanness of that Worship which is upheld by
the Heathen; for verily the Hand of the Lord God Almighty is stretched sorth
against it and them.

Wherefore, all People turn your Minds to the Lord God of Life, who dwells in
his People ( and not in Temples made with Hands) and has given to every one of
you a measure of the true Light of his Son, which Light, in you, will let you
see your secret Sins, and will teach you and show you plainly of the Father, if
you love it, and come to be led by it, to do God's will so may you come to
worship the Lord God of Life, in Spirit and in Truth, with the Children of the
Light and of the Day, which has dawned upon many, who need not any man teach
them, but are all taught of the Lord, Glory and Honor, and Everlasting Praises
to his blessed Name forever and ever, Amen.

Given forth as a Testimony against all Idolatry and Heathenish-Worship, from
the true Love of God the Father, in pity to the Souls of them who have Eyes and
see not, and Ears and hear not, that they may come forth of Darkness, to follow
Christ Jesus the Light of the World, who is bringing the Blind by a Way that
they know not, Isa. 42. 16.

Therefore is this to go abroad among all People, and read in Steeple Houses,
Streets, Marketplaces, private Meetings and Families, that all may consider
what they have been doing in the dark, Ezekiel. 8. 12.

By a Servant of the Living God, a Sufferer for the Testimony of his Name in
the Common Goal and House of Correction at Winchester. Humphery Smith.
The 4th Month, 1658.
Man driven out of the Earth and Darkness, By the Light, Life, and Mighty Hand
of GOD: Wherein plain and simple Truths are brought to light, that so the cause
of Stumbling may be taken from before the Eyes of both Rulers and all sorts of
Professors in Herefordshire, etc.
Also something related of the Wonderful Power of God, in the Work of
Redemption and Restroration. With a plain Self-denial by him that takes up the
daily Cross.
Behold, the Lord works wonderfully; every Morning he brings his Judgments
to light; he has brought me back from the Grave, and saved my Soul from Hell,
and set my feet upon a Rock.

THE Living Truth of the Lord God, which he has revealed in me, by the mighty
Operation of his Word of Life, which living eternal Truth being my Life, and
shall last for evermore, and be as a Standard of the Most High, lifted up to
all the scattered weary Souls, that they may flow unto it, and have it to be
unto them a place of Refuge and Defense to fly unto in the day of Distress, and
by it come to be made Free, and in it Worship the God of the Spirits of all
Flesh, and feel it in the inward parts, according as the Lord requires, by
which Truth man comes to be sanctified; for the Word that lives and abides
forever is Truth, which comes to be ingrafted into them who believe in the
Light, and in it wait for the Promise of the Father, even that Spirit of Truth
which the World cannot receive; for they know it not, it being in Gods Wisdom
hid from the Wisdom of the World, who know not him that may be felt after and
found, who is near unto every one of you, whose measure of Light in you, is it
you are all to know, by it to come to know the eternal Power and Godhead, as
they did who had not Scriptures, Romans 1. 19. for the Light of Christ in you is
that which is to give the Knowledge of God, 2 Cor. 4. 6. who has assuredly
revealed his Son in me, and led me in the straight Way to Life Eternal, and the
enjoyment of the Truth, which is Immortal, the which being to me a Pearl of
great Price, and more precious than a thousand Rivers of Oil.

And that none may be hindered from receiving of this, which I have most
assuredly found to be more excellent than the Royalty of Diadems, or the
Excellency of the most purest Gold, or the most Renownedst Glory, Beauty or
Riches that the natural Eye can behold; and that all who breathe after divine
Refreshings, and the Rest that never shall be shaken, and the attaining to the
Covenant of Life and Peace, may come to be gathered into the One Fold of
blessed Happiness, and rest upon the Rock of Ages, and never more be moved
henceforth and forever.

And that if possible, all Murmurings and Reasonings (concerning me, or what I
was) may be taken out of the Minds of all People of all sorts, and that all
Jealousies, Whisperings, and Heartburnings in the Wrathful Nature may be
passified and cooled with the over-spreading Streams of God's free Love, which
truly is shed and grows in my Heart, and streameth forth as a Wellspring of
Life toward the Seed that is yet oppressed in them, among whom sometime I
walked in Darkness, and wallowed in Unrighteousness, and afterward stood up as
a tall Cedar in the height of Profession, preaching great and high things daily
unto others, whereby then I was admired by many Hundreds, who thereby came not
to receive Power to overcome their Sins, neither yet attain to that which the
Souls of many of them thirsted after, whom since I have often mourned over in
Pity, and in the Bowels of my Father's Love to the Soul in Bondage in them,
from whom I have been long and far absent in Body.

And that none of them by looking and wondering at me, or any thing that has
befallen me may stumble thereby at the Light or Truth it self, or be thereby
kept from receiving the living Truth, or from giving heed to that which all the
Wise Masterbuilders refuse; nor that they by looking at what I was before I
received and lived in the Truth, and at that which justly came upon me for my
former Rebellion against the Light, nor at the Judgments of God that came upon
me within or without, because of my unwillingness to follow him who said, I am
the Light, follow me; and said, He that will not leave Father and Mother, Wife
and Children, Goods or Lands for my sake, is not worthy of me; and he that will
not deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me, is not worthy of me: And
what a Cross it was for me to leave what I did, let that of God (in all that
knew me) judge. But I say, that none of them who are Colonels, Captains,
Justices, Professors nor People, by looking out at any thing concerning me, may
not be withheld from receiving the Truth, and so kept from that which is the
way to the Father, and the Door to the Rest for evermore.

Therefore has it lay long (of late years) and often upon me, and that from
the hand of the Lord, to lay something before your Eyes (O ye Rulers,
Professors and People of Herefordshire, and thereabout) endeavoring thereby to
remove any cause of stumbling, by reason of what I was, or of any false Reports
raised upon me, whereby the whole Truth of God might be Evil spoken of. And
this have I waited long to declare among you, either in Words, Writing or
Print; thought thereby Shame might come upon my former Course of Life, when I
lived in all manner of Sin and Iniquity [except it were actual Adultery,
Fornication and Murder] and though also hereby Contempt may come upon all that
great Profession I was in, when I preached, daily in the Synagogue, or upon all
that I then spoke or preached, out of the Innocent Life of God; or if hereby at
present suffer I Reproach (as it is like I may by many) yet the Reproach of
Christ is greater Riches to me than the Treasure, Glory and Preferment of
England.

And first, Concerning my Call out of the World, or my going out from my House,
Country and outward Employment.
THe Light of Christ, which condemns the Evil Deeds, comes from him who calls
his out of the World, and from their Employments, to follow him who puts
forth his Sheep, and thrultech forth Laborers into the Harvest; and Abraham,
of whose Seed I now am, went out of his Country, and from his Fathers House,
Genesis 12. and him God blessed and increased mightily, and the Lord also called,
and thrust forth me, who at last was obedient to the Command of the God of
Abraham; and ever since his Presence has been with me, and his Blessings have
I found, and the Encreasings of God have I received, Praises to the Lord God of
Life for evermore, who has called me by his Word of Power, through his Grace,
which did teach me to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to obey his
blessed Will, which was and is my Sanctification in Jesus Christ, who did also
call Matthew from the receipt of Custom to follow him, and Peter and John from
their Employment of Fishing and made them fishers of men; and Paul also being
called, left his Employment of Tent-making (after a time) and was Obedient to
the heavenly Vision; and those then became a Wonder and a Gazing-stock to many,
yet they continued on, Traveling through many Countries, as I since have done,
preaching the Word of God with boldness.

And one of these men, who were called from their outward Employment, said,
Every man, wherein he is called, there abide; and whereunto they were called,
they did abide, (and so do l) and when the Priests and Rulers would have stopped
their Mouths by their Commands, they said Whether it be lawful to hearken unto
God or Man, judge ye: But these Ministers of Christ, did not say, he that is a
Husbandman, there abide; for Noah was a Husbandman, yet a Preacher of
Righteousness, and Elisha a Plowman, and Amos a Herdsman; neither did they
say, He that is a Fisherman, let him so abide; neither did Christ say, he that
will be my Disciple must follow his outward Employment or Trade, but he said,
He that will not hate Father and Mother, Brethren and Sisters, Wife and
Children, yea, and his own Life too, cannot be my Disciple, Luke 1^. 20. and if
not a Disciple, much less a Minister of his.

But hereby, neither Christ, nor them Ministers of his, neither I did, or do
intend to draw or persuade People to Idleness, or open a Door for any such
Evil, (neither is there many who are called out of the World's Worships, and
required to leave their Families and called to the Ministry) but that hereby it
may plainly appear, that the Command and Call of Christ, to his Work and
Ministry is to be obeyed, though it be to the forfaking of House, Goods or
Lands; for a Minister of his, said We have forsaken all (And have not I done
so?) and unto them who had forsaken all, unto all such was promised a Hundred
fold, Matthew. 19. 17, 18, 19. And Heaven and Earth shall pass away, before one
Jot or Tittle of his Word shall fail: And truly, I have found his Promise true,
for a Hundred times Hundred sold have I already received, blessed be the Lord
forever.

But how contrary it was to my own Will to fulfill the Will of the Lord. in
leaving my Employment and outward Business in the World, let all them judge
with the Light, who knew my Conversation therein, and saw my Eagerness in the
things of the World and Contrivances therein, beyond many men; my Heart being
set in the Earthly things, being very fierce in Laboring therein, for the
getting and increasing of the Fruits of the Earth, as though I would have laid
up Treasure for many Years, which might have been good in its place, if my Mind
had been redeemed out of it, and my Heart from the Covetousness thereof; but I
say again, it was much contrary to my strong Will, to leave these things and
the love of them, and much more that might be named, and be taken from it with
a Hundred and Fifty Pound loss, and be exposed to Want, Hardships, Revilings,
Imprisonments, Whippings, Stonings, and all manner of cruel Torture, that the
Soris of men might have Power to inflict upon my Body, and for me (that ruled
over many, and was respected by many) to become a Servant unto all, and counted
the Offscouring of all, and be abused by any Boy, or the Vilest Person I meet;
and it was much contrary to my Will, to refuse that Glory, Honor and
Preferment of the World which was offered me by the Rulers thereof, when I was
beloved of them, and Hundreds more; and when I preached among them in the
Pulpits daily, and was then called of men Master, like the Hirelings of
England, who being in the Curse cannot cease from Sin, 2 Pet. 2. 14. yet I
still refused their Unrighteous Gain, and denied all their Gifts and Rewards;
for the Lord, in his Mercy, kept me out of them Temptations, though sometimes
some that were then near Friends unto me, would have persuaded me to have taken
something of what was offered, as to live upon, but I durst not, if I had
wanted Food or Raiment; but answered one Justice, who was proposing me a free
Gift toward Maintenance, which might have been worth a Hundred Pound a Year, or
more, seeing I left my Employment, freely to preach daily, but I say, I
answered, I shall rather go in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, and eat Bread and
drink Water; and that little honest, meek Principle in me, which then kept me
from that (and such Temptations) in due time led me to be Ruler over much,
which before I had not Power over; therefore I say unto all, it is good to be
faithful to the little measure of God in the Conscience.

For when I was but young and void of the knowledge of God, or his Way of
Holiness, my Mind ran much in the Earth, with a covetous care, how to gain the
Riches thereof; and even then did the Hand of the Lord follow me, and his
Witness in me did so judge and condemn me Night and Day for my Evil, that at
last I was scarce able to do any thing in the Earth, or go upon it; and then
waiting to see what the reason was, after many Hours, I saw clearly, if I would
leave the Wickedness of the world, and follow the Lord and trust him, I might
have Peace, and if not, I was like to be cut off: And then I left some Sins,
and resolved to live more Holy, and began to Pray and Read, and then I went to
follow the Priests, not knowing that in me which I was to hear and follow, yet
it secretly led me out of some Evil, and so into some Peace; and then my Heart
was exalted in the Earth, though I increased in a Profession.

And when I was in the height of the World's Way and Worship, and expecting
Riches to increase, even then in an unexpected time, did the dread of the Lord
fall upon me, and his wonderful mighty Power wrought exceedingly in me, to
break me off from all my Ways, and separate me from all the Worship of the
World, and gave me to see the Abominations of all the Prayers of the Wicked,
and the Invalidity of all the Worships of all Mankind, who are out of God's
Covenant; and the Operations then upon me by the terrible Hand of the Lord, and
the strivings that were in me, can never be declared, and then did the Lord
command me to follow him in Obedience to his Will, to declare against all
Unrighteousness of men, which I saw in the Light of Life to be in Priests,
Rulers and People; and I then saw clearly, in the eternal Light and foresight
of God, the Hardships, Cruelties, Whippings, Imprisonments and Dungeon, and
many such things, which since in part have been upon this Body fulfilled, as
may be read in several of my Books, (read the True Rule) and at that time did
the powerful Life of God so much break through me, with such unspeakable Love,
that I was even willing to leave all and walk with God.

But then contrary to Paul, I reasoned with Flesh and Blood, that I should be
esteemed a Madman, and that People would not believe me; and that I was not
fit, (and many such things:) Then the Word of the Lord was spoken in me,
saying, Who is it that opens the Mouth? Is it not I the Lord? Then was my
Bowels even turned within me, with the constraining Power of Gods Eternal Love,
and I began to be willing; but when that was a little over, the Tempter being
near, ^ reasoned concerning my Wife and Children, How they should be provided
for? and presently the Promise of the Lord was, That they should be cared for;
and his Promise was to me, That he who converteth Souls to God, should shine as
the Stars forever: And when I had received them Words into me, I was overcome
with the Refreshings of God, and at the present made willing to undergo all
Tribulations, if in my whole Life I did Convert but one Soul to God, seeing and
feeling the Redemption of one Soul to be so precious, the which then grew so
strong in me, that I was scarce able to retain from present actual Obedience to
God therein; but when I looked at my outward things, and how first to settle
that in order, then was I by Temptations made afraid, That it was a Delusion,
or something of the Devil transformed as an Angel of Light; and then between
both, I was in much Trouble and Distress, not knowing what to do, having not
then known any called Quakers, nor any such Operations in any man in those
days; yet that could hardly prevail to make me believe it was a Temptation:
But at last, reasoning about outward things, I then resolved not to leave them,
but to mind the things of the World, and not obey that which called me out of
the World.

And to write in short; at last I did strive and join with all the Powers of
Darkness that I could, and used all means possible to drive the Power of God
from me, and the Thoughts of him and his Works out of my Mind; but Woe was me
after for it, and it had been just, if his Spirit had never strived more with
me, but left me to be cut off forever, and to remain in the horrible Pit of
Darkness; (And surely it was for the good of others that the Lord did spare me,
some whereof may now with me rejoice for evermore.)

For when all was too little to overcome the mighty Power of God in me, then
did the love of the World prevail, and even thirstings, for the love of it to
come into my Heart, to drive out the Love of God; at last, I with it against
God prevailed, though the living Power of God was so great, that the Devil, the
Flesh and the World was scarceable to overcome it for a time; and so I have
seen Children, Wife, Farms and Oxen to hinder from the Kingdom of God; but that
which hindered most was the love of outward Goods: And so it was but just with
God, to take that at the last out of the way; and if he had swept all away in
his Anger, as from Job, he had done me no wrong.

But when I had thus, in a cursed manner, overcome the striving of the sweet
and lovely Spirit of Truth, yet was I not quiet, but much troubled, and in a
sad Condition, which I was not able to hide from the World, who said, I was
going Mad, seeing me so changed into Sadness, but of all this, and much more, I
durst not then spoke a word to any Creature.

And now mark, what for my Rebellion did justly follow:

My outward Goods, which I then loved more than Christ, became as a Prey and a
Spoil to unreasonable men, and most unjustly on their parts, was I by them
deprived of it; and the Lord also dried up all my Springs within, that such a
time after I knew, that I was left without hope, being in the horrible Pit of
Darkness, from God, that I could neither pray nor believe, but concluded, that
I was accursed from God forever (and that which disobeyed was accursed) and
being in a sad miserable Condition, resolved to write a Warning to all People,
that they might take Example by me, and never resist the Spirit as I had done;
but before I could write (sinking down into the Condemnation, without Murmuring
against God, knowing him to be just, if he cast me into the nethermost Hell
forever) the Lord had Compassion on me, and listed my Soul out of the Horrible
Pit, and staid me with his hand for a time; yet afterward his Afflictions
followed me in Judgments within, and much trouble in things without, which my
Heart was so upon, and yet for a long time I turned not unto the Lord that did
smite, that his hand might make whole, though Checks I had by his Light in my
Conscience, but strong was my Will about it, until the fierce Judgment of the
Lord did often break forth upon me with much Astonishment of Heart, and
Horrible Indignation (not to be uttered) with Tears as streams of Water from
mine Eyes night and day, when it came upon me with Tremblings and Breakings,
which broke the hardness of my Heart, and opened a way to something in me,
which then I dearly loved; but going out again from that, I reasoned about my
Outward, and not waiting to receive Counsel from the Lord, I went unto a Rich
Understanding man in outward things, whom I loved, who may yet remember, that I
made my Complaint unto That I was not able any longer to abide in the Way of
the World; whose Counsel I then took, and my own Will together, and so sought
to keep two Kingdoms some time longer, and therefore much Trouble followed me
within, and VVasting, Loss, Shame and Destruction upon things without.

But however, I durst do no less than follow the Lord, and be Obedient unto
him, whatever Loss I suffered, or whatever Shame or Reproach I might undergo,
though often times I was afraid that this Power of God in me would soon come to
an end, or fail from me, and that then I might return to my outward Employment
with great Shame and Loss, and that then, instead of doing Service for God, I
might bring a Reproach upon his blessed Name, and my self thereby be a
Hissing-stock to all men, and they say, I began to build, and not able to
finish; and this also kept me back very much. But such was the Everlasting Love
of the Lord, who is known in the Ways of his Judgments, that his Hand was heavy
upon me, and his Judgments increased in me, that there was no way for me to
escape, but I must be Obedient, and bow under it, or be cut off forever by it,
so that my Bowels were often pained in me, and it is like for many Weeks had
little sleep or bodily rest, and sometimes knew not my Wife and Children, that
I felt and heard in the Bed by me, but thought they were People I should not be
with: And therefore one time after it was day, I was rising and putting on my
Clothes in a sober manner, and in Meekness said, Surely I should not be here;
and my Wife then laying hand on me, easily persuaded me, but I said, I Know not
who I am with; neither did I know her Voice at that time: And some time after,
having endured much, I told she and my Family (with Heaviness and Tears) That I
was not able to enduce it any longer; and that I had abode with them in the way
of the World so long as possible I could; and that I must give up my Life to
serve the Lord; desiring them (with Tears) to be Content, and in what I could,
I should be careful for their good as ever I was: And this is true, and but
little of what might be written.

For another time formerly, the Light of Christ in me (which then I knew not)
did so condemn me, and judge and trouble me in secret, that it brought Sickness
upon me, and thereby being Weak, expecting I should dye, I was then much
troubled, and it lay much upon my Conscience at that time, that I had not in
the time of my Health gone to the Steeple-house, and in the fear of the Lord
warned all People to Repent; and I was then much grieved because I thought I
should dye, and not first in that thing discharge my Conscience.

And so, though I might write much, by what is written may appear to the Meek
and Sober-minded, that the Lord did not only call, but also thrust me forth of
the World into his Harvest, and this was of God, and the operation of his
powerful Word, which called me out of the World, and Hundreds since, by the
Word of his Power through me have been gathered out of the Way of the World,
and received the Earnest of the Rest Eternal, and many converted unto God, and
Woe be unto them who openly oppose me in this the Lords Work I now am in, which
he has thus called me unto; and let none think that I did wilfully neglect my
outward Employment; neither let any one think, that I left my Family, as not
regarding them, nor that I stay much out of that Country for any By-end; for
the words are true, A Prophet is not without Honor, save in his own Country,
and in his own House; and those that did since seek to stop my Mouth, did not
well.

Concerning my public Preaching, and something of what followed.
THAT none may stumble thereat, and say, We called Quakers are such who change
from one thing to another, and so what we hold not to be regarded: But I say,
Those that have to changes, are not come into fear of God, psalm. 55. 19. and
the Fear of the Lord is to depart from Evil: And they depart from Evil are
become a Prey; but such were cleansed and changed from Glory to Glory, 2 Cor.
3. 18. and grew in Grace and Knowledge in the Lord Jesus Christ. And what I did
or said then, was in a great Zeal and real Intent to do good, neither did I
covet men's Silver for it, neither was it my end to make a Gain thereby, though
much was freely offered me, more than I intend to make mention, though I
recceived it not; so that therein I was not much found in Covetousiness. But
when Judgment came upon me, as beforementioned, I gave up that Preaching, and
said at the last Meeting I had then, which was at Stoke-bliss, That my Mouth
was stopped at that present, but if ever the Lord should open my Mouth again, I
should Preach indeed; and it is so, Praises to the Lord forever, who has
indeed opened my Mouth, (and since I was no longer Rebellious) and the living
Truth of Jusus Christ do I declare, and bear Testimony to his Name wherever I
come, as his Spirit moves me.

And let none herby think, that I now glory in what was then my shame; for
though I had a great Zeal then for God, it being not according to the Knowledge
of the Crofs of Christ, which crucisies to the World, and all its vain Customs;
the which Cross being then left behind, which is the Power of God, so the Love
of the world, which is Enmity to God, remained in me, and the Root Iniquity not
them removed out of my Heart, therefore Fruits of Disobedience in secret were
still brought forth, which the Would the World took little notice of, but I had
one near me, who did let me see all that ever I did, and reproved me for vain
Glory, and having the Praise of Men and the Love of the World, and so my
Preaching did not bring Souls home to God, though I informed their Minds of
many things, which many ignorant People knew not before; and so though much
Love was in many, yet this brought not forth Fruits of Obedience unto God, and
so all came to little; for the People remained in their Sins, and received not
Power to come out of them; neither came they out of the Fashions and Customs of
the World, nor to the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, which purrisies the
Heart, stands in the pure Conscience my self: And so their Faith and mine was
vain, being then in our Sins.

Therefore let none think, that I now justify any Deceit, Hy-pocrisie or
secret Evil, that then was in me, or practsed by me; for in the Presence of the
Lord God I do openly declare against it all, and that Spirit that acted me
therein (but I own that simple thing, which then encourged me to do good, out
of an Honest Intent, and that kept me out of Covetousness, and from receiving
of Gifts.) And I openly declare against all Cruel, Unjull and Ungcdly Action
and Words and all that Filth which I wallowed in, before I was a zealous
Professor, as it is known to may Ungodly Persons, how I was once as Wicked as
many of them, whom I Warn all to Repent, otherwife they cannot escape the
Dammantion of Hell.

And I utterly deny, and declare against that Blindnese and Hypocrisy I was
in, when I followed the chief Priests from one Idols Temple to another, who
were chief in the Serpent's Wifdom, deceiving me and many more, and taught me
that Knowledge which came from the Devil, who said, Te shall be a Gods,
knowing, Genesis 3. 5. And in that Knowledge (in which every man is Brutish, Jer.
10. 14.) from them Hirelings Iencreased in that which pusseth up, and increased
my ^orrow, as before was mentioned; for by that Serpent's subtilty, which I
learned from them without me, I fought against and resisted that which was holy
in me: Therefore I declare in the Name of the Lord God, that all the Hireling
Priests do more harm than good, and shall never bring People to receive the
Power of God, but lead them into Subtilty, and further off from the Knowledge
of that of God in them, Romans 1. 19. And as true as the Lord God lives, upon
their Deathbeds shall both Priests and People witness this to be true: And its
also as true, that I write this without any Prejudice to any of their Persons,
but in Love to all Peoples Souls do I warn all them Hireling Priests in
Herefordshire, and elsewhere, to leave deceiving the People; for absolutely the
People are deceived by them, and forced to maintain them too, who may be warned
of them, by what I have learned by Experience from them, having tried them and
their ways to the utmost, and have much experience of them more than many
Country People, whose Souls I truly love, and therefore this I write.

And I declare against that which ruled in me in the time of Ignorance and
Perverseness, and acted me in Cruelty or Oppression toward any Person; or to
Wrong, Defraud or Insult over any one in Tyranny, either by Word or Action, or
wherein I abused or smote with Envy (which is of the Devil) Either man or
Beast, and that whereby I was led into any manner of Hypocrisy or
Double-mindedness, or any manner of Evil whatsoever, which was Unjust in the
sight of God, though not seen by Man; or any secret Evil that then lodged in
the dark Corners of the stoney Heart then in me, whereby any thing did arise in
me, or proceed from me, which was contrary to the Humble, Meek, Innocent,
Upright Life of the Lamb of God, who is now come and has taken away the Sin of
the World, and is Pure, Humble, Meek and Lowly, whose Life and Power of Love
constrains me to declare openly against all that which was done or said by me
in Envy, either openly or secretly against any Creature; for there is nothing
done in secreet, that shall not be made manifest.

And let all who knew me before (who are saying, I was an honest man, be warned
of the like Evil, and leave it, considering, that if the Righteous scarcely be
saved, where shall the Ungodly and Sinner appear? for many did look upon me, to
be either a Godly or an Honest man, yet am I made willing to let open Shame
come upon all that, which then was in me contrary to the Righteousness of God;
for he alone is to be exalted, and the Transgressor is to be ashamed, Psalm. 25.
3. And every mouth shall be stopped, and every one stand guilty before God, and
the Shame and Nakedness of all, both Priests, and Fathers, and People shall
appear as much as mine, when Gods Witness in them arise, though they cover it
for a time by deceitful Flatteries, Promising Liberty, but are as deeply the
Servants of Corruption as I was.

And I do assirm in the presence of the Lord God, that there are a Generation
of Professors, who follow Sermons, and have gathered themselves into outward
Forms, who are grown up into a Profession and Knowledge in the Letter, who are
further off the Life of God than the Publicans and Harlots, and are grown into
Pride, Hypocrisy, secret Deceit, Arrogance and Covetousness; and some of them
for a time denied the Priests, and then for their own ends, got into their
places, and so are more Abominable than they, and the Tree of Knowledge they
feed upon; but the good savor of pure Obedience unto God, in all Self-denial,
they have cast behind their backs, and are become an ill Savor among all men:
And the Lord God will visit them for these things; and in the Day of his sierce
Wrath will all such want a Hiding Place; and when the day of Howling and
Astonishment come upon them, as it has passed upon me, then shall they know
that the Sinners in Sion shall be afraid, and Horrible Fearfulness shall
surprise the Hearts of the Hypocrites, and then shall they find, that God will
not be mocked, though they deceive themselves with vain Hopes, which shall
perish with all such Professors, if they Repent not, ard strip themselves bare
from all their false Coverings, which in the day of the Lord (which they put
afar off) will certainly be all too Narrow: For because of the greatness of my
Profession, without the Power that overcomes all Sin, therefore was the Wrath
of God the more upon me, and I never came to receive Pardon for Sin nor Power
over it, nor to receive the Life of the Son of God, until his Judgments had
confounded all that Wisdom, which I had learned from and among the Priests and
Professors. And this is absolutely true, and may be a Warning unto all them.

And all that is herein declared of the Strivings in me, and Judgments of God
which came upon me, is very short of what it was, neither indeed, can it be
ever declared, being then confounded both within and without, not having any
man to be a Director unto me, nor then to guide me in Gods Wisdom, neither did
any man bring me unto that Condition, nor lead me through it, but even the Lord
alone, in whose Judgments I now rejoice for evermore; but this especially,
would I have all people that then knew me to consider, That at that time, (when
I was in Distress,) I knew not well what I should do or sp^ke among men,
neither what I should be, being become a Fool for Christ's sake, and my Wisdom
being confounded, and my Understanding brought to nothing; Read, 1 Cor. 1. 1,
9, verse. 27.

And so, that is true which I have writ in that book in Answer to Edmund Skipp,
wherein I said, That we were but in measure leaving of the World, and entering
into a little of that which is Eternal; at which time beforementioned, I was
brought to be silent from my public Preaching, and waited on the Lord, with a
few foolish contemptible Ones in the Eyes of the World, at which time having
lost my Earthly Wisdom, and not received that measure of the pure Wisdom of
God, (which since he has given me) whereby to order all my Words and Actions,
in Prudency and Moderation, before the Eyes of all People, and others also
might then with me therein fall short, whereby some to this day may stumble at
the whole Truth of God, looking at what happened among us, in that time, when
the Judgments of God was often on us (by which Judgments, his Sion is now
Redeemed) and so they looking at that, and watch ever since for Evil, may be
kept thereby from receiving the precious tried Stone, which the wise
Master Builders also refuse, though we now know, he is laid in Sion (redeemed
with Judgment, for a Stone of Stumbling, and a Rock of Offense, even to both
the houses of Israel; But let all take heed, of stumbling at the stumbling
Stone, (the Light of Christ) for other causes of stumblings, especially by me,
I have hereby endeavored to remove out of the way (and minds) of all that are
willing to receive the Truth, or believe in the Light, John 12. 36.

And as for Edmund Skipp, if ever he come again to that, which convinced him of
Evil, and made him in public deny his peaching for Hire and Tithes, though
after he strated aside, and stumbled in the Dark, not minding the Light of Life
(which once he honestly desired after) in him, to which Light, if he return,
and love the Witness of God in him, which has ever since stood a Witness for
me, and has let him see his Barrenness, and without a true Eternal Rest, and
if he to that be obedient, which is manifest of God in him, and by it be led
into Meekness and Plainness, without Prejudice, he may come to receive the
living Truth of Jesus Christ, for which this day I suffer Bonds; for I did
never yet look upon him to be so utterly Reprobate, as not possible to receive
the Faith that purifies the Heart, and Respects no man's Person; for truly my
love has been to the Seed oppressed in him, though that which has exercised
him in Rashness (against the Truth of God) I do deny forever; and there is
neither him, nor any Priest, Preacher, Professor or Profane, that can have any
good ground or reason to envy me for declaring openly against all that in them
which I declare against in my self, when it ruled in me, when I was as they yet
are.

I being by several long unjust Imprisonments detained from Liberty to declare
in words those and other things, therefore for this very end have I written
this in short, that God's Truth might stand clear, and not suffer in any thing
done or said by me, before Gods pure Wisdom was born up in me; and that also
the ground of all other things against the Truth (if occasioned by me) may be
removed out of the Minds of all that are willing to receive the Truth, if they
knew it; for I would not, if possible, that any thing whatsoever which
concerned me, should so remain in the Mind of any one, as that thereby he
should be hindered from receiving the living Truth, which I have found so
precious, without which none can be saved: And if by the appearing of the Shame
of my former Nakedness, an inlet for the Truth may be made into the Minds and
Hearts of any, therein will be my Joy, and the Eternal Comfort of all them, who
by receiving, and Sanctification of the Truth, and faithfulness in the Light,
do come to rest in the Kingdom of Joy and Eternal Peace forever and ever.

Thus at present, in tender Love to the Souls of you Rulers and Professors in
Herefordshire, to whom I say, believe in the Light, and mind God's Witness in
you, and be not Rigid, Bitter, nor Persecutors of the Children of Light, who
(by them in the dark) are called Quakers, among whom I have chosen to suffer
Reproaches for Christ's sake, and Whippings, long Imprisonments, and Dungeon,
and now in the House of Correction, all which declares me to be, as you may
read, 2 Cor. 6. 3, to 11. who am a Friend to the Souls of all Mankind, a
Servant of Jesus Christ, not by the Will of men, to whom I am known by the Name

Humphry Smith.
Winchester, the 19th of 6th Month, 1658.
THE Wandering-Star DISCOVERED, And his False Light Comprehended and made
Manifest.
Or something in Answer to a Book called, The Duakers Blazing-Star; Or, The
Worlds-Wonder: Set forth by Edmund Skipp, who calls himself A Preacher of the
Gospel at Bodenham in Herefordshire. But is sound and seen by the Light of
Christ, and proved by his own Writings to be out of the Light of the Gospel,
and to be himself wandered from the Truth, and is now amongst the rest of the
Wandering Stars, mentioned in Jude, v. 13.
With a Word to all Professors.
BEing moved to write something in Answer to the Scandals that have been cast
upon the Truth by Edmund Skipp, in a Book called, The Worlds Wonder, or the
Quakers Blazing-Star; whereing he has not only cast many Aspersions upon us,
in these parts of the Nation, to wit, Here for dshire, but also on those, yea,
all of the same People whom he never saw nor heard, whom the great and mighty
Power of God has raised by the pure Life of Christ in them, to witness and
live in, which we (here a handful of Babes) are but in a little measure yet
brought to witness; therefore not for our own Vindication, but for the simple
Ones sake, who ever were carried away in all Ages with Scribes, Pharisees,
false Prophets, false Apostles, through the slight and craftiness of men,
whereby they lay in wait to deceive, 2 Cor. 4. 2.

Therefore take notice, that not many Wise men after the flesh, not many
Learned, not many Mighty; for the Wisdom of this World passes away, and the
Lord is now taking the Wise in their own craftiness, and choosing the Foolish
things of the World to confound the Wise, and the things that are not to bring
to nothing things that are, That so no Flesh may glory in his sight, but that
the Lord alone might be exalted, in this the great day of his Power, Isa. 2.
11. wherein he is risen out of his holy Habitation, Zach. 2. 13. to shake
terribly the Earth, Isa. 2. 19, 21. and bring down the Haughtiness of man, and
lay low the Haughty looks of man, Isa. 2. 11. who are going forth like men of
War in their own Strength, against the Lord, and against the anointed, witness
the last page of Edmund Skipps Book, Psalm. 2. 2.

Now that the Truth of Jesus Christ may the more appear, I shall in this
following Discourse in brief, lay open some of the stromer and yet-lived-in
Deceits of this open Enemy, and also some of his Lies, which he has written
against the Truth of Christ, whom the World knows not; therefore they write,
spoke, hate, stone, whip, imprison, and falsely say all manner of Evil against
us, wherein the Scriptures are fulfilled by them, Mat. 5. 11, 12. whose
Judgment slumbereth not, and whose Damnation lingereth not.

Now before I proceed further, I give thee a little notice what sort of people
he thus has opened his Mouth wide against, and it shall be made manifest, and
that from his own writings which declare us to be the People of God, chosen out
of the world, John 15. 19. and he to be the Persecutor, I shall give thee a few
short hints; but if thou will observe his Writings, thou will find that he
himself has declared, that our whole Life and practice is proved by plain
Scripture, and that our Lives and Practices are the same with them that did
write and speak forth the Scriptures: But in short, see his own words in page
40. Did you ever know People acted through a more Glorious show or appearance
of Righteousness, then they are? (to wit us) their denying and throwing off the
World, and all care and Pains for Christ's sake? their forsaking Father and
Mother, and Wife and Children, Mat. 10. 37. Luke 14. 26. though with so much
Affliction, Opposition, Persecution and Disgrace from men: Is not this like the
Cross of Christ, and the Sufferings of Christ and his Apostles? (yea even the
same) Their traveling so many miles from place to place, and speaking so boldly
unto great men, crying out against their Abominations, their writing so many
Letters, and dealing so plainly with men: (Jer. 18. 18.) And there are hardly a
People to be found, that cry out more against Antichrist, and all appearance of
Sin and Unrighteousness than they do. And in page 41. The whole bulk of their
actings hitherto, as far as I know, or have heard, do declare them to be
carried forth as Ministers of Righteousness, page. 44. for I am persuaded, they
dare not tell a Lie.

Now see plainly, before thou proceed, the Darkness, Ignorance and Envy of this
man, that can persecute in writings, and smite with the Tongue such a People as
he himself in this very Darkness cannot choose but confess such things by and
in; who that is not altogether blind, will not see the Blindness, Darkness and
Ignorance of this man's confused Writings?

See one more page 50. Now these People, as far as I am, and ever was able to
discern them, are endued with a large measure, in those things the Apostle
mentioned in Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. I mean, many of them that I know, that I did
take, in my former Intimacy and Acquaintance with them, to have received much
of the Power of Truth through Christ's and to have much communion with God, and
large experience of his Love: But as for others of them, they were never judged
by me or the rest, to be any more than a willing People; and for such, this
Scripture does not touch them. Even by this, (although there might be much more
mentioned) thou may see in measure, in the Light of Christ, what he is that
does Rail against such a People whose Words, Lives, Ways and Actions are
agreeable to the Scripture, as he confesses in his own Book.

The World loves his own, and the World delights in its own, the World speaks
to the World, and the World hears that which is spoken from the Earthly Heart,
reaches the deaf Ear, and no farther; that which is comprehended by the dark
Mind, that is spoken forth by the deceitful Tongue, that feeds the Deceit that
lodges in the Hearers; so one Darkness upholds another, and the same Deceit
upholds its own in both Speaker and Hearer: So in both Writer and Reader, yea,
all that write and speak that which proceeds not from the Life, but from the
Death, being in the state of Death, is but Death speaking to Death, whereby
Serpents are begotten, or the Seed of the Serpents is increased.

Now they that are of God, hear God's Word, and they that hear not his Word,
are not of God; for the natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of
God, for they are spiritually discerned by the spiritual man that judges all
things, though no man can judge him who is a Child of the day, and dwells in
the Light, and has no fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, out of
which the Children of the Day are delivered, and can witness the Darkness past,
and the true Light now shining in them: But all those who say, they have
fellowship with Light, and walk in Darkness, are Liars, and all Liars are shut
out of the Kingdom, and are estranged from God, who is altogether Pure, Holy
and Righteous, Just, Perfect, Light, and those that dwell in him, are as he is,
and they only have the Mind of Christ, the which all the World and earthly
Hearts are ignorant of.

Therefore I shall not put the worldly carnal Heart to judge of what may be
written by me, although I am but yet leaving off the World, and entering into a
little of that which is Eternal, which no Eye of Flesh can ever attain unto and
live; neither can any but those that live in the same Life that speaks aright,
or understands what is spoken from the life, by those that spoke aright from
the pure life: Therefore let not thy deceitful Heart deceive thee in judging
herein; for the Old Heart is Deceitful, as I shall further make manifest, both
unto the World, and unto the Children of the Light, not only from what I hear,
but from his own written words, and my knowledge; and being witnessed by the
Light and Truth, as it is manifested in me, whereby something may so plainly
appear, that even the World it self may see the Deceit that always has been,
and yet is in this man, who now desires all the World to take notice (p. 24.)
of his Exposition of his Lies, that he himself has cast on us, who are not of
the World, therefore the World knows us not; for we witness against it, that
the Deeds thereof are Evil.

After Edmund Skipp had thrown off his Tithes, and convinced of much more,
which he was waiting to throw off too, he then told me not long before he lest
us, That he had not Faith to carry him through, neither could he believe; but
he was confident, That the Devil would steal all that he had from him again;
the which is now too true.

Woe, Woe, Woe, from the Eternal God to all the Inhabitants of the Earth, who
dwell in the earthly Darkness, being seated in the Earth, drove out from the
presence of the living God, and are Vagabonds and Fugitives in the Earth, whose
center is in the earthly dark Mind: Woe to all those that put Light for
Darkness, and Darkness for Light: Woe to all those that go down to Egypt for
help in Egypt, the pure Seed is captiyated and kept in Bondage; in Sodom and
Egypt the Lord is daily crucified and put to open shame: Woe to all the Oaks of
Bashan, and all the Beasts of the Field: Woe to them that build their Nests
among the Stars; for Capernaum that is lifted up to Heaven, and in its wisdom,
in its own strength, shall be brought down to Hell; for the Lord God of Life
and Power is risen out of his holy Habitation, to confound the Language of
Babel, and dry up the Tongue of the Egyptian Sea, and famish all the gods of
the Heathen, that know not God, whose presence is terrible to all the Children
of Disobedience: Therefore Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker, who
arises to scatter his Enemies, and to wound the Head of every one that goes
on still in his Wickedness. Oh! the Day of the Lord is at hand, wherein every
man shall receive according to the Deeds done in his Body; then he that has
seemed to wait, and now begins to smite his Fellow Servants, saying, his Master
delays his coming, and so eat and drink with the Drunken that are drunk indeed
with the Wine of the Fornication of the Whore of Babylon, those are Drunkards
indeed, that are drunk with Wine and overcome, but not with strong drink, such
stagger at the Promises, and stumble at the Cornerstone; but when that Stone
shall fall upon them, it will grind them to Powder: Therefore be warned of the
Lord, thou that despisest and wonderest ( For all the Works of the Lord are
Wonderful) lest thou perish; for the Lord is working a Work in these days that
thou can not believe, nor any that live in their own Wisdom, exalted above
the pure Wisdom of Christ, who teaches all his to deny all, yea, even all,
both their Wisdom, Righteousness, Wit, and all carnal Comprehensions; for they
are Followers of him, who lived not in his own Will; For, says he, I came not
to do mine own Will, but the Will of him that sent me; and says, Not my Will,
but thy Will be done: And he that is not yet made a Fool, and so denies his own
Will and Wisdom, is yet exalted above the Cross, and the Son of Perdition is
exalted above all that is called God, sitting in the Temple of God, even in the
Holy Place, where Truth should always be exalted. Christ should reign as King,
and subdue all his Enemies under his Feet, and lead Captivity Captive, that a
Gift may be received, which Gift is Eternal Life, and this Life is in the Son;
by which Gift, all that are in the Son-like Obedience do witness, being made
Heirs with him in the eternal Covenant, which is established upon better
Promises then the first; therefore he takes away the first, that he might
establish the second, which is witnessed in the Son-like Obedience, by the
which we are made the Righteousness of God through him, the which is a Mystery
to the dark World, whose Mouths are now open to speak Evil of that they know
not, calling the Great and Mighty Works of God, The Delusions of Satan, and the
conditions now witnessed in the Sons and Daughters, that the Prophets and
Apostles both passed through, to speak of those things, they now call The Works
of Antichrist.

But he is an Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son: Now see who is an
Antichrist; No man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son
reveals him: He that denies this Revelation, denies both Father and Son (that
is an Antichrist.) Now to know the Father, is Eternal Life; and he that says,
He knows, and has fellowship with the Father, and walks in Darkness, is a
Liar; and the Devil is the Father of Lies: And he that lives not in the Truth,
which is Jesus Christ, he must needs Lie, because he is out of the Truth, and
therefore found an Enemy to the pure Truth, as it is in Jesus, who is the Truth
and Life it self, by whom the World is, and shall be judged, when the Lord
shall come in flaming Fire, rendering Vengeance on all that know him not: This
Day is even at hand, yea, even now the Lord is coming a swift Witness against
all unrighteous Ones, who hold the Truth of God in Unrighteousness, living in
their ungodly Practices, sporting themselves now in the Daytime, spending
their time upon their Lusts, living in their own Wills, speaking forth the
Saints Words, but are Enemies to the Saints Conditions. Oh! consider, consider,
the Lord is Just in all his Ways, and he is come to judge the Earth with
Righteousness, he will plead with all Flesh, before him all Faces shall gather
Paleness; and in him, who is pure Light, are all the Secrets of all Hearts laid
open; for nothing hides from him, who is a God of consuming Fire, and of purer
Eyes then to behold Iniquity: Oh be ashamed and confounded, all ye Inhabitants
of the Earth and of the Sea, for the Devil is come down unto you, and rages,
because his time is but short.

To thy first in page 6. where thou say, It must needs be the Spirit of
Antichrist and Delusion, that does mis-inform the Heart.

I Answer; The Heart it self is deceitful, and out of the abundance of thy
Heart, thy mouth speaks, page 8. or else thou would not speak, as though a
Deceitful Heart might be misinformed by a delusion; for Deceit and Delusion is
but one, which lodges in the Hearts of all the Children of Disobedience, who
are all in the Death, the Curse and the Fall, unless they come to witness
Restoration, the Stoney Heart taken away, and a New Heart given, which is by
the putting off the Old Man with his Lusts and Corruptions, and the New Man put
on, which after God is created in Righteousness, and true Holiness, without
which no man shall see the Lord.

But in the Light in thy own Conscience, see when ever thou could witness
thy Redemption, and thy heart free from Delusions, as thou speak, or from
the power of Darkness, when thou by thy own Relation to me, went from one
Parsonage to another, and that not without thy Gown (as thou call it) upon
thy back, that thou have looked upon as it was indeed Antichristian; and then
after at Bodinham, thou did sue the poor People for Tithes, to my knowledge,
witness one poor man thou did sue for one Shilling, and would have
constrained the poor man to have paid Charges for that one Shilling, if I and
some other had not spoke to thee, after thou had often refused the one
shilling without Charge, though the Light let thee see. Tithes to be contrary
to Christ, yet then lived contrary to the Light in thy own Conscience, as thou
wast made to confess in my hearing, and hundreds more, that thou had acted in
it contrary to thy Conscience two years; and before that time thou did
confess unto me, and to others; How thou wast going to take counsel of men, how
to sue for thy Tithes, and the Lord met with thee, yet the Devil had like to
have taken thee off of the work of the Lord again, diverse times, as thou
confessedit, Then thou layest groaning under the burden of thy Tithes; yet thou
resolvedst to keep them another year, yet I had thoughts to the contrary, and
was made to tell thee at J. B's house in Hereford, on the sixth day, that thou
would ever long roar against thy Tithes like a Lion; and on the next first
day after it was so, and thou wast made to acknowledge the Lord in it, and sent
thy Man with those few words to me; Brother Smith, the Lord has done a strange
Work in me this Morning, and I shall alter strangely this day therefore pray
earnestly for me and make what haste thou can to come unto me. Now this is
that which thou now call Delusion; for this was the greatest Power that ever
thou could witness; but thou wast made to see by the Light, the Emtiness of
thy own words, both in Speaking and Prayer before, as thou call it; witness
that in Margarets Grave-Yard, where thou spokest words, the which were a burden
to thy Life, and after acknowledgedst, That it was nothing but Flesh, though
thou did strive much in thy own strength: And at Len. thou toldest the whole
Assembly, That thou had long spoke after the manner of men; but now they must
expect no more such from thee; and that thy Praying was as dead as Ditch-Water;
but now thou should wait to Pray in the Spirit, and speak by the Spirit; and
the like at Cliston: And then thou wast convinced, that thou must leave all,
even Glebe-land too, and so live on thy own Land, and build on thy own Land, as
thou call it; and thou then wast convinced of more Deceit in thy Heart;
therefore thou wast not at all freed from Deceit, but always lived in the
Antichristian state, where thou art yet, witness thy own hand in page 5 where
thou confessest, Thou have got a sinful Heart; which is a Heart in Sin, and
full of Sin; and we know, that none but the Pure in Heart shall see God; but
Sin is of the Devil, and is the Work of Darkness; and none that walk in
Darkness have fellowship with God, 1 John 1. 6. Here thou discoverest plainly,
that the Old Heart is not yet taken away; therefore thou wast not at all, nor
yet is free from Delusions: Therefore for shame leave off thy judging the
Hearts of of others, as thou have; read E. S. p. 6, 11, 19, 16.

And as for the five Charges which thou mentionest, p 9. and saying, That if we
had had more Accusations against thee, its like thou should have had them;
and in saying, The first Charge was Hypocrisy, in page 7. I answer, That that
which was written by me in answer to thy Deceitful Lines first sent to us, I
shall for the sake of the simple set down plainly, in the same order, as it was
written by me, having a just Copy of it by me; and then let the tender spirited
read thy Lies in thy own Book.

A true Copy of the Answer sent by me and the rest, to thy Letter and
Accusacion.
1. You said, you would tell us truly, etc.

Answer; There cannot be a true discovery of Truth brought forth in these that
are yet in the fallen estate, as thou art.

2. That there is a Mystery of Iniquity in us, that we see not.

Answ. The Mystery of Iniquity is not discovered, but by the pure Light and
Life of God, as it is freely given forth from God, the which Light all the
Children of Light live in; but thou live in the dark ways of the World, and
live not in this pure Light to judge by.

3. That the time is come, that thou should dis-burden thy self of the
discovery of Truth.

Answ. Thou have laid aside too much Truth; that which convinces of thy Evil
is now a burden unto thee; but we disown all that disown the Truth.

Mark,
4. That the Devil is an Angel of Light, and his Nature is to act in the Light.
Does the Scripture say, that the Devil's Nature is to act in the Light?

Answ. Thou art imagining what the Devil is without thee, but thou know but
little of his actings in thee, although thou art his Servant, and live in his
Light (as thou call it) but the Light of Life thou art a stranger unto.

5. The Light, as it is acted in the Soul, gives no Discovery of the Deceit,
but rather covers it all.

Answ. By virtue of the pure Light that proceeds from the Father, we see thee
live in that thou call Light, which does not discover unto thee the
abominable Practices thou art in (to wit) Pride (thou do usually call thy own
Child Mr. Benjamin Skipp) (a Proud practice, seldom heard of) the love of the
World, deceiving the People, upholding the Worship of the Beast, painted over
with the Saints words, an Enemy to the Saints Life, as does now more fully
appear.

6. Thou writest so largely of the Devil, as if thou were acquainted with all
his secrets, both what he is doing, and what he will do.

Answ. The things of God thou art a stranger to; for they are hid from thine
Eyes, and all such wise Ones of the Devil, the World and the Flesh, who are in
the first Nature, as thou art.

7. Thou writest of what the Devil will bring us to.

Answ. 1. It is neither thee, nor the Devil in thee that know what we are, much
less what we shall be.

2. If thou, and the Accuser of the Brethren in thee, have ought against us at
present, that we walk not up to the present discovery of the pure Light, as it
is in measure brought forth in us, then I charge thee to speak.

3. Thou Hypocrite, first cast out the Beam that is at present in thy own Eye,
before thou go to cast the supposed Mote that thou think may fall into
our Eyes hereafter.

In the close of this Answer, I writ a tender Letter in love to his Soul. Now
let any that live in the Light compare these several Answers with that in page
7, 8, 9.

In Answer to that which thou call Railing and Reviling Language, in page
10. the Devil has always brought up his Children with so much pretense of
Manners, that they must not tell a Liar he Lies, nor a Thief he is a Robber; or
if any tell the Proud of hsi Pride, or the Covetous of their Covetousness, then
this is called Railing; read the Scriptures cited by him, this is fully cited,
Tit. 1. 13. c. 3. 15, etc. See how thou condemnest the Practice of Christ, both
in his Person and Members in page 11.

To that which thou call thy Experience, in page 11. I tell thee, thou have
had much Experience of Deceit, being always in it; but thou never had any
experience of the powerful Workings of God in us, only thou wast made by the
Light to see thy Filthiness in some measure, and then presently thou wentst
from the Counsel of the Lord, and acted and spoke in thy own Will, the which
was Deceit indeed, running before the Light, the which I mourned over, and
often complained to my Friends, who can witness the same.

Page 12. The Scripture cited by thee, Mal. 3. They shall discern between the
Righteous and the Wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves
him not; the Promise being in measure fulfilled in us, we discern thee still to
live in thy own Will and Wisdom: Therefore when thou haltedst between two
Opinions long, at last one of our Friends was made sharply to reprove thee, the
which thou could not own, and therefore left us that had undergone burdens
upon our own Spirits for thee, in condescending unto thee in tender love,
desiring thou might be made at last to witness the Work of the Lord in thee,
unto which thou art still a Stranger, and now an Enemy unto.

In thy page 13. thou mentionest a Scripture, as to us, 1 Timothy 6. 4, 5. They
are there discovered by their Covetousness; for they suppose, that Gain is
Godliness. And can thou in the least accuse ^s of Covetousness? if thou
can, spare not to speak the Truth, but else let shame cover thy face for so
many Lies, and comparing us with those in this Text. Ask the Light in thy
Conscience whether thou have not looked after Gain, witness thy Tithes, thy
looking after another Parsonage to that thou had, witness thy Physical
Office, thy questioning what to do for more Maintenance, although thou have
told me, that thy Lands was 10 1. per Annum; 2 Timothy 3. 4. that is thy own
Portion, witness thy many Instruments of Music in thy House. Page 16. thou
writest of Faith, but thou know not that Faith that purifieth the Soul; he
that has this Hope, purifieth himself as he is pure; he that believes is
entered into his Rest, has ceased from his own Works, as God did from his, the
which Faith thou art a stranger unto; for thou have writ thy own Lies, and the
Deceit of thy own Heart, and thy carnal Thoughts, the which thou call the
World (with whom thou art) to judge, witness page 9. line 11. and 7. 18. and
thou think in page 16, 51, 56, 57.

Page 17. Thou say, that we esteem, The more our Hearts are brought off the
dealings of God, and Prayer, and Spiritual Exercises, the more pure and
Perfect: The which thou know to be a Lie; witness thy own Words, after the
Meeting at Clifton, where thou say, Thou sawst such a Spirit of Prayer as
thou never had seen before; To which those that were there can yet testify;
and we witness growth in Grace and Knowledge, 2 Pet. 3. 18. and walk from Grace
to Grace, leaving the first Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6. 1.
forgetting those things that are behind, we press forwards; For man in his own
Wisdom cannot find out the Lord, who is a Spirit, John 4. 24. and regards not
the Wise in Heart, Job 37. 23, 24. Therefore if any man will be Wise, let him
become a Fool, that so he may be found in the Wisdom that is from above, James
3. 17.

Next, thou say, That we desire the Perishing of the former Ways of God.
This is another of thy Lies; For all the Ways of the Lord are Righteous, Psalm.
145. 17. so in page 18. Satan acts thee to call that Scripture dangerous, Phil.
3. 7, 8. If thou call Paul's Experience dangerous, its no wonder that thou
call ours so too: But we know, that all Scriptures are written for our
Learning, the which we are searching.

Next, thou will show the Thoughts (and but the Thoughts) of thy own Heart,
which is thy old sinful Heart, wituess thy own Hand, page 5. Line 11, 12.
Therefore from thy wicked Heart, thou being ignorant of the Spirit, do in
page 24. even Jeer at speaking by the Spirit, in opposition to all the Holy Men
of God, 1 Pet. 1. 21. Therefore thou art an Enemy to Prayer in the Spirit,
Ephesians. 6. 18. the which we witness: Therefore, in the Light of Jesus Christ,
thou art calling thy own Company (to wit, the World) to try thy Exposition of
thy own Lies, that thou have cast upon us in page 23. and the last in thy
Second Rule, page 23. there thou denyest the Sufferings of Christ, being
ignorant of it in thy own Soul; but we know, that if we suffer with him, we
shall be glorified with him: So we are made willing to fill up the measure of
the Sufferings of Christ; and those that have thus suffered in the Flesh, have
ceased from Sin, 1 Pet. 4. 1, 2. Thy Second, where thou mentionest Quaking (thy
Lies there we deny, but Quaking and Trembling) we witness to be the Saints
conditions fulfilled in us, who witness the same Power of God as they did, Jer.
5. 22. ^sa. 66. 2. Psalm. 2. 12.

In the Third, thou speak thy own Lies at random.

In the Fourth, thou have declared thy self to be an Enemy to the Sufferings of
Christ, calling it A Delusion: Oh let Shame stop thy Mouth forever! thou Enemy
of the Cross of Christ, and thy own Soul. For although Isaiah prophesied of
what Christ in his own Person has fulfilled, yet the Members of Christ are to
take up his Cross and follow him; as it is written and and witnessed, 2 Cor. 1.
5. For as the Sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our Consolation also
abounds by Christ, 1 Pet. 4. 13. 2. Cor. 4. 10.

That which thou and the rest of the World does call our Bondage and Slavery,
page 18. that was the Saints, and is our Joy and Liberty, by which the
righteous Seed is brought forth in Obedience to the Living God. But it is no
wonder that the World hate us, for they know us not; If we were of the World,
the World would love his own, John 15. 18, 19. Matthew. 5. 11, 12. In Answer to
that in page 29. Jesus Christ is unto us the Bread of Life, John 6. 33, 35, 48.
and he is unto us the Water of Life, John 4. 14. and 7. 37. In page 30. thy
Lies are made manifest unto all men that know us; For which of us does deny to
Labor with his Hands? And which of us is it that live in Idleness? Nay, it is
Satan, the Father of Lies, that acts thee to say, that we should say, It is the
Language of Antichrist that bids men take care for their Families. For we do
take care for our Families with all diligence, in the sight of God; but our
Conversation is without Covetousness, Heb. 13. 5.

What is mentioned in the third Rule, page 31, 32, 33, 34, To that I answer;
The same Spirit that ruled in the Children of Disobedience then, even in the
days of the Apostles, the same Spirit rules in thee and others. Now they
stumble at both Prophets, Christ and his Apostles; and now the same Generation
are stumbling at Christ in his Memembers; so all they that stumble, stumble at
the Light, and at the Cornerstone. As for the Professors, page 36. I tell thee
and them, that all Professors that are Enemies to Possession, we do deny to be
any Members of Christ's Church, which is in God, 2 These. 1.

Page 37. Is another Lie, yea, more then one, plainly in saying, That we rank
our selves with the sinful men of the World, who are indeed under all the
Powers of Antichrist, from the which thou wast never yet redeemed by Christ in
thee; for thou art a stranger to his Life.

See what thou raisest from thy Supposition, or thy [ If] in page 37. see what
thou cast witness from those Scriptures fulfilled in thee; thou art a Thief and
a Robber, stealing the Apostles words, stealing the word from thy Neighbor;
thou confessest, That we walk like as the Apostles did in many things, as in
Conversation, Words and Writings. In page 40 and 41. thou say, That the whole
Bulk of our Actions hitherto, as far as thou have either known or heard, do
declare us to be carried forth as Ministers of Righteousness. Oh! let all take
notice of this, the Devil speaks some Truth: but in the latter end of page 40.
thou art thinking that Satan's Kingdom is divided: Oh filthy Conclusion! Oh mere
Babel! Can thou open thy Mouth, and let thy Pen run against such a harmeless
People, of whom thou thy self art made to confess such Excellent things?

I shall now leave a little in following of thee in thy confused and deceitful
Lines, and shall turn to that Scripture, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. for such were
false Apostles, deceitful Workers, etc.

In page 41. elsewhere, thou raisest thy own Conceivings (as of other things)
of the Scripture, and then amplisiest or illustratest upon thy own
Imaginations, so give private Interpretations of the Scriptures, for thy own
private ends, whereas no Scripture is of any private Interpretation, 2 Pet. 1.
20.

I shall lay down by plain Scripture, who those false Apostles are.
1. They are such as preach another Jesus, 2. Cor. 11. 4. Now Jesus is a
Savior; Thou shall call his Name Jesus; for he shall save his People from
their Sins, Mat. 1. 21. He makes an End of Sin, Dan. 9. 24. Being dead with
Christ, Romans 6. 8. the Body of Sin is destroyed, Verse. 6. He that is dead with
Christ, is freed from Sin, Verse. 7. compared with 1 Pet. 4. 1. By the which we
are made free from Sin, Romans 6. 18, 22. and become the Servants of God: So that
the Blood of this Jesus, who is the Son of the living God, cleanses us from
all Sin, 1 John 1. 7. chapter 2. 12. because your Sins are forgiven for his
Names-sake; which Name is Jesus, a Savior from Sin; and we know, that he is
manifested to take away our Sins; and he that abides in him, sins not, 1
John 3. 5, 6. Rev. 1. 5. Now whosoever believes, that Jesus is the Christ, is
born of God, 1 John 5. 1. Now Jesus is a Savior, Christ is God manifest in
Flesh, and anointed the true Teacher, 1 John 2. 17. Now he that can witness
Jesus Christ to save him from Sin, he is born of God, and can witness Christ in
him, the hope of Glory, which is Emanuel, God with us, and those dwell in God,
and God in them, 1 John 4. 16. 2 Cor. 6. 16. Now Sin is the unfruitful Work of
Darkness, God is Light, 1 John 1. 5. Now he that says, he can witness Jesus,
and is born of God, and yet lives in Darkness, to wit, Sin, he is a Liar. Now
Jesus is one with the Father, and dwells in the Father: Now he that dwells
in the Father, has this Hope or Faith that purisieth himself, even as he is
pure, 1 John 3. 3. and 5. 1. And he that abides in him, sins not: This is
Jesus, the Son of the living God, that saves his People from their Sins, whom
Paul witnessed, revealed in him, Gal. 1. 16. by the which he preached Grace and
Peace to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1. 3, 30. and 22. 16. Now there is no other
Name given under Heaven, by which men shall be saved. Therefore all those that
cannot witness this Jesus, this Son of God, they are false Apostles, that speak
of a Jesus that they know not, like those that went to cast out Devils in the
Name of Jesus, whom Paul preached, Acts 19. 13, 14, 15, 16. Those were not
Vagabond- Jews only, but chief of the Priests that did so: Now all that cannot
witness this Christ, this Jesus revealed and brought forth in them, as the true
Apostles did, that spoke from the Life of Christ in them, even all others are
false Apostles, among whom thou art seen in the Light of Jesus Christ to be,
and in the World, like a raging Sea, whose Waves cast up Mire and Dirt
continually, unto whom there is no Peace, Isa. 57. 20, 21. a Wandering Star,
never settled, Jude 13. but tossed up and down with every Wind of Doctrine,
from such turn away.

II. How you may know them.

Page 36. 9. Abiding in the Light that comes from Christ; in that Light you
will see Light, and so comprehend all the Children of Darkness; for he that
follows Christ, who is the Light of the World, shall not walk in Darkness,
but shall have the Light of Life to judge all the false Apostles, and all the
Children of the Night, who live in the dark Mind, in Pride, Covetousness,
Lying, making a Trade of the Scriptures, which were spoken forth from the
Light, by those that witnessed it; but thou that take up their Expressions,
and live not in the same Life, thou art the false Apostle that preachest
another Gospel. Now besides the foregoing Scriptures, thou have declared thy
self to be a false Apostle, by thy own Writings.

First, in writing thy [Thinkings and Conceivings] page 50. yet my former
Thoughts, page 53. I am but in part convinced, page 16. Methinks, page 51. As I
conceive, such were the false Apostles, 1 Timothy 1. 7. understanding not what
they say, nor whereof they affirm, but speak and write the Imaginations of
their own Hearts, as thou have done in page 18. The thoughts of my own Heart,
in the which are many Devices, Prove. 19. 21.

Secondly, In being one of the world, and calling thy Fellow Creatures of the
World to judge what thou say; and here thou have manifested thy self to be a
false Prophet, entered into the World, which the Saints of God never did; page
23. And let all the World assure themselves that, in page 45. Here thou do
write thy self (as thou art) calls thy own to witness, the World, one with the
World, therefore we being gathered out of the World, are hated and written
against by thee, John. 15. ^^. I shall forbear to write what I know of thy
former, and yet continued Practices, this being sufficient to prove plainly,
that thou art a false Apostle, whose many Lies written against us, I need not
to mention in particular, only some few in short, that the simple may not be
deceived by thee, nor the Truth suffer altogether under thy Scandals.

Page 48. Thou biddest the feeble Creatures of the World, To judge of Spiritual
things, though the World by Wisdom knows not God, 1 Cor. 1. 21. page 46. thou
say, That we do Lying Wonders, But have thou in all those Lies and Writings
of thine proved that any of those which thou call Wonders, are Lying
Wonders? for it is not thy saying it is a Lying Wonder, that makes it to be so;
for there were such as thee, that said, that Christ cast out Devils through
Beelzebub, but they were Liars, and so art thou.

Thou say, Our Works are Deceitful, page 49. But thou have no ground for it,
but the deceit of thy own heart, page 18. the which thou call the World to
bear thee witness, page 23. 50. Thou say, We disown the Power and Spirit of
Truth (which is a Lie) but thou have a form of Godliness, denying the power
thereof, 2 Timothy 3. 5.

Page 53. Thou say, Thou art in part convinced, that per adventure the Lord
would have his People walk in some way, whereby they might be brought into a
perfect Unity in Heart. Oh! art thou not here ashamed! O let even the World
(whom thou call unto so often) read thy Ignorance! What! art thou but in
part convinced what way leads to Unity? Oh! for shame, for shame, give over thy
Profession, talk no longer of the Gospel, thou have made thy self manifest to
all men! Oh! have thou been talking of the Gospel so long, and art yet Ignorant
of the way that leads to Unity. Oh! let shame stop thy mouth, and cover thy
face forever! but if thou would shift from this, and say, Thou meanest an
outward way or form. I tell thee, there is no way to have fellowship with the
Father, 1 John 1. 3. but in the Unity of the Faith, and the Knowledge (not a
Thinking) of the Son of God, who is the true living, and only way unto the
Father, John 14. 6. where is perfect unity, even one Heart and one way, Jer.
32. 39. which is a way of holiness: The Wayfaring men, though fools, shall not
err therein, Isa. 35. 8.

Also in page 53. thou say, That thou art very sensible, that thou have lost
thy Comforts, and therefore thou do hope not to give over until thou have
found some way or means of having thy former. Enjoyments refreshed.

Why! have thou lost that thou never had? thou said but now, That thou wast
but in part convinced of the way; And had thou the Comforter long ago, and
lost him now? the Way and the Comforter is but one, the which is Jesus Christ,
John 14. 6. 17. 26. chap. 17. 23.

I know, that if Jesus Christ had been brought forth in thee, without which
there is no true comfort, who is the substance of all Tithes, Types, Forms and
Shadows, that thou could not unto this day have remained a Parish Priest, and
so upheld an Antichristian Priesthood, halting between many Opinions, neither
according to Aaron, Levi nor Christ, but living in thy own will, and so living
above Christ, who lived not in his own Will; for says he, Not my Will, but
thine be done, John 6. 38. And now who will regard thy writings, when thou
acknowledgest, That the Comforter, which is the Spirit of Truth, is departed
from thee: Now it appears, thou art a Liar indeed; now thou have no Truth born
up in thy Understanding; thy former Enjoyments (as thou call it) which were
indeed nothing but Comprehensions got up in the Wisdom of the Serpent.

Oh! art thou not ashamed, that the World should now read thy Confusion, which
thou did soon make up in thy Writings? Art thou not ashamed in such a
condition as this, when thou confessest, thy former Enjoyments and Comforts are
departed from thee, even now to writ against those that thou acknowledgest, to
have large Experiences, and much of the Power of Truth through Christ, page 50?
Oh! take heed, lest it had been better for thee, that a Millstone had been
hanged about thy neck, and thou cast into the Sea! Oh! can thou not look back
on him, whom thou have thus pierced, to wit, the Life of Christ in others? Now
thou may read with Shame and Tears that which thy own hand has written from
own sinful Heart, look in page 5, 8, and 18. which was then in the apostatized
condition, without the former Comforts (as thou calledst it) page 53. Now thou
art found to be a false Apostle indeed. Oh! remember from whence thou art
fallen and do thy first Works; yea, Repente'er it be too late, Rev. 2. 5. Oh,
though thou can strive with man, there is no striving with thy Maker, who
will come a swift Witness against all deceitful Workers, who livewithin the
power of what they speak or write; much more against those that write filthy
Abominable Lies. Oh! if thou love either Christ or thy own Soul, return,
return unto the Light of Christ in thy own Conscience, which will let thee see
the Deceit of thy own sinful Heart out of the abundant Deceit thereof, thy Pen
has run so largely in Confusion. Now I charge thee in the presence of the
living God, (in as much love to thy Soul as ever) that thou return to the Light
of Christ in thy own Conscience, and mind that which cheks thee in secret.

I tell thee (man) in love, there is something yet in thee, which will witness
me to be true. See one more page 64. where for thy own defense, not for the
defense of the Truth, thou say, Thou wast necessitated to fly unto the
Practices and Truths of other men, to wit, Baptists; where it is plain, thou
had not the spirit of Christ to fly unto and speak from, as the true Apostles
had, witness one, Acts 6. 10. Therefore thou art both seen in the Light, proved
by Scripture and thy own Writings, to be a false Apostle, and a false Minister,
2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. Much more might be said and proved, both from thy
Writings and Actings, but I desire the good of thy soul, by this which is
sufficient at present to prove thee to be one of the Wandering Star, Jude 13.

A Word to all Professors in the World.
BEing it was ordered of my Lord God, and Father of Lights, that something must
go forth in Print, as from me who am the least of all Saints, I was even as
freely engaged in my Spirit, out of tender Love to your Souls, to present a few
Lines from that measure of the Spirit which is brought forth in me.

Oh! My Friends, my Friends! the hour is not only coming, but now is witnessed
in me, that the dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, and they that hear
shall live, John 5. 25. and the Voice of the true Dove is heard in our Land, to
wit, this Earthly Tabernacle that is made the Temple of the living God, who is
now fulfilling his Promises in us, that walk not after Flesh, but after the
Spirit, even in us is the Lord establishing his New and Everlasting Covenant,
even the sure and certain Mercies of David, which is by the Life of Jesus
Christ in us fulfilled and witnessed, whereby we have fellowship with the
Father, and are in measure brought to live in him, and he in us, where we have
Joy, Rest and eternal Peace, which passes all Understanding, and all the
Worlds Comprehension, where all the Children of the Light meet, and see face to
face; for the Lord has brought again Sion, who is become the Perfection of
Beauty, out of which God now shines, Psalm. 50. 2. and is become our Glory, and
we his, Isa. 46. 13. O Praises, Praises be unto him who has redeemed us out of
the Nations, Kindreds and Tongues, to serve the living God in Newness of Life,
and not in Oldness of Letter, that so now we may offer up eternally living and
eternal Sacrifice and Praise for evermore, who has in measure redeemed us from
the World, and out of all Darkness that is therein, and has translated us into
the Kingdom of his dear Son, and made us Partakers of the Inheritance of the
Saints in Light, which is the Eternal Light of Life; for God is Light, and in
him is no Darkness at all; and all those that live in him, are the Children of
the Day, who walk in the Day, even the pure Light, in the which there is no
occasion of stumbling, our Feet being guided in the Path of Peace, which is the
true and living way, in which the way faring man, though a Fool shall not Err,
Isa. 35. 8. which is the pure way of Holiness, leading up into the full
Enjoyment of the Father, who has long waited to be gracious unto us; and now
in the Day of his Love and Power has gathered us in his Arms of Love, and
brought us home unto himself, who were before the Outcasts of Israel, wandering
with you from Mountain to Hill, but did not find Rest unto our Souls; but now
the great and mighty Power of the Lord has raised up his own Seed in us, to
cry Halelujah unto him; to whom alone be all Honor, Glory and Obedience, and
Eternal Praises forever, even forever and ever; for he that was lost is found,
he that was dead is alive, and behold he lives for evermore.

Now my Friends, the whole World lies in Wickedness, and all the World by
Wisdom knows not God; the natural man perceives not the things of God, which
are hid from the Wise and Prudent, even from the Readers of the Scripture, from
Scribes, Pharisees, Priests, yea, the Princes of this World; for had they
known, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory, who is crucified daily
by the same spirit that now rules in the Children of Disobedience, even in the
Scribes, Priests and People, that live in the same Nature, where the learned
Ones of the World are, and all those that walk in Darkness, to wit, Pride
Covetousness, Love of the World, Hatred, Varience, Strife, Sedition, Heresy,
Backbiting, Heady, Highminded, Lovers of Pleasures more than Lovers of God,
Scoffers, walking after their own Ungodly Lusts, Raging Waves of the Sea,
foaming out their own Shame, who account Gain Godliness, whose Eyes are full of
Adultery, Feet swift to shed Blood, Ears open to all deceit, whose Mouths are
full of Cursing and Bitterness, the Poison of Asps is under their Lips, their
Throats are an open Sepulcher, who imagine Mischief, their Hearts being
altogether Deceitful and desperately Wicked: Such as these are the Fruits of
the Flesh, in the which all the World lies; therefore I witness against the
World, that the Works thereof are Evil.

Now in the world there are Sects, Schisms, Judgments and Opinions, there they
are heaping up Teachers to themselves, having itching Ears, and according to
the number of their Fancies, so are their ways of Worship; according to the
number of their Imaginations, so are their gods; for there are many gods, and
many Lords, but the living God is not known by the World; for it by Wisdom
knows not God: No man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son
reveals him: Now he that has the Son revealed in him, is born of God, and he
that is born of God overcomes the World, and sins not; He that sins,
has not seen him: But this is a hard saying, who can bear it? the World
cannot; for the World hears its own; they that are of God, hear Gods Word; ye
hear them not, therefore ye are not of God.

Now Friends, all you that have looked after me, and other men, for teaching,
now I can write unto you what I know, that it is the Lord alone, that teaches
his people to profit, none teaches like he, who is now my Teacher indeed, and
will be yours if you are made willing and obedient to be taught, directed and
guided by him, who is gathering his out of all Nations, Kindreds, and Tongues,
Ezekiel. 31. 11. which is by Jesus Christ, the one and only Priest, who is the
Light of the Gentiles, and the light of the World, by which he has enlightened
every one that comes into the World, John 1. 9. which light shines into the
Darkness, and the Darkness comprehends it not, verse 5. Now the World is set
in the heart of man, eccles. 3. 11. Of the which World, Christ is the Light,
and he that follows him, shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the Light
of Life, John 8. 12. This is that Grace of God that has appeared unto all men,
teaching them to deny Ungodliness, and Worldly Lusts, and live Soberly,
Righteously and Godly in this present World, Tit. 2. 11, 12. This is the Light
of Christ, who is the Word of God in the Heart; for his Word of the living God
is not far off, but it is nigh thee, in thy Heart and in thy Mouth, that thou
may do it, Deuteronomy. 30. 14. Now therefore, Friends, look not forth after them
that say, Christ is here, or there; for they are all Deceivers: The Word is
nigh, the Light is within thee, even in thy Dark Heart, although thy Dankness
cannot comprehend it, because thou love Darkness rather then the Light of
Jesus Christ, which shines in thy Consceince, and lets thee see the evil of
thy Ways, and calls thee to Repentance, and to forsake the Wicked, and live:
This is the Talent that thou art hiding in the Earth; for the which thou must
give an Account; therefore say I unto thee, mind that Teacher that teaches to
deny Ungodliness, and this is the Light to Jesus Christ in thy Conscience, the
which Light proceeds from Christ, and leads all that love it ( John 8. 12.)
up to Christ, who is the Way, the Truth and the Life, the only Way, and no
other way to the Father.

Now all of you owning this Word, and Teacher, and Light in your own
Consciences, you will come to witness Jesus Christ in the Light of Life, and
know him to be the way unto the Father, which leads out of the Darkness of all
the World's Ways, Worships, Forms, Fashions, Customs, Words, VVayes and
Actions, and come to be gathered in the Light unto Jesus Christ, who is the
Light, and from the Light then to come to witness the Scriptures to be true,
yea, even fulfilled in you by the same Spirit as it was in them that did write
and speak forth the Scriptures, and so witness with them against the same
things that were witnessed against then, by the Children of the Light, who had
fellowship with the Father, by the which they saw that which in measure I
witness, that there is but one Way, one Truth, one Light one Faith, one
Baptism, one Spirit, one Head, one High Priest, whoever lives to make
intercession for us, one Church of the firstborn, whose Names are written in
Heaven, one God over all, who is Rich unto all that call upon him in Spirit and
Truth, the which Worshippers the Father seeks to Worship him, who is a
Spirit, and all his Worships are Spiritual; but God hears not Sinners; and he
that regards Iniquity in his Heart, the Lord will not hear him; for there are
none but the pure in heart that shall see God, whose Presence is Terrible to
all the Workers of Iniquity, that continue in the unfruitful Works of Darkness.

Now all of you, see that you keep unto the true Guide, which is Jesus Christ,
and follow him, and see that you do not turn again to the Vomit, as the manner
of some is, who begin in the Spirit and end in the Flesh: Oh! leave all for
Christ, you cannot serve two Masters; you cannot be of the World, and of God,
you must witness a Separation: Therefore in Love to all your Souls, that have
been Professors with me in public, in these parts of the Nation, and all
others, flatter not your selves in your Conditions, promising your selves
Liberty, whilst you are the Servants of Corruption; therefore forsake the
Wicked, and live.

Now my Friends, and all Persecutors, marvel not at my Change; for the Wicked
have no Changes; therefore they fear not God, Psalm. 55. 19. but I am made to
witness the fear of the Lord to be the beginning of Wisdom, the which Wisdom is
pure, which comes down from above, James 3. 17. which none of the Princes of
this World know, 1 Cor. 1. 21. therefore they call the Doctrines of Christ
Madness, Acts 26. 24. for the preaching of the Cross of Christ is to the Joros
a Stumbling Block, to the Greeks Foolishness; for Christ is this day, as he was
ever, a Stone of stumbling, and a Rock of offense to both the Houses of Israel,
2 Cor. 1. 13. therefore are they this day speaking Evil of that they know not;
for say they concerning these Sects called Quakers, We know that it is every
where spoken against, Acts 28. 22. But in the Way that men call Heresy, do I
Worship the God of my Father, Acts 24. 14. and am not ashamed to own the Power
that shakes the Earth; for if I should be ashamed to own the Power of Christ
before men, then he might justly be ashamed of me before my Father which is in
Heaven; but I own and witness the same Power which made Moses exceedingly fear
and quake. The which overpowered Daniel, that he had no strength left in him,
Dan. 10. 8. Which Power made Habakkuk Tremble, his Lips Quivered, Rottenness
entered into his Bones, Hab. 3. 16. the which Power struck down Paul, Acts 9. 3,
4, 5, 6. which caused the Jailer to come in Trembling, Acts 16. 26, 27, 28, 29.
Therefore I say unto all, serve the Lord with Fear and Trembling, Psalm. 2. 11.
and work out your Salvation with fear and Treambling, Phil. 2. 12. for now I
know the Lord to be with them that Tremble at his Word: Therefore O foolish
People, without Understanding, which have Eyes and see not, Ears and hear not!
Fear ye not me? says the Lord, Will ye not Tremble at my Presence? Jer. 5. 21,
22. Are you worse than Devils, that Fear and Tremble, Isa. 2. 19. And now the
mighty Power of the living God has shaken the Earth, and the Heavens, that now
that which cannot be shaken may remain, Heb. 12. 27. Now all you that will
enter in with the Bridegroom, wait to receive the same Power; for the Lord
Jesus Christ is come, tendering himself unto his own, John 1. 11. and I
witness, that as many as receive him, receive Power to become the Sons of God,
John 1. 12. O be not Fools, and slow with Heart to believe all that the
Prophets and Apostles says; for the Lord is still a God with Power, he is the
same yesterday and to day, and forever, whose everlasting Love is shed abroad
in our Hearts, by which the Love of the World is cast out; For if any man love
the World, the Love of the Father is not in him, John 2. 15. But we are bought
with a Price, and after glorify God in Body, Soul and Spirit, which is the
Lord's, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. Being made Ministers, nof of the Letter, which
kills; but of the Spirit, which gives Li^e, 2 Cor. 3. 6. Giving no offense
in any thing, that the Ministry of Christ be not blamed; but in all things
approving our selves as the ministers of God, in much Patience, in Affliction,
in Necessities, in Distresses, in Stripes, in Imprisonments, in Tamults, in
Labors, in Watchings, in Fastings; by Pureness, by Knowledge, by
Long-suffering, by Kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by Love unfeigned, by the Word
of Truth, by the Power of God, by the Armor of Righteousness, on the Right
hand and on the Left, by Honor, and by Dishonor, by Evil Report and Good
Report; as Deceivers, and yet True; as unknown, and yet well known; as Dying,
and behold we Live; as Chastened, and not Killed; as Sorrowful, and yet always
Rejoicing; as Poor, and yet making many Rich; as having Nothing, yet Possessing
all things, 2 Cor. 6. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 Verses. Now the Light of the
glorious Gospel in the Face of Jesus Christ has shined into our Hearts,
whereby the Grace that was to be brought in at the Revelation of Jesus Christ,
1 Pet. 1. 13. is now in us witnessed, even the Grace the Apostle exhorted to
hope for, and the Prophets searched after, 2 Pet. 2. 20. the which Grace and
Glory is now made manifest in the Sons and Daughters, whereby the everlasting
Gospel is sounded forth in the Ears of many Thousands in England, blessed are
they that hear the joyful sound thereof: For verily, verily, as the four
Hundred and Thirty years Bondage in Egypt was at last accomplished, and as the
Captivity in Babylon had an end, and the Lord brought again the Captivity of
his People, even so now the many Years of Apostasy is over, and the Lord has
heard the Cry of his own Seed, and is come down to deliver Israel out of all
Distresses, and to gather the Outcasts, Psalm 147. 2. And to bring home that
which is driven away, and to bind up that which is broken, and to strengthen
that which is sick; but he will destroy the Fat and the Strong, and will feed
them with Judgment, Ezekiel. 34. 26. but his own shall be delivered from the many
Shepherds, which have destroyed the Flock of Christ, and they shall feed no
longer, Verse 20. yea, verily People, the mighty Power of the Lord is risen in
England, to gather his from the Corners of the Earth, and they that have been
long in the Highways to Destruction, being ^lind and Lame, shall now be
compelled to come in to the Supper of the Lamb, and eat of the hidden Manna:
But many of the Children of the Kingdom shall be cast out; For, for Judgment is
Christ come into the World, that they that see not, may see; and they that so;
may now be made Blind, Joh 939. And the Sword of the Lord is drawn against the
man of Sin, to cut it down Root and Branch, and to set up the Kingdom of Christ
in Rightcousness and true Holiness: And this Work of the Lord shall certainly
go on, and Men, Devils, nor the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against it.

The just Complaint of the Afflicted (against the Rulers, who oppress the
Innocent) to be delivered to the Judge of the Sessions at Winchester, the 8th
Month, 1658.
YOu that are set to rule over others should not let secret Envy, Ambition and
Prejudice so rule over you, as not at all to hearken to the Counsel of the
Meek, nor receive Instruction from the Simple, whom the Lord preserves, but
you should let Haughtiness and Arrogance be done away; for God resists the
Proud: And you should come to that which is meek, low, sober and humble, with
it to know a ruling over that which has captivated you under the power of Sin
and Satan, who has so blinded the Mind, that the Meek of the Earth are become
your Enemies for telling you the truth; and the Day upon you is come, in which
you cannot endure sound Doctrine: But this I tell you, That they who hate
Reproof, are brutish, and every man is brutish in his Knowledge; yea, O ye
men, your Pastors are become brutish, and have not known the Lord; though this
be a hard saying to you, who are your selves in that which is to be ruled with
the Sword of God's dreadful Power, who will execute Judgment upon all; and with
his own eternal Power is he working Deliverance for his Jewels, that are
precious in his sight, who suffer long and cruel Bondage under your strong
corrupted Wills; for which thing the Lord will visit, and bring Darkness upon
you, even thick Darkness that may be felt, and will fill you with Trouble in
the Night season, and overwhelm you with Obscurity in the day, when you would
have Rest.

Hearken ye Rulers, and consider my Words, and be ye warned of hatching
Mischief in secret; for behold! a day of Trouble is coming upon you, a day of
Darkness, and not Light; yea, the Lord God is coming near to Judgment, and with
Place this after page 92.
what measure ye have meated, it shall be measured to you again; for of a truth
the Lord is for us, yea, even with us and in us, the mighty God of Jacob, in
whose dreadful Power and righteous Judgments we rejoice forever, whose Word of
Power is our Life (at which the Heathen rage) whose Foolishness is our Wisdom,
in which we stand, knowing him to be near who justifies us, who will not
always suffer the Rod of the Wicked to rest upon the back of the Righteous,
neither will his Spirit always strive with you who rebel against the Light,
Job 24. 13. But those who hate Instruction, and receive not the fear of the
Lord, neither yet cease afflicting the Members of his Son, even such is the
Lord of Life coming to vi^^t; and he reaches forth his hand, and takes away
the Breath of the Wicked, and puts forth his Finger to the Life of the
Princes of the Earth; and most assuredly there is neither Pope, King, Prince,
Ruler, Judge, Justice, or any other Nation or People whatsoever, that shall be
able to stand before the dreadful Power of the Lord of Hosts, neither shall
they ever prosper who combine together, and rise up against him, his poor
despised Flock, and the knowledge of his Ways, but he will rain Snares upon all
his Adversaries, and pour Contempt upon Princes, and stain the Pride of all
their Glory, and bring into Contempt all the Honorable of the Earth, and with
a foolish Nation will he anger the Judges of the Earth, and with a People
rejected, forsaken and trodden under foot, will the Lord bring down the strong
Oaks of Bashan; and Zion that no man cared for, which has been as a plowed
Field, will the Lord restore into its former Beuty, and Jerusalem shall become
a Praise over all the Earth, and the Mountain of the Lords House of Holiness
shall certainly be established above all your high dark Mountains of
Wickedness; and there is no Weapon formed against the Seed, whom God has
blessed, that ever shall prosper; for we know in whom we have belived, and we
fear not the inchantings of Balaam, neither are we discouraged because the
mighty Rulers of the Earth would have the Israel of God defied; for we know the
Enterprises of the Wicked will come to nothing, and themselves shall fall into
Destruction, who are privately and openly seeking the Destruction of those whom
God has said shall prosper.

Therefore in vain do the Wicked bend their Bows and smite with the Tongue, and
imprison by their unjust and false Writings (called Mittimusses) for the Lord
God sees the Affliction of his People, and will reprove Kings for their sakes,
and take the Wise in their own Craftiness, and lead Judges away Fools, and
bring the Honor of the Princes of the Earth into Contempt for evermore, and a
perpetual Shame shall cover the faces of all Zion's Enemies, and the
Adversaries of Jerusalem, which is free, shall be as Chaff before the Wind, and
none of the Arm of Flesh shall be able to preserve you from the Wrath of the
Almighty, neither shall your Greatness in the World deliver you from the
wrathful Presence of the Lamb, who is the Light that condemns for the Sin;
neither shall any of your Unrighteous Laws, Decrees and Ordinances, Warrants or
unjust Orders and Snares, (which you make for the Innocent) hide, cover or
deliver you from the Terror of the Pit in this day of Darkness that is nigh at
hand, wherein yet more gross Darkness shall cover you, until your feet stumble
at the dark Mountains, and you suddenly fall and never rise again, and a
perpetual Shame cover your Names for evermore, who Repent not.

Wherefore, Woe unto you Rulers of Hampshire; who has bewitched you, that you
should not obey the Truth which makes free? Who has blinded your Minds, that
you cannot see the Life of the suffering Seed, which preaches the Innocence of
the Lamb in Meekness and Long-suffering among you? What is it that has
hardened your hearts, that Truth cannot have entrance in you? How are you
Bowels shut up, that you have not affection to Nature? How unreasonably have
you caused the Members of Christ, sick and in Prison, to suffer? How will you
give an Account for these things, when they must go to the left hand, who visit
not the Members of Christ sick and in Prison?

Oh, blind and miserable men! my Soul even mourns over you; that which should
be your Life, is and will be your Condemnation; it lies in Prison in you. Oh!
who are more blind than you? And how long have you hardened your hearts against
the day of Slaughter, and rebelled and strove with the Powers of Darkness,
against the Light of Christ in you, who (amongst you) has not whereon lay his
head, neither can he be received, though he come unto his own? How evilly have
you entreated his Servants and Messengers? Where is your entertaining of
Strangers? and when do you plead the Cause of the poor and needy? Is it not
apparent that the poor in Spirit you are strangers to? And is it not seen, that
the Bonds of Iniquity, which separate you from God, are not broken? Are not we,
in this filthy straight Prisor, a true figure of the filthy straight place in
you, that the righteous seed is long in Prison? And is not the cutting off of
one of the chiefest Counselors among you, an apparent token that your Councils
are not of the Lord? And may not the sudden destruction of another of the
chiefest of you be a warning to the rest? Are you more hardened than they in
the days of Corah? And are you more blind and worse than them whom God plagued,
because they kept the Ark of the Testimony of the Lord in the place of the
uncircumcised? And is not his Testimony a witness in us? And will ye not see
when the hand of the Lord is lifted up? Surely were the oppressed let free
within, you would soon let the oppressed go free without; and because it is not
so, Woe be to you, a hard hearted and unbelieving Generation! who shall pity you
in the day of Slaughter, or bemoan you when your Calamity comes as a
Whirlwind? Even then shall you know, that the Lord is become your Enemy, who
are Enemies to his Lambs.

Oh! my heart is enlarged, and I am filled with the Indignation of the Lord,
and overcome with the Power of his Might! Many Woes could I from the Lord
declare, and much of his Judgment make known unto you; yea, many Lines might I
write, and unfold the Mysteries of his Power, which from your Eyes are hid; and
long has my Soul mourned in secret for you, and because of the fierce Terrors
of the Lord, which you cannot escape, mine Eyes have been filled with Tears,
and my Heart with Sorrow, and that for you, O ye blind, scornful and rebellious
Men, that rule this County! The Lord God will bring Shame upon you, and your
Names shall Rot, and be left for an evil Savor for the Generations to come:
Better had it been for you, if the Womb had been your Grave, or that you had
had a Millstone hanged about your Necks, and cast into the depth of the Sea,
before you had writ an Line, or made one Order, or had a hand against one of
the Friends of Christ, who follow him that makes an end of sin, whom one day
you shall see to be of the Seed whom God has chosen, who being born of the
Spirit, are now unto you as the Wind, of which you hear a sound, but know not
whence they come, neither whither they go, whom you keep in your filthy Prison,
to force them to bow to you, like Haman; but take heed how long you provoke the
Lord therein, and consider what it is in you, which you would have us please,
bow or submit unto, by speaking such words as may satisfy that Will in you
which unjustly cast and keeps us in Prison.

And now, behold, the Lord God has tried you, and you are found Enemies to his
suffering Seed, and Fighters against God, and your Hypocrisy is made manifest,
and the Infamy of your Unrighteousness is spread over the Nation, and Gods
Witness in the hearts of Thousands will judge of your Actions to be Unjust and
Unreasonable, and to the Children of Light your insides are discovered, and
your end is seen, and your secret intents; neither can your Devices be hid, nor
any shelter cover you; for the Light is come that makes all things manifest,
and the secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him.

Be ye now therefore awakened and instructed, O ye Rulers of the Earth, and let
your Minds be turned to the Light in you, and strive no longer with God, who is
Light; for that which may be known of God is manifest in you. And did you not
first strive and fight against his Witness in you, you would not fight with
your carnal Weapons, and carnal Prisons against his Messengers and Servants,
who fear before him, and fear not them that kill or imprison the Body till
death, of whose Servants and Messengers you shall know that I am one in the day
of your Calamity and Destruction, the which that you might escape, in Soberness
and Meekness have I this many Months dealt with you, writing reasonable and
plain things unto you, that you might in meekness come to hear the Cry of the
Oppressed, both within and without; but if you hear not earthly things, but in
that be unreasonable and unfaithful in the unrighteous Mamo^, who shall commit
unto you the greater Riches, or open unto you the Mysteries of the things of
God? who with things that are not, is bringing to naught things that are; and
with the things that you despise, is he overturning the Counsels of the Mighty;
and that which confounds the Wisdom of the Wise, and brings to nothing the
Understanding of the Prudent, and overturns the Devices of the Wicked, even in
that is my Life; and in that which terrifies, troubles, torments and condemns
the World, do I rest in Peace with God for evermore, and remain.

A Friend to the whole Creation, and to the Souls of all Mankind, who of men am
numbered amongst Transgressors, in a filthy Prison, and place unfit for men, at
Winchester, this 24th of the 8th Month, 1658. To the Enemies of Equity, Truth
and Peace, I am only known by the Name Humphry Smith.

To them who have lately believed in the Light, and are waiting to receive the
Life.
THE Day of Gods Everlasting Love is come, and with his Mighty Power is he
risen to gather all them in the Light of his Son, that long have sat in
Darkness, and in the Shadow of Death, upon whom the Day is now Dawning, wherein
the Outcasts of Israel shall be gathered, and the Captives that long have
groaned may now come to know Deliverance; for with plentious Redemption is the
Lord visiting his People, and he is coming near unto his own, and seeking them
that are afar off, and lifting up a Standard for the Standard for the Strangers
to flow unto, and many shall return unto the Lord, and People shall be gathered
to the God of their Salvation, and he will pour out his Spirit upon the Humble,
and fill the Meek with the Riches of his Love; Multitudes of People shall come
unto Sion, and the Poor of the Flock to the City of the great King; for Light
is breaking forth as the Morning, and Righteousness as the Sun at Noon;
therefore shall the Mourning Seed be comforted, and that which groaned in
Captivity lift up the Head, that the Prisoner may spring forth of Bondage, and
the longing Soul be satisfied, and Judgment come upon the Wicked, and Terror
upon the Loftiness of man, the Rebellious brought down to the Dust, and that
which boweth not unto the Light, with it is condemned forever, that through the
Condemnation the Seed may spring, which long in Death has lain, and is now to
be raised up by the Arm of God's Almighty Power, which now comes to be revealed
unto them who believe the Voice of the true Spirit, which is in the midst, whom
all are to hear, and obey his voice, who comes out from God, and leads them
that believe in and obey him up unto God again, and he is the only Way unto the
Father, by whom the Redemption comes, who is arising in the Hearts of the
Children of Light, whereby they come to know Light shine out of Darkness,
giving them the Knowledge of God, which Knowledge they never learned from all
the Teachers of the World, which Teachers are themselves in that Ground, in
which the Knowledge of God cannot be received; and that which they have not
received themselves, they cannot teach others; therefore you have not received
the Knowledge of God from them, after which Knowledge something in you has
long groaned, which is now to be satisfied from him in whom the Fullness of God
does dwell, who is the Light, of which you have received, in which you are to
wait to receive the Promise of the Father, that your Souls may be refreshed in
the Bosom of his Love, and feel God's Mercies showered down as the early Rain
in the time of Drought, that your tender Desires may not wither, nor your
breathing Spirits faint in the way, but may with cheerfulness walk in the
Light, and continue in faithfulness in your Measures, enduring the Cross unto
your Wills, that by it the Carnal may be crucified, and that which is Earthly
mortified, and all the fleshly Lusts subdued, and the ground of Unbelief
removed, that you, as Obedient Children to the Light, may walk not (as do
others) in the Lusts of Ignorance, and Ways of Unrighteousness, where all the
Ungodly lie, and are without his Fear, not knowing that in which the Power of
God does stand; and many of them are Murmurers and Complainers, who dwell in
all Unrighteousness, from among whom Redemption you are to find, that a true
Separation you may come to know, that the Unclean you may touch no more, and
that which defiles to be no more entangled with.

For the Lord our God is pure, his living Truth is to be known in the inward
parts, and that which makes Free received in the Heart; and pure is the Lord in
his Ministration of Life, and free in the Discoveries of his Love; his
unsearchable Riches are made known unto his Jewels, and his Secrets revealed
unto them that abide in his Fear, whose Fear is a Fountain of Life, whose Love
is streaming forth as a River of Oil unto the broken hearted; and in him the
Fatherless find Mercy, and he gives strength unto the Faint, he cherished the
Babes as a Nurse, and feeds the Young with Milk, he gathers the Lambs with
his Arms, and nourishes the tender Plant; he confounds the Proud in his
Judgments, and removes the Ground of the Wicked: Kings before him are as the
Drop of a Bucket, and Ungodly Rulers as the Smoke before a mighty Wind: His
Wonders are seen among the Living, and his Judgments made known upon the
Wicked; they that come to him find Mercy, but his Enemies he turns into the
Land of Darkness; the Ungodly are not able to come near his Presence, when he
is Angry the Wicked stand afar off; but there is no Darkness in which they may
be hid, nor shadow of Death, in which they can be covered; for his Hand will
find out all the Rebellious, and he will reward them all according to the Pride
of their Heart, then shall they be banished from the Lord, as the Chaff before
the Wind, and none of their strength shall save them.

But all you that wait for Sion's Redemption, and call that love his
Appearance, who are willing to take up the Yoke, deny themselves and follow the
Light; thus I say unto all such, The Lord God of Life is at hand, he is
hastening his Mercies to the simple, and reaching forth his hand to the
Helpless; your Redeemer is near, your Deliverer is at hand; for the Lord God
has not cast off his People, neither will he leave or forsake his Chosen Ones:
With the Brightness of his Power is he appearing to judge down that which kept
his own in Bondage, and lay low that which did the Just oppress, that from
under the Oppression it may now arise, that the Hungry may be fed, and the
Naked come to be clothed with the Everlasting Righteousness of God, who brings
his Righteousness near unto the Humble, and clothes them with the Armor of
Light, that so they may be able to stand where the Wicked cannot endure.

Wherefore all you, my dear Lambs, in whom there is honest Desires begotten
after the living Truth of my Father, who are in measure made willing to walk as
Children of the Day, and to undergo the Reproaches and Revilings of Wicked and
Ungodly men, and desire the Kingdom that is not of this World, from the honest
Simplicity of your Hearts, that you may come to rest in the Kingdom of the
Father forever. Unto you, I say, my Heart's Desire, and Prayer to God for you
is, That you may be enabled, through the Power of him who is the Light, to
undergo all your Trials within and without, and that none of you may faint in
your Way, nor be weary of well doing, but that you may come to show forth the
Works of Righteousness by a chaste Conversation, in the midst of a crooked and
perverse Generation, by whose Filthiness the Just is grieved.

And my dear Lambs, grieve ye not the Spirit of the Lord, neither be you
Envious against the Evildoers; let not Wrath arise in any one of you, but be
Examples of Love and Meekness, one unto another; and all come to know what a
true waiting upon the Lord is, in the Sincerity of the Heart, to receive that
which the World never knew, even the Spirit of Truth, which comes from the God
of Peace, in which the Blessing is received, and leads in the way of
Righteousness, and will join your Hearts together, in the Everlasting Covenant
of the Father, which he is establishing with all his faithful Ones, among whom
you may now come to be gathered, and find an eternal Inheritance with them that
are sanctified, who come to be made one with him that sanctifies, who now
comes to purge away the filth, and cleanse that which has not been cleansed,
that Sinners may be converted unto him, and the Filthy redeemed from their
filthiness, before the day come, wherein it shall be said, He that is Filthy,
let him be Filthy still.

Wherefore, let the Day of your Visitation be dearly prized, knowing that God,
who is Light, will not always strive with man; and its his Everlasting Love in
that he has visited you, and passed by the Wise and the Mighty, and made your
Hearts sometimes soft and tender, by the powerful Drawings of his Everlasting
Love, which by your Obedience and Belief in the Truth, comes to be more and
more shed abroad in your Hearts, which Love will constrain Obedience to the
Light, in which Light Gods Power is received, which Power makes Sons, who cry,
Father unto him that begeteth after his own Image, whose Image comes to be
renewed in the Children of the Light, which Light is now come, and we are
Witnesses of it, and testisie what we have seen, and declare unto you the
Message that was from the beginning, and so preach not another Gospel unto you,
but the same, which is the Power of God, which I neither receive of men, nor
learn of men, but by Revelation, in which the Father is known, which to the
World is a Mystery, and sealed from all them who believe not in the Light,
whose Deeds are Evil, but manifest through the Operation of the mighty Power of
God, which works mightily in me, that I might reach forth unto you also, and
that you might feel the Operation of the Fathers Love, that is manifest in my
Bonds to you, who through many Tribulations, with the rest of the Lambs of
Christ, are to wait for Deliverance from the Bondage of Corruption, in the
which you have long continued; but now Christ Jesus, the Light of the World is
come to redeem them, who through fear of Death were all their life time subject
to Bondage; and the Bonds of Iniquity are now to be broken, and the Oppressed
are now to be set at liberty, and the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God is,
and is to be made manifest.

Therefore, Friends, wait on the Lord, that you may come to reap the peaceable
Fruits of Righteousness, which in due time comes to be brought forth in all
them that faint not: And take heed of seeming to be what you are not; for all
Proud Boasters are for the Lake. Take not Counsel of the Serpent, neither
reason by the carnal Thoughts for the Morrow; be watchful in all Diligence,
that you may know Gods Work wrought in you, before the Night comes, in which
none can work: Therefore be not Idle, Sloathful nor Negligent; for the Lord,
who is Love, will not always wait upon such to be gracious; yet they that
Honor him through Obedience, he will Honor; but they that despise him shall
be lightly esteemed: Those that obey him, he honors in his Love, and the
Disobedient he leaves in a Bed of Torment.

You who are tender, humble and lowly in the bowels of my Father's Love, I
salute you all; and Friends, take heed of your Wills, and learn of him who is
the Light, and leads into Lowliness, and came not to do his own Will, and him
has God the Father sealed: And take heed of words, and be not hasty, any of
you all, to utter words before the Lord, I charge you in his living Presence;
and speak not rashly unto men, nor out of Gods fear one unto another; for that
which bridles the Tongue is able to rule the whole Body, and keep it in
Subjection to him, who is the God of Order.

The Blessings of the Lord God Almighty be with the Suffering Seed, and with
you all, to which only I desire to be manifest, and to which my Love does
reach, and by it am felt and received, who am known to some only by the Name
Winchester-Bridewell. Humphery Smith.

The two striving within.
THat Mind and Spirit which went out from and disobeyed the Life of God,
professed the Name of God to cover itself with that, without the Life; the
which Profession, through the secret subtilty, did more and more increase,
which led farther off from the sense of the feeling of the Life of God, and
when it stirred to judge that which went out from it, then presently would that
which out lead forth farther to seek after and comprehend in the Knowledge and
Profession of his Name, treasuring up that in that which went out from his
Life, therewith to cover that without the Life; and then for a time that was
quiet, being got so far out from the sense of the feeling of the stirrings of
the Life, which stirrings being got out from, ceased for a time to strive,
being resisted with that which abode not in it, whereby it became veiled and
covered with a thick Cloud by that which sinned against it, the which thereby
came to be Exalted above it, even above all that is called God, and is of his
Nature, increasing, getting strength, and covering it self in the Earthly
Wisdom, through the Carnal Coverings and Profession of God, out of the Life and
the Power, which by that was grieved, and under that oppressed, which under the
Oppression sometimes would stir again, and in secret judge that which did
oppress, and wound that which grieved it, even striking through it with the
dreadful Darts of its Power, making the other sensible, that its Judgments was
to pass over and cut down the Head of that which was above it exalted, the
which Judgment being loved and turned to, there is a coming again to the sense
of the feeling of the operation of the Power which judges, and stirs
against that which got up against the Power, professing his Name, who is the
Power, but not bearing his Image, nor feeling his Nature, who being with the
Power, judges and condemns with the Light which comes from the Power; yet
being not kept to the Cross, and his Head always under the Sword of the Power,
through the Law in the Judgment, his Head gets forth again, the twining Head of
that which got the Profession, but abode not in the Power, which Head being not
bruised in its first motion, the Body grows up, even the man of Sin, with
Spiritual Wickedness in High Places, showing it self like the Power, but
exalted above the sense of the Power, and there stands in opposition against
the Power; which being judged, condemned, confounded, scattered and overturned
with the powerful breakings forth of that which by it suffered, so the true
thing presents it self to be the Leader, which being received and obeyed, it
drives the mind in, where is stillness and quietness out of that which labors
for Vanity, into that where the labor and striving cease, and the Rest is
received, and the Day come which God has blessed for evermore, where the Lamb
is the Light, and the small still Voice is heard, and the Power of the Word is
received, the which some coming to see through the Openings in the Light, and
yet not in it waiting through the Openings in the Light, and yet not in it
waiting through the Judgment to be led into the thing it self; so that that
which stood in the Power soon leads out the Mind into a false Joy, because of
the sight to cover it self again therewith.

And so, as that is still followed, which leads forth from the Power, in the
sight conceiving and professing of the Light, being out of it, having not the
Substance and the Power, is more and more departed from, in what Image or From
soever it be, and the bare Form is continued in, the Power is denied; but as
the Power is minded and waited for, standing out of dead Forms and Images; so
the other, which abode not, but leads out of the Power of the Truth, comes
to be crossed, judged and denied, and so not followed, but kept out of, in the
Light to Watch and War against it by the Light out of it, to be lead into that,
and it to receive Immortallity abides forever. And so as there is a continual
watching with the Light, that may be seen, which abides not in it, but is got
up above it, working in all Deceiveableness in the Mystery of Iniquity, to
cover it self with a Profession of Truth, but still keeps out of it: And also
that may be seen which suffers under all this, and lies under it, so that it
cannot be come to, nor come at, by that which is out of it, and stands above
it, and it is veiled and covered, and the narrow entrance to it is hard to be
found; and being found, is soon turned out of, and hard to be kept in, by
reason of the many Twinings of the Deceiveableness of that which is, and is
rightly named, the Mystery of Iniquity, which works in them that obey not the
Light, which comes from the Truth, in which the Power stands, out of which
that goes forth which has not the Power, which is to be confounded with the
Power, that the Power without Hands may break in pieces that made with Hands,
or the greatest, tallest, or most glorious Image that has been conceived in
the dark mind, and set up on high above the humble, suffering Seed, to be
worshipped within in the Power of the Light, is resisted with all his Wiles,
though therein he brings Scripture to uphold his Kingdom and Dominion over
the other, to have it bow down to him and worship him, who abode not in the
Power, which by the Power is resisted and denied forever: And so that which
denies the other, and is Humble and Low, it is that all are to wait to receive
and join unto, from it Power to know, in it to stand against the other, which
did it oppress, and by secret subtilty, being exalted, does always endeavor
to sit in the Temple of God, showing it self as God, being covered with a
Profession of the Truth, which in the Truth does not abide; yet to the Truth in
words may confess and acknowledge that which saves from Sin, to be the
begotten of God, and may believe and tremble, and yet remain an Enemy to the
same, tempting him by many Glorious Presentations, to bow to that, and worship
that which abides not in the Power, that so thereby, over the Power it may
always rule, in the Deceiveableness of Unrighteousness, wherein many are
ensnared, others tempted, and some Overcome, whose latter end is worse than
their beginning.

Oh! who can declare the Depth of the Ground of this Mystery of Iniquity, or
utter forth the Innumerable Transformings and Changings of that which still
seeks by all subtilty to keep from the Obedience to the Life of the Power, by
which man was made, and from which he was led by that which said, Ye shall be
as Gods, which against God does stand in that ground which by him is cursed.

And how can the unsearchable Love of the Father be uttered with words! who so
loved the World that he gave his Son to them that asked not for him, that by
his Light might be seen the Deceiveableness of the many Workings of the Powers
of Darkness in the Mind that is darkened, which from the Darkness to the Light
is to be turned, with the Light in the holy Fear to watch against every
appearance of the changeable Powers of Darkness, which sometimes appears as
an Angel of Light, against whose Appearance all are to stand armed with the
Power of him who is the Light, and to feel the Power of the Word, which is as a
Fire, and yet to resist that which the Devil darteth in, which is also like
unto Fire, that the tender Simplicity, after which my Soul breaths, may not
be betrayed by that which still seeks to devour, and to keep from the Power
of the Cross, and turn aside from the narrow Way of Life, and that in it all
the innocent Friends of Christ may be kept to follow the Leadings of that which
from the God of Truth, and Love, and Peace to them has come, by it to be led
out of, and from all that which in the Truth did not abide.

Therefore is this given forth, even from the Breathings of my Life, appealing
to the pure Witness in you all, which the Changeableness of Iniquity does
always stand against, the which in Gods living Power let all that feel it, keep
against the other, to stand and keep out of all Satan's Wiles, to be preserved
to the end of all that which has an End, that then when time shall be no more,
you may rest and abide with and in him that is the Truth, whom the Devil has
nothing in, to receive the Blessings of the Father, and the tender Mercies of
the most High, to refresh you and overcome you with the Power of his Love, that
it to you all may be the Bond of Everlasting Peace, in which, with all the
humble and faithful, I am bound up, and in it with them for evermore do rest,

Humphry Smith.
Winchester-Bridewell, 1685.
THE Love of God Declared AND SATAN'S VVILES DISCOVERED.
THE Lord God of Life and Father of Infinite Love, Preserver of all the simple,
Deliverer of all the innocent, whose Power reaches unto the Heavens, and his
Goodness to the Sons of men, who never forsook the Faithful, but was near unto
them in the hour of Temptation, and knows how to make War for the Innocent to
escape, and deliver the Oppressed in the day of Distress, whose Mercy endures
forever, whose Love can never be fully declared, whose Glory is beyond all
Expression, whose Ways are past finding out, whom my Soul honors forever,
to whose Infinite Fullness and Incomprehensible Power be Blessing, and Glory,
and Honor, from the Power of my Life, to the Throne of his Love forever and
ever.

Even he who is the Fountain, from whence comes the Breath of the Life of the
Souls of all Mankind: He, I say, from the Throne of his Power, through the
brightness of his Love, with his Eye of Fatherly Pity, has looked down and
taken notice of the Wants, the Groans and the Cries of his captivated Seed,
which has been long oppressed with the strong and cruel Bonds of Iniquity,
which separated man from God, and grieved the Spirit of the most High, who
bowed the Heavens, and came down to visit the Captives and relieve the
Oppressed, which is acceptable to many, and a time of everlasting Comfort; for
by him the weary come to be refreshed, and the weak receive Everlasting
strength; for the Lord has Compassion on the Needy, and comes to clothe the
Naked with the Righteousness of his Son for his Spirit reaches unto that which
is in Want, and his Compassion is extended to the Lowly in Heart, which long
breathed after Life and Power to overcome the Evil, but knew not the way to
obtain it; and therefore in the restless Wilderness, under the burden of Sin,
did long Travail, as in a wearisom Land of Darkness, having little hope toward
God, being often in much Distress, when no Eye pitied, even then had the Lord
Mercy for his own Name sake, and he remembered his Covenant with Abraham, his
Friend, and had Compassion on the Seed of the barren Womb, which was as the
Root of a Plant hid in a dry Land, whom the Lord came to visit in the Power of
his Infinite Love, and said to the dead, Live forever, which Word of Power
reached through the Earth, making way through it unto the Seed, that it through
the Earth, making way through it unto the Seed, that it through the Earth might
spring (by the Virtue of his Life) as a Lilly in the Spring, that so the
Prisoner might grow up out of Captivity, and receive the early and the latter
Rain, and the Dews of Heaven, that as a tender Plant it may grow, and become as
a Tree, and be fruitful as a Vine, bearing much Fruit over the Earth. Oh! the
Infinitness of the Fullness of the Fountain of the Father's unexpressible Love
unto the Prisoners of Hope, and the captivated Seed of Israel! Who can declare
his Mercy to the Afflicted! or utter his Bowels of Compassion to the Spirits in
Prison? What Tongue can declare the unsearchableness of his Way of Life, or
make known the Infiniteness of that which passes Knowledge? He has been a
Father to the Fatherless, he has given Light and Life to them that sat in
Darkness, and in the shadow of Death; he is found of them that sought him not,
he spreads forth his Arms to gather them that asked not for him; he gives
Gifts to the Rebellious, and he is grieved with those that receive not the
Tenders of his Love, and complains (from the grief of his Soul) when Israel
will have none of him: He delights not in the Death of the Wicked, but
waits long for their Return. If Israel backslide, yet afterward return with
true Repentance, forsaking the Evil, he shows Mercy, even to the Prodigal,
and he heals the Backslidings, and loves them freely, that none may say, their
Destruction is from him, nor that he appointed them thereunto, nor charge him
with Injustice in the day of his Judgments, when the Just shall arise to the
Resurrection of Life, and the Unjust to the Resurrection of Condemnation
forever, that every Moath may be stopped, and every one stand Guilty before the
Throne of his Judgment, and every Tongue confess to God, That he is Righteous
in all his Ways, and that all his Judgments are Just and True.

And out of his Fatherly Pity, from the freeness of his Love has he visited
many of you, even with a Message of Life and Salvation by the Word of his
Power, making known that unto you, which has been hid from Ages and
Generations, and is yet hid from all Ishmaels Princes and Nimrods Builders,
yea, even from all the Wise and Prudent of the Earth, even that is he revealing
to many of you, who are willing to become Fools and suffer the loss of all for
his sake, who saves the Soul, and that not for any Works of Righteousness which
you have done, but of his own free Love, through the Power of his Immortal Word
is he begetting Sons and Daughters to himself, that he alone might be honored,
who works all their Works in them, that his Workmanship all such might be
created a new in Christ Jesus unto good Works in them, to walk in Newness of
Life, bringing forth Fruits unto God, who with the Light of his Son, in whom he
is well pleased, has convinced many of you of the Evil of your Ways, and the
Blindness you were in, when you were Children of Wrath, even as others; and his
Light of Life has shined in you, to let you see the want of a Savior, and
feel the burden of your Sins, that the Word of Repentance you all might
receive, and come to be led by him whom God the Father has sealed for a
Covenant of his Eternal Love, and sent for a Light, to be a Leader to the House
of Joseph, and a Deliverer to the House of Israel, and to inherit the Gentiles,
and possess the utmost parts of the Heathen, that the Brightness of his Power
might shine over all the World, and the sound of his Voice be heard to the
utmost parts of the Earth, that the Outcasts of the Earth might be brought to
the one Fold, and the Seed of Abraham be gathered from the four Corners of the
Earth, that Redemption might be known, from under the Shadow of Death; and that
the blind, which have Eyes, and the deaf, which have Ears, might come forth to
the Light of the Son, who loses the Tongue of the Stammerer, that it may
speak plain, that those who Err in Judgment might learn the Doctrine of the Son
of the Father's Love, who comes to lead the blind by a way they know not, and
lead them in Paths that they have not known, and with Weeping and with
Supplication does he lead them that walk in the strait and narrow Path of Life,
where those that abide in the Fear shall not stumble, but walk in the
Uprightness of Innocence, through the Power of the Father's Love, continuing in
the way of Holiness, where only the Ransomed of the Lord do walk, the which Way
of Holiness the Lord God has made known to many, which reached unto your
Hearts, whereby it was at the present made soft and tender, and you received
the Truth with love, rejoicing that you came to find the way to Eternal Peace,
and many began to say one to another, This is the Way, let us to walk in it;
and for a time many walked in Humility, and pure, dear and tender Love began to
spring up in you one to another, and the Enemies of your Souls began to be
subject to you, and the tenders of God's Love was over you, to do you good at
your latter end; but behold, before you came to the Land of Rest, the Lord
tried you, by suffering the Enemy to present Hardship, Straits, and many
Difficulties to come; on the other hand, to present the Glory of the World, and
the Favor of great Men; and some, the Enemy draws forth their Minds from the
Strait and narrow Way, into carnal Liberty and Ease in the Flesh, and so to
contain an Easier way, whereby the simplicity in many is betrayed into the
Power of the man of Sin, who works strongly to keep his hold in one
Deceiveableness or another, to keep in Bondage the Life of the JUST, to keep
his Head from being bruised by the Power of the Seed of the Promise, which
under the Subtilty in many has cried for Vengeance upon the Head of that which
Murders the Just; and when times of Trial come by Judgment, and Famine and Want
have come upon others, then have they started aside like a broken Bow, and
caused th Offense of the Cross to cease, and then has Unbelief come in, and
the Enemy caused Questionings of the living Truth, and Consultations about the
Way of Life, and such grew weary of their Trial, like their Forefathers in the
Wilderness, even letting the Enemy draw back their Hearts to the Flesh Pots of
Egypt, which God by his mighty Power had redeemed them from, and was leading
them by the right Hand, and in the narrow Way that they should go: And others,
the Enemy (who still seeks to devour the begotten of God) has drawn forth
their Minds into a sottish careless Condition, not regarding the stirrings of
Gods Spirit with them, by the Light of his Son in their Hearts; and so not
minding that his Spirit will not always strive with them, and having seen
before the straitness of the Way, the Enemy will work by all Subtilty to keep
such from it, and from the Meetings and Society of them that in the strait Way
abide, keeping them still from the Cross, which would be his Death, and the
Life of that which would give Peace, and Victory over him and all his Wiles.
And others coming to see that they are come so far, so that they need not
Words, nor any man to teach them, then has the Enemy invited them to sit down
at ease; and so not minding the continual fear, at last they loath the Manna,
and call it Dry, whereas the dryness and barrenness comes by reason of their
Unfaithfulness in not improving what they had through their continual
watchfulness under the daily Cross. And the Enemy geteth forth the Mind of
others to watch for Evil, or at least, to look at the Temptations,
Backslidings, Backwardness and Failings of others, more than their own
Conditions, (who see their own Evil therein) some whereof thereby at last draw
back others, question the Truth it self; and by such things as these the
Simplicity in many other tender Lambs is burdened and grieved, and the Life
pressed down, by which they should grow and be fruitful unto God. And others
being convinced with the pure Light of something that is Evil, which seems
little to the carnal Eye, and so going out from the Obedience to the Light, and
consult and reason, and take Counsel of the Serpent, who then contrives a way
to shun the Cross therein, and so endeavor to dawb the thing over from a
secret Deceit, working in the Power of Darkness, until the Light has even
ceased striving with that Person, and then he goes on with the thing, saying,
He has liberty therein. But let such mark and observe themselves; for no more
unto them is committed, neither do they grow or come any further, but there
stand as dry Plants, coming long to Meetings, having the Form, but not feeling
the Power; for such who knowingly deny their Obedience in any thing to the
Light of Christ, he will deny them his Power in all things.

And thus does and will the Enemy of your Souls make havoc of the Flock, if in
the pure humble fear he be not always watched against, and slain by the Power
of the Cross in the Light; and many other Wiles and Ways does the Enemy of your
Souls watch to devour, ensnare and overcome you; the time would even fail one
to declare it; the Lord God Almighty help you against it, that so in the Light
you may see all these, and many more things, which you are all to Watch and War
against, that Spiritual Wickedness in High Places may not overcome you, and
that you may not turn aside with the Error of the Wicked, nor be overcome with
the power of Temptations, but that you may be all diligent and watchful against
every appearance of your Enemy, and be able to stand in the day of Trial, that
the Enemy of your Souls prevail not.

Therefore, all Friends every where, keep upon your Watch, let the Light search
your Hearts, and keep your Meetings together in the silent fear and dread of
the Lord, that his Power in you all may raise you all in the Dominion and
Wisdom of God to stand and feel that which keeps your Hearts together in the
unlimitted Love of God, and so his presence you will be fruitful unto his
Blessing come to receive, whereby you will be fruitful unto him in every good
Word and Work.

The living Power of my Father preserve you all from the Power of the Enemy,
and keep your Minds in that which crosses your Wills, that the Lord God of
Life may watch over you all for good for evermore.

Written for the good of many, from the true Love of him, who is known to many
of you by that which is nearer than the Name of Humphry Smith.
Winchester-Bridewell, the 4th Mon. 1658.
TO THE Musitioners, Harpers, Minstrels, Singers, Dancers and the Persecutors;
From one who loved Dancing and Music as his Life, which being parted with, and
the Light being come, which was before these things, in which they are all
seen; And from it is declared THE Ground, Foundation, Beginning, and Father,
and Children, and Compass, and End, and the Effects of all the Harpers,
Musitioners, Singers and Dancers.
Who may read what I have learned, who have tried their ways, and also
searched into the things of God, and declare this according to Scripture, and
have found the Joy which Man cannot take away
JUBAL was the Father of all such as handle the Harp and Organ, and so the
Father of all such Musitioners, being himself of the Seed of Lemach, who slew a
man; and so the Son of a Manslayer was the Father of all such as handle the
Harp and Organ: And the Man Christ, the Light, is the Lamb slain from the
Foundation of the World. And Jubal was of the Generation of Cain, who first
slew a Man, and then built a City; he slew his Brother, one that was near unto
him; and the Light of the Lamb slain is near unto every one, even that which
comes from the Man of Sorrows is in the Heart; Cain's Seed slayes the man of
Sorrows; the Musitioners were of Cain's seed: And that which slayes the man of
Sorrows, invents, sets up and delights in the Instruments of Music; and the
Father of all such was Jubal, the seed of Cain, who built a City, and so was a
Rich man, and his seed delighted in Music, and so his seed, who are gone from
the Lords leading are building Cities, Strong holds, high and large Houses,
with painted Parlours, and then set up the Instruments of Music, in the cieled
Houses without, and within themselves full of Rottenness, or as a Cage of
unclean Spirits, whereby the just is murdered, and the House laid wast and
desolate, as to the Life of God, which should be the Temple of the holy Ghost;
and the Father of all these was Jubal, the seed of Lemach a Manslayer, who
also had another son Tubalcain (the seed of Cain) an Instructor of every
Artificer in Brass and Iron; and he that has attained to never so much, if not
come to that which fulfills the perfect Law, is as sounding Brass, 1 Cor. 13.
and there is many also of the Seed of this Instructor, whose Instructions bring
people to be but as sounding Brass: And this first Instructor and Jubal, were
the Offspring of Cain, the Vagabond driven from God, against whom the Blood of
the Righteous does Cry, yet so rich in the Earth, that he built a City, being
separated from God, (who confounds man's wisdom) then comes that which makes
merry over the Witness, Genesis 4.

And they who danced in the wilderness, and sung and made a great noise, and
were in the Mirth and Vain Delights, were a stiff-necked People, and such as
sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play, like the same Generation now,
who are stiffnecked, and bow not to him, who is the Light, low in the Heart, to
whom every knee shall bow, but eat and drink, and rise up to vain delights,
having Music at their Feasts, seeding themselves without fear, Jude 12. like
Jezabel,. (at whose Table the false Prophets feed) who made a Feast, when she
intended to murder the Righteous, to gain his Possession (read within) and that
which Murders the Just; and such who forget God, delight in these things; for
they that sung and danced in the Wilderness, forgot the mighty Power of the
Lord which brought them out of Bondage, therefore they got into the carnal
Liberty, like many others at this day, before they come to the true Rest; and
these were in the false Worship, who Worship that which the carnal Eye might
perceive, and these had lost the true Guide: And when they were in their
singing and dancing, they knew not what was become of him, who was the Minister
of the Law, that discovers sin; but though they who danced saw him not for a
time, but began to despise him, yet in a time unexpected he came upon them in
the Fierceness of his Anger, who executed the judgments of the Lord upon those
vain Dancers, with whom he was grieved, who was in the Church in the
Wilderness, and is the holy One in the midst, who with a sudden slaughter
destroyed these Dancers, whose voice of singing was not because of Mastry,
neither was their Voice the voice of the Cry of the Oppressed; and these were
Idolaters, whose Hearts were uncircumcised, and knew not the Ways of God, who
therefore condemned them with an utter Overthrow that they perished in the
Wilderness, where they thus sinned, after they had seen the Deliverances of the
Lord, as many of the Rulers and People of England have done, who have forgotten
their Leader, to whom these are left for an Example, of whom there were about
thirty Thousand slain for their Singing, Dancing and False Worship, Exodus 32. 1
Cor. 9.

And Herod had Dancing before him, and she that danced, and he that was pleased
with Dancing, caused his Head to be taken off that directed to him that is the
Light, and preached the Lamb that takes away the Sin, and their carnal Nature,
and so this murders that which is to prepare the Way of the Lord; and they took
off his Head, and murdered him, who was a burning and a shining Light, and
slew him that preached Repentance; and so the Dancers and the Rulers of the
Earth, who were pleased with Dancing and Music, murder that in them, which
calls to Repentance, and are ready to murder such as preach Repentance to them:
And whilst there is a delighting in Dancing and Music, that which calls to
Repentance is in Bondage; for John was in Prison when Herod was pleased with
the Dancing; and there is not a greater Prophet than he that preaches
Repentance; and he that proclaims the Way of the Lord was in Prison, and she
that danced desired his Death, and he that caused him to be beheaded, was a
King, a great one in the Earth, who was pleased with Dancing, and was a
Swearer, out of Christ's Doctrine; for he promised, with an Oath, What soever
she would ask, who danced before him; then nothing would satisfy the Dancer,
but the Death of him who preached Repentance; and he was an Observer of Days,
and kept the day of his Birth with Dancing: It was his Birthday, the day of
his Birth, in which he was brought forth, who was a Swearer (the Swearers
delight in dancing) that caused his head to be taken off, who warned them that
had the Oracles of God, To fly from the Wrath to come, and said, They were a
Generation of Vipers, who had the Scriptures, and came also to his Baptism, and
brought not forth fruits meet for Repentance, (these are the Vipers) And so,
that which is to lead unto Christ, does suffer in Bondage, and is murdered,
and the Head or first Appearance of it taken off upon that day which the Birth
of that is brought forth, which is pleased with the Dancing (not like Job and
Jeremiah) and delights in the Music, and that which exercises the mind of the
Creature in the dancing, desires the Death and Murdering of that in Prison,
which is to call to Repentance, above all other things; yea, there is nothing
then so much desired as the Killing and Overcoming of that which is cast into
Prison, by him that delights in the Music, Matthew. 14.

And when them in Israel, who had Harps (the Musitioners) them who delighted in
Music were carried Captive into Babylon, the Land of Confusion, in which Land
Nimrod the mighty One in the Earth went hunting before the Lord, and by the
River of Babylon they sat down and wept, who were before the Musitioners with
their Harps; these went into Captivity because of the Sin, and hanged their
Harps upon the Willowes, and sat down Mourning by the Rivers of Babylon; and
that which delighted in the Music caused the Captivity, and leads into Bondage
that which should come to Liberty, whereby Sorrow, Weeping and Mourning comes
in the End; for the Songs of the Temple is to be turned into Howling, and their
Delight in the Music was turned into Weeping, and they led captive from Zion,
who were come to the land of Promise, and there took Liberty in these fleshly
Delights, Psalm 137. The Mind that has Wisdom may read this.

And it was the King of Babylon (who said, Is not this great Babylon that I
have built by the Might of my Power, for the Honor of my Majesty?) that set up
the golden Image to be Worshipped at the hearing of all kind of Music; and he
also was a great man in the Earth, a great King, the King of Babylon, a mighty
One in Confusion, who commanded the Magicians, the Astrologers, and Sorcerers,
and Caldeans, and ruled over them, and all them that dwelt in the Earth; and he
sent Greetings of Peace to People, Nations and Languages that dwelt in all the
Earth; but he that is the Light comes not to send Peace on the Earth; and the
Angel cried, Woe, Woe, Woe, to the Inhabitants of the Earth; but he that was King
over Nations in the Earth had many Instruments of Music, even all kinds of
Music, and he that delighted in the Music set up the Golden Image, and by his
command, they that heard the Music were presently to fall down and Worship the
great Golden Image, like the Children of Israel who set up the Golden Calf; and
these were Idolaters, and in the false Worship; and that which delighted in all
kinds of Music, was in the Enmity to the Righteous Seed, and sought to murder
them who denied the Music and false Worship, and therein such appear to be of
Cain the Murderer, and of Lemach, the Manslayer: And these great Ones in the
Earth, who had all kinds of Music, were in Babylon; and these were the
persecutors, (and such persecute now) whose Rage was exceeding great against
the Servants of the living God, who to him were faithful, though in Babylon,
and regarded not their Music, neither feared their great threatening Words, nor
yet obey their strict Command, neither would they keep their Decrees, nor take
much care to Answer them in that matter, nor bow before their Image, though
made with Gold, nor Worship any other God, than he that dwells in his People,
though they were in the Land of captivity, among them in the Land of Confusion,
who at last were brought to confess unto, and fear and tremble before the
living God (who is Light) that reveals secrets in the Hearts

But that which delights in the Music, seeks to murder the just, and unto that
which seeks to murder, and persecute all them who are yet great in the Earth,
are joined (being not out of the Earth redeemed) and the Rulers of the Earth
take counsel together against the anointed, which need not man to teach, which
seed is preserved and anointed amongst the flames of their burning Enmity) for
the Princes, the Governors, the Captains, the Judges, the Rulers, the
Counselors, the Sheriffs, and all the Rulers of the Provinces, who were of
Babylon, that delighted in the Music, stood before the Image, and were in the
false Worship, and joined together in the Persecution, (as such do now) against
the Seed of God, and to confirm the Decree made by the King of Babylon, which
Decree was made with such fierce Tyranny, and height of Pride and Envy, that
nothing less but presently to cast into the burning fiery Furnace, would
satisfy that Nature, which ruled in these great Rulers in the Earth, that
loved the Music, whose fire of Enmity burned within them, and they caused
their Decree to be Proclaimed with a loud Voice, That at the hearing of their
Music, all men should Worship their Image, or presently be cast into the Fire
without, because of their Fire of Enmity within, the which Decree being not
obeyed, nor their Image worshipped, nor their Enmity within, nor Furnace
without regarded by the Servants of the living God, presently the King of
Babylon was so full of Fury, as the Furnace was full of Fire, so that the form
of his Visage was changed, and rose up in that Power of Enmity against the
Righteous Seed, like Cain the Murderer, who rose up against his Brother, whose
Countenance also was changed, whereby it appears he and the rest were of Cains
seed, and the Musitioners of their Father Jubal, the seed of Lamech, who slew a
man; read Dan. 3. When the Harp and the Music go, they must Worship the Image.

And the Persecuting Rulers of England need not to put this far from them,
being Rich and Mighty in the Earth, and Envious like Cain, and delighting in
the Music like the rest of his seed; for the great Whore, and Mother of
Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth, Mystery Babylon, has made all the
Kings of the Earth Drunk with the Wine of her Fornication, and the Great Men,
the Rich Men of the Earth, and all Nations have committed Fornication with her,
who have corrupted the Earth, and all Nations wonders after the Beast; and in
all Nations the Seed, and Children of Mystery Babylon, and of Cain and Lamech
are sprung up, and even in this Nation and other adjacent Kingdoms, the Princes
the Governors, and Captains, the Judges, the Treasurers, the Counselors, the
Sheriffs, and the Rulers of the Provinces, delight in the Instruments of
Music, and are Envious against the Righteous Seed, who cannot bow to any
Image, nor Worship, any Golden glorious Image or Likeness whatsoever; but the
living God, who is able to deliver them, and is a Spirit dwelling in his
People, and in Spirit is Worshipped by them, who cannot bow unto, or worship
any Image or Likeness without set up by the will of man.

And therefore it is this day that the Governors, and Captains, the Judges, the
Treasurs, the Counselors, the Sheriffs, the Justices, and all the Rulers in
the Earth, who are of Babels stock, and of their Fathers, Cain, Lamech and
Jubal, are joining together to persecute them that Worship God in Spirit, who
commanded not to bow down or worship any Image or Likeness; and so their
Likenesses are denied, the Substance being come, and Christ revealed within,
who is a man of Sorrows, who said, The World should rejoice, John 16. 20. But
their joy should be turned into sorrow; and his Light in the Conscience is it
which judges those vain Delights in carnal Music, which is to perish with the
using.

For when the Spirit was departed from Saul, he sought for one to play upon a
Harp before him, and for a time he was satisfied with that, and when he heard
the Music, he would be well, but afterward his delight in the Music could
not overcome that Murdering Spirit in him, but at the very time that Saul
heard the Music he sought to slay him that was to be King; and such as Saul,
who reject the Counsel of God, slayes him that is the Light, and would not that
he should reign, who is a man of Sorrows; and he that loved the Music, had an
evil Spirit, or something that troubled him, and that which moved in him, while
he heard the Music, to murder that which was to Reign, (the Lords Anointed)
the same thing led him to the Witch; And so first he left the Spirit of God,
then sought ^ase by Music, then sought Counsel from the Witch, and he was
shortly after destroyed. They follow Witchcraft, who obey not the truth, which
makes Free; and he that is the Light, is the Truth, and the Lamb slain, by that
which takes delight in that, which is out of the Truth, invented by the
Generation of Cain, a Fugitive in the Earth, of whom his deceived Mother said,
I have gotten a man from the Lord, whose seed loves that which keeps from the
Lord, and leads into the Witchcraft (like Saul) not obeying the Lord, nor the
Truth of his Son, who is the Light; and Saul being required made use of the
Harp, to quiet him for a time, from whom the Spirit of the Lord was departed,
and afterward the seed of the Evildoers, even the chief of the Nations, did
chaunt to the sound of the Viol, and invent unto themselves Instruments of
Music (like David) putting far away the Evil day, lying upon Beds of Ivory,
drinking wine in Bowls, but not grieved for the Affliction of the Righteous
seed; and these were them that were at ease in Sion, who were to go into
Captivity with the first that go into Captivity, whom the Woe is to, as may be
read, Amos 6.

And Solomon's Wives, his Men-Singers, Women-Singers and Instruments of Music
drew away his Heart from the Lord; and after he cried against the Vanity of
these things; for it leads out from the Spirit (and fear) of the God of order
within, into the confused things without, and such as follow that, are of
Babel, the Mother of Harlots, who has made all Nations drunk, in whom the time
is come, that the Voice of Harpers and Musitioners shall be heard no more at
all; for the Foundation and Skirts of that great Whore and her Craftsman are
discovered with the Light, which judges these things.

From a Prisoner of Christ, in whom my Life is hid, Humphery Smith.

DIVINE LOVE Spreading forth over all NATIONS, OR, The Glorious Day of Unity,
Teace and Concord Tendered unto all the Meek of the Earth.
Given forth from a tender Compassion to the Captivated Seed of the Noble Plant
of Renown, which is hid in all Sober, Humble, Wise and Professed Religious
Emperors, Kings, Princes and People in all Nations, kindreds and Tongues over
all the whole World, and for all sorts of Poeple who know not the Power of
Truth in the inward Parts, that they may come to have the hidden Treasure
opened in them, and be gathered into the Glorious Life of Eternal Peace.
HEarken and hear, ye Mighty Ones of the Earth that love Righteousness, and all
you Prudent Ones that can receive Instruction, who have not yet hardened your
Hearts, as many have done, against the day of Slaughter; even all ye who are
willing to come to Meekness, and receive Understanding, that your Souls may
live, who have an Ear ready to be opened to entertain Counsel, that the Wisdom
of the Most High you may attain unto, and come to taste of the Virtue of the
Substance of that which nourishes all things living, that the unsearchable
Life of the unlimited Power you may attain unto, and come to that which was in
the beginning, and partake of the Life, which over Death is to reign, that to
the Immortal Being you may be led: Be ye now therefore awakened, and feel the
operation of the Breath of Life in you; and let the Virtue of the Word of Life
break through you, and the Power thereof break through the Earth, that you may
come to be overshadowed with the Influences of divine Love, and filled with the
sweet Content of the Riches of the Life Eternal, that nothing may stop the
River of Healing Oil, nor hinder the issuings forth of the pleasant Streams of
Living Water, but that in it your Souls may be refreshed, and your Life grow up
as a fruitful Vine, that under the Wing of the most High you may be shadowed,
and rest in the shelter of a Rock.

For the Almighty Power of the Infinite Being, is spreading forth it self, and
the Eternal Excellency is giving forth it self unto the Sons of men, that they
by Humility in it may come to rest forever, and come to the fullness of that
which only gives satisfaction, without which there is no true Peace, by which
Immortallity may be enjoyed forever, and the Life which only through Death is
found, and that Dominion, which through Patience and Long-suffering is
obtained, which only belongs to Kings and Princes, and such whom the King of
Kings delights to Honor, who has eternal Crowns of unspeakable ^lory for
all that come to him in the humble Simplicity and Innocence of Uprightness,
with that Love which thinks no Evil, which comes from that ^ife in which no
Evil does stand.

For he that inhabiteth Eternity has roared from the highest Heaven, and the
Almighty, Wonderful and Terrible God over all, has thundered with the might of
his Power, to the revealing of the hidden things of Darkness, and discovering
the Foundation of all Worships practiced by all Mankind upon the face of the
whole Earth, and the ground of their Revolting from that which was, and is to
be their Life, that by it they might have lived forever, who from the holy Life
and Virtue of all things being departed in their Transgression and Rebelion
against the Light, whereby thick Darkness bath covered all mankind, and
Bruitishness in knowledge has happened unto many, and inordinate Aflections
have had Dominion, and Sottishness has blinded the Mind, and the things that
are made in the Earth has filled the carthly Heart, that in it the living
Power that made all things cannot have entrance, without which living Power
received in the Heart, there is not Eternal Peace, by the enjoyment (or
possession) of all the things that are created in or upon the Sea or Earth,
neither is there any manner of Worship that obtains life to the soal, until
therein man comes to be guided with that, by which the soul at first had its
life, by which man was made, which is Light; for the Eternal Power, who is
Light, is breaking forth of Darkness, and shining forth as the Brightness of
the clear Morning, that all the dark Corners of the Earth may be enlightened
with the beauty thereof; which Light in the lowly and the meek may be felt, who
obeying it may know it shining more and more to the brightness of the Day of
Glory, whereby all Nations may come to taste of the Virtue of the Life, and
come to know the Covenant of Peace, which will heal all the Breaches, and
restore the Unity of all Nations, that one peaceable Covenant over all Nations
may spread as the Morning Cloud, and be all covered under that, which shadows
over all the Upright in Heart, who love the Breathings forth of the holy Life,
and keep their Minds to the humble Seed, continuing in the pure Fear, thereby
in them to have the Fountain opened, that they all may drink at the Spring that
shall never be dry, whose Souls come to be as a watered Garden, and their
inward parts as a Vessel of Oil, their Hearts being enlarged with the abundance
of Peace, and because of Salvation, rejoicing forever, that all Nations may be
at quiet, and every one feed under his own Vine, and none destroy nor devour
one another henceforth forever more.

For by the Mighty Wonderful Operation of the Power of the one Light, which
shines in and over all, were all things made, and all Mankind upon the whole
Earth, from the Life of which one Light, was breathed into man, that by which
man might be kept in the Unity, and abide in the Oneness of Spirit, the which,
though all Mankind are gone out from, by Sin and Evil, yet that which is but
One in all, which was before man (and sin) does still in man remain, even the
Light, proceeding from the Life, which was the Life of man, without which he is
dead unto God, which Light remaining in man a free gift from the God of Life,
Power and Love, by it may all Mankind seek after the living God, and find him
who is not far from every one, but is near unto all that seek him in the meek
Lowliness in the Heart.

And that all Emperors, Kings, Princes and Judges, and all Nations, Languages,
Kindreds, Tongues and People upon the face of the whole Earth, may come be
restored into Unity, Peace and Concord, and be united together in one bond of
Love and Peace, and never learn War any more; and that they may all come to the
true Worship of the God of Life, Power and Light in and over all, and never to
have hatred one against another, concerning professed Religious Worship, nor
differ and strive about that, by which the Souls if all Mankind come to be
saved, nor about the Way of attaining thereunto.

And that all Nations and People may receive the Virtue of the Life it self, by
which man may come to live forever in that noble state of Prudence, Innocence
and Wisdom, in the durable Dominion of divine Honor, ruling in the excellency
of the Omnipotent Power (of the most Infinite God of Life) over all that, which
at first in divine Wisdom was subjected under man, who then bore the Image of
the Immortal God of Power; and live in the Glorious state of Peace and
Quietness, out of Wrath, Envy and Trouble; and that man may be brought into
that Noble state of Uprightness, and come to be directed and guided with that,
by which the may be renowned forever, and leave the Memorial of his
Righteousness for a sweet favor unto many Generations to come.

Therefore all ye Wise and Prudent, Ancient and Honorable, Devout, Zealous and
Religious Ones, let all your Minds be turned from the Varieties of Conceptions
in the vain Imaginations, and the vain Thoughts of the dark Mind, which leads
forth into the carnal Conceivings of things, without the pure Substance of the
one Immortal Life, which in man lies hid, from all that carnal Wisdom which
naturally rules in man, who is fallen from the Dominion and Life of the God of
Wisdom, whose delight is to dwell in his People, and reveal in them his
secrets, and make known unto them (by that which searches the Heart) the
unsearchable Riches of the Mysteries of his Will, instructing them, as a tender
Father, in the Perfect Way of Life, that unto them who feel his Power, an
Eternal Inheritance he may give, and at last receive them in the Arms of his
Love, with him to reign in the Light of endless Glory forever.

Wherefore, let all Tongues be silent, and let every Evil Motion be denied, and
the passage of every Vain Thought be stopped, and let Dread and Fear Possess him
that has done Evil, and let the inward parts be searched with the Light of
Life, which is in the Heart of every one of you; and let your Minds be wholly
turned from all the visible carnal fading Glory, to the Light of Truth in you,
which being by you loved, will lead you into Meekness, and into true Humility,
which leads to, and goes before Eternal Honor, and brings to be
Honorable in his Power, who rules in the Hearts of (Emperors and) Kings, who
fear before him; and he only who searches the Heart, is to be sought after,
above all things, and the operation of his mighty Power is to be felt in the
inward parts, judging that which has kept man from the knowledge of his Life,
and condemning and overturning that which has hindered man from the sense of
the feeling thereof in him; the which being turned unto, and loved, followed
and obeyed, will bring Judgment upon that in you all, which has long kept you
from the Dominion of pure divine Glory and Love, in the Slavery of sleshly
worldly Glory, which has more and more begotten you into that which lusts
after the Beauty which is to perish with them that dye in it.

Now, therefore awake ye all to Righteousness, stand in awe and sin not,
commune with your own Hearts, and be still, and in the cool of the day, and
quietness of your Mind, listen ye then to the voice of the Word in your Hearts,
and prize and tender that which moves in you against that which is Evil, and
come to be guided by that in you which is Light, which comes from him who is
the God of Love, whose love is already shed abroad in the Hearts of many, which
constrains them to wait in his Light to receive his Power and further
Discoveries of his Will, who wills that all men should be saved from Eternal
Death and Damnation, and not dye under the horrible Terrors of his Fierce
Wrath, nor perish in the Darkness of Unbelief, and Rebellion against that Power
which made man at first Upright, and now from a fatherly pity does call after
all Mankind, that they may return from Evil, and come unto him, and be saved
from Wrath to come, and find plenteous Redemption in the Life of his Power, and
be gathered into the Comeliness of his Love, and translated into the Kingdom of
his Immortality, and reign with him who sits upon the Throne of unspeakable
Glory, ruling in and over all the Kingdoms of men.

For behold, the Day Star of the Morning is risen, and his Glitterings are
enlightening the Dark parts of the World, and unto all Nations is it arising, to
declare in the Hearts of many, the springing forth of the day of Judgment upon
the vail and night of Darkness, which has long covered that from man, by which
all Mankind might come to see the Fountain of endless Love, which now through
Judgment, by the brightness of the Light is brought near unto all People whose
Hearts are open to receive it, and the Light of the Morning Star (which arises
in the Hearts of the beloved chosen Seed) is bringing to Judgment the hidden
things of Dishonesty, and in secret reproving the Double-mindedness of man,
that Deceit, Defraud and Hypocrisy out of him may be cleansed, and the ground
of all Vanity, Tyranny and Lust discovered and removed, that Death upon Death
with Judgment through the Light may come, that by the Light Life and
Immortality may come forth and arise in the strength of immortal Power,
breaking through that which separated man from Unity, Peace and Truth, that
unto it all Nations may become subject, and by the force of its Lowliness be
drawn together to the Hill of Holiness, and rest together in the heavenly
Felicity upon the Mount of Refuge forever.

For the Son of Righteousness is risen with Healings in his Wings, and an
overshadowing Power is with him; and they that come to the Fruit of his Love,
are filled with Peace to their Souls, and so come to that which may be received
in the Heart, and which is given to heal all Nations, and spring up in the
midst of them as a Tree of Life, whose Fruit shall never fail World without End.

And this glorious Light of Life, and Power of Love, is springing forth of
Darkness in the Hearts of Thousands in the Northern parts of the World, and is
shining forth in the brightness of Righteousness toward the utmost parts of
the South, and unto all Kindreds upon the Face of the Earth, reaching from the
East to the West, to declare and give the knowledge of Immortal Power, which in
the Hearts of the humble, harmless and singleminded may be felt and received,
if they rebel not against the Light in the Conscience, nor remain in the
strength of their own carnal Knowledge, but be willing to come out of all that
which they must dye unto, or perish with, and leave all that which never
brought them to the Enjoyment of everlasting Rest to their Souls.

Now therefore all ye tall Cedars of the Earth, whose Heads are lifted up on
high above others, and whose Minds are exalted above the Principle of Meekness
in your selves, this are you all to know, even that Power of Eternal Life,
which is to rule in and over you: And see that by greatness of your Honor and
and Glory in this present World, your Hearts be not thereby lifted up in Pride,
Ambition and Wrath, so as thereby to keep your selves from the attaining unto a
Pearl of far more and greater Price, and of a more durable Substance; for great
is the Riches, Honor and Dignity that is coming near unto you, if you let not
your Hearts be hardened against it, in the strength and perverseness of your own
Wills, despising the Day of your Visitation of Love, and rejecting the Message
of Life to your Souls, and contemning that by which you might come to live
forever, and have Dominion over Death and Hell, and escape the Torment which
all them fall into in the day of their Death, who dye out of the Covenant of
Life and Peace; the which Covenant that you may attain unto, and come to live
in forever; let Love and Mercy be received in you, and then brought forth by
you, and let Humility and Fear be placed in your Hearts with it, in tenderness
to rule over others; and let the Light in you (which lets you see the thing
that is Evil) lead and guide you to speak and do the thing that is good, right
and just; and let your Words be few, sound, sober and meek, and hate not them,
who from good will to your Souls bring the Reproof of Life unto you, or publish
the word of Repentance among you, or proclaim this message of Love and Peace
within your Borders; let not such be harmed, for a day and time of Visitation
is coming near upon you all, and happy may you be if you receive Instruction,
and love the Light.

By a lover of the Souls of all Mankind, a Servant of the God of Life, Prisoner
at the City of Winchester, known by the Name of Humphry Smith.

TO ALL Parents of Children Upon the face of the Whole Earth:
That your Children you may the better train up in the right Way that they
should go therein, something of the True Way it self is discovered, that
Iniquity may not be received by Tradition from Parents to Children, and so from
one Generation to another, but that your Children may come to Christ, and be
Children of God, and so be a Comfort unto you: Therefore is this sent among you
every where in love to your Children and you.
FRom the Bowels of God's infinite Love, unto a tender Seed of him, not known
nor brought forth in tender Babes, am I moved to you to write, That your
Children you provoke not to Wrath, nor draw forth their Minds into
Unrighteousness; neither be ye Examples of Rashness, nor Frowardness, neither
teach ye them that, when they are little (to please your vain Minds) which you
must chastise them afterward to leave again; neither teach ye them to be
Proud, by drawing forth their Minds to look at foolish Toys, which you in the
Transgression have put upon them, in any manner of dressing which is needless;
for this know, that in so doing you bring them from being such, of whom the
Kingdom of God does consist, to be Children of the Devil, who is the Father of
Pride, which many harmeless Children would not come unto, were they not trained
into it, by such as are in Pride already; neither teach ye them to strike in
the least, nor provoke them to have any delight to see striking; for thereby
afterward they come to strike one another, and hurt one another; and so you
teach your own Children to be unnatural one to another, and you unnatural to
them, in teaching them to strike one another, and then when they are a little
grown up, to strike and beat them for striking one another, the which you
taught them: Neither teach ye them to speak wicked Words, nor many Words; for
in the Multitude of Words, there wants not Sin: Neither teach ye them to call
Names in the least, nor any such thing, as you will answer it for their Souls
in the great and terrible Day of the Lord; for in these things is greater
weight than many Thousands are aware of: And for want of taking heed of these
things, in the true fear of God, Children have grown up in these and the like
things, to be a great Grief unto their Parents, of whom they learned it; and
some beat their Parents, being taught thereunto when they were little, and so
trained up out of the fear of the Lord. And by this Wickedness, received by
Tradition, and nursed up from one Generation to another, Nations are overspread
with Sin and Iniquity, and Towns and Countries are filled with all
Abominations, whereby the Lord of Heaven and Earth is grieved.

Therefore of these things be ye all warned; for this do I know, that in many
tender Babes and young Children, there is a meek, innocent, harmless Principle
from God, who wills not the Death of any; and they have a Light from Christ,
that lights every man that comes into the World, which Light is in them: And
he said, Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not; for of
such is the Kingdom of God, who come unto him that is meek and low in Heart;
therefore you should suffer them to keep unto, and come unto that which is meek
and low in the Heart; for that which may be known of God, is manifest in them:
And Christ the Light had a love to little Children, and said, He that will
enter the Kingdom of God, must become as a little Child: Therefore Woe be to
you, if you teach and cause such to become the Children of the Devil, by
following your devised Fables, evil Examples and wrong Guidance in your own
rebellious Wills: For behold, and look upon young Children, and see how
innocent and lamb-like they look; and consider if every thing were as good as
God made it; and how much more, if they were brought forth in the Covenant of
God? And wherein have they delight, in Pride or any Covetousness, or any manner
of Cruelty? And is it not better for their Souls, if you let them keep in that
state, and so to suffer them to come to Christ, who saves from Sin, and his
Power keeps out of Sin, and his Light in the Conscience condemns for Sin,
where it is, and he comes to destroy the Works of the Devil? Therefore you
should consider, that you are far from Christ, if you teach such the works of
the Devil, that never knew it, and teach Children to enter into Sin, which
separateth them and you from God, and keep you forever from Salvation, unless
you come through Judgment out of it again, which many come short of, and most
attain not unto; for few there be that enter in at the strait Gate.

And that you may the more consider my words, and come into Moderation and the
Wisdom of God, in these and other things, to walk exemplary before your
Children, and to be to them Patterns of Gravity, Meekness and Sobriety;
therefore shall I set before your Eyes some plain and simple Truths of my
experience when I was a Child.

First, as concerning Tenderness, my Heart was much affected therewith, and
Tears was as my meat and drink night and day; and often was my Heart refreshed
with love from God, when I came unto that which came from Christ, the Man of
Sorrows, who said, Come unto me; and suffer little Children to come unto me;
but many despised my Tears, and vilified my Mournful state, not knowing (as
they said) what the matter was with me; and much provocation was used to get me
out of that Condition, and as I grew up, to hurry me into the Earth, which
brought much disturbance upon my foolish despised state, that fear and terror
then entered upon me, and ghastly Dreams in the Night, and sometimes strange
Visions, in which I should cry out, and speak aloud, to the raising of all in
the House, who with all the means they used could not get me out of it, which
even astonished the Parents with fear, which things I well remember; and by the
violent, fierce, wrathful Nature that ruled in others, was my quietness
disturbed, which begat Wrath and Anger in me again toward them, which may be a
Warning to you; yet something of God in me was not wholly overcome: And the
first words, according to Scripture, that pierced my Heart, and remained with
me, was, He has filled the Hungry with good things, and the Rich has he sent
empty away.

The which words remained as a thing printed and sealed in my Heart, from the
pure love of God, and my Meditations of him and his Love was exceeding
prevailent upon my little tender Heart, being a Child, and so much the greater
was my Grief, when by the Earthly mindedness, and wrathful hasty Nature in
Parents, and others, I was even forced out of it, and so provoked to Wrath,
Grief and Discontent, and not suffered to come nor keep to Christ, who says, I
am the Light, which I felt meek and low in the Heart, therefore was my Trouble
great many times, and wrath and hastiness began to have entrance in me, the
which being sensible of, and finding a love toward God to be much more
precious than any thing of the World, and having a Hope toward him, I do
affirm, That when I was a little Child, I should and did often pray to God
(believing there was a God, though I knew him not) even earnestly did I pray
with Tears, and my Heart was opened with his Love, to whom also I should make
my Complaint in secret sometimes upon my Knees, when I could get into such a
place that none could see me, nor at all come to know it: And sometimes as I
went along the way, when it come into my heart, then should I even as it were
beg and cry with many Tears, and had boldness toward God, as toward a
familiar Friend, though much in submission and fear, as one unworthy, because I
had sinned against him: And for these things I had no Creature to be my
Example, nor to learn it of, and not knowing nor hearing of any that did the
like, I durst not let any know of it, nor wherefore I did so often weep, when
they did see me; for I saw none but despised that condition, and were
unsensible of my state.

And so having not any that was sensible of that tender Principle of God in me,
to cherish that, or be a help to me in it; but all, (as I grew up) to nurse up
the evil earthly thing that was begotten in me (as I said before) by that
nature my Leaders were in; and as I grew in years, so that was apt to grow in
me, my natural Father being more eager than most men, in laboring and caring
for earthly things, that when I grew to the age of six or seven years, and
upwards, there was seldem one day in six but he caused me to cry bitterly, and
through provocation continually thereunto, the Earth and Darkness got entrance
in me more than before, and the tender Principle of God in me was veiled from
me, and so became in after years as a Child of Wrath, disobedient to God, as I
have written in a Book entitled, Man driven out into the Earth, wherein is
declared the dreadful Indignation of God that after came upon me (because of
that wicked Nature which I was led into) before I came into this peace with
God, which now I do enjoy with him forever, whose Name my Soul does magnify
for evermore.

And this I do write to be an Ensample unto you, and a Warning, that you may
not bring your Children into the like Alienation, Torment and Condemnation as I
was, and the more especially, because that few afterward do return to God with
all their Hearts, and enter in at the straight Gate. And this you may also
consider, that this I write in plainness, and true love to you and your
Children, for the good of Body and Soul that in the fear of the living God, you
may train them up, so may you have comfort in them at the last, and they may
grow up in the Wisdom of God, to rule over such outward Earthly things, as the
Lord or you may commit into their hands; for this you may or should know, that
such as truly fear God will do no Evil, nor waste the Creatures upon their
Lust; and if you teach them to waste the Creatures of God in Pride, lust,
vanity, and needless things when they are young, how can you expect, but they
will abuse, spend and waste your Estate when they are grown up; and some have
been bred up so high in Pride, that when they have wanted to maintain that, and
other Wickedness, they have robbed and stole to maintain it, and at last, with
shame, come to untimely ends; and many things might be named which with the
Light you may also see and know, that these things are of great concernment
both for Body and Soul, and for your good and your Children.

Therefore that it may go well with them and you, and that God may do them good
at the latter end, let all your Children every where be trained up in the Way
that they should go, which Way is Christ, and he says, I am am the Light, and
the Light in them will let them see, that they should not Lie, nor speak Wicked
Words, nor do any Violence one to another; and so you are to train up your
Children in the Light; for the Light is the Way in which they may come to know
God, and hear his Voice; for God speaks by him that is the Light: And God
called Samuel, being yet a Child, and Ely bid the Child answer the Call of the
Lord. And the Child, who answered the Call of the Lord, reproved old Ely the
Priest; for that Priest's Sons were Sons of Belial, and knew not God; and them
sons of his were the first Priests that ever took Tithes by force, and they and
their Father came to an untimely Death, under the Judgments of God, which is
also to follow upon all them Priests that take Tithes by force. And certainly,
when I was a Child the Light of Christ in me did let me see the Abominations of
the Priests practices, and did speak against their way of sprinkling Infants,
and said, I should never stand as a Godfather for any (nor never did) whereat
a man Swore at me, and said, It was pity any one did it for me; but I said, I
mattered not if they had never done it; for I was never the better, though I
had never heard any one speak against the things, nor did not until many years
after: And so, that which is now my Guide, is the same which was in the
beginning before the Sin, and no other Foundation I never knew, neither can
another Foundation be laid in any, than that which is already laid, which is
Christ within the hope of Glory; and he says, I am the Light, come unto me;
and suffer little Children to come unto me; for the Kingdom of God is of such,
as come to him meek and low in Heart, who saves from Sin: And certainly I
never knew the Kingdom of Righteousness and Peace, until I became again as I
was when I was a little Child: And how hard it is to come again into that
simple innocent state, (when degenerated from it) let Gods Witness in the
Couscience answer. Therefore is this written that you may not shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven from your Children.

Secondly, Take heed how you cause or suffer your Children to Babble many vain
words with their Tongues, with a delight to hear them prattle when there is no
need; for thereby afterward the Tongue becomes an unruly Member, set on fire of
Hell, Jam. 3. 6. as I found and bore the fierce Indignation of the Lord for;
and many little Children would not come to speak so many vain and evil words,
which corrupt the good Manners, if they were not much provoked thereunto; and
seeing People delight to hear them speak the most crasty words, which are from
the subtilty of the Serpent; and many send their Children abroad among other
wild People or Persons, to have them learn subtilty and crast, to speak their
words from, and how to be hardy, or too hard for others by subtle Words and
Lies also, in buying and selling, and when they have learned it, say, They can
live any where, and that they can shift for themselves, and live by their Wits
and forecast, which indeed oft-times to deceive others; and yet there (...)
such a plain, honest, simple Principle in some, that they can never be brought
into such subtle words, nor into so many words as others, though they
themselves have much endeavored to attain it, but they have been more plain
and simple, and the Lord preserves the simple, Psalm. 11. 6. and such sometimes
could not defend their own cause, but were pleaded down when their cause was
just, by others that had learned more of the Serpents subtilty, which the
Vengeance of God will one day come upon, when the Lord avengeth the cause of
the oppressed.

And in this I have had also much experience; for when I was a Child I saw much
into the vanity of needless words, and was very backward a long time in
speaking, and in that, and some other things, much differing from other
Children, and many thought I would have been a fool, (...) they call it (...)
the foolishness of God, and therefore oft-times much means was used to cause me
to speak, and many Provocations long together, and yet not at all scarce make
me speak one word, for I saw then it was needless, and could not ask one how he
did, when I saw he was well, nor answer that which was needless; and when I was
a little grown up, and sent upon any small Errand, I should deliver my Message
in very few words, that people thought I would be never like a man; and about
ten years of Age my Father, in the flesh, would sometimes send me to Market,
and it was long before he, and all others, could make me ask any more then the
price he did allow me to sell at; or if he did not set me a certain price, then
I should resolve of a price in the mind, according as I saw the Market, and so
I often sold with the cheapest, being loath to take too much, and therefore was
often esteemed and called a Fool, and Dunce; but it had been easier for me, if
I had never been drawn out of that state, when I was taught of God, to do unto
others, as I would be done unto, and was fearful to strike any one, but rather
gave way to them that struck me, and so was by many of my equals abused, and it
was hard for me to take away the life of any Creature, and pleaded much against
it with my Father and Mother, when they commanded me to do it, though it was
but to kill a young Dog or Cat, or the like, my Life in me was grieved to do
it, and much was I forced to harden my Heart before I could do any such thing,
though commanded by my Parents, which may be a warning to all Parents, that
they be not the cause of the hardening of their Childrens hearts, and then say
of them, they are hardy Lads, for that which har dens the heart seperates from
God, who is Love, and from Christ, who comes to save the Life, and so the
Sacrifice of God is not known, which is in the broken Heart, but the Lord is
with the humble and the broken hearted: And you should all take heed of
provoking your Children to many words; for all flesh should be silent before
the Lord, and their words and yours should be few, seasoned with salt, that
they might minister grace to the Hearers; for God sits in Heaven, unto whom
an account must be given for every Idle word; and according to every word that
a man shall speak, shall he be judged. Therefore let the fear and dread of the
Lord God be before your Eyes, that you bring not your Children into the
Condemnation, by speaking more then (...) (...) (...), Of plain simple Truth in
few Words, left the Lord God of Heaven and Earth requite it of you, in the day
of his firce Wrath, when you will not be able to answer him one of a Thousand,
and left you bring your tender simple Babes, to be Children of the Devil, and
then it be not in your power to bring them back out of that state again, but
they dye in their sins, upon whom the Wrath of God abides.

Therefore as you love and tender their good, both of Soul and Body, see that
you keep, and in all things bring them to Gods Witness in them, and that will
judge and reprove them for any Evil they have done, and will keep them more out
of all Evil, then you by any other Reproof can do, and will answer your
chastizing for any Evil to be just, when done in the true Moderation, not
exceeding the Offense committed, nor proceeding from the least motion of the
wrathful nature in you [mark that.]

Thirdly, take heed of provoking your Children to unquietness, neither disturb
them of being quiet; for many are not content to see them sober and quiet, but
are provoking them to Lightness and vain Pleasure, when they would be sober,
like Lambs; for it is written, In quietness and rest shall ye be saved, Isa.
30. 13. And study to be quiet, I These. 4. 11. And commune with your own Hears,
and be still, Psalm. 4. 4. For when I was a Child, I did often sit and stand
quiet long together, pondering many things in my Mind, and as I grew up all
along that thing remained with me, that for an hour, or some hours, if I were
not disturbed, I should sit quiet, either waiting on the Lord for Counsel, or
searching which motion in me to be guided by; And when I have been riding along
the way, when I have sound the right thing in me did not lead me, I have turned
back and not rode that Journey: And my silent siting like a Fool, my Father
has often called studying, and has often sharply reproved me for it; saying,
by way of Reproach, I would sure study to be some great Preacher or another;
and my Mother has come to me, its like hundreds of times, both when I was a
Child, and a Man, and in her pity has laid hards on me, and bid me should not
sit studying so, for surely I would make my self a fool, not knowing what my
condition was: And being so usually disturbed and grieved, sometimes on
First-dayes, or when I could, I should get into some Wood, or place so private,
that none should find me, and there wait in quietness three or four hours, and
sometimes the Love of God would break through me, and his Word would make my
heart soft, and I felt the same then which now is my Life; and now I know, that
those that wait on the Lord renew their strength; and though it is written, The
Lord was weary of the Peoples Sacrifices, and with their Words, Mal. 2. 17. Yet
it was never written in Scripture, that the Lord was weary of those that waited
upon him. Therefore you should suffer your Children to wait upon God (or at
leastwise to be quiet) and that which may be known of God, is manifest in them,
Romans 1. 19. And the Lord has not lest himself without a Witness in every
Conscience; and it is Christ that is given for a Witness, Isa. 55. 4. and his
Light shines in their hearts, who says, Come to me, and learn of me; for he
is the Shepherd and Bishop of the Soul, who teaches all to Prosit, Isa. 48.
17. And is that true Prophet, which whosoever hears not, the Soul is cut off; and
certainly my Soul was cut off from the Life, when I was forced from hearing his
voice in me, that is a man of Sorrows, and as a Lamb dumb. Therefore take heed
of provoking your Children to hear ken to a stranger, or another Teacher than
he that is a living Mimster within the vail, and the vail is over the Heart,
where I have found that Instructor that shall never be removed, but all
Teachers without may be removed, and Priests and men may dye, but this abides a
Priest forever, being made by the Power of an endless Life, Heb. 7.

And so now all such as come to know something of God in them, they also come
to sit in silence, and quietness, to receive Instructions from God, which is no
new thing invented by the will of man, or learned one from another, but is the
same with that which guided the Prophets, and was in my heart from God of a
Child: and I do affirm in the presence of the Lord God, that I had never
returned out of that degenerate state which I was hurried into, from the
measure of the breath of Life in me, if I had not waited in, and been obedient
unto the Light of Christ, which was in me so a Child: And you may all mind,
that all along there has been something in you, which in secret did reprove
you for sin, and will let you see the sins of your Youth or Childhood, and that
is the Light of Christ, the Son of God, who so loved the World, that he gave
his Son a Light into the World; and the World is sct in the Heart, Eccles. 3.
11. that all men through him might believe, and be saved from Wrath to come;
and that is it that is given for a Witness, and the Witness is alss in the
Conscience of a Child, which will testify against it, after it has done Evil,
and the Countenance will fall, like Cain; but before they have done Evil they
are not ashamed, as Adam, being innocent; and if they be falsely accused of an
Evil they have not done, they will have Boldness therein, and the Witness in
them will justify them; and the Witness is given, of God to be a Leader, Isa.
54. 4. and a Captain, Heb. 2. 10. and a Savior, Mat. 1. 21. And the Lord in
the midst is mighty to save, Hos. 11. 9. And this is freely given to every one,
without Money, and without Price, so that there is neither Jew nor Greek,
Barbarian nor Scythian, Bond nor Free, but Christ is all, and in all, and he is
called a Witness, and the Light of the Gentiles; and he says, I am the Light,
believe in the Light; And God is Light, who is above all, and through all, and
in all, Ephesians. 4. 6. And he has placed a sufficient measure in every one,
Psalm. 46. 5. Heb. 8. 10, 11. which was my Teacher when I knew no other, and
before I knew what it was, and is my Teacher now, and is the same as ever it
was, and does not Change; and this is that which comes from God, and is not put
in them by Man nor humane Learning, but men by their Eloqent Speeches and vain
Deceit may lead them forth from that in them, and so break the Command of
Christ, who said, Go not forth, Mat. 24. 25. And then when they are led forth
after Lo here and Lo there, from the Rock, which Christ, the Light within, and
from the sure Foundation, which God has laid, and no man can lay another,
though they despise this, and reject, and refuse this precious Cornerstone,
which is the Light that shines in the heart to give the knowledge of God, from
the which being led by the subtility of man's fallen Wisdom, then are they
liable to follow any devised Fables, and Imaginations, and Sects, and Opinons,
and to be scattered upon every dry, barran and dark Mountain, as the Lord
knows I was long, not knowing where to find Rest, having been hurried from,
and led out from my true Guide, from and by the which at first I could pray
with the Spirit, as in measure the Spirit that was within helped my Infirmity,
with Sighs and Tears, which being led out from, and the tender Motions of it
quenched, then after I grew up, was taught to say Prayers, and some Prayers
that others learned out of Books, and this they laid upon me to say every
night, but I found that was just as dry Heath, instead of a Honeycomb before.

And so being led on in a Form, and to look after Things, and Teachers without,
the Light within became darkened, and my understanding of the Son of God's Love
shed abroad in my Heart, which sometimes being sensible of, I began very Young
to look after Priests and Sermons, and thought to have sound the true Thing
again there; but as true as the Lord God of Heaven and Earth lives, They did
me more harm than all the rest, and led me farther from my Teacher, and from
the sense of the feeling after God, Acts 17. 27. to sind him near me then ever,
and withal begot in me abundance of the Serpents subtilty, and the more because
I being sensible of a want in me, received their fair Speeches with much
eagerness and earnest Desires, believing them that that was the Way to Peace;
so that I grew much into that knowledge which puff^th up, and did indeed
increase my Sorrow, and so by them was I deceived, the Lord God knows I Lie
not, but speak the Truth in Flainness, having not Envy toward any of their
Persons; and this is the very Truth of my Heart, in the Presence of the living
God, That it was more harder for me to leave and deny, and know Redemption out
of that, which I learned from and among the Priests, then to leave the Fruits
of all the Sin that ever I by Temptations did run into, and my Witness herein
will abide in me forever.

Therefore let the Lord God be the Teacher of your Children, who has given
them Life and Being, and a better Teacher you cannot provide for them, nor
direct them unto, and that which may be known of God, is manifest in them; and
let that lead them, and guide them in his fear; and you are to let them
understand, that they should do and speak justly, according to that Witness of
God in them, which will let them see whenever they are tempted to speak a Lie,
or say they have done such a things as you commanded them, and have not; and
will let them see, they should be faithful and diligent unto you in all things,
that are just in the sight of God; and other things you should not require of
them, left you grieve them, but examples of Righteousness should you be in all
your Words and Actions unto them; and if you are not able to set them to School
to learn to read, yet they have the Light from christ in them already, and that
will show them plainly of the Father; and he that is the Light is the good Old
Way, in which the way faring men, though Fool, cannot Err.

And if you set them to school never so long to read and write, and with their
learning to search the Scriptures, which is good, yet they are to come to
Christ the Light that they may have Life, and they are to learn of him, and
follow him, and so to learn of Christ, as to know him to be in them the Hope of
Glory, and the Way out of Sin, and unto the Father, his will in all things made
manifest to obey, rather then man, that so it may go well with them, and that
they may come to receive a Blessing from God, and be a Comfort to their
Parents, who fear him, and at last in Gods Everlasting Covenant lie down with
Peace and Rest

ANd all you young Children, who are growing up into years of discretion, this
you are to understand, that you have not made your selves, but were created by
the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, who rules over all Mankind, whose Presence
is every where, and fills Heaven and Earch, and Knows the secrets of all
the Hearts of the Children of men, and shows unto man (both Old and Young)
what is his Thoughts, from whom the least Evil cannot be hid, who is dreadful
in Holiness, and just in his Judgments, and Righteous in all his Ways, and his
Presence is near unto every one, and from his All-seeing-Eye can no one hide
his deeds, and before him should you fear forever, and learn in his fear to
walk, which will keep you out of Evil; and grieve ye not his Spirit, left he
refuse to help you in your great Distress, neither provoke the Lord against
you, by learning Wickedness among the Sons of men, who are all astray from the
lowly Guidance of his Spirit, and so their works are Evil, and their words
Unfavoury, and Evil Words they use, which does corrupt the good Manners, the
which of them you should not learn, but let your Yea ne Yea, and your Nay be
Nay, and so learn of Christ, that his Power he may minister unto you and you by
him come to be saved, that you may be Children of God, and taught of God, and
drawn by his Spirit unto Christ his Son, who said, I am the Light, of whom the
Scriptures bear Testimony; And in him (the Scripture says) is Life; and he is
come, who is the Light, that you might have Life in your selves, and come to be
Heirs of the Promise of God by Regeneration, through the working of the Power
of God, which works in the Hearts of the Children of men, to sit them for
himself, a Habitation of Holiness, that he may be glorified in his People.

And certainly you ought in the tenderness of your Years to have a true fear
before that God of Life, which made you, who is an invisible Spirit, as may be
read in the Holy Scriptures of Truth: And as you learn the fear of the Lord,
who comes to dwell in his people, he will by the Direction and Guidance of the
Light of his Son in your Hearts, who is the Mediator, by whom the Law is handed
forth, will he teach you your Duty toward your Neighbor, which is near unto
you, and to Honor your Father and Mother and what Honor is, as also your Duty
and Obedience in the first place toward God, that his Love might be toward
you, and that your days might be prolonged, as also says the Law; for whosoever
grows Wicked and Rebellious against the Light, the Lord suffers not to live
out half their days, Job 24. verse. 13. For Life comes from God, and he
withdraws it at his pleasure from them that obey him not; and when he takes
way their Breath they dye, and the Breath of God was the Life of the Soul of
man; and Christ said, He was the Life, who is meek and lowly in Heart, who
said, Suffer little Children to come unto me; and said he, I am the Way, and he
comes to condemn Sin, and calls to Repentance, his Name is caled, The Word
of God, Rev. 19. 13. and the Word is very nigh thee, even in thy Heart, Romans
10. 8. And so that is the Way that you all which are Young, should go, and be
trained up in, that when you are old, you might not depart from it, Prove. 22.
6. so may you have Peace with God, and his Blessing to be with you always, and
be a Comfort to your Parents, and all that truly fear the Lord.

Written by a Member of Christ, whose love was to little Children, and so is
mine, who am called. Humphery Smith.

THE True and Everlasting Rule From God discovered.

AND That which proves all things Published from the Spirit of Truth.

To the which Rule the Scriptures also bear Testimony that the Simple and
Honest-hearted may see what Rule they are to walk by to come to perfect Peace
and Rest with God for evermore.

Also, A Testimony of the true Prophet, who was to come, and is come, and there
is not another; his Work witnessed, and Truth declared from a feeling-sence and
experience, according to Scripture.

Wherein also is showed, That the Prophets of God and Ministers of Christ did
preach the Light; and so those who preach the Light now, do therein preach the
same Doctrine as the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles did.

With an Invitation from the Spirit of Christ.

By a Servant of the Lord, and a Sufferer for his Truth in the House of
Correction at Winchester in Hampshire, called Humphry Smith.

The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of
thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him shall ye hearken, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. To the
Flock of GOD, whom he has gathered in Glocestershire, Herefordshire,
Worcestershire, Wiltshire, Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Hampshire, Dorcetshire
and Devonshire.
TO you, my dearly beloved Lambs and Babes in Christ Jesus, chosen of God the
Father before the Foundation of the Word; called to be Saints; sanctified with
the living Truth in the inward parts; justified by him that is near; redeemed
with the Blood of the new Covenant; glorified as a royal Diadem in the hand of
the Father; preserved through believing and obedience, by the mighty Arm of
unlimited Power; compassed about with Salvation; anointed with Oil of Joy, and
Gladness of Heart; who are beloved of my Soul, and the Joy of the whole Earth,
who are chosen, and faithful and true; who through great Tribubation the
Kingdom do come to receive; who have not loved your Lives unto the Death; who
did once walk in the Shadow of Death; whose feet now come to be guided in the
Way of Everlasting Peace, to whom the hand of the Father's infinite Love has
been reached forth, as unto tender Babes, who come to be born and nursed up by
the Womb and the Paps that are free, which is the Mother of us all; who know
the firstborn, which is blessed for evermore; who are become the first Fruits
unto God, and to the Lamb; who have received the Testimony of Jesus; who have
washed your Robes in the Blood of the Lamb, and have received the fine Linen,
which is the Righteousness of God, and the Righteousness of the Saints; whose
Sins are done away forever; whose Nakedness is covered; who have put on the
pure Robes, and are adorned as a Bride for her Husband; who are clothed with
Righteousness, as with a Garment, and are all Glorious within, and are able to
stand upon the Sea of Glass, mingled with Fire, and before the Throne, out of
which proceeds Lightnings, and Thunders, and Voices; who have cast down all
your Crowns at the fect of the Lamb, and come to wait on him forever and ever,
who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who is worthy of all Glory, and
Honor, and Praise, and Thanks, and Obedience, and Dominion from all his for
evermore.

The Salutation of me, the Prisoner of Jesus Christ, with my own hand, unto
you, my dear Ones, unto whom at present my Bowels of Love from God the Father
are poured forth, with whom I am in the Spirit of Love and Meekness, among whom
I have passed through good Report and evil Report, yea, that which is not to be
named, who am as one of the least, yet not the least in Love unto you, who are
unto me as the Children of my own Bowels, bound up with me in the unspeakable
Life of the Father, which from all the World is hid for evermore, where Life
and Immortality dwells forever, and is daily felt by all you that abide
faithful in the Obedience, and keep your Garments unspotted of the Flesh,
abiding in the pure Fear and godly Humility, your Bread is continued, and your
Waters are sure, and your Souls are made as a watered Gard^n, and Peace and
Life springs up in you, and you may delight your selves in Fatness, and find
the replenishings from the Fountain of God's living Mercies, and grow up in the
holy Life as Trees of Righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he may be
glorified.

The Church of the first born are you come to be, the Pillar and Ground of
Truth, made lively Stones, elect and precious, growing up a holy Building unto
God the Father, who will dwell in you his holy Temple forever and ever, who are
founded upon the elect, precious and Cornerstone, the sure Foundation, the
Rock of Ages, the Light of the World, whose light is your life, which is
shining forth unto the Sons of men, that they may see your good Works, which
are wrought in and by you, and hear your seasoned words, which ministers Grace
unto the Hearers, and answers Gods Witness in all, and makes for your
Advantage, who are as Plants of Renown, a Habitation of Holiness, Vessels of
Honor, Clusters of Grapes, who receive nourishment from the Vine, whose Fruit
never fades, whose Rivers are never dry, whose Raiment never waxes old, whose
Glory never fades, whose strength is renewed as the Morning, your Dread is
upon the People, and your Terror upon the Heathen; your Enemies are all as
stubble before you, and your God in the midst of you is a consuming Fire;
Dreadful is his Presence in you, unto all his and your Enemies, the Workers of
Iniquity, who shall fall before you as the Grass that is cut down, and wither
as the Blossom that is cut off; Paleness shall cover the faces of all your
Enemies; before you shall all People be much pained; Sorrow shall take hold
upon them in the Night-season; then shall the Arrows of the Lord reach into
their Bowels; Astonishment of Heart shall be upon them, and they shall fly when
none pursues; and be in Distress, and none shall deliver. Arise against them, O
ye, my Lambs! in the strength of the Lord, who teaches your hands to war, and
your fingers to fight; let the Beast be overturned forever, let the Whore have
blood to drink; let her Merchant be spoiled forever, and all her Children
dashed against the Stone, and broken to pieces as a Potters Vessel with the
Power of the Light; let the Darts of your hands, who handle the Word of Life,
strike through all the false Prophets, and reach unto the secrets of all their
Hearts, to the renting open of their Chambers of Darkness, and the cutting down
of the Enemies of the Most High; and fear not, let not your hands be slack, the
Lord of Hosts goes before you, the mighty God is in the midst of you, the
shout of a King is among you, and your Weapons are not Carnal, but Spiritual,
which will bring down their Holds, though never so strong.

And you who suffer in outward Bonds, and there in your place, according to
your measures, bear your Testimony against the covetous Hirelings, who are the
Merchants that belong to the great Whore, who have long fed at Jezables Table
and have long deceived the simple: Oh! faint not in your long-suffering, the
Lord God is with you, as you continue in patience and long-suffering, and you
shall be crowned with Immortality forever, if you endure to the end; for the
Cry of your Affliction is ascended up on high, and the Lord has heard the
Sighing of the needy, and a threefold Reward will you at last receive, who
endure to the end; For the Lord God of Life, who sees in secret, is sccretly
undermining the very Foundations of all Sions Enemies, and bringing Deliverance
unto the Captives in a Way that has not been known; that unto you, O ye
afflicted Ones! may Deliverance come, not by might, nor by strength of man, but
by the mighty Arm of Gods Power, which in due time will bring Deliverance unto
all the dear Lambs of Christ, who this day stand faithful in the Innocent
sufferings.

And all you who are yet but young and tender, abide you all in Meekness,
Lowliness Diligence and Faithfulness, without murmuring at them that are
growing up before you; and let no Root of Bitterness spring up among any of
you, I beseech you in the Bowels of the Lord Jesus Christ.

And all you that are grown up into the Understanding of Holiness, walk you all
in the Life of God, and let that guide you in God's Wisdom, as Examples to the
Flock, among whom you are placed, not as Lords, to rule with any thing in the
Will, but in Tenderness to serve the least Member, that it may be preserved,
that all may grow up a holy Building unto God the Father, To whom be all Glory
forever and ever.

The Blessing of the Lord be upon you, and the Power of the Most High
overshadow you, that you may spring forth as the Rose in Summer, and be
fruitful as the Vine in its Season.

The true and ever lasting Rule discovered, etc.
THe Lord God formed man of the Dust of the Ground, and breathed into his
Nostrils the Breath of Life, and and man became a living Soul. So man was
formed of that which was earthly, and into that which was earthly, that which
was living was breathed; and that which is living comes from God, which is to
keep and lead man unto God; but man going from that which is living, into that
which is Earthly, is thereby led from God, and being led from that which is
living, he is also pleading for another thing than that which is the Life, to
be his Rule and Guide, and so comes not to be guided by that which is manifest
of God in him, Genesis 2. 7. Romans 1. 19. Now the Letter is not living, but the
Breath of Life within is; the which living Breath man not knowing, goes forth
from it to be guided by the Letter which kills, 2 Cor. 3. 6.

But the holy men of God, who walked with God, and were obedient to his Will,
and spoke forth and writ Scriptures from that which was holy in them, and were
Perfect in their Generation; they were such who came to be guided by that which
was living in them, and from that men in days of old called upon the Name of
the Lord, Genesis 6. 28. and they had not a Scripture without them to guide them
thereunto.

And Enoch walked with God, and so he walked with that which is living, and not
with that which is earthly, neither had he a Scripture (without him) to be his
Rule; and so he walking with him who is the Life, came to be translated that he
should not see Death, Genesis 5. 24. Heb. 11. 5.

And Noah, who was Perfect in his Generation, found Grace in the sight of the
Lord. [Consider this] he found that by which man comes to be saved; for by
Grace man is saved, which Grace to all men has appeared; and so Noah found
that which brings Salvation, which is the Grace of God in the Heart, and
thereby he came to do God's Will, and not by any thing that was earthly, nor
from a Scripture without, Genesis 6. 8, 9. Ephesians. 2. 5, and 8. Col. 3. 15, 16. And
Noah, who found that by which man is saved, him God blessed, and his Seed, and
said, The fear of you, and the dread of you shall be upon every Beast of the
field; and they were to multiply and bring forth abundautly from the living
that was within the Earth; for by that comes the increase of God, and with them
God established his Covenant, and so Gods Covenant came to be established with
him who found that in the Heart by which man is saved, Genesis 9. 1, 2, 7, 8, 9.

And the Lord, who is the one Spirit, was Abraham's Leader from his Kindred,
and Father's House; and so Abraham heard that which was living, and obeyed that
which was spiritual, who had not a Scripture to be his Rule; and unto him the
Lord appeared, and blessed, and in the time of the grievous Famines he and his
seed was fed, Genesis 12. 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10. And he that is led by the Spirit
comes, thereby to receive feedings when the Famine comes upon them who are led
by another thing; and Abraham, who followed the Lord, was called the Friend of
God, and he (through believing) became the Father of many Nations; and he saw
the day of Christ, the Light, and obeyed the Word, which lives and abides
forever, 1 Pet. 1. 23. and being led by that which is living from his Father's
House, and out of his Country, so by that which is living was he preserved, and
him God loved, and to him afterward the Word of the Lord did come, saying, Fear
not Abraham, I am thy Shield, and thy exceeding great Reward: And Abraham
answered the Lord, and the seed which God blessed came forth of his Loins, who
are led by the Spirit, Genesis 15. 1. Heb. 11. 8, 9.

And on the contrary, Nimrod, who began to be a mighty one in the Earth, he
went hunting before the Lord, who is the one Spirit; and now there is that
first which is earthly, and much earthly Wisdom, whereby man goes hunting
before the Spirit comes, the which should not be, but man should stand still
(and not hunt) and see the Salvation of God, and so receive the Spirit to lead
(or go before) him, and not to run or hunt before the Spirit, but let it lead
man, as its written, As many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of
God, Romans 8. 14. but Nimrod hunted before God, who is a Spirit, and he was one
of the seed of Ham, who was the Father of Canaan, whom Noah cursed. And the
beginning of this mighty Hunter's Kingdom was Babel, where the Lord (whom he
hunted before) followed after, and confounded the Language of all them that
belonged to this mighty Hunter, who was a mighty one in the Earth; and out of
this Land of Babel went forth them that built many Cities, and afterward there
was a People whose gods were according to the number of their Cities: And so,
see what follows when man is not led by the Spirit of God (as Noah was, and
so preserved) but hunts mightily before him, being mighty in that which is
Earthly; first he is mighty in the Earth, then a mighty Hunter, then builds a
mighty Tower, whereby he that is earthly would climb up to Heaven [this a
Figure] and then God confounded the Language; and after wards those that were
in the many Languages professed God (who confounded the Language) before whom
their Father Nimrod hunted; and they being found in that which God confounded,
though they professed God, yet in Works denied him, and crucified his Son, the
Lord of Glory, and writ over his Head, of the many Languages, Latin, Greek and
Hebrew; and this was written above him that was the Light; and so them now who
are of the stock of Babel, are yet exalted above the Light, and count the Light
a weak and low contemptible thing, not able to save it self, much less to save
them that believe in it; and so therein manifest themselves to be of their
Fathers, who crucified him that said, I am the Light, and said unto him, If
thou be the Son of God, save thy self; and so despised him who came to save
them. And this is some of the effect of man's hurting mightily in the Earth
(before they came to receive the Spirit) as Nimrod did, Genesis 9. 18, 25. ch 10.
8, 9, 10, 11. chapter 11. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. John 19. 19, 20.

But Jacob followed, obeyed and believed the Lord, who is a Spirit, and the
Presence of God was with him, and the Blessing of the Most High was upon him;
and the Lord promised, To be with him (who was a Worm) in six Troubles, and in
seven; and when he passed through the Fire and the Water; and God gave him a
new Name, and afterward promised, To give his Seed a Name better than of Sons
and Daughters; and Jacob was a plain man, and dwelt in Tents, and him God
loved, and he prevailed with God, Isa. 41. 14. chapter 43. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Genesis 22.
28. Isa. 56. 5.

And so Nimrod (with his Followers) who was mighty in the Earth, came to be
confounded, and Jacob, who was (little in the Earth) as a Worm, and dwelt in
Tents, he and his Seed came to be blessed.

And Moses, the Servant of the Lord, whom God Almighty honored in his
everlasting Love, and made him a Deliverer unto, and a Judge and Ruler over the
People, Acts 7. 35. he being in Egypt, the Land of Darkness and Bondage, and
all the Seed and Israel of God in cruel Oppression; and I do not read that he
had any direction from Man or Scripture, or any thing else without him, to
guide him at first to refuse to be called the Son of Pharoahs Daughter, and the
glory of Egypt, and to choose to suffer Affliction with the People of God:
Neither do I read, that he saw the Angel or Glory of the Lord, until after he
was, and had been Obedient unto that which God had given into him ( for that
which may be known of God, is manifest within, Romans 1. 19.) for it is said in
the Scriptures of Truth, That it was by Faith (Heb. 11. 24.) that he refused
the evil, and chose the good; and Faith is that which is in the Heart, Acts 15.
9. As it is written, If thou believe in thy Heart, Romans 10. 9. Acts 18. 37. And
of that Faith in the Heart, God has given to every man a Proportion, Romans 12.
6. And as that (which is but little) in man is loved and obeyed, so man comes
to know more of God, and hear his Word of Faith, which is in the Heart, Romans
10. 8. And by hearing and Obedience of Faith man receives the Spirit, Gal. 3.
2. which is an undeniable Truth, which I might prove by a cloud of Witnesses
from the Scriptures, which were given forth from the Inspiration of God, by his
holy Servants: And so there being something of God in man, whereby man may (as
Moses did) first refuse the Evil, and then choose a suffering state, and so
learn to do well, the Sin then comes to be done away, Isa. 16. 17, 18. and
afterward more of God's enless Love and powerful Presence is made manifest;
and so being faithful in the little received from God in the Heart, man comes
to rule over much, as Moses did, who first learned the Obedience of Faith in
the Heart, though in Egypt, and in the time of great Persecution, where he was
also despised of his Brethren, yet he obeyed the Word of Faith in the Heart,
and so afterward to him God appeared, and the Word of the Lord came unto him,
and he talked with God afterward face to face, as a man talks with his
Friend; and the many Wonders that the mighty Power of God wrought in and by
him, are recorded at large in the holy Scriptures for a Testimony thereof, to
last throughout many Generations. And by this Faith also afterward the Members
of Christ did walk, 2 Cor. 5. 7.

And Joshua, who succeeded Moses, was full of the Spirit of Wisdom; [consider
that] he was first full of the Spirit, and so thereby he came to be a Leader
and Ruler over others, and the Dread of the Lord fell, and his Judgments came
upon them who rose up, or stood against him, and those whom he by the Power of
the Spirit in him came to rule over; and great, many and mighty were the
Victories that God gave unto this man, who was bold and courageous by reason of
the fullness of the Spirit that was in him; and the People hearkened unto him,
as they did unto Moses, and he left nothing undone of all that the Lord
commanded Moses, Deuteronomy. 34. 9. Josh. 11. 15.

But the Lords people in these days, who are led by the Spirit of God in them,
are accounted both by Priests, Rulers and People, to be drunk or mad, as it was
before, when the Son of God (who is the Light) was revealed in Paul, Gal. 1.
15, 16. he was accounted by the Ruler of the People to be mad, Acts 26. 24. And
when the Disciples of Christ had waited, and afterward received the Spirit of
Truth within, from the which they spoke, as with new Tongues, as the Spirit
gave them utterance; at them then many were amazed, others mocked, supposing
them to be drunk, Acts 2. 12, 13, 14, 15. And when Hunnah prayed in Heart,
being grieved in Spirit, was esteemed to be drunk, even by Ely the Priest, yet
she by her Prayers in her Heart, obtained her desire of the Lord, who gave her
a Son that knew the Lord, and ministered before him, being yet a Child; but the
Sons of Ely the Priest, were Sons of Belial, and knew not God, (like the
Priests of England) 1 Samuel 14. and 2. 18.

And David, a man after Gods own Heart, was a deaf man, and heard not, and as a
dumb man that opens not his Mouth, being dumb with Silence, and held his
Peace even from good until his Heart was hot within him, and the Fire burned,
then he spoke with his Tongue, Psalm. 38. 13, 14. Psalm. 39. 1, 2, 3. and 9. and
afterward he said, Thy Word have I hid in my Heart, (which Word is as a Fire)
that I might not sin against thee; and so that which keeps from Sin is hid in
the Heart; and that Word David said, was a Lamp to his Feet, and a Light unto
his Paths; which Word he kept, and loved the Law of the Lord, which is written
in the Heart, and so was made wiser than his Enemies, and had more
understanding than the Ancients, and all his Teachers, Psalm.. 119. 10, 11.
verse. 42, 43, 50, 67, 81, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105.

And all the Prophets of the Lord were led, guided and directed by the Spirit
of Christ which was in them, both in their Actions, which sometimes were as
Foolishness and Madness in the Eyes of the Professing Jews, and also in their
Words, which sometimes were as Thunder against the ungodly, though they were
the Rulers of the People; and their Words were so Terrible against them that
professed Godliness, and lived in unrighteousness, that Amaziah the high Priest
said of one of the Prophets, (who spoke in the dread of the Lord) That the
whole Land was not able to bear his Words, Amos 7. 10.

And Amaziah the Priest of Bethuel, being not able to bear the Word of the
Lord, therefore he falsely accused Amos of conspiring against the King, Amos 7.
And from the Spirit in them did the Prophets with boldness declare against the
Wickedness of the Rulers of the People, saying to the poluted City, Thy Princes
are Rebellious, and Companions of Thieves; they love Gifts and Rewards, and
judge not the Fatherless, nor the cause of the Widow; and suh as these are the
Adversaries and Enemies of the Lord, upon whom he will be avenged, and all them
that trouble his Servants, Isa. 1. 23, 24. 2 These. 1. 6. And it is just and
right for the Friends of Christ to declare against the Enemies of the Lord, and
those that decree unrighteous Decrees, and write grievousness which they have
prescribed, and turn aside the Needy from Judgment, and take away the Right of
the People, that they may Rob the Fatherless; against these is the Hand of the
Lord stretched out, and they are to bow down under the Prisoners, and fall
under the slain, Isa. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. and says the Prophet, Woe to the filthy
and poluted City, her Princes are roaring Lions, her Judges are evening Wolves,
her Prophets are light and treacherous, her Priests have poluted the Sanctuary,
Zeph. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. and many more such expressions they used, which was not
Railing, but sound Words in the fear and dread of the Lord; read Amos the first
and second Chapters.

And from the Spirit of Truth in them did they also declare, even against such
as were the Teachers and Leaders of the People, and were made Ministers by a
Law of God, which Law was then in force, and those Ministers departing out of
the way, and corrupting the Covenant, (like the Priests of England) therefore
the Lord made them (as he will these, who deny the Way, the Light) base and
contemptible in the Eyes of all the People, because they also have been partial
in the Law, Mal. 2. 8, 9. and against such did (and do) the Servants of the
Lord declare, they being such Shepherds that cannot understand, but are blind,
ignorant, dumb, greedy Dogs, (these are the worst of Dogs) Isa. 56. 10, 11. and
by such is the horrible thing committed, Jer. 5. 30, 31. And the Pastors are
become brutish, Jer. 10. 21. Therefore hearken not unto them, Jer. 27. 13, 15,
16. verses; also read Jer. 23. and Ezekiel. 34. For as Troops of Robbers wait for
a man, so the company of Priests murder in the way by consent, Hos. 6. 9. And
one of the chief of that number is John Hodder, Priest of the Parish called
Haychurch, in the County of Dorset, and there was a People, the Heads thereof
judged for Reward, and the Priests teached for Hire, and the Prophets divined
for Money, (is it not so in England?) Mich. 3. 11. and says the Prophet, O ye
Priests, this Commandment is for you, I will send a Curse upon you, and corrupt
your Seed, and spread Dung upon your Faces, even the Dung of your solemn
Feasts, [hearken ye Priests of England] Mal. 2. 1, 2, 3. And this was and is
sound Doctrine, which the itching Ears of the false Teachers of our days
cannot endure to hear, being found themselves such cursed Children that cannot
cease from Sin, that were to come in the latter days, 2 Pet. 2. 14. and those
Words, and many more to the same effect, were they guided by the Spirit of
Christ (the Light) in them to speak; and from that Spirit they declared against
the Rulers, Priests and People, who had the Law or Letter, and Moses Writings
without them, yet were Enemies to the Spirit of Truth within. But the Prophets
searched diligently to see what, and what manner of time the Spirit of Christ
in them did signify, 1 Pet. 1. 11. So that the Spirit of Christ was in the
Prophets, which testisied unto them, and was their Rule and Guide.

And when Christ came who is the end of the Prophets, and the Law, he also
declared against the same generation, as the Prophets did (and we do) and he
said, They were of their Father the Devil, who did his Works, notwithstanding
they had the Scriptures and the Oracles of God, and were of the place of holy
Worship, and were zealous and strict therein, even against them did Christ
proclaim many Woes, Mat. 23. for the Word of God had no place in them, neither
could they hear it, John 8. 37, 43. but in Christ the Light did all the
fullness of God dwell, Col. 1. 19. and 2. 9. And so, he that had the fullness
of God within him, was counted a Deceiver, a Blasphemer, denied and crucified
by them that had the Oracles of God without them, and read the Prophets every
Sabbath Day (yet knew not their Voices, Acts 13. 27.) which prophesied of him,
whom they knew not when he was come (who is the Light.) And now we do bear
witness, that the Light is come, as did Isaiah 60. 1, 2, 3. though Darkness
covers the Earth, and gross Darkness the People, yet in him that is the Light,
does the fullness of God abide; and no man comes to the Father (or fullness of
God) but the Son, who is Light. And now, those that have the Scripture (and
call that their Rule) in the which they read of Christ the Light, yet the Light
they deny, and so deny him of whom the Scriptures speak, and him unto whom all
Power in Heaven and Earth is committed; and so long as they deny him, who is
the Light, unto whom all Power is committed, they cannot receive Power from him
to become the Sons of God, but they who do receive and believe in him who is
the Light, unto them he gives Power to become the Sons of God, John 1. 12.

And now the zealous professing Jews, Scribes and Pharisees have the
Scriptures, but they deny him that is the Light, and so they are blind; and all
those must needs be blind who hate the Light, and deny it; and so the Jews had
the Oracles of God without them, and the Law without them, and Christ the Son
of God without them, and among them, preaching to them, and yet they were deaf
and blind, and of the Devil; for they did his Works.

And moreover, the Disciples of Christ might read the Scriptures without them,
and they had him, in whom was the fullness of God, among them, with them, or
without them, and yet in many things they understood not, John 12. 16. but were
often asking Questions, as in Mat. 23. 10, 36. chap. 16. 22. chapter 17. 10, 13,
19. chapter 18. 1, 21. chapter 19. 10. chapter 24. 3. John 13. 7. and some time they knew
not what Spirit they were of, Luke 9. 55. and though he had been a long time
with them, yet it was hard for them to know him, John 14. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. and
though he had been so long time with them; [consider] (it was with them) (for [
With] may be one thing, and [ In] another) until he had finished the Work
(without them) which the Father gave him to do, John 17. 4. [Consider] (the
outward Work of Christ without, or among the Disciples, may be finished) and he
was at the Passover with them, and at the Supper with them, and gave his Life
for them; and they saw his Body broken, and his Blood shed without them; and
yet not withstanding all this, afterward he (that is, the Light) upbraided
them of Unbelief and Hardness of Heart, Mark 16. 14. who for a long time had
the fullness of God amongst, and with them, who being with them, said, He that
is with you, shall be in you, John 14. 17. And so they were to wait to receive
him [ within] and that within was to abide forever, but that without departed
away; but that within was and is to lead into all Truth, and be with his to the
end of the World; for that which is in man, is always with him; but that which
is with man, and not in him, may not always be with him. And now the Light is
in man, and so he that is with his to the end of the World, is the Light of the
World, who is the Resurrection and the Life, who was dead, and is alive, and I
say, he lives for evermore, who has finished his Work in the outward things,
to wit, Circumcision, Baptism, the Supper, and Death on the Cross without the
gate, and is now revealed within, and works all our Works in us, and ever
lives to make Intercession for us, Isa. 26. 12. Heb. 7. 25. in whose Hearts he
is now crying, Abba Father, and he that has the Son, has also the Father, to
whom be Eternal Dominion, Glory, Honor, and humble. Obedience for evermore.

And so Christ Jesus being also guided by that of God, or rather the fullness of
God in him, whereby he finished his Work, and departed away from among them,
and bid them wait for that which should abide with them forever; and said,
These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you, but the
Comforter, whom the Eather will send in my Name, he shall teach you all things,
John 14. 16, 25, 26. and that which teaches all things was to be revealed
within, and until that was come and revealed in them, they did not know all
things; so that that which teaches all things, and shows plainly of the
Father, and abides forever, is to be received within; and they in Obedience to
his Command did wait, and their waiting was not in vain; for when the time was
fully come, they did receive the Promise of the Father, which they had waited
for, and so were filled with the holy Ghost, Acts 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. as Joshua was
full of the Spirit; and in Christ was the fullness of God; and Stephen was a
man full of the holy Ghost; and the Desires of such was, That others might be
filled with all the Fullness of God, Ephesians. 3. 19. (Its not filled with the
Scriptures) And so they being filled with that which was holy, were by that led
in the Way of Holiness, and with that which was holy in them, were they to
build up one another, Jude 20. and then they spoke the Word of God with
Boldness: and after the Son of God was revealed in Paul, three years after he
went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, Gal. 1. 16, 17, 18. and fourteen years after
he went up to Jerusalem by Revelation, Gal: 2. 1, 2. And so, he did not say, he
went by the Scriptures, or any Command without him, but by Revelation, and a
Revelation is within; and that all the Ministers and Disciples of Christ did
come to be led and guided by his Spirit that was in them, might easily be
proved by many undeniable Truths of plain Scripture, wereby it might more
largely appear, that they were all led, guided and directed by the one Spirit
in them, though the Gifts, Leadings and Operations of that one Spirit in them
was various, as may be read, 1 Cor. 12.

And now, most People will grant this before written to be true, That all the
People of God formerly were led by the Spirit that was in them; but that men
should now in these days be led by the Spirit of Christ in them, is by many
denied; the which thing chiefly is that which I would a little search into, or
rather open to thee, from that which has searched me, Psalm. 139. 23. and that
according to the Scriptures of Truth, if that will be by thee regarded, that so
it might appear unto all that are not wilfully Rebellious against the Light of
Christ in their own Consciences, and also deniers of plain Scripture, by the
which I am ready to prove, That the People of the Lord and Ministers of Christ
were not only led by the Spirit of God themselves, but also in their Words and
Writings did direct others thereunto, saying, Walk in the Spirit, be filled
with the Spirit, and Worship God in the Spirit, Gal 5. 16. Ephesians. 5. 18. Phil.
3. 3. John 4. 24.

But say the People, Though they did walk, and direct others to walk by the
Spirit, yet are not we now to walk by the Scriptures? And is not the Scriptures
now to be our Rule? And are we not to be led by that?

To which I Answer: That God changes not; And where does the Scriptures say,
That the Scripture is to be a Rule to walk or be led by? And the Ministers of
Christ did not say, As every man has received the Scriptures, so Walk; But As
every man has received Christ (and he is the Light) so walk, Col. 2. 6.
Consider, there is first something to be received, and then there is to be a
walking in the Power and Strength of that received; for a Babe is not able to
walk by all the words that may be spoken unto him, until he receive power and
strength within him; and the new born Babes are to receive the sincere Milk of
the Word (and the Word is in the Heart) and then to grow up by that received, 1
Pet. 2. 2. and every man is to walk as he has received of Christ the Light,
which comes from the Word, which lights every man, John 1. 9. but every man
does not receive that into the good Understanding which he is lighted with, but
rather strives against, and hates it; for every one that does Evil hates (not
the Scriptures, but) the Light, John 3. 20. and so they hate that in which the
Power stands; but as many as receive him who is the Light, to them (and none
but them) he that is the Light gives Power; and he has gifts for the
Rebellious, but they hating the Light, and his own, whom he lights, receive
not him that is the Light, and to them he commits no more, and so they have
not Power (yet they may have the Scriptures.) And so man walks by the strength
that is in him, which strength comes from the Word by which all things were
made; and man receiving the ingrafted Word (which is not the Scriptures) it is
able to save the Soul; for Christ, the Light, whose Name is called the Word of
God, Rev. 19. 13. is able to save to the utmost all them that come to God
through the Light of the World, Christ Jesus; and in him neither Circumcision
nor Uncircumcision avails any thing, but a New Creature; and as many as walk
according to this Rule, (I do not say my Writings) peace be unto them, Gal. 6.
15, 16. And so, here was the Rule, which whosoever walked by, the Peace belonged
to; but many call the Scriptures their Rule, and have not Peace; but they to
whom the Spirit is a Rule, from it to them Peace comes; and man being led by
the Spirit in him, has that to be his Rule from whence the Scripture was given
forth. And now, that which man is to be directed, guided and led by, tryes,
measures or searches things, that sometimes he calls Rule; and it is not said,
the Scriptures searches all things, but the Scripture is to be searched into,
John 5. 39. and its said, The Spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things
of God, 2 Cor. 2. 10. Prove. 20. 27. and that Spirit which searches all things,
comes from him Who has measured the Waters in the Hollow of his Hand, and
meeted out Heaven with a Span, and comprehended the Dust of the Earth in a
Measure, and weighed the Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance, Isa.
40. 12. and draws a Line through the midst of his People, and lays Judgment
to the Line, and Righteousness to the Plummet, and sweepeth away the Refuge of
Lies, Isa. 28. 17. and tells the number of the Stars, and calls them all by
their Names, Psalm. 147. 4.

And they to whom this Spirit is a Rule, and are led by it, they are the Sons
of God, Romans 8. 14. and it is not said, as many as are led by the Scriptures,
are the Sons of God; and man is to walk by the same Rule of that he has
attained, Phil. 3. 16. and mark them that walk so; and it is said, If ye are
led by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law, Gal. 5. 18. but many have the
Scriptures, and yet are under the Law, but the Spirit, which is the Word,
Ephesians. 6. 17. comes (and has power) to redeem from under the Law, which the
Scriptures does not; for through the Spirit the Deeds of the Flesh come to be
mortified, Romans 8. 13. And while Paul profited much in that Religion which he
learned from the Pharisees, he was an Enemy to Christ the Light; but when
Christ was revealed in him, and he obedient to the heavenly Vision, then was he
led by the Spirit in him, to do God's Will; and he did not say, That the
Mystery of Christ, which in other Ages was not made known, was then manifest to
him by the Scriptures; but he said, That it was by Revelation made known unto
him, and revealed to the holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit, Ephesians. 3. 4,
5. and he did not say, without Scriptures it was impossible to please God, but
it is said, Without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. and Faith
is in the Heart, and purifies the Heart; and so without that in the Heart,
(which purifies it) men cannot please God; and so man cannot please God without
being guided by that (in the heart) which respects no man's Person, Jam. 2. And
so, every one is to walk according to that which he himself in particular has
attained unto, and to mind the same thing according to the measure of the Rule
which God has distributed, 2 Cor. 10. 13. and that Rule which God has
distributed, is the Rule, and no man ought to go beyond it, or boast of things
without or beyond that measure, or of other men's labors, or things made ready
to their hands, but to give all Glory to the Lord, 2 Cor. 10. 14, 15, 16, 17.
And this was the Rule received from God, which his Ministers walked by, and
exhorted others unto; and so I do not bid People walk by my Writings, but by
their measures in them, received from God, and that is living, as God is, and
of his own Nature, and enables man to do his Will, and so fulfills that which
is written without, and was given forth from the measure of God within.

What then? do I herein in the least make void, contemn, slight, villifie or
deny the Scriptures? God forbid; nay, I had rather my Pen mightfall out of my
Hand, or my Arm from my Shoulder, or my Tongue cleave to the roof of Mouth
forever, then I should go about to make void the Scriptures of Truth (and is a
true Declaration, Luke 1. 1.) Which was given forth from that which is my Life,
which is hid, not in the Scriptures, but with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3. and the
Word was God, and that which was God is God, John 1. 1. but if I should say,
the Scripture is God, I should be a Blasphemer, like unto others: Do I herein
deny the Scriptures? Nay, rather I establish the Scripture in its place, and
make use of it as a Cloud of Witnesses by me, in directing all People unto that
which the Scriptures testify of, and was given forth from, John 5. 39. that by
it in them they might be enabled to do God's Will, and witness the Scriptures
fulfilled, as it is written, I will walk in them and dwell in them, 2 Cor. 6.
16. and he is the God of them in whom he dwells, and they are his People in
whom he walks, from whose Inspiration the Scripture came, in which it is
written, Prove all things, 1 These. 5. 21. and try the Spirits; and that which
proves all things, and tryes the Spirits, comes from the God of the Spirits of
all flesh, and from the Word of his Power, by which all things were made; which
Word in the Heart is as Fire, which proves, tryes and refineth things, and is 1
John 4. 1. Numb 16 22. John 1 3. Col. 3. 16. Psalm. 3^. 3 Jer. 5. 14. Mal. 3 3.
Heb. 4. 12. Psalm. 139. 1, 23, 24 John 4. 1. Luke 10. 42. 1 Cor. 2. 12. chapter 1.
21. Rom 8. 9, 10, 11. 1 Cor. 3. 16. chapter 2. 10 John 15. 4, 5. Jude 6. 2 These. 1.
5 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. John 17. 17. Psalm. 51. 6. John 1 14. chapter 8. 44. 2 Cor. 44.
Ephesians 2 2. John 8. 24. chapter 17. 7. 1 Timothy 4. 5. Job. 8. 32 chapter 15. 5. 1 John 3.
5. Dan 9. 24. 2 Cor 3. 5. chapter 4. 10. Romans 4. 8, 10 Ephesians. 3 17. Col. 1. 27. Joh
16 25. chapter 15 5
quick and powerful, dividing asunder Soul and Spirit, and is a Discerner of
the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart; and man feeling that, and coming to be
guided by that which searches the heart and tryes the reins, with that may he
try all things, from the which one thing within, the false Spirits are gone
forth into the World; and those Spirits of the world, and all the world by its
wisdom, and that Spirit which is without, knows not God, nor the measure of his
spirit within: And so, those are the false spirits that are gone forth, which
are to be tried by that which is not gone forth, but abides within, and
discerns the Heart; and those that are gone forth from being guided by that
within (as the holy men were) they are like unto the Angels who kept no their
first eslate; for man at first was (and holy men were) guided by that within,
which is the Word, which Word is Truth, and he that abode not in Truth (which
is in the inward parts) was a Devil and a Murderer, who is called the God of
the World, that blinds the Minds, and works in all the Children of
Disobedience; and so the Devils Works are in his Children, and they are talking
of the Works of God without them; but they that are led by the Word of Truth
that sanctifies, cleanses and makes free; by it they come to know the Works
of the Devil destroyed, which was in them, 1 John 3. 8. And so, he that
destroys the Works of the Devil, and makes an end of Sin, and brings in
Everlasting Righteousness, is known in all them that are not Reprobates: And
so, when sin is made an end of, Everlasting Righteousness is brought in; and so
its within, and not without: And so he being received within, who brings that
in which is Everlasting, to that man he is within the hope of Glory, and shows
plainly of the Father, and says, Without M E yo can do nothing [Its not said,
Without Scripture ye can do nothing] and they that are without him who teaches
all things, are without God in the World; but he that has the Son, has the
Father also; he that has the Father and the Son abiding in him, need not to go
out from that, to be taught or led by any other thing or Rule without him, as
it is written of him that overcomes, That he shall no more go out; and upon
him that goes not out, the New Name comes to be written, and he comes to be a
Pillar in the Temple of God, who goes not out, Rev. 3. 12. And the Name which
is better than of Sons and Daughters, even the Everlasting Name that shall
never be cut off, is given to them within the House, and within the Walls, even
to such who take hold of the Covenant, Isa. 56. 4, 5. And the Sanctuary is set
in the midst of them for evermore, Ezekiel. 37. 26, 27, 28. And in the midst of
them will the Lord spread forth his hands, as one that swimmeth, Isa. 25. 11.
And though Ephriam compassed the Lord about with Lies, and the House of Israel
with Deceit, yet says the Lord unto Ephriam, I am God, and not man, the holy
One in the midst of thee, Hos. 11. 9, 12. And so, Ephriam compassed him about
with Lies, who was in the midst, and he that was in the midst was holy, though
compassed about with Lies, and the Just Lord was in the midst of the filthy
poluted and oppressed City, Zeph. 3. 1, to 5. Consider this, all you poluted
Ones, who oppress the Just in the midst of you; for the Just Lord in the m^^st
will arise as a Lion out of a Thicket, and a young Lion out of the Forest; he
shall roar like a Lion, and utter his Voice like a man of War, Isa. 42. 13, 14,
15. And then shall his Enemies be scattered, Psalm. 68. 1. And he will sweep
away the Refuge of Lies; therefore the Daughter of Zion, and the Daughter of
Jerusalem, and Israel shall be glad; for unto them it is said, The Lord is in
the midst of thee, thou shall not see Evil any more: In that day shall it be
said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not; and to Zion, Let not thy hands be slack, the
Lord thy God in the midst of thee, is mighty, he will save, Zeph. 3. 14, 15,
16, 17. And he that is mighty to save, is known in the midst; and so he that
justifies is near, Isa. 50. 8. even he who has said, I will dwell in the
midst of the Children of Israel forever, and my holy Name shall the House of
Israel no more defile, Ezekiel. 34. 7. For the Lord has chosen Zion, he has
desired it for his Habitation; this is my Rest forever; here will I dwell; for
I have desired it: I will abundantly bles her Provision. I will satisfy her
Poor with Bread: I will also clothe her Priests (not the Priests of England)
with Salvation, and her Saints shall shout aloud for joy; there will I make the
Horn of David to bud: I have ordained a Lamp for mine anointed; his Enemies
will I clothe with shame, but upon himself shall his Crown flourish, Psalm 132.
13 to 18. And every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as
he is pure, 1 John 3. 3.

The true Prophet, who was to come, is come, and there is not another, his Work
witnessed and Truth declared from a feeling sense and experience, according to
Scripture.
THe true Prophet is come, of whom Moses the Servant of the Lord did write, who
is raised up in the midst, and has rent the Vail, and from under Death is
risen in his unlimited Power, Dominion and Authority, even him that Death nor
the Grave cannot hold, who through Death has conquered Death forever; and
though Death had Power over him before the Way into the Holiest of all was made
manifest, yet now Death has no more dominion over him, but he is risen through
Death who was made a Curse, and has born away the Curse, and removed the
cursed ground upon which fallen man stood, and has born away the sin of the
World, and was made sin for us, that we might be made the Righteousness of God
through, in and by him who has opened the Understanding, whereby the
unsearchable Riches of unspeakable love comes to be made manifest, even unto us
who were going astray, and were Children of Wrath as well as others, and Aliens
and Strangers to the Covenant of Grace, and long were without God and in the
World, tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine, after the cunning
Craftiness of men, whereby we were long deceived, even by such who still
bewitched the Minds of the simple; out of which Witchcraft, I can say, the Lord
has delivered, and obedience to the Truth (that makes Free) is yielded, and
Love, Mercy and Judgment is come and brought forth, and Victory is witnessed;
the Messenger of the everlasting Covenant is come, even he that we long waited
for, and we do not look for another, but he that is the same yesterday, to day
and forever, who was to come, and is come, and is to come ( he that reads,
let him understand) who is without beginning of time, or end of days; who is
made under the Law, and became as a Servant, being obedient to the Death,
through which the Life is risen up into the understanding, and has born away
that which the Law had power over, and has brought in that by which the Law is
fulfilled; and so he that is the end of the Law for Righteousness, is felt and
received, who takes away the Sin, and reconcileth the World up unto the
Father, where the sin is taken away by him, who though he was made sin, yet
knew no sin, who appears now the second time without sin, to the saving of that
which was lost, which is now brought again, and plenteous Redemption is known;
for the desire of all Nations is come, and the second Houses is filled with his
Glory; the Wine Press is full, the Fats overflow; for the VVinter is past, and
the Summer is come, and the Lillics appear in the Field where the Pearl was
hid; the Fig Tree puts forth her buds, and the Vine yields her increase; the
Olive does blossom, and the Apple Tree in the midst of the VVood does flourish,
and the good ground yields her increase, and is fruitful in its season to the
good Husbandman; and there is seed to the sower, and bread to the eater; the
Barns are filled with abundance, and the Storehouses with plenty, and Treasure
is laid up for many years in the heavenly places, which are purified with the
lively sacrifices, so that the earthen Vessels are fitted to keep the heavenly
Manna that shall dure throughout many generations; and so against the Famine
comes upon the Earth (and all them that feed at Jezabels Table) Oil is laid up
in safety, and the finest of the Flower in a place where it is sure, where it
will last and never fail until the Heathen are scorched with heat, and they
that have forsaken the Lord are become as a parched Heath, and all the gods of
the Heathen famished, and the Tongue of the Egyptian Sea dried up, and all the
false Prophets overturned, who belong to Jezabel, whose Body the Dogs must
tear, though she yet sits as a Qeen, in opposition to the true Prophet, Christ
the Light; and until them who are drunk with the Wine of the Fornication of the
Whore, and are the Merchants of Mystery Babylon the great, the Mother of all
the painted Harlots, be all condemned in one day with an utter overthrow, and
the Seat of the Whore removed, and all them that commit Fornication with her
made as the Valley of Hammon Gog, and as the Dung upon face of the Earth; and
all the Brats of the Whore dashed against the Stones; until then, I say, shall
that in store remain, and a Hiding Place be found for the Prophet of the Lord,
who is also hid near thee in thy own Land, though thou art seeking him afar off.

Wherefore hear, O ye Kindreds of the Earth! for as the Dew spread upon the
Mountains, so does the Streams of my Beloved raise, overspreading the Earth
with the comeliness of his Love, and filling it with the Beauty of his Grace;
the Banner of his Love is spreading forth as a Curtain; and under the shadow of
his Wings is a certain Hiding Place both from the Storm and from the Heat; and
though the Sea rage, and all Kindreds and Tongues swell up in Wrath, Pride and
Arrogance; yet he come, known, witnessed and received, who commands both the
VVirds and the Sea, who is the former of all things, by whom they all were
made, and at his Command all are subdued; and the lightnings of his Light
enlightens the World, Psalm. 97. 4. and the Glory of his Power is spreading
over the Nations, and the excellency of his Beauty is reaching to his Lambs;
and because of his Comeliness the Virgins love him, and to him the Daughters of
Jerusalem bring their Gifts, and before him the Princes of the People lay down
their Crowns; and because of him the Wilderness does rejoice, and the Desolate
is made glad; for the fruitful Land was become a barren Wilderness, and now
the baren Wilderness is turned into a fruitful Field, and the plant sprung out
of a dry Ground, and the Seed is born of the barren Womb, and there is a Way
made in the Wilderness, and streams are given in the Desert, and the Ear of
the deaf is opened, the Lame does walk, and the Leaper is cleansed, and the
stammering Tongues speak plainly; the Gospel is received, and the everlasting
Power is come, even the Immanuel, God with us, and in us; and we confess Christ
come in the Flesh, and do not look for another, but do know that this is the
great Prophet, who is come into the World, that is set in the Heart, Ecclcs.
3. 11. which is in the midst, out of which Moses said, the Lord would raise up
a Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. the which Prophet being come, which all are to hear,
he says, I am come a Light into the World, John 8. 12. chapter 12. 35, 36, 46. The
World being set in the Heart, there is the light of him who says, I am the
Light; and he that is the Light, is the true Prophet; and the true Prophet is
in the midst, who is the Light, whose day Abraham saw, unto whom the Gospel was
preached, which Gospel is Gods Power, whereby Abraham rejoiced because he came
to see the Day of him who is the Light of the World, unto whom all the Prophets
gave Testimony.

Isaiah, who witnessed, the Son born, and the Child given, Isa. 9. 6. by whose
stripes he came to be healed, he preached the Light, and said, The Light was
come, and the Gentiles should come to his Light, and Kings to the Brightness of
his rising; and he also prcached the Light to be everlasting, Isa. 60. 1, 2, 3,
19, 20. so that Kings and Gentiles shall come unto him that is the Light, who
is Gods Wisdom, that is from Everlasting, Prove. 8. 23. who is given for a Light
to the Gentiles, and in him they trust. And Isaiah said, Come ye, let us walk
in the Light of the Lord, Isa. 2. 5. And the Disciples called him Lord, who is
the Light. And David's servants were careful that the Light of Israel might not
be quenched by his going forth to War; [Mark] That which leads forth to War
quenches the Light, 2 Samuel 21. 17. And Job did not deny but the Light was given
to him that was in Misery, and to the man whose Way was hid, Job 3. 20, 23. And
David preached him who is given for a Light unto the Gentiles, to be Salvation
to the ends of the Earth; and said, The Lord is my Light, and my Salvation,
Psalm. 27. 1. And in thy Light we shall see Light, Psalm. 36. 9. And Light is
sown for the Righteous, Psalm. 97. 11. And he that came of David said, Truly
Light is sweet, Eccles. 11. 7. And when he came of whom the Prophets
prophesied, who is the only Prophet and High Priest, and the end of the
Prophets and the Law, and that Priest hood which was made by a Law; he being
come, preached himself to be the Light of the World, and said, While you have
the Light, believe in the Light, John 8. chapter 12. And John who was a Minister of
Christ, preached the Light, and said, it was the Life of man, John 1. and Light
is come into the World, John 3. 16. And Peter preached the Light shining in a
dark place. And the Ministers of Christ who were Eyewitnesses of his Glory,
said, The Light shined in Darkness, and God commanded the Light to shine out of
Darkness, and some witnessed, that they were made partakers of the Inheritance
with the Saints in Light.

And many more Proofs might be brought from the Scriptures of Truth, as a Cloud
of Witnesses to prove, that we who preach, declare, and bear witness to the
Light, do not therein preach a new Doctrine, nor another Gospel, but the same
with all the holy men of God; and that which we have heard and seen, which was
from the beginning, which Message is this, even the Light; which Light in the
World, in the Heart, is the Cornerstone, which is the sure Foundation, and
other Foundation can no man lay, than he that is the Light that is already
laid: And this is the true Prophet which all are to hear, and the Children of
the Light do hear, know, and obey his Voice, and stranger they will not hear,
but him by whom God speaks; for God in times Past spoke unto our Fathers at
sundry times, and in diverse manners, but in these last days he has spoken
unto us by his Son, who is the Light, whose Name is called the Word of God,
Rev. 19. 13. which Word was hid in David's Heart, of whom Christ came, who is
the Light, and the Word which was a Light unto David's feet, and a Lanthorn to
his steps; and so David called him Lord, who is the Light and the Word nigh,
who is in the midst, and preaches Peace to them that believe in, follow and
obey him that is the Light; and the Light is the Condemnation of all them that
hate it; and every one that does Evil hates the Light; but the Light is the
Condemnation of all whose Deeds are Evil; and every one that loves the Light,
wherewith he is enlightened, brings his deeds to it, and by it the hidden things
of Darkness are made manifest; and waiting in that which it does make manifest
to be Evil; so Christ the Light comes to destroy the Works of the Devil, and
make an end of Sin, and reconciles up unto God, who has given him a Light of
the Gentiles, and a Covenant to be salvation to the Ends of the Earth; and this
is he that lights every man that comes into the World; which World God so
loved, that he gave his Son a Light into it, that all men through him might
believe, and be saved from Wrath to come; and so its the Will of him that sent
him, who is the Light, that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge
of the Truth; which Truth brings Freedom to the Seed, whereby it comes to have
Peace with God being redeemed from the Bondage of Corruption, and set at
Liberty from under the shadow of Death wherein many long have walked, whose
feet now comes to be guided into the Way of Everlasting Peace, where the
Children of the Light do rest together.

And this is he who has wrought Redemption with his own Power, and redeemed
out of the Captivity, and opened the Prison Door, and preached Peace to the
Spirit that was in Prison in the days of Noah, when the old World was
destroyed, and brought the Flood upon the Ungodly, yet saved the Seed in the
midst of the Storm and raging Waves; and by him, even he that is the Light, is
Captivity led captive, and that which ruled over, is brought to be a Servant
under; and when the Word of the Lord came to the Rock it opened, and much of
living Water issued forth abundantly, whereby the Thirsty came to be satisfied,
and clothing from him who is the Light does daily come, and the Raiment that
never waxes old; he clothes with the Armor of Light, and is as a Sun and a
Shield; from him the Spiritual Weapons come, and he teaches the Hands to War,
and the Fingers to Fight; so that the strong Holds are broken down, and every
Thought comes to be subjected, and when he leads through the sufferings like a
Lamb, so is he followed; and when he arises up to speak with Authority, and not
as the Scribes, then is he obeyed, who then utters his Voice like a man of War,
and lifts up his Voice like a Trumpet, crying aloud unto all them that are
Thirsty, and proclaming the Woes unto all them who wear the false Coverings;
and by him are his Enemies confounded, and Judges led away fools, and Princes
laid in the dust. And at him do the Kings of the Earth shut their Mouths, and
before him shall they all bow; for with the Sword of his Lips does he slay the
Wicked, and his slain are many, and shall be more; for no Flesh shall stand
before him, who is now come to plead and make War in Righteousness, and now are
his Enemies flying unto their strong Holds and fenced Cities, but his Salvation
is stronger than Walls or Bulwarks, and that all them that follow him (their
Captain) know right well; and before him all the mighty of the Earth are as a
tottering Wall, and as a broken Hedge; and he it is that rides upon the Wings
of the Wind, whose Power is unlimitted, whose Ways are past finding out, who
descended into the Lower parts of the Earth, from whence the wicked never knew
him to arise.

But I, with the rest, do witness, he is risen through the Earth, and his Feet
stand upon it, and is become the first Fruits of them that slept, and is
ascended up on High, and has Dominion over all, and is crowned with Glory and
Honor eternally in the Heavens, and has given Gifts unto men, and from him
the Gift of Eternal Life is come.

And this is my Beloved, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem! and this is my Friend and
Redeemer, O ye Sons of men! even he who has redeemed my Soul from Hell, and
brought me back From the Power of the Grave; this is the Prophet of whom Moses
did write should come, and is come, and there is not another than he that is
raised up in the midst, which is Christ the Light of the World in the Heart;
this is he that has done wondrous works for, in and by me, and many more, who
are thereby made living Witnesses unto his Name, whose Name is a strong Tower,
and a Rock of Defense, he is a sure Dewlling Place; he is the Rest of the Soul
and the ^oy of the Living.

And since he has put the Sword of his Spirit into my hand, and his Word of
Life into my Mouth, and Wicked thereby have been cut down like the Grass, and
the Mighty have been trampled upon as the dust in the Streets; the tall Cedars
have been as the Brambles, and the strong Oaks have been rooted up; the Prophet
became a Fool, the Pastors became Brutish, and the Spiritual Man was as Mad,
but the Seed has been refreshed; and the weak nursed up, the tender Plant
preserved, and the Hungery fed

And for his Names sake will I not keep silent until my Testimony be finished,
and until Jerusalem be made a Praise over all the Earth, and her Righteousness
break forth as the Morning, and her Comeliness as the Brightness of the Sun, and
till I see the Destruction of her Enemies and her Adversaries overturned
forever; for Powerful is our King, who is come to reign.

Oh! who can withold the Pen from writing, and the Tongue from declaring?
When the Lion has roared, who will not hear? When the Lord has spoken, who
can but prophecy? How can I but declare his Wondrous Works, and proclaim his
Name wherever I come, and confess him before men, though I should suffer much
more Prisoning, Dungeon, and Whipping than I have done? surely his Name I will
declare in the World, who is the Light, and give my Testimony of him that saves
from Sin, whose Name is called Jesus, the Light of the World, which is the
elect, precious, and Corner (but stumbling) stone, even to both the Houses of
Israel; but it is he that is come to rule the Nations with his Iron Rod, and
dash his Enemies in pices like a Potters Vessel, and judge the Earth in
Righteousness, and the people with his living Truth; and now the Sinner shall
not stand in Judgment, nor the Wicked in the Congregation of the Righteous; for
he utters his Voice like Thunder against the Wicked, and is dreadful against
all the Double-minded; he condemns the Unjust with an utter overthrow, and
pulls down the Unrighteous from their Seats; Oh! who of the Wicked can stand
when he thunders from Heaven, and pierces through the secret parts of the
Heart!

And though I do speak an Allegory, yet I do not speak contrary to the
Scriptures, but according thereunto from the Spirit of Truth; and though I
speak of the Operation of Christ in his Members, yet I do not deny the Works
which were wrought by him in his own Person; and though I preach Christ within
the Hope of Glory, yet I do not preach another; and though Paul traveled in
birth again, until Christ was formed in the Galathians, yet he did not desire
another Christ should be formed in them: And though Paul said, God had revealed
his Son in him, yet it was not another Son; and though I say the Son of God is
come, and has given me an understanding, yet it is not another Son, but the
same that ever was, who works all our Works in us. And though I preach him
The Make^^^^ End of Sin, yet I do not preach another; but they who preach a
Christ that does not make an end of Sin, nor save them (who preach him) from
their Sirs, do preach another Christ, seeing the true Christ makes an end of
Sin: And though I say, the Prophet is come, who is mighty in Word and Work, and
raised up in the midst, or in the Heart, yet it is not another, but the same,
whose Wonders appeared outwardly whilst he was in the form of a Servant upon
the Earth.

And though I preach him to the World, the Light of the World, yet it is not
another, but the same who said, I am come a Light into the World; and I am the
Light of the World, Joh. 8. 12. And so, he being come a Light into the World,
he is to be preached as he is, [the Light] that all men through him might
belive, and men's minds turned from Darkness to him who is the Light, (in the
Darkness) and it is most right and proper to preach him the Light who is now
come, and is the end of the Law to all them that believe in the Light, and the
end of the Prophets, who preached him that is the Light under various Names or
Terms, as King, Priest, Prophet, a Son, a Child, the Mighty God; and David
called him Lord; and he is called a Savior, a Redeemer, a Mediator, etc. who
being come says, I am the Light; and so its right and sound Doctrine to preach
him as he is, The Light of the World, and lights every man that comes into
the World, which is the true Light; and we that preach this, do not preach
another, but him who said, I am the Light.

By me who refused the Glory, Treasure and Preferment of the World, and did
choose rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God; and though I
profitted much in that Religion where the carnal Ordinances are, yet that
profiting came to be accounted as Dross and Dung, that he might be received who
makes an end of Sin, who being now come, his Love constrains me his Name to
publish, who is the true Prophet, whose Name is called Jesus, who has, and
does save from Sin, for whose Name sake I have been often brought before
Rulers, haled and beat out of the Synagogues, numbered among Transgressors,
tried at Assizes, as an Offender, yet there denied the Liberty of a Murderer,
being six times imprisoned, twice stripped naked and whipped with Rods, and since
put into Bridewell; once put into and kept long in a Dungeon sor Praying; often
abused in Prison; sometimes near Death; in Trials often, in Perils often, in
Loss of Goods, in daily Reproaches, and in that which has been greater then
all these things; and yet have I been preserved unto this day by the Power of
him who is the Light, and the only Son of God, to whom be Eternal Glory from
his own Seed in his Servant, who is one of the least among many Brethren, being
a Prisoner at Winchester for the Truth of Christ, by the will of men, unto whom
I am known by the Name of Humphry Smith.

An Invitation from the Spirit of Christ.
COme unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden, come unto me and find
Rest; I, even I am he that comfort Zi^^, I am he that preaches Liberty to
the Captives; Oh! come unto me, stay not, I am the Way, the Truth and the Life;
I am he and there is none other; I came out from the Father into the World,
that it might be reconciled up unto God through me: I am the good Shepherd that
am now come to gather the Outcasts of Israel, and to bring home unto God the
lost Sheep, that the dispersed of Judah may now return, and the seed of Abraham
may be brought in to me, in whom the Redemption is, even plentious Redemption
for all that will hear and turn in hither. Oh, all ye scattered of the Flock!
my Voice is to you that have not found rest to your Souls, now hearken
diligently to hear my Voice, and feel my Words of Life; for now the time is
come that the Seed that has long lain in the Death shall hear my voice, and
they that hear shall live; and arise out of the Death, and I will give them
Life: Oh! come unto me, my own, my beloved before the Foundation of the World;
come, and stay not; I have long waited for you; my Locks are wet with the drops
of the Night, and you have wearied me with waiting for you; long have I knocked
at the Door of your Hearts, calling to Repentance, and no man regarded; now the
sloathful would not arise that I might come in and take up my abode with and in
my own, and refresh them with Waters of Life; but now am I come, who am the
Bridegroom and the Bishop of the Soul, with my alluring terms; Come, oh my
Friends! hearken my Beloved, let me not be denied; open the door of thy hard
Heart, and let me not stand waiting any longer; behold, I have Honor for all
them that follow me, and Crowns of Life for all that will receive me. Come unto
me, my Lambs, I have prepared my Supper, I have made in this Mountain a Feast
of Wines of the Lees, of fat things, full of Marrow; all things are now ready;
Come in unto me, I am the Bread of Life, I am the hidden Manna, I come to save
men's lives: Come all ye that are weary with the burden of your Sins, I am the
Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World; I come to take away the Sin of the
World; I am the Root of Jesse, and the Offspring of David; I am he that opens
and none can shut, and shuts, and none can open; I have Power to forgive Sins
on Earth. Come, cease from the Evil of your doings, learn of me to do Well, and
then we will reason together, and though thy Sins have been as Scarlet, they
shall then be as white as Snow; for I come to finish Transgression, and make an
end of Sin, and bring in the Everlasting Righteousness of God. Therefore hear,
O ye scattered of the Flock, that are yet in the miery Clay, covered over with
the thick Cloud of your Sins; Oh! remain not in the filth now, continue no
longer with the Fleshpots in the house of Bondage, for I am come to condemn
Sin in the Flesh, and destroy the Works of the Devil, that you may find
Redemption in me, and be washed from your filthiness and cleansed from your
Sin. Wherefore hear, all ye that are far from Righteousness, behold, I have
Gifts for the Rebellious, my hand is stretched forth; O ye simpels Ones! come
unto me and learn pure Wisdom; and ye Fools, be of an Understanding Heart. Oh!
why will ye dye, O house of Israel! have I any pleasure at all that the Wicked
should dye? turn you, turn you now I do call, O ye hard hearted! wherefore do
you hide your selves from me, and dig deep to hide your Counsels from me? Why
do you run always astray? Oh! what shall I do unto you that I have not done?
and yet do you still go on in the Evil of your Ways! When will you once
return? O Jerusalem! will thou not be made clean? When shall it once be? Oh! I
have seen your Abominations, and am wearied with your Sins, and yet have you
not regarded: Oh! now it is high time to consider thy Ways, and return from the
Evil of thy Doings, lest thou be shut out forever.

And all ye, my dear Ones that have long waited for me, behold, I come quickly,
and my Reward is with me, says Christ the Son of God; and I will open to you
the hidden Treasures of my Father, and make known his Will to you; and I will
remove off the burden, and circumcise your Hearts: Behold, I come, says
Christ, and I will open the Prison-door, and raise the Prisoner out of the Pit,
and bring Deliverance to the Captive, and refresh the plant of my Fathers
planting, and nourish the tender Grape which the subtilty has hurt; and I will
bind up the broken, and restore unto the Mourners the years of Joy and Comfort;
and I will be unto you a sure Foundation, a present Help in time of need; and I
will bring back the scattered, and they shall not return, and fear the Lord God
of their Fathers in my Mountain of Holiness, and they shall walk in the Way of
Peace, and in the Paths of Righteousness, where the Unclean shall not pass
over, nor the wild Beasts of the Field shall not come, but the Ransomed of my
Father, says Christ the Son of God: Therefore hear, all ye, my Brethren, and
consider, all ye, my Friends, for I am come, who am the sure Foundation, and
the Cornerstone, the Light, the true Light of the World, and the Life of Man,
and the Everlasting Covenant of the Father, and the Power of God, and the
Wisdom of the Father; by me Kings reign, and the Princes of Israel shall now
rule in Equity; for behold, I am come, even he that you have long waited for,
and there is not another; come, learn of me, I am meek, I am lowly, I am the
Light, low in the heart, I am the living Minister, says Christ, the Son of the
Fathers love, and the Light of the World; I change not, but remain a Priest
forever, a living Minister of Life within the vail, ministering Life unto the
Spirit in Prison.

The Sounding Voice Of the DREAD of Gods Mighty Power To all the Judges and
Rulers of the Earth who rise up against the Lamb: And to Gog, Magog, and all
their Armies; and to the whole Host of the Power of Darkness, and to all men
who fight against God, who, or whatsoever they be (or whatsoever they be
called.)
BEhold, ye Rulers of the Earth, and listen and hear, all ye Earthly minded
Men, let the Blindness of your Minds be opened, that your dark Hearts may be
enlightened; hear, I say, and stop not your Ears, whose Minds are in the Earth,
whose Eyes are closed, whose Hearts are covered with a thick Vail by your own
Iniquity, who see not the Wonders of the Lord wrought among the living, neither
perceive the mighty Power of the God of the whole Earth, who are besotted
through the sinfulness of your continual Transgressions, and are grovelling as
Moles in the Earth, and laden with thick Clay, and covered with the Vail that
is spread over all Flesh, that you see not the glory of the God of Life,
neither perceive ye the comeliness of the holy One of Jacob, to whom the bright
Morning Star is as a Cloud of Darkness, and the Way of the living God as a
fierce Whirlwind of Fire, who see not him that dwelt in the Bush, neither hear
his Voice, who has made Darkness his Habitation, and his Pavilion round about
him thick Clouds of the Skey.

Hear, I say, and let my words have entrance in you, and let the sound of my
Voice take place in your Hearts; let the opening of my Lips give Astonishment
to the Wicked, and the enlargement of my Heart the Confounding of the Heathen;
let the Dread of the Lord take hold upon the Hypocrites, and Astonishment seize
upon the Double-minded; let the Prudent keep silent and hear; and let the
Honorable be quiet and consider; let the Understanding give audience to my
words; and let the Mouth of the Fool be stopped; let the Sinner stand still and
be quiet; and let the Ungodly consider the words of Truth; rebel not against
the Word of the Lord, neither harden your Hearts against the Dread of his
Power; let the tall Cedar bow and bend, and that which is lifted up, be brought
down, and stand ye all in Meekness.

For behold, the Omnipotent Power is come, the Rock of Ages is revealed, the
Everlasting strength is made manifest, the God of Abraham has reached forth his
hand, and the Redeemer of Israel is come to dwell in the midst; the great
Jehova has uttered his Voice, and he whose Name is I Am, is at hand, he that
moves upon the Waters may be felt, and he that forms the Seed in the Womb
may be known; he that inhabiteth Eternity is come to dwell in his People, and
walk in the midst of the poor despised of his flock, having cleansed them by
the washing of Water, and renewed them by the Spirit of Burning, and refined
them with his Righteous Judgments, and cleansed them with the Blood of his Son,
that in his Zion (redeemed with Judgment) he may dwell for evenmore, and take
up his rest in the midst of his People, having made the place of his feet
Glorious, and his residence as a Seat in the midst of a Fire, which burns
against all them that are in the Night, and gives light to them that are in
the Covenant, whose Glory is hid from the dark Mind, and his Counsel withheld
from the Unbelieving in Heart; he stands near unto the Wicked, who perceives
him not, and takes Notice of his secret Intents; he observes the footsteps of
the Kings of the Earth, and marketh the Decrees of the Unrighteous, and when
they have filled up their measure, he puts forth his Finger to their Life,
and takes away their Breath; he suddenly cuts off the Wicked, and regards
not the Mightiness of Princes; he searches the Hearts of Kings, and rules
over the Powers of men; his Infiniteness can never be declared; in his hand is
the Breath of the Life of the Souls of all Mankind.

Hear (I say) and consider my words, and ponder the Meditations of my Mind; for
behold, the Lord God of Life is come, Immanuel is revealed, the Root and
Offspring of David is grown up as a Plant of Renown; the Seed of the Shepherd
sits upon the Throne, and before him shall all the Kings of the Earth lay down
their Crowns; every Emperor shall bow and bend, and the Potentates of the Earth
(before him) shall wither as a green Herb, their Glory shall perish as the
untimely Birth of the Womb; their Honor shall vanish as the Smoke before the
Wind; their Wisdom shall fade away, as a Blossom cut off, and their
Understandings shall come to nothing; the Wisdom of the most high shall be
exalted over all, and with his foolishness will he them all confound; yea, with
a foolish Nation will he anger the Judges of the Earth, and with a despised
People will he provoke the Rulers of the World to jealousy; by the foolishness
of his Flock will he confound his Enemies, and by his weakness in them, will he
subdue the strength of the Mighty, and though all his Enemies strive in the
Arrogance of their Spirits, and in the fierceness of their strength, yet shall
he be exalted, who is led as a Lamb dumb, and he shall reign whose right it is,
in whose. Mouth there is found no Guile, who makes an end of Sin, and brings
in Ever lasting Righteousness, and sets up Judgment in the Heart, and comes
to rule in the Kingdoms of men, and overturneth the Host of his Enemies, by
whom Judges are led away Fools, Diviners turned Mad; before whose Presence the
Mightiness of the mightiest Rulers of the Earth is as Wax before the fire, and
their Strength melts away as the fat of Lambs.

Wherefore hear and see, O ye Kindreds and Rulers of the Earth! the Lord our
God is come, the might of his strength is revealed, and the Power of his
Presence made known; he has chosen his Army to himself, and their Names are
written in his Life; he has numbered up his Hosts together, and armed his
chosen with his Everlasting Strength; the Captain of his Host goes before
them, and the Camp of the Lord is very great, they are Numberless as the Sand
of the Sea, and Infinite as the Stars of Heaven: Even so is the Seed of
Abraham, the Remnant of the Flock of Jacob, whom the Lord has redeemed, who
are chosen, and faithful, and true; yea, behold its even so, and that all the
Nations of the Earth shall know; for the Lord of Hosts rides on in Meekness,
in the midst of his Host, and makes War in Righteousness with the Enemies of
the Lamb, who would not that he should reign, who makes an end of Sin, and he
is clothing his Army with Zeal, as with a Garment, and covering them with the
Armor of Light, and preserves their Head in the day of Battle, and girds them
up with strength, and guides their feet upon the Rock, and preserves their
Life under the shadow of his Hand. When he speaks the word, his Army goes
forth, and at his Command they march on their way: He lifts up a Standard
before them, and proclaims open War against the Inhabitants of the Earth, who
now hear that the Lamb is come to reign in Righteousness, and to stain the
Pride of their Glory, and confound the height of their Wisdom, and lay their
Honor in the Dust forever.

Therefore, all Kindreds of the Earth, even Gog, Magog and all the Hosts of the
Heathen are rising up in the bitterness of their Spirits, in the height of the
Power of the Man of Sin, joining all their Forces together, as in one band of
Darkness, taking Counsel from Egypt, making a Covenant with Death, and an
Agreement with Hell, and gathering up the utmost Powers of Darkness to be as a
Refuge unto them: And thus in the strength of the King of the Children of
Pride, they are rising up against the Lord; even the God of Life, and against
his anointed Ones, who have indeed and in truth received the Anointings, and
need not man to teach them, but are all taught of the Lord God Almighty, who
also teaches their hands to war, and their fingers to fight: And he utters his
voice as the sound of many Waters, before his Army, who follow him in the might
of his Power, whose Presence is dreadful in the midst of his Host, and there is
none that is able to stand before him; for he is a consuming Fire in the midst
of his Camp, and burns up his Enemies round about; and before him and his
Army shall all faces gather paleness; Everlasting Shame shall cover the Glory
of all Flesh; before him all People shall be much pained, his Dread and
Vengeance shall take hold on all his Adversaries: His redeemed shall march with
him in the travail of their Souls, from strength to strength shall they
continue on, and none shall be feeble among them; their Arrows shall reach into
the Bowels of the Scornful, and their words of Life pierce the Hearts of the
Hypocrites: They shall tread upon Kings, as upon Monter, and trample upon the
Wicked as upon Ashes; they fear not the greatest Goliahs, neither yet the
Wickedness of the Pride of Haman; Unrighteous Decrees cannot stop their
Mouths, nor the fear of a Furnace or a Dungeon withold them from their Way:
All Flesh is as Grass before them, and at their Rebuke shall the Potsherds of
the Earth be broken forever; before them there is no Nation shall stand; For
One of them shall chase a Hundred, and before Five shall the strength and
wisdom of a Thousand be confounded.

And this the Lords Army shall never be confounded, and his Glory in them shall
never be defaced, nor his Power with them shall never be overcome, nor his
strength in them shall never be vanquished; therefore in vain do all the
Potsherds of the Earth strive; for they that rise up against them, shall be as
Flax before the Fire, and the Mightiest among the Sons of Men, shall he as the
Grass that is cut down; for the Lord of Hosts is very Terrible; and in Meekness
is the Lamb riding on to Judgment; his Followers are enrobed with the Light of
the Morning, and adorned with the Beauty of the Sun: Their Eyes are enlightened
with the Light of the most High, and they see through the dark parts of all
their Enemies, and discern the secret Plottings of all their Adversaries: Their
Wisdom comes in like a River, and their Understanding shall never be darkened:
Their Strength is renewed as the Morning, and they are valiant to do Exploits:
The Wisdom of the Wise before them shall be confounded forever, and the
Understanding of the Prudent be esteemed as a thing of naught: They spy out the
lurkings of their Enemies, and see through the coverings of the Deceitful: Of
their strength they shall never be deprived, neither shall their Weapons be
taken from them: Their Refuge shall never be shaken, nor the place of their
Rest removed: The Wicked shall never enter upon their Dwellings, nor all their
Enemies invade the Land of their Rest; for the desire of all Nations to them is
come; and him that they long waited for, have they now received: They tread
upon the Cockatrice den, and meet the devouring Lions. And in the Power of the
Father's love there is no deadly thing that does them hurt, nor any VVeapon
formed against them that ever shall prosper.

And this is Sion, the Redeemed of the Lord, the Glory of the God of Israel,
the Seed of Jacob, whom the Lord has chosen, and set up on high over all the
Kindreds of the Earth, which stands against all the Enemies of the Lord, and is
his new threshing Instrument, with which he will thresh the Heathen in his
Anger, and bathe his Sword in the Blood of the slain; for behold, his Sword
shall devour much Flesh, and the slain of the Lord shall be many: With Sion,
the perfection of Beauty, will the Lord break in pieces, wound, confound and
overturn forever, the Horse and his Rider, the Captain and his Troops, the
Ancient and Honorable, the Prophet that tells Lies, yea, all the Host of the
Unrighteous, and the Strength of the Army of the man of Sin, and the Beauty of
the Whore that rides upon the Beast, and all them who set themselves in Battle
against the Lord, and all them who lead into Captivity, and would captivate the
Servants of the Lamb, shall go into Captivity forever.

For behold, the Lord is with us, the Shout of a King is among us, the Lord,
whose Name is holy, is come, he has uttered his Voice from Heaven, and now the
Nations of the Earth are angry, but the Lord will reign in Righteousness, and
all his Enemies shall be astonished at his Presence, and his Adversaries shall
be amazed forever, their Hearts shall be turned as a Stone within them, and men
shall be at their Wits end for fear, and for looking after those things which
shall come upon the Earth, and all them whose Names are written in it, their
Wisdom shall not preserve them, their Understandings shall not defend them,
neither shall all their Subtilty cover them from the Light, their Nakedness
shall appear to their Everlasting Shame, and the Prisoners of Hope shall
rejoice over them for evermore.

For behold, I say, your day is come, wherein you shall bow down under the
Prisoners, and fall under the slain, according to the words of the Spirit of
Prophecy, Isa. 10. 4. and the slain over you shall rejoice for evermore, having
the high Praises of God in their Mouths, and the Sword of the Spirit in their
Hearts, with which they shall cut in pieces and pierce in sunder the Bowels of
all flesh, and it shall be as Chaff before them, and the strength thereof as
the passing away of the Morning-cloud, and in the strength of the most high,
shall the Army of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah go on and prosper, even as
Kings, whose Armies are swift to the Battle, their faces are as an Adamant, and
their Countenances firce and terrible, the found of their Voice is dreadful,
and the noise of their Appearance Astonish the Heathen; the Earth before them
is full of its Fruit, behind them its a desolate Wilderness, they spare not the
Ancient nor the Honorable, neither have they respect to the Persons of men;
they even smile at Destruction when its coming, and they are prepared for all
your Oppressions.

Wherefore now gather your selves together, O ye Potsherds of the Earth, and
stand up, all you that thirst for blood; assemble your selves together, all ye
Persecutors, let your Counsels come up from Hell, and let the depth of the
Powers of darkness show forth it self in the utmost of its strength, and with
it combine ye all together, and stand up in the Power of your King, which is
the Angel of the Bottomless Pit, who is head among (in) and over all you who
thrist for the blood of the Innocent. Now come and draw near in the very height
of your Father's Wrath, and behold, we meet you in the Infiniteness of our
Fathers Love, and stand you together in the depth of your secret Subtilty, and
behold we abide in the pure Wisdom of the most High: Stand ye up for the Glory
and Honor of the World, and we abide faithful for the Glory of the Lord our
Maker.

And this I say plainly unto you, that your long Tyranny will never weary out
the patience we have received, neither can you inflict more punishment than the
Lord has enabled us to bear; and as your Wrath is incrased, our Humility is
increased much more; and as you are filled and moved with Envy, we are much
more filled and overcome with the Power of the Fathers Life, and though you
contrive ways to ensnare the Innocent, we take no thought aforehand to deliver
our selves; for Self we have denied, and we have given up our Bodies and Souls
a living Sacrifice unto God, to do or suffer his Will: And him that kills the
Body we fear not, much less those that can but Whip or Imprison but for a few
Months; for our Life you cannot reach, neither can you disturb their Rest whom
the Lord has crowned with Honor, who out of the World are redeemed and bought
with the price of Blood most precious, but are become his, to follow him
whither-ever he leads them, though it be through Trials, great Tribulations,
Bonds and long Imprisonments; these things cannot move them who are brought to
rest in the Defarts, and sleep in the Woods; yea, and there is none can make
them afraid with all their Threats, unrighteous Laws, Bonds, Bridewels, long
unjust Imprisonments, or Death it self.

And this Honor has the Saints, and herein do they rejoice for evermore, in
that they are counted worthy to suffer for his Names sake, who was made perfect
through sufferings, and and thereby overcame all the Powers of Darkness,
whereby Principalities and Powers are spoiled forever; and through sufferings
are we made more than Conquerers over all our Enemies, whose Day will have an
end, whose Cruelty will cease, whose Tyranny will be rewarded upon their own
Heads, and their Memorial will Rot forever; but the faithfulness of the
Faithful shall never be taken from him, nor the innocence of the Harmless shall
never be forgotten, neither shall they ever want strength to stand in the day
of Battle, nor courage and boldness to endure, when the Enemies of the Lord
arise in Opposition against the brightness of the rising of the Power of the
Lamb of God, who is come to take away the Sin of the World, even him who is the
Light, and the Heir, against whom, with one consent, the Rulers of the Earth,
the Hireling Priests, with all the Profane and Unclean, and all them of all
Opinions in the World, are joining together in one Combination, as with one
Mind conspiring in their Enmity, to slay and murder the Heir that is come to
make an end of Sin, Who says, I am the Light.

H. S.

To all that want Peace with God To the Sheep every where not brought Home: To
the Thirsty Breathing Soul, and to the Seed, though in Captivity, among and in
the midst of all Professors. Greetings of Love, Mercy and Peace from God, the
Father of the Living.
Where the Bowels are not shut up, nor the Heart darkened, and where that does
not bear rule which stops the Ear and closes the Eye; and where Prejudice
and Rebellion against the Light, with the Wisdom of the Flesh, through that
knowledge which puffs up, has not wholly eaten up, devoured, got over, and
wholly overcome that tender Principle, which once moved in the Heart, toward
that being of the living Substance.

There may my words take entrance, and unto such, who feel that which breathes
to God, and who are willing to be satisfied concerning the living Truth of his
Son, and who would receive the Truth if they knew it, and do yet more desire
after the Power of God, than all the Temporal things that are seen, and who are
yet come no further than the reading of the Law, the Priests, the Tithes, nor
that Religion that makes nothing perfect, and who are come no further than the
outward Baptism, Shadow, or Figure, or such things, which are to be left
behind, H^b. 6. or who are come no further than the Supper, or the Death, and
so not yet saved by his Life, nor drunk of that which saves, and is to cleanse
from all that, which separateth from God; after whom, and the incomes of his
Love Immortal, whosoever truly desires, and is willing to receive the Power of
his Life, and come in Covenant with the Lord;

Such may lend me an Ear a little, and you are them who may receive some
benefit hereby; for behold I write in plainness of the things of God, my heart
being enlarged with abundance of his Peace, in which there is good will toward
men, that you might come to draw near to the Witness; the Testimony whereof is
within the vail, which vail is over the heart, 2 Cor. 3. 15 and is not done
away, but as you come to be in him, who is given for a witness, Isa. 55. 4. by
believing in the Light, John 12. 36. and so to have the witness in you, 1 John
5. 10. and you to be in it; and that you may come to participate of Gods
Indwellings, and feel the Oil which will last forever; therefore I proceed thus:

How can I but look back a little, with an Eye of Pity over those, who yet are
where once I was, when the Darkness was over the Earth, and the Cloud of Error
compassed me as well as others, surely I cannot now be so unmindful of them
that are yet lost, as not to have compassion upon the Outcasts, of Israel, or
to conceal from them these things of so great concernment, but rather as the
Lord of my Life has opened to me, will I reach forth my hand toward the weak,
and utter my voice to the Prisoner of Hope, and show unto the meek in the Earth
how the invisible God has led his seed, and is leading his Remnant through and
out of the Variety of things, unto the one thing it self, from whence the
various Things, Gifts, and Ministrations do come.

Now that which is chiefly in my heart, to write for the Seeds sake, is, First,
Something concerning the Ministration of Moses, (when he was upon Earth.)
Secondly, Concerning the Ministration of Christ (whilst he was upon Earth)
Thirdly. and chiefly, Concerning the Ministration of the Spirit.

First, Concerning Moses's Ministration, ( when he was upon Earth) which was to
last till Shiloh came, or until the time of Reformation.
AS concerning Moses Ministration, to wit, the Law, Condemnation or Death, with
the Priests Offering, and worldly Sanctuary and an outward Tabernacle, and
daily Offerings for Sin, and Storehouses for the Levites, Strangers,
Fatherless and Widows, having the Ark of the Testimony within the vail, and
the Mercy seat covered, and the Golden-pot, and the People to seek the Law at
the Priests Mouth, whereby their knowledge is preserved, and many profit much
thereby, and come day by day, and year by year unto that which they esteem a
place of holy Worship, and Ordinances of God. And notwithstanding the Priests
of Moses Law, were made by the Law of God, yet that Priesthood changes, and
the Law changes, and the very glory of all this passes away; for this did
once seem glorious unto me, and many more which only discovered sin, though it
made nothing perfect, and with much delight was the reading of the Law and the
Prophets hearkened unto, and the daily confession of sin, (but the vail is over
the heart whilst Moses is Preached) and Sacrifices Morning and Evening with the
long Prayers, which the comers thereunto, were not at all thereby made Perfect,
as pertaining to the Conscience, though it had a shadow of good things to
come, yet the glory thereof comes to be done away; then how much more will the
very glory of the most glorious Appearance of that Ministry perish, and be done
away, which comes short of this, and has not so much as the Image of this,
which was as a shadow. O weak and beggarly things, that are found among those
Priests now and their followers, who come short of Moses Ministry; for he
directed them to Christ the substance, and so his Ministration comes to be done
away, as Christ comes to be received; for Moses did not seek to uphold his
Priests, or Law, or Tithes, or any thing else, when Christ should come, who is
the end of the Law, but did write of him, and not withstanding his Ministry and
Priests, he said, He that would not hearken unto him, should be cut off; and
said, The Lord will raise up [Mark the words, raise up] The Lord shall raise up
a Prophet, and when the Prophet was come, he said, I am the Light, and I am
meek and low in Heart; and this is to be raised up which is meek; for to them
that sat in darkness Light has sprung up; and the Soul that hearkneth not to
the Prophet, which springs up, shall be cut off, for Truth springs up out of
the Earth, and Christ is the Truth, and he said, I am the Light, which is the
Horn of Salvation that God raises up, to be a Light to lighten the Gentiles,
and is the Salvation of Israel; and so the soul is to hearken to that which God
raises up, and that is it which condemns sin (under it) who is like unto
Moses, whose Ministry discovers sin; and so Moses directed unto Christ, (who
puts away the sin) and Paul said of the glory of Moses Ministration, That it
was no Glory in respect of the Glory of the Ministration of the Spirit; and the
glorious Ministry of the Spirit was received, after he who had a Body prepared,
had suffered the Crucifying of his body, and the Prophets searched diligently
to see the glory that was to be after the sufferings of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 10,
11.

But the thing intended, That Moses when he was upon Earth, directed unto
Christ, and gave commandment, That they should hearken unto him, (who said, I
am the Light) and this is one Tittle of the Law, that the Light be hearkened
unto, who is the end of the Law, and the substance, and he that offends
herein is guilty of all; and this is that in which all the large Ministrations
of Moses is included, that Christ, the Light, the true Prophet be hearkened unto
and obeyed, that by hearing and obeying his Voice, (or the Word in the Heart)
they might come from under the Law and the Priests, and that which waxes old,
unto the Life and Obedience of him, who abides a Priest forever, even the Lord
of that glory, which lasts for evemore.

Secondly, Concerning Christ and his Ministration, ( when he was upon Earth)
and his work which he finished.
ANd when he comes, which Moses commands to hearken unto, even Christ, the
true Prophet, the Light of the World, the living Minister, the end of the Law,
who had a Body prepared to do the will of the Father, which was in him, the Man
Christ Jesus; he says, follow me, and he took up his Cross and passed through
the Death and the Vail; and so being made Perfect through sufferings, attained
that Glory, which he had with the Father before he had a Body, which Body was
prepared to do the Fathers will, whose will was, That all men should be saved;
therefore Christ tasted death for every man, and rose again for the
Justification of those that believe in him, who said, I am the Light, and is
sat down at the right hand of God, who is a Spirit eternally in the Heavens,
ascended up out of the sight of them, which gazed after that Body, which is
gone out of their sight, even he, Christ, the Ministry, hid from Ages and
Generations, now made manifest to destroy the works of the Devil, being meek
and low in the Heart, he says, Learn of me: Then not the of Priests, nor any
longer of Moses; for the Law is the Schoolmaster to Christ, who being come,
calls one from the Custom, another from going to bury the Dead, another from
questoning and reasoning, what this man, or another should do that he might not
stand looking out at others, but himself to follow the Light, saying, follow
thou me.

And those that followed him when he was upon Earth saw his Miracles, and heard
his Parables, and eat of the outward Bread, and were filled (though many now
eat and are not filled) and they had his body among them, and they came to the
Baptism and the Supper, but Christ himself Baptized not; and when he was upon
Earth, he said, I go to the Father, and I go to prepare a place for you; and he
said, whither I go ye know; and he said before, follow me, and except a man
deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me, he cannot be my Disciple;
and he said, My sheep hear my Voice, and they follow me, and he entered within
the Vail, (and the Vail is over the Heart) and was made Perfect through
suffering, and is sat down in the Majesty on high, glorified with God the
Father, and the Father was in him, even the fullness of God; and that which may
be known of God, is manifest in thee; and he said, He had finished the work
that the Father gave him to do, and so the Fathers will was accomplished and
done, for which the body was prepared; he said, Now glorify me Father, with
the same glory which I had with thee from the beginning; and he that spoke in
the body abides forever, who said, A Body have thou prepared me, which Body
being crucisied, he took up his Life again, and then those that did know him
three days before, knew him not, and he ascended, and a Cloud received him out
of the sight of certain men, who never found him unto this day, for he
remains out of the sight of most that profess him, and as the lightning in
the Clouds of Heaven does he come again, and every eye shall see him, that
condemns sin; and the Kingdom of Heaven, is within you, and yet the blind
cannot see, nor the deaf hear.

And this was he that Moses commanded to hear, who said, he that is with you
shall be in you, and he that was with or without, was to go away; and that
which was to be received within, he said, should abide with them forever, and
the Spirit of Truth, was to lead into all Truth; for though the body was
prepared to do Gods will, yet they by it were not led into all Truth, but
sometimes understood it not, though he speak Spirit and Life; and moreover,
they went away, and some fled from the Truth, and Peter denied him that was the
Truth; and so such as have got a Profession of the Truth without them, and not
the Spirit within to lead into all Truth, such fly in the day of Trial from
that Truth they profess, and some deny it rather than suffer with, or for it;
and herein, them called Baptists also, have not come short; and some of them
have bowed to the Beast, and so it is with many who profess Christ and Truth
without them, even as with those who understood not the Parables; nor could not
cast out the unclean Spirits, so that Christ was and is grieved when he has
been so long with, and professed, and followed without, and yet not come to
that Faith which purifieth the Heart, whereby to cast out the Unclean within,
as thou may read in thy self.

And therefore Christ, when he was upon Earth did often speak unto them of what
was yet to come, and I do seldom read or take notice, that he did so often
preach and repeat any one thing unto them, as that of the Spirit to come,
saying, That it (Mark, the Spirit) would lead into all Truth; and seeing their
Weakness and Unbelief, ( Mark 16. 14.) he by the often repetition thereof, did
as it were the more chiefly engage their Hearts to wait for and seek after the
incomes of that which should comfort them, and abide with them, when his Body
was gone from them, whither they could not come; and to this one thing does he
direct them in various expressions, as of his going to the Father, and coming
again, and says he, I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot receive, John 12.
16. And many things Jesus did, which if they should be all written, the World
might not contain the Books, John 21. 25. And many things he spoke unto them,
Acts 2. 40. and yet there was something to come to be waited for, and after to
be received, which was more than all this; for said he, These things have I
spoken unto you, being yet present with you; But the Comforter (Mark) the word
[BUT] intimates something greater, or more than what was spoken to them,
whilst he was with them; for he says, He that is with you shall be in you,
John 14. 17. and said, But the Comforter, which is the holy Spirit, whom the
Father will send in my Name, he will teach you all things, (Mark what that is
that teaches all things) and brings all things to your Remembrance what
soever I have said (and so that is within which brings the words of Spirit
and Life to remembrance) John 14. 25, 26. And having spoken of other things, he
says again, But when the Comforter comes, even the Spirit of Truth, John 15.
26. And if I go not away, the Comforter will not come, but if I depart, I will
send him unto you, John 16. 7. And I have many things to say unto you, but you
cannot bear them now; howbeit, when he, the Spirit of Truth is come, he will
guide you into all Truth, John 16. 12, 13. Here it may be seen, that they who
followed Christ without, and not received the Spirit within, could not bear
what he had to speak unto them; and also, it may be seen, that when the Spirit
was come, it would be better with them.

And much more might be mentioned, how Christ foretold, what was to come, and
be received, and revealed in that day, John 16. 23. when the Spirit should be
poured forth according to the Prophets, all which plainly declare, and most
evidently set forth, how Christ in his Ministry, when he was upon Earth, did
most chiefly direct unto the Ministration of the Spirit of Truth, which was
then yet to come; and that they might not run to teach others (as many do now)
before they had received the Spirit of Truth in themselves, by and with that to
be led into all Truth, but might receive the Power of Truth in themselves, from
the Life thereof, to convert others into the same; therefore said he further,
after he was risen again, But tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem, until you be
enducd with Power from on high, Mark 24. 4. so that though they had seen his
Body before, and had now seen him after his Resurrection, yet that and all the
rest was not enough without the Power and the Spirit, which was to come, which
they were to wait for: And so, now men should tarry, wait and stand still to
see the Salvation of God, and until they receive the Spirit; for it is the
Spirit, (not the Body) which searches all things, and shows plainly of the
Father.

And by this before-written in short, I have a little endeavored to show unto
the meek and single-hearted, That Moses, when he was upon the Earth, directed
unto Christ; As in these words,

The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet, from the midst of thee, of
thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him shall ye hearken, Deuteronomy. 18. 15.

And Christ, when he was upon Earth, directed unto the Spirit, which was to
come, in the like words, saying,

These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you, but the
Comforter, which is the holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my Name, he
shall teach you all things, John 14. 25, 26.

And then, what if I did write after the manner of men, and say, If Moses were
now upon the Earth, and Christ in his own Body upon the Earth; and Moses with
all his Priests, Tithes and Offerings, and Religion, which discovers sin, but
makes nothing perfect, which Paul profited much in; if he, I say, should
command and exhort all People under his Ministry, to go to Christ, and hear him.

And if Christ were now upon Earth, and notwithstanding his outward Miracles,
Circumcision, Baptism, Supper and Death, yet he should command and exhort all
(that come through the Law or Ministration of Moses unto him) to look, and
tarry, and wait for another Comforter, that they might receive the Spirit in
them, and say unto them, that that should teach them all things, and lead them
into all Truth.

Then whether or no, People were to continue following Moses Priests, with
their Tithes and long Prayers, and still be seeking the Law at their Mouth, or
to come to Christ, to seek the Gospel? for Moses himself did not say, that they
should seek the Gospel at the Priests Mouth: And then, when did the Priests
ever preach the Gospel?

And then, whether those obey not Moses, who leave the Priests and come to
Christ (the Light?) And whether such, when they are come to Christ, should
always be looking and following after Water, Baptism and outward Supper, or
tarry and wait to receive the Spirit within them?

And then, which of these now, should all People that profess Christ, be led by
in these days, either Moses, or the Person of Christ, or the Spirit of Truth?
And, whether such as have received, and are truly indeed led by his Spirit of
Truth, and know that to be their Teacher, and follow it, and are ruled,
governed and guided by it, according to the command of Moses and Christ, do not
hereby obey the command of Moses and of Christ, and fulfill their Doctrine? And
whether any other People or Professors whatsoever, do obey the command of Moses
and Christ, but only such? And whether this be not a thing of great Concernment
to be known and learned by all that profess Christianity?

But why then do People follow these Priests of England any longer, which are
contrary to Moses, and also to Christ, who have no Storehouses, but suffer the
Poor to want within and without, and the Widow and Stranger ready to perish,
and moreover devour, and can never have enough of the Spoil of other men's Goods?

And why do others dispute about, and talk of the Body so much, which they know
not? And is it not better to be silent, and know the true God and Jesus Christ,
who dwells in his People, and the Spirit of Truth, which he requires in the
inward parts, and to feel after God, even the Life in themselves, because the
Apostle said, They were saved by his Life, being before reconciled by his
Death, Romans 5. 10. And until the Life came, there were many things which they
were not saved from, and the Death which reconcileth was passed through, and
the Life was received again to save and justify.

And why then are People so much busied about that which was before the
Reconciliation (and so therein much short of the Life) and for outward Bread,
Wine and Water? Are not these things which are seen? And are not the things
that are seen Temporal?

But Christ the true Prophet being come, of whom Moses did write, who is the
end of the Law, and so the end of that Ministry, whereby that is done away for
the weakness and unprofitableness thereof, and Christ coming after John, of
whom John bare witness, that he was before, and greater, and came after him;
and Christ having finished that which he himself came to do; and likewise so
largely and often exhorted, to wait for another Comforter, even the Spirit.

Then what Ministration is it that now stands and remain^eth, which is
according both to Moses, Christ, and the holy Scriptures? And what Ministration
is to be expected or waited for, but the Ministration of the Spirit? And
whether all they be not compassed about with a Cloud of Error, who are
upholding that Ministry of the Law, (or a worse) which Christ is the end of,
and the Apostles said was done away; and likewise such as are upholding and
keeping up that which Christ said he had finished? And whether the upholding of
such things now, be not quite opposite both to Moses, Christ and Scriptures?

And being that Moses, nor indeed his true Ministers of the Law, are not upon
Earth, neither that Body of Christ, (which by the Professors was murdered at
Jerusalem) visibly to be seen upon Earth; Then what was it that those have to
follow, who have not received the Spirit to be led by? and if they will say,
They have the Writings of Moses and the Words of Christ: I say, if that be all,
then they that forsook and denied Christ had more then them; for they had the
Words from his own Mouth, which was Spirit and Life, and yet they understood
not; (and then what do those understand, who have not so much as they had?)
therefore after he had suffered and rose again, he opened their Understandings.

And so, what is all their Religion worth, who are not come to the Spirit? And
whether Moses Ministration being ended by Christ, and Christ also having
finished his Work, are not all People in the first place now to wait for the
Spirit, and to receive the Spirit by it, then to be led into all Truth; and so
being first led into the Truth, then in the same Truth to worship God in the
Spirit, who is a Spirit? And whether there be now any true Worship standing
which God accepts, but only this? And whether this alone be not agreeable to
Moses, Christ and Scriptures? And then, whether all other Worship now upheld,
be not contrary to this true Worship of God, and contrary to Moses, Christ and
Scriptures; and indeed chiefly opposite to the Spirit of God, whereby he is
grieved? And if so, whether all such Worship, Way, Practice, Performances,
Duties and Ordinances (so called) be not better left undone, than performed,
until God's Spirit be received to guide therein?

Thirdly, Concerning the Ministration of the Spirit, which abides forever.
Moses and his Ministry were visible, and Christ in the form of a Servant (and
so like unto Moses) was visible, and so was his Miracles, and that which is
visible to the Natural Eye, the Carnal Mind can come to profess, and contend
about, but the blessed Eye, which God opens with the Light, comes to see,
the one done away, and the other finished by Christ the Light and Life.

And this Spirit is that which first moved, and yet moves, and moved unto, and
led through the visible Ministration; and this Spirit is invisible, as it is
written, The Invisible only Wise God, whom no Eye of Flesh has seen, or can
see, and this moving invisible Spirit of God, which is without limit or end, is
that which all People should be led unto, by all its outward visible
Appearances, Ministrations and Dispensations, and this Spirit was that which
gave forth and ordained the Ministration of the the Law, which was glorious in
its time, though to be done away; but how much more glorious is the
Ministration of that Spirit of Life it self, from which the Ministration of the
Law came, which Spirit abides forever? And the second Adam is made a quickening
Spirit, and the Spirit, which is the Word, was with God, and was God, before
the Body of Flesh was made, and that Spirit abides forever, as it heard out of
the Law, He shall abide forever; and this is that which ever lives to
intercede.

And this forever blessed invisible Spirit was before time, and is to be when
time shall be no more, and is without limit, an Eternal lively substance,
giving Life from it self, and secretly covering it self from the carnal part of
man, not seen nor understood, but by such as by its secret motions come to be
led to see through that which shadows it forth, and by the Image, Form, Shadow
or Figure, to discern the substance, which is the Life, where Immortality
dwells; for in the most innermost and secrets of all, is the Life of all,
being covered over with that in which it lies; through the which it breaking
forth in any discovery of it self, is that whereby the Beholders might be drawn
through the discovery to it self, which in the discovery broke forth; for the
discovery was still too short of that from whence it came, and that which was
discovered forth in any Shadow, Form or Image, was not to be idolized nor set
up, for the very thing or substance of Life, from whence it proceeded; and
herein has been much mistake by such who came not by that which opened in the
Visibles, to that from whence it came, in that to have their Understandings
opened, and thereby to be made sensible of that which is Eternal, by it to be
brought in, where its indwellings abide forever, whose breakings forth in the
visible (which was to draw to that invisible) refreshed the Soul invisibly, in
an unexpected time; but being (after) sought for in the Visibles (and not in
the Eternal) with-draws it self out of the Visibles, and out of the sight and
reach of that which seeks it there, that thereby that which is to live forever
with it, may come through all that which it appeared in, unto the very thing
and invisible Substance it self, which is the Life of all, and the true center
of the living Motion, which moves of it self, and gave forth all things good,
as they proceeded from it, by virtue of its gradual and various Motions; and
this being come, opens it self in them that find it, and live therein; and
this makes Darkness Light before the People whose dwelling is with God, and
the crooked comes to be made straight by the thing it self, and dark Sayings of
old come to be opened, and secret things revealed.

But to write more plain, for the sake of the weak, of this glorious indwelling
Spirit, which in the fullness of time comes forth in Flesh, laying hold of the
Seed of Abraham, the most glorious appearance that ever was, being thus
appeared was the express Image of God, who dwells in his People, whose Bodies
are Flesh and earthly Tabernacles; but by the operation of the sanctifying
cleansing Spirit, which the Father sends, are made fit Habitations of God,
and so Coheirs with Christ, and Members of his Body, Flesh and Bones, which
Spirit quickneth to God; and being thus received and obeyed, is felt to live
forever, though the shadowings forth of it be done away; and this is Eternal,
and never ends, but abides with such forever, and the Ministration of it is
Life it self to the Soul, and more to be valued and desired than all that ever
was seen before it.

And as the Lord took off that Spirit which was upon Moses and put it upon his
Brethren, the Elders of Israel, whereby they might rule and judge with him; so
says Christ, The Father shall take off mine, and give unto you, even of that
Spirit of Love, Life, Power, Valor and Virtue, which was upon and in him (that
was like unto Moses) is ministered into, and put upon such as are truly his
Brethren and Friends, whereby him with they (thus gifted, sanctified and
qualified) judge the World; for all Judgment is committed to the Son; and of
that which the Son has (and is committed to him) does the Father give unto his
Members: And so, from Christ the Head, they come to receive Power over the
World, and its Way, Worship and Fashions, and over Unclean Spirits. And that is
an Unclean Spirit which will lead into any Sin, and it is an unclean Spirit in
which sin stands, and which pleads for the continuance and upholding of
that which is unclean, and that is of the World, which the Saints judge.

And as those Elders of Israel (who were of the Church in the Wilderness) were
not made fit to judge nor rule in outward matters by all the writings and words
of the Law (though received by disposition of Angels) until the Lord himself
took off that Spirit which was upon Moses and put upon them.

So those that profess to be Elders in the Church now, or any other Person
whatsoever, are much less made fit to rule or judge in spiritual matters, by
all the reading and professing Moses writings and Christ's words, and the rest
of the holy Scriptures (though they were given by the Inspiration of God) until
the Lord take off that Spirit, which was upon and in Christ (who is like unto
Moses) and give unto, and pour it upon, and minister it unto them. And this is
done in Gods way (which is secret) and time (which is in his own hand) to those
whom he accounts worthy thus to Honor, and who truly wait for it, as a
Wayfaring man for a Resting place, and as a Captive for Deliverance.

And though Christ (after his Resurrection) said, All Power in Heaven and in
Earth is given unto me, go ye therefore and Teach; yet they were to tarry until
they had the Power in themselves; and when that was come, which they were to
tarry and wait for, then with that they went and taught the Nations, from the
sensible feeling of that which taught them how to teach, and all things else,
when the same Spirit and Power was upon them, which was before committed unto
him; and so the coming forth of it from him into them, and filling them
therewith, was to them in that work of the Ministry most effectual, like as the
Virtue going forth of Christ healed the Woman; so the Power and Virtue of the
holy Spirit coming forth from Christ, being sent of the Father, and received by
the Disciples (who with much desire waited for that) empowered them to do that
which before they were commanded to do, after they were endued with Power (or
had the Power in them) And so, what they were commanded to do, they were to
wait to receive Power in themselves, from God to perform; and Christ did intend
to give them Power to do that which he commanded: And as he commanded them to
go and teach, he also required them to tarry (and so not to go) until they had
received Power so to do; and so it was the Power of the holy Ghost in them
which made them Ministers; and these were, and such are truly Ordained
Ministers: And after they had received Power from on high, even the Spirit (or
Life) of Truth, and were filled therewith, and so had it in them, then they
went to do that which was commanded them; then they went to teach the Nations,
and converted Thousands, and turned Sinners, and brought Souls to God, and then
they were called Christians, and then were People brought to be of the true
Church, which Christ builds upon, that which flesh and blood reveals not.

And this is the entrance into the Church of God, 2 These. 1. 1. the receiving
of the Spirit, and in this God is worshipped, and not else; for this has
excluded all other Worship, and those only are the true Worshippers, who come
in thus by the Door, which is Christ, the Light and Spirit of Truth, sent into
the Heart from God.

And if all the prudent learned Divines (so called) in Europe, or all, or any
of the wisest Orthodox men in any other Quarter of the whole World, can prove
(by the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament) any other true Worship of God
(who is a Spirit) now extant among men, and to be performed (especially among
them called Christians) with acceptance to God, but only that which the Spirit
of Truth leads such unto, as receive it; then let them bring it forth that we
may see it, and prove it by plain undeniable Truth of Scripture; or otherwise I
shall look upon their Proofs, Words, Ways, Actions, Practices, Performances,
Duties and several Worships as things of no value.

Or if there be any other entrance into the true Worship of God than this
Spirit that God sends (or the Light which leads to it) or if there be any
other Worship which God does or will accept to be after this, spoken or
prophesied of in the Scriptures of Truth, whereby this shall ever be done away,
or ended from being the true, only, and alone Worship of God, whilst men have a
being upon Earth, then let the wisest of the Sons of men bring it forth, and
produce there strong reasons therein, that we may plead together, and that the
entrance into, and the true Worship it self, of the only true invisible God,
may be declared over all the World, for the satisfaction of every tender Heart
concerning this.

For this I am satisfied in, that Christ Jesus (who is the end of the Law, and
who finished his work, when he was upon Earth) is made a quickening Spirit, and
is the Way and Truth of Life, which brings into the Worship of God, and he is
the beginning and the end, and he leads to the beginning of Gods Worship, and
he is the end and the Rest of all the faithful, in whom all the Promises are
Yea and Amen; and without him all is as nothing, and all that come before him
are Thieves and Robbers, and he it is that abides a Priest forever, and his
Spirit of Truth is it which all People and Professors whatsoever, should first
wait to receive, thereby to be led into that true Spiritual Worship which alone
God accepts, lest they and their Worship and Building fall together, in a day
when there is none to deliver.

And then thus I will Query; If Christ own dear Disciples, who had forsook all
and followed him, ( not Priest or Baptists) did not come to receive this
Spirit, by hearing all the words which he he spoke unto them, but by waiting
after the words were ended? Then whether those that have not forsaken all (nor
so much as the Worlds fashions) do now come to receive the Spirit by Reading,
Hearing or Professing the same words of Christ, now written, or any other part
of Scriptures?

Or, whether a Proud man has received this Spirit, or a Liar, or a Profane
person, or any Wise or Prudent man whatsoever, by any means or way of his? And
whether any such ever did, have, can, or may by any industry, or other way or
means attain to this Spirit which leads in the true Worship of God, but as it
is freely given forth from God? And then, whether all people are not to be led
by that Spirit (which God freely gives) into the Worship of God; because
Christ said, The Spirit should lead, which indeed does lead into all Truth, and
nothing else does so? And they that have not received this from God to lead
them, are not yet come to be led by that which the Sons and Children of God
were and are led by.

And the Ministration of the Spirit, which all are now to be taught by, is
inwardly to be known, in the most nearest, secret, invisible manner, and is
more out of the sight, Comprehension and reach of man's Wisdom, than any other
Ministration, and it is given forth from the clear Fountain it self, unto the
Souls satisfaction of man, when he is come to the end of words; or having heard
much, or all the words that can be spoken of it, remains unsatisfied, in a
restless longing desire to find, receive, feel and enjoy the thing it self,
which the words declared of; and that which satisfies the true thirsting Soul,
comes clearly from God to the refreshing of the inward parts of man, and
filling of the empty, barren, hungry Spirit, which cannot be sa^^s^ed without
Gods indewllings; and thus the Disciples were led along, and at last, in a
foolish way to the great Professors, they waited among them in Jerusalem, and
the Lord had regard unto them, and sent his own Spirit unto them, and then they
were filled with the Holy Ghost.

And the secret invisible hand of God, whose Power was and is felt in my heart,
having out of the sight of flesh and blood, in the hidden counsel of his secret
Will, led me by the virtue of the operation and drawings thereof, through those
things, which thereby I come to leave behind, and to receive, and feel that
which now goes before, and is my Leader in whose Covenant of Life Eternal, my
Soul is now satisfied; and so by good experience of the Lords leading, and from
an experimental knowledge and sensible feeling, and present enjoyment of the
incomes of the Spirit of Truth and Life, which fills the inward parts with
the holiness of it self, and gives power to do the things required before of
God, even from the right and good understanding thereof, is this written; That
where it meets with the like condition in a wea^y Traveller, it may answer its
own, and be helpful to the weak and feeble, that such may not give over
pressing forwards, nor faint in their long Travail, though many Mountains on
which they did nourish themselves for a time, will not yield them Bread now;
yet that they may with me, and the rest of the Followers and Friends of Christ
(past and present) always continue following the Spirit as it leads, until the
inward man be filled therewith; and so power and strength from God come to be
known, and received in every particular.

For thus it is with Christ's Followers now, they are not satisfied until they
are filled with that which they heard of, and their Souls thirsted after, and
so it was with them then, and they were filled with what they wanted before;
and then, from that which they were filled with, they spoke forth; and so they
did teach the Nations, and brought People under the Power of God, and baptized
them into that, and dipped them into the Name of the Father, and brought them
under that which saves from Sin, and plunged them into the holy Spirit; and as
they taught they did this, baptizing as they did teach, and plunging them (as
their Doctrine went forth) into that which washes and purifieth the Conscience
from the Filth and Guilt of Sin, of which the outward Baptism was a Figure of
this which saves; and so their Doctrine was from an inward Life, and proceeded
from that which was invisible, and so reached to that which wanted Life in the
Hearers, and so brought up the Power of God over them, and them under it, and
into it; for the Word is [ into] and they were to bring People Into the Name,
(not Water) and they were to bring or baptize them Into the Name, as they did
teach, Go ye and Teach, Baptizing Into; Baptizing is in the Present Tense, when
they did teach; And so here the Spiritual and Inward Baptism goes alo^g with
the preaching of the Word of Life, which is inward, and brings man to an inward
enjoyment of God, being baptized Into his Name, which is a strong Tower which
preserves from the Power of the Devil: And we all who are brought into this,
and are come in here, are all by one Spirit baptized into one Body, and so
worship God in the Spirit, having the Heart sprinkled from an evil Conscience,
by the washing of Regeneration in the Ministration of the Gospel of Peace,
whereby there is a drawing nigh to God, (being brought into his Name) and a
free access to the Throne of that Grace, which saves from, and out of all
filthiness of Flesh and Spirit.

H. S.

THE VISION OF Humphry Smith, Which he saw concerning LONDON In the 5th Month,
in the Year 1660. being not long after the King came in.
The Prophet speaking of the pouring forth of the Spirit in the latter days,
says, That then the Young Men shall see Visions, Joel 2. 28. And the wise King
said, Where there is no Vision the People Perish, Prove. 29. 18. And the true
Minister of Christ said, I will come to Visions and Revelations of the Lord, 2
Cor. 12. 1.
Concerning the great City of LONDON.
I Beheld all her Waters, which belonged to her frozen up, and that exceeding
hard, and the Vessels which went upon them, so that I and others passed over
her Waters without the least danger, and over the greatest Vessels which had
carried her Merchandise; for all was frozen with a mighty Freezing, whereby all
her goodly Merchandise were stopped, and her mighty swift Waters were turned into
a mighty think frozen Ice, which stood still, so that her pleasant Streams ran
not.

And as for the City her self, and her Suburbs, and all that belonged to her, a
Fire was kindled therein, but she knew not how, even in her goodly places, and
the kindling of it was in the Foundations of her buildings, and there was none
could quench it, neither was there any able, and the burning thereof was
exceeding great, and it burned inward in a hidden manner, which cannot be
expressed; and the Fire consumed Foundations which the City stood upon, and the
tall buildings fell, and it consumed all the lofty things therein, and the fire
searched out all the hidden places, and burned most in secret places, but the
Consumation was exceeding great, where with it consumed.

And as I passed through her streets, I beheld her state to be very miserable,
and very few were those that were left in her, who were but here and there one,
and they feared not the Fire, neither did the burnings hurt them, but they were
(and walked) as mournful dejected People, and the fire burned every where, so
that there was no escaping of it; And thus she became a Desolation, and as an
Astonishment; for the burning was suffered of God for her chastizement, and
could never be ^^enched nor overcome; and in the midst of her Waters was the
Vessel of her Merchandise frozen up, that none could move it, and there were
none that could stop the burning; and the Fire consumed all things, both Stone
and Timber, and it burned under all things, and under all Foundations, and that
which was lifted up above it fell down, and the Fire consumed it, and the
burning continued; for though the Foundation was burnt up, and all the lofty
part brought down (by the fire) yet there was much old stuff, and part of
broken desolate Walls and Buildings in the midst, which the fire continued
burning against; and that which was taken, as to make use of, which yet escaped
the fire, became useless in man's hand, as a thing of naught. And the Vision
hereof remained in me as a thing that was secretly showed me of the Lord.

And now let her Wise men find out the matter, and her Prudent men read, and
her Divines (so called) interpret the Vision (and let her know, that her day is
at hand) and let every one of them look to their own ways.

And as for thee, O City of London, thy Sin has been exceeding grievous, and
thy Iniquities beyond measure; Who can number thy daily Transgressions, or set
before thee the multitude of thy Abominations? Oh! thy ways have grieved the
Lord, and thy works have oppressed the Just, and the Lord will surely plead
with thee, whom thou have long rebelled against, and walked in thy Pride, and
nourished thy self in Voluptuousness, as a Beast for the slaughter, and in
Arrogance has thy steps been found; Oh! thy Heart has been defiled, and thy
ways are ways of Grievousness, and thy paths are polluted before the Lord,
and thou have not done the thing that is just in his sight, but have chosen thy
own Ways, and trusted in thy own Wisdom.

Take heed now therefore, O City of London, for God will be too strong for
thee, and thy strength shall fall before him, and thou must come to an Account
for thy Deeds, and then where will be thy Refuge, or what shall be thy Shelter?
Will thy Multitude of men deliver thee from God, or the Greatness of thy
strength prevail against the Almighty? If so, then may thou stand in thy
Ways, O City of London! but if not, thy Misery will be great; and who shall
bemoan thee in that day, or pity thee in the time of thy Distress? Forasmuch as
thou have refused the counsel of the Lord, and rejected the voice of his
Servants in the midst of thee, and hearkened not to his Word in thy own Bowels,
but also slighted the many Warnings of the Lord by his Servants, who were sent
of him in love to thee, that thou might come to serve him, and not thy own
Pleasure, proceeding on from Year to Year, like a monstrous Woman, who
regards not the Voice nor Person of Husband nor Friend: Oh! what shall be
said unto thee? Must thou needs be left for Desolation? And must thou be left
as a Woman forsaken? Will thy Lovers help thee in the Day of Trouble? or thy
delightsom Pleasures preserve thy Heart from Judgment, or thy glorious Riches
hide thee from the burning Torments? If thou love thy Wages of Vanity more
than God, and thy Hearts lust more than thy Maker, and wilt not turn speedily
from it to seek the Lord in thy Heart, then may thou post on (as thou art
going) hastily to the Pit, and with much eagerness to the Gulf of Misery, where
none can help thee: And then will thy Feasting be turned into Famine, thy
Beauty into Dust, thy Glory into Shame, and thy Honor into Contempt, as thou
have seen it come to pass upon others, whose Glory and Strength was as great as
thine, by whom thou have not taken warning by a through and speedy returning
unto the Lord with all thy Heart.

Therefore will God search thee and judge thee according to what is found in
the midst of thee, and thou shall be awakened in the day of God's anger, and be
sensible of the Torment when it comes: For though God has also tried thee,
with giving thee thy Hearts desire, yet have thou not been thereby humbled; and
though the Lord has visited thee in loving kindness, yet have thou walked
loftily; nay, moreover thou have taken occasion thereby to be the more exalted,
and art going in the Steps of them that the Lord so lately (for such things)
overturned before thee, that it cannot yet be forgotten; And do thou or the
Rules in thee think to establish your selves by acting such things, for which
God overtured many mightier then you? Therefore, O City! think not to establish
thy self by Blood, nor to be settled by way of Revenge; for though some men may
have done some things unjust against some of you, (and others) so that God may
justly by you scourge them sore for it; yet wherein you do it in the way of
Revenge, or to Avenge your own cause, or to set up your selves in Self Ends,
like them before you, therein God will also find out a Scourge for you. And
this I have seen, that the Great men of the Earth stand in slippery places, and
their great strength before the Lord is as Smoke before the Wind.

My counsel is therefore, That thou fear the Lord, and turn from the Way thou
art in; and let thy Judges know, that the Lord will judge them; and let thy
Rulers understand, that the Lord will rule over their Strength and Wisdom; and
let thy Teachers perceive, that God is come to teach his own Children. And let
the Kings Heart be upright before the Lord in this the day of his Trial, and
time of Visitation from God, ( the shortness or length thereof being hid from
him, over whom God rules as it pleases him) who is cutting his Work short in
Righteousness: Therefore let all thy Inhabitants, O thou great City! from the
highest to the lowest, take good heed unto their Ways, and the Intents which
are in them, for the Lord sees the Secrets of all your Hearts.

H. S.

ANd that thou may not altogether disesteem of this Vision concerning thee,
and that thy Wise men may not esteem it as a thing of naught (which is
published for thy good, and brought forth for thy Warning, and declared to set
before thee thy state at hand, that thou might be warned beforehand, and
come to find something in thy self, whereby thou might stand in the day of
Trial, and endure in the hour of Trouble, or otherwise Gods Servants might seal
up the Visions and Revelations of God in the Book of Secrets, and treasure them
in the enlightened Chambers of the Heart, where God is revealing his Secrets to
those that fear him) Therefore shall I write what has been formerly showed,
most whereof being come to pass, and the rest hasteneth.

In my former Vision, in the days of the former Rulers, I saw on a Hill many
Trees together standing, which were both great and tall, but they were very
old, and of a long standing, and many of their lofty Boughs were broken and
battered, and many hanged downward, which pressed down the Trees, and they were
old, withering and decaying, and had not grown a long time, and were but as a
Wonder to the Beholders, though they had been of great account, and the chief
Trees among (or over) the rest; and it was so, that I beheld them much even
with admiration, to see such Trees in such a state, which was more to this
purpose than is here expressed; and I beheld until all these Trees were rooted up
out of the Earth, and so overturned every one, and their dead Bodies lay in a
confused manner, and were fallen one upon another, and the Ground upon which
they stood was broken up, and then there was some room and liberty, and Light
came in, and I walked and looked every way, both upon the Light, and the great
Desolation of these great Ones. The Interpretation whereof may be read by such
as can but see.

And though this great overturning befell those great, tall and strong Trees,
and that light came into that Ground, over which those fruitless Trees stood,
yet I beheld round about, and near unto it much Briars, Brambles and Thorns in
abundance, which covered the Earth; and it was such Rubbish, that it was never
like to be fit for any thing but to have a Fire kindled among it; and it was so
thick and so strong that there was no passing in nor through it, but only where
the narrow Way was, and there also those Briars would catch on every side; and
he that passed through must stoop very low. And what those Briars and Thorns
were, let those Brambles read, who covered the Earth with their Multitudes, in
Raging, Swearing, Cursing, Shouting, Roaring and Drinking the Health (as they
call it) of their King at his coming.

And near unto the place of the Destruction of those great Trees, was there a
Child in great Desolation, in a close place, where it had been a long time, and
was not like yet to be released, but remained in want and misery, which mine
Eye pitied, and in Irons, and my Heart was sadned for it, and the more because
none came to visit it, nor succor it; for it was in a desolate place, and
unseemly, and few had regard unto it, and yet there was some hopes it might be
delivered. And this was a true resemblance of the state of the Seed of God in
all the World.

And in plainness concerning Oliver Cromwell, and his Son Richard, (late
called) Protectors, the Vision from God was showed to me, (before the downfall
of either of them) thus:

And I beheld a great and mighty Tree, much bigger than ever I saw before, and
appearing without Sap or Virtue in it, or Leaf, Bough or Branch upon it, (much
less Fruit) and the top of it was broad, (being all big) much like unto the top
of Paul's Steeple in London; and close by this great old Tree, grew up another
Tree, as out of his Root, and belonged to him, but not both in one Body, though
very near together, and stood both upon one Foundation, and this was as a
little stripling Tree, which also was without Leaves or Branches, or any thing
to bear Fruit, so that I admired to see it so with the young Tree; for I looked
for Branches or Leaves, but there were none.

And whilst I was beholding of them, a Man being sent came in much haste, with
an Ax in his hand, to cut down the great mighty old Tree, which seemed strange
to me, that one man should adventure upon so great a work, to cut down such a
Tree as that; for the lower part of the Tree was exceeding big, and almost as
broad upon the Earth as half the height; so that I thought he had need of three
or more to help him, and that one man could scarce cut him down with one Ax, if
he stood hewing all his Life time: But I much more admired to see the
Confidence of the man that came with speed with his Ax, who made no stop at
all, because of the greatness of him, nor any thing else, but as soon as ever
he could get to him smote with the edge of his Ax, and struck between the
Ground and the Tree, so that I soon perceived he intended to separate between
the Tree and the Ground on which he stood; and the man in the might of his
strength struck but three Blows in all, but he separated the Tree from the
Earth on which he stood, and immediately the Tree fell with a mighty overthrow,
and the Foundation of the Tree was altogether rotten, and not one Root at all,
but where the Root should be was Rottenness, and the Earth shook at his fall,
and many Great men stood amazed, and fear seized on many, because of the great
sudden fall thereof.

And as this great Tree fell, I saw under the Foundation of the young tall Tree
that stood near the other, and it was much like to fall presently after, and
was almost down on the one hand, and then almost down on the other, and yet it
recovered and stood up for a time, having no Root but Rottenness: And the great
Tree fell from him on the one side, and the Earth parted from him on two sides
more, so that only upon one side in four (or less) the Earth cleaved to him,
and he being slender and tall without Root, was not like long thus to stand;
neither did Richard.

And I likewise beheld many more smaller Trees, and the man with his Ax in his
Hand cut them all down at the Butt, somewhat above the Ground, and so left the
Stumps in the Earth, and therefore it might be possible for them to grow up
again: As some did come up again who were put down, but fell the second time
through Disobedience.

And after all this I beheld also many more Trees in abundance, yea, more
numerous then the other, coming up out of the Earth, and covering the face
thereof, and growing up apace, which were not yet ready to be cut down; and I
saw the man with the Ax in his hand, standing still for a time (having cut all
the other) until those should be ready to be cut down; and he waited till the
time came, and was in a readiness with his Ax in his hand ready to strike, when
those abundance of Trees should come up to their growth, which hastened. And
let those who are now come up read this, and let the whole City of London take
heed (as I said before) and Repent with speed, and turn to the Lord, whose
Servant I am, called.

Humphry Smith.

Postscript.
WHen those People to whom God gave his Ordinances and his Statutes had long
resisted and grieved his Spirit in them, who said, I am God, and not man, the
holy One in the midst of thee, and had also refused plain Instructions; then
the Lord sent them the Prophet Isaiah, who said, With stammering Tongues and
other Eips will I speak unto this People; and for a Sign he was sent to walk
Naked among them. And the Prophet Ezekiel was sent with that which they might
esteem dark Visions and foolish Signs (which were many) and hard Sayings. And
Jeremiah he lamented over them; and all the Lords Prophets proclaimed against
their Priests and Leaders of them, who caused them to Err; and yet would they
not be warned, nor their Priests leave preaching Peace unto them, nor they
leave following their Priests until they had crucified the Just, and denied him
that is the Light, who saves his People from their Sins; and Jerusalem became
a Heap, and a Desolation, and an Astonishment; and so both Priests and People
went into Destruction and Captivity together. And thy Sins, O London! may be
equalized with hers, and are as many, and as grievous; and that thou may a
little the better understand my Vision concerning thee, therefore have I
written these latter things that concerned others, which if thou understand
not, that which concerns thee is more Mysterious.

To the great Flock of the Imprisoned Servants of GOD Almighty.
THe Lord is become our Portion, and the God of Jacob the Lot of our
Inheritance, even the God of the whole Earth, whose Throne is in the Heavens,
and his Dwelling in the Hearts of the Humble, before whom the least Lamb of his
Fold is more delightsom than the beautifulst Flower of the Grass of the Field,
and of more value than the Fowls of the Air, or many Sparrows, which are
according to his Providence; the Mystery of whose Will lodges in the secret
Chambers of his Wisdom, whose Ways are unsearchable, and his goings in the
deep; none can fathom the unsearchable Fountain of his Goodness, nor find out
the utmost of the Intents of his Heart, but as Love springs up with healing
Oil, discovering a measure of the Motions of his Spirit, whereby something of
his Mind is known, who inhabiteth Eternity, and is dreadful in Holiness, severe
in his Judgments, clear in his Love, free in his Mercy, bountiful in his
Goodness, large in his fatherly loving Kindness, wonderful in his Operation,
pitiful to the Meek, gentle to the Upright in Heart, rewarding the greatest of
his Adversaries according to the fruit of their own Ways, and altogether
Righteous in all his Doings, from whom the Upright may certainly expect a
plentiful Reward, and all his Servants the Wages of Righteousness, and every
one of the least of his Children a certain Inheritance with the sanctified in
the Kingdom that fades not away.

Even this is the Lord our Righteousness, whom the World knows not, who also
appeared unto them, who were truly our Fathers in the days of old, who is the
same both in Wisdom, Strength and Power as ever he was, and it is he that found
us in the waste howling Wilderness, and tossed to and fro with the unsettled
Waves, on which the Whore sat, that brought into Drunkenness, and with his
holy Arm did he bring us out of the Miery Clay, and my Soul from under the deep
Waters, and set our feet upon the certain Rock of Ages, that Men, Laws nor
Decrees can never remove, and he has been unto us a Shield, and will certainly
be an exceeding great Reward, or a Reward that shall exceed and surmount all
the contrary: What shall I say? what he will be unto the faithful can never be
uttered, what he has been in his Power, Wisdom and Love to us, we have seen,
and what he is, let all my Brethren feel, and this we are most assuredly
assured of, that he is become ours, yea, even our own, and we have a part in
him that is true, our Covenant with him stands in the Power of his Life, which
is endless, and he has bought us with the price of that which puts away the
Sin; and certainly I cannot but glorify him even in the Body, Soul and Spirit,
and no other Lover does my Soul desire, nor a better Shepherd can Israel ever
find, nor a more wise, stronger and tender Father can Children ever have, nay,
he himself (as I have said) is become the Lord our Righteousness, and the
portion of our Cup, in which Salvation stands, of which we daily drink, and
know it to be the Cup of blessing, and can truly say, our lot is fallen in a
good ground.

I can truly say, my Soul cleaves unto the Lord, who brings Deliverance, and
hitherto the Lord has helped us, and has done greater things than could have
been by man expected; and what, now though there be a Sea to pass through, and
Floods of ungodly men to get beyond, shall we therefore be discouraged, or
shall we murmur because of the length of time, or be discontented when the Lord
brings his People into Trials, for a two fold end or purpose, as in himself,
that is to say, For the proving and humbling of his People, that he may do them
good, or much more good than he has done at their latter end; And for the
drawing forth of the Cruelty and Tyranny of his Enemies to the utmost, which
was in them before, or grounded in their Hearts, that their Sin being finished,
he might destroy them forever, and overturn them, so that they never rise
again? Or shall we be unsatisfied because the People of the Land of Darkness do
shut us up out from amongst them, by reason of the dread and trouble that is
upon them? Or shall we not be contented if the Lord should suffer us to be
deprived of all things but himself, that we might have none other thing to have
unity with, but only him alone? surely this would be his Love, and great would
be the Unity between such and him! What if we went out as Jacob did, and left
all behind us, even Goods, and Lands, and Fathers House, as did our Father
Abraham? And what if there should be a Pursuer, like Saul and David, yet we
know the Dominion belongs to the faithful Seed, though in many Tribulations,
even to us the seed of Abraham, according to the Promise, whose seed was led
out of the place of Bondage, as it is this day? And what if we had none but
him, even the Lord our God, to take care for our Bodies (who causes the
Raiment not to wax old, and the Widows Oil to increase, and gave Bread from
Heaven in the needful time,) yet should it go well with us; and though we had
none other to trust unto, then he who delivered his People after the Decree was
sealed for their Destruction in the days of Mordecai (who could not bow, though
the King had commanded it) yet should we not be discouraged; and though we had
none other to cry in secret unto, but him that preserved Daniel in praying to
his God (though his Life thereby was in great Jeapordy, and the Decree of the
King broken) yet might we have quietness and peace; yea, much better it is to
enjoy the Lord, than life it self, and the lowliness of his Countenance, than
earthly Treasure: Nay, truly let them take what they are for, and their Minds
in, so we may but enjoy the Treasures of Life Immortal, and the Crown of
Everlasting Peace, which fades not away.

Dear Friends and Lambs of the Morning, and Flock of the Fold of God, in the
suffering state, through which the Everlasting Life does spring, when I am
declaring of the unutterable Goodness and transcendent infinite
Loving Kindness, of the Lord, I am sometimes rather willing to be swallowed up
in that infiniteness of it self, than to be declaring of that which in it self
can never be uttered (as it is) and when I enter into the Chambers of secrecy,
where the hidden Wisdom is treasured up, I have been even ready to shut up all
the outgoings, and to dwell in the inward Chambers of the secret Closets, where
the unutterable Treasures are treasured up abundantly forever, and even say in
my Heart unto the yet scattered Ones, Oh! that ye would come and see my
Dwelling, and find out my Resting place, and abide in the beautiful Habitation,
and rest in the munition of Rocks: Oh! that ye would come and drink of the
everlasting Streams, and be satisfied with the Springs of Virtue, that your
Bones might be full of Marrow, and the inside of your dwellings beautiful, so
shall the Lord delight in you forever; and though the World hate, yet he will
love, and though Relations may deny, yet he will own, though Riches may take
themselves Wings, yet he will never forsake; nay, though mortal Parents might
cast off, yet then the Lord will not cast off, but receive; and though Wives or
Husbands may break their Promise, and so be without natural affection, yet the
Lord will never break his Covenant with his People, for that shall last for
evermore; and though Children might for sake their Parents, the Lord will be
more unto them than ten Sons. So that I say again, were I in one day bereaved
of all, and separated from my Fathers Children, which of all outward things are
most dear unto me, yet enjoying the Lord, and his Presence being with me, in
whose Covenant I am with all the flock of God, in the invisible Life, so should
it be well with me, and so may it be well with all you, as ye are faithful to
God in the suffering state, and so enjoy his Presence; thus also with you for
evermore may it go well.

Shall I now therefore return to Exhortation and Admonition, with desires of
tender Love toward you, that you all in patience may stand and look to the
Lord, whom we have, and have none other in Heaven to hear our Cry, nor in Earth
that truly commiserateth our Cause, nor has Power like him to help. Dear
Friends, he knows our Intents, and sees how it is with us; he has given to
many of us an heart to say, Lord, if thou should suffer us to perish, we will
not leave thee; and whatever become of us, we dare not deny thee before men;
for thou have called us, and we are thine, even thine own, whom thou have
chosen: Let your desires be forever thus unto the Lord, and wait upon him
continually, and let your Eyes be more upon the Lord than upon those things
which in this day of Trial are suffered to come to pass by him, which he can
also turn for his own Glory, and your Everlasting Comfort.

And Friends, this know, that as your Minds are upon, and much caring how to
preserve the temporal things, the weight of them will lie upon you, and stop
the Springs of better Treasures, but as your Minds are toward the Lord, a
great case and satisfaction will be come unto you. And Friends, Murmur not that
this day is come, for it may be there was need of it, even amongst us, and it
may be ye are more yet to be redeemed out of the earthly part and transitory
things, and question not but this will be for good; and as for Trials, since
this cloud was up, I have even drunk deep with you of the inward sufferings,
yea, more than is convenient to mention, but the Lord has kept my feet upon
the Rock, and with all the Upright I sing Praises to his Name.

And now be tender one to another, you may read the Figure, God is bringing you
near together, and Egypt is thrusting you out, by reason of the Torment that
is upon them, and a Land of Rest is before you, and from the presence of the
Lord they cannot Banish us, nay, nor what they would neither, for God is on our
side, though they have yet something more to do; and when every man's Work is
over, he shall certainly receive his Reward from God, either good or evil; and
then, as the Apostle says of the Wicked, They shall be punished with
everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of
his Presence, 2 These. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9.

But Friends, it is safe for you all to dwell in your own Tents, and mind the
Lord, and let your love be toward him above all things, and in all things that
you do, wait to feel his Counsel and Guidance, and trust him forever, for great
is the work of the Lord, yea, I have even looked for this day, that the Cry of
the innocent may reach unto Heaven, and (as I have said) the sound thereof
reach over Europe, that Kings may come to be crowned with Honor, and Judges
decree Righteousness, and true Judgment may stream forth as Water, and
Righteousness as a living stream, that Thousands, and Thousands of Thousands
may slock to our Fold as Doves to the Windows, that the Nations of men may bow
under the Scepter of Righteousness, and the Powers of Darkness shut up forever:
Behold, O Friends! yea, stand still and see the fall of Babel, the Destruction
of the Whore, and the Torment of the Beast; for though Hell has enlarged her
self, yet this we know, the Lord lives, who scatters the Powers of Darkness:
Oh! what more shall I say? who come to the dewlling place of its unutterable
Power, may feel the unsearchable things of God.

And Friends, let not the Enemy prevail through Unbelief, for there Israel fell
in the days of old; and there is no greater danger than that of Unbelief: But
consider, that you have something still to resist, and seldom ever more than
now; and you have a spiritual Enemy to war with, which flies not but as he is
resisted; and in the time of your weakness and inward trouble is his time to
prevail, if ever; and if thou can stand then, full easy may thou walk,
when Refreshings come, and with delightsomness may thou persevere, when the
Cloud is over; and this know, that a Storm lasts but for a time, and Winter
is but for a season, and the Night remains not always; nay, the four hundred
and thirty years had an end, and the Bounds of the Seas are set, and happy is
he that always looks unto him that rules over them; for though (when the
Waves swelled) even the Disciples were ready to think he cared not if they
perished, yet he intended better things for them; and when for the Life's sake
they cried unto him, he soon and easily abated the Rage both of Wind and Sea,
and then the sweetness of a Calm is prized. Dear Friends, I need not open the
Parable unto you, but even rather say, The Lord be with you, even every one of
you beyond all that I can write, and the Lord strengthen you, and keep you
steadfast in the Faith, and refresh your Souls, and minister more strength,
virtue and comfort unto you all every where for evermore, Amen.

This is chiefly intended for all the imprisoned Servants of God, and them yet
at liberty, and to be read among them with a good Understanding, in that which
gives it distinctly in the fear of God.
Humphery Smith.
Chalfont in Buckinghamshire, the 13th of the 11th Mon. 1660.
To N^w-Englands pretended CHRISTIANS, Who contrary to Christ have destroyed
the Lives of men.
Having seen something of yours, called by you an Appendix, whereby you would
justify your selves in Whipping, Imprisoning, Banishing, Killing, and making
Spoil of whole Families; I being weak of Body, and in Bed, the strength of the
Lord arose in me, from the which was given forth that which follows:
THe Lord God will answer you with that which you shall never be able to
resist, from the which you shall never be (...) to fly; neither shall your
Coverings defend you, but God will visit in secret, and the Almighty will rain
Snares upon you; and all your strong holds in one day (and that suddenly, in a
moment) will the Lord God scatter and confound, with all your strong Reasons,
and your Weapons which you have gathered together against the invisible God and
his Servants, like your Fathers in the days of Old ( Isa. 41. 21.) these with
all your Weapons of War, against the Lamb and the suffering seed, shall be
broken in the midst of you, and Death will overtake you, and Gods Righteous
Judgments will enter within your dwellings, and a day of blackness from the
Throne of God will come upon you, and his Anger with Bitterness will be poured
forth upon you, as a mighty Storm, which which comes on a sudden, and as a
Whirlwind which none can stop, and as the mighty unmerciful raging Waves of the
Sea, which none is able to resist; even so shall the day of your Calamity come,
which is hastening, as the lighting, whose breaking forth, all your fleshly
Wisdom shall never be able to hinder.

Behold! I have heard a Voice of Terror from the Lord against your Unrighteous
Proceedings, and the day of Gods Vengeance is in his heart; and who should
stand to plead with him? Behold! ye Thorns, the Lord our God is a consuming
fire, and before him you cannot stand, for your Sins have reached up to Heaven,
and your Iniquities are come before the most High, and your grievous
blood-thirsty actions are spread over Nations, and Gods witness in thousands
(who are not of us, but rather yet against us) do rise up in their hearts
against you; and when you are awakned, you will be filled with Anguish, and a
Cup of Astonishment from the Righteous God of Truth, will be poured forth unto
you; and as sure as you have thirsted after, and drunk deep of the Blood of
Gods chosen, (though despised of men) so certain shall you have Blood to drink;
and Trembling, Horror and Amazement will most absolutely come in that day,
which approaches as a Thief in the Night, and then shall your Bowels be ripped
open, and your inside Coverings broken, and then shall your Hearts be rent with
Perplexity, and Amazement shall come over you as a Cloud of the Night, and the
hand of the Almighty will find out your secret lurking places, and then shall
ye know, that the Lord our God does and will plead the Cause of his People, and
avenge himself on his and their Enemies; and then shall ye know, that ye have
risen up against the Lamb, who is sometimes silent from pleading his own cause,
who though dumb as to answer the mighty Ones of the Earth, yet faithful in
suffering, according to the will of him who rules over all; and then shall ye
know, that though no answer at all were written unto your dark pretended
Coverings, yet shall you then feel an answer near unto you, and the sound of
Gods Terrible Voice shall be heard in the midst of you; and form the dreadful
Noise of his War, shall you never be able to cover your selves with all your
Writings, Printings nor Declarations, though never so strong from the prudency
of the Earth, for God has cast all that behind his back; and in the day at
hand, shall you most absolutely come to know it so to be.

For behold, my heart is indeed rent, and God has opened in it the secret
Counsel of his Will, and his Purpose concer^ing you, whose Decree shall never
be changed, which is sealed against the evil doer: And (...) or Evil-doer, who
have done worse then (...) selves a Reproach amongst me^, (...) the People? O
horrible and Wicked Cru^lty and Mercil^ss Tyranny which is found in the midst
of you! Is this the fruit of your Profession? And has the Spirit of Truth led
you to do these things? Do not even the Nations stand and look at you? And do
not the Upright in Heart mourn in secret because of your Sins? Ah! who could
have believed that you would have done such things! And do you think now to
stop the Mouths of People by publishing your strong Reasons? Nay, this is
plain in my heart, that all whatsoever you Print, Publish or Declare, shall
never give satisfaction to the meek just Principle of God, which remains in the
Spirits of many Thousand Thousands in the Nations round about you: And if your
called An Appendix, with the rest of your Writings, were never answered by us,
and if we therein should lay our mouths in the dust forever; yet this we know,
that the holy One of Israel, the Righteous God of Truth will plead our cause,
and execute Judgment in his fury, and avenge the Blood of his Saints, and help
the man of low degree against him who is too strong for him; and to the Lord
God of Righteousness we commit our Cause, and the Innocence of our dear
Brethren, and in Gods blessed will I rest, and am satisfied in respect of his
love unto his Jewels, though but as Fools to the World, and in respect of his
answering of you acording to the fruit of your own ways.

And behold! ye Children of men, I cannot but proceed to declare unto you the
Day which is near at hand, and warn you all to strip your selves from your
coverings, and sit down, ye People, in Dust and Ashes, and confess your
Iniquities in secret unto the Lord, before it be to late; for great is the Woe
which is coming upon you; and that which I have heard concerning you, is none
other then a Voice of Terror: O the Trouble, Distress and Calamity that
sounds in my heart concerning you! and from the Lord God will it be poured
forth, and exceeding deep shall you drink thereof; and this shall you know to
be true, when the Whirlwind comes from far, and the shadows of the Night draw
near, when no hiding place will be found for the Hypocrite, neither a refuge
for the Evil doer.

And then, as ye have not spared the despised of the World, so will the Lord
cast upon you, and not spare. O the Bitterness and Unutterable Torments which
will then come! but who amongst you will believe these things, and who can
entertain the Counsel of the Lord? And are not your hearts yet hardened against
Reproof? And are not to be reproved for your Envy against Gods People? Nay
moreover, are you not sometimes already reproved by him, who sees in secret,
and who searches the Intents of the Heart, and makes manifest unto man the
Wicked Enterprises thereof, and overturneth the Counsels of the Wicked, but
remembers the Cause of the Needy, and pleads the Innocence of the Upright,
in whose sight the Death of the Saints is precious, and who pleads their
Cause in the day of Trouble, and will most certainly confound his Adversaries,
and scatter his Enemies as smoke is scattered with a mighty Whirlwind; and in
that day, where then will your place be found?

And a seed there is which God will deliver from your hands, and preserve from
the Blood-thirsty men, which shall grow up in the midst of you as a Lilly among
Thorns, and Gods blessing shall be upon them, with whom my Life is: And as the
latter gleaning in the time of Harvest, so shall the gathering of Gods Heritage
be. And what you have done, will be for the advantage of the suffering Seed,
and for the Glory of God, and much for your disadvantage and eternal Shame, and
endless Misery, if you repent not. And this you men of sin should know, that
inasmuch as you have taken away the Life of Gods Creatures; and moreover,
Unjustly by an Unrighteous Law destroyed the Lives of his Servants, therein may
all men see, that you are contrary to Christ, and led by a Spirit opposite to
him, who came not to destroy men's Lives, but to save them.

And what is here written need not hinder the moving of God in any of my
Brethren, his servants, in giving forth a more large Answer, according to the
particulars written in your called Appendix, or to any other of your writings,
the which you may also expect; only this was in my heart, in which I have
discharged my Conscience; and so herein give forth my Mite aamongst the rest of
my Brethren, by way of Declaration, and that from God.

And by this it is my Souls desire, your hearts may be humbled, and truly rent,
and broken for your own Iniquities, and that with speed, or otherwise Gods
dreadful hand you cannot escape.

And this is in faithfulness to God, and love to your souls, from a Friend
thereof, called Humphry Smith.
The 14th of the first Month, in the Year 1660.
The Lamb and his Day PROCLAIMED.
THe Kingdom of God is at hand, which comes not with Observation; Salvation is
near unto all that will receive it; Redemption is coming in a time unexpected,
and Deliverance in a way not known; as a Thief in the dark is the Heir come,
whose Light out of Darkness is shining, and that which shines out of Darkness,
is it alone that gives the knowledge of God, whom to know is Life eternal; and
the brightness of the Day of God is springing forth of Darkness, as the
Morning-Sun after the Darkness of the Night; and glorious is this Day of the
Revelation of God, to all them that have waited for his coming, who in the Life
of his Power, through the Obedience in his Love, come to rejoice in his
Dominion, over all the Powers of Darkness forever, and sound forth the dreadful
Day of his Power unto all the Inhabitants of the Earth, from the which Christ
the Savior comes to take Peace, and to bring the Sword of Gods Judgments into
the Bowels of all the Earthly Minded, and in him that judges the secrets of
all men's Hearts, do his Followers rejoice, and proclaim him unto you all, that
makes an end of Sin, who of the Father of Love and Mercy is tendered unto all
that will receive him, that in him who condemns the Evil deeds, and sin in the
flesh, Salvation might be attained unto, who now comes unto his own, of whom
many receive him not; for he is come to judge the World, whom God so loved,
that he gave his Son the Light of the World, that whosoever believe in him (by
whom the secrets of all hearts are, and shall be judged) may be saved from
Wrath to come, and find a sure hiding place, when the wicked shall be cut off
the Earth.

And now, who will receive the Lamb, in whose Mouth there is no Guile? Who
among the Sons of men will receive him that has been slain from the Foundation
of the World? Who will receive him that is the Gift of God, which is Perfect?
Who will receive him that is a man of Sorrows, whose beauty is hid from the
prudent of the Earth? Who will receive him, that the Priests cry out against
and the Rulers say, Away with him from the Earth? Who will come unto the waters
of Life and return unto the Fountain of living Mercies, that in his Belly the
springs of Life may be felt? Who can endure to follow him to end of World,
whose Kingdom is not of this World, and who receives not honor of men? Who
can hear, receive and keep the hard sayings, and drink his Blood that cleanses
from all sin? Who is willing to receive him that is the Resurrection, and the
Life, whose Presence troubled and terrified his own Disciples, so that their
Hearts burned within them? Who will lay down their Crowns at the foot of him
that is the Light, and mourn over him that is slain, whom they have pierced,
and through Patience, Long-suffering and Obedience, follow the one Shepherd in
the Regeneration? even unto them is the Word of Consolation sent.

Therefore be ye awakned, O all ye Rulers and People! let not your Hearts be
hardened against Gods VVitness in you, neither stop your Ears, nor close your
Eyes; for of a Truth the Lord is at hand, and is come to try you, with his
Loving Kindness, and with his Judgments! His flock despised of men, has he
sent in the meekness of his love, to preach the innocent Life of his Son among
you, in Meekness, Patience, Sufferings and Tribulations, who being reviled,
revileth not again, but in patience enduring long Imprisonment, yea, Want and
Sickness there, and Abuses, cruel Mockings, Stonings in the street daily, and
Revilings by ungodly Persons, whose Cruelty is increased and their Sins
multiplied, increasing to the day of Judgment, and Righteous Revelation of Gods
wrath upon all Unrighteousness of men, who hold his Truth in that which is not
his Righteousness, which is now brought near unto all that fear, before him in
Uprightness of Heart, that Truth in the inward parts they might come to know,
and in it Worship the God of the Spirits of all flesh.

And all you People that are meek and tender, who have been taught by the
Priests, and not by the Lord, whose Mercy to the humble abides forever, the
Lord God Almighty has so loved you, that he has provided a better Teacher for
you, which shall not be removed, and a Priest that abides forever, and a
Bishop for your Souls; and behold, he is no less then a King, yea, he rules
over Kings, and help is laid upon him who is mighty, and he is able to save,
and he is so willing to do it, that he has laid down his Life for that end,
and he stands at the Door and knocks, and he that knocks is called the Word,
and the Word is as a hammer, and the Word is in the Heart, where Christ is to
be received, and where this knocks for entrance, and it knocks against sin, and
in him is no sin, and he comes to save you from sin, and to lead you the way
to the Father; and without Money does he ever teach, nay, he gives abundantly
unto all that are taught by him, and that more then mortal Riches, and you may
have him to be with you always forever, and he can resolve all your Doubts,
and satisfy every one, and replenish the weary, and nourish the faint, and in
him are all Gods Treasures, of the which by him you may come to partake
forever, and he himself is as a Treasure in thy field, but hid from thee, which
I have found in the Earthen Vessel, and declare it unto thee, that thy
Fallowground may be ripped up to find the Pearl; for this is near unto thee, and
the motion of it is against thy sin, the beauty whereof thou can never see,
until to it thou come to hearken.

H. S.

FOR THE honor of the king, AND And the great Advancing thereof (amongst men)
over all Nations in the World.
In the ensuing Proposals, tending thereunto, stated in Six PARTICULARS.
Concerning the KING'S Honor: 1. By His Subjects Unity one with another. 2. By
His Subjects Submission to all his Laws. 3. By His Subjects Faithfulness unto
him. 4. By His Subjects Uprightness in Craffick with other Nations. 5. By His
Subjects Departing from that which dishonors both God and the King. 6. By
His Subjects Being the peculiar People of God, and they having his Spirit to
counsel him.

I. Concerning the honor of the king, by the Unity of his Subjects one with
another.
WEre all (or the Major part) of the King's Subjects so in Unity one with
another, that every man sought each others good, as much as his own, and so
fulfilled the Law of God therein, by each man's loving his Neighbor as himself,
and doing unto all (and at all times) as they would be done unto; having the
Bond of Peace upon their Hearts, by the power of his Spirit, who commanded the
Christians, not only to love one another, but also their Enemies; whereby they
are so far from Defraud or coveting other men's Goods, or wronging any man in
Person or Estate, that Covetousness is not named among them, neither could be
by any justly charged upon them; but rather the things they possess are
acknowledged to be the Lord's, and themselves to be but Stewards thereof, and
therefore durst not be unfaithful toward God or man, in the Unrighteous
Mammon, lest the Lord should refuse to commit unto them the greater Riches. And
were they brought to have a certain knowledge one of another herein, that they
durst with boldness confide one inanothers Constancy in those things, without
the least fear of being any way wronged, or oppressed, or injured by each
other; with what abundance of satisfaction would such live upon the Earth? and
how desirable and amiable would this be for Christians, and Brethren, to live
thus in Unity?

And were they brought not to turn away their faces from their own flesh, nor
to slight the Cry of the Poor, but with an Eye of Pity still to be
commiserating the Needy, and much caring how to have Oppression removed, that
so with the more cheerfulness the Necessities of their poor Brethren might the
easier be relieved, and such continual Care to be taken herein, until all
Oppressions were brought to an end, and all the Poor kept from want (their
being sufficient within the King's Dominions to do it) that what is spent in
Vanity might be forborne, and what is wasted in Oppression might be withheld,
and other ways found out (as something has been prescribed by Thomas Lawrence
of Marleborough) until there were not one poor Member of all the Body of the
King's Dominions to be found, that had need to ask for Food or Raiment, by
reason of the Brotherly Care, Love and Unity in the aforesaid Subjects.

And all Jealousies and Heart-burnings one against another, and fear one of
another, as to be hurt in Person or Estate, or destroyed one of another, to be
as clearly removed out of all minds, as if such things had never been; all
being contented with the things (and places) that they have, and no man seek
another's Goods, or House, or House, or Land, or Place, or Worldly Honor from
him, nor any strive to be greater than another therein; but if any strive, then
so to strive, as to excel in Virtue, and in his service of love to his
Brethren, and People of his Nation, until Love, Unity and lasting Peace and
Concord spread over all, and all the contrary removed: which would be much for
the Honor of the KING, not only all the days of his Life, but would reach
unto the Ages to come.

II. Concerning the King's Honor, by his Subjects submission ( actively or
passivly) unto all his Laws.
Were the King's Subjects (or the major part thereof) brought to be as ready
to observe and keep all his Laws, Edicts and Commands, which are according
unto, and grounded upon good Reason, the holy Scriptures, and according to Gods
Witness in their Consciences, as he is to require it; and as freely willing to
walk according to all such his good and wholesome Laws, Statutes and Ordinances,
as he is to impose such upon them. And moreover, that they could not be
constrained to break them by any Foreign Prince or Evil Member at home, but at
all times, and in all cases, standing so faithful that the King be never
dishonored by their transgression of his just and righteous Laws, and that for
Conscience sake, out of love, and not for fear. And moreover, did the King make
such Laws and Orders, or suffer such to remain in force, which his Subjects
aforesaid did certainly know were contrary to good Reason, and not according to
the Scriptures or Law of God, but quite contrary also to Gods Witness in their
own Consciences; and that such Laws also were well known to them to be
destructive to the King's Subjects, and much hurtful to their Estates, and
danger of ruinating their Families; or if it should reach to Death or
Banishment, yet they not to rebel against the King, nor raise Arms to defend
themselves, though they are truly satisfied that such Laws are unreasonable,
yet for Conscience sake not to oppose, but submit unto every Ordinance of Man,
whether unto the King, or such as are set in Authority under him. And so,
though they cannot actively obey those Laws which are contrary to Gods
Righteous Law written in their Hearts, yet passively to fulfill those Laws
also, by a passive suffering the Penalties which those Laws require of such as
actively keep them not: And so, therein again are those Laws fulfilled also by
them, that so it might be said of him, That his Subjects are always ready to
fulfill or submit unto all his Laws and Orders, either by active or passive
obedience, whether they be reasonable or unreasonable. And a People being
brought thus to submit to the King in all things, would be very much for his
Honor in Truth and Righteousness,

III. Concerning the King's Honor by the Faithfulness of his Subjects unto him.
Were all the King's Subjects brought unto such Faithfulness unto him, that he
himself could with good Confidence trust them, or himself with them; and,
without any doubting, believe and know, that they would not harm him in the
least, nor in the least contrive the shortning of his days; but all desiring
his long life, to govern in Righteousness: And were they all of such a
Principle, and unalterable therein, as not to destroy any man's Life, though
their Enemies, much less a Friend, a Neighbor, or a Christian; that the King
might be well persuaded of them, that they would never harm him, nor plot, nor
conspire against him, nor ever offer or intend Violence toward him, though he
had none to guard him; so that if he please, he might even with boldness and
confidence at any time trust himself with them, or amongst them, without the
least danger or fear in himself, knowing all his Subjects to be as careful of
his Life, as his Lifeguard; so that if he please he might not need always to
keep one Company of his Subjects to guard him, for fear of any other of his
Subjects; but rather for fear of such as are not his Subjects. And were all his
Subjects brought in such Faithfulness, and the King well and truly satisfied
therein, would it not ease him and his Council of much Care, and sometimes Fear
too? and to be so well satisfied in himself concerning his Subjects
Faithfulness to him herein, that he could take their Word for it, without Oath,
Bond or Surety; Or, if he had no Word or Promise at all from them, yet could
believe and trust them, that they would never plot or rise against him, nor do
him harm, but remain as firm, steadfast, and true to him, as any other Princes
Subjects in the whole World, by any of their Oaths, Bonds, or other Engagements
whatsoever, if not more constant and steadfast: which, were all the King's
Subjects brought unto, would be such an Honor unto the King therein, as would
hardly be found belonging unto any Prince in the whole World again.

IV. Concerning the Honor that the King might have by the Uprightness of his
Subjects in their Traffic with other Nations.
Were all the King's Subjects (or most part of them) brought into Truth,
Plainness, and Righteousness, so that their Yea was Yea, and their Nay, Nay;
that so all Merchants and Factors could take their Words, and trust to their
Words to be of more value than the Oaths of most Princes Subjects in the World;
and that in what Nation or Kingdom soever they come, in the World, as soon as
it was heard they were such a Princes Subjects, that then both the King of
those Dominions, with Princes, Judges, Merchants, Factors and People, might all
conclude, they were true men of their Words; and that any, man might deal with
them, and none be afraid to traffic with them, because they abhor Deceit,
Defraud and Lying, and all manner of Cozening or Dishonesty: And would not this
also promote trading, and so enrich the Kingdom, and be some means to relieve
the Poor? And is not the enriching of the Kingdom for the King's Honor? And
what Man or Nation is it, but would desire to deal with Just Men? And would not
the Fame of such a Prince, and such his Subjects as deal justly and truly
wherever they come, soon sound over all the World? And would it not be for
his Honor, that had such a People as did neither seek nor ask but a Just Price
wherever they come amongst all Nations in the World? And if such Honor
before mentioned be esteemed, what part of it is beyond this, which might cause
a King's Name to be renowned over the whole World, having such upright, true,
just, honest-hearted men in all things, to his Subjects, as not any other
Eemperour or Prince could produce the like?

V. Concerning the King's Honor, by his Subjects departing from that which
disbonoureth (both God and) the King and themselves.
Were all the King's Subjects brought to leave and utterly to forsake the
Devil and all his Works, the Pomp and Vanities of this wicked World, and all
the sinful Lusts of the flesh, and the carnal desires of the same; and so to
leave and utterly forsake all manner of Evil in word and deed, and to bear no
Malice nor Hatred in their Hearts; to keep their Tongues from Lying and
Evilspeaking, seeing it is the evil words that Corrupt the good manners; and so
not to speak proudly, nor contemptuously, no, not of the meanest Member in the
Nation; but to abhor and leave Arrogance, with all manner of Voluptuosness,
knowing, that God resists the Proud; and so not one such profane person as
Lord Esau to be found amongst them; nor one Swearer, nor Liar, nor Thief, nor
Murderer amongst them; neither yet a Drunkard, nor a Glutton, nor a
Whoremonger, nor a Covetous Person ( which is Idolatry) to be found amongst
them; nor any that spend their days in Vanity, nor that abuse or waste the
good Creatures of God in any of the King's Dominions, whereby any of his
Subjects may come to want, to his dishonor. And were they all brought to
forsake the very Appearance of Evil, and so never to transgress any of his good
Laws, to his dishonor: herein also would this be for the Honor of the King.

And thus might his Fame ring over all the World, and be of great Renown among
all the Upright-hearted in all Nations; for what is a King without his
Subjects? And when is a King more honored by his Subjects, than when his
Subjects themselves are most honorable, and act most noble and honorably? And
what is more honorable and more noble in the outward practice among the sons
of men, whereby a King might be honored, than the things aforesaid? Nay, do
not the Principles, Qualities and Practices aforesaid make men more noble and
honorable than the Titles of For Esau was called Lord, and Edom had many
Dukes, and Ishmael had twelve Princes.
Lord Esau, or Dukes of Edom, or Princes of Ishmael, seeing Abraham was a
Wanderer, and Jacob a Pilgrim, and Israel dwelt in Tents; who obtained a good
Report through Faith, and whom God has renowned with an everlasting Honor.

VI. Concerning the Honor of the King, and also his great Benefit, by his
Subjects being the Peculiar Chosen People of God, and their having the Spirit
of the Lord to counsel Him.
Were many of the King's Subjects the true Servants and Children of the
invisible God of Heaven and Earth, by true mortification, sanctification and
regeneration, and truly led, moved and guided by the Spirit of God, and many of
them so grown into the Power and Wisdom of God really, and absolutely so having
the Spirit of the Lord poured sorth upon them in these latter days, according
to the promise of God, which must be and is already fulfilled, so that at a
needful time one of them having (as it was said of Daniel, chapter 5. v. 11.) the
Spirit, Light, Understanding and Wisdom being found in him, could show unto the
King such a thing or things, or secret Determination of God, which all others
(the King's Wisemen) whomsoever could not; and to discover the lurking of the
King's Enemies unto him, and their secret purposes against him, though they
were far remote; as Elisha discovered unto the King of Israel that which the
King of Syria in his Bedchamber contrived against him, whereby the King of
Israel escaped his Plots, not once or twice, 2 King 6. 10. And that they could
and did at any time, and often times (as moved of the Lord) declare and show
unto the King, the Counsel of God concering himself and his Kingdom, and what
would come to pass concerning both; and how he might avoid the Evil, and choose
the Good, like as Samuel and other Prophets, who had the Spirit, were wont to
do unto the Kings of Israel in the days of old, that so his Throne might be
established in Righteousness; which would be more than an ordinary Honor for
the King; and God might bless and prosper him for their sakes, as he did
Pharaoh for the sake of that one faithful man Joseph, after the King had
released him out of Bonds.

But by this time many might say unto me, as a Lord said unto the Prophet, when
he spoke of things much unlike to come to pass, How can these things be, though
God should make Windows in Heaven?

To which I answer, That though I do not affirm, that all those things shall
come to pass concerning him; yet I say, that many are already, and many more
may come to the slate asoresaid; And it would be his Happiness, and more for
his Honor than men can yet receive, to be chief Magistrate among or over such
a People, and to have most of his Subjects so qualified, and great would be his
Peace thereby.

And thus further I say, That the God of Heaven and Earth has promised, That a
People shall be all Righteous, and that Iniquity shall cease, and the Nations
shall learn War no more, but every one shall rest under his own Vine, and, and
none shall make them afraid; and they shall be in League with the Stones of the
Field; and the Beasts of the Field shall be at peace with them. And the Lord
God has brought many into the entrance of these things, that with Christ in
the Prophet they can give their Backs to the Smiter, and their Cheeks to him
that plucketh off the Hair. And if it were well if that all the King's Subjects
were come to the things aforesaid, and to live in that upright state; then it
is not ill that some are come unto that state already: And if the little that
is begun toward this work were cherished, might it not grow and increase
toward that state hinted at in the former brief Particulars, touching the
Honor of the King, though there is an Honor which exceeds all this?

And certainly the Word of the Lord will stand forever, though Men and their
Powers, and Heaven and Earth may pass away: And assuredly the God of
Righteousness has begun his Work in this Nation, and in the hearts of many of
his little Ones; And a Little One (he has said) shall become a Thousand, and a
small One, a strong Nation; and the Kingdoms of this World shall become the
Kingdom of our God, and of his Christ. And what if a Nation be born at once,
and Sion bring forth before her Travel, and the Lord answer before his People
call, and hear while they are yet speaking, and multiply the seed of Abraham as
the Stars of Heaven, and increase the innocent flock of his Fold as the
innumerable Plants upon the face of the Earth, that Sin and Iniquity may have
an end, and Righteousness reign for evermore.

And if it be farther enquired, How the King might have his Subjects truly
principled and qualified as before said; or, have such Subjects generally thus
for his great Honor?

I Answer further (to the everlasting Praise of God) That there are many (which
may well be called some of his truest Subjects in his Dominions) that are
already truly principled and qualified, as aforesaid; and more are entering and
growing up into the same Faithfulness, Love, Unity and Peace with all men, and
God will increase them; and it might be much for the Honor of (God and) the
King to encourage them therein; and much for the dishonor of God, and
dishonor and great disadvantage of the King diverse ways, if he seek, or should
be persuaded to seek the hindrance of these things, or of his Subjects, who are
thus already qualified, or the increase of their Number therein, or their
increasing in the honest, noble, honorable upright things aforesaid; which
things might make for the Honor of the King, and will certainly be for the
Glory of God.

And this is written by one that desires the Peace of all the Nation, and
Unity amongst all men, and that many more may come into the Righteous things
aforesaid, which would be for the Glory of God, the Honor of the chief
Magistrate, the great Benefit of the Nations, and much Comfort to themselves:
And that desires the increase of love, truth and virtue, which brings into the
true honorable Nobility, for the which this is written, that men may come into
the true Noble and Honorable Estate in the sight of God and all just Men,
among whom I am a true Friend to them all in love, called Humphry Smith.
The 10th of the 4th Month, 1661.
To the Lambs of Christ.
MY dear Brethren, who are Children of my Father, whom he has visited with the
Power of his Eternal Love, and gathered into his covenant of Light, where Life
and Immortality abides forever, who come to feel the Life of the risings of
the Son of Gods Power with his Immortal strength, you all in his Power to keep,
as living Branches of the Root to himself, single and pure, in the uprightness
of Innoceny, in this the day of his infinite love, wherein the Glory of the
Most High is revealed to the humble Seed, which receives the Gospel of Peace
and the Ministration of Life, to those who in the Death did lie, and by
Captivity was long in Bondage kept, which now from the Lord God of Life
Refreshings comes to receive, and Oil of everlasting Joy to the mourning Plant,
whereby the everlasting Covenant of the Father is known, in which I am with you
forever, you standing in obedience to the Power of the Word, which operates in
the Heart, by which all things were made, in which they are all enjoyed, as you
all in his Wisdom stand by it to be guided in the dominion of the Word, with it
over all to find Life, and guidance with that which is Immortal, in the
strength whereof to stand as Pillars of Life for the living Truth of God
against all his Enemies, with boldness and cheerfulness through the Power of
his Son, whose Life you are to feel exercising you therein, to which you are to
yield Obedience with all humble Submission to the Fathers will, abiding low in
his fear, and there is both Safety and Strength, that the Fountain of the
Fathers love may be opened in you as a Wellspring of Life, to overcome you
with the Power of himself, that thereby you may be refreshed one in another,
and be opened one to another in the bowels of the Fathers love, that it may
overshadow you as a Tree in Summer, and be to you as the refuge of a Rock, in
it to be hid from all the high and raging Waves, Winds and Storms, and from all
secret Discontent or Swellings in the mind, which are apt to hurt that which is
little and tender, which is to be brought forth (into Liberty, Peace and Life)
with the pangs of Sorrow; and as with the anguish of a travailing Woman, so is
the Seed brought forth which lives forever, which is fed with the Milk and
preserved from the Storm and the Heat, and fed with Food convenient, and
clothed with Humility forever; the little Child is you to lead in the peaceable
Path of the Fathers love, that you all as Lambs may follow him, whose Power
saves from Sin, in him trust, compassed about with the Walls of Salvation, and
feeling the everlasting strength you all to preserve in the Power of his Might,
his Blessing to receive unto the Seed, that you in it and by it may be fruitful
unto God forever.

For dear Friends, the Father is well-pleased in him who is meek and lowly in
the Heart, and in obedience unto him through the leadings of his Spirit of
Power in which the Father's Love is manifest, which leads in the low Ground,
where the safe way of everlasting Peace is known, where all things are quiet
and still, where the small still Voice is heard, whereby the Dead come to live
in the powerful Life of the Fathers Love, which compasses about the Seed as a
Wall of everlasting Strength, which is made perfect in Weakness, and to the
Weak is only to be known, that the Weak then may say, I am strong, feeling
Strength ministered forth from that which is begotten of the Father, which
never was comprehended by the Earthly Wisdom, which is all scattered as the
Smoke before the Wind, when he arises, who has long been as a Servant, and is
now to be served, that he may be Lord over all, who is as a Man of Sorrows, and
leads through the Suffering state, that by the Obedience of Faith, through
the Power of the Cross, which crucifies and brings to the Death that which is
to dye, that the Vail may be rent, the way into the Holiest of all made
manifest, and that received into the new Ground which abides forever, even
that which now Comfort the weary Soul, and Satisfies the longing Spirit,
and Replenisheth the dry and barren Land with the Rivers of the Valley, and the
Springs of the Desert, that the Meek in the Earth may Rejoice forever, and
through the Earth may grow as a Lilly in Summer: For plainly, its the Poor that
receive the Gospel, and the Meek of the Earth that shall inherit Substance, and
its the Lowly that will abide forever, and the Seed of the Shepherd that shall
be set on the Throne, and he that is low shall never fall, neither shall his
Footsteps at all be moved; he leads the Creature in the Fathers fear, and
guides the Tongue in Wisdom; and its him alone that all are to wait for, to
receive and continue in, even him that is acquainted with grief, who never
opens his Mouth in Perverness, but speaks Life in Wisdom through the Power of
the Father's love, which overpowereth the Soul as an overflowing River of Oil,
which makes all well, and heals the grieved Spirit, which none ever comes to
find but such as alone walk with him, who humbled himself to the Death of the
Cross, and became as a Servant, though he was Lord over all; in him there is
Safety, for he is the Rock and the sure hiding Place, even out of the sight of
the World, and from the Tempters power; for the Devil has nothing in him, who
is meek and low, in whose Mouth there is found no Guils: And this is he that
has been long set at naught, whose Tenders of Love constrains Obedience to
himself, because of the Beauty that is in him, which from them is hid, over
whom the Vail is, through which they cannot see the Comeliness of his Love.

Oh, all ye Lovers and Followers of Truth and Righteousness! come ye all and
sink down in your Minds unto him, whose love springs forth of the low Ground
as a Wellspring of Life issuing forth abundantly, as through a Rock that is
hid under the Earth, thence comes Life to the Humble, and there may you drink
with me of the Cup of Blessings; for from the Root of Jesse, and the
Foundation, the Branch which is low, does spring forth the Life to the
satisfying of every Branch: and truly in him there is Life indeed, and with him
there is no want; Who can desire another than he? or who can complain that
dwells in him, where the Unclean does never come, where all things are at
Peace, and Rest is enjoyed forever? Oh let none turn aside from him, nor climb
up above the measure of his humble Life, nor reach beyond the Power of his
Breathings forth, neither grieve ye him through the unkindness of your forward
Wills, but love him as the Life of your Souls, and prise him above all that can
be spoken, and tender his Love as the Apple of thine Eye, that he to thee may
be forever the Prince of Eternal Peace, and the Power of thy Strength, and the
Blessing of thy Life, that thou never may want Food nor Raiment, nor want a
shelter in the hour of Temptation, nor look for another to help in the time of
need. And so, my dear Lambs, in him keep for evermore, for its he that comes
out from God, and keeps them in perfect Peace, who in his lowly Spirit abide,
from thence to feel the Fathers Love arise, with it to love and tender one
another.

So to that which is of my Fathers Life in you all, I desire to be known, and
in it with you to have Fellowship forever, which is more than ^^ to be declared
by a multitude of Words, or written in many or long Epistles; the bowels of my
Fathers love, from the measure of his own Life in me, is to his Image, and that
which is begotten of him in you all: So the Life of the Power of the Lamb of
God be with you all, and the Blessing of the God of Love and Peace preserve you
in all Humility of mind, that the begotten of the Father through the Power of
his Love may increase and grow up unto him, who is the Life of my Soul, who is
blessed for evermore, Amen.

H. S.
Winchester-Bridewell.
To such in whose Hearts the Spirit of the Lord is beginning to move his Truth
to declare.
YOu whom the mighty God of Power has found in a Desert Wilderness, polluted
in your Blood, without help or strength of your own, whose Nakedness did once
^ppear, and you in it stood guilty before the Bar of Gods Justice, receiving
the Condemnation due from him, who then said unto you, Live; and since in the
measure of that Word upon the Lord have waited, to receive that which was
promised of him who is the Father of the faithful: This I say unto you, the
thing is great that you are come unto and entering upon, to speak in the Name
of the mighty God, and to publish the Message of the most High, to declare the
Word of the Lord among the Heathen, and minister Life to the Spirits in Prison,
to stand Witnesses for God to the People, and to be as Guides and Examples to
the Tribes of Israel: Oh! how can you but be overcome with the dread of the
Lord, and filled with the Power of his Love! How can your Hearts be restrained
from breaking, and your Bowels from an unexpressible yearning after the
advancing of the living Truth of God, which he has so freely made you
partakers of? May you not fall down to the Dust before the presence of the
Lord, and become as the smallest thing in respect of him? Who can but fear
before him, and be astonished at the Power of his Might, and bow before him,
who is the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, that he over all may be honored,
who is blessed for evermore.

And as through Humility you come to receive that which makes Honorable, even
that which is Holy, like pure Oil to comfort and nourish you, in that keep,
treasuring it up for your selves until you receive Power from on High, or feel
the higher Power that stands over all, opening the Mouth of that which is to
speak, giving you Power and Wisdom, your Life forth to minister to the reaching
of that in all which can receive the Gospel, and to the chaining down of all
the Powers of the Prince of Darkness that would arise up against it.

And such as feel something stirring to speak Words, and a great War and
trouble within, being neither quiet one way nor the other, and by reason of
fearfulness, Words begin to go forth as from under a load and trouble, and then
feel the Earth lie upon the Seed, let such take heed of speaking too much with
a strangled and strained Voice, but sink down again, and wait to feel that rent
and broken, which is as a hard thing between thee and that which should rise up
to speak, that thou may feel it opened in thee as a place of broad Rivers,
giving thee room, or as the opening of a Rock, and the powerful issuing forth
of a mighty stream of living Water, pure and clear, not mixed with Earth and
Dirt, and when thou have felt this, take heed of spending all upon others; and
another time take heed of that which would imitate such a Power again. And
also, let such who speak in Meetings, take heed of speaking above the Vail,
with a forward Zeal, leaving the Light behind him* lest he do more hurt behind
him, than he does good before him; and when the Vail is rent, and a few Words
spoken, and the measure being declared, the Vail comes on again upon a sudden;
and then some there be that change the Voice, and continue in a form of strange
words an hour after like a Priest: Now the measure in such is owned, the which
they keeping to, might increase, but going beyond it, the other will increase,
and that decrease; but stopping with the Light when it stops, and so become a
Fool, the Light would arise again, Life speak; and its that alone which does
Service for God: and other long Declarations of Words do but thicken the Vail
over them that have felt Life, though Death in others, (who have not found
Life) will feed upon the many words.

And such as are moved to bear their Testimony against the false Prophets, or
the Wickedness of men, in it be faithful, keeping in the fear and dread of the
Lord, that in his strength you may stand as a Wall of Brass against the
Ungodly, and spare not to thresh the Heathen so long as you feel the Hammer of
the Lord up over them (and then take heed of Disputations after) and go not out
of that which is your strength, lest you fall before your Enemies, and
dishonor the Lord. But let every one take heed of running too soon, for some
such there are, who run to Priests and others, in the light airy Spirit, and
pride of Heart, who are vain Boasters, out of the Truth, whose service the Lord
abhors; and likewise, some such speak in Meetings, whose Mouths should be
stopped.

Thus, Friends, from the dear love of my Life to you all, and the living Truth
of God, for which I suffer in Bonds, have writ these things in plain and few
words, to be considered of by you whom it concerns; and the Lord God of Life
make it a blessing unto you.
H. S.
Sound things Asserted, I. In the King's own Words. II. From late Experience.
III. From Scripture-Truth. IV. According to Reason and Equity.
And certain things opened (or propounded) by way of Enquiry thereupon.
Offered in meekness and good will unto the consideration of the King's Lords,
Counselors, and other his chief Officers under him, in all places of Justice
and Trust, both Civil, Military and Ecclesiastical.
Being intended for the good of the KING and themselves, and all Persons under
him, and for the preserving of Peace amongst men.
The first Assertion.
I. FOrasmuch as you are set in Authority under the KING, and so are to
observe, and to be Ministers of his Laws, for the punishment of Evil, and not
to go beyond his Will and Proclamations; and so to do that which is just and
reasonable toward all his Subjects, thereby to preserve them in Peace toward
him, and one with another.

II. In that the King has freely engaged himself by Promise in his Declaration
from Breda, That no man shall be disquieted nor called in question for
differences of Opinions in matters of Religion, etc. And in that he has since
he came to England doubled the Confirmation thereof, in repeating the self-same
words twice over in his Declaration Of Ecclesiastical Affairs, bearing date the
25th. of the 8th Month, called October, 1660. page 5, and 18. And since all
this, he having again renewed the same in a late Speech of his to the
Parliament, bearing date the 8th day of the 5th Month, called July 1661.
saying, It is to put My Self in mind, as well as You, that I so often (I think
as often as I come to you) mention unto you my Declaration from Breda. And he
further says, My Lords and Gentlemen, let it be in no man's Power to charge
either Me or You, with breach of Our Word or Promise, which can never be a good
Ingredient to our future Security, Page 5, 6.

III. In that he has confirmed the same to us in particular, in a late
Proclamation, entitled, The Enlargement of Prisoners called Quakers, bearing
date the 11th of the 3d Month, called May, 1661. wherein he writes us his
Subjects called Quakers, whereby Friends were generaly released out of Prison,
and that without Fees.

IV. In that the King has promised the same by word of Mouth, and granted,
that we should have our Liberty of Conscience, and that we should not suffer
therein, engaging Himself thereunto, in the Word of a King, and in that he has
manifested the same toward us several times.

The first Queries upon the first Assertions.
THese things (above written) being rightly considered and truly understood,
this then would I learn from you or enquire of you whom the King has set in
chief places of Authority under him, and let just witness of God in all your
hearts answer hereunto.

Query 1. Whether all or as many of you, whom the King has placed in Authority
to do his his will, and act according to his Proclamations, and minister
Justice ( not Cruelty) according to his Laws, for the punishment of Evil, and
instead thereof (as toward us) act otherwise, and that also in his Name; do
you not therein dishonor the King?

Q. 2. Whether this which the King has promised, declared, and so often stood
to confirm (as aforesaid) both in general, and toward us in particular, (to
wit) Liberty of Consceince, be reasonable or unreasonable? If you hold it
unreasonable, do you not dishonor the King, and his Council both? The King, in
that he did so, and his Council in that they advised Him no better all that
time? But if the thing be Reasonable, you sit in place by the King to see it
done, it being part of your service to him; Then whether you do not more
dishonor the King therein, (and neglect your Duty and deny Reason) when you
act quite contrary, and that in his Name, and so make use of his Name to
dishonor his Person.

Q. 3. Whether all such that are set in Authority under him, who do not see to
the Performance of this, which the King has so much, and so often engaged
himself in, but do cause his Word and Promise, in that thing to be broken, do
not therein much dishonor the King.

Q. 4. Whether all them that counsel the King not to keep his Promise in this
thing, or subtly persuade him unto such things, whereby at last his Word and
Promise herein must needs be broken, do not therein endeavor to lead him in
that unsound path of Oliver, and them Rulers who broke Word and Promise with
God and men, and so cause the King to lose part of the love of many of his
Subjects by breaking his word like them?

Q. 5. Whether this which the King has so freely Offered, so fully Engaged, so
firmly Promised, so often Renewed, so far Confirmed and so largely Published
(it being a thing of so much concernment, for preserving peace in his Kingdoms)
is not always to be performed, and by the King, and all other Ministers of
Justice, and all Officers whatsoever at all times to be granted, and in all
places, and in all Courts, unto all Persons truly concerned therein? And
whether they all ought not to have a special care, that his Subjects be not
deprived of the benefit of this thing, which from the King to them is made so
strong as aforesaid?

If the Kings words were true (as indeed they were) which he lately spoke in
the House, as aforesaid, That the breach of his Word or Promise, can never be a
good ingredient to his future Security:

Q. 6. Then whether ever it can be for his good or security, to cause His Word
and Promise to be broken? And whether those be good Subjects to him therein,
who seek to have it done? And what good security can ever come to Him thereby?
and whether many do not endeavor very much to have his Promise broken, and
sometimes already do it also, though he has (as it was said) it can never be
for good; yet do not many endeavor it, especially to have his Word and Promise
broken, which was to us, for the Liberty of Conscience; and whether all those
do seek his good and future security therein or not; let his Words stand either
against or for them in that matter. And as the King has said, That the breach
of his Word of Promise can never be a good Ingredient to his future security?

Q. 7. Then whether the breach of this so often an engaged Promise, of so high
a concernment ( for Liberty) may not cause the People much to question in
themselves, or in their minds, whether he may not be drawn aside from the
performance of the rest of his Promises, pertaining to other matters, and so
cause them to be afraid lest he will forget his other Promises also; and so
prove unfaithful to his Word, like them before, seeing the People have long and
often been deceived with fair Speeches and Pretenses, by many Rulers, one after
another this long time, who did not perform what they promised to them?

The Second Assertion.
SEeing by late experience, the late Wars did first begin, and strife has
still continued, and much dissatisfaction does yet remain about, and chiefly
concerning, Liberty, or not Liberty of Conscience, and being the Peace or
Strife in these the Kings Dominions does very much depend thereupon, and the
Kings welfare, (and his Subjects too) depend much upon the peace and quietness
of the People; and seeing that for One that was really for Liberty of
Consceince, when the War or difference first began, there is Twenty now, and
one of those Twenty, or one in the Twenty, are stronger in their Zeal, or in
their minds for it, then Twenty of them were then, and yet the Lord suffered
them to prevail, until they proved false to God, and not true one to another,
and became breakers of their Promises, which they had often made and renewed.

Seeing by late experience, that the other Army, and the other Powers, never so
much began to be divided among themselves, nor were never overcome, nor quite
overturned until they themselves, who had promised Liberty of Conscience, began
as it were, to make War one with another, with men amongst them, about matters
pertaining to their Consciences, and so turned men out from among them, and out
of the Army, only for wearing their Hats, or because in Conscience to God they
could no longer put them off, when it was but only to please the Wills of men
of corrupt minds, and until honest sober men were sent for out of their honest
Employments, before Rulers, and into Courts, only to ensnare them about their
Hats, or else about some Oath, (then against Popery) knowing aforehand, they
durst not break Christ's Command, who says, Swear not at all.

The Second Queries upon the second Assertio^s.
Qu. 1. WHether it be not good and safe to prevent all farther Strife among the
People to grant them all just Liberty of Conscience, in matters of Religion,
especially seeing it is so much already promised? And whether it be not good to
be kept, lest there should be also difference about it now, and that also among
your selves, and so to have Peace kept which is often in so much danger of
being broken?

Q. 2. Whether it be not good and safe, to take heed of ensnaring, or seeking
occasion against men, about matters pertaining to their Consciences toward
God, especially the most innocent and uprightest of them? And whether it be
safe in the sight of God, for these Rulers, now to act as vigorously against
such Innocent People as they before did, and were overturned? And whether it be
not dangerous for these now to Ensnare, Persecute and Imprison the Innocent for
and in the self same things, as them Rulers did about the Hat, not Swearing,
and not coming to the Steeple-House, and the like?

The Third Assertions, with the Qu^ries to them annixed.
1. SEeing there was a People who had not a King, to whom the Lord gave a King,
and seeing he gave them a King in his anger, Hos. 13. 11. (and (after) took him
away in his wrath or greater anger.)

Q. 1. Whether then these people of our days, being without a King, did
purchase themselves a King, with Gold, Silver or mortal Strength, or did the
Lord give the King unto them? And whether the King did come to them (to rule
over them) in his own Power, strength, wisdom and force of Armed men* or did
the Lord give or bring him to the People, (and that beyond, and above, and much
more easier than he, or the wisest Polliticians he had, could perceive, expect
or believe?)

2. Query upon the same.
And whether or no the Lord was pleased or displeased with these People before
the King came, or rather was given to them of the Lord? And whether the Lord
was angry or pleased with the Governors and Government as it then stood, and
with the Army, and the Ministry, as they and it then stood? And whether most,
if not almost all, or wholly all the Rulers were not then Breakers of their
Promises and Engagements, which they had often made unto the People, and one
with another, and might not God be justly Angry with (Promise and)
Covenantbreakers?

3. Query upon the same.
And whether the total Overturning the whole Government, (as it then stood) and
the Destruction of the Governors, (with Shame, Scorn, Ignominy, Reproach and
Loss of Honor, Dignity, Fame and Renown, together with Riches, Goods, fair
Buildings, Lands, Liberties and Life it self) were not and will not remain a
sure Testimony of Gods anger against them, in which Anger he gave the People a
King, thus to execute his just Judgments, in his anger? And whether those
things be Signs of Anger, or not?

4. Query upon the same.
And whether God was angry or pleased with the Soldiery, and Army as they then
stood, seeing that before they could have their pay, they were fain to swear
for that manner of Government which they had so long, and so often protested
and fought against? And may not the sense of Gods anger therein remain to this
day upon many of their Consciences?

5. Query upon the same.
And whether the Lord was then angry, or not angry with the Priests and Leaders
of the People, and with the Ministry as it then stood, especially with the
pretended and esteemed, most refined^t of them, whom some in scorn call
Quakers, much warned before hand, and much declared against, seeing they are
alloverturned, as from what they then stood in and were (or at least seemed to
be) And seeing that many of them are turned from Hundreds a year, whereby some
are in distress, some in great care how to live, some faint to travel from one
Country to another, some being ashamed to show their faces among People, some
faint to turn Hypocrites, in denying their own Principles, some lose their
dearest Friends, some faint to bow and creep (like (...)) unto such that before
they had in little esteem (or (...)) some turn against that which themselves
were in, and (...) against themselves, like the wind that turns every way;
(...) and preach down, and contradict that which before the^ themselves were,
and so write and preach down themselves, and contradict themselves and one
another? And many more things I might Query concerning them, and as to their
standing then, and their state now, and leave them, or any for them, who do now
either own them or disown them, as to their former standing, (when the King was
given) to answer for them, or in their be half, whether such things as these
(and much more) (which I say is justly come upon them, seeing they rejected
warning) be Testimony and Signs of Gods anger, or not?

6. Query upon the same.
And whether those Rulers who now, under the King, and in the Name of the King,
have Imposed the things aforesaid (and much more) upon the Priests, Rulers,
Soldiers and People, and have executed those just Judgments of God upon those
Promise-breakers, and People that had not a King, and took away the Liberties
of many, and that which was moreover even the Lives of some, did do those
things in love and pity unto them (as they then stood) or else in anger against
them? And if God was not then angry with the people, how came those things to
pass? And if he was angry, was not their Promise-breaking a great cause of his
Anger? And if the People now break Promise again, is it not just, if the Lord
be in his Wrath with them again? And if the King (though he has given him to
be King) should likewise break his Word and Promises, may not the Lord justly
be sorely displeased therewith, as he was angry with the same things before,
and spared not the chiefest of them that did it?

7. Query upon the same.
And if the People generally be as Wicked now they have a King, as they were
before (or worse) how then shall the ensuing Wrath of God be stopped, or hindered
now, any more than his anger was then? And is not Gods Power as great now as it
was then? And does not he hate Wickedness and Promise-breaking as much now, as
he did then? Or if the King, whom the Lord has given, and these Rulers,
Soldiers, Priests and People, now under him, shall break Promises, as the
other did, and be as cruel, and as hard hearted, and as great Oppressors, as
the other Rulers, and as full of Envy as the Soldiers, Priests and People were
in the time of the other Government, when they had not a King; whether then the
Lord will respect Persons* or the Persons of the Mighty in judgment? And unto
all these things here stated in brief, let the just witness of God in all
Consciences answer, yea or nay.

2. Seeing that Mercy and Truth preserve the King, and his Throne is upheld by
Mercy, Prove. 20 28. And so seeing a King may be given in Anger to the People,
and in Wrath may be taken from them, yet Truth may preserve the King, and Mercy
may uphold his Throne (which thing is worth the Kings observing, and all that
truly love him.)

Qu. 1. Whether now is it best for the King to keep to the truth of his Word
and Promise, or not, seeing Truth preserves the King? And if Truth be a
Preservation to the King, whether Untruth and denying of the Truth be not
destructive? And now who are the Kings best Friends, they that would have him
keep to the Truth, and live in the Truth, or them that would lead him from it,
to do quite contrary to Christ, (that said, I am the Truth) who said, That
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my Words shall not pass away, Luke 21.
33? And is not his Throne established forever? and should not a Christian King
take him for an Ensample? And is it not good for the King to keep the Truth,
and not to sell it? Prove. 23. 23. seeing Truth preserves the King, and to know
and receive and abide in, and be led by the Spirit of Truth, which the World
cannot receive, John 14. 17. And to know that Truth which God desires in the
inward parts, where Wisdom is to be known, Psalm. 51. 6. And is not the Word the
Truth? John 17. 17. And is not Christ's Name called, the Word of God? Rev. 19.
13. And did not Moses say, The Word was in the Heart? And is not the Word there
as a Hammer, and like Fire? Jer. 23. 29. And does not that Word sometimes
pierce and divide in the Heart? and is it not there quick and powerful? Heb. 4.
12. And is not Christ the Power of God? 1 Cor. 1. 24. And did not he say, I am
the Light, John 8. 12. and I am come a Light into the World? John 12. 46. And
did not he that was sent of God, bear witness of the Light, and say, That it
was the true Light (or indeed the Light and Truth) which lights every man
that comes into the World, that all men through him might believe, who was in
the World? John 1. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. And did not he himself say, Believe in the
Light? John 12. 35. And is not this he which is the Truth, whom God has given
for a Light unto the Gentiles? Isa. 49. 6. And is not this he whom the Princes
of this World has not known? 1 Cor. 2. 8. who was from everlasting, when there
was no Deeps, nor Fountains of Water, neither yet Mountains nor Hills, Prove. 8.
24. And is not this he that is given for a Leader and Commander to the People,
Isa. 45. 4. who will break the Yoke of the Oppressor, Isa. 9. 4. even him that
is the Light, whom they that walked in Darkness have not seen, Isa. 9. 2. who
ends the Strife with burning, being born unto such as know and preach the
Light; Shall not his Name be called the wonderful Counselor, the mighty God,
the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, the increase of whose Government
and Peace shall have no end, who shall sit upon the Throne, and establish
Judgment and Justice henceforth, even forever, Isa. 9. 6, 7. Is not this he at
whose Name every Knee shall bow, unto whom the gathering of the People shall
be? And are not the Kings to be brought unto his dwelling? Isa. 60. 11. And
shall not the Kings of the Earth bring their Glory and Honor unto his
beautiful Habitation, Rev. 21. 24. and shall he not have a habitation in the
Hearts of the Children of men, in whom God does come to dwell? And may not this
Truth (and Power of God) preserve the King?

Qu. 2. Again, if the Kings Throne be upheld by Mercy, (and not by Cruelty nor
Persecution) whether then it be not good for the King to show Mercy? And how
sadly, even as it were without Mercy or Pity to Old or Young, Widows or
Fatherless, did several Thousands lately suffer by Imprisonment, and diverse
ways, only concerning things which to them were matters of Conscience? And
should the King be persuaded moreover to break his Promise, and restrain
Liberty of Conscience, and so thereby ruinate many Families, impoverish many
that now live well, honest and comfortable, and cause Children to starve in the
Streets, and Old People to perish with Hardships and Abuses, and many more to
lose their Lives in Prisons, as some have done already, (who can lay down their
Lives for Christ's sake) and that not for any Evil in the least done or intended
by the said Sufferers, but only truly and purely in matters of Conscience to
God, and whether this would not be unmerciful?

The third Query upon the same.

ANd is it not said in some of that part of the Book of Common Prayer, which is
(in it) appointed to be read once a Year, or upon that day called Ashwednesday,
Cursed are the unmerciful; and should any man be first persuaded to be
unmerciful, and so brought liable to the Curse, and then they themselves to
curse him (once a Year) who cause him to be unmerciful, and it may be much
endeavor to make he himself say, Amen, to the Curse against himself, and so
curse one another? And is it not dangerous for any man to come under the Curse,
and to be unmerciful, lest God shut up his Mercy from him? Therefore whether
Mercy and Pity does not become the King, that therewith his Throne might be
upheld? And whether all the wise men he has, with all his Bishops and his
armed men, with all strength and Wisdom else whatsoever be able to uphold his
Throne without Gods Mercy; and if he would always receive Mercy from God to
have his Throne always upheld thereby? Whether it be not meet, if not needful,
for him always to show mercy, and to let all people, but especially Gods
Servants, have Mercy from him, or at least so much right, as the Lord himself
has given them, which is, to Worship him in Spirit, and serve him in that
which purges the Conscience from dead works, that they may serve the living
God, Heb. 9. 14. And seeing the King has promised, as aforesaid, that such
shall not be disquieted therein, and whether these lines are not written for
his good, and in love unto the King?

3. And seeing the same that said, I am the Truth, (who was in the beginning
with God, Prove. 8. 30.) said likewise, By me Princes decree Justice, Prove. 8.
15.

Qu. 3. Then whether he be not the Power of God, who said so? And if so that he
be the Power of God, and that thereby Princes decree Justice (or that which is
just) then what Power is that by which Princes decree Injustice? And whether it
be not Injustice for the King (to be persuaded) to break his Word and Promise;
and which Power are those men in that would have him do so, seeing Christ is
the Power of God, by whom Justice is decreed? And is it not just for the King
to be as good as his word, and may not all such as would have him break his
promise, remember, That Lying Lips become not a Prince, Prove. 17. 7.

Moreover according to reason.

Whether many of them that do so much endeavor to have the King act contrary
to his word, or make void his promise, by restraining sober honest Persons from
the Liberty of their Consciences in spiritual matters, and duties of prayer to
the God of Heaven, and waiting upon the Lord in his true service, and fear of
his holy Name; whether such as these would be contented themselves to be
restrained from the Wicked Liberty of their fleshly Lusts (though that was
never so openly promised them) and so to be kept from all Whoredom, Drunkenness
and Swearing, and such other works of Darkness, wherewith they serve the Devil?
And can such be willing that all Boys, and all sorts of People, as often as
they see a Whoremonger, or a Drunkard, then all cry out presently A
Whoremonger, A Whoremonger, or, A Drunkard, A Drunkard, as they are, that such
should cry after us, A Quaker, A Quaker? And whether such be willing to suner
as much for their profane Swearing as they would us (and as we have done) for
not Swearing at all? And whether such can be content to suffer as great
Punishment for going to an Alehouse (needlessly) on the First-Dayes (or any
day) as they would have us suffer for not going to the Steeple-house the
First-dayes? (which to us is needless) And whether they would have such Laws
made against them, for such things, and such their practices, as they would
have made against us, for our practices, in Liberty of Conscience, as
pertaining to the service and Worship of God? And if Liberty had been so much
promised them, in this their Wickedness, as has been to us in the matter of
Conscience; would they have had that promise broken? And whether they would be
haled out of their Alehouses, Tipling-houses and Whore-houses, as often as they
meet there, or could be found there by any Officer, Soldiers, Boys or People,
as they would have other sober persons haled out of their own Houses and
peaceable, private and Publick-Meeting-houses, wherein they meet to serve God?
And would they receive every such time the like usage or abuses by any Boys or
Persons that should find them there, or take them in such things, and that
would stone them for their Whoredom and Drunkenness at the present? or would
they receive the like Punishment afterward, when they were brought before a
Magistrate in Imprisonment, or otherwise? If not, then whether all such men as
these (who would have the King break his Word) be not absolutely of the Devil?
And would they not limit the Spirit of God, and his Worship and Servants, and
tolerate the Spirit of the Devil, and have liberty for his service and his
Children therein? And then, whether it be good or safe at all for the King to
hearken unto the Counsel of such men, or in the least to incline thereunto in
this matter? And whether the Lord God will ever bless their Counsels herein
(which lead to Destruction?) And whether the King be in the least to receive or
consent to the Counsel of such men herein, or their Petitions in that matter,
and so become a Breaker of his Word and Promise? This will I leave to Gods
witness in themselves, and in the King, Council, Parliament, and all other
Magistrates, and other inferior Officers and People whatsoever to answer, yea
or nay.

And further, I might enquire in like manner, concerning the matter and manner
or form and place of Worship, whether they would be deprived of theirs, as they
would have us of ours, and be haled out as they have haled us, and suffer so
much therein as they have caused us, and have Laws made against them for it, as
they have made against us, and have another manner of Worship, and Place, and
Teachers imposed upon them, than what they are persuaded of to be Right? And
how do such come to be more certain that their way of Worship is right in
things they have no Scripture, nor example therein for, than we do come to be
certain that our way is right, which we have Scripture and example therein for?
And how came they to know that their worship is better in a temple made with
hands, in which God dwells not, and the Apostle declared against, Acts 7. 44.
than ours is in the Spirit (of which God is, John 4. 24.) and in the Truth,
which is his Son, in whom the fullness of God does dwell, Col. 2. 9. and in the
Light, where God does dwell; for Christ said, I am the Light John 8. 12. And he
that has Immortallity dwells in the Light, 1 Timothy 6. 16? And whether such as
are compelled to a Worship, which they are persuaded is not right, and that God
does not accept, are they not therein made Hypocrites? And if they would compel
us from such a Worship that we are persuaded is right, and also compel us to
such a Worship, that we are persuaded is not right, whether they themselves
would be done so by? And if not, how do they love their Neighbor as
themselves, and do unto all men as they would be done unto, according to the
command of Christ? Mat. 7. 12. And wherein are such like unto a Christian
Spirit, which the true Christians were in, and them that by the Holy Ghost were
made Overseers of the stock of God, who said, that it seemed good unto them,
and to the Holy Ghost, to lay no greater burden upon the Gentiles, th^n to
obstain from Meats offered to Idols, and Blood, and things strangled, and
Fornication, which were necessary things, Acts 15. 28.

These things in brief at present, are offered in plainness, and love unto the
consideration of all Rulers, and People, by one that truly desires Peace
amongst men, being an Innocent sufferer for the cause of God, in the place of
my late long and sad Sufferings, in a close unsavory Prison at Winchester, the
28th of the 9th Month, 1661. being known amongst men by the name

Humphry Smith.
If a Ruler hearken to Lies, all his Servants are Wicked, Prove. 29. 12. Bewise
now therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth, Psalm. 2. 10.
Judge righteously, and plead the cause of the Poor and Needy, Prove. 31. 9. The
King that faithfully judges the Poor, his Throne shall be established forever,
Prove. 26. 14. Thou shall not wrest Judgment, thou shall not respect Persons,
neither take a Gife; for a Gift does blind the Eyes of the Wise, and pervert
the Words of the Righteous; That which is altogether just shall thou follow,
that thou may Live, and Inherit the Land, which the Lord thy God gives
thee, Deuteronomy. 16. 19, 20. The People that are gone out of the way, it were them
that knew not the way of peace, Romans 3. 12. verse. 17. But Christ, who is our
Way, and unto us the Prince of Peace, has taught us to give the Back to the
Smiter, and to turn the other Check.



Forty Four Queries propounded to all the Clergymen of the Liturgy, by one
whom they trained up in the best things set forth in the Book of Common Prayer.
Eleaven Reasons why these Queries are proposed.
BEcause your manner and way of Worship, and practice First,
in many things, has been these twenty years, by many Zealous persons, very
much questioned; who ought to be satisfied, or stopped by sound Arguments and
Doctrine, and words of Scripture-Truth; or else a true Reconciliation in the
hearts and minds of both, cannot easily be

2dly, Because it is most agreeable to the Law of God, and most according to
the Commands of Christ, and does most suit with the Doctrine and Practice of
the Apostles, and is professed, even by you in the Book of Common Prayer, To
love thy Neighbor as thy self, and not hurt the Body of any man by word or
deed; to Love Enemies, to do good unto all, and to convince Gainsayers with
sound Doctrine, and words that cannot be condemned; Rather then to inflict
great Punishments upon men's Bodies, and Forfeitures of outward Goods, because
of a Principle in the inward Mind, which is not removed thereby.

3dly, Because that Heresy is first occasioned by the Devil, whereby the mind
is mistaken or mis-lead, and then prompt on in the same by a spiritual Motion,
which works in the spiritual Wickedness, which is of another Nature and Being
than the visible body (simply considered) in which it acts, or than the outward
Goods.

And therefore the Power of God, and the Spiritual Weapons, and the continual
exercise thereof, is to stop, overcome and remove that, which the taking away
of carnal Goods, and casting into carnal Prisons (neither yet a carnal
Commandment it self) can do.

4thly, Because it is no less than the Duty of a true Minister, to render an
account of the hope that is in him, unto him that asks.

5thly, Because twenty years ago there was no such a necessity of enquiring
into those things, as now there is; forasmuch as then your way was going down,
and now coming up again; and that then there were not so many unsatisfied so
much about such things, as now there are.

6thly, Because diverse things and Opinions in the minds of many, has within
these Twenty Years, been more largely contended about, and opened, both in open
Conserrence, Disputes, Writing, Print and Practice, than in some Ages before,
whereby in Twenty Years time, you might be learned therein, and so know the
better how (now) to return the morereadier Answer thereunto.

7thly, Because now you are (as it were) upheld under both Arms (with Law on
the one side, and Armed men on the other) that so you need not to be afraid,
but may with more boldness answer to such things, than in the late years, when
the Powers of men ruled so much over you, that you durst not so openly contend
for your Faith, or answer such things, nor manifest and practice your
Principles, as We do ours now in Bonds under you.

And again, as in respect of my own particular, and so in the behalf of others
truly with me concerned in the same.
First, Because that I was taught, educated and trained up in the very same
things, which you practice and profess, and which yet among you your selves
stand in force.

2dly, Because I now suffer Bonds this day, as an Heretic, or as a Seducer (as
the M^^i^us says) who has to this very day, with the help of God's special
Grace, more and more endeavored, and come to lead my Life, and regulate my
Words, Ways and Duty toward God and Man, according to the best, most weighty
and chiefest things set forth in the Common Prayer, according as I was by some
of your own (called) Episcopal-Divin^s trained up, and without which they would
not receive me into Communion with them; at which time I was by one of them
encouraged (as by others at other times (...) press on further commending me
for what I was then already come unto.

3dly, Because that ever since that time, unto this day, I have been pressing
forward, and was never cast out from among them for so doing (nor any thing
else) as by any way of Excommuni^ation, or any known Order or Rule used or
owned by them; neither yet has any one of them come to admonish me (from
pressing forward) since that, to this day; neither can they well justify
rejecting of me until after the second Admonition, if they could prove I was an
Heretic, Tit. 3. 10.

4thly And Lastly, Because they did not tell me, nether did I ever learn out of
the Common Prayer, nor read in the holy Scriptures, That a (...) might
pers^vere too much, or too far in the way of Holiness; or walk too much with
God, or to be too much mortified, or leave sin too much, or be too holy, or too
circumspect, or too just, or too upright, or too faithful to God and man, and
walk and speak too much according to the Scriptures; or be too innocent, or too
harmless, or be too much conformable to the Image of Christ, or be too much
like unto Him, or too much cleansed by his Blood from all Sin whilst in this
World, or walk too much in God's Commandments all the days of Man's Life.

The Queries propounded to you are these, viz.
Whether the late Resormers and Composers of Common Prayer, were not
themselves for Liberty of Conscience? If not, how are their own words true
Seeing in that (before the Common prayer) which shows why some Ceremonies are
abolished, and some retained, they say, These things were taken away, which
were most abused, and did burden the Conscience.
? If they were, Whether those that profess the Common Prayer, and are against
Liberty of Conscience, are not contrary to them, like those who profess
Scripture, and are contrary to that Spirit by which they were given.

II. Whether those who profess the Common Prayer, and prescribe things to those
whom they own not as their own People, but persecute them as Heretics, and do
think it not convenient, neither will allow every People who are not their own,
or one with them in Worship, to use such things as they shall think best, to
the setting forth of Gods Honor and Glory, and to the reducing the People to a
most perfect and holy Living, etc. be not contrary to them that reformed the
Book of Common Prayer? Seeing they said, We condemn no other Nation, nor
prescribe any thing but to our own People only; for we think it convenient that
every Country [And if so, then consequently every People] should use such
Ceremonies as they think best, to the setting forth of Gods Honor and Glory,
and to the reducing the People to a most perfect and godly Living, without
Error or Superstition?

III. Whether those that now profess the Ceremonies, and will not have other
things put away, than they who reformed See the latter end of that abovesaid.
it, be not therein contrary unto them, and to their Order, who said, They
should put away other things, which from time to time they perceived to be most
abused? And whether they did not order, that not only Abuses, and the things
themselves that were abused, should be put away; and not only the things which
they had put away, because they were abused, but likewise other things, which
from time to time they perceived to be most abused? And so, whether these now
that would have no other things put away but what they did, be not worse than
them, and contrary to their order, mentioned in the Margent?

IV. Whether that Confession and Repentance, in that beginning, Seeing they say
(not the Scripture) At what time soever a Sinner do^ repent him of his sin from
the bottom of his heart, God will put out all his wickedness. And seeing they
say, They should not dissemble nor cloak their sin. And seeing they confess,
they have offended against Gods holy law, and there is no health in them, but
are miserable Offenders; And seeing, that following is said to be the
Absolution and Remission of Sins.
with the words of Almighty and most merciful Father, etc. together with the
Absolution and Remission of Sins following, be a true Confession, Repentance
and Remission from the bottom of the heart? Or is it false and feigned? If
false, is it no t^loaked of more sin, and dissembling with God, and deceiving
their own Souls? If true, how then are such (after Confession and Remission)
Miserable Sinners before they depart* as in the Letany? And if the Confession,
Repentance and Absolution be right and true, and from the bottom of the Heart,
and such thus pardoned, and so made clean, run afterward, and that again and
again into the very same Sins, whether they be not like the Dog and the Sow,
that turn to the wallowing in the Mire, and the Vomit again?

V. Whether after true Confession and Repentance, such may thenceforth live a
godly, righteous and sober Life, and that pure and holy, according to the
latter end of the Confession, and of the Absolution?

VI. Whether all such as have erred and strayed from the ways of God, were
(before they did so err) made Members of Christ, and Inheritors of God? And
whether any were made such Members, etc. but such as have tasted of the good
Word of God, and the Power of the World to come? And whether such as have so
tasted thereof, and after err and stray from the ways of God, can be renewed
again by Repentance? If not, is not their Repentance false, or not effectual,
like Esau's? If true, how then is the Scripture true, seeing it speaks as
aforementioned, of not being renewed by Repentance?

VII. Whether such as were made Members of Christ, Children of God, and
Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven, and are now erred and strayed from the
ways of God, so that they are Miserable Offenders, and that against God's holy
Law (as themselves confess) can then, in that state, and in that very hour,
sing unto the Lord, and heartily rejoice, and come before GOD'S Presence with
Thanksgiving? And whether such Miserable Offenders are the People of God's
Pasture, and the Sheep of his hands?

VIII. Whether all such, as in the beginning of the Letany do themselves
acknowledge four times over, That they are Miserable Sinners, can call God
their Father, by saying, Our Father which art in Heaven? Or, can such Miserable
Sinners make others the Children of God, by sprinkling a little Water upon
their faces? And whether God has such fourfold miserable Children? Or, are
those that are truly the Children of God, at the same time in such a fourfold
miserable state? Or, are such miserable men truly the Ministers of Christ?

IX. Whether God's people may be delivered by him from See Letany 6, 7, and 8.
Particulars.
all these things following, that is to say, from all Evil and Mischief, from
Sin, from the Crafts and Assaults of the Devil, from God's Wrath, and from
Everlasting Damnation; from all Blindness of Heart, from Pride, Vainglory and
Hypocrisy; from Envy, Hatred and Malice, and all Incharitableness; from
Fornication, and all other deadly Sin; from all the Deceits of the World, the
Flesh and the Devil? And whether such as are delivered from all these things,
be not delivered from all Sin? And then are not such free without sin? If not,
then what Sin is it they are guilty of, who are truly delivered from all these?
And whether such as pray to be delivered from all these, and do not believe,
that they shall be so delivered, do not therein sin against God, and so instead
of being delivered out of sin (by their praying) add sin unto sin, being it is
written, Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin?

X. Whether shall I own that man, as Christ did, and believe See Letany the
14th Particular.
him, who said, We know that God hears not Sinners? or else miserable
Offenders, who in their Prayer say, We Sinners do beseech thee to hear us, O
Lord; and so believe that the Lord does hear them, though their continual
fruits (and the Scripture) testify otherwise?

XI. What, and where is the way of Truth, which all such See Letany the 26th
Particular.
as have erred, and are deceived, are to be brought into, seeing when one sin
was committed, the creature was deceived, and if deceived and in sin, then
unclean, and no Unclean thing shall enter into the Kingdom of God? And whether
Christ, who is the Way and the Truth, be not in the Kingdom of God? And whether
all such as are not only yet unsaved from their sin, but are miserable
Offenders, and that against God's Righteous Law, and yet in the same Nature,
Way, Words, Worship and Practice, as were their Forefathers, whom they confess
were in Iniquity; have not all these erred, and are yet deceived, seeing Christ
saved his from sin? And whether such do yet rightly know the Way of Truth
themselves, which they should be brought into, in which there is no sin?

XII. Whether all men are capable of the Mercy of God? And whether Christ has
not lighted every man that comes into the world? And whether God does show to
all men that be in Error, the light of his Truth, to the intent they may return
into the way of Righteousness, according to the Collect, appointed for the
third Sunday after Easter? And whether the Word be not the Truth, John 17. 17.
And is not the World in the heart? And has not God showed that to all men,
though they be in Error?

XIII. Whether men may (with the help of God's Grace) cast away the works of
Darkness, and put on the Armor of Light now in the time of this Life? And
whether the works of darkness be not Sin, the works of the Devil? And whether
the Armor of Light be not the Power of God? And whether the Power of God, be
not sufficient to defend from the Enemy and his Power, and able to defend from
the Devil and his works?

XIV. Whether those that in this life have put on the Armor of Light, are not
to let it shine before men, that God may be glorified? And whether it be not
for God's glory, when his people are by the Light defended from all the works
of darkness? And whether those that now deny the Light, and would hinder the
children of Light, from letting their Light shine before men (which saves them
from sin) be not them selves against the Common Prayer and the late Reformation
of it, against GOD, CHRIST and Scriptures, seeing that God is Light, and Christ
said, I am the Light; and the Scriptures testify of him that is the Light, who
commanded his, to let their Light shine? And then is he a man, or below the
principle of a man, who hides his Light under a Bushel?

XV. Whether any men in their Youth, Infancy or full See public Baptism about
the midst, and Catechism a ^ittle after the beginning.
Age, may forsake the Devil and all his works, the vain Pomp and Glory of the
World, with all Covetous Desires of the same, and carnal Desires of the Flesh,
so as not to follow, nor be led by them, and afterward keep God's holy Will
and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of their lives? If they
may, why should they not profess the same, and not be counted boasters by such
as taught them so? And why may they not live in the same, without being
persecuted for it, by such as bound them to it? If they cannot, why is it that
they are forced to promise and vow so to do?

XVI. Again, whether they that minister this Promise and Vow unto others, have
in all things performed the same, viz. Whether they themselves, who impose this
upon others, do forsake the Devil and all his Works, the vain Pomp and Glory of
the World, with all Covetous Desires of the same, and the Carnal Desires of the
Flesh, so that they themselves do not follow, neither are led thereby, but do
keep God's holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same every day of their
own Lives?

If they do, how is it that their Fruits appear otherwise, not only in vain
Pomp and covetous Desires (like Balaam) but also in Covetous Practices, worse
than Balaam?

If they do not, then whether therein they are not just like the Scribes,
Pharisees and Hypocrites of Old, who laid heavy Burdens upon the People, but
themselves would not move them with one of their Fingers?

XVII. Again, if any men in Youth, Infancy or full Age, do attain so far in
their own particulars, to forsake all tho things aforesaid, (which indeed
includes all Sin) whether they can safely, and with a good Conscience, Promise
and Vow for another, that he shall do the like, seeing also it is but an
Infant? And whether all Infants in England be elected, and are of the faithful
Seed? and whether any but Gods Elect can perform the Promises and Vows
aforesaid?

If not, why should the People be forced to make such Vows which cannot be
kept, and be constrained and taught to tell Lies in the presence of God, by
saying, We forsake them all; if they nor the Child do not so?

If they do, let God's Witness in their Consciences answer, which will show the
truth of the matter.

XVIII. Again, whether it is good or evil for People To forsake the Devil and
all his Works, the vain Pomp and Glory of the World, with all covetous desires
of the same, and carnal desires of the Flesh, so as not to follow, nor be led
by them, and then to keep God's holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the
same all the days of his Life?

If Evil, why are they bound and taught so to do?

If Good, why are many this day Persecuted and Imprisoned only for so doing?

XIX. Whether the old Man in People or Children may be See further in public
Baptism.
so buried, that the new Man may be raised up in them?

If not, why have the Priests prayed so many Years together?

If it may be so, why may not such then profess the new Man raised up in them,
without being called Heretics for so professing?

XX. Again, if the new Man be to be raised up in People when they are in
Infancy; then whether it be not to be raised up any other time, or some other
time of their Life, if it be not raised up in their Infancy? And then whether
they be not true Laborers who labor to raise this up in People? And whether
they be not effectual Preachers who do thereby raise it up in People? And
whether this new Man be not Christ? And if he be not raised up, whether the
Preaching be not vain, the Faith vain, and the People continue in their Sins,
that being not raised up in them, which is to save from Sin? And whether this
new Man is not in People and Children before it be raised up? And is not the
new Man the second Adam? And is not that the Seed, which if we had been left
without, we had been as Sodom? And is not the Seed sown in all sorts of Ground?
And is not the Seed Christ, which is still in the World, though not known by
the World, and who lights every man that comes into the World? And is not
this the Truth (Christ) which God desires in the inward parts? Psalm. 51. 6.
And is not this the Truth which is promised to spring out of the Earth? Psalm.
85. 11. And was not the first man made of the Earth? and are not all People
descended from him, and so of the Earth? And whether it be not unreasonable
that many Hundreds should be Persecuted chiefly for professing this, and that
by such who taught them so to profess, and for witnessing, speaking and writing
of the new man raised up in them, and for living uprightly according thereunto?

XXI. Whether Children or People (who have the new man raised up in them) may
have all carnal Affections dye in them, and come to know all things belonging
to the Spirit (not only) to live (but also) to grow in them? If not, why are
they deceived with those fair Speeches? If they may, then who are most
agreeable thereunto, and the best Christians, they that only talk of, and
profess these things effected inwardly, and yet deny that any live in it; or
them that are come unto, and do truly know, and live in the possession of these
things within them?

XXII. Whether the New Man be not the second Adam, the quickening Spirit? And if
it be, whether as many as are truly led thereby (it being within them) be not
the Sons or Children of God? And whether there be any other that be the
Children and Sons of God, but only such as have this New Man raised up in them,
and are truly led thereby? See further in public Baptism.


XXIII. Whether all the Children these late hundred Years that were baptized,
were regenerated when a little Water was sprinkled upon their faces, though it
were done by such a Priest who himself was Unregenerate, and either a Proud,
Covetous or Drunken Man? If they were, or the most part of them, how then did
they come afterward to be Unregenerate, seeing that after their Infant Baptism
most are looked upon to be, and by their Fruits do indeed appear in an
Unregenerate estate? And whether in any Age it can be proved by Scripture, that
there were so many, either Young or Old, first regenerated, and then
unregenerated again? If they were not, how then are the Priests words true,
when he says (after he has sprinkled them) Seeing now, dearly beloved
Brethren, that these Children be regenerate?

XXIV. Whether all or any of those Infants these many See priva^e Baptism.
hundred late years, whom the Priests say, were born in Original Sin, and in
the Wrath of God, did come to Regeneration in their Infant Baptism, and were
then received into the number of the Children of God, and Heirs of Everlasting
Life? Was all this done for them, and did they truly come from the one state
into the other, by having a little Water poured on their faces, and by the
speaking of these words, viz. I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen? It being done by a man, who himself at
another time will confess with his own Mouth, That he is (with the rest) a
miserable Sinner? And how can an old miserable Sinner make a young Child thus
happy?

XXV. Whether all Children (so sprinkled) or the most Se^ Ca^^* (...)
part of them, were made Members of Christ, Children of God, and Inheritors of
the Kingdom of Heaven? If not, whether it be not pity that so many thousand
Children should be taught and trained up to speak that which is untrue, whilst
they are so young, in saying they were made so, when they were not, and
likewise to be deceived thereby all the days of their lives? If they were made
so, how shall a reasonable man be persuaded from any good reason of
Scripture Proof, that they are afterward dismembered from Christ, separated
from God, and dis-inherited out of the Kingdom of Heaven? And when did Christ
lose his Members, or God his regenerate Children, or his Kingdom the Inheritors
thereof?

XXVI. How can such make others the Members of Christ, who are not so
themselves? And whether Christ has any miserable Members? And if miserable
Sinners pretend to take upon them to make others the Members of Christ, and
receive Wages for it, and yet do it not, whether such are not plain Deceivers?

XXVII. Whether the Priests, that say, they are miserable Si^^ers and miserable
Offenders, be really so, or not? if not, are not they miserable Liars in so
saying? If they be, whether they that are miserable Sinners, and miserable
Offenders, can make others so free from all sin and misery, as the Members of
Christ, in whom is No Sin, who were as miserable as themselves, if they were
born in Original Sin, and in the Wrath of God?

XXVIII. Whether Children were not first taught their duty toward God, before
their duty toward their Neighbor? And whether all such are not still in the
first place to obey God, and secondly, to love their Neighbor as themselves?
And so, whether Obedience to God is not still to be preferred before obedience
to man, though his Neighbor? If not, why were they so taught? If it be, why
then do the Teachers now seek to cause them to obey man in Swearing, and many
other things, rather than Christ, who said, Swear not at all? Mat. 5. James 5.

XXIX. Whether Children are not taught (among other things) to hurt no body by
word or deed, to bear no Malice in the heart, to rule the Hands, the Tongue,
the Body and the Desire, in not coveting any man's Goods? If this be right so
to do, why do not the Priests themselves do it, and instruct all Magistrates
and People in the like, and suffer them that do so, and encourage them also to
continue in the same? If this be not right, why did the Priests teach it us
when we were young? and whether be the Priests covetous, yea or nay?

XXX. Whether Children were not taught, that they could do little of
themselves, nor walk in the Commandments of God, nor serve him without his
special Grace; and after in another place, that the Geace was inward and
Spiritual? If so, whether God's special Grace, which is inward, is not much
more than the Letter, which is outward? If it be not, why were those words
written in the outward Letter?

XXXI. Again, if none can walk in the Commands of God, nor serve him without
his special Grace, which is inward; then what manner of walking or service is
theirs, who of late have denied the Grace which is inward, and them that are
led by it; which Grace the Bishop in the Confirmation, prays to the Lord to
defend Children with? And if nothing can be done of ones self without this
Grace, and that this Grace does defend, and the Apostle says, brings
Salvation, and by Grace ye are saved; and the Catechism says, this Grace is
inward and spiritual; and also, why are so many persecuted this day for
receiving this Grace, and power by it, which is inward, who walk in the
Commands of God, and serving him?

XXXII. Whether Children were not taught, that this See Bishopping.
inward and spiritual Grace was a death unto sin, and a new birth unto
righteousness? If so, then whether shall People esteem those Common-Prayer-men
to be rightest, who directed to the inward and spiritual Grace, to bring unto a
death unto sin, and a new birth unto Righteousness, or these men, who direct
unto the Letter without, or a Steeple-house, or any thing else that is outward
and visible; seeing the others directed to that which is inward and spiritual,
which the Apostle said saved them? and whether the same does not save now? or
whether the Grace of God has not the same sufficiency in it self as it had in
the days of the Apostles, or in the days of the late Reformers of the
Common Prayer? And whether those which have received this inward Grace, may not
thereby increase in the same, and in the Spirit more and more (according to
that in the laying on of hands?)

XXXIII. If you will grant the Apostles words to be true, See Ma^^imony.
that the man was not deceived, but the woman being deceived, was in the
Transgression, 1 Timothy 2. 14. then whether this be not dark work, or works of
darkness, to cause the man to worship the woman, seeing they were both
deceived, and in the Transgression, and so instead of worshipping God, make him
worship the deceived Transgressor?

XXXIV. If you will grant that man was not deceived, but the Woman (who was
first in the Transgression) Then wherefore is it that Man being first deceived
by the Woman, must now also worship the Woman? And whether this be God's
Ordinance, or not? And did not God ordain, that Man should rule over the Woman?
Genesis 3. 16. And why then did man ordain, that man should worship the woman? And
when did God ever ordain that man should worship that which he had set him to
rule over? If you will grant, that when Peter did only contradict Christ in
words, Christ esteemed him as a Devil, saying, Get thee behind me Satan, Mat.
16. 22, 23. Then whether all the women you marry, do not more contradict
Christ, both in Words and Actions, than Peter then did, and so in as bad or a
worse state than Peter then was? And if so, then whether that man which is
caused to worship such a woman, or a woman in such a state, do not therein
worship one that was deceived by the Devil?

XXXVI. But whether does the man worship the woman, yea or nay? If he does, is
it not evil to worship the Creature, or any thing else but God alone? If he
does not, why must he speak that Lie, and so thereby serve the Devil, and ^o be
constrained to worship the Devil one way, or serve him another?

XXXVII. Whether the man be not Head of the woman? and then, whether that which
is head and above, must worship that which is under? And whether such a joining
together as this, for the one to worship the other, be of God? and whether
God's People, in time of Law or Gospel, were ever joined together in such a
Covenant? and whether it be not contrary to all Scripture and good
understanding? And whether it be not time to have this put away, as is
mentioned in the beginning?

XXXVIII. Whether it be not a piece of gross Apostasy See visitation of the
^ick.
and Popery, for proud, covetous Priests, who are in diverse Sins, generally to
pretend power to absolve the Sick from Sin, with these Words, I absolve thee
from all thy Sins? And whether most of the same Priests will not themselves
acknowledge, that they are miserable Sinners and Offenders? And can such
forgive the Sins of others, and cannot leave Sin themselves? Or can they pull
the Mote out of another Eye, before they have cast the Beam out of their own?

XXXIX. Whether the Priest (though he by his own confession a miserable Sinner)
does absolve the Sick from his Sin, that so he is then free from it? Or does he
not? If he does, whether he does not more for another, than God has done for
him? And then whence had he that Power so to do? and whether any true Members
of Christ can believe it? If not, whether therein the Priest be not a most
miserable blind Leader of the Blind, and a foul Deceiver of Mankind, both at
their coming into the World, by a pretended Regeneration, and at their going
out of the World by as false an Absolution? And whether ever there were any
greater Deceivers than these?

XL. Whether the People that dye in their Sins, and the Priests that live in
their Sins, be not therein truly Brethren See Burial of the dead.
together in Iniquity, seeing the Priest says at the burying of the dead, For
as much as it has pleased God to take our dear Brother here deceased?

XLI. Whether the Priest does give God thanks for the safe deliverance of no
other Women but such as are Gods See Churching of Women
Servants? Or whether they are not to give God thanks for almost all Women
after Childbirth? And whether all Women that they are to give thanks for, and
do give thanks for, be the Servants of God, seeing they say, Almighty God,
which has delivered this Woman thy Servant? Or whether most of the women they
give thanks for, be not Servants of Sin, and led about with diverse Lusts? And
whether it be not one thing to be a Servant of Sin, and another thing to be a
Servant of God?

XLII. Whether the new Man, which is within Children See Commination.
and People, and to be raised up in them, be not Christ? and whether Christ be
not the Light? And whether he that is the new Man, and the Light, be not the
Way? and whether all they be not blind that know it not? And if Christ the
Light and the Way be to be known within the hope of Glory, and that the Priests
have caused Children and People, who were so blind they did not know it, to go
out from that which is the new Man, and the Light, and the Way within, and also
teach them to go after, and walk in something without? Whether such Priests
have not these many Years cursed themselves or read the Curse against
themselves, and causing the People to say Amen to it, in saying, Cursed is he
that makes the Blind to go out of his Way?

XLIII. Whether the Priests themselves have not put their Trust in Man, and
taken one Man and Protector afteru aother for their Defense? And whether some
of them have not been unmerciful, in taking more than Ten times the value (in
Goods) of what themselves demanded from men? And whether some have not been
Fornicators, and some Covetous Persons, and some Slanderers and Drunkards, and
many Extortioners? If not, let Gods Witness and their own Fruits testify. If
they are such, then whether they have not a long time read the Curse against
themselves, and that from Year to Year in these late Ages, as long as they
durst do it, saying, Cursed are the Unmerciful, the ^ornicators and Adulterers,
and the Covetous Persons, the Worshippers of Images, Slanderers, Drunkards and
Extortioners?

XLIV. Whether the Priests, that did in our Infancy sprinkle us, who are now in
derision by them called Quakers, did then by that Water and their Words, make
us, or so many of us as they did so sprinkle, the Children of God, the Members
of Christ, and the Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven? If not, whether did not
they grossly deceive us, as also by after teaching, and persuading us we are
already regenerated, and born again in our Baptism, by which means hindering
us, what in them lay, for ever looking after it, and causing us to say we were
that we were not, and so made innocent Children speak Lies, we not knowing it
to be Lies? If they did make us so, then what have they since done, in Reviling
and smiting with the Tongue and Pen, and writing against us, the Members of
Christ, and persecuting us the Children of God, and that so many Years
together; and in causing us, the Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven, to be
Imprisoned Year after Year, to the depriving many of us of our Healths, and
some of our Lives, and many of their Livelihoods, by spoiling of their Goods?
And by this time some other thing then what the former Composers of the
Common Prayer did put away, which did burden men's Consciences, are herein by
way of Query made manifest to be abused, yea, even the Prayers abused; and
several of these things the Minds of People will never be quiet concerning, as
to own them again, unless some better satisfaction in plain and sound Words be
given them, either by answer hereunto, or otherwise in the like nature, in
Love, and not by Severity; for Love and sound Words may win the Hearts of
those, which Severity, Bonds and Cruelty cannot force them unto, till they are
better satisfied concerning it.

Written by one that has learned (as he was taught) To for sake the Devil and
all his Works, the Vanities of the wicked World, to hold the true
Christian-Faith, and to keep God's holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the
same all the days of his Life. H. S.

An Epistle to all the Meetings in Dorsetshire.
ONce more am I moved to visit you with an Epistle of plain words, from the
free and powerful operation of divine Love, unto the seed which in many lies
oppressed, by reason of that which through disobedience does hinder the growth
thereof, so that many come not into the Life of Truth, which in the power of
God was declared unto you, whose hearts at that time were much broken, and true
desires in many raised; but afterward not standing in the Cross to your wills,
in Obedience to the Light, to receive the Judgment due to that ground, from
whence Transgression arises, whereby the Enmity might be ^^ain, the love of
the World rooted out, and that ruled over with the perfect Law of God, which
was not subject to it, that the Law of the Spirit of Life, your minds might be
always exercised in, thereby to be made free from the Law of sin and death;
that sin might not reign in your mortal Bodies, but that through the power of
the Cross of him, who is the Light, the sinful Lusts of the flesh might be
mortified, and you led by the Light through the Law, by it to have the
Transgression thereof to you in every Particular discovered, that every one
might deny and stand out of that, which leads into the Transgression thereof,
seeing with the Light, that not one jot nor tittle thereof shallpass, till all
be fulfiled; and the Righteousness thereof is to be fulfilled in you, by your
humble and faithful following of him (that works in us) who cannot transgress
the Law, who being made as a Servant under the Law, to him you are all to come
and see the Law stand in force, over every one that does transgress, which Law
is addedbecause of sin, and that which saves the Soul does not make it void,
nor mittigate the power thereof against any one that sins wilfully, after the
knowledge of the Truth received, but upon such the Wrath of God abides, which
is ministered forth through the Law, with Tribulation, Anguish and Woe upon every
Soul that does Evil; so Trouble, Torment and Vexation of Spirit comes upon
such, who turn aside from the simplicity of the Gospel, and let the spirit of
the world reign over them, not being faithful in the little, which from God
they had received, by the powerful ministry of his living Truth that the
smallest of all seeds in them might spring, with obedience, through the whole
body of the Earth, under which it lies, and by it in many is oppressed; and
such in whom it is so, are in many Doubts and Reasonings, from that ground out
of which Unbelief does arise.

And then the Mind being from the Light, a hardness comes in, and the
Rebellious take entrance; and so that which is worse than before gets strength,
which being joined unto, leads in a secret deformity, farther from the Witness
then ever; so that then the good Savor comes to be lost, and the Understanding
darkened, not knowing the true motion, and often a carcless Spirit gets head,
and such are from the true Love and suffering Seed in themselves, and so not
joined in the Covenant of Love and Peace, with them that abide therein, the
which they sceing, a discontent arises therein in the mind; so did Cain, he
murmured at the other, but the Fault was in himself, for Sin lay at the Door;
and it is Sin to transgress against that which is Perfect; and the Light is the
perfect gift of God, and his Gifts are Perfect, and in the Light there is no
Evil, and the Light is to lead out of that which is Imperfect, and they that
err from the Light are in the strife and fleshly will: And the other Eye seeks
for evil, and then that kindles a Fire in the Bowels, and eats as a Worm, and
so drowns that from whence true Love should arise, as deep as the depth of the
Sea, and nothing but raging Waves over it, sometimes ready to vent forth its
own shame, and discover the nakedness of it self and others, which begets its
Image in the minds of them that regard it, so as to come under it, or let it
have entrance in them: And where these things are, there is little increase
within or without, but Truth suffers, and the World takes advantage, and the
Weak stumble, for whom Christ dyed, and the Lambs hurt, and their dear Life
grieved. And so these things are far from answering the dear and tender Call
and Visitation of the Lord; and then, if not faithful in little, when can such
come to rule, or how can they receive the blessing of God, being joined to that
which he has cursed? What shall I say to such? or with what Words shall I find
entrance in them? Surely if I had not a Word to write, I would mourn in secret
for them! Oh fruitless Trees, dry Branches, foolish Virgins, unprofitable
Servants, take heed lest the Lord spue you out of his Mouth! What should the
Lord do for you, that he has not done! My Bowels within me are troubled for
you, and I even mourn under the burden of your Iniquities.

How is it that you delight in other Lovers? and what is it in you that keeps
you from the power of Truth? How long shall the Lord stret^h forth his Hand to
them that rebel against the Light? And how often have you grieved the Spirit of
the Lord? And why is it that he is provoked to Jealousy every day? Will not
the Lord visit for these things? And can the Wicked go unpanished? Turn ye now
therefore, O ye Rebellious! and let the Double-minded fear and tremble before
the God of Power; for no Peace have I to preach for the Wicked, nor Pearls for
the Swine, in which the Unclean is entered: Let your Hearts now therefore be
opened, and let Judgment come upon that which is above the Seed, and sink down
into the House of Mourning, that the Prisoner may hear my Voice.

And now you that are honest, tender, faithful, willing and obedient, dear is
my Love unto you, the Lord God eternal preserve you dear Babes, and give you up
your Lives, and praise his endless rich love, who has called you to come out
of the World. My dear Friends, let my Fathers love arise in you, even the same
which I now feel toward you; and let me come near unto you in the power of my
Fathers love, that you may feel my Life, and partake with me of the hidden
Treasure, that your Hearts may be open to me again, from the feeling of the
Power of the covenant of Life, that in him I may salute you, who is at the
Fathers Right Hand: For unto you, O ye Children of the Light! is my Heart
enlarged, and toward you does the Power of my Life arise from the streams of
unlimitted Love, which from all the World is hid, and reserved in the Bosom of
the Father, for the meek and tender Lambs, for whom the Milk is prepared, and
to whom the Bread is to be given, and the sure Waters that never shall fail.

Let the Light arise in you, my dear Ones, that with it your Hearts may be
opened one to another, that you may know that the Lord is a God of Power, and
near at hand unto the Humble, that in his Love you may be kept, and by his
Power be defended, and so from strength to strength in his fear to walk, and to
come at last to be a People saved from Death, and redeemed from the Corruptions
of the Flesh.

And walk in the Life of Righteousness, to preach forth the Innocence of the
Lamb in uprightness, through a suffering state, and therein to glorify him,
whom in Spirit and Truth you are to serve forever more, so your Life may be
renowned with him forever, and your Souls replenished in the bountifulness of
his Love, whereby Fruits in you may abound to the glory of his Grace, and you
become rich in every good Word and Work.

And all you that are weak, who meet with many Hardships, and Trials, and
Temptations within and without, be ye not therefore discouraged nor moved, but
still mind that the Lord is able to deliver, and still on him in much Patience
wait, that in the due time you may come to reap. And truly Friends, in
faithfulness you will come to know the Lord to minister strength to the weak,
and give power to the faint, that the small thing in you may become great, and
the barren become fruitful; for in him, who is the Light, the plentious
Redemption is, and he it is that succors and saves in the time of need, and
helps and delivers in the time of distress; and he will not leave the Humble
Comfortless, nor forsake the Meek of the Earth; neither can the Lord forget his
Covenant of Peace with the Seed of Jacob, though it be but as a Worm in the
Earth.

And you who suffer Bonds, Imprisonments or loss of Goods for his sake, who
has called you out of the World, dear is my love unto you, and precious is the
faithful suffering Seed in you to me, who also with you suffer, both within,
and in outward Bonds, seeing the Crown of rejoicing that through a suffering
state is manifest to the Seed, which through suffering comes to live forever;
and the Life is that which will uphold, in the measure whereof manifest in you:
The power of the Lord preserve you, that you may feel Truth kept clear in you,
and preserved blameless by you, that the Prisoner of hope in you may Reign over
its Adversaries, and you feel the Power of the Lord strengthening the spoiled
against the strong, that under it the other may bow, that to the humble Life of
the Lamb slain, all Nations may become subject.

And all consider, that he that is the Wonderful Counselor, who says, I am
the Light; In it therefore wait, the counsel of the Lord to receive: And all
take heed of going out from that, to set up a form of barren Words without,
neither build ye the things which began to be destroyed, but all take heed of
vain Talkers, high Boasters, and such, who by a multitude of Words, darken that
in you which is to give the knowledge of him, whose Kingdom consists not of
Words; for many see things afar off, and speak too soon and too much, and out
of the true fear, whose Words feed that above the Seed in many, who live
thereby; and it burdens the Seed in some tender Lambs, so that it which should
live in them is kept in Death. And so such Talkers, with their many Words, do
scatter the Flock, and cause Strife, being separated from the suffering Seed
within, and so cannot suffer one with another, and things are out of God's
Wisdom, and out of Unity and true Brotherly Love; and then the Mouths of the
Heathen are opened against you all, and the precious Truth of God suffers:
Therefore its better all such were silent, and that in the true fear you come
to wait on the Lord, that the power of his Life might be opened in every
particular; and then if that speak a Word or two, it will hurt none, but be
received by all that fear the Lord, and that my Soul loves; but this I know
and feel, that many Words are spoken, which murder the Life in the Meek.

Therefore where these things are, let it be searched into with the Light in
every particular, that the true thing in all may arise, and act, and lead, and
guide in Meekness and true Fear, that the Power of God in you all you may come
unto.

And let all your Meetings be kept as in the dreadful Awe and Presence of God;
and meet together often, that the Seed through Death may come, to which my Love
is dear, in which Love, which comes from God, his Arm of Power preserve you
all, which is both my Desire and Prayers to God, whom in the measure of his
living Truth, I serve in my Spirit, and for which now I suffer Bonds, who to
some of you may be felt in that which is more near unto many of you, than the
Name Humphry Smith.

To the despised, rejected and persecuted Lambs of Christ in the County of
Dorset.
YOu whom the Lord God of Life has visited with his Everlasting
Loving Kindness, in a day of Salvation, and in an acceptable year has the Lord
^ought after you, who from him were going astray in the frowardness of your
Wills, and haughtiness of your vain Minds, whereby your Souls were kept in
Death, out of which the Lord is now come to redeem, and gather you, his long
lost sheep, in his everlasting Arms of unlimited Love, home unto the rest
eternal, where Peace and Plenty is within the Walls that are Salvation, and the
Gate of everlasting Peace; within which the redeemed of the Lord do dwell, and
their rest is gloriously glorified with the presence of the most High, who
comes to rule in the Kingdoms of men; and set his Righteousness and Judgment in
the Earth, whereby the meek of the Earth shall rejoice, and the Mourning seed
shall be comforted, because of him that executes true Judgment upon the head
of the Wicked, which ruled over the growing seed, which cries unto the Lord in
the hour of distress, and mourned for him who is the bright Morning Star, whose
lightnings begin now to enlighten the Earth, and shine out of Darkness, to give
the knowledge of God in the sensible feeling part of the heart, which comes to
be made soft and tender thereby, so that its wrought into Gods love, which
melts the Hills and shakes the Mountains, and divides asunder, that an open
way, fair and clear may be made for the longing breathing seed to spring out of
Bondage, and feel Gods Mercy showered down as the latter Rain upon a dry and
thirsty Land, where^y the Lillies grow, and the Vine yields her Increase, and
the Olive flowrishes, and Clothing from the God of Righteousness comes to cover
the mourning naked Birth, who has no strength nor help but from the Lord God
of Mercy, who is the Father of the Fatherless, and the Helper of the Helpless,
who also hears the Cry of the Needy, and knows the mind of the Spirit, and has
pity on all Sion's Mourners, and Compassion of all the faint, and he is helping
the Prisoner out of the Pit, whereby the Captive comes to be set at liberty,
and the opening of the Prison Door is felt by the Lambs and Children of the
Day, who unto the day of Salvation are come, wherein God, even our God is
shining out of Zion, the redeemed of the Lord, the perfection of Beauty unto
all the World; and all Nations who have been high shall now be brought down
into the Valley, and there will Christ, the Lord of Hosts, plead in the cool of
the day with all Flesh, and fallen man; and the day is come that the Heathen
shall be weakened, and the strength of the Mighty shall fail; and he that
handles the Bow, and the Shield, and the Spear, shall not deliver himself, but
the mighty man shall fall in the Streets, and the strong man shall utterly
faint, and Wisdom shall perish from the Wise, and Understanding from the
Prudent; and Judges shall be led away Fools, and the Honorable shall be laid
in the Dust, and no Weapon formed against the Righteous Seed shall prosper; for
of a truth the Lord is with us, and in vain do all the Potsherds of the Earth
strive against the Lamb, and his meek Spirit in his Members; for though they
Fine one, and Whip another, and Imprison many, yet the day is come, that they
shall fall down under the Prisoners, and bow down under the Slain; for the Lord
our God is risen over them all, and he even laughs them to scorn, and will have
them in derision: Therefore by ye still and quiet, O ye flock of the most high,
and let the Bountifulness of God's everlasting Love break the Earthly Pitchers,
and feel Gods unlimitted Power fighting for you, who are now to be quiet for a
little season, and you shall see the destruction of the wicked, and the
overturning of the seats of the ungodly, who are all but as Chaffbefore the
wind, and as stubble ready dried before the fire of God's Jealousy, which will
shortly smoke against his Enemies, who shall vanish like smoke when our God
arises to confound Babel, and overturn the foundation of the Wicked; for great
Babel is come in remembrance before our God, who is now giving her Blood to
drink, and the day is at hand, that Vengeance shall be poured forth upon the
head of the Wicked, and Flames of everlasting Burning upon the Whore, the Beast
and the false Prophet, and all they that commit Fornication with strange flesh,
and they shall now be taken and cast alive, sensible of Gods Wrath, into the
Lake that burns forever and ever; yea, the day is at hand, and the Ungodly
shall not escape.

Therefore, ye Sons and Daughters of the most High, lift up your Heads, behold,
your Redemption draws nigh, therefore rejoice in the Lord forever; and again,
I say, Rejoice, for your Redeemer comes, riding upon the Wings of the Wind, a
Fire devoureth before him, and behind him a flame burns; behold, his Reward
is with him, and his Work before him, and long his Enemies shall not stand, but
the overflowing Scourge shall pass over them all, and their Covenant with Hell
shall be broken, and their Agreement with Death shall be dissanulled, and their
Shame and Nakedness shall appear to the view of all Nations, and their
Whoredoms shall be made manifest in the sight of all People, and the Nations
afar off shall hiss at them, and they shall become a Byword and a Hissing to
them afar off.

Wherefore, be ye still and quiet, O ye Children of the Light! commune with
your own Hearts, and be still in your own Closets, and fret not your selves
because of the Ungodly, for his day is short, and ever long his place shall not
be found, and in the mean time your Patience comes to be exercised; and by the
Tyranny of the Wicked, and the Oppression of the Merciless, your Faith is
tried, and blessed forever are they who love not their Lives nor Goods more
than Christ the Light, but follow him unto the end, who is despised of men,
contemned of the Wise, and consulted against by the Rulers of the Earth, who
are now lifting up their beastly Power unto Heaven, and are laying Snares and
setting Traps to catch the Innocent, and are openly blaspheming the God of the
Seed of Abraham, whom they call Quakers, who confess we are Strangers and
Pilgrims on the Earth.

And all you who stand fast in the Faith, that respects no man's Person, and
you that in patience endure the spoling of your Goods, the Imprisoning or
Whipping of your Persons; and all you, in whom there is honest desires begotten
after the living Truth of the God of Life, even to you all my Bowels of Love do
reach, and of your sufferings I do partake, and my Prayer and Hearts desire to
God, for you Night and Day with Tears, is, That you may be preserved unto the
end; and this I write from a true sense and feeling of you, your Sufferings and
Conditions, who are tried diverse ways both within and without; but faint not,
my dear Lambs, the Lord God will never break Covenant, neither can he leave or
forsake the faithful; Therefore only trust in the Lord and be still; for the
Lord of Hosts is fighting for you, yea, it is so, and all your Enemies shall be
but as the dust of the Earth, and as the mire in the streets; so shall the Lamb
in Meekness Trample upon them all.

And my dear Friends, now the Everlasting Love of God unto you has appeared,
with the same Love come to love one another, and be watchful one over another;
and in the Light meet often together, and be not soon shaken in mind, and so
turn from the true Guide, as some have done, and that which is out of the
Light, with it judge in wisdom and meekness, that you may answer that of God in
all, who contrary to the Light do act, but of rash Judgment see that you all
beware, but rather in love wait to restore and build up one another; and none
of you depart out of Gods fear, but be low, single-hearted, plain and honest,
without any By-covering or Double-mindedness, but as Doves and Lambs in the
godly simplicity all walk, not as Strangers unto, or High-minded^ess one over
another, but in Love to serve; and let your Minds be kept on the Eternal
Invisible things, and let Faith, Love, Meekness and Virtue abound in you, so
shall the work of God prosper in and by you. Truly Friends, the Love of the
Lord is toward you, and he will make you a blessing and a praise over the
Earth; and if you stand in his Counsel, your Enemies shall be confounded and
overturned: Believe it, it must be so.

And you, the Jewels of the Lord shall be Crowned with Eternal Dominion, and
the Lord of Glory will be your God, and Peace, Righteousness and Plenty shall
you enjoy forever: Wherefore faint not, O ye seed of Abraham, who are Strangers
and Pilgrims on the Earth, but let the meek be encouraged, and the tender
nursed up, in the everlasting Arms of Gods endless Love, and let none turn back
because of the Enemy that stands up before, but all join battle with the
Lamb; and Gog and Magog, and all Nations that rise up, and gather themselves
together against you, the beloved of the Lord, they are all but as the rising
up of Smoke, and as Chaff before the Wind, so must they ever long be driven
away: Have you not seen the Overturning and the Confounding of them that were
against God and goodness, who raged much against you, as these do now? And will
not the Lord once more overturn? Yea, it shall be so; for the Blood-thirsty
Priests and persecuting Officers must follow after; for though Pharaoh, and all
his Host were overturned, yet the Moabites, nor the Canaanites would not take
warning: But rejoice not thou, when thine Enemy falls, nor because the Devils
are made subject, but feel thy Name written amongst the Living.

And now to the Lord God of Life I commit you all, and to the Guidance of the
measure of his Spirit of Holiness; and the Blessing of the most high be upon
you every one that is faithful, now and for evermore; and the presence of Lord
be in all your Meetings.

Humphry Smith.

DEar Brethren, Friends and Babes in Christ, who are begotten again by the Word
of Power, and born of the Immortal Seed, whom God has raised up in the Day of
his Love, and gathered into his Covenant of Life, with whom my Heart is joined
in the Life of Righteousness, where the sweet savor of divine Love is felt, as
healing Oil, blessed forever and ever be the Fountain from whence it comes,
whereby the heart is made glad unto God, and the weary Soul refreshed; Beauty
and Excellency remains in the Life forever, and durable Righteousness
inhabiteth therein: Let the humble rejoice because of its Beauty, and let the
meek be glad for evermore; let the Earth be quiet and still, and let the
Inhabitants therein feel the Visitation of Life, where God's day of brightness
dawneth in the Hearts of his chosen, where Peace abides forever, and the Light
most gloriously does shine, which expels the Darkness far away, and scatters
the Clouds of the Night; Love then springs up from God, and Life and Virtue
does nourish his tender Plant, unexpressibly is it received therein, and the
Father's Mercy more sweet than the finest Honey, with this may all Gods Plants
be nourished, and your breathing desires answered, and longing Souls satisfied;
then may you all lie down together, receiving God's blessing of Life, and grow
up in the Power thereof, as the holy Building of God, to show forth the Praise
of his Glorious Name, by walking in the Virtuous Life, that the Father and
Begettor of your true Desires for evermore may be honored, and you a
delightsom savor of Life unto him, to be joined in his Covenant Immortal,
where God, who is Love, dwells in the Light, which no Eye of flesh can
behold, nor the fleshly Birth come near, nor the polluted enter within his
Dwellings, nor the Transgressor of the Law come with his burden into this City
of Rest, where the Lamb is the Light, and the blessed Sabbath is kept, who feel
the liberty of the Seed Immortal, may see, and read, and understand, even the
unutterable things of God, whose Power, Love, Mercy, Compassion and Peace may
many of you feel sometimes in your own hearts, which is to draw you to himself,
that you might love him again forever, above all things that are created by
him, that in his Power, which was before it, you may come over it all, to him
again, and in the same Power, with him, over it to reign, and the Creatures to
rule in his Wisdom, that your Souls may be kept clean to God, and you
sanctified to himself, a sit Habitation for him forever.

The Lord God Almighty help, keep and preserve all Friends, that all may stand
in the day of Trial, and finish your Testimony with Peace. H. S.
Broomeyard in Herefordshire, the 4th of the 3d Month, 1660.
One Hundred and Forty four Lines of secret inward Melody and Praise to the
Lord.
MY heart shall sing of thee,
Who do my Soul defend,
Whose Life has saved me,
Who did my Ways amend:
Whose strength has me upheld,
Whose Love is with me still,
Whose Grace does virtue yield;
Who have taught me thy will.
O! blessed be thy Name,
Who have my Life redeemed,
That I may sound the same,
With them thou have esteemed.
O! let me now rejoice,
And praise the Lord my strength,
Who long has been my choice,
And drawn my days in length.
O! that I could declare
Unto the sons of men
His Gifts and Rules rare,
Which he has yet for them.
O! that my heart could dite
The goodness of his Love,
Or that my pen could write,
His Mercies yet above.
O! that I might express,
With Heart, with Tongue or Pen,
His sweet delight somness,
Reserved for upright men.
O! that I could unfold,
Or in meekness declare,
His strength, which makes bold,
And keeps from the Snare.
Behold, his Throne is Love,
His Seat is Mercy pure,
Descending from above,
Is he both day and hour.
Behold, his Glory shines
Unto his Jewels rare,
He visits them betimes,
When they in Darkness are.
Behold, his Heart is bent
Toward his little Ones,
His Love their hearts does rent,
And in his Virtue comes.
Behold, he draws near
To all the Poor and Weak,
And he to them is dear,
Who will them not forsake.
Behold, he does arise,
In Might, Virtue and Power,
To bring in his lost prize,
Into his refuge Tower.
The weak he does defend,
The poor he will still uphold;
Forth' needy he will contend,
And give them more than Gold.
His Lambs he still does lead,
His little Ones he will teach:
The Hungry have his Bread,
The Thirsty he will refresh.
He makes the Feeble strong,
He makes the Barren bare,
He leads the Blind along
Into the Light most clear.
He comes as a Dew
In heat of Summer time,
Upon his Plants below,
That forth their Fruit may shine.
He feeds every Babe,
He seeks every Lost;
His Love does never fade,
For his he spares no Cost.
His V^rtue and his Strength,
His Wisdom and his Power
He gives to his at length,
And they of him are sure.
He never does forsake
His dear and little Flock,
Who of that Bread partake
That Is hidden in the Rock.
The Heavens and the Earth
He with himself Does fill;
He dwells in our Hearts,
And does reveal his Will.
He makes known his Way,
That all his Flock shall go,
And them in light Array
For to withstand the Foe.
He helps in time of need,
He leaves not in distress,
He does effect the Deed,
To Man he gives redress.
He casts down to Hell,
His Power is so great,
He does the Living kill,
And none can him defeat.
He raises from the Grave,
And makes the Dead alive;
From him there is none can save,
Nor in his absence thrive.
He Is always near at hand
From trouble to deliver.
He Is joined with his in Band
To live with them forever.
No God is like to him,
No Honor like to his,
No man is said to win,
Whose Soul is lost from bliss.
Oh praise him all ye Saints,
Who feel his virtue near;
Unto him still give thanks,
Who is our Father dear.
Let wicked men lament,
Let all Ungodly howl:
Too late shall some repent,
When down his Judgments roll.
When Babel's turned int' Lake,
When the Beast is thither thrown,
When Drunkards reel and shake,
When Wrath is poured down.
When Vengeance much with might
Is poured on the Whore,
And all secret Deceit
Destroyed forever more.
Then Sion shall be glad,
Then God shall honored be,
Then Praises shall be had,
Then Worship shall be free.
Then Comfort shall abound
In all true mourning Lambs,
And Gospel free shall sound
Throughout all Nation Lands.
The time hereof's at hand,
The Captives shall be free
Gods Seed in every Land,
By him shall gathered be.
Let Friends rejoice in fear,
Let fear in love abound,
Let Thousands more draw near,
For we the Pearl have found.
Let all in Patience dwell,
And in the Lord still trust,
That we in Love excel,
In which with you I rest.
As I walking alone in my close Prison at Winchester, upon the 24th of the 5th
Month, 1662. in much Quietness, Meekness and inward Refreshings, by the rising
virtue of Gods refreshing Love, these Lines began to run gently through me,
with Melody in my Heart to the Lord; and when I was free in my self to write,
it departed not from me, but came so easy and so fast, as I could well write,
whereby in a very little part of the said day this was begun and finished with
my own Hand: Yet would I not have it looked upon to be a great thing, nor a
pattern or example for others to run into the like.

For since I came into the Life and Obedience of Truth, I durst not write any
thing thus in Verse until this day and time; neither was there the least
thought in me thus to write, until the very instant. For writing in Meeter is
apt to beget a lightness in some Readers, and make way for too much, or a wrong
Liberty in others, to do the like, but not in the true fear, which is the
continual Refuge of

Humphry Smith.

Hidden things made manifest by the Light, In a plain Distinction between
Condemnation and Temptation.
Wherein is showed How the Righteous Law of God is ministered upon the
Transgressor, and how it is to be by all received, as a Schoolmaster to come to
Christ, by him to have the sin done away forever. Also, of Temptation, what it
is, and how it may be known and discerned from Condemnation. With a Direction
to them who profess the knowledge of Truth, and live not in the power of God.
Concerning the Ministration of Condemnation.
THe World being set in man's Heart, and Sin being in the World before the
Promise was made, which Promise was before the Law, by which the Sin is
discovered; which Sin was in the World before the Promise, yet the Promise was
before the Law; and yet until the Law comes, Death reigns over that to which
the Promise is, and Sin separateth man from God, the which is not clearly seen
until the Commandment (which is Light) is come, the Ministration whereof is
Condemnation unto Man, being found in the Transgression; the which Ministration
of Condemnation is to pass over all, having sinned; and when this comes, it
finds man in the Death, and by it is sin revived, whereby man comes to see a
Body of Sin, which stands between him and God, so that he is afraid of the
dreadful Power of God, ministered forth through the Law, to slay him that has
transgressed, the which some coming to see, or in the least measure to feel,
call it a Temptation, because it makes him sensible, that Condemnation
belongs to him, and that all his Profession and building upon the Promise, in
that which the Promise was not unto; and seeing, that if he lie down to receive
this Ministration, that then all his Profession and Knowledge, Zeal, Wisdom and
Prayers (which did arise out of that ground which was cursed by reason of the
sin that was in the World before either the Promise, the Profession, or the
Law) will be all ripped up from him, as filthy Rags, and that his shame and
nakedness must appear, as its written, Every mouth shall be stopped, and every
one shall stand guilty before God, and no Darkness, no shadow of Death shall
hide the workers of Iniquity from the mighty hand of God, who brings to
judgment the hidden things of Darkness, and rips open the secrets of the Heart,
so that the most secret Sin^ that ever were committed are clearly made
manifest, and justly charged upon the head of the Transgressor, who stands in
Enmity to God, who will wound the head of the Transgressor, and plead in
Righteousness with him, in whom the sin is found, though not made manifest
until the time that the Law is come, by which it is discovered.

And this Ministration of Condemnation is not a Temptation, though many call it
so, who being blind, put Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness; for that
which shows man his sin, does not tempt man to sin, but rather brings man in
fear that he may not sin; for because of sin was the Law added; and the Law was
given after much of the Love, Preservation, Power, Deliverances, and the
Wonders of the Lord had been seen, and it was given in the Wilderness, where
sometime there was want of Bread and Water, where was Serpents, Scorpions and
many Trials, where the figure of him who was to heal the wounded, and take away
the sting of death, and save the Life of man, was lifted up on high without
them; the which figure or outward bodily Appearance, was prepared by Moses: And
Christ had a body prepared him, both which the carnal Eye might see, and the
carnal Mind contend about (even as the Devil about the body of Moses) but the
Substance of the Figure, Christ the Light, Gods power, being not received
within, in the heart, and so fin (the transgression of the Law) remains within,
and the figure or that which the natural Eye did or may see, was and is looked
upon without; and that without does not take away the sin within; and these
knew not the Ways of God, who sinned, and at last loathed the Manna (calling it
light bread) in the Wilderness, even there was the Law Ministered; they whose
eyes are open may read and understand

And where the Law was given forth, there was a Mount, or a high place of the
Earth, which then trembled by reason of the dreadful Power of the Lord of
Hosts; and beneath or under the Mount was the Seed and Israel of God, which was
to keep the Law and Life [ Read within and understand] and yet by reason of
that which was hard upon the heart, there was a crying out with Dread, and
Horror, and Fear, That the Lord might speak no more, lest they dye; and so that
which is hard upon the heart, in the which by the Law (which is Light) sin is
found, that is it which is afraid to receive the Law, and come near the
Darkness, and Thunders, and Tempests; and so, though many do talk of the Law
(being a Schoolmaster to Christ) yet they are much afraid to receive the
Ministration of Condemnation, as their Fathers were, who might have boasted,
that they were the People of God, his only chosen flock, and that the Land of
rest was promised to them, and that they had fed upon the Passover (and yet
they perished before they came to that which was promised, who are left for an
Example) and they might have boasted and talked much of the goodness of God,
and of his wonders, and of his presence being with them, and of their own
experiences therein, and that therefore they were not to come under the
Ministration of Condemnation, and fear, and horror, and trembling, and
astonishment, and that they need not now to be afraid of God, who had showed
them so much love and mercy: And many such things might they have pleaded, as
most professing People do now, who can talk of promises and deliverances, and
of Christ, and his Merits and Righteousness, and Justification, and Redemption
(finished without them) and especially of Ordinances, and their own experiences
of the Power of God, but are yet in their sins, having not received the thing
promised, neither come to him who is the end of the Law, and makes an end of
sin, whom many satisfy their vain Minds with talking of him with the same
Tongue that uses deceit; and professing him who is the end of the Law, but the
Law they despise, holding the Truth of God in the unrighteous Ground, which by
the mighty power of God, through the Ministration of the Law, is to be shaken
and removed, as it is written, Sinai also was moved, and all Israel trembled,
and Moses did fear and quake; and once more will the Lord shake not only the
Earth, but the Heavens also, and then shall the Foundation of the Hypocrites be
overturned forever.

For though the Name of God and Christ be professed, yet if Moses's Law be
despised, such dye without Mercy; for the Law is to remove the Iniquity, which
does withold the Mercy and the good things from man; and in the end of the
Law is that received by which the Law is fulfilled, which is according to the
Law and the Prophets; but there is none can come to that in the end of the Law,
who refuse to come to the beginning of the Law, and despise the Ministration of
Condemnation, and make a mock at Trembling, or at least, not knowing what it
is, exceedingly to fear and quake, being not in the least sensible, what that
is which must be shaken and removed, before the thing promised be obtained; for
a Promise may be made long before the thing promised be given or obtained; for
a Promise was made unto Abraham and his seed, and yet it is written of him, and
many more, that they dyed, having not obtained the Promises; and he that made
the promise was before the sin, who ministered forth the Law to discover the
sin; through the Ministration whereof, and by Obedience thereunto, that comes
to be received which takes away the sin, in which all the Promises are
received.

And so, all that come to receive the thing promised, they receive that which
is the end of the Law, and was before the sin, in which there is no sin, by
which sin is finished, and him received in whose Mouth there is sound no Guile;
who brings his to be as he is in this present World, being made the
Righteousness of God through him, having the Righteousness of the Law fulfilled
in them, by him who is the end of the Law, dwelling in them, in whom also his
Power works mightily, which is more than to talk of the Law being fulfilled
without them; for many such are neither come to that which fulfills the Law,
neither yet to the Law it self; and such are hating, reviling, backbiting,
opposing, and many ways persecuting those who witness the Law fulfilled in
them, even as Saul, who was bred up at the feet of Gamal^^l, and knew that of
the Law which was written without, and walked blameless according to the
Righteousness thereof, and yet knew not that which gave forth the Law, but
persecuted him by whom the Law should be fulfilled, whose dreadful Power smote
him down, and a blindness came upon that great Professor, who had profited much
in that Religion, above many of his equals: And to that Power which struck him
blind did he then bow, and became obedient, and afterward said, When the
Commandment came, sin revived, and I dyed: And so that was struck blind, and is
to be blinded, which professed the Law before it came, and increased in that
knowledge, without the Life, and Knew not that by which the Law should be
fulfilled. Therefore that which sees, must be blind; and that which is blind,
is to see. And this Revelation and heavenly Vision he did not then call a
Temptation, nor a Delusion; neither did he despise that which struck him blind,
and let him see a Body of sin, and came to cut him down because of the sin, but
cried out of his Wretchedness, and accounted all as Dross and Dung; and unto
this he was obedient, and this he loved, and did not say of it, That it was not
able to save him from Sin, the which before did prick for sin, though against
that which pricked he had strived (which was in him) and it was said unto him,
It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.

And so, that which striveth and kicketh against that which pricketh at the
Heart, is that by which the Heart is hardened; for the Word is hid in the
heart, which Word is sharp as a sword; which Word being preached, some were
pricked to the heart (others cut to the heart) so that many cried out, Men and
Brethren^ what shall we do to be saved? And so the Word being nigh, ^n which
God is striving with man, even piercing the hearts of many, that some in secret
have been ready to cry out and say, What shall I do to be saved? And yet being
not truly sensible what it is in them which did prick and pierce through the
heart, and let them see themselves out of Gods Covenant; therefore have they
strove against it, and called this a Temptation, which was the Powerful
Operation of God by the Light of his Son in the heart, calling to Repentance,
the which they have called a Temptation of the Devil (esteeming it so to be)
which is most horrible Blasphemy and resisting of the Spirit, and refusing to
turn to him that smites: And this is the blindness of them who know not God,
who by the Light of his Son does knock at the Door of the heart, to minister
forth the Law, to judge and condemn, and break the hardness, that in the broken
heart this Word of Life might be received, and his Power made known, to the
Confounding of that which kept that in Bondage (under the Transgression) which
was given into man before the Transgression was, out of which Transgression
there is no coming, but by and through the Ministration of Condemnation, which
does it discover in the ground of it, through which there is a coming to
receive the Gospel of Peace, which is the Power of God, not to be preached to
the Wicked things, under which the just do suffer, which the Law is to, but by
the Lord of glory, through the Light, preached to the Spirit in Prison, that
it, through the Condemnation of the other, may grow up to lead and guide the
Creature in all things, in obedience to Gods will, from a true sense of his
Love in the heart, whereby his whole Law comes to be fulfilled, and the Promise
and the Blessing received in him, who is the end of the Law, who is the Light,
given into man, to let him see, and to condemn the sin, the which man being
dead in, and in Trespasses, does not love, but is afraid of that which in
secret judges and reproves him, from the which man flying, forsakes that by
which he should come to receive the Mercies of the Lord; but Woe to them
forever, who strive with their Maker, and call him Belz^bub, who is the Light
in the Heart, and should be Master in the House.

Therefore let all take heed of despising the Law, which is written with the
singer of God in the heart, whilst it is yet hard; sor the Law of God is
perfect, making wise the simple, and the Ministration thereof is to destroy
that which did it Transgress, and lead unto him by whom the Transgression is
finished: And this is not a Temptation, but a Dispensation of Gods Justice
Through his Righteous Law upon that which sinned, over which the Law has Power
so long as that lives, which the Law is to kill, that through the death of it,
that might come again to live which was before the Law, and before the death,
and before the sin.

And now when the Law or Ministration of Condemnation comes, man is to stand
still and wait quietly under it, and not let any thing break through in a
haste, to rage or gaze, and wonder at that which is so dreadful that man is not
able to stand under it, without unspeakable Astonishment, because of that which
then is over him, who then is commanded, not to break through, lest he dye; for
the Law is to break through that which cannot keep it, and make way to that
which is to keep it, and live forever; but man is not to break through, from
under the Condemnation, to that where the Law is ministered, until that is
received by which the Law may be kept; for such who in the Condemnation do
abide, come at last to see and receive him that is made under the Law, and is
the end of it, and takes away the sin; but such who come to the Law, and break
out from under the judgment, before the Lord had broke through, and cut down
all that in them which could not keep it, such have let in Death again to reign
over that which with judgment should have been redeemed, to bear away that
which the Law had power over, and arise up with that Power, Love, Life and
Obedience to God, as in all things to fulfill the whole Law of God, which until
then, does still stand in force over that and them in which sin remains,
which does transgress the Law, one tittle whereof shall not perish till all be
fulfilled, though some coming to the Law have broke forth, and then healed the
Wound slightly, supposing it would serve their turns to talk of the fulfilling
of it by and in another for them, and without them, seeing themselves not able
to keep it in all things, not waiting to the end of the Law, by it to have all
that destroyed which could not keep it, and receive that which cannot break it;
[ Mark] and in it keep, by it to be led out of the Wilderness of sin, in the
promised Land to rest, in it to have the days prolonged and the life
preserved; for Christ the Light comes to save the Life.

And there are many that are now come to peace, dominion and the land of Rest,
who did once come to know the judgments of God upon Cain's nature, which then
cried out, That his punishment was too heavy to bear, and have also come to see
the Beast, whose head is full of the Names of Blasphemy, and yet have they not
started aside like a broken Bow, from under the judgment, neither suffered the
Enemy to prevail over them by Temptations, to curse God and dye, nor to call
him Beelzebub, who is the Light, which condemns, and should be Master in the
house; neither have they despised Moses Law, which is the Ministration of
Condemnation, and in its time is glorious; but in patience and longsuffering
under it have waited, and that without murmuring, or suffering that to break
forth in rage, which Gods judgments are to; neither have they suffered Unbelief
to prevail over them, but in love to him who was made a Curse, in patience have
endured all these things, and have been made as free to drink the Cup of
Astonishment, with the Dregs thereof, as the Lord was to pour it forth unto
them, who now drink the Cup of Salvation, even the Blood of the Lamb, which
cleanses from all sin, whose life saves them from the Terror of the Pit, who
have come to feel the seed born and brought forth (though with Pangs and
Sorrow) which the blessing is to.

Those may see, hear, and understand what I write, who are come to know how the
Law is handed forth by a Mediator (who was before the Law) and the
Righteousness of God manifest without the law, and sin discovered by the Law,
and Gods Righteousness revealed by that which was before the Law; and that
notwithstanding the Law must be received, yet by the works thereof no flesh
shall be justified, but by obedience of Faith toward God in the Blood of his
Son, by which all that is done away which trangress'd the Law; and so not of
Works, nor of Merits, but of Faith and Love, is the Law fulfilled.

Concerning Temptation.
And that those who were born blind, and have been ever since covered with the
blackness of Darkness, through their own Wisdom, being dead in Trespasses and
Sins, not feeling nor savouring the things of God, but remain in that Religion
and Profession which crucisied his Son, who is a man of Sorrows, and called
him, A Blasphemer, who is the true Light, which lights every man that comes
into the World; and said, he had a Devil, who came to condemn sin in the flesh,
whose Light in every Conscience is the Condemnation, so long as the Evil deeds
remain; the which Condemnation is not a Temptation; for God, who is Light,
tempts no man to Evil. Therefore in love is this written, that no man through
blindness and ignorance (in his own wisdom) may esteem that to be a Temptation,
which does condemn, and that out of Temptation, all such who are tempted, may
be led and kept by that which does condemn, which is the pure Light of Christ,
which does judge and condemn the Temptations, and the Sin, and the Transgressor
(who enters into it) and every Evil motion, which is apt to arise in the mind,
that is darkened and blinded by the God of the World; which mind from the
Darkness to the Light is to be turned, in the Light to believe as he has said,
I am the Light, believe in the Light; and it is a Temptation which hinders man
from believing in the Light; and all such keep not the Commands of Christ, who
do not believe and obey the Light; and such profess his Words, but deny that in
which the power of his Life does stand.

And it is a Temptation which causes man to deny and refuse the Law (which is
Light) and not come under, nor receive the Ministration of Condemnation,
supposing he is under Grace, and so not to come back to the Law, because he
has gotten a Profession of Christ, whose day Abraham saw, whose seed came
through the Law, of whom Christ came, who fulfills the Law, and makes an end
of sin, who was in the Church in the Wilderness, and in his pity saved them,
and bare them all the days of old, leading the humble seed, that through the
Wilderness of sin it might come, and at last enjoy that by which the sin is
done away forever.

And it is a Temptation which causes man to call that a Temptation which in
the Conscience does sometimes arise and let men see, that he by his sin is in
the Fall, the Death and the Curse, and that the Judgments of God belong to him,
and that he cannot escape the fierce Wrath of the Almighty, living in that by
which sin is daily committed, and the Righteous Law of God transgressed, and
himself out of the Covenant of Life, wanting the power of God to bear him up
out of Iniquity, so that he labors, and prays, and cries sometimes with Tears
(like Esau) to keep that alive in the Transgression, which God has appointed
to destruction; [ Consider this] And strives against that which lettet^ see the
emptiness thereof, and condemns afterward; if a false joy does not arise
secretly to glory in what was done, whereby that was satisfied and got ease,
which the Judgment was to, which of the Judgment was afraid, and from under it
led forth to perform a Will worship, from the ground where Cain's nature bears
rule, who can bring a sacrifice, but the deeds (with the Light) seen to be
evil, who at last murders the just, and the sin lying at the door, which
secret sin cannot be hid from the Light in any that commit it, or in whom it
is, though never so secret.

And it is a Temptation which works in the dark corners of the heart, in the
time when Condemnation comes to drive man to despair, by reason of the
fierceness of the Judgment, and drives him from God and his Righteous
Judgments, into Unbelief and Hardness of Heart against God; and herein the
Tempter prevails over many, some whereof then go to destroy themselves, not
keeping in patience under the Judgment, which was to destroy the sin; for
Christ the Light comes to condemn and destroy the sin, but the Life he comes to
save; Others through Unbelief have hardened their hearts in sin, their minds
being in that in which they cannot believe, That ever they shall overcome sin,
nor be saved from it; and such grow worse than before, and use all means in
vain lustful Delights to murder that in them which checks, reproves and
condemns them for sin; and many here turn aside from under the Condemnation,
many and various ways, some who are blind calling it Melancholy; so that few
endure to the end, and enter through the strait Gate by the Death, through it
the Life to find, not waiting with long forbearance out of that which hastes,
in patience in the Light to see, feel and know the seed of Abraham (brought
forth of the barren Womb) which against hope, in hope believe: And these
Temptations lead further into sin, and is not that which condemns for sin; for
that would keep out of sin, though its Judgments be never so heavy upon man for
sin.

And being that God is known in the ways of his Judgments, and that they who
are to receive the Promise, must keep Judgment, and that with Judgment Sion's
Redemption is to be witnessed, and when Judgment begins to be set up in the
heart, to judge, condemn, confound, overturn and cut down the Head, Body and
Root of all that which by the Light is seen to be in the Transgression, having
the form of Godliness, but not the Power which keeps out of, and free from
all sin, which the Judgment is to pass upon: Therefore is that a Temptation
which then draws forth the mind from under the Judgment, to get ease by a
supposed Peace with God, from the Comprehension of something done without afar
off or long ago, and so climb up another way then by the Light within (which I
know is the door) which condemns and brings to Judgment the hidden things of
Darkness, and brings fire and sword upon the Earth, and sends not Peace to
it, but sets two at variance within, whereby there is much striving in the
Womb, and not rest day nor night, because of the War between the two seeds, out
of which trouble being led, by that which in the Judgment could not stand, so
that getteh ease again, and then man preached peace unto himself, having got
out of some trouble, he then striveth more strongly to keep out of it then he
did before, and labors much to comprehend a resting place to abide in, though
that be not redeemed with Judgment out of Bondage, which thereby should come to
obtain rest and peace for evermore.

And being that the Law and the Prophets (together) are until John, and that
the Law is to judge and cut down that which is above the seed exalted; and that
the Prophecies and Openings from the Testimony of Witness, is to uphold and
preserve under the Judgment, whereby some secret hopes or refreshings come unto
that which at last out of Bondage shall be redeemed; therefore it is a
Temptation which leads forth (on that hand) in a Joy, through the reason,
with great swelling Imaginations in the vain light Mind, out of the fear of
God, not standing in his Counsel, but like the rest of the false Prophets
coming to true Openings, from it run forth, before that through judgment be
brought forth, which should go before, and lead them in God's Wisdom and
Counsel to stand; and such speak great swelling words in a secret pride,
boasting of their Experiences, but are become the untimely Children of the
Mother of Harlots, who with their Mother must be turned back into the Bed of
Torments.

And being the Lord God of Life has given his Son a Light in the Heart, that
man might be led, taught and guided by him out of sin, and gives power to all
them that love, follow and obey him, to overcome their sin, whose light being
in Man a free gift from God, and that by no other Name, Way or Means man can
ever be saved. Therefore that is a Temptation which leads out from that in the
Heart [Which in it is given, there to make an end of Sin] to follow that which
does not make an end of Sin, nor minister Power to them that follow it, to
overcome their sin, so that they cannot receive that which cleanses from all
sin, such have the root and ground in them, from whence sin comes; but the
Root of Jesse, in whom there is no sin, they are only professing and talking of
without them.

And that is a Temptation that leads man to commit any manner of sin
whatsoever, and keeps man from believing in him that makes an end of Sin, and
keeps man in sin, and from Repentance and turning from sin (whilst that of God
in the Conscience is striving with him against sin) persuading him, that he
cannot be free from sin, and to put off the time of true Repentance until Gods
Spirit by the Light in the Heart, has ceased striving, and then such think all
is well, because that which judged and condemned them for the least appearance
of Evil, has ceased striving with them, that so they are now quiet, and not
judged as formerly for what they do, though they do the same things for which
formerly they were judged; but let such assuredly know, That that which was
sin, is sin still, though they (instead of coming through the Law) are gone
back from the Law which did discover it, and come to that state again, which
was before the Law (or a worse) where Death reigns, and Sin is in the World,
though not discovered by the Law to them who have despised the Law, and so
become dead to that which should fulfill the Law, and also dead in that which
does transgress the Law, even so dead in sin, that now feeling the weight and
burden thereof, neither yet feeling any thing of God in them, striving in them
against it; and is not their latter end like to be worse than their beginning?
And are not such as these, who have got a Profession, more hardened in their
Sin, and pleading more strongly for their continuance therein, than the
Publicans, Harlots and Profane?

And that is a Temptation which draws forth the mind to fear, love, serve, obey
or respect any man, or created thing, glory, honor, or whatsoever may be
named, more than God, or to deny obedience to God; for the attaining or
retaining thereof, or to let any of the most glorious Creatures of God fill and
take plnce in the heart, that in it room may not be found for the Power of God
to enter; so that the life, virtue and substance of all things, in which there
is full satisfaction, cannot be received.

And that is a Temptation that leads forth to seek or love the praise of men;
for if that was out of the Faith, which received Honor from men, then that
must needs be of the Devil which would compel Honor to be given to it; that is
it in man of the Devil, which would have the begotten of God, honor and
worship it, which would take the due honor and praise from God, to whom alone
belongs all Dominion, Glory, Honor and Obedience, and Praises forever and
ever.

And that is a Temptation which draws forth the Mind to worship any other God
but he that made all Men of one Blood, and is above all, and through all, and
in you all, who dwells in his People, and what of him may be known, is
manifest within, whom all may feel after and find, whom the World by Wisdom
does not know; who abhors the Sacrifices of them whose Hearts are
Uncircumcised; and is wearied with the Peoples Words, Mat. 2. 17. and grieved
with their Iniquity, who hears not the Prayers of men of Sin, but waits to
be gracious unto such who wait for him in the Light of his Son, who was led as
a Lamb dumb, and is of the Seed of David, who was dumb with silence, and opened
not his Mouth while the Wicked was in place.

But when the wicked thing is removed out of his place, and the humble Seed of
the Shepherd raised up in his Throne upon his Hill of Holiness, having his
Enemies under his Feet, then he speaks with Authority, and not as the Scribes.

Thus man coming into the fear of the Lord, and waiting in the Light of his Son
in the Heart, with it may he see and discern between that which discovers and
condemns Sin, and that which tempts to Sin, out of which that man may be
redeemed (and kept out of Temptations) is this written in love to the Seed,
over which the Beast, the Dog and the Swine do vaunt themselves, who have
nothing to do with this, but only to receive the Cup of Astonishment, which to
the Serpents is to be poured forth, who are not to feed upon this which is
written.

A Direction in the way to that within the Vail, by which Temptations are
overcome.
TRuth is that in which the Power of God does stand, and in the Truth there is
no Lie; and all them who receive Truth from God, in it they receive his power,
whereby they are made his Sons, in his power to stand in obedience to his will,
which is that by which they are sanctified, and by obedience of Faith thereunto
are preserved, keeping in stedfastness by the mighty Power of God, out of that
which does defile, are preserved in that Dominion and place of Holiness, into
which the Harlots (out of the Truth and Power) and all proud Boasters (and such
who are intruding into things they have not seen, and all Murmurers, who
complain for want of Power) do not enter.

Therefore, all People who profess the knowledge of the Truth, and yet have not
received the Power of God, in which no Sin does stand, wait ye all in the Light
to know the Vail rent, and the ground to be removed, from whence the Words
come, which darkens that in which the counsel of God should be received, and
wait to feel Judgment and Condemnation upon the Earthly, that over the Seed
does rule; and keep Judgment, that through the Condemnation that may spring,
which never yet was found: For certainly till there be a coming through the
Ministration of Condemnation, the Pearl is hid under the Earth, and the Earthly
bears rule over it, whereby it still in Bondage lies, and the Creature
sometimes led by a fight of that which it does not possess, holding the Truth
of God in that which is not his Righteousness; for his Righteousness is
revealed by Faith through the power of him that takes away the Sin; and so its
not comprehended in, by that mind which is out of the Covenant. And this know
assuredly, That many may see that which is afar off, and not feel the Life of
what they see; and so are many high Professors in the World, who change from
one Opinion to another, and are all yet but fruitless Trees, which are to be
cut down and rooted up.

And many there are who call him that is the Light, Lord and Master, but to the
Light are not obedient in Self-denial, nor taking up the daily Cross, which is
the Power of God, and crucifies unto the World; and so the first Man of the
World being not crucified nor put off, the new Man is not received; and so
little more is witnessed by many, who profess Truth without the Life, than was
in the time of other Forms: for if the Death be not known, the Resurrection of
the Just received, and the Dead raised, then is all in vain: And this is not
known by any but such who know the Judgments of the Lord set up in the Heart,
and the Cup of Astonishment to the Adulterous Seed, which comes of the will of
the Flesh, and cannot lay down the Life for the Friend.

Wherefore (I say) wait to know the Birth that is Immortal, and feel that born
up which never yet was raised in them, over whom the Vail yet is, that the free
Birth may be known, and the Seed, whom God has appointed the blessing unto,
from under death redeemed, that by the powerful risings thereof, the
understanding may be opened with that which was before Forms were, that to it
you may come, which gives Life unto the Soul, and know a Savior born of the
barren Womb, and a Deliverer brought forth in the place where he has not been
known, and the Plant to spring out of that ground which is yet dry, that it may
be overshadowed with the loveliness of its spreading forth, that a way may be
opened in the Wilderness, and the humble exalted in the Valley, and so come to
learn of that which is yet little and low; and take heed of taking counsel of
the Serpent, whose subtilty will soon lead forth from the Simplicity, neither
cover your selves with any thing before the Righteousness of God (which is
perfect) be received; but love that which comes from the man of Sorrows, who
comes to break the peace of all them who walk not in the Everlasting Way of
Life. Let all them who are out of it, search their Hearts with the Light.

And take heed of that which is high, froward or strong in the Will [for we are
weak] which is not brought to the Cross; for there is the first Birth from the
wrong grounds, which will speak and act that which it lives not in, neither is
able to confirm it in Faithfulness to the Death and Loss of all; for things may
be true in themselves, and that which is out of the Truth may speak of it; yet
such vain Talkers cannot suffer to Death for what they speak.

For that which comes forth first, is strong in the Earthly, and would live
forever, and have the Blessing, and would rule over the meek thing in the
particular; and in others, having a secret desire to be admired, being far
unwilling to take a Servants place; but certainly it is the meek, humble,
suffering Seed (which in many is yet oppressed) that is to last forever, who
through Death comes into the Dominion.

Therefore sink down out of the airy Comprehension and Subtilty, above the
Life, and first come to suffer with that which is meek and low, if ever you
intend with it to reign in that Peace and Life, which from all that without the
Vail is hid; and in silence watch, and be sober, to see him come which saves
the Soul, and clothes it with his own Righteousness, that you be not found
without a Covering of the Spirit, Power and Life, among the foolish Virgins;
for few there be that find the Way of Life, and abide therein.

And I knowing the Terror of the Lord that will certainly come upon all them
who dye out of his Covenant, therefore I Warn all People every where (as the
Lord enlarges me) to wait to feel the powerful Word of Repentance, and with
the Light to make diligent search into the ground and foundation of all
Professions, Words and Actions.

For the Lord will make inquisition for the Blood of the Just, and reward the
Double-minded according to the intents of their hearts, the Gaul whereof will
be rent with the Power of his Might, which will sweep away the refuge of Lies,
and confound, your Divinations in the head of that knowledge above the seed;
and a day of Desolation must come, Sword and Famine must you know, and the
Earth to be removed, and your Heavens shaken, that the poor may come to receive
the glad Tidings of the Gospel, which is the Power of God; for the fat and the
strong are for judgment both within and without, and they are still sent away
empty; but the poor are they which are to be satisfied, not the rich, high,
wise, strong, mighty, prudent Diviners, and Orthodox men, and zealous
Professors, and liscentious Libertines (as they are called) who profess a
Savior to come, and some would have a King to reign hereafter; but they are
not agreed how, nor when, nor where their King shall reign (whom they imagine
shall come) but are found Despisers, not Lovers nor Faithful Followers of him
that is come, the Glory of whose KINGDOM is already shining over the World, and
is established in Righteousness, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who
is our Head, our Lawgiver and our King; and we do not look for another, as the
Drunkards of Ephriam do, who are drunk, but not with Wine, and stagger at
Noonday, and must be dashed one against another, and broken to pieces as the
Potsherds of the Earth, who are looking for a King to come, and know not the
King who is already come, who is the Light, to which they will not bow, though
it in secret does them reprove, and show us plainly of the Father, and lets
them see their Disobedience.

To it now therefore bow and bend, for plainly the Lord God, who is Light, will
not always strive by the Light of his Son in your hearts: And this know, That
as I tender the least honest desires that are begotten in any after the living
Truth of God, yet I am to deal plainly with all, and clear my Conscience of all
who are covered with their own Conceivings, and in Words and Writing to warn
all in the Spirit of Truth and Meekness, as the Lord moves me in faithfulness
to declare against that which yet in any bears rule over the Seed, which by
Judgment must be overturned, and all the Judgments of the Lord are true.

Wherefore, ye that are willing to come out of Temptations, into that where the
foolish Virgins cannot enter, wait in the fear of the Lord to feel his Work
within, whilst the day of Salvation lasts, lest thick Darkness come upon you,
and you be found in the Night, in which none can work; and take heed of a
secret High-mindedness, and prize your day of Visitation more then Life or
Liberty, and take heed of that which would contrive a way to shun the Cross, or
stop the mouth of the Witness; but let the honest Simplicity come to rule in
the measure of it; and take heed of entering in and yielding to Temptations; for
many ways has the Serpent (which is near) to beguile and destroy the Life from
man; which is not overcome, but in the continual fear, through the Cross to the
Will, with the Power of the Light, which is given to lead through all these
things, into the rest which is prepared only for them who are faithful to the
Light.

For this have I not learned nor received from men (the Lord God knows I Lie
not) but through the operation of the mighty Power of God, whose Indignation I
have born, in whose Judgments I rejoice forever, and glorify and praise his
blessed Name, who by it my Wisdom confounded, and suffered me to be sifted and
tempted by the Enemy diverse ways, yet preserved my Life under the shadow of
his Wing, that I might praise and serve him in the Land of the living, and
declare his Wonders among the Sons of men, and let them also see with the Light
the narrow way that they are to come, which in some measure has been declared,
though in that Language which the Wisdom of the World may not understand, and
call it legal, to whom as foolishness it may appear; but my voice may be known
to the Spirit in Prison, whom my Soul travels for in the bowels of my Father's
love.

Given forth for such who say, they see, and yet their Sin remains; and may
be serviceable to such who can hear and understand the things of God, that
those who are yet blind may no longer put Darkness for Light, and Light for
Darkness. H. S.

The Meditations of an humble Heart.
Written only for Friends, who can read it.
To the Undefiled of God, Elect, Chosen and Precious.
ELect, Chosen and Precious, whom God has loved, and does love, and cannot but
love from Everlasting to Everlasting, with an Everlasting Infinite Love; who art
the most delightsom Plant, of most Honorable Renown; renowned with honorable
Dignity forever; the Delight of all the Upright, the Life of all the Virtuous;
the Spouse of all the Undefiled Virgins; the Staff of Abraham's Strength, the
Bread of Jacob's Soul; the Succor of Joseph in time of need; the Mouth of
Moses's Wisdom, the Rock of Israel's Srength, the certain Hiding Place of all
the Troubled, the House of all the former scattered, the Bed of Repose, wherein
the beautified Damsels fill themselves with the solace of most heavenly divine
Delights; whose Beauty surpasses Expressions of words; whose tender Offers
have invited many; whose Love has allured the hearts of Thousands; whose
Pleasant Countenance has prevailed with a numberless Number to love thee
forever; whose pleasant Smiles have gathered unto thee innumerable Doves of the
Wilderness, and thy Virtue has caused the barren desolate to bring forth both
Bud, Blossom and Fruit in abundance; the Breath of thy Nostrils has enlivened
the Dead; the sound of thy Voice has quickened the Weary, and by thy Power has
the barren brought forth in abundance, whereby the Earth has been covered with
thy fruitful Riches; Thou art clothed with Innocence forever; thy dwelling is
hid from all the disobedient Children of men; Thou have bound thy self (to live
out of their sight) with thy Darlings in a stronger Covenant than all outward
Marriages; Thou deckest thy Beloved for thy self, and then thou delightest in
her; Thou preparest thy Spouse for the joy of thy heart, and then love her
because of her Beauty; Thou deckest her with Ornaments of well-refined Gold,
and causest her face to shine; Thou fillest her with Glory within, and causest
her to dwell among the Honorable, and walk with the choicest Virgins in the
Paths of great delight, and she is become the Daughter of the King of Kings;
Thy Goodness does much overcome the hearts of many; thy Wisdom pleases the
Prudent; thy Meekness delights Hundreds; thy Strength upholdeth an infinite
Number, and thy Life nourishes Thousands; thou renewest the strength of the
Faint; thou turnest the shadow of Death into a Morning; thou keep thy Flock
under the shadow of thy Wing, and nourishest them with the choicest Food; thou
guidest them with the hand of thy Power, and succourest them at every needful
time, and thou relievest their greatest wants: The Consideration of thee (which
brings thy Goodness into remembrance) even fills the hearts of the Flock of
thy Fold, and thou art He who only satisfies them forever.

Oh! where wast thou in the day of Adversity? and where was thy dwelling in the
time of the Night? Where did thou hide thy self in the day of Transgression?
and to what place did thou confine thy self when Iniquity ruled? and what was
thy state in the time of man's Sin? Ah! how wast thou then as a slain Lamb, and
as a meek Prince deprived of his Kingdom and Government? How wast thou, as a
true Heir deprived of his Right, and as an only Son from the Father's House,
and found not wherein to rest thy head? How wast thou grieved in that day, and
how wast thou wounded by thy pretended Friends? How was thy Glory defamed, and
thy Honor laid aside? How was thy Beauty marred, and thy Wisdom bound up as in
an obscure place? How did Darkness compass about thy dwelling? How was thy
Strength put by, and thy Comeliness, as if it had not been? Wast thou not as in
a Grave in the midst of all the Wicked? And wast not thou taken in their Pits,
and lay long slain in the streets of the Sodomites, and exiled as the greatest
Captives.

Oh! where did thou hide thy self when the Dragon cast forth his flood, when
the Waves swelled, and when the Land was fruitless, when the Birth failed in
the Womb, when the Seed came not to Maturity; when the blade was killed in the
Spring, when the sharp nipping Frost cut down the head of the tender Herb; when
the Winter nights were long; when the boistrous Storms were many; when the
whole Earth was covered with thick Darkness; when the Heavens were as Brass;
when the Rain descended not; when the distilling Dews came not down; when the
Blossom withered in the time of Drough; when the Path to dwell in was not
known; when the Stars shone not; when all the Lights of Heaven were eclipsed;
when the Voice of the Shepherd was not known; when the Eye of the Traveller was
dim; when none could direct him in his Way, nor supply him with Food for his
Journey, nor Water in his greatest thirst, nor succor him in the time of the
Storm; when he knew not the end of his Journey, neither perceived the way to
go, nor ever could have rest till he came there; when the feet of the Virgin
stuck in the Mire, and the Young man failed of strength; when no way was known
but a Wilderness; when no succor was found but a Forest of most fearful
devouring Beasts; when the Scorpions did bite in the daytime; when the Lion
did roar in the night; when the Dragon was near to devour; when the Wolf yelled
for his Prey; when the Foxes spoiled the tender Grapes; when the brazen-Serpent
could not be seen; when thy Lambs cried as in the day of forgetfulness; when
the Young lamented the birth for want of the food; when thy Damsels fainted
with thirst; when Pity was not to be found amongst men; when Mercy could not be
seen in Heaven, neither would the Earth open her mouth and swallow up, to end
the state of Misery; when the day of Jacob's Trouble was as in a Whirlwind, or
as a combustious Thunder in the midst of heat and cold, which none does know
but the man that has seen it; who in the bitterness of his soul has long
traveled as a Woman in her sore pangs of Sorrow, through the Warfare, in the
grievous troublesome day of Distress?

O! how wast thou then as a Prisoner in the Pit, and where was thy place to be
found, or who could search out thy dweling? O! Thou now well-known to be the
much more than the threefould Chiefest of ten Thousand hundred Thousand, and of
Thousands of Thousands! to whom my Soul's love can never be fully expressed.

Arise now thou meek One of Wisdom, spoke forth thy self in thy own Virtue; let
thy Spouse hear thy Voice and rejoice in thee for evermore, whom thou have
fitted for thy self, a chaste comely Virgin, to shine forth thy Glory in
forever: for thy Beauty has often filled my heart with precious Oil, and the
Desire of Thee has drawn me out of my self; my lips at first have stammered at
thy presence, but thou have healed the wounded heart; Thou art the chiefest of
all Delights, and happy are all them that know thee.

To the Espoused Virgin.
ARise out of the dust, awake as in the days of old; let thine Eye be more
bright with the Light of the Day than in the Ages past; adorn thy self with
Comeliness, deck thee with Ornaments, prepare thee with sweet Ointments; put on
Beauty as a Beam of the Morning, shine forth as the fairness of the Sun; enrobe
thee with Righteousness, as with a Garment, and deck thy self with precious
Jewels as the choicest Bride; grow up as the tender Plant, spring forth as the
Lilly; blossom as the Rose, be fruitful as the Vine; grow up as the Cedar;
spread as the Vine-branches; let Salvation be the Wall on which thou layest
hold; come forth as the increasing Herbs of the field, with many stems from one
Root, and many branches on every stem, and many blossoms on every branch, and
(much more) many seeds of fruitful increase under or after every blossom, that
the Sower may be made glad with the abundance of the increase thereof; that the
good Husbandman may rejoice in his labor, that the Planter may delight in the
works of his hands.

Let thy Fruit be as of an Apple Tree, whose Boughs therewith do bend; let the
taste thereof be as sweet as the Honey, and the smell thereof as the sweet
Odor; let thy Boldness appear as the Morning, and thy Meekness as the Bay Tree
that is always green; be more fruitful than Labanon; let no Female that God
has made bring forth the fruit of her Womb more often than thee; in labor be
more diligent than the Ant; in multiplying, bring forth more often than the
chiefest of the Conies, though she make her Nest in the Rock: In fragrant
smell, let not the sweetest Flower or Ointment surpass thee; in Beauty, let
nothing exceed thee; in Meekness, come not short of Sarah; in Wisdom and
Prudence, let neither Abigail, Ruth, Easther nor Mary excel thee; receive thy
beloved as the choicest of Princes, and embrace him in the Arms of
Righteousness forever; Bring forth according to his Nature, and let thy
increase be of his own Image; keep clean thy Garments, let not thy Beauty be
spoiled; defile not thy breath with the Garlic of Egypt, nor thy taste with
the Grapes of Sodom, drink not any thing down which may defile the savor of
thy Breath, that may offend thy Prince, neither let any Covering remain upon
thee, which may cause him the less to love thee; let all thy ways be pleasant
to Him, and all thy Robes delightsom in his Eye; let thy foot-steeps be ordered
as in the sight of the King, and let thy words be grave and sound, which may
not offend Him, that his love may both continue and increase toward thee, and
he delight in thee, and rejoice over thee, and the smiles of His Countenance
fully gratify thee for all the f^owns of thy (former) now forsaken Lovers;
that thy daily delight may be in Him forever, and flourish under his Arm as the
beautiful Rose of Sharon, with its blossom of many doubles, and remain fruitful
as the Olive Tree forever.

So will the King delight in thy beautiful Excellency, and so shall the Prince
be satisfied with thy fruitful Virtue; thy Arm shall gather thee Riches, and
thy Faithfulness shall give thee strength; thy Boughs shall reach over the
Earth, thy spreading shall be over the Sea, and thy Fruit shall shine affar
off, thy Root shall remain firm and steadfast; thy Branches shall enlarge
themselves, and the weak shall lay hold on thy Skirts; thy Leaves shall be
pleasant to many, and thy Sap shall ever spring up from the Root; thou shall
never be forsaken in the troublesome Night, nor removed with the greatest Storm,
nor overturned with Wind or Sea, but shall be kept from the Darkness which thou
have seen.

Hereby let all the Barren hear the Voice of the fruitful Vine, and she that
sat in the desolate place come to see the Light of the Morning; and let the
Spouse be prepared, and the Virgin adorned; and let the Voice of Meekness be
heard in the solitary place, and Life spring forth as the Noonday, that the
Prisoner may come out of the Pit to sit in his Throne forever, and the Captive
from Exile to the enlargedness of Dominion; that the Bounds may be broken, and
the boundless known where no limit is.

Something how the Marriage of the Undefiled Lamb, and the Virgin came at first
to be.
THe slain thing had God's Power in it, even in that state; and when it became
as a Servant, because of man's Sin, in the great service of love to help man
out of Sin, who has Power both to serve and to rule; both to lay down his
Life, and to take it up again; who in himself is still the same, and his Power
is exercised in his Suffering as well as in his Ruling; or, as when He
exercises his Power in Ruling: And He that was dead is alive, and he has
taken unto him his great Power and does reign over the Creature, and the Sin
(having done it away) with the same Power, whereby before he came so to serve
man under the Sin, as to help him from under it, and so to bring man with
himself in his Power, as it suffered by the Sin, out of the Sin, and out of
that Power which captivated under, or into the committing of Sin, and so to the
end of it, with Christ over it to live and reign forever, as it is received in
that way, manner and operation, which at first it does come and show forth it
self in the Power of its sufferings, whose Power and Virtue therein at first is
known. And so, such who know Him in his suffering-state, He permits, chooses
and electeth to live and reign with him in his Ruling-state.

And so he that has power to Reign, has power to Suffer, and so to Suffer
that he may Reign, the exercise of whose power in his Suffering is in order to
his Reigning, and such as feel, know and receive his Power, first enabling them
with him to suffer, they with the same are brought to the end of sin and
sinning, by which the suffering came upon the Just for the Unjust, and as man
to this is joined in his sufferings, its Power works man's Redemption (and so
not of man) or brings man back from under that power which held in the
Transgression and Separation from the Bridegroom of the Soul, and takes away
that which captivates it, and so breaks the Wall which stood between the
desired Liberty and the present Bondage, and so brings the true and lasting
Peace; and so both receive each other, and are made one in each other (and not
otherwise) It is certainly so.

And that man which truly suffered with it, reigns with it, who was joined to
it in its suffering, till it came to reign, and then to submit unto it and
serve it, in its Motions, Leadings, Rulings and Governings in the power of its
Love, which wins the heart so to do, as the chaste Wife to the Husband, so
with it, in the Power of it, man comes to reign over that which was both
contrary to it, and to the upright hearted man, until all its Enemies are put
under it, and so under the man that is one with it, and whose Life is in it,
being truly joined to it of the Lord (then not to be put asunder) and so loving
of it, and in all things submitting to it, more than the true chaste Virgin to
the Husband, living in the Power, and the Power living in man, and so both
becoming one in Sufferings, one in Trials, one in Tribulations, one in
Afflictions, one in Joy, one in Peace, one in Liberty, one in Captivity, one in
Riches, one in Poverty: And so truly one, partaking with each other, in all
states unseparable, may well in some measure be termed, The Marriage of the
Lamb which is come (and more of it may be known) and the Virgin being thus and
more fully espoused, to the undefiled, unspotted of God, they are thus far made
one, and she becomes the Daughter of the Husbands Father, the King of Kings, or
the Adopted Child of God.

And thus the undefiled One of God and the Virgin of Sion, becomes one in the
unspeakable Unity, which Unity being felt, both as one, (preceive me) and my
Lines are understood, and my Words received in Love.

And this is written and sent forth among all Friends, who desire to hear of
me, and who have known me in the invisible Truth, and such to whom the Lord
has made me serviceable in the precious things of the Kingdom of God, which is
of Peace and Righteousness, where my Rest is; that hereby they may hear from
me, and know that I remain in the labor of the Gospel (which is very great)
and in the Fellowship of the Saints:

Your Brother in the unexpressible Love of the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior,
Humphery Smith.
From Cogshall in Essex (in which parts very many of late have received the
precious Truth) the 12th of the 5th Month, 1661.
This is to all dear Friends who keep faithful in their measures to the end.
My dear Friends,
THe Father is well pleased in him who is meek and lowly in the heart, and in
Obedience unto him, through the leadings of his Spirit of Power, in which the
Father's love is manifest, which leads in the low Ground, where the safe Way of
everlasting Peace is known, where all things are quiet and still, where the
small still Voice is heard, whereby the dead come to live in the Powerful Life
of the Fathers Love, which compasses about the seed, as a Wall of everlasting
Defense, whereby there is boldness, and courage comes in, to Jacob the worm,
that its then able to stand, in that everlasting strength, which is made
perfect in weakness, and to the weak ^^ only to be known, that the weak then
may say, I am strong, feeling strength ministered forth from that which is
begotten of the Father, which never was comprehended by the earthly Wisdom,
which is all scattered as the smoke before the Wind, when he arises that was
laid in the Earth, who has long been as a Servant, and is now to be served,
that he may be Lord over all, who is a Man of Sorrows, and leads through the
suffering state, that by the Obedience of Faith, through the Power of the Cross
which crucifies, and brings to the death that which is to dye, that the Vail
may be rent, and the way into the holiest of all made manisest, and that
received in the new ground, which abides forever, even that which comfort
the weary Soul, and satisfies the longing Spirit, and replenish^th the dry and
barren Land with the Rivers of the Valley and the springs of the Desert, that
the meek in the Earth may rejoice forever, and through the Earth may grow as a
Lilly in Summer.

For painly its the poor that receive the Gospel, and the meek of the Earth
that shall in her it Substance, and it is the thing that is low that will last
forever, and that shall be set on the Throne, and he that is low shall never
fall, neither shall his Footsteps at all be moved; he leads the creature in the
Father's fear, and guides the Tongue in Wisdom, and its him alone that all are
to wait for, to receive and continue in, even him that is acquainted with
Grief, who never opens his Mouth in perverseness, but speaks Life in Wisdom,
through the Power of the Fathers Love, which overpowers the Soul as an
overflowing River of Oil, which makes all well, and heals the grieved Spirit,
which none ever comes to find, but such who alone walk with him who humbled
himself to the Death of the Cross, and became as a Servant, though he was Lord
over all, in him there is safety; for he is the Rock, and the sure
hiding place, even out of the sight of the World, and from the Tempters power;
for the Devil has nothing in him who is meek and low, in whose mouth there is
found no guile; and this is he that has been long set at naught, whose tenders
of Love constrain Obedience to himself, because of the beauty that is in him,
which from them is hid, over whom the Vail is, through which they cannot see
the Comeliness of his Love.

I rest in the Fathers will, your Souls Friend, H. S.

FRiends, the Lord is with us, and the God of Heaven is on our side, and the
Lord is our Defense, who has spoken Life and Peace to my Soul; behold, he will
be with us forever, and the holy Arm of his precious dreadful strength shall no
Nation under Heaven prevail against; dwell all in the Power of God, and the
blessing of the God of Heaven will be upon you all forever.

THe Spirit of the Lord came upon Saul, and he then Prophesied; but after, for
his disobedience he lost the Kingdom, and was afraid of the shame before the
People; and the Kingdom is rent from such who disobey the Lord, though they
were among the Prophets, like Saul, who afterward went to the Witch: And the
Witchcraft is near to all such as stand not in the Counsel of God, to cause the
People to hear his Word, and not their own, whose Word feeds not the flesh
above the seed, but is as a Hammer to break the Rocks in pieces, and it kills
and makes alive, and opens a way through the Earth, for the Prisoner of Hope to
come forth.

And the Spirit came upon Balaam, who was reproved by the dumb Ass, that he was
exalted above, and resisted, and he durst not go beyond the Word of the Lord,
he durst not go beyond that which was quick and powerful in the heart, nor
overreach it, to do more or less, for the gaining of half a Kingdom in the
Earthly. And such as exceed Balaam therein, may expect to be cut down also by
the true seed, as he was, and so to fall among the rest of the Enemies of the
Israel of God, who is dreadful in Power.

And the Spirit came upon Jephthah, who after offered his own Daughter for a
Sacrifice; and the Spirit came upon Sampson, and yet he not standing in wisdom,
was bettrayed of his strength by a Daughter of the Philistines, who also
afterward put out his eyes: And so the Spirit may come up in some, and yet
afterward they lose that with which they should see; and some there are that
use their tongues as in the Name of the Lord, upon whom the Spirit never came
(mark that.)

And Caiphas the High Priest prophesied, and he spoke not of himself, and yet
he was an enemy to Christ the Power of God, and such as are got up high, like
high Priests, above the measure of the Man of sorrows, speak from self or
flesh, and are in that by which he that is the Light does suffer, and the power
is resisted, and the seed in others oppressed, and they not brought to the
Living Minister within the vail, that abides a Priest forever, but are in that
which will dye. And many might be named, upon whom the Spirit came. And Judas
also had obtained part of the Ministry.

^ut now consider; the Spirit rests upon the branch of the Root, even the
seed it self; for the Spirit came upon many, but it rested and relieth upon the
se ed only, even the Spirit of Wisdom and Understan^ing, and counsel and might,
and knowledge, and of the sear of the Lord, in the fear of the Lord which is a
fountain of Life, which Life all are to feel, and not be kept from by words
without it, but to feel that which comes from it and favor that, that Jacobs
Tent all; may know, which who so dwell in, are blessed, against whom there is
no enchantment, and where the Witchcraft cannot enter, which leads from the
strait and narrow way, to the Spirit and Life, into a liberty to that which is
fleshly, where that is kept alive, which the word in the heart, as a hammer and
a sword, should have broken and cut down; for Paul was grieved with such, who
at first could almost have plucked out their own eyes for him, and after sought
occasion against him, and themselves to be made perfect in the flesh, and all
flesh as grass, is to be cut down with the Sword of the Lamb, and where the
flesh is above, the Spirit suffers by it, and the vail is thickened, which keeps
from the Unity, and out of the Life and Power of God.

H. S.

THe Lord God of Heaven preserve all every where in the Love, Long-suffering,
Forbearance, Meekness and Gentelness, out of the Strife or Self-seeking; for
suerly Woe will come upon that Spirit wherever the Lord finds it, and even the
Lord knows the desires of my heart in true Simplicity has been, That his
Righteous Judgments might pass betimes upon every appear ance thereof in my
self, and all others; and I believe that God will never prosper it in any;
therefore my Exhortation in the Everlasting Love of the God of Heaven is, That
you all every where live in true Brotherly Love, and remember Joseph's Advice
to his Brethren, That they fall not out by the way. The heavenly God of Power,
and Life, and Virtue keep ye out of all this, in the Life of Wisdom and
Meekness, where Strife shall never inhabit, nor Death enter within the walls of
Zion, in which their dwellings are, who keep themselves undefiled, and remain
in the fear of God, to whom I commit you all, and to the Power of the Word of
his saving Grace, praying to the Lord for you, that evermore you may continue
in the Love of Christ.

Your Friend and Brother, Humphry Smith.

To the meek and open hearted Lambs and Flock of Heaven, in meekness of Love,
with Greetings of Peace, from the Seat of Infinite. Mercy. ^endred unto, and
sent to be read among them all, who live in the humble State.
THere was a time of Blackness and Darkness, which covered all flesh, and the
Guilt of Sin was upon all Consciences; and Hardness of Heart possessed every
Vessel, and the Minds of all was astray from God, and their Souls in the bonds
of Iniquity, in the day when none was able to deliver his brother; O! who can
utter the distress and the Languishing state, which the Sheep then scattered
were in? O! the secret Groans of the Outcasts of Israel, which God has now
gathered! Why should it be forgotten? Who could pluck their Feet then out of
the Snare, or deliver their Souls from Death, had not the Lord in mercy looked
down from Heaven? surely many had sunk in the Pit of Misery, and never come to
see the Light of the Morning, for the which the Bowels of the humble yearned in
secret, and the Sights were deep in the Solitary Place.

And then did the Lord in the Bowels of his Mercy let open his Ear, and for his
own Names-sake had regard unto the Complaint of the poor and needy, and he
caused Light to break out of Darkness, and Truth to spring from its secret
hidden place, and Life to grow up in the midst of Death, and to break through
the Powers of Darkness; and the Lord in his Power gave utterance to his
Servants and Messengers, and then were the words of his Truth as Food to the
Hungry, and with much gladness of Heart was the sound of the Way of Life by
many received; then did Love begin to arise in the Heart, and a tenderness in
the Bowels, and a willingness in the Mind; and then was a Joy, like the Joy of
Harvest, among the People, and many began to invite one another, saying, Come,
and we will return to the Lord, and we will resolve to walk in his Paths
forever; then was the Voice of Thanksgiving among the People, and the ways of
the Lord became more delightsom than Gold, and the footsteps of Righteousness
more pleasant than all the Treasure in the world. O! it even melts the heart to
remember the days that are past, and to consider the infinite Goodness of him
that is the God of the Poor and Needy! Then were many made willing to run and
to leave their filthy Garments behind them, even before they well knew how to
do it: O! how loathsome was Sin in that day? and how wearisom was the Land of
Darkness? and how desirable, even beyond expression was the unsatisfied
thirsting Soul after the Presence of God? Could the Treasure of the Earth then
have given Peace? or, could Silver have satisfied the hungry heart? Or, could
the choicest Love of the most nearest Relations have quenched the thirst of the
parched ground? Surely none but the Lord was then desired; yea, other Lovers
became as loathsome, and other Delights became burthensom to the weary
Travelers, and all Vanities began to vanish as a Vapor of Smoke, and the Wind
of Heaven was daily a scattering the chaff, and the barren Womb mourned for the
quickening Life of God, who had put it into the hearts of his long afflicted
scattered Ones, to follow him in the Ways of Truth and Equity; and then did the
Lord visit such again and again in his Loving Kindness, by his Servants, whose
Living Words of Truth, through them, did yet more open the Understandings and
Hearts, and satisfy the judgments of the humble People, in the knowledge of
the way to Rest and Peace, in leaving the evil and choosing the good, and to
walk and come to live therein forever.

And then came the time of Trial and Exercise, when the Cross must be taken up
to the Worlds ways, and all foolish Vanities left behind, and the needless
words no longer used, nor that Religion continued any longer in, which made
nothing perfect: Then did the People gaze and wonder, and the Relations and the
Acquaintance stood like as from David afar off; and then was every ones
greatest Enemy (with the Light) found in his own House; then did the Tribes of
the Earth mourn; then did the Dragon stretch forth his Power; then did the
Doubtings, and Fears, and Thoughts, and Unbelief come roling in like Floods; O
the straights that many then were in, even seeming greater than any before, and
none but the Lord could deliver, so that then the Cries were doubled, and the
secret Groans came on afresh again, and the greater the Cries of such were, the
more they prevailed with him that was to help, but with his Rod he forced them
to submit unto his Will, by departing out of that which had caused him to frown
upon them, and by leaving that which had polluted their Dwelling, and as they
began to obey him therein, so he began to let forth the smiles of his Favor
toward them, and when they offended again, he chastized them fore, and
scourged them for their Negligence, and corrected them because they forgot
their Obedience to his will; and as thereby they drew near unto him, he eased
the stroke of his Justice, and let them taste of his Mercy, and sometimes
invited them with love, as a Father draws the Child. And thus he left not
working with them, and in them by his own secret Wisdom and Power, until he had
brought them to be after the desire of his Heart, that he might delight in them
forever, and that they might never more be scattered upon the barren Hills, nor
yet the dark Mountains.

And as Obedience, in Truth and Innocence, was willingly yielded to the Lord,
Peace began to take hold, and Satisfaction got some entrance, and a little
secret hope there was, which became as an Anchor to the Soul, against the
Stormy time, and also in the midst thereof; and as Inniquity was departed from,
so there came into the humble Heart some satisfaction from God, and some
stability in his way of Righteousness, and then refreshings of Life attended
the heart in the Morning, and the Water which renews the Thirsty, began to
open it self in the midst of a barren Land; and then nothing was more desired
than the living upon that Food, with which the God of Heaven does nourish only
his Children; which he freely gave and brought down, even near to the Tents of
Israel, and he caused them to know his Statutes and his Judgments, and he put
his perfect Law in the midst of them, and his Mercy seat within the Vail, that
they might ask Counsel at the living Oracle; and he gave them his Spirit, which
all the circumcised of Heart do rightly know to be the chiefest good; and to
this end did he bestow that most precious Gift upon them, and gave that Spirit
of Life into them, even to guide, counsel and direct, inform, instruct,
reprove, defend and succor them, and nourish their Souls for evermore. And so,
he set before them the way in which they should walk with him, wherein he would
be their Father, and the Rock of their strength, and made known unto them the
secret Mysteries of his heavenly blessed Will, which had been long concealed,
and does yet so remain from the Disobedient, and covered from the Children of
men.

And when even the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob had done all this, and much
more for you, O ye now well beloved Friends! then did he begin to try your
patience, and to exercise yo^, yet further to prove you, and to make known unto
you even more of that which had long been in the heart; and then he suffered a
calm to come over you, and much quietness there was with many; and then did the
Enemy begin to assay again to bring into Carelessness, and present a spirit of
slumber, with dullness and negligence attending, and then the Seed was again
burdened, therewith and the Upright hearted durst not give way thereunto,
before whose Eyes the pure heavenly fear still remains; surely it were almost
endless to relate the sundry Trials and States which have been known among the
flock of Jacob; Who could have believed, that the strong should have been so
tempted as they were, and the mighty so assaulted diverse ways, as they have
been, and yet that the weakest, who continued in the Grace, which teaches to
deny Ungodliness, should stand and remain? And how wonderfully has the Lord
preserved his whole flock unto this day? even so, that with true gladness of
Heart in living Praises, it might truly be said, That no Weapon formed against
Gods Israel has to this day yet ever prospered, though no man has appeared,
either in Field or Court on their behalf, nor visible hand appeared for the
defense of the flock of Heaven, O! where is that Lamb of the fold, who now
stands in the Covenant of Redemption, that cannot breath forth the Praises of
God, in the heartbreaking Power of his Love, and the sensible feeling of his
tender unspeakable Mercies: Behold, O friends! the goodness of God is
unutterable, yea, I have not words to express it, and such that feel it, may
taste of it, and drink of the fullness thereof, beyond the narrowness of my
broken speech; and let such draw near unto me, and let lose that which binds
and closes up in the Bowels, that we may meet at the entrance of Wi^dom's
Gate, and live one with another, and one in another, so as the World did never
^now, neither in their nature shall eve^ understand; for my heart is filled
with Love, and my dweling is enlarged with bou^dless Borders of Peace, and my
Life streams forth in meekness: Behold! there is none can stop it, where the
seed springs up as a Lilly, and where the dawning of the day is witnessed,
where undefiled Love, which cannot think Evil, has its resting place, and
where the true simplicity of meekness remains. Even there my Lines are read, my
Words are heard, my Mind is Known, my Language understood, my Love received,
and even my Life takes entrance; What shall I say? I am with, near, or in the
midst of a^ the Innocent Lambs, by the virtue of that Power and invi^^ble
Spirit which fills all in all, and in silence with you could ^ long rest,
where the World should neither know, nor yet perceive me, and the same Bread
which I receive in the invisible Power, and break unto, or disperce among the
Lambs of God, who can feed upon no other; Even so, the same is it which my Soul
at present does live; yea, behold I live, who once was dead, and my Life is hid
among the rest, with Christ in him, from whence the heavenly Food, and the
Souls-saving and hearts-satisfying Power does come.

And this is to stir up your Minds, and to put you in remembrance of the Lords
dealing with you, and his large Lovingkindness toward you, and his effectual
work of Love in you, that you may never forget him, nor be unmindful of his
fatherly Pity toward us all, when we were all in our low estate; and that you
may feel the Revivings of his virtue, and the Inlivenings of his power, and the
quicknings of his Spirit, That you may grow therein, and wax fruitful to God,
and come to be seated and established in the Land of Life, blessed from Heaven,
with much more fruitful increase than the Land of Goshan; That the fruit of
Lebanon may be known, and the Rose of Sharon, and your selves as the Cedars
that are full of Sap; and your Life as the Vine that never wants Nourishment,
whose Fruit abounds to the glading of the Vine-Dresser, that the Lord may
rejoice over his Heritage, and delight himself in the midst of Zion, and be
glorified in his People, and admired of all them that believe.

THe Lord God of Heaven preserve all every where, in the Love, Long-suffering,
Forbearance, Meekness, Gentleness, out of the Strife or Self-seeking; for
surely Woe will come upon that Spirit wherever the Lord finds it, and even the
Lord knows the desires of my Heart in true simplicity has been, That his
righteous Judgments might pass betimes upon every appearance thereof in my
self; Neither do I believe, that God will ever prosper it in any, nor any with
it; Therefore, my Exhortation in the Everlasting Love of the God of Heaven is,
That you all every where live in true Brotherly Love, and remember Joseph's
advice to his Brethren, That they fall not out by the way: The Heavenly God of
Power, and Life, and Virtue keep you out of all this, in the Life of Wisdom and
Meekness, where Strife shall never inhabit, nor Death enter within the Walls of
Zion, in which their dwelling is, who keep themselves undefill'd, and remain in
the fear of God, to whom I commit you all, and to the Power of the Word of his
saving Grace, praying to the Lord for you, That evermore you may continue in
the Love of Christ. From the feeling and refreshing whereof in the heart, this
is written unto you by him that in the Truth can serve the least of you, being
your Friend,

Humphry Smith.

ANd Friends, this is a time of quietness and stillness, or a time for you so
to be, and there has been a large time of gathering, and for convincing; and
now the Lord is proving and trying them that are gathered; And after this time,
blessed and thrice happy shall they be, that are found faithful in it, and
worthy to be Crowned with Heavenly Honor, and to be further employed in Gods
service, and to remain as Pillars among the Flock of Heaven, and as Lights to
invite others home to the dwelling of God. And, now should all Friends be kept
in Wisdom, and take heed what words they use among men, or concerning any men,
though they do contrive against us: Had the Lord left us where they are, and
set them where he has placed us, then might we have been this day as ignorant
of the Way of Peace toward Enemies, and of the Path of Innocence and
Righteousness, as they now are, but the Lord has showed us Mercy; And I say,
the God of Heaven forgive them and defend us; And all that dwell in this, may
come at last to see a time of greater Gathering, than ever yet was: Oh! my Pen
cannot write it. And if all were quiet in their own measures, and little at all
were moved in that measure, either to write, print or speak at this time,
waiting singly upon God; Oh! he would plead for us, and he alone would help us,
and keep us, as in his Arms, until the Indignation were over-past. And this I
write, that you might know of my continual confidence in the Lord, if he had or
did not at this time, raise up, or make use of any of us to help him, or to be
workers together with him: But a Remnant he has, whose hearts he enlarges
with prayer, and some of them with strong inward desires and groans, and some
with utterance to declare the good will of God unto others, in your Assemblies,
and some steadfastly to believe in God, that he will never leave us, and all
this ascends up before the Lord even as one sacrifice. And he that has heard
and had mercy on us when we were not his People, and turned not back our
complaints in that day; O! how shall he now forget us, now we are his people,
and are purchased unto him with a Ransom more precious than all the Gold in the
World? Who is it among all the flock of God, but have already had much
experience of his Love, good Will and Mercy? And wherefore then should any of
the Sons or Daughters of Zion, suppose, that God will ever forsake or leave
them in distress? I even say, doubtless and certainly it will not be so, but
the Lord will stand by us; and the God of the whole Earth will go before us,
and the wonderful, dreadful, powerful Presence of the most High will be with
us, over us, among us, and in us, for evermore, and we shall certainly be
preserved by his Power.

And by this (my tenders of Love in these Lines) all the dear an^ humble
hearted Friends of Christ may hear from me, and understand, that something of
the virtue of the Vine, is, and remains in me, and if the will of God should
be so, that my Body suffer in this close unsavory Prison at Winchester, many
Months or several Years longer, yet shall the Lord be my God forever, and my
Rest unto the end of Troubles, and in silence and secret, shall and does my
Heart and Soul pour forth Intercession to the Throne of Power, in the behalf of
his own Truth and People, and for every feeble Plant which God has planted.

And when I have put you in mind, that you ought not to forsake the Assembling
of your selves together, I leave you to God at present.

H. S.

ANd you should all take heed of that which would lead you up an easier way
than by the Light that condemns sin, and terrifies and troubles you; for by it
does God speak, and in it calls for Repentance, and in it strives with you, and
many more so strongly, that they cannot rest night nor day, being not yet
reconciled to it; but this consider, that this will not always strive with
you; therefore while the Light is, and is not put out, if you will hear his
Voice, by whom God speaks peace, that Peace you might enjoy forever; then take
heed of that by which a hardness comes upon the Heart, and a Vail so thick with
unbelief, that the true Mourning is done away, that there cannot be then a
secret Crying unto the Lord for help and deliverance, in the true brokeness of
Heart, which opens to God, with Bowels of Love and Tears, whereby Gods Mercy
is felt; but a hardness upon the heart, and a wrong thing ask for Peace, in the
unbelief, from that, which darkneth: Take heed of this thing. And this know
assuredly, that when Trouble comes in the inward parts, and the rumor of War
is heard between the two Nations, Jacob and Esau, both in the Womb, and the
Light condemning in the heart, which has been fleshly, and the Witness of God
awakning the Conscience, that then if there be not a Brokeness thereby, and a
Mollifying of the Heart, and a humbling of the lofty part, then will Hardness
take place, and Rebellion prevail with thee against the Light. Therefore in its
season let these things have entrance in you, and come to that which can
receive it in love, faithfulness and plainess, as it is written.

H. S.

The Cause of the long Afflicted and sore Oppressed; sent forth (in brief) from
Wincheste^ Prison, b^i^g a Copy of the Mittimus, wh^^e^y H^mphry Smith was
again committed (in o^th pace of his former lon^ suffering, in the same
straight unsavory Prison) wi^h his Answer (which was then sent b^ck thereunto;
As likewise a sho^t Relation from the rest of them called Quakers there.
The Mittimus.
To the Keeper of his Majesty's Goal at Winton, or to his sufficient Deputy,
Greeting.
YOu shall herewithal receive the Body of Humphry Southton
Smith, who was taken at unlawful Meetings at Alton, being a Ringleader, and
one of the chief of the Quakers, who travelleth the Country to seduce the
People, and disturb his Majesty's Peace, contrary to the Law in that behalf
made and provided These are therefore, in his Majesty's Name, to will and
require you forthwith, that you receive the Body of him, the said Humphry
Smith, into your Custody, and him to detain in your said Goal, until he shall
be delivered from thence by due order of Law. Whereof fail you not, at your
peril: Given under our Hands and Seals at Alton, the 14th day of October, in
the thirteenth year of his Majesty's Reign, Anno 1661. John Norton, Humphry
Bennit.


The Answer.
THe Jews (who denied him that said, I am the Light) laid hands on Paul, crying
out, Help, men of Israel; this is the man that teaches every where against the
Law, Acts 21. 28. And the Jewish Christians (who denied the Light) laid hands
on Humphry Smith, and in the Mittimus say, He was at an unlawful Meeting. And
so, these called Christians say, Our Meetings are Unlawful, or against the Law.
And just so it was said of Paul, That his teaching was against the Law. Again,
John Norton and Humphry Bennit say, That Humphry Smith was a Ringleader:
Likewise, Turtullous said, That Paul was a Ringleader, Acts 24. Again, Humphry
Smith is accused for one of the chief of the Quak^rs, and for traveling the
Country to seduce the People: And in the same manner Paul was accused for a
mover of Sedition among all the Jews throughout the World, Acts 24. 5. (and if
so, then Paul was a greater Traveller than Humphry Smith) And as Humphry Smith
is here accused for seducing the people; so Paul was accused for setting forth
of strange Gods, and for preaching new Doctrine, Acts 17. 18. And again, Haman
accused the Lords People, That they kept not the Kings Laws: And these men
accuse us, that we disturb the Peace, contrary to the Kings Laws. And the
Rulers accused Paul for teaching things that were not Lawful: And these accuse
Humphry Smith, That he did that which was contrary to the Law, which they say,
is made and provided, which is as much as if they had said, We have a Law, just
like their Fathers, who (crucified Christ and) said, We have a Law, and by our
Law he ought to dye: And so, these who have Envy (which is Murder) in their
hearts say, We have a Law made and provided, and by the force thereof Humphry
Smith (who is a member of Christ) must be Imprisoned (his Body, [ Mark] not his
Soul, then his Soul may be at liberty.) And them Magistrates cast Paul into
Prison: And so these did by H. Smith. And they charged the Jailer, To keep Paul
safely, Acts 16. 12. And these charge or require the Jailer in no less than his
Majesty's Name, and at his own Peril, to receive and detain the Body of Humphry
Smith in his said Goal, until he shall be delivered by due Order of Law.

And in this their acting and writing, they themselves have compared Humphry
Smith with Paul (and others of Gods people) And themselves with Paul's
Persecutors, and But now they have above a year together, contrary to Law,
deprived me, of the benefit of all their Law and Liberty.
other such Rulers, who accused and Imprison Gods people formerly, who
pretended a Law then as these do now: And so, here is still much Law spoken of,
but little Mercy, and less Justice or Equity either among them or these: And
thus we are daily brought before Magistrates, and cast into Prison, where the
Members of Christ have been sick, and some have dyed too; whom these called
Christian Magistrates never visited: And thus in pretense of a Law does Christ's
Members suffer by these now, as he himself did by those then, who said, We have
a Law, and by our Law he ought to dye.

And hereby all People may plainly perceive (who are not wilfully blind) that
here is not one thing charged against H. Smith, but what has been Charged
against Gods Servants in the days of old: And all persons may easily see, that
Humphry Smith is not any otherwise accused than the Members of Christ have
already been. And all the Rulers themselves may hereby know, that in all this,
there is not one word or particular thing by which Humphry Smith does now
suffer, but what the Lords dear people have already suffered by and under, and
that by the Magistrates, or the Rulers of the People, by whom likewise now
Humphry Smith does Suffer; and so, he is hereby and therein the more declared
to be one of Gods Servants, and they by whom he thus suffers, are manifested
the more, to be of the same Generation, who still accuse and Imprison, and by
cruel hands cause Gods Servants to suffer; but Christ has promised (whose word
shall stand forever) That these things should turn to us for a Testimony, Luke
21. 17. And this may and does this day testify to the World (and for us
against the World) that we are of God, and that Humphry Smith is his Servant,
and that he does this day suffer by the Rulers, under the same accusation, and
no other, and for the same Truth, and so in the same cause, as Gods People of
old did, and not for any thing else, nor any other thing pretended against him,
nor in the least laid to his charge.

And if this will in no wise convince these Rulers of their Evil herein, nor
other People, of the Innocence of my present sufferings, Then let them all take
heed lest the God of this World has wholly blinded them, and hardened their
hearts therein, and chained them up in obscurity, and bound them under the
Powers of Darkness, and so far Seduced them already, that they are become past
Sense, Sight or Feeling, and then no more b^t a most fearful looking for the
Righteous Judgments and Indignation of the Almighty, which will one day devour,
and none shall deliver.

And then shall they all know, both Rulers and People, that I am Gods Servant,
this day in Bonds for the Testimony of Jesus (against the Cruelty of men) in
close Prison at Winchester; being known to the wicked World by the name,

Humphry Smith.
This was in short time sent back to them that committed me.
A Copy of a Paper sent to the l^te intended (but Adjourned) S^ssions..
WE are men that do fear the Lord, and do also truly desire peace with and
amongst all men, among whom we have likewise behaved our selves in peace and
qui^tness, laboring with our hands in the things that are honest, whereby to
provide for our selves and Families, continuing also in careful^ess therein,
that though we suffer in body and estate, that neither we nor them, might be
chargeable to any, neither have we wilfully provoked the Officers and Rulers
against us, but in Humility in that we dare not but obey the Lord that made us,
in waiting upon him, for the which only and for no other cause, on our parts,
we have already suffered before this Imprisonment so much cruelty and Inhumane
Usage, that several sheets of Paper might be filled there with, though it would
not be easy to be believed, that Englishmen should so unmercifully be abused,
by Soldiers, and other men, of their own Nation, as has been daily inflicted
upon us in the Town of Portsmouth, the place of our abode and habitation, where
for the space of one year and half, few First-dayes therein, but we were by the
rudest Soldiers (that they could choose for the purpose, and such like
Officers) either haled out of our Meetings (before the Law was made, as against
us) or beat forth with much Voilence, or thrust or beat with Muskets along the
streets, or punched, or knocked with the great ends of Muskets, and so with
Voilence drove forth at the Gates, from our own Habitations, and then were
hindered from coming in again to our Employments; and most, if not all these
things were daily inflicted upon us, ^ with many more crueler Beatings and
Bruisings of our Bodies, than is herein written; and our Goods have been
spoiled, and some carried away and our Windows battered down, even after we
were beat and turned out, as aforesaid; and such First-dayes as we escaped,
these things, we were shut up together in our own Houses, and Armed men set on
every side to keep us in, both Men and Women, in a most evil and unseemly
manner, and food deny^d to be brought in to us, and sometimes our food that was
sent us, taken away by the Soldiers, and other times we were some of us kept
in several nasty Holes, which are so bad, that most people do esteem it a hard
thing for the worst Fellon or Offender, to be kept a few days, where we were
constrained to be several weeks, having also both Friends, and our own Wives
and Relations, yea, and Food it self, and other needful things then kept also
from us; and in Feltons-Hole the Waves of the Sea have so beat in on one of us
in Winter-season, that he has stood in water up to the Ancles: for the which
things the Lord God has and will visit them that were the Actors thereof.

And when we had for the space of one year and half in much patience suffered
many such things as aforesaid; then Affliction was added by the severe
Execution of a Law against five or above meeting from their habitations, and
assembling together, under pretense of Worship; the which, though our Meetings
were not in pretense, but really intended, and absolutely for the Worship of
God; yea, notwithstanding, though we were not this time (for the which we yet
suffer) the Number of Five that departed from our habitations, and so not
Transgressors of that Law, as we made it appear unto the Mayor and Rulers that
committed us: Neither could they themselves affirm and prove, that we had
therein transgressed that Law; yet notwithstang they imposed the utter most
penalty upon us, which in the said Law is mentioned against them that
transgress it, and so kept us full three Months in Prison in that Town, and
three Weeks moreover then the three Months. And then in our Mittimus they did
not so much as deal justly with us, but writ therein, That we were lately taken
at a Meeting, as though it had been very lately indeed; and thereby have sought
to conceal the long Imprisonment we had then suffered for the same Meeting
therein signified; and concerning which we have also suffered nine weeks more
in this Prison of Winchester, this 13th of the 11th Month, 1662.

And these our heard and unreasonable Sufferings, and grievous Abuses, does
even cause a Cry for Mercy, and may claim Compassion in Equity, as well as
Justice from you, who in Justice ought to show Mercy, in relieving the
oppressed; who having suffered all these things only upon the account of some
difference in Opinion, in matters of Religion, or matter in us of Conscience to
God, wherein also the King's late Declaration offers us Relief, the benefit
thereof we shall gladly receive; but if otherwise, then we say, The will of the
Lord be done, whom we dare not but follow, though it should be to the loss of
all.

John Austin, Jonas Goff, William Bucklan, Thomas Cozens, Nichlos Cumplin,
William Jennings.
Solomon Nun, also a Prisoner eleven Weeks, for not paying four Shillings for
being absent four First-dayes from their Church at Fareham, which in Conscience
he could not pay; and so he is kept from his Masters business, being a young
Apprentice-lad.

John Bishop, also a Prisoner nine Weeks, being taken out of his own House,
from the which he was not departed, neither were there then found with him any
more men but two.

Humphry Smith, a Prisoner one year and three Months, and never called at
Assize or Sessions, nor suffered to come to any of the Rulers in the County to
lay before them the true state of his Case.

And now seeing the hardness of the hearts of the Rulers is such, that though a
Copy of this foregoing Paper was sent unto them, at the time of their late
appointed Sessions, and they not release the said sufferers nor commiserate
their long and fore suffering Cause, being some of them but poor men, and
seeing the said Paper, was turned again, and so the cause of the long oppressed
turned aside.

Therefore is this published (with the other) that both Rulers and People may
hear and see the long and many Afflictions of the harmless.

And now, as touching four Coats that in cold Winter weather were stripped off
us, since we came to this Prison, and openly carried forth (by one whose name
we forbear to write) and the Money for them drunk presently in strong Beer;
concerning the which, although we mentioned not a word amongst the rest of our
sufferings, in the foregoing Paper: And yet seeing it is so, that just
thereupon we were curbed and checked, and Friends kept out from us, and bitter
words used at them that were let in (though the Jailer had profit by them) and
that even by the Goaler's Wife (she having slighted Gods love, and so now has
little Pity for us) and this being also done at the same time, when the King's
Declaration was come forth, which is so largely tending to our Liberty: And
that the said Goalers Wife and himself (if they own that action) may know, that
it was out of forbearance of love, and not of slavish fear of any, that we
mentioned not these our Coats in the said Paper.

Therefore are these few lines pertaining to this matter, now added to the rest
of the sufferings of us J. A. T. C. J. G. N. C. This 14th day of the 11th
Month 1662.

And the cause, or the Reasons wherefore the Copy of the Mittimus, with the
answer of me, H. S. is herein made public, are these.

First, Because John Norton and Humphry Bennit, have not only thus committed me
upon no other account, but for being such a man as Gods servants were in the
days of old, and for doing no other thing, but what was (though sometimes
unjustly) charged against them, and also before this late Law was made
(intentionally) against Meeting. Secondly, Because they have kept me close
Prisoner one Year, three Months and upward, and that only upon this account.
Thirdly, Because I have been all this time deprived even of that benefit of the
Law in this Land which Thieves and Murderers have, being not all this time
called at Assize or Sessions. Fourthly, Because the said John Norton refused to
let me have any liberty for a little season, when a Friend came to seek it of
him, after I had lain here almost a Year. Fifthly, Because nothing of evil is
proved or brought in against me, nor any Law known, by which they thus keep me
in long Bondage, though wrongfully in the Mittimus they have pretended a Law.
Sixthly, Because I am more hardly dealt with (in my imprisonment) then the
High-way-men, that break out of Prison, or any other Ossendor here, by their
order, for the keeping of Friends from coming in to visit him that is one of
the Members of Christ in Prison. Seventhly, Because that by no means all this
time I can be permitted once to pass forth to any House in the Town; and
several Reasons more, wherein I am unreasonably dealt with, all which having so
long, and with much silence and patience undergone. Eighthly, Because all this
and much more of their hard dealing, and my sufferings are so little regarded
by the said John Norton and Humphry Bennit, and other Rulers, who some of them
said, I might Rot here.

Therefore, I say, thus much is at present published, and that other tender
hearted people, and the meekest among the Rulers, may both read and consider
the cause of the Oppressed, and also the long sufferings of Humphry Smith.

The time comes that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God
service, John 16. 2. If the World hate you, ye know, that it hated me, before
it hated you, John 15. 81. But in the great day when it shall be said, Come ye
Blessed, and Go ye Cursed; the things then laid to their charge will be these,
I was Hungry, Thirsty, a Stranger, Naked, Sick, and in Prison, and ye visited
me not; Answer, When saw we thee so? Reply, In as much as ye did it not unto
one of the least of these, ye did it not to me, according to Mat. 25. 41, 42,
43, 44, 45, 46.

The the Sons of Men.
YOu Sons of men, whom God has made to show forth the works of his hands,
listen a little, be quiet and hear, and let your Minds be still; Why should
Envy arise in your hea^ts? let my words be received in Love; for behold, I
speak in Righteousness and in Peace, from him that has goodwill toward man;
let your vain thoughts be denied, and in coolness of Spirit, in true Moderation
give ear a little; Why should the true fear of the Lord be despised by you? And
why should you not receive instruction, that your Souls might live in Peace
forever? Or, why should I be esteemed by you as an Enemy, for bringing the
Message of Everlasting Peace to you, which long did want it? Be quiet now
therefore, and hear, all ye Judges, Rulers, Governors, Justices, and all other
Officers and People whatsoevr, upon the face of the whole Earth, who ignorantly
from your Zeal in that knowledge which puffs up have had a hand against a
despised, rejected, forsaken People, that are accounted the Offscouring of all
things, and are accounted as sheep for the slaughter, and are killed all the
day long, who follow him in the Travail of their Souls and brokenness of Heart,
whose face is marred more then the Sons of men, to whom from him no Beauty nor
Comeliness does appear, nor any thing, wherefore he should be desired, who
indeed and in truth is not of this World.

Behold, I say, unto you, who have persecuted the Innocent, and smote the
harmless with the Tongue, and the Fist of Wickedness, if you will let the
humble seed arise in you, and read with fear, and consider in Meekness, with a
true desire to receive the Power of God's Love, unto you is this Word of
Visitation sent; therefore, O ye men, feel ye that which opens the heart; for
behold, I was made of one flesh with you, and the Lord God, and Father of my
Life, made all men of one Blood that they might feel after him and find him;
and surely, from the true sense and feeling of Gods infinite Love unto Mankind,
that he might be saved from Wrath to come; Therefore am I moved, with my
Father's Pity, to visit you, to whom Gods Love is, and in whom the Seed lies
in Bondage, and is not brought to the birth nor deliverance, but the Earth is
over it; and you that should be gathered into God's Everlasting Covenant of
Peace, who lie yet in the Bondage, why will you not believe my words, which are
the Truth of the Lord, in the Power of his Love, which will stand forever? And
so, all your Hating, Reviling and Imprisoning the Servents and Seed of God
without you, in the Nation, and your ruling over the Innocent, Honest, Plain
and Harmless, is unto you a true figure of your hating, resisting and
imprisoning the Seed of God which is in you; and your ruling over the honest
meek thing in you, with Tyranny and Cruelty in the strength of your wills; and
this has long been so, and by this figure, has the Lord been pleased to
preach unto you of late years, that you might hear, and see, and understand;
and this is plainly so, you being not reconciled unto that of God in Bondage in
you, Therefore is your hatred against them without you, who are reconciled to
God, and have no Confidence in the flesh; and because you are not reconciled to
him that made you, therefore has his witness in you often times disturbed and
broke your Peace in the Earth, and the hand of the Lord has so followed you,
that many times you could not cause his Spirit to cease striving with you for
some time, but even trouble from it has come upon you, even in the
Night-season, when you would have Peace; and when the Power of the Enemy of
your souls, has risen up in you, with Wrath and Envy, in hastiness and passion
against the Servants of the Lord, and thereby have been moved with Envy, to act
that which was Evil against them, intending thereby to make the true Jews bow
down unto Haman's spirit in you; then afterward, and some at the very time,
has the witness of God in you arose and brought Judgment, and Trouble, and
Torment upon you, when some of you have been alone, in quietness, then has the
Lord been secretly Dealing with you by his measure of Light in you, the which
you have strove against, some not knowing what it was, and sought Peace and
ease another way, and so have not loved that which came to confound your
Wisdom, nor received that which is to bring the understanding of the prudent to
nothing; for that prudent understanding is in man, and that which is to
confound it, is to be received in man; I speak what I know, and the Truth of
which will stand forever: but you have not received that which in the heart
began to judge you, nay, rather are you not afraid of being judged, and of that
which judges in you? And is it not a hard saying unto you, that have talked of
God, to preach him unto you, who confounds the Wisdom of the Wise, and brings
the Understanding of the prudent to nothing? and to tell you, how that which
may be known of God, is manifest in you? Is it not therefore plain, that you
are yet joined to that which is to be confounded, and so have not received that
which is to confound, though it be in you; for the Kingdom of God was in the
Pharisees, but they not knowing it, did neither know the Lord of Glory, but
crucified him without them, and resisted that which was holy in them, yet
professed the Scriptures without them, as you do, whose minds are out from the
measure of the Inspiration of that Spirit in you, which gave forth the
Scriptures, which are without you, which Scriptures also testify of the Light
of Christ, which is in you, and of that which may be known of God in you, to
which you are to come; for unto them who had the Scriptures without them,
Christ Jesus said, Come unto me, I am meek and low in heart; and his Name is
called the Word of God, which is nigh, even in your hearts, though from you
there it be hid as a Treasure hid in the Field; but though it be hid from you,
yet it is there, and though you have been unprofitable, yet have you had a
Talent; yea, the Lord God has given Gifts to the Rebellious, (though they
receive it not) that he might dwell in them; ye hard-hearted, stiff-necked and
uncircumcised! why will you not believe my words? Why will you not receive the
Truth? When will you bend and bow before the Lord God of Life? Can you say in
your hearts, like the fool, That there is no God? Would you shut him out, from
having an entrance in you? When was it that you did come to this thing which is
hid in the heart? And when did you try this thing, which sometimes judges,
condemns, troubles or confounds, whether this thing would give you the
knowledge of God? And is not the Light to give the knowledge of God? And does
not he that is the Light enlighten every man? And is not the Light that which
does make manifest? And is not there something in you, that does at sometimes
make manifest? And is there not something in you, which does judge and condemn
you for Evil, which is made manifest by it? You that talk of trying all things;
Is not there one thing, and have you not yet need of one thing, even that which
gives Power over sin, and cleanses from all sin? And have you tried this one
thing, the Light, or that of God in you? Whether this will bring you to Peace
with God and man? And whether by this in you, you may overcome the World, which
is let in the heart? And was not he that is the Light and the Lamb slain from
the Foundation of the World? And has not the World such a Foundation in you,
and such a growth and stature over you, that you cannot see to the end of it,
nor believe to the overcoming of it? And is it not therefore, that you are
joined to that by which the Lamb is slain, so that his Grave is with the Rich,
and his Burial with the Wicked; read and understand? And does not the Blood of
the slain Cry from the ground against you? Did you never hear the the oppressed
Cry? Did you never feel a seed in you, cry aloud for Life, though it lies in
the Death? Did you never know the house of Mourning, nor feel him near, who is
a man of Sorrows? Are you quite dead and past feeling; Nay nay, there is many
of you; are not so far hardened, nor yet so much given up however, the time
has been that you all might have known this thing I declare, of which belongs
to your peace, you that have the Scriptures, and are talking of the place of
holy Worship, take heed, hearken and hear a little, He that makes an end of sin
is come near unto you, he who remains a Priest forever, Mourns over you, and
your day of visitation is come, yea, behold the Lamb, the meek, harmless,
unspotted, beloved of God, comes meekly, though esteemed not able to save
himself, yet behold, its the King of Glory crowned with Immortality forever,
who rides meekly in Righteousness, and gentle in the Father's Wisdom; yea, the
Heir is come, resist him not, lest the thing which belongs to your Everlasting
peace be hid from your Eyes, for evermore, and you left desolate, only having
the Scriptures of Truth, but not the Truth in the inward parts, where the
knowledge of it makes free.

For behold, the Prince of Everlasting Peace I proclaim unto you, even the Word
by which the World was made, by which Word all things are upheld, and the Word
of Reconciliation, reconcileth the heart ( Mark, its the Heart) of the parents
to the Children, and the Children to the parents, that the Earth may not be
smitten with a Curse, and who so have received that Word, so as it comes to be
ingrafted into them, thereby their hearts come to be reconciled one to another,
and have Love, Unity and Peace with all those Things, Persons and Creatures,
which were at first made, and are upheld by the Power of that Word, to which he
that is come, of him its written, In Famine he shall redeem thee from Death;
and in War, from the Power of the Sword, and thou shall be hid from the Scourge
of the Tongue; neither shall thou be afraid of Destruction, when it comes; at
destruction and famine thou shall laugh; neither shall thou be afraid of the
beast of the Earth, for thou shall be at league with the stones of the field,
and the beasts of the field shall be in league with thee, and thou shall know,
that thy Tabernacle shall be in peace, and thou shall visit thy habitation, and
shall not sin. And you that are far off from coming to read this within, may
search the Scriptures, and read it there of a seed, that shall be great; as the
offspring that shall be as the Grass of the Earth for Number; so shall they be
multiplied, in whose Mouths there is found no guile, and are Children that
will not Lie, that are come to him who is the Prince of Peace that makes an end
of sin, and is the Word before the sin, and the Covenant of God, the
Everlasting Father, who proclaims Liberty to the captive, and is the one thing
needful, in the which all things are reconciled to God, and in him to one
another whether things in Heaven, or in Earth, or under the Earth, whereby
comes Peace in the receiving, and submission unto that Word of Power by which
all things were made, and are upheld, and the Light of that word is that which
is become unto us both Rest, and Joy, and Life, and Peace.

And this is that which is ministered into every Creature; and this we have
heard in secret, and proclaim on the House tops, and this is to be preached
unto all Nations, that by it he that is above all, through all, and in all, may
come to be known, which is the Gospel of the Kingdom; and this I proclaim unto
you, and publish, within your borders, and make mention of his Name within your
Gates, that the Life of Immortal Peace there you might feel, and this is it,
which you have long resisted, as your Fathers did, and when you have rebelled
against this, like them before, that also rebelled against the Light, Job 24.
13. And having resisted it in your selves, then you rise up against us, who
believe in the Light, John 12. 39. and when you have even murdered the witness
in your selves, then you seek to destroy us; who bear witness, that he is come,
who reproves the World of sin; and the World is set in the Heart, and the Light
is come into the World, and that which reproves for sin is in you, though by
reason of sin it is wounded, and often overcome, and with that which is wounded
in you, we mourn, and with that which sometimes troubles you, we have Peace;
and that in you is our Friend, and pleads for us against you, whom you refuse
to hear! and that which you are most afraid of, we love and embrace; and that
which would break your hearts, has broke ours, and that in you which is to
kill the Life you live, is that which has brought us from Death to Life, by
which we now live; for that which was alive is dead, and that which was dead is
alive, and the first born is slain, and the seed is come forth from under
Deaths Bond; but you that are Rich, and think you need nothing, in whom
Wickedness is found, are the grave, ( Isaiah --) in which that is buried, as a
dead thing, which should save from Death, and give power over the Grave, and
bring peace for evermore; And if that in you arise not, to give you Life and
Peace, and so fellowship with us, whose Life is in it, yet do we with it
rejoice in its Righteous Judgments, and have fellowship with it, as it arises
to judge and condemn you for your disobeying and contemning of it; for
absolutely if you will not let it now arise, to mortify the Lust and bring
down the Life, which is in the strength of your wills, and so to give you
peace, then will it arise hereafter, to judge and condemn you, when you shall
not be able any longer to resist, nor overcome the strength of its dreadful
power, in executing Judgment upon the Transgressor.

To Friends at Ailsbury (Prison) and in them parts.
DEar and well-beloved Friends, who continue true Followers of the Lamb of God
in faithful Sufferings for the Testimony of his Name, and remain Prisoners for
the same Truth and Testimony of Jesus, for which also this Body of mine does
and has long suffered Restraint and Bonds, and my Soul grieved with the
Sodomitish Wickedness and Heathenish Prophainness of Hard-hearted Rebellious to
God, and disobedient Ungodly People, whose Judgment slumbereth not, and whose
Damnation will certainly come and be just from God upon them, who have made a
Covenant with Death, and show forth themselves as a people at an Agreement with
all the Powers of Hell, in which is the Reward of all the Wicked, that have
forgotten God and wholely rejected the manifold Manifestation of his Mercies,
which unto you, O ye dear and tenderhearted! is as precious Oil, and as
desirable Treasure! Who can but prize the Mercies of the God of Heaven? How
refreshingly has it often flowed in upon the thirsty Habitations of many, to
the abundant refreshing and comforting of the weary Land? Oh! how sweetly, and
with what pleasantness has mine Eyes beheld the springing up, and the growth
and spreadings of the tender Plants, after the distiling streams of the
Heavenly Dews upon them, and every one standing in his place flourishing with
their Branches over the Earth, not one offending the other, and all casting
forth a sweet favor, being daily replenished with the springings up of the Sap
of Life, and comforted with the Sun Beams of Righteousness? How harmoniously
then does the Garden flourish? And how beautiful is every Plant, whom God has
planted? And is it possible for any other plants to bring forth Fruits unto
holiness, but only such whom the God of Heaven causes to grow? And how sad is
it for any one Plant to hurt, kill or destroy another? And who can without some
Remorse or pity behold the withering and fading of any such Plants, whose
flourishing was once so delightsom, that all who passed by, and took notice
thereof, commended them for their virtue; or at least, took some special notice
of their prudence, and the wisdom of him by whom they flourished, in that they
grew, multiplied and prospered, though they could not perceive, nor understand,
by what invisible virtue they thus were nourished, nor whence it came

I say, again, when I have beheld the Trees of the Lord, the Plants of the
Garden of God, in their fresh green growing, flourishing united State, in the
Life of Liberty, my heart has often been refreshed, my Soul quickened, my
Spirit revived, and my mind and desires abundantly satisfied; Then has my life
founded forth the precious praises of the Almighty in the Assemblies of the
upright, and my Heart broken therewith, in the delightsom Love, has poured
forth Thanksgiving, with tenderness and tears in secret: O! how then has the
overflowing of Mercy reached over the uttermost borders of my dwelling? and how
sweetly have we then been comforted and revived one in another? How lovely then
has the face of the Righteous been, when Righteousness it self, in the
Meekness of Love, looked forth at the Windows? How were the Bowels of each
other, then enflamed within them? How sweet was the Beauty of Meekness to the
Beholders? Who then could but receive the love of the loveliness it self?

Dear Lambs of the fold of Heaven, whose hearts are still opened, by the
feeling of the virtue of life, who only know me, and can hear the words of my
Life, and understand the Voice of my Love; My Heart and Soul salutes you, my
Love is dear unto you, my Life has long reached forth it self toward you; in
my Remembrance your Life is written, I am your Servant in the Love of God, a
Member of the Body with you, a Brother in Tribulations, a Companion with you in
your Warfare, a Feeder with you at your Table, and one that rejoices with you,
in the Joy unspeakable, being made with you a partaker of that precious
Inheritance, that fades not away, where Life, and Love, and fellowship, with
Praises and Thanksgiving abounds forever.

Wherewith should I greet you, in the Greetings of that Love, which cannot be
uttered? And how should I Salute you in that which cannot be declared? What
words might I use to speak forth the Life of Wisdom, or reach forth the true
love of a broken Heart? Behold! I may become as a Babe herein and be silent as
a Child, yet learning utterance, lest in reaching forth of my strength, I
should signify my weakness to unfold the undeclareable Infinitness of the
fullness of Virtue, Wisdom, Meekness, Life and Love, from the measure whereof my
simple words most certainly do at present proceed, as some few amongst many
will surely perceive hereby, who remain in the single-heartedness of undefiled
Unity, whose desires are still afresh enflamed, and whose Bowels yet daily
yearn after a more fuller enjoyment of God, and the increase and preservation
of his Precious Truth, and who for the same can still deny themselves, to serve
others in the true sense and feeling of the undefiled brotherly Love, and who
can lay down their Crowns that the Lamb may be honored, and suffer in the
inward man, that the Brother may be preserved; for whom Christ dyed, and
toward whom Gods Love was, even when he was an Enemy, the which love of God
being continued toward thee, in the same Love should thou continue toward
thy Brother, and therewith may thou do him good, and perform some service
toward the Lord, whose love was toward you both; and then from him shall thou
receive a Reward into thy own Bosom, and in the needful time, God will deliver
thee, and at the hour of Trial he will Succor thee, and thou (the dear Plant
of the Lord) thereby may stand, though some that were stronger then thee be
overcome and fall into the Snare of the Enemy in that hour of Trial, and be
then entangled with many Encumbrances, and that of diverse kinds.

The Lord God of Heaven and Earth preserve my dear tender hearted Lambs and
Brethren out of such things, that a Vail may not come over you, and so the Life
be stopped from springing up in you; for then may such again go Mourning all the
day long, when none does pity.

Friends, the often Incomes of Gods Love, and the forth flowings of the same
toward you, and the precious seed of God in them parts, has constrained me at
present to visit you in the true love of my Soul with these Lines, that so you
might not only hear from me, but also in some measure be comforted in me, and
likewise some of you a little refreshed hereby. For Behold, the God of Heaven
is my Refuge, and strength, and the Lord of Host is my Upholder, and the holy
One of Israel is my Everlasting Support, and the daily Incomes of that which
does truly comfort, is as Marrow to my Bones, yea, the Lord has prolonged my
days, enlarged my Borders, and beautifyed the Place of my Dwelling! My heart
is overcome with his Love, my Soul is filled with his Virtue, and my Tongue
does declare of his Goodness; the praises of the Lord ascend up to Heaven,
whose Mercies refresh the Earth; Oh that you might partake with me of the
unspeakable Blessings of God, and feel and receive in your selves, the true
Tenders and Offers of the tenderness of my Love hereby presented unto you, that
you might feel your Hearts begin to open therewith, to receive the same, that
in the Life of the Spirit of Truth you may truly perceive me to be present
praising the Lord with you, and likewise pertaking with you of your sufferings,
having also Acquaintance of your Grief, and being truly sensible of your
manifold Trials and Tribulations: The Lord preserve you to the end thereof.

And Friends, let not your hearts be sad, neither be ye overmuch cast down with
any thing whatsoever (of which I forbear to mention) neither be ye discouraged
by reason of any thing that the Lord brings or suffers to come to pass,
either amongst us or concerning us, neither let the multitude of Trials, nor
the length of days therein cause you in the least to distrust the Lord, who in
his secret Wisdom (in the end of all things) brings forth good unto such, who
in all conditions, and under all Trials, do truly love and cleave unto the Lord
their strength.

But why should I multiply words? The intent of my heart is, that you might
have benefit by the increase of the same love of God, and the Springings forth
thereof, of the which we have all received; For you know the Truth which
teaches all things, and a measure of that Life, from whence all these words do
come, which do service for the Lord, and are helpful to his Servants, and
comfortable to his Chosen people and for the refreshing of the tender Lambs,
and the building up of the members in the holy Unity, to grow up in the holy
Life for the honor of his Glorious Name forever, in whose blessed Name, Life,
Strength and Virtue is found, the which indeed is become a true Refuge unto the
Chosen Israel of God, where they are succored, when none can help, and where
they are preserved, when none other can uphold, unto whom they can pour forth
their Complaints in secret, and Address themselves at every needful time, whose
complaints are never by him rejected, nor turned back upon the Upright hearted;
as sometimes it has been, when help or comfort has been expected from some of
the Children of men, who may also be tempted, and in danger of being overcome,
but the Lord can never be overcome, neither can he ever Err in his
Understanding, or mistake in his Judgments, nor reject that which is truly
simple and tender, neither yet receive that which is deceitful, though
appearing or seeming never so Glorious.

Let all Friends, whose hearts are tender, in the tenderness thereof still,
return unto him, from that which causes a hardness, and out of that which
brings distrust, to leave that which brings darkness into the mind, and so
to get from the barren places into the fruitful Habitation of the living. Then
shall Peace flow as a River, and Unity shall flourish as the varieties of the
various Flowers in the Field, and Righteousness shall spread over all as the
Morning dew; and then the Beauty of the Righteous shall shine, and the Glory of
the Lord shall yet more abundantly appear, and fruit shall increase as in the
Summer season, and the Vineyard of the Lord shall yet again flourish in
Righteousness, and the Lord shall be glorified in his Saints, who is greatly
admired by all them that truly believe. Oh! that the seed might lift up the
head! Oh! that the Plants of Righteousness might spring! that the true Mourner
might be comforted, That fruit might abound in abundance, That the weak might
receive strength, That the Seed of the Lamb may know the Boldness of the Lion,
That all might be refreshed together, and that you all might live, and grow,
and increase with the Increases of God.

The Lord God of Heaven and Earth grant these things unto you, and fulfill them
in you, that you may be filled with Virtue, and wax bold and Valiant to the
end, in the noble Life of the honorable Power of God, whose Name is blessed
for evermore, Amen.

From Winchester Prison is this sent forth toward you, and the true Love and
Simplicity of Heart, by your Brother in the fellowship and Testimony of Jesus,
and the Bonds of the Gospel. Humphry Smith.

To the Young and Tender, and to the late Convinced People of God amongst the
rest of the Elect and already Chosen, whose outward Habitations are in and near
the County of Essex.
To be read amongst them in much Wisdom, Meekness, Deliberation, and most
chiefly in the true fear of the Lord God.
THe sound of the everlasting Truth of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth has
passed through and amongst you, and the Word of his Power, in the dread of his
holy Name, has been published within your borders, and the way of everlasting
Life and Righteousness has plainly been declared to the understanding, and the
Covenant of everlasting Peace and Truth has been tendered unto your Hearts, and
the Day of Visitation from God has been freely offered unto your Souls, and
the things which belong to your everlasting happiness has been set before your
Eyes, and those things of the Kingdom of God, which pertain to the Sons of men
to know, in the power of his Wisdom, and in the strength of his Might, has
been demonstrated among you, and the tender Call of God in the day of his love
has been unto you: Oh that your Hearts might retain it forever, and that your
Eyes might be abundantly opened, to see into the unsearchable things of God!
Oh, that your understandings might yet be more opened to receive the Riches of
the invisible Truth of God! Oh that your Hearts might come to be more enlarged
therewith! and that you who have known the Call of God, and felt the working of
his Grace in your hearts unto a true Convincement, might all come to live the
Life of Righteousness, end forever hereafter to walk from that more and more,
which you are truly convinced of to be evil, either in Word or Deed, or any
manner of Practice whatsoever, and to walk with more Circumspection, and
Integrity, and Faithfulness to the Lord, in obedience unto all things, truly
made known unto you to be right, and justifiable in the sight of the God of
Heaven. This certainly is the breathings of my Soul unto the God of Heaven for
your everlasting Welfare.

And the true desire of my present enlarged Heart for your Eternal Happiness,
is, That as the Lord of Heaven and Earth has counted you worthy of his Call,
in the power of his Grace, which brings Salvation unto all, you may not judge
your selves unworthy of the Kingdom of God, but may cleave unto his Truth in
the inward parts, leaving all that which has kept you from it, whatsoever it
be; and all that which has hindered you, and does hinder from the Life and
Virtue of it in your own Hearts; this all to leave behind you forever, and to
give it away freely, and as freely willing as a man would part with Dross for
Gold, and present mortal Honor for immortal Renown forever; for behold, the
Glory of the World passes away, and all the Beauty thereof shall be as a
fading Flower when it is fully ripe, the strength thereof shall melt away like
Wax before the Jealousy of our God; and Egypt shall be judged, and Babylon
confounded, and the strength of the Oppressor brought down; and the Lord will
weaken the power of the Heathen, and all the Earth shall know, that he is the
same God of Power and righteous Judgments as ever, in the day when he comes in
the dread of his Power to assemble the Heathen to Judgment, and to pour forth
Floods of Indignation upon the Wicked, when Anguish shall enter the dwellings
of the Ungodly, and intolerable perplexity seize upon the Consciences of the
Unfaithful; when the Hypocrite shall no longer cover himself, nor the
Adversaries of Sion rejoice against her! when the Lord shall reach forth his
Hand and scatter his open Enemies, as in the day of slaughter, and consume the
Briars of the Earth, as with endless Burnings and unquenchable Flames in the
strength of his Fury, when he pleads by the Fire of his Jealousy and the
Sword of his Mouth, with all the Wicked, Ungodly and Unfaithful ones, who make
Flesh their Arm, and depart from the Word of the living God in their Hearts,
which then they shall know to be Powerful against all Unrighteousness, and
quick in executing Judgments accordingly.

Oh! happy is the Man that then shall know a Refuge, and blessed shall the
People be whose God is then the Lord, and full well will it be for them who
then know a hiding place! Then shall Sion alone rejoice, and Jerusalem be glad
forever, and only the redeemed of the Lord shall walk in the Paths of his
Judgments, and in the midst of devouring and consuming Fire, which to them
shall be as a Wall for everlasting defense round about them, and as precious
healing Oil of Joy and Gladness in the midst, and as pure Ointment poured out
into the Wounds of the brokenhearted! Light shall shine forever in their
Habitations, and Wisdom shall be found in them, like as in Daniel the Servant
of God in the days of Old, and only the Faithful shall stand, and the
Upright-hearted shall endure, and God will keep his little Ones, and the Weak
shall be strengthened by him, and the Poor of the Flock shall be comforted; and
the Feeble among men shall receive strength from God as the Morning, and
renewing of virtue as the dawning of the day, and the Lambs of the Fold shall
be kept, and only Gods People shall stand; yea, they shall stand, and the Gates
of Hell, with all the powers of darkness, shall never prevail against them; the
Lord has spoken it; whose Words shall stand forever, which shall seal it unto
the Heritage of God, and the Dross must be purged away, and the Unbelieving
must stand behind; and the Careless will stagger at the Promises; and they that
seek themselves shall have Self enough; but Self shall never help them in that
day, neither shall their own Wisdom stand them instead, neither yet their
Righteousness, in the Day of God's Controversy, when the great Oaks shall
fall, and the lofty Cedars shall bow to the Dirt, when no covering at all shall
hide, but that which is put upon men by the Power of God's dwelling Spirit in
the Heart of every individual, by the virtue thereof, and not otherwise.

And this moreover I say to every, particularly unto you who were late astray
from God, and lately were convinced of the precious Truth of his Son, that in
the Name and Power of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth from him to you was I
sent, and that more chiefly to gather the Outcasts, than to feed the Lambs,
who were already gathered; and rather to call home the lost Sheep, than to
nourish them that were already brought home, and to call Sinners to Repentance,
and for the opening the Hearts, Understanding and Eyes of those, who though
they truly desired, had not clearly understood the secret things of the hidden
Wisdom of the Almighty: And truly, my Love was to Sinners, and the true
affections and breathing of my Soul for the Prodigals in them parts, which were
most chiefly my Message from God at that time, and my Service of Love unto the
Souls of such in them parts, and to publish the Name of the Almighty in the
great Congregations; and surely my own Brethren, even the gathered Flock of
God, attended in much patience, whilst I thus performed my Service of love to
you; neither did I turn my Face from you to them, nor withheld from you the
Counsel of God in truth; neither was I negligent in the Service to do you good;
neither yet sparing of my strength, nor withholding my Speech, when God gave
utterance; but rather can truly say, I could even have been spent for you, in
the discharge of my Conscience to the Lord my strength.

And now, this is that which my Heart desires of you, and my Soul desires for
you, That you all, and every of whose Hearts then God touched with the feeling
of his Love, by the power of his Immortal Word, through me his weak Earthen
Vessel, that you all may obey the Call and Visitation of God in the requiring
of his Light in your own Hearts, thereby willingly to depart from the ways of
the Wicked, the professions of the Hypocrites, and the paths of Ungodly men,
and to stand no long in the way of Sinners, nor regard the counsel of them who
hate the Light and Truth in the inward parts, and to come out from amongst them
that are unclean, who live still more and more in that which pollutes them, who
live in their Sins, professing God and serving the Devil, until they have
finished their Sins, which then brings forth Death; and he that dies in his
Sins, not believing in the Light, which makes an end of sin, cannot come where
Christ is. And so, the Tree falling, there it lies; and as Death leaves,
Judgment finds; and as Judgment finds, so shall the Reward according to the
deeds be. And then shall every man stand or fall to his own Master; the
Servants of the Devil to their Master, and the Servants of God to their Master;
and there is no more Masters but them two, and no man can serve both, though
Thousands profess the one and serve the other, who in that day must give an
account whom they have served, and not whom they have professed; for they who
professed God, and served the Devil, were Hypocrites; and so are unto this day,
of whom the World is full. And blessed are they who by the living Power of the
Soul-saving Grace of God, are truly redeemed out of the way, works, worships
and nature of such, to serve the living God in the newness of the spirit,
through Faith and Patience, and to walk in Innocence before the Lord for
evermore. Such shall come to rejoice in the Truth, and the Arm of the Lord
shall bring them more nearer to himself, that they may come to see the Lord in
his Glory, and to praise him in the Land of the living, and to behold Sion in
her perfect Beauty, and to feel their Unity with Gods Elect, and to enjoy the
Covenant of Everlasting Peace, that shall never be broken, to be bound up
together in the life of Immortality, Wisdom and Righteousness, to shine forth
as the Morning, like the Jewels of the Lamb, and to be beautified with Meekness
as the Members of the unspotted of God.

Oh! the Crown of Rejoicing and Everlasting Felicity that is set before you, to
whom I am not able to express the infinite bounty and goodness of the Almighty!
Oh! who can hold when the Lord has spoken, or conceal his loving kindness,
when the Almighty gives utterance? The Lord has enlarged my Heart, let me not
therefore enquire among you, where there is room to receive it! Oh! let there
be an inward search, whether that the door be open, and the straitness taken
away, that he which was with you may find entrance in you, and you truly come
to feel the receiving of his life, to the glad Tidings of your Hearts. From
such an outward Prison cannot keep me, nor from them the vast distance of Miles
cannot withold me! Behold, I say, in the Name of God, I am near unto you.

And when you are assembled together with one accord, in the place where the
Light is a Ministry to the work, this read among you in the fear of the God of
Heaven; then shall many of you know it so to be, and that the Lord has given
me of his unlimited Spirit, which I freely let forth unto you: And the
breathings of my life are, that you might receive benefit thereby, and be
comforted together. And be strengthened in the inward man, that the Devil may
not prevail, nor the love of the World overcome the innocent desires which God
has begotten; let no unbelief nor slavish fear hinder you in your spiritual
progress toward the attainment of the Crown of Life in the Kingdom of
blessedness, which God has certainly prepared for the upright and innocent.

And now, behold, I turn unto my Brethren, the called and chosen of God, whom
my Soul hereby saluteth, unto whom I cannot by words sufficiently express my
Love, neither have I room to publish the enlargedness thereof in writing,
neither will usual phrases of Speech satisfy my broken Heart. Oh! blessed be
the day that ever you were called, and the hour of your Visitation, and the
time of the Conception of the Seed in the Womb, and the season of the
forthcoming thereof into the liberty of Peace! Blessed be the Lord forever on
your behalf, who has chosen you to the riches of life, and brought you to the
Well-springs of Mercy, and caused you to drink of the Rivers of his strength,
which has daily been renewed unto you, Oh! blessed be the God whose love has
not been withheld from your Souls, and who has not withheld counsel from
your Eyes!

Friends, God has opened my Heart unto you, receive me therefore as in the
Bowels of Mercy, that now we may praise the Lord forever: Oh! that your Souls
may with me forever magnify the unutterable Power of the God of Heaven, and
that you may this day with me drink freely of the Cup of Eternal Salvation,
that then we may rest together as in a Bed of Repose, in the delightsom Arms of
our Father's love, that forever we may sing the Song of the Lamb, and sound
forth the Praises of the Almighty together, that you may know the Lord is with
me, and that the holy One of Israel is indeed become my everlasting Support.
And unto you all, Friends, Erethren and fellow Members of the heavenly Body,
these are the pourings forth of Gods infinite Love, free for all that can
receive it.

And thus in few words as unto you, my Brethren, even desiring to be felt and
received in that which comprehends all words, and is more than words can
express, in which the words end, which was before the words were, where my
dwelling is; and you that truly know me, know it so to be, wherewith you in
the eternal Being and Substance of all living, I rest in the Fountain of
Mercy, desiring daily, in my pourings forth of my Soul unto God, that you all
may walk blamelesly, and be preserved in the Truth of your Hearts, to stand
steadfast in the day of Trial at hand. And so in the power of Wisdom, which is
the Refuge of the Innocent, the Lord God Almighty of Heaven and Earth preserve
you all, and keep you all for evermore, Amen.

And hereby you may likewise know, that I am in health and strength of Body and
Soul, and that my Heart is sometimes enlarged with the Power of Gods Love, and
my Spirit at Liberty, which is out of their power to imprison, by whom my Body
is shut up in the close unsavory Prison of my late and long sad Sufferings in
the common Goal at Winchester, where this is written by him that God has
called herein to be your Servant, in obedience to his blessed Will; known to
the World, but unto you in that which is nearer than this Name, Humphry Smith.

Concerning TITHES.
Tithes at first were not required, but given only of the Spoils of the War
(only once) by Abraham, unto him that was made like unto the Son; but the
Substance being come (even Christ) who was before the Wars, and before Abraham,
he redeems out of the Lust, from whence the Wars arise; and so brings to an
end of that from whence Wars come, and so to an End of that from whence Tithes
were first given, and so to give nor pay Tithes any longer, being redeemed out
of Lust, and Wars, and Fightings, by the Blood of Jesus, who said, I am the
Light, that abides a Priest forever; and his day Abraham rejoiced to see, who
brings to the End of the Tithes, and makes War with that, and slayes that,
which caused men to Slay one another in the Wars, who comes to save the Life,
who is Greater than Abraham, who being now come, denies fighting, and says,
He that takes the Sword, shall perish with the Sword: And so that was to
perish whereby Tithes were first given; then must there needs be an end of
Tithes, which also perishes with the using, and the Law for the Tithes ( which
had a shadow of good things to come) decays and waxes old, and vanishes away,
the good things themselves being come, and good will toward man, and the
Covenant of Light to join the hearts together. For Tithes were never given nor
paid until after men had killed, and slain, and done violence and wrong one to
another; and Christ says, Love your Enemies; and if he smite thee on the one
Cheek, turn the other: And such as are come to that, and obey his command, are
come out of the Wars and the Strife unto the Prince of Peace who was before the
Wars, and so know the peaceable Covenant, which will not wax old, but last
forever, in which there is no Wars nor killing one another, and so comes to the
End of that Covenant, which commanded the Tithes, and to the change of the Law,
the Priest whereof; and they that receive the Tithes, murder and slay him that
is to bring to the End of Tithes; so that by him to the End of Tithes they are
not come, nor from under the first Covenant, where the Tithes are paid whilst
the vail is over the Heart, and that Ministry standing, which makes nothing
Perfect, and will dye, and change, and perish, but he that Redeems out of and
from among them, and that which perishes, abides a Priest forever: and of him
it is said, he lives. And so him we bear Testimony of, who is entered within
the Vail, in whom the Vail is done away, and so that is seen, and departed
from, and made an end of, which stood whilst the Vail was not rent, and the way
into a more Holy known than the first Covenant, wherein the Tithes were paid,
the Vail being over the Heart, and is yet over the Hearts of all them who pay
or receive Tithes, and all that uphold it; who may take notice, that the first
Priests that ever took by force Offerings, were Sons of Belial, and knew not
God, whom the Lord destroyed, and they perished in the Wars with the Sword, 1 Samuel 2. 12. ver. 16. Therefore we cannot but deny Tithes, and the upholding of
it, and all such as take it (especially) ly force, which Actions are the fruits
of such Priests as know not God, and such he will overturn. For the Seed of God
in many Thousands, Cries unto him, by reason of the Cruel Oppression of Tithes,
from under which the Lord will deliver us.

Humphry Smith.

This for my nearly related Friend Elizabeth Smith at Little Cawerne.
THe God of Heaven, that made me, and the Lord God of Power that called me to
obey and follow him, even in that day when I was not acquainted with his Voice,
and who has been my Guide, Defense, Succor and Comfort unto this day and
moment, and who has ever upheld me, as a Father the Child by the Arm of his
Power, whom the world neither did nor can by its Wisdom ever know, who is the
only wise Invisible Spirit that upholdeth all things by the Word of his Power,
who is dreadful to the Heathen that know him not, and more precious than ever
can be expressed with Tongue or Pen, unto them who have felt and received and
live in the true sense of the Enlarging incomes of the virtue of his Power, the
Life whereof to them is most desirable. My Strength, Life and Refuge alone is
he, whose service I have no cause to decline, and whose precious powerful call
he never gave me cause to repent; for with himself he has and does daily
gratify me with a full Reward for all, and all manner of my manifold Trials,
and daily Sufferings, and Exercises, which I meet with in the way, but really
and Absolutely I can truly say, that none of these things move me in the least
from that foundation, upon which the God of Heaven and Earth has long since
established me, that I might stand for him and the Glory of his Name, who has
both set and appointed me thereunto, and given me Courage, as a fortified
Tower, to stand as a mark for the Adversaries of Sion to vent forth the utmost
of their limited Fury. And in the Lord my strength is my Considence, neither
have I believed that ever I should distrust him, though since the day that I
have known him he has even suffered the Sorrows of Death, and the pangs of
Hell, and the Powers of Unutterable Darkness at sometimes to compass me in on
every side, and to lift up themselves in the vaunting Arrogance of the swelling
Pride thereof, as Mountains never to be removed. But behold, he who has his
way in the Whirlwind, and his path through the midst of the deepest Ocan, him
alone it was that my broken Heart was by the power of his constraining Love
resolved to follow forever, even through the greatest difficulties, and the
most hardest Straits, Trials and Hardships, with all manner of outward and
inward Sufferings, that might be permitted to happen unto or fall upon any one
of the Children of men. Oh! that I could now sufficiently declare his Goodness,
and so fully and effectually make mention of his Power, as it deserves! or as
the Lord has given into my Heart to desire of him to be made use of, in the
Declaration or Manifestation thereof in this my day, unto the Sons and Children
of men. Surely, when I am waiting of him, and of his unutterable Goodness and
Power, my Words and Lines are also short of setting forth, the Virtue and
Fullness of the most unexpressible divine excellency thereof, that sometimes I
am rather ready to dwell in silence with and in the fullness thereof, which
overcomes with unutterable Virtue, than to be writing of that which in its self
can never be written, though what is written may be by and with, and from the
overflowings of the same, and so be as drops or little streams of heavenly
Water, to refresh the dry and thirsty Land, which therein does its service, and
then the praise thereof is to return unto him who is the alone fountain of all
Virtue, and the Life which gives Life, even unto the dead that hear his Voice,
whereby he comes to be known to be Infinite in Wisdom, Power and Virtue, whom
my soul does Honor, my heart does Praise, and my spirit adoreth forever; for
none is like to him, neither does my soul desire any other but he whilst in
this body, or for evermore in the Life which yet does come.

Let all that know him bow before him, and let all that hear his voice be
humble and meek, and let every one that truly desires after him wait with
diligence and in patience upon him, and let all that are faithful to him
rejoice in his Love, and prize him for much more then the liberty of their
bodies, or the Enjoyment of Thousands and Thousands of Thousands of Temporal
Visible Earthly thing, All which are his, and he is ours, yea, he is certainly
mine, and I am his, and my soul does magnify him, and my spirit does yet
breath farther to sound forth his Praises, not only all the days of my life,
whilst in this Earthly Tabernacle, but likewise in the hearts of Thousands of
them yet unborn, and among the Generations that are yet to come by my faithful
upright Testimony, and the Record thereof, which may remain, when the God and
Father of my life has gathered me, with the rest of his servants of old to
live with him, in the delightsom Ocean of the Infinite Fullness of his most
desirable Power and precious Presence, the streams whereof already are as the
free Issuings forth of Life Eternal, and as the streams of Mercy, and the dews
of the Morning Refreshing, even the outmost borders of my dwelling, and
Comforting the mournful places of my Habitation! Who can express his Goodness?
What man can utter his Bounty, or how can man either in words or with Pen
sufficiently signify forth the Fullness and Virtue of that which passes
Knowledge? Behold, my Dwelling is in it and my Life is bound up with the
inocent Lambs, who live in the feeling Virtue of that which much
super-aboundeth the most pleasantest and delightsom'st Words that ever my
Tongue can utter, and yet those that hear them hear the Truth in the which the
Life does stand; and they that hear the Truth hear him from whence the Life
does come, which Life it self in the power and virtue of it, is the center of
the Upright, the Refuge of the Innocent, and the thing it self, unto which it
self is drawing and gathering, that it may be known within, even to those who
have been astray therefrom, that the one Fold, the one Succor, the one Food,
the one Shepherd, the one Refuge, the one Spirit, the one Heart, and the one
Mind may be known, and so the One God, in the one only Unity worshipped,
served, and praised, from the Power, Life, and Virtue of the one Spirit which
comes from the only One God of Heaven and Earth, before whom let the Heathen be
Astonished, and the ungodly fear and Tremble, and the Brambles of the Earth
prepare, for the day of his Righteous Judgments, and Fiery Indignation, which
as the breadth of his Nostrils, being mixed with Flames of Endless Burnings, he
will plead with his own open Adversaries, which shall be more fully manifest in
the great Day of the Lord, when all Mankind must give an account to him both of
idle and wicked words; and likewise of their deeds done in the body. The Lord
God hasten that day, and let him come, even him who comes as a Thief in the
Night, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who said, I am the Truth, the Spirit whereof
the World cannot receive, but we have known him, and received him, and know
that he is true, and have believed on him, and have often drunk of the Living
Water that springs up unto life Eternal, in those that truly believe. And
this I say, forever blessed are they that believe and endure to the End, for
whom Gods Crown of Life is prepared, and for all who give up their Lives, and
suffer faithfully, for the Honor of him, who has so far honored them, as to
account them worthy to bear their Testimony, and to suffer for him: In the
which I say, The Lord preserve my Friends and Brethren every where, who have
tasted of Gods loving kindness, and remain sensible at present of the meekness
of his love. And let all Friends so dwell in the faith which is the gift of
God, over the World, as to live thereby, and not to lose the Crown of Glory,
and Immortality which was desired from the breathings of the seed in the day of
Jacob's Captivity; and the Lord God of my Life preserve and defend the plants
of Righteousness even by his own Power and his own Spirit, in that day and at
that time, when all other helps may not be available, that then the sufficiency
of the Greatness of his own Wisdom and strength may be apparent, and then most
happy shall those be, who are found worthy to suffer, and endure all manner of
Trials, Cruelties, and Hardships for him and his Names sake, and to live and
reign and enjoy his unutterable Peace and Rest, which is in himself treasured
up as a full Reward, and much more then could have been expected for the
Upright in Heart, who end their days in Truth, and finish their Course in
Righteousness, and lay down their Lives for his sake, to live with him for
evermore.

And this is that thee and others may hear from me, and know that I remain in
the service of God, and in faithful Long sufferings, for the Gospel of his Son
as at this day, being the 6th of the 7th Month 1662. In the straight Prison at
Winchester, where I am known by this name, Humphry Smith.

THE END.

