AN ALARM, Sounding forth unto all the Inhabitants of the Earth, as a warning
before the Vials of everlasting wrath be poured forth upon them.
THE Lord of Hosts, whose Name (...) whose Way is everlasting, whose (...)
^^^^reth for ever, whose Power is unlimited, (...) Mercy endures for ever;
whose judgments are just and true, and all his Ways are equal; whose
presence is dreadful unto all the double minded; whose bright appearance is a
fierce Whirlvvind of fire, and his voice as the terribleness of many Thunders;
all the bowels of the Earth are ripped open by the dread of his powerful voice;
and all the created Earthly things passes away as if they had not been,
because of the presence of the Almighty, and the fierce terror of the Lord of
glory, who is now arising as a Giant unto the battle, and as a mighty man of
valor unto the War; Who a long time has held his peace, and hid his face, but
now says the Lord, will I arise and roar like a Lion, and utter my voice like
a man of war; yea I will arise as a Lion out of a Thicket, and a young Lion out
of the Forest; and I will thunder from Heaven, and darkness shall be upon the
Earth, and with the fire of my jeal^usie shall the wicked be consumed, and the
ungodly as the smok^ that v^n^sheth for ever.

Wherefore come all ye brambles of the Earth, and gather your selves together
all ye briars, thorns and thistles, and all ye strong oaks and tall cedars;
yea, all ye fruitless trees tha^ long have cumbred the ground, behold, the day
is at hand that you shall be consumed for ever and as the stubble ready dry
before an unquenchable fire, [that is kindled with the fierceness of the Wind
of the Nostrils of the Most High] so shall all the bram^^^^ of the earth be.
Wherefore assemble your selves together O ye Heathen, and stand up to judgment
O ye Princes and Rulers of the Earth, and prepare to meet the Lord, whose
Trumpet is sounding an Alarm out of the holy Mountain to gather the whole host
of the Heathen to battle, and the people who know not God to the slaughter of
the great King. A rise ye Idol shepherds, awake ye blood thirsty Rulers, stand
up together ye fatted Bulls, let all the wild Horses stand to the battle, says
the Lord of Hosts, that I may pour out my indignation like fire upon them, and
consume them as in a moment for ever; that I may give you blood to drink, and
fill you with torment for evermore; for thus says the Lord, Once more will I
arise and confound mine Enemies, and ease me of mine Adversaries; and I, even I
will fill the Heathen with horror, and all mine Enemies with the blackness of
darkness; a fire will I kindle in the bowels of the scornful, and in the proud
shall the flames burn for evermore; and all the Earth shall know that I the
Lord in the midst of them am mighty in power, and that none is able to deliver
out of my hand: Therefore shall the shepherds howl for ever, and the Priesthood
of England be confounded and covered with a perpetual shame; the Nations afar
off shall hiss at them, and the Ages* to come shall call them accursed; for the
day is at hand that not a Tongue of all the dogs of Egypt shall be lifted up
against the seed that long has groaned under the bondage of cruel oppressors,
who bite with their teeth, and imagine evil upon their beds, and lay snares for
the souls of the innocent, and watch for iniquity to devour the simple

Therefore shall these things come upon you, an unbelieving generation, whose
hearts are hardened, ears stopped, and eyes closed, and many of you sealed up
unto the great day of everlasting destruction, which upon you the seed of
evildoers is stealing unawares; neither shall you believe the things that are
hastening upon you, and declared unto you, for the Prophets and Seers are
covered, a deep sleep is upon the brutish Pastors, and the vail is upon the
heart of all who are under the old covenant, and many of them are given up to
the hardness of their hearts, and their consciences are seared, and such have
yet a measure of wickedness to fill up, and then upon them the vessels of wrath
fitted for destruction, shall the flames of everlasting burnings be poured
forth for ever from him that sits upon the Throne,

Wherefore woe to the inhabitants of the earth for ever, woe to the proud and
lofty ones, woe to all the hard hearted, abominable, and unbelieving, the devil
is come down among you, the old Dragon is head in you, the god of the world
has blinded your minds; the subtilty of the Serpent has deceived you, and now
Woe is your portion, you are undone for ever; your King is the Angel of the
bottomless pit; Gog and Magog are your chief Captains; Cain is your Father;
Nimrod the mighty Hunter, the builder of Babel, is your elder brother; the
great Whore is your Mother; Ishmael and you are of one house; Pharaoh and Haman
are your companions; Judas the betrayer of the Just, is near unto every one of
you, and the life of the just cries for vengeance upon your head; the
glittering sword of the Most High is drawn to cut you down for ever; the Ax to
the very root shall now come, and root and branch shall be cut off for ever.

Wherefore all ye Sorcerers, Witches, and sons of the Whore, with all
blasphemers, who say you are Jews, and are not come to the true circumcision,
but servants of sin, and so the Synagogue of Satan; and all you false Prophets
who seed at Jezabels Table, and not at the Table of the Lord, nor never drunk
of the blood of the new Covenant, to cleanse you from all sin, but are daily
drinking the cup of Fornication, now come all together, the Standard of the
Lord is lifted up against you, and you shall have to drink for ever the cup of
the Wine of the fierceness of the everlasting Wrath of the Lord Almighty, and
he will plague you with the Beast and the Whore together for evermore, and your
seed shall be cut off the Earth, and your children from among the living* your
memorial shall rot for evermore, and your Name blotted out from under heaven,
and all that hear of you, shall hiss at you, and an astonishment and a hissing
shall you be unto all people.

Where are Queen Maryes Judges and bloody persecutors? Where are King Char's
his Nobles, and the glory of his mighty men, and the number of his horsemen,
and the multitude of his oppressing army, and unmerciful tyrants, who sought to
drive down all by their devilish power, who were as high in Wickedness,
Tyranny, and cruel oppression, as any of you who are this day thirsting for
blood? Where are your Cardinals, Jesuits, Friars and Monks? Where are your
Bishops, Archbishops, Deacons, and Deans? Where are your Abbots, Abbeys,
Nunneries, and Bishoprics? Where are your Altars, Crosses, Candlesticks,
Tippets, Surplises, and Common-Prayer-books? Where are your Rails about your
Tables, your Organs, Quiresters, and singing-boys.

Even as your eyes have seen the overturning of all these, so shall the
offspring and residue follow after; and then shall the Priests howl, and the
lamentation of the shepherds be heard in all the Land and the great men, and
the rich men, and all the mighty of the Earth shall lament bitterly, and many
of them shall curse their God, and their King; for their Torment shall come in
one day, and there shall be none to deliver; then shall your high places of
Worship be left desolate, and the Temple of the beast destroyed for ever, and
all the Idols burnt with fire, and the abominations of Molech confounded for
ever, and the Whoredoms of the Whore punished with an everlasting destruction;
and all them that have committed Fornication with the painted Harlot, shut up
in the bed of torment and in the Winepress of the fierceness of the Wrath of
the Almighty for evermore.

In that day shall the songs of your Temples be turned into howling for ever,
the place of holy Worship laid desolate, and the dung of your solemn Feasts
spread upon your Faces; your rottenness shall appear, and your unsound parts be
made manifest; the Skirts of the Whore shall be discovered, and all your
nakedness that long in secret have committed Fornication with her, shall now
appear to your everlasting shame.

And this shall come upon you as a Whirlwind, and overtake you as a Thief in the
night, and when you cry peace, then shall destruction upon destruction come
suddenly, and you shall not escape; torment shall take hold upon you; and
anguish shall seize upon your inward parts; a fire shall be kindled in your
bowels for ever, which shall burn, and none shall quench it.

Oh who shall stand in that day! or who shall be able to endure the terror of the
Wrath of the Almighty! surely all the ungodly shall be as the grass that is cut
down in the heat of Summer, and all the unrighteous as Fuel fitted for the
fire: oh! whither then will the sinners fly for help, or the wicked for a
refuge? Where shall the liar stand? or how shall the proud endure? What shall
be the end of them that know not God? and where will they be hid that obey not
the Gospel of his Son? Why certainly into the Lake must they be turned, and
with an utter overthrow shall be condemned for ever, as it is written, The
wicked shall be turned into hell and all that forget God.

Therefore lament, O ye Inhabitants of the Earth, for the Lord is become your
enemy by reason of your sins, he is raining snares as thick as hailstones upon
you, and the wise men shall be taken in their own craftiness; Judges led away
fools, Princes laid in the dust, Diviners turned mad; and a curse will come
upon all your goodly things; your glory shall vanish as the dust, and your
beauty shall be as the dung upon the Earth, your riches shall eat you up as a
Moth does a garment; your chiefest delights will be your greatest torment; for
the Lord is making the Earth empty, and woe to the inhabitants thereof for
evermore, no deliverer in it shall be found, neither yet any to comfort you,
therefore shall the young man weep and wail, and the strong man cry bitterly; in
that day the Priests shall howl, the honorable lament, and the ancient go
mourning all the day long; for the Lord is changing times and seasons, and the
iniquity of the people is ascended up, and the remembrance of the wicked is
come before him, and once more will the Lord shake his hand against the wicked,
as in the day of Sodom, and overturn the oppressors, as in the day of Phar^a^,
and shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea; and this shall be known when
the Lord passes through the Earth with his grounded staff, and battles of
shakings.

And in that day shall your solemn meetings be confounded, your high places
left desolate and your goodly Temples defaced; bats and owls shall then build
in your Steeplehouses, and they shall be for the Fowls of the air to lodge in
the night; the unclean beasts, and spirits of devils do, and shall resort
thither; a den ^or dogs shall it be made; your bells shall come down after your
Organs, and your Temples shattered as the old Abbeys, and a perpetual shame
shall come upon all them that have been, and are upholding the outward temple
made with hands, wherein God dwells not, and they themselve a den of thieves,
and full of rottenness; therefore astonishment of heart shall come within, and
destruction and overturnings without; fear on every hand, and amazment shall
come upon all flesh; then shall the Vine-dressers be ashamed, and them that
preach peace to the Wicked shall no longer be hid.

Wherefore all you that have been Parliament members, and all Judges, Mayors,
Justices, and Constables, and all other Officers and people whatsoever, that
have been upholding the wicked and oppressing the just, and have been hatching
mischief against, and acting all manner of cruelty you could invent upon the
servants of the Most High God; behold, the Lord will kindle a fire in your
bowels, which shall burn in the night-season, and with all your striving against
it, and vain hope, shall you not be able to quench it; and when you should go to
your grave in peace, even then shall the pangs of hell lay hold upon you, and
utter darkness shall compass you in on every side: oh! fierce, furious, and
with unspeakable violence vvil the plagues of God come rolling in upon you
like the unmerciful mighty waves of the Sea, which none can stop; for verily
When I was sick in Prison, and for a long time so weak that neither I, nor any
friend then with me, did never know any one, and recover strength in the body
again; at which time I gave up my life, and took my leave of friends, and lay
down in the Fathers love, not feeling sorrow or pain, friends hardly then
knowing whether I breathed or not; in which time I saw things unutterable: and
though heaven was opened, and two angels by my sides to bear me away into the
everlasting rest, yet was I left only for this end, For the work of the lord
amongst the sons of men for a time, and so came into the body again, and having
seen before the way that all the wicked shall go out. And this I eternally
witness to be true, and now this Paper is written as a warning from the lord by
one that came as from the dead, and yet many of you will not believe.
and plainly I have seen the way that all the wicked shall go, and the place
that they shall abide for ever, and none of their greatness in the world shall
save them from it; and I have seen the place where the innocent (whom you hate)
and all that die in the Lord shall sleep in the infiniteness of fullness of the
Fountain of the Fathers unspeakable mercy, and unlimited love, where they shall
rest in the fullness of God for ever and ever; and the entrance thereinto is
easier, and more to be desired then to fall into asleep, (the sting of death
being taken away.) And this I know, and testify what I have seen and so warn
all you (the Enemies of the Lamb, his dear Members, and your own souls of the
day that is coming upon you, and the vials of Wrath that therein will be poured
forth upon you, who when you have felt torment in your selves, have then let
wrath arise up in You, whereby You have been filled with envy against a
harmless people, upon whom then (to get ease of that torment) You have acted
that cruelty which afterward the light of Christ in Your own consciences has
condemned You for, and the same will condemn all You for ever that repent not.

And these things will certainly come to pass, and then shall all the heathen
know that the Lord is the same that ever he was, and that he has heard the cry
of the oppressed, and seen the affliction of his people, and taken notice of
all your secret contrivances against them who are born of, and led by the
spirit, who are as the sound of the wind unto You, that know not whence they
come nor whither they go, who now suffers by you with Christ, and shall reign
with him for ever and ever, when he who is their life, shall appear to confound
Sions enemies for ever, and overturn the very foundations of the wicked, though
never so great and high, and bring down the mighty from their ungodly seats,
and overturn the inventions of the Wicked, and pour forth everlasting judgment
upon the beast, and all them that bear his mark, or worship his image; and when
the Whore shall have blood to drink, and the mouths of her Merchants stopped for
ever, and all them that love, and make lies their refuge, with all the unclean
and unbelieving (who receive honor one of another) and all the blood-thirstie
turned into the Lake, then shall righteousness spread over the Nations as the
morning-dew, and holiness as the light of the Sun in Summer; and judgment run
down as Water, and peace spring up as a Fountain that overflows, and is never
dry.

In that day shall the poor of the flock be gathered, and the outcasts of
Israel return; deliverance shall come to the captives, and joy to them that have
mourned; the wilderness shall then rejoice, and the desert be glad for evermore;
springs shall arise in the desert, and a Fountain shall be opened in the
wilderness, the Standard of the Lord shall be lifted up on high, the scattered
in the desert, and the meek of the Earth shall flow unto it; Nations shall turn
unto the Lord of Hosts, and people be gathered to the banner of the Most High;
they shall feed together as the Lambs in the morning, and be satisfied as the
Flock in Summer; and then shall Sions mourners be comforted and filled with joy
for ever; then shall they shout aloud for joy, with halelujah for evermore, when
the smoke of the torment of the Whore (her lovers and her brats) ascends up as
the smoke of Sodom for ever and ever.

Then shall glory, and honor, and praise arise from them that were beheaded for
the testimony of Jesus the light of the world, and unto him that sits upon
the Throne, and the captives shall come out of their captivity, and the
prisoner out of the pit; and every bondman shall be s^t at liberty, and those
that are at ease and liberty in the flesh, shall be bound with chains of
everlasting darkness for ever and ever, and they shall be tormented day and
night in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb (who
is light) even all them who will not that he should reign who is the Lamb and
the light; and then shall they see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who wandered up
and down and were strangers and pilgrims on the Earth; these with all their
Seed then shall they see in the Kingdom and Dominion of God, and they
themselves shut out, and so the parable of the rich man and Lazarus shall they
know fulfilled.

Wherefore woe, woe, woe to the Inhabitants of the Earth, and (all you the
Enemies of the Lamb, by reason of the judgments that are) yet to come, for
your proud flesh, which is as the flesh of horses, shall be as dung upon the
Earth, and your flesh is to be given unto the Fowls of the air to feed upon;
for the day of the great slaughter is at hand, and the battle of the great King
shall be set in order, and every battle of the VVarrier is with confused noise,
and garments rolled in blood, but this shall be with burning and Fuel of fire,
and blood shall all them have to drink who are found in Babel the great whore,
that long have made the great men of the earth rich, in whom the blood of all
the Saints is found, from Abel unto this day, wherein she and her children are
thirsting for the blood of all them who believe in the light.

Written upon the seventh and eight days of the second month, by him who
suffers by some of Gogs Army in the House of Correction, and Common-Goal for
Hampshire, called Humphrey Smith.

THE END.
London, Printed for Tho. Simmons, 1658.


