The true and everlasting RULE From GOD discovered, AND That which proves all
things, published from the spirit of truth, to the which Rule the Scriptures
also bears testimony; that all the simple and honest-hearted may see what
Rule they are to walk by to come to perfect peace and rest with God for
evermore. With an addition (to the former) wherein is also showed, what that is
in man which is not to be his Guide nor Rule.

Also, a Testimony of the true Prophet who was to come and is come, and there
was not another; his work witnessed, and truth declared from a feeling sense
and experience according to Scripture. Wherein is also showed, that the
Prophets of God, and Ministers of Christ did preach the light; and so those who
preach the Light now, do therein preach the same doctrine as the Prophets,
Christ and his Apostles did.

With an Invitation from the Spirit of Christ.

The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee of
thy Brethren like unto me unto him shall ye hearken, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. By a servant
of the Lord, and a sufferer for his truth in the house of correction at
Winchester in Hampshire, called Humphrey Smith.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1658.

The true and everlasting RVLE received from God, discovered, etc. that all the
simple and honest-hearted may see what Rule they are to walk by, to come to
perfect peace and rest with God for evermore.
THE Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his
nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul. So man was formed of
that which was earthly, and into that which was earthly, that which was living
was breathed, and that which is living comes from God, which is to keep and
lead men unto God; but man going from that which is living, into that which is
earthly, is thereby led from God, and being led from that which is living, he
is also pleading for another thing then that which is the life to be his Rule
and Guide, and so comes not to be guided by that which is manifest of God in
him, Genesis 2. 7. Romans 1. 19. Now the letter without is not living, but the
breath of life within is, the which living breath man not knowing, goes forth
from it to be guided by the letter which kills, 2 Cor. 3. 6.

But the holy men of God, who walked with God, and were obedient to his will,
and spoke forth and writ scriptures from that which was holy in them, and were
perfect in their generation, they were such who came to be guided by that which
was living in them; and from that men in the days of old called upon the Name
of the Lord, Genesis 6. 28. and they had not a scripture without them to guide
them thereunto. And Enoch walked with God, and so he walked with that which is
living, and not with that which is earthly, neither had he a Scripture (without
him) to be his Rule, and so he walking with him who is the life, came to be
translated that he should not see death, Genesis 5. 24 Heb. 11. 5.

And Noah who was perfect in his generation, found grace in the sight of the
Lord [consider this] he found that by which man comes to be saved; for by grace
man is saved, which grace to all men has appeared; and so Noah found that
which brings salvation, which is the Grace of God in the heart, and thereby
he came to do Gods will, and not by any thing that was earthly, nor from a
scripture without, Ge^. 6 8, ^. Ephesians. 2. 5. and 8. Col. 3. 15, 16. And Noah who
found that by which man is saved, him God blessed, and his Seed, and said, the
fear of you, and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the field; and
they were to multiply, and bring forth abundantly from the living that was
within the earth; for by that comes the increase of God, and with them God
established his Covenant, and so Gods Covenant came to be established with him
who found that in the heart by which man is saved, Genesis 9. 1, 2. and 7, 8, 9.

And the Lord who is the one spirit, was Abraham's Leader from his Kindred and
Fathers house, and so Abraham heard that which was living, and obeyed that
which was spiritual, who had not a scripture to be his Rule; and unto him the
Lord appeared, and blessed, and in the time of grievous Famines he and his Seed
was fed, Genesis 1^. 1, 2. and 7, 1, 9, 1^. and he that is led by the spirit,
comes thereby to receive feedings when the Famine comes upon them who are led
by another thing; and Abraham who followed the Lord, was called the Friend of
God, and he (through believing) became the Father of many Nations, and he saw
the day of Christ the light, and obeyed the Word which lives and abides for
ever, 1 Pe^. 1. 23. and being led by that which is living from his Fathers
House, and out of his Country, so by that which is living was he preserved,
and him God loved, and to him afterward the Word of the Lord did come, saying,
Fear not Abraham, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward. And Abraham
answered the Lord, and the seed which God blessed came forth of his Loins, who
was led by the spirit, Genesis 15. 1. Heb. 11. 8, 9.

And on the contrary, Nimrod who began to be a mighty one in the earth, he went
hunting before the Lord who is the one spirit; and now there is that first
which is earthly, and much earthly wisdom whereby man goes hunting before the
spirit comes, the which should not be, but man should stand still (and not hunt)
and see the salvation of God, and so receive the spirit to lead (or go before)
him, and not to run or hunt before the spirit, but let it lead man, as it is
written, As many as are led by the spirit of God, are the Sons of God, ^om. 8.
14. but Nimrod hunted before God, who is a spirit, and he was one of the seed
of Ham, who was the Father of ^ana^r, whom Noah cursed. And the beginning of
this m^ghty hunters Kingdom was Babel, where the Lord (whom he hunted before)
followed after, and confounded the language of all the that belonged to this
mighty Hunter, who was a mighty one in the earth; and out of this land of Babel
went forth them that built many cities, and afterward there was a people whose
gods were according to the number of their cities; and so see what follows
when man is not led by the spirit of God, (as Noah was, and so preserved) but
hunts mightily before him, being mighty in that which is earthly; first he is
mighty in the earth, then a mighty Hunter, then builds a mighty Tower, whereby
he that is earthly would climb up to heaven (this a figure) and then God
confounded the Language; and afterward those that were in the many Languages
professed God (who confounded the Language) before whom their father Nimrod
hunted; and they being found in that which God confounded, though they
professed God, yet in works denied him, and crucified his Son the Lord of
glory, and writ over his head of the many Languages, Latin, Greek, and Hebrew;
and this was written above him that was the light; and so them now who are of
this stock of Babel, are yet exalted above the light, and count the light, a
weak and low contemptible thing, not able to save it self, much less to save
them that believe in it, and so therein manifest themselves to be of their
fathers, who crucified him that said, I am the light, and said unto him, If
thou be the Son of God save thy self, and so despised him who came to save them
And this is some of the effect of man's hunting mightily in the earth as Nimrod
did before they come to receive the spirit, Gen, 9. 18. and 25. Genesis 1^. 8, 9,
10, 11. Genesis 11. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. John 19. 19, 2.

But Jacob followed, obeyed, and believed the Lord who is a spirit and the
presence of God was with him, and the blessing of the Most High was upon him,
and the Lord promised to be with him (who was as a Worm) in six troubles, and
in seven; and when he passed through the fire and the water, and God gave him a
new Name, and afterward promised to give his seed a Name better then of Sons
and of Daughters; and Jacob was a plain man, and dwelt in Tents, and him God
loved, and he prevailed with God, Isa. 41. 14. Isa. 43. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Ger. 2^.
28. Isa. 56. 5.

And so Nimrod (with his followers) who was mighty in the earth, came to be
confounded, and Jacob who was (little in the earth) as a worm, and dwelt in
Tents, he and his Seed came to be blessed.

And Moses the servant of the Lord, whom God Almighty honored in his
everlasting love, and made him a deliverer unto, and a Judge and Ruler over the
people, Acts 7. 35. he being in Egypt, the Land of darkness and bondage, and
all the seed and Israel of God in cruel oppression, and I do not read that he
had any direction from man or scripture, or any thing else without him, to
guide him at first to refuse to be called the Son of Pharaohs daughter, and the
glory of Egypt, and to choose to suffer affliction with the people of God;
neither do I read that he saw the Angel or glory of the Lord, until after he
was, and had been obedient unto that which God had given into him, (for that
which may be known of God is manifest within, Romans 1. 19.) for it is said in
the scriptures of truth, that it was by faith, He^. 11. 24. that he refused the
evil, and chused the good; and faith is that which is in the heart, Acts 15. 9.
as it is written, If thou believe in thy heart, Romans 10. 9, Acts 18. 37. and of
that faith in the heart God has given to every man a proportion, Romans 12. 6.
and as that (which is but little) in man is loved and obeyed, so man comes to
know more of God, and hear his word of Faith which is in the heart, Romans 10. 8.
and it came into Moses heart to visit the Brethren, and by hearing and
obedience of Faith (then not Scripture) man receives the spirit, Ga. 3. ^.
which is an undeniable truth, which I might prove by a Cloud of Witnesses from
the scriptures which were given forth from the inspiration of God by his holy
servants; and so there being something of God in man, whereby man may (as Moses
did) first refuse the evil, and then choose a suffering state, and so learn to
do well, the sin then comes to be done away, Isa. 1. 16. 17. 18. and afterward
more of Gods endless love and powerful presence is made manifest, and so being
faithful in the little received from God in the heart, man comes to rule over
much, as Moses did, who first learned the obedience of faith in the heart,
though in Aegyp^, and in the time of great persecution, where he was also
despised of his Brethren, yet he obeyed the Word of faith in the heart, and so
afterward to him God appeared, and the Word of the Lord came unto him, and he
talked with God afterward face to face, as a man talks with his friend; and
the many wonders and mighty power of God wrought in, and by him, are recorded
at large in the holy Scriptures for a testimony thereof to last throughout all
generations. And by this faith also afterward the Members of Christ did walk,
2 Cor. 5. 7.

And Joshua who succeeded Moses, was full of the spirit of wisdom, (consider
that) he was first full of the spirit, and so thereby he came to be a Leader
and Ruler over others, and the dread of the Lord fell, and his judgments came
upon them who rose up, or stood against him, and those whom he by the power of
the spirit in him came to rule over; and great, many, and mighty were the
victories that God gave unto this man, who was bold and courageous by reason of
the fullness of the spirit that was in him; and the people hearkened unto him
as they did unto Moses, and he left nothing undone of all that the Lord
commanded Moses, Deuteronomy. 34. 9. Josh 11. 15.

But the Lords people in these days who are led by the spirit of God in them,
are accounted both by Priests, Rulers and people to be drunk or mad, as it was
before when the Son of God (who is the light) was revealed in Paul, Gal. 1. 15,
16. he was accounted by the ruler of the people to be mad, Act. 26, 24. and
when the disciples of Christ had waited, and afterward received the spirit of
truth within, from which they spoke as with new tongues, as the spirit gave
them utterance; at them then many were amazed, others mocked, supposing the^ to
be drunk, Acts 2. 12, 13, 14, 15. and when Hannah prayed in heart, being
grieved in spirit, was esteemed to be drunk, even by Ely the priest, yet she by
her prayers in her heart, obtained her desire of the Lord, who gave her a Son
that knew the Lord, and ministered before him, being yet a child, but the Sons
of Ely the priest (who was in the outward sacrifices) were sons of Belial, and
knew not God, (l^ke the sons of the Priest of England,) 1 Samuel 1. 14. and ^. ^8.

And David, a man after Gods own heart, was as a deaf man and heard not, and as
a dumb man that opens not his mouth being dumb with silence, and held his
peace even from good, until his heart was hot within him, and the fire burned,
then he spoke with his tongue, Ps. 38. 13, 14. Ps. 39. 1, 2, 3. and 9 and
afterward he said, Thy word have I hid in my hear, (which word is as a fire)
That I might not sin against thee; and so that which keeps from sin is hid in
the heart, and that word David said was a lamp to his feet, and a light unto
his pathe^; Which word he kept, and loved the Law of the Lord which is written
in the heart and so was made wiser then his Enemies, and had more understanding
then the ancient, and all his Teachers, Ps. 19. ^0 11. v 4^, 43. ^. 5^. v 67.
v. 81. v. 97, 98, 99, 10^, 101, 102, 1^3, 104, 105.

And all the Prophets of the Lord were led, guided, and directed by the Spirit
of Christ which was in them both in their actions, which sometimes were as
foolishness and madness in the eyes of the professing Jews, and also in their
words, which sometimes were as thunder against the ungodly, though they were
the Rulers of the people; and their words were so terrible against them that
professed godliness, and lived in unrighteousness, that Amaziah the High Priest
said of one of the Prophers, (who speak in the dread of the Lord) That the
whole land was not able to bear his-words, Amos 7. 1^.

And Amaziah the Priest of Bethuel, being not able to bear the Word of the
Lord, therefore he falsely accused Amos of conspiring against the King, Amos 7.
and from the spirit in them did the Prophets with boldness declare against the
wickedness of the Rulers of the people, saying to the poluted City, Thy Princes
are rebelli us, and companions of thieves, they love gi^^s and rewards, and
judge not the fatherless nor the cause of the widow; and such as these are the
adversaries and enemies of the Lord, upon whom he will be avenged, and all them
that trouble his servants. Isa. 1. 23, 24. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6. and it is just and
right for the Friends of Christ to declare against the enemies of the Lord, and
those that decree unrighteous Decrees, and write grievousness which they have
prescribed, and turn aside the needy from judgment, and take away the the
right of the people, that they may rob the fatherles, against these is the hand
of the Lord stretched out, and they are to bow down under the prisoners, and
fall under the slain, Isa. 10. 1 2, 3. 4 and says the Prophet, Woe to the
filthy and polluted City, her Princes are roaring Lions her Judges are evening
wolves, her Prophets are light and treacherous her priests have polluted the
Sanctuary, Zeph. 3 1, 2 3 4. and many more such expressions they used, which
was not railing, but sound words in the fear and dread of the Lord; Read Amos
the first and second Chapters.

And from the spirit of truth in them did they also declare even against such
as were the teachers and leaders of the people, and were made Ministers by a
law of God, which law was then in force, and those Ministers departing out of
the way, and corrupting the Covenant (like the Priests of England) therefore
the Lord made them (as he will these who deny the way the light) base and
contemptible in the eyes of all the people, because they also have been partial
in the Law, Mal 2 8 9. and against such did (and do) the servants of the Lord
declare, they being such shepherds that cannot understand, but are blind,
ignorant, dumb, greedy dogs (these are the worst of dogs) Isa. 56. 10, 11. and
by such is the horrible thing committed, Jer. 5. 30, 31. and the Pastors are
become brutish, Jer. 10. 21. therefore hearken not unto them, Jer. 27. 13, 15,
16. also read Jer. 23. and Ezekiel. 34. for as troops of robbers wait for a man,
so the company of Priests murder in the way by consent, Hos. 6. 9. and one of
the chief of that number is John Hodder Priest of the Parish called Ha^church
in the county of Dorset, for he said, if the Protector would raise an Army to
cut off all the Quakers, he would be the first MAN in it; and there was a
people, the heads thereof judged for reward, and the priests teached for hire,
and the prophets divined for money (is it not so in England?) Mich. 3. 11. and
says the prophet, O ye Priests, this commandment is for you, I will send a
curse upon you, and corrupt your seed, and spread dung upon your faces, even
the dung of your solemn Feasts [hearken ye Priests of England] Mal. 2. 1, 2, 3.
And this was and is sound doctrine, which the itching ears of the false
teachers of your days cannot endure to hear, being found themselves such
cursed children that cannot cease from sin, that were to come in the latter
days; 2. Pet. 2, 14. And those words and many more to the same effect, were
they guided by the spirit of Christ (the light) in them to speak; and from
that spirit they declared against the Rulers, Priests and people, who had the
law or letter, and Moses writings with out them, yet were enemies to the Spirit
of truth within-But the prophets searched diligently to see what, and what,
manner of time the spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, 1, Pet. 1.
11. so that the spirit of Christ was in the Prophets which testified unto them,
and was their rule and guide.

And when Christ came who is the end of the prophets, and the Law, he also
declared against the same generation, as the Prophets did, (and we do) and he
said, They were of their father the Devil, who did his works; notwithstanding
they had the Scriptures and the Oracles of God, and were of the place of the
holy worship, and were zealous and strict therein, even against them did Christ
proclaim many Woes, Matthew. 23. For the word of God had no place in them,
neither could they hear it, Job. 8. 37. 43. but in Christ the light did all
the fullness of God dwell, Co^. ^* 19. and 2. 9. and so he that had the
fullness of God within him, was counted a deceiver, a blasphemer, denied and
crucified by them that had the Oracles of God without them, and read the
Prophets every sabbath day, (yet knew not their voices, Acts. 13. 27.) which
prophesied of him whom they knew not when he was come (who is the light.) And
now we do bare Witness that the light is come, as did Isaiah 6^. 1, 2, 3.
though darkness covers the earth, and gross darkness the people; yet in
him that is the light, does the fullness of God abide, and no man comes to the
Father, (or fullness of God) but by the Son, who is light. And now those that
have the Scriptures, (and call that their rule) in the which they read of
Christ the light, yet the light they deny, and so deny him of whom the
Scripture speaks, and him unto whom all power in heaven and earth is
committed; and so long as they deny him who is the light, unto whom all power
is committed, they cannot receive power from him to become the Sons of God, but
they who do receive and believe in him who is the light, to them he gives power
to become the sons of God, Ioh. 1. 12.

And now the zealous professing Jews Scribes and Pharisees, have the
Scriptures, but they deny him that is the light, and so they are blind; and all
those must needs be blind who hate the light, and deny it; and so the Jews had
the Oracles of God without them, and the Law without them, and Christ the Son
of God without them, and among them, preaching to them, and yet they were deaf
and blind, and of the Devil, for they did his works.

And moreover the disciples of Christ might read the scriptures without them,
and they had him in whom was the fullness of God, among them, with them, or
without them, and yet in many things they understood not, Joh. 12. 16. but were
often asking questions, as in Matthew. 23. 10, 36. Mat. 16. 22. Matthew. 17. 10.
13. 19. Matthew. 18. 1. 21. Matthew. 19. 10, Matthew. 24. 3. John 13. 7. and sometime
they knew not what spirit they were of, Luke 9. 55. and though he had been a
long time with them, yet it was hard for them to know him, Ioh. 1^. 5, 6, 7, 8,
9. and though he had been so long time with them, [consider] (he was with them)
(for with, may be one thing, and in, an other (until he had finished the work
(without them) which the Father gave him to do, Ioh. 17. 4. [Consider] (the
outward work of Christ without, or among the Disciples, may be finished) and he
was at the passover with them, and at the supper with them, and gave his life
for them, and they saw his body broken, and his blood shed without them, and
yet notwithstanding all this, afterward he that is, the light) upbraided them
of unbelief and hardness of heart, Mark 16. 14. Who for a long time had the
fullness of God amongst, and with them, who being with them, said, He that is
with you, shall be in you, John 14. 17. and so they were to wait to receive him
within, and that within was to abide forever, but that without departed away;
but that within was and is to lead into all truth, and be with his to the end
of the world; for that which is in man, is always with him; but that which is
with man, and not in him, may not be always with him. And now the light is in
man, and so he that is with his to the end of the world, is the light of the
World, Who is the Resurrection and the life; who was dead, and is alive, and I
say he lives for evermore; Who has finished his work in the outward things,
to wit, Circumcision, Baptism, the supper, and death on the Cross without the
gate, and is now revealed within, and works all our works in us, and ever
lives to make intercession for us, Isa. 26, 12. Heb. 7. 25. in whose hearts he
is now crying Abba Father, and he that has the Son, has also the Father: To
whom be eternal dominion, glory, honor, and humble obedience for evermore.

And so Christ Jesus being also guided by that of God, or rather the Fullness
of God in him, whereby he finished his Work, and departed away from among them,
and bid them wait for that which should abide with them for ever, and said,
These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you, but the
comforter whom the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you all things,
John 14. 16. 25. 26. and that which teaches all things was to be revealed
within, and until that was come and revealed in them, they did not know all
things; so that that which teaches all things, and shows plainly of the
Father, and abides for ever, is to be received within; and they in obedience
to his command did wait, and their waiting was not in vain; for when the time
was fully come, they did receive the promise of the Father which they had
waited for, and so were filled with the Holy Ghost, Acts 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. as
Joshua was full of the spirit; and in Christ was the fullness of God; and
Stephen was a man full of the holy Ghost; and the desires of such was, That
others might be filled with all the fullness of God, Ephesians, 3. 19. (it is not
filled with the scriptures) and so they being filled with that which was holy,
were by that led into the way of holiness, and with that which was holy in
them, were they to build up one an other, Jude 20. and then they spoke the word
of God with boldness; and after the Son of God was revealed in Paul, three
years after he went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, Gal. 1. 16, 17, 18. and
fourteen years after he went up again to Jerusalem by revelation, Gal. ^. 1, ^.
and so he did not say he went by the scriptures, or any command without him, but
by revelation, and a Revelation is within; and that all the Ministers and
Disciples of Christ did come to be led and guided by his Spirit that was in
them, might easily be proved by many undeniable truths of plain Scripture,
whereby it might more largely appear that they were all led, guided and
directed by the one spirit in them, though the gifts, leadings, and operations
of that one spirit in them was various, as might be read, 1 Cor. 12.

And now most people will grant this before written to be true, That all the
people of God formerly were led by the spirit that was in them; but that men
should now in these days be led by the spirit of Christ in them, is by many
denied, the which thing chiefly is that which I would a little search into, or
rather open to thee from that which has searched me, Psalm. 139. 23. and that
according to the scriptures of truth, if that will be by thee regarded, that so
it might appear unto all that are not wilfully rebellious against the light of
Christ in their own consciences, and also deniers of plain scriptures, by the
which I am ready to prove, That the people of the Lord and Ministes of Christ
were not only led by the spirit of God themselves, but also in their words and
Writings did direct others thereunto, saying, Walk in the spirit; be ye filled
with the spirit; and worship God in the spirit; Gal. 5. 16. Ephesians. 5. 18. Phil.
3. 3. Joh. 4. 24.

But say the people, Though they did walk and direct others to walk by the
spirit, yet are not we now to walk by the Scriptures? and is not the
scriptures now to be our Rule? and are we not to be led by that? To which I
answer, That God changes not; and where does the Scriptures say, That the
Scripture is to be a Rule to walk, or to be led by? and the Ministers of
Christ did not say, As every man has received the s^^i^^ures, so walk; But as
every man has received Christ (and he is the light) so walk Col. 2. 6.
Consider, there is first something to be received, and then there is to be a
walking in the power and strength of that received for a babe is not able to
walk by all the words that may be spoken unto him, until he receive power and
strength within him; and the newborn babes are to receive the sincere milk
of the word, (and the word is in the heart) and then to grow up by that
received 1. Pet. ^. 2, and every man is to walk as he has received of Christ
the light, which comes from the word, which lights every man, John 1. 9. but
every man does not receive that into the good understanding which he is lighted
with, but rather strives against, and hates it; for every one that does evil
hates (not the Scriptures, but) the light Joh. 3. 20. and so they hate that in
which the power stands; but as many as receives him who is the light, to
them, (and to none but them) he that is the light gives power; and he has
gifts for the rebellious, but they hating the light, and his own whom he
lights, receive not him which is the light, and to them he commits no
more, and so they have not power, (yet they may have the Scriptures.) And so
man walks by the strength that is in him, which strength comes from the Word by
which all things were made; and man receiving the ingrafted word, (which is not
the Scriptures) it is able to save the soul; for Christ the light, whose name
is called the Word of God, Rev. 19. 13. is able to save to the utmost all them
that come to God through the light of the World, Christ Jesus; and in him
neither circumcision nor uncircumcision avails any thing, but a new creature;
and as many as walk according to this Rule, (I do not say my writings) peace
be unto them, Gal. 6. 15, 16. and so here was the Rule, which whosoever walks by,
the peace belongs to; but many calls the Scriptures their rule, and have not
peace; but they to whom the spirit is a Rule, from it to them peace comes; and
man being led by the spirit in him, has that to be his rule from whence the
scripture was given forth: And now that which man is directed, guided, and led
by, and by which he tries, measures, or searches things, that sometimes he cales
Rule; and now it is not said the Scriptures searches all things, but the
scriptures is to be searched into, Joh. 5. 39. and it is said, The spirit
searches all things, yea the deep things of God, 2 Cor. 2. 20. Prove. 20. 27
and that spirit which searches all things comes from him who has measured the
waters in the hallow of his hand, and meted out Heaven with a span, and
comprehended the dust of the Earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in
scales, and the hills in a Balance, Isa. 40. 12. and draws a line through the
midst of his people, and lays judgment to the line, and righteousness to the
plummet, and sweepeth away the refuge of lies Isa. 28. 17. and tells the
number of the Stars, and calls them all by their Names, psalm. 147. 4.

And they to whom the spirit is a rule, and are led by it, they are the Sons of
God, Romans 8. 14 and it is not said, as many as are led by the scriptures are
the sons of God, and man is to walk by the same rule of that he has attained,
Phil. 3. 16. and mark them that walk so, and it is said, if ye are led of the
spirit, ye are not under the Law, Gal. 5. 18. but many have the scriptures and
yet are under the Law, but the spirit which is the word, Ephesians. 6. 17. comes
(and has power) to redeem from under the law, which the scriptures does not;
For through the spirit (not scripture) the deeds of the flesh comes to be
mortified, Romans 8. 13. And while Paul profited much in that religion which he
learned from the scriptures, he was an enemy unto Christ the light; but when
Christ was revealed in him, and he obedient to the heavenly vision, then was he
led by the spirit in him to do Gods will, and he did not say, that the mystery
of Christ which in other ages was not made known, was then manifest to him by the
scriptures; but he said that it was by revelation made known unto him, and
revealed to the holy Apostles and Prophets by the spirit, Ephesians. 3, 3, 4, 5. and
he did not say, without scriptures it was impossible to please God, but it is
said, Without Faith is is impossible to please God, Heb 1^. 6 and faith is in
the heart, and purifies the heart; and so without that in the heart (which
purifies it) men cannot please God, and so man cannot please God without being
guided by that (in the heart) which respects no man's person, Jame^ 2 and so
every one is to walk according to that which he himself in particular has
attained unto, and to mind the same thing according to the measure of the rule
which God has distributed, 2 Cor. 10. 13. and that rule which God has
distributed, is the Rule, and no man ought to go beyond it, or boast of things
without, or beyond that measure, or of other men's labors, or things made ready
to their hands, but to give all glory to the Lord, 2 Cor 10, 15, 16, 17. And
this was the rule received from God, which his Ministers walked by, and
exhorted others unto; and so I do not bid people walk by my writings, but by
their measures in them, received from God, and that is living as God is, and of
his own nature, and enables man to do his will, and so fulfills that which is
written without, and that which was given forth from the measure of God within:

What then? do I hereby in the least make void, contemn, slight, vilify or
deny the Scriptures? God forbid; nay, I had rather my pen might fall out of my
hand or my arm, from my shoulder, or my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth
for ever, then I should go about to make void the scriptures of Truth, (and is
a true declaration, Luke 1. 1.) which was given forth from that which is my
life, which is hid not in the scriptures but with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3. and
the Word was God, and that which was God, is God John 1. 1. but if I should say
the Scripture is God, I should be a blasphemer like unto others: Do I herein
deny the Scriptures? Nay, rather I establish the scriptures in its place, and
make use of it as a Cloud of Witnesses by me, in directing all people unto that
which the scriptures testify of, and was given forth from John, 5. 39. that by
it in them they might be enabled to do Gods Will, and witness the scriptures
fulfilled, as it is written, I will walk in them, and dwell in them. 2 Cor. 6.
16. and he is the God of them in whom he dwells, and they are his people in whom
he walks, from whose inspiration the Scriptures came, in the which it is
written, Prove all things, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. and try the spirit; and that which
proves all things, and tries the spirits, comes from the God of the spirits of
all flesh, and from the word of his power, by which all things were made; which
Word in the heart is as fire, which proves, tries, and refineth things, and is
quick and powerful, dividing asunder soul and spirit, and is a discerner of
the thoughts and intents of the heart; and man feeling that, and coming to be
guided by that which searches the heart, and tryes the reins, with that may he
try all things; and so the Rule which man may try all things by, is to be known
within; for there is one thing in man which will try the many things; from the
which one thing within, the false spirits are gone forth into the world; and
those spirits of the World, and all the world by its wisdom, and that spirit
which is without, knows not God, nor the measure of his spirit within; and so
those are the false spirits that are gone forth, which are to be tried by that
which is not gone forth, but abides within, and discerns the heart; and those
that are gone forth from being guided by that within, (as the holy men were)
they are like unto Angels who kept not their first estate; for man at first was
(and Holy men were) guided by that within, which is the word, which word is
truth and he that abode not in truth, (which is in the inward parts) was a
Devil and a murderer, who is called the God of the world that blinds the
minds, and works in all the children of disobedience; and so the Devils
works are in his children and they are talking of the Works of God without
them; but they that are led by the word of truth, that sanctifyeth, cleanses,
and makes free; by it they come to know the works of the devil destroyed which
was in them, 1 John chap, 3. ver. 8 and so he that destroys the works of the
Devil, and makes an end of sin, and brings in everlasting righteousness,
is known in all them that are not reprobates; and so when sin is made an end
of, everlasting righteousness is brought in; and so it is within and not
without; and so he being received within who brings that in which is
everlasting, to that man he is within the hope of glory, and shows plainly of
the Father, and says, Without me ye can do nothing; (it is not said, without
scripture ye can do nothing) and they that are without him, who teaches all
things, are without God in the world; and all they are without him, that are
not in him, nor he in them, but he that has the son, has the Father also; and
he that has the Father and the Son abiding in him, needs not to go out from
that, to be taught or led by any other thing or rule without him, as it is
written of him that overcomes, that he shall no more go out, and upon him
that goes not out, the new Name comes to be written, and he comes to be a
pillar in the Temple of God who goes not out, Rev. 3. 12. and the Name which
is better then of Sons and Daughters, even the everlasting Name that shall
never be cut off, is given to them within the house, and within the walls, even
to such as take hold of the Covenant, Esa. 59. 4. 5, and the Sanstuary is set
in the midst of them for evermore, Ezekiel. 37. 26, 27, 28. and in the midst of
them will the Lord spread forth his hands as one that swimmeth, Isa. 25. 11.
and though Ephrain compassed the Lord about with lies, and the house of Israel
with deceit, yet says the Lord unto Ephraim, I am God and not man the holy one
in the midst of thee, Hos. 11. v. 9. 12. And so Ephraim compassed him about
with lies, who was in the midst, and he that was in the midst was holy, though
compassed about with lies, and the just Lord was in the midst o^ the filthy
polluted and opressing City, Zeph, ^3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Consider this all you
polluted ones, that oppress the just in the midst of you; for the just Lord in
the midst will arise as a Lion out of a Thicket and a young Lion out of the
forest; he shall roar like a Lion, and utter his voice like a man of War, Isa.
42. 13. 14, 15. and then shall his enemies be scattered, Psa 68 1* and he will
sweep away the refuge of lies; therefore the daughter of Zion, and the daughter
of Jerusalem, and Israel shall be glad; for unto them it is said, The Lord is
in the midst of thee, thou shall not see evil any more: In that day shall it
he said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not; and to Zion, Let not thy hands be slack,
the Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty he will save, Zeph. 3. 14, 15,
16, 17. and he that is mighty to save is known in the midst; and so he that
justifies is near, Esa. 50. 8. even he who has said, I will dwell in the
midst of the children of Israel for ever, and my holy Name shall the house of
Israel no more defile, Ezekiel. 34. 7.

For the Lord has chosen Zion, he has desired it for his habitation, this is
my rest for ever; here will I dwell, for I have desired it; I will abundantly
bless her provision, I will satisfy her poor with bread; I will also cloth
her Priests (not the Priests of England) with Salvation and her Saints shall
shoute a loud for joy; there will I make the horn of David to bud; I have
ordained a Lamp for mine anointed, his em^mies will I clothe with shame, but
upon himself shall his crown flourish. Psalm. 1^2, 13 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

And every man that has his hope in him, purifieth himself even as he is
pure; 1 Ioh. 3. 3.

A short discovery of that in Man, Which is not to be his guide nor Rule.
NOw Christ Jesus being come, who shows plainly of the the father, and came
out from him who is the God of Order, he says no man knows the Father but
the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him, Man. 11. 27. and no man comes to
the Father, but by him, and its not said no man comes to the Father but by the
Scriptures, nor none knows the Father, but they to whom the scriptures reveal
him, and many have the Scriptures but know not God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who does not say come unto the Scriptures, but says search the
scriptures and come unto me, and he is meek and low in the heart, even the
light within, which came from him, who said, I am the light, come unto me, and
that his should not go out from him within, when wars, dasolation, and
destructions comes, therefore says he to them, in patience possess ye your
souls, and patience is in man, and the soul is within, and he foreseeing the
many deceivers and antichrists that would come, one crying Lo here, and
another Lo there, and that many would follow their pernitions ways, by reason
whereof the way of truth (which makes free) would be evil spoken of, and that
if posible such would deceive the very Elect, therefore says Christ, if they
shall say behold he is in the desert, go not forth, Mat 24 26. and this is a
command of Christ which all that talk of his Ordinances and commands should
chiefly observe, and then they would not follow them who are pleading for sin,
and so in the Serpents nature, creeping into houses, with his wisdom, leading
them captive, who are laden with sin, neither would they believe them that say
he is in the secret Chambers, (where the most subtilest serpents are creeping
together) and confined to their privates meetings, for the light shines in and
over all, as the lightning shining from the East unto the West, so is the
coming of Christ, Gods power suddenly, as a thief to all them that are in the
darkness, but waited for by all them that are in the light, and there is
nothing done in secret chambers among the serpents, that shall not be made
manifest, but those that obey the command of Christ, who says go not forth,
will not follow them that preach him (or an other) in another place, as a
private chamber, or a far off, or without, or in the desert, for the true
ministers preached Christ within the hope of glory, that all men who are not
reprobates, might come to know Christ the light in them.

For the Kingdom of God was in the wise zealous Pharisees and yet by their
wisdom and knowledge, and learning in the Scriptures without them, they knew
not the kingdom of God which was in them, but denied him who was the light of
the world, that came to preach it, and show it unto them, and preached the
kingdom of God at hand, not afar off, in another Region, nor in the desert or
another place, or country, not another time, but he who was in the Church in
the wilderness, says to day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts in sin until many years hence, for the Kingdom is nigh at hand,
salvation being come to the house, which house are they whom God dwells in, who
hears his word in the heart, from the which whosoever goes forth, to be led by
any other thing (or man) whatsoever to seek him in whom is the fullness and
power of God are deceived, and receives not the power, nor him in whom is the
fullness of God, and so they are still seeking and never satisfied, neither
receive that which they seek for, and all that thus go forth, hunting, (like
Esau) after that without, they break the command of Christ, who said go not
forth.

And many there are who let their minds go forth, busying themselves about the
body of Christ without, and earnestly disputing about his body (flesh and
bones) in the darkness of their minds like the Devil about the body of Moses
and those are they that have broke his command, who said go not forth, and
believe in the light, which light is within, and the command is in it, and they
going forth from it, are out of the light, and so out of the command, and are
conceiving something in the wrong ground, from what is written without them, and
these keep out the Law which is written in the heart, and so look more at the
things without, then at the light within, whereby to see that which may be
known of God in them, and such are still like the men of Galile, who stood
ga^ing after him that was gone up into heaven (and taken out of the sight of
all them that gazed abroad) and knew not that which was near, but stood gazing
after one that was gone, not minding the two that was with them, neither saw
them that were by them, who at last reproved these gazers, Acts 1. 1^, 11. and
after they were reproved by that which was near, for gazing after that body
which ascended up afar off, then they returned from gazing and wandering abroad,
unto Jerusalem and there continued, until they were filled with the Holy
Ghost, and so then that which was holy was revealed in them, and by that in
them which was holy, did they after build up one another, and we know that as
he ascended (out of their sight who gazed after that afar off, and knew not
that which was near) even so does he come again, out of the sight of all such,
and so they see him not, but are still gazing and seeking after him, and will
not receive reproof, neither turn in, where the power is to be received,

And there were many young men, who had not received a double portion of Elijah
spirit, that were very earnest to send and seek after the body of Elijah. but
Elisha who had received adouble portion of the spirit, looked no longer after
the body of Elijah or that which departed out of his sight, or the sight of the
carnal eye, and also forbad the other young men for looking after it, but they
would not forbear seeking abroad, until many men had sought several days and
then they returned, after they had sought in vain, and found not him with the
carnal eye, would see (which eye must be blind) 2 Kings ^. 1^, 16, 17. but
many there are now, who have not received the spirit of Elijah, who have looked
many years for the body, and have not found it, neither yet return from going
forth, and wandering in their dark minds to seek that which I know they shall
never find; for if any might have found it, why not I, (who was once wise,
though now a fool) who sought long with carfulnesse, therefore let such
wandering stars understand, that it was not he which had received a double
portion of the spirit of Elijah that sought after his body without, but them
that had not received that spirit, and though they sought that body which was
taken up into heaven, yet they never found it, neither shall ever such see that
body of Christ they look so much after, who break his command in going forth,
from the guidance of his light in them, for they that sought the body of Jesus
in the grave found it not, but had one nearer them, that they knew not, who
reproved them for seeking the living among the dead, and said he is not here,
but is risen, so he was risen out of the sight of that eye which he came to
blind, John 9, 39, and the eye being yet dark which he came to open, they were
much perplexed and afraid, and bowed their faces to the earth when they saw two
men stand by them in shining raiment, and this was that which the other eye was
to see, and these were they who were much perplexed, who sought after the one
that was dead but now alive, and a cended out of their sight, who were afraid
of them, ^. Who were near and manifest in their sight, as they expected not,
Luke 24. 4, 5, 6.

And they that had not received the comforter, the spirit of truth within, were
reasoning as they went along about the man Christ Jesus, and these who thus
reasoned about him without, had not received him within, and they who had the
strong reasons were in the emnity to God who is light, Isay ^^. 1. and the
disciples that reasoned their eyes were holden that they knew not him which
caused their hearts to burn within them, and was with them, and preached to
them, and opened to them the scriptures, preaching the resurrection to them
whose eyes were opened, when he break bread unto them, and they shall never dye
who eat that bread which is given by him who came and stood in the midst of
them that had followed him, and said peace be unto you, and he that stood in
the midst, is the light, (and the light shines in darkness) even the son of
him, that will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel for ever.

And this is he that opens the understanding, and appears unto his Lambs, in
the power of the fathers love saying, Children have you any meat? but they
answered him no, who had Christ without, John 21. ^. but with them who have
meat he feeds, and they with him, at the table of the Lord [not of Devils]
who comes in unto them, and sup and dine with them, and they with him, who
feeds them with the bread of God which gives life unto the world, of which he
is the light, he that can receive and understand these things, let him.

And Mary who went while it was yet dark to seek the body (of him that was
crucified) in the grave [as many are now in the dark (before the light is
received) seeking him in the earthly] yet she found not the body, but she had
left him behind, who was the light and the life, and she turned her self back,
before she saw her Lord, and then she knew him not, but when he said Mary,
self was turned, and she called him master who is the light, John 20. 1^. and
many that looked after that body and bones that was crucified were troubled,
much perplexed and terrified at him that abode not in the earth, and were
troubled and much afraid of him who did appear again unto them according to his
words, and how hard was it for them to know him, that had been but very few
days from them, and how hard is it for them to know him now that never saw
him, and how hard it is for them to receive him who deny and hats that which
terrifies and troubles them, for Christ was near Do thou k^^w that which
troubles thee and is thy life now in it, or have thou tried that thing, and
whether it will lead thee out of all sin, and trouble or not?
those disciples that were terrified and troubled, but they knew him not, but
when he that troubled them (and caused them to tremble, and their hearts to
burn within them) had opened their eyes and understandings, then they knew
him, and loved him at whose presence before they were troubled, and then they
turned back (mark that, they turned back) and waited to receive him within,
whom they had seen without, and when they were turned back and were within,
Jesus stood in the midst and when the doors were shut, he came and stood in the
midst, [therefore I say enter thou into thy closet and shut the door, for there
is a door to be shut] and when they that were within had received him within,
by whom they had been terrified and troubled then (and not before, they
preached him unto the world who troubled and terrified them, and them who
troubled and terrified the world, and caused many to tremble, and be pricked to
the heart, and then some who were troubled gnashed with their teeth at those
who preached him, that troubled them, and whole cities were troubled, and
against one of those harmless Lambs of Christ who preached him, that
perplexed his disciples, did the professors cry out, saying, men of Israel
help, Act 21. 28. [many professors cry out for more help against one professor]
and all the City was in an uproar against one of them that preached him by
which people are cut to the heart.

And so the preaching of him now that did trouble and terrify us, who is now
our life, does trouble perplex and terrify both Priests, Baptists,
Independants, yea all professors and people of the world, and whole Towns,
Cities, Countries and Nations.

Oh the blindness of the professors, and the ignorance of of the prudent are
they not all to keep silence in this day of light, where is the wise, let the
disputer come forth, let the deviners join together, my heart is even broken
for them all, and my bowels are turned within me, Oh that I might enter with^n
their walls, and be received with that in which the wisdom of man does not
stand, why will the disputers stand to reason about that they know not, and why
do they let the veil be thickened over their hearts, when can they understand
the things of God, or perceive the hidden tresures of the mysteries of his will.

Oh that the hearts of the simple among the wisest of them might be opened to
receive instruction, and that in meeknes they come to wait and turn to receive
him, that is near unto them all (and that they might let the tender principle
now arise in them, to bring them into meekness that they might come to receive
him (that sometimes troubles them) upon whom the spirit of wisdom, of
understanding, of counsel and of the fear of the Lord does rest forevermore,
that of him they might learn, and so no more to go forth, nor to err not
knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God; but that they might receive power
to overcome the world and their sins, and to become the Sons of God, and to
have the Scriptures opened in them, by him who is the light that sometimes
causes their hearts within them to burn.

And this in the tenders of my Fathers love, would I have all professors
consider, that this command, where Christ says go not forth, is a chief
command of great concernment to every one that profess his Name; for he says
he that is with you shall be in you, and until they had received him within,
they were to be quiet and stay waiting together, and not run up and down,
preaching the body of Christ without, before they had received his life within:
And his life is that which saves from sin and wrath to come.

Therefore now the light of Christ being in man, from it he is not to go forth,
but wait in the light which discovers sin, until by it he come to receive
power to overcome the sin, for there is none to go forth to seek him in the
desert or the private chambers, nor to follow any of them that say lo here or
^o there, for all they are not to be believed, neither let any man or woman be
so mistaken, as to think that we (in scorn called Quakers) are any of that
number which cries lo here and lo there, for I do not bid any man go forth
from that which is manifest of God in him, to any place, or outward form, or
image or invention of man, or command without, or any thing done in private,
neither indeed do I so much as bid them come forth from the light of Christ in
them to follow my writings, and take that to be their rule, guide, or Leader,
but that by my writings, words, example and sufferings they might be informed
(even by this without them) of that which God has freely given into them, by
that to be guided and that to be to them a Rule of life, and by it to be led
into all truth, for its the spirit received within, which leads into all truth,
even into the truth it self, of which I declare, and so people being come to
be guided by that which is of God in them, this will abide with them for ever,
and that in them may be with them, when they have neither my writings, words
nor person without them, as at that present by them, therefore I say unto all,
as Christ did, go not forth.

And to this very end were the scriptures written, that men might come to
receive and attain to the knowledge of the Son of God and his mighty power
manifest in them, to destroy sin and reconcile unto God, and to be led by him
as a shepherd, who shows unto his all things plainly of the Father, and so to
be taught of the Lord, and come to be guided by him, and need not any man teach
them.

A short discovery of that in man which is not to be his guide nor Rule.
ANd now seeing man is gone so far forth from the life of God that was first
breathed into him, and that by his rebellion against the light, and
transgression of the command of that power whereof man was made and by his
degeneration from the holy life of that breathing spirit, which at the first in
him gave an eternal life unto the soul, and that by the continual receiving
in, and following of that which at first led man forth from the life of God,
which was breathed into him and that by man's continual grieving of that spirit
which gives life and being to all things living, and also by reason of the
multiplyings and increasing o^ that mystery of iniquity in fallen man, which
has ever since the fall ruled over, and guided him in that which is contrary
to the upright innocent life of God, whereby man is become brutish in his
knowledge, Jer 10. 14. and the minds wholly darkened, and the understanding shut
up in the womb of obscurity, from receiving that which comes from God, and is
freely tendered unto man to Rule, lead, guide and direct man in the way of
uprightness, and in the plain simplicity and fool^shnesse of God, into which
the wisdom of the World can never enter.

And seeing that by reason of these things, there are many things which have
gotten entrance into the heart and mind of man, so that man being in the many
things cannot but all offend, and seeing those many things in men does draw
forth their minds whereby they are exercised in many and various things,
proceeding from the power of darkness, whereby even the simplicity in many
have been betrayed and deceived, sometimes by following of that which in them
has appeared, as an Angel of light, the which some receiving and becoming
subject unto it in them has wrought in all manner of deceiveablenesse; and
lying wonders, the fruits whereof has been, even brought forth in open view,
not only in former ages, but also in this your days, even in this nation,
among them called Ranters, and diverse others that might be named, and such who
once professed the living truth, but abode not in it, who also have gone forth,
from the meek thing, in which Gods wisdom and fear is placed to follow the
evil motions of the Prince of the air, who works in the vain ayry light
minds.

And that none may believe a Lie, and so foll^w something in them, which moves
in the dark mind, and take that to be the ture guide, or rule, and that none
may be deceived, through a mistake, of what I have here intended, neither yet
through ignorance by reason of the want of the true knowledge of that which is
of God in man, which [in him] is perfect, and there is placed not only to be
his Rule, guide and leader in the way of life, but also with it to rule and have
dominion over all other creatures of God, and to rule and order them to the
glory and praise of him, who at first made man honorable in dominion over all
these things, by that which was the breath of the God of life in him,

Therefore first let all people take heed of following their own spirits, for
their own spirits are also in them, the which I do not bid them follow, for
they were false prophets, who followed their own spirits, and had seen nothing,
Ezekiel 13. 3. and these that followed their own spirits, though they spoke never
so great and many words, and as in the name of the Lord, as some do at this
day, by whom the living truth of God does suffer, yet against such as these did
and do the prophets declare, who were and truly are guided by the eternal
spirit of truth, which was and is in them, and guides them in faithfulness to
testify against those who say, thus says the Lord, and the Lord had not
spoken unto them, but they had seen a false vision.

Secondly, I do not bid any man follow the thoughts of his own heart, for
there is a heart which is hard, even hardened in sin, the works of darkness
and receives not the light, neither yet loves it, which is the old heart, that
remains in all them in whom the old man is yet alive, and not put off, and
the thoughts of that heart is vain, and out of the abundance of that heart the
mouth speaks folly, and the lips utters perverseness, and all manner of
fruits of disobedience is brought forth, and that is the heart, which yet
remains in all them, who have not received the spirit of of God, to become
his sons and obey his Will, Jer. 23. 16, 17.

Thirdly, I do not bid any man follow his own imaginations, though they also
arise from within him, for I have found by experience, that the imaginations of
the thoughts of the hearts of the Sons of men are evil continually Genesis 6. 5.
and much most desperate wickedness, blasphemy, heresy, and the like, have
been brought forth by many in these Nations, who have followed their own
imaginations, speaking great swelling words, pretending great ayry things,
which indeed are without substance, which that transsforming prince of the air
has suggested into their dark minds, who then follow their own devices, Jer.
18. 12.

Fourthly, I do not bid any man follow the spirit of the world, for we who have
believed, and obeyed him, who said I am the light and follow me, for we have
not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God that we might know
the things that are freely given unto us of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12. and so that
spirit of the world, which in words seems to profess God, but in works deny
him, having a large cloak of religion, but continue in sin, and
unrighteousness, making long prayers like the Pharisees, and having sin lie at
their door like Cair, talking much of God and Christ and the scriptures, and
yet have men's persons in admiration because of advantage, whose faith is vain,
having a form of Godliness, but denying that power which saves from sin, and
so deny Christ, yet intruding into those things he has not seen, being vainly
puffed up with the fleshly mind, that spirit in man which so guides him I deny
for ever.

And that man may the better understand, what that is which he is to love and
wait to receive, by it after received to be his rule guide and leader and
leading him in the narrow good old way of life, unity, peace and love, which
all the holy men of God walked in, which is a pure way of holiness [then not
of hypocricy and sin] where the ransomed of the Lord does walk, and where the
waifairing men, though fools shall not ere, therefore I declare that man is to
be silent and quiet and wait to receive the spirit of meekness, patience,
gentilnesse and long suffering, and so come to know something borne of the water
and of that spirit, which truly calls God Father, and in which no evil
stands, and out of which does not arise any perverseness impatience,
distrust, envy nor prejudice toward the person of any man but is pure, lamb
like, harmless, undefiled and thinks no evil, the which being received
obeyed and abode in, it guides unto and keeps man in perfect peace, out of
the reach of the devouring nature of the wild beast^ of the field, so that
unity, peace passing understanding eternal felicity, joy in the holy Ghost,
and love unchangable is enjoyed for ever, and there is no boasting nor exaiting
above or beyond the measure received from God.

And they that have received this measure and dwell in the spirit of the Lamb
which comes from God, who is love, it thinks no evil, neither is it easily
provoked, and this is that which was in Esaiah, and so ruled him, and in him
Ruled over all his natural passion that he could give his back to the smiters,
and his cheek to them that plucked off the hare, and hid not his face from
shame and spitting, and this is that which comes from the God of love, which
can bear all things, hope all things, endure all things.

And that man may come to receive this spirit, and have it always in him to
the end of the world, ruling him in the fear of God, and leading him to the
eternal dominion of the God of order, and that man may know the true and
infalable thing, which is most assuredly given into man, to lead him to the
enjoyment of the God, of the spirits of all flesh

Therefore let all people (in what forms or state soever) have their minds
turned to that in them, which lets them see their sins, and every evil thought
and evil motions of the enemy in the dark mind, before it be brought forth
into the act of sin by word or action, and that in them, which lets them see
this, which is evil before it be acted, as they love it, believe in it and
obey it, it will keep them from the acting of that which they are tempted to,
and that in them which lets them see the evil, and that they should not sin
is the only thing which God has plased in man, to keep him from acting the
evil, and from sin, and by it may all mankind receive power to withstand sin,
and stay the first appearance of that which is evil, and the nature and
property of it (being loved) is to destroy sin where it is, and to keep out of
it, and kill that from whence the motions to sin would arise, and this is that
which led me out of sin, when no other ways, helps or means could be found,
and that which shows man his sin, and leads out of sin and gives power over
it, is a certain rule to follow and walk by, for it does never lead into sin,
and that which lets see the motions of sin, and leads out of all sin, is
absolutely that which comes from him in which there is no sin, and certainly
as true as the Lord God lives, this is that which leads up, even to the Lord
God of life, and this is his free love who gave his son to them that asked not
for him, and his Son is the light which is the gift of the Fathers Love: given
to the Rebellious, that he might be manifest to them that asked no for him, and
that he might be found of them who sought him not, that he might dwell in them
who did rebel, and gather them nere who were afar off, this is Gods eternal
love, and the gift of his grace unto all mankind, who wills not that they
should dye in their sins, and these are the true and faithful sayings of God,
and that which will stand for ever, and in the presence of the Lord God of life
and of his holy Angels I do declare, that this is that which God has placed
in man to rule him in his fear that by it he may come to rest eternal, and in
the face of men and devils (who oppose the truth of God) I do affirm that
there is no other Rule, ways, means, or name by which man shall ever come to
walk with God, but by that which is manifest of God in him, even the light of
Christ Jesus the Son of the living God, according to the Scriptures.

But we boast not of things without our measure, but according to the measure
of the rule, which God has distributed to us, A measure to reach even unto you
(who have not known the Rule) according to 2 Cor. 10. 13.

The true Prophet who was to come, is come, and there is not an other, his
work witnessed, and truth declared from a feeling sense and experience
according to Scripture.
THe true Prophet is come of whom Moses the servant of the Lord did write, who
is raised up in the midst, and has rent the veil, and from under death is
risen in his unlimited power, Dominion and authority, even him that death nor
the grave can not hold, who through death has conquered death for ever and
though death had power over him, before the way into the holiest of all was
made manifest, yet death now has no more dominion over him, but he is risen
through death, who was made a curse, and has borne away the curse, and removed
the cursed ground upon which fallen man stood, and has borne away the sin of
the world, and was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of
God through, in, and by him who has opened the understanding, whereby the
unsearchable riches of unspeakable love comes to be made manifest even unto us
who were going astray, and were children of wrath as well as others, and aliens
and strangers to the covenant of Grace, and long were without God, and in the
World, tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine, after the cunning
craftiness of man, whereby we were long deceived, even by such who still
bewitch the minds of the simple; out of which wicthcraft I can say the Lord
has delivered, and obedience to the truth (that makes free) is yiedling, and
love, mercy, and judgment is come and brought forth, and victory is witnessed,
the Messenger of the everlasting covenant is come, even he that we long waited
for, and we do not look for any other, but he that is the same yesterday, to
day and for ever, who was to come, and is come, (he that reads let him
understand) who is without beginning of time, or end of days; who is made
under the Law, and became as a servant, being obedient to the death, through
which the life is risen up into the understanding, and has borne away that
which the Law has power over, and has brought in that by which the Law is
fulfilled; and so he that is the end of the Law, for righteousness is felt and
received, who takes away the sin and reconcileth the world up unto the Father,
where the sin is taken away by him, who though he was made sin, yet knew not
sin; who appears now the second time without sin, to the saving of that which
was lost, which is now brought again, and plentious redemption is known; for
the desire of all Nations is come, and the second house is filled with glory;
the wine press is full, the Fats overflow, for the winter is past, and the
Summer is come, and the Lillies appear in the field where the Pearl was hid;
the fig tree puts forth her buds, and the vine yields her increase; the olive
does blossom, and the apple tree in the midst of the wood does flourish, and
the good ground yields her increase and is fruitful in its season to the good
husbandman; and there is seed to the sower, and bread to be eater; the Barns
are filled with abundance, and the storehouses with plenty, and treasure is
laid up for many years in the heavenly places, which are purified with the
living sacrifices, so that the earthen vessels are fitted to keep the heavenly
Manna that shall dure throughout many generations; and so against the famine
comes upon the earth, (and all them that feed at Jesabels Table) oil is laid up
in safty and the finest of the flower in a place where it is sure, where it
will last and never fail until the Heathen are scorched with heat, and they
that have forsaken the Lord are become as a parched Heath, and all the gods of
the heathen famished, and the tongue of the Egyptian Sea dried up, and all the
false prophets overturned who belong to Jezable, whose body the dogs must tear,
though she yet sits as a Queen in opposition to the true prophet Christ the
light; and until them who are drunk with the wine of the fornication of the
Whore and are the merchants of Mystery Babylon the great the mother of all the
painted Harlots be all condemned in one day with an utter overthrow, and the
seat of the Whore removed, and all them that commit fornication with her made
as the valley of Hamon Gog, and as the dung upon the face of the Earth; and all
the brats of the whore dashed against the stones: until then I say shall that
in store remain, and a hiding place be found for the prophet of the Lord who is
also hid near thee in thy own Land, though thou art seeking him afar off.

Wherefore hear O* ye kindreds of the earth; for as the dwe spread upon the
mountains, so does the streams of my beloved arise, overspreading the earth
with the comeliness of his love, and filling it with the beauty of his Grace;
the banner of his love is spreading forth as a curtain and under the shadow of
his wings is a certain hiding place, both from the storm and from the heat;
and though the Sea rages, and all kindreds and tongues swell up in wrath, pride
and arrogance, yet he is come, known, witnessed and received, who commands both
the winds and the Sea, who is the former of all things, by whom they all were
made, and at his command all are subdued; and the lightenings of his light
enlightens the whole world, Psalm. 97. ^. and the glory of his power is
spreading over the nations, and the excellency of his beauty is reaching to his
lambs; and because of his comeliness the virgins love him, and to him the
daughters of Jerusalem bring their gifts, and before him the princes of the
people lay down their crowns; and because of him the wilderness does rejoice
and the desolate is made glad; for the fruitful Land was become a barren
wilderness, and the barren wilderness is turned into a fruitful field, and
now the plant sprung out of a dry ground, and the seed is born of the baren
womb, and there is a way made in the Wilderness, and streams are given in the
desert, and the ear of the deaf is opened, the lame does walk, and the Leaper
is cleansed, and the stammering tongue speaks plainly; the Gospel is received,
and the everlasting power is come, even the Immanuel, God with us, and in us;
and we confess Christ come in the flesh, and do not look for an other, but do
know that this is the great Prophet who is come into the World, that is set in
the heart, Eccles. 3. 11. which is in the midst, out of which Moses says the
Lord would raise up a Prophet Leut. 18. 15. the which prophet being come which
all are to hear, he says, I am come a light into the world, Ioh 8. 12. Ioh* 12
35, 36, and 46. The world being set in the heart, there is the light of him who
says, I am the light, and he that is the light, is the true Prophet; and the
true prophet is in the midst, who is the light, whose day Abrabam saw, unto
whom the Gospel was preached, which Gospel is Gods power, whereby Ahraham
rejoiced, because he came to see the day of him who is the light of the world,
unto whom all the prophets gave Testimony.

Isaiah, who witnessed the Son borne, and the child given, Isa, 9. 6. by whose
stripes he came to be healed, he preached the light, and said the light was
come, and the Gentiles should come to his light, and Kings to the brightness
of his rising; and he also preached the light to be everlasting, Isa. 60. ^, 2,
3, and 19, 20. so that Kings and Gentiles shall come unto him that is the
light, who is Gods wisdom that is from everlasting, Prove. 8. 2 3. who is given
a for light to the Gentiles, and in him they trust: And Isaiah said, Come ye,
and let us walk in the light of the Lord, Isa. 2. 5. And the Disciples called
him Lord who is the light. And David's servants were careful that the light of
Israel might not be quenched by his going forth to war; [marke] That which
leads forth to war quenches the light, 2 Samuel, 21. 17. And Job did not deny but
the light was given to him that was in misery, and to the man whose way was
hid, Job 3. 20. and 23. And David preached him who is given for a light to the
Gentiles to be salvation to the ends of the earth; and says, The Lord is my
light and my salvation, Psalm. 27. 1. And in thy light we shall see light, Psalm.
36. 9. And light is sown for the righteous, Psalm. 97. 11. And he that came of
David said, Truly light is sweet, Eccles. 11. 7. And when he came, of whom the
Prophets prophesied, who is the only prophet and High Priest, and the end of
the prophets and the law, and that Priesthood which was made by a Law; he being
come, preached himself to be the light of the World, and said, while you have
the light, believe in the light, Ioh. 8 Ioh. ^2. And John who was a Minister of
Christ, preached the light, and said it was the light of man, Ioh 1, and life
is come into the world Ioh. 3. 10. and Peter preached the light shining in a
dark place. And the Ministers of Christ who were eye witnesses of his glory,
said, the light shined in darkness, and God commanded the light to shine out
of darkness; and some witnessed that they were made partakers of the
inheritance with the Saints in light.

And many more proofs might be brought from the scriptures of truth, as a cloud
of witnesses to prove, that we who preach, declare, and bear witness to the
light, do not therein preach a new doctrine, nor another Gospel, but the same
with all the holy men of God, and that which we have heard and seen, which was
from the beginning, which Message is this, even the light; which light in the
world, in the heart is the corner stone, which is the sure foundation; and
other foundation can no man lay then he that is the light, that is already
laid: And this is the true Prophet which all are to hear, and the children of
the light do hear, know, and obey his voice; and a stranger they will not
hear, but him by whom God speaks; for God in times past spoke unto our Fathers
at sundry times, and in diverse manners, but in these last days he has spoken
unto us by his Son, who is the light, whose Name is called the word of God,
^e^. 19 13. which word was hid in David's heart, of whom Christ came, who is the
light and the word, which was a light unto David's feet, and a lanthorn to his
steps; and so David called him Lord who is the Light, and the word nigh, who is
in the midst, and preaches peace to them that believe in, follow, and obey him
that is the light, and the light is the condemnation of all them that hate it;
and every one that does evil hates the light: but the light is the
condemnaton of all whose deeds are evil; and every one that loves, the light
wherewith he is enlightened, brings his deeds to it, and by it the hidden things
of darkness are made manifest; and waiting in that which it does make manifest
to be evil; so Christ the light comes to destroy the works of the Devil, and
makes an end of sin, and reconciles up unto God, who has given him a light of
the Gentiles, and a covenant to be salvation to the ends of the earth; and this
is he that lights every man that comes into the world; which World God so
loved, that he gave his Son a light into it, that all men through him might
believe, and be saved from the wrath to come; and so its the will of him that
sent him, who is the light, that all men should be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth; which truth brings freedom to the seed whereby it
comes to have peace with God, being redeemed from the bondage of corruption and
set at liberty from under the shadow of death, wherein many long have walked,
whose feet now comes to be guided into the way of everlasting peace, where the
children of the light does rest together.

And this is he who has wrought redemption with his own power, and redeemed
out of captivity, and opened the prison door, and preached peace to the spirit
that was in prison in the days of Noah, when the old world was destroyed and
brought the Flood upon the ungodly, yet saved the seed in the midst of the
storm and raging waves; and by him, even he that is the light, is captivity
led captive, and that which ruled over, is brought to be a servant under; when
the Word of the Lord came to the Rock, it opened, and much of living water
issued forth abundantly, whereby the thirsty comes to be satisfied, and
clothing from him who is the light does daily come, and the raiment that never
waxes old; he clothes with the armor of light, and is as a Son and a shield;
from him the spiritual weapons comes, and he teaches the hands to war, and
the fingers to fight; so that the strong holds are broken down, and every
thought come to be subjected, and when he leads through the sufferings like a
Lamb, so is he followed; and when he arises up to speak with authority, and
not as the Scribes, then is he obeyed, who then utters his voice like a man of
war, and lifts up his voice like a Trumpet, crying aloud unto all them that are
thirsty, and proclaiming the woes to all them who wear the false coverings, and
by him are his enemies comfounded, and Judges led away fools, and Princes laid
in the dust. And at him do the Kings of the Earth shut their mouths, and
before him shall they all bow; for with the sword of his mouth, and with the
breath of his lips does he slay the wicked, and his slain are many, and shall
be more, for no flesh shall stand before him who is now come to plead and make
war in righteousness; and now are his enemies flying unto their strong holds
and fenced Cities, but his salvation is stronger then Walls or Bulwarks, and
that all them that follow him (their captain) knows right well; and before him
all the mighty of the earth* are as a tottering Wall, and as a broken hedge,
and he it is that rides upon the wings of the wind, whose power is unlimited,
whose ways are past finding out, who descended into the lower parts of the
earth, from whence the wicked never knew him to arise.

But I with the rest do witness he is risen through the earth, and his feet
stands upon it, and is become the first fruits of them that slept, and is
ascended up on high, and has dominion over all, and is crowned with glory and
honor eternally in the heavens, and has given gifts unto men, and from him
the gift of eternal life is come.

And this is my beloved, O ye daughters of Jerusalem; and this is my Friend and
Redeemer, O ye sons of men, even he who has redeemed my soul from Hell, and
brought me back from the power of the Grave; this is the prophet of whom Moses
did write should come, and is come, and and there is not another then he that
is risen up in the midst, which is Christ the light of the world in the heart;
this is he that has done wondrous works for, in, an^ by me, and many more who
are thereby made living with ^^es unto his Name, whose Name is a strong Tower,
and a rock of defense, he is a sure dewlling place, he is the rest of the
soul, and the joy of the living.

And since he has put the sword of his spirit into my hand, and his word of
life into my mouth, the wicked thereby has been cut down like the grass, and
the mighty have been trampled upon as the dust in the streets; the tall Gedars
have been as the Brambles, and the strong Oaks have been rooted up; the Prophet
became a fool, the Pastors became brutish, and the spiritual man was mad, but
the seed has been refreshed, and the weak nursed up, the tender plant
preserved, and the hungry fed.

And for his name sake will I not keep silence until my testimony be finished,
and until Jerusalem be made a praise over all the Earth, and her
righteousness break forth as the morning, and her comeliness as the
brightness of the Son, and till I see the destruction of her enemies, and her
Adversaries overturned for ever; for powerful is our King, who is come to
reign.

Oh! Who can withold the pen from writing, and the tongue from declaring?
When the Lion has roared, who will not hear? When the Lord has spoken, who
can but prophecy? How can I but declare his wondrous works, and proclaim his
Name where ever I come, and confess him before men, though I should suffer
much more imprisoning, dungeon, and whipping then I have done? Surely his name
I will declare in the world, who is the light, and give my testimony of him
that saves from sin, whose Name is called Jesus, the light of the world, which
is the elect, precious, and corner (but stumbling) stone, even to both the
houses of Israel; but it is he that is come to rule the Nations with his Iron
rod, and dash his enemies in pieces like a potters vessel, and judge the Earth
in righteousness, and the people with his living truth; and now the sinner
shall not stand in judgment, nor the wicked in the congregation of the
righteous; for he utters his voice like thunder, against the wicked, and is
dreadful against the double-minded; he condemns the unjust with an utter
overthrow, and pulls down the unrighteous from their seats: Oh! Who of the
wicked can stand when he Thunders from heaven, and pierces through the secret
parts of the heart?

And though I do speak an allegory, yet I do not speak contrary to the
scriptures, but according thereunto, from the spirit of truth, and though I
speak of the operation of Christ in his members, yet I do not deney the works
which were wrought by him in his own person; and though I preach Christ within
the hope of glory, yet I do not preach an other; and though Paul traveled in
birth again until Christ was formed in the Galathians, yet he did not desire
an other Christ should be formed in them, And though Paul said God had revealed
his Son in him, yet it was not an other Son; and though I say the Son of God is
come, and has given me an understanding, yet it is not another Son, but the
same that ever was who works all our works in us; And though I preach him the
maker, an end of sin, yet I do not preach another; but they who preach a
Christ that does not make an end of sin, nor save them (who preach him) from
their sins, do preach another Christ, seeing the true Christ makes an end of
sin: And though I say the prophet is come who is mighty in word and work, and
raised up in the midst, or in the heart, yet it is not another but the same,
whose wonders appeared outwardly whilst he was in the form of a servant upon
the earth.

And though I preach him to the world, the light of the World, yet it is not an
other, but the same who said, I am come a light into the world, and I am the
light of the world, Ioh. 8. 12. and so he being come a light into the world, he
is to be preached as he is, [the Light] that all men through him might believe,
and men's minds turned from darkness to him who is the light, (in the
darkness) and it is most right and proper to preach him the light who is now
come, and is the end of the Law to all them that believe in the Light, and the
end of the Prophets who preached him that is the light under various Names or
Terms, as King, P^iest, Prophet, a ^on, a Child, the Mighty God: and Davi^
calls him Lord; and he is called a Savior, a Redemer, a Mediator, etc who
being come says, I am the light; and so it is right and sound Doctrine to
preach him as he is, The light of the World, and lightneth every man that
comes into the World which is the true light; and we that preach this, do not
preach another, but him who said, I am the light.

By me who refused the glory, treasure, and prefermen of the world, and did
choose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God; and though I
profited much in that Religion where the carnal Ordinances are, yet that
profiting came to be accounted as dross and dung, that he might be received
who makes an end of sin, who being now come, his love constrains me his Name
to publish, who is the true Prophet, whose Name is called Jesus, who has, and
does save from sin, for whose namesake I have often been brought before
Rulers, haled and beat out of the Synagogues, numbered among the transgressors,
tried at an Assizes as an offender, yet there denied the liberty of a
murderer, being six times imprisoned, twice stripped naked and whipped with Rods,
and since put into Bridewell, once put into, and kept long in a dungeon for
praying; often abused in prison; sometimes near death; in trials often, in
perils often, in loss of goods in daily reproaches.

And in that which has been greater then all these things, and yet have I been
preserved unto this day by the power of him who is the light, and the only Son
of God, to whom be eternal glory from his own seed in his servant, who is one
of the least among many brethren, being a prisoner at Winchester for the truth
of Christ by the will of men, unto whom I am known by the Name of.

Humphry Smith.

An Invitation from the Spirit of Christ.
COME unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, come unto me and find
rest; I, even I am he who comfort Sion, I am he who preaches liberty to the
captives: Oh come unto me, stay not, I am the way, the truth, and the life; I
am he, and there is none other, I came out from the Father into the world, that
it might be reconciled up unto God through me, I am the good shepherd that am
now come to gather the outcasts of Israel, and to bring home unto God the lost
sheep, that the dispersed of Judah might now return, and the seed of Abraham
may be brought in to me, in whom the redemption is, even plentious redemption
for all that will hear and turn in hither.

Oh all ye scattered of the flock! my voice is to you that have not found rest
to your souls, now hearken diligently to hear my voice, and feel my words of
life, for now the time is come that the seed that has long lain in the death
shall hear my voice and they that hear shall live and rise out of the death,
and I will give them life.

Oh! come unto me my own, my beloved before the foundation of the world; come,
and stay not; I have long waited for you; my locks are wet with the drops of
the night, and you have even wearied me with waiting for you; long have I
knocked at the door of your hearts, calling to repentance, and no man regarded;
nor the slothful would not arise that I might come in, and take up my abode
with, and in my own, and refresh them with waters of life; but now am I come
who am the bridegroom and the bishop of the soul, with my alluring terms.

Come, Oh my friends, ^ hearken my beloved, let me not be denied; open the door
of thy hard heart, and let me not stand waiting any longer; behold I have
honor for all them that follow me, and crowns of life for all will receive me,
come unto me, my lambs, I have prepared my supper, I have made in this Mountain
a feast of wines of the Lees, of fat things full of marrow; all things are now
ready; Come in unto me, I am the bread of life, I am the hidden Manna, I come
to save men's lives:

Come all ye that are weary with the burden of your sins, I am the Lamb slain
from the foundation of the world; I come to take away the sins of the world; I
am the root of Jesse, and the offspring of David; I am he that opens and none
can shut, and shuts, and no man opens; I have power to forgive sins on earth.
Come, cease from the evil of your doings, learn of me to do well, and then we
will reason together, and though thy sins have been as scarlet, they shall then
be as white as Snow; for I come to finish transgression and make an end of sin,
and bring in the everlasting righteousness of God. Therefore hear, oh ye
scatered of the flock, that are yet in the miery clay covered over with the
thick clouds of your sins; oh! remain not in filth nor continue no longer with
the fleshpots in the house of bondage, for I am come to condemn sin in the
flesh, and destroy the works of the Devil, that you may find redemption in me,
and be washed from your filthiness, and cleansed from your sin.

Wherefore hear all ye that are far from righteousness, behold I have gifts for
the rebellious, my hand is streched forth; oh ye simple ones! come unto me, and
learn pure wisdom; and ye fools be of an understanding heart. O why will ye
dye, oh ye house of Israel! have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should
dye? turn you, turn you, now I do call, oh ye hard-harted! where fore do you
hide your selves from me? and dig deep to hide your councels from me? why do
you run alwais astray? Oh what shall I do unto you that I have not don? and yet
do you still go on in the evil of your wais? when will you once return? Oh Jerus.
I will thou not be made clean? When shall it once be? Oh! I have seen your
abominations, and am wearied with your fins, and yet you have not regarded; oh!
now it is high time to consider thy ways, and return from the evil of thy
doings, lest thou be shut out for ever.

And all ye my dear ones that have long waited for me, behold I come quickly,
and my reward is with me, says Christ the Son of God, and I will open to you
the hidden Treasures of my father, and make known his will to you; and I will
remove off the burden, and circumcise your hearts; behold I come, says Christ,
and I will open the prison-door, and raise the prisoner out of the pit, and
bring deliverance to the captive, and refresh the plant of my Fathers planting,
and nourish the tender grape which the subtilty has hurt; and I will bind up
the broken, and restore unto the mourners the years of joy and comfort, and I
will be unto you a sure foundation, and a present help in time of need; and I
will bring back the scattered, and they shall now return, and fear the Lord God
of their Fathers in my mountain of holiness, and they shall walk in the way of
peace, and in the paths of righteousness, where the unclean shall not pass
over, nor the wild beasts of the field shall not come, but the ransomed of my
Father, says Christ the Son of God.

Therefore hear all ye my brethren, and consider all ye my friends, for I am
come who am the sure foundation, and the cornerstone, the Light, the true
light of the world, and the life of man, and the everlasting covenant of the
father, and power of God, and the wisdom of the Father; by me Kings reign,
and the princes of Israel shall now rule in equity; for behold I am come, even
he that you have long waited for, and there is not another; come learn of me, I
am meek, I am lowly, I am the light, low in the heart, I am the living
Minister, says Christ the Son of the Fathers love, and the light of the World;
I change not but remain a Priest for ever, a living Minister, a Minister of
life within the vail, ministering life unto the spirit in prison.

H S.

The two striving within.
THat which went forth from the life of God, professed the name of God to cover
it self with that, without the life the which profession through the secret
subtilty, did more and more increase, which led further off from the sense, of
the feeling of the life of God, and when its stirred, to judge that which went
out from it, then presently would that which went out, lead forth further to
seek after, and comprehend in the knowledge and profession of his name,
treasuring up that, in that which went out from his life, and therewith to
cover that without the life, and then for a time that was quiet, being got so
far out from the sense of the feeling of the strivings of the life, which
strivings being got out from, ceased for a time to strive being resisted with
that which abode not in it, whereby it became veiled and covered with a thick
cloud by that which sinned against it, the which thereby came to be exalted
above it, even above all that is called God, and is of his nature, and
increasing, getting strength, and covering it self in the earthly wisdom
through the carnal conceivings and profession of God out of the life and the
power by which that was grieved, and under that oppressed, which under the
profession, sometimes would stir again, and in secret judge that which did
oppress, and wounding that which grieved it, even striking through it with the
dreadful darts of it is power, making the other sensible, that it is judgment
was to pass over and cut down the head of that which was above it exalted, the
which judgment, being loved and turned to, so there is a coming again to the
sense of the feeling of the operation of the power which judges and striveth
against that which was got above the power, professing his name, who is the
power, but not bearing nor feeling his nature, who being with the power judged,
and condemned with the light that comes from the power, yet being not kept to
the Cross, and his head always under the sword of the power, in the
judgment, his head gets forth again, the twining head of that which got the
profession, but abode not in the power, which head being, not bruised in it is
first motion, the body grows up, even the man of sin, with spiritual
wickedness in high places, showing it self as the power, being exalted above
the power, and there stands in opposition against the power, which being
judged, confounded, scattered, and overturned, with the powerful breakings
forth of that, which by it suffered under; so the true thing presents it self
to be the leader; which being received and obeyed, it draws the mind in, where
is stillness and quietness, out of that which labors for vanity, into that
where the labor cease, and the rest is received, and the day come which God
has blessed for evermore, where the Lamb is the light, and the small still
voice is heard, and the power of the Word received; the which some coming to
see, through the openings in the light, and yet not in it waiting, through the
judgment to be led into the thing it self, so that that which stood not in the
power, soon leads out the mind in a joy because of the sight, to cover it
self again therewith.

And so as that is still followed, which leads forth from the power in the
sight, conceiving, or professing of it without it, having not the substance; So
the substance and the power is more and more degenerated from, in what image or
form soever it be, and as the form is continued in, the power is denied; but as
the power is minded, and waited for, standing out of the form or image: so the
other which abode not, but leads out of the power of the truth, comes to be
crossed, judged and denied, and so not followed, but kept out of, in the light to
watch and war against it by the light, out of it to be led into that, and it to
receive, in which immortality abides for ever.

And so as there is a continual watching with the light that may be seeen,
which abides not in it, but is got up above it, working in all deceiveableness
in the mystery of iniquity, to cover it self with the profession of truth, but
still keep out of it, and also that may be seen, which suffers under all this,
and lies under it, so that it cannot be come to, nor come at, by that which is
out of it, and stands above it, and its veiled and covered, and the narrow
entrance to it, is hard to be found, and being found, is soon turned out of,
and hard to be kept in, by reason of the many turnings of the deceivableness of
that, which is, and is rightly named, the mystery of iniquity, which works in
them that obey not the light, which comes from the truth, in which the power
stands, out of which that went forth which has not the power, which is to be
confounded with the power, that the power without hands may break in pieces
that made with hands, or the greatest, tallest, or most glorious image that
has been conceived in the dark mind, and set up on high above the humble
suffering seed to be worshipped, which in the power of the light is resisted,
with all his wiles, though therein he brings Scripture to uphold his kingdom
and dominion over the other, which is to reign, to have it bow down to him, and
worship him, who abode not in the power, which by the power is resisted and
denied for ever, and he commanded to serve it, and bound and chained down with
it.

And so that which denies and overcomes the other, and is the younger, which is
to reign, whom the other is to serve, and is humble, low, meek, sober, wise and
gentle, harmless and innocent, is it that all are to wait to receive and join
unto; from it power to know, in it to stand against the other which did it
oppress, and by secret subtlety being exalted, does always endeavor to sit in
the Temple of God, showing it self as God, being covered with a profession of
the truth, which in the truth does not abide, yet to the truth in words may
confess and acknowledge that which saves from sin, to be the begotten of God,
and may believe and tremble because of it, and be tormented and troubled by it,
and yet remain an enemy to the Son, tempting him by many glorious presentations
and gifts, rewards and promises, to bow to that, and serve that, and be led by
that which abides not in the power, that so thereby over the power it might
always rule, in the deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, still presenting that
which is fair, pleasant, and desirable, and seeming to make one wise; which
being received, opens that eye which looks at the things which are seen, and
darkens that which is to give the knowledge of the power, by which the things
that are seen were made, wherein many are ensnared, others tempted, and some
overcome, who are to sink down to that then overcom, and feel it again in them
to rise to overcom the other, lest their latter end be worse then their
beginning.

Oh how can the depth of the ground of this mystery of iniquity be declared; or
who can utter forth the innumerable transformings and changings of that which
still seeks by all subtilty to keep from the obedience, to the life of that
power, by which man was made, and from which through disobedience he was led,
by that which said, Ye shall be as gods, which against God does stand, in that
ground which by him is cursed.

And how can the unsearchable love of the father be uttered with words! who so
loved the world (and his seed in it) that he gave his Son to them that asked
not for him; that by his light may be seen the deceiveableness of the many
workings of the powers of darkness in the mind that is darkened; which from the
darkness to the light is to be turned with the light, in the fear, to watch
against every appearance and first motion of the changeable powers of
darkness, which sometimes appears as an Angel of light, against whose
appearance all are to stand armed, with the power of him who is the light, and
to feel the power of the word, which is as fire, and yet to resist that which
the Devil darteth in, which is also like unto fire.

And that the tender simplicity, after which my soul breaths, may not be
betrayed by that which still seeks to devour, and keep from the power of the
Cross, and turn aside from the narrow way of life, in which that all the
innocent friends of Christ may be kept to follow the leadings of that, which
from the God of truth, and love, and peace to them have come, by it to be led
out of, and from all that, which in the truth does not abide, and in the power
does not stand.

Therefore is this given forth, even from the breathings of my life to the pure
witness in you all, which the changeableness of iniquity does always stand
against; the which in Gods living power, let all that feel it keep against the
other to stand, and out of all Satan's wiles to be preserved, to the end of all
that which has an end, that then when time shall be no more, you may rest, and
abide with, and in him that is the truth, whom the Devil has nothing in, to
receive the blessings of the father, and the tender mercies of the most high,
to refresh you, and overcome you with the power of his love, that it to you all
may be the bond of everlasting peace, in which with all the humble and
faithful am I bound up, and in it with them for evermore do rest.

Writing the name of my flesh, H. Smith.

Concerning that which overcomes and prevails with God.
JAcob is the second birth, whom God loves, the noble seed, who like a Prince
wrestles for the everlasting blessing, he prevails, and has power with God
and with men, who was and is beloved for ever; he was of God beloved and
blessed, and called by another name after he wrestled and prevailed, and had
power with God, and with men [mark] he had a new name given after he prevailed,
and had power, as it is written, He that overcomes shall eat of the hidden
Manna, and have a white stone; and in it a new name written, which no man
knows saving he that receives it, Rev. 2. 17. [Mark] a new name in a white
stone, Christ the light, the cornerstone, a new name in the light of life, in
the white stone, pure and precious, the elect, the sure foundation, the
foundation laid in Sion, the Law shall go forth of Sion, the Law is written in
the fleshly tables of the heart. I will write my Law in their hearts says God,
from whence it shall go forth; The law is light, and the commandment. The law
shall go forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem Behold I lay in
Sion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious cornerstone, he that
believes on him shall not be confounded. He that believes makes not have, but
he that believes not, is to be confounded, he makes have, he wills, he runs;
not he that wills, nor runs, but he that waits upon God for mercy, he
believes, he makes not have, he waits, he wrestles with God for the blessing,
he prevails. Jacob the plain simple man, the seed of Abraham, that dwelt in
his tent, he gets the blessing of God that waits upon him, that wrestles with
him like a Prince; he prevails and has power with God, and with men; he has
a new name in a white stone, who overcomes, whose light is like a stone most
precious, clear as crystal. He that overcomes shall be clothed with white
raiment, white as the light, Jac^b the second birth, he knows the dreadful
place, the house of God, and the gate of heaven, he passes over Jordan, and
after become two bands; his seed is blessed of God, who prevails and
overcomes; the second birth, born of the spirit, him God loves; but Esa^ have
I hated, the first birth born of the flesh, the cunning hunter, a man of the
field, wandering in the field, in the wilderness, in the darkness abroad,
hunting for venison (mark) for food, for meat that perishes, the wild man
abroad hunting, he loses the blessing. Hearken all professors of the
Scriptures, who know not the wild Asses colt tied to the vine, the Covenant of
God, the life of God, and the power of God you are out of, and strangers to;
Here is the state of the foolish virgins, the foolish woman is clamourous, her
feet abide not in her house; but she that tarryeth at home divides the spoil,
she sweepeth the house, and seeks diligently for the piece of money which was
lost. The Lords money was hid in the darkness, which has his image, which is
found in the house, by the light, he lights the candle, and diligently
searches: The spirit of man is the candle of the Lord (which in the house is
lighted) searching all the inward parts of the belly, Prove 20. 27. The Lord
will search Jerusalem with candles; I the Lord search the heart and try the
reins; how are the hidden things of Esau searched out? (mark) of Esau the
first birth, of the flesh, the cunning hunter, a man of the field, in the
darkness; the dark places of the earth are full of cruelty; he is born there,
the first birth Esau, Cain the first birth, the murderer, the envious one, in
the darkness conceived, after the flesh born, the persecuter and murderer of
the second birth born after the spirit, beloved of God, whose offering of him
is accepted; but the offering of the first birth is not accepted (sin lies at
the door) which separateth, he is to be banished and driven from the presence
of God, before whose door sin lies, and is the vagabond and fugitive on the
Earth. Hear this ye blind persecutors and professors; your envy, deceit, and
your hunting in the subtilty, in the ravening and devouring nature, shuts
you out: And except ye be born again, you shall never inherit the kingdom of
the Lord God of eternal life and love, wherein dwells righteousness and peace
for ever and ever.

W. B.

THE END.

