The Last SERMON Of Mr. Henry Smith. Sometime Master of Arts in Christ-Church
College in Oxford, and late Minister in Sallop. With his earnest Invitations to
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. And Directions to young beginners that they
may be fitted for that Holy Communion, and receive it with profit. 2. His Holy
and Pious Sayings in general, necessary for all persons. 3. Instructions for
young People, Exhorting them to Obedience, and duty toward their Parents. 4.
The sad effects of disobedience, in the Examples of many wicked and unnatural
Children, who ^ame to untimely ends. With Prayers suitable to diverse occasions,
by the same Author. ^ublished for the instruction and benefit of all Christian
People.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

Printed for J. Blare at the Looking-glass on London Bridge. 1686

The Epistle to the READER
REader in this small Treatise, you will (...) such Spiritual Consolation, as
will (if it (...) rightly applied) strengthen you, and enable (...) to resist
the wiles of the Tempter, who l^ snares to entrap the doubting or careless So^
and not only so, but hereby you will be furnis^ with Coeles^^al Manna to
sustain you and k^ you from fainting in your Pilgrimage, thro^^^ the wilderness
of this World, till you safely ^rive at the Heavenly Canaan, where all is (...)
and peace: The which that it may be the (...) and portion of all faithful and
sincere Chri^ans is the hearty desire of him who is a well-w^^^er to Souls.

J. B.

The Last SERMON OF Mr Henry Smith Late Minister in Salop. etc.
Luke 10. Chap. 13. Verse. Woe unto thee Chorazin; woe unto thee Bethsaida: for
if the mighty works had been done in Tire and Sydon, which have been done in
you, they had long ago repented in Sackcloth and Ashes.


OUr Blessed Savior, the Prince of Peace, the Mediator and Judge of the World,
in order to recover lost and undone Man, and restore him to the state from
whence he (through disobedience) was ^allen, laying aside the Ensigns of Glory
and Majesty, for a time was content to leave the Right Hand of his Almighty
Father, and to ^orgo those Hallelujahs and Triumphant Songs, sung in his praise
by Saints and Angels, ^o take our Nature upon him, and fulfill his Fathers
pleasure, that he might take away the Curse, by becoming an acceptable
Sacrific^ and a propitiation for the remission of sins* But what Entertainment
did this low cond^scention of the Second Person in the bless* Trinity meet
with among the ungrateful So^ of men? why? almost as soon as he was bo^ (though
his humble Birth was celebrated an^ proclaimed with greater magni^cence tha^
the greatest of Kings, which might have convinced the stupid world that he was
the Mess^^ a Tyrant seeks his life, and all along snar^ were laid to entrap
him: ye^ he went about doing good even to those that were his enemy^ many of
whom his Miracles (though the^ were such as never man did) could not mo^ to
relent, or once so much as consider the miserable state they were in; which man
our compassionate Lord use these words of (...) Text, viz. Woe un^ thee
Chorazin; woe (...) thee Bethsaida: for if the mighty works had be^ done in
Tire and Sydon, which have been done^ you, they had long ago repented in
Sackcloth a^ Ashes. By which it is plain, That Me^c^ and the offers of Grace
^^ighted and neglect^ draw down impendant Judgments upon t^ Heads of the Sons
of men: for certain it i^ that Tire and Sydon had not the means used (...)
them, that were used in Chorazin and Beths^da; they had not the Gospel preached
unt^ them, nor the visible presence of God among them; no, they were in
darkness, and groped for that Light only, which others had as bright as the Sun
at Noon day, yet shut their eves against it, they re^used his instructions, and
would ^ave none of his Reproo^s, that (out of the abundance of h^s love) came
to pluck them out of the snares wherein Saran had intrapped them, and Chose
darkness rather than light, because their de^ds were evil; Oh had they but
considered in that the day of their peace, when grace and mercy was offered,
how happy had they been! but by carelessness and negligence le^ting so great a
mercy ^^ip, he that came to save them, pronounced in the followi^g verse of my
Text, that It should be more tolerable for ^yre and Sydon at the day of
Judgment, than for th^se Cities.

And now let us consider a little with our selves, and exami^^ whether we are
not in the same Bal^ance with those people: whether the o^^ers of G^ac^ have
not been equal: whether our ^igh^ing them have not been more: and if (...), how
we shall avoid those woes pronounced, which wo^s are not temporal; but eternal.
Have we not had the Gospel in its purity for many years preached amongst us,
and its light shining bright as the Morning ^tar, whilst Nations fit in
Darkness, and the shadow of Death? how often has Life and Salvation been held
forth, and how often refused and slighted? Consider, I say, how the precious
moments (upon the well-using of which our immortal souls depend) have been
vainly and idly squandered away, in pursuing vanity, and our own idle
imaginations, in taking care for the things of this World, which profit not,
but are fading and momentary, almost lost as soon as obtained, making
themselves wings, and flying away; which caused the Royal Preacher to say, That
(after his considering all things under the Sun) he found them to be but vanity
and vexation of Spirit; and indeed, they are less than vanity, if compared with
those immortal joys, that are laid up for the Righteous, which Eye has not
seen, nor Ear heard: neither have they entered into the heart of man to conceive.

Have we, I say, slighted and carelessly rejected these favors and offers of
Grace? the^ certain it is, we may expect to be included into the number of
those that were bidden to the Marriage Feast, and by many trivial Excuses
denied to grace the Chamber of their Lord, and so be pronounced unworthy, which
must needs be the greatest misery that can befall us: for that Parable relates
not to a temporal Feast, but to the fullness of joy, that shall be hereafter, in
the presence of the great God of Heaven and Earth; and how then shall we mourn,
when too late we find our ^elves shut out from the Beatifick vision, through
carelessness and negligence, whilst those that traveled in Lanes, and by the
Highway, little expecting so happy an in^itation, supply our places. O What a
tor^uring and tormenting sting will it be, when ^e consider, that for the
trifling momentary ^anities of this deceitful World, we have ^ost those
immeasurable and unspeakable Joys that were freely offered, and might have been
^ur own, for mortifying a few carnal Lusts and vain delights, wherein we found
no satis^action; Nor will it be the least addition to ^ur misery, in our lost
Estate, to think how we have been invited, and once, and again in^reated to
embrace Life and Salvation; ^ay, how we have been almost at the Gates of
Heaven* and then fainted and turned back, not ^hinking it a prize wor^h
striving for: In ^uch a case, I say, if God withdrawing his ^avour, should give
us up to a Reprobate ^ense, and we by sad experience find the hour of Grace is
past, and not the least Beam of ^t left to comfort and refresh our weary souls,
^hen, I say, we should be miserable; and yet this will be the case of every
impenitent Sinshadow for although God is a God of Patien^ and forb^arance,
long-suffering, and abu^d^nt in m^r^y, and pardon, yet will not h^ spirit
always strive with m^n, but bei^ grieved and often affronted, will withdraw
(...) self, and then will they be given up to be g^verned by their own Lusts
and unr^ passions, and run into all wickedness: as to^ plain are the examples
of Cain and Judus, a^ many others that I might instance as (...) examples of
Divine Vengeance, through the own per^erseness and folly: for the mo^ Mercies
and Opportunities we have to repe^ the greater will ^e our punishment and sham^
if we neglect to lay hold on them: for if b^ such neglect we grieve and affront
the Ho^ Spirit, that with sighs and groans unu^ter^ble makes intercess^^n for
us, what can we le^ expect, than that so high an affront should b^ as highly
resented. And upon the like oc^sion was it, that the Prophet Isaiah, in t^ 1.
Chapter of his Pr^phecy, the 2, 3, 4, an^ 5. Ver^es, thus complains, viz. Hear,
O He^vens, and give ear, O Earth: for the Lord ha^ spoken; I have nourish^d and
brought up Children and they have rebelled against me. The Ox knows his
owner, and the Ass his Masters Cr^ but Israel does not know, my people does not
cons^der. A^ sinful Nation! a Nation laden wi^ iniquity, a Seed of evil doers,
children that are corrupters: they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked
the Holy One of Israel to anger, they are gone away backward. Why should you be
stricken any more? you will revolt more and more: the whole Head is sick, and
the whole Heart is faint.

In consideration of this, I say, let us look back, and consider what God has
done for us, how gracious he has been, and what little Reason we have to sin
against so much mercy and goodnes^, against so much light and so much love, and
how we by doing it provoke him to withdraw the light o^ the Gospel, and to
remove his candlestick from among us, and overshadow us with darkness and
des^la^ion; as too sadly the Churches of Asia (though planted by the b^essed
Apostles) have experienced, of which once glorious and flourishing Churches now
rem^ins nothing but a Name, those C^un^ries being at this day totally
overspread with Paganism and Superstition; and this proceeded from their
luke-warmness and coldness in holy Duties; plenty of the Gospel, for want of
being rightly us^d, surfeited them, made them grow wanton, and so forget the
hand that protected them, cavelling about niceties, and falling at variance
among themselves, to the scandal of their profession. And what less can we
expect, unless in tim^ we repent, and be heartily sorry for the mercies we have
abused, and thankful for the many deliverances we have had; no Nation under
Heaven having more visibly participated the Almighty's immediate favor. How
often, and how m^raculously have we been delivered from the treacherous
conspiracie^ and bloody contrivances of our implacable Enemies, visited as with
a Fatherly correction by Plague, Sword, Fire, and many other calamities, to
wean us from our Sins, and ye^ have been hardened the more, which may justly
incense the God of me^cies to deal wit^ us according as he has pronounced by
hi^ Prophet ^eremiah, in the 23. chapter of hi^ Prophecy, verse 10. Moreover, I
take from them the Voice of Mirth, and the Voice of Gladness, the Voice of the
Bridegroom, and the Voi^^ of the Bride, the sound of the Millstone, and the
light of the Candle.

In which words are comprehended all that can render a people miserable in this
Worl^ and the World to come: Therefore, whilst i^ is to day, hear his Voice,
and put not off Repentance till to morrow, for no man knows what a day may
bring forth; Delays are the gilded Baits, smoothed over, by which the Devil
insnares and deludes men's Souls, leading them through ^he whole progress of
their life by vain flat^eries of long continuance here, when God ^nows we are
as often cut off in the flower of ^ur Age, as when Palsey-Winter chills our
blood, and leads with trembling steps unto ^he Grave: and then we may assure
our selves ^s Death leaves us, so will Judgment find us: and woe, and alas!
will be our condition, if at ^he coming of the Bridegroom we want Oil ^n our
Lamps, for then it will be too late to ^^y, and we shall for ever be shut out;
or if ^e should enter, wanting a Wedding Gar^ent, that is, if we should by vain
flattery, or (...) con^dent relyance on Gods mercy, have ^ome pro^pect of
Heavenly happiness, and yet ^ever enjoy it, our case will be so much the more
miserable. And it will be more tolera^le for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of
^udgment, than for such, because they never ^ad the means of Salvation offered
them, but groped in the dark Mist of Error, darker ^han that the Angel
overshadowed them with, when they groped for Lot's door. And what ^an be then
expected, but for ever to be shut ^ut from the Beati^ick Vision, to hear the
dreadful Sentence of, Depart from me ye cursed unto everlasting F^re: And who
can dwell with everlasting burning? ^er. 33. 14. And ten to ^ne this will be
the end of such as trifle out their time in hopes a Deathbed ^epentan^ will be
sufficient to atone for the sins (...) their whole life, when for the most
part th^^ are at that time neither able nor willing, (...) especially of all
impenitent sinners; for (...) the Son of Sirach says, Eccl. 21. 10. ^he way
(...) sinners is paved with stone, but at the End is (...) Darkness, and Pains.
And holy David in (...) 61. 12. says, God rewards every man acco^ding to his
Works; yet is not God willing th^^ any should perish, but that all should be
save^ and has in the Gospel of his Son left precio^ promise, as Balm to cure
the wounded Sou^^ Nay, he is not only desirous, but e^trea^^ desirous, we
should be saved: for our ble^^ Savior assures us, There is more joy in H^a^^
over one Sinner that repents, than over Nin^ and Nine just persons, that need
no Re^enta^^ And God expostulating with the rebellion Israelites, dema^ds of
them the question, (...) will ye dye, O house of Israel? seeming ther^ b^ loath
to stretch out his hand against them but like an indulgent Father strives to
re^lai^ them by mildness, and prevent their ruin^ for certain it is, that his
mercies are over (...) the works of his Creation. Nor was ou^ Blessed Savior's
compassion less, when (...) wept over Jerusalem, with this Lamentation O
Jerusalem! Jerusalem! did thou know in th^^ ^hy day the things that belong to
thy peace, but ^ow they are hid from thine eyes: How often would I have
gathered thy children, as a Hen gathers ^er Chickens, and you would not? Now,
I say, ^east this should be our case, let us no longer delay our repentance,
but labor with diligence to make our Calling and Election sure: Let us labor
while it is day, least the night of Death come upon us, wherein no man can
work: and contend earnestly for the Faith that was once delivered to the
Saints: that having run ^he race, we may receive the Crown, which only can make
us eternally happy; which God of his infinite mercy grant to all those that
^rust in him, and call upon him.

And now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, Three persons,
and One eternal God, be ascribed (as is most justly due) all honor, glory,
power, praise, might, majesty, and dominion, both now and for ever, World
without end. Amen.

Seasonable Instructions in order for a Preparation for the receiving the Holy
Sacrament.
REceiving the Blessed Sacrament is so necessary a point of Christian Duty, and
so great a Mystery of the Christian Religion that it is highly to be observed
by all Chr^stians, with the most profound Reverence an^ the stri^test
preparation: for in receiving (...) worthily, we mystically or spiritually eat
t^ Flesh and drink the Blood of our blessed S^viour, that is, by Faith and a
full Affiance (...) him, whereby he dwells in us, and we (...) him; therefore
it is not a thing rashly or u^ advisedly to be undertaken, least the unwo^thy
receiver far^ as the man did that wante^ a Wedding Garment; for notwithstanding
the Bread and Wine are but Elements for no^rishment, yet in such a case they
are to be r^ceived as a pledge of the Lords death, till h^ coming: it being his
special command to (...) Disciples, That as often as they did it, the should do
it in remembrance of him; and b^ them enjoined to the Primitive Churches, a^
from thence continued to this day, in spite (...) all Opposition, Persecution,
or whatever could be invented by Heathens or some professers (...)
Christianity, that were worse to abolish i^ or render it useless. Therefore let
such (...) are desirous to participate of so great a benefit, conducing to the
Salvation of their precio^ and immortal Souls, consider.

First, Let not any that is in a known sta^ of Sin approach the Lords Table,
unless he have entered into a state of Repentance, and resolved amendment for
the future, least instead of receiving benefit thereby, he eat and drink his
own damnation, not discerning the Lords Body.

2. After a man has examined himself, let him consider the wretched state he
is in, by nature, and the inestimable value of that precious Blood, that was
shed for his Redemption, and beg pardon of God for his past offenses, and
earnestly desire, that through his grace he may for the future be armed against
Temptation.

3. Let a man consider well if he have any prejudice against his Neighbor, or
have injured him, and if so, he must reconcile himself, for otherwise he is not
worthy of so great a Blessing: for as our Savior says, If a man love not his
Brother, whom he has seen, how can he love God, whom he has not seen?

4. When a man is minded to approach the Holy Table, he must lay aside all
worldly thoughts, and fix his mind wholly on Heavenly things, considering well
that he is more immediately in Gods presence, than at other times, although he
is omnipresent, and his eyes at all times pierce the darkest corner of our
thoughts and actions.

5. We must put on bowels of compassion and Charity toward our poor Brethren
considering that God made us Stewards of hi^ good things, that we might
dispense them to such as stand in need, and that ther^by he may try our Zeal
and Love to himself: for He that gives to the Poor, lends to the Lord, etc.

6. Have a steadfast faith in Christ, and adore his goodness, that he vouchsafed
to h^mble himself to the death of the Cross, to sav^ lost Man, and (like the
Angels) love and wonder at such his condescension, often putting up praises in
Divine breathings to him, for such his infinite love and favor.

7. When you kneel to receive the consecrated Elements, let not your thoughts
wander, for thereby you will give way to the Tempter, to steal away your
affections, and place them upon Worldly matters, and tri^^ing vanities, and so
lose the benefit of the Holy Mystery.

8. When you have communicated, retire with a steadfast Faith fixed on Christ,
in assurance, that through his merits, Salvation can only be derived to Mankind.

9. Do not so soon as the blessed Solemnit^ is over, return to the World, to
mind temporal matters, nor give heed to vain and idle discourses, but spend the
remaining part of the day in works of love, charity, holy exercise, meditation,
prayer, and thanksgiving: ^or suffer at any time what you have done to ^ip out
of your mind, nor forget the promises (...) amendment of Life, least God be
displea^ed with such trifling, and withdraw his ^race.

10. Learn to be contented in whatsoever ^a^ion or condition it has pleased God
to ^ace you: And if at any time you have any ^oubts, or trouble arising in your
mind, know (...) proceeds from the temptation that is ^yed to withdraw you
from Holy Duty, and ^e best Remedy to withdraw such obstructi^ns is Prayer, and
a steadfast faith, and laying ^'d upon the precious promises of life and
^alvation, offered in the Gospel to all that are ^fflicted or heavy laden. And
thus much may ^riefly suffice for the instruction of such as are ^esirous to
receive the holy Communion of the Body and Blood of our Blessed Savior: the
^enefit of which is great, if with a true and ^ely faith in Gods mercies, and a
resolution ^f amendment of life, it be received; and the ^anger as great, if it
be unworthily recei^ed.

The Holy and Pious Sayings of H. S. B. of D. in general.
LEt no man take care for the things of the World, more than is necessary,
least (...) setting his heart thereon, he forget God.

In all Estates learn to be contented wi^^ your condition, for if God sees it
requisite, (...) can raise you from a low condition to a high or bring you from
the top of honor, to (...) with Job on the Dunghill.

Refrain evil conversation, least by hearin^ vain discourse, you addict your
self thereto and it becomes habitual in you.

If any one injure you, mildly reprove him that so he being overcome by your
meekness may take shame to himself and repent of the ev^^

Good words are more forcible than threats for what is done unwilling is not
done heartily^

Avoid the snare of the beauty, for that (like a Trap) is set to entangle thy
Soul.

Be not credulous to believe reports, least in so doing you creat to your self
much trouble.

Let not anger overpower you, nor be subject to unruly Passion: for he that
cannot govern himself, would do ill to rule others.

If Parents or Children dye, consider they were born to that end, and that we
may go (...) them, but they cannot return to us; and therefore restrain from
immoderate sorrow, for no sorrow (unless for Sin) is available.

Let every man be just in his dealings, least God blast his endeavors: for
there is nothing so secret, but his eyes behold it.

If we submit our selves to those that are set ^ver us, we do not therein so
much obey Man (...) God, whose pleasure it is that it should be so

If any be afflicted with sickness or calamity ^et him not repine, but bear it
as the chaste^ing of the Lord, who sancti^es affliction to those that trust in
him, to the saving of their ^ouls.

^he profitable Sayings of H. S. to exhort Children to be Dutiful and Obedient
to their Parent^.

LIttle Children, next to serving God, observe to be obedient to your Parents
(...) all things: for so is the will of your Hea^enly Father.

Remember what is threatened to naughty ^d disobedient Children: That the Ravens
of ^e Valley shall pluck out their Eyes, and the young ^gles shall eat them up.

Moses in his Law says, That whoever ^rseth Father or Mother, shall dye the
death. therefore take heed, and do it not, no not (...) your Heart: for
although Man regards it ^t, God will surely punish you.

If your Parents be angry, strive to pacify ^em with soft and gentle words,
and so w^ll (...) win their love.

If at any time you have committed a ^deny it not, but be sorry for so doing,
(...) observe for the future you do so no more.

Children, above all temporal Blessing prize the Blessing of your Parents: for
ne^ any prospered, on whom their Pare^ Curse was intailed.

Consider what Christ says: He has ^clared, That whoever breaks the least
(...) the Commandments, is guilty of the wh^ Law; And the Fifth ^ommandment
(...) Thou shall honor thy Father and Moth^ that thy days may be long in the
L^ which the Lord thy G^^eth the.

Those that cast off Obedience to the Parents, will never be obedient to any
b^side them.

The lowly and me^k God gives Gra^ but the proud and stubborn shall be abash^

Consider, little Children, that you (...) dye, for Death as often crops the
blosso^ as the ripe fruit, and then what will beco^ of you, if you are not
found obedient to the that God has set over you for your good?

Satan first striveth to alienate the hearts (...) Children from their parents,
then from Go^

O let Virtue (my little ones) be yo^ Treasure, that so you may (when you dy^
be numbered among those little ones the Christ took in his Arms and blessed.

Obedience is the Crown of Youth, and in all God accepts it before Sacrifice.

Obey not through fear, but love, and so God will bless you, and you shall see
many happy days.

Sad Examples of the untimely ends of Children, disobedient to their Parents.

THE first in Holy Writ that I find disobedient to his Father, and to despise
^im, is Ham, the Son of Noah the Patriack; who beholding his Fathers nakedness,
de^pised and sco^^ed at it, holding him that ^ade him a being next to God, in
derision; for which he and all his Posterity in^ailed a Curse, for ever to be
ser^^nts and sla^es to his Brethren and they* Seed and to have no portion in
the Inheritance of his Father; wherefore Josephus is of opinion, that be^oming
a ^unagate in the Earth, in process of time, his own children a^ose up against
him, and slew him.

The second example in Scripture, is of Phineas and Hophni, Sons to Elie the
High ^riest; who in despite of their Father, li^ing licentiously, despising
him and disobeying ^is commands, they both in one day fell by ^he Sword of the
^hili^^ines. At what time (for their wickedness) God suffered the (...) of his
Covenant to be taken, and old (...) their father, who had been too tender
towar^ them, to fall ^ack and break his Neck.

The Third is of Absalon, who und^ mining the Throne of a too indu^gent fath^
conspired his death, and rose in Rebelli^ against him; but what ensued? He w^
caught by Gods Divine hand in an Oak, (...) there (whilst he was hanging)
thrust throu^ by Job, and cast into a deep Pit.

The fourth is of Adonija, who casting (...) all ties of Duty and Obedience,
usurped h^ fathers Throne, wh^^st he was yet alive; b^ what was his end? He was
slain by t^ Sword of King Solomon. Nor have t^ Examples of our later days been
less drea^full; for few Youths that have been execut^ for Robbery, or such like
Crimes, but at t^ place of Execution sadly confessed, that d^ obedience to
their ^arents, and falling in^ evil company, brought them to their untimely
ends.

A Prayer in Sickness, or at the point of Death

O Holy and most Gracious Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; in whose hands the
souls of the faithful are laid up till the day of Recompense; have mercy upon
the so^ and body of me thy poor and afflicted ser^ant; O spare me a little,
that I may reco^er my strength before I go hence and am no more seen; cast me
not away in thine anger, nor forsake me when strength fails; let not thy hot
displeasure burn against me, least ^n a moment I am consumed; nor turn away by
Amiable countenance, but be thou my Physician, (O thou Physician of souls) let
^y precious blood wash and cleanse me from (...) Iniquity, that so whether I
live, or whe^er I dye, I may be thine; and through thy Grace be added to make
up the number of ^^y Elect; Even so be it Lord Jesus, Amen.

A Prayer for young People.
O Lord regard my tender years, and accept in good part these my early
Sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving ^at I most humbly offer to thy Holy Name;
^^rengthen and support me O most merciful ^^ther, that as I grow in years I may
grow (...) Grace, and the knowledge of thy Divine ^^ll; that so when I have
with patience pas^^d through this troublesome World, I may ^rive at the place
thou have prepared for all ^^se that love and fear thee: and this I (...) thou
would grant me, not for my own ^e, for I am unworthy of the least of thy
^^rcies; but for the sake of my blessed ^^rd and Savior Amen.

A Prayer and Thank'sgiving after the receiv^^ the Holy Communion.
MOst merciful Father, we render u^ thee all thanks, praise, honor, a^ glory,
for that it has pleased thee of t^ great mercy to grant unto us miserable
s^ners so excellent benefits and privileges, (...) to be received into ^he
fellowship and company of thy dear Son Jesus Christ our Lord yea, by his means
we are thy adopted Ch^dren, and he is made our elder Brother. Y^ O Lord, we
come nearer than so: He is o^ Head, and we are the Members of the mystical
Body. And all this proceeds from thy gracious goodness, and compassion. F^ thou
have delivered him to death to give (...) life: Thou have made him a Sacrifice
(...) the necessary food and nourishment of (...) Souls; thou gave way to the
piercing of (...) sides, from whence issued water and Blo^ that we might know
how we came clean^ from ou^ sins, and redeemed from damna^on. Yea, O Lord God,
thou have present^ us in this Sacram^nt that whole Tragedy^ his passion, that
we out of Sorrows might^ cover Joys, out of his Groans might be comforted, and
out of his death be presented^ life everlasting: we beseech thee, O Heav^ly
Father, to grant us this request, that the never suffer us to become so unkind
as (...) forget such wor^hy Benefits, but rather m^ (...) of them in our hearts
(...)


