THE Golden Fleece. Wherein is related the Riches of English Wools in its
Manufactures.

Together with The true Uses, and the Abuses of the Aulnageors, Measurers, and
Searchers Offices.

By W. S. Gent.

Pecunia a Pecude.

Guic. Plin. lib. 33. Omnes veterum divitiae in re pecuniari a consistebant.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Richard Lowndes, at the white Lion in S. Paul's
Churchyard, near the Little North-doore. 1657.

A Preface to the Reader.
THere is neither House, nor City, nor Country, nor the universal Being of
Mankind, nor the course of Nature, nor the World it self, which can subsist
without Government, says Cicero in his Discourse upon Laws; which Government
intends and includes these two Fundamentals or corner stones, Power and
Obedience, by which as the Regiment of every Commonwealth does stand, so the
flourishing Trade of England (under Societies and Companies) does manifest the
same to the whole world: Nevertheless, as in general all men cry up Liberty,
so in particular each respective man desires that freedom gratis, though it
cannot be granted without those contributary services which maintain that
Government. The Seas exhale their Vapors to the Heavens, from whence they
descend in Showers upon the earth, which being impregnated by their fertility,
does gratefully dismiss them again to the Ocean, Natures Storehouse for the
like coursary services; Alterius sic altera poscit opem, et conjurat amice.

The regulated government of Merchandice performs all this, by which it
beautifies the Earth and Seas, giving intercourse and combination, supplies and
riches to each industrious part of the world; It procures Amities, Leagues,
Confederacies, Conjugall and Consanguinary Alliances between Princes, and all
by the necessary productions which one Nation wants of another abundance, the
purchase whereof to each others occasions nourishes and beautifies each others
People. How then should not Merchants be of principal renown to themselves
and their Country, which with great hazards both of person and estate, they do
so faithfully and profitably serve.

We have a Record which does worthily recite the ingenious expressions of a
young Florentine Gentleman called Cosimo Ruchelli, who dying about the age of
two and twenty years bewailed not his departure from his Kindred and Friends,
nor from the riches of his Family, or pleasures of the world, but because he
was summoned by Death before he had done his Country that retributary service
which to it was due for his Being, or had gratified his Friends by reciprocal
benefits for that they had bestowed upon him, nourishment and education.
Another Author gives us a quite contrary opinion of one Theodorus, who thought,
and taught it to be great injustice, that a wise man should in any case hazard
himself for the good or benefit of his Country, which he said was to endanger
his wisdom for Fools; now though each of these men's fancies had a rational
foundation upon their respective principles, one to gratify and serve the
world, the other to despise and reject its vanities, yet Natures positive
doctrine to all her Children, is, Non nobis solum nati sumus.

God made the world in number, weight, and measure, because he would have it so
preserved, and by that President he appointed man to govern both it and
himself; for as in Order there is beauty and continuance, each part in its
proportion so supporting another as with comlines it has durance; so in
government amongst men, that which we call Justice, is in its distribution the
glorious preservation of the whole which it intends to govern, and that is,
Honest vivere, alterum non laedere, suum cuique tribuere; and this is the
work of every honest and wise man, so it is to follow the primitive un-erring
pattern of Number, Weight, and Measure, which was observed by God himself.

Prima sapientiae pars est been numerare, says Plato, and well to number a
man's days is the ready way to wisdom, says David: both these were excellent
Divines, though not comparatives, yet without numbers we cannot so distinguish,
but that Plato's heathen may claim as great esteem as David's heavenly wisdom;
this gives to one the most excelling finite, and to the other the
super-excellent infinite measure of his prudence; one of them fulfilling the
first of the moral, and the other of the divine Virtues, and from these the
equality of measuring between men, takes being, and is the lifeblood of Trade.

As without a common certainty of measure there can be no intercourse, nor
transaction of trade between men or Nations, so in this of Clothing, (The glory
of England) there can be no indifferency, rule, or continuance, without such an
establishment of measure and proportion as may satisfy every man in his
bargaining, bartering, buying, or exchangeing. In the following discourse will
appear a great deviaton from the determined rules of Justiice provided in this
case, and such a necessity of reformation, as Clothing cannot be freed from
open or underhand abuses without it; nor can this peculiarised blessing of
Woolls in its streams of Manufacture answer to the cleareness of the fountain
from whence it springs.

There are now a Trinity of officers relating to the regulation of Clothing,
all which were anciently comprised in the Unity of one man's person; these bear
the distinct names of Searcher, Measurer, and Aulnageor, which last, though it
be a tautologicall expression (Aulnage and Measure being the same work denoted
in two languages) yet the long usage and custom have brought them to be
distinct offices, and that which anciently was called Aulnage, from whence the
Aulnageor takes his name, who was no more but measurer in signification, is now
become Collector of the Subsidy granted to the State, by many precise Laws in
that case ordained, still holding the name of Aulnageor, because the collection
of that Subsidy was by King Edward 3. committed to the charge of the Aulnageor,
and he nevertheless not abridged of his measuring and searching, till by his
own wilful neglect they became separated, and that by distinct Laws; Insomuch
as there is a peculiar Measurer, who ought to know, and allow the Assize of
length and breadth to every Particular Cloth which is made in England and
Wales: And because the Subjects of this Land should not be abused, their grave
Senators in Parliaments have also established an office of searching, whose
Officer ought by his Seals (judiciously and diligently affixed) to denote the
defaults, and casual abuses which each particular Cloth does contain.

In the following discourse it will appear, that these offices were all of
them under the cognizance of the Aulnageor, and until they shall be again
restored unto his care, and that he be as well under strict terms obliged, as
by competent Salaries enabled to see the duty discharged, Clothing in England
will be so far short of recovering its pristine worth, and honor, as it will
undoubtedly run utterly to decay, and through necessity the materials (now
forbiden to be transported under the penalty of life and limb) must be licenced
to go to such places, as will more justly discharge the manufactures, and then
will be found the irrecoverable want of those two great blessings, which our
Ancestors so much endeavored to increase, which are Wealth in general, and
Strength in numbers of People, both of which have within these last 300. years
so multiplied under the Monarchs of England, as by the Trade of Clothing they
have been loved or feared of all Nations.

How those Officers stand now directed by the Laws, and how unable the people
therein employed are to discharge those duties, will in the following work be
found to be expressly and according to the Laws delivered; Insomuch as every
man of judgment who will vouchsafe to read the relation, will by his natural
affection to his Country, be induced to endeavor a timely reformation; lest as
the most illuminating Tapers of Religion and Learning, are through the
provocations of a sinful People whelmed under a Bushel of Obstinacy and
Ignorance, so the Riches and Glories of this Lands peculiarized endowments in
wool and clothing, will not so much be carried away by an invading enemy, as
forced to be transplanted by its own People, who daily work so industriously
in that Mine, as a very short time will bring the Stranger under the Walls of
our safety, which God forbid, and whereto every true Englishman will say Amen.

THE GOLDEN FLEECE.
CHAP. I. About Wool and Clothing.
THere is nothing in this flourishing Nation of England so universally good,
and beneficial to the people thereof, as is the conversion of Wool into its
several Manufactures, wherein it answers the Invention of Man; the consequences
whereof relate as well to the Soveriegn, as to the subject, to the Noble as
well as to the Ignoble, comprising all conditions of men, women, and children.
For as in Man the Brain and Liver assisting the Heart do no more but preserve
themselves, and are chief in their own contemplation, though they seem only to
complement, and attend the Heart; and as the peoples readiness to obey does
seem to ingratiate them to their supreme powers, yet do they indeed pursue
their duty wholly to their own interest. Thus and no otherwise it is with the
profits of Wool; The State gives safety and protection to the peoples works,
and the people give wealth and Revenue to the States subsistence, but each of
them to each of them chiefly for their particular benefit. Wool is the Flower
and Strength, the Revenue and Blood of England. It is a Bond uniting the people
into Societies and Fraternities for their own Utility. It is the Milk and Honey
of the Grasier, and Countryman. It is the Gold and Spices of the West and
East India to the Merchant and Citizen; In a word, it is the Exchequer of
Wealth, and Scepter of protection to them all as well at home as abroad, and
therefore of full merit to be had in perpetual remembrance, defense, and
encouragement.

The Wools of England have ever been of great honor and reception abroad, as
has been sufficiently witnessed by the constant amity which for many hundred
years has been inviolably kept between the Kings of England and the Dukes of
Burgundy, only for the benefit of Wool; whose subjects receiving the English
Wool at six pence a pound, returned it (through the manufacture of those
industrious people) in Cloth at ten shillings a yard, to the great enriching
of that State, both in Revenue to their Sovereign, and in employment to their
subjects; which occasioned the Merchants of England to transport their whole
Families in no small numbers into Flanders, from whence they had a constant
Trade to most parts of the world. And this intercourse of Trade between England
and Burgundy, endured till King Edward the third made his mighty Conquests over
France and Scotland, when finding fortune more favorable in prospering his
achievements then his alledgeate subjects were able to maintain, he at once
projected how to enrich his people, and to people his new conquered Dominions,
and both these he designed to effect by means of his English commodity, Wool;
All which he accomplished, though not without great difficulties and
oppositions, for he was not only to reduce his own subjects home, who were and
had long been settled in those parts, with their whole families; many of which
had not so certain habitations in England as in Flanders, but he was also to
invite Clothiers over to convert his woolls into clothing, (and these were the
subjects of another Prince) or else the stoppage of the stream would soon choke
the Mill, and then not only clothing would every where be lost, but the
materials resting upon his English Subjects hands, would soon ruin the whole
Gentry and Yeomanry for want of vending their wools. Now to show how King
Edward smoothed these rough and uneven passages, were too tedious to this short
Narration, though otherwise in their contrivance they may be found to be
ingenious, pleasing, and of great use; which relation must await another
opportunity.

By this it must be granted, that King Edward was Wise as well as Victorious,
and in both he was fortunate, which last was much nourished by his bounty; for
upon a visitation made by himself to the Duke of Burgundy, during his residence
there, he employed such able Agents amongst the Flemish Clothiers, as (barely
upon his promises) he prevailed with great numbers of them to come into England
soon after him, where he most Royally performed those promises, in giving not
only a free Denization to them, but he likewise invested them with Privileges
and Immunities beyond those of his native subjects, which peculiarities their
posterities enjoy to this day. Surely the seasonable bounty of a Prince rightly
placed, will not be found the weakest instrument to his atcheivements of honor
and success. The liberality of Alexander amongst his Macedonians, brought three
parts of the world under his Dominion; because amongst other his valuable
considerations toward that rich purchase, he summoned by Proclamation the
Creditors of all his soldiers, and discharged their Debts; wherein afterward
diverse of the Roman Emperors, as Julius Caesar, Pertinax, and others followed
his great example by other bounteous actions, in which rank of wise and
indulgent Princes, we place this Royal and true Lover of his native Nation,
King Edward.

But for the more sure establishment, and before these preparations came into
effect, King Edward upon his return called a Parliament, and that in the
beginning of his Reign, where he so wrought with the Commons-House (who had not
the least knowledge that the King had molded the design) as after long debate
(which all motions in that House ought to undergo) it was presented to the
Lords, and so to the King; who amongst other objections, urged the loss which
must necessarily befall his Revenue, as well in respect of the outward Subsidy
of a Noble upon each sack of wool which was to be transported, as of the
inward Custom which the cloth paid upon return, according to the rates then
established; but these soon met with an expedient: For the cloth in time to
come, must needs yield a far greater custom upon that which was to pass into
all parts of the World from England, then it could do upon that small return
which came only to the service of England, and for the wool which from that
time forward was to be wrought in England (with prohibition under penalty of
life and limb at the Kings pleasure, that none in any sort without the Kings
especial license, should be transported) the Parliament gave unto the King that
Subsidy of a Noble upon a sack, the Collection of which Subsidy the King
entrusted with his Aulnageor: and this was the original, and is the continuance
of that money, which at this day is collected and ought to be paid upon all
wools wrought into any sort of manufacture, and is called (though most
improperly) The Aulnage money, from whence many inconveniences will presenly
appear.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Aulnageor, and the legality of his office.
THough Aulnage is an office of this Nation, which is of as great antiquity as
Traffic; for the very Title which comes from Ulna in Latin, and Aulne in
French, either of them signifying an Ell, shows, that the Aulnageors office was
to provide that all such measurable commodities as came into England, should be
of lawful assise in length and breadth. And from the ancient Records it may be
gathered, that in measuring the Aulnageor had the same charge upon all foreign
measurable Merchandises, from the finest Silk, Gold, or Tissue, to the coursest
Hemp, as may be found granted to several persons of worth, in the first, the
fourteenth, and the seventeenth years of King Edward the second, which was
before Clothing was made in England, (as has been said) when that Subsidy upon
all manufactures of wool was granted to him, and his successors, which he
entrusted with his Aulnageor, who was nevertheless to continue his attendance
upon the searching and measuring, as anciently he had done. And accordingly he
did attend both offices for many years; but finding that the clothing so
increased as it became scattered all over the Land, notwithstanding that it was
by diverse Statutes confirmed to Towns Corporate; insomuch as the Aulnageor
finding the collection of the Subsidy to be of far greater profit, and less
trouble then the sallary which related to the searching and measuring, he
neglected those, and betook himself wholly to his collection, after which,
through the misbehaviour of Weavers, and other handy-crafts relating to the
making, and accomplishing of Clothing, such and so many grew the abuses to be,
as the Cloathiers themselves became Petitioners to the King to be incorporated
into Fraternities, and Societies, and to have officers distinct from the
Aulnageor to search and measure their clothing; nevertheless the Aulnageor
continued his office of collecting the said Subsidy, and was enjoined, upon
receipt of his moneys, to affix a seal of Lead whereon was to be stamped some
part of the Kings Arms, which is now become a justification to that cloth, or
else that cloth is a great dishonor to the Nation which bears that seal
throughout the World; and this seal was to be annexed after the measurers and
searchers seals were on; to the end that those seals denoting what faults those
clothes contained, the cloth was seized if it were not vendible, or else the
faults were discovered to the buyer; and for this purpose the Aulnageor was to
keep a book of his Receipts and Seizures, and once yearly to present the same
to the Lord Treasurer, or Barons of the Exchequer, who were to assign the
Aulnageor his reward; and this course continued till the Aulnage was made
Farmable, which was Enacted by Parliament in the seventeenth year of King
Edward the fourth.

This relation shows that all the officers, Aulnageor, Searcher, and Measurer,
were to be knowing men, as the Statutes also do deliver more at large; for want
of which the Trade of clothing is almost quite lost in England, and daily
increases in Holland, by the help of English wool, and Fullers earth, the
prevention of whose exportation is provided by more ancient and severe Laws,
then any other Laws, then any other Laws relating to Trade; all which is grown
originally from the neglect of the Aulnageor, who has detained the Title from
the other officers, and neglected his own, thereby confounding the duties of
their works, as though the Aulnageor was then made Collector; yet now the
Collector is not (either in propriety of name or execution of office) to be
called Aulnageor, yet so he accounts himself to be to the no small prejudice of
clothing. Again, since the Aulnageor left his other works of measuring and
searching, his Subfidy money has in all times declined, for he wilfully
neglecting to survey the clothing, taught the Collectors to convey many from
his sight in point of the Subsidy; insomuch as they have practiced to put on
counterfeit Seals, or else to procure the Seals to be cut from such cloths as
have been sold, and delivered out of the market, of which to this day there is
a common trade between the Clothiers and their Chapmans Apprentices, or their
Drawers; which deceptions are generally used at this day, as shall be made more
apparent.

Again, by the Aulnageor's only neglect the Clothiers have (through the help
of some incendiary Attorneys, who would burn their neighbors house to roast
their own eggs) found an invention to make a difference between old and new
Draperies; a distinction not once thought upon in the Primitive Statutes for
Clothing, by which they endeavor to work a division in payment of the Aulnage;
for the old Draperies they allow to be paid, but the new, which are
Perpetuanoes, Serges, Says, and all other Stuffs (though made of wool) they
deny to pay, because, say they, these are not mentioned in the Statute; Now if
the answer to this ill grounded exception be well weighed, it may appear more
agreeable to the Law, that the new Draperies have transgressed the Statute even
in the letter it self, for whose benefit they do so much quarrel. For the Law
shows the precise length, breadth, and weight of all Manufactures contained
in the Statute; and says, that whatsoever shall be made contrary or defective
to those ordinations, shall be seized, without any clause or reservation to the
new inventions, which is a chief part of their Plea: nor does it once name new
Draperies, either in point of Aulnage, nor any other consideration, till about
the end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and in the beginning of King James, where
because the exception runs to new Draperies, the Statute says, That payment
shall be made of the Subsidy or Aulnage upon cloth, and all other sorts of
manufactures of Wool; and one of the most learned Judges of his time has set
down a positive interpretation this doubt (for more it is not) that even in
mixtures where the major part is wool, the Aulnage ought to be paid, which
conclusion the wisdom of the last age ordained to be kept as authentic in
answer to this objection. And surely the learned Judges have ever been more
properly the Interpreters of the arduous points of the Law, then the Attorneys,
who have no such interest as the Judges have in making the Laws, all men
holding this for a maxim, that Ejus est legem interpretaricujus est condere.

Now concerning this doubt which has in late years been raised about exemption
of the new Draperies, and is of as new an invention as the Stuffs in question,
it may peradventure prove of little encouragement or advantage to the opposers,
if it be considered that where a doubt rests upon the Law, the favor of
interpretation does ever incline to the advantage of the State till a
Parliament come, and make a final resolution, which also is seldom determined
by that grave Assembly, to the prejudice of their Ancestors judgments, who in a
case of such gratitude did not probably intend in any measure to abridge their
liberality to the King.

CHAP. III. An Answer to such as call the Aulnage a Monopoly.
THere are yet another sort of opposers who charge the office of the Aulnage
with the ignominious Title of a Monopoly; Surely Monopoly is and has always
been a name of Scandal, for it cannot subsist without injury to another, and
yet there is a glimmering of it in very worthy Societies; For all order, and
government has in it a sort of Majesty, as is seen in Corporations and
companies, where they exercise uncontrollable power by virtue of their
Statutes; and scarcely any of them would bear the affront, if their ancient
Customs and Grants should be branded with the Title of Monopolizing, yet their
whole Societies do rather savor of a Monopoly, than does this Subsidy of
Aulnage; but we free them both, though of the two the over-strict regulating of
a Company carries with it the more resembling marks of a Monopoly. As for the
Aulnage, it may be presumed that very few of those who term it a Monopoly, do
know what a Monopoly is.

Monopoly is a Greek word, and intends (in all its interpretations) the
diversion of of a Commerce from its natural course, into the hands of some few,
by which (for their sole interest) others are prejudiced. This is the opinion
of Althusius, and other learned Civilians; whereby it appears that one alone
cannot be a Monopolizer, though in some carriages of Trade one alone may bear
the ignominy of an Ingrosser, and so may raise the price of the commodity which
he deals in: yet others say, that a Monopoly is a kind of Commerce in buying,
selling, changing or bartering, usurped by a few, and sometimes only by one
person to his proper gain, and to the detriment of other men; But neither in
this definition is this Subsidy a Monopoly, for there is neither buying,
selling, changing, nor bartering in it, but it is a free gift of the Common
wealth to that King and his successors in this government; Then which no
Demise or Grant of Land (let the consideration be what it will) can be more
firm in Law, for herein no man is restrained or prohibited, nor is any price
imposed by the Statute Laws; and these two are the only supporters of a
Monopoly.

And whereas from the beginning of this Grant, the want of the Aulnageors seal,
is the forfeiture of that Cloth which is taken so defective, in any Market,
Shop, Warehouse, Custom House, or Ship; Now it is come to a further
consideration, and necessity, for no forreigner will value that cloth which
wants this seal; because the seal (ever containing a part of the Arms of
England) is by foreigners looked upon as a justification of the true making of
the said cloth, as indeed it ought to be, and herein both a necessity of the
office, and a necessity of the due execution of the office is very apparent,
over and besides a necesfity of an exact collection of the States Revenue,
wherein the losses are less visible because the practice is continual.

By that which has been said the world may see that this Subsidy stands clear
from that charge of a Monopoly, seeing it neither offends in equity, by
supplanting or undermining another freedom of equal rank and condition, nor in
utility, by giving a particular price to the common interest for the Aulnageors
private benefit; without the proof of which particulars, a Monopoly cannot
subsist. And we have this moreover to say, That neither the Grand Assembly of
Parliament, nor the lesser Brotherhoods of Companies, would conclude it to be
worthy or just that future conventions shall brand their Acts with so
ignominious a title as that of a Monopoly; which being granted, this Subsidy is
out of danger, for it has the consent and fortification of more Acts of
Parliament, by hundreds, then any temporal affair whatsoever.

And yet you may be pleased further to take an additional president, both where
and why the King has of his own goodness forborne his Aulnage or Subsidy; In
some of the North parts of this Nation, whilst clothing has been in the
infancy, and where the substance was very course, as as it were but for
practice to future increase; the King upon petition of the workmen, has (for
their better encouragement) been pleased for a time to remit his Subsidy, even
upon such as they call old Draperies, they allowing it to be chargeable with
the said Subsidy; but so as such manufactures have afterward fallen into
constant payment, and do continue the same unto this day without any exception
or once pleading the said favor of the King now to excuse them.

Take yet if you please a president of a foreign nature to this work. There is
in Dorset shire, in that part which was the Forest of Blackmore, an Imposition
upon all the Tenants, called White Heart Money, of as long a standing
peradventure as this of the Aulnageors Subsidy, though not of so worthy a
foundation, where the Land and Inhabitants upon it by way of punishment, for
killing the Kings White Heart, have for diverse hundreds of years, paid, and do
(notwithstanding the disafforesting the same) still continue constantly to pay
a yearly Tax, which the State does upon no condition remit or forbear to demand
and receive. And surely no man that is a Tenant there will endanger his Lease
for want of paying this Tax, yet it never was renewed, if ever it was
established, by Parliament, or had it been so grounded, it could never have
been called otherwise then a punishment; and let all men judge if a punishment
have as good right to charge the people, as has an act of their own grateful
bounty.

But this particular of the equity of payment upon the new Draperies is come to
such a height of opposition, as peradventure it may not become this humble
relation, and, as it were, single opinion, to wade too far in so troubled
waters. Therefore because the Aulnageors deputies are not always men of that
integrity in their places as is required, we will now proceed to show you
wherein their illegal carriages are manifest, and the execution of their office
may be reformed.

CHAP. IV. Showing the illegal execution of the Aulnageors office.
THe legality of the Aulnage or Subsidy is (by that which has been said)
visible to all who will not be blind, but the illegality in the execution is
carried with a far greater secrecy; When the Aulnageor (whose ancient duty
enjoined him to search and measure all Trade which came into England) was by
King Edward, as has been said, commanded to receive that Subsidy which the
Parliament had granted unto him upon all such Woolls as in time to come should
be wrought into any kind of manufacture in England and Wales, he was also still
engaged as formerly, to visit, search, and measure all such cloths as were to
be made in England; but finding that the dispersing of the Manufactures was of
much more difficulty, pains and charge to him in visiting the several
Countries, and respective Towns wherein clothing was placed, then it was when
the clothing which was made in foreign parts, came only to the Custom
houses, where by casting a line of seven yards in length, four times over the
cloth, his measuring office was performed, but now the clothing was become
scattered all over the Land. He considered with himself that his Collectorship
was of more gains, and far less pains then his former office of Aulnage, which
consisted of searching for the truth in making, and of measuring for the assize
of lengths and breadths; and that of these two works there were many branches
both of charge and trouble, and that the Reward by Law established, was very
small; he contented himself with the execution of that which had most ease, and
most profit, whereupon clothing speedily corrupted into many abuses, as being
in a manner lest without Survey, each man doing what pleased or profited
himself without any reverence to the Law, or fear of punishment.

The Clothiers therefore coming to London to their general Market, and there
conferring their grievances, and complaining each to other of their abusive
servants, false Weavers, and the like; they applied themselves to the State for
remedies, and so became incorporated into Societies and Fraternities, and to
have the works which were made in and about them brought into their Hals, and
there to be searched, measured, and sealed; which order does in some kind
continue to this day, and this also pleased the Aulnageor, who by a Deputy with
seals placed in such a Town dispatched his work with ease. In which times also
the Aulnageor having the custody and use of the Kings money, was answerable for
the same to the State but once every year, and then passed his Accounts with
great favor from the Lord Treasurer, to whom he also at the same time
presented a book, containing the relation of the moneys he had in that year
received for the Subsidy, and of the seizures he had made upon the defective
clothes; which being done he had his quietus, and his reward for the year past,
which he received sometimes by the appointment of the Lord Treasurer, and
sometimes from the Barons of the Exchequer; for from one or some of them he
likewise received his commission to seize into his hands all such cloths as
were not statutable in assise, and substance, as also such as were put to sale
without the Subsidy seal.

It was no longer since then in King James his Reign, that the Mayor of one of
the most eminent Cities in England for clothing, was compelled by the
Aulnageor, nolens volens, to seize his own cloths (which were taken in offense)
to the Kings use; which Mayor afterward compounded with the Aulnageor for no
less then an hundred pounds. The same power also has the Aulnageor over cloths
which are not of assise, though in the presence of any Mayor, Bailiff, or other
Magistrate, which argues that there is great credit and trust reposed upon the
Aulnageor. Besides, the Statute does allow him an half penny upon a cloth for
his pains in affixing his said seal, which half penny in those times was in
value worth two pence in these days, and yet his pains were not then so much by
a tenth part as now they are, as also the faults were few and easily suppressed.
But the abuses herein soon increased to such height, as they begot him great
trouble; and therefore he neglected measuring and searching offices, but still
kept the name of Aulnageor, under which Title he does to this day execute the
office of Collecting the Subsidy, calling that the Aulnage, when indeed the
true Aulnage is the measuring only, and of antiquity established by Laws far
more ancient then any Parliament in England; of which we shall speedily say
more when we speak of measuring.

The Aulnageor is by the Statute required to be a person qualified to the place
with knowledge and a responsible estate, as also for the execution of the
place, he is to be an Englishman; but for receiving the profits and revenue,
there has ever been some person of honor and principal dignity thereto
deputed; which office some Queens and Princes have not been ashamed to undergo.
And further it is observable, to the credit of the Aulnageor, that in all
Parliaments, where Statutes were ordained in order to Clothing, the Aulnageors
power and privileges were ever preserved; which gracious providence ought much
to work upon his care, as it is evidently a signature to all men of his honor.

In the seventeenth year of the Reign of King Edward the fourth, the Aulnage
was made Farmable, and then the Aulnageors Fee was established; soon after the
Counties were farmed out, some to one, some to another, as pleased the King
reigning. In the beginning of King James his reign, this office was by him
Farmed to Lodowick, late Duke of Richmond and Lennox, for the term of about
sixty years (whereof many were expired) with the revertion of a considerable
Rent; the reversion of which Lease, after the Duke Lodowick his decease,
descended upon his most Honorable Brother, Esme Duke of Lennox; who disposing
the profits thereof to his younger children, the possession of the whole is now
in right descended upon the Right Honorable the Lord D'Aubigny, as only
Survivor and Heir to his Father and Uncles; who being in minority of age, the
execution of the place is by his Honorable Guardians disposed to such persons
as to them seems meet; who again for their best improvement of its profits, do
grant Leases, and Deputations to others, with a clause and penalty of re-entry
upon nonpayment of their Rents; by which means many controversies do grow, for
amongst the diversity of Tenants, such suits and troubles do arise, as in the
interim the Clothiers not knowing whom to obey, do pass without any seal, or
paying any Subsidy, to the great detriment of the State and the Honorable
Aulnageor, whose rights failing, his rents also to the State must necessarily
so do.

All this while the cloth wants the justification of the seal, to the great
confusion of the Clothiers, for a double seal may not be put upon their cloths,
upon penalty of five pounds for every such seal twice annexed, and without a
Seal the cloth will have no credit in sale, besides that it is liable to be
seized by the several Aulnageors; for which causes the Clothier is encouraged,
and in some sort compelled to offend (which needs not) for rather then the
Clothier will have his cloth dishonored for want of the seal, he will either
counterfeit a seal, or else covenant with the Drapers servants or Drawers to
cut the seals from such cloths as have passed the Marker, whereas the Draper is
by the Law required to keep his seal upon his cloth to the last remnant, and
then to demolish the seal, and by these opportunities the Clothier justifies
all his faults to the buyer.

Again, the present execution of the office is by Deputies, who for saving
charge do deliver upon account their seals, either to the Clothiers
themselves, or to the Fullers to put them to the cloth after scowring, or else
they are entrusted in some servants hand of mean quality and less knowledge,
with whom the Clothiers for easy rewards can prevail to pass such juggling
tricks as may better be discerned in the Country, (for one half that are made
come not into the Market to be sold) and then they annex counterfeits, or
having the seals in their own power, they hang them so slightly upon the cloth
as they can, without any defacing, take them off again after the cloth has
passed the Market, and affix them to others; by these proceedings all the
Clothiers faults are concealed, and so they pass to that part of the world
where that cloth goes, which brands the clothing of this Nation, and advances
that of other Countries. This was lately seen in Holland, where some English
cloths, faulty enough, were presented in open Markets, and a disgraceful
Proclamation being published, the cloths were therewithal given to the view of
the people to be warranted by the Arms of England, whereby not only great
scandal was drawn upon English clothing and Merchants, but their own was
brought into better credit, which not long before that were by thousands
banished out of France for Rags, and Cheats.

There is yet another great prejudice which comes to the Aulnageors loss, by
such manner of entrusting seals with servants of Clothiers, or Clothiers
themselves to affix them; for whereas the cloths are regulated by the Statute
both in their length, breadth, and weight, yet they will most cunningly draw
three clothes into one, and then cut it into two clothes, whereby the State is
defrauded of a third part of the Subsidy; and this they do usually and so
neatly, as a very good Drawer (not knowing it) shall not easily discern the
fraud. This covenanting for seals does also discover a false intention in the
Clothier, even in the very bargaining; for whereas a cloth, by the primitive
ordination, ought to weigh sixty four pounds, the Subsidy payment whereof
amounts but to a groat, yet the Clothier usually pays six pence a piece for
his seals, under color that he would not have his clothes opened, or any way
disordered before they go into the Market; yet the very truth is, he would not
have his faults or defects discovered; and then again he secures the doubts of
weighing, which would give the Aulnageor as good information, but would much
reveal the Clothiers dishonesty, by the deficiency which would be found in want
of weight; which shall be further declared, when we come to speak of the
Searchers office, to which it has now chief relation: In the interim we will
proceed to show what prejudice is befallen to clothing by want of the
Aulnageors duty in measuring.

CHAP. V. Of the Office of measuring, anclently called the Aulnageor.
MEasuring is a work of that extent in government, as without it no man knows
his own, nor is there any such thing as a man's own without Mensuration; how
divine it is let Solomon speak, who says, That diverse weights and diverse
measures are abomination to God; we have now to do with measuring, that of
weighing more properly coming within the discourse of Searching, whereof we
shall presently speak.

We cannot properly wade into the abuses of measuring, unless we begin our
enquiry from the originals of clothing, which rests upon such as mingle, card,
and spin Woolls. The minglers are usually in great fault, for whereas by the
Statute, clothing is to be made of Fleece wool only, nevertheless they mingle
Fell woolls and Lambs Wools with Fleece-wools, which are of natures contrary
one to another, and as contrary to the Statute Laws one to be mingled with
another; yet these are daily practiced: From whence come these Inconveniences,
that the Cloth which is made of such disproportioned Stuff, does render it
uneven cockly, pursey, and rewey; and howsoever the Art of the Cloth worker
does in some measure cover these faults, yet that Cloth contains Deceptions
and abuses, which will easily be found in wearing.

Again, there is a great abuse in mingling fine Flox with long Wools (though
course) these being Carded together, do (with no little care) hold Spinning and
Working, but do prove most deceitful and abusive in use and wearing. The use
of short Thrums produces the same Couzenage in working, and abuse in wearing:
For when they have cut the thrums into short lengths as they mean to use them,
then they lay them to steep in strong Lie or Liquor, which opens the Threads
into Wool, which makes the Yarne more uneven then the Flocks; the practice of
this is common and intolerable, insomuch as it has been and is publicly
known, that Cloths have been made of two parts Flocks and Thrums, and but one
part Wool; and that which helps the deception is, that it carries good and
fair satisfaction to the Eye, but in wearing and service will not last a
quarter of that time which a sound Cloth made of perfect Wool will do: But
here the Clothier alleges the loss that will be to him of his Flocks and
Thrums, which is as readily answered; for there are several sorts of
commodities to which they are only proper, and where the use of them may be
preferred; the thing we complain of is, when they are used to evil purpose,
with intent to make unlawful gain, and used with such subtilty and cunning, as
the Buyers ignorance may be abused.

The Weaver is proverbially a Thief, to which he is the more encouraged, by
being acquainted with the Clothiers practices in false mingling his Yarne; and
therefore in sleying his Warp, he will usually steal a whole Sley, which
cosists of above thirty threads, and with instruments which he has prepared,
he will hold out his Cloth to the full breadth which the Statute requires; and
though this cloth will sufficiently show the Robberies of the Weaver when it
comes to the Mill, yet so soon as it is scow^ed, and comes to the Cloth-worker,
he with his Tenters will bring it to the in^ended breadth; Such a Cloth will to
a man of judgment soon be discovered, for it will feel slender, loose, and
hollow in hand: Herein rests the Weavers chief gains, and because these
deceptions cannot be practiced without the Clothiers knowledge, he endeavors
to make him amends by further cozening the Chapman, for he cunningly knits
together the long Thrums left of Broad Cloths, which cannot be wrought to the
shortness of narrow Clothes, and mingling them with Yarne of better nature,
where by the help which each gives to other, the workmanship is eafed, but the
wearing is highly abused; For by the inconveniences of the many knots in such a
Cloth, which after scowring are Burled out, and then shut up again in the Mill,
when this Cloth comes to wearing, it will soon prove to be full of holes, and
will not be lasting.

And yet further the Weaver is artificial in his cheats, for in sleying his
Warps he will cast the Yarn to prove fine about a foot breadth from the Lists,
which is so far commonly as the Chapman looks into the Cloth, or the making
it up with pleights and threads will permit, when the rest of the Cloth is
warpt quite through with a for courser Yarne: It is also a common practice for
the Weaver to cover a course Warp, being spunne hard and small, with a fine
Wooffe, spunne soft and round; this conceales the Warpe from sight, which
otherwise in working would appear; but in wearing it is sufficiently found,
and the practice of this is ordinary upon such Cloths as are sold rough.

They have yet another deceptious help for their masters, which is to shoot in
a fine Woose at each end of the Cloth, which serves for a muster to show and
sell the Cloth, but all the rest of the Cloth is far worse; and these ends
doubtlesly want not workmanship to drive them in the Loome, for better show in
sale.

Such as make stuffs called new Draperies, that is to say, Serges, Seyes,
Perpetuanoes, and the like, do despise all Form and order enjoined by the
Laws to such kind of Manufactures in their making, and therefore the wonder is
less why they so earnestly refuse, and by litigious and tedious Suites at Law
do oppose the view of such Draperies to the Aulnager: For to give you an
instance upon that of Perpetuanoes (which was a Clothing of this Nation of
principal esteem both at home and abroad) these stuffs in their first
ordination had their pitch in the Loome at twelve hundred, which gave them
substance and estimation, and being of acceptable wear to the Kings and
Princes of Spain and Italy, are now brought to eight hundred in their pitch,
and yet made to hold out their length and breadth; and some Merchants (who are
a scandal to such as respect their reputation and Credit) do usually buy
slight Seyes, which by artifice and cunning in Milling are brought to be
Bastard Perpetuanoes, and in some measure acceptable to the sight, but so
unprofitable are they in service and wearing, as they do discredit that
Commodity, which for many years has held as quick and creditable a Trade in
their kind, as any Manufactures of Wool have done, which in these times is
almost quite lost.

Now for Kerseys, it is to be noted, that the original of that kind of clothing
had gotten good reputation for its durable wearing both at home and abroad, but
of late years a sort of cloth called Manchester or Lancashire Plains, which
were usually made for Cottons and no other, about a yard in breadth, are now
become the greedy purchase of some Merchants, who cut them in lengths according
to that of a Kersey, which being dressed and dyed in the form of a Kersey, are
both at home and abroad vented for Kerseys, which Cloth in wearing does very
much disgrace that which is true of that kind, and does not a little abuse the
wearer.

And the more to abuse this sort of Cloth, which for long time has given great
credit to Devonshire, there be Merchants who deceptiously to imitate those
Devonshire Kerseys, do cause counterfeits to be made in Yorkshire out of
Washers and half Thicks which have contained such length and breadth, with
slop Lists as true Devonshire Kerseys are used to do: These when they have been
dressed, dyed, and hot pressed, have possed the Seas for Devonshire Kerseys, to
the great abuse and discredit of that sort of Cloth; whereas the true
Devonshire Kerseys ought to be marked at the head end, but being defective they
are to be jagged at both ends, or to have the head Forell to be cut off, and
the offender to be Fined as he deserves.

CHAP. VI. Of Measuring.
IT was requisite that these particularities of abuses should first be related,
because it is necessary the Measurer should be a man known in them, and many
more deceptions which are incident and daily practiced upon Clothing: The
Measurer is now become a distinct Officer about Clothing, who was once the
chief of that Employment, known by the name of Aulnageor, the branches of
whose Office, were Searching, Measuring, and collecting the Subsidy, formerly
related; and a greater injury could not have come to the interest of the Common
good, then the improvident separation of the Name and office of Aulnageor, who
now only bears the title, but to his own and the Nations general loss, has
formerly neglected and now is dismissed of that beneficial work, wherein
almost every particular man's good is interessed.

And the Aulnageor is herein as blameable toward himself, for though through
his negligence, the Offices of measuring and searching became the employment of
other men, who were to be sworn in Corporations by the Mayor or Bailiff, yet
was the election of such men to be presented to the said Magistrate by the
Aulnageor; from the neglect of which these mischiefs are grown: First, that
ignorant persons, as Tailors, Tanners, Glovers, Butchers, Smiths, and the like,
who have no judgment at all in Cloth, are chosen into the offices of measuring
and searching: or, Secondly, if there be men elected of some knowledge in
clothing, yet such men are chosen by the Magistrate himself, who in all
clothing Towns is ever a Clothier; now if Malefactors may make choice of
their own Judges and Jury, it is apparent how the Commonwealth would be eased
of Crimes and Malefactors: and it is no better here, for the men by this office
being to be regulated or punished are the Magistrates themselves, as is before
said, and therefore not probably to be questioned by their own Substitutes:
Thirdly, these officers ought annually to be changed, but now and of long time
they are continued for life, or for many years, as they can prevail with the
Mayors in succession; which seldom fails, because each man in his course has
need of them: and how foul and prejudicial a crime this does prove both to
the State and People, shall presently be found in our Discourse upon Searching.

We have formerly showed that all Clothing in England was confined to
Incorporate and great Towns, where in their Halls it was to undergo measuring
and searching, and so it does in such an imperfect and partial way, as has
been declared: But in the Villages which are not Incorporated, and where there
is no magistrate, there is also no Officer in these Super-intendencies of
measuring and searching, by which means all their Clothes which pass
immediately to the Ports, and thence to Foreign parts, are neither measured
nor searched, whereby it may appear what vast Sums of the Subsidy money are
lost, (for such Clothes seldom or never come under the Aulnageors hand) or if
they be sealed, it is performed (as has been said) by deceptious and
counterfeit Seals, and though true ones be sometimes taken from the Aulnageors
Deputies, yet are they kept for the more visible use, and counterfeits clapped on.

For such as are not measured in the Country (as out of Corporations none are)
they coming to the general Markets in London, are there by power of the Lord
Mayor measured by the City sworn Measurer, as he is called; and here the
Clothier is in some sort punished for his other dishonesties but not legally;
for when they are brought into the sworn Measurers hands, he there keeps them
for some time, under pretense of leisure, which by others clothes is prevented,
during which time the Clothes are so handled amongst those Officers, as their
owners daily complain of abuses intolerable: For though the Clothiers which
are makers of them, do measure them at home, yet after they come out of the
sworn Measurers hand, they receive them shorter by four or six yards, after
their own account, then they delivered them; and it has been and peradventure
yet is a practice of such as have them so long under their custody, to cut a
yard, four or five out of the middle or best part of a Cloth, and afterward to
have it so curiously drawn up again as the place cannot be found: So again out
of fine white or single colored Cloths, they have cut what quantities they
please, and with the like neatnes have drawn in as much of a courser Cloth of
the same color, whilst the abused Clothier for want of witness knows not
certainly whom to accuse, himself having before he came from home measured his
cloth before good witness, and therefore must rest contented with the Loss.

These abuses amongst the sworn Officers do teach the Clothiers to practice
daily deceptions, some of which they do own and countenance; for they have in
these late years invented the making of Stuffs of fantastical fashions, to
which they give such names as the Law does not comprehend; these under the name
of new inventions do defraud the Law in their making, the State in their
Revenue, and the People in their wearing: For to the Law they are not known
either by name or assize of length and breadth; to the State they dare not
appear, unless by quarrels, contentions, and Suites; and to the wearer they
are so welcome, as where he once buys them he will come no more for the most
part: Anciently the cloth Ray, and colored clothes were limited to their
length and breadth; since which time provision was made by several Laws for
Broad Clothes, Kerseys, Dozens, Pennistones, Cottons, and the like, which did
appoint unto them a length, breadth, and weight; but now if these present
Manufactures be held before the Law, as once was Joseph's Coat to his Father
Jacob, surely the Statutes beholding such rags as are now made in comparison
of the ancient glorious clothing, without doubt the Law will take up Jacobs
wonder and indignation, that some wicked beast has slain the Ordinance, and
torn the Coat; nevertheless Jacobs Law, that is, Anno quarto Iacobi, if it
be seriously perpended and put in execution, will give a speedy remedy to these
insufferable abuses.

CHAP. VII. Of the Searcher and his Office.
THe Officers of Measurer and Searcher may better be called the Gemini, then
Twins, for they are so much entrayned one within another, as in some passages
we cannot speak of one without the other; for though the Searchers office be of
first use in clothing, yet is the Measurer to see the Cloths measured when they
are wet at the Mill, and afterward when they are scowred and dressed, and this
course the Law provides, to the end the wickedness of the Weaver may be
prevented, if it be possible; for between the wetting and working of the cloth,
there ought to be but half a quarter strained in breadth, and one yard in
length, whereas it is now become a great courtesy to the cloth if they streine
it but a quarter and half in breadth, and five yards in length, for many in
these days go beyond this height.

We have a Proverb which says, where God has his Church, the Devil will have
his Chapel; so, soon after clothing came into England, deceptions and abuses
were practiced about it: For instance, there was in the thirty and ninth year
of Queen Elizabeth, a Law made concerning the abuses in clothing, wherein
orders were provided that all sorts of clothes should be truly searched, and
their just contents of length and weight set upon every Piece, the Seal
reciting the word (Searched) upon it, and this to be done upon pain of
forfeiture; This Law doubtlesly intended the general good and reformation, yet
in regard there was but two Counties named, which had most offended in this
matter, therefore would all offenders in other places confine that Law to those
two Counties, wherefore in the three and fourtieth year of that Queens Reign,
the Parliament did interpret that Act to extend over all and singular of
woollen Broad-clothes, half-clothes, Kersies, Cottons, Dozens, Penistons,
Frizes, Ruggs, and all other woollen clothes of what nature, kind, or name
soever they be, or shall be made within this Realm, to be viewed, searched,
sealed, and subjected to penalties in such manner and form, to such purpose
and intents respectively, as was limited to those Clothes: There is no doubt
but if the question now started between old and new Draperies had then been
thought upon, the Subsidy of Aulnage would then as precisely have been cleared,
if in those words (subjected to all penalties) it be not already contained.

But to come more exactly to the necessity of the Searcher, (of which officers
in Towns and Villages not Corporate there is none) we will here enter upon the
deceipts as they are daily found, and as the Law detects them. The first
deceit used about Woolls, (whose own innocence is as much as the Sheeps which
bears it) is commonly by mingling it in diverse kinds, that is to say, Fleece
woolls, Fell woolls, and Lambs woolls, which are contrary of nature to be
wrought together; this composition we have formerly denoted to render a cloth
uneven, cockly, pursey, and the like; that mingling fine flocks with long
Wools, but course, does give an uneven thread in spinning, and proves
deceitful in wearing; that short Thrums opened into wool, and carded again
with other wool, which is worse then that of Flocks, does also much embase the
thread, and yet it is common to put two parts of Flocks and Thrums into a
Cloth, and but one of good wool, which though it coseneth the eye, yet does it
prove so weak in wearing, as it will not last a fourth part of that time which
a perfect cloth will do.

These and some others are before recited, therefore we will proceed to the
Mill, whither when a cloth comes, it would be there truly searched even by the
Mill it self, which would lay open the faults; but the Millers art prevents it,
for with tallow, pigs dung, and urine, they keep in the flocks and help the
thicking; and when a cloth proves slender, and will not thick kindly in the
Mill, by reason of the defects, then they help it with the medicine of
oate-meale, and the like, which remaining in the cloth, makes it feell fast and
thick in hand until it come to dressing, where all that stopping vanishes,
but there the Clothworker uses his art to preserve it from shame: When a cloth
wants of his substance and allowance in yarn, as has formerly been observed,
the defects would soon be discovered, being clean scowred, thicked and dried,
therefore in such a case it shall be scowred by halfes, the oil and seame
being left in it, in which filth they will thick it up, which proves noisome in
wearing.

Then come we to the Tenters, which with great penalties are forbidden upon
rough cloths, yet in the Counties where those cloths are made, and ought to be
sold rough, there are Tenters erected as commonly as in other places; and
whereas such cloths ought to be left in the same order as they come from the
Mill, they are nevertheless brought upon the Tenters, the better to conceal
the recited abuses in the yarn, and weaving, which the Mill leaves shameful in
cockles, pursinesse, and narrower in some places then other; these faults they
pretend to even out, under which color they strain them beyond the limits
allowed for dressed cloths.

Again, because the Clothe; thus strained do leave visible marks upon the Lists
and ends, whereby the abuses offered unto them may be plainly manifested, there
the Cloth-worker goes to work, who with a wet cloth and a hot Iron runs over
the sides and ends, and so smoothly shuts up the tongues of the Tenters as they
tell no tales. And when by the same tentering the cloth does prove hollow in
hand, then is the same wet cloth and hot Iron used again about a span deep from
the lists, (the binding up of the cloth with threads keeping it from further
examination) and for so much the cloth feels close in hand, but the buyer must
take the rest as he finds it: when any of their clothes fall out much too
light, then they hang them abroad in an evening, and sometimes all night to
receive the dew, and rather then fail, they spout water upon the cloth to
weighten it, which will give it no less then seven or eight pounds in
additionall heaviness, besides that it makes it feel more kindly in hand; and
this is so cunningly done, as it shall very hardly be perceived; nevertheless
many of them are so over-watered, as in their travailes into far parts, whilst
they lie long in the hot holds of the Ships, they become rotten and are
returned.

Besides these tricks, the Cloth-workers have a professed Art or Mystery of
their Trade in dressing clothes: For instance, the weavers falsehood in making
up clothes with flocks and thrums would be to little purpose, if the
Cloth-worker did not join his deceipts; for finding those clothes to prove too
tender for honest workmanship, there he will row them dry, and work them with
solace, and soft liquor, to preserve the flocks from the force of the Tessel,
and yet they will make it rise with a ground to work upon in shearing: and in
streining upon the Tenters (as has been said) they will so stretch a cloth, as
they will bring that to thirty yards, which being wet again, a third part of
the length and breadth is quite vanished.

A Kersey is allowed to be streined but one nail in breadth, and half a yard
and no more in length, yet such a Devonshire kersey of only twelve yards long,
has been streined a quarter of a yard in breadth, and three yards in length;
so as in breadth and length the Tenters have lent such a cloth one half of the
piece, which is no sooner come to the water, but the moiety flies invisibly
away, worse then Hocus Pocus tricks. Again, if a cloth by much milling do run
in, so as it causes more then ordinary labor to bring it to the length and
breadth which they appoint for it, then they will use warm water in the
Tentering thereof, but more after the warmth of the Sun, which they know will
make a cloth yield any way in stretching.

Finally in the finishing their work of rowing and shearing, they will use a
deceit with flocks of the same color of the cloth, which they can sheare as
small as dust, this they mingle with solace, and spread upon the musters, and
where the cloth may be seen, which makes it to seem much finer then it is, and
feel more substantial in hand; But if this cloth lie a while after dressing,
the solace dries up, and those flocks fly away, leaving the cloth in his own
nature again.

CHAP. VIII. Of deceits in colors and dying.
DYing is of great importance, and of double concernment toward clothing; one
in behalf of the people which use it, the other toward the woolls, cloths,
and stuffs which are dyed: on the peoples part it is so beneficial, as diverse
weighty Statutes made for the preservation of it, do relate the livelihood
which it does give to many thousands of people; and therefore the Laws
ordained for it, do under great penalties oblige the professors of dying in
wools, that they shall not teach their mystery to a foreign nation; yet in
late years there have several Englishmen transported themselves into Holland
for no other cause, but to enrich themselves with the spoils of their own
Country; and have there practiced, communicated, and taught the mysteries of
dying colors in wool, so that the reformation hereof may seem to be too late
undertaken; yet breention of the like false brethren in time to come may be
provided, partly by encouraging the Dyers at home, which cannot better be done
then by care that one do not undermine another by faleness in dying: And again,
by keeping the materials (which are especially wools and white cloths) from
being transported (as the Statutes do enjoyne) that is to say, without License
from the State, where also the petition ought well to be enquired.

The other part of importance in dying, relates to the woolls, cloths, and
stuffs, and therein that the colors be true and well grounded, for the truth
of the color is as material as the goodness of the cloth, because oftentimes
a good cloth is spoiled by a bad color, and as oftentimes does a good color
mend and prefer a mean cloth: Such as intend to give beauty to false colors
(as colors do to evil complexions) do practice with that so much prohibited
ingredient called Logwood, which though forbidden by the Statute under severe
penalties, is nevertheless as commonly used as colors; yet it is known to be
a cheat as bad as picking a pocket, for it barely gives a vading gloss to the
thing dyed, which changes with the Sun, or Fire, blows away with the wind,
and alters with the air; in a word, this abuse is intolerable, though common,
and gives great discredit to the commodity so dyed.

The ground of good and durable colors is substantial Woading, without which
diverse colors cannot perfectly be made, that is to say, Blacks, Russets,
Tawneys, Purples, Greenes, and the like; many of these colors in late years
are made without the justifiable foundation of woading, which though they
appear beautiful to the eye by the help of Logwood, as has been said; yet
in use and wearing they prove very false and disgraceful: to some colors they
give a flight ground of Woad, though far too weak to the depth of the color
it bears; nevertheless they have the art to set up a a true woad-marke, or
woad-rose upon the piece, at a far richer depth then the cloth is woaded
throughout: and some have yet a more neat and subtle art to set a woad-mark
upon a cloth with a little Indico, when there is no sort of woad at all upon
the cloth; such as will do justly, must set a woaded seal upon woaded colors,
which is better and more justifiable then the Rose mark so much abused.

There be five especial degrees in woading, that is to say, a Huling, a
Plounket. a Watchet, an Azure, and a Blew: every one of these exceeds another
in value, yet is every one of them fit for some colors: it is therefore very
requisite that each of these degrees be truly expressed upon the woad-seale,
that the buyer may know the truth of that color which he has for his money;
by which reformation those intolerable abuses would be prevented, which cause
such numbers of cloths and stuffs to pass beyond the Seas, and there to be
dressed and dyed, to the exceeding great prejudice and detriment of the good
people of this Nation, who might live, and very plentifully increase,
maintaining themselves as happily, as any other people upon those employments.

The Aulnageor of England has also the intuition of colors, in a double
capacity; one is to provide that the cloths be truly dyed, and for that purpose
to have them truly marked, to the end the people who buy them be not defrauded
by such practices as are before recited: the other is his care to see that the
Subsidy be duly paid according to the Statute: for the Laws do give unto the
State a Subsidy of six pence, five pence, four pence, three pence, according
to the colors put upon the cloths; as also the moiety of those rates upon the
half cloths: the same also is proportionably allowed upon stuffs: it is
therefore apparent how necessary it is for the Aulnageor and his deputies to be
knowingly conversant in colors also, and in the truth of dying, for as upon
false made, and false assized cloths, his seal gives a great abuse to the
buyers, be they natives or foreigners; so the granting the States Arms to
justify false colors, cheats the Chapmen, whilst both of them do dishonor
the Nation.

CHAP. IX. Of abuses in exporting Wools and Fullers earth.
THe whole world cannot produce such accommodations for accomplishing the work
of clothing, as can the nation of England: for though most Countries do afford
woolls, and those of Spain are finer then in any other part of the world, yet
will not those of Spain sort in work with any other Nations, unless it be
these of England: a reason whereof may peradventure be, because the Spanish
woolls are grown originally from the English sheep, which by that soil,
(resemblant to the Downs of England) and by the elevation of the Pole for
warmth, are come to that fineness; yet keep they a natural conjunction and as
it were, affection with these from whom they are descended: so we see the Wines
of Canary which are planted from the grape of the Rhine, though they become
much richer then those of their natural Climate, yet retain they the same
flavor (as the Vintners call it) with the Rhenish, and before all other, do
hold best with it in mixture: but to let pass comparisons, the wools of
England are superlatives to all the world for fineness, except that of the
Spanish, which neither by it self, nor by the incorporation with the wools of
any other Nation, will be wrought into any cloth, without the help and mixture
of English wools, which being carded together (as by the English Clothiers they
are) they produce the richest manufactures in clothing which the whole world
can show.

Again, there is another material without which clothing cannot be perfected,
which also in the excellency of it is only appropriated to England, that is
Fullers earth, without which clothing cannot be scowred from the Seame and
Oils wherewith they must necessarily be wrought: It is possible and probable
that other parts of the world may produce Fullers earth, but neither in such
finenesse nor abundance as this in England; which approbation is highly
confirmed by the appraisment which the Hollanders make of it, who spare not
upon occasion to give ten pounds sterling a Tun for it, which any man may have
in such places as it grows, for three shillings the same quantity; surely this
is a great temptation to break a commandment or Statute of Parliament, and so
they do familiarly, as presently shall appear.

First therefore to return to the wools of this nation, such as shall be
pleased to peruse the Statutes made in the beginning of King Edward the third
his Reign, to prohibit the transportation of raw wool, white-Cloths, and
Fullers earth, after that clothing was confined to be made in England; shall
find that the penalty which those Laws did inflict upon such as should break
them, did extend to life or limb, at the Kings pleasure, which of them he would
please to take; for it is no more likely to make clothing, if the materials be
carried away, then it is to preserve life without food, or government without
power: true it is, that after clothing was settled, and that wools multiplied
beyond the Manufactures, then (with license from the State) wools were permited
to be transported, and by the like license they have continued to be exported;
yet for the most part the State did strictly regard the restraint, and in the
chief liberty of exportation, the Grant was permitted only upon the meaner
sort of wools, and those commonly from Ireland, where clothing might not be
grieved.

But the case is otherwise now, even in these days when clothing has extended
over this Land almost into every corner, when the great strength of the Nation
in people lies upon the several relations to clothing; when the greatest
Customs and Revenue of the State arise from clothing; when the largest
negotiation of merchandises overspreading the world, issues from clothing;
when the mightiest power upon the Seas in Shipping grows from clothing; when
the formidable obligation in awing all foreign States rests upon clothing,
even now is the practice and trade of transporting its mateterialls become
almost an open profession: and were this presumption but as formerly the
permissions, grants, and licenses were, that is, upon the worst wools only,
the faults were the less; but these men's trade consists of the best and finest
wools, combd into Iarsies presently fit for spinning, and these are contrived
into Bales, as those of Drapery, and entered into the Custome-houses, and shipped
as clothing, and in all points so cunningly carried as they are seldom
discovered, and never seized as the Statutes do strictly require.

All States and Common wealths are supported by two providentiall works, that
is, Reward and Punishment; for as no law can compel men to be corporally
laborious, or studious in knowledge of literature, unless rewards be annexed
to all such compulsions; so no providence can attend the preservation of
profitable designs either in learning or trade, unless punishments be
enjoined; this opinion that profound Senator Cicero alleges from Solon, one
of the seven wise Graecians, and the only man of them which gave Laws; and
this is the weak and frail estate of men and nations, that unless they be as
well encouraged in their endeavors, as punished in their misdemeanors, they
will speedily become Libertines and ruin all.

Above three hundred years these works of clothing have been confined to this
Nation, and until late years have been so preserved, by the diligence of such
officers as have been ordained and empowred carefully to see the manufactures
kept under those rules which the Laws have provided for their perfection;
amongst which it must be concluded, that the materials were of especial
regard, which (as we have said) are wools and Fullers earth: and seeing this
nation is by God peculiarised in the se blessings and through the vigilance of
its Monarchs, safe guarded by Laws, that the native manufactures might not be
undermined by the practices of foreigners, their ancient providence exacts
from the present age the same preservation, that those particulars be not
common to such as daily labor to supplant the very being of this so important
trade, the negligence whereof has already brought the Scales to an equality of
the Beam between England and Holland, if rather the inclination tend not to
their advantage.

Again, we may be taught by their diligence, who spare no attendance in
overseeing and searching the true making of their manufactures, giving
therefore power and commissions to persons of more then ordinary worth amongst
them, whom they call Cure-masters, which is Care-masters, to whom every piece
of work of wools, be the condition of it what it will, is brought, opened, and
surveighed from end to end, where the enquiry is not slight or short, but these
officers do unpartially examine it through all the hands it has passed, even
to the minglers of the wools, which afterward are carded, then spunne, so
weaved, scowr'd, dyed, strained, rowed, even from the first hand to the
finishing of the Cloth: and where they find a defect, they make a default upon
the cloth, which first is recompensed by a Fine to the State for abusing the
Laws, and afterward remains to admonish the buyer, who thereby may guard his
purse; and in case the Clothier be abused by any of his before-recited
work-folks, he checques his damage upon the true offender in his wages, and
all this is done to their own manufactures; but when the business concerns
English clothing, first, they load the cloth with Imposts and Taxes, contrary
to the Law of nations, and freedom of the merchant, and afterward are so
rigorons in denoting faults upon it, as they oftentimes bring a great part of
the price into taxes and abatements.

The Premises considered, let any man be Judge whether that Nation ought to be
helped with the wools and Fullers earth, without which they cannot work, the
exportation of which also is little less then Felony in punishment, and of
more damage then ordinary Felonies, in consideration and comparison of the
crime; nevertheless there is nothing which is prohibited to pass from
England, more daily practiced then these abuses; yea, they are rather
oppressions, and robberies of the greatest magnitude.

Nor is the transportation of these, in their loss, all the injury; but when
honest men, well affected to the good of their Country, do detect these
Caterpillars of the Commonwealth, who make so vast gain as has been denoted
upon the materials so carefully prohibited, when they do endeavor by due
course of Law to make stoppage thereof, and to have the offenders punished, so
many are the evasions, such combinations, and interest in the officers who
ought to punish the offenders, such favor have they in Courts of Justice, and
deceptions in the return of Writs, and in general such affronts and
discouragements, as the dearest lover of his Country, or most interessed in
Trade, dares not attempt to prevent that mischief which his eyes behold to fall
upon his nation, or which his own person feels to pick his pocket.

CHAP. X. Concerning Apprentiships.
SUch is the pravity and weakness of man's nature, as without industry, art, and
discipline, he remains but the only degree of Reason from a Beast: For as
after the Creation of the first man, the worlds increase and continuance of
people has by God himself been established by way of generation, so the arts
of men and polishings of nature came first from God to man by some singular
inspirations to certain particular persons, which afterward continued amongst
men by nourtrature, education and discipline; the fundamentals of which are
superiority and inferiority, power and obedience, knowledge and ignorance: now
as the Jews comprehended all the people of the world between themselves and
Barbarians, so all conditions of men are comprised between wise and ignorant;
this made Solomon say, That the Fool shall be servant to the wise in heart.
Therefore men learn not of men as beasts do, barely to obey, but so to inform
themselves, as they may instruct them which come after, whereby even the world
it self subsisted, and must continue; that sort of youth being most miserable
which wants education.

There be, or ought to be in every parent two degrees of providence toward
their children, one to have them live, the other to have them live well; nature
has accomplished one, and instruction must give the other, which the Ancients
and learned men call Discipline: not only the Church and People of God from
the Primitive times, have ordained this as a religious care, but the heathens,
that is, the Persians, Lacedaemonians, Romans, and Turks, have framed Laws,
enjoining Parents to instruct their children, and compelling children to obey
their Parents on pain of death; which the weak and partial affections of
Parents neglecting, the Commonwealth it self has undertaken, and upon pious
foundations have established prudent Laws, to the end Youth may be educated to
the competent election of a vocation, answering their own genius and
inclination, yet all this is but to solicit nature to perfect her own work,
which must be done by Art, and Art is a work of time, to which, that Youth may
bequeath themselves, the Laws of each nation have proportioned a certain
number of years, and that is generally seven.

It is not without mystical signification, that servitude is so generally
fastened upon this number of seven years; Jacob covenanted for seven years
service, and trebled them rather then he would not enjoy the freedom and
purchase of that he so much loved and desired; seven times seven years must
pass before a Jubilee of deliverance could enfranchise offenders; the number
of seven gave perfection and rest to Gods works: this number also is
harmonicall, comprising all kinds of proportions, Arithmeticall, Geometrical,
and Musical: It is the number of sanctification, as may appear in several
passages of Moses Ceremonial Law: it is the Climaterique, and consummation of
man's age: It is the comparison of the most sacred word of God, which David
resembles to silver seventimes refined: it is also Solomon's Palace of Wisdom,
supported by seven Pillars: and finally, to instance our own argument, it is
the ternary seven of the age of Youth from the second seven, which makes
fourteen, to the third seven, which reaches one and twenty; in which time the
Brain, and Memory, best receive and retain the Institutions, which that Party
intends to follow in course of his nature, and inclination.

There is a double reason why Youth is almost in all Nations obliged to a seven
years Apprentiship, before they can obtain a Freedom to practice the Trade to
which they are engaged: one is to teach the Disciple or Apprentice; for such is
the dullness of man's nature, that repetitions and multiplications of one and
the same instruction, are little enough to fasten doctrines upon the judgment
and memory of the learner, in matter of Art and Trade.

The want of instruction and teaching in Clothing, is the principal cause that
the Manufactures of wool are so abusively and deceptiously made; and teaching
is thus wanting, because there is no regular or legal course followed, either
for time or form in working; there is not any of the relations to clothing
which does observe this rule of Apprentiship not withstanding it is enjoined in
very strict and penal manner by the Statute Laws; The chief inconvenience of
which is, that a Trade so general in use, and maintenance of even numberless
Families, does by its own vast exuberance convert into corruptions; and so
those great multitudes of People become discredited, beggered, and finally
ruined, to the destruction of themselves, and that nation which gave them so
great a blessing.

Another prejudice, and not the least, is, that the nation which has given
them being, and invested them with such materials for clothing, is dishonored
by false and abusive work: and it is not a little scandal to that nation,
which God has particularly endowed with those blessings that others want, when
its people shall divert those good things which God has bestowed upon it, to
evil and deceptious practices: In this consideration it is very observable,
how little comparatively, is the drunkenesse of those Countries which produce
wines, and wherein lies their personal riches, and their Nations honor;
Though their other sins may sufficiently swell their ultimate account, yet
doubtlesly it strengthens their last apology, in that they abuse not that
endowment, which God has made the original of their being and subsistence.

A third consideration is the cheat it puts upon all the world, for though
every country have not the benefit of the Manufacture in themselves, yet are
there few of them condemned to such ignorance, as not to discern the Cozenage
which false clothing puts upon them; in which case to the foresaid dishonor
they add a curse; and it was a chief care in Jacobs practice for the
blessing, that he turned it not into a curse: how much more is this of
consideration, when the blessing comes by gift and not by design or procurement?

And lastly, great is the thought of heart, when the sins of false lucre and
covetousness are in the full pursuance of such as have the full plenty to make
weight and measure, yet make it the art of their practice as well as the
practice of their art, to cosen both the wise and weak; it can be no great
wonder, nor without abundance of Presidents, if God for sins of such
wilfullnes remove his blessings, with which this nation is peculiarly enriched
and dignified, and give them to a People which will render him a better, and
more just, and more profitable account of his talent: and it is no news, that
though England be by the Almighty, chiefly ordained to produce the materials,
yet the manufactures be given to a people which will render a better account.

All this, and much more is expected, if the Native people continue to abuse
the Native commodity, as of necessity they must, when they know not how to use
it; the wisdom of our Ancestors has been liberally manifested in this
particular; for more or better Laws are not ordained in any relation to Trade,
then that the manufactors be constantly made Apprentises for seven years at
least, in stead of which provident ordination, there is not one of a thousand
made apprentice at all, but entering into Covenant with a workman in that he
intends to profess, after three or six months at the most, he leaps forth a
workman for his own account, and so brings his work peradventure to the height
of his Skill, which height is ignorance, and so the abuses are unremediable.

The other reason, and yet untouched, why Apprentices are generally confined to
seven years servitude, is to theend that in each art professors multiply not
beyond the support of their trade, which were not to increase good Subjects,
but Vagabonds and Rogues, to furnish prisons and the gallows, which was not
the intention of King Edw. the third, when in his design of bringing clothing
into England, a chief part was so to multiply his People, as by his native and
alleadgeate Subjects he might securely possess the Conquests wherewith God had
blessed him, which were beyond any Christian Prince of his time.

It is utterly against reason that a nation can be poor, whose people are
numerous, if their industries be compelled and encouraged, and their idleness
be punished and reformed; it is not the barrenness of a Country which can
forbid this maxim. The Scots are an abounding and numberless people, and they
have a Soil which to a Travelers eye, seems to produce nothing toward so
vast a maintenance of the body of that People, yet are they in all parts of the
world a warlike and honored nation, helpful to all Princes in their Wars,
and readily upon occasion returning to the assistance of their brethren be
their cause good or bad. The Dutch are a numerous Nation, daily multiplying in
a Country which has in comparison, nothing of its own growth to support them
either in food or clothing, yet they want nothing either in necessaries or
wealth, because they are industrious; what Creek of the Seas do they leave
unvisited? And in Shipping are so stored, as most parts of the world do love or
fear them.

Now a great increase of People rests upon the regulation of Trade; for it is
not the number of workmen, but the number of good workmen which increases
Families; and it is Families which increase and spread good people; the other
for want of knowledge and Skill, being fixed no where, because their labors
will not maintain themselves, much less a family; for who will use a workman
who has neither Skill nor Credit, when he can employ one that has both? Of
principal importance therefore is the regulation of Apprentiships, both
toward the best increase of people, and to the honest, creditable, and wealthy
manufactures of woolls, and especially of clothing; for want of which, not only
the former denoted defaults are daily found in their works, but good workmen
are undersold and ruined by bad, and the whole Nation involved in great
dishonor; therefore we will resort to the Reformations.

CHAP. XI. Showing the abuses of those Laws whereby Clothing ought to be
remedyed.
Justice (which all men cry up and few practice) is a virtue both divine and
humane: Divine Justice is either from God to man, wherein his Providence is his
Justice, by which he governs the world; or it is from man toward God, and
then it is Piety, whereby he returns to God praise and glory for his
numberless blessings: In Republiques, Cities, and Towns, it is Equity, the
fruit whereof is Peace and Plenty: In Domestique relatitions between man and
wife, it is unity and concord; from Servants to Masters it is good will and
diligence; from masters to servants it is humanity and gentleness, and from a
man toward his own body and soul, it is health and happiness; There is none
of all these relations, but is necessary and important to the reformation of
the abuses, defaults, deceptions, and grievances committed upon clothing, which
in this discourse have been in some measure discovered, and by which both God
and man are justly provoked.

The justice we are to use to the relief of the complaints before exhibited is
either distributive, or commutative; Justice distributive is to give each man
according to his deserts, whether it be honor or punishment; and commutative
justice, is in bargaining, bartering, exchanging, or in any transactions
between man and man to keep promises, covenants, and contracts, and for a man
to behave himself as he would have others do unto him; to receive the innocent
into protection, to repress and punish offenders, without which, common
intercourse and humane society must necessarily be dissolved, and for the
preservation whereof, amongst the ancient Fathers have not spared their own
sons. The Egyptian Kings, to whom antiquity gives the privilege of making
Laws, did engage their Magistrates in an oath, that in Judicature they should
resist any unjust Commands even from their Princes themselves: The Graecians
and Romans deified Justice, and would not violate it toward their enemies; so
just also were the Lacedaemonians, and so free from distrusting each other, as
even for the public safety they used neither locks nor bars; insomuch that
one asking Archidamus who those Governors were which so justly, happily, and
gloriously, governed the Common wealth of Lacedemon, answered, that they were
first the Laws, and afterward the Magistrates executing those Laws; for Law
is the rule of Justice, and Justice is the end of the Law.

Rectum est index sui and obliqui, a right Line does not only justify it
self, but accuses the crooked, say the Mathematicians; by which it may seem,
that the ready way to rectify abuses about clothing, were to compare them with
the Rule of the Laws provided for them, which nevertheless holds not in all
points; for instance, the Law empowers the Merchants and Drapers to be their
own Searchers, and to punish the Clothiers purse, as they find his works to be
faulty; and so they do, to the no small grief of the Clothier: but cui bono?
For the retayling buyer is not hereby at all relieved, the Draper selling to
him those faults for which he was before paid by the Clothier; the Merchants do
the same, by causing their Clothiers to bring their manufactures into the
Merchants private Ware houses, where their own servants are Judges, who upon
searching the Clothes do make, and mark faults enough, for which they have
reparable abatements, but themselves again do practice all fraudulent ways
they can to barter and exchange those faults away, without giving any allowance
for them; and though sometimes they be detected, yet find they means to save
their purses, whilst their Nation suffers in honor, and the Laws are
vilified to Foreigners, who stain the Justice of the Nation with weakness and
fraud: true it is that in the Netherlands, where their cunning is as piercing,
as their practice is common, they (even every buyer) do search with diligence,
and make themselves reparations, first to the Merchants great loss, and so in
course to the Clothiers no small damage: but in all this the State remains
much dishonored by the scandal, and robbed of those Fines which the Laws in
punishment do give to the public Revenue, which if they were rightly and
legally attended, would render a vast gain to the Common wealth.

As in diseases where the causes are mistaken, the remedies are consequently
misapplyed, whereby a disease in supposition becomes one in fact; so in the
foregoing instance, the remedies being misapplyed, are themselves brought to be
a disease almost incureable: therefore though in finding out the causes why
manufacture in clothing becomes so abused, there may be good use of the Drapers
and Merchants knowledge and Skill, yet the application of the remedy is a work
of State and Policy, in making and executing the Laws proportionably to the
grievance, in which instance it does not hold; for though the Merchants and
Drapers be able Searchers of the abuses, yet they are not competent reformers
of the grievances, because they are interessed in participating of those gains
which the faults occasion and intend.

Nor is this all the abuse, for in such parts of the world as the buyers are
not in ability of knowledge, like the Dutch, who make Cloths themselves, and
especially in those parts where the difference in Religion is so great as it is
between Christians and Turks, there the corrupt Merchant causes the name of
God to be blasphemed; for when those people, whose eye and judgment gives them
not so good information as does their proof and wearing, do find themselves
cheated in their garments, they presently conclude, that there is no fear of
God in that place, nor obedience to their Rulers for conscience, which must
assuredly procure much scandal to Christian Religion.

Now as Pliny observes (as in the Front you have it) that Pecunia dicitur a
Pecude, thereby bringing the original of money from sheep; affirming that the
ancient signature upon money was a sheep; he also thereby shows that
merchandises were the cause of money, and there being no greater merchandises
then are from the sheep, he makes it evident that there is nothing more
requisite toward the enriching this nation, whose peculiar blessing rests in
sheep, then strictly to hold the manufactures to the letter and rule provided
for their just making, and that the laws be unpartially executed; For,
Necessarium illud dicitur sine quo fieri non potest, and it being apparent that
this Nation cannot be rich without a constant utterance of clothing, nor can
that be done without a perfect reformation in the particulars of the works, it
does undeniably follow, that clothing must be purged from its corruptions, or
England must be poor: It is therefore the Manufactors which abuse the woolls,
and thereby improvidently give advantage to the Dutch; whereas a perfection in
the making of Cloths in England, will gainfully undersell the Hollander a Noble
in a Pound sterling.

CHAP. XII. Showing how the Laws are used to cross and destroy each other
about clothing.
BY that which has been said, it does appear that there may be too much Law,
though there cannot be too much justice, and where the Law abuses justice,
that Common wealth is in a desperate condition: England will be found in little
better state, if a short review be taken of some preceding passages: for the
Laws are made to fight against themselves in that tedious cont roversie about
the Aulnageors Subsidy: for though there be none more authentic then such as
establish that Imposition, nevertheless the litigations about the legality of
this Subsidy, and the opposition to the State revenue has for some late years
been carried on with such heat, as some innocent officers for doing their duty,
have been no less then ruined: For which cause the deputies and subservient
Aulnageors become very remiss in their office, as well in selling their Seals
by dozens to such as will buy them (the inconvenience and loss whereof is
formerly declared) as by neglecting to survey and examine what clothes are
Statutable or truly sealed: Again the Farmers and sub-farmers of the Aulnage,
being (through the troubling and interrupting their servants) made unable to
pay their Rents, the Lessors to them ever premising a Clause in their Lease for
re-entry upon non-payment of their covenanted Rent, do presently upon default
grant a new Lease to another man utterly unknown to the preceding Tenant; by
which promiscuous course there are diverse Aulnageors for one and the same
place, at one and the same time; whereof the Clothier soon getting knowledge,
by their exercising a double duty, he pays to neither, yet gets his Clothes
sealed by such indirect means as is before declared; in all which proceedings,
the Law is abused under pretenses of legality.

As for the duty of searching, the former powers granted by that Statute of
quarto Iacobi to the Merchants and Drapers, and the inconveniences thereupon
denoted, are enough to show the Imperfections of that Statute to that use;
nevertheless not only the prejudice to the buyer, and dishonor to the
Nation, are thereby as it were authorized, but the loss to the State is not
easily to be valued, seeing that in that only Country of the Netherlands, the
taxes or abatements for defects in Clothing have been by that State punished to
the damage of ten thousand pounds in one year; what then must be the Income
of the like abuses upon the whole clothing of England in those Fines which the
Statutes give to the State? all which are lost for want of legal searches,
where the faults being detected and marked upon the edges of the Clothes, as
the Statutes require, all future buyers are satisfied of their worth, and the
State secured of the revenue: and that these faults cannot be few, the Reader
may be pleased to cast his eye over their works, in mingling, carding,
spinning, weaving, scowring, milling, rowing, tentering, and many other works,
wherein every one helps his Lawful living by unlawful practices. True it is,
that the foresaid Statute of quarto Iacobi, by the largeness of it seems to
be an epitome of all the Statutes made in three hundred years before; yet such
are the insufficiencies, and the incongruities of the commands, and powers
thereby established, as the Subject, and more especially Foreigners are rather
grieved then relieved by it, wherein the dishonor of the State and Nation is
very great and apparent.

Now for the weight of Clothes so precisely commanded, and by the Statute
strictly enjoined, the Clothiers are herein generally abusive; for whereas they
were originally ordained to weigh sixty four pounds a Cloth, and afterward by
degrees came to fifty eight, yet now for want of exact searching they hold
themselves very obedient to the Law, when their Clothes hold fifty six pounds a
piece, whereof more come short then over, their general answer being, that
they cannot cast their Clothes in a mould, yet when they please they will bring
twenty Clothes together not differing from each others weight so much as a
quarter of a pound in a Cloth, so as indeed one may judge that they were cast
in a mould, which men could as well make them hold as near to fifty eight
pounds; but herein lies the Weavers chief practice of falsehood, for they will
many times make them four or six pound short of the Statutes established
weight, and then they find tricks with Stones, Leaden weights, and the like
ponderous things to give them weight, which upon the Aulnageors legal search,
may soon be discovered and seized.

Again, the Law is by the Law crossed and abused even in those places where
they pretend they have legal established Searchers; first in their number,
there ought to be six or eight in a town, according to the capacity of the
Corporation, and clothing in it: secondly, those Searchers ought to give
security of forty pounds penalty at the least, and to approve themselves men
of knowledge, wealth, and integrity, to the end the search may be thoroughly
performed once in a month or oftener: and they are by the Law furnished with
power to carry their search through Warehouses, Shops, Ships, or any other
place which shall harbor any clothing or manufactures searchable, the
resistance or concealment whereof, is put under strict and valuable penalty:
thirdly, they are by the Sature appointed in their Search what faults to
denote, and what penalties to declare on each fault.

In performance of which Injunctions, first, out of towns Corporate there is
no Searcher appointed, but all is left at liberty to the Clothier, who uses
his liberty so much to his own advantage, as should a Searcher be there
established by a Justice of Peace, as the Law requires, he shall assuredly be
affronted, sued, and imprisoned by such secret helps as the Clothier can
procure in the Exchequer, carrying therewith such abusive countenance of the
Law, as a single and simple Officer dares not resist. Secondly, in Towns
Corporate, where this office ought to be attended with numbers, there is
sometimes none, but never above one, and that an ignorant man, as also both
nominated and sworn by the Magistrate, who undoubtedly is ever a Clothier, and
as likely by his power to be an offender, whom such a worthless officer as
himself puts in, dares not control, much less correct or seize his Clothes:
Add to this also, that as he is an abject person, and the creature of the
Magistrate, so is he wanting in knowledge to judge of good and true work, as
also of estate or ability to answer his neglects, or to give security therefore.

Thirdly, there is neither fault nor penalty denoted, or put upon the Seal or
Cloth, wherein the State is abundantly damnified: but because in such a
constant practice it is impossible but some people must be punished, and some
clothes seized, in such cases another law appears (in opposition to the
Statute which directs the deciding and adjudging such faults to the Lord
Treasurer) by which the Magistrate of the place where such seizure is made,
takes upon him more then the Lord Treasurer, for he not only condemns the
culpable goods, but ex officio, he appropriates the confiscation to himself.

If in Villages there be a Searcher established by the Justice (as the Law
enjoynes) then such seizures come to the Quarter Sessions, where by favor and
friendship the offender escapes, and the State is the fufferer: in a word, it
is very material to observation, that of so many thousands of Clothes as are
made defective and deceptious in England and Wales, the Exchequer neither sees
one Cloth so seized or seizable, no nor a Penny for all the Fines or redemtion
of such a Cloth, but the abuses continue, increase, and are maintained, the
Common wealth and foreigners are generally wronged, the State is deprived of
its Revenue, even to vast sums, the Nation is dishonored over all the world,
and the continuance of it, if not speedily reformed, will plead prescription.

We will now walk through the Measurers office, who (since the Aulnageor left
it) is ordained by the Statute to be sworn in Corporations by the Magistrate,
and in Villages by the Justice adjacent, but no Law allows either them to
nominate or appoint the said officer; yet in Corporations it is so ordered, as
well to the Subjects, as to the Foreigners great damage, whereof daily
presidents may be produced: out of Corporations there is no such officer; which
defect the Clothiers as well as others do feel; In which proceedings there is
also Law against Law; First, in Corporations where the Aulnageor ought by the
Law to present his deputies, to whom the Magistrate is bound under the Penalty
of five pounds to give an oath, there the Magistrate finds a Law to claim both,
and therein proceeds as he did about the Searcher, which is formerly related;
and out of Corporations there is Law against Conscience, where the Clothiers
for want of a legal Measurer, do bring them unmeasured to London, and because
they dare not so appear in the Market, the Lord Mayor, ex officio, causes his
sworn Measurer to measure them, yet the Clothier for his private satisfaction
causes them to be most exactly measured before he brings them from home;
nevertheless he receives them again from the aforesaid sworn Measurers hands,
with the ordinary loss of four, and sometimes six yards in a piece, of which
abuse, the Day men in Essex make no small complaint.

The Mill-men and Cloth-workers can find small color of Law to countenance
their misbehaviours, yet they spare not to practcie their deceptions, and
because they have no shadow of Law, they find out the more Art to keep their
Cheats from discovery, which through use and continuance are now become the
chief secret and mystery, yea the principal part of their trade, (there being
very few able to make a perfect Cloth.) There be indeed some casualties which
are pardonable, as heat in the Mill to the prejudice of a Cloth which goes in
too dry; some come by small stones undiscerned in the Fulling-earth; some oils
change color, and alter the cloth, and some other there be of such kinds.

CHAP. XIII. The crossing of the Law by their own Ministers, in exporting raw
wools, Fullers earth, etc.
IN this part of our complaint, we presume not to meddle with Licenses granted
by the State to export Raw wools, or white Clothes, both of which have been
permitted to pass the Seas, as well for the good of the People, as for the
benefit of Clothing it self, yet so as to have the same limited, and joined
with the transportation of colored Clothes, may be found much to the advantage
of the Nations commodity in Clothing: and likewise to observe times in such
Licenses is very requisite; for many Acts of Parliament (useful and important
without doubt to the good of the public when they were ordained) have
nevertheless within few years following, not only been suspended but
repealed; in which condition the state of white Clothes has been sometimes
found; at present the liberty is great, and and thought to be good, converting
to the utility of the Merchant adventurers, but (without denial) it is a great
prejudice to the Dyers, and therein to many thousands of People: As for Raw
Wools there may be advantage to the Common wealth by their exportation, namely,
when the Cloth trade is obstructed, and the manufactures lie upon the Clothiers
hand, which at present is so found, both by the troubles of the Seas, and the
daily Wars, which stopping the utterance of Cloth, leaves the wool upon the
Grasiers hands, and extends to the prejudice of almost all the People of
England: nevertheless such as can find a market for Wools, may if they please,
find the same for Clothes, and therefore they are fit to pass together, so as
the wools in smaller quantity, may help off the Clothes in greater measure.

The place also to which Wools may be licensed to pass, ought to be
considered, and that may rather be any where then the Netherlands, where their
whole drift is to undermine the English Cloth-trade, which they cannot so
profitably accomplish, if they be forced to procure the wools through many
hands and several voyages: by no means therefore is the present practice to
be borne, which daily carries away of the finest sorts of Wools ready combed
into Jarsies for work, which they pack up as Bales of Cloth, and accordingly
they do enter and Custom them: Lastly, for Fullers earth, there is never any
occasion why that should be transported, therefore to have it licenced either
by its own name, or by that of Tobbaco-pipe-earth, or by any other title, is
clearly the greatest injury which can be done to Clothing: It is a commodity
which the Dutch cannot get in any quantity, or worth, nearer then the
Streights, unless from England, where the total exportation being by the
Statutes most strictly prohibited, their clothing being the more laden with
charge, the English will be better able to undersell them.

Now to show the Reader how the Laws are crossed and daily obstructed to such
as endeavor to serve their Country, by such as ought to encourage the
Prosecutors; surely there will be very many practices of evil consequence
discovered: for first, in the Custome-houses where Bonds are taken to the
intent these prohibited commodities pass not by means of Mariners out of the
Nation, but only from Port to Port, for accommodation of such parts as want
such commodities, they are very remiss and careless in taking account of the
Sea-mens discharge of their obligatory conditions, where also it is usual with
the Sea men to bring fraudulent Certificates, and so do cheat the States
providence, who keep servants at great wages purposely to prevent such abuses;
or if there be a regular return of the Bonds, yet there is commonly a
fraudulency in giving them, for the Masters of Ships will so contrive their
design, as he who is Master at giving the Bond, and is legally bound, shall
immediately pass his interest to another man, who taking charge of the Vessel
and Voyage, is notwithstanding not engaged in the Port-Bonds, and therefore
neither is he accountable for breach of their condition: Again, when the
Port-Bonds are justly taken, and as justly returned, yet to prevent the true
and real detection of the offender, and to dishearten the legal Prosecutor,
some friend of the offenders will clap in an information against him, purposely
to hinder and divert others, and soon after will let the prosecution fall at
his pleasure; nay, it has been said, and peradventure not unjustly, that such
preventing Informations have been antedated, to the overthrow of the real
information; But when all is granted, and a full and formal hearing and Decree
passed to the just condemnation of the offender, yet when Judgments and
Enquiries are granted, and do without Errors of the Clerks, (which is not
always) empower the Sheriffs and their Bailiffs to see execution thereof made,
it is familiar with those officers to return a Nonest inventus, or a Mortuus
est, even then when the offender and the officer have been known to be drinking
together at that very time when the Writ should have been executed.

After all this, one step further will show how charity it self abuses
Justice; for let all the former proceedings be granted to be candid and clear,
and that the Law be indeed juftly and legally executed, the offender in
custody, and nothing remaining but that he honestly discharge himself with
money, (seeing bail will not be admitted) nevertheless upon a lamenting
Petition, and urging a great charge of children to the Bench, the offender is
usually admitted to compound for ten in the hundred, or less, when by his
offense he has gained a hundred for ten, or more, and peradventure has undone
a hundred Families in so doing; yet all this while the honest Prosecutor, the
only man that appears for the good his of country, who ought by the law to
have the full benefit and advantage of the Law gratis, it being enough that he
spends his time for promotion of the Public weal, after it has cost him
several great sums of Money, and large expense of time to bring the offense
to Trial and Conviction, is dismissed with little or no satisfaction, unless
he be rewarded with the Brand of an informing Knave; surely they who made these
Laws for the benefit of themselves and their Country, did intend a more
current and just passage toward them, then thus to be obstructed and baffled;
But at the present time Felis dormit, et mures saltant, every man does as he
pleases; Prosecutors and Informers have paid for their Learning, that it is
better to lose a Coat then a Skin: such abuses as these made Theodorus say,
as in the Preface you have it, that a Wiseman did himself injustice, by
hazarding his wisdom and estate for the benefit of his Nation; and therefore
some have not spared to urge, that Customs and Imposts, and Tolls and Taxes,
might be taken away from honest, laborious, hazardous Trades and Adventurers,
and be put upon litigious Suites at Law, and such as make benefit of their
corrupt breath, that is to say, upon such Lawyers as abuse their Clients, and
such malicious Clients as abuse the name of a just and innocent defendant; but
righteousness must be expected in another world, for in this he that
endeavors to remove discommodities, and inconveniences from the Laws, does
undertake to cut off Hydra's heads, says divine Plato, which Seneca cofirmeth
in saying, Nullum sine auctoramento est malum.

CHAP. XIIII. Containing some Queries of Remedies.
WE have seen a short account of some abuses in relation to clothing; to speak
of all the frauds and deceptions daily practiced about these manufactures, were
in substance to fill a volume, they being for invention far beyond the compass
of one man's brain: but because it is concluded to be more easy to extinguish
another man's virtue, then to establish a man's own; it will here be expected
that some means should be proposed by way of reformation, proportionable to
the offenses and grievances related.

A Ship is one of the most excellent structures both for wealth, and fafety,
and conquest, that ever was invented; yet that vast Body, that Magazine of
wealth, that Castle of strength would be of no use, were it not for that small
timber the Rudder, which contracting as it were all the Mathematical lines of
the Hulls composition, every proportion answers in obedience to the commands
and checques of that inconsiderable Moover, the Rudder. It is so in Government,
which therefore magnifies Monarchy or single Dominion, for though the Art of
man might frame two or more Rudders to one Ship, yet all the wisdom of man
could not so proportion the obedience of the Vessel, but that there would be
distraction in the course and sailing.

Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas, and though it be more easy to
derive the errors then to contrive the remedies, yet it is a great step
toward health for a man to know the cause of his sickness; and it may be
concluded, that he who has taken the pains to give himself knowledge of the
several abuses arising upon so immense a work as Clothing is, would not
trouble his Countrymen with relation of their grievances, unless he knew
likewise how to shape the remedies in proportion to them; If the Reformation
did rest only upon the offenses, the respective Statutes provided for them may
seem to expedite that work, but so many have been the inventions to carry
these offenses beyond the reach of these Statutes, that the reformation by them
is not probable, whilst they disagree so in themselves,

In the first place therefore we present the the Laws themselves to
consideration, which are so, and so often used and managed one against another,
as they may well admit a reconciliation, which is supposed to be most properly
the work of the learned Judges, or else of a Parliament if it be sitting; and
herein the first difference of note is, that of so long and great heat and
contention between the old and new Draperies, wherein (if the question be not
already resolved by the ancient Judges, as is supposed) it remains to be
enquired why that Subsidy was granted, and upon what Manufactures it was
granted, and what it was that was granted.

Secondly, those Queries once resolved, and the Law being set clear from such
bold Inquisitors, it is next to be vertuated by the power and countenance of
the State; and that the Aulnageor who is trusted with so honorable a charge as
is the Seal of the State, (which the Law requires him to use to the justice of
the People, the advantage of the public Revenue, and to the honor of the
Nation) may be so countenanced and encouraged as a minister of Justice, and the
dignity pro^per to such trusts do require, and by no means to be affronted in
the execution of his office.

Thirdly, That it be resolved whether ths Magistrates in Corporations (who are
always men dealing in Clothing) ought both to nominate the Persons, and to
administer the Oath, to the Searchers and Measurers of Clothing, and if not,
who then ought to nominate or present those officers to the Magistrates, who
also are bound under a penal sum to administer the said Oath.

Fourthly, whether the Clothing which is now dispersed all over this Nation, as
well without as within Corporations, may be searched and measured at those
rates of allowance which the Statutes provided when Clothing was confined to
Corporations only, or whether the neglect for want of a competent Salary, has
not been a great cause to let in manifold abuses upon Clothing. Which being
granted, the next enquiry is, what shall be the Salary, and by whom it shall be
paid.

Fifthly, that in regard the manufactures of Clothing are by the Statutes
confined to Corporations, and nevertheless are (through Gods great blessing)
so multiplied as the Corporations cannot contain them, whether the Clothing
which is made in Villages, may not by the power of the State, be brought to
some eminent villages or market towns, lying conveniently for their
transportation to Markets, and there to be searched, measured, weighd, and
sealed, provided the same be within fifteen miles off the Clothiers
habitation, and whether in every such town it may not be convenient to erect
Halls, and therein to place Tables, Pearches, Scales, Weights, and Measures,
for the better discharging the said duties, and benefit of the Clothiers?

Sixthly, whether the reformation of colors and dying be not belonging to the
Aulnageor, in regard the Law gives him cognizance, and subsidy upon the said
colors, and whether the prohibitions and searches for Block-wood, Logwood, and
other forbidden materials do not belong, or are fiting to relate to the
Aulnageors charge, who in regard of the subsidy is to see that the grounds of
colors be justly and truly laid, to the lasting of the colors, advantage of
the cloth, and to the honor and profit of the State.

Seventhly, whether it be not requisite that the two principal materials
belonging to clothing (which are Wools and Fullers-earth) for prevention of
their illegal tronsportation, ought not most properly to be within the care
and charge of the Aulnageor, and whether some speedy and strict course ought
not to be taken with offenders herein, to prevent their evasions and abuses of
the Laws in that case provided, and whether the intuition of the same belong
not most properly to the Aulnageor?

Eighthly, whether all those trades which are appertaining to any manufactures
of wools, as Minglers, Carders, Spinners, Weavers, Fullers, Cloth workers, and
the like, ought not to be attended with servants of ability and good knowledge,
for which each of the said servants ought by injunction of the Law, and many
strict Statutes to that purpose, to be bound Apprentices, and to accomplish the
number of seven years in attaining the said knowledge; and whether it be not
proper to have the said Apprentices bound, enrolled, and enfranchised in the
Halls before named, to the end that false and ignorant work men be not admitted
to abuse both Natives and Foreigners as they have done?

Ninthly, whether all commodities coming from foreign parts, and measurable,
be not properly belonging to the charge of the Aulnageor, as in King Edward the
seconds time they were, and in some other Kings Reigns both before and since
they have been, to the intent the native Subjects be not abused, as at this day
is found in abundance, and whether a Fee for so doing be not in the power of
the State, for the visible benefit of the People, it being established in
proportionable manner to the works as we daily find it to be done in other
States.

Tenthly, whether the Manufactures of Cotton wool, converted into Ticking,
Fustians, and the like merchantable commodities, ought not to be within the
survey of the Aulnageor, or if not, then in whose power it is to regulate the
said manufactures, in regard they are at present much altered and corrupted
from their primitive ordination both in length and breadth; and whether
likewise the State may not impose a Fee upon those works as in other clothing
is done, to the end the natives be not abused as now they are.

Thus we have proceeded upon the discovery of some abuses, being no small
grievances, as also by an humble inquisition into some remedies, both of which
may be enlarged as occasion and encouragement do invite; for it is not enough
thus briefly and superficially to run over misdemeanors, and reformations,
where the work extends to the universal good or ill of a Nation, no more then
it is to take a general survey upon an entire and compacted body, to discover
the diseases of all bodies; but when the Limbs, and Veins, and Nerves, and
Arteries, when the noble parts, the heart, the brain, the liver of one man
come to be dissected, the Anatomy will then show the infirmities and disorders
which have brought that body, and by the same occasions, may bring others into
a final dissolution: nevertheless the result in clothing will not be like the
similitude in diseases; for by the inspection of one body many may be cured,
but if Clothing must dye, (as it is likely to do) for want of enquiry into the
remedies, how then shall clothing be found again in this Nation to undergo the
cure?

It is not of small importance therefore well to consider the present state and
condition of clothing, for though the materials be English, yet they have been
sometimes converted into clothing in other Countries; and peradventure upon an
ingenious and diligent inquisition, it may be found, that there was not more
art and policy used in bringing home the work to the Wool, then now there is
cunning and daily practices to carry the native materials unto foreign
manufactures; to the help whereof, and in apology for illegal clothing, every
man holds himself justified by the newness of the invention; but if the Laws
for regulation must be bound to attend the Laws for invention, it will prove
not only the greatest but the final destruction to the ancient and
substantial Clothing, by degenerating into fantastical and invalid inventions.

CHAP. XV. Of the benefits of Clothing.
THough all that has been said, has been delivered with integrity as to
truth, and with affection in reference to this Nation, yet the Author flatters
not himself that he has pleased all his Countrymen, for he expects
opposers, and wishes for them, if their intent and purpose be (as his is) to
the good of his native Country; for so Contraria inter se posita magis
elucescunt, and there is no doubt of a public benefit where all men endeavor
it: To the end therefore that God may have his due praise and glory for his
immense goodness and blessing bestowed in that peculiar of wool upon this
Nation, we will conclude the whole with a short Survey of some particular
immunities which clothing has conferred upon England, with which the glory of
it extends to the Verges and utmost inhabited parts of the world, and without
which the Arc of Gods mercy and the glory of this Land is like to depart.

First, the reducing of clothing to England in manufacture as well as in
materials; (which must a thousand times repeat Englands gratitude to the
memory of that ever renowned King Edward the third) has produced such opulent
and magnificent Societies of Merchants, as the whole world cannot again
demonstrate, that is to say, first the Merchant Adventurers Company, whose
Governors, Presidents, Consulls, and the like chief officers are not of less
esteem (where they please to seat themselves) then are the Residentiaries of
the greatest Princes; and so much the more cordial is their welcome, as each
man's profit leads his affection beyond his reverence to public Embassies,
because proximity to a man's personal interest sits nearer in his thoughts,
then when he is involved in the public concernment.

This Company has by their Policy, and Order, supplanted those Societies of
the Hans Towns, (as they are called) who vending an inconsiderable number of
cloths and at low rates, did nevertheless account England obliged to them for
their Markets and Shipping; whereas at this day the Merchant Adventurers do
utter ten times as many cloths annually in the same markets, at far better
prices, and in answer to the Shipping which England had in those times from
those Countries at dear entertainment: This trade of clothing, and this
particular company of Merchants, have furnished the Navy-Royall from time to
time, and upon all occasions with such strengths, as they have not feared, (if
they have not awed) the greatest Navall Forces sailing upon the Ocean; he that
may have the favor to peruse their Records shall find what opportune service
they did for their Country in the year eighty eight, and since upon all
military occasions wherein this Nation has been embroyled with any other.

Next, the East land Company has planted the trade of Clothing all about the
Baltic Seas, which at this day employes many warlike Ships, and gives a great
increase of Mariners, to the no small growth of Englands strength at Sea: The
Muscovia Company have discovered the passage by the North Cape, and the great
trade of Greenland; what wealth accrews to England by the Turkey and East
Indian Companies is not easy to be numbered, their Shipping also being as
strong and rich as any that swim upon the Seas: how one of them has by the
trade of Cloth only, engrossed all manner of wealth coming from the
Levant-Seas, and how the other of them has established the rich Trades of
Silks, Spices, Jewels, etc. in the Southern parts of the world, is by all
admired, though by none to be valued; and what strengths of Shipping these two
Companies have produced, as they have been wonderful, so they have been
formidable to al Nations: what contribution the clothing Trade with Spain and
France have given to Englands maritime powers, is by those Countries themselves
feared, as well as by England found to its great security.

And as these unvaluable blessings have befallen England by the trade of
Clothing, politiquely and providently drawn into Societies, Companies and
Corporations; so the loose transactions of trade in other Countries have
rendered them so poor at Sea, as were it not for the Shipping of England and
Holland, the very life of commerce would perish, would return to the same
wilderness and uselesnesse as it is now in Greenland, and the West India, where
Civil Government has not once been heard of.

Again, if comparison be made for richness of Trade, between Clothing and any,
or all other substances of Merchandises, whereby any Nation, but more
especially England may be enriched; neither the Silks, nor Furs, nor Wines,
nor Spices, nor Bullion it self of all other Countries can render that account
to its own, or can in proportion equalize England in Clothing, Food, Shipping,
Strength of People, or wealth of Money, the honor whereof, rightly derived
must (next after that which in all Ages has been and is due to the State for
its providence) rest upon the Merchant Adventurers, upon whom nevertheless
there have been, and at this present are, great oppressions and Impositions,
especially those of Holland, whereof we here forbear particularly to enlarge,
having confined this brief Discourse to the Landbound grievances of England,
yet so as we intend not to smother those just complaints of foreign abuses,
which together with some other irregularities of Trade, and certain humble
presentiments of Reformation, shall hereafter attend the present acceptance of
this small offering; in pursuance whereof peradventure upon Conference with
some of the many Laws which the several Kings and Queens of this Nation have
in Parliaments enacted for the advance and wealth of Trade, something more then
is at present in visibility may be produced.

To shut up all, because the absolute and most commodious reformation of the
abuses, frauds, deceptions, together with the constant practices of evil
works, and evil worke-men does cry aloud in the ears of Justice, and that
they may with the same facility and obedience answer the rules of the Laws,
and the many prudent orders of State, as a Ship does the commanding Checques of
the Rudder, (as has been said) It is humbly proposed, that a well formed
Commission, comprehending all the branches of Trades incident to Clothing, and
entrusted in the hands of persons honorable, judicious, and conscientious,
conferring with the ablest and honestest Clothiers, and amongst them all
establishing a competent to discharge the attendance of Officers, Deputies, and
Servants, as in the Customs, Excises, and the like vast employments is done,
will be found a true and most serviceable Rudder to this Ship of richest
Freight, which the whole world can produce; For nothing does more prejudice the
public utility, then that every man should exercise his own fancy, nor is any
thing a greater Bane to a well governed Commonwealth, then ill governed and
disorderly Trade.

Civitais eversio, morum, non murorum casus.

Postscript,
SUch is the excellency of the Sheep above all the other irrational Creatures,
as well in his natural as in his symbolicall capacities, that not only
morality, but piety it self may thereby receive instruction, even to the
recreating the mind and soul; and because they may prove acceptable to deceive
the melancholy of some men's leisurable hours, it is intended shortly to
present the courteous Reader with some meditations, wherein shall be showed,
that as every part of the sheep is useful in Food, or Clothing, or Physic, or
Music etc. so also is he divine in his uses, and comparative considerations.

FINIS.

