AN ACCOUNT, OF THE Behavior of the Fourteen Late Popish Malefactors, whilst
in NEWGATE.

And Their Discourses with the Ordinary, VIZ. Mr. Staley, Mr. Coleman, Mr.
Grove, Mr. Ireland, Mr. Pickering, Mr. Green, Mr. Hill, Mr. Berry, Mr.
Whitebread, Mr. Harcourt, Mr. Fenwick, Mr. Gawen, Mr. Turner, AND Mr. Langhorn.


ALSO, A CONFVTATION of their Appeals, Courage, and Cheerfulness, at Execution.

By SAMUEL SMITH, Ordinary of Newgate, and Minister of the GOSPEL.

He who is First in his Own Cause, seems Just; But his Neighbor comes, and
Searches him, Prove. 18.17. It is not probable, that such who will Perjure
themselves, to Calunmiate Protestants, should be Capable of giving any real
Testimonies for Themselves.

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, Dorman Newman, Tho. Cockeril, and Tho.
Simmons, 1679.

The Unmasking of the Thirteen Popish Malefactors: AND Their Discourses with
the Ordinary, etc.
IT being desired of me by a Worthy Divine, that I should Publish what I said
to Staley, who was Condemned for Treasonable Speeches: Likewise my Discourses
with the other Twelve Jesuitical and Popish Conspirators, before their being
Drawn out to their Execution: I could not (though with some reluctance at
first) but grant him his Request; hoping that this Narrative may be of public
Use and Benefit to all, into whose hands it shall come; to acquaint them with
the Truth of what I spoke to them, by way of Advice, to Prepare them for their
approaching Death: And that I may give some Satisfaction, to such as are apt to
be staggered in the Belief of their Abominable Crimes, because they frequently
Avowed their Innocence. Which Satisfaction I shall perform in order as they
Suffered.

I. Mr. Staley.
THe first person Executed, was Mr. Staley, who spoke Treasonable words against
his Majesty, which expressly threatened to take away his Sacred Life. I did
frequently, after the Sentence of Death was past on the said Staley, visit him
in order to Prepare him for his Execution. In my first Address to him, I told
him, I came not to insult over him, but out of Conscience to discharge the Duty
of my Office: He received me with great willingness, and said, He had great
Terror upon his Conscience for the Guilt of his many and great Sins; yet
utterly denied the speaking of those words for which he stood Condemned. I told
him, that the readiest way to be free from those Terrors, was to make an
Ingenuous Penitent acknowledgement; and that for Tongue-sins or secret
Heart-sins formerly Indulged, God might justly desert him, to ensnare himself
by such Treasonable Words. He said, He never had any thought of mischief
against the Kings Person. I replied, that words were the natural product of
thoughts, and a frequent Prologue to the most abominable Actions. He persisted
in denying, that he spoke any words tending to that sense; but when I told him,
that his friend, who was Drinking with him, could, or had Deposed upon Oath,
that he spoke those very words: He replied, Nay, if my Friend will swear so
much, it is probable I might (in the heat and extravagancy of Passion) utter
them, though they never were intended in my Heart. He had great Remorse for the
sinfulness of his. Life, and expressed some particulars which I shall not
mention. I told him, if he expected any settlement of true serenity in
Conscience, that he must not seek it in adhering to the Romish Religion; For
false and loose Principles can never produce solid and lasting Comfort: then I
undertook to convince him from the Sacred Scriptures, of the many Absurdities
which are maintained by Popish Doctors, that it is a presumption not to doubt
of Salvation, and yet that a person may Merit it, which is utterly
inconsistent; for if any man doubt of his future happy estate, how can he Merit
it? and if he may Merit it, what need he doubt, when by works of a
self-Righteousness, he can create a Title, or may lay Claim to Eternal Life? I
judged it necessary, in order to the removing his Terror in Conscience, to
inform him aright; that although it were impossible to fulfill the Covenant of
Works, or to attain any Perfection in this Life; yet there is a Foundation of
hope, for degenerate Mankind as restored to the Image of God by Christ; Whose
satisfaction to divine Justice, is of infinite value and virtue: so that Christ
being the only Mediator by Redemption, it is Blasphemy, and the highest
Sacriledg to constitute or invocate any Saint or Angel as a Mediator of
intercession. For this is equivalent to Christ's Infinite Satisfaction, as
grounding the Right of his intercession, especially considering, that Mediatory
Intercession is only the representing and pleading the Merit of infinite
Satisfaction. Upon this, he expressed an Assent to what I had affirmed, by bowing
his head; and applying his hand to his Breast, he said, Sir, Go on. Then I
unfolded the nature and necessity of Faith and Repentance in order to the
Justification of a sinner; how they were the conditions of the Covenant of
Grace, So required of us, for pardon of sin, and eternal Life; As that they
could not be extracted out of the power of free will in man, but were the sole
purchase of Christ's free-Love; who by his Spirit, infusing the principle of
Faith and Repentance, does Regenerate, and actually reconcile a sinner to God;
and so Redeem, or set him free from the slavery of his corrupt will, which he
cannot shake off by any Improvement of Natural Reason, or moral Resolutions. I
stated also the difference twixt true saving faith and repentance, from that
which is false: And that the Office of Faith, is not only to rely on the mercy
of God, and merits of Christ, but also to give back the the whole man, in an
hearty resignation, to the conduct and government of Christ's Word and Spirit in
all things. That Saving-Repentance was not an Act of mere Attrition, which only
effects a legal consternation in Conscience, from the apprehension of guilt,
and divine Wrath: But true Repentance is Evangelical, wrought deep in the heart
by sound Contrition for sin as sin, chiefly for offending the Holy God: so that
it is the result of an holy filial Ingenuity, and is encouraged by the hope of
Mercy, attended with an hatred of all sin, and a studious resolution to walk in
all holy Obedience. Here I told him, what an unsound dangerous Opinion that was
of the Romish Doctors, who maintain Attrition only with the receipt of the
Eucharist, and the Sacrament of Absolution at the very point of Death to be a
sufficient Pasport for a comfortable Exit out of the World, or Ticket to claim
Salvation: After this, and some other Discourse, he thankt me for my Advice,
and said, He was much Benefited, Supported, and Comforted thereby: And desired
me, as frequently as I could, to renew my visits of him; so I promised I would,
and then I prayed with him; and he was very intentive, and much affected with
what I Prayed.

When I came again, he complained, that his heart was not so thoroughly Contrite
for sin as he desired; that he was much perplexed that he had no more Assurance
of a future happy state. I stated the nature of true saving-Faith, that it was
an adherence to the free grace of God in Christ, for pardon and Eternal Life,
joined with an obedient self-resignation; and where this was wrought, the
soul-state was safe, tho assurance of Gods Love might be wanting. For this was
not an essential Privilege, absolutely necessary to Salvation, but only a
peculiar favor given to strict walking Christians; and that only at some
set-times, in great extremity and need of such hidden Manna. That it was rather
of the nature of a Rational short sensation, than the Ground of settled Comfort;
which is the result of an Heroical strain of Faith, to trust in God, when he
seems to reject and slay us; and that the Lord does more esteem this resolute
dependency, in the midst of seeming-contradictions, than the most multiplied
Acts of external Worship. Upon this he was somewhat more serene in his mind: And
I told him, that in praying and seeking the Lord more fervently, comfort would
gradually be obtained.

The next day he distrusted his Heart, as to the Truth of his Faith and
Repentance, which I told him, was a good sign that he was in a hopeful way of
making his Peace with God. That he must wait in believing that he should obtain
Comfort promised to the Penitent. He desired me to pray with him, and for him;
and to prepare to speak somewhat of the sufferings of Christ, when I should next
Visit him. Accordingly, from that Text, I am Crucified with Christ, I treated
of many parts of his Bitter Passion, and of his Soul-agonies, inferring matter
not only of Comfort from thence, but also of Instruction, for our Imitation and
Conformity. I left him afterward in a frame more willing and fit to Die; and
coming to him on the very Morning he was to Suffer, he told me, that Now he
had more Comfort, and an hope of his future Happy-state: yet renouncing all
opinion of worth in his own Tears, Prayers, and Humiliation. He was solicitous,
if the Executioner should deal with him according to the strictness of the
Sentence, lest feeling any pain (if Cut down, and ripped up Alive) he should
Curse, or use any Unchristian word: Which rather than to do (said he) I would
Bite my Tongue in pieces; for I dread Sin now, more than Death. I told him,
that I hoped the manner of his Execution would be mitigated; however, that God
would prevent Sin in him at the time of his Suffering, because he was so
anxious as to distrust himself, and cautious to avoid all unbecomming Words or
Gestures. After some farther Discourse, I prayed with him, and he was much
pleased with my attendance about him; yet he spared me from going with him to
the place of Execution for some Reasons. I cannot say how he declared himself
there, because I was not present: But upon my whole Observation of his
Behavior in Prison, I do charitably judge, he was a real Penitentiary. It was
doubtful to some, whether he dyed in the Roman or Protestant Religion; because
(as I think) he did not at last declare himself either way: Yet this I am sure
of, that if he had solid and true Comfort in Dying, this could not proceed from
such a sandy foundation as his old Popish Principles, but only from
Self-abhorrency in the sense of his great Sinfulness, and the defectiveness of
his best Repentance and Obedience, that he might build his hope on Christ, and
his Righteousness only, as the Rock of Eternal Life.

II. Mr. Coleman.
I Come now to Coleman, of whom I can say very little, because he had an
Arrogant opinion of his own Abilities; and out of an Hope to be Canonized for a
Saint, despised and rejected any Assistance from me, either by Discourse or
Prayer. I offered him both on the next day after the Sentence of Death passed
upon him; but he returned me this Answer (by the Messenger I sent to him, to
know if he would admit me) That he had but a very short time to Prepare himself
for Death, and would not be hindered in the Loss of any part of it; thanking me
for my offer of Visiting him, but desired me to forbear. I put a fair
construction on the Message brought me at the first, thinking he might be very
busy at that time, about some extraordinary emergency, or indisposed to be
Visited; and therefore told the Messenger, that I would attend on him on some
other fit time. The Officer told me, that Mr. Coleman would never admit me; and
he inferred it from his manner of speaking that Message which he sent by him;
he observed his Countenance and Gestures in the delivery of it. So I totally
desisted. Yet when he was brought down from his Chamber in the Press-yard-side,
to go to the Sledge, I stayed him a little, saying, Mr. Coleman, You did not
think well of admitting me, yet know, I have earnestly Prayed that God would
give you true and great Repentance for your great Crimes, stand not out in your
denying of them. Some other words I used, to which he replied in short and
quick tone, Thank you, thank you. As I moved nearer with him toward the gate,
he said, Sir, I must beg your Pardon. It being a strange word to drop from Him,
I asked him for what? He replied, That I did not Admit you; but truly, it was
not in any contempt of your Office; but when you sent to me, I was under some
perplexed Thoughts; and for other Consideratious, thought it not Convenient.
Then I told him, that I would pray for him as a dying man, which he took well,
and so we parted.

III. Mr. Grove.
MR. Grove was Executed on Friday the 24th. of January 1678. I spoke to him in
the Chapel these words (before he was carried down the Stone-stairs unto the
Sledg:) Sir, I earnestly desire you, Now that you are going to appear at the
Tribunal of Christ, that you would clear your Conscience and speak the Truth,
that you may die in Peace: And I do Exhort you, that you would beg of God great
Repentance for your great sins. He replied, That he did understand his Duty.
Yet I persisted, to exhort him not to trust to the merits of any Saint or
Angel, but wholly to go out of himself, not grounding any Confidence of his
Salvation on any prayers, tears, nor the deepest Humiliation of his own heart.
That even Cardinal Bellarmine said, when dying, It was safest to rely wholly
and solely on the Alsufficient Merits of the blessed Jesus. Mr. Grove replied,
That Thomas a Kempis had said the same: To which I replied, Do you consider of
it, and Act accordingly: For you must not hazard your Souls eternal welfare by
any presumptious mixing of your own good works with Christ's Infinite
Satisfaction and Merits. For the Apostle saint Paid says, If Justification be
of Works, it is altogether of Works; but if of free Grace, it is altogether of
Grace.

So I took leave of Mr. Grove, desiring him to consider well of what I had
said, Praying that the Lord would in much mercy look upon his soul to pardon
him, and fit him for his approaching Death. Mr. Grove seemed to take in good
part what was said to him. After which, he was conducted down to the Sledg.

IV. Mr. Ireland.
MR. Ireland was Executed on the same day with Mr. Grove, to whom I had not
time to say more than these few words, viz. Sir, I do earnestly beg of God to
grant you mercy and pardon for your great sins. Trust alone in the
Righteousness and Merits of Christ Jesus: Compose your self in your passage,
and six your Heart upon the Lord, till you Expire. Which words Mr. Ireland
seemed to take kindly from me: And so we took leave of each other.

Here I cannot forbear to give some account of Mr. Irelands perverting of a
Woman who was Burnt in Smithfield for Clipping his Majesty's Coin. This
seduction of the said Woman from the Protestant Religion, was before Mr.
Ireland was Apprehended for the late Conspiracy. An Officer in Newgate did
assure me, when Ireland was committed for the Plot, that he was able to take
his Oath, that Ireland perverted that woman some time before; for he well knew
him upon a second Reveiw, but knew him not to be a Papist or Priest at first;
for he was admitted to her as a Friend. Irelands stratagem in turning the Woman
to become a Papist, was thus discovered. Early on the morning on which she was
Executed, I asked her, what hope she had of a future happy state? she hufft at
me, telling me, I need not trouble my self about her, for she was sure of her
Salvation. I wondered at her Confidence, but suspected not the Grounds of her
Malepartness.

After I had Exhorted and Prayed with her at the place of Execution, and was
taking my farewell of her; she entreated me to give her some time to pray for
her self, which she did: In her Prayer, she mixed these words, Lord grant, that
the offering up of my Body to the Flames, may expiate the guilt of all my Sins,
and save my soul. I told her, when she had finished her prayer, that the
foresaid expression smelt rank of Popery; and therefore asked her, what Religion
she came to die in? She replied, she was a Roman Catholic. I asked her, How
long she had been such? She said, that a good Minister had told her, that if
she died in the Protestant Religion, she was sure to be Damned. And that he
proved it by this Scripture, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I Build my
Church. So that, he assured her, that the Religion of the Romish Bishop, who
was St. Peter's Successor, was the Rock there meant; and so there was no
Salvation to those who are Separatists from that Church, and the Profession of
it. I told her, That the Priest had deceived her. For the Rock was not St.
Peter's Person, nor his Verbal Confession of Christ; for if so, Where was the
Rock, and, What became of the Church, when St. Peter so shamefully denied his
Lord thrice? But the only True Rock, on which the Church is Built, is the very
Person, Offices and Merits of Christ, the Son of God, who was the Object of St.
Peter's Confession. She was attentive to what I said, and seemed somewhat
sensible of her being deceived. Saying, She was willing to be Saved betwixt us
Both. But I told her, She must not halt 'twixt two Religions, so opposite to
each other; and that it was very dangerous to dye in the Roman Persuasion. She
told me, She could not Renounce it, in as much as the said Priest had obliged
her by the Blessed Sacrament, that she should never recant or depart from the
Popish Religion, as the best and safest to Dye in. I convinced her with
Arguments to the contrary; yea, she her self was not Credulous of their absurd
Affirming of the Transubstantiation of the Sacramental Bread and Wine, into the
very Body and Blood of Christ: For she said, She neither tasted any Flesh or
Blood. She also declared, That she had no Good Works of her own, which she
durst trust to, as Meritorious of Heaven; but relied wholly and solely on
Christ's Righteousness. Whereupon I told her, She denied the grand Points of
Popery; and therefore, was a Papist to get a Pretended Absolution, or upon some
Design. But, fearing to Dye in the Romish Opinions, she ask't me, If she
should not be Perjured, if she renounced them, having taken the Sacrament, to
persist in them? I told her, That she must not cleave to an unlawful wicked
Oath; but beg Repentance of God, that she so easily suffered her self to be
seduced. I told her, That the Lord says by the Prophet, That an Oath must be
taken in Truth, Righteousness, and Judgment.

Now, she did not, neither could swear in Truth, because it was to a False
Religion; nor in Judgment, in Wisdom and Discretion, because she swore rashly
and inconsiderately: Therefore, this Oath was Void in its own Nature; and it
could not bind her, the Matter of it being Unlawful and Wicked.

At last, being Convinced of her Error, she was willing to Retract it: But I
told her, That what she did, she must do willingly, and from a sincere penitent
Frame of Heart. She said, She could and would freely (out of Conviction of her
Duty) Renounce all Romish Opinions and Practices; which she did openly, with an
Audible Voice; affirming, That she dyed a True Protestant. So I took her by the
Hand, and Prayed again with her, that God would pardon her former Levity, and
give her Perseverance in the True Faith, which she had so solemnly re-imbraced.

This was the first Discovery of Proselyting condemned Malefactors at Newgate:
To prevent which Seduction, Captain Richardson (since this came to his
Knowledge) is very watchful, and gives all his Officers a Charge to suffer none
to come to Condemned Persons, but only such whom they know to be
Protestant-Divines; and that always, an Officer be present to hear what passes
in Discourse.

V. Mr. Pickering.
I Had discourse with him before his Execution; but he would not permit me to
pray with him, only desired my Prayers at Home for him; which I promised him,
and he Thanked me. I was present at his Execution, because he was Hanged after
three other ordinary Malefactors. When he came out of the Sledge into the Cart,
He had a great Flushing in his Face; I apprehended by his Words and Gesture,
that he had Elevated his Artificial Courage; or rather sunck himself into a
Sullenness, by taking Cordyal-Spirits: For he was unconcerned at the Approach
of his own Death, and no way affected with his monstrous Crime. With an
impudent Face, a lying Tongue, and anticke Carriage, he Denied what he was
Condemned for, and Asserted his Innocence. He was reproved by the Sheriffs, for
such impudent Lying; having had a fair Trial, and found Guilty of the whole
Indictment charged upon him: Yet so seared are the Consciences of these Grand
Traitors, and Enemies to all Order, and well-Establish't Government, as well as
the True and Pure Religion, that they will hazard the Eternal Loss of their
Souls, as to a future happy State, rather than declare any Remorse for their
abominable Designs and Practices. Yea, they stick not to justify themselves,
as if Perjury could change the heinous Nature of Treason, and wash it into a
perfect Innocence.

Sir Richard How told Pickering, That he should have a considerable Time to
prepare for his instant Death, if he would improve it well, and not mispend it
in extravagant, and false Pretenses. He likewise called unto him, to put him in
mind of Praying for himself; alleading, that it was reported, that he was a
Priest; therefore, he ought to be able to pray, in Expressions, and with
Affections suitable to his present Distress: Yet Pickering neither warned the
People, to take heed of an ill Life, nor Confessed any Sin to God, of which
himself was Guilty; but with a kind of rude smiling, denied himself to be a
Priest, but only a Religious Brother. Sir Richard ask't him, If he were ashamed
of his Religion, or, That the People should hear him Pray? For some of his
Fraternity, Executed before, only muttered a few Private Ave-Maryes, or other
Popish Prayers, to themselves. Then Pickering repeated the Lord's-Prayer, and
the Apostolical-Creed; and said no more, as to any Religious Concernments. Then
the Ordinary, being in the Cart with him, exhorted him to Express himself more
fully and pathetically in Prayer, suitable to the distress of a Dying Man, which
he refused to do. Then I ask't him, that I might Pray for him, because he might
be uncomposed or indisposed himself: But he said, That he did not matter it; he
had rather I should let it alone. So after a strange unbecoming, stupid, and
sullen behavior of himself, when he desired no longer time, his face was
veiled, and he was turned off: he hung about half an hour, and then was Cut
down and Quartered.

VI. Mr. Green.
GReen was one of the Murderers of Sir Edmundberry Godfrey. He was born in
Ireland of a Protestant Father, (as himself said) but his mother being a Papist
and his father dying, she committed the Son to his Uncle (her brother) for
Education, in the Popish Religon. Green could neither read nor write, yet his
Uncle had so trained him up in the Popish Principles, that he was a fitter
subject (when grown up) for Popish Priests to work upon, and make him an Engine
for their destructive Practices. This appeared by their inveigling of him into
the horrid murder of the said Sir Edmund: Green had some time before been
preferred to be Chappel-keeper at Sommerset-house. Hereupon the chief contrivers
of that Murder, took their opportunity to draw him in, to be an Actor in that
bloody Tragedy. Green was very ready at hand for that purpose, and was the
easier induced thereunto, because Sir Edmund, being one of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace, was very active in discovering and committing Popish
Priests to Custody: his Life was laid wait for several times, not only for the
reason aforesaid, but chiefly because he had taken some Examinations upon Oath,
concerning the late Horrid popish Conspiracy, which they thought (if Sir Edmund
were killed) would be lost, or not so valid in their Credibility. But in this
they were infatuated, for the murder of this Worthy Patriot, confirmed the
belief of the Plot. The manner of contriving Sir Edmund's Death was thus. As he
passed by Sommerset-House, he was importuned by some of the Accomplices in the
murdering of him, to turn in at the Gate, under pretense that there was a fray
within the Court; and that he being a Justice of the Peace, might (as he was
bound) do a great good Office in appeasing the Scuffle. Sir Edmund went in, not
mistrusting their design on him: But these cruel Enemies to the Protestant
Religion, had no sooner got him into the back part of Sommerset-House, but they
josled him into a private room, and there set upon him with their Fury. The
Narrative is in Print, and too tedious to relate. Therefore in sum, as to
Greens part, who acted in that bloody Tragedy, it was proved upon Oath, that he
strangled Sir Edmund; and farther acted, in conveighing his dead body to the
place where it was afterward found. Green being condemned to be hanged for
this Barbarous Murder, I proffered my self (as Ordinary) to visit, and fit him
for his approaching Death. He accepted of it, and I went to him several days,
to make him sensible of so great a Crime. He stiffly denied it, as also did Hill
and Berry, to the last. I urged Green with various Arguments, to adore the
Sovereignty of divine Providence, which had thus wonderfully brought to light
such a secret mystery of Iniquity, hardly to be paralleled, in any Age. Yet
Green was very obstinate, in standing out to deny, that he knew any thing of
this Murder more or less, which I told him proceeded from some or all of these
Reasons following; either because he had taken an Oath of Secresy, or counted
it no sin, but rather a meritorious Act, to destroy such a grand Heretic as
Sir Edmund was accounted. Or had received a Popish Absolution from the Guilt of
that Murder, and so looked upon himself as Innocent as the Child Unborn. Or
would not confess that horrid Crime, to decline casting a great reproach upon
the Popish Party. Yet however, I did not cease for many days to exhort him, to
unburthen his Conscience of this particular Guilt. I aggravated in many
particulars, the heinousness of the sin of Murder, especially of this,
committed with such perfidious and cruel Circumstances. Yet no Arguments
prevailed with him to acknowledge it.

I found him Ignorant in the Principles of the Christian Faith; therefore I
took the more pains to inform him of the danger of dying in the Romish
Persuasion, which is grossly opposite, by the Mixture of many absurd Traditions,
to the saving Fundamentals of Christianity. He said, That he did not believe
many Points of Popery; viz. The Power of Priestly Absolution, nor the Merits of
Good Works to claim Salvation by: Nor that it was Lawful to Pray to any Saint
or Angel: And that no Sin was Venial in its own Nature, though it were never so
small. I much wondered, that he should say, He believed not any of these Popish
Points; and yet, that he should wear a Crucifix at his Girdle. I desired him,
not to put any Religion in Looking on It, nor in Kissing of It. He said, He put
no Confidence of Salvation in It; only It was a Remembrance of his Blessed
Savior. I told him, That Christ had left no such, nor any other Memorials of
Himself, but only in the Scriptures of Sacred Truth, and in the Sacraments:
That it is the Office of the Holy Spirit, to bring every Truth necessary for
Salvation, to our Remembrance: And that Christ, his Offices and Merits, were
only to be Believed in; and were sufficient to put us in mind of our Duty, and
to quicken holy Affections in us.

I said moreover, That it was a more Refined piece of Idolatry, to Conceive
otherwise of God in our Thoughts, than as He had Revealed himself by the
Scriptures of Truth, in his Infinite Excellencies. And therefore, to relieve
us, in preventing any gross Mistakes in our absurd Imaginations of God, we were
bound to fix our Thoughts and Conceptions in Prayer, upon God in Christ, as
Incarnate; who is the only express Image of the Deity, and not any Corporeal,
dishonorable Mis-representations of God, by the help of Pictures or Crucifixes.

I found also, that his Popish Education had strongly prevailed on him, to
adhere to the false and absurd Dotages of the Romish Church: For when I told
him, That it was not safe to Dye in that Religion; He replied, That he was
resolved to hold and persevere in it, because he had been Bred up in it. I
said, That could not be a solid Argument; for then he might be as Peremptory to
dye in a sinful State, because the Principles of a Corrupt Nature were rivited
in his Heart, and were grown familiar to him by Custom.

He was sometimes Pettish; yet when the Fit was off, he harkned to my Advice,
and joined with me in Prayer. I desired him, not to mock God, either by any
deliberate Wandering in his Thoughts, while I should pray; nor by saying any
Ave-Maryes, or Popish Petitions, secretly to himself. He promised me, he would
not. He was troubled for his sinful Course of Life: Yet I told him, That was
not Repentance deep enough. David's Heart was the Center of his Remorse; and
that not only his heinous-Crimes of Murder and Adultery, were his Burden, but
the Sense of his vile Corrupt Nature, which was the poisonous Spring of all
scandalous Impieties. And that, as we are in our Thanksgivings for Divine
Mercies, to Ascend to the Free Grace of God, in giving Christ to Redeem us, as
the Springhead of all Spiritual Benefits; So, in a penitent Confession of Sin,
we must likewise Ascend to the Guilt and Defylement of Original Sin, whence all
Actual Abominations flow. That this is a great Relief to us, when we cannot
make a distinct Particular Enumeration of our Sins: And that no Hypocrite can
be truly humbled for the sin of his Corrupt Nature, nor for Gospel-Unbelief,
which is the direct damning Sin, as being against the very Remedy of our
Recovery from a State of Sin and Misery.

Every day, after suitable Advices given to him, I Prayed with him. He had not
been Grammarred in that strange Distinction, which most of those Popish
Malefactors had learned, That a Papist may lawfully desire a Protestants
Prayers at Home; yet that his Joining in Prayer, is an owning of their reputed
Heresy; whose Breath is Infectious, when poured out in the Solemnity of
praying mutually in each others Presence. Hill had learnt this Evasion, though
Staley and Berry, as well as Green, had not. I believe, the true reason, why
all the other Criminals denied me Liberty to Pray with them, was, Lest I should
touch too distinctly upon the right Sore, (which they palliated, yea denied)
and so dreaded that Trouble and Perplexity, which might thereby be raised in
their Consciences.

I can give no further Account of Green, but only this, That upon the Day
before his Execution, he told me, That he had received much Information by my
Discourses, and Benefit by my Prayers, in order to fit him for his Death: He
thank't me for my Visits, but discharged me from farther Attendance upon him;
so I went not with him to the Place of Execution, to observe what End he made.

VII. Mr. Hill.
THis Hill was one of the Murderers of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey. He was Born and
Bred a Papist. He was not a Shoemaker, as was reported; but the Son of a
Shoo-maker. He said, That he had been Servant to a Recusant Lady, and managed
some of her Concernments; and went over Sea sometime, to give her an Account
thereof. That he had lately hired an house for himself to Dwell in; But was not
present at the aforesaid Murder: Yea, that he knew nothing of it, more or
less, neither before nor after. This he often averred with so many
self-Imprecations, that I was afraid to urge him for the present, to any
farther Acknowledgment; lest I might thereby, give him an Occasion to aggravate
his Sin, and seal up his Damnation with greater Obduration and Impenitency. I
unfolded to him, the wide Difference betwixt the Protestant and Popish
Religion; and that the Latter could not be a Religion Instituted by Christ,
because It was founded in Blood, and propagated by Artifices of Cruelty,
Injustice, Violence, Equivocations, and Perjuries: Yea, even by false Appeals
to the Omniscient Judge of Innocence, when Crimes were Juridically proved
against the Appellants.

I said, That this was the deepest Policy of Papists, fetched from the Conclave
of Hell: For, such daring and Atheistical Appellants, are not only possessed with
the Spirit of Lying, and strongly deluded (while Living) to believe a false,
absurd Religion; but also, do as strangely, out of an obstinate, impenitent
Heart, palliate Bloody Crimes with a flat Denial of them, after Conviction
thereof by due Process of Law. Surely, such a Violation of the Sentiments of
Conscience, must needs proceed from an Atheistical Denial of God's Omniscient
Inspection, or a Profane Doubting of the Future Judgment. As if false
Appellants had not Souls capable of Damnation, or studied how to seal it up
more firmly to themselves: But such studied Evasion of their Crimes, render
them blacker and more horrid, while they would make Credulous Persons suspect
their Accusers to be Perjured; which is a Sin of that deep Dye, and Malignity,
that it rarely admits of any Repentance in the Sinner, or Pardon from God. Yet
so hardened are some, that they will stand out in the Denial of their Crimes
(though proved against them) to the last Breath. They are not afraid to look
the Almighty Judge in the Face, with a Lie in their Mouth.

But then, such frontless stupid Sinners presume, they shall have this Relief
as a Shield, to keep off their Damnation; that their Self-Imprecation was for
the promoting of a greater Good; viz. That the Romish Religion may not lie
under the Reproach of a Blood-thirsty Disposition, in its Professing Party;
lest, being hindered in its Propagation, if this were credited, it should
gradually become so Abominable, as to be rooted out.

Papists think, that they may lawfully, safely, yea commendably, Perjure
themselves, to promote their false Religion; especially, if in a Transport of
Zeal, they Imprecate themselves, that they may sit higher in the Good Opinion,
and Implicit Faith of their blinded Proselytes. Such was Hill! Who was not more
subtly Molded unto, than deeply Confirmed in all Popish Principles. Hence it
was, that he would not admit of any Information, which might beget the least
suspicion of their Falsity: Yet this was very Commendable in him, that when I
exhorted him to take a strict Review of his Sins; that so, being deeply humbled
for them, he might obtain some hopeful Prospect of their Pardon: He replied,
That he had endeavored to search out whatever might provoke the Lord to desert
him, and suffer him to fall under the fatal Sentence pronounced upon him. He
said, He had been Guilty of Sins enough, for which he was thus severely
punished: Among the rest, he instanced in this; That he had wronged one in a
Twelve-penny matter; but he was now so troubled about it, that he had made
Restitution since his Condemnation; although he was in extreme want of
Necessaries for his present Subsistence. I Commended this in him; but withal
told him, That there was one Crime committed by him, for which he could never
make any Satisfaction; viz. The Murdering of Sir Edmund: yet, that upon his
true Repentance, Christ's Bloodshed was All-sufficient to wash away the Stain
and Reproach of this most Prodigious Wickedness.

He still stood out in a peremptory Denial, That he knew any thing of it, more
or less. And in the usual Canting Language, affirmed, That he was as Innocent
of it, as the Child unborn. Which Words may admit of an Equivocation: For the
Child unborn is Innocent, as not being Capable of committing or declaring the
Heinousness of such a Crime. But though Hill was Capacitated for it, with all
imaginable Principles of Jesuitical Subtilty; yet his deepest Sophistry
appeared, in pretending to be as Innocent as the Child unborn; viz. In this
Sense, Innocent, as not able to declare his Guiltyness of the said Murder: For
so he might be unable, in respect of an Oath of Secrecy, which was the Seal of
his Impenitency. Or, he might think to Evade the Confession of it, by this
Equivocation, viz. I am as Innocent of the Fact, as there is Truth in this,
That the Child unborn is here present, reserving this Supplement of the
Assertion unto himself. And then it being unriddled in plain English, it comes
to thus much, I am as Innocent of the Fact laid to my Charge; that is, There is
as much Truth in affirming This, as there is in the Child's being present, which
is yet Unborn: For there is not Truth in either.

I did fear, that some such Equivocation might shroud it self under Hill's flat
Denial of the said Murder: Therefore, I told him, That his Ingenuity in
Confessing a pecuniary Wrong, and making Restitution, could not demonstrate any
sound Repentance, unless he took the Shame of this Murder upon himself, by a
free Confession of it. For a sincere Penitentiary dares not conceal any sin,
though of never so Ignominious a Nature. He replied, That he had taken Shame to
himself, in confessing his doing Wrong, and that he had violated the Integrity,
and Peace of his Conscience, for a very Trifle: Therefore, I could not think,
he denied the Murder laid to his Charge, that he might maintain his
Reputation. But to Confute this Plea: I knew a Fellon, who denied the Robbery
for which he was Condernned; yet probably to insinuate into me a good Opinion
of him, he Confessed that he once Robbed a poor man going to Market, but being
afterward troubled in his Conscience for so doing, he inquired out where the
person wronged Lived, and sent him double Restitution; because happily (said
he) the poor man losing of his market, might have gained as much as I sent him,
by selling the Provisions which he was carrying thither. Thus some will pretend
to be Ingenious in Confessing hidden Crimes, and yet will stand out in denying
such which are proved against them. This is but a counterfeit remorse.

On the day before Hills his Execution, he discharged me of farther attendance,
because he said, he would be in greater retirement, to fit himself for his
Death, now so nearly approaching: whereupon I took leave of him; and he prayed
God to reward me for all my Visits of him.

VIII. Mr. Berry.
BErry the Porter of Summerset-house, was one of the Murderers of Sir
Edmunbury Godfrey, and was Executed some time after Hill and Green. He
willingly admitted me to Visit him for many days, sometimes twice in the same
day. I found him dejected at the first, yet afterward he was reduced to a more
composed frame. I observed that he had some books in his Chamber; of all which
I took an inspection, and found no popish Author among them. I told him, that I
much approved of his Care in the Choice of those Books, especially of the
Bible, to be his Associates and Guides in his solitary Confinement. Then I
advised him, to search his Heart-state Godward, and to consider for what
special sins God had deserted him, to fall into so shameful and notorious a
Crime, as the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; who had Demonstrated himself
to be a worthy Patriot of his Country. He replied, that he knew nothing of it,
neither before, nor after; and that he was no way Accessory to the guilt of it.
I said, I could not give Credit to him in that; For the Crime was clearly
proved against him. I did not much urge him to confess it, at that time,
fearing I might provoke him to be more shie of embracing any future Visits or
Advice. I bent my Discourse, to fit him for his approaching Death; and from
Scripture Demonstrated, that immediately after the Souls expiration, every one
is presented by Angels Good or Evil, (according as their state is, in which
they dye) before the dreadful Tribunal of Christ, the most Impartial righteous
Judge of all men. And that of what nature the sentence which then past was of,
it was irrepealable: Therefore he could not be too circumspect in trying his
heart-frame, which is naturally deceitful; For if his faith and repentance,
(the only qualifications and evidences of a future happy State) were not
solidly built on Christ, as the Rock of Salvation, after his being adjudged,
there could not be any retrieval of the Sentence, though it were to the Eternal
banishment of his Soul from the bliss-making Vision, and fruition of the God of
Glory. This awakned him to some Remorse for the sins of his Life. I then
proceeded to advise him, not to venture to die in the the Romish Persuasion;
For this could not produce solid nor lasting tranquillity in any Conscience,
perplexed and defiled with the guilt of the least sin. In as much as Papists
build their hopes of future happiness on corrupt Principles, viz. they mix the
belief of the falsities of the Apostatical-Trent-Council with the Articles of
the Apostolical Creed; which can never cement into any consistency of Truth,
either in matters of Faith, or Practice. I did undertake to discover the
notorious absurdity of some popish Opinions; in doing which, he was not only
very attentive; but said, he did not believe many things which the Doctors of
the Romish Church Teach, as necessary to be embraced for Articles of the true
Faith.

I told him, I hoped that he was not stubborn in that Heresy, having declared
himself better Informed. Yet He did not deny that he was a Papist. After much
discourse, I drew out a little Treatise of one Mr. Bradshaw's, which states in
short, but very solid Theses, or Propositions, the true nature of Justification
by Faith in Christ; and oppugnes, yea, overthrowes the Popish doctrine of
Good-works, as Meritorious of Salvation: I Lent it Mr. Berry, who having read
it, liked it, and said, He was much settled and confirmed in the belief of
that sound and comfortable Doctrine. He often admitted m^ to Pray for, and with
him; he was not afraid to be Infected with the breath of an Heretic, as Mr.
Coleman, and others of the fraternity in Conspiracy were. I doubt not but
wholesome Counsel, and fervent prayer wrought much on Mr. Berry, to bring him to
some remorse for his Sinfulness; For he gave an eminent signal of this in
declaring that God had justly left ^im to fall under the sentence of so
shameful a death, for his notorious dissimulation; which was this, viz. That he
had for his private interest, and to supply some wants he was in, changed his
Protestant profession, and turned Papist, against the dictates of his
Conscience, to get into employment by the favor of that party. This he affirmed
more wounded his Conscience, than all the sins which he had Committed in the
whole Course of his Life. Yet still he was very shie and reserved, as unto any
acknowledgement of the Notorious Murder of Sir Edmundberry Godfrey. But take
notice, that a sincere Conscience, does not content it self with the Confession
only of some particular sin, but is most free and ready to take the shame of
every sin, especially of such a crime as wilful Murder, clearly proved
against him. And that none are such proper Objects of Gods just condemnation,
as such, who to cover any one sin, though never so small, will study Evasions,
to deny, conceal, or extenuate it.

Thus to Cover sin, is to Add sin to sin. The Obligation to punishment takes
faster hold, the Guilt remains incapable of being pardoned: the sin not
confessed, rankles and festers in the Conscience, Haunts the sinner as an
affrighting Ghost, yea, the Contagious poison spreads, till it grow so strong
in the Malignity of it, that it damns Eternally.

This Alarm (or awakening Consideration) I gave to Berry, that I might excite
him to an Ingenious Confession of the Murder of Sir Edmundberry Godfrey; And
beside, I told him, that there was this danger in not Confessing a Crime, that
it hardens the heart insensibly, to an impudent and impenitent peremptory
denial of it. And that this was the blackest mark of a Reprobate. Afterward I
prayed with him, that the Lord (who is the searcher of all hearts, and the just
Avenger of all lying and false appeals) would incline him to an hearty and free
acknowledgement of this very Crime; that he would grant him true and deep
Repentance, and strengthen his faith in the Merit of Christ's Blood, for
expiation of so great Guilt. Berry had a reprieve for some time to fit himself
for death, and I hope he made Good use and improvement of it. For when the
morning came, wherein he was to be executed, I found him in a more penitent,
melting frame than before. I prayed with him at his Execution. I must do him
this Right, as to say, that he was in a very Serious composed Temper; For I
have seldom heard any Malefactor (at the public place of suffering) express
himself in such suitable and heart-broken petitions, for Divine Pardon, and
renewing grace, as Berry did: He needed not a Prayer Book in his hand; his
Soul-Agonies taught him to pray; Nor did he let fall any thing, which smelt in
the least of Popish Leaven. His prayer was fervent, and very composed, though
death stared him in the face; yet was he not under any Consternation or
dejection. He said not any thing, either in asserting his Innocence as to the
Murder of Sir Edmundberry Godfrey, neither as to the Religion he dyed in. He
fixed his eye upward, and looked not upon the people, being very intentive on the
great work he was about. I gave him a Large time to prepare and fit himself to
dye: He made some secret Ejaculations of his heart Heavenward: Then taking a
Solemn farewell, I desired him to resign himself up to the mercies of God in
the alone and All-sufficient merits of Christ, and so I went out of the Cart;
and after a little time of Consideration with himself, the Sentence of Death
was executed upon him.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Five Jesuits, Condemned to be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered,
on Saturday the 14th. of June, 1679. viz. Whitebread, Harcourt, Fenwick, Gawen,
and Turner.
THese five Jesuits having received the aforesaid Sentence, for Conspiring the
Death of the King, and the subvertion of the Protestant Religion, I did on the
Monday following (because the duty of my Office as Ordinary obliged me) offer
to them my assistance to prepare them for the Execution; but they did not Admit
me to their Chambers: Thereupon, I desisted from any farther offer to Visit
them. Yet upon the day of their Execution I waited for an opportunity to speak
with them before they were, Conducted to the Sledges.

I. Mr. Harcourt.
MR. Harcourt was first brought down from his Chamber, to be carried up to the
Chapel, where a door opens to conveigh them down the stone-stairs more
conveniently to the Sledges.

I thus spoke to Mr. Harcourt, Sir, you did not think fit to admit me to any
Disourse in your Chamber, but now that you are upon the very Borders of Death,
and must be judged to an Eternal State in Happiness or Misery, Consider well
how heinous the Crime is for which you are to suffer Death. Beg of God to give
you true Repentance unto Life Eternal, and do not stand out in the denying or
extenuation of your Crime.

Mr. Harcourt made me this slight answer, That I needed not to trouble my self
concerning Him, for he knew his Duty; and so past away from me.

II. Mr. Whitebread.
THen came Mr. Whitebread from his Chamber; I said something of Advise to him as
a dying Man, and told him withal, that I had earnestly prayed that God would
give him Repentance, in order to pardoning Grace and Salvation. This he
resented with more Calmness and Modesty of Spirit than Harcourt did, and put
off his Hat to me at parting.

III. Mr. Fenwick.
I Had longer Discourse with Fenwick in a little Room alone by himself. I did
Address my self to him in more Pathetick Expressions, than to the two other,
because I had more opportunity for it. In sum, I wished him to search his heart,
because every man's by Nature, is as deceitful as it is Corrupt. That he would
pray to God to Undeceive him, as to any false hopes of Heaven, and not build on
any Sandy Foundation, by trusting to any Humiliation for Sin, or the Merits of
any Saint or Angel; And that he would not stand out in denying of his Crime.
That he would consider seriously of that Sacred Scripture in the Twenty eighth
of the Prove. of Solomon, the Thirteenth verse, He who hides his sin shall not
prosper in the attempting of it, but rather exposes himself to a Curse. But
whosoever Confesses and forsakes his Sin, shall obtain Mercy. He said, That he
had Confessed 'twixt God and himself, and that was Sufficient.

I told him, that in respect of the great Scandal he had given, and Reproach he
had brought upon Religion, which Obliges to all Fidelity toward Princes, and
forbids the Subvertion of a Lawful Government, he ought to express great Sorrow
for, and detestation of such Principles which destroy Humane Society.

But he angerly replied, What! do you undertake to instruct me, or others of my
Order, as if we were not Men of Reason and Learning. I told him, that I was
bound to assist him as a dying Man; and to put him in mind of seeking his Souls
Salvation, in a Right way. And that, whereas he slighted my Advice, he ought
not to look upon any Protestant Divine, to be like Their Novices, whom they
Train up in Ignorance, as if it were the Mother of Devotion.

I said, that I stood Amazed, that any man of his Learning should so far
forfeit the Repute thereof, and all the Sentiments of a Good Conscience, as to
adhere to principles so destructive to all Order, Equity, and Government
established by Light of Nature, even among Savages.

He was not pleased with my discourse, yet I did assure him, I would not desist
praying for him, while I could Rationally think, that he was Alive, and within
the reach or benefit of my prayers. And so we parted.

IV, V. Mr. Gawen and Mr. Turner.
I Could not speak with Gawen or Turner till they were placed in the Sledge. I
spoke but little to them, Time, and the Noise of the people thronging me, would
not permit me to say much. Only I told Mr. Gawen, that Now death stared him in
the face, and his judgment to an Eternal State was very Near; therefore I
advised him not to palliate or extenuate his great Crime, much less to deny
it; for, he would hazard his Salvation, if he went out of the world with a
falsity in his mouth.

I told him I had and would continue to pray for him and his Fellow-Criminal in
the Sledge with him. So wishing them a penitential frame of Heart, that they
might obtain Eternal Life in Christ, upon the drawing away of the Sledg, Mr.
Gawen showed a public Signal of Civility to me, and thankt me. He seemed much
more cheerful than the rest. And I hope he had better grounds for it.

Mr. Langhorne.
AFter Sentence of Death past upon the said Unhappy Gentleman, as being
Involved in the Jesuitical Conspiracy against the King and Nation; I Addressed
my self in a Visit to him, which he Accepted. When I first came into his
Chamber, I told him, That I came not to upbraid a Dying Man, though of a
contrary Religion: That I pittyed him, as a Condemned Criminal; yet was more
troubled, that he should Espouse the Popish Persuasions so far, as to Suspend,
or Renounce rather, the Sentiments of Right Reason, in Embracing and Adhering
to so Corrupt and Absurd Opinions. He answered me, That he thought himself in a
surer Way for to attain Salvation, than any of my Opinion could set themselves
in. For Protestants (said he) follow the Mistakes of their private Judgments;
and then cry them up, for the Genuine Interpretation of the Holy Scriptures.
But We (said he) who are Roman Catholics, have the Conduct of an Infallible
Guide, to Interpret obscure Ambiguities in the Scriptures: For no Scripture is
of any private Interpretation; otherwise, well-meaning Persons may propose, and
put off their Fancies, for solid Conclusions, drawn from the sacred Records of
God's Word. He said, That therefore, there was great need of an external,
supreme, infallible Judge on Earth; whose Decision upon Appeals, can only state
and determine all Controversies about matters of Faith and Practice. I replied,
That the Divine Authority of God, as impressed upon the Veracity of the
Scriptures, was never separated from the same Spirit, who did Dictate them, as
unto special Guydance; so far, as not to Desert sincere Christians, that they
should fall into any Damnable Heresy. But I feared, that the Romish Opinions
were such, though they be imposed to be Believed and Obeyed, upon the score of
the Pope's Infallibility, equally with the sacred Scriptures. What Blasphemy is
this, for a sinful Man to arrogate the Title of Infallible, due only to God,
the Fountain and Architype of all Truth! That the Father of Lights, gave
Mankind the Best and Safest Conduct of his own Holy, Infallible Spirit, in
Matters aforesaid. And that the Scriptures, being exemplified from his
Essential Purity and Veracity, were not defective as Human Laws; which require,
an External Judge and Interpreter, distinct from themselves, in their Original
Constitution. So that, in all Things necessary to Salvation, the Scriptures
were a Perfect Rule and Standard, to dictate and determine Matters of Faith,
and Christian Obedience. Yet so arrogant is the Pope, as to Challenge an
Authority to Himself, to give the Scriptures a Sanction; yea, to Overruled them
by his Corrupt Traditions, which he declares Infallible. Thus he Exautorats,
and Invalidates their Divine Original, and Superintendency; as if they received
all the Life of their Interpretation, from his Authoritative Dilucidation, as
the Moon does her Light from the Sun. Hence it is, that when the Pope enters
into any Council, he has the Bible placed under his Feet, while singly himself
Overrules the Council; and Exalts his sole Determination, above the sacred
Records of Truth. Hence it is, that under a Pretense, that the Scriptures are
Obscure, and a dead Letter in themselves, that they must be Animated with his
Traditions, though never so Absurd and Contradictory to their Divine Authority,
Certainty, and Perfection.

Also I said, That where the Scriptures were Obscure in one Place, they
explained that Ambiguity in another: So that, there was no need of any External
Judge. And that Protestant Divines, did not give out their Private Sentiments,
and Interpretations of the Scriptures, for Laws, to supersede the Innate
Authority of the Scriptures; or to oblige Christians to an Implicit Faith and
Obedience, as the Pope does; who overrules the very Scriptures Themselves: So
that, no part of them is Canonical, but only those Books, which he declares to
be such. Thus a sinful Man judges that sacred Law, by which himself, and all
Men must be Judged; though he claim a Power to Pardon Sin, and Dispose of the
Eternal Rewards of Virtue, or Vice; accordingly as himself pleases to determine
the Nature and Circumstances of Both. Hence I said, It proceeded, that the
Opinions of the Romish Church were so Corrupt, as molded and adapted, to serve
and promote the Carnal Interest of his Ambition, and the Licentiousness of his
Followers.

Then he asked me, Whether I did not think, that the Popish and Protestant
Religion, might not be Reducible into a Coalition or Unity? I answered, No;
because they were so Contrariant, that they could never Cement, so as to yield
a safe Conduct to Eternal Life. Inasmuch, as Christ himself averred, That in
vain do all such Worship him, who Teach for Divine Doctrines, the Traditions of
Men: That whosoever Adds or Diminishes from Scriptural-Fundamentals, despises,
and seeks to nullify the Wisdom and Authority of God Himself. That Popish
Principles undermine, and subvert the All Sufficiency of Christ, in the
Execution of his Offices. That as Socinians cannot be accounted Christians, who
deny the Divinity of Christ's Person: So Romanists, who Invalidate his Offices,
are Antichristian, in their Spirits, and in their Mis-belief.

Therefore, there is no more hope, that two Religions so opposite, should ever
Cement in One, according to the Analogy of Faith, prescribed by Christ; than
that Light and Darkness should agree, or have Fellowship.

Nor can there be any Color of right Reason, for that Distinction; That Popish
Traditions are rather beside the Rule and Dictates of the Scriptures, than
directly contrary to them. For, whatever is not agreeable to the Revealed,
Perfect Will of God, either directly, or by natural Consequence, or by right
Deduction, it is a Sin. Consider, There is as little Hope and Comfort for that
Person, who falls into a River, by slipping betwixt, or beside the Bridge; as
for him, who directly casts himself into It. Both may be Drowned irrecoverably.
The One, out of the Inadvertency, or Mistake of a Drunken Giddyness: The Other,
out of the Presumption of a sullen Obstinacy. There are more Ways which lead to
Death, than the direct Stabbing of one's self. So, Transgression on the
Right Hand, in a Superstitious Zeal, may ruin a Man's Soul, as certainly, as
downright Atheism and Profaneness.

After these Discourses, I asked Mr. Langhorne, That I might Pray with him? He
answered me, No; Yet, I desire your Prayers at Home. He said, That Prayer in
Presence, was an Act of Communion; but it was unfit, to join with One, who was
not a Member of the Roman Church. I replied, That I thought, there was little
or no Difference in such distinct Praying; however, it could not be any
unlawful Act. He would not Admit me to Pray with him: Therefore, to root out
such a Scruple, I shall state now, more at large, what I then spoke more
succinctly. Is not Prayer an Universal Duty, and a Testification of Christian
Charity? Therefore, to limit It only to such, who are Adopted into any Faction,
is to look on all others, as Excommunicated from Christ, and the Hope of
Salvation by him, as the only Head; who Influences the Universal Church, with
the Spirit of Faith, Unity, and Concord.

Can any Papist think to receive Benefit by Prayer, himself being absent; who
has not so much Charity, as to bear Protestants Presence, in Praying together?
What proud Singularity is this? What Inconveniency can happen, from a
Protestants joining with a Papist in Prayer, if they do not mix their Private
Opinions (which are fitter for a Disputation) in the time of Praying together?
Such Imprudence would turn Prayer, which is the Badge of Christian Communion,
into an occasion of Reproach; and imbitter each others Spirits, to remain at a
farther distance. To prevent such a Mischief, let them consent, that they will
keep close to Scripture. Matter, and Phrases in Prayer; because in these, they
are agreed. So shall they not grieve each other, by an uncharitable Exagitating
and venting of their private Opinions. Yet I deny not, but that they ought to
desire of God, that he would clear up to them his Truth and Ways more fully;
and that, in whatever they dissent, by way of Mistake about Opinions Foreign,
to the Essential Parts, and Fundamentals of Christian Religion, they may come
to a right Understanding of each other; and may recede from any false Mixtures,
super-added to Christ's pure Religion. Therefore, to deny any Protestant
Divine, to Pray with Popish Persons Conidemned, when they cannot have the
Relief thereof, from any of their own Persuasion; lest they should Confirm them
in their corrupt Principles, or join wicked Counsels, to diffuse their
Treasonable Designs, by Messages, to put Plots in Execution, is a Warrant to
deny them the Assistance of their own Party. Yet they stick not, to grow sullen
and insolent, in rejecting the Prayers of Protestant Divines.

How careless of, and cruel to their own Souls, are such, who will not by all
Lawful Helps, secure and promote their Souls everlasting Blessedness! Is not
this such a Breach of Charity, as to make void their own Prayers for
Themselves? and to limit Christian Religion, only to the Roman Church, which is
but a Corner of the Christian World; and cannot be properly Catholic, unless
It embrace an Universal Charity for All Christians, who Profess the same
Christ, and the same Fundamentals of Christianity? But Protestants, have not so
departed from the Church of Rome, as to hate all Persons of her Society; but
only, their Corruptions in Doctrine and Practice. We deny not to them, the
Duties of Common Charity; or such Requisite Assistances at the time of Extreme
Sickness, or Death, which may safely consist with their not being Confirmed in
Popish Principles, too deeply rooted in them already; and the Consistency of
the Established Government, in the English Church, and State. After these
Conferences with Mr. Langhorne, I asked him, Whether he were the very Person
Accused before the Committee of Parliament, in 1666; for being Conscious, at
least, of the Conflagration of London, by Treachery: Because Mr. Richard
Langhorne, Counselor at the Temple, is said in a Deposition upon Oath, to have
cast out Threatening Words about the said Conspiracy? -- He answered me, That he
was the Person then Accused; but knew no more of the Firing of London, than he
did of this Plot. But what he knew of This, is sufficiently Demonstrated, by
his being Condemned, and Executed for a Well-wisher to It, and Agent in It. I
offered a second Visit to him, on the Thursday before his Execution; but he
sent me Thanks, and desired to be wholly Retired to himself. So being in the
Country when he was Executed, I cannot give any furthere Account concerning him.

THE False Appealing Jesuits, Silenced and Confuted: OR, A Discovery of their
False Courage and Cheerfulness at Execution; how differenced from the hidden
Manna of Real Martyrs.
I Do more than probably believe, that the Jesuits appenls relating to their
Innocence, were mere Equivocations; and that I may not be censured to wrong
them by a suspicion only, I shall Endeavor to prove, that they made false
Apologies and Appeals. This I shall do three ways.

First, I will present you, with many Assertions of the Doctors of their own
Church and Society, who maintain Equivocation, yea down right Perjury, Lawful
in those Circumstances, which occurred to these Jesuits. Secondly, I shall
demonstrate, how Sutably they drew the Copy of their Defense, after the
Original Pattern set them by the Precedent Fathers of the same Society.
Thirdly, I shall Demonstrate, how deep-dyed a Sin it is, how great mischief it
does, and what exemplary remarkable punishment, God usually inflicts on such
false Appellants.
First, IT is very likely, these Jesuits were Induced to make Equivocating
Appeals when dying, because so many Doctors of their Church assert these to be
Venial, nay Lawful in many Cases. Soto, who was a Principal Divine in the
Council of Trent, He acknowledges Perjury to be a greater Sin than Murder:
Notwithstanding he maintains the Violation of Promissory and Assertory Oaths,
to be only Venial, not Mortal Sins, how habitual and enstomary soever they be:
So that, thereby, the dint of the Magistrates just Sentence, may be avoided, or
the Catholic Cause promoted.

Now, if rash Appeals be (in the right Construction of them) a great Contempt
of God, False Ones must needs be an high degree of Blasphemy and Atheism.
These, joined with self-Imprecations, are a Mocking of the Divine Majesty, and
the sending up of a Challenge to the God of Truth, to damn the Appellant, if he
speaks what is False, or any way Conceals the Truth. Yet in the Jesuits
account, not only Officious Lies, but downright Perjuries are Lawful; when they
may serve the Interest of their Church, maintain their false Doctrine, or
Conceal their Hellish Designs. It is a great poice of Piety, to make Lies for
the promoting of their Religion; So Ludavious Vives, and Espencaeus Comment in
Tim. lib. 1. cap. 11. page 156.

Here it is to be Observed, that the third Lateran Council decreed it Lawful,
to Depose and Kill any Prince Infected with Heresy (that is to say) being a
Professed Protestant. Hereupon, these Jesuits thought, They needed not the help
of an Equivocation, in asserting of their Innocence; because by the Maxims of
their Bloody and Hellish Divinity, they affirm that it is better, to suffer a
King to be Slain, than to reveal the Consession, of such a design intended. So
Eudaemon in Apolog. Garneti. chapter 13. And Suarez Tractatu de Panitentia, That
the Lord gave to St. Peter, and Consequently to the Pope, Power to make that
which is sin, to be no Sin So Bellarm, in Barklaium. chapter 31. That to Kill a
King who is deposed, is not to Kill a King, but only a private Person. So
Tolet, lib. 4. De Instructione Sacerdotali. ch 58.

That, he is not a Murderer, who Kills an Excommunicated Person, being possessed
with Zeal toward our Mother, the Catholic Church. -- So, Pope Urban, in the
23d. Cause, and 5th. Questions That the Sentences, Decrees, and Judgments of
Judges, who are Excommunicated, ( as all Protestants are by them) are Void, and
of no Authority. So Tolet, lib. primo, De Instutione Sacerdotali. cap. 13. That
the Pope is Lord of all the Temporal Possessions of Kingdoms. -- So Bellarm. in
Barklaium. cap. 21.

Cardinal Du Perron, in his Oration made to the States in Paris, (upon the
15th. of January, 1615.) does not think it fit, that a King should be Killed,
but only Deposed; which is all one, as to Condemn him to Dye: Because (as they
say) from the time of his Deposing, he is no more a Lawful King; but an
Usurper. Now, every Usurper of a Kingdom, may Lawfully be Killed. The said
Cardinal, Equivocates in his Advice. For, he speaks to this Effect: Let us not
Kill an Heretical King, but Depose him. That is; Let us however, Disarme him of
his Authority, that he may be Killed. Let us take his Title from him, which is
a Means to preserve his Life. Let us not Kill him, while he is a King; but let
us Depose him: And then, who ever Kills him, shall not Kill a King. These
Sayings, are full of Contradiction, and very Weakly, yea Wickedly, set together.

By such Popish Principles, the very Foundations of the English Government, are
quite blown up; as if they had been at the Mercy of Faux. They hold, That the
Nation being Heretical, (because It will not stoop to the Yoke of
Antichristian Tyranny) has no Government properly Its Own; No King, no
Subjects, no Parliament, no Laws, Liberties, or Propriety in any thing. They
think, they may deal with Us, as Monsters of Mankind, who have forseited all
into their Hands; and nothing shall hinder them from taking Possession, any
longer, than till they can Master the Power of our Severeign Lord, the King,
and his Laws.

They deny, we can have any Legal Parliament; because the Peers, (they
allege) are Infamous as Heretics. And Freeholders, to Choose and be Chosen
for Commonners, have no Propriety. None have Power (they say) by Consequence,
to Make Laws, to Require or Grant Subsidies: For no Order of Men, among
Heretics, have any thing of their Own, to Give or Grant. All is Forfeited from
them, for their Heresy. They hold, That our Laws are of no more Force, than
the Agreement of a Company of Robbers: Because, being Excommunicated, we are,
Ipso Facto, Divested of all Civil Right, and Propriety in our Laws, Estates,
Liberties, and Municipal Privileges. So that, these Jesuits pleaded Innocence,
because they Acted By and Under the Pope's Commission; which is
Presumptively-Constructive, for Depraedation of our Goods, and the Destruction
of our Lives, upon his Issuing out the Sentence of Excommunication; though no
Declaration should expressly enjoin the Execution of Rapine and Murder.

To be sure, He who will Regulate himself by Their Maxims, may Act any
Wickedness in the World, without any fear of Deadly Guilt. Yet, That Church
pretends to a Monopoly of All the Holiness upon Earth.

They may persist till Death, in all Perfidiousness to God and Man, in Breach
of Promises and Compacts, in all Lying and Perjuries, in Slandering or
Detraction; yea, in all Unmercifulness and Cruelty to Protestants: and yet, Not
fall short of Salvation, if these Impostors may be trusted upon their Own
Maxims. These abominable Practices, are but Specks or Motes; not Against the
Law of God, (the End of which, is Charity) but only Beside It. So Durandus,
Vega, Rada, Herrera, Estius, Becanus. All these aforementioned Crimes, are but
Peccadilioes in Their account, when Committed against Protestants. For, they
owe These, No Charity; and therefore, may justly Contrive their Destruction, as
Heretics. If an Atheist had a mind, to render the Christian Name Odious, and
the Gospel a Licentious Doctrine, tending to Debauch Mankind; He could need no
greater Argument, but only This, viz. To persuade Men, that the Maxims of the
Roman Divines, are Conformed to the Rules of Christ, and Christianity. For, Do
not Popish Doctors Reverence Hypocrisy, as an Holy Art? A Lie, though very
Gross, is only Venial in Their account, unless it do Much Mischief; not so,
when it is only against Truth it self. Thus, it may be as Innocent, to tell
Lies, as Truth; and as Criminal to speak Truth, as Lies. There will be no
Difference in their Own Nature, unless by accident, they do Hurt Alike. Thus
Soto, ibid. Lib 5. Quest. 7. Artic. 4. Page 168. Yea, Antonius Corduba
determins, that a Person Interrogated by a Judge, whether such a Crime were
Committed by him, may stiffly Deny It, (although he Did It) with this Reserva, I
am not bound to Discover It; though he be upon his Oath, to declare the whole
Truth. He may Equivocate in usual Form, says Lopez. cap. 51. page 264. Angel
Sum. V. Confess. N. 1.

Yea, Popish Doctors have Devices to Legitimate the worst Wickedness.
Bellarmine says, If the Pope should forbid Virtue, and command Vice, the
Church must practice Vioe, or sin against Her Conscience. If the Pope can
dispense with Vows, which are Solemn Promises made to God, why not with the
Guilt of False Appeals? So Canus, pars Sexta, Relict de Paenitentia.

Some affirm, That the Pope can Legitimate Incest: If so, by the same Reason he
may pardon False Appeals. For, What are such, but a Spiritual Incest, committed
'twixt the Heart and Tongue; which ought to agree in speaking Truth, for this
is the Souls-Chastity? They count it better than Innocent, to abuse the World
with Lies, even in point of Religion. Surely, if the Injury be not Great there,
wherein can it be Small? Yea, they allow of Lies, in their very Devotion. Peter
Abbot of Cluny, declares That in one Church-Hymne, in the Praise of St. Bennet,
he found Twenty-four Lies, at least. They affirm, That they may safely Lie, in
Confessing, that they abhor the Sin confessed: Yet themselves look upon the
Confessors Chair, as the Divine Tribunal. So Angelus, Sylvester, Navar. Cap.
21. Number. 37. Covarruvius, Soto, Bannes. Now, if they may lawfully Lie, in doing
Penance; when or wherein will they speak Truth? If such a Sacred Part of their
Religion be thus Profaned, we may well conclude, that wheresoever they find
any Liberty for speech, they must have License to Lie, and that ex Officio.

Nor can we rationally expect from Jesuits, that they will Swear the Truth at
Death. You will say, Then Conscience is more awakned, made quick and serious in
the Directive and Corrective Part of its Office. So that, the most profligate
sort of Sinners, when Dying, will not dare but to declare the Truth. I reply:
Yet Jesuits are Errant Designers upon Men's Consciences, to seat themselves as
Over-awing Demigods therein, while they dictate Cheats and Dotages unto them.

Yea, How do these Seducers Instruct their Novices, to believe such strange
Absurdities, which Themselves deny at Death? Then they detest all Lying
Doctrines and Miracles; as also, all Dispensations for Equivocating. This they
pretend to do, when they have a Prospect of Damnation at Death; and to make the
World believe, that Protestants Charge them with False Imputations. Yet I
cannot suppose them to be Serious, in Renouncing their False Tenets at Death.
For, if they did heartily do it, How could they averr, that they Dyed in the
Profession of the Romish Church? What Contradictions are these Asseverations?
If they spoke the Truth, when Dying, then were they Apostats from that
Religion, which themselves style Catholic and Apostolic. These Jesuitical
Impostors dread not Damnation it self, while they turn themselves into all
Forms; and for their Interest, affirm and deny the same thing in a Breath;
whereas Truth is the same Eternally, and Alters not. Yet, these Men live by a
false Religion, for Earthly Interest and Grandeur: But, after all their
Dissimulation and Intrigues, seem to Dye in the right Religion, Instituted by
Christ.

Hence it was, That they Disclaimed the Merit of Good Works; and at their
Execution, did not so much as Touch upon any Thing grossly different, from the
Purity of the Protestant Religion. Hence it was, that they Prayed not Audibly
to any Saint or Angel: For, had they Grossly Contradicted the Scriptures at
their Death, their Appeals (they thought) would not so Cleverly have been
Believed by Credulous, Vulgar Minds. It may be, in their Appeal to God, they
Equivocated, and meant, that they Appealed to the Pope; whom they style, Their
Lord God, as seated High in the Veneration of their Hearts. For they give
little less, than Divine Honor to Him, in presuming, that his
Vnholyness-Absolution, is an Immediate Ticket, to Challenge Heaven by, and to
wash them clean from the Guilt and Reproach of the Greatest Villainies.

Doubtless, these Appealers were so well known to, and Approved by his
Holiness, as it was a Wonder, that he did not work a Miracle for their
Impunity. However, It is likely, that he so far honored these Eldest Sons in
the Mystery of Iniquity, that they escapt Purgatory by some rare Contrivance,
and were Dignifyed Saints immediately after Death, for being Knights of the
Post. Doubtless they were hardened in this presumption, that the Pope has power
to Dispense with the Sentiments of right reason, yea can make void the positive
Duties of the Divine Law. Hence it is the common Doctrine of their Church, That
it is not Lawful to keep Faith with Heretics, in promissory Oaths, or
Assertory Justifications of their Integrity. Romish Doctors affirm, that if the
Pope constitute and declare Virtue to be Vice, and the most abominable Crimes
to be Innocence, they are bound under the Penalty of Damnation to believe him.

Now this is to Arrogate a Power above God himself, who cannot alter the
Eternal Nature of Moral Principles, which are such Fixed Truths, that what is
Right and Just, or Wicked and Unjust in the Nature of the thing it self, was
such, before any declaration of the Will of God concerning it was superadded.
Therefore to change the Measures of Good and Evil, which are Originally founded
in the Essential Intrinsecal Goodness and Badness of Principles, is to give a
Dispensation to Sin. It is to Exautorate or Invalidate the Eternal Principles
of Virtue, although these be Established on the very Dictates of right Reason.
This is to Supersede and make void the Authority of God himself, who has
Implanted those common sentiments of what is right or wrong, in the Hearts of
all Men. They, who draw all Appeals to the Pope for the Decision of what we are
to believe or practice, though contrary to Divine Revelation (which is to make
God himself a Liar) how can such Miscreans be credited in the most solemn
Asseverations of their Integrity? Had these Imposters turned their Eye, with an
Holy, Awful Reverence upon God, the Prototype of Truth; had they had any regard
of his Omniscient Inquisition, after false Appellants, they durst not have
Challenged his Justice, to detect and punish their Impudent Assertions. Surely,
they dreamt of being weighed in Saint Michaels Balance, which is a Popish
invention to deceive dying persons; as if their Meritorious Treasons for
promoting the Catholic Religion, should Outweigh their Lying Appeals; that
so, they might not bind a Curse upon their Souls, but directly go to Heaven
Thus, they did not weigh themselves in the Even Balance of Gods Sacred Law,
but flattered themselves in the Contrivances of a deceitful Heart; because any
one grain of Sin, makes all real Good works of no value at all in Gods account,
when he makes a Righteous disquisition of the Nature of our Actions. All the
Ways of a Man, are Clean in his own Eyes; but the Lord weighs the Spirit,
Prove. 16.2. The Heart of a Sinner, often mistakes the Nature of its own
Actions; and yet, a False Appeal concerning them, does not Appale him. I desire
all False Appellants, to consider well, how they Seal up their Damnation to
themselves. I remember, how the Wife suspected of Adultery, was Tried by God's
own Order and Appointment, in the 5th. Chapter of Numb. The Oblation to Try and
Discover, was called An Offering of Memorial, to bring Iniquity to Remembrance,
verse. the 15th. The Lord's Jealousy, will wax Hot, and his Fury Flame forth
against Hypocritical Appellants. God Himself, will become a more Zealous
Witness, and as Severe a Judge, to Entayl their Self-Imprecations upon
themselves, and their Posterity. The Sacrament of Christ's bitter Death and
Passion, shall not Purge away their Guilt, nor Comfort them in asserting of
their Innocence: It shall rather Revive and engraven their Iniquity, in the
horrid Reflections of their Conscience. Their Appeal, shall not prove their
Compurgation; but shall more suddenly and strangely Reveal their Iniquity, to
their shame: while Upright Souls are made more Fruitful in a Conception of Holy
Thoughts, and are impregnated with all the Graces of Christ's Spirit. An
Hypocrites Belly shall swell with Pain, while he prepares Deceit; and when he
falls in Travel with Iniquity, Satan, (that Lying Spirit) shall take the Deeper
Possession of him. His Sin shall be brought more sadly to Remembrance, Haunt
him in the Guilt, and Hunt him to swift Destruction.

Thus a False Appeal, like the Jealousie-Water, shall hasten a Consumption upon
the Credit of every Impostor. The Curse shall enter as Oil into his Bones; yea,
soak deeper into his very Soul. Thus Perjury binds firm, every Self-Imprecation
upon the Hypocritical Appellant. Such Prostituting of Sinners Consciences to
Perjury, in making false Apologies to be Credited, is as Great a Sin, as the
Heathens Sacrificing of their Children, to the Idol-Moloch. For such False
Appeals, may ruin thousands of Deluded Souls; causing them to Justify the
Wicked, and Condemn Righteous Judges: Both which, are equally an Abomination to
the Lord. It is very observable, in the 5th. of Numbers, the 15th. That in the
Oblation made for Trial of the suspected Wise, there was No Oil, nor
Frankinsense, mixed with the Offering of Jealousy. This signified, that while
any Sinner gives the Lord cause, to suspect the Chastity, and Loyalty of his
Soul, in any False Appeal; such an Impudent Pretender unto Truth, (which ought
to tie the Heart and Tongue, in the sacred Bond of Chastity and Agreement)
shall not go Unpunisht. He cannot have any Hope of being Anointed with the
Spirit of Holiness, and of Peace. His best Services, shall not be Received with
any Mer^iful Interpertation; nor can the Prayers of such, yield any Delightful
Savor to the Lord; because they cannot be mixed with the Fragrant Incense of
Christ's Meritorious Intercession. This Advocate, shall rather turn the Edge of
his just Indignation against them: Yea, by degrees, such Sinners will Commence
from Lying Equivocations, to downright Perjurious Atheism, and the scoffing at
all Religious Fear of Damnation, to all Eternity. Apologies artificially
contrived, neither cover the Scandal of the Sin, nor Cure or Recover the
Sinner. They are rather Libelling Accusations against God's Justice, who has
found out the Hypocrite, in his Atheistial Presumption of Impunity. Such
Self-Defences, rather aggravate Guilt, than wash away the Stain of Sin, or
Reproach.

Ingenuously to Confess the Crime laid to our Charge, and proved upon us, is
the only Honorable Apology, and not any Sordid Yielding up of the Cause.
Judah's Name, which signified to give Praise to God by Confession of Sin, was
made good by his Practice, in the Case of Thamar. A True Penitentiaries Heart,
is Grieved for his Offense, and not Imbittered against any Adversary, for
Charging It Home upon him. Thus, by Ingenuity, we prevent the Judgment, and
severer Condemnation of the Lord. He will never Reject such, who will put
themselves to Shame; but will then be most pacifyed, when they least spare
Themselves. At Christ's Tribunal, to Justify ones Self, is to Lose the Cause,
and more incense the Judge of all the World. There, impudent Appealers shall
neither be able to Conceal, nor to Deny their Crimes. Then, they shall not
Defend themselves, much less, Glory in their Shame. A free Penitential
Confession, Reconciles God to the Sinner; and the Sinner to Himself, in the
Recovery of his Lost Peace and Reputation. Yea, it is attended with the
Wonderful Essicacy of Faith; not only in applying the Merit and Virtue of
Christ's Blood, shed for the Expiation of Guilt; but it also obtains Singular
Remarks of Divine Favor. I shall instance This, in a Minister; who once joined
with others of his Brethren, in Ejecting Satan out of one Possessed. Satan being
loath to be disturbed or ejected, designed to discourage this Minister, by
suggesting to the possessed Person, that he was formerly of a Scandalous
Conversation; whereof the Daemoniack Accused him before All who were present.
The Faithful Servant of the most High God, acknowledged all those Crimes laid
to his Charge, and took the Shame of them to Himself; thereby giving Glory to
the Lord. Hereupon, he grew more Confident, that the Lord would signally Honor
him, as an Instrument to Eject Satan out of the Possessed Person. Hereupon, he
set himself more humbly and fervently to Pray; and in the very time of the
Duty, the Devil flew out of his Long loved Tennement; so that, the Daemoniack
was not longer Tormented by him. If these Jesuits had been as Ingenuous
Confiten^s, as they had been Busy Confessors, in racking other Men's
Consciences; This it self, had been a Miracle. But they Dye in the same
Impostures, which they promote while they Live. Their Religion, (as they have
molded it to Secular Interest) is nothing but a Cheat, Varnisht over with
Specious Shows of Piety: It is only a Fardle of Lies subtly packt together,
and the Dead-Sea of all abominable Impieties. Therefore, no wonder, if such who
avowedly profess the Trade of Seduction, are as Dextrous at the Art of
Equivocation. Hence it is, that they Obstinately and Impudently sport
Themselves, in maintaining that Mystery of Iniquity, against all Right Reason,
and Self-Conviction. While they draw all Appeals to the Pope, as Infallible,
they presume, that He can supersede the Righteous Judgment of the supreme
Majesty of Heaven, in delivering of them from the Curse of their False Appeals.

All the foregoing Considerations being well weighed, the Self-Imprecating
Appeals of these Jesuits, If they were not as Innocent as the Child Unborn,
needed not stagger any Person, concerning the Justice of their Condemnation and
Execution. For, that Form of their Canting Plea, which very probably, was
prescribed to them, or fore-agreed to among themselves, without any Alteration,
may be thus Unriddled; viz. I can no more Protest my Innocence, than the Child
Unborn can. I cannot Really do it; though in Artificial Words I may Endeavor
it. Or Thus: The Child Unborn is Really Innocent, but cannot Protest it. I may
and do protest it; yet have it not Really to protest: Nor is the Child Unborn
really Innocent. True, It cannot be Charged with any Injurious Fact; yet, is It
not Innocent, because the Rectitude of Human Nature, or that Original
Righteousness, which ought to be in It, by the Law of its Primitive Creation in
Adam, the Root and Common Trustee of Perfect Righteousness, for his Posterity,
is by his Apostasy, justly wanting in every Child. There is in the Nature of
the Child Unborn, a Seminal Aversness to God, and a Propensness to all Evil.
Therefore, to affirm, That they were as Innocent as the Child Unborn, was as
much as to say, That They were Guilty before God; for, So is the Child Unborn.

Yet, the Council of Trent has Determined, (as an Article of Faith) That in
Baptism, all the true and proper Nature of Original Sin, is quite abolisht.
Upon That account ( They say) God himself, cannot bind any One to Repent of it
any more, than of an Innocent, Harmless Thing. Council Trident. Sess. 5. cap.
4. Soto ibid. So, these Malefactors, being now about to Receive (as they
presumed) the Baptism and Crown of Martyrdom, thought this would immediately
wash away the Guilt and Stayn of their Bloody Crimes; yea, Repair the Integrity
and Peace of their Conscience, after a False avowing of their Innocence.
Possibly, they reputed themselves Innocent, because they were Arraigned before
a Protestant-Court of Judicature; which they counted Incompetent, to take
Cognizance of their Crimes; and so were Innocent, in That Respect. Or,
themselves esteemed It, a Meritorious Act, to Murder Heretics. This De
Graffiis proves, out of their Own Church-Laws. Graff. lib. 2. cap. 11. Numb.
12. Barronius also, Commends the Murdering of Protestants, as having Forfeited
their Lives by the Sentence of Excommunication, pronounced against them Yearly.

Suarez, an Eminent Author, in the Fourth Chapter of his Sixth Book, against
the King of Great Britain, says, That if the Pope Deposes a King, without
giving Express Commission to Kill him: In That Case (he Cursedly says) It
belongs only to his Lawful Successor, if he be a Catholic; or, if He will not
do it, then, it belongs to the Common People to do it. Yea generally,
Bellarmine, Becanus, Francis de Verona, Ribadinera, Gretzer, Eudaemon-Johannes,
and Emanuel Sa, (all which, amount to more than only Mariana, as Mr. Gawen
untruly Alleged) These maintain, That the Pope has Power to Chastise (yea,
Kill) Heretical Princes. From the Deposition of Henry the 3d. by Sixtus the
5th. ensued the Parricide Committed by Jaques-Clement: For the which, the said
Pope gave Thanks to God, in open Consistory. This Oration was Printed at Paris,
by Nicholas Nivelle, and Rollin Thierri; with Approbation of three Doctors,
viz. Boucher, De Creil, and Ancelin. Or (it may be) they pleaded their
Integrity, because they Acted by, and under the Pope's Commission; who (as they
believe) can Legitimate the worst of Crimes, so as to make them become Real
Virtues. This Assertion I believe no more, than I do that Rapper of the Popish
Miracle, pretended to be wrought upon this Occasion: A Polonian Gentleman,
speaking slightly of the Pope at Dinner among his Friends, the White-Bread next
to him, became presently as Black as Ink; But upon his Penitential Recanting,
it turned Whiter than it was before. Thus their Appeals are of as much Credit,
as their Fabulous Miracles.

Or, it may be, they Pleaded their Integrity, as their Holy Father, the Pope,
assumes High Names of Sanctity; being himself of a clean Contrary Disposition.
Thus a Cruel Pope, takes the Title of Clement; and Malefacins, will needs
pretend to be Boniface. This is to be Innocent, per Antiphrasin, by the Rule of
Contraries.

But, that it may not seem strange, that Dying-Criminals will falsely avow their
Innocence, my self, in my late Experience, (as Ordinary of Newgate) have known
some Malefactors Condemned for Murder and Burglaries, to have gone out of the
World, with a Notorious Asserting of their Integrity; although they had twice
or thrice Confessed to me, (with some seeming Remorse) that they were justly
Condemned for the said Crimes.

I do believe, that the Jesuits have been their Tutors, Patterns, and Patrons,
in such Abominable Untruths. I shall more closely Convince all Unbyassed
Persons, that these Five Jesuits could not be Innocent. Their Witnesses from
St. Omers, were Votaries Trayn'd up in their Religion, and sworn at their
Entrance into the College, to obey their Superiors Instructions. Therefore,
some of them being asked by the Honorable Court of Judicature, What they could
averr (as to their own Knowledge) about a very Material Question? replied, That
they were not Instructed to Answer that Point: Which demonstrates, that they
were Fore-taught, as Parrots, what to allege in other Respects, to have
invalidated Doctor Oats his Testimony: Yet were they Heard with Wonderful
Patience and Candor. Nay, the Jesuits themselves, when they made their Own
Defense, did offer nothing of any considerable weight, but mere Sophistical
Evasions, why the Court should not proceed to pass Judgment upon them. At their
Execution, What Self-Imprecations did they use, as if they would by These, as a
Magical Conjuration, Charm the Public Spectators, to give Credit to their
Lying and Atheistical Appeals.

Yet, these Disturbers and Underminers of Human Society, before they were
turned out of the World, thought it Necessary, to Charm the
Secret-biting-Accusations of their Consciences, with Father Whitebread's
Absolution, which they Received (in all probability) when they Whispered
together. This they Reserved till Now, as a Presumptive Purgation of all their
Crimes, and as a Safe Ticket, or Transport unto Heaven. They counted
Atheistical Lies, to be St. Peter's Keys, to Open Paradise unto them; Or a most
Dextrous Artificial Pick-lock, to screw themselves into a Good Opinion with the
Credulous, Vulgar People. But, as that Witty Pope said, (when he Sprinkled
Holy Water on Romish Novices, and they Expected Miraculous Effects) He who will
be Deceived, let his Superstitious Conceit be Rewarded with a Cheat: So say I;
Let Papists be deluded with false Protestations, who believe a Religion, stufft
with Lies and Blasphemies. But, let not any Protestant be so Infected, as to
Resign their Reason, and Resolve their Faith, into the Conduct of their bare
Assertions; who Promote their Church, by all Deceivableness of Unrighteousness.
How are Popish Novices in a blind Zeal, hurryed on by such Sophisters, to
perpetrate the most Notorious Assassinations of Princes; and not to Boggle at
This; as if it were a Virtue highly Meritorious. Thus do such Bigots gratify
the Blood-thirsty Humor of the Scarlet Whore, and E^ecute the Fury of the
Romish Beast. And yet, when Jesuits are Justly put to Death for Villainous
Treasons, they dare protest, that they Dye Martyrs for the Cause of their
Blessed Jesus; whom they Crucify afresh, not only by the Hands of an Idolatrous
Mass-Priest, but in the Persecution of the Professors of his pure Religion.

I will give some proof of this. Baron Hene, one of his Majesty's Justiciaries
in Ireland, assured a Person of Honor, that one John Curphy, a Papist,
Condemned for a Burglary, in the Year 1671. at the time of his Execution, did
peremptorily Deny the Fact, and made solemn Appeals to God of his Innocence.
Yet, the Contrary was thus Discovered: After he had Hung some little time, the
Rope by Chance brake; so he fell down a little Stunned: Yet some Seed of Life
remaining in him, he was brought to his perfect Speech. Hereupon, Terror was so
deeply impressed upon his Conscience, for Lying, (though counted a Venial Sin
before) that he was forced to Confess the Fact; and after some time given him
for Repentance, he was Executed as he deserved.

Thus you see, that Impudent, Impenitent Malefactors, at different Seasons,
have different Sentiments of God's Omniscient Justice, for Forging Lies
deliberately, to make the World believe, that they are Innocent. God is
concerned, in the Honor of his Justice, to Vindicate his Omnisciency, in some
strange Discovery of such Matchless Impostors; who can hardly Repent in the
time of Dying. Indeed, it is not probable, they should; who Entayl upon
themselves, a Voluntary Curse, by their pertinacious Dissimulation, and their
Lying Artifices. These Men, are of late, Commenced such profound Doctors in all
Treason, Rebellion, Cruelty, and what not, which may destroy a Protestant
Government, that they outstrip all former Monsters of Impiety. Had this
Unparellel'd Villainy been Effected, it would have been Celebrated for a
Meritorious Act, in Contriving a Speedier and more Effectual Method, for the
Propagation of the Romish Persuasion.

This, is not the Truly, Ancient, Apostolical Faith; but a Mushrom of Fancy,
started up, out of an Affectation of Superstitious Novelty; and cherisht or
spread by the Boundless Ambition of Earthly Pomp and Grandeur. How can any Man,
who has not quite Extinguished all Sparks of Reason and Ingenuity, Embrace such
a Religion; which any Idiot may be Ashamed to Live in, and Afraid to Dye in?
For, it is a Miscellany of Blasphemies, and all Absurd Opinions; yea, of all
Impieties.

Hereby, it comes to pass, that at last, they are not able to put any
Difference 'twixt Light and Darkness, Truth and Falsehood; nor to distinguish
Righteousness, from Violence and Injustice; nor Piety it self, from the
Extremity of Profaneness.

I have done with the Discovery of the Falseness of their Appeals: Let us now
see, whether their Faith and Charity in Dying, were of any Better Stamp.

The Jesuits False-Faith in Dying, Detected to be Fancy and Presumption.
HOw many False Martyrs has the world afforded, who while they Courted Death,
Sacrificed only a Sturdy Body to a Stubborn Mind, to keep up some Heresy in
Repute? Jesuits count this, a brave Resolution; yet, it flows from the
Inconsiderateness of a Sleepy secure Conscience. They weigh not the after-claps
of Death, nor Dread the future Assizes of the Universal Judgment. Hypocrites,
will as confidently, commit and commend their Spirits into the Hand and Bosom
of Christ, as if they had been Washed in his Blood, and changed into his Image.
Jesuits, who are a Faithless Generation, cannot really make use of the Shield
of Faith, to Blunt the Sting of Death; or to Quench the Fiery Dartings of
Despair into their Hearts. For, that Faith which they pretend to, is rather
Carnal fancy and presumption, than any well regulated Resignation of their
Souls to the Conduct of the Scriptures, as embraced by a firm Belief, Such
Resignation flowing from a Right-bred Faith, is Divinely grounded on the Sacred
Authority of God Alone, who is the Architype of Truth. But Jesuits, do not
believe the Scriptures to be a perfect Rule of Faith, and of the practicals of
Christian Self-denial. If they esteemed the Sacred Records, able to make the
Man of God Completely wise unto Salvation, then Consequently, they must needs
be the strongest and only Shield, to overcome the Inordinate Love of Natural
Life, and the Slavish fear of a Violent Ignominious Death. Such a frame can
never be attained, unless the Purity of the Scriptures, which are Divine in
their Original and Authority, be Assented to, and Embraced with a Faith
Divinely subjected to them. I must receive and defend Divine Truth to the very
Death; not because I believe it with an Humane Faith, as giving more credit to
the Churches Tradition (which Consignes the Scriptures to be Canonical) than to
the Authority of Divine Revelation: If so, I ground my Faith for Eternal Life,
upon an Uncertain Opinion, or at best, upon the Rash and bold Assertion of some
Pope or Council, who say and unsay, Decree and Abolish the same Constitution in
a Breath.

Thus, the Jesuits-Faith, which is merely or chiefly Humane, in the very
essence and formality of it, (because the Church or Pope determines So, or So,)
can never reach to the Spiritual pitch and excellency of that Divine Faith;
which being grounded on the Sole Authority of Divine Revelation, can only
Justify and Save a man's Soul, and Consequently, can only afford true courage
and comfort in Dying. But Jesuits, never had their Hearts purified by
believing, and obeying the Truths of Christ, as such; for then, they would have
their Affections more in Heaven: But spending their Conversation chiefly among
Machivilians of their own Tribe and Order, to promote a Secular Interest,
rather than to Subject themselves to the Rules of the Blessed Jesus, (whose
name their Society Blasphemously pretends to) they cannot have any Experimental
Taste of the powerful joys of the World to come. Their confidence therefore in
Dying, cannot be Hearty and Ingenuous. It flows chiefly, from the Effort and
vigor of natural courage, not from a Super-elevated Principle of Unfeigned
Faith, which takes a prospect of Eternal Life, not only beyond the pleasing
Accomodations and Advantages of this present World, but also, beyond the
Torments of Death; that so God himself may be Glorified All in All, and not
only a Saint-like Cannonization be Ambitiously aspired unto, which, without
real Holiness, is but the Dream of a Fools-Paradise. Are not such men under the
delusion of a strange Phrency, and Spiritually bewicht, who put on an
Artificial courage and zeal, in sealing a false Religion with their Blood,
only, out of a fond Ambition, to avoid Purgatory on the left hand, and that the
Pope may immediately Canonize them for Heroical Champions, in defending the
pride of his Tripple Crown. Jesuits account this, to be justifying Faith to
Eternal Life, firmly to Assont to all the Popes determinations as Infallible,
when oftentimes, Popes have been persons neither of common Truth nor Honesty,
but Atheists, Heretics, Conjurers, Sodomites, yea Incarnate Devils. Platina in
the Life of John the 13th. Constan. Council. Sess. 11. Art. 5. Benedict. 9. vide
Baronium anno, 1034. N. 3. Yet the unwritten Traditions, or Fancies rather, of
these wicked Monsters, must be Embraced as Objects of justifying Faith, by all
such, who expect not to be sent to Purgatory, when they Dye. But, Can
Jesuitical Martyrs, for the Pope's Religion, retain a firm Belief, that they
shall be Canonized for Saints? Yes. For Graffius, Bellarmine, and other
Divines, have found out a compendious way to Salvation: For, by Forming the
Sign of the Cross with Three Fingers, to signify the Mystery of the Sacred
Trinity: by drawing the Cross from the Forehead to the Navel, to signify, that
the Son of God Descended from Heaven into the Bowels of his Mother; and then
drawing the Cross line from the Left-Arm to the Right; Hereby the Cause of the
Incarnation is Expressed; viz. Christ came from Heaven to Earth, that we who had
deserved to be placed amongst the Goats at his Left Hand, might be removed to
his Right Hand, amongst the Sheep. Behold! What Mysteries of Faith, Mother
Church has taught Her Eldest Sons, yea, all her Novices; that by these Exact
Moods of Forming a Cross, without the Knowledge of any thing besides, even this
alone, may be sufficient for Salvation. This is All the Faith, necessary for a
Roman Catholic; and when by such Admirable Conduct of the Cross, he has but
Once believed, he need never more trouble Himself with Faith, while he Lives.
So Bonacina Tom. 2. in 1. Precept. Disp. 3. Q. 2. N. 16. Graff. Decis. Part 1.
Lib. 1. Cap. 24. N. 3.

You have seen the Admirable Efficacy of a Jesuits Faith, in Signing himself,
when Dying, with the Sign of the Cross: Now view the Effects of their Hopes.

Jesuitical Hopes of Divine Mercy and Salvation, at Death, Detected to be
False, and Vain.
ALL Rational Hope of Salvation, is Divine in its Original and Foundation; this
will not make them Ashamed, who are Possessed of it. Romans 5.5. It is not like the
Spiders-Web, because it has God in Christ, for its Foundation. 1 Col. 27.
Christ in You, the Hope of Glory. But now, Popish Doctrine is opposite to
Christ in all his Offices, as making him to be an Insufficient Savior. Thus
they join Pennances, as necessary Additions to Christ's Infinite Satisfaction
for Sin, as if he had Merited, to take away only the Fault or Offense; and had
left the Sinner himself, to complete the Redemption of his Soul, by satisfying
for the punishment of Sin, in Self-invented and Self-imposed Severities, upon
the Body. How does this derogate from Christ's Infinite Redeeming Love, in
making a full and perfect Satisfaction for All Sin, and the Appurtenances
thereof, in respect of Persons truly Justified. Besides, Romish Doctrine
over-throws another part of the Foundation of true Christian Hope, which is,
the Alone All Sufficiency of Christ's Meritorious Intercession: Thus they join
with Him, Suffragans and Coadjutors, in this part of his Priestly Office; as if
Himself were not a pityful and faithful High Priest, as God-man, solely and
sufficiently prevalent with his Father, to Obtain whatever we can Ask,
according to His Will. But Papists pray amiss to Saints and Angels; who know
not their particular Distresses, nor the Thoughts of the Heart, which Ascend to
God directly in Prayer: He only, can Hear the Suppllcations of Millions, at the
same time; and Supply the Wants of All Creatures. Therefore, they are Guilty of
Idolatry and Blasphemy in their Orlsons: And, Can such Sacriledgious Derogation
from God's Honor, ground any real Hope of being Heard, or Supplied with the
Necessary Means of Salvation? So far are such Prayers, from giving the least
Hope of Eternal Life.

2. True Hope, has the Promises of Free Grace in Christ, for its Support:
which Promises are only Yea, and Amen, in Him, to Christians that are sincere
in their Obedience. But, Popish Doctors assert, that the Highest or most
Necessary Duties of Christianity, are only Counsels, which they are at Liberty
to embrace, or not; so as to make them practical. Thus they dispense with the
Necessary Duties of Religion; in which, the very Essence, Life, and Power of it
consists: As they fancy Divine Precepts to be but Arbitrary Duties; so, to
such, Christ's Promises of Eternal Life, become as mere Ciphers, because they
do dispense with his Laws, when, and as themselves please to be partial in
their Obedience. That only is a Lively Hope of Salvation, which makes the
Possessors of it, to purisy their Hearts, as God is Pure; which is fruitful in
Obedience, and active in the ways of Holiness; which Girds up the Loins of the
Mind, by avoiding all Impediments, and making use of all Expedients in the
Christian-Race; thus the Hope of seeing and enjoying God, does strenuously work
up the Heart, to a Conformity in Holiness. Such an Hope only, can be a firm
Anchor in all Extremities. But Popish Hopes (as the Spiders-Web) are soon swept
away like Vanity: Yea, there is no Hope of Remedy, to Recover such to a
Salvable State, who study to be Ignorant, and fear to know the Latitude of
God's Will, lest they should be Obliged to follow it. How dangerous is an
Implicit Faith! viz. to believe Only as the Church dictates, though she teach
Points contrary to the Purity of the Christian-Institution? How can that Faith,
which is grounded on the Authority of the Pope, and consequently, which is
merely Human, as molded to his Determination, produce any solid Hope of
Eternal Life? Hope is the Daughter, or Twin-Sister of Faith: Therefore, As the
Nature of This is, so Hope is True or False. Such blind Bigots, who hold their
Souls in this Miserable Captivity, cannot rationally think them Redeemed by the
Blood of Christ; while they reject that Saving Light which is offered to them.
What then shall we think of Jesuits, who sin against Conviction, that they may
uphold a Carnal Interest? If any persist in This, they Sin damnably, and cannot
have any real Hope of Salvation. The like we may affirm of such, who, to
Preserve their Trading and Worldly Accommodations in Popish Countries, quench
the Sparks of True Convictions in themselves: These Persons are Ashamed or
Afraid to Confess Christ's entire Truth, in the Purity thereof against all
Romish forged Innovations, although These betray Men's Souls insensibly to
Perdition Such persons, who for State-Interest, viz. to gain Favor or Wealth,
suppress the Sentiments of Christ's pure Religion, and receive the Mark of the
Beast; though not in the Forehead openly, yet closely in their Hand; This
Anathema from God, may justly take hold of them, that they shall be blinded and
hardened to believe Romish Lies, according to that Just Sentence, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
That They all may be Damned, who Believe not the Truth once professed, but Reject
it: Or refuse to be informed of the Danger of Heretical Tenets, when Means of
Conviction are offered; because, they Demonstrate hereby, That they have
Pleasure in Unrighteousness. Now, Popish Religion is the Greatest Seminary of
Viciousness, and all Impiety: For, Does not the Council of Trent Establish
this, That Attrition only, which is but a slight Grief for Sin, from mere
slavish Fear of Hell, or Shame, without any Love to God, is a sufficient
Demonstration of Repentance to Eternal Life; so that the Sacrament of Penance
be joined with it? Yet this Sacrament of Penance, on which they say, the stress
of Sinners Salvation depends, is a mere Human Invention: God has promised
nothing to it, upon Popish Terms; neither can a Man build any rational Hope
upon It, that it will secure him from Damnation. They affirm, That the
Sacrament of Penance infuses All saving Graces, when Men are Dying: This is a
Rare Device, by which Debaucht Persons may escape Hell at last, without True
Repentance. There was never any Heresy more monstrous and pernicious, than
this of the Trent-Council, which makes all Sins Safe, and all Duties Needless,
by a Knack of very Easy Use, and New Invention, viz. Absolution, upon the mere
Profession of any slight Grief for Sin, though the Motive be but Natural, and
the Grief it self, in the next Degree to Nothing.

The Premises considered, I cannot see how Papists can rightly Ground their
Hopes for Salvation, which is to be attained by Faith in Christ alone, as it
purifyes the Heart to an Obediential Hope of Glory.

Jesuitical Charity Counterfeit in Life and Death.
I Do suspect, the Jesuits Charity in Dying, could be no Better than their
Faith: For, according to the Truth and Strength of This, (which is the first
Radical Grace Implanted) is proportionably, the Genuine Nature and Extension of
Christian Love. Now, if the Jesuits Faith be Unsound (as I have Demonstrated) I
cannot see any reason, why their Charity should be of the right
Scriptural-stamp: How could these Jesuits sincerely Forgive their Enemies? Is
Self-denial, this Grand Masterpiece of Christianity, so easily practiced by
Antichristian Spirits? Yet, they would make us believe, that they heartily
Forgave their Enemies, as themselves expected Forgiveness from God. But such
Sophisters use to Forgive their Just Accusers in a Complement, as they believe
themselves to be Forgiven of God in a Dream. I suspect, that their
Reconciliation to their Adversaries, was as Mystical, as their Faith is
Dubious. For, if they require an Implicit Faith only, to believe whatever the
Church Virtual, viz, the Pope dictates; why should their Charity be more
expressive and distinct, viz. in Comprehending such Persons, who designedly (as
themselves asserted) sought to take away their Lives.

Is This the Charity of the Roman Church, to Condemn all Protestants to Hell;
while in a fond-mistaken Compassion, all Her Own Faction, (though never so
prodigiously Wicked) are Canonized for Saints? Yea, Why does the Pope, that
Merciful High priest, permit so many Souls to lie broyling in Purgatorian
Flames, when he ought with a more fervent Charity, and at a more easy price,
to Redeem them thence.

How could these Jesuits sincerely Forgive their Enemies, who fancy a strange
Mock-Forgiveness of a Sinner, by the God of Truth. This they do, to color and
palltate their own Hypocritical Reconciliation. Their Blasphemy is this: That
God in Pardoning Sinners, forgives the Offense, but not the Punishment. This
must be satisfied For, In, and By Themselves. This makes way for fraudulent
Reconciliations: For, the Malicious Person may allege the Example of God
Himself; who, while he pretends to Remit an Injury, yet Reserves in his Heart,
Seeds of Wrath for a Crop of Future Revenge. For, he will say, Would you have
me more Merciful than God! Herein, I have followed His Example. We are too much
inclined to Revenge; we need not se^k Devices, to prove, that God Invites us
there unto. These Men pretend Meekness of Spirit; but it is Malice Raked up in
Embers, till they find a fit Opportunity to be Revenged in Earnest, and with a
fuller Interest. I cannot see through the Mists of their Impostures; nor can I
Reconcile their Hearts and Words together, when almost in the same Breath, they
Revile and Condemn their Judges of Injustice.

Virtually, they Supplicated for the Avenging of their Blood, as wrongfully
spilt; while in those very Appeals which they made to God, they asserted
themselves to be as White and Innocent, as Innocence it self. I have Read of
Apollonius Thyanaeus, that when he Prayed, he had his Sword lying drawn before
him, as ready to take Vengeance on his Enemies; though this were the only
Expedient, to cut off Mercy from himself. Do not Popish Doctors maintain, That
it is Lawful to Kill any one who only Reviles us? This, they count not Revenge,
but a Regular Self-Love, yea, a very Just Care, which the Injured Person Owes
unto Himself. At the Least, he may Repair his Honor, by the Swords-point of
Recrimination. Doubtless, they who hold, That we owe No Express Act of Love to
God Himself, all our Life-long; and that the Intention, and Desire only of
Loving Him (when we are Dying) fulfils our Duty in this Respect, could have but
Little or No Charity, for their Enemies. This is really the Merciful Temper of
Romanists, to wish, That by One Blow in the Destruction of His Majesty, they
had readily dispatched Three Nations, because they will not stoop to the Yoke of
Antichristian Heresy and Tyranny.

How Diabolically did these Malefactors presume to Clear themselves, by
clapping One Lie gravely upon Another. First, They asserted their Innocence,
though Convicted and Righteously Condemned. Then, to testify their Innocence by
their Meekness, they pretended to Forgive their Enemies; while by a Jesuitical
Back Blow, they endeavored to stab their Reputation, and Invalidate their
Testimony by false Recriminations. Now, it is alike Absurd, for a Malefactor
convicted by Law, to presume to Clear himself, by Calumniating of another; as
for one really Innocent, to bear a False Testimony against himself. This is
Unnatural, and against Regular Self-Love; but the Other is Natural to a Corrupt
Heart, though it be Diabolical.

I will prove the Absurdity of the First-mentioned Artifice, by instancing in a
True Example of the Latter; viz. An Innocent Woman bore false Witness against
Her self, that she was the proper Murderer of a Child, which was destroyed by
its own Mother. The Devil suggested to this feigned Criminal, that it was
impossible, she could have a broken Heart for Sin, unless she were publicly
Hanged, and. so shamed into a Penitential Frame. The Woman closed with this
Self-cruel Design, Indicted her self, and Pleaded Guilty of the Murder: But
the Judge observing her modest and penitential Behavior, could not think, that
she was the Real Murderer. Therefore, he urged her, not wilfully to cast away
her own Life, by palliating and p^rsonating of another Crime. She frequently
affirmed, that she Killed the Child. Yet at last, God was pleased to discover
Satan's Stratagem. So the Mother, who was the proper-Criminal, was sought for,
and Apprehended; but the Other was set at Liberty, with some R^buke and Pity of
her Folly. This strange Occurrence, a Person worthy of Credit, Related to my
self, upon his own Knowledge, as he attended the Judge in his Circuit.

Now, Why is it not probable, that the Devil might as designedly, Animate these
Jesuits, to assert their own Innocence, by darting Calumniations against their
upright Witnesses, to Confirm them in their Impenitency. The Charity of these
Jesuits, toward their Enemies, is the more to be suspected, because their
Casuistical Divines declare, that a Criminal may lawfully Perjurate himself, in
pleading of his Innocence; yea, may without Sin, falsely Recriminate, and Murder
such Witnesses, who are likely to prove the Crime against Him.

This is their common Doctrine, Bannes 22 Q. 70 Art. 3 page Thus Bolsec, and
Chocleius, did cast out False Aspersions, to desame Luther and Calvin, that
Credit might not be given to their Writings against the Roman-Church. Ledesma,
a Dominican, assures us, that to Defame falsely any Adversary, is no Sin: For,
it is the Common Doctrine of Aquinas his Disciples. Caramuel says, Twenty
Doctors assert it Lawful. If Popish Confitents will be Prodigal of their own
Reputation, and (out of a Superstitious Fear of losing the Benefit of
Absolution, if they Enumerate not punctually all their Sins) will Charge
themselves with such Wickedness, which they never Committed: How little
Conscience will Jesuited Persons make, of Murdering not only the Good Name,
but the Person also, of an upright Witness; that so they may prevent a True
Testimony against them, or weaken the Validity of it.

By this Maxim, which Legitimats false Desamations, the grand Sophisters in
that Hellish Art, have set themselves upon a Pillory of Infamy, with this
Inscription, That they are never to be Credited, though they Imprecate
themselves, if they speak not Truth. Yet, these are the Persons, who would be
Admired for their Self-denial, in Forgiving of their Enemies. This is of kind
to the Blind preposterous Charity of their Popes, who often Canonize for Saints
and Martyrs, such who are Executed for Treason and Rebellion. Yet Cotton says,
in the 26th. Chap. of 1st. Book of the Institution, That to doubt of the
Blessedness of such Canonized Saints, is to make a Challenge against the Book
of Predestination; which the Pope (as Christ's Vicar) has the Keeping and
Opening of, though it be sealed up from the Knowledge of all Heretics. What a
blasphemous Charity is this, to Arrogate the Disposal of the Book of Eternal
Life? For, Who can think, that Popes have a Right to inrole whom they will
amongst the Saints, when our Adversaries affirm, that many of Their Holynesses
are Damned themselves?

Let us now see, whether the Jesuits Courage, and Cheerfulness, in Dying for
their Religious Treasons, be of any better Stamp, than their Dissembled Charity.

Jesuitical Courage and Cheerfulness in Dying for Heresy and Treason, how
Differenced from the Comforts of Real MARTYRS.
Object. But is it likely, that such Holy Men should put on a Dissembled
Courage and Cheerfulness, in Dying for Heresy or Treason?

Answ. I Answer; Although this is the Worst sort of Lying, because it
Counterfeits the Anointing of God's Holy Spirit, and stains the Glory of their
Reputed Martyrdom; yet, I shall demonstrate, that Dissimulation in this kind,
is not only possible, but frequently Exercised.

Erroneous Principles may have such a Prevalency upon the Conscience and
Affections of Heretics, and Traitors, as to raise a Passionate False Joy, in
Suffering a Violent and Ignominious Death. But, How does this strange
Witchcraft, differ from the Real Joy of Christ's Martyrs?

1. True Cheerfulness in Suffering, differs in the Springhead, or Root: There
is a Gracious, and a Moral Kind of Sincerity. Now, from this Moral Inducement
only, mere Opinionists will Do and Suffer much, that they may preserve the
Peace of an Erroneous Conscience in being Honest to their False Light. Yet, do
they not enjoy the Comfort of a Renewed Conscience: This prefers the Glory of
God, and the Propagation of the Truth, before the Preservation of its own Peace.

2. Jesuitical Courage, is Artificial and Forced, merely out of design, to
keep up the credit, of a False Opinion; rather than any Hearty Demonstration of
Real Self-denial. It spends it self in Vainglory, and is not attended with any
Humble Distrust of Persevering. Impostors, in their pretended Comfort, are
either Besotted with Sensuality, or Tickled with Fantastic Joy. It is no
wonder, if they suffer out of a Brainsick Fancy, for the Brats of Popish
Superstition. But Fancies in the Head, beget only Flashes of false Zeal and
Comfort, by the Concitation of Brisk Animal Spirits. Thus, Phrentick Persons
(the Brain being over-heat) Cant, in rattling of their Chains, as if they were
Princes in their own Imagination. Impostors suffer, either from the Strength of
Delusion, or from Stiffness and Rigidness of Spirit, because they hold it a
Discredit, to be Changlings in Opinion. But one Divinely Courageous for the
Truth, chooses rather to be Its Captive, than the Champion of Error.

3. Impostors cover a sad peevish Heart, with a jocund Countenance: But real
Martyrs, having the secret Consolations of God's Spirit, are not Transported
with Aerie Joys, neither are they Theatrical in their Carriage. Joy in the Holy
Ghost (not in Fancy, or the Face only) rests upon them. Res est Severa, Verum
Gaudium.

4. Dissembled Courage, cannot be Uniform in a constant Undauntedness; viz.
Such, which becalms the Passions, and confirms the Sufferer in his Uprightness.
But some Jesuits have used Opiate Potions, that they might bring a Stupefaction
on the Animal Spirits, so as to have Little or No Sensation of their Death. But
real Martyrs, refuse to use any Artificial, Sinful Means, to force Joy, rather
than to wait for it from Heaven, by the Acting of a Regular Faith. A
Pseudo-Martyrs Courage, is designed to Hector Protestants into a Belief of
their Cheats; and their Patience is as Counterfeit, as their Penitence.

5. True Courage in Christ's Martyrs, Convinces, Shames; and Converts some of
their Adversaries, because the Lord sets an edge on that Comfort which flows
from His Spirit, rather than the Gallantry of a Roman Resolution. True Comfort
in Suffering, is demonstrated to carry a Divine-Stamp, by begetting a secret
Veneration in the very Hearts of such, who Oppose the Truth.

But Jesuits in their Just Execution, never (I think) did win over any
Protestant, to become a Patron for their Lies. The Reasons are these:

1. Their Delusive Joy arises, partly from fortifying and confirming themselves
with the Sign of the Cross, as a Charm against the Fear of Death.

2. From a Popish Absolution given before their Death: The Form of which, (as
Emanuel Sa reports) runs thus:

The Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Merits of the most Blessed
Virgin Mary, and of All the Saints, and of all those Good Acts done by Thee,
(we may interpret them for Exploits of Treason) and of all the Evil, which thou
shall patiently endure, ( though justly for thy Crimes) serve, or be of Benefit
unto thee, for the Remission of all thy Sins, for Increase of Grace, and for
the Reward of Eternal Life.

3. Their False-forced Courage, flows from an Ambitious, Superstitious Opinion,
that their Super-abundant Sufferings, shall constitute a Stock or Treasury of
Merit, for granting Indulgence to looser Papists. For the like purpose, some
Relics of Pseudo-Martyrs have been Buried under an Altar, either to cry for
Vengeance against their Unjust Judges, (Reputed such by themselves) or that
every Mass said over such an Altar, might Redeem a Soul out of Purgatory. So
Ambitious are they, to share and compeer with the Office of Christ himself, in
making an All-sufficient, and Meritorious Satisfaction for Sin: Yet, George
Cassander (in his Consultation how to Reconcile Rome and Us. in a Middle-Way)
attests, That Saint Martin going to a Place in his Diocese, Famous for the
Sepulcher of one who Dyed a Reputed Martyr, found out, that the People
Reverenced and Adored the Relics of a Wicked Thief. So dextrous are they, to
put a Cheat upon the World, in boasting of the Multitude of their Saints: Also,
they set the Crown of Martyrdom on the Heads of Traitors, to whom the Merits of
Christ's Passion must be applied for Absolution, from all those Impostures,
which are so Destructive to All Right Sentiments of Christianity.

Here it may be Objected, that Protestants, do not profess, the True Religion,
because they look Dejected in their dying for it. To this I answer, that the
Countenance, is not always the true Herald of the Mind. Impressions of Divine
Joy, usually at first, fill the Soul with Fear, lest there should be a Delusion
in its peace. Therefore Real Martyrs, may not always Express the Transport of
Joy in suffering. Excessive Rapture of Divines Joy, may so powerfully affect
the Mind, that the Body may be Careless (in a manner) of Composing its Outward
Mspect, which Jesuits more mind, in their Artificial Courage, than Sincerity to
bear Testimony to the Truth. Yea, the Soul of a Real Martyr, may abate an
Extrinsical Cheerfulness, by reason of the Indisposition of the Body, which is
incapable to bear Long the Exuberant Raptures of Divine Joy. Yea the Soul It
self is sometimes hindered in a more distinct and deep Consideration of those
divine Comforts which it possesses; because it drinks In the Impression of
meanner Objects from the Senses. These flat and dead, the briskness of the
purest Divinest Consolations, so that the strength of its Joys may be Remitted
upon this Account.

Besides the Spirituous Operation of them is deaded, by a dull Imperfect
Description of them unto Other Persons, who cannot Conjecture, what they Are,
by any Report made of them at the second Hand. Thus, the Reflection of the
Sunbeams, are Weaker, than the direct Influences: An Echo is fainter in the
Rebound, than the Immediate Articulation, or first Forming of the Voice.

Therefore, Protestants ought not to Faint under Tribulation, because Comfort
does not Spring up to them in an Extraordinary degree, as soon as they first
engage to give their Testimony to Christ's pure Religion. It is not the part, or
duty of a Christian under suffering, to Anticipate Divine Manifestations by
Impatiency; nor to Carve the hidden Manna lavishly, and Unseasonably to
himself. It is Treasured up, to be Revealed in the deepest extremities of
suffering. The Spirit of Christ will not fail to Succor his Martyrs, in the
Fittest Season. For, He is not only a Prudent, but a Faithful dispenser of his
own Favors and Comforts.

Let not therefore any Protestant Degenerate from an Holy courage and
cheerfulness under his sharpest Trials. Let Him not Degrade himself below his
Spiritual Dignity, by any pusillanimous warping in his Testimony to the Truths
of Christ. We are to Count this, rather matter of great Joy, that we are
Esteemed by God, to be His Faithful Witnesses, entrusted with the Defense of
His pure Religion. If we Persevere under His Banner, to overcome the
Corruptions of Antichrist, we shall at Last Receive Robes of Glory, and Palms
of Victory, as signal Trophies of our Eminent selfdenyal.

Now, to wind up this whole Discourse: If Jesuits may express an Artificial
Magnanimity in suffering Exquisite Torments for the Reputation of their false
Religion; Then, let it be a seasonable Caution, not to justify Imposters,
because in their death, they may seem to parallel the real Zeal and Constancy
of Protestants. Every Like is not the same.

Again, though some sincere Martyrs, have seemed to set in a Cloud as not
expressing any Extraordinary Joys; yet, Suspend your Censure of their Persons,
neither suspect Christ's pure Religion which they desended: Their Grave Reserved
Seriousness, was no dishonorable Despondency. For, in the lowest Ebb of
Comfort, they were never deprived of a Lively Hope of Glory, which kept them
Adhering to God in Christ.

On the other side, a Presumptuous Sinner, a Close Hypocrite, an Insolent
Self-designing Jesuitical Impostor, may Counterfeit a Commendable Patience,
Excessive Joy, and an Earnest. Desire to be Dissolved. He may seem to Conflict
with Death undauntedly, and challenge an Executioner of Justice, to do his
Worst: And yet, all these Rays of Cheerfulness, and Raptures of Transporting
Joy, may prove only the Presumption of a deluded Conscience.

Therefore, set not the Crown of Martyrdom on the Heads of such Unworthy
Wretches. Give not such the due Encomiums and Praises of Real Saints, who are
only their Apes and Counterfeits in Life and Death. This would be to Justify
the Wicked, which is an Abomination to the Lord. It will Harden Profane
Persons. Encourage Hypocrites, and Sacrilegiously Rob the Saints of their due
Honor and Veneration. Give not Prodigally a false Testimony to such in their
Death, who despised and opposed the Truths of Jesus, (as Jesuits do under the
Title of His Society) or, who Renounced the Ways of Holiness in their Lives.

Be not Deceived, God will not be Mocked: For, what any Man Sows, the very same
shall he Reap^. If to the Flesh, Corruption, and Destruction shall be the Fruit
of his daring Impiety

Every Man's End is ^^^tually in his Way, or Course of Life. Reckon upon This,
as an Eternal Truth, that False and Licentious Principles, can never produce
Solid, nor Lasting Comfort.

FINIS.

