THE TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE BEHAVIOR AND CONFESSION of the Criminals, Condemned
on Thursday the 15th. day of April, 1686. At JVSTICE-HALL in the OLD-BAYLY Viz.
Peter Lary, John Toy, Elizabeth Churchill, John Crofts, John Steers, and
Rebeckah Rose, of which Peter Lary, was this present Wednesday the 21st. of
April, Executed at TYBURN, And the other five Reprieved.
THe Ordinary first undertook this service, to the Community, of publishing the
Account of the Behavior and Confessions of the Condemned Criminals in Newgate,
that no persons might be imposed upon by others, who presumed to Print false
Reports concerning them.

Now, whereas some of late have expected that an Account should be given of
Confessions to be made at Tyburn. This the Ordinary has endeavored to bring
the dying Malefactors unto, but they are somewhat Averse to it there, because
they cannot be well heard, by reason of the Noise of the People, besides the
Consternation which is upon them, being ready to be Executed, makes them say
little, but only thus. Take warning, not to come to this Fatal Place, to which
we are brought, by the neglect of our Duty to God and Man; and usually desire
only, that the Ordinary would pray with them, and that they may do the like for
themselves.

This Account therefore he now gives, that on Friday which was the next Day,
after the Sentence of Death passed upon the aforesaid Criminals, he visited
them, and after he had prayed with them, earnestly exhorted them, that they
would beg of God to make them sensible of their several Crimes, that they would
look back on the whole course of their Life; in as much, as the just God never
leaves Sinners destitute of his preventing Grace, till they first harden their
own Hearts, indulging themselves in some secret Sins, thereby strengthening
vicious inclinations, to a considerable degree of Atheism, because they are not
some time discovered and brought to shame.

He told them, that they ought, having given Notorious Scandals, to make their
penitential acknowledgments as public for the warning of others, by their
Example of suffering Justice, to avoid the same Crimes.

And that though they had quenched the motions of God's Holy Spirit, and resisted
the Convictions of their Conscience formerly; yet now by this Fatal Stroke
drawn upon themselves.

He loudly calls them to Repentance, that so they may escape the Wrath which is
to come.

Upon this, they began to be awakened from their Security in an Evil State, and
to lament their former flagitious Courses, which Relenting, the Ordinary
Encouraged, yet advised them not to rely on any slight sorrow for Sin, as if
this were any satisfaction to God, for all the Exorbitances of their
Conversations.

Here he stated the differences betwixt True and False Repentance, and the
Nature of True Faith in coming to God for Reconciliation by Christ, to which,
they were very attentive.

On Saturday I visited them again, and told them that I expected a further
Account from them of their fitness to Dye, than what I had already received.

I enquired what Frame and Disposition of Heart they were in at present:
Whither they retained those good impressions which were upon them the day
before. The replied, That they did.

Then asking them what Hope they had, that God was reconciled to them in
Christ, they replied, That they Prayed and did what they could, to obtain the
Pardon of their Sins, and that they might be saved. I assured them, that if
they were willing to be happy on God's Terms, viz. If they desired sincerely to
be Holy as much as to be Happy, then Christ's sanctifying Spirit would become
their Comforter.

Then I Exhorted them to prepare for the Duties of the Lords Day; because it
was likely to be the last Sabbath they would spend upon Earth.

After this, they were desirous that I would pray with them again, which I did,
and they promised me, that they would take pains with their own hearts in my
Absence, to fit themselves for a future happy State. I told them, that they
ought to assist one another to the utmost, in Order thereunto; considering how
by their bad Counsel and Example, they had misled others into sinful Practices,
and so dismissed them.

On the Lords Day, the Ordinary Preached on this Text, the 26 Chap. of St.
Matthew, the 40 Verse: Watch and Pray, that ye enter not into Temptation.

These Words were Christ's Advice to his Disciples, when he found them heavy a
sleep, in the midst of his Agonies, in the Night, immediately foregoing his
being Apprehended to be Crucified. He Alarumed them from their Security, by
enjoining them to Watch and Pray, as being most forcible in Conjunction. If we
Pray not, we disarm our selves, Satan gets an advantage of our sloth: If we
Watch not in Praying, and after it, to maintain a spiritual Frame; we make our
Prayer fruitless and ineffectual; Prayer keeps us watching, and this makes
Prayer available.

1st. We have need to Watch in Praying, and to Pray in Watching, because
Temptations always await us in our Christian Station.

2ly. It is very dangerous through carelessness of our Duty, to expose our
selves to the least approach of a Temptation, ( lest ye enter.

3ly. Such who Watch and Pray with a due frame of heart, shall ordinarily be
kept out of Temptation, or not left in it to themselves. If they enter into it,
they shall not fall under the Power of it Totally and Finally.

4ly. Pray, lest (ye) my Disciples, Enter into Temptation: Observe, the best of
Men cannot promise themselves to be free, and exempt from Satan's Stratagems or
Assaults. These are the Trials of Sincerity, the Exercise and strengthening of
real Grace. The Christians Alarm against Security; otherwise, we should be
good by Necessity, rather than Choice: If we did not strive for Victory against
Sin, Satan, and the World.

5ly. Christians must Watch and Pray, especially against such Temptations,
which most beset their present State and Condition of Life, or at the approach
of Death.

6ly. Though the Lord overrules Temptations to a good Issue in the Godly, yet
they are not to expose themselves by security, in any expectation of that good
which comes by Accident. Temporal Victories are got by Fighting, but Spiritual
by flying the occasion of sinning. God is not bound to Aid us in those
Temptations, which we thrust our selves upon.

After these Observations raised from the Text, the Ordinary proceeded to show
wherein the Nature of true watchfulness consists; and in what Respects, Prayer
in Conjunction, contributes to the declining or defeatment of Temptations. Then
he described some Symptoms in persons liable to enter upon the Borders of
Temptations, and some means in the use of which, they might be avoided, or the
effect and prevalencys of them, much broken and abated.

Also he gave some Directions, how to get out of the Snare of Satan's
Temptation, when taken therein.

And assigned some Considerations whereby the several Temptations of
Discouragement or Presumption in the approaches of Death, may be overcome.

Lastly, he Addressed himself to the condemned Criminals, by a practical
improvement of the precedent Discourse to their particular distressed Estate.

In the Afternoon, a Sermon was Preached on the 95th. Psalm, and the 8th. Verse
To day if you will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts. From which, were
deduced these general Considerations.

1st. By what various kind of Voices does the Lord call upon, and invite
Sinners unto Repentance?

2dly. In what Respects, are we said to hear and obey these Voices.

3dly. That by not attending to them, the Heart becomes gradually hardened, by
the deceits of Sin and Satan.

4thly. That to prevent such obduration of Heart, and provocation of God by it:
It is the Duty of all Persons, to day without delay, to comply with, and
improve the distinct voices and Calls of God unto Repentance and amendment of
Life. These Generals were treated of very pathetically, and the Auditory much
affected therewith.

On Monday the Ordinary Repaired to the Condemned Criminals, and inquired of
them what Divine impressions were made upon their hearts by the Prayers and
Sermons on the Lords Day; and took a farther Account of their fitness for their
approaching Death; and they readily complied with his desires.

John Toy, about 19 or 20 Years of Age, said that he was bred a Seaman, was the
fourth Mate in an East India Ship, had 50 s. per Month Wages; might have lived
well on the Sea Employment, and intended for a Voyage in a Ship now ready to
put to Sea: But for two Months past he fell into bad Company, which miss-led
him into some Extravegancies, as Drinking, and other miss-spending of his time.
He denied not the Fact for which he is Condemned. Idleness he said, brought on
the neglect of his Duty to God, whereby, he took to this unlawful Course of
taking money by Violence: But he says it is the first Fact of this Nature that
he Committed. He affirmed, that it is no little trouble to him, that he has
sinned against clear Light, and the frequent Convictions of his Conscience,
which now Recurr to mind, and do aggravate the sins of his miss-spent Life. But
he hopes if he may obtain his Majesty's Pardon, that he shall lead a New Life,
in serving God and the King Faithfully.

I told him and the other Criminals, how deceitful the heart of man is; this
has too often been sadly experienced in some, who after they have been
Reprieved and set at Liberty, have abused God and the King's mercy, by the
greater aggravation of their sins, having been Cut off in a short time by
public Justice, for Committing fresh and greater Crimes. I admonished them
therefore, to distrust their own hearts, for as much as sincere Repentance is
not so easy a work after sin has been strengthened by custom, and that it
requires some considerable time to manifest the sound Fruits and effects
thereof. But some Criminals after they are spared, forget the Vows made to God
in their distress, and their good Resolutions of Reformation vanish, when their
fears of Death are blown over.

Upon this, they did say, that they did pray to God, that they might be sincere
in their sorrow for their sin, and that his Grace hitherto, had lead them to
Repentance.

Secondly, John Steers, was Condemned for breaking up the house of Edward
Wiseman, on the 4th. of March last, and Apprehended in the Prosecutors house.
He said that he was Born in Middlesex, at Shadwell, that he is Nineteen Years
of Age. the Employment he was bred up to, was to be a Seaman; that he had
served his Majesty formerly in the War against the Dutch, that afterward he
was entertained as a Soldier at Tangier; that since the Demolishing the Forts
there, he came over into England, and wishes that he had not followed an Idle
Course of Life: This brought him to Poverty, and was the temptation of joining
himself to bad Company, and to contract acquaintance with some Lewd Women. He
expressed himself to be penitent for all his other sins, which he said were many
and great. It grieved him that he had not observed the Lords Day, that he had
neglected to Pray, that God would daily keep him from Temptations of sinning
against him. But he hoped that he would give him Faith and Repentance, to fit
him for another World,

That he does not despair of Gods mercy, but endeavor what he can to make
peace with him, through Christ, that death might not be terrible unto him.

Thirdly, Peter Lary, Condemned for stealing a silver Tankard, value 5 l. of
the goods of Thomas Earl. This Lary having been an Old Offender, though young in
Years, about Fourteen, changed his Name to Wright, but confessed to the
Ordinary, that his True Name is Lary, that his Father is an Irish Man, but
traveling into Flanders, set up there a Victualling House, and that himself
was Born there; but his Father meeting with disapointments in his Trade, came
into England, and is now a Soldier. The Youth acknowledged that he kept bad
Company, had been a great Swearer and a Liar, denis not that he stole the
Tankard. The Ordinary found him very ignorant in Religious Concernments, and
therefore took more pains in instructing him. He says he is sorry for all his
sins, and that if he may be Transported, he would not do any ill thing for all
the World.

Fourthly, John Crofts, of the Parish of Stepney, was Condemned for breaking up
the House of John Wells, and stealing thence one silver Poringer, with other
Goods; he was taken in the Prosecutors House, and had been an Old Offender.

He told the Ordinary that he is one and twenty years of Age, that he was Born
in the County of Norfolk, and served out his Apprenticeship with a Broad
Silk-Weaver, but his Friends not being able to set him up in his Trade, he fell
into bad Company: That he had been Guilty of Breaking the Sabbath, and
neglecting to improve the opportunities which God gave him for to amend his
life. That he did not pray that he might shake off his bad Acquaintance, though
sometimes he resolved so to do. That by sinning against the frequent
Convictions of his Censcience, by degrees, it became so senseless, that he
adventured to Commit most sort of sins, without any check or restraint; but he
hopes that this sad Sentence of Death, which God and Man has righteously
inflicted upon him, has been a means to awaken his Conscience, that hereupon,
he has endeavored to call to mind his great sins, and to beg of God, that he
would give him true Repentance for them. That he hopes he shall make his peace
with him, through the Merits of Christ, and then he shall not be afraid to dye.

5ly. Eliz. Churchill, of the Parish of St. Peter, Condemned for stealing three
pieces of Guinea Gold, March the 12th. last, from John Russel, which she denied
not at her Trial: She is 35 years of Age, was Born at Newcastle upon Tyne: Her
first husband lived in Wapping near the Chapel, he was Mate to a Master of a
Ship; and she lived with him a 11 Years: Afterward she married to a Gold
Wyre-drawer, who lived in Moorfields, by whom, she had several Children, two of
which died of the Smallpox, and a third as he was playing, fell into the Town
ditch and was drowned: She Confessed, that the sudden loss of these Children;
presently the one after the other, grieved her almost to distraction; but she
did not improve that afflicting providence of God, as as she ought, to bring
her to a sincere repentance for all her sins:

Also she had a good Father, who gave her Religious Education, but she forsook
the ways of God, for a Year and an half, before this sad distress came on her,
to be Condemned: She said that poverty upon her present husband (who is now a
Soldier) was the occasion of falling into this crime: that she is now
convinced of the many sins of her life; yet she is at times doubtful of the
truth of her faith and repentance, because she now finds, that by reason of
great guilt contracted, it is very hard truly to rely on Christ for salvation:
The Ordinary encouraged her to believe, because God's grace is all-sufficient
to support her under those dark dismal apprehensions which she has of her
spiritual estate; and upon further inquiry, he hopes she is truly penitent.

Sixthly. Rebekah Rose; Condemned with John Steers for Burglary and Felony; She
was Born in Middlesex, is now 24 Years of age; she says that she is very much
troubled, that she went against the council of her nearest Relations, in
marrying one Biggs, who was very lately Executed at Tyburn; and fears, that God
blasted her for such disobedience to her Parents; that she had good Education,
but led an ill life, which aggravates her sins.

That she married three Weeks before last Christmas, to one Rose, a person of
very ill note; that she kept a Victualing house in East-smithfield, till she
committed this Fact, and that her heart failed her in the doing of it, which
makes her sin the greater. She confessed that she had been an ill liver, but
Poverty drove her to commit this Crime for which she is Condemned. She says
that she desires to become a true Penitent, and resolves by Gods Grace to amend
her Life, if she may be spared from the Execution of the Sentence passed upon
her.

The Two Women before mentioned are Reprieved, upon their being quick with
Child. The Ordinary Exhorted them, that they would not pervert this Respite
from Death, to an occasion of greater Security and Impenitence, but redeem
precious time to the best advantage of their Souls.

This is all the Account which the Ordinary can give of the Criminals,
Condemned this Sessions.

About 10 of the Clock this Mornin, Peter Lary, was put into a Cart at Newgate,
and conveyed to the place of Execution, where the Ordinary prayed with him, and
he Exhorted the Spectators to take Warning by him; after which the Ordinary
sung part of a Psalm, and so concluded with a Prayer, after which he was turned
off.

Dated this 19th. day of April, 1686. Samuel Smith, Ordinary.
This may be Printed, R.L.S. April the 21st. 1686.



LONDON Printed by E. Mallet next Door to Shipton's Coffee-House near
Fleet-Bridge. 1686.


