A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Company OF MERCHANTS Trading
into the LEVANT, AT St. OLAVES HART-STREET LONDON, Tuesday JUNE, 2. M.DC.LXVIII.

BY THO. SMITH, M. A. Fellow of MAGDALEN COLLEGE in OXFORD, and Chaplain, to
the RIGHT HONORABLE Sr. DANIEL HARVEY, His MAJESTY'S EMBASSADOVR to
CONSTANTINOPLE.

LONDON, Printed by T. Roycroft, for S. Mearn, Book-binder to the KING'S most
Excellent Majesty. 1668.

INSIGNISSIMO VIRO, Domino ANDREAE RICCARD Equiti Aurato, Amplissimae
Societatis Mercatorum Cum Imperatoris TURCARUM subditis In Orient Commercia
exercentium Praesidi long dignissimo, Clarissimo D. Vice-Praesidi, D.
ASSISTENTIBVS, Reliquisque ejusdem Mercaturae Sociis, Viris Eximiis,
Clarissimis, and Humanissimis; THO. SMITH Hanc Concionem quale^ qualem, brevi
ac tumultuario conceptam, Et coram Iis nuper habitam, In 1 D. Pet. III. cap.
19, 20. v. (Quem difficilem locum pro pio erga Sacras literas amore
Discutiendum voluere) Jamque eorundem jussu Publici Juris factam, L. MQ. D. D.
CQ.

IMPRIMATUR. Sam. Parker RRmo in Christo Patri ac Domino, Dno Gilberto
Archi-Episcopo Cantuariensi a Sacris Domesticis. Ex. Aedibus Lambeth. Jun. 15.
1668.

A SERMON Preached before the Levant-Company.
1. St. Peter, III. 19, 20. By which also he went and Preached unto the Spirits
in Prison,

Which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in
the days of Noah, while the Ark was a preparing: wherein few, that is, eight
Souls were saved by Water.


THE First times of Christianity were times of great trial and danger, and the
Gospel, though it brought along with it the glad tidings of Salvation, and laid
down rules of Life, beyond the strictest institutions of Philosophy, so
conducive to the improvements of reason, which was Clouded and be-nighted with
Error, and had lost its command in the Soul, and was become subject to the
Sensitive appetite, so directly tending to the advance of Humane nature, and
the peace and quiet and benefit of the Universe, beyond the highest reaches and
fetches of State Policy; yet every where met with opposition from the Civil
Powers; which might be enough to stagger and shake the weak faith of the
newly-converted Christians, and prove a dangerous temptation to make them
Renounce that Christian Profession, they had so lately taken up, which they saw
was pursued with Scorn, and Persecution, and Death.

To Obviate and prevent which, is the design of St. Peter in this Epistle
inscribed to the believing Jews, Verse. 1.
and especially those of the Asian dispersion, his peculiar charge and care, as
being the Apostle of the Circumcision, (...). 11.7, 8.
and to encourage them to constancy and perseverance, notwithstanding their
present sufferings and hardships they were forced to endure and undergo: Which
as he does throughout the whole, so especially he urges upon them in this
Chapter from a double Consideration:

The one, That to Suffer for righteousness sake, and the Gospel, to endure
Persecutions and Crosses upon the account of the true Religion, to bear witness
to the Truth, though it cost them their lives, was indeed a seeming misery, but
a real happiness. Verse, 14. If ye suffer for Righteousness sake, happy are ye.
In the eye of the World their condition might seem dolorous and sad, but to
them it was to be esteemed a matter of joy and triumph, that They were
accounted worthy to suffer for Christ. A good Conscience, and the honor of
being a Martyr, and the hope of Glory, promised as a reward of their sufferings
and constancy, should carry them through all difficulties; only they were to be
very sollicitous, that they suffered as Christians, that no base or unlawful
Act brought them into those sad instances, that their Accusers objected to them
no other crime but their Religion, that they were not haled to the Bar, and
arraigned as Murderers, or as Thieves, or evil doers, or busy-bodies in other
men's matters, not as Enemies to the Government, under which they lived, not as
Seditious nor Pragmatical, not as Invaders of other men's lives, or Civil Rights
and Proprieties, nor as guilty of any of those flagitious Crimes, that are
justly punishable by Humane Laws.

The other, From the Example of our Blessed Savior in the verse before the
Text, For Christ also has once suffered -- He came down from his Glory,
wherewith he was encircled, and assumed our Nature, and all its infirmities,
and was content to be cloistered up Nine months in a Virgins Womb, and then
came into the World a poor helpless Infant, exposed to all the hardships and
miseries of life, to Hunger, and Thirst, and Cold, and all the inconveniences
that attend Poverty; and at last, after he had spent very nigh Four and thirty
years in sadness and disgrace, was condemned to the ignominy and torment of the
Cross. They could not faint, so long as they had his blessed Example in their
eye; this must needs put life into them, and add strength to their Faith, and
constancy to their Resolutions; and especially if they would reflect, for whose
sake Christ underwent, with such un-wearied patience, all these sufferings;
Verse, 18.
Christ also has once Suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he
might bring us to God, being put to death in the Flesh; Innocence it self was
arraigned, that the Criminal might be acquitted, and Justice condemned to dye,
that We, that were the only Guilty, might survive. It was his Love to man, even
when at enmity with God, that brought him dowm from Heaven, and fastened him to
the Cross, and laid him in the Grave; and all this, that he might reconcile us
to our Maker, whom we had offended, and bring us to God: and shall not we
follow after the Author and Finisher of our Faith, this Captain of our
Salvation, who was thus consecrated by Suffering, and endure a little for his
sake, that Suffered so much for ours?

The Apostle having pursued his Argument thus far from the Sufferings and Death
of Christ, immediately subjoyns the Article of his Resurrection, Being put to
Death in the Flesh, but quickened by the Spirit; Oecumenius in Loc. (...).

Et Paulo post, (...).


that is, though Christ, as man, died, and there was a real disunion of Soul
and Body, yet he revived again by his Eternal Power and Godhead: for so much
we must understand by those words, quickened by the Spirit, which cannot be
meant of the Soul of Christ, the other part of the Humanity, which, being
immortal, can in no wise whatever be said to be made alive, but are in a direct
opposition to the former Clause, where Flesh signifies The whole Humane Nature,
as it does in several places of Scripture, which refer particularly to our
Savior; 1 Timothy III. 16. Without controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness,
God manifested in Flesh, St. John, I. 14. The Word was made Flesh; that is, the
two Natures, Divine and Humane, were both united in the Person of Christ: Romans
IX. 5. Of whom, as concerning the Flesh, Christ came: and Romans I. 3. Concerning
his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who was made of the Seed of David according to
the Flesh; that is, Christ, as man, the Son of a Virgin Mother, derived his
descent and Pedigree from the Jewish Nation, and particularly from the Royal
Family, the house of David; and may be further explained by a Parallel place, 2
Cor. XIII. 4. Though he was Crucified through weakness; that is, by reason of
the infirmity of the Humane Nature, which is obnoxious to death, yet he lives
by the Power of God, where his being Crucified through weakness is the same
with his being put to death in the Flesh, and his living by the Power of God
the same with his being quickened by the Spirit.

Hereupon the Apostle adds, by which He, that is, Christ, went and Preached to
the Spirits in Prison: (...), in or by which, which, according to all
Grammatical Analogy, does plainly and necessarily refer to the word immediately
foregoing, (...), the Spirit, and therefore I cannot but wonder at the Oecumen.
(...).
Greek Scholiast, who explains them by the Illative (...), which were to make
the Apostle argue at a very loose rate, and is altogether inconsequent and
besides his purpose, who in the continued order of his discourse shows, how
Christ may be said to Preach to the Spirits in Prison. Which reference being so
plain and easy and natural, this Notion of Spirit, so agreeable to Scripture
and the Articles of our Faith, will serve for a Key to open the difficulties of
the Text. By which also he went and Preached to the Spirits in Prison: --

This for the Connection, which it was necessary for me to show, in order to the
full meaning and understanding of the words; which being difficult in
themselves, and made more so by the fancies and descants of Interpreters, it
will take up some time to explain them, and settle and fix their true meaning,
before I can raise any doctrinal Propositions to build us up in our most holy
Faith; as in our ordinary building, the Foundation must first be cleared,
before we can raise any strong or lasting Superstructure.

1. Some there are, and those great Names, justly reverenced for their Learning
and their Antiquity, men that by their Writings and by their Sufferings have
deserved well of the Church of God, who, relying too much on the Literal sense
of the Words, which they took in gross, and confounded without any
distinction, pleased themselves with this Interpretation, That Christ in his
Soul, then really separate from his Body, during the intervening space between
his Death and his Resurrection, Preached to the Souls of men below in Prison,
which they explain by Hell, or (...), some place separate and distinct from
Heaven: and accordingly that the Patriarchs and their Posterity, together with
Plato and other good-natured and enlightened Heathen, upon their owning of Him,
were freed and delivered from that Prison where they had been so long detained,
and redeemed from that state of Thraldom; those only, that rejected him,
continuing there upon the account of their Infidelity.

An Exposition received by several of the Ancients, and so dispersed in their
Writings, that I shall not heap up Citations in the Proof of a Thing that is
granted on all hands: I shall therefore content my self with that single one of
Stromatum lib. 6. p. 270. ex Editione Fr. Sylburgii Graec A. C. 1592. Who
taking this for granted, presently after argues thus, p. 271. (...). --

(...). For other Testimonies I refer the Learned Reader to Archbishop Usher's
answer to the Jesuits challenge, Chap. of Limbus Patrum: and to the Learned
Dr. Pearsons Exposition of the Apostles Creed on the Article of Christ's descent
into Hell.


St. Clement of Alexandria, (...); That the Scriptures manifestly declare, that
our Lord preached the Gospel to those that perished in the Flood, yea rather to
all them that were enthralled, and detained in Prison, and held in Ward. So
that the Text is alleged as the end and design of Christ's descent into Hell,
which They understood Locally, and by which They explain it. But whatever be
the meaning of that Article, which I am not in the least obliged to explain,
(which Ruffinus tells us was left out of the Old Creed of the Roman Church, and
is not extant in the Nicene, and was first found in that of Aquileia, where He
was a Presbyter) their Interpretation of these words can no way stand. For

1. It supposes (...), by which, to refer to the Soul of Christ, which before
has been sufficiently disproved, (and the Translating the words by vivens
spiritu, which perhaps might contribute to the mistake among the Latins, is
very untrue, all the Greek Copyes having not (...), but (...), not living, but
made alive) and by and by shall be more fully evidenced.

2. Supposing the meaning of the Article in their sense, there may be other
ends of the descent assigned, this of theirs to free the Patriarchs, and to
preach to those that were dead long before, being impossible to be true: As
being

1. Repugnant to the plain words of the Text, which says expressly, that the
Souls preached to were disobedient in the days of Noah; marking out that
Generation of men that was contemporary with Noah, and the particular time of
their being disobedient, the time before the Flood, while the Ark was a
preparing. But this cannot belong to the Fathers, who lived in the Ages before
Noah; and yet they reckon Inconveniens erat, ut cum multi ex eo nati
remissionem acciperent peccatorum, and beneficium resurrectionis
consequerentur, non magis ipse Pater omnium hominum hujusmodi gratiam
consequeretur. Origin. Tract. XXXV. in D. Matthew. cap. 27.
Adam among those that ascended with Christ, (which they grounded on the XXVII.
St. Matthew 52. and the Graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints, which
slept, arose) and consequently that He enjoyed the benefit of this descent; nor
can They be said to be disobedient or refractory. Abel, and Seth, and Enoch
served God in their Generations, and had this testimony that They were
righteous. Heb. XI. 13. These dyed in Faith.

2. It is Repugnant to the condition of departed Souls, whether those of the
righteous, or those of the disobedient.

1. The Souls of the righteous were in a blissful and happy condition, and
needed not that Christ should be preached to them. They had, when they were
upon Earth, a praenotion and belief of Messiah that was to be born in the
fullness of Time, and by his Merits they were saved, Revel. XIII. 8.
who was The Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, that is, in the
Divine decree and appointment; and to all intents and purposes the merits of
his death were applicable to those that lived before his coming in the Flesh,
as to those that live after. It was by virtue of his precious blood, that was
shed upon the Cross, they were accepted that were accepted. I know it was
maintained of Old, that, notwithstanding this supposed descent and deliverance,
the Souls of departed Saints are still in abditis receptaculis and exterioribus
atriis, in some secret recesses, where they expect the Resurrection of the
Body. But the holy Scriptures make no mention of a Third estate; no Limbus
Patrum or Purgatory to be met with there. It Is true, They are not in that
perfection and glory in Heaven, to which They shall be advanced after the
Resurrection, when their souls and bodies shall be reunited; yet however They
are in a state of Bliss and Happiness: The Souls of the Just are in the hands
of the Lord, and therefore there was no need they should long and wish for
Christ's descent into the lower Parts, who before had been made Partakers of the
benefits of his death and passion, as some strangely gloss from Which Vatablus
renders in the Future, and thus interprets; Liberaturus sum Te: Intelligit
Patres, qui decesserunt ante adventum Christi, and in fide ipsius Christi
venturi mortui sunt: Herein followed by several Pontifician Writers, who cite
this Text to prove a Limbus Patrum.
Zach. IX. 11, 12. As for thee also, by the blood of thy Covenant I have sent
for thy Prisoners out of the Pit, wherein is no Water; Turn ye to the strong
hold, ye Prisoners of Hope. Which words in their Literal sense import only thus
much, That God either had or would for his Covenants sake free the Jews, (the
People of the daughter of Sion, v. 9.) out of their Babylonian slavery, (bring
them from the dry, and parched, and sandy places of Chaldaea, where they were
carried Captive) according to their hopes and expectations. And,

2. For the Souls of the unfaithful and disobedient, who dyed in their sins,
and at defiance with God, They were shut up in Prison, never to be released:
The Sentence was past upon Them, and there is no hope or possibility of ever
getting it reversed; nor were they in a capacity of receiving benefit by the
Preaching of Christ. There is no saving faith, no effectual repentance in those
infernal Regions: Rivers of tears there poured out cannot wash off the stain
and guilt of Sin. Heb. XI. 27.
After death immediately follows the Judgment, and the Soul at its departure
knows its Doom, and what it must trust to for ever.

3. It is contrary to the end and design of the Gospel, which only respects the
living in its Publication; Go ye, and teach all Nations. St. Mat. XXVIII. 19.
and more fully, St. Mark, XVI. 15. Go ye into all the World, and preach the
Gospel to every Creature, was the Commission Christ gave the Apostles after his
Resurrection; that is, Publish the Gospel through all the Parts of the known
and Habitable World, make known the Doctrine of the Cross to all the Nations of
the Earth, and make Proselytes and Disciples by Baptism, and instruct them in
the true Faith: it is not, Descend into the Regions below, and there Preach me,
as Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. VI. (...). p. 271.
some have fancyed the Apostles to have done after their death, that they might
speak congruously to their Hypothesis. But we know, and are assured from
Scripture, that He that now refuses and slights the overtures of Life and
Salvation, that rejects the offers of a Savior, and prefers a few brutish
Pleasures, which perish in the enjoyment, and yet leave a deadly sting behind
them, before the Promises of unmixt Joy and Glory, must never expect the
benefit of an after-Faith or Repentance in another World. If we would be happy
hereafter, it must be procured in the time of life; Behold, now is the accepted
time, behold, now is the day of Salvation, 2 Cor. VI. 2.
even while we live; and the night comes, that I may apply that of our blessed
Savior, St. John. IX. 4. the night of death, wherein no man can work.

Thus you see this First Exposition, however it was so greedily swallowed down
by some of the Ancients, and gained credit from their Authority, is very weak,
and bottoms upon a Sandy Foundation, and signifies just nothing, as to the true
sense and meaning of the Words.

2. Others there are, who, rejecting the Literal sense, fly to a Mystical one,
understanding by the Spirits in Prison sinners in general, Glossa
Interlinearis, iis qui eram in ca^cere tenebrarum vel infidelitatis, vel in
carcere, i.e. in carnalibus de Adertis vivebant.
who are imprisoned and shut up in darkness and infidelity, while they live and
are in the Flesh, and are slaves to their carnal desires; Grot. in loc.
Loquitur, quasi iidem fuissent, and fuerant iidem Spiritus sive animi non
(...), ut Aristoteles loquitur, sed genere: i.e. an mi pariter Deo inutiles,
illi scil. qui Noae praedicationi non ^rediderunt.
who were disobedient after the manner and likeness of those, that lived in the
times of Noah. But against this Exposition I have these Two things to allege,

1. In General, That it is a sure Rule of the Schools, and ought to be followed
in the explaining of Scripture, Scripturae verba proprie accipienda sunt,
quando nihil inde absurdi sequitur; that the words of Scripture are to be taken
properly, and according to their Literal meaning, and as they are vulgary
understood, when nothing of absurdity, nothing that is disagreeable to Faith,
or the common notices of Mankind, can follow from such a literal acception. And
therefore to seek for Allegoryes in plain sense, and find out Mysteries, where
none were intended, is neither safe, nor proper; for if a liberty be once
indulged herein, what bounds can be set to a roving fancy, which loves to sport
it self with pleasing Idaeas and Phantasms it self has raised? and men too are
very favorable to the issue of their brain, those fine and nice conjectures
and interpretations, that owe their conception and being to a strong and
ungoverned imagination. And how much Religion has been prejudiced, and the
truth of Scripture-story brought into question by this (...), this vein and
humor of Allegorizing, which Origin by his great Name and Learning brought
into the Church, having borrowed it from Philo the Jew, I wish there was no
cause to complain, especially in this Age of ours, wherein every Pretender, out
of an itch of vainglory to seem wiser then others, presently sets up for an
Origenian, and vents his ill-grounded conjectures for proofs and
demonstrations, and revives Old opinions, very uncertain, and vain, and
heretical, and justly condemned as such by the Zeal and Learning of former
Ages, as the great Truths of God, as if Providence could not be justified
without their admittance, nor the Articles of Faith and the Attributes of God
Salved, unless we believe a Praeexistence of Souls, Genii living in the Air,
and vehicles formed out of Ether by the Plastic life and virtue of the Soul
after its departure out of the Body. But it is to be feared, that, while they
follow Origin too close, even in his errors, and take up his way of
interpreting some parts of Scripture, according to a pretended Cabbala and a
mystic Theology fetched from Plato and Proclus, they have given occasion to
Atheists and profane Persons to deny the Truth of all.

2. In special, That the Text does expressly refer, as was said before, to the
times of Noah, and to those that lived in them; and therefore cannot be meant,
as the learned Per quem Dei spiritum missum in Apostolos, (...) post quam in
coelum ascendit, Christus dicitur praedicasse Gentibus, quia Apostoli id ejus
nomine as virtute fecerunt. in loc.
Grotius would have it, of Christ's preaching by the Apostles to the Gentiles
after his Ascension: For this would be to confound two distant Ages of the
World together, and to make St. Peter speak unintelligibly, and contrary to all
usage and custom: for who can rationally imagine that St. Peter, when he says,
Christ preached to the Spirits in prison, which were sometimes disobedient,
should mean this preaching of his own and after Ages, who is so careful first
to tell us of what persons he meant it of, and then is so express and punctual
about the right timing of it? for the Spirits that were preached to, were
disobedient: but when? why, (...) of Old, which being a general reference of
time, and so might comprehend all from the Creation, He limits and restrains to
the Age just before the Flood.

Besides this, there is another Figurative notion of the word (...), brought in
first by St. Hierome, and taken up by the same Grotius and others, which I
shall briefly examine.

They taking the Greek word, which we justly render Prison, in a large and
unconfined sense for any kind of close receptacle, thereby understand the Body,
in which the Soul is detained and shut up, as a Sword in a Sheath. Thus Annot.
in Genesis VI. 3.
Grotius, Hinc interpretari liceat illud, 1 Pet. III. 19. (...), illis
Spiritibus humanis, quos velut in vagina detineri inutiles Deus querebatur; who
is herein followed by a late most Excellent, and Learned Person of our own
Nation, who takes also these Spirits in Prison to be the Souls of men, that lay
so sheathed, Senseless and unprofitable in their Bodies, immersed so deep in
carnality, as not to perform any Service to God, who inspired and placed them
there.

But to this I Answer, That the ground of this Conjecture is very uncertain, as
being built upon an interpretation of another place of Scripture, whereto they
suppose this to refer, which yet may be otherwise accounted for: it is In the
Hebrew the Words are, (...)
Genesis VI. 3. which our Translators have thought fit to render thus; And the
Lord said, my Spirit shall not always strive with man; but They by reason of
some affinity in sound the Verb (...) has with (...) (whence they will have it
derived, though contrary to all Analogy and form) which signifies a Sheath or
Scabbard; and metaphorically, a Body, thus; And the Lord said, my Spirit shall
not always be sheathed in man, which Annot. p. 800. Grotius in loc. Non
permanebit, i.e. nolo diu permaneat. Spiritus a me datus homini non manebit in
homine diu inclusus, velut in vagina, quippe nulli bono usui, non magis quam
ensis tectus. Nam (...) est vagina, 1 Paral. XXI. 27. Et Corpus Chaldaice sic
dicitur, Dan. VII. 15. nempe quod Spiritum intra se contineat. Hinc
interpretari liceat illud, I Pet. III. 19. ut supra. And to the same purpose in
his Commentary upon the Text; Si proprietatem vocum sequimur, id dicit, non
erit ut in vagina detentus sic spiritus meus in homine, i.e. non erit inutilis
animus, quem ei dedi, sicut ensis in vagina, qui nihil efficit ejus, ad quod
factus est -- Est autem vagina carcer gladio. Chaldais (...) vagina. Eodem modo
corpus Hominis Chaldaei vocant, ut Dan. VII. 15. Et in Talmudicis saepe. Sic
and Tertullianus, Caro vagina afflatus Dei. lib. de Resurrect. carnis. Haec
interpretatio non nova est, sed Hieronymi ad Esaiam.
. They are pleased to Paraphrase, And God said, the Souls which I have breathed
and given to men, the Sons of Adam, and which are sheathed in them, imprisoned,
detained uprofitably, shall no longer continue and abide in them. But to this I
have several things to say; As that

1. There is no need, in favor of this Interpretation, to fancy with Lib. IV.
c. 4. p. 248.
Cappellus in his Critica Sacra, and others, that the Greek Interpreters read
otherwise in their Copies, either (...) as He, or (...), who thus render the
Words, (...), My Spirit shall not abide or continue in these men for ever; who
are herein followed by the Syriack and Arabic Translators, and with them
Onkelos in his Chaldee Paraphrase (which indeed in the general is nothing but a
strict and rigid version, a few words some time being added over and above only
for explication) does well enough agree; (...)
This wicked Generation shall not be established before me for ever. But this
without any reference to (...) or the abiding and continuing of a Sword in a
sheath, and they may in their Translation So Mr. Fuller in his Learned
Miscellanies.

Lib. V. cap. 5.


be very probably supposed to allude to, and have in their mind the Syriack
Word (...), which in the New Testament is set down to express the Greek (...)
and (...), it being usual for defective Verbs of these kinds mutually to
exchange their significations. The Hebrew and the Greek being thus reconciled,
I say

2. That the Notion of the Word, (...)
as it refers to sheathing, is very forced and strained, and not to be
paralleled in Scripture, nor in any of the Languages, that derive from the
Hebrew, as neither can the Notion of my Spirit for the Spirit, that I have
breathed in them.

3. That the ordinary and common acception of the word for striving or
contending is very applicable to the scope and design of the Text, And the Lord
said, my Spirit shall not always strive with man, I will no longer endure the
perverseness and obstinacy of this evil and sinful Generation, I will no
longer bear with their Provocations, (and sure as long as God forbears, He may
well be said to strive with man) but now am resolved to punish; for that he
also is Flesh; that is, has corrupted his ways, and has polluted himself by
abominable acts of uncleaness, yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty
years, so long time I will forbear, says God, and no longer. So that Three
things are here plainly observable,

I. A judgment denounced in the Threat, that his Spirit should not always
strive with man; Gods patience was provoked, and he expresses his resentments,
and threatens Revenge.

II. The equity of the judgment in the reason of the Denuntiation, For that he
also is Flesh, because of their fleshly lusts and abominations.

III. A merciful forbearance of the judgment threatened in the time alloted for
their repentance, Yet his days shall be one hundred and twenty years; not as if
the life of man was to be shortened, and brought within the compass of this term
of years; but that beyond this time God would not defer his vengeance, as it is
excellently Paraphrased by the forementioned Onkelos, (...)
The space of one hundred and twenty years shall be given to them, to this end,
that they may return and repent. God would not cut them off in their sins, but
gave them space and time to repent, if they would make a right use of it.

All which being so agreeable in themselves, and following so naturally one
from the other, and suitable to the scope and design of the Text, and to the
common and ordinary signification of the words, do sufficiently confirm and
justify this interpretation.

3. I come now in the Third place to fix upon the right meaning of the words,
which you may take in this short and plain Paraphrase; that Christ by his
eternal Power and Godhead preached to the Generation of men immediately before
the Flood, whose Souls are now shut up in Hell, upon the account of their
disobedience and infidelity.

All which may be clearly and demonstratively made out from the Text.

1. That Christ is here meant, is evident beyond all possibility of
contradiction, for about Him the discourse proceeds: He that once suffered for
sins, the just one, that He might bring us to God, He that was put to death in
the Flesh, but quickened by the Spirit, the same preached to the Spirits in
Prison. Which plainly supposes, and proves too, his Godhead, in that He
praeexisted long before his Incarnation. For operari sequitur esse, How could
He be said to Preach, unless He were? Before Abraham was, I am, said Christ to
the Jews. St. John, VIII. 58. Here in the Text, before Noah was, He is; yea,
before the Foundations of the World were laid. St. John, I. 1. In the beginning
was the Word, -- in the beginning of the Creation, (for it is a plain allusion
to Genesis I. 1. In the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth) when as
yet there was nothing made; (for v. 3. All things were made by him, and so
Hebr. I. 2. By whom also he made the Worlds) the Word, the Son of God, the
Second Person in the Sacred Trinity had his being and existence, and
consequently is God Eternal. Romans IX. 5. (speaking of the Jews and their
Privileges, by reason of the Covenant God made with the Patriarchs) Whose are
the Fathers, and of whom, as concerning the Flesh, Christ came, who is over
all, God blessed for ever. A Text able to confound all the Sophistry and
blasphemies of Socinus and his Party, who deny the Divinity of our Blessed
Savior, and put them to an eternal silence, who very presumptuously reject the
Mysteries of Faith, because they cannot fully comprehend them, as if the
shallow capacity of a man were to be the measure and standard of divine Truth:
when they can give no satisfactory Accounts of the ordinary Phenomenon of
Nature, much less of its secret operations, and least of all, of the Mysteries
of Providence. And if this were a sufficient reason to deny the Articles of
Faith, because They are above our capacity, They may as well deny the being of
a God, because they cannot have full and comprehensive Notions of Infinity,
Eternity, Omnipresence, and the like. But certainly we have the highest reason
in the World to believe the Articles of the Christian Faith, which are so
plainly revealed in the Holy Scriptures; because whatsoever God has been
pleased to reveal is infallibly certain, and therefore, when proposed to me, I
am bound to believe it, though I cannot comprehend the modus, how it is so.
This for the Person, He went and preached.

2. The manner or means, by which Christ is said to Preach, by which Spirit,
that is, by His eternal Power and Godhead, as was shown in the beginning, and
now shall be further proved. For by the same Spirit, by which Christ rose from
the Dead, He preached to the Spirits in Prison: But Christ rose from the dead
by virtue of his Godhead and divine Power. Romans I. 4. Declared to be the Son of
God with Power, according to the Spirit of Holiness by the Resurrection from
the dead. Heb. IX. 14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the
eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your Conscience from
dead works to serve the living God? that is, How much more available, then the
blood of Bulls, and Goats, and Calves, and all the Sacrifices offered up under
the Mosaical economy, for the cleansing from sin, and delivering from its
Guilt and condemning Power, and in order to the serving of God acceptably, is
the Blood of Christ, shed upon the Cross, who, after he had raised his Body out
of the Grave by his divine Power, presented himself a perfect Mediator to God
in our behalf?

3. That Hell is meant by this Prison is very easy to conceive, having before
proved it could not be meant of the Body, much less can it of the Grave, for
the Soul at its departure takes a flight beyond the Grave and Regions of Death,
and cannot be pent up in those Charnel houses under ground; nor does it sleep,
as some have fondly dreamed, that is, remain in a state of dullness and
inactivity, without any apprehension or knowledge till the Resurrection, as we
shall see anon, but goes to the place and state allotted for it according to
its deserving. And the resemblance and comparison between Hell and a Prison is
very fit and proper: When men are legally Imprisoned, it is either for their
Crimes or for their Debts; Now evey un-repenting Sinner, that dies in his Sins,
has broken the Law of God, has made assaults upon his Attributes, and
rebelled against Heaven, and by this means has contracted a guilt upon his
Soul, which binds over to punishment, is a debtor to God, and has forfeited his
Soul to Justice, and because He took no care to agree with God, who was become
his Adversary, and impleaded him, While He was in the Way with him, did not in
his life time compound for the Debt, and get the Bond Cancelled, is justly cast
into Hell: A Prison because

1. Without Light, which must needs add to the horror of it. There is utter
darkness, and the blackness of darkness for ever.

2. Without Liberty. Here Malefactors are secured and kept safe till their
trial. Jud. verse. 6. 2 St. Pet. II. 4.
Thus has God reserved the Apostate Angels, verse. 9.
and the Souls of wicked men, in everlasting Chains under darkness, unto the
Judgment of the great day. But with this vast and great difference, that They
shall be remanded and sent back to this Prison, where there will be no
possibility of escape or ransom, where they must undergo an eternal
Imprisonment.

3. Without Comfort. Prisons usually are dismal and loathsome Places. To be
immured and shut up from company, to be deprived of the benefits of converse,
and of the sweets and pleasures of liberty, to spend ones days in sadness and
melancholy, and to measure out the slow minutes of ones wearisome life with
sighs and Groans; This is That, that troubles nature, and puts her into a
fright to think of: How dismal then! How insupportable must it be to lie under
the wrath of God, under the quick apprehension of a guilty mind, under the
sting of Conscience, to be gnawed upon by that worm, that never dies, to have
no other company but Fiends and damned Spirits equally miserable with
themselves, and to be in a continual expectation of the great Day of Account,
when the Body shall be raised to be partaker of the Punishment, as it was of
the Sin!

4. Christ preached to the Spirits in Prison; that is, (...), to those men,
whose Souls are now in Prison, cast into Hell, but then were alive in their
Bodies; those being long since dissolved and consumed in the Waters, that
overwhelmed them, while their Souls survive, as being immortal, and are
reserved in Hell for Judgment. Hereto perchance may be referred that difficult
place in Job, Chapter XXVI. v. 5. which the Vulgar Latin has thus, Gigantes gemunt
sub aquis; the LXX. render, (...); from another signification of the Verb:
Symmachus, (...), and so may denote the Giants (...) (those mighty Apostates,
that fell from the belief and Service of God, into Atheism and ((...)) open
rebellion against Heaven) who were upon the Earth in those days, Genesis VI. 4.
that is, in the days of Noah; and the manner of their punishment by being
overwhelmed by Water, and that They and their Accomplices are now troubled, and
forced, by reason of the horror and sadness of their condition, to sigh and
lament: and Rephaim ((...)) is so rendered by the LXX in other places, and
particularly, Prove. IX. 18. (...), Symmachus again, (...) (which name may be
well applied to the men in Noah's time, and hence the Heathen in all likelihood
borrowed the story of their (...)) T^^dotion, (...), and St. Hierome, Gigantes.
This I take to be the meaning of the words, as deeming it in no degree
probable, that they are to be understood of Sea Monsters, such as Titans and
Whales, as Grotius, or of Metals, or Seeds, as Others.
So that the Prison plainly refers to the place and condition, in which their
Souls are, as a just punishment of their disobedience, and not at all to the
Preaching: which will yet further appear from the IV. Chap. of this Epistle,
Verse. 6. (...), For this cause also was the Gospel Preached to the dead; that
is, to those, who are now dead, but then were alive, when the Gospel was
preached to them. Where (that I may note this by the way) the Apostle speaks
not in general of Gods making known his will to the Ages before Christ, but
particularly mentions the Preaching of the Gospel, which must be limited to the
times of Messiah, and therefore those in that verse, that are dead, to whom the
Gospel was Preached, must be supposed to have lived since the coming of Christ
in the Flesh, and consequently this place is not parallel, but only in the
Phrase or form of speech, with the Text, as some imagine; the one respecting
the times of the Gospel, the other, the Age before the Flood.

It only remains to be satisfied, How Christ can be said to preach to those
that lived in the Old World? I Answer, That it must not be understood, as if
Christ did actually preach and appear to the men of that Generation; (though
some of the Ancients have thought, that Christ did often appear to the
Patriarchs in humane shape, as a Praeludium to his Incarnation; which Opinion I
shall not now stay to examine) but that he did it by the Ministry of Noah, who
is called 2 Pet. II. 5. (...), a Preacher of Righteousness; that is, He
denounced the Judgments of God against them for their sins, forewarned them
of the danger and ruin They were bringing down upon their own Souls, and
continually sounded in their ears an alarm of judgment, that would infallibly
overtake them, except they repented, and did by their unfeigned humiliations
and amendment of life stop and prevent the Anger of God, which otherwise would
break out upon them, and overwhelm them in an Universal Deluge. So that by the
same divine Power, by which He preached in the Apostles after the Resurrection,
who preached in his name, by virtue of that Commission and Authority They
received from Him (and upon this very account, He is said to come, (a Phrase
like this in my Text) and preach peace to the Ephesians, Chapter II. v. 17. as
Archb. Usher, Grotius, and the Learned Dr. H.
several have well observed) He Preached in the Prophets, that lived before his
Coming in the Flesh. 1. Pet. I. 10, 11. Of which Salvation the Prophets have
enquired and searched diligently, who Prophesied of the Grace that should come
unto you, Searching what or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ, which was
in them, did signify, when it testified before hand the Sufferings of Christ,
and the glory that should follow.

The Prophets and Apostles were the Ministers and Ambassadors of Christ, and
therefore what They do, He is said to do; and the dishonor that is done to
Them, God takes as done to himself: 1 Samuel VIII. 7. They have not rejected you,
says God to Samuel, but They have rejected me; and our Savior told his
Disciples, when He commissioned them to Preach in his name, He that receives
you, receives me; and He that receives me, receives him that sent me. St.
Matthew. X. 40. according to that usual saying among the Jews, (...)
(...)
Every man's Delegate or Messenger is as himself. As here upon Earth, the
respect or affront that is done to an Ambassador, interpretatively is done to
the Person whom He represents; and the King is said in our ordinary discourse
to do that, that his Commissioned Minister does in his Name. Let none therefore
be so vain as to say in their hearts, Had we lived in the times of Messiah,
when he was upon Earth, Had we heard those powerful Oracles of Truth drop from
his sacred lips, Had we heard him Preaching to us the Great mysteries of God,
how affected should we have been! What deep impressions would his Preaching
have made upon our Souls! For Christ still Preaches from Heaven to you by his
Ministers. He has appointed several Orders, and has settled a Sacred Ministry
in his Church, and has provided also for a constant succession to the Worlds
end. 2 Cor. V. 20. We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God, (Christ, the
Son of God) did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, by ye
reconciled to God. Every Sermon you hear is the voice of Christ speaking to you
in his Minister: And let me add, As They that heard not Moses and the Prophets,
would not have been persuaded, though one had arose from the Dead; so it may be
feared, that those that are deaf to so many admonitions, to such continued and
earnest entreaties, that they would repent, and lead better lives, that are
resolved to continue in their sins, notwithstanding the frequent and often
repeated importunities of Gods Ministers in his Name to the contrary, would
even reject the Preaching of Christ himself, if He were upon Earth. He has
left his Gospel among us, which is vox Scripta, his Word put into Writing, and
to that he does require our faith, and our obedience, as much as if He was
actually present. He Preached to the Old World by the Ministry of Noah, and
still Preaches to us by the Ministry of his Word: Their disobedience to Him,
for which They were thrust into that infernal Prison, consisted in this, That
They contemptuously refused his mercy, which was offered to them, and
disbelieved the Word which Noah Preached: and how shall we escape, if, amidst
all those frequent invitations that are made us, we neglect so great Salvation?

Thus I have removed the difficulties, and cleared the words with as much
brevity as I could.

The Propositions, which are deducible hence, are these Four, which I shall but
briefly touch.

I. That God is graciously pleased to use all means to bring men to repentance,
before He cuts them off by his Judgments. He went and preached.

II. That the Souls of the disobedient are now shut up in Hell, He went and
preached to the Spirits, that now are in Prison, which sometimes were
disobedient.

III. That God, notwithstanding the daily and great Provocations of sinful
men, does oftentimes give them time and space to repent: The long suffering of
God once waited in the days of Noah, while the Ark was a preparing.

IV. That in the midst of the severest and terriblest Judgments, that befall
the World, there is a mixture of mercy; or, That his Judgments are never so
general, but he spares some. In this Universal Deluge, as it is justly called,
few, that is, Eight Souls were saved by Water.

1. That God is graciously pleased to use all means to bring men to repentance,
before he cuts them off by his Judgments: He went and Preached. God has set up
a light in every man's Soul to direct him in all his ways. Reason is given to
him for a guide, and Natural Conscience tells him his duty, and how he ought to
behave himself in all capacities whatsoever: without any institution or
teaching, every one sees, by an innate internal light, the Essential and
Fundamental differences of good and evil, and none can pretend ignorance.
Micha, VI. 8.
He has showed thee, O man, what is good, even by those deep impressions, he
has made upon thee, which can never be totally effaced; and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, and love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy
God? And what is or can be more agreeable to nature, then for a man to do, as
he would be done to, to be sociable, and kind, and loving to men of the same
nature with himself, and to crouch and humble himself before his Maker, and
adore his Goodness, and his other divine Perfections? Yet so foolish, so vain,
so inconsiderate a thing is Man, that he is wilfully forgetful of his duty,
that he throws off those restraints, which Nature has laid upon him, breaks
through all obligations of Religion and Conscience, refuses the conduct of his
Reason, and gives himself over to the hurry of his Passions and foolish Lusts,
and thus puts out his eyes to be lead by a blind guide, till he loses himself
in a maze of error and vanity. But when we are thus lost to our selves, God
will not leave us so: He is pleased to find us out, His Goodness still pursues
us. He is unwilling to punish, till all his Methods are frustrated and
disappointed and rendered ineffectual. Thus when the Inhabitants of the Old
World had forsaken God and themselves too, had corrupted their ways, the whole
course of their life, and given up themselves to work wickedness, and that with
greediness and delight, He inspires Noah and sends him among them to re-mind
them of their duty, to show them how much they had degenerated from their
Nature, to rouse them out of their carnal security, by thundering Judgment in
their ears, and to bring them home, if possible, to himself. And after the same
manner God proceeds with Us. He condescends to entreat and beseech us to accept
of his mercy: He woes us by his loving kindness: He frights us by his
Judgments. He does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of men; if he
uses sharp Medicines, it is in order to our recovery, because gentle ones
could not work the cure. It Is true, God will not force us to be happy against
our wills, He will use no violence to our Faculties, He treats us as Rational
Creatures. He invites, He threatens; He uses all Arguments to persuade and work
upon us to repent, and accept of his mercy. So far is God from decreeing the
eternal ruin of myriads of his Creatures, merely to show his Sovereignty and
Power, as some maintain to the great prejudice of his Goodness, that most
lovely Attribute of a God, that He protests solemnly with an Oath (and sure God
is to be believed upon his bare saying so, much more upon his so vehement
asseveration) and He commands the Prophet to tell them so in his Name, Ezech.
XXXIII. 11. As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the
Wicked: To these disobedient obedient and ungodly ones in the Text, Noah is
sent, in hope that he might reclaim them. God puts the Question to us, and that
most seriously in the same verse, Why will you dye? Why will you so foolishly
make your selves away? Why will you ruin your sleves for ever? When we are at
the brink of the Pit, and hovering over the mouth of Hell, He calls to us to
draw back our adventurous Feet, lest we tumble down the Precipice. Turn ye,
turn ye, Why will ye dye? And as we value our own eternal concern in another
World, let us obey this Heavenly call, let us fly to his mercy, which he so
freely offers to us now in the time of life, for hearafter it will be too late:
The Justice of God will exact punishment on those hereafter, which refused his
mercy here, and dyed in disobedience. Which brings me to

2. The Second Proposition; That the Souls of the disobedient are now shut up
in Hell. The Spirits that are now in Prison, which sometime were disobedient. I
am not obliged by the nature of the Proposition to vindicate the Justice of God
in the punishment of a Sinner with Eternal Torment; but only am hence briefly
to show the groundlesness of their fancy, that so easily persuade themselves to
the great damping and cooling the heats and ardors of devotion, and to the
making men suspicious and mistrustfull of its ever being awakened out of such a
long and stupid Lethargy, that the Soul sleeps during the interval between
death and the Resurrection, that it enters the same Grave with the Body,
without any reflexive knowledge or expectation of the last Day, that, in a
manner, it is dead for a time, and as senseless as the Body that is dissolved
into its first Principles; as if when freed and disentangled from Flesh, it was
confined to, and shut up in the Grave, there to sleep out some Thousands of
years, if the Goodness of God shall reprieve the World for so long a space,
void of all perception, and without exerting any vital operation: A conceit as
wild as the Poets, concerning the stupifying Waters of Lethe, which they
fancied to drown and overwhelm the sense and memory of things done here upon
Earth.

But not now to allege the Eccl. XII. 7. Luke xxiv. 43. Act. I. 25. 2 Cor. V.
1. Phil. I. 23. and many others.
several Texts of Scripture that assert the contrary, and that it was the chief
design of our Blessed Savior in the Parable of the Rich man and Lazarus, to
assure us of the survival of the Soul after its Emigration, either in a state
of bliss or woe, nor to lay before you the Physical Arguments, that might be
fetched from the Nature of the Rational Soul, and the independency of its
Operations, I shall only urge at present this Moral Consideration.

The Soul, we know, in some of its nobler flights soars far above the Earth,
and seems oftentimes, not only in its raptures and ecstasies, but ordinary
contemplations, to have no intercourse with the Body; and when raised and
advanced by Grace and Holiness, grows weary of its confinement, and with
furious and impatient desires and longings gasps and pants after a more close
and immediate enjoyment of the Divine Presence, breathing out, When shall I
come and appear before God! While the disobedient and the ungodly, that have
made their Souls drudges and slaves to the brutal Part, to procure for their
Lusts, and forced them to comply with their appetites and their humors, and
have abused all their faculties contrary to the end and design of the Creator,
when they come to dye, then begin to have too quick a sense, that there is
something within them, that will prove immortal, that will pass beyond the
Grave, and in all its flittings and wanderings will never be able to shake off
the horror of that guilt, which it contracted here upon Earth. These general
sentiments, these hopes and fears, that attend the innocent and guilty at such
times, when they have the least reason to flatter or abuse themselves, and when
They are the likeliest to make the most impartial judgments, seem to me (if
there were no express Scripture or other Argument to induce or compel my
belief) conviction enough, that the Soul immediately knows its eternal Doom
upon its first entry on a new Stage: and that it is very absurd and irrational
to doubt of or deny the possibility of a Souls existing separately, because we
cannot fully comprehend the manner of it, or solve all the difficulties, that
some men's Curiosity and Skepticism have raised with convincing Demonstrations,
and evidence no less than Mathematical.

3. That God notwithsanding men's daily and great Provocations oftentimes
vouchsafes to them time and space to repent: The long suffering of God once
waited in the days of Noah, while the Ark was a preparing. How much and how
greatly God was provoked by their sins, before He threatened them with his
Judgments, you may read in the Sixth of Genesis. Wickedness had overspread the
Face of the whole Earth: There was a General Apostasy amongst men: They had
forgot God that made them: They had thrown off all fear of his Name: They gave
up themselves to their Lusts, and their own hearts desire: Their thoughts and
imaginations were set upon evil and mischief: They were guilty of unnatural
and beastly lusts, and of all manner of injustice and violence: So great was
their Wickedness, that it troubled and grieved God at the very heart, that he
had made man. Well, God sends Noab among them: But do they hearken to the voice
of the Prophet? Has his Preaching any influence upon their lives? Nothing
less: They were in^^rious still, 2 Pet. II. 5.
(...), a World of ungodly wretches, (...) in the Text, They were disobedient
and refractory still, They would not be persuaded, nor would They believe He
threatened them with a Deluge, that should overwhelm them, except They amend;
and by Gods appointment Sixscore years before the time, that they might not
complain of a surprise, sets upon the building of an Ark, to convince them by a
visible representation of Gods intended purpose, and (...) i. e. (...), By
which Ark so built: though it may also refer to (...). But the former sense
seems to be the most Natural and right.
By this He condemned the World, and became Heir of the righteousness that is
by Faith, Heb. XI. 7. Every stroke should have been more terrible in their
ears, than a Clap of Thunder: but they were resolved to stand it out. Possibly
they might come to him, while he was busily employed about his work, and vent
their infidelity in a piece of raillery, and laugh at his credulity and fear,
as some of our Modern Atheists droll upon the Day of Judgment; What meanest
thou, O thou Foolish Builder, by this strange Project and device? The
impossibility of the thing seems to us a sufficient confutation of your
Prophecy, and your design too, that all the Earth should be covered with Water;
and what the Mountains too? and be changed into Sea. This is against Nature,
and therefore cannot be. Thus they might dispute and argue themselves into a
confident disbeliefe of the threatened Judgment. But see the Goodness of God and
his unlimited Patience! Notwithstanding all their infidelity, and beastliness,
and abominable immoralityes, His long suffering still waited In one Word, as in
several places of the N. T.
(...), still patiently, and with all gentleness imaginable, expected their
amendment. God needed not to have given them any warning at all; His Justice
might have swallowed them up quick, without the least notice or intimation of
his intended fury: but He waits, that he may be gracious. If he turn not, He
will whet bis Sword; he has bent his Bow, and made it ready, Psalm. VII. 12.
And yet though his sword be bright and glistering, it is long before He
strikes; though his bow be bent, yet the deadly Arrows do not presently fly
abroad. He Summons us to yield, and parles with us, before He storms us with
his Judgments. How loath and unwilling is God to put his threats into
execution! as if it were a doing violence to his Nature to punish. Hosea, XI.
8. How shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel? how
shall I make thee, as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? My heart is turned
within me, my repentings are kindled together. They wrong God then in the best
of his Attributes, in That, that he delights and glories in, that represent him
to the World, as plotting and contriving the ruin of his Creatures, by an
absolute and peremptory decree, as if he was an Almighty Tyrant. No, He takes
no pleasure in revenge, but is very willing and desirous to be prevented in his
Executions. Revel. II. 5. Remember from whence thou art fallen and repent, and
do the first Works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
Candlestick out of its place, except thou repent. To apply this in one word to
our selves: There is none here, I believe, whose Conscience does not suggest to
him such like thoughts as these; Thus graciously has God dealt with me; He
might have justly cut me off in the midst of my sins at such and such a time,
but he was pleased to spare me, and I am this day alive a Monument of his
Mercy: and there is none too, but has had frequent Warnings from God, either
by remorse and touches of Conscience, or by his Ministers, or by the Judgments
that have been in the midst of us; especially the raging and consuming
Pestilence, and the late Dismal Fire. But what use have me made of all these
dispensations? Let us therefore at last be persuaded to close with God, and
hearken to his Voice, that Thunders out of Heaven, and no longer despise the
riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, as knowing, and
being thoroughly convinced, that the goodness of God should lead us to
Repentance.

4. The Fourth Proposition, That in the midst of the severest Judgments, that
befall the World, there is a mixture of Mercy; or, that Gods Judgments are
never so Universal, but He spares some. In this Universal Deluge few, that is,
Eight Souls were saved by Water. Where I might observe.

I. The means of their preservation, it was by an Ark.

II. The number of those Persons, that were preserved, which was incomparately
small in respect of those vast multitudes that perished, wherein few, that is,
Eight Souls were saved by Water. The History of which Judgment was recorded and
taken notice of by Heathen Writers, being derived down to them by a general and
uninterrupted tradition, though not so clear in all particularities, by reason
of some mixtures and additions of their own, and the belief of it was retained
among them, notwithstanding their ignorance in other matters, and their
superinduced Barbarism. But on this I must not now enlarge, only in general as
to the Proposition, I shall explain it by the History of the Text, and confirm
it by a double instance.

God had often forewarned these Inhabitants of the Old World of his Judgments,
but they continued careless and unmindfull: St. Luke XVII. 27. They did eat,
they drank, they married Wives, they were given in Marriage, until the day,
that Noah entered into the Ark, and the Flood came and destroyed them all: They
continued their sports and their frolicks, They swam in pleasures, and drowned
their reason by their full draughts, as carnally minded, as unbelieving and
secure as ever, till the very day, whereon the Floodgates and Sluices of Heaven
were opened, and Rivers of Water were poured out of the Sky, and the Fountains
of the great Abyss were broken up, and then they were forced to mix Tears with
their Wine; their rich and costly Dainties, wherewith they had corrupted and
overcharged Nature, turned into Gall and Wormwood; their Excesses and their
Wantonness and their caresses into loathing and horror and confusion; they
exchanged their Marriage-Songs and Triumphs into shrieks and howlings; doubly
overwhelmed, with the Waves, and with grief as swelling and as impetuous. Thus
they perished in the Waters, while Noah and his little Family was safehoused in
the Ark. So when Clouds of Fire and Brimstone discharged themselves upon Sodom
and Gomorrah, and consumed the impure Inhabitants, who had burned with
unnatural Lusts, and were set on Fire of Hell, before they were form Heaven,
God sent his Angels to rescue Lot from the Flame: Genesis XIX. 15. St. Pet. II. 6,
7.
And thus the believing Jews, that were in Jerusalem, a Voice from Heaven,
heard by some of them, admonishing and inviting them to depart thence, as
Historiae Eccles. lib. III. cap. V. -- (...) --
Eusebius relates, after the Siege was unexpectedly raised by Gallus, laid hold
on the opportunity, and went over Jordan to Pella, and so were freed from all
those unparalleled miseryes, which their obstinate and perverse and unbelieving
Countrymen were forced to endure from the close Siege of Titus, that happened
some Months after. To Conclude; As the Old World was once drowned and
overwhelmed by Water, so we believe God will one day let loose upon it that
other more fierce and raging Element of Fire, which shall consume all its
Glories into Ashes, and make it but as one Funeral pyle at the dissolution of
Nature. We all profess to believe, that Christ will come to judge both the
quick and the dead, and we have had frequent Warnings and Alarms of his Coming.
How does it concern us to prepare for that Day, wherein we and all the
Generations of men, that ever were or ever shall be, must stand before his
Throne, and not delay our repentance one moment, lest Death surprise us on a
sudden, and as Death leaves us, Judgment will find us; but secure an Interest
in CHRIST, and make him our Advocate, who is to be our Judge: And then happy
shall we be at that day amidst the noise of the perishing World; and as Noah
and his Family were saved in the Universal Deluge, as the Text says, (...),
through or in the midst of Water, so shall we be saved in the time of that
Universal Conflagration, (...), through or in the midst of Fire.

Page, 43. l. 24. in some Copies r. impious. p. 47. l. 5. we. p. 47. l. 23.
incomparably.

FINIS.

