A SERMON ABOUT Frequent Communion, Preached before the UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD,
August the 17th. 1679.

By Tho. Smith, D. D. and Fellow of St. Mary Magdalen College, Oxon.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1685.

REVERENDISSIMO in Christo Patri ac Domino, D. GULIELMO, Divina Providentia
Archiepiscopo CANTVARIENSI, Totius Angliae Primati and Metropolitano,
Serenissimae Regiae Majestati a Sanctioribus Consiliis: Ecclesiae CATHOLICAE,
Primaevae Antiquitatis, ECCLESIASTICAE HIERARCHIAE Strenuo Vindici and
Adsertori: ECCLESIAE ANGLICANAE, Sub optimo and benignissimo REGE,
Prudentissimo Moderatori, Magno Literatorum PATRONO. T. S. Hanc de frequenti
Communione Concionem, coram Academicis Oxoniensibus habitam, humillime and cum
omni debita veneratione offert.

A SERMON ABOUT FREQUENT COMMUNION.
1 Epistle to the Corinthians, chapter 11. v. 26. For as often as ye eat this
Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lord's death till he come.


WHatever does happen extraordinarily, and above the usual and established
course of Nature, does mightily affect our minds and fancies at first, and
surprise and fill us with wonder; but as soon as we are grown a little familiar
with it, our thoughts are at rest, and notwithstanding our former transports
and heats, we quickly grow cool, and the impressions which it made upon us wear
away by degrees, and we care not to make any farther reflections upon it.

And the like is to be said of great and extraordinary Favors, in the moral
state of things, as well as of extraordinary events in the natural; when they
are first conferred, they draw our minds hugely after them; nothing does or can
insinuate it self more kindly into our affections. Greatness may make it self
be feared and respected too; (for who will dare to affront armed Power, or
choose to be defective in those points of Ceremony and Honor, which are due to
the person, oftentimes merely for the sake of his character?) But then there is
a secret hatred mixed with that fear, and the respect is outward and forced,
and if it be not, it is but the effect of a civil and prudent behavior, and of
a wise compliance. Whereas we are naturally inclined to applaud, to admire, to
love such as have done any public good, and especially if we have any share in
it. Interest, and a particular concern for our selves, heighten our esteem and
our affections, and our resentments hereupon become more pleasing and
ravishing. But all this, for the most part, is but a fit of Passion, and a mere
scene and representation of Fancy, arising from the present sense of the
benefit; for the longer we enjoy it, we become less and less sensible. So
forgetful are we of every thing but our selves, whom we could be content only
to love and admire for ever. Whether this arises from an impatience of fixing
our thoughts too long upon the same thing, or from the natural Pride which
every man carries about him, as if the remembrance and acknowledgment of a
favor were a tacit upbraiding us of our want, and of the infelicity of our
former condition; yet so it is, and we need continually to be put in mind of
our Devoirs and Obligations. It is but a piece of ordinary Justice, for
instance, and what we cannot deny without the imputation of Rudeness, as well
as the guilt of Ingratitude, that such as have sacrificed their dearest
Interests for their Country, as have out of an Heroic Principle of meriting
of the Public, exposed themselves to all the Misfortunes, and Hardships, and
Adversities of humane life, and have redeemed the Lives of Thousands with the
generous loss of their own, should have their Names mentioned with honor: they
deserve at least, as a reward of all their labors and sufferings, that their
memories be held dear and precious by their surviving Friends and Countrymen:
this common gratitude obliges us to do; and especially if the benefit be
perpetual, the remembrance of it should be perpetual also.

Now what greater benefit could possibly be done to the Sons of men, than the
redemption of them from the slavery of Sin and Hell, and from the wrath and
indignation of an offended God, by the Sufferings and Death of our blessed
Savior? This Victory he obtained for us, but not without much Sweat and Blood,
whereby he has restored Liberty to the World, and put an end to the Usurpations
and Tyranny of the Devil, who had enlarged his Conquest, and spread his Empire
far and wide, and held the greatest part of Mankind in a dismal and miserable
Bondage. This certainly deserves everlasting Acknowledgments, and an eternal
Triumph. This ought to be continually and for ever fresh in our Memories. Who
is not amazed at this new and strange way of Conquest, that through death he
should destroy him, who had the power of death, that is, the Devil? Heb. 2.14.
that he should triumph over the evil Spirits in the Grave, the place where they
used to erect their Trophies over the ruins of Mankind, and where the direful
effects of their Power, and Malice, and Revenge, were most seen, and lastly,
that the end of his Life should be the beginning of his Glory and Exaltation?
And then who is not equally, or rather, more amazed at the greatness of his
Condescension and Love, that he should come down from his glory, and assume the
nature of a Man, with all the natural Infirmities and Imperfections of it,
undergo the Malice, and Slanders, and Fury of an enraged Multitude, who by
their restless importunity got him sentenced to die as an Impostor and
Malefactor, and submit to the Torments and Ignominies of the Cross, and endure
with so great patience the revilings and contradictions of these impious and
unrighteous Men, even while he hung upon the cursed Tree, which must needs add
to the anguish and pain, which the violent extension of his Nerves caused in
his tender Flesh; and all this for our sakes, who were the Enemies of God, and
lost to all sense of goodness, and who deserved no pity? This was the effect of
his tender Compassion and Love to Mankind; 'twas this that made him even relish
that bitter Cup; and though as Man, he had just apprehensions of the Horrors
of Death, and the Wrath and Justice of God, which he as our Surety, and as in
our stead, was to undergo and satisfy; yet this alleviated his passion, and
made him submit willingly to the hard condition of dying.

This indeed which he has done and suffered for us men, and for our Salvation,
cannot be forgotten without monstrous baseness and unpardonable ingratitude,
and without making our selves unworthy of the blessed effects and consequences
of his passion. And our Blessed Savior himself would have the Memory of it
perpetuated to all Ages and Generations; and to assist our Weakness, and
sustain our Faith, which has need of such supports, and to make it impossible
that it should ever be forgotten; He has instituted the blessed Sacrament of
his Body and Blood, as a perpetual and visible representation of it. He still
presents himself before us, as hanging upon the Cross, his Body rent and torn
with wounds, and his precious Blood gushing in a plentiful stream out of his
side. Thus he is evidently set forth before our eyes, crucified among us still,
(Gal. 3.1.) as it were in Effigy. These memorials he has left us of himself
till his second coming, to put us continually in mind, how much he suffered for
us. This was the grand Reason of the Institution, the better to imprint it on
our minds, that we might always have before our Eyes a lively Image and Figure
of his Sufferings; the mysterious Rites used in the celebration being for this
very end and purpose, and the whole Action solemn and fully significant. For as
often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show the Lord's death till
he come.

I shall comprize the full sense of these words in these four following
Propositions:

I. That the holy Elements, after Consecration, retain their own proper Essence
and Nature, without any Physical and Substantial Change made of them. It is
Bread that we eat, and Wine that we drink; but with a distinction and note of
Dignity and Honor; it is this Bread, and this Cup, that is, of ordinary and
common they become mystical and sacramental; they are altered and changed, as
to their use, and effect, and condition; and not only a divine Signification,
but a divine Virtue is imprinted upon them.

II. That the blessed Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord does very
fitly and fully represent and set forth his death.

III. That it is of perpetual Use and Observation, and to be continued till the
end of the World; ye show forth the Lord's death till he come, that is, till he
come to judge the World at the last day, and to put an end to the present state
of things.

IV. That all who profess their Belief in a crucified Savior, and exspect the
saving benefits of his Passion, are obliged to a frequent celebration of this
holy and tremendous Mystery; which is here plainly supposed, as often as ye eat
this bread, and drink this cup. Which last Proposition I intend to make the
Argument of my Discourse at this time. Now the Reason and Necessity of the
Obligation will appear, if we consider these two things:

I. The End and Design of the Institution of the holy Sacrament.

II. The blessed Consequences and Effects of frequent Communion.

1. The End and Design of the holy Sacrament is, that it might be an
everlasting Memorial of the Death and Passion of our Lord and Savior. He was
pleased after the Consecration of both Elements to add particularly and
distinctly, not in the way of Advice, to be followed, if we think fit our
selves, but in the way of a peremptory and absolute Command, v. 24. This do in
remembrance of me, and v. 25. This do ye, as often as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me. It is certain, that we ought to remember the Death of our
Blessed Savior at other times; as when we are upon our knees at our Prayers.
He gave himself for us an offering and sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling
savor, Ephesians. 5.2. by virtue of which, our Prayers winged with a lively Faith
in his Blood, and with Zeal, ascend like a Cloud of Incense into the Holy of
Holies, and find acceptance with God. We cannot employ our Thoughts and
Meditations better, when we are upon our Beds, or when we are in private, and
especially upon our Days of Fasting and Penitence, when God only is witness to
these spiritual Exercises. No Argument can make us more and better sensible of
the defiling and damning nature of Sin, than the consideration of a crucified
Savior, that his Blood was shed on purpose to expiate and atone it. This will
make us reflect upon our sins with a hearty sorrow and regret, which brought
the Son of God to so sad and shameful an end. How ought I to abhor and loath
my self, when I consider that the sins which I have committed, though so many
hundred years after, contributed to his dying, and make me an accessory of the
guilt of the Jews, who were the cruel Instruments of his Murder? Nothing can
more and better inflame our Zeal and Love to God and to Christ, than frequent
Meditation on our Savior's Death; that God should contrive this admirable way
of our Redemption by the Death of his only Son, whom he sent out of his own
bosom on purpose to be a Sacrifice for Sin, and whom he set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, for the remission of sins that are
past through the forbearance of God, Romans 3.25. and that Christ should
willingly undergo all this for our sakes. O blessed Savior, how can we
recompense this thy infinite Love toward fallen Man! Jesu God! I cannot do, I
cannot suffer enough in the way of a just acknowledgment of thy inexpressible
Kindness and Pity to my poor Soul, which thou have redeemed from the nethermost
Hell, and from the Wrath of God, which would have been the more intolerable.
The reading also of the Narrative and History of our Savior's Sufferings and
Death, as they are recorded in the holy Gospels, together with a reflection on
the several circumstances of them must needs leave deep impressions upon our
memories. This tragical story wherewith the Heathen Thus did the Emperor
Trajan in his discourse with St. Ignatius, for that seems to be the meaning of
his words, Sub Pontio Pilato crucifixum dicis: V. (...) Martyrii S. Ignatii,
Editionis Usserianae, (...) Simplicius, a Roman Judge of Tarsus, under
Diocletian and Maximinian, to Bonifatius, (...); V. passionem S. Bonifatii ex
Edit. E. Bigotii, p. 319. which seems to me to be a Translation out of the
Latin, first published at Rome by Holstenius. Arnobius adv. Gentes; lib. 1.
Caecilius in Minucius Felix, hominem summo supplicio pro facinore punitum:
nempe colunt. See also Lactantius divinar. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 16. Lucian,
de morte Peregrini, (...) -- (...), as the Wretch blasphemed. The most usual
reproach was, Deus vester patibulo affixus est; or, hominem colitis, hominem
Palaestinum, crucifixum adoratis pro Deo.
of old used to upbraid the Christians, as Votaries and Worshippers of a
crucified God, was so universally diffused throughout the World, that it was
impossible that it should be forgotten; and the sight of a Thus Eusebius says
of the Emperor Constantine, de vita ipsius, lib. 3. cap. 1. (...). And in his
Oration, de laudibus Constantini, (...). cap. 9. p. 6^8. Ex Edit. Valesii.
Cross (which as soon as the Roman Empire turned Christian, became an Ensign and
Trophy of Honor, every where to be met with, V. Eusebius. de vita Constantini,
lib. 1. c. 31.
in their Banners, and upon their Cap. 21. (...) -- (...). S. Hieronymus ad
L^^tam, Ep. 7. Vexilla militum crucis insignia sunt, Regum purpuras and
ardentes diadematum gemmas patibuli salutaris pictura condecorat.
Bucklers and Helmets, upon the Diadems of the Emperors, upon their Medals,
upon their Churches and Spires of their Towers, and in their solemn
Processions,) would quickly refresh their memories, and put them in mind of the
great Savior of the World, whose Hands and Feet were nailed to it, and his
Arms extended upon it, to receive and embrace all, who fly to him for refuge,
from the assaults and pursuits of offended Justice. But Christ who knew the
best and most effectual method to keep alive for ever the Memory of his Passion
and Death, has ordained this holy Sacrament, as the most proper Instrument to
make us truly and really sensible and mindful of it.

It is not then a matter of mere indifference, whether we will receive the
Sacrament or no: we cannot with any pretense or show of Reason, take a liberty
of dispensing with this Law of our Religion, as if it were wholly in our power
to come and abstain as we please. For certainly all Laws were given with an
intent that they may be observed and obeyed. If they oblige to a Duty, and
require any thing to be done, the Omission is culpable, and is more or less
aggravated, and admits of greater or lesser degrees of guilt, determinable by
the variety of circumstances that attend it: and in this case especially when
the Lawgiver, to make our Obedience more ready and yielding, has been pleased
to superadd to the express Declaration and Determination of his Will,
Considerations of its agreeableness and reasonableness, as well to encourage as
to command our Obedience, which he might otherwise justly claim as an
Acknowledgment of our Dependence upon him. So that from what Principle soever
our Nonperformance proceeds, whether from Obstinacy and Pride, or from
Carelessness and Neglect, we throw off and reject the Authority that imposed it,
as if that did not oblige, or that we were not to be commanded.

Now Christ has commanded us to commemorate his Passion and Death, by
participating the Symbols of his holy Body and Blood; and if we admit him to be
our Lord as well as our Savior, we can do no other than obey; nor can we
question his Power and Authority even in the more difficult Duties of taking up
his Cross, of Self-denial and Mortification, or of sacrificing our Interests
and our Lives in the propagating and defense of his Truth. For no difficulty in
the thing to be performed can warrant or excuse the not doing of it, where the
Obedience is necessary: and especially if we consider, that the End of the
Institution of this holy Sacrament is highly agreeable to Reason; that the
Sufferings of the Cross might never be forgotten, that our thoughts of it be
not slight or transient, a cold reflection upon it, as upon a sad and lamentable
accident, the reading of which may trouble and move us a little, and incline us
to pity or melancholy for a time, but that they be composed and serious, and
often sixth upon the Object of a dying Savior, who does so well deserve them,
and at last be raised up to a due pitch and height, to which this holy
Solemnity is so conducing. For if it be our Duty, as most certainly it is, to
meditate on the Death of Christ, to reflect, and that seriously, and with due
intention of Mind, on the dolours of his Passion, if this be to be done often
(for who can reflect too much or too often upon the effects of infinite Love
and Condescension, the greatest that could possibly be shown?) and if Christ
has prescribed us a way how it may be done most effectually, that is, in the
Sacrament, the consequence is easy, and just, and natural, that we are to
communicate often; this being the most likely means to attain that end, the
solemn commemoration of his Passion and Death. So that the design of the
Institution makes frequent Communion necessary.

Now that this was the mind of Christ, will appear demonstratively from the
practice of the Apostles, who may be presumed to know and understand it best,
and of their first Converts, of whom we read, Acts 2.42. they continued
steadfastly, (...), were very assiduous and diligent, in the Apostles Doctrine
and fellowship, or rather, (...), communication, and so may refer either to
their presents and gifts of Bread and Wine, and Fruits for the use of the
Sacrament, and Love-Feast, which followed, or to the liberal distribution of
the good things, with which God had blessed them, in a way of Charity and
Benevolence, for the support and sustenance of the poorer sort of Christians:
it follows, and in breaking of bread and in prayers, that is, in receiving the
Sacrament, and in joint and public Devotions. This was their constant
practice, and it was universal too. For it takes in the whole number of
Christians, which then began to increase mightily, no less than Three Thousand
having been converted to the Faith of Christ by Saint Peter's Sermon, v. 41. of
all which this is expressly affirmed. So great was the Faith, and Piety, and
Zeal of these new Converts, that they communicated every day. For Saint Luke is
punctual in relating this material circumstance, v. 46. And they continuing
daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from house to house,
For that (...) is in the writings of the new Testament, sometimes the same with
(...), is fully and clearly proved by the excellent Dr. Hammond, in his Annot.
on Act. 1.13.
(...), in, or at the house where they used to make their resort, did eat their
meat with gladness and singleness of heart: the meaning of which words seems to
be plainly this, that as many of the Christians as could with convenience, met
every day in a certain upper Chamber, adjoining to the Temple, or not far from
it, and there celebrated the blessed Sacrament, and afterward very cheerfully
and heartily entertained one another with Feasts of Love and Charity: This
upper room being the same with that in which our blessed Savior eat the
Passover with his Disciples, and instituted the Sacrament, afterward called
The Oratory of Sion, Mark 14.15. Luke 22.12.
according to a tradition which passes current among the Christians of the V.
Eurychii Patriarchae Alexandrini Annals, part. 1. page 322. Josephum Aegyptium
in codice Arabico Conciliorum titulo Canonum Apostolicorum, Librum
Constitutionum Syriacarum Ecclesiae Maroniticae, a Davide Archiepiscopo ante
sexcentos annos, Arabice scriptum apud Abrahamum Ecchellensem, de Origin
Nominis Papae, p. 225. Romae 40.1^^. Et Petrum D D. Basilii and Gregorii
fratrem, Episcopum Sebastes in opere Arabice translato, quod inscribitur (...)
Liber Demonstrationis, apud eundem p. 236. Sancti Jacobi Liturgiam, in 2. vol.
Bibliothecae Patr. editionis Parisiensis (...), p. 15. Geographiam Nubiensem
climate 3. part 5. p. 113. Claudium Regem Aethiopiae in confessione sidei, ab
eruditissimo viro D. Ludolfo edita, number. 4. Epiphanium de ponderibus, sect. 14
ubi de Hadr ano Imperatore dicit, quod itinere suscepto sanitatis causa,
Aegyptum and Palaestinam petiit, Hierosolyma lustrandi cupidus, ubi nihil sere
relictum erat, (...). Joannem Damascenum de fide orthodoxa, l. 4. c. 14.
Joannis Pho^^ (...), etc. page 20.
East. For that which is alleged by some, Mr. Gregory in his Observations upon
some passages of Scripture, p. 9.
that the former part of the verse may refer only to their daily resort to the
Temple at the hours of Prayer, that is, that they went and prayed in the mixed
Assemblies of the Jews, for so they must be understood, if they speak
consonantly to themselves; but that they brake bread from house to house, that
is, at their particular homes, is of little force; because the words have an
intimate connection and dependence one upon another, and seem to contain the
reason of their continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, which was to
receive the Sacrament in a particular place in it, or near it: as (...) may
very fitly be rendered. For if they render the words distributively from house
to house, what hinders but that upon this supposition it may be inferred, that
the Sacrament was celebrated in every Christian house of Jerusalem apart: which
is against the undoubted practice of those first Christians, who used to meet
in great numbers (...). Act. 2.1. (...). Act. 2.44. (...). Cor. 11.20.
together, for this sacred purpose at a certain place, if it were wide and
large enough to receive them.

But to let this pass only as a probability, that there was a constant weekly
Communion, that is, every Sunday, is certain beyond all possibility of
exception. Act. 20.1. upon the first day of the week when the disciples came
together to break bread, Saint Paul preached unto them, etc. This was at St.
Paul's being at Troas, which was two or three and twenty years after the
Ascension; variety of practice, as to these and the like circumstances, being
allowed at different times, and in different places, and what they did here
weekly, might formerly have been done daily by the Apostles and Disciples at
Jerusalem. I do not urge their example, as if all Christians were obliged to
follow it in these punctualities and circumstances, or as if we were guilty of
a horrid neglect, if we do not receive the Sacrament daily, at least every
Lord's Day: but I only mention it as an instance of their piety and zeal, and
of the great sense which they had of the obligation which lay upon them, of
celebrating the Eucharist frequently from the command of Christ.

But this perchance might be the peculiar glory and excellency of those times,
wherein devotion was at the highest pitch, and Christianity flourisht in its
perfection and purity.

Let us therefore in the next place enquire into the practice and behavior of
their successors, and see whether they fell short of, or how nigh they came up
to their example.

That the Christians had their private Meetings at night, and in the morning
before the light appeared, that they might serve God and Christ, and perform
all the solemnities of their Worship with less disturbance, could not but be
taken notice of by their prying and idolatrous neighbors, among whom they
lived, who envied them these happy opportunities; and the government was at
last alarmed with the number and frequency of these religious conventions: and
the whole world then knew how they were reproached and abused for it by the
opprobrious name of latebrosa and lucifugax natio: and what cursed slanders
past upon them among the credulous Heathen, from the misunderstanding of their
solemn receiving of the Sacrament at such times, and the Love-feast after:
dicimur sceleratissimi, says Tertullian in the 7th chap. of his Apology, de
sacramento infanticidii and pabulo, inde and post convivium incesto: which
scandalous stories they diffused abroad with equal subtility and malice, and
enlarged upon with particular circumstances, that they might with the greater
hope of success blacken the great credit and reputation of the Christian
Religion, which it gained every where, and hinder its progress. But that this
was the pure invention of the Devil and his Instruments, the Heathen Priests,
their Temples being thin of Votaries, and their Altars reeking no longer with
the blood of sacrifices, one of their writers, and a Proconsul in the lesser
Asia, at least V. inscriptionem apud Onuphrium Pauvinium in commentario in
^astos ad annum DCCCLIII.
a Propraetor with Consular power, in Epist. l. 10. ep. ^^.
a letter, which he sent to the Emperor Trajan, who would have been glad to
have found these stories verified, does fully prove. For he upon a diligent,
and severe enquiry (for to some, particularly to two Deaconnesses, he gave the
question, and put them upon the rack, quid esset very and per tormenta
quaerere, to know for certain, what their behavior was in private) could only
make this discovery, that they met, stato die, on a set day, that is,
undoubtedly on a Sunday, to sing an hymn to Christ, as to their God, that they
then obliged themselves by Oath, that is, upon their solemn receiving of the
Sacrament, to abstain from all sorts of dishonesty and baseness, and that they
met again, and entertained one another with ordinary and innocent food; which
is an irrefragable confutation of the (...) or devouring the raw flesh of an
Infant imputed to them by their Enemies, which might in probability, partly, if
not chiefly, arise from their gross and unnatural conception of the sacramental
rites.

Indeed these were times of persecution and great danger and bloody decrees
were oftentimes signed by the Emperors for their execution and slaughter. They
were outlawed, and proscribed, and hunted after with violence, and dragged
before Tribunals, and in hourly danger of their lives. They saw that the
profession of Christianity was made a capital crime, no less than Treason
against the State; their Enemies out of an impious zeal for their Idolatry mad
at them, inexorable, and void of all pity; their malice and their cruelty were
insatiable and knew no bounds. They beheld what great wastes the sword, the
wheel, the cross and the flames had already made of their Fellow Christians,
and, for ought they knew, their turn was next, and that they should have the
honor, and be counted worthy, not only to suffer reproach, but death for the
name of Christ: They were so far from being wrought upon by fear to fly for it,
that they seemed ambitious of dying, and willingly proffered themselves to the
Heathen Judges. This did not discompose or distract their thoughts, but rather
heightened their zeal and their devotion: every day was to them their dying day,
because they had not the least moral assurance, that they should live to the
end of it. Yet they were men still, though they seemed to act above the power
of humane nature, and had need of a continual support to bear them up against
so fierce and great opposition of men and devils. They looked up to Jesus the
Author and finisher of their faith, who for the glory, that was set before him,
endured the cross, and despised the shame.

The contemplation of his death, and in the Sacrament especially, where it was
so livelily set forth, inspired them with more than humane courage. They
received the Sacrament as often as they had opportunity, to fortify their
resolutions of dying for his name. They were fit for it every day, and
therefore they might, and probably did, actually receive it every day, and so
might we, if our affections were as pure and vigorous, and our lives as
mortified and as holy.

Sometime indeed there was a suspension of these sanguinary rescripts, and
several acts of grace were past in behalf of the poor Christians. The Emperors,
notwithstanding those sudden fits and paroxysms of fury and madness, had their
lucid intervals, and saw clearly, that it was against all laws of humanity and
equity, and against reason of state, to depopulate the Empire of such useful
subjects, and to butcher and massacre such a vast number of men, whose only
fault was their religion.

During this uncertain state of things, the Christians relaxed nothing of their
piety and ancient discipline; they went on in the same course, and followed the
footsteps of their Predecessors in the faith. Nobis, says Contra Psychicos.
cap. 14.
Tertullian in his Book de Jejuniis, certe omnis dies etiam vulgata
consecratione celebratur. But when they foresaw a storm of persecution arising,
then the Bishops and the Christian people under them had S. Cyprian Epist. 58.
Edit. Oxon. Plebi Thibari consistenti, milites Christi, considerantes iccirco
se quotidie calicem sanguinis Christi bibere, ut possint ipsi propter Christum
sanguinem fundere. p. 120. De oratione Dominica, Eucharistiam quotidie ad cibam
salutis accipere. p. 147.
daily Sacraments, and at such times they abated the rigor of the
Church-Canons, and admitted the lapsed persons to the Communion, which
otherwise was not allowed them but sub ictu mortis, as Epist. 54. Edit.
Rigatlianae quae est Epist. 57. Edit. Oxon. p. 118. He had said before, p. 117.
ut quos excitamus and hortamur ad praelium non inermes and nudos relinquamus,
sed protectione sanguinis and corporis Christi muniamus: and cum ad hoc fiat
Eucharistia, ut possit accipientibus esse tutela, quos tutos esse contra
adversarium voluimus, munimento Dominicae saturitatis armemus.
St. Cyprian speaks, who tells us, in that excellent Epistle to Cornelius, of
his daily offering up this Sacrifice, and justifies his dealing thus mercifully
with his penitents, or rather triumphs and glories in it. Episcopatus nostri
honor grandis and gloria est, pacem dedisse martyribus, ut Sacerdotes, qui
sacrificia Deo quotidie celebramus, hostias Deo and victimas praeparemus. Nor
did this zeal and devotion cool of a sudden, as soon as the flames were
extinguished: devout persons kept up the custom of receiving often in the
flourishing times of Christianity, when it was favored and cherished by the
Civil power: and S. Basil. ad Caesariam Patriciam, epist. 289. (...).
St. Basil commends daily communion as useful and pious, and says of himself,
that he communicated four times a week, and also upon the memorials of the
Martyrs: Though it must be most sadly confessed, that a general decay of piety
came in afterward, and luxury eat out the vitals of Religion, and these holy
duties, which had been the great comfort and desire of their souls in the day
of their afflictions, became to be neglected, and the pleasures and vanities of
the World had dulled their appetite, that they no longer relished this heavenly
food, this bread of Angels, and if they came to the Sacrament, it was only at
the solemn times of the year, as at Christmas and Easter out of respect to the
Law of the Church, and the custom of the place where they lived, that they
might not be guilty of a scandalous omission of a duty so necessary, rather
than out of a thirsty desire and longing after it.

But if we can have the patience to compare the forwardness and zeal of the
first Christians, with the dullness and stupidity of this age, how ready and
desirous they were to embrace all opportunities of commemorating the death of
Christ according to his own institution and appointment, and how willing most
of us are to decline them, and that upon very slight and oftentimes
unreasonable pretenses, if we dare compare their mortifications and severities
in order to a due preparation, with our slight and perfunctory performances,
how we are forced to do that twice or thrice in a year, which they earnestly
longed for almost every day, it will make us tremble to consider, how much we
are degenerated, and are fallen short of those glorious examples which those
ancient worthies set us, and how little of the power of Christianity is to be
found at this time among Christians, notwithstanding all that great noise and
profession which is made of it. Our Scholastical disputes and quarrels about
the Sacrament have destroyed and swallowed up our devotion, and our charity;
and that which was designed by Christ for an instrument of uniting men's minds
together in Christian Communion and love, is now become an occasion of
difference and irreconciliation. They were not troubled with those hot debates,
which have since so miserably distracted the Peace of Christendom: they
contented themselves with a simple belief of the mystery, without busying their
thoughts about nice and curious speculations: whole Churches were not then
excommunicated for not assenting to a monstrous opinion contrary to common
sense and reason, and the universal experience of Mankind; they did not, under
a pretense of exalting the mystery, destroy the nature of a Sacrament, as now
is done in the Roman Church. It must now no longer be a representative, but a
real propitiatory sacrifice for the living, and for the dead, and Christ's
natural body must be brought down from heaven upon a thousand Altars at once,
and there really broken, and offered up again to God the Father, and his Blood
actually spilt a thousand times every day, and mixing it self with ours. Nor
did they on the other side degrade it into a bare empty sign, and entertain
slight notions of it, or approach it without a due and becoming reverence, or
abstain from it upon frivolous excuses, as the manner of some is. For had we
that high value for the blessed Sacrament as we ought, did we believe it
necessary to receive it often, not only necessitate proecepti, but medii too,
did we believe seriously and consider, of what great use and benefit it would
be to our Souls, we would be more diligent and conscientious in the use of it,
and think our selves under an indispensable obligation of frequent Communion;
which arises also from a consideration of the blessed effects and consequences
of it; which is my second particular. And of these I shall name only three.

1. By it we gain a close and intimate communion and conjunction with Christ;
hereby we are one with Christ, and Christ with us; that is, upon our humble and
penitent, and devout receiving of the Sacrament, he descends into our hearts by
the sweet influences of his Grace; he is really present with us by his Spirit,
and the life, which we now live in the flesh, we live by the faith of the son
of God, who loved us, and gave himself for us, and still gives himself to us in
these holy mysteries. For we must not fancy an immediate and personal union;
he indeed was pleased by assuming the humane nature to unite the word to it,
whereby he became God and Man; which wonderful union is therefore called
Hypostatical; because he had the two natures fully, with all their natural and
essential qualities concurring in his own proper single person. But the union
of Christ with the devout soul is purely spiritual; not an union of his
personal excellencies and endowments, but a communication of his Grace and
Spirit, whereby the soul is exalted above its natural capacity, and is
transformed from glory to glory, and is made partaker of the divine nature,
that is, filled with love and purity, and such God-like qualities. By this we
are joined and united to him, as members of his body, of his flesh, and of his
bones, that is, of his mystical body, the Church, as the Apostle explains
himself, Col. 1.18. and not of his natural body, on account of a
concorporation, or assimulation, or conversion of the Sacrament into our bodily
substance. Thus as the Apostle St. John speaks, we have communion with the
Father, and with his son Jesus Christ. By virtue of Christ's precious blood
shed upon the cross, we are reconciled to God; he has entered into a new
Covenant with us, which Christ has solemnly ratified by his death, and is
willing to receive us to mercy and favor, upon the conditions of hearty sorrow
for our sins, wherewith we have offended the eyes of his glory, and of a holy
life; and through faith in his Son we can put up our prayers to him with some
assurance, that he will hear us, and communicate his favors and blessings to
us, so far as he in his infinite wisdom sees fit, and give us of his Spirit:
and the same communion we have with Christ; the soul is ravished with the
contemplation of his infinite love and goodness to lost man, and to it self in
particular, and is filled with astonishing reflections of the merits of his
death, as much as if he were personally present upon Earth again. This indeed
is better understood than expressed, words being too scanty, and the imagination
not able to reach and comprehend what the pious soul knows by experience. And
if this be the blessed effect of our devotion and meditation; if when we are
upon our knees, and are employed in holy thoughts, we then seem to be out of
our bodies, and rapt into heaven, and there lie prostrate before the throne and
the Lamb; how much more, when we are kneeling before the Altar, and are
admitted to the participation of the body and blood of our Savior, and are
performing the most solemn part of the Christian worship, exerting with all
possible vigor and intention of mind, (for so we ought to be affected) acts of
holy love and zeal, and uniting our souls to Christ by faith. There is no need
of fansying the bread to be substantially changed into the natural body of
Christ, that so by this mean we may be really united to it, which is one of the
colorable pretenses made use of by Petrus de Marca, and others, for the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and Christ naturally be and remain in us. It is
enough, that Christ took our nature upon him, and united it inseparably to his
divinity, that he was made up of flesh and blood, and a humane soul, and that
he does communicate himself, that is, his body and blood, in the Sacrament; for
so the Elements really and truly are, after consecration, but without departing
from their natural state, and without loosing their bodily substance. For this
is all, I humbly conceive, that our Church means by the doctrine of the real
Presence, which it acknowledges and maintains: that is, by the power of God,
and the institution of our Savior, and the descent and supervening grace of
the Spirit, the elements of bread and wine, after consecration by a Priest,
rightly ordained and constituted, become the body and blood of Christ
Mystically and Sacramentally: and so the Sacrament is more than a bare figure
and representation, more than a mere Symbol or external rite, as were the types
and shadows of the law: because it does exhibit and communicate Christ really
and truly to us. Thus Saint Paul has expressly determined, the bread which we
break, is it not the communication of the body of Christ? the cup of blessing,
which we bless, is it not the communication of the blood of Christ? 2 Cor.
10.16. Now were this seriously laid to heart, that in the Sacrament we meet
with Christ, and receive him, how should we long for these blessed
opportunities! As the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul
after thee, O God; my soul thirsts for God, for the living God, when shall I
come to appear before God? Can we be weary of his blessed presence, or complain
of too frequent entertainments and communications? It will be the unspeakable
glory and happiness of the other world, to be in the presence of God, and with
Christ for ever. Here on earth he vouchsafes to be with us, in the Sacrament
especially; here we may find him, whom our soul loves: here we may embrace
him. Why then are we so unprepared? Why are we so backward? Why do we this so
seldom?

2. By a frequent participation of the body and blood of our Savior, we are
more and more confirmed in our purposes of holy living, and strengthened in
grace and goodness. We are daily exposed to a thousand temptations, by reason
of the frailty of our nature, temperament of body, which has too too often a
sad and fatal influence upon the mind, allurements of sense, and evil example,
and the like. There is a continual strife between the dictates of right reason,
which incite us to do our duty, by arguments drawn from the obligations we owe
to God, and the agreeableness of it to our nature, and the insinuations of
appetite, which suggests a present pleasure, if we strain a little, and cease
to be so scrupulous, till at last the directive and commanding faculties are
impaired and captivated, and reason dethroned, and lust domineers in the soul,
and the miserable person, who has lost his power over himself, is at the
command of every extravagant passion. Which evil effects and consequences are
prevented by a frequent and conscientious receiving of the blessed Sacrament.
This being the true Physic of the soul, which not only cleanses it from the
defilements of sin, but fortifies it against all infection for the future. As
often as we find any ill humor growing upon us, we endeavor carefully to
prevent it. When we are sick, the tediousness and uneasiness which our
distemper brings upon us, and the fear of death force us to seek out medicines
to restore our health, and prolong our lives. The soul has its distempers, for
the prevention or removal of which, there cannot be a more sovereign remedy
than the frequent devout receiving of the Sacrament. For there is such a divine
efficacy in the holy Sacrament, and the blessing of God does so accompany this
holy institution of our Religion, that, as a moral instrument, it conveys grace
into the heart of the Communicant, if his approach be with due preparation and
reverence, and if he does not wilfully and obstinately resist and hinder the
kindly influences of it. If there went such a virtue out of Christ's natural
body, when he was upon Earth, that great cures were wrought thereby: ( If I may
but touch his garment, said the woman, who had a bloody issue, Math. 9.21. I
shall be whole.) What a great blessing must the receiving of it in the
Sacrament bring along with it, to the devout soul, that addresses to him with a
lively faith, that he is able and willing to heal us? But we sin, after we have
received the Sacrament, and we do not find these blessed effects of it within
our selves: To which several things are to be replied.

1. That the Sacrament does not work physically and necessarily, but in the way
of moral efficacy, to which we our selves must concur and contribute somewhat.

2. That these blessed effects are producible and visible in others, and have
been in all ages; so that the fault is wholly our own, and no defect can be
imputed to this mean and instrument of grace, why it is not equally effectual
to us: And therefore,

3. That we did not either receive it with due preparation, that is, our hearts
were not purified by repentance and faith, and inflamed with love and charity,
but we might break in upon the Altar without awe and reverence, merely out of
formality, in compliance with the custom of the place, and only for fear that
our absence should be censured; or else we are not careful after we have
received it, to perform those vows and obligations, which we laid upon our
selves, when we were partakers of the Lords table; which is the general fault:
we are seemingly strict before, as if this were enough, and could satisfy the
Conscience to receive Christ, without any farther care of walking in him.

4. That this is as far from being an objection against frequent communion, as
it is against our daily Prayer, for do we not, every morning privately on our
knees, beg of God the assistence of his grace, that we may not be led into
temptation, but may be powerfully defended from it, and preserved in it? and do
we not as often, at least we should, publicly and in the congregation, beseech
him, that he would vouchsafe to keep us the remaining part of the day without
sin, and defend us by his mighty power, that we may not fall into it? But God
knows our weakness, and we cannot but acknowledge it with shame and sorrow of
heart, that the corruptions of our nature are oftentimes too strong for us, and
baffle our purposes and resolutions. This drives us upon our knees again, and
we pray God not to leave us to our selves, and by degrees we gain greater
measures of strength, and in some sort get the mastery over the inclinations of
corrupted nature. This holds much more in the Sacrament, when we go to it with
fresh desires, and more vigorous resolutions of living a holy and truly
Christian life, and when we reflect upon our failings and miscarriages, since
our last receiving, with deep humiliation and sorrow. Thou, O Lord God, art
full of compassion and mercy, long suffering, plenteous in goodness and truth,
O turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me; give thy strength unto thy
servant, and help the son of thy handmaid. We need no invitations to satisfy
the natural desires of the body, which is nourished and cherished, and
oftentimes pampered by us. Nature has laid upon us a necessity of daily food,
for the preservation of life, to repair those decays, which we daily suffer:
without this, we consume and dye. Now if we believe the blessed Sacrament to be
the food of the Soul, that we grow and are strengthened in grace by this bread
of life, the true spiritual manna, that comes down from heaven, that is
designed by God for this purpose, and conveys his blessing and sanctifying
graces to all worthy receivers; that by virtue of this nourishment, we either
retain or recover our vigor and healthfulness of mind, and that without it we
languish and decay in the inward man, there would be no keeping us from this
heavenly banquet at the Lord's table, where there can be no fear of a furfeit,
where we eat and drink health and salvation, and where Christ himself is the
entertainer, and the entertainment 100. For thou, O Christ, as the Greek Priest
prays in the Liturgy of St. Chrysostom, just before the (...), when they carry
the gifts from the Prothesis to the Altar, where he consecrates, (...), thou
offerest, and yet art offered up: thou receivedst the Elements into thy holy
hands, and yet at the same time thy body and blood are distributed; thou, O
Christ, make this bread in the Sacrament to be thy flesh mystically, which
thou still give for the life of the World. Can we eat too much, or too often
of this bread of life, whereby we are nourished to immortality, the holy
Elements being the (...), for so St. Clement in his former Epistle to the
Corinthians must be understood, that is, not of the doctrine of our blessed
Savior, for that is mentioned in the following clause, (...), much less of the
(...), or things pertaining to our bodily sustinance, and things of this life,
as Junius thought fit to explain, but of the divine viaticum of the Sacrament,
that we may not faint in the journey, which we are taking to the other world?
(...), that is, (...), for it immediately follows, (...), (to which there can
be no other relative but (...), (which express testimony of this Apostolical
writer for the Divinity of our blessed Savior, I could not but observe by the
bye, to help to confound the arrogance and blasphemy of that professed Arian,
Sandius) so that these words seem clearly to relate to the Sacrament, where the
sufferings of Christ are so livelily represented to our sight.

3. By frequent receiving of the Sacrament we are more and more made partakers
of the benefits, and blessings, and merits of Christ's holy passion and death.
It is the great artifice of the Roman Church to keep up the credit of their
private Masses, to which antiquity is a mere stranger, to make the people
believe, that the Priest has a power of applying the efficacy and merit of
Christ's sacrifice to their particular benefit, for whom he intends it; so they
contribute somewhat in the way of charity or gift, and are but present in the
time of the celebration. But it is certain, that before superstition, and
corruption of Doctrine had overspread that Church, and before they had
perverted this most solemn part of the Christian worship into a mere piece of
pageantry and theatrical show, all that was anciently designed by the
mentioning the names of the living, to say nothing at present of the
commemoration of the dead, at that time, as is clear from the Canon of the Mass
still in use, was only by way of intercession, that God would be pleased, for
the merits of his Son's death, which they were then commemorating, to have
mercy on them, to forgive them their sins, and to pour down of his grace
abundantly upon them, and not only upon them, but upon the whole number of
Christian people throughout the world.

But this cannot yield such peace and quiet, and satisfaction to my conscience,
as my own particular application of the merits of Christ's sufferings to my
self; what another does for me, cannot be my act, when I am obliged to do it in
my own person, and not by my representative. I am to eat his flesh in the
Sacrament, and drink his blood, if I would live in him, and by him. Now Christ
by his death has satisfied the divine Justice, and reconciled us to the
Father, who no longer imputes our sins to our charge and condemnation: the
blood, that he spilt upon the cross, is the seal of an everlasting covenant;
for this cause he is the mediator of a new covenant, that by means of death,
for the redemption of the transgressions, that were under the first covenant,
they which were called, might receive the promise of an everlasting
inheritance. Heb. 9.15. So that now heaven and salvation are made over by God,
by virtue of this expiatory Sacrifice, to all that truly believe in his Son's
name. This Sacrifice was made once for all upon the Altar of the Cross; but the
merit reaches backward to the first being and original of things, and looks
forward to the end of the world, and to eternal ages. It is, as to the fruit
and efficacy of it, as present to God, as if Christ were born every day into
the world again, and really every day offered up, or as if it were but
yesterdy, or but just now offered; it being all-sufficient, and of infinite
value, and fully accepted by God, as a just price and ransom. Now that he
suffered this bitter and cursed death upon the cross for me, and that I may
apply all the saving benefits of his passion to my self, he assures me by
giving me his body and blood. Every time we receive the Sacrament worthily,
there is a new confirmation of our pardon; the spirit of God bears witness
with our spirit, that we are his children, and reinstated in his grace and
favor. It Is an infallible pledge of our immortality, and that he will raise us
up at the last day, as much as if his natural flesh and blood were eaten and
drunk by us, and converted after the ordinary way of digestion, into our bodily
substance. We have this assurance in his holy word, but much more in the holy
Sacrament, because here is a more lively, sensible and particular
representation of it; that is, though I acknowledge and believe this to be one
of the fundamental truths of the Gospel, that Christ died for our sins, that he
appeared once in the days of his flesh, to put away sin by the sacrifice of
himself, and that at his ascension he entered in his humane nature into the holy
place, having obtained eternal redemption for us; my faith grows stronger yet,
when I receive the sacred symbols into my hands, and convey them to my mouth.
For then if I come with a due preparation, it is, as if I received from Christ
himself, and as if he still pronounced the same words to me, as he did to the
Apostles at the institution. Now can we have too great, too full an assurance
of the favor of God, of the pardon of our sins, of our living for ever in the
presence of God in the other world! God knows, we forfeit our hopes by our
gross and scandalous relapses: we lose the favor of God by our presumptuous
disobedience; we miss the sight of heaven by reason of the thick mists of our
sins: our only comfort and support is, that God upon our hearty repentance and
amendment will be reconciled to us. Here it is, that we may recover our selves,
that God restores us to the joy of his salvation, and upholds us with his free
Spirit. Here it is, that the weary and heavy laden with the burden of their
sins may find rest and peace to their souls. Here it is, that Christ not only
commands, but invites us to come; and how can we but accept of such an
invitation? so that were the thing wholly arbitrary and indifferent, yet the
benefit and advantage is so great, that this should prevail with us to come,
and to come often.

To draw to a conclusion, with particular reference to this reverend and
learned Audience. If this obligation lies upon all in general, how much more
upon us, who have the honor to wait at the Altar, and administer in holy
things, and upon You, who are designed to the same honor? This was the pious
intent of our munificent and glorious Founders and Benefactors, in erecting and
endowing these structures, which are the envy and admiration of all foreigners,
and in providing so liberally for us several ages before we were born; that
being here trained up in severe exercises of piety, and in the studies of sound
and useful learning, we may the better be fitted to do God service in the
Church, defend the truth of our religion against all its subtle and malicious
opposers, keep up the belief and practice of Christianity in the minds and
lives of the people, be a credit to the Country and Age we live in, and
approve our selves not unworthy of the bounty and maintenance which we so
happily enjoy. Both God and man expect it from us, that we especially should
show forth an exemplary piety, to which nothing can conduce more, than a
frequent and devout receiving of the Sacrament. This would take off our minds
from idleness and vanity, and confine us more to our selves, and our studies,
and make us reflect on the true end of living in a College, and the particular
duty of the Priestly sunction. This would confound all the scandalous
imputations cast upon the Universities of late by Mr. Hobbs, and his
Atheistical Gallants, by the Papists and Fanatics in their scurrilous libels
and Pamphlets, who make it their business to bring a discredit and a
disreputation upon us. We cannot but be sadly sensible of the great contempt
that is poured out upon Churchmen; and we justly esteem it, as we have highest
reason so to do, an infallible mark and proof of the Atheism, of the
irreligion, of the debauchery of the age. But are we not too too much wanting
to our selves? would we retrieve and recover the honor due unto the
Priesthood, which seems in a manner forfeited at present? there cannot be a
better or more effectual expedient, than this, than to make others sensible by
our example of this great duty of our Religion, and of the necessity first, and
then of the blessed effects and benefits of frequent communion. Such an
exemplary strictness would help to re-establish and bring back the true
Christian temper and spirit, which are almost lost and shut out of the world.

I will not take upon me to prescribe precisely, how often the blessed
Sacrament is to be received. Every one is best able to resolve himself in this
case. The Church of England out of the great care, which she has of the souls
of all such, as live within her communion, does oblige them to communicate
three times at least in the year, of which Easter to be one; and this I find
expressly determined in a Ca^^^ 18. Seculares, qui Natale Domini, Pascha and
Pentecosten non communicaverint, Catholici non credantur, nec inter Catholicos
habeantur.
Council held at Agatha, a City in the south of France, under Caesarius,
Archbishop of Arles, in the year of Christ 506, with this farther addition,
that they who did not comply with this Canon, should not be reputed Christians.
But this limitation respected secular persons only, and he is not generously
pious, that does but just come up to the bare letter of the Law, which forbids,
that it should be longer neglected, but is supposed to encourage the willing to
more frequent approaches. But we are under higher and more indispensable
obligations. The Persons concerned in the late disturbances, and who by their
furious preachments helped to pull down the Hierarchy of the Church, cannot but
reflect, one would think, with shame and horror enough, upon the sad effects
of their pretended Reformation: how the giddy people, whom they had insatuated,
were broken into many factions and sects, and lost their reason and their
religion, and grew enthusiastical and mad. It is but a sorry excuse to say,
that the hand of the Jesuit was in all this: for they by their unreasonable
schism, and discontent, and factious conventicling, though colored over with
pretensions of godly zeal against the Papists, as at this day, wherein they are
playing over the same game, had created unjust prejudices in their minds; had
shaken them in their judgments from the established doctrine and service of the
Church, and had sitted them to be wrought upon by their subtle artifices, and
insinuations. What a sensible decay was there of true Christian piety and
devotion! the blessed Sacrament being seldom administered. Those Intruders, who
called themselves the University of Oxon. from the bloody and fatal year of
1648, to the King's happy restoration, did not think fit so much as once to
celebrate the communion together in this Church, and a public Sacrament was
not seen in several College Chapels during the same space of time. This was the
holy discipline of those times: and indeed men of such divided hearts and
interests, having once separated from the Church, soon grew weary of one
another's company: pride, and conceitedness, and passion, had embittered their
Spirits; and they would not communicate but in private chambers, and with their
own beloved party, refusing to make use of the public places of worship, which
they had usurpt, and were then possessed of. How much does it concern us to
have a better and greater esteem of these venerable and holy mysteries, and
accordingly how ought we to take care, that our approaches be frequent, and
that we make all due and necessary preparation! otherwise we eat and drink
damnation, not considering the Lord's body. If we believe, that we ought not to
come to the Sacrament without due preparation, why do we not prepare our
selves? why are we not in a continued readiness? If we do at any time forbear,
let it not proceed from supine negligence, or slighting; or from a false and
deceitful color and pretension of our unworthiness, but out of reverence and
humility, and that we may come with greater measures and degrees of repentance
and devotion. For where there is an heart inflamed with the love of God and
Christ, where there is purity and innocence of life, where there is a zeal to
promote the glory of God, and the good of others, where there is a hearty
sorrow for sins past, and a serious resolution and endea^^ur of pleasing God
for the time to come, by an entire obedience to his commands, and where there
is not the least indulgence or continuance in any known sin; where there are
these qualifications, there cannot be any just scruple. I shall conclude
therefore with that excellent and well known advice of De Sacramentis, lib. 5.
cap. 4.
St. Ambrose, Accipe quotidie, quod quotidie tibi prosit: sic vive, ut quotidie
merearis accipere. Receive daily, that which will be of daily, nay of
everlasting use and benefit to us: at least, let us so live, that we may be sit
to receive every day, that so having here on earth communion with our blessed
Savior in the holy Sacrament by faith, we may hereafter be admitted to an
everlasting communion with him in person in the highest heavens. Amen.

FINIS.

