THE BEHAVIOR OF Edward Kirk, After his CONDEMNATION FOR Murdering his Wife;
WITH THE Advice and Prayers which he left with the Ordinary, desiring him to
Publish the same for the Reclaiming OF Vicious Youth. TOGETHER With the
Behavior of the other Condemned Malefactors in NEWGATE.
WHEREAS at the late Sessions of Jail-deliver held in the Old-Bayly on
Wednesday and Thursday, the 2d. and 3d. Days of July, 1684. Nine Persons
received Sentence of Death, viz. Edward Kirk, John Mould, John Holtam, John
Bennet, John Richardson, James Walden, Mary Shelton, Andrew Hill, and Morgan
Reading.

Now whereas several Malefactors Condemned to Dye, do in the Prison of Newgate,
desire the Ordinary to Publish their Conferrences with him, thereby giving an
Account of their Penitency; and to warn others by their Example of suffering
Justice, to avoid the same Crimes. The Ordinary thereupon thinks it a necessary
Service to give a faithful Account of the said Condemned Malefactors Behavior;
hopeing thereby it will be a means to reclam Vice in Youth.

This account therefore he now gives, that on the next Day after Condemnation
(they all appeared together in the Chapel) where they were Exhorted and Prayed
with; the like was done on Saturday.

On the Lords Day, following being the 6th. of July Instant those for whose
Execution the Warrant was directed, were at the Chapel; where the Ordinary
Preached on this Text, viz. the 33. Chapter of the Prophet Ezekiel. and the 11th.
Verse. Say unto them, as I Live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the
Death of the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from his way and Live: Turn ye
turn ye from your Evil Ways, for why will ye Dye, O House of Israel.

The Ordinary observed, that Edward Kirk who was Convicted for the Murder of
Joan Kirk his Wife, in cutting her Throat on Sunday, the 25th. Day of May last,
in the Fields near Paddington, whom he often Visited before his Trial; seemed
then to be more affected with his Horrid Crime, then was observed before, and
since continues so.

The Paper of Advice which Edward Kirk, left with the Ordinary in Prison.
WHereas, the All-searching Eye of God with whom Darkness is Light, and by whom
the most Hidden and Secret Things are made Manifest, has made a just Discovery
of my Transcendent Wickedness; I think it equally my Duty to God and Man, to
second it with a Penitent Confession, that so the dear Interest which the
Meritorious Death and Passion of Christ has purchased for the Sins of frail
Mankind may be applicable to my self: For such is the Misery and weight of Sin
I lie under, that unless the Miraculous Grace and Mercy of my Creator
interpose, is sufficient to press me down to the neathermost Hell. Upon this
Consideration, I esteem it my Duty to Publish to the World the occasion which
had the influence on my Punishment, or what is the Meritorious cause of my
Fatal and untimely End. The occasion was so slender, that it rather aggravates
my cruel Crime, than mittigates it. My Wife for whose Murder I duly suffer was
of that Temper, that she was indefatigably officious to hunt me from Place to
Place; but whether out of Love or Necessity she did it, is a difficulty to
Discern, and therefore I proclaim her Innocent; and dare impute nothing to my
Excuse, my Passion being above my Principle; and that Grace of God which should
lead Men to a true and sincere Repentance, for want of a true management of it,
was taken away from me, and I left, like the Jews, in my own Willfulness and
Stubbornness, to act whatever my Spiritual Enemy the Devil could impose upon my
Inclination: and indeed the influence of my Wickedness is such, that if I had
the Greatest affluence of Sublunary Enjoyments, it inbitters the most hopeful
passages of my Life; and nothing can be Sweet and Cordial to me but the
precious Blood of Christ, which was shed for the Sins of the Penitent; such
likewise is the present Punishment of the Murder; that through the sense of it,
I am Involved into a Deluge of Melancholy, sometimes preventing my address to
God for assurance of Pardon: yet according to that Gracious Light which it
pleases God to entrust me with, I continually lie under the contest of Sin and
Satan, and heartily beg for that Supernal Regeneration, which is a turning from
Darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan, to the Kingdom of God. Now,
because the world is more Governed by Example than Precept, I am highly and
zealously concerned to propose the reflection of my Condition to all those who
are miserably biased to a Dissolute and un-Christian Life; that from my doleful
End, they may be cautioned to discard all such Ways as may be Effectual to draw
them on to Perdition, and living without God in the World.

Nor can I forbear to express my Inclination, which was always equal to the
Natural State of all Men: yet such was my Misfortune, that I added the Whip and
Spur to make it Strong and Vigorous, and was as inquisitive to know Lewd
Company as ready to Embrace whatsoever was adapted to Irregularity, the Sin of
breaking the Sabbath I cannot pass by, and was continually Guilty of: upon
which Holy Day I committed the Heinous Sin of Murder; while Pride, Lust and
Luxury, had the sole Dominion over me, and was frequently more acceptable than
any thing of Piety and Godliness: Thus my Soul being surfeited with all manor
of Sin, I am brought to condign Punishment. Take timely care therefore all
Young Men, how you are drawn in by the Bewitching Lust and Love of Women: for
tho my Relations were Responsable, and gave me a Good and Pious Education, yet
the Grace of God which is infinitely eligible before the whole World, was
wanting in me, and justly left me to the Guilt of Murder. Let no Man therefore
trust in uncertain Riches, nor bolster himself up with the sufficiency of his
Friends, in order to any hopes of Security from suffering the just Punishment
of an evil Life; for there is a just God that made and Governs the World, who
will not only in this World, but in that which is to come, Shower down Hail,
Fire, and Brimstone on those who tread under Foot the Son of God, and put him
to open Shame. If this Confession and Advice have efficacy to reclaim any, it
only gains the end for which I designed it, and to God above be Glory. Amen.

Two Prayers which Edward Kirk, desired might be Printed with his Advice to
Youth.
O Lord God, Good and Gracious, Everlasting and Blessed God; I must confess I
have been a great Sinner, and without thy Pardon am utterly Undone for Ever: and
therefore I pray thee Lord, that thou would be pleased to wash away all my
Sins from my Heart, and give me a new Spirit within, so that I may truly serve
thee in Holiness and Righteousness, those few Minutes that I have to live in
this World: that when my Soul and Body parts, my Soul may ascend up into
Heaven, to God on High: so that he that shed his Precious Blood for Sinners (if
it be his Blessed Will) may make my Peace with God. Of all my Sins that I have
Committed, there is none so sad and Horrible as the Sin of Murder is: therefore
I Beseech thee O Lord, to blot out that loud crying Sin from before thy
Presence, so that it may not rise up in Judgment against me, when I come before
thy Tribunal-Seat on High.

Oh! that men would consider this in time, that Sin will one Day change their
Countenance; however it comes in a flattering form, pretending nothing but
Friendship but in the end, will leave a Sting behind it, even a guilty
Conscience, Terror of Mind, and anguish of Spirit; wherefore let us fly from
Sin, as from the biting of a Serpent, that we be not stung to Death; knowing
that the ways of Sin, is Death.

O Lord most Holy, Good and Gracious, Everlasting and Blessed Lord God, how
Glorious art thou Lord thou art a great and a Merciful God; and thou have done
more for me a thousand times than I have deserved; I confess I have been a
great Sinner; I have done those things which I should not have done, and I have
left undone those things which I should have done. Lord help me, and strengthen
my Faith every Minute more and more, those few Minutes that I have to live in
this World, that when I am departed hence, through the merits of Jesus Christ,
I may ascend into a Heavenly Kingdom, Amen.

Edward Kirk, acknowledged that he was at the Execution of John Gower, a
Coach-maker, who for Murdering his Wife, was Executed at Tyburn, on the 23d. of
May last; 1684. And that after Kirk returned from Tyburn, Satan suggested him
to Murder his own Wife within one hour after; That he Prayed against the
Temptation; yet, not so fervently as he ought. The Instigation came with
Violence upon him, about six a Clock on the Lords Day in the Morning, being the
25th. of May, 1684. That he then contrived how to draw her out in the
Afternoon to walk with him into the Fields; That when he got her out, he
sometimes went before her, and called to her to walk faster after him: and when
they were near Paddington, he told the Ordinary, that he pretended some excuse
into a Gravel-Pit, which was within two Fields of Tyburn; That he asked his
Wife to give him her Hand, which she did; and so led her into the Gravel Pit.
That when she was there, he Quarreled with her, and Bruised her Face and Head
with a Cane; that she begged him to spare her, but he drew out a Knife to cut
her Throat: which he attempting to do, she Strugled with him, using these
Words, Lord have Mercy on my Soul, Was ever Woman so, barbarously Murdered?
After he had cut her Throat, and returned home, he endeavored as much as he
could to compose his Countenance, and go about his Business, and so order his
Behavior, that nothing more than ordinary might appear in his Looks, to give
suspicion that he had been about any un-Lawful, much less so Horrid a Fact. He
told the Ordinary that he would at his Trial Plead Guilty, and beg God and the
Kings Mercy; yet against his Resolution he denied the Fact, till it was proved
upon him, by his own Confession before his Trial. Notwithstanding he used many
false Stories to evade the Proof of the Fact, as appears in the account of his
Trial. Since his Condemnation to Death he has plainly Bewailed his great
prevarication and false asseverationtos the Court of Judicature; hoping that by
Repentance and through a true lively Faith, in the Meritorious satisfaction of
Christ's Bloodshed; His Horrid Murder, and the denial of it so Impudently in
the Court of Justice, will be pardoned by God, to him. And the Ordinary, does
hope that upon narrow search into the frame of his Heart, that Edward Kirk, had
some Ground to Expect a happy Eternity, for he said that his Sin was so great
that he deserved to Dye; and desired not to Live.

Andrew Hill, Aged 21 Years, acknowledged to the Ordinary in conference, that
he had spent his time very Idly, and lived a very disorderly Life, often
quenching the motions of the Holy Spirit: and warns all Young Men to mind their
Honest Employments, and not to seek out, nor mix with Lewd Company, least they
come to an untimely Death.

Morgan Reading, Condemned for a Burglary, was very sensible of his Sinful
course of Life; and grieved that he had committed several Impieties against
clear and strong Convictions in Conscience to the Contrary.

Another of the Condemned Persons, being a Lusty and Comely Person, of the Age
of Four and twenty Years, is very Penitent, and much bewailed his mispence of
Precious Time, neglecting the public Assemblies on the Lords Day, and the duty
of Prayer, whereby he fell under the Temptations of Satan and bad Company; so
that he committed many Excesses, such as he desires all Young Men to refrain
from, particularly to bridle their Tongues from Cursing and Swearing, or useing
any other Intemperance; for God in due time will discover all who persist in
Impenitency.

Dated on Thursday the 10th. Day of July, 1684. Samuel Smith, Ordinary of
Newgate.

London, Printed by Geo. Croom, in Thdmes-street; over against Baynard's
Castle, 1684.


