^^primatur,

(...)ane, R. P. D. Hen. Epis. (...) a Sacris Dom.
^^^7.
REMARKS Upon the MANNERS, RELIGION And GOVERNMENT Of the TURKS.

Together with A Survey of the SEVEN CHURCHES OF ASIA, As they now lie in their
Ruins: AND A Brief Description of CONSTANTINOPLE.

By Tho. Smith, B. D. and Fellow of St. Mary Magdalen College Oxon.

London, Printed for Moses Pit, at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard,
M.DC.LXX.VIII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Sir Joseph Williamson KNIGHT, ONE OF HIS MAJESTY'S
Principal Secretaries of STATE, AND Of his most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL:

These Observations of Travels in Turkey are humbly presented by the AUTHOR,

His HONORS CHAPLAIN.

TO THE READER.
IT had been a matter of no great difficulty to have presented you, instead of
this short Essay, with a large Volume, if I had either affected or designed,
when I first took my pen in hand, to have written a full history of the
Religion, Manners and Government of the Turks, or had tho^ght fit to have
stuffed these M^moires with accounts of things trivial and common, which have
been said too often already and which are to be met with in every little
Relation. But I was not in the least tempted to such a piece of vanity and
ostentation: and indeed I thought it very much beneath ^ne to do this;
especially when I reflected I was writing Letters to an Excellent Person, who
by his studies and travels, and many honorable employments both at home and in
foreign parts had acquired a perfect knowledge of the state of affairs, not
only of Christendom, but also of all other remoter Countries; and who deserved
to be treated with greater respect and ceremony, by me especially, that owe the
opportunity I gained of traveling into the Levant to his most obliging and
effectual recommendation. So that brevity was my choice, and I was oftentimes
more sollicitous and concerned to consider what not then what to write. That I
have done what I proposed to my self, and have made good my pretensions,
neither my fears nor my modesty will permit me to be over-confident: But I have
this, I will not say to justify, but to excuse at least my presumption and
forwardness, that if I had known these things to have been satisfactorily
accounted for by others, I should not have troubled either my self or you.
These accounts, which upon my return home to Oxon I published there in Latin,
I am in a manner necessitated to translate into English, tho with some few
enlargements, to prevent the doing of it by another, which I had just reason to
apprehend. For a worthy person, who has often condescended to this kind of
drudgery for the public benefit, was so just and civil, as to ask my leave to
do it; which I did not think fit to grant: but whether for the better or the
worse I must not say.

If the thread of a Churchman be perceived to run through the whole Relation,
I hope this will be so far from being a just exception or prejudice to it, that
it may gain some little credit and reputation with you upon that account; if
not the performance, the design at least, I easily persuade my self will not be
disallowed. It is not only to gratify your curiosity, but to serve you in
better and nobler ends; whereof this is the chiefest, that being more and more
convinced by such kind of relations, of the brutish ignorance and horrid
barbarousness of the Turks, and of the dotages and follies of their worship,
you may the more thankfully and seriously reflect upon that most blessed and
merciful providence, which has cast your lot in Christendom, and in a Country
especially, where the Christian Doctrine is professed in its primitive purity and
integrity, and where civility and learning, and all ingenuous Arts flourish,
and are in their height and perfection.

The account of my voyage to the Churches of Asia, all but the beginning and
end, I wrote in Smyrna out of my Diary, for the satisfaction of my
fellow-travellers, who were pleased to demand Copies of me. And I hope what I
have done in this kind will not in the least hinder any of those worthy and
ingenious persons, who have made the same tour before or since, from publishing
their Journals: this argument being capable of continual enlargements,
especially in the matter of Inscriptions. This would be of very great advantage
to learning, of which there cannot possibly be a greater proof than in those
marbles which were brought out of Greece, and the lesser Asia at the expense of
that great man, Thomas Earl of Arundel, and which by the most generous favor
of the illustrious, Henry Earl of Norwich and Earl Marshal, now serve to adorn
the area about the Theater at Oxon: and especially the Parian marble, which
contains the most famous Epochas of the ancient Greeks, by the help of which
many difficulties in History and Chronology have been cleared; as Mr. Seldom,
Mr. Lydiat, the right Reverend and most profoundly learned, the present Lord
Bishop of Chester, the most accomplished Sir John Marsham, and Mr. Prideaux, the
learned Publisher of the Marmora Oxoniensia have shown in several instances.
And of what great use several other inscriptions are, for the adjusting and
settling the accounts of time, and rectifying the Fasti Consulares, will better
appear, when the Reverend and most judiciously learned Doctor William Lloyd
Dean of Bangor shall think fit to publish those things of this kind, which he
has been pleased to show me in his Collections. An incredible number of marbles
still remain behind in those parts, and others are continually dug up, (the
erecting of these having been formerly the pride and gallantry of the Greeks)
and what might be purchased upon no very hard terms, if some excellent persons
would be at the expense of enriching their Country with the spoils of the
East. I have often lamented the misfortune, which drove me from Hierapolis
after the short stay of two or three hours, where I believe I could have
employed my self for a week or fortnight to very good purpose: and that neither
my necessary attendance npon the Ambassador and the Nation, nor my small stock
of money afterward, when I was at liberty, would permit me to travel to Nice,
Nicomedia, Ancyra, Iconium, and several other places, where I heard were
numerous and famous ruins; but especially to Monte Santo, as they call Mount
Athos, to look after Greek Manuscripts. But I hope other Travelers will be
more fortunate, and better encouraged than I have been, and will one day make
the world happy with their discoveries, and receive the reward of their
generous adventures and undertakings, when God shall restore them to their
native Country.

Lastly, I have added a short description of Constantinople, which I readily
acknowledge to be far from accurate and perfect, not designing in the least,
when I was upon the place, to have done any such thing; and therefore I
contented my self only to put down some short notices to relieve my memory. I
soon was made sensible, by passing up and down the streets of that great City,
that the site and sceleton, if I may use the word, of the ancient buildings
only remains, the beauty and glory of them being lost, since the Turks became
Masters of it: And as when I was at the Churches (an idea of which they may
easily have, who have seen the Abbey of Glastenbury or Thetford, or will but
call to mind the deplorable ruins of London after the dismal fire) so when I
considered the present state and condition of Constantinople, I was oftentimes
perplexed and in doubt, whether I was more to admire the piety and munificence
of those, who raised such stately and glorious structures, or the brutishness
and barbarousness of those, who pulled them down. But I soon laid my hand upon
my mouth, when I further considered, that sacrilege had done the like to
several goodly houses of Religion and Learning in Christendom, and that it was
wholly owing to the miraculous providence of God, who laid a restraint upon the
mad and impious zeal of some of the prevailing faction in the late times of
usurpation, (when the revenue of the Church became a prey to their
covetousness) that the Cathedrals, which are the wonder of all ingenious
forrainers, and one of the standing glorys of England, had not been laid wast
and levelled with the ground, and turned into confused heaps of stone and
rubbish, like Ephesus or Laodecea. A reflection upon which sad times should make
us detest those seditious and fanatical principles, which if they should once
prevail, and be received as good Christian Doctrine, as they were most
unhappily not many years since, we have just reason to fear they would bring as
great desolations along with them as any that are now in Turkey.

T. S.
Stanhop-house, All Saints day. 1677.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 14. for has, read have, p. 5 l. 16. r. do, p. 7. l. 7. r.
estates, p. 13. l. 25. r. the mysteries of the Christian Religion, p. 17. l.
14. r. Omar, sp. 18. l. 2. r. taken, l. 13. for that, read as, p. 27. l. 17. r.
and which, p. 32. l. 26. r. on, p. 30. l. 10. r. the Emp^e, p. 13. l. 17. 22.
r. were, p. 36. l. 8. dele out, p. 45. l. 19. r. in the afternoon, though not
constantly, p. 50. l. 20. r. how far, p. 75. l. 24. r. on which, p. 80. l. 5.
for some, read several, p. 71. l. r. convenience, p. 77. l. 24. as it is, p.
86. l. 15. Rum-ili* p. 105. l. 4. provision made for them, and water, p. 119.
l. 19. fear, p. 123. l. 18. the first, p. 131. l. 21. (as well as at Buda and
Bagdat) p. 137. l. 20. for but, read as, p. 149. l. 15. for sorts, read arts,
p. 165. l. 19. of, p. 167. l. 25. dele his, p. 190. l. 4. such a, p. 196. l.
17. heard, p. 203. l. 20. upon hearing, p. 243. l. 15. l. 19. I found, p. 247.
l. 13. turn, p. 248. l. 7.., (...), p. 181. l. 2. read past, p. 301. l. 14.
nor, p. 302. l. 22. jetting. p. 281. l. 2. past, p. 318. l. 14. (...), p. 320.
l. 1. (...), p. 321. l. 15. a long time since.

REMARKS upon the MANNERS, RELIGION, and GOVERNMENT of the TURKS.
THE Turks are justly branded with the character of a Barbarous Nation; The
Turks in what qualified sense Barbarous.
which censure does not relate either to the cruelty and severity of their
punishments, which their natural fierceness, not otherwise to be restrained,
renders necessary and essential to their Government; or to want of Discipline,
for that in most things is very exact, and agreeable to the Laws and Rules of
Polity, which Custom and Experience has established as the grand support of
their Empire; or to want of civil Behavior among themselves, for none can
outwardly be more respectful and submissive, especially to their Superiors, in
whose power it is to do them a mischief, the fear of which makes them guilty of
most base compliances: But to the intolerable Pride and Scorn wherewith they
treat all the World besides.

Their Temper and Genius, Their contempt of Learning.
the Constitution of their Government, and the Principles of their Education
enclining them to War, where Valor and Merit are sure to be encouraged, and
have their due reward; They have neither leisure nor inclination to entertain
the studies of Learning or the Civil Arts, which take off the roughness and
wildness of nature, and render men more agreeable in their conversation. And
though they are forced to commend and admire the ingenuity of the Western
Christians, when they see any Mathematical Instrument, curious Pictures, Map,
or Sea-Charts, or open the Leaves of any Printed Book, or the like; yet they
look upon all this as a curiosity, that not only may be spared, but what ought
to be carefully avoided, and kept out of their Empire, as tending to soften
men's minds, and render them less fit for Arms, which they look upon as the best
and truest end of life, to enlarge their Greatness and their Conquests.

But it is not so much their want of true and ingenuous Learning, which makes
them thus intractable and rude to Strangers, Hatred of all other Religions,
which is
as a rooted and inveterate prejudice against, and hatred of all others who are
of a different Religion. It is not to be expected, that where this principle
prevails, and is looked upon as a piece of Religion and Duty, they who embrace
it should be guilty of any act of kindness and humanity; except when they are
bribed to it with hope of reward and gain, or forced to it by the necessities
of state, or wrought upon more powerfully, as it were against their wills by
the resentments of some favors and kindnesses received, which may happen now
and then in some of better natures and more generous tempers.

How mean and contemptible thoughts and opinions soever we have of any, a
principle of their Religion, and
yet common humanity obliges us to restrain and keep them in from breaking out
in scurrilous and reproachful language, especially when there is no
provocation; but the rude malice of the Turks scorns to submit to these general
rules of civility, who are so far from being sensible of the indecency of it,
that they triumph and glory in it, as if it were not only an act of bravery and
gallantry, but a just proof of their zeal, and most becoming and worthy a
Musulman.

This hatred they are very careful to instill into their Children from their
very infancy, of their Education.
as a most necessary part of their Education, next to the belief of one God,
and of Mahomed his Apostle and Messenger. I must profess, it raised my wonder
oftentimes to see little Boys, whose tender age seemed no way capable of such
resentments, upon the sight of Franks (for by that general name they most
confusedly call the Western Christians) passing by, to leave their sport and
play, and with great vehemence of passion, and with a fury above that of
Children, exclaim upon them, and not satisfied with this, throw stones at them,
with a most strange and serious concern, upbraiding them with their infidelity,
as if they had learned nothing else from their Parents.

This is the general civility of the Turks, Their behavior toward Christians.
who vouchsafe us no other title when they speak of us in their ordinary
discourse, when they seem most calm and mild, when their zeal and malice does
not boil over in fury and madness, then that of Gaour, or Infidel; and to
disgrace and deride us the more, they usually preface it with some obscene
words, which are now grown a common mode of speech among them, and so frequent
in their mouths, that upon any the slightest accident that crosses them, if a
stone that lies in their way does offend them, if their Horses are unruly or do
but stumble, if their Buffaloes and Asses trip or stand still, they vent their
passion and displeasure in the same beastly language. When their passion swells
and rages, and prompts them to show a higher degree of contempt and hatred of
us, then bre Domuz, you Hog, is the word; (the very mention of which adds to
their disorder, and gives their blood a new fermentation) ranking us with those
impure Creatures, which they account so execrable, (as if we were equally
impure), and from whose sight and touch when they are alive, and no less from
the taste of their flesh, they so carefully and religiously abstain. We are not
yet arrived at the height of their rudeness and barbarity; this is not the
worst reproach and abuse they put upon us; it is not enough they think to
compare and rank us with Beasts, unless they pronounce us Devils too; and
maintain with great noise and confidence, that we stink in the Nostrils of God
Almighty.

In Cities, and places of Trade, Christians only secure in places of Trade;
where Merchants reside, there is provision made by capitulations and articles,
accorded by the Grand Signor to their respective Sovereigns, for the security
of their persons and estate, which interest alone makes them submit to. For as
dull and as heavy as they are, they are mighty sensible of the benefit and
advantage they receive by foreign Trade. They themselves not caring to traffic
out of their own Empire, either out of a principle of pride, as if there were
more of state in it, that all sorts of Merchandises are brought to their doors,
without their seeking or fetching; or of laziness and fear, not willing nor
daring to undergo the hazards and fatigues of Sea-voyages; or for want of skill
in the art of Navigation, in which they are very blockheads and bunglers,
confessing, that God has given both the knowledge and command of the waters to
the Christians; all which added to the natural dread and aversion they have of
the Sea, make them content themselves for the most part with the Trade of the
Black-Sea, sailing for the most part terra terra, or of Alexandria, the great
Scale and Port of Caire, and the other parts of Egypt which lie toward the
Mediterranean; though oftentimes molested in the one by the Cossacks, who in
times of war come down the Borysthenes with their Fleet of Boats, and thence
coast all along to the very mouth of the Bosphorus, as by the Malteses in the
other. And I am induced to believe, by arguments of very great probability,
that if the Trade of Christendom were wholly interrupted by wars, and the
Silk-trade particularly diverted and turned out of the Dominions of the Turk,
either by the way of the Caspian Sea, or which would be more feisible, by
lading it at Gombroon, and so joined to the Indian Trade, (both which projects
were mightily approved of by Abbas that victorious King of Persia, and great
enemy of the Turks), to avert so great a mischief, they would quickly vail
their Turbants, and descend from their high terms, and quit their disdainful
and proud thoughts, as if the Christians could not live without their
friendship, and submit to more advantageous conditions of peace and commerce.

But notwithstanding these privileges, yet obnoxious to affronts and abuses,
and the superaddition of the Law of Nations to that of common nature and
humanity, as if their tongues lay not under the restraint of an Edict, and
Religion gave them a license to be rude, they do not abstain oftentimes from
reviling Ambassadors themselves, as they pass along the Streets, with their
Nation and their Retinue to their Audidience, though the Janisaries who are
their Guards and in their pay, are concerned and think fit to discountenance
and chastise such an insolence.

Here is not indulged the liberty of Christendom, and to be picked up, and made
Slaves of,
of running up and down the Streets and by-Lanes of Constantinople, and being
too curious; for besides the affronts that are everywhere to be met with,
there is danger of being thrust into some private House, and after some days or
weeks sent over to Asia, or shipped for Tartary; and though examples of such
violent seizures are but few, yet custom grounded upon such like fears, makes
it necessary to have the company and attendance of a Soldier, which is
necessary to desend one from the open assaults of Turks, either spirited with
Wine and Rackee, or with the zeal they have brought with them from Mecca, (for
these religious Pilgrims, who have visited the Tomb of their Prophet, are very
fierce) who will draw their Knives and Ponyards; or assaulted.
and whatever the design be, whether only to affright, and to show what they
would do, if their Emperor had not forbid it; yet in such a scuffle the
accident may prove very dangerous and fatal too, and only this way is to be
provided against.

Their prejudices lying so deep as not easily to be removed, Patience and
prudence necessary;
a Christian who is not a Slave as the Greeks and Armenians are, who seem to be
below their hate and scorn, will be liable to continual affronts, which he must
put up and digest with a patience becoming his Religion and his prudence, and
not seem much concerned, but be deaf rather to the noise and ill language.

However, as also the Habit of the Country, when they travel.
if curiosity carries one twenty or thirty miles into the Country, the danger
is really great and certain, (for it is usual to seize upon straglers, if they
meet them in the Fields and Woods separated from their company, where there is
such great probability of securing their prey, and of their being
undiscovered), unless he throws off his Christian Habit, and puts himself into
that of the Country, and goes armed and well attended. In places where
Christians seldom appear, they are had in greater horror and execration; and if
they meet with any civility, it is for the sake of the Janissaries who accompany
them, whom they are afraid to displease; though sometimes the ill humor will
break forth into such obstinacy and peevishness, that the Janissaries themselves
shall sare the worse for the Christians, whom they wait upon. I remember, when
I was at Sardes, not caring to lodge in the Caravanserai with our Horses, we
employed our Janissaries to procure us a Lodging for a night or two in any
Turkish Cottage, which the barbarous people would not give way to, (though they
had the assurance of a gratification above what so slight a courtesy could
possibly merit) as soon as they understood we were Christians; but rejected the
overture with a great deal of indignation and scorn, saying, that they would
upon no condition or reward suffer their Houses to be defiled by Infidels.

This opinion they generally bear of Christians; Their opinion of, and
behavior toward the Jews.
but they entertain a far worse of the Jews; and herein they think they
mightily oblige us, and would have it taken not only as an argument of their
justice, but of their good will, that they prefer the Christians, whose valor
they have so often experimented to their great cost, before them whom I found
by just and frequent observation they esteem as the basest and most
contemptible people upon the face of the Earth, and as a company of pitiful and
low-spirited wretches, who dare do nothing that is generous and brave, and
worthy of men. It is usual with them to say, it is matter of great wonder to
them, that the Christians who pretend to so much wit and understanding, should
believe the just and great God should give up a Prophet so famous for the
holiness of life and miracles as was their Messiah (for this character they
acknowledge as most due to our B. Savior) into the hands of so vile a Nation as
the Jews, to be crucified; and therefore in compliance with their gross
conceptions, which are no way capable of understanding the Christian Religion,
they imagine, that Christ escaped out of their hands, and was assumed privately
into Heaven, and another very like him in stature and shape, and the other
signatures of his body, substituted in his room, upon whom they executed their
utmost malice and fury in putting him to so ignominious a death. They call them
generally by the name Gephut; which word is corrupted from the Arabic, and
though originally it might denote nothing but the name of that people, yet now
they use it in a most disgraceful and ignominious sense, as if there could not
possibly be a greater disgrace or reproach than the bare title of a Jew; tho
sometimes for merriment sake, and to show their scorn, they usually prefix some
opprobrious term or other, to make them more contemptible and ridiculous. But
when they grow a little more serious, and recollect themselves somewhat, and
change their scorn into anger, they will upbraid them with their obstinacy and
insidelity in rejecting and disbelieving the holy Prophets sent by God, and
particularly our B. Savior, whom they place next their false Prophet Mahomet.
The Jews are very obnoxious to the insolences of the Janissaries, who
oftentimes to make themselves merry, throw and kick them to the ground, and
pull them by the Noses and by the Ears. Against which they dare not so much as
open their lips, for fear the sport should by the least ill word be turned into
fury and madness. And very often, to do them the more dishonor, when any
Criminal has received the sentence of death, they presently hurry him away, and
make the first Jew, rich or poor, they can light upon, walk with the Rope in
his hand, tied about the neck of the other, till they come to the next Tree out
of Town, and then hang him. It is a great mistake to think, that the Turks
admit them into their Divans, or public Councils, as if they were privy to any
of their designs they have upon Christendom, or valued their information, or
thought they could reveal the secrets of Government used among the Christian
Princes. Their pride will not suffer them to stoop so low; and the policy of
the Jews in such like affairs, is far less than their malice and ill will; and
their wit and cunning is shown and exercised better about Merchandise, and
Brocage, and Usury, wherein they do great service to the Turks, who are pitiful
Accomptants; and are employed by them in collecting their Customs, and the
making even their accounts, as knowing that their Talent lies this way, and
that they are crafty and subtle in making bargains, and understand money
matters very well, there being no Basha, or scarce any of fashion, who has a
numerous Family, but retains a Jew with him or about him, whose only business
is to look to the expenses of the House, and buy all things necessary, as
Clothes, Provisions, and such like.

Above all they retain an immortal hatred of the Persians, Their hatred of the
Persian greatest.
though they are their Brother Mahometans, and pay a like respect and reverence
to the Alcoran, and embrace the dotages, and follies, and impostures of it,
with the same concern of zeal. The original and fundamental difference is about
the Succession, which the Persians contend to belong to Ali, not only in right
of his Wife Phatima, who was Daughter of Mahomet; and by the last Will of
Mahomet himself, whose Favorite he was; but also upon the account of his
Valor, and other personal excellencies. Agreeable to this opinion they have of
Him and his Title, they exclaim upon Abu Beker, Osman, and Omer, who were
successively Chiefs of the new Religion, as mere Usurpers, and as Corrupters of
the holy Text; they are one great argument and subject of the raillery of the
Persian Poets, who make odd and ridiculous representations of them; whereas the
Turks look upon them with all possible veneration, esteem them not only as the
ornaments, but as the props and supports of the Musulman faith, and their
memories are so sacred among them, that their names are usually inscribed upon
the inside of their greater Moschs, as I have often took notice of. This
difference is heightened by different interpretations of some ambiguous Texts in
their Law, and by the introduction of different Rites and Ceremonies in their
Religious Worship, each fiercely accusing the other of perverting the mind of
their Prophet, and of innovation. Their disputes and grudges, and mutual
censures and recriminations have some ages since broke out into such quarrels
and feuds, that seem no way likely ever to be peiced up and reconciled. If any
discourse happen concerning the Religion of Persia, the zeal wherewith the
Turks are presently set on fire, does furnish them with sufficient arguments of
reproach. A Persian, they will tell you, is a desertor of the true faith, and
an Apostate; an Heretic, who follows his own fancy, and rejects the established
and ancient Ceremonies of Religion; is altogether impure, as neglectful of
those washings, which their Prophet requires as necessary preparations to
prayer; one who does not know how to say his prayers as he ought, void of all
sense of the true Religion; lastly, a very Infidel, kizel bash Gaour, the
Infidel with the red head, alluding to the Turbants or Shashes they wind about
their heads, which are usually of that color; whereas the color the Turks
most affect is white, except the kindred and posterity of Mahomet, whose special
privilege alone it is to wear green, a color they pretend he most delighted
in, and used to go in when he was old; his name is writ with that color in the
Alcoran.

However this animosity might begin upon a Religious account, yet it is
mightily supported by interest, and managed with a great deal of dexterity and
cunning by the Turks, who cherish these evil opinions and prejudices in the
minds of the people and Soldiers, especially against both Christian and
Persian, the two extremes of their Empire confining upon their Territories, and
so easily either find or take frequent occasion to quarrel and war with both.
By these arts they work upon the minds of the Soldiers to a greater
willingness of undergoing the hardships of war. With this politic Engine they
thrust them upon any design, though never so unlikely or desperate. For who is
so cowardly and faint-hearted, or so much in love with life, as not to venture
the loss of it in the cause of Religion, when the true Faith either is in
danger, or is to be propagated; when they take up Arms to chastize and punish
Heretics and Apostates; when they fight for God, and the advancement of his
cause against the professed Enemies of it? This persuasion inspires them with
desperate and brutish valor, when they turn their faces upon Christendom; as I
shall have occasion to show hereafter. And the same argument they use as
successfully, when reason of State or ambition oblige them to make a War in
Asia; a famous instance of which we have in the taking of Bagdat, in the year
of Christ 1638, by that warlike Emperor Morat, who was present there in person,
and not long after died of excessive drinking of Wine, to the great joy of
Poland, which he threatened to invade with his well-disciplin'd Troops, full
fleshed with blood, enraged to revenge the affront and disgrace of his Brother
Osman. For as soon as an expedition into Persia was resolved upon, and
determined in the Seraglio, the Churchmen had orders to sound the alarm in
their Pulpits, for the better animating and encouraging the Janissaries, who
otherwise would have had no very great mind to it. And they performed their
part mighty well by their popular and furious preachments, telling them over
and over, that the Persians had made a defection from the true Faith; that they
had perverted the sense of the Divine Law, by their wicked and false
interpretations and glosses; and how highly they would deserve of the great God
of Heaven and Earth, of Mahomet his Prophet and Apostle, and of the whole
Musulman Religion, if they would fight stoutly. Every Mosch rung with zealous
exhortations to fight for the cause of God, and the Soldiers longed to be at
it before the time. And to keep firm their good resolutions, the Mufti, whose
sentence and determination they revere as most sacred and binding, and little
less than infallible, having orders from Court so to do, sends forth his Brief
all the Empire over, (a Copy of which in the original language I have laid up
in that great Repository of all curious as well as useful and necessary
Learning, the most famous Bodleian Library at Oxon) wherein he thunders upon
the heads of the poor Persians, charging them with Apostasy. He makes them
guilty of damnable Heresies and Errors, which he endeavors to show in several
branches and particularities; he solemnly pronounces them accursed of God, and
not worthy to live upon Earth, assures them that it is a meritorious work, and
what will be rewarded in Paradise, to root them out, and more meritorious than
if they destroyed the Christians; and not contented with this peremptory
sentence, as bloody and cruel as it is, but as if it were too mild, he condemns
them to the pit of Hell, and very devoutly prays God, that there they may serve
for Asses, and be condemned to the drudgery of carrying the Jews upon their
backs, not being able to wish them a more vile or more disgraceful employment.
Thus extreme violent and deadly is their hatred of Sects; and I would to God
the false Religion of Mahomet only afforded instances of it.

This contempt and disesteem of all others is the natural result of the
overweening conceit and false valuation they have of themselves; The proud
behavior of the Turks arising from a false belief of their being Successors of
the Greeks and Romans in the Empire.
they proudly style their Port the Refuge of the World; and fancy the glory and
majesty of the Roman and Greek Empire to be devolved upon them by a most just
right; and that other Princes stand in awe of them, and are no better than
Tributaries, and do them homage, because they judge it their interest to send
their Ambassadors and Ministers to reside among them; custom that had its
beginning from the too forward compliance and condescension of those who
courted the favor of the Grand Signor, this way passing into right, that no
Ambassador can in the least assure himself of a civil reception, except he
bring his presents along with him, upon his arrival at the Imperial City.

The chief ground of this their arrogance is a mighty confidence and
persuasion, and only in the right way of Religion and Salvation.
that they are the chosen of God, to whom he has revealed his Will and his Law
by Mahomet the Seal of the Prophets, as they style him; that they are in the
right way which leads to Paradise, while others wander in bypath of error,
and consequently are the only true Believers (for so Musulman signifies) which
is become the general name, Musulman.
by which they distinguish themselves as Mahometans, of such a particular
denomination from all other Religions in the world. They are ashamed of their
Scythian original; it does not comport with their present grandeur, to look
back and remember what poor vagabond lives their Ancestors lead upon Mount
Imaus, how they wandered to and fro with their Goats and Kids, and how not
being able or willing to support their poverty by their labor and industry,
they betook themselves to the more gainful trade of spoil and robbery. For the
old name of Turk is altogether laid aside and despised by them, as ominous and
of an evil sound, as if an alteration of condition had made them quite another
Nation, and they seem desirous to forget it, and therefore never mention it
themselves, and take it amiss and are very angry and look upon it as an
affront, if any Christian call them by it. Such as depend immediately on the
Emperor, and are enrolled in his service, and receive his pay, for distinction
and for honor assume to themselves the title of Osmanli, out of respect to the
name and memory of Osman, to whose valor and prudence they owe the first
beginning of their Empire; and to show their duty to the Ottoman Family, whose
Slaves they glory themselves to be; but the name of Musulman, which Religion
bestows on them, and equally respects all, is that they are most pleased with,
and desire chiefly to be known by.

They say, The Prophets of the old Testament laid claim to by them.
as well as the Jews, we have Abraham to our Father; all the Prophets are
theirs, Moses, Samuel, David, and the rest. A Jew thinking to put a trick upon
a very zealous but ignorant Turk, who was discoursing upon this argument, told
him, that they had one Prophet however peculiar to them, which they could not
pretend to or challenge in the least, naming the Prophet Habakkuk; to which the
other could not tell what to reply, having never heard of him, till having
recourse to his Imaum, or Parish Priest, and understanding from him, that
Habakkuk was a good Musulman, he finds him out, and beats him soundly for
daring to go about to rob them of one of their greatest Prophets. In this they
triumph and applaud themselves; this is the continual subject of their most
solemn thanksgivings to God, that he has made them Musulmans, in such like form
as this, which I have met with, Praised be God who has made us to be of the
stock of Abraham, and of the seed of Ishmael, and has given to us an holy
Religion, and a House to which all Strangers resort, and has appointed us to be
Judges over men.

In a Religion, The Mohammedan Religion gross,
which is made up of folly and imposture and gross absurdities, which
abstracting from the common and fundamental principles and notices of Natural
Religion, has nothing in it to recommend it self to the choice and acceptance
of any sober and wise man, no subtle, no grave discourses of learning or
reason, not so much as an argument, that looks like probable, is to be expected
for the defense of it. Their strength lies more in attacking other Religions,
than establishing their own. What they commonly object against the Christian,
argues a stupidity only befitting Turks, as being the result of a gross fancy,
that entertains no other idea's of things than what are derived from material
and sensible objects. With their foolish and idle imaginations the great
mysteries of our Religion can no way suit; concerning which they ask
blasphemous and most shameful questions, and they think this a sufficient
confutation; though it must be sadly confessed, that for the sake of some novel
Doctrines, and especially that of Transubstantiation, which interest and a
misapplied zeal and a superstitious fancy have brought into the Church, they
loath and abhor the very name of Christianity, for this reason, because they
think they cannot be Christians but upon the hard and impossible condition of
first disbelieving their very senses.

The liberty their Religion allows in gratifying the corrupt inclinations of
nature, and brutish.
is so far from being a bar and a prejudice to it, that it sets it the more
closely upon their minds; the doctrine of it being so agreeable to the example
of their Prophet, who was of a hot lustful temper, and pleased himself with
variety of women. By this with an equal cunning he both justified his own
practice and drew in such great numbers of men, of as bad a temper and
complexion as himself, to embrace a Religion so charming and so pleasing to
flesh and blood, which proposed the grossest satisfactions of sense in Paradise
as the reward of their belief. And least virtue and modesty should make
opposition against this brutish licentiousness and sensuality, as well as
reason and discretion dislike and find fault with the gross follies of it, he
takes his Sword into his hand, and strangely infatuated with Enthusiasm, to
which a distemper of body inclined him, (for that he first cheated himself,
seems to me as plain as a demonstration) and mistaking the dreams of folly for
Divine inspirations, pretends God having tried several ways, which the
obstinacy and wickedness of men had rendered ineffectual, The proof of it lying
in their Swords,
was resolved at last upon this, and bring men over to the true Faith by
violence and force of Arms, whom tenderness and mildness could not move and
work upon. This was his chief warrant (for he pretended but little to Miracles,
and those few he is said to do are very idle and frivolous) taking advantage of
the distractions of the time he lived in, and of the horrid ignorance of his
Countrymen of Arabia, which fitted them for any new impression, when Religion
was broken into so many Sects and Parties, and a horrid dissoluteness and
corruption of manners had overspread their Empire.

This is the ground of their confidence; and in their success.
the whole stress of their arguments lies in their Scymitars; their Religion,
they will tell you, cannot but be true, which has extended it self so far, and
has been blessed with so mighty success; that God himself has clearly decided it
in their favor, as being his Champions, and the propagators of his truth and
worship against the Infidels; witness those triumphs and victories they have
gained over the Christians, the Empires and Kingdoms they have subdued by their
all-conquering and irresistible Arms; what are all these, say they, but full
and satisfactory proofs and demonstrations, that Mahomet was sent by God, and
that particularly they ( Turks) are his true followers, who have so great a
share and part of the world; as if the Sophi and Mogul had little or nothing,
and that there was no such Empire as that of China, and America they hear the
Franks talk of lay out of this world; and as if all Christendom, though brancht
into so many distinct Monarchies and Governments, was but a little scantling in
comparison of their Empire, which by degrees has increased to that vast bulk,
next to the just judgment of Almighty God, by the follies and divisions of
Christians themselves.

Sometime out of an excess of zeal, they will ask a Christian civilly enough,
as I have been asked my self in the Portico of Sancta Sophia, why will you not
turn Musulman, and be as one of us? The usual answer is, that my Father before
me, and my Grandfather before him were Christians, and that I think it best for
me to continue in the Religion of my Country, in which I was born and bred. No
disputing with them.
And indeed as they are scarce capable of any other answer, so neither is it
safe or prudential to give it. It would be a piece of unwarrantable zeal and
indiscretion (not to call it by a worse name) to upbraid them of their follies
to their faces, without the least hope of success, and dispute with them in the
Streets, and in their Moschs, when such like questions are proposed, about the
purity and truth of the Christian Religion; and supposing that zeal should
transport any one so far, that he were knocked in the head in the pursuit of his
argument, he would deserve pity, and his courage that the fear of death could
no way mate, were to be admired; but I question whether he could challenge the
glorious title of a Martyr, who without any just occasion, much less necessity,
has brought his death upon himself. The case of that poor Christian is vastly
different, who having renounced his Faith and his Savior, being perplexed in
conscience for the great sin he had been guilty of, and informed by his
Confessor, to whom he had disburthened his grief which lay so heavy on him,
that he could no way expiate it, but by publicly professing himself a
Christian again, went boldly to the Cadi, and persisting in his new resolution,
received the sentence of death with great comfort and satisfaction.

This shadow of an argument, Most secure in their opinions and belief.
added to the force of education, has such a mighty influence upon their minds,
that it stifles all the exertions of reason and natural conscience, and makes
them perverse and obstinate, and so secure withal, that it is a sin to doubt of
the happiness of their condition, as to the other world as well as to this; in
justification of which confidence it is most severely forbid by the Government
to go about to convert a Musulman, and the doing of it is adjudged a capital
crime, without the least hope of favor and mercy.

The Turks indeed knowing how generous the Franks are in order to the sfying of
their curiosity, as if Money sprang up in their pockets ready coined, make
their superstition and their hatred vail to their covetousness, and will admit
them into their very Churches; though sometimes I have met with a repulse at
Sancta Sophia, where I used to go often to please my self with the sight of
that glorious Structure; they telling us, the Caymacam, who had taken frequent
notice of the resort of Christians, had sent orders to keep them out, which
they durst not but comply with, for a time at least.

Being at Prusia in Bithynia, the Imperial City before they crossed the
Hellespont and took Adrianople, we procured a Priest to let us into a Mosch,
which had been formerly a Christian Church, hard by which is the Tomb of the
Emperor Vrchanes, who took the City. After we had viewed it, we presented the
old man, who was waiting at the door, with about half a Dollar, who perchance
exspecting but a few Aspers, was so surprised with it, that to show his sense
of the unexspected civility, with great earnestness and devotion, lifting up
his eyes to Heaven, he prayed God in his good time to make us Musulmans.

This is the only way of taming their fierceness, Only to be pleased with money
and presents.
by presenting them money, and bribing them with gifts to be civil; and so long
as this pleasant force is upon them, they will pretend great kindness; but if
they do not depend upon you, or if you withdraw your hand, they return to their
natural rudeness and hatred with greater violence, which hope of gain and some
present advantage had restrained; for to be kind to Christians is against the
very principles of their Religion. Here and there may be a few, whom a sense of
gratitude for received kindnesses, and a freer conversation with Christians, by
reason of commerce, have soft'ned out into better manners.

As I and my Companion were walking in the Streets of Bursia, An instance of a
generous civility.
as they now call it, to see what remains of Antiquity we could meet with, a
Gentleman-Turk (for so he showed himself) guessing by our complexions, that
there was something of Christian under our Turkish Clothes, asked our
Janissaries, if we were not Franks. They readily confessed it, and upon further
demand of what Country of Phrenkistan or Christendom, knowing that we were
English, he invites us to his House; which civility as we were unwilling to
accept, so did we not know how to refuse; but after a little consultation with
our two Janissaries, who were very forward for it, we went with him. Upon our
first coming in, he bids us heartily welcome, and expressed such respect and
kindness, as fear of being taken notice of did not permit him to show in the
public Streets. He entertained us with Coffee and Sherbet and Sweetmeats,
according to the custom of the Country; our wonder at this unusual and
extraordinary treatment was the more heightened, when we understood that he had
been a Haggi, or Pilgrim, and had visited Mahomets Birthplace at Medinat
Alnabi, the City of the Prophet, and Sepulcher at Mecca (from which places they
use to bring back greater measures of zeal and fury against the Christians).
But to satisfy us, he told us, that he had formerly received very great
kindnesses from an English Merchant at Smyrna, and that he was
resohttp://www.thecatseyes.com / show.asp?showid=2460ved for his sake to be
civil to his Countrymen wherever he met them. Not content with this, he would
scarce give us leave to depart, proffered us the use of his House, while we
stayed in (...); and upon our refusal, took a solemn farewell of us, and sent
one of his Slaves to attend upon us to the Seraglio, which we had a great mind
to look into. One may travel from the Danube to Euphrates, and perchance not
meet with the like instance of generous civility.

They observe most strictly the Rite of Circumcision, Circumcision.
as the Seal of the Covenant, which God made with Abraham and Ismael, which
gives them a right and title to all the privileges of the Musulman Faith. This
Sacrament the Impostor Mahomet thought fit to receive, as well in compliance
with the Jews, as with the custom of his Country and many other Nations in the
East, who were punctual in the observation of it, out of a strict adherence to
the traditions of their Fathers, and the usage of ancient times, without any
remembrance of the true ground of its orignal institution. They do not
circumcise Children in their infancy, much less think themselves obliged to the
eighth day; no Canon ties them to a set time, but they are left wholly to their
liberty, and to consult their convenience, so it be not deferred beyond the
thirteenth year, which is the utmost limit, (that is, if they be not deprived
of an opportunity of doing it for want of a skilful hand) in memory of the
Circumcision of Ismael, which as they alledg agreeably to the holy Scriptures,
was done when he was at that age. Till which time the Boys wear their Hair
long, but made up into curled knots hanging over their Shoulders. The Ceremony
is performed with great noise and tumult, which with them are the only
expressions of their festival joy and mirth; all their solemnities being
disorderly and rude, and without any decorum or discretion to manage them. The
whole day is spent in entertaining their Relations and Neighbors, who are to
be witnesses of the operation; for at this time they think they may fairly and
lawfully lay aside their gravity, and wholly give themselves up to merriment.
But as soon as Evening-prayers are over, they prepare sor the business, which
is committed to the care of a Surgeon, or Barber, or any other who has an
easy and dextrous hand. In the mean while the Boy is brought in by his Father
and Kindred, in his new Vest and Turbant, whom they flatter and caress to divert
him from melancholy and fear, and to prevent him from fainting before he feels
the sharpness of the Rasor; telling him, that in a few minutes he will be
enrolled among the followers of Mahomet, and be made capable of the favor of
God and the joys of Paradise. Sometimes they cast the Boy into a sleep with an
Opiat potion, when they think he has not courage enough to endure it; or do it
by a surprise, before he is aware, having first prepared all things in order to
it, and then making as if it were to be deferred till the next day, quickly
return and finish the intended work. Yet notwithstanding the great stir they
have made in the daytime, and that by this they are initiated into their
Religion, they do not use to have any solemn prayers at it; only the Operator
in the very act cries out, Bismillah, in the name of God, three times, the
Music playing to drown the noise and howling of the young Turk, bleeding under
his wound. At the Circumcision of the Son of the Grand Signor, or any other
considerable Bassa or Officer, for the greater pomp and solemnity, and for
example sake to encourage him to endure what they have undergone before him,
several others are circumcised at the same time; between whom upon the account
of this Religious solemnity, there is contracted such a dearness and
friendship, beyond all ties of natural relation, that it is only dissolved by
death, and ever after they call themselves by the title of Sunnetdash, or
Associate of Circumcision, which they value above that of Brother. In the night
they repeat often the same rude mirth, as they had in the day. Those Villains
who out of desperation or a desire of living in all bestial sensuality, turn
Renegados, are compelled to be cut. They first appear before the Cady or
Justice, and acquaint him with the design of becoming a Musulman, and desire to
be admitted to the favor and privilege. Immediately he commands their heads to
be shaven, and the matter being usually known before, Clothes and Turbants are
provided and freely bestowed upon their Proselytes; and sometime upon his first
coming out in his Musulmans Habit, they set him upon a Horse, and carry him in
triumph through the Streets of the Christians, with a Lance or Dart in his
hand, to signify they are ready to fight for and defend the Religion they have
newly taken up, with the utmost hazard of their lives. Some few, perchance out
of a natural horror of pain (I intend it only of the Apostate Christians, for
the natural-born Turks never omit it) have by several artifices and wiles
eluded the sentence of the Law, and remain uncircumcised, and abhor this
invisible sign of a Mohammedan; and old men especially, to whom this wound might
prove deadly and fatal; but then they must keep it mighty private and secret,
lest it come to the Cady's ear, whom they must otherwise bribe, or else be
forced to submit to this piece of religious severity.

It was one of the great policies of Mahomet, Their prayers at set times.
that he might the better establish the fancies that were to be the peculiar
characters of his Religion, to press upon his followers the frequent practice
of those great duties of Nature, which refer to the worship and service of God,
as if in this they were to outdo both Christians and Jews. For they are
obliged to make their solemn prayers five times a day, at set hours; which vary
according to the different seasons of the year. They do not divide the natural
day into so many equal portions, as not understanding the use of Aequinoctial
hours, or the benefit of Sun Dials, to measure and adjust their time; but only
have regard to the rising and setting of the Sun, and its longer or shorter
stay above the Horizon; though of later years they are mightily taken with the
invention of Watches, there being scarce a Turk in Constantinople of any
fashion, but is master of one, and besides has a striking Clock in his House; a
considerable number of Artizans of the French Nation reaping good advantage
from this their curiosity. The times are at Sunrising, Noon, the Middle-time
between Noon and Sun set, Sunset, and an hour and half in the Night; only upon
Friday, which they call Giumahgun, Friday their day of Religious Convention.
or the day of their Religious Convention, they add to their devotion, and go
to Church about the middle of the Forenoon; at which time the more devout shut
up their Shops, but afterward return to their trade and business. This being
the only distinction and solemnity of the day, and no other reverence paid it.
Otherwise there is the same noise in the Streets and Markets, the same
chaffering of wares, their Magazines as much frequented, and no difference as
to the neatness and fineness of their Habit; they thinking they have done
enough, if they step to the Mosch at that peculiar time for a quarter of an
hour. In the time of Ramazan, which is the most solemn time of the whole year,
wherein they pretend to most devotion, and wherein the most careless will
endeavor to expiate the miscarriages of the year past, some will rise two
hours before day to praise the name of God in a set form, this being a holy
month, devoted to fasting and the more strict exercises of Religion. In the
greatest Moschs on Friday in the Afternoon, such of the Priests as have
acquired the fame of Learning and Eloquence, enlargeing upon some words of the
Alcoran, entertain the people with harangues in their way, with a great deal of
noise and seeming zeal, tending to the advance of Piety, Justice, Charity, and
the other virtues of conversation and society. But this is extraordinary, which
they are not bound to, their part being to read several Surats or Chapters of
the Alcoran, and recite the prescribed office of Prayer: A little stock of
Learning serving to qualify them for this function.

Before they make their prayers, Their washings.
whether publicly in their Moschs, or privately in their Houses, they are very
solicitous to wash themselves, as thinking, that without this previous
lustration God will be deaf to their requests, and that all their devotion will
be ineffectual and to no purpose. This being so necessary a qualification of
prayer, that they might not be destitute of conveniences, and so be forced to
omit their devotion for want of due preparation this way, besides the vast
number of them everywhere in their Streets, there are Conduits and Fountains
with great variety of Cocks adjoining to the greater Moschs for this purpose.
It is not enough to wash themselves, except they do it after a particular
manner, which though difficult in it self, yet custom and use have rendered so
easy and familiar to them, that they do it without delay and without error;
the manner is this, as I made a Turk, whom I had obliged, show me particularly
in my Chamber. Tucking up their Vests and short Sleeves above their Elbows,
they take up as much water as they can hold in the hollow of their hands, which
they wash thrice, and then putting their forefinger inro the left side of their
mouth, and their Thumb into the right, wash that three times also. Snuffling up
water with their Nostrils, they gently stroke their Face from the Forehead to
the Chin, and back again; next their Arms to the bending; taking off their
Turbant they rub with the inside of their Hand the forepart of their Head, from
the Crown to the Forehead, putting their fore and middle Finger into the
cavities of their Ears, and their Thumbs behind, washing their Necks with three
Fingers of both Hands reversed. Their public Bagnos or Baths usually are built
very handsome and stately; all great men have them in their Houses for their own
use, and the uses of their Women, being frequented not only for health and
cleanliness, but for Religion in several particular cases, in which they are
obliged to cleanse other parts of the Body, not to be named, which yet I have
seen them do at an open Fountain in the Streets. This ceremony, be their
occasions never so great and urgent, they cannot omit without great scandal and
guilt. Before which purgation they look upon themselves as unfit not only to go
to Church, but to converse or to be conversed with. But how shall such as
travel in the Deserts of Arabia or Libya comply with this fundamental Article
of Mahometism, where they cannot be profuse with the provisions of water they
carry with them for the necessities of life, where they meet with no Springs to
supply themselves? Are they wholly freed from the obligation of prayer? No. The
subtle Impostor has herein provided a remedy against this contingence; in case
of the faileur of water, Sand or Ashes or a Morter-clod crumbled into dust
shall do as well, and shall convey the same cleansing virtue, as much as if
they had made use of the clearest Fountain Water. They use cold water, except
in case of sickness and weakness, when they are indulged to warm it, for fear
otherwise the cold should strike into their bodies and increase their malady.
But see the madness and folly of their superstition! by the sprinkling of a few
drops of cold water, they think their minds are as much purified as their
bodies, and that this is a sufficient purgation from the defilements of sin,
and a most effectual remedy against brutality, and the most horrid impieties
they can possibly be guilty of.

To put them in mind the better of these duties of Religion, Called to Prayers
by the Priests or their Servants*
that neither pleasure nor business may divert their thoughts, the Priests or
their Servants give notice to the people publicly of the approaching times of
prayer. And for their better accommodation, about the Menar or Pyramid raised
from the ground adjoining to the Mosch, is built a Gallery, to which there is
an ascent by a winding pair of Stairs, the door whereof always looks toward
Mecca. Here walking round and straining their voices in a kind of singing tone,
which they lengthen out, they invite them in a peculiar form of words, which is
common to all, and from which they do not depart a tittle, to come and make
their prayers; and by this way they supply the want of Bells, which they
neither use themselves, nor permit the poor Greeks. It is scarce credible how
this noise, by reason of this advantage of height, in a clear evening may be
distinctly heard. The words are exactly these; God is great, God is great;
there is no God but God, there is no God but God; I confess that Mahomet is the
Messenger of God, I confess that Mahomet is the Messenger of God; come to
prayers, come to prayers; come to worship, come to worship; God is great, God
is great; there is no God but God. In the morning sometimes they remind them,
that prayer is better than sleep, and bid them repeat the Phatiha or first
Chapter of the Alcoran, which they use as frequently as we do the Lords Prayer.
In the Royal Moschs, where there are usually four Pyramids, (only that of
Achmet, the Grandfather of the present Emperor, in the Atmidan or Hippodrome
in Constantinople having six) this proclamation is made with greater solemnity
by several Priests jointly at the same time, but without the least variation of
words, and agreeable to the same number of repetitions.

Their prayers are in the Arabic language, Their prayers in Arabic, and of
what nature.
the language of Mahomet and his Alcoran, which by reason of their daily use
are easily understood by the people; to which also the frequent mixture of
Arabic words in the Turkish does not a little conduce. The matter of them is
generally pious, and what might not misbecome those who worship the true God;
but that they are defective; except where they reflect most impiously upon the
most sacred and venerable mysteries of the Religion of Jesus, by making a
deprecatory appeal to God, with a far be it from thee, O Lord, what the
Christians impute to thee; meaning, that thou have a Son. These prayers, as
several other parts of their worship, have for their foundation not only the
Alcoran, in which, as they speak, are contained the commands of God, but the
practice and example of Mahomet derived down to them by tradition, which they
call Sunna. By which pretense they have introduced several customs, though in
matters of less moment, of which there is not the least intimation in the Book
of their Law; and the people, out of a blind reverence and ignorant zeal,
esteem them to have the same authority and to be equally binding. They direct
their prayers only to God Almighty, acknowledging his infinite power,
sovereignty, and right over Angels and Men and Devils, and the whole
comprehension of all other Beings. They put up no prayers to Mahomet, nor do
they bow their knees, as ever I could observe, as some write, at the mention of
his name, it being one of their principles, that God is only to be adored and
worshipped, which makes them so severe upon us, arraigning us of Idolatry for
worshipping Christ, who is God blessed for ever; Arianism, which Mahomet
learned of the Monk Sergius, being one main ingredient of their Religion. In
what a fair way are a great number of false Christians (especially inferior
persons, who are taught to renounce the Lord God their Savior, who bought
them) in Poland and elsewhere, to become Mahometans, if the Grand Signor should
enlarge his conquests among them, which God avert for the good of Christendom!
Only as to what concerns Mahomet, they wish God would be propitious to him and
his Family, that peace and mercy and the benediction of God may be upon him;
which civility of expression Mahomet himself uses in the Alcoran toward the
holy Patriarchs and Prophets and our B. Savior, in imitation of whom their
writers take up the same form, joining the name of the blessed Virgin to his,
as Isa the Son of Miriam, on whom be peace. They do Mahomet no other honor in
their offices of Prayer, besides frequent acknowledgments of his mission from
God as his Apostle and Messenger.

There is a great semblance of devotion in their Churches. Their public
Service in their Moschs.
This is the only representation that can be made of them to their advantage.
Take them in their Streets and Houses, they are rude and fierce and
ill-natured; but their modesty here triumphs over their fierceness of temper,
and a sense of Religion influences their behavior, and makes it extraordinary
humble and reverent. I happened to be present at Evening-prayer in the time of
Ramazan in the new Mosch built by the Mother of this Emperor, where might be an
Assembly of no less than two or three thousand. Lifting up the Antiport, and
advancing a little forward, I could not perceive the least noise; no coughing
or spitting, no disorderly running up and down, no gazing one upon another, no
entertainments of discourse, nothing of irreverence or heedlesness, as if they
had forgot the business they came about; but all were mighty intent and
serious, and listening with great diligence to the Priest, or busy at their
private prayers, with that profound silence, as if it had been not only a sin,
but a crime that drew after it bodily punishment to be inflicted immediately,
to misbehave themselves whether in discourse or gesture in that place.

When they make their prayers, And the manner of it.
they turn their faces toward that determined point of the Heavens, under which
Mecca is placed, as the Christians do to the East, and the Jews to Jerusalem,
in what Climate or position of Sphere soever they are; standing almost erect,
only that their heads do incline somewhat forward; their eyes being fixed upon
the ground, and their hands close to the breast, almost in the figure of a
Cross, without any the least motion, as if they were in an ecstasy. But soon
after, upon the repeating of some words, they at set intervals incline their
heads, and bend their bodies, and prostrate themselves upon the pavement,
covered with Carpets or Maps of Grand Cairo, several times together; then
sitting cross-leg'd, their hands placed upon their knees, but not exactly in
the same easy posture as in their houses, but as it were somewhat higher, and
upon their right heel. They often pass from one gesture to another, and make
often interchanges, which tradition and custom have made necessary in order to
the right performance of this duty. Besides, they have a trick to move their
heads several times from one shoulder to another, as if they showed the
expectation they have of the coming of Mahomet, who promised to appear at the
last day at the time of prayer; or else (which is the reason Albert Bobowski, a
learned Polonian, who had been kept in the Seraglio full nineteen years, and a
person well-skill'd in all the Rites of the Mohammedan worship, gave me upon
enquiry) to show respect to their Angel-keepers, whom they foolishly believe at
that time to sit upon their shoulders. They make use of Chaplets of Beads, upon
which they number their short prayers, such as Sabhan Allah, blessed be God;
Allah Ekber, God is great; Alhemdo lillah, praise be given to God; Bismilla, in
the name of God; which they will repeat sometimes a hundred times, as they will
likewise the several names of God, with great noise and fervency. We heard in
Sancta Sophia six or seven Priests crying out several times till they were even
hoarse again, We believe, we believe; as if they thought God Almighty had been
to be wrought upon by such loud and vain repetitions.

In making bows and prostrations, Their prostrations.
which they look upon as necessary appendages of prayer, their devotion does
chiesly consist; to omit them is very scandalous, there being not a greater
disgrace and reproach among themselves than to be accounted Binamaz, one who
does not say his prayers. It is enough however they do it in their Houses, so
they do not neglect the Mosch too much, and especially in their Month of Fast;
but the Janissaries particularly, who by the obligation of their Order fight for
the propagation and advancement of the joint-interest of Religion and the
Empire, think this their zeal and readiness enough to excuse them from going
thither too often, and dispense with themselves for not going above once or
twice in a year, except such as live in the two Oda's, or public Chambers in
Constantinople designed for their Lodgings, adjoining to which is a Mosch
peculiar to them. But some on the other side, who would be taken for Saints,
are as extravagant in the excess, as the Janissaries are usually neglectful: For
at the times of Prayer they will dismount from their Horses, The excessive zeal
of some Turks,
leave their shooting and hunting, spread their Handkerchiefs in the open
streets, as well as in the Fields and Woods or Seashore; as I have known them
do, when crossing the Propontis we were forced by violence of weather, to make
into a Cove between two Rocks, where I found several Boats of Turks got thither
before me, being the only Frank in the company. After their prayers, they fell
to drinking of Coffee, and observing that I was wet and cold and indisposed, by
reason of the ill-weather, they bid one of their Slaves give that Infidel who
was in the Cleft of the Rock, where I had sheltered my self against the wind, a
Dish of Coffee, which was very welcome, not daring to offend them by making use
of the Wine I had laid in the Boat to serve me during my Voyage to
Constantinople.

In some this devotion certainly flows from a principle of conscience, and
hypocrisy of others.
and is very hearty and sincere, as both justice and charity oblige us to
believe; but it would be as great folly and weakness not to censure others of
gross and ridiculous folly and dissimulation, as this following instance will
fully demonstrate: My Lord Ambassador one day entertained at Dinner one Husain
Aga, who had formerly been Customer at Smyrna, and at that time one of the
great men of Constantinople, by reason of the relation that his Father-in-Law
had to the Vizir then in Candia, but as very a Turk as is in the whole Empire,
together with five other Hogs fatning up for the slaughter. They drank mighty
freely of Wine and Strong-water, which had been distilled in Christendom, for
the sake of which they chiefly came; though they would jestingly at Table check
themselves for daring to transgress the Law of their Prophet: But being once
in, they drank on, a drop of each defiling them as much as the greatest load
they could stand under. But however, to show that for all this extravagance
they were Musulmans, as soon as they heard the Priest from the Spire of a
neighboring Mosch at Ikindi, that is, the middle-time between midday and
Sunset, call to prayers, they desired a Carpet might be spread in the
Courtyard upon the ground, where they went very devoutly to their prayers, and
left us to wonder at their stupid and irreligious hypocrisy. This is no very
rare or unusual thing among them, it being what I have seen also practiced
before a great number of Christians in other places.

The Fast, Their Fast of Ramazan.
which every year is observed in the month of Ramazan, is another great
fundamental of the Mohammedan Religion. Which though it be fixed as to the
month, yet because the years they make use of in their Religious and Civil
accounts are Lunary, without any intercalation to adjust the different periods
of the motions of the Sun and Moon, there is an anticipation made every year of
eleven days, and by consequent it does not return to the same beginning, till
after a Circle of thirty three years has expired. In determining the beginnings
of months, not troubling themselves with the nice calculations of Astronomy,
they only respect the Phasis of the Moon, not in the least its Conjunction; and
accordingly, as it must needs often happen, they begin the month one day sooner
or later, as the Moon appears. Sometimes they have caused their Lamps at their
Moschs in Constantinople, which is the usual signal in this month, to be
lighted at midnight, as soon as it has been attested by credible Witnesses, who
either have had better eyes or a clearer Horizon, that they have seen the Moon
that night. But however to prevent confusion, in rainy and cloudy weather,
after a days expectation and forbearance, they begin it the next, when the
thickness and haziness of the Sky hinder it from appearing. Generally upon the
sight of the New Mood they bow their bodies, gently stroking their faces and
beards, and put up prayers to God. During this month, as long as the Sun
continues above the Horizon, a total abstinence from all manner of sustenance
is injoined; in the very heat of Summer, when the length of the days adds to
the trouble and irksomeness of it, they dare not so much as put one drop of
water into their mouths; and indeed herein their strength and their patience
are both equally to be admired; such restraints a fear of violating this severe
Law of their Prophet lays upon their very natures, that a natural Turk, though
at other times brutish enough, and apt to indulge his appetite, will choose
rather to perish with thirst, and faint away by reason of an empty stomach,
than commit such a great sin, though in private and out of the sight of the
world. Their constancy or rather obstinacy have been so great, that their
Histories relate, that the Janissaries themselves, who in several other matters
do not use to be over scrupulous, when they have been in the Field and
preparing to engage their enemies, have abhorred the very thought of eating and
drinking in Ramazan time, till they have been dispensed with by the Mufti,
assuring them by his infallible authority, that it is more acceptable to God,
to defend his Religion against the enemies of it, than to observe its precepts
to the prejudice of it, in weakening themselves by such excessive and immoderate
fasting; and the Emperors own example has prevailed with them above the
necessities of nature. The Renegadoes perchance, who have embraced Mahometism,
that they may wallow the more securely in all manner of sensuality and lust
(for no one can be supposed so sottish, or void of reason and common sense, as
to embrace it upon conviction, as if he had found by strength of argument, that
it was true, and upon that account ought to be embraced) do not use this
severity upon themselves; but then their great care is, that they be not
discovered. For though it be not a capital crime, yet the irreligious criminal,
if convicted before the Cady, is oftentimes drub'd, and by way of expiation and
penance, is to fast a considerable number of days. To prevent the scandal and
the punishment of it, they durst not so much as enter into a Cabaret (when the
Greeks were allowed to sell Wine) which would have been a double crime,
remembering the sad fate of him, who being got drunk in the Ramazan time, had
hot melted Lead poured down his Throat and into his Ears by Nassuf, who was
chief Vizir under Achmet, who judged his bad example merited this severity:
though some, out of their excessive love to it, will venture to drink in
Christians Houses, where they may be free and can have it. Their luxury,
instead of being repressed by this total abstinence, is the rather heightened
and inflamed; for as soon as the Sun is set, and their Lamps flame round about
the Towers of their Moschs, which they place in several figures, as of a Gally,
and the like, which make a very diverting show; and that prayers are ended,
from which none who are well are to be absent, who have any care of their
reputation, they play the gluttons more solemnly, and spend the whole night in
entertainments and revellings. They pass over the day with a great deal of
weariness and drowsiness, wishing and yawning till the Evening-Star appears;
but in the night they enjoy themselves doubly for their forced abstinence and
forbearance; which is therefore the more shameful and ridiculous, because it is
but an introduction to riot. The case of sick persons, Travelers, and Children.
Sick persons and Travelers are dispensed with, but upon this condition, that
when they have regained their health, or have finished their voyages, they fast
so many days in another month, till they have filled up the number. Some out of
a foolish opinion of merit, begin their Fast in the month preceding, but which
is always to be concluded with the last day of Ramazan, and never to be
extended beyond this limit. No Children are tied to this hard Law, though
sometimes they make Boys of five or six years of age, that they may learn to
accustom themselves, fast two or three days together, after some little
intermissions. This month was consecrated by Mahomet to this solemnity, because
in it he pretended to receive the Alcoran from Heaven. In this they all pretend
to a greater devotion than ordinary; and he who at other times scarce cared to
go to Church, thinks now to redeem his former neglects by his greater diligence
and frequency. The last day of it is devoted to the memory of their dead
Friends and Relations, whose Graves marked with red Oker they usually visit,
and put up their prayers and suffrages for their Souls, that it may be well
with them; with which ceremony they end the day and the Fast together.

The following Moon begins the Feast of the great Bairam, The Feast of great
Bairam.
which is a time of great mirth and joy, lasting only for three days. In the
morning of the first of which the great Guns are discharged, and Drums beat.
There is nothing but joy and triumph in the Streets. They seem to be quite
another sort of men than they are all the year besides, diverting themselves in
the open Streets with Music and Dancing, making invitations and entertainments
at their Houses, and sending presents to their Friends. A great number of Sheep
are killed too upon the first day of this Festival; Sacrifice Sheep.
which they call Kurban, or the Offering, hereby thinking that God will become
propitious and favorable to them, this being no obscure Relic of the
Mosaical Worship, ( Mahomet borrowing something out of the Religions then most
in vogue, when he first started up a Prophet) and is questionless looked upon
by them in the nature of an expiatory Sacrifice, which they use at other times
upon solemn occasions. As Solomon, when he entered Buda 1541, sacrificed in the
great Church dedicated to the V. Mary, turned into a Mosch; and so at
Strigonium two years after, in 1543; As Selim his Father did at Jerusalem, for
good success in his expedition into Egypt. Every man is his own Priest, and may
slay his Sheep at his own House. They distribute the several parts of it among
the poor, reserving nothing in the least to their own uses, which will take off
from the merit of the Sacrifice; which also ceases and is rendered ineffectual,
if these Victims be purchased with money, got dishonestly either by fraud or
violence. I have been assured of a Turk, who was so scrupulous this way, that
instead of satisfying for the injustice he had been guilty of, and restoring
what he was wrongfully possessed of, only desired an English Merchant to change
such a number of Dollars for others of the same species, fancying those that
were got honestly in the way of industry and Merchandise would thrive better
with him than those he parted with, as if the money only were in fault, and
drew a curse after it, which he fancied thus easily avoided by an exchange. The
Sheep thus sacrificed, they fancy enter into Paradise, and there graze all
along the flowery Meadows upon the Banks of Rivers flowing with Milk and Honey.

Seventy days after is the Feast of little Bairam, The Feast of little Bairam.
which is not observed with half the pomp and noise as the former. Their
Pilgrimage to Mecca.


In the intervening space the Pilgrims prepare from the farthest quarters of
the Empire for their journey to wards Mecca, that they may enter that City in
procession the first day of this Feast. In this pilgrimage all perswasins of
Mahometans agree, the obligation lying upon all indifferently to perform it,
once at least in their lives. The concourse of Pilgrims is extraordinary great;
and for the greater pomp and show, and for better security and convenience of
travel, there are places assigned confining upon the respective Countries
whence they usually come, where they meet first either alone or in dispersed
companies; such is Damascus for those of Europe and the lesser Asia; Cairo for
the Inhabitants of Africa; Zibet, a City in Arabia Felix, for the people of
Arabia and the Islands of the Indian Ocean; and Bagdat for the Persians, Vsbeck
Tartars, and the Subjects of the Mogul. But this obligation and command is
dispensable in several cases. If they are employed in the necessary service of
the Emperor, either about his person, or in the Wars, or in the Government of
any Province. If they be sickly, and so their health like to be endangered by
long travel; if they are poor, and have not wherewithal to maintain their
Families in their absence, or cannot furnish themselves with necessaries for
the Voyage, and the like; so that it is in a manner wholly left to their
liberty and choice, and is to be measured and directed by their convenience and
interest. Yet notwithstanding there is so much of merit in it, and such
reputation gained, every one thinking himself, as the more holy, so the more
fortunate, as if they had gone to take possession and secure themselves of a
particular place in Paradise, that several thousands flock there continually
every year, and in their numbers at least outdo the Christians, who live among
them, whose zeal and devotion carry them to visit the holy Sepulcher of Jesus
in Jerusalem at the time of Easter. The ceremonies are too many and too idle to
be put down here minutely and in detail; the chiefest and most remarkable are
these which follow, as they were communicated to me by a curious and learned
Renegado: They all afterward meet on the Mountain Arephat, not far from Mecca,
and are there at the farthest by the ninth day of the month Dulhaggi, where
they sacrifice, and put on their holy Covering or Blanket, of which presently.

The Haggiler or Pilgrims put on a white woollen Coat, and hang about their
necks a white Stole, all their other Clothes being cast off, pairing their
Nails, cutting their Mustachios and Beards, and shaving their Pubes, Head, and
Body, or washing their Body, at least their Head, Feet, and Hands, and after
perfume themselves and say their prayers. By this they become Muharrem or
devoted, and are obliged to abstain from all obscenity of language and strife,
even from hunting and looking after game, and do not dare so much as to kill a
Louse, or put on their other Clothes, Turbants, or Caps. Yet they may go to a
Bagno or House for shade, or into a Bed.

Upon their entering Mecca, they go strait to the first Mosch, and then to the
Black Stone, which they foolishly imagine the Patriarch Abraham used to step
upon to mount his Camel, and say their prayers there, and kiss it and rub their
Chaplets of Beads upon it. The whose remaining Ceremony consists in
sacrificing Sheep, in processions about the wall of the Sepulcher of Mahomet,
and to the neighboring Mountain, and to the Rock, in which as they pretend
with the like certainty, are still to be seen the footsteps of that Patriarch.
Their visiting of Jerusalem.
Several in their return, to make their pilgrimage complete and more
meritorious, visit Jerusalem, for which they preserve a great veneration; the
ordinary name whereby it is known and called in their discourse, being Kuds, or
the Sanctuary, or the holy City; to which they add the additional titles of
Sherif and Mubarek, or the noble and blessed holy City. Here they come to
worship and say their prayers in the Mosch, which is built upon the top of
Mount Zion, in the very place where Solomon's Temple stood, once the Mountain of
Gods holiness, and the joy of the whole Earth, and still beautiful for its
situation. This like the Chapel at Mecca, they esteem so holy, that it is only
lawful for a Musulman to enter into it. If a Christian or Jew should but lift
up the Antiport, and set one step into it, he profaned it, and indeed the
penalty of such a curiosity would be, as they give out, no less than death, or
at least they would force them upon a necessity of redeeming their life with
the loss and change of their Religion. Yet some Greeks have been so curious,
who have spoke Turkish admirably well, and known all the Rites and Customs used
in their Worship, as to put on a Turbant and dissemble their Religion, and
enter boldly therein, who report upon the best survey and observation they
could make, they could see nothing extraordinary or differing from what was in
their other Churches. So that it seems nothing but the holiness of the ground
in which it stands, derives upon it this great luster and veneration, and makes
the Turks so cautious and superstitious how they admit strangers.

All upon their return are mighty zealous in the observations of the least
punctilio's of the institutions of Mahomet, Their care of their behavior upon
their return from Mecca.
and particularly abhor the very thought of Wine, or any other prohibited
liquor, and would not drink a drop of this, if it were to save their lives.
Some put out their eyes, who have been blessed with the sight of the Tomb of
their Prophet, as if they cared for nothing in the world afterward. Others
impose upon themselves a silence of two, three, or four years, and sometimes
longer, and upon no provocation or danger will open their mouths to speak a
word. This is to several the great comfort and triumph of their lives, that
they have been at Mecca; and for the merit of those weary steps they have
taken, and of the prayers they have offered up at Mahomets Shrine, they flatter
themselves they shall not fail of entering Paradise, though in all other things
they be as very Turks as they were before they set one foot forward upon their
journey. The Grand Signor every year sends a considerable present to Mecca, and
Clothes for the covering and adornment of the Temple Kaabe, at which time the
old is taken down; and happy is he who brings home a rag of it with him, which
he preserves ever after, as a holy relic and a powerful Amulet against all
danger whatever; and with the same care, as the Inhabitants of Catanea do the
Vail of St. Agatha against the eruptions of Mongibel.

The other principal Festival days are these. Their other Festivals.
On the twelfth night of the month of the former Rabbia, they celebrate the
Birth of Mahomet, hanging out Lamps at their Moschs, which with them is the
most usual sign and expression of their triumphs and rejoicings. At this time
they employ all the wit and eloquence they have, as little or as great soever
it is, but far different from European, and indeed consists only in fantastic
and swelling expressions after the Eastern way, flowing from a gross and
uncultivated fancy, without any great depth of reason or sense; which practice
might put several Christians to the blush, if they were not hardened into
immodesty and an obstinate humor by their conceitedness, who refuse to pay
that respect to the memory of the Birthday of their Savior, which the Turks so
zealously pay to that of their false Prophet.

On the twenty-seventh night of the month Regeb, is the Feast of the Ascension
of Mahomet into Heaven; a Fable so ridiculous in its whole composition and
circumstances, that nothing but absolute sottishness can admit it as credible;
but yet as gross and foolish as it is, they believe it with the same certainty,
as that there was such a man.

The fifteenth night of Shaaban is called Baratghege or the Night of
Privilege, in which they say was conveyed a Sword out of Heaven into the hands
of Mahomet, and an Instrument at the same time, commissioning him to draw it,
and make use of it against the Christians and all others, who should oppose the
propagation of the new Religion.

In the twenty-seventh night of Ramazan, is the Feast of the Descent of the
Alcoran; which is the cause why the Impostor thought fit to consecrate the
whole Month to more than ordinary devotion, being the holiest time of the year.
And to encourage them to spend this Festival in the exercises of Religion, they
keep up and support the credit and reputation of it with a pretended privilege
from God, that whatsoever petitions they put up from Jatzi, or an hour and half
in the night, until the Sky opens, (as they speak) and the day appears, shall
be infallibly granted, and that God has decreed and determined this; and
therefore they call the prayer at this time Kadar namasi, or the prayer of
predestination.

There is a fixed and established distinction of order and degree among the
Ministers of their Religion; The Ministers of their Religion.
the chiefest of which is the Mufti, who Mufti.
is often too consulted in Civil affairs and controversies, which seem to have
little or no respect and dependence upon Religion; and so may be looked upon
under the notion of a supreme Judge under the Emperor, as well as of a Chief
Priest. He is the great Doctor and Oracle of their Law, and Heir (as they
speak) of the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, the Fountain of virtue and
knowledge, one who can resolve all the difficulties of Religion, and who has a
Key to open all the treasures of truth; for by these and such like foolish
characters do they represent him. Let him be never so dull and stupid
otherwise, either through a natural incapacity, or age, or any other defect, if
he be preferred to the Muftiship, as some have been out of a capriccio by some
Emperors, presently he becomes infallible; his decisions are sacred and
authentic, and his authority is unquestionable and received without any
dispute or debate, and his dreams are looked upon as inspiration, as being
Mahomet's representative. Though he poor man, conscious to himself of the
Cheat, uses to be over-modest, and is ashamed to assume this inerrable power,
and subscribes his Sentence with this usual Expression, God knows better; which
is yet no bar to the Peoples opinion and esteem of him; and no one under the
Emperor dares pass judgment contrary to his determination. To keep up this
veneration of the Musti in the People, the Emperor descends from his State,
and as soon as he appears before him, rises up and advances leisurely six or
seven steps toward him, and permits him to kiss his left Shoulder; whereas the
chief Vizir is only permitted to kiss and salute the hem of his Vest, though to
do some little honor to his first Minister he makes a step or two forward to
meet him. The Emperor makes great use of him in his private Councils, and
scarce sits upon a great design without his advice, to make it take the more
among the Soldiers and People, who assure themselves both of the lawfulness,
and convenience, and necessity of an Expedition, and flatter themselves too
with the good success of it, if it be ratifyed by his consent, and blessed by his
Prayers and encouragement. If reason of State judge it necessary to strangle or
take off the head of a Vizir, any other Bassa or General of the Janissaries; the
Mufti's consent will vindicate the execution, and stop the clamours and
discontents of the Soldiers and People: who by this are made to believe, that
the person cut off deserved to die according to the Law; and that it is a piece
of Religion to submit to the Emperors Pleasure, and the Mufti's determination
noless than to the Will of God. The Authority of the Mufti being so great, the
Emperor will not trust a matter of that consequence to an election, knowing
that the keeping up his Prerogative in the disposal of such an office to a fit
person, who shall comply with his humor and the necessity of State, is a just
piece of Policy, on which may oftentimes depend the safety and security of his
Person and Government. Although usually he prefers one of the Cadileskires into
the place of the deposed or dead Mufti, if he be for his turn; But in case the
Mufti should prove resractory and disturb his Councels by throwing in scruples
of Conscience, and refuse to obey and confirm his Orders, though they be never
so unjust and unreasonable, they are not long to seek for a remedy; and as if
the spirit of infallibility, wherewith he was before invested, immediately upon
this foolish act of disobedience, left him to his pure natural condition; then
he is said to dote, and to be infatuated, and to forfeit his discretion and
understanding, and is hereby rendered unworthy of so holy and supereminent a
dignity; and one presently is substituted into his place, who understands
better the Arts of compliance and Courtship, and will receive as an Oracle
whatever comes proposed to him out of the Seraglio. The Mufti by his place
always moves with the Emperor; none of his Retinue more constantly attends
him, that he may be ready to assist with his Council at all times in case of
doubt or difficulty. This high place lies in common to any one, whom the
Emperor shall think fit to dignifie and honor with it, and is not confined to
the Kindred and Posterity of Mahomet, as some through a mistake have affirmed.

I am fully assured the Mufti sometimes acts as a mere Politician and
Counselor of State, though the advancement of Religion is always the pretense,
as it happened upon a debate before the Emperor much about the year 1669. when
there were dispatched two Gentlemen out of Croatia with full Commission to
treat about their becoming tributary to the Grand Signor, from several of the
Nobles of the Roman communion, who afterward had their heads struck off at
Newstadt, upon the assurance of his assistance and protection against the
Emperor of Germany, whose Government they had shook off, and thought to
justify and secure their Rebellion this way. Mustapha Caimacam of Adrianople
was against their being received, as being against the Peace made so solemnly
after the battle of Rab; and besides very politickly remarqued, it was no fit
time while they were involved in so troublesome and expenseful a War with the
Venetians in Candia, to bring the Germans upon their backs, which would
inevitably follow; but the Mufti was as zealous and fierce for their being
taken into protection, alleging that the Port was the refuge of the world, and
that the Interest of Religion as well as of State would be advanced by such an
acquist, which the Christians themselves would maintain and make good to them,
and that this was of greater obligation, than the strict observing of a Treaty,
that the misfortunes of the last Hungarian War forced them to submit to. The
Emperor distracted with such different Counsels, would resolve nothing till he
had received the opinion of the Vizir then before Candia; but before that could
be brought back, they had certain intelligence, that Croatia was over run with
an Army of Thirty thousand, and the whole force of the discontented and
rebellious Nobility defeated, and not an Acre of Land left to plant a Turkish
Garrison in.

Next to the Mufti are the two Cadileskires, Cadileskires.
the one of Anatolia, who has the precedence, and the other of Rumuli or
Thrace; the authority of which latter, notwithstanding, the seeming restraint
of the name, is extended as far as the Turk has any Dominions in Europe. These
formerly were, as their titles literally signify, Judges of the Army; and
perpetually attended the Camp to administer Justice among the Soldiers, that
so the Discipline of War might receive support, and be maintained, and kept up
better by the assistance of the Law; and little quarrels that might arise among
them, might be the more fairly determined, and capital punishments inflicted
according to the demerit of the Criminals. This was the design of their
Original Institution; but at present they only assist the Vizir or his Deputy,
in deciding civil Causes, and exercise no authority and power over the
Soldiers, who have long since extorted this Privilege from the Grand Signor,
to be tried only by their respective Commanders and Officers, They have carried
before them a Pole or Spear, on the top of which hangs horse-hair, as an Ensign
of Honor; to support which, besides what they get by bribes and fees from the
parties contending, which are greater or lesser proportionally to the quantity
of the Sum, about which the Suit is commenced, They have a daily allowance of
Five hundred Aspers out of the Exchequer, according to the Canon established by
the Emperor Suleiman.

The Mollas challenge the third place: who, Mollas.
under the Bassas, are Judges and Presidents of Provinces: in the chief Cities
of which they reside, and to whom the Cadies or inferior Judges are obliged to
give an account of their Judicature. Their pay is out of the Public Treasure,
which is never less than Three hundred Aspers a day, but always under the
allowance of the Cadileskires. The first design and intent of the allowance was
agreeable to Equity and Justice, that they might live handsomely and well, and
never be forced to descend to base Arts and ways of gain, unworthy their
places, or be under the temptation of perverting the Law for reward and gain.
But this does not satisfy and content their avarice, who are not ashamed to
extort Money and Presents from the several Parties, who must this way defend
their Cause, if they would not have it miscarry, be it never so just and
equitable in it self. This is the best and most effectual Plea they can
possibly make: for certainly if Justice be to be sold in any part of the world,
it is in Turkey. For though they may pretend Religion and Conscience, and may
seem nice in determining some Suits; yet it is both known and sadly
experienced, by poor Christians especially, if they implead any Turk, that they
are horribly corrupt, and men of no faith or honesty, and judge the cause on his
side, who has given the greatest bribe; though to free themselves from the
infamy and guilt of injustice, they allege several trickish subtilties out of
the Alcoran, and from Tradition, and to stave off the injured person from
pursuing his right, and prosecuting his complaint. These are reckoned among the
number of Churchmen, the Law by which they judge and determine Cases, being as
much a part of their Religion, and founded in their Alcoran and Sunna or
Tradition, as the Rites of their Worship: and although they have nothing to do
in the Moschs, and sustain only the office of Civil Judges; they are
accordingly advanced to the highest dignity a Churchman is capable of.

Every Mosch has a Priest peculiarly belonging to it, Imam, or Parish Priest.
who is called Imaum. In the royal Moschs and others that be endowed, several
are maintained, who take turns in celebrating their office, or else for greater
Decorum and State officiate together. A small proportion and measure of
Learning is a sufficient qualification of a Turkish Priest; there is no great
need of any praevious study, or a peculiar education and designment to make any
candidate fit to take the care and Government of a Mosch upon him. For the most
part if he can but read the Prayers, and write and recite a few Versicles out
of the Alcoran, and be no way scandalous in his life, though he has been at a
Trade all his life long, he is very capable, if he can get to be nominated to
fill up any vacancy; and in case of any miscarriage or unfitness degraded as it
were from his function, and he contentedly returns to his Trade again, and one
of his Neighbors is preferred into his place. The great Vizir is Patron of
most of the richest Moschs; the chief Mufti disposes of others; the Kizlir-aga
or chief of the black Eunuchs recommends persons to succeed in the vacant
places of the royal Moschs; the Capi-aga challenges a right, where any of the
Pages of the Haz-oda or Chamber have been founders, as having been bred up
under the care of his Predecessors. To other places of lesser value the
recommendation of the people is sufficient, who upon producing his Letters
Testimonials to the Vizir, or any of his Deputies appointed for this purpose,
are forthwith admitted and confirmed. The greatest allowance as far as I could
learn any of these could pretend to, is Sixty Aspers a day; though some are
content with a sixth part.

The vast number of Priests may be collected from the great number of Churches,
The great number of Moschs.
which are every where to be met with. They stand very thick in Constantinople,
Pera and Galata, and the Towns situated upon the Bosphorus. In the Country the
poorest Village whatever has a Mosch in it; and if it be large, two or three;
if the Inhabitants be Turks, which I add, because some Christians are permitted
to live by themselves, without the mixture of any Turks; which is particularly
indulged to those, who live in Villages about eight or ten Miles from
Constantinople toward the Bosphorus, and not far from the black Sea (in one of
which, Belgrade, seated in the middle of a Wood, my Lord Ambassador had his
Villa or Countrey-house) who are obliged to take care, that the several
Channels, which convey the water from the numerous Springs arising not far off,
be kept clear and unobstructed, and the water have a free passage to the
Aqueducts, the glorious work of Valentinian, and long after restored to their
former usefulness and magnificence by Suleiman, who for this one thing, if
there had been nothing of Victory and Conquest else in his Reign, had deserved
the title that usually is bestowed upon him.

All the Moschs are endowed by their respective Founders: for upon no other
condition are any allowed to build. To preserve order and unity among so great
a number of Priests in every great City, as Adrianople, Prusia, Smyrna, and the
like; there is one who presides and exercises authority over the rest, who is
called Mufti, whom they consult in all cases of ambiguity and doubt, and whose
Sentences and Orders they dare not disobey.

Sometime in the greater Churches Harangues and Discourses are had before the
People, Sermons.
but not weekly upon a Friday, or any other fixed day, this not being the proper
employment of the ordinary Imaum, or Parish Priest, whose Talents and parts do
not usually lie that way. They are performed with a great deal of seeming zeal,
earnestness, and devotion; their chief Argument being a Religious or Moral
duty, as frequency of Prayer, Justice, Charity, and the like. These Preachers,
whom they call Scheicks, who have had their Education in a College or Convent,
and have spent their time in the study of the Alcoran, and its several
Commentaries, are mightily followed, and had in great veneration, and what with
their fluency of language, and pretensions to extraordinary measures of
devotion and cunning, have a strange kind of influence upon the people, and
sometime are made use of as fit and proper instruments to work upon them.

Besides these, Readers of the Alcoran.
several are by their places and offices to read the Alcoran. Of which sort are
about thirty in number in some of the royal Moschs, who either there, or in the
Chapels adjoining, where the Emperors and the Great Men lie interred, read
over the Alcoran every day, each one taking his Section. To which are joined
others, who have a Pension allowed them to come there, and say daily Prayers
for the dead. The rest who belong to their Moschs, are inferior Officers and
Servants of the Priests, whose employment is to call to Prayers, to look to the
Alcoran and Prayer-Books, to take care of the Mats and Carpets, to light the
Lamps, to keep the Church neat and clean, and the like.

The Cadyes are the inferior Justices, Cadyes.
placed almost in every Village to see good order kept among the people, to
administer Law and Justice, to decide Differences, and to punish Offenders,
which they do with severity enough, unless they buy off their punishment. This
power they usually buy at a dear rate; and that they may be no losers by the
bargain, they sell Justice as dear, and upon every slight occasion, oppress the
poor Christians, make Avanias, and demand Sums of Money upon a pretended fault
or breach of the Law, and oftentimes force Travelers to give them so much
Money in specie, as they set upon their heads. Such greedy Extortioners are
they, as most Francs know, who have traveled far into the Country, by their
sad experience. As for Presents, they expect them of course upon their first
coming into their Towns; and as if they were due and recoverable by Right and
Law, as well as by injustice and violence, if we have been a little slow in
making them, they have sent an Officer to demand them. For as soon as the News
of the arrival of any Western Christian is brought to the Cady, he seems sure
of a prey. Before we stirred out of our Caravan-serai, which the piety of the
Turks has built for the use and accommodation of Travelers, to view the
Antiquities of any place, we were first to obtain the leave of the Cady by a
Present of Coffee, or Pepper, or Sugar, and sometime of all three; and unless
we had done so, we could have had no security, (for by some devilish trick or
other he would have put us to a greater trouble and expense) which together
with the necessary guard of Soldiers to attend, makes traveling so dear and
chargeable in Turkey. Coming to Anchor on the North-side of the Castles at the
Dardanels, where is the narrowest strait of the Hellespont, as they force all
Ships to do that come from Constantinople, and to lie there three Suns to
search them, if they have no Contraband Goods or Slaves, which have made their
escape from their Patrons; we went ashore, and had scarce past through a Street
or two in Sestos, but we were overtaken by an Officer sent from the Governor
to bring us before him: we understood the meaning of it, and therefore in our
way to the Castle bought some Coffee Powder, for a Present, which we put into
his hands, who after some idle questions dismissed us. But for the most part in
our Land-voyages, we prevented the demands of the several Cadyes, out of which
number I except the rascally Cady of Sardes: He hearing that there were several
Franks got into the public Chane, very imperiously sent for his Present; we
replied, that we had the Emperor's Pass to exempt us from all injury and
exaction, and to travel unmolested; for such a one two English Gentlemen had
procured at Constantinople, passing thence over land to Smyrna, which they gave
us to make the best use we could of it in our Voyage to the Churches. But the
truth is, we did not rely so much upon the Pass, as our number and the weakness
of the Village: For this once glorious City the Metropolis of Lydia, which has
nothing of its ancient glory and state left, unless that the great ruins show
what it has been before Earthquakes and War, and the barbarousness of the Turks
had caused those horrid and frightful desolations there, is become a very
pitiful and despicable place, made up of a few Hutts and Cottages. Pretending
to be satisfied with the sight of our Passport, he counterfeits respect and
civility, and desires us to give him but half a Dollar; but by the advice of
the Janissaries, we did not think fit to give him, being such a low-spirited
Fellow, not so much as a single Asper; upon which denial he could not contain
his weak passion, and therefore severely forbids a poor Christian, that we
employed in buying us some Provisions, to be any way assisting to us. Afterward
when we were at leisure to reflect upon what we had done, we began to condemn
our selves or our Imprudence, that might have given us so much trouble, which
for so small a Sum as was demanded, might have been better prevented, being
afterward sensible, that neither our Swords nor Pass might have been of
sufficient proof against his rage and madness.

They look upon the Alcoran as containing not only the Word and Will of God,
Alcoran.
dictated by the Angel Gabriel to Mahomet, concerning the Rites and manners of
his Worship, but the body of the Civil Law referring to matters of Justice and
Government; and therefore, as I said before, use its authority in the decision
of Cases that happen daily in conversation and commerce; and where it is
defective, as it must needs be, they call in to their assistance their Sunna,
made up of the Sayings and Acts of their Prophet, derived down to them by Oral
tradition, Sunna or Tradition.
from Father to Son, as they pretend, and of equal authority with the holy
Book: and because innumerable cases happen, that are so perplexed and confused,
that neither written nor traditional Law have made any provision for them,
equity and right reason are to interpose and determine, but no where are less
practiced than in Turkey, where the Cadyes make all to bend to their covetous
humor; and yet to keep the fraud from being discovered, wrest some obscure
sentence of the Alcoran in defense and favor of their unjust determination.

The Cadyes are necessarily bred up in the knowledge of the Mohammedan Law,
Colleges
to qualify and fit them for their office; to which purpose there are
Colleges, endowed by Emperors and great men in most of the great Cities, for
the Education of Youth; Professors.
and Professors, men of great age and experience and learning, appointed to
direct and govern their Studies, whose office and place procure them great
respect among the people, they seldom walking in the Streets, but are mounted
upon excellent horses, richly caparison'd, which is indeed the usual Grandezza
of the Turks, and what all men of authority and fashion use, having two or
three Slaves walking by.

Some of these receive for their Salary about three hundred Aspers a day, Their
Allowance.
and oftentimes are preferred to a Mollaship, whom they presume by their long
study to have digested the whole Law, and to be perfect Masters of it: They are
obliged to teach publicly the young Students twice a week, on Saturday and
Monday, and to exact an account of their behavior, and of the progress of
their Studies: and if upon examination they find the success answerable to
their expectation; after a set time they have the degree and title of
Danishmend or Learned conferred on them. Each has his Cell, over a set number
of which is placed a Supervisor to prevent idleness and the practice of worse
vices. According to the fame of their merit, some are preferred to places of
Judicature* others to rich Moschs, who together with some of the Dervises bred
up in their Convents, prove the great Preachers, and have that mighty influence
upon the people, as before was mentioned.

Every Cady, besides an Actuary and Apparitor, Officers under the Cadyes.
and such like Officers, has his Naip or Assistant, who sees that the Weights
are just, and the Provisions which are brought to the Market, be wholesome, and
sold at a moderate price; for which purpose they walk the Streets and enter
into Shops, and those of Bakers especially, whose bread if they find wanting of
its just weight, besides a pecuniary mulct they impose, they oftentimes throw
them into Prison; or if the fraud be but light, they bring them out and drub
them upon the place. But for all this pretended justice and severity, if they
bribe but the Officer beforehand, they may cheat the people securely.

I found the Turks excessively pitiful and good natured toward dumb creatures,
Turks pitiful to dumb creatures.
soon putting them out of their pain, if they were necessitated to kill them.
Some buy birds on purpose to let them fly away and return to the liberty of the
Woods and open air. The Vultures fly up and down the Courts of the great houses
in the City, as if they had perceived by natural instinct, that Mahomet, whose
birds they are fancied to be, had forbid under a penalty any one to shoot at
them. The Storks, which in the Springtime return out of the Southern Climates
to the very same Nests the sharpness of the Winter drove them from, enjoy their
natural liberty without the least molestation; and if at any time in our
travels we shot at them, our Janissaries would take it amiss, and look upon it
as ominous, as if some mischief would certainly befall us for our cruelty to
the poor innocent birds. For though they use hawking, and take them with
Birdlime, and sometime use their Guns and eat their flesh, yet they are not
very much accustomed to such dainties, and never kill them for the sport and
pleasure of it, especially if they are not proper and good for food; which is
the reason of the great number of Cormorants and other revenous Fowl hovering
over the Bosphorus, and the arm of the Sea that divides Pera from
Constantinople. Their love of Dogs.
But above all they seem to have a peculiar love and kindness for Dogs, which
yet are the ugliest and of the worst Race that ever I saw. They will not indeed
admit them into their houses, because they are unclean creatures; but however
lest the Winter-air should be too sharp and piercing, there are distinct
Kennels in every street, to which they peculiarly belong, and a daily provision
is made of water put into hollow Pits. I have observed some mighty
tenderhearted Janissaries go to a Bakers shop and buy an Asper or two of bread
to bestow by way of charity upon them: when at the same time, if a poor
Christian had been ready to perish for want of a little relief, the sight of
such a miserable object would have no way moved them to pity: and though they
are so troublesome, in the night especially, no one dares either stab them or
poison them without danger of being stabbed himself if the fact were
discovered. How idly and fondly superstitious they are herein, will appear by
the ensuing relation, which though it happened in the time of Achmet, yet still
holds true, and represents their present temper. The Plague raging very hot,
the Emperor and the Bassas at last seemed to make a mighty discovery, that it
was necessary to destroy the Dogs in and about Constantinople, to prevent the
further spreading of the Infection: but the Mufti, who was consulted in this
weighty Affair, would by no means give way to so bloody and cruel a sentence,
maintaining it was altogether unlawful; and that he might not seem to be
peremptory without cause, he added this momentous reason, that Dogs had souls,
and therefore were to be exempt from this universal and horrid carnage. But it
was a plain case, so great a number of Dogs was a real mischief: what therefore
was to be done in this great strait and perplexity of mind? Upon the Mufti's
sentence they recalled the former order about their slaughter, and resolved to
transport them over the Water to Asia-side; above fifty thousand were found
upon the Muster, and carried over to Scutary and the Neighboring places: but
though they were out of sight, yet they were not out of mind; and their care of
them seemed to be doubled, and Provisions were sent daily over to keep life and
soul together, in compliance with the Mufti's learned and philosophical
determination; till at last growing weary of the expense and trouble, and
fearing they might infect the places where they were, with great trouble and
reluctance of mind they conveyed them to some of the uninhabited Islands that
lie in the Propontis toward the Bay of Nicomedia, where they were famished. But
the City since is so pestered with them, that I believe if a new Muster were
now made, the number would be found to be greater. No one must offer to kick or
touch any of them; if a Christian does this by chance, they impute it to his
hatred and ill will, and will be sure to chide, if not beat him for it: as one
in a great fury asked a Christian, who through great haste and carelessness trod
upon a Mangey Curr, that lay in the way, Thou Infidel, how do thou know, but
that thy fathers soul is in that poor dog? showing by this his love to the dog,
and his zeal for his opinion: for he was one of those who maintained the idle
Pythagorean dream of a (...) or transmigration of Souls.

They still retain the absurd principle of fate, The opinion of Fate.
which is the genuine issue of their gross ignorance and barbarousness. This
makes them encounter the greatest dangers of Death with such desperate
boldness; fearless and secure, as to their thoughts, in the time of a raging
Plague. The contagion does not hinder them from visiting persons infected, with
the same freedom, as if they were only sick of an ordinary Fever; they wipe
their faces with the Handkerchiefs of their dead Friends, and put on the very
clothes they but lately died in: their confidence being grounded upon this
foolish belief, that every man's destiny is written in his forehead, and not to
be prevented or kept off by care or Medicine, that the term of life is fatal
and peremptory, and that it is in vain to go about to extend it beyond the set
Period; and that Physic is to be taken not to prolong life, but to take off
from the anguish and bitterness of death, and to make the pangs of it the more
tolerable and easy: and that it is a piece of folly to think to escape. This
error destroys thousands of them yearly, who hasten their own death by their
conceitedness and folly: which is true of the common people especially, in
whose minds this fancy is so rooted, that they think it a kind of Sin as well
as weakness to relinquish their houses, and retire to more wholesome air; what,
say they, is not the Plague the dart of the Almighty God? and can we escape the
blow that he levels at us? is not his hand steady to hit the persons he aims
at? can we run out of his sight, and beyond his power? thus calling in the
belief of some of the Divine Attributes to the maintenance of it. Indeed some
of the Cadyes, who seem to be the only men of deep sense and understanding
among them, are aware of the pernicious consequences of this Doctrine, and when
the Plague grows hot and violent, provide for the safety of their Families by a
timely flight into the neighboring Villages, where they keep them till the
fury of it is spent; while entire Families (and one I heard of in our time in
Galata consisting of six and thirty persons) which have stayed behind, have
been destroyed.

The Plague necessarily diffuses its Poison among them, The Plague rages among
them often.
having no Antidotes and Preservatives against it, or Remedies to make use of
when it has seized upon them: By such a general neglect and promiscuous mixing
one with another the distemper is heightened, and makes great wastes, especially
toward the end of Summer, when the heats are so excessive, and the Fruits, and
the Melons and the Gourds ripen, which both Turks, Greeks and Armenians much
indulge themselves in. Constantinople is scarce all the year long free from the
Plague, although it remits of its fury in the cold weather, the nastiness of
several places of the City, and the stoppage of their common shores, and the
dead dogs putrefying in their streets contributing much to it; which the wiser
sort cannot but acknowledge; but they are so used to the Plague, that they are
not much solicitous about it. They do not think of making any public Prayers
and Intercessions, till a thousand bodies are carried daily out at Adrianople
Gate to the public places of Burial, which lie in the plain without the City,
and are extended from the Propontis to the Haven. For though it be an arrow
that cannot be put by, yet they acknowledge it is in the hand of God, and that
he can stop it if he pleases; and so are forced at last to acknowledge the
weakness and falsity of their own Principle. At such times, as also when the
affairs of the Empire are in an ill posture by reason of War, the Grand Signior
and Mufti attended by the Bassas, and a great number of Priests in solemn
procession, pass over the Water to Pera-side, where upon a high hill a little
above Kasim Basha in that part of it they call Okmidan, where at other times
the better sort of Turks use to shoot (which is one of their greatest
exercises) on the edge of it toward the South-east is a little Square of about
twenty paces long, andas many broad, hemmed in with Freestone about two foot
from the ground, where I found a stony Pulpit ascended to by ten steps; on the
top of which the Mufti makes his prayers: after which Ceremony is over, they
think they have done all they can do, and leave off all further care. This is
their great argument of comfort upon the death of their friends, that it is the
decree and pleasure of God, which they are to submit to, and that all humane
counsels and remedies are ineffectual against his will, (which is a great truth
in it self, but very much misapplied by them) and that so long they are to
live, and not a minute longer: as I remember a Turk who escaped being buried
under the ruins of a wall, that fell as he past by, said, when he was
recovered from his surprise, Egel ghelmedi, that the hour of his death was not
yet come, without giving God thanks for his great deliverance.

Some of them indeed seem to have a great reverence and fear of God, Their
reverence of God.
which they show both by their gestures and discourses, whenever they have
occasion to mention his name; referring all things, not only the events of war,
or any great undertaking, but of a journey, and the private concerns of their
life, to his will and disposal, ratifying their promise and purpose with this
condition, In Shallah, if God will; beginning nothing of any moment, not
stepping out of their door, nor mounting a Horse but in the name of God. In any
danger or distress they quiet their fears, and encourage others not to despond,
with the remembrance of the mercy, power, and goodness of God, often crying
out, Allah karim, God is gracious, Allah ekbir, God is great, and the like; out
of a sense of their own weakness, flying to God to help and protect them; and
when the danger is over, the journey finished, or the design accomplished to
their satisfaction, they repeat often these words, Alhemdo lillah, praise to
God, by way of gratitude and acknowledgment. This is the temper of some of the
more religious among them.

There are others who run into the extreme of irreligion; Atheists among them.
Atheists in their hearts and in their lives; among which I may reckon justly
enough the greatest part of the Cadyes, and almost all the Apostate Christians.
These latter, who conscious to themselves of horrid crimes, which the Laws of
Christendom have made capital; or else of dissolute lives, and wallowing in
brutality, that they may enjoy their lusts more freely, and without check and
remorse of conscience, embrace the Mohammedan Religion, look upon it and all
other Religions as a mere cheat, and by their lives show the disesteem of them.
The other being men whose understandings are somewhat refined by their
education from the stupidity and dullness of the ordinary Turks, sensible of the
idle fopperies of the Alcoran, and of the imposture of Mahomet, and of the
absurdities of his Doctrine, and the inconsistency of it with the principles of
right Reason, rashly conclude of Religion in general, that it is a trick of
State, and an invention of Policy; and that the belief of a God and of
Providence is wholly owing to the credulity and superstition and unjust fears
of mankind. Only they are so wise and cunning to conceal their Atheism, which
they are so justly suspected to be guilty of, for fear of the great danger an
open profession of it would involve them in. For the Turks are mighty zealous
for the existence of a Deity against the Atheist, and think such a person not
worthy to breath in the air, who dares deny this fundamental principle of
nature. And the example of such a just severity is very fresh in their
memories, as happening in the year of Christ M.DC.LXI, upon a certain Mohammedan,
which I shall here put down from the mouths of credible persons, who knew the
man very familiarly. This Mahomet Ephendi (which is a title of respect they
usually bestow upon men of learning and authority) was born in Larr in Armeuia
major, a man of great esteem in Constantinople among all who knew him, for his
skill in the Law, and in the Arabic and Persian languages, of a temper mild
and sociable, which made him covet the acquaintance and friendship of several
Western Christians, from whom he could learn somewhat, and whom he acknowledged
to understand the laws of discourse, and to reason much better than his Brother
Turks, whom he looked upon as very dull and heavy fellows. His inquisitive
genius put him upon the search of several things, and his pride and
conceitedness were so great, that he thought he had found the secret indeed,
which all the Atheists have been seeking after to quiet and banish those fears
which perpetually haunt their guilty minds. Ambitious of fame and applause, he
sets up for a professed Atheist, being so far from suppressing these extravagant
fancies, the effect of the greatest madness whatever, that he takes care to
divulge them in all companies where he thought to meet with opposition, and
disputes fiercely against the being of a God. Whenever he went to visit Signor
Warner, whose extraordinary learning and worth derived a great luster upon his
public character, the first salute upon the very sight of him was, there is
not, meaning a God; to which the Resident would immediately reply, there is;
after which they would often descend to a close dispute about that dictate of
universal nature, and right reason; but he had so hardened his heart against all
conviction, and blinded his mind and understanding with absurd and irrational
prejudices, and foolish and vain imaginations, that though he could not well
sustain the mighty shock of arguments which the learned Resident levelled at
him, yet he flattered himself he could fully satisfy them all, and that he had
the better of him. But in the miserable end of this wretch the Divine justice
was as much seen as if he had been consumed by Lightning from Heaven. There
happening in the public Caravanserai, where he lodged, a quarrel between him and
some Armenian Christian Merchants, they carried him before the Caimacam, who is
the Governor of Constantinople, who had for his Assistant the chief Justice of
the City, whom they call Stambol Ephendi. The injury he had done the Armenians
was proved by several Witnesses; and in the close the Turks, who were present,
acquainted the Judges of the temper of the man, and accused him of several
impieties he was guilty of, as that he never came to the prayers of the Mosch,
neglected the other rites instituted by their Prophet, drank Wine freely, and
that in the time of Ramazan; and besides, that he openly maintained that there
was no God. The contestation through the zeal of the Turks grew very hot, and
matter of fact seemed to be fully made out by just proof. Whereupon the
Governor demanded of him, what he could say for himself? whether the evidence
against him were true or no? here several unanimously agree, that you deny the
being of a God. He replied without any demur or feat, you would be of the same
mind if you knew as much as I know. They advise him, if he valued his life, to
retract his foolish and impious opinion, otherwise they would pass the sentence
of death upon him. They give him time to consider of it, and expect that
whatever his private sentiments were, fear of death would make him confess his
belief of a Deity. But it seems he would be a Martyr for his Atheism, and chose
rather to dye than confess he was in an error, and dissemble his inward
thoughts; whereupon he is sentenced to dye; he continues as perverse and
obstinate as ever, even in the last moments of his life. For being set upon a
Mule with his face toward the tail, and carried to the place of punishment, and
admonisht by the Subashi or Officer, who attended upon the execution, to recant
his error; his only answer was, that the filth (for so I choose modestly to
express it) he was to eat he would eat presently; meaning by the rude Proverb,
that he was willing to dye as soon as might be. Thus he perished in his folly,
being between fifty and sixty years of age, and leaving a considerable sum of
money behind him, infatuated by the just judgment of God, which became most
visible in his deserved ruin.

The Janissaries are the strength of the Turkish Empire; Janissaries.
anciently the Sons of Christians, violently taken from their Parents at six
and seven years of age, as it pleased the Collectors, sent into Bosna and
Servia and the other Provinces of Europe (for by common observation they find
the Asiaticks to make the worst Soldiers, the pleasantness of the Soil, and
the mildness of the Air having an influence upon their tempers) who take one or
two out of a Family, Their Collection.
if it be numerous; and these afterward embracing a new Religion, razing out
the obligations of nature, and by their severe education hardened against all
impressions of pity and good nature, prove the greatest plagues and tormentors
of their Relations, and are the cruel instruments of their servitude. The
collection of these Children of Tribute, is not triennial, as some have
fancied, but happens sooner or later according to the necessities of State, and
as the number and proportion of Soldiers is to be more or less supplied.
Constantinople, and very many other places are to the great joy and comfort of
the poor Christian inhabitants exempted from this dismal exaction, and
particularly all Moldavia and Wallachia; but these Countries being tributary
and under the Turkish Government, the respective Princes, which they constitute
and put out as they please, are obliged to appear with such a number of
Horsemen in the Field, when the Scene of the War lies either in Hungary or
Poland, and by this means they enlarge their Conquests in Christendom by the
Arms of professed Christians. These Children are called Agiamoglans,
Agiamoglans.
that is, rude and unexperienced Boys, whereof some are dispersed into several
parts of the Country, that they may the better be enured to want and labor and
hardship, and initiated in the Principles and Rites of Mahometanism, and learn
the Turkish language. Others are placed in certain Colleges, built on purpose
for their reception, (of which sort is that at Constantinople, and another at
Pera, hard by the Palace, the ordinary Mansion of the English Ambassadors
successively) which are the Seminaries of the Youth of this Order, and where
they pass their novitiate. Here they are under the eye of most rigorous, severe
and cruel Masters, and are forced to the vilest offices, to mortify them, and
make them humble and obedient; here they are taught to be at the command of a
beck or nod, and if any way faulty, are sure to receive a severe chastisement;
here they learn the first principles and rudiments of War. This is according to
their original institution by Morat, the first who settled this new Militia or
Army, as the word Janizary signifies; which out of respect to the Founder and
Order is still retained. But there discipline of late years has not been kept
up to this great height of severity, but is very much relaxed and corrupted.
And because that according to the usual maxim of policy, which experience has
so often confirmed and rendered little less than infallible, Empires are kept
and preserved by the same arts wherewith they were first established, which
ceasing, they begin to moulder into pieces: We may look upon this decay of
discipline as a good omen, that the Turkish Empire, which has been raised to
that great pitch and degree of glory, upon the ruin of so many Kingdoms and
Governments, grows toward an end; the same fate usually attending Governments,
as single persons, that after a set period of years, broken with intestine
factions and divisions, or weakened with idleness and the charms and delights
of a long and uninterrupted peace they perish and decay. They are not now so
solicitous to fill up those seminaries with Agiamoglans, which anciently were
accounted the hope and growing strength of the Empire; and indeed of late years
they have spent such a vast number of Soldiers in the Wars, that they cannot
get supplies hence fast enough to serve the necessities of War. A very
considerable part of the veterance Soldiers was lost in Candia, which they
themselves have called the burying place of Musulmans. For by a very just
calculation from their first landing in the Island, and sitting down before
Canea to the surrender of the chief City, what by Plague and what by Sword and
Mine above four hundred thousand perished there; the tediousness and
disadvantages of the War were so grievous and irksome to them, that the
Janissaries went thither very unwillingly and without any heart to fight, who
dread all expeditions by Sea, upbraiding the Emperor with the misfortunes and
ill success of the design, while their Country was impoverish't by the Temins,
a false Coin of mixed and base metal, (which were imported in vast quantities
by the French and Italian Merchants) and that the Soldiers were thrown away in
Crete, and yet for all this, that he went a hunting. To supply the Siege, which
made such continual wastes of them, I have known several country fellows taken
from the plough, and enrolled Janissaries without any previous exercises of
arms. Formerly all the Constantinopolitan Janissaries were quartered in two
spacious houses under the banners of their respective officers, and kept guard
and watch; but now for a little present they are dispenst from this attendance,
and are permitted to marry, and accordingly several make use of the indulgence;
the cares of the world put them upon arts of gain to maintain themselves and
their families; and natural affection takes off their minds from the pursuit
and love of arms, and makes them choose rather to lie at home in their houses
than go into the field. They are busied in the management of trade, and turn
shopkeepers, and by an idle and sedentary kind of life remit much of their
warlike ambition and fierceness, and are become soft and effeminate; all their
thoughts and wishes being for peace and quiet. But however, the privileges of
the Janissaries being so great and the name honorable, they get their children
admitted into the same order; of which they are very tender and solicitous; and
lest they should any way be diminish't by any public council or trick of
State, there are several of their order, (I think about twelve, whom they call
Ogiack Agaler) constituted as so many Tribunes to take care of them. These
Agitators are the men whom they respect as their Patrons and defenders, and who
have such a great power and influence upon them. If they give but the word,
they are presently up in arms, and the Piazzas and Streets are full of
seditious tumults, and the Seraglio it self not safe from their assaults. For
they know well enough that the Government is jealous of their strength, that it
is in their power either to depose or make what Emperor they please, that they
are the safeguard of the Empire; that Osman uncle to this Emperor had a design
of destroying their whole order, and setting up another, which should be more
at command and not so dangerous to the public, as they are upon every
discontent; that his successors carry on the same evil designs against them,
and that it is want of a good opportunity, that hinders them from putting the
same in execution and practice. Whence arise their care and their fears; and
proportionably their pride and insolence and extravagant demands of greater
privileges increase, and the distrust they have of the Emperor makes them
unite more closely and show a greater regard and respect to their officers, who
manage their interest. They are wholly exempt from the civil jurisdiction, be
the crime never so directly contrary to the Laws; they are only triable among
themselves: if it be judged and proved capital, before they execute the
sentence, they first strike his name out of the Register, and then do it
privately and in the night, to prevent the disorders this unruly sort of men
are too apt to be guilty of. In every City and large Town, where they abound,
there is a superior officer, whom they call Serdar, to whose jurisdiction they
are obnoxious. He according to his orders, sent either from the Vizir or
Janizary Aga or General, musters those who are within his Province, and
disposes of them according to the exigences of the present circumstances. If
any quarrel happen among themselves, they must stand to his decision; before
him they can only be impleaded by others; and the partiality they show to them
is so great, that it is much better to take an injury patiently, than to go
about to redress it by a complaint, which oftentimes too is resented and
revenged. Such an opinion they have of themselves, that they think they may do
any thing, and for all that go unpunisht.

It is the grand concern of the Emperor to make a wise choice of a General over
these masterful Slaves, The General of the Janissaries.
of whose fidelity he may rest assured, knowing the great mischief he may do by
his influence and authority; and if there be but the least shadow of suspicion,
he will take care, upon some plausible pretense, to put him out of his command;
the very least compliance and popularity among the Soldiers would draw him
within the danger and guilt of treason; so that he is forced to be stiff and
fierce, and to draw upon him their ill will and hatred, to keep himself in the
good graces of the Emperor, who yet has a watchful eye over him, and
entertains continual jealousies and fears of him, though never so much at the
devotion of the Seraglio. He has the Government of no Province, City, or
Castle; has no share in the management of State Affairs; is accounted inferior
not only to the Vizir Azem, but to the other Bassas of the Port. If sometime he
be admitted into the Divan or Council, he is only to hear, and never to speak,
but when his opinion is asked. They will not suffer him to nominate his
Lieutenant General, for fear they should conspire, and make new alterations in
the Government; and justly; for considering the power and insolent behavior of
the Janissaries, it is far from being improbable, that as they have raised the
Empire to that height of honor and greatness by their valor, so they will one
day be the ruin of it by their mutinies and seditions.

They are continually in pay, Their pay.
which is various, according to the quality, age, and merit of the person, from
three Aspers a day to twenty, which they receive four times a year quarterly.
They are usually reckoned of late years about fifty thousand; Their number.
scarce a third part go into the wars together, the rest being in Garrisons
upon the confines of Hungary, Persia, and Dalmatia, and are drawn out upon
occasion. And great numbers of them are found at Cairo, Buda, and Bagdat, to
overaw the Egyptians, who are of a very unsettled and inconstant temper, very
prone to sedition, and desirous of shaking off the Turkish Government, and only
to be restrained by force. Before they meet at the general place of Rendezvous,
a proportion of money is distributed among them, to provide themselves with
necessaries against evil events; but their chiefest care is to get warm
Clothes, to defend themselves from the violence of the wind and cold, and to
lay in provision della bocca, as the Italians call it, to pass the time of
their lying in the field, or before a besieged place a little better. Each has
his Tin-pot and his Coffee, and a quantity of Pulse, Rice, Flesh dried in the
Sun, and beaten into powder for his broth, Onions and Salt in his little Sack;
this is the usual entertainment of the Camp. Every Fountain supplies them with
drink; for it is a crime punishable with death, and as rigorously executed at
such a time, to bring Wine among them. They go soberly to destroy their
enemies. They permit no women to come nigh the Army. All private quarrels are
forbid under pain of death; the least provocation is severely punished. Their
marchings and encampings are done without noise; silence being one great part
of their military discipline. They ever are in a readiness to charge, and go
wherever they are commanded, being fearless of danger and of death it self.

The Spahyes are another great support of the Turkish Empire; Spahyes.
Soldiers who are obliged to serve on Horseback by the tenure of the Lands (
Timars) and Estates they are possessed of; these being not only the reward of
their sweat and blood, but ties and obligations to further service in the field
upon the first summons; each bringing so many Horses with him according to the
value of what he holds, which is the reason they do not receive an Asper of pay
out of the Grand Signiors Exchequer, and are therefore known by the name of
Timar-Spahyes, or Feudatory, to distinguish them from other Spahyes who live in
the Cities, and have not obtained a piece of Land; whose daily pay is very
different, proportionably to the worth and merit of the persons, as was said
before of the Janissaries; some receiving twelve Aspers, and others an hundred.

Of these they reckon about twenty three thousand in Europe, Their number.
and as many or more rather in Asia; for their number is uncertain, and
increases with their victories; and sometimes a rich Timar is divided upon the
death of the former possessor into many parts; besides such as live about Buda
on the one side, and Etzrum and Bagdat on the other, who are not obliged to go
out of their Quarters. We must not think that when they war against
Christendom, they make bare the limits and frontiers of the Empire toward
Persia. These Spahyes are no better than Country Farmers; their minds are so
taken up with the study of good Husbandry, and the pleasure of enjoying what
they have has so taken off their minds from the fatigues and hardships of a
Soldiers life, that by money and presents oftentimes they labor to get
themselves exempted from that personal service they owe their Emperor; which is
one reason (the success of a Battle depending more upon discipline than number)
they do not care to bring such vast Armies into the field, as in the last age,
when Suleiman carried a hundred thousand Horse with him in the Hungarian war,
when he flattered himself he should become Master of the Imperial City of
Vienna. Every Spahy is so laden with Arms, that he seems to carry an Armory
with him, having a short strong Bow, the same questionless which the old
Parthians made use of, with his Quiver of Arrows, Sword, Gun, Shield, Lance, at
the top of which hangs a little Banner, which shows to what order he belongs.
For there are six orders and degrees of them, distinguishable by the different
colors of their Banners; Orders of Spahyes.
Red which is that of Spahioglauleri, Yellow that of Selichtari, Green, White,
White and Green, Red, and White. Long experience has taught them the use of
these several weapons, which they manage dexterously upon occasion; as they do
their Horses, which they can stop upon a full career at the distance of a foot.
It is a pleasant sight to see them divert themselves by throwing darts on
Horseback, which they do with great strength and dexterity, turning and winding
their Horses at pleasure.

There is another sort of Feudatories, Zaims.
whom they called Zaims; fewer in number than the Spahyes, obliged to the same
services, but with greater proportions of men, having considerable Lordships.
To qualify their Children to inherit, their great care is to send them to the
Camp, and breed them up Soldiers.

In all their warlike expeditions great numbers of Volunteers offer themselves;
Volunteers.
some out of a design to succeed into the places of the Janizaryes and Spahyes,
who shall happen to be knocked on the head, which they judge worthy of their
adventure; for if it be their fate to dye in the field, they believe they shall
directly go into Paradise; and if they survive a Battle, they are sure to be
enrolled in the Grand Signiors pay, which is the only ambition they seem
capable of. Others out of a principle of zeal, for the propagation of Religion,
who usually prove the most desperate, and seldom come off alive; and to make
the act meritorious, maintain themselves, and think the service it self a
sufficient reward.

The Auxiliary Forces are the Christians of Moldavia and Wallachia, Auxiliaries.
of whom before. Tartars.
Next, the Tartars, not so much by virtue of an old compact, that in case of
faileur of the Ottoman line, their Prince shall succeed, as some pretend, but
out of an interest to gain by the war, come in to their assistance. They are
more for their prey than for fight, which they endeavor to avoid, till
necessity and shame put them upon it. They carry with them usually a great
number of lead Horses, which are of double use, either to set their miserable
Captives upon, or in case their provision should fail, to serve them for food;
Horseflesh being one of the Tartarian dainties, and which is sold in the Market
an Asper in the pound more than Beef or Mutton.

Thousands of poor miserable Christians are forced into the wars, and serve
only for Pioners, having no other Arms than a Mattock and a Spade; sometimes
placed in the front of the Army to break the fury of the onset; or else in a
Siege, when they go to storm, thrust forward, that upon their bodies the
Janissaries may pass the more securely.

The Turkish Soldiers do not care to go out of their Winter Quarters till the
Spring, when they may find grass for their Horses; nor will they keep in the
field after October, unless bribed with promises of reward, or forced to it by
some urgent necessity. Among their Baggage there are usually great quantities
of metal, to cast great Guns upon occasion; which they find more convenient
oftentimes, than to carry Artillery with them, especially in long and tedious
marches, where there is no conveyance by water.

The many great victories the Turks have gained over the Christians, Their
valor and the causes of it.
are too sad and convincing a proof of their valor, which is heightened and
rendered desperate by a concurrence of causes added to the severity of their
discipline and education.

Before they engage, if there be any opportunity, the Surat or Chapter of the
Sword is read out of the Alcoran; which contains a warrant from Heaven to
exterminate and destroy all who set themselves against this new Law, revealed
by God to Mahomet; hence their persuasion and their zeal receive new vigor and
force, that they fight in the defense of Gods cause, which makes them look upon
cowardice and faint-heartedness as a sin. For who can be so base and unworthy
as not to be ambitious of dying at such a time, when they are the Champions of
God? The signal being given, they run upon their enemies with the name of God
in their mouths, confusedly repeating it several times, and invoking him to
assist and maintain his own cause, which they are fighting for.

The doctrine of Predestination and Fate contributes not a little to their
fury; upon confidence of which principle they expose themselves to certain
dangers, believing themselves safe in the midst of them, if God has so decreed
it; which they do not know, whether he has or no, but by the event; and if so,
all their wariness and endeavors to escape signify nothing in the end.

They are convinced by a thousand examples before their eyes, that this is the
readiest way to rise to a command, that there is a certain reward due to
valor, and that the Bassas and all the other great Officers owe all to their
Scymitars. Thus solicitous of fame and honor, they value not their lives in
fighting, knowing, that if they come off, they are sure to be preferred.

But the most effectual and efficatious machin to skrew up their courage to the
highest degree and pitch of desperation is an opinion, which by the artifices
and insinuations of the Churchmen passes for infallible among the Soldiers,
that whoever dies in the wars, is in the account of God and Mahomet a Martyr;
his death expiates and atones all his sins of what nature soever; that ipso
facto he merits the joys and pleasures of Paradise, and his Soul shall not be
kept to attend upon the body in the grave, to undergo the examination of the
two Angels, which they are so terribly afraid of. A Mufti being consulted in
what order the followers of Mahomet shnuld enter into Paradise, determined it
in favor of the Soldiers slain in the wars, that they were to have the
precedence; then the honest plowmen; afterward the Lawyers and Priests; and the
rest promiscuously without any order at all, as they can pass and get in in the
crowd. Animated with these hopes, they are almost unwilling to live; no danger
terrifies, death does not mate their courage; the pleasant and wanton thoughts
they entertain of their Fools Paradise do so run in their minds.

They show the same, if not a greater, courage in keeping a fortification,
where they have fixed their Half Moon Standard; much more a Town or City, where
they have built a Mosch, when besieged by Christians; choosing rather to undergo
all the hardships of a Siege, or the most dismal consequences of an assault,
then any way think of a surrender. This is a mighty piece of Religion among
them, that Mahometanism may loose no ground; rather than so, they will perish,
not only without complaint and murmur, but willingly and with joy too. Such a
fatal obstinacy are they wrought up to by their superstition.

The great wastes, which are made by plague and war, Their Slaves.
are supplied by the Slaves which are continually brought into the Empire, and
by the multitude of women allowed by the Law of Mahomet. It is enough to rend
any heart, that gives way to the least impressions of pity, to consider the sad
condition of poor Christian Captives in Turkey. They are chiefly brought in
yearly by the Tartars, who make excursions into Poland and Russia for several
days journeys, and upon their return sweep and carry all before them; several
Ships laden with them in the Ports of the Black Sea (the old name of Euxine
being wholly lost and forgot) in the months of June and July arriving at
Constantinople. This is the great Mart for Slaves, where they are sure to meet
with a quick and a good Market, for no commodity is more vendible or
merchantable. Or else they are brought along with the Caravans from the
farthest parts of the Empire in Asia, out of Georgia and Mengrelia; wholly
intent upon their private gain in the sale. The Tartars while they enrich
themselves with this kind of spoil, advance the public interest of the Turks;
that part of Christendom, which they ravage, being much weakened by the loss of
thousands, thus barbarously carried into captivity, and their own Empire
enlarged and strengthened by such great accessions. For few ever return to
their native Country; and fewer have the courage and constancy of retaining the
Christian Faith, in which they were educated; their education being but mean,
and their knowledge but slight in the principles and grounds of it; whereof some
are frighted into Turcism by their impatience and too deep resentments of the
hardships of the servitude; others are enticed by the blandishments and
flatteries of pleasure the Mohammedan Law allows, and the allurements they have
of making their condition better, and more easy by a change of their Religion:
having no hopes left of being redeemed, they renounce their Savior and their
Christianity, and soon forget their original Country, and are no longer looked
upon as strangers, but pass for natives. Every Wednesday morning they are
exposed publicly to sale, like so many Horses or Sheep in a Fair, in a
peculiar place of Constantinople, which has the name of Jazir Basar, or the
Slave-Market, where is an established Officer to register the sales. The Area of
which is about fifty paces square; on the sides of it are Chambers, where
usually they put the women. Here I have seen, not without horror and confusion
of mind (for pity was too mean a passion, and soon swallowed up with so dismal
and frightful a spectacle) above five hundred at the same time, as so many
victims, ready to be offered to Moloch. The poor Children, scarce yet sensible
of their misfortune, modest and silent; and the women, who had any skill in
Embroidery, at work with their Needle; by which artifice the Patrons think to
put them off at better rates; feeding them well before hand, that they may look
plump and fat, and seem to be in good case, and putting them on handsome
clothes, the better to attract a Chapman. There is scarce a Turk, if he be of
any fashion, but has one Slave at least, and some of them twenty, according to
the greatness of their estates, and the occasions they have of them. They are
their proper goods, and let them out to hire sometime; whatever they get, is
their Masters, who have an absolute power and command over them in all things,
except in the case of life and death; otherwise be their usage never so cruel
and barbarous, the poor wretch has no remedy left but patience and submission.
It is interest more than good nature and humanity which makes them use them
well, and puts them upon providing clothes, victuals, and whatever is necessary
to sustain life, that they may yield them the better service, and for fear they
should sicken and dye; which would prove their loss: the care of them being
only the same with that they bestow upon their Cattle.

The Bassas and other great men enjoy themselves unto the height, The Grandezza
of the Bassas in what it consists.
out of foresight, that in an Empire, where all things are so uncertain, and
where happen daily such sudden changes and traverses of fortune, they may be
soon stripped of all; they will not lose one jot of their grandeur, but mightily
pride themselves in it. In their Houses indeed they do not consult pomp and
beauty, so much as largeness and convenience; their riches is more to be seen
in their Stables than in the furniture of their Rooms. No Porticos, no Courts
laid out in exact proportions, no Galleries adorned with costly pieces of art,
nothing either for state or pleasure; accommodation being chiefly looked after;
their diet too is course and mean, and far from luxurious, and little differing
from that which ordinary persons content themselves with. Their magnificence
appears in the number of their Women, of their Servants, and of their Slaves.
Being bred up Soldiers, their care and glory is to provide for the security of
their Provinces by stores of Arms and other warlike Provisions; to get an
excellent breed of Arabian Horses, whose race they will run you up to several
scores of years; and to have a considerable number of brave, tall, and well
proportioned young men to mount them, and to be of their constant retinue. In
this piece of gallantry they strive who shall outdo the other; which they
think is true greatness.

The law confines them to a set number of Wives; Number of Women-Slaves allowed.
but for Women-Slaves they are left to their own choice and liberty. They may
heap up as many as their lust and their estate will and can give way to. It is
wholly indifferent of what Religion they be, so they be not very heathen. Over
them they have a full power, and can dispose of them according to their humor
and pleasure; and send them to the Market, when they are weary of them; it
being no unusual thing for a poor miserable Christian woman to be sold five or
six times. I observed a piece of cunning in the Jews, who are well versed in
all the little tricks and shifts of gain, and who usually thrive under all
Governments, wherever they are tolerated: They buy little Girls of five or six
years of age at the rate of thirty or forty Dollars, and are mighty careful in
their education; teaching them to dance and sing, and instructing them in all
the sorts of a winning behavior; and the advantage they receive does fully
answer their labor and expense; these accomplishments rendering them valuable
at twenty times more than what they cost; being oftentimes taken into the
Seraglio, or into the Families of the Bassas, the ordinary Turks having not
wherewithal to make such a purchase. And these mindful of the kindness of
their Educators, whose chief design was their own profit, which has been the
happy occasion of their preferment, do them, by the interest they get in their
respective Patrons, many real and great kindnesses. For the Captive-women there
is scarce any possibility to escape; they are forced to keep at home, and only
divert themselves by looking through a lattice of an upper Chamber, if they
belong to a person of any condition, who usually keeps a Bagno in his house;
the meaner sort only going abroad, it being disgraceful and scandalous to be
seen in public, except in the Summer time when they are permitted now and then
to go into the fields, or pass the strait to Scutary, or enjoy the cool
refreshing air of the Bosphorus in a Boat, as I have seen them sometimes, with
a black Eunuch in their company, not so much for a guard, as a spy to secure
the fears and suspicions of their jealous Lord and Master.

Fury and impatience oftentimes drive the Men-Slaves upon desperate attempts of
escaping, Men-Slaves often make escapes.
preferring their liberty to the great hazard of being retaken and the ill
consequences of it. Some have lain so long in the woods, and other places, till
they have been forced by hunger into the highways, which lead to Towns. The
Turks suspect all straglers, and seize upon them either for their own use, or
upon the first notice given, to restore them to their Patrons, unless they
produce an Hogiet or Paper under the Cadyes hand, that they are freemen. Upon
the absence and flight of a Slave they give notice far and wide, and order
several to watch at Bridges, which they must necessarily pass. When I passed
the Bridge laid over the Cayster, not far from Ephesus, too deep to be forded,
several Turks had fixed their station there, hoping at that pass to intercept
the Slaves they were in quest and pursuit of, and taking us to be as good
Musulmans as themselves, desired us, that if in our travels we met with any
such, whom they described, we would stop them and carry them before the next
Cady. But for all this care on the one side, and hazard on the other, some are
so happy to get away, and are mightily favored in it, by the Western
Christians especially, in a Seaport Town, when the Ships are upon their
departure for Christendom. There is such a visible appearance of Providence in
the following stories, that I should not pardon my self if I omitted them. A
poor Russ Lad, about twelve years old, being evil entreated of his Master, was
resolved to try his fortune, and upon the next opportunity in the evening stole
away. He gets hastily over the water out of the City, altogether ignorant
whither he went; a good providence carried him to a Christian Village about a
mile from Pera; he wanders up and down as a Stranger, not knowing in that sad
perplexity of mind, where he was, or what he had to do, being equally afraid to
go or stay; it happened, that one of our Druggermen had at that time business
there, and easily guessing him to be a poor Christian run away from his Master,
the Lad confessed it, and begged of him for Christ's sake to take pity on him. The
good man promised him to take care of him when it was a little darker, when he
could do it with greater security, and with better hope of success. About an
hour and a half in the night, he brought the Boy to our House to kiss my Lord
Ambassador's Vest; immediately he was put into a Livery, and a Perruke given
him, and kept within doors for some time: but after he began to talk English,
he walked the streets securely; so disguised in his looks and habit, that if
his Turkish Master had met him, he would not have known him, he passing for one
who had come out of England with us. The other is this, A few days before we
set sail for Italy, lying at Anchor in the Bay of Smyrna about a League without
the Castle, about midnight the Seamen, who were upon the Watch, heard a
mournful voice of one in the water, calling for help; they immediately run to
the sides of the Ship, and spy one almost quite spent with swimming, and ready
to sink through weariness; they throw out a Rope, and get him aboard. We then
lay fourteen miles from the City, and about a mile and a half from the shore.
When they had recovered him with strong-water and a warm bed, he told us next
day, that he was a poor Christian of Russia, of nineteen or twenty years of
age, who was resolved to make use of that opportunity of recovering his
liberty; that he got in the evening out of Smyrna, and kept along the shore,
till he came to the place over against which our Ship rode: a calm Sea and a
bright Starlight night favored the bold adventure, so that he had the Ship
always in his eye; but the distance deceived him, proving greater than he
expected. He throwing away his upper Vest into the Sea, that it might be no
hinderance to him in swimming, committed himself to the goodness of God and the
water, and with much a-do got to us. We put him into Christian habit, like one
of the Seamen; but for his and our greater security, the Turkish Customers
being within a day or two to search the Vessel, lest they should give us or the
Merchants any trouble, if they found him with us, our Captain desired the
Commander of a Dutch Man of War, that lay in the Bay, to receive him till we
set sail: within four days, when we were out of all danger, we received him
again, and brought him for England.

The condition of the Slaves is more or less tolerable, How the Slaves are
treated.
according to the temper and humor of their Patrons. But of all, a Gally-slave
leads the most sad and miserable life: when they are abroad at Sea, perpetually
laboring at the Oar, and chained to their seats; there they are fixed in all
weathers; their only hope being this that violent storms are not very lasting.
They must make a virtue of necessity, and are forced to be patient. A love of
life and hope one day of being freedmake them submit their backs to the cruel
whip; otherwise death would be a real advantage to them: and some indeed out of
a weariness and loathing, of life have been so desperate as to get loose and
leap into the Sea.

They who are taken in the wars are the Grand Signiors Slaves, and seldom or
never get their liberty, unless when a Christian Ambassador intercedes
powerfully in their behalf, or that this condition be inserted in the Articles
of a Treaty renewed after a rupture by war; a point the Signoria of Venice in
the late accord upon the surrendry of Candia pursued with great zeal, and by
the prudent conduct of their Bailo so happily effected, to the great honor of
St. Mark. They judge it an indecorum, that the Exchequer should be one Asper the
richer for ransoms. No, their Prisoners must linger out their time, and grow
old either in their Galleys or Prisons, unless they are met with and
overpowered in fight by the Knights of Malta, who are obliged their by their
Order to be in perpetual enmity with the Turks, and are a great thorn in their
side, and so have their liberty given them by the Conqueror; or else when their
Galleys are halled ashore into their Voltas, by some unexspected chance get
away.

At such time they are shut up in a spacious Area by the Arsenal, Arsenal of
Constantinople, where the Grand Signiors Slaves are kept.
on the North-side of the Haven at Constantinople, enclosed with very high
walls, and strict guard kept at the entrance; and for the greater security,
they shackle them in couples. Here I had occasion to go often, to visit and
relieve four or five poor English men; some of which had served Captain
Georgio, a famous Greek Pyrate, who was a plague to the Infidels; but at last
by a surprise he fell into their hands, though after a most brave resistance,
himself being killed in the encounter, to the great joy of all the inhabitants
of the Seacoasts, whose often visits were so terrible to them: his head was
sent as a present to the Emperor, for which the Messenger was considerably
rewarded, and the service of the Captain Bassa, who with his whole Fleet of
Galleys, assisted by some Ships of Tripoly, set upon his two Ships in a Port of
Mitylene, highly magnified, and Songs made upon the victory: my business being
to confirm them by my advice in their profession of the Faith of Christ, that
no hardship might work upon their troubled minds to make them turn Turks, and
to relieve them as I saw their necessities required, with the money that was
put into my hand for such Christian uses. The Turks allow them only black bread
and water, but for other necessaries of life they are beholding to their
Fellow- Christians; though some of the more handy and ingenious, by some kind
of work or other do scrape together a few Aspers to lay in a little provision
against the time of their going to Sea.

The Christian Commanders and Officers are imprisoned in the Seven Towers, The
Seven Towers a Prison for Gentlemen taken in the wars.
situated upon the Propontis in the South-East corner of Constantinople. These
Gentlemen are the great trophies of their victories; with these, and their
perpetual servitude they seem satisfied in the loss of many thousands killed in
the war. They have a daily allowance of fifteen Aspers made by the Emperor, and
this is esteemed a mighty piece of bounty, which they cannot safely reject,
though the Governor usually gets a third part of it: but being most of noble
Families, they are well maintained, not only by their Relations, but by the
respective Governments and States under which they served; considerable sums
being yearly sent toward their relief, which is distributed in due proportion
according to their quality and character: only I could wish the Hungarian and
German Gentlemen, who are Protestants, had a little more justice done them in
the distribution, and did not suffer upon the account of their Religion. Here I
went three or four times a year to give them the Holy Sacrament, and found
easy admission into the Castle, as did the Religious of the Roman Church, to
say Mass to those of their Communion, who were far more numerous; visits were
continually made them by their friends; they had the free use of the Castle, so
as they kept within their due limits; and free liberty of keeping one another
company; and thus they deceived the tediousness of their imprisonment by mutual
kindnesses and civilities of conversation; the Governor of the Castle letting
out a Garden to a noble Venetian, who had been taken in Corso, which favor he
admitted his fellow prisoners to. Nothing seemed to be wanting but their
liberty to make their life pleasant; many of them were allowed to keep their
Servants, and lay in what provision they pleased; the Governor being a mild
man, and extraordinary indulgent, besides the usual custom of Turks, who think
that the right of war will justify the most horrid act of barbarity and
brutishness toward their Prisoners, who are to look upon it as a great favor
and mercy that their throats are not cut. But after that a French Gentleman a
Knight of Malta made his escape in the latter end of the year 1670. in the
Frenchmen of War, which brought their new Ambassador; the Turks, mad at their
remissness, were resolved to revenge themselves upon the remaining Prisoners,
treating them with all imaginable despite and cruelty, thrusting them (having
first put iron-bolts upon their legs) into loathsome Cellars and Dungeons,
without the least regard to their quality, and suffering no Christian to come
nigh them: and indeed the cruelty and insolence were so great, that without the
divine assistance it had been altogether insupportable.

The other Slaves, Slaves in private men's hands
who are in private men's hands, are redeemable at a good price; but then there
must be artifice used in the buying of them. The more forward the Western
Christians are to redeem their Contrymen, the greater price their covetous
Masters set upon their heads; a seeming indifference, whether they are redeemed
or no, does very much beat down the ransom. They have rowing in their Galleys
Christians of almost all European Nations; English, and French, and Dutch, and
the like. Which must not seem strange, though we have a league of commerce and
trade with the Grand Signor and Ambassadors reside in the Port, and the effects
and persons of the Merchants are secured by virtue of capitulations, and our
Ships pass securely in their Seas. For these foolish men enticed with hope of
prey and good pay, deserted the Merchants Ships of their own Country, and
served under the banners of the Venetians and Malteses, or else privateering
Pirates: the trade being usually gainful, either by intercepting the Alexandrian
Saikes in the Archipelago, or by making a descent upon the land: (the Turks
till of late awakened by their losses, not fortifying their Seacoasts, and
lying naked to the assaults of every bold invader) but now and then they are
snapt themselves, and catch a Tartar; which happened to Captain Georgio's men,
who were all considerably rich with their plunder; but greedy of more, lost
all, and their liberty to boot: a continued success not being to be hoped for
in the uncertainties of War. I remember, that when I was at Smyrna, I attended
our Consul in his visit he made Kaplan Bassa, a Georgian, the Admiral of the
Turkish Armata. He interceded with him in behalf of several English Seamen
which were in the Galleys; his answer was, that he had a command from the
Emperor to torment such rogues (for he was out of all patience when he spoke of
them) who assisted his enemies; that they were to thank themselves for their
slavery; that this severity was justifiable by the rights and laws of War; and
that he ought not to supplicate for such, who deserved greater punishment than
what they endured.

The Bassas and Beyes of the several Islands, which are scattered up and down
the Mediterranean, hold their Places and Governments upon condition of
furnishing out so many Galleys, according to a fixed proportion, every
Summer-expedition at their own expense.

If when they are separated from the Fleet, they master an Enemy, both ship and
men are their own; but this happening but seldom, they are forced to hire or buy
Slaves to man their Galleys. These were the men we were forced to deal with. I
should here injure my conscience as well as the reputation of my Lord
Ambassador and the worthy Factories of Constantinople and Smyrna, if I should
conceal with what earnestness and zeal they would lay out great sums of Money
in this most Christian piece of Charity, consulting herein very generously the
honor of their Religion, and the honor of their Country, as it became
Christians and English Gentlemen.

Fifty pounds sterling is an ordinary price for a Slave; and so much we have
given, and sometimes more. We had a great mind to set at liberty one honest man
above the rest, and offered a considerable sum of Money for his ransom; but it
was refused, and would have been, though we had doubled it. For they could not,
it seems, well spare him, he being a Sail-maker by his profession, whom they
continually employed; and being sensible how useful he was to them, they used
him very kindly; so that he could complain of nothing but the bare want of
liberty. Others of these Beyes out of pride and peculiar hatred to the
Christian name and of our Nation, were so obstinate and inflexible, that they
were not to be moved or wrought upon, by any overtures of Money, to part with
their Slaves; which distemper we found most raving in the Bassa of Rhodus;
whose example is an instance of the lasting revenge of Turks, which only death
can extinguish. His Father had been Captain Bassa, and having according to the
usual custom, visited the Islands and the coasts of Greece, went with his Fleet
into the Sinus Euboeensis, now called the Gulf of Volo, to the N. of Boeotia
or Negropont, where were two English Ships at anchor, taking in Corn, which was
contraband, for Christendom; which he made sure of, as lawful prize, and
promised himself an easy victory. The poor Mariners who knew the danger, and
the inconvenience they were put to for want of Sea-room, being not able to turn
and wind their Ships, were resolved however to fight and die, rather than
tamely yield; there was no hope of flight, or safety, or victory; which made
them the more desperate. He sends them an insolent summons to deliver up
themselves immediately; otherwise he would beat their Ships about their ears;
and threatens them with present death. This most dismal accident, instead of
abating, increased their strength, and made them the more furious. The Turks
fight for prey, the Christians only for revenge; and overprest with the
disproportioned number of the Infidels, most of them die bravely, some few
unhappily surviving to be the triumph and sport of their cruelty. But the
Captain Bassa, who thought to gratify his covetous, proud, and revengeful
humor, was killed in the fight with a Musket; the manner of whose death the
Son so implacably resented, vowing revenge upon the whole Nation for the
misfortune of it, though it happened above forty years ago; getting as many
English as he can, either by money or violence, into his hands, and using them
with all imaginable cruelty and despite to please his Father's angry Ghost. He
had about ten in his Galleys, whom he would not part with at any rate, though
we often tried him; and he a man otherwise very covetous; but his hatred, and
ill will, and revenge, were in him more prevalent passions.

The Enthusiasm wherewith Mahomet was so infatuated, Wine forbid to be drank by
Mahomet.
did not deprive him of the use of his reason in other matters, relating to the
establishment of his Religion, which was to be kept up and propagated by the
joint aids of ignorance and arms: wisely considering the horrid effects of
intemperance in a Camp, how inconsistent with the discipline of War, in which
his followers were to be trained, (there being no likelihood of its prevailing
upon the understanding of any wise or sober people otherwise) how the Greeks
and Asiaticks had given up themselves to the excessive love of Wine, which
introduced softness and effeminacy in their manners, took them off their
natural strength and courage both of body and mind, and rendered them less able
to endure the hardships that necessarily attend a warlike life; how the
extravagant mirth they were guilty of in their cups, made them unlike men, and
ended for the most part in quarrels and blood; he forbad the use of Wine
wholly, as if there had been a Devil in every grape, and that he diffused his
evil influence in the juice. No, those who were to be Champions of the Almighty
were to be grave and sober, and not any way exposed to the danger of losing
their reason, or having their souls defiled with so profane a liquor.

This he pretends was the command of God, which might easily enough prevail
upon a blockish and stupid people, wrought upon by his wiles and artifices, to
deny themselves this satisfaction, (though their taste could not but be
affected with the pleasantness, and sweetness and refreshing qualities of
Wine,) and even force their very natures and inclinations to a submission.

I expected to have found them as abstemious as they have been famed to be, But
notwithstanding this prohibition, the Turks generally debauched with it.
and that no such thing as drunkenness was to be seen among them, or but rarely
at least; this being the peculiar vice wherewith they used to upbraid the
Christians and Jews: but I quickly found, that riot and the love of Wine were
too strong for their first belief and education; and that the inclinations of
Sense had beaten down the commands of Religion; that generally all, not only
the Renegados but natural Turks, Citizens and Soldiers, were excessively given
to it; except the Priests and old men, and such as had been at Mecca, whose
age, and profession, and manner of life rendered them averse from doing a thing
so indecent and scandalous; and that a man could not do a Turk a greater
civility and kindness, or more oblige them, than by giving them Wine. For the
sake of this they would visit the houses of Christians, and not be satisfied
without it. They are for the pure blood of the grape, and wonder at our
spoiling the Wine by our mixtutes of water, and think they have not drank
enough, till they are able to drink no more. The late Vizir himself was not
free from this vice of excessive drinking. For being persuaded (much about the
time of the taking of Candia) by his Physician a little to transgress the law
of his Prophet for his health sake, he no sooner had tasted the sweetness of
Wine, (for till that time he was utterly ignorant whether it were sweet or
bitter) but he loved it ever after; and was almost angry with his Prophet, for
forbidding a liquor so grateful to the palate; as I believe he was with
himself, for living in ignorance so long: it being his constant practice, upon
his return from that Island, to indulge himself in it in the afternoon, when he
had dispatched the weighty affairs of the Empire, relying, I suppose, upon the
strength of a Proverb that holds as true in Turkey as in Christendom, That he
who is a wise man in the day, will not be accounted a fool at night.

This defection was so gross, general, and notorious, that it alarmed the
Churchmen, and filled them with anger and zeal, which broke out in bitter
invectives; they thunder out of their Pulpits, that their Religion and Empire
were both like to be at an end speedily, that the violation portended nothing
but ruin and desolation; that the crime grew to that excess and height, that
it seemed almost to be above expiation. But the Janissaries, no way moved with
their zeal, drink on still. At last a certain Priest, one Vani Ephendi, famous
for his eloquence, and who had gained a mighty opinion in the Court for his
pretensions to extraordinary piety, (consisstent, by the practice and law of
the Country, with a multitude of women, which he kept) upon Mahomet's
birthday, took the liberty in an harangue before the Emperor, to put him in
mind of the quarrels of the Janissaries, occasioned by this devilish liquor,
almost in his very sight, and near his Tent; that this was of evil Omen to the
Government; that the state of affairs were in an ill condition; that God and
Mahomet were highly angry and offended at the practice of so much lewdness,
which was universally tolerated; and that their holy Religion was in great
danger of being lost by such profanation. He very tragically and passionately
laments the miscarriage; then entreats and beseeches with mighty earnestness
and zeal the Emperor, to think of a fit remedy, that may put a stop to this
growing evil: and for fear his persuasions might be ineffectual, he tells him
he shall never enter into Paradise, and thereatens him with everlasting
punishment in the other World, unless he removes this grievous Scandal. The
Grand Signior was then at Adrianople, Wine forbid by the Emperor to be drank
all the Empire over.
who commands immediately the Taverns of the poor Greeks to be shut up; and the
Casks of Wine, the occasion of this great disorder, to be staved in the open
streets; and issues forth his Royal command, that no more Wine should be drank
all the Empire over. I cannot but remember, with what horror the Greeks of
Constantinople received the news, how amazed and disheartened and how they
lamented and deplored the misfortune, being ready to act the Desperadoes: but
their trouble and solicitude are to no purpose, the Emperor commands, and he
must be obeyed. The Turks enter the Cellars of the public houses, and spoil
all the Vessels they light upon, where the Greeks and Armenians had not
prevented them by their over have, for fear they should be thought to have
disliked or disobeyed the Edict; for that was universal, and took in Jews and
Christians as well as Turks. For they for the future must abstain from Wine out
of respect to the Emperor's command, as the Turks out of respect to Mahomet.

The Turks are always guilty of Extremes; when once they have determined upon a
thing, though never so rashly and without the due examination of circumstances,
or the mischiefs that may follow, they presently proceed to execution.
Whatsoever they do, they do it with so much impetuosity and fury, that equity
and clemency and civility are wholly laid aside. To add geater force and
authority to the command, and to strike a terror into the people, a severe
penalty is threatened to be inflicted upon the transgressor: the fear of which
made them forbear drinking Wine in private, lest their very breath should
betray them. The Christians, who were less careful herein, suffered the
punishment of their own folly. For I knew several of them faulty herein seized
upon in the streets, and condemned to the Galleys. Our Drugger-men would never
venture to drink a glass of Wine, whenever they crossed the waters and went,
as they had occasion, for the business of my Lord Ambassador and the Nation, to
the Caimaicam's house; for this had been an affront, and consequently an
aggravation of their fault, for a Christian reeking with Wine to breath in a
Bassa's face.

In the mean while the Christian Ambassadors were concerned, The concern of the
Christian Ambassadors for this severe prohibition.
lest they and their Families, if there were no Vintage the following Autumn,
should be involved under the same Inconveniences; for the Greeks out of
despair left off cultivating their Vineyards, not thinking the bare Grapes,
whereof there is such plenty, worth the labor and cost and time; and it was
justly to be feared, lest the Customers in the Seaport Towns would prove
froward and troublesome, and not permit any Vessels of Wine sent for Presents
out of Christendom to be carried to their Palaces. The Cadyes too were very
fierce in the execution of this Order; some out of zeal to Religion, others out
of a principle of obstinacy and ill will to the Christians; others out of
covetousness to get money for a License and Dispensation. This last made the
Cady of Jerusalem so fierce upon the poor Religious of the several Communions
of Christians there, so as to forbid them the use of Wine in the Holy
Sacrament, pretending he did but his duty to the Emperor, when it was a lusty
Bribe the Villain aimed at, knowing the obligations their Religion and their
vows laid upon them of celebrating a daily Mass, as the event soon showed.

During this disorder the Ambassadors Who remonstrate upon it.
send their Druggermans (for so they call the Interpreters they make use of in
transacting their concerns) to represent to the Visir and other Bassas the
injustice of concluding them under the prohibition; that it would be a
prejudice to their health, to be forced upon the liquors of the Country, to
which they had not been accustomed; and that it was against the law of Nations
that they should be deprived of the conveniences of humane life; upon a debate
in their Divan, the request seemed just and reasonable, and fit to be complied
with, that they should have a liberty of making what quantity of Wine they
pleased for their own uses; for they would extend the privilege no further.
The Ambassadors were unsatisfied with this order, but made further demands,
that all the Western Christians, who were under their protection, dispersed in
the several Factories of the Empire, might enjoy the same favor. The Bassas
demur upon it, and pretend this would enervate the force of the Emperor's
edict; and that such a concession would have an evil influence upon the
Government, which is preserved by a punctual submission to his will and
pleasure, which was the highest reason of a law. All likelihood of success
seemed to vanish; our Druggerman however was commanded to attend, and take all
opportunities of making new proposals in his Master's name: The matter is put
off from day to day, but at last (for it was four months first) being wearied
with continued demands, they suffered their obstinacy with great difficulty to
be overcome.

The drinking of distilled liquors was equally forbid; Strong waters equally
forbid.
for the Turks seemed more pleased with them than with Wine, as affecting their
stomachs and brain with greater heats and tittillations. Neither Turks nor
Greeks are skilful in the arts of distillations; but do it in so rude and gross
a way, as that it rather seems a boiling of liquors, than a separating the pure
and spirituous parts from the gross and saeculent; which makes a company of
Brutes, who make sense if not the only yet the leading principle of life so mad
for strong waters sent out of Christendom, distilled with so much art and cost,
out of spices, herbs, and such like hot materials and ingredients. They have no
moderation and command over themselves or appetite, and think it can never be
satisfied, unless cloyed with excess. And if any Turk, who indulges himself in
the drinking of Wine or strong Waters, does not lose his reason, and returns
sober from such a debauch, it must be wholly imputed to the strength of his
brain, not to his good will, much less to his virtue.

Besides their Coffee and Sherbet, Turkish Liquors.
which last is used by the better sort in the heats of Summer to quench and
allay their thirst, the ordinary people drink sometimes other liquors; one they
call Bozza, made of a kind of Millet; another made of boiled raisins and honey
mixed; another of water and honey, and with eggs macerated in them; besides a
syrup made of preserved grapes.

But which is most peculiar to them, The common use of Opium among them
is the use of crude Opium, which they swallow whole in little pills without
any the least mastication. The stomach performing its vital function in the
opening and dissolving this concreted juice, the brain feels the violent
operation of it; the spirits are put into a rapid motion; a vertigo seizes upon
the person; and a kind of delirium, which takes away the free and sober use of
reason; if they walk, their motion is very unsteady, like men who are drunk or
mad; and their tongues faltering, and the whole body disordered. A thousand
foolish ideas of things possess their imagination; their fancies are then most
raving, as if all that time they were as happy as the Grand Signor himself.
They think this the greatest pleasure of life, which they can purchase at the
rate of a few aspers; for to this purpose some vile persons take it, as they do
Wine, being capable of no greater pleasure than what arises from a
preternatural state of the body. Others to strengthen them in their lust;
others to deprive them of their understanding, so as to be less sensible of
danger, or the impressions of hunger, or the cold air, and the other severities
of Winter, and especially when at such times they are obliged to travel.

This is the constant viaticum or provision of the Messengers, The chief
provision of the Arabian Messengers.
especially Arabians by Nation, who like our foot-posts are employed by the
Ambassadors and Merchants from Constantinople to their several Factories; there
being no established conveyance of Letters all Turkey over, (which is one
argument of their barbarousness) their service is very useful and necessary.
They are reduced to a set company, and have a Chief over them, who dispatches
them to the several parts of the Empire; and they perform great journeys with
incredible haste, unless when the ways are rendered unpassable by deep snow or
great rain and inundations of waters, and are very faithful in the discharge of
their trust. Dozed and intoxicated with Opium, they go on their way, and have
just so much sense left as to know they are not out of it; at first they shake
off the drouziness, which the poisonous medicament brings upon them, by a
continual agitation of the body; and when they are tired and forced to rest,
they are content with as little sleep as possible, not lying stretched out to
their full length, but leaning down with their backs against a wall or bank,
with their knees against their belly to keep it warm; every one knows his
convenient dose according to his strength and temperament; some will receive
the quantity of a little pea, as ordinarily as they do their daily food, or
rather make that serve for it; stronger stomachs and constitutions require as
much more, which one would wonder how they should concoct, but that we know, to
some by a peculiarity of constitution, which nature has given, or use
introduced, occasioned by necessity or wantonness, poisons have served for
aliment. How small a part of that, which custom has made so necessary to their
lives, as that they cannot forbear so much as one day, would put us into our
last sleep, and awaken us in another World! This affected phrenzy has this
event usually, the spirits being so often fired and put into a preternatural
motion, their whole force being spent, grow dull and torpid; their looks pale
and frightful, like men distracted; their eyes sunk in their heads; a palsy in
their hands, and all the infirmities of old age seizing upon them in the time
of their manhood: so that they appear to be as so many walking ghosts. Which
horrid and necessary effects of it have of late made the use of it less
frequented among the more considering Turks, who are sensible their excesses
and debaucheries with Wine are less dangerous and pernicious to their health. I
know not how true the experiment is, but this is certain, that those who use
Opium abstain most carefully, for some time at least, from drinking cold
water,: which they say would cause death incurably, though without any
convulsion or agonies. This is the only use of Opium with them, ignorant of
correcting its noxious and stupifying qualities, and so making it fit for
medicine.

There is so great and universal a regard had to Mahomet's prohibition of
eating Swines-flesh, Swinesflesh prohibited.
that the transgressor is counted sacrilegious and void of all conscience, who
dares defile his soul with it, as they firmly believe it does; which opinion is
so rooted in their minds, that they may be sooner brought to renounce any part
of their Religion, than this particular institution. Those who will indulge
themselves to drink Wine, abhor the very thought of touching, much more of
eating the least bit of Pork. To breed an antipathy in their children toward
it, they teach them, as soon as they can speak, to call Christians by the
opprobrious name of Hogs; which hatred grows up with their years; so that they
had rather die with hunger, than meddle with such profane and cursed diet, in
what strait or necessity of life soever. The very sight of a Hog puts some into
a fright and trembling, which soon passes into fretting and indignation; and
woe to the poor Swine, if the Soldiers come in their way; for they are sure to
come by the worst of it, if they escape being killed with their small shot; the
steams of the dressed flesh are hated worse than any pestilential air; and
therefore if any goodnatur'd Turk condescends to be entertained by a Christian,
great care is taken that nothing may be served up of Hogs-flesh, however
disguised: for this would be an affront not only to his Person, but Religion,
and would fright him from the table. Which I remember happened particularly at a
worthy English Merchant's House at Galata, who prevailed with a gentile Turk to
stay and dine with him. The Cook not knowing there was such a Guest in the
company, sent up a mess of Pork, which one of the servants as ignorantly put
upon the table. The Turk suspecting what it was, asked the question, the thing
being confessed, (for there was no possible denying or dissembling it) he rises
from his seat in great haste as one out of his wits, looks about for water, and
observing a little Cistern in one corner of the room (as is usual) washes his
hands, mouth, and nostrils, as if all had been polluted, and left us
immediately in great disdain, though fully satisfied it was a mistake, and no
way out of design. The Greeks who live in Villages apart from Turks, breed up
these creatures not so much for their own use, as to sell them to the We, stern
Christians, and to Masters of Ships for their Sea-provision; a privilege which
they are forced to buy with their Money. But to do this with greater security,
the Druggermans are forced to procure a warrant from the Caimacam every year at
the beginning of Winter; and then the Swineherd must remain in the fields, in
some by-place out of the road, till the dusk of the evening; at which time the
Turks, not used to stay out late, retire to their houses; there being as great
silence at an hour and an half in the night as at midnight. This great care
must be taken to prevent and take off all occasion of scandal, offense, and
tumult, which would necessarily arise, if they were brought into Constantinople
as it were in triumph by daylight; and would be sadly misconstrued, as an evil
Omen of the downfall of their Empire by the Christians.

They are at present strangers to luxury and high feeding; Their diet.
the Kitchen-arts have not as yet got among them; no poignant sauces to provoke
the appetite, besides popper and garlic to heat their stomachs; no curiosity
of diet, little decency in their entertainments: They understand not the use of
knife and fork, tearing the flesh asunder with their fingers; a wooden spoon
being the chief furniture of their table. There are some dishes peculiar to the
great men's tables, which an European stomach, though not nice and curious,
would reject; fish and soul, though they have in abundance, they do not much
affect. They cut the flesh they roast into little mammocks, and put them upon
wooden spits. The common food of the Levant from Constantinople to the walls of
China and beyond, is Rice; which they disguise with several colors with
saffron and several sorts of seeds and juices which yields hearty nourishment.
The usual time of dinner is about nine of the clock in the morning; they sit
close and round a copper vessel, placed upon a stool a foot and half high from
the ground, which contains their plates and dishes either of tin or earth; (for
the Emperor does not use silver) and eat their meat in great haste, as if they
strove who should eat most, or have done first. This Paragraph of their diet I
should altogether have omitted, as of too poor and mean a consideration, if it
did not conduce somewhat to the better understanding their manners and tempers.

Their Weddings are celebrated with great noise and tumult; Their Weddings.
the Bride muffled up and covered with a red veil is brought home on horseback
riding astride, attended by her relations and friends, and Music playing
before, and the boys running up and down and making a confused noise. This is
the first day of their coming together; the whole business of the contract and
marriage being managed in their absence by the friends of each party. But
forasmuch as the Mohammedan law permits the man to put away his wife upon every
slight occasion, that they may not leave their Daughters wholly at the mercy of
their Husbands, whose humors are so fickle and inconstant, but prevent such an
accident, at least to provide better against it, a Writing is signed before the
Cadi, whereby they oblige themselves to make such daily allowance to their
Wives, in case they are weary of them and turn them off: which allowance is
exacted as a just debt and always payable. The paper of contract being
ratified, the Proxies of both parties go to the Parish Priest, who is invited
to the Nuptial entertainment, who there bestows his blessing on the married
couple; and then begins the mad mirth, which lasts for three entire days and
nights together.

They are confined to the number of four Wives, How they treat their Women.
who have some little command over the women Slaves, though otherwise not much
better treated; for their condition is servile, being shut up in their houses
as so many prisons, scarce permitted to go abroad without a keeper; barred from
all outward conversation; their Brothers grown up to be men, denied access to
them, or else but twice or thrice in a year, and then in the presence of their
jealous Husbands: forced thus to live an idle and melancholic kind of life at
home, their chiefest diversion is to bath often, or to stand at their
lattice-window to observe the passengers; but the good Housewives, who are
almost dead with this idle and dull kind of life, deceive the slow hours by
embroidering Handkerchiefs and Quilts. Their chiefest care is how to please
their Husbands, in whose favor they place their happiness; it being in their
power to retain them, or put them away; so that their observance and love
spring wholly from a principle of fear. Examples of which severity are
frequent; after the first or second divorce a reconciliation is allowed; Their
Divorces.
but if their fury and inconstant humor carry them on farther, then they lie
under an interdict. It is a sin, and no less than that of Adultery, to reassume
them, unless after another embraces; this punishment of folly is established by
law, and is horribly disgraceful; a greater curse or infamy than which, Bayazid
the first thought he could not wish upon himself, when he was challenged by
Tamerlan to fight, if he did not meet him and join battle upon a certain day.
The Jews practice the same liberty of divorcing themselves from their Wives,
allowed by Moses for the hardness of their hearts. A certain Jew had bebauched
a Jewess, Wife to another of his own Religion; which being known, the man was
excommunicated, and turned out of the Synagogue, and the woman locked up and
deprived of her liberty. But they were resolved to keep company together, and
by mutual consent turn Turks, to the great forrow and regret of the Husband,
from whom she was violently forced away. At last being convinced of her sin,
and her Jew-Turk-Gallant weary of her, she is willing to return to her first
Husband; but this was inconsistent, she being an Apostate, with the law of
Moses, and with the law of Mahomet, which forbids any Turkish woman to marry
either Christian or Jew. The man is mad for his Wife, and to put himself into a
condition to receive her, he turns Turk, and marries her, the other having
given her a Bill of Divorce. After some time they both go to Salonichi, where
is the greatest concourse of Jews in the Empire; next to Constantinople and
Cair, and turn Jews again, hoping in such a multitude to pass undiscovered.

The women may sue for a Divorce from their Husbands, In what cases the women
may sue for a Divorce.
when they are not maintained according to the law, and according to contract,
and when they suffer an injury too great to be endured; which if they obtain,
they only carry away their Clothes and Dowry, and lose all future allowances,
and take the Girls with them; but these cases are rare, and very feldom happen.

They are very kind and assisting to their sick friends, Their kindness to sick
persons.
accounting it a matter of piety and religion: the frequency of visits renders
them troublesome, every one bringing fruits or medicines, which they judge
proper in the case. This care and kindness continue as long as there is hope of
life; but when that is past, and the pangs of death seize upon the person, the
Priest or any other whispers several times in his ear, and puts him in mind of
that usual form, of the profession of Mahometism, that there is no God but God,
and that Mahomet is his Prophet. They are much concerned for them in their
agonies, and express it by their looks and by their moan; but when once they
are dead, their mourning and trouble are at an end; they cease from all
complaints, and scarce a sigh to be hard, looking upon this, as a finding fault
with the decree of God Almighty and a resisting his will. The dead body is
perfumed with Frankincense, carefully washed with clean soap and warm water,
and sowed up in linen: unless toward the head and feet, (which are left free,
that the person may stand on his legs, and show himself in the grave, when he
gives an account of his faith to the Examining Angels) and not kept long above
ground. They have not the art of embalming. Their Funerals are solemnized
without Obsequies; Their Funerals.
no show, or pomp, or expense in the least; they do all in the daytime, and
usually in the morning; deriding the Greeks, who at such times carry lighted
Tapers and Torches, and the Priests their Censers, and hire women to cut and
tear their hair, and is a necessary part of the solemnity. The Priest usually
goes before the corpse mumbling out somewhat, who says peculiar prayers for the
soul of the dead person at his grave; nigh which he stands alone by himself,
the rest about twenty foot distant, and there reads some short Chapters of the
Alcoran. Then he gravely admonishes him about the fundamentals of his Religion,
that the Angel Inquisitor may not surprise him, and find him unprepared with
suitable answers; and that he boldly confess that God is the Creator, and
Mahomet his Messenger, and that he used in his prayers to turn his face toward
Mecca, and the like; which ceremony being finished, they lay the body in the
ground, and wish the man a good success in his examination. Their care and
respect is not confined to the grave; for they bestow Money to the poor to pray
for their souls, which they believe find ease and benefit by their suffrages,
and often go themselves to their graves, out of love and respect to their
memory. Some Emperors and great men have left lands for these very purposes,
that these religious offices may never be omitted. Their women are not
permitted to be present at a Funeral; only the last day of Ramazan, as I said
before, they are allowed to go to the public burying places. These
burying-places are without the City, Their burying-places.
and usually nigh the highway; somewhat perchance for pomp and more for use,
to put passengers in mind that they must dye also, and serve for examples to
others: Their graves are somewhat hollow, that they may the better rise and sit
before the Angels, planks being laid athwart to keep the sand and dust, that
cover them, from falling upon them. At the extremities are erected two broken
pieces of pillars (which formerly belonged to Christian Churches) or great
stones, some of which are between four and five yards high, as I found by
measure in the burying-place of Galata. They avoid doing any possible injury to
the dead; their bones lie quiet and undisturbed; they do not dig up a grave a
second time; every one has his grave apart; no mixture of ashes or bones, which
are as safely preserved as if they were in distinct urnes and peculiar vaults
and repositories: The sepulchral monuments of the great men are made of
freestone, Their Tombs.
well cut and smoothed, in the fashion of a chest, whose cover is taken off,
with a stone-step running round and jetting out. Both sides are adorned with
gilt circles, and one at each end, the intermedial spaces being filled up with
flowers, very handsomely wrought; for here as in their cielings they show their
skill of engraving and painting. Statuary and drawing a man's face they do not
pretend to in the least; this being altogether unlawful; which makes them so
brutishly fierce against all humane figures, whether wrought by the chezil or
pencil. In either of the extremes is placed a pillar, which rising from a
square, ends in a cone; on the tip of which is placed a turbant, or a cap, such
as the women wear, to distinguish whose the monument is. These monuments are in
the open air. The Emperors and great men lie buried in Cities, in covered
Chapels, which they have purchased and built for this very purpose.

An Oath is of great force with them in deciding pecuniary and capital causes;
Their Oaths.
they lay their hands upon the Alcoran and call God to witness to the truth of
what they shall attest, which they kiss and then put to their forehead, having
first washed their hands; for no unclean person must dare to touch it, as they
are warned by the inscription, that is always on the outside cover of the book.
If any Christian or Jew are to give in witness upon Oath, they adjure them to
tell the truth of what they know, making them also lay their hands upon the
holy Gospels or books of Moses. An English Gentleman being cited before a Cady
as a witness of a bargain, readily appeared, and was very willing to take his
Oath, as he could do most conscientiously and religiously; but they wanted a
book to swear him, which put a sudden stop to the contestation and trial; after
much search among the neighboring Christians, they brought in an old Latin
book, which they took for the Gospels; He quickly perceiving what it was, began
to refuse, till his Interpreter, from whom I received this account, told him,
that such a scrupulosity would spoil the cause, and make the Turks suspect the
truth of his testimony; that it was brought there instead of the book of the
Gospels, and that it was believed by them so to be; and that it was the same
thing in effect, as if the original handwriting of the Evangelists were put
into his hands; wrought upon by these arguments, he took his Oath accordingly.

Some of them will swear horribly in their private discourse; sometimes out of
design to gain belief, and sometimes in their passion; and the forms are very
odd, and which are not worth being recited or known. But it is the highest
unkindness in the world not to believe them, when they swear one particular
Oath; for then they are most serious, and desire to remove all possible
suspicion of falsehood; which is, by the truth of the four books the thing is so
or so, or I will do this or that; meaning the law of Moses, the Psalter of
David, the Gospel of Jesus, and the Alcoran of Mahomet: for they look upon the
three first also as sacred, and reverence their authority. They acknowledge
Moses and David and our blessed Savior Christ to be great Prophets, and do not
speak of them without a preface of respect and honor; following herein the
example of Mahomet himself, Their respect to the name of Christ.
who has left them abundant witness in his Alcoran of the most holy life and
stupendous miracles of Christ. To whose holy name the better sort show so
great a reverence, that if any cursed Jew go about to blaspheme it, they will
be sure to revenge the affront: as it happened not long since at Gallipoli, a
maritime City of Thrace upon the Propontis, where a Jew, quarrelling with an
Englishman, broke out into most scurrilous language against our Savior; but
the Turks, who were present, were so concerned at the blasphemy, that they
carried the wretch to the Justice, who hearing of the evidence, without delay
commanded him to be severely drubbed before him, to teach him more respect and
duty to the name of so holy and great a Prophet.

A Survey of the Seven Churches of Asia, as they now lie in their ruins.
THE curious surveys every where extant of Bethlehem, Surveys of Palestine
common.
Nazareth, and Jerusalem, places so famous for the birth, education, and
sufferings of our Blessed Savior, (which are owing to the industry and
learning and curiosity of devout Pilgrims, who from the first ages of
Christianity to this present, not without the design of providence, as I verily
believe, have visited mount Calvary and the holy Sepulcher) suffer us not to be
unacquainted with their situation and state: every one, who has but the least
gust for Antiquity, or History, or Travel, or insight into Books, greedily
catching at such relations. But not of the Seven Churches of Asia.
But a sadder fate seemed to hang over the Seven Churches of Asia, founded by
the Apostles, and to which the eternal Son of God vouchsafed to send those
Epistles recorded in the book of the Revelation of St. John, which by the
unpardonable carelessness of the Greeks, (unless that horrid stupidity, into
which their slavery has cast them, may plead some excuse herein) have lain so
long neglected; they giving us no account of their ruins, and the Western
Christians either not caring or not daring to visit them. English the first who
made solemn visits thither.
The English Gentlemen who live in Smyrna, out of a pious zeal and a justly
commendable curiosity, some few years since were the first who made a voyage
thither, to see the remainders of that magnificence, for which those Cities
were so renowned in the Histories of ancient times: and their practice and
example have for the most part every year since in the Autumn been taken up and
followed.

During my stay at Smyrna, Occasion of my voyage.
where I arrived about the middle of February 1670. from Constantinople, in
order to get a safe passage for Christendom in our Fleet of Merchants Ships,
then lading at that Scale, (the Corsairs of Algiers infesting the Mediterranean
with their number and strength, and making all sailing in a single Vessel very
dangerous) I was seized with the same curiosity. But an opportunity did not so
easily present it self: the waters were not then quite down, and the plains in
several places scarce passable: besides, I wanted company, which is highly
necessary in those Countries both for security and convenience; having had sad
experience by my travels in other parts of Turkey of the difficulties and
hazards of such voyages: and especially in a voyage I made to Prusia in
Bithynia, in which I narrowly escaped having my throat cut upon mount Olympus
by several Janissaries newly arrived from Candia, and traveling toward
Constantinople. But our Ships not departing till July following, the love and
respect I had to Antiquity, and to the memory of those Churches, once so
famous, made me not only forget but despise danger: and it happened very luckily,
that three worthy English Gentlemen, Mr. Lewis, Mr. Rudings, and Mr. Jolly
(which last with one and fifty more most sadly perished by Shipwreck near
Mounts Bay in Cornwall in October 1671.) not long after acquainted me that they
had taken up the same resolution, and would risque it too. The Spring was now
advanced; and we were to set out with all convenient speed, before the heats
increased and grew excessive: and for our better safety, we hired two stout and
honest Janissaries, well known to our Nation; two Armenian Christians, a Cook,
and three Grooms to look to our Horses; in all twelve of us. Which number was
but necessary; for at that time of the year, when there is grass in the fields
for their horses, the roads are infested with Robbers in strong and numerous
parties, well mounted and armed, who take all advantages of assaulting
passengers, and kill first, and rob afterward: sometimes coming twenty or
thirty days journey out of the mountains of Cilicia, and from Georgia, to the
furthermost Provinces of the lesser Asia lying toward the Archipelago for this
purpose.

I cannot here conceal the extraordinary civility and courtesy of the Cady of
Smyrna, The Cady of Smyrna's extraordinary civility.
then newly promoted to that Office, who hearing of our intended voyage, to
oblige and gain the love of our Nation, sent one of his Servants to advise us
to be well armed, and to have a good Guard with us; for that he was assured
there were murdrous Villains abroad on the highways, and that several had
fallen into their hands. This advice was seasonable and most obliging: and
accordingly we provided against all evil accidents as well as we could, relying
chiefly upon the good providence of God, as our greatest and best security.

April the third 1671. we set out from Smyrna, Bay of Smyrna:
and went about to the Northern-side of the Bay, which runs in a good way to
the North-east, riding for several hours near the shore under the rocky
mountains of Gordilen, which with the opposite mountain Mimas, there being high
hills also to the East, makes the Haven so secure for Ships, which lie as it
were land-lockt. Our way lay Northward, and somewhat to the West. For that we
might the better observe the turnings and windings of our journey, and the
bearings of places, we took a Sea-Compass with us. Menamen.
Leaving Menamen, which I suppose is the Temnos of the Ancients, on the
right hand, a Town well situated, and considerable for the trade of Dimity and
Scamity, we rode down to the River Hermus, not far distant from it, (having in
our way a very pleasant prospect of rich plains and meadows) where we arrived
after six hours and a half.

Hermus has its rise in the greater Phrygia, Hermus.
and passing through Lydia and Aeolis, pours its waters into the Bay of Smyrna
over against Vurlaw, Vurlaw.
(famous for its hot waters, mentioned by Strabo under the name of (...), and
much frequented by Turks and Greeks in the Summertime) and not far from
Foggia-vecchia the Phocaea of the Ancients, where the Athenians first settled a
Colony.

The Channel as wide as the Thames at Windsor, and deep withal, and not being
fordable thereabouts, we were ferried over it, the current being somewhat
strong.

We rode along the banks of it toward Chiaus-kuy, situated about a mile from
it, where we made our first Conac or nights lodging, having traveled this day
about eight hours.

On the 4th, within three hours after our setting forth, we had a sight at some
distance of the Bay of Elaea: Bay of Elaea.
and avoiding Guzelhisar, which from its distance and situation I take to be
the old Aegae, As appears from Strabo, Geograph. lib. 13.
a Town well situated on the rising of a hill, we came to the bottom of it, and
went round it, it running in considerably to the N. W. and not being able to
reach Pergamus with any convenience, we ascended to a little Village, called by
the Turks Clisia-kuy. Our days travel being almost ten hours; our way lying
still Northward.

On the 5th. Plain of Pergamus.
having rode through a wood for half an hour, we got into the plain of
Pergamus; a most delightful and fruitful plain; several parts of it plowed up,
the rest yielding excellent Pasturage: it extends it self to a very
considerable length to the South-east; in some places about five miles over. On
the North-west of the plain we left the river Cetius, which has but a very
small channel, and the Caicus to the Southward of it, which we past over at a
miles distance from the City on a Stone-bridg of thirteen Arches, the City
lying to the North-west of it, where we arrived after four hours.

The Caicus runs with a very smooth stream, Caicus.
the channel about half the breadth of Hermus, but very apt to overflow its low
banks upon the descent of rain and the melting of the snow upon the mountains,
which makes those plains to be scarce passable for some time of the year. It
runs into the Bay not far from Elaea, a City of Aeolis, (from whence it has
its denomination) called by the Turks Ayasman, on the western-side of it, the
Scale of Pergamus; from which it may be distant about twelve or fourteen miles:
this river separating Mysia from Aeolis. Pergamus.


Pergamus the chief City of Mysia Hellespontica (called by the Turks with a
very little variation Bergamo) is about sixty four miles from Smyrna to the
North North-west of it. It lies under a very high and steep hill, by which
sufficiently secured from the cold Northern blasts. On the top of it is a
Castle built according to the old way of fortification, which the Turks in a
manner neglect, it being without any Artillery or other provisions of War: they
being altogether secure and free from the fears of having an enemy in those
parts. This inscription is to be seen there on some ruins of Marble.

(...)

From the Castle there runs down Eastward a good part of the hill a stone-wall;
at the end of which some ruins of a fortification, that seems to have been
built for the security of it that way.

The ancient Stone-buildings, now the ordinary dwelling houses of the Turks,
still continue in several streets; the City by this means retaining somewhat of
its former glory, amidst those many and vast ruins that lie about it, contrary
to the fate of other Churches; most of whose ancient structures are wholly
ruined, and pitiful Turkish houses built of earth baked in the Sun, and
beggarly Cottages raised upon their foundations.

We went first to see the ruins of a Palace, (as it is judged to be) which lie
in a street to the East part of the City; where we found five Pillars of
polished Marble, of about seven yards in length, the Chapiters curiously
wrought, in a line equally distant: and further on, there being a larger space
between, two other Pillars; all which serve now only as so many props to
support a wall that is built close to them. They are confronted on the other
side of the street with other Pillars of the same make, but whose Chapiters are
broken, two lying along upon the ground.

More Eastward toward the plain lie very famous ruins of a Church dedicated to
St. John, built of brick; about fifty six paces in length, and in breadth thirty
two; the walls of a very great height, two rows of windows on each side.
Several Pillars fixed within the body of the Church, but broken of, and wanting
much of their due height: the Turks not willing to be at any pains to clear the
earth where they are fixed, and the broken pieces serving their purpose as well;
which is to place them at the extremities of their graves: abundance of which
we found in their burying-places in our travels where ever we came. Under the
East end, a large Vault. On each side of the Church is a round building, the
one exactly agreeing with the other. The doors very high; opposite to which is
a great Nicchio or cavity in the wall; a Vault underneath sustained by a great
Pillar; the foundation strengthened by several arches and pillars; it is
eighteen of my paces in diameter within; the walls very thick.

In the upper part of the City is the Rivolet Selinus, Selinus.
whose stream is very swift, running toward the South South-east into the
Caicus; over which are built several Stone-bridges; some with two, some with
three arches. By the stream not far from the great Church, part of a wall is
yet standing of about ninety paces.

On the other side of Selinus is a very handsome and large Church, formerly
called Sancta Sophia, into which you ascend by several stone-stairs; now
polluted by the Turks, and made a Mosch. We observed a passage under ground
from the Castle to the Selinus, by which they supplied themselves with water.
Along the side of a hill from the South-west are the remainders of an Aqueduct.

On a hill to the west of the City we met with several vast ruins with six
great arches over a water, which seems to have been formerly a common-shore;
and South of this another range of six arches more, with two large rooms. The
former of these ruins the Turks call Kiz-serai or the Women's Seraglio; telling
us, that anciently they were kept there, accommodating according to their rude
conception of things, who have not the least knowledge of Antiquity, the customs
of former ages to the practice of their Emperor at Constantinople, and fancying
them to have been the very same.

More Southward is another great ruined building with arches, situated
pleasantly upon a hill; from whence we had a good prospect of the City and the
neighboring Plain; hard by which is a Theater, that opens to the South, the
marks of the steps still remaining. In the declivity of which almost at the
bottom is a Marble-stone about seven spans in length and two in breadth, with
this inscription, (...). On the opposite side a Marble statue about two or
three foot in the rubbish, which we caused to be removed by a poor Christian;
this being the only way to preserve it; the Turks being such professed enemies to
all humane figures, whether painted, or in Mosaic, or wrought in Brass or
Marble, that it would quickly be defaced and broken, if it appeared above
ground. As we walked in the streets, we observed several Vaults almost
everywhere.

We went to see several ruins about a quarter of a mile out of Town, to the S.
W. which seem to have been a fortification; under which are several Vaults that
open one into another, which serve not only for the foundation of the building,
but might also very conveniently be made use of for a granary to lay their
stores in, though now only a receptacle of cattle.

To the South much about the same distance are two mounts opposite one to the
other, raised artificially to command the passage, and secure the Avenues that
way; in the mid way lies the road: and the like toward the East.

The state of the Christians here is very sad and deplorable, there being not
above fifteen families of them: their chief employment is gardening, by which
they make a shift to get a little money to pay their harache, and satisfy the
demands of their cruel and greedy oppressors, and maintain a sad miserable
life. They have one Church dedicated to St. Theodore; the Bishop of Smyrna,
under whose jurisdiction they are, taking care to send a Priest to officiate
among them.

In the Bagno we found an excellent jarr of marble, not unlike a font; about
five or six foot from the pavement, very near seven yards in compass, with
figures of horsemen in relievo round about it, but broken somewhat at top: near
which is a curious marble-basin about two or three foot higher than it.

In the yard adjoining we found this inscription upon a stone-pillar sunk in
the ground.

MA. AEMILIO. AVR. PVB. SACRVM.

On it is engraven a Bulls head.

On a stone very high upon the wall is the figure of a dog, with these two
verses under it.

(...)
(...).
Having satisfied our selves with the view of Pergamus, on Thursday the 6th.
about Sunrise we set forward in our journey toward Thyatira, our way lying
almost due East, repassing the Cetius and Caicus; which last we forded at about
two miles distance from the City.

After four hours we came to a river, whose channel was somewhat broad and
banks very high, Hyllus.
which we left on our left hand; perchance the river Hyllus. After seven hours
we arrived at Soma, Soma.
a very large Town, situated under a high hill, and from thence passed in three
hours to Kirk-agach, Kirk-agach.
or the Town of forty trees, placed under a hill also; the plain lying to the
North of it: and so to Bak-hair, Bak-hair.
a Village so called from the pleasantness of its situation; those words
signifying a fair prospect; where we took up our lodging after eleven hours
travel.

On the 7th. from Bakhair after four hours we came to a Village called
Mader-kuy, Mader-kuy.
seated on a little hill, under which runs a little river, which loses its
waters in the Hermus. In the plain before it we saw several pillars (about
forty or fifty) some fixed in the ground, and others lying upon the grass, no
other ruins being near. From this Village to Thyatira in one hour.

Thyatira (called by the Turks Akhisar or the white Castle) a City of Lydia,
Thyatira.
is distant from Pergamus about forty eight miles; almost South-east, situated
in a spacious plain about two miles and an half in compass. Very few of the
ancient buildings remain here; one we saw, which seems to have been a
marketplace, having six pillars sunk very low in the ground, about four spans
only left above. We could not find any ruins of Churches; and enquiring of the
Turks about it, they told us there were several great buildings of stone under
ground, which we were very apt to believe from what we had observed in other
places, where digging somewhat deep, they met with strong foundations, that
without all question have formerly supported great buildings; but the
descriptions of the Ancients and the several inscriptions that we found there
put it out of doubt, that this is the true Thyatira: though the Greeks, who are
prodigiously ignorant of their own Antiquities, take Tyreh, a Town twenty five
miles to the South-east of Ephesus, to be the place, being deceived by the
neerness of the sound the one has with the other; upon the same weak pretense,
as they have mistaken hitherto Laotik, a Town not far from Ancyra (Angury the
Turks call it) in Galatia, for Laodicea; when we have most authentic proofs
that it is placed near to the river Lycus, and not far from Hierapolis.

On the pedestal of a pillar in the middle of a marketplace covered, we found
this inscription engraven in very fair characters.

(...)

On the side of a large stone-coffin in form of a chest, the cover taken off,
in the middle of a Court of a Seraglio, is the following inscription of six
very long lines, the letters engraven small, and very close; where there is
mention made twice of the City of the Thyatirenians.

1. (...) 2. (...) 3. (...)* 4. (...) 5. (...) 6. (...).
On another such sepulchral-stone now made use of by a Tanner, in his house
might be read these words.

(...)

We found several other inscriptions, some of which I took, not being able to
take all for want of time and convenience; the Turks in great companies, both
men and boys, pressing upon me; (several stones being placed upon the walls
reversed by these great enemies of Learning and Antiquity) who wondered at us,
and thought us little less than mad for coming from so far as Smyrna to look
upon a few old stones, which they make no other use of than to put into the
walls of their houses, breaking them off in the midst oftentimes, as they have
occasion.

I find by several inscriptions, that the inhabitants of this City, as well as
those of Ephesus, were in the times of heathenism great votaries and
worshippers of the goddess Diana.

In the corner of a street near a fountain upon a broken stone put into a wall:
(...).

To Diana goddess of the mountains: and in the burying-place of the Turks (who
always bury their dead out of Town, and near the highway, except their Emperors
and their relations, or some great men, as Bassas or others, who have merited
well by their services of the Empire, who have the privilege to be interred in
Cities, as Constantinople, Adrianople, or Prusia, near the Moschs, or chanes in
their own ground, which they had purchased) to the North-west of the City,
where there are a great many stately pillars, which were designed to another
use, is a very fair stone erected to the honor of one of her Priestesses Vlpia
Marcella by the Senate and People.

(...)

Upon a Tombstone in the said burying-place (...)

We saw several old pillars with inscriptions in a Chane; but the letters were
so effaced and broken, that they could not be well read.

In a back yard belonging to a Tanner.

(...)

With these four Latin verses under. VOTA SUPERVACUA FLETUSQUE
ET NUMINA DIVUM
NATURAE LEGES FATORUMQUE
ARCUIT ORDO
SPREVISTI PATREM MATREMQUE
MISERRIME NATE
ELYSIOS CAMPOS HABITANS
ET PRATA VEATUM


In a back lane not far from the corner to the North-east of the Basar.

(...) (...)

This City has a very great convenience of water, which streams in every
street, flowing from a neighboring hill to the Eastward of it about a mile
off; there being above three thousand five hundred pipes, if the Turks may be
credited, to conveigh it to every part of it. It is populous, inhabited most by
Turks, who have eight Moschs here, few Christians residing among them; those
Armenians we found there being strangers, who came thither to sell shashes,
handkerchiefs, etc. which they bring out of Persia. They are maintained chiefly
by the trade of Cotton-wool, which they send to Smyrna, for which commodity
Thyatira is very considerable.

On the 8th we left Thyatira, and about a mile from the City in the plains, we
found a stone-coffin that had this inscription.

(...)

As in the City we found several stones that had the name of Antoninus engraven
on them.

Within two hours we past a small river, which crossed the plain from East to
West; and a mile off another stream, which we supposed might arise from the
same spring, and be divided from it.

After two hours more we arrived at a Village called Selinte-kuy, Selinte-kuy.
where were to be seen several excellent pieces of polished marble up and down,
and some few ruins, which assure us sufficiently, though we had but just time
to look into it, that it is not originally a Turkish Village, but was once
inhabited by Christians, especially considering the situation of it within a
mile of a river, I suppose the Cryon, or rather the Halys, Halys.
so fatal to Croesus formerly King of this Province; whose stream we found very
swift, according to the ancient account given of it, passing thence into
Hermus. About six or seven miles beyond is the Lacus Gygaeus or Colous, Lacus
Gygaeus.
of about five miles in length from East to West, which we viewed upon the
banks of it; after we had ascended the hill that leads to Marmora, (probably
the Exusta of the ancients, Marmora.
so famous formerly for the sepulcher of Halyattes the Father of Croesus:
admirably well situated, a spacious and fruitful plain lying under it) still a
very handsome Town with several Moschs in it, one fairer than the rest, with a
Tekeh or Monastery belonging to it.

Hence we came into the plains of Magnesia, The plains of Magnesia.
where the famous battle was sought between Antiochus and Scipio, victory after
many turns and traverses, uncertain to which side to incline, (the dispute
being a long while maintained with equal fierceness, prudence, and valor) at
last falling to the latter, who hereupon had conferred upon him by the
Soldiery first, and after by the Senate, the glorious title of Asiaticus;
which title he justly merited: the victory being of so great a consequence,
that several of the Asian Provinces, terrified with this success of theirs,
immediately yielded, and became an accession to Rome's greatness. Leaving at
some distance mount Mastusia and mount Sipylus, Mastusia and Sipylus.
upon the rising of which stands Magnesia, Magnesia.
a Bashalick, though of late years governed by a Moselim or Deputy, which
separates Ionia from Lydia to the East, we crossed the plain toward mount Tmolus,
Tmolus.
called by the Turks Boz-Dag or the icy mountain.

In our way we repast the Hermus over a large stone-bridg, that seems to have
been built of late years, and after two hours and a half passing through a
Village called Jarosh-kuy, Jarosh-kuy.
that lies about two miles on this side, we arrived at Sardes, having been
eleven hours on horseback: our way all along from Thyatira lying almost due
South.

Sardes (retaining somewhat of its name still, Sardes.
though nothing of its ancient glory, being called by the Turks Sart) is
situated at the foot of the famous mountain Tmolus on the North side of it,
having a spacious and delightful plain before it, watered with several streams
that flow from the neighboring hill to the South-east, and with the Pactolus,
arising from the same, Pactolus;
on the East, and increasing with its waters the stream of Hermus, into which
it runs; now a very pitiful and beggarly Village, the houses few and mean; but
for the accommodation of travelers, it being the road for the Caravans that
come out of Persia to Smyrna with silk, there is a large Chane built in it, as
is usual in most Towns that are near such public roads, or have any thing of
trade; where we took up our quarters, the Turks refusing to admit us into their
houses and lodge us, hearing from our Janissaries, that we were Franks. The
inhabitants are for the most part Shepherds, who look to those numerous flocks
and herds which feed in the plains.

To the southward of the Town at the bottom of a little hill, the Castle lying
eastward of them, are very considerable ruins still remaining, which quickly
put us in mind of what Sardes was, before earthquakes and war had caused those
horrid desolations there; there being six pillars standing of about seven yards
in compass; and about ten in height; besides several vast stones, of which the
other pillars that are thrown down were made, one placed upon the other, and so
exactly closed in those that stand, as if they were one entire piece, now lying
by in a confused heap; the first row of pillars supporting huge massy stones
that lie upon them.

From hence we went up to the Castle which lies eastward; Castle of Sardes.
the ascent very steep, in some places almost perpendicular; so that we were
forced to take a great compass about to gain the top of the hill, whereon it
stands; easy enough to be undermined, having no rock to support it; but what
might be as well impregnable for its strength, as inaccessible for its height
in former ages, which knew nothing of the prodigious effects of the mixture of
brimstone and saltpeter; and when they made use of no other artillery than
cross-bows and slings. The wall still remain with several arched rooms, though
somewhat narrow.

Hard by the entrance on the lefthand there is this inscription.

(...)

Within the Castle we found this inscription upon the Chapter of a pillar.

(...)

By which it appears that it was erected in honor of Tiberius the Emperor,
whom Sardes ought to acknowledge as a second Founder; he having taken care to
repair the breaches caused by an earthquake, and having given it the form of a
City again, as Strabo has recorded.

Easterly of the Castle lie the ruins of a great Church; and North of them
other vast ruins, the walls still remaining of a very considerable length, with
several divisions and apartments; all which take up a great compass of ground:
whether it was the chief Seat of the Governor, or the public Court of
Justice, or the place where the Citizens used to convene at this distance of
time and in so great a confusion wherein it is involved, is difficult to
conjecture: but whatever it was when it stood, it must needs have been very
stately and glorious. We met with other ruins all along this tract, which made
us quickly conclude, that the greatest part of the City lay this way.

The Turks have a Mosch, which was formerly a Christian Church; at the entrance
of which are several curious pillars of polished marble. Some few Christians
there are who live among them, working in gardens and doing such like drudgery;
but who have neither Church nor Priest to assist them and administer the holy
Sacraments to them: into such a sad and miserable condition is this once
glorious City and Church of Sardes, the Metropolis of Lydia, now reduced.

On the 10th we set out from Sardes, and in our way past over several streams
running down from Tmolus, which enrich the pleasant plains we rode through.

After six hours we found in a burial-place of the Turks full of pieces of
pillars and marble-stones (among several others, but what were scarce legible,
and required more time to transcribe than we could conveniently bestow) this
that follows.

(...)

Three hours after we arrived at Philadelphia.

Philadelphia distant from Sardes to the South-east about twenty seven miles,
Philadelphia.
is situated upon the rising of mount Tmolus; the streets to a good height
lying one above another, which gives it a very advantageous prospect from most
parts into the plain both toward the North and East.

It is called by the Turks Alah shahr or the fair City; which must be
understood only in reference to the situation; for there is nothing of building
in it to make it deserve that name. A City formerly of as great strength as
beauty, having had three strong walls toward the plain; a great part of the
inmost wall yet standing, though decayed and broken down in several places,
with several bastions upon it. Defended by them, but more by the valor of the
inhabitants, it maintained its liberty, and held out against Vr-chan and Morat
the first, when all the lesser Asia besides had been overrun by the Ottoman
forces; but at last in the reign of Bayazid the first, whom the Turks call
Yilderim or Lightning, after a long distance the Philadelphians having made
several sallies, but all in vain, to remove and raise the siege, it was forced
to submit to the fate of other Cities, and became a prey to the barbarous
Conqueror, who was not wanting in cruelty to express his revenge and furious
rage against the distressed Citizens for daring to withstand so long his
victorious arms: there being about a mile and a half out of Town to the South,
a thick wall of men's bones consusedly cemented together with the stones; in all
probability raised by his command: (for sure none but such a Barbarian would
have done it) in compliance perchance with some rash vow that he had made, when
he lay fretting and storming before it. The Churches felt the terrible effects
of his fury as well as the inhabitants; most of them being demolished and
turned into dunghills; as it that of St. John's to the South-east, most probably
the Cathedral for its largeness, where they throw their rubbish and filth, and
the rest made Moschs. Southward is the river Cogamus flowing from the hill;
abundance of Vineyards all along, which the poor Greeks used to cultivate, but
were at that time deterred from making Wine, by reason of the severe
prohibition of the Grand Signor; so that here, as a Greek Pappas told us, they
had scarce wine enough for the Sacrament. The City is very populous, there
being above five hundred Janissaries in it, who according to their privileges
(the government being so much in their favor) can be judged only by their
Serdar or Captain; the Cady or Civil Governor having no power over them in the
least. Next to Smyrna, Philadelphia has the greatest number of Christians above
the other Metropolitical Seats, there being above two hundred houses of them
there, and four Churches; whereof the chief is dedicated to (...), or to the
holy Virgin St. Mary, the other three to St. George, (a great Saint among them)
St. Theodore, and St. Taxiarches.

We found several stones here with inscriptions, but what were either turned
up-side down and so clapped into walls, or else horribly defaced and broken.
These six verses found entire upon a monumental stone in a Churchyard of the
Greeks.

(...) (...)

On the 12th, after three hours riding from Philadelphia, we past over the
river Cogamus, whose channel was narrow, but stream deep and full; and leaving
the plains some hours after, we climbed up the Tmolus, which we found in some
places very sleep and rocky; on each side covered with vast numbers of Pine and
Firr-trees: and having gained the top, we entered into a wood very dangerous to
passengers, there being that shelter for thieves in it, and that advantage they
have, keeping together upon the hills, between which the road lies, to pour
down their shot upon them, and after three hours past out of it, and getting on
the other side of the mountain, we came at last to a Village called
Koshyenigeh-kuy, where we lodged that night, having traveled twelve hours
complete.

On the 13th, about a quarter of a mile hence, we went to see several ruins,
which in all probability, by their distance from Hierapolis, must be those of
Tripolis; Tripolis.
of which nothing left but huge massy stones lying confusedly in heaps, and the
appearance of a Castle and Theater; near to which we forded the Maeander,
Maeander.
and about four hours after we came to Hierapolis.

Hierapolis (now called by the Turks Pambuck-Kulasi or the Cotton Tower,
Hierapolis.
by reason of the white cliffs lying thereabouts) a City of the greater
Phrygia, lies under a high hill to the North, having to the Southward of it a
fair and large plain about five miles over, almost directly opposite to
Laodicea, the river Lycus running between, Lycus*
but nearer the latter; now utterly forsaken and desolate, but whose ruins are
so glorious and magnificent, that they will strike one with horror at the first
view of them, and with admiration too; such walls, and arches, and pillars of
so vast a height, and so curiously wrought, being still to be found there, that
one may well judge, that when it stood, it was one of the most glorious Cities
not only of the East, but of the World. The numerousness of the Temples there
erected in the times of idolatry with so much art and cost, might sufficiently
confirm the title of the holy City* which it had at first, derived from the hot
waters flowing from several springs, to which they ascribed a divine healing
virtue, and which made the City so famous; and for this cause Apollo, whom both
Greeks and Romans adored as the God of Medicine, had his Votaries and Altars
here, and was very probably their chiefest Deity. In the Theater, which is of a
large compass and height from the top, there being above forty stone-seats, we
found upon a curious piece of wrought marble belonging to a portal these words
(...) To Apollo the chief President, a title peculiar to him. Where these
springs arise, is a very large Bath curiously paved with white marble, about
which formerly stood several pillars now thrown into it.

Hence the waters make their way through several channels which they have
formed for themselves; oftentimes overflowing them, and which cursting the
ground thereabouts, which is a whitish sort of earth, turns the superficial
parts into a Tophus. Several Tombs still remain; some of them almost entire,
very stately and glorious, as if it had been accounted a kind of sacrilege to
injure the dead; and upon that account they had abstained from defacing their
monuments; entire stones of a great length and height, some covered with stones
shaped into the form of a Cube, others ridge-wise. Some inscriptions we took,
which here follow: the shortness of the time we staid there, and great danger
we were in, not permitting us to take more.

1
(...) (...)
2
(...) (...) (...) (...)
3
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
4
(...) (...) (...) (...).
Three hours and a half after we forded the Lycus; and having ascended a very
high hill, after an hours riding through a very pleasant plain overspread with
Olive Trees and Figtrees, we came to a poor Turkish Village, where we lodged.

On the 14th in the morning, we set forward for Colosse, where within an hour
and a half we arrived Colosse, Colosse.
by the Turks called Chonos, is situated very high upon a hill, the plains
under it very pleasant; but we were no sooner entered into it, but we thought
fit to leave it; the inhabitants being a vile sort of people; so that we
doubted of our safety among them. There still remain some poor Christians,
notwithstanding those horrid abuses they are forced to endure: but without any
Church or Priest: poor miserable Greeks, who amidst that ignorance and
oppression they labor under, retain the profession of Christianity still,
though they have forgot their own language, and speak only Turkish. Hastily
quitting the Town, not long after we met the Vaivod of Dingilsley, Dingilsley.
a very large and handsome Turkish Town about four miles to the South from
Laodicea, with about three hundred horse in pursuit of a famous robber called
Inge Morad, who with a party of two and twenty horse had alarmed the whole
Country. Our way lay almost West to Laodicea, where we arrived after six hours
and a half, and passing down the hill, lodged at the bottom of it to the North
of the ruins in a poor Village called Congeleh. Congeleh.


Laodicea (called by the Turks Eski Hisar or the old Castle) a City of Lydia
according to the Geography of the ancients, Laodicea.
is above twenty miles distant from Colosse, situated upon six or seven hills,
taking up a vast compass of ground. To the North and North-east of it runs the
river Lycus at about a mile and a half distance: Lycus.
but more nearly watered by two little rivers, Asopus, Caper.
Asopus and Caper; whereof the one is to the West, the other to the South-east;
both which pass into the Lycus, and that into the Maeander. It is now utterly
desolated, and without any inhabitant; except Wolves, and Jackals, and Foxes:
but the ruins show sufficiently what it has been formerly: the three Theaters
and the Circus adding much to the stateliness of it, and arguing its greatness.
That whose entrance is to the Northeast is very large, and might contain
between twenty and thirty thousand men, having above fifty steps which are
about a yard broad, and a foot and a quarter in height one from another, the
plain at the bottom being about thirty yards over. A second that opens to the
West; and a third, a small one, whose entrance is to the South: the Circus was
about two and twenty steps, which remain firm and entire, and is above three
hundred and forty paces in length from one end to the other, the entrance to
the East. At the opposite extremity is a Cave that has a very handsome arch,
upon which we found this inscription.

(...)

To the South-east are the ruins of a fortification; not far an Aqueduct, the
channel of which is cut through massy stones: formerly there were two rows of
pillars from South-east to the North-west, the bases only remaining, continued
on a great way, and other rows from North-east to South-west, which probably
might bound the walk leading to some Palace.

The walls of a very large Church still remain; to the West Side of which are
adjoining three very curious arches.

More to the Southward two rows of arches, five on each side.

On the Chapter of a pillar I found these verses engraven.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Upon a piece of white marble. (...)

On the 16th we left the Village an hour after Sunset, the Moon favoring us;
and after six hours and a half, at the bottom of a small hill, but not far
distant from a very high one we saw a boiling Fountain, whose waters were
extraordinary hot and scalding; it sent forth a very thick vapor like the
smoke of charcoal, which diffused it self over the plain. About half a mile
thence we crossed again the Maeander over a very rotten and dangerous
woodenbridg, a fair and large bridge of stone somewhat above it being so broken
in the midst, that there is no passing over it, and so entered upon the pleasant
and fruitful plains of Apamea, Plains of Apamea.
watered by the Maeander, whose various windings and turnings we observed with
great pleasure and satisfaction: riding all along its banks for several hours.
After almost seventeen hours riding we arrived at Nozli. Nozli.


On the 18th, after we had rode three hours from Nozli we came to a Village
called Teke-kuy, Teke-kuy.
very pleasantly situated, and about a quarter of a mile thence on the
right hand went to see several great ruins that lie on the North upon a hill;
between which and the opposite great hill is a very lovely plain. We made up to
the ruins of the Castle, and a great Aqueduct: other vast ruins lying
dispersed up and down for a great way: these ruins are called by the Turks
Sultan Hisar or the Sultan's Castle; Sultan-Hisar.
and can be no other than those of Tralles, Tralles.
formerly the seat of a Bishop, and a famous City in the first beginnings of
Christianity: situated about three quarters of a mile from the Maeander. Having
traveled eight hours this day, we came to Guzel-Hisar, where we took up our
lodging in a Chane.

Guzel-hisar or the fair Castle, Guzel-Hisar.
a very great and well built Town, walled, and having very handsome gates, with
several Moschs. We found in it several pillars and ancient buildings, which
made us conclude from its distance from Tralles, that it is Magnesia ad
Maeandrum, Magnesia upon the Maeander.
formerly the seat of a Bishop, to distinguish it from another City of that
name in the same Province, upon mount Sipylus. It is now maintained by the
trade of Cotton yarn, which they send to Smyrna, caravans going weekly hence.

On the 19th, Gherme-aule.
from Guzel-Hisar to Gherme-aule we made it six hours; our way lying North-west.

On the 20th, our way lay hence West by North, till we came to descend the
hill, upon the top of which we had seen the Island Samos to the North-west;
Island Samos.
at the bottom is a very large Aqueduct with three great arches below, and five
above to convey the water from one side of the hill to the other, and so to
Ephesus, where we arrived after six hours.

Ephesus called by the Turks Ayasaluk, Ephesus.
formerly the chief Metropolis of the Lydian Asia, and the seat of the Roman
Proconsul, (who had the government of these parts) as being the principal City
subject to his jurisdiction, was not then so famous in its flourishing and
glory, as it is dismal and despicable at present; being reduced to an
inconsiderable number of poor cottages, wholly inhabited by Turks; distant from
Smyrna to the South-east about forty six miles. It lies to the South of the
river Caystrus in a plain (abounding with Tamarisk, growing to such an height
as to hide a man on horseback) under two hills; the one to the South-east,
which runs out but a little way; the other, which is very high, to the South;
under which lay the most considerable parts of the City: between which is a
plain of about a quarter of a mile in breadth: upon the sides of both are very
great ruins, the walls and some arches remaining: upon the latter are the
ruins of a wall, which seemed to have bounded the City that way with several
caves upon the declivity of it. There lie dispersed upon the ground in several
places vast marble pillars; some white, others speckled; these latter hard by
the Temple of Diana, of about seven foot in diameter, and about forty foot in
height; their Chapiters fallen off, and lying near them proportionable, of
about eleven or twelve foot square, and about four or five foot thick, the
bases whereon they were fixed being alike thick.

The Temple of Diana (for so tradition and fancy will have it, Diana's Temple.
though I suppose it might have been a Christian Church built upon the ruins
of it) is to the West North-west, where lie stones of a huge weight heaped one
upon another; it lies North North-east, and South South-west, the entrance from
the former, as we conjectured by reason of a very fair gate that way still
remaining, formerly enclosed with a wall (taking up a good compass of ground,
where they might have their gardens and other accommodations) though most of it
now broken down. To the West of it, having lighted our tapers, and made fast
our cord, we went into the labyrinth on the right hand, where after a descent
of several foot, we crept through a narrow passage, and so past forward in a
direct line; on each side were several rooms, that open into others, built
arch-wise; the alleys being so low, that we were forced to creep through them
too; and having continued for above a quarter of an hour in these subterranean
Vaults built very artificially, The Labyrinth.
and intended only at first as a foundation of the Temple, (though not
undeservedly called a labyrinth, by reason of its several turnings, and the
difficulty of finding a passage out of it without the help of a clew) being
somewhat solicitous of the ill effects of the damps and the thick air, which
put us into an extraordinary sweat, we hasted to enjoy the fresh air and the
comfortable light of the Sun.

To the South-west of the Temple are the remains of a Watchtower or Castle,
placed upon a high rocky hill, whence there is a very fair prospect of the
South-west Sea, and of the Promontory Trogyllium. Tradition will have this to
be the place where St. Paul was imprisoned, St. Paul's prison, or rather a
Watchtower.
out of reverence to which it is so called; though the situation, and the
narrowness of it, it being not above eleven or twelve paces square, incline me
to believe, that it was only intended for a Watchtower to observe what ships
pass to and again in those Seas; from which it may be distant about five miles.
Here we observed to the North-west the various turnings of the Cayster, more
crooked than those of Maeander, watering the plains below.

On the North-east of Diana's Temple lies upon the ground a very large Font of
porphiry, the inmost circle being about six foot in diameter, which is called
by the name of St. John's Font, there being four pillars not far from it, upon
which they suppose it was raised. A thing very unlikely, that in those sad
times of persecution under Domitian and Trajan, when the poor Christians were
forced to serve God in grottas, and Converts were baptized secretly, there
should be such care taken to do it in so stately a laver. On the East are the
Aqueducts.

Upon the side of the Eastern hill is the Cave of the seven Sleepers, Cave of
the seven Sleepers.
near it several small arches; and more forward of them a very large arch,
within which are several little caverns.

On the North is St. John's Church, St. John's Church.
turned into a Mosch; about seventy paces in length, and five and twenty in
breadth. In it are four pillars standing in a row of excellent porphyry, of
about five foot in diameter, and much about the bigness of those that are in
Sultan Suleiman's Mosch in Constantinople, and about forty foot in height,
which support two Cuppolas, the glass windows still remaining; before it a very
large and fair entrance.

Northward of the Church on the gate leading up to the new Castle are very
curious figures engraven, representing several, who seem to be haled and
dragged away, as if perchance the design had been to show how the poor
Christians were formerly seized upon and treated by their heathen persecutors.

Here are two very spacious Theaters, the one under the Southern hill, the
other to the West, near which is a stately gate, where I found these words
engraven in two places.

ACCENSORENSI ET ASIAE. Upon a Pillar by the ruined Aqueduct. (...)

On a marble not far from Diana's Temple.

C. CLODIO. C. F. MAEC. XIII. GEM. X. VIR. STL. IVD.

On another hard by. (...) (...)

On the 21th, within a mile of Ephesus we past over the Cayster, a very deep
river; and two hours after past through a narrow place of about thirty yards in
length, cut very deep through a rock, I suppose, done out of a capriccio to
exercise the Soldiers, and to show that nothing is too difficult and
impossible for art and industry to effect. The marshes that lie below it on
each side of the cause-way, and the low ground so apt to be overflown, may make
it unpassable that way at some time of the year; but here, this lying upon the
ascent of the hill, that cannot be pretended.

From hence we clambered over the Alyman, which is extraordinary bad way; part
of the famous mountain Mimas, (which runs as far as Cape Cornobbero, the Turks
call it Kara-borun or the Cape with the black nose, at the entrance into Smyrna
Bay) which we past over in two hours. After ten hours we forded a little river
called Halesus, that runs into the Sea at Colophon; two hours beyond which is a
Turkish Town called Giamo-bashee, situated in a spacious plain with several
handsome Moschs in it; where not meeting with any accommodation, we rode half a
mile further to a poor Village called Karagick-kuy, where we lodged, and the
next morning we arrived safe at Smyrna, being the twentieth day from our
departure.

Smyrna, Smyrna.
called by the Turks Esmir, lies in the bottom of a Bay, which is encompassed
with high mountains on all sides except to the West, about ten leagues in
length, where is good anchoring ground, and the water deep; so that the Ships
ride near the Merchants scales, who for their convenience live to the water
side. The breadth at the bottom may be, I ghess, about two or three miles. To
the North is the river Meles. Meles.
This is one of the most flourishing Cities of the lesser Asia, both for its
great trade and the number of its inhabitants; in which I include Franks, Jews
and Armenians, as well as Greeks and Turks. Little of its ancient glory is left
standing, earthquakes and fire and war having made as great desolations and
wastes here, as in the other parts of Anatolia. It Is certain from the numerous
foundations continually dug up, that the greatest part of the buildings
anciently were situated upon the side of the hill, and more to the South: the
houses below toward the Sea being built, since Smyrna became of late years a
place of trade. On the top of the hill, which overlooks the City and Bay, is an
old Castle without any regular fortifications about it, Old Castle.
and in a manner slighted; there being only two or three guns for fashions sake
mounted, with which they salute the new Moon of Bairam, and the Captain Bassa,
when he comes into the Port with his armata of Galleys. Near the entrance is a
marble head, the nose of which is cut off by Turks out of their great zeal and
hatred of all kind of humane figures especially. I found nothing in it
observable but a Cistern or perchance Granary under ground propt by pillars,
and the bottom curiously plaistered over; the work of the ancient Greeks: but
much inferior to one I saw in the long Island just within the Bay on the side
of a hill, into which there is a descent of about eight or nine feet; the
buildings very regular and stately, having twenty pillars in length, and five
in breadth, the distance between each about seven of my paces, that is above one
hundred and sixty paces one way, and above thirty five another.

At a little distance from which is another almost of the same bigness, but
filled with water; the Island being altogether uninhabited, but full of wild
hogs and hares.

On the sides of the other gate of the Castle are yet to be seen two Eagles,
the ensigns of the Romans, delineated at large, and handsomely enough.

In our descent to the South-east we entered the Amphitheatre, Amphitheatre.
where St. Polycarp first Bishop of this City was martyred, the stony steps
being removed for the most part by the Turks for their buildings and other uses.

In the sides are still to be seen the two Caves opposite to each other, where
they used to enclose their Lions; fighting with beasts being in ancient times
the great diversion of the people of this Country, and to which they usually
condemned their slaves, and the poor Christians especially.

On the side of the hill, but somewhat lower, The sepulcher of St. Polycarp.
is the sepulcher of this great Saint, which the Greeks solemnly visit upon the
anniversary festival consecrated to his memory: in compliance with an ancient
custom in use almost from the times of his martyrdom, as Eusebius relates in
the 4th Book of his Ecclesiastical History, chap. 15. It is placed in a little
open room, that possibly might be some Chapel: in the entrance of which I
found this inscription upon a marble stone now placed in a chimney.

(...)

The poor Greeks are very careful in repairing this monument, if it any way
suffers, either by the weather, it being exposed to the air, or by the Turks,
or by the Western Christians, who break off pieces of marble and carry them
away as relics; an earthen dish hanging by, to receive the aspers any either
out of curiosity or veneration and respect to the memory of the blessed Martyr
shall bestow for the repair of his Tomb.

Nigh hereunto are several arches, stones of huge bigness lying upon the
ground, and a great building having three large rooms upon a floor; which
perchance was a place of Judicature: the front having been formerly adorned
with four pillars, the bases of which at present only remain. Not many years
since in a lane toward the North-east, digging for a foundation they met with
several rows of square stones placed regularly one above another, and in all
probability it might be part of a Fane or Temple in the times of Heathenism. In
the walls of the City I observed a great cavity almost in every square stone,
resembling somewhat a Roman V, which some fancy might be in the honor of the
Emperor Vespasian, who was a great benefactor to this City. But the figure not
being always the same, but admitting great variety, I am apt to believe it was
rather made by the Masons, that the stones might be the better cemented
together. About a mile from the Town are the ruins of a Church, which the
Franks call by the name of Janus's Temple: Janus's Temple.
which I believe rather to have been dedicated to St. John the great Saint of
the East, and that hence the mistake of the name is to be fetched.

The Turks have here thirteen Moschs; the Jews several Synagogues; and yet tho
Smyrna still retains the dignity of a Metropolitical seat; the Greeks have but
two Churches, the one dedicated to St. George, the other, if I do not
misremember, to St. Photinus. The Armenians have only one Church: in the
Churchyard whereof, I met with these inscriptions.

In the Eastern division. 1
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
2
(...) (...).


In the Southern. 1
(...) (...) (...) (...)
2
(...)... (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
3
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
4
(...) (...) (...) (...). (...) (...) (...) (...).


For the other inscriptions, I must refer the learned Reader to the Latin copy.

By this short and imperfect survey the curious Reader may be sadly convinced,
in what a pitiful and deplorable condition these once famous and glorious
Churches of Asia are at this day; Churches, which had the Apostles for their
Founders, and which yielded so many Martyrs, and which abounded with so many
myriads of Christians, whose patience and valor tired out and wearied, and at
last triumphed over the tyranny, the malice, and the hatred of their Heathen
persecutors; and which afterward, when the Empire became Christian, and the
civil power submitted it self to the law and discipline of Christ, and when the
Cross, which before was had in such execration, was held the highest ornament
of the Crown, advanced in splendour and glory above what they had enjoyed in the
times of Heathenism, and which upon a due consideration of circumstances one
might have truly enough judged should have been eternal and placed almost out
of all possibility of danger and ruin, now turned into heaps of rubbish;
scarce one stone left upon another, some of them utterly uninhabited, and the
remains of all horribly frightful and amazing. I shall not here lament the sad
traverses and vicissitudes of things, and the usual changes and chances of
mortal life, or upbraid the Greeks of luxury and stupidity, which have brought
these horrid desolations upon their Country: these are very useful but very
mean and ordinary speculations. That which affected me with the deepest anguish
and most sorrowful resentment when I was upon the place, and does still, was
and is a reflection upon the threat made against Ephesus mentioned in the second
Chapter of the Revelations of St. John, who made his abode in that City, and
died there. Remember from whence thou art fallen, and do the first works: or
else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of its
place, except thou repent. And upon a farther and more serious consideration,
as I sorrowfully walked through the ruins of that City especially, I concluded
most agreeably, not only to my function, but to the nature of the thing, (and I
am confident no wise or good man who shall cast his eyes upon these loose and
hasty observations will deny the conclusion to be just and true) that the sad
and direful calamities which have involved these Asian Churches, ought to
proclaim to the present flourishing Churches of Christendom, (as much as if an
Angel were sent express from Heaven to denounce the judgment) what they are to
expect, and what may be their case one day, if they follow their evil example,
that their Candlestick may be removed too, except they repent and do their
first works; and that their security lies not so much in the strength of their
frontiers, and the greatness of their armies, (for neither of these could
defend the Eastern Christians from the invasion and fury of the Saracens and
Turks) as in their mutual agreements, and in the virtues of a Christian life.

A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF CONSTANTINOPLE.
COnstantinople seems to have the advantage of most Cities in the World for
situation, The advantage of its situation in general.
either in respect of the pleasantness of its prospect; or for security against
the attaques of an enemy, it being naturally fortified, and might be made
impregnable by art; or for its narrow passage into Asia; as if, in all changes
and revolutions of government, designed by God for the chief seat of Empire and
command. The high hills, upon which it is seated, add much to the beauty and
glory of it; several knots of Cypress-trees appearing (...) set upon them, that
to one sailing in the Propontis, it looks like a City placed in the middle of a
wood: but in the haven it resembles a great Amphitheatre, the houses like so
many steps rising orderly one above another; the gilded spires of the Moschs
reflecting the light with great pleasure to the eye: so that to all travelers
it seems justly the most delightful, the most admirable, and most charming
spectacle of nature: and what would even satisfy for the tediousness and
fatigues of a Sea-voyage, were there nothing in it to please the fancy or
curiosity besides.

Though it lies upon the Sea, Difficulty of access.
yet on both sides the passages to it are so narrow, that there can be no
coming at it without great difficulty.

The entrance to it toward the Mediterranean is by the Hellespont, Hellespont.
which is there about five miles over: where is a perpetual current into the
Archipelago, which is strong and violent, and especially when the wind is at
North, which blows for the most part here and at Constantinople eight or nine
months of the twelve: the want of a Southerly wind, which is necessary to get
up the channel, making the passage very long and tedious. Near the two head
lands the Turks have, since the beginning of the war: of Candia, built two
Castles, to prevent the landing of the Venetians, who before past unmolested
with their ships and galleys up as high as the Dardanels. In the Castle on the
level within Cape Janizary, anciently Promontorium Sigaeum on the Asian shore I
counted six and twenty great guns in front; and about sixteen on the side
toward Tenedos. A little above at the end of a long sand is the river
Scamander. Sailing directly in the middle of the stream, the guns can do no
great execution.

The Hellespont widens hence Eastward, till almost at an equal distance between
the Aegaean and Propontick Seas (for it ends at Gallipoli) you arrive at the
narrowest strait, being scarce three quarters of an English mile over: where
are two strong Castles to command the passage; which the Turks call
Boghashisar, Dardanelli.
or the Castles in the strait or jaws of the channel, but better known to the
Christians by the name of the Dardanelli; directly opposite to one another.
Sestos.
The Castle of Sestos on Europe side, lying under a hill, is triangular: having
twenty five guns level with the water; and a Bastion at each angle: in the
middle an high Tower consisting of three semicircles, encompassing a square
fortification. Abydus.
Abydus on the opposite shore lies in a plain; the Castle square, having about
sixteen guns, which almost touch the surface of the water. On the sides are
raised round Towers, and in the middle an oblong work. The strength of these
Castles is the great security of Constantinople; no ships being able to get by
without manifest danger of being sunk: and if at any time a ship or gally
coming from Constantinople have part, helped forward by the current and a brisk
Northerly gale, it ought not to be ascribed so much to good fortune or a wily
stratagem, as to the carelessness and stupidity of the Castellans. For any but
Turks, who do not well understand fortification, and the use of great guns, to
make them bear to the best advantage, would infallibly, humanely speaking,
defend and secure the passage.

On the other side the Euxine Sea, Bosphorus.
Constantinople is defended by the Bosphorus, whose channel is about eighteen
miles in length. The first Castles, which guard each side of it, are about five
miles from the City, built by Mahomet the great, from which about nine miles to
the second, where the distance between the two shores is not much above a mile.
The current so violent, especially when the wind blows hard at North, that the
watermen, who pass toward the black Sea, are at such times forced to go
ashore, and hale their boats. I observed in several places a ripling or
bubbling of the water, as in the Race at Portland. In the several turnings and
windings are large Bays for small Vessels, (made by the Promontories, which run
out so far, that they seem at a distance to stop the passage) especially on the
Thracian shore, upon which several Villages are situated, and where the Bassa's
and other great men have their villas and houses of pleasure. The Bithynian
shore, for the most part covered with wild Olive, Chestnut, and Cypress-trees,
seems to be one continued wood or garden, and yields a pleasant and curious
entertainment to the eye, Almost in the entrance or mouth of the Bosphorus are
placed several rocks, Symplegades.
the Symplegades of the ancients, which break the force of the waters
continually poured out of the black Sea. On Europe side I counted four, which
lie so close one to another, that the Sea at some little distance not being
discerned to run between, they seem to join together. In the greatest of them
remains still a pillar of white marble of the Corinthian order, about eighteen
foot in height, commonly called by the Western Christians, Pompey's pillar, as
if it had been erected by that great man, Pompey 's pillar.
in memory of a victory gained over Mithridates King of Pontus. But this is the
invention of an ignorant and trifling fancy, taken up without any ground of
reason or old tradition, (just after the same manner as they call the ruins,
which are near Belgrade a Village about four miles from the Bosphorus, by the
name of Ovid's Tower) and is sufficiently confuted by the inscription upon the
basis, where is plainly legible the name of Augustus Caesar, though the
remaining part is so effaced, that conjectures are different. But the best and
truest I take to be this;

AVGVSTO CAESARI

On the neighboring shore is a Pharus or Watchtower, a very stately and
elegant structure, and built long before the Turks were masters of a foot of
land in Europe, now serving for a light house to direct Vessels in the nigh to
enter the Bosphorus with greater ease and safety: which I ascended that I might
take the better view of the Euxine, which not so much for want of good Ports,
as for their ignorance in the Mariners art, becomes in foul and stormy weather
so dangerous and fatal to the Turks.

This situation of Byzantium between two Seas rendered it a place of great trade
and commerce long before the times of Constantine, Advantage of situation in
respect of trade.
who restored it to its ancient glory out of its rubbish, the Emperor Severus
through indignation and revenge, for the long and stout opposition the Citizens
made in favor of Pescennius Niger, having long before ruined and demolished
it. All the products and commodities of Greece, Egypt and Mauritania may with
great ease and convenience of shipping be brought hither. It joins upon the
lesser Asia, where Soldiers and all sorts of provision may be conveyed in an
hours space. Besides, the various nations which inhabit all along the coasts of
the Pontick Sea, and the lake of Maeotis here find a quick vent for their
merchandise: as do the several Christian Nations, as the Cossacks, Moldavians,
and Wallachians, and those of Podolia, who live either toward the Sea or nigh
the great rivers of Boristhenes or the Danube: beside the Persian and Armenian
Merchants and those of Christendom. So that however the winds chance to blow,
Ships may come in continually from the one Sea or the other: they are supplied
especially from the black Sea with Corn, Furs, Wax, Honey, and the like.

The present name of Constantinople is Istanpol, Stambol.
or according to the common and ordinary pronunciation, Stambol: which plainly
shows it not to be originally Turkish, for Istamboul a City full of or
abounding with the true faith, as some most ignorantly fancy, but corrupted
from the Greek: the Turks for the most part retaining the old names of Cities,
though with some little variation accommodating them to their own language, as
Adriane, Bursia, Esmir, Budun, Saloniki, Conia for Adrianople, Prusia, Smyrna,
Buda, Thessalonica, and Iconium.

It lies over against Scutari, Its particular site.
formerly Chrysopolis, about the distance of a league on the other side of the
water on the Bithynian shore, which seems to be built out of the ruins of
Chalcedon, Chalcedon.
not far distant from it: which is situated in the bottom of a narrow and
shallow Bay. It is now a poor beggarly Village, having lost its old name, and
known only by that of Kadi-kuy: though out of respect to what it was in ancient
times, it still retains the dignity of a Metropolitical seat among the Greeks;
the curious and stately Church consecrated to the memory of Saint Euphemia
Virgin and Martyr, being the only remainder of its formor greatness and
magnificence. But to return to Constantinople.

It is cast into a triangular figure; Figure of Constantinople.
the vertex of which is a point of land to the East, called by the Greeks the
Promontory of St. Demetrius, on which is built the Seraglio or Palace of the
Emperor. The greater side, which lies upon the Propontis, runs N. W. and S. E.
about the space of six miles from the point to the seven Towers. The other
side, which makes the haven, winding like a horn, called therefore by Strabo
(...), lies East and West; and may be almost three miles in lenght. The basis
is the Isthmus, which unites it to the Champaign and Continent of Thrace, and
lies meridionally from the Sea to the upper part of the haven, almost four
miles long, having three walls running in a strait line, as far as the ruins
of Costantines Palace, (near which is the greatest eminence of the City) where
is a turning at a small distance from the Port, and only a single wall, like
the other two sides, which are washed with the Sea. Extent.
So that the compass of the whole is between twelve and thirteen miles; the
latitude various, and at about two miles at the widest, which is caused by the
approach or distance of the several parts of the opposite angles. It is
advantageously placed, Situated upon seven hills.
as I said before, upon the rising of several hills; seven of which are most
conspicuous for their great height; most of them have upon their tops very
stately Moschs built after the model of Sancta Sophia, whose cuppolas and
pyramids seem almost to reach the clouds. But of these Moschs I shall have
occasion to speak distinctly.

No place perchance in the World deceives a man's expectation more than
Constantinople, Its inconveniences.
it promising so largely at a distance both from the land and Sea: but when you
enter into it, all the glorious outward appearance seems but a delusion of
fancy. The streets narrow and unequal, and by reason of their steepiness in
several places, troublesome to walk in, except one fair street, which crosses
the City from the Seraglio to Adrianople gate. And however the narrowness of
the streets (though it detracts much from the sightliness and beauty of a
place) may be excused for the benefit it affords in sheltering passengers from
the rays of the Sun, yet the filth and nastiness is intolerable; dunghils and
great wastes of ground, caused by fire, being every where to be met with. The
ordinary houses are generally very low and mean, Ordinary houses.
and without any ornament of building or strong materials; only a few bords
clapped together, and the walls of clay, baked in the Sun. Some few houses of the
Greeks remain, which are built of stone, and high: which show what
Constantinople was before the Turks cut and broke down all the carved and
stone-work with their scymitars, and axes, and hammers, and set fire upon the
holy places and Palaces, and pulled down the Cross, and set up their Half Moon
instead of it.

The Bassas houses are but little better: Bassas houses.
no portico or pillar at the entrance; no curious walks adorned with rows of
trees in their gardens; no pictures or statues; no hangings, no fret-work in
their ceiling; their outward Courts rude and irregular. They take up indeed a
great compass of ground: and the portals are checkered with several colors, as
red, blue, yellow: their rooms are above stairs, which lead into a gallery or
hall; the chambers little boxes, the chief furniture of which lies upon the
floor: though sometimes the roof is gilt, and the sides covered with tiles,
with flowers and foliage painted, and sometimes, though very rarely, with
cedarwainscot: they being afraid to build rich and great Palaces; not only
because it would be looked upon as an argument of a foolish and vain pride, but
also of ostentation of their riches, and what might really prove a snare, and
draw the envy and ill will of the Emperor upon them.

The walls are considerably thick and high, Walls.
and serve equally for defense and ornament. Toward the Propontick there runs a
ledge of rocks under water at some distance from the shore, which keeps off
Ships of greater burden, and only admits Galleys and Brigantines which draw
but little water. Part of this wall, weakened by the violence of the waves, or
thrown down by earthquakes, was repaired and rebuilt by the Emperor Theophilus,
this inscription being to be found in several places:

(...)

Under the Seraglio-point, upon a platform, about four or five and twenty feet
broad to the wall, gained from the Sea, are planted about fifty pieces of
Cannon: one of which they are very chary of, as being the first which was
discharged at the siege of Bagdat, which they afterward so succesfully carried
on: to which is opposite a small Castle not far from the other shore, which
they call by the name of Kizkolasi or the Virgin Tower. These walls are built
of freestone, and only here and there pieced up with brick and uneven stones
clapped in: a few breaches being left, I suppose, out of design, unrepaired in
the wall to the landward, made by their guns when they lay before it. Here in
the uppermost wall of the three are about two hundred and fifty square Towers
with battlements, built at an equal distance: to the middle space of which,
answer other Towers in the second wall, making so many isosceles triangles: the
third a plain wall, now sunk very much in the ground; the ditch from the
highway to the skirts of it being about five and twenty of my paces. Without
are no suburbs, except two or three farm-houses, and toward the haven; the
Country lying open: which renders the prospect of Constantinople as pleasant
and glorious to the eye upon the land as upon the Sea: Its prospect from the
land.
and indeed the walk from the seven Towers, where I had occasion to go often,
to the haven, all along these walls, seemed to be the most delightful and
diverting of all that ever I took in my whole life.

The gates are about five and twenty in number, Gates*
whereof seven are toward the Propontis in this order, beginning from the
Seraglio point:

Achur-kapi, or the Stable-gate, nigh which are the stables of the Grand Signor.

Chatlad-kapi, or the Cleft-gate. Kum-kapi, or the Sand-gate. Jeni-kapi, or the
new gate.

Daoud Bassa-kapi; repaired by a Basha of that name, and hence it takes its
denomination.

Samathia-kapi.

Narli-kapi, or the Pomegranate-gate.

To the landward these, which front the West.

Jedicoula-kapi, or the gate of the seven Towers: which some, wholly ignorant
of the Turkish language, have through a gross mistake called Janicula.

Selivrea-kapi, the gate which leads to Selymbria.

Top-kapi, or the Gun-gate. Jeni-kapi, or the new gate.

Edriane-kapi, or Adrianople-gate, as leading directly thither.

Egri-kapi, or the crooked gate.

Ivanseri-kapi, in the plain not far from the water side.

To the Haven.
Balat-kapi, I suppose, corrupted from Palatium; leading up toward the ruins
of the Palace of Constantine; as they commonly call them. This gate is in the
furthest recess of the Canal, or arm of the Sea, dividing Constantinople from
Pera and Galata: into which run two little rivers, which have long since lost
the ancient names of Cydrus and Barbyses.

Petri-kapi, I suppose, from a Christian Church near it, dedicated formerly to
the honor and memory of St. Peter.

Phanar-kapi, (...), or the Lanthorn-gate. Here and at Gun-gate the Turks first
broke into the City: the poor Greeks having raised a wall upon the side of the
hill, not daring to trust to that by the water side, to this day called by them
in their vulgar language, (...).

Gebali-kapi, or the Hill-gate, or as others pronounce it, Giob-ali, the deep
Well-gate.

Vnkaban-kapi, or the Meal-gate; near which are the public granaries.

Odun-kapi, or the Wood-gate: over which may yet be seen this moral sentence,
(...).

Yemish-kapi, or the Fruit-gate.

Balukbazar-kapi, or the Fishmarket-gate.

Balkaban-kapi, or the Honey-gate.

Zindan-kapi, or the Prison-gate.

Bahchia-kapi, or the Garden-gate, hard by the Seraglio.

The Emperor's Palace; which the Turks call Padisha Serai (from which latter
word, Seraglio.
which in the Persian language signifies any stately Mansion, the Italians,
from whom we and the French borrow it form their Seraglio, and appropriate it
hereto) is situated partly upon the plain, and partly upon the rising of the
hill, which overlooks the Promontory at the very entrance into the haven;
having the Thracian Bosphorus on the East: upon which point the current sets so
violently, that Vessels oftentimes upon the slacking and scantiness of wind are
cast upon it, and get off with very great difficulty.

Two sides of it, taking in the gardens belonging to it, are washed by the Sea:
the third to the land, flanked with Towers, which jet out. Here in all
likelihood stood old Byzantium: afterward in the succeeding ages of
Christianity was placed here-abouts a College of religious persons belonging
to the neighboring Church of Sancta Sophia. Several years past after the
taking of Constantinople, before the Turkish Emperors made it their residence:
Mahomet the great abandoning the Greek Emperor's Palace, either because
demolisht in the time of the siege, or as ominous to himself and successors,
having fixed his seat almost in the center of the City: called to this day
Eski-serai or the old Palace, which has but one gate, and the walls very high:
where the women of the deceased Emperor are conveyed and shut up as close
prisoners without any hope of liberty, except when they are bestowed as wives
upon the great favorite Bassas; being only permitted at the feast of Bairam,
to come and make their complements to the Hasaki Sultana or the chief woman of
the Emperor, who has been so happy as to bring him a boy in the Seraglio. The
whole enclosure comprehending the gardens and spacious Courts, may take up
about two miles in compass. The gate to the landward, which is the usual
entrance, (the rest seldom opened, except upon great occasion) is always
guarded by Capigies, the inside hung with shields, darts, guns, and spears;
without any great ornament, two pillars of course marble propping up the sides.
It opens into a Court, whose area may be between three and four hundred paces
in length, but not proportionably wide; the whole lying rude. On the left hand
is a great building, where the Agiamgolaus, who do all the drudgery and all the
vile offices about the Seraglio are quartered: as also a round building,
supposed to have been a Sacristia of Sancta Sophia, but now turned into an
Armory. On the right is an Hospital, where such as fall sick within the
Seraglio, are brought for cure. At the second gate, guarded also by Capigies,
(over which there is the often mentioned form of the profession of the
Mohammedan Faith written in Arabic in large golden letters) the chief Vizir
must dismount, only the Emperor himself riding on horseback into the second
Court; which is very stately. The area square, a portico covered with lead and
sustained by pillars of Theban marble, whose bases and chapiters are bound with
brazen circles, running round it. The walks curiously laid out into parterrs on
the sides of the paved walks, and set with rows of Plane-trees and Cypresses,
and a fountain in the middle. At the further end on the left hand is the Divan
or Council Chamger; Divan.
where the great Vizir and in his absence his Deputy or Caimacam, assisted by
the Cadileskires and other men of the law, administers justice four times every
week, that is, Saturday, Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday; from whose sentence there
lies no remedy of appeal. At the upper end is a casement, which opens into it,
where the Grand Signor often comes, (though he cannot be seen there) out of
curiosity or design, to hear the determination of cases brought before them.

This Court of Judicature is not thronged with idle spectators, here is no
place for such curiosity; only business or a particular citation draws company
hither; much less is it permitted to strangers to be present at such times.
Mahomet Kupriuli Father to the late Vizir Achmet, who took Candia, one day
espying several French Gentlemen present, demanded their business: they
presuming upon the innocence of their curiosity, answered, they only came to
see: which put him into a fit of passion, What, said he, do you take us for
monkeys, which show tricks, that you come here to gaze and stare upon us?
whereupon they were rudely thrust out, and upon their alleging they were
strangers, and knew not the customs of the Country, with very great difficulty
they escaped drubbing. To prevent the like affront or danger, I made a pretense
of debt upon a Jew in Smyrna, and attended by our chief Interpreter, by whose
contrivance the little plot was laid, went boldly into the Seraglio to demand
justice; my request was very plausible; and upon the proposal of it, they
granted me a warrant to arrest my Jew in case the debt was not speedily
satisfied, the fees not coming to above one hundred or six-score aspers. The
inmost part of the Seraglio beyond the third gate, and the women's apartment, is
kept secret, and to Christians inaccessible, except upon extraordinary
occasions. The whole, (though not built according to the rules of modern
Architecture, not to be compared with the Palaces of Christian Princes) as to
the outward appearance seems handsome and stately.

For the better accommodation of Merchants and travelers, Caravanserais.
(there being no such thing as an Inn in our acception of the word in Turkey)
Chanes or public lodgings are erected in the chief streets of the City: from
the free use of which no one of what Country or Religion soever is exempted or
debarred, called for distinction either by the names of their several Founders,
or from the peculiar sort of Merchandise, to which they are appropriated, as
the Silk Chane, or the Rice Chane, and the like. The two best and stateliest I
saw are those of the present Emperor's Mother near her Mosch toward the haven,
and of Kupriuli in Taouk-bazar or the Hen-market. But the figure and the use
are the same in all. They are built for the most part of squared stone, in the
middle of the area is a little Mosch. A stone-gallery above the stairs running
round, and little narrow chambers opening into it; and the like below in Chanes
of a late foundation: for in those which are ancient, there is no division into
stories or partition into rooms; but all lies open like a great barn under the
same roof: a little wall about a foot and a half high, and four or five feet
broad, being raised round with chimneys at three or four yards distance.

The Bezesten or Exchange is a square stone-building, Bezesten.
where they sell linen, cloth of London, as they call our woollen
manufacturies, Furs, etc. but this must not be compared with that at Prusia
either for greatness or ornament.

The public Bagnos, Bagnos.
which are for the uses of strangers, and such as cannot furnish out so great
an expense, as to have them in their houses, (there being a continual necessity
of bathing, not only upon the account of religion, but also of health in those
hot Countries) are built of a courser sort of marble with a large cuppola. In
the outward room there is a fountain, round which a seat of brick covered with
mats, where they undress themselves: out of which you go through a narrow
passage into a spacious room comprehended under the cuppola, little oblong
squares setting out in the sides. Upon the first entrance, except care be taken
beforehand to reduce the body to such a temper, so as to endure the heat, one
shall scarce be able to fetch breath, unless with great difficulty, and be
almost stifled with the hot exhalations, which are so gross, that oftentimes
finding no vent and reverberated by the roof, they are condensed, and fall down
in thick drops of water.

Constantinople owes the chiefest part of its present glory to the great
Moschs, Moschs.
which were either formerly Christian Churches, or else built and endowed by
several Emperors and other great men. Of these and their Founders, who have
adorned the profession of their Religion with such pomp and magnificence, the
Turks, after the manner of their eloquence, which consists in foolish and
indiscreet hyperboles, use swelling words of vanity. By the vastness of the
structures they judge of their zeal and piety; and the greatness of the revenue
is an argument and proof of their successes and victories: custom by the
bewitchery of the Mufti and the other Churchmen prevailing, that no Emperor
can assume the honor of building a Mosch, except he has gained so much ground
in Christendom, with the revenue of which he may maintain the public service
of religion in it, in part at least, as if it were offering up a proportion of
the spoil to God by way of acknowledgment and gratitude. Which consideration
must needs have a mighty influence upon them to carry on their wars with all
imaginable vigor, not only out of a desire of fame to imitate and equal the
glory of their predecessors, but out of a principle of zeal and conscience.
They make a fine show, especially toward the haven, and are seen at a great
distance; situated for the most part on the hills; and though not all in a
strait line, yet the height takes off so much from the obliqueness of the
angle, that the eye is at no trouble or loss to find them out.

Aia Sophia; for so the Turks call Sancta Sophia, without any other variation
from the old Greek name.

Achmets in the Hippodrome.

Bayazids.

Suleimans, near the old Seraglio.

Shahzadeh. This built by Suleiman also in memory of his Son Mahomet, the
eldest he had by a Russian woman, whom we call from her Country, Roxolana, who
died in his youth in his government at Magnesia.

Mahomets, who took the City. This was formerly a Christian Church dedicated to
the memory of the H. Apostles: in which many of the Greecian Emperors lie
buried.

Selims, who was the Father of Suleiman. He overthrew the government of the
Mamalucks, and subdued Egypt.

Another Mosch of Mahomet the great, which they call Phatih giame or the
Conqueror's Mosch for distinction. This was a Christian Church dedicated to the
B. Virgin St. Mary; and after the taking of the City given to Gennadius
Scholarius then Patriarch for the Patriarchal Church, but afterward seized on
by this Emperor for the services and uses of his own false religion.

Sancta Sophia appears still a most glorious structure, Sancta Sophia.
though the Turks are not so careful about the beauty and ornament and
reparations of it, as of the other Moschs. The contrivance and architecture are
very admirable, fully answering the description given of it by Procopius
Caesariensis, who was contemporary with the most glorious Emperor Justinian the
Founder, and one of the officers of his Court. A stately portico at the
entrance from the ascent; five gates covered with plates of Corinthian brass
lead into the nave of the Church. Its length about one hundred and twenty of my
paces, and almost half as wide. The whole fabric resting upon arches is upheld
by three rows of pillars of different marble, Serpentine, Porphyry, and a kind
of Alabaster, whose bases and capitels are bound about with brass wreaths. In
the middle there arises a large cuppola, supported by four massy pillars, and
encompassed without with many little cuppolas, some higher than the rest:
several little Chapels of an oblong figure toward the sides. There is an
ascent by a winding pair of stairs into the galleries, which take up three
sides of the Church, supported by several curious marble pillars. The pavement
both of the Church and gallery is marble, not made up of little squares, but of
very large tables: the walls crusted over and slagged with the same. The roof
of the Church and portico in mosaic; though the Turks have defaced the faces
of several figures; yet notwithstanding several representations of sacred
history may be clearly enough discerned.

The two next best Moschs are Suleimans and Achmets. Suleimania.
In the middle of the Court, which encompasses the former, is a large square
fountain covered at top. The portico adorned with very curious tall pillars;
the pavement laid with large tables of porphyry: the cuppola propt up by four
pillars of the same sort of marble, whose circumference may be about twenty
foot, the spoils of a Christian Church: for such art and curiosity are above
the reach and skill of Turks.

Into Achmets Mosch there is an ascent of twelve stone-steps, Achmets Mosch.
the gate of brass curiously wrought: the four arches of the cuppola upheld by
four pillars of cast marble, as I judge it to be, of a very vast bulk. It still
retains the name of the new Mosch, though diverse have been built since, and a
stately one very lately near the garden gate toward the haven by the Mother of
the present Emperor, a Russ by Nation, and the daughter of a poor Priest.

That which is common to all the Royal Moschs is this; What common to all the
great Moschs.
several gates open into the area; within which are fountains or conduits full
of cocks and basins for their cleansing, before they make their prayers; close
adjoining an Hospital, and porticos built arch-wise, the little cuppolas
covered with lead running all along in an even line: usually four spires or
cylindrical towers of a great height, which the Priests ascend to call the
people to their devotion, raised from the ground, and placed at a due distance
and in opposite corners including a square space; except at Achmets Mosch,
where there are six. Each of these have a threefold gallery, one above another.
the tops of these towers are gilt and end in a point like a pyramid, on which
is placed a gilded Crescent, the ensign of the Mohammedan religion, and so
generally wherever there is any Mosch or oratory; though never so mean and
little. The name of God or of Mahomet, or his four chief companions, or the
form of the profession of the Musulman faith inscribed upon the inside of the
walls: and lastly, several iron circles or hoops containing a vast number of
crystal lamps used to be lighted at their night prayers: so that with the
reflection from the arches and pillars, the Church seems to be of a light fire.

Within the enclosure of the outward Sepulchral monuments of the Emperors.
wall are the sepulchral monuments of the several Founders and their children:
for no one lies buried in their Churches, no not the Emperors themselves. They
are built of white marble with a cuppola. The marble coffins, which are very
large and above the proportion of their bodies, lying in a space encompassed
with iron-grates, two great tapers being placed at the end, are covered for the
most part with a silk Pall of a deep green, having a good fringe, their
turbants, which they renew every year, being placed over their heads. Their
women lie near them; but their coffins are not so large, nor raised so high
from the ground, covered with purple or violet cloth. The coffins of their
children are bigger or less according to the age at which they dyed. Such as
have been strangled by their Brothers, who usually since the reign of Bayazid
the second lay the foundation and beginning of their Empire in fratricide, have
a handkerchief tied about their necks, as a sign of their unnatural death.
These little Chapels are frequented by several Priests and other pensioners,
who are obliged to come and say prayers for the souls of the deceased. Several
Emperors, who have not been Founders of Moschs, have their monuments near
Sancta Sophia, as Selim the son of Suleiman with his thirty seven children;
Morat the third, who had a more numerous issue: for I told about five and
forty; Mahomet the third, Mustapha the great Uncle, and Ibrahim the Father of
this present Emperor, both by a strange fate preferred to the Empire, and both
deprived of it; alike in their lives and deaths: both foolish and frantic, and
equally unfit to sustain the weight of the government, and both strangled. Hard
by Achmet's Mosch lie buried his two sons Osman and Morat, both warlike
Emperors, who endeavored to reduce the soldiery, which through sloth and
luxury had much degenerated, to their ancient discipline. The first made away
with by the Janissaries, whose ill behavior in his expedition against Poland,
and other insolences he could no longer support, and therefore designed to
have destroyed the whole order, and to have instituted a new militia; which
they perceiving, they grew tumultuous and mutinous, and soon after had him
bow-string'd: the other died with a debauch.

Being at the Mosch of Mahomet the great, Of the Mother of Mahomet the great.
I had a curiosity to see the tomb of his Mother, who was no way shaken by the
artifices and enticements of her Husband and son from her fixed resolutions of
continuing in her religion, but lived and died a Christian, being the daughter
of Lazarus Despot of Servia. Several Turks, who were there present in the area,
perceiving I bade my Janizary enquire which was her Turbeh or Chapel,
immediately before they were asked, pointed to it with their finger: which I
entered, and found very plain and unadorned. The Turks care not to come into it:
but several poor Christians frequent it at set hours, and have a small alms
allowed them for the prayers they make there.

This honor is indulged to some of the Bassas, Of the Bassas and
who have by their valor and council highly merited of the Empire, to be
buried in the City, and to have their sepulchral monuments in peculiar places
they had purchased for this end: such as were the illustrious Bassa Ibrahim, to
whom the Emperor Suleiman married one of his daughters, in whose praises the
Turkish Historians are so foolishly lavish and extravagant, who lies buried
near Suleimania; and Mahomet Kupriuli, who settled the government during the
minority of the present Emperor, when it was almost torn asunder by the
factions of the great men and the mutinies of the soldiery; buried near the
Mosch he built in Taouk-bazar. In the suburbs to the West very near the haven
there are several of these Chapels: and among others the tomb of Sultan Ejub,
Of Sultan Ejub, where
a person of great fame among them, as being, as they pretend, Standard Bearer
to Mahomet, a Prophet, and Martyr, of whose zeal and industry in propagating
and defending the Musulman religion they tell a company of idle, The Grand
Signor is inaugurated.
foppish, and ridiculous stories. In the adjoining area adorned with a portico,
the new Emperor is inaugurated, the Mufti girting his sword about him, this
being the only ceremony used at his investiture, and is instead of a
coronation. This place I suppose is chosen out of respect to the memory of
their great Saint, as if there were something of good omen in it, and to put
the Emperor in mind of what he must do, if there be occasion, for the
advancement of religion.

The Janissaries by virtue of an old establishment, The chambers of the
Janissaries.
even in times of peace, that they might the sooner form themselves into a
body, and prevent any sedition or tumult of the Citizens, were to live
together: for which purpose there are two great Odas or buildings at a little
distance one from the other at Constantinople to receive those who are
quartered there. But by the connivence of the officers bribed with money and
presents, several are permitted to be absent; and the married men of the order
turn shopkeepers and artizans to make better provision for their wives and
children. Between these two chambers is their Mosch, where upon any emergence
of state, that either may have an influence upon the Empire or their body, they
have their meetings and consultations.

The Acropolis or seven Towers, Seven Towers.
in the furthest angle of the City to the South upon the Propontis, serves
rather for a prison, than a garrison: for though there be a few soldiers in
it, yet I could observe no great guns or any other warlike furniture. In the
garden belonging to the governor of the Castle is the tomb of Husain surnamed
Delli or the mad and furious, who had been Janizary-Aga or General of the
Janissaries in Candia, where he was strangled by the command of the Vizir for
several pretended miscarriages; but the true cause of his death was believed to
be his great merit, which the other envied, and could not brook with any
patience, and accordingly contrived his ruin. But out of respect to his valor
his body was sent hither to be interred, and to be honored with a monument.

I sought in vain for the several Palaces, Theaters, Baths, Conduits, Churches,
and the other proud buildings with which this Imperial City was formerly
adorned in the times of the Greecian Emperors, as I find them mentioned in
ancient Histories and Surveys; and indeed it would be just matter of wonder,
that no more of the monuments, which the Emperor Constantine fetched from Few
ancient monuments left.
Rome and the other places of Italy to adorn this City which was to be called
(...) as he writes himself in a letter to Eusebius. Bishop of Caesarea, V.
Theodoriti Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 16.
after his own name, and his successors emulous of the same glory afterward
raised almost in every street, should now remain, if they had fallen into other
hands than those of Turks, who make a greater ravage, wherever they come,
than either earthquakes or time it self. The few remaining pieces of Antiquity
are these:

The Circus or Hippodrome is about two or three furlongs in length, Hippodrome.
and almost half as wide. At one end of it is a large Colossus or Pillar,
Colossus.
the top of it broken down, having suffered much by fire, and therefore called
by the Franks la Colonna brugiata; in whose basis these verses are engraven:
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)


About the middle there remains an entire Aguglia or Obelisk of a kind of
Granite or Theban marble, Hieroglyphical Pillar.
commonly called the Hieroglyphical pillar, by reason of the several figures of
animals and other representations engraven upon the sides according to the
Egyptian Priests and Philosophers, who used to involve some trivial slight
notices of religion and nature in such dark and perplexed characters. It is of a
square figure, the four sides making so many equilateral triangles, which are
sensibly contracted, as they rise higher and higher, till they end in a cone.
That which makes it the more admirable, is, that it is one entire stone, (...),
as both Codinus and Manuel Chrysaloras call it; whereas the Colossus consists
of several pieces. The Emperor Theodosius raised it again upon its basis,
after it had been cast down to the ground, (in all probability by an
earthquake, to which this City is subject) as the double inscription attests,
the one in Greek on the side to the West, the other in Latin to the East;
which while I read with so much ease, the Turks who stood by, (such was their
ignorance and stupidity) were amazed, and enquiring after the sense and
meaning, seemed hugely pleased and satisfied with what I told them.

(...) DIFFICILIS QUONDAM DOMINIS PARERE SERENIS

In the same Piazza is a pillar of wreathed brass hollowed, Serpent pillar of
brass.
at the top of which are the necks and heads of three Serpents, which shut out
at an equal distance triangular-wise, This in all probability was designed a
Talisman (but whether made by that famous Conjurer Apollonius Tyanaeus, who
resided here some time, is uncertain) to preserve the City from Serpents, that
might annoy them: this being one of the pretended wonderful effects of natural
Magic, according to the credulity and superstition of those times; which some
fanciful men of late have very idly and foolishly gone about to make out and
justify.

The Porphyry pillar of Constantine the great, The pillar of Constantine.
which he brought from old Rome, on the top of which he placed his own statue
in brass, still remains in Taouk-bazar, bound about in several places of the
shaft, where the pieces join with brass hoops; but the marble is much defaced
and blackened by fire, the statue having been long time tumbled down.

In Aurat-bazar or the women's market upon an eminence stands another pillar,
Historical pillar.
which is seen at a great distance by such as sail upon the Propontis: it rises
to the height of about an hundred and forty feet, the top being broken off, to
which they ascended by a winding pair of stairs; several figures in basso
rilievo are engraven upon it, which relate to a warlike expedition of the
Emperor Arcadius, upon which account among the Frankes it has got the name of
the Historical pillar.

In the Western part of the City toward the Campaigne, but not far from the
haven, Ruins of Constantines palace.
are the remains of a certain palace called by the Turks Tekir Serai, and by
the Greeks supposed to be that of Constantine, who was the last Emperor, and
the Son of an Helena too, the last fate as well as first glory of
Constantinople deriving from the same names. In the lower part there is only
left standing a chamber adorned with curious wrought pillars of the Corinthian
order, and above, a large stately hall. The other places are filled and stuffed
up with ruins.

That Constantinople, tho lying upon the Sea, Aqueducts.
might not be destitute of fresh water, which is so useful and necessary to
life, was the chief care of the Emperor Valentinian, who caused aqueducts to
be raised, by which the water is conveyed to the City from hill to hill in a
winding compass the space of eighteen miles. But these by the sloth and
carelessness of the Greeks and Turks falling to decay and rendered useless, were
restored and refitted by the Emperor Suleiman, who was so intent upon this
great work, that he said he would go on with it, although the laying every
stone stood him in a purse of money, that is, five hundred dollars; and it was
one of the three things he so earnestly wished he might live to effect, the
other two being the finishing of the Mosch which bears his name, and the making
himself Master of Vienna.

The springs arise hard by a Village called Domus-deri, which lies toward the
black Sea, whose waters are conveyed partly through little channels, and partly
through pipes under ground into several large cisterns, nigh which are summer
houses, floored, Kiosks or summer-houses.
and sometimes the cieling painted, and the sides crusted with a kind of
porcellane: the tops rising pyramidally, where the better sort of Turks in the
heats of summer retire to enjoy the cool air, and for the shady walks, bringing
sometimes their women with them, and spend there several days, pitching their
tents for their better accommodation. Here it is, and here alone, that they
seem to live gentily, and understand how to make use of the conveniences and
delights of nature. Every one here is a Prince, and fancies himself for a time
in Paradise. These cisterns are of different figures, square, Cisterns.
round, oblong, hexagonal, made of freestone, the bottom either paved or
plaistered over, into which you descend by a pair of stairs sometimes twenty
foot deep. Two of these above the rest are very stately, both within a mile of
Belgrade, the one to the East, the other to the South-west. From this latter
the waters are conveyed to the first Aqueduct near a Greek Village called
Pyrgos, Pyrgos.
the Christians of which, as of the neighboring Villages, are free from paying
haratch or head-money for their care in looking after the waters. This is a
very magnificent pile of building, and of a great length, with a double range
of arches about eight and forty or fifty in number, joining two hills, and in
the middle to the bottom of the valley it may be about one hundred feet: the
water running in a covered channel at the top. Not far on the other side of the
plain is another great Aqueduct, which makes an angle, having three ranges of
arches one above another. On one line are two and twenty arches in the
uppermost range, through which and the other below it are two galleries about
five foot wide, in some places shut up on each side, in others open at the
regular distance of about twelve foot: the contrivance was but necessary: for
after the fall of rains or melting of the snow, which in some winters lies here
very deep, there are such bogs below in the valleys, that no horse can pass
that way: the other line is shorter, and consists of twelve arches, which grow
less and less according to the greater or lesser steepiness of the hill. Hence
about a mile you pass to a third Aqueduct: which indeed is a most splendid and
glorious structure, containing only four arches in two ranges, the distance of
the sides of the arches being above fifty foot. This Aqueduct is raised to a
great height, whence the waters pass in an uninterrupted course, and fall into
a large cistern in the City near Sultan Selims Mosch, and so by earthen pipes
are conveyed to the several houses.

The Greeks have six and twenty Churches in Constantinople, Greecian Churches.
and six in Galata; of which I have given an account elsewhere.

Galata, as it appears from an old survey in the times of the Emperors Arcadius
and Honorius, Galata.
made up the thirteenth and fourteenth Regions, that there might be the same
number in new Rome, as Constantine would have his new City also called, as in
the old. It is situated on the North side of the haven, Haven.
by which it is divided from Constantinople. The passage is very easy, and a
great number of boat-men get their living by carrying passengers to and again
continually. This arm of the Sea is about half a mile wide, and in length from
the Seraglio-point to the fresh water rivers between four and five miles; of a
great depth, that Ships of a considerable burden may lie with their
bolt-sprits ashore, and have several fathoms of water at the stern; and so
secure withal, being shut up with the several high hills and promontories,
which break the force and violence of the wind and waves, that let the weather
be never so ill, and the Sea boisterous in the Propontis, the Vessels are not
in the least stirred with it in this narrow strait. The Arsenal is to the West,
where there are several voltas or chambers built arch-wise, where they hall up
their Galleys after the summer expedition is over.

Galata of it self, both for the compass of the ground it takes up, and its
strength, may be justly accounted a large City, and is very populous. It is
encompassed with walls flankered with towers, built by the Emperor Anastasius,
having a wide and deep ditch to the landward. It runs along the side of a hill,
higher than those of Constantinople, and in several places is very steep.
Formerly toward the declension of the Greecian Empire it was in the possession
of the Genoueses; the arms of some noble Families of that republic are still
here and there to be seen engraven in the walls. Without which, both upon the
ridge of the hill and upon the plain, farther in, toward and parallel with the
haven, are several large streets, which whole tract of ground, by reason of its
situation on the other side of the water, is therefore called by the Greek name
Pera, Pera*
where most of the Christian Ambassadors choose both for their convenience and
privacy to make their residence.

FINIS.
Books sold by Moses Pit, at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Folio.
THE Six Voyages of John Baptista Tavernier, a Noble Man of France (now living)
through Turkey into Persia, and the East Indies, finished in the year 1670.
Giving an account of the State of those Countries. Illustrated with diverse
Sculptures: together with a new relation of the present Grand Seignior's
Seraglio, by the same Author. To which is added a description of all the
Kingdoms which encompass the Euxine and Caspian Seas. By an English Traveller,
never printed before. Price 20 s.

Theses Theologicae variis Temporibus in Academia Sedanensi editae, and ad
disputandum propositae. Authore Ludovico de Blanc verbi Divini Ministro and
Theologiae professore. In qua exponitur sententia Doctorum Ecclesiae Romanae,
and Protestantium. 1675. Price 20 s.

Dr. Henry Hammond's Sermons. 1675.

A Table of ten thousand square Numbers, by John Pell, D. D. stitcht, 1 s. 6 d.

Tuba Sentoro-Phonica, or the Speaking-Trumpet; being an Instrument of
excellent use both at Sea and Land; by Sir Samuel Morland. Price of the Book 1
s. of the Instrument 2 l. 5 s.

Articles and rules for the Government of his Majesty's Forces by Land, during
this present War, 1673. 1 s. 6 d.

Bailii opus Hist. Chronol. vet. and Nov. Test. 1663.

Becmanni Exercitationes Theol. Contra Socinianos. 1643.

An History of the Church, by Alex. Petrey. 1662.

Catalogus Librorum in Regionibus Transmarinis nuper Editorum.

The History of Don Quixote. 1675. 10 s.

The Comentaries and Life of Julius Caesar, containing his Wars in Gallia, and
the Civil Wars betwixt him and Pompey; with the Notes of Clement Edmons, 1677.
16. s.

Quarto.
Thesaurus Numismatum Antiquorum cum Commentariis Jac. Oiselii. 1677. 20 s.

Johannis Bonae (Cardinalis) Opera Theologica. 1677. 16 s.

Georg. Hicks Sermon before the Lord Mayor, on 1 Cor, 10. 13. 1677. 6. d.

Dr. Pell's Introduction to Algebra. 7 s.

Nich. Mercatoris Logarithmo-Technia, sive methodus construendi Logarithmos,
1668. and Jac. Gregorii Exercitationes Geometricae, 1668. 2. s.

Love only for loves sake, a Dramatick Romance, by Sir Richard Fanshaw, 3 s. 6
d.

Mori Enchiridion Metaphysicum, 1671. 10. s.

Snellii Typhis Batavus, Ludg. Bat. 1624, 5 s.

Petrus Paaw de Ossibus, Amst. 1633. 5 s.

Dr. Thomas Jacomb, on the Eighth Chapter of the Romans. 8. s.

A Letter from a Gentleman of the Lord Howard's Retinue, to his Friend in
London, dated at Fez. Nov. 1. 1670. 6 d.

Dr. Wallis Opera Mechanica, 22. s.

Hieronymi Mercurialis de Art Gymnastica Libri sex cum figuris, 1672.

Pignorii Mensa Isaica, 1669.

Pharmocopia Hagiensis, 1659. Augustana, 1672.


J. Crellii Ethica Aristotelica and Christiana, 16 s.

Joan. Binchii Mellificium Theologicum, 16 s.

Theod. Kerkringii D. M. Spicilegium Anatomicum, Continens Observationum
Anatomicarum rariorum centuriam unam nec non Osteogeniam foetuum in qua quid
cuique ossiculo singulis accedat Mensibus, quidve decedat and in eo per varia
immutetur tempora, accuratissime oculis subjiciuntur, 1670.

Fortunius Licetus de Monstris ex recensione Gerardi Blasii, qui Monstra
quaedam Nova and Rariora ex recentiorum Scriptis addidit. Editio novissima
Iconibus illustrata. 1665.

Complete Clark, Containing the best Presidents, 1677. 12 s.

Holy Fast of Lent defended, 1667. 6 d.

A Looking-Glass for all new Converts, 1667. 1 s.

There is newly published two Recantation-Sermons, (Preached at the
French-Church in the Savoy) by two Converted Romanists, Mr. De la Motte, late
Preacher of the Order of the Carmelites; and Mr. De Luzanzy, Licentiate in
Divinity; wherein the Corrupt Doctrines of the Church of Rome are laid open and
confuted. Both Printed in French and English.

Also two other Sermons, one Preached before the King at White Hall, Jan. 30.
1676. by Henry Bagshaw, D. D. the other before the Lord Mayor, December. 19.
1675. by John Cook.

A Modest Survey of the most material things in a Discourse, called the Naked
Truth. 6 d.

A New Dictionary, French and English, by Guy Miege. 1677.

Marshal Turenne's Funeral Sermon. 1677.

Jer. Herrocii. Angl. Opusc. Astron. 1673.

An Historical Vindication of the Church of England in Point of Schism by Sir
Robert Twisden.

The last Siege of Mastricht, Sept. 5. 1676.

Dr. Tillotson's Sermon before the King, Apr. 18. 1675.

Dr. Wilkins's Three Sermons before the King, March 7. 1669. and Feb. 7. 1670.

Catalogus Librorum Regionibus Transmarinis nuper Editorum. Continuandus est
hic Catalogus in singulos Terminos.

Octavo.
Dr. Jo. Tillotson's Rule of Faith. 1676.

Rhetores selecti, Demetrius Phalerius, Tiberius Rhetor, Anonymus Sophista,
Severus Alexandrinus Greece and Lat. per Tho. Gale, Soc. Coll. M. 1677.

A Scriptural Catechism, according to the Method observed by the Author of the
Whole Duty of Man. 1676.

How, of delighting in God; of the Blessedness of the Righteous, Two Vol.

Art of Speaking, by M. du Port Royal. 1676.

A Discourse of Local Motion, undertaking to demonstrate the Laws of Motion,
and withal to prove, that of the seven Rules delivered by Mr. Des Carts on
this subject he has mistaken six: Englished out of French, 1671. 1 s.

The History of the late Revolutions of the Empire of the Great Mogul, with a
description of the Country, in two Volumes, 7 s.

The History of the Conquest of the Empire of China by the Tartars, 1671. 4 s

A Collection of Popish Miracles wrought by Popish Saints, both during their
lives, and after their death; collected out of their own Authors, 1. s.

Treatise of the Holy Communion, 1677. 2 s. 6 d.

A new way of curing the Gout, and Observations and Practices relating to Women
in Travel, 3 s.

Elenchi Motuum Nuperorum in Anglia pars tertia, sive Motus Composita. Vbi G.
Monchii e Scotia progressus, nec non Aug. Caroli Secundi in Angliam Reditus;
ejusdemque Regiae Majest. per Decennium gesta fideliter enarrantur, 1676.

Gualteri Needham Disputation Anatomica de Formato Foetu, 1677. 3 s. 6. d.

A Discourse written to a Learned Friar, by Mr. Des Fourneillis, showing that
the Systeme of Mr. Des Carts, and particularly his opinion concerning Brutes,
does contain nothing dangerous; and that all he has written of both, seems to
have been taken out of the first Chapter of Genesis. To which is annexed the
Systeme General of the Cartesian Philosophy, 1. s.

The Poetical Histories; being a complete Collection of all the Stories
necessary for a perfect understanding of the Greek and Latin Poets, and other
ancient Authors, etc. written originally in French, by the learned Jesuit P.
Galtruchius. Now Englished by Marius D' Assigny, B. D. 3. s. 6. d.

A complete Treatise of Chyrurgery, concerning Barbets Chyrurgery. Minderus of
Diseases incident to Camps and Fleets: With a Chyrurgeons Chest of Medicines
and Instruments, etc. 6 s.

Memoirs of Mr. Des-Ecotais, formerly styled in the Church of Rome, the most
Venerable Father Cassianus of Paris, Priest and Preacher of the Order of the
Capuchins; or the Motives of his Conversion. In English 2 s. In French 2 s. In
French and English 4 s. 1677.

Les Memoirs De Madame la Princess Marie Mancini Colonne G. Connetable du
Royaume de Naples, 1677. La vie et les Actions Memorables de Lieut. Amiral
Michel de Ruyter, 1677. 5. s.

The Present State of Samos. 1. s.

Compendium Biblicum continens, Ex 23202. versiculis totius veteris Testamenti,
Tantum versiculos 2289. (non tamen integros) in quibus omnes universi veteris
E. voces, tam primitivae quam derivativae, tam Hebraicae quam Chaldaicae
Authore Jo. Leusden. 1673. 4 s.

Pauli Barbetti opera Chirurgica Anatomica, 1672.

Praxis Barbettiana cum notis Fred. Deckeri, 1669.

Herls Wisdoms Tripos.

Dr. Wilkins Beauty of Providence.

Pharmacopoea Royal, or the Royal Dispensatory, in Three Parts, the First Part
the Galenical and Chemical Pharmacopoea; the Second Part the Galenical
Pharmacopoea; and the Third Part the Chemical Pharmacopoea. Written by M.
Charus, Apothecary to the King of France. And now rendered into English. Being
now in the Press.


