Imprimatur,

^^g. 16. 1687. Guil. Needham.

A Pacifick Discourse OF THE CAUSES AND REMEDIES OF THE DIFFERENCES ABOUT
RELIGION, Which distract the Peace of Christendom.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Smith at the Prince's-Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1688.

A pacifick discourse of the causes and remedies of the differences about
Religion which distract the peace of Christendom.
HOW much the saving doctrine of the Christian religion does conduce to the
establishment of an universal peace in the world, beyond the utmost force and
reach of humane wit and policy, it were to be wished, it could be as clearly
made out by fit and suitable events, and by the lives and behavior of
Christians, as it is most justly demonstrable from the design of Christ, and
the proper and genuine ends of such an holy institution. For with what just
severity does that most perfect rule of life require of us to lay restraints
upon our passions, and to stifle and suppress the first motions of them, lest
our ill will and dissatisfactions break forth into enmity, and our enmity soon
improve into downright malice and hatred! how does it give and restore to the
mind a full power of reducing unto reason all those tumults and disorders,
which either anger or lust are wont to raise! with what great ^^re, even a care
worthy of God, is it there provided for, that no one should deserve ill of his
neighbor, nor so much as treat his enemy, as his enemy, that is, in a furious,
disdainful, and hostile way, but rather forgive him, and show him kindness and
mercy: that we should be more afraid to do, or return, and revenge an injury,
than undergo death it self: that we endeavor to the utmost of our power to do
good to all, and in several cases have less regard to our own than another
advantage, and sacrifice our lives and dearest interests to the public peace!
Under what terrible sanctions, and with what fullness and clearness of
expression has the divine Author and establisher of the Christian law enacted,
that the rights of every one, whether founded in nature, or introduced by
custom and the common usages of life, or by civil and municipal laws, should in
no wise, and upon no pretense whatever be violated, but be preserved in their
full extent and vigor!

How had the world been blessed with a solid and lasting peace, if these
excellent rules had been observed, and if no unjust force had been used; if men
had religiously and conscientiously abstained from invading the right and
property of others, and had been content with that state and condition of life,
in which providence had placed them, without having recourse to fraud and evil
arts, or to violence and arms! Thus we see Christ has consulted most wisely
and effectually the peace and benefit of all mankind in general, beyond the
institutions of the most famous Lawgivers whatever. But how more deeply and
zealously concerned, and fuller of holy care was our blessed Savior for all
such, as should believe in his name, and make profession of his religion in all
ages of the world, that the mutual love, which the acknowledgment of the same
Faith, which the partaking of the same holy rites and mysteries, and which the
hope of the same immortal happiness and glory to be enjoyed in the other world
justly challenged, and required, and obliged them to upon so many excellent
accounts, should be continually kept up, and made appear at all times by an
hearty desire and readiness of doing good in their several stations, and
whenever an opportunity presented it self, by all offices of love and
kindness! He was so intent upon this necessary and essential part of
Christianity, in the last stage of his life, that in that divine discourse,
which he made to his Apostles, St. John chap. 14. just before he was to leave
the world, and offer up his most precious blood, as a just price and
satisfaction for the sins of mankind, he commends nothing more to their
imitation, and makes this the great characteristick of his Religion: and shows,
that nothing could be more dear and grateful to him, and more advantageous and
beneficial to them, or could more powerfully and evidently show their love to
him, and better deserve their care, than their punctual and diligent observance
of this new command, that they should love one another, as he had loved them.

Now this command being grounded on the greatest authority, and the highest
reason, and equity imaginable, and which cannot be violated without the
imputation of impiety and folly, and without great hazard of Salvation, who
would believe, that Christians should be so unmindful either of God or
themselves, as to dare to contravene it, as if they were not any longer to be
known to be of that denomination, by reciprocal affection and charity, and by
unity and harmony of mind, and by the most endearing acts of generous
friendship, but by bitter invectives and reproaches, by siding with parties,
and by disagreement and hatred one of another?

It is a long time since, that the Catholic Church of Christ has felt the sad
effects and consequences of this foolish and mad perfidiousness, even almost
soon after she was blessed with peace, and freed from the horrid butcheries and
cruel persecutions of the heathen Roman Emperors, (who made it their business
to keep up their idolatrous worship, with all the arts of subtilty and furious
rage, and exterminate the very name of Christian out of the world) and has
been forced to endure and suffer far worse things from her own children,
hurried on with the excesses of mad zeal, and all the bitterness of enraged
passion: by reason of which unchristian misbehaviour she soon perceived, that
she had but little reason comparatively to complain of the proceedings of Nero,
Decius, Diocletian, and the rest of her merciless Persecutors. For this was the
sad case and temper of those times, that they, whom fear, and modesty, and a
due regard to, and reverence of the name of Christianity, and whom common
dangers and sufferings had endeared to each other, to the great astonishment of
their enemies, now when they no longer stood in awe of the tribunals of the
Gentile Magistrates, and of the pursuit and arrest of soldiers and officers of
the civil Courts; when they were no longer in danger of being dragged to
prison, or condemned to crosses, stakes, gibbets, and wild beasts in their
Amphitheaters; when by the protection of the civil power they might profess
Christianity with all possible security, the whole Empire becoming Christian,
and embracing that faith, which it had for some ages before endeavored with so
much fury and madness to root up; these very persons, abusing this wonderful
change, that God had brought about, when they had no enemies to exercise their
faith and their patience, soon grew peevish, and froward, and insolent toward
one another.

The doctrine of faith, as it is proposed in the holy Gospels, was slighted and
carelessly past over, and fierce contests arose about matters of opinion and
ceremony, as if nothing less than eternal salvation had been concerned in these
niceties; whence charity being wholly forgot and lost in these disputes, whilst
each strove, not so much for truth as victory, evil suspicions and animosities
took place, and opened a wide gap for schism to enter. Hereupon Altar was
erected against Altar, and contrary Episcopal Sees established in the same
cities; and furious and seditious Preachers sounded in the Pulpit an alarm to
a holy war, as if they had been ready to engage with the professed enemies of
Christ in defense of the chief articles of Religion. Hence they first looked
upon it as a piece of becoming zeal, and as a mark of godliness to abstain from
all external communion with each other: as if the danger and the guilt had been
less to have been present at the Heathen and Jewish assemblies: afterward
followed odious crimes laid to each others charge, and most abusive and
execrable titles and appellations, as if there had been a total apostasy and
defection from the Christian faith; from which most unjust and scandalous
censures there arose at last an irreconcilable enmity and hatred, which no
art, no compliance in other matters, whilst these evil and perverse opinions
were rooted in their minds, could be able to remove or mollify.

But alas! so far are these dreadful and fatal heats, with which the Church for
so many ages has been enflamed, from being abated, that upon the addition of
fresh matter they have burst out with greater violence, which is almost
irresistible. Who is there so far forsaken and devoid of good nature, mercy,
and pity, who is not filled with horror, when he reflects upon those horrid
tumults and distractions, with which Christendom is torn asunder at this very
day? I do not mean those distractions the natural effects of war, wherein
thousands are daily sacrificed to ambition and other brutal passions, but such,
as different opinions about matters of religion have brought upon the world, in
which no mercy and charity are showed to the souls of the adverse party, which,
as far as furious zeal takes place, are consigned over to hell by peremptory
sentences of excommunication: it being accounted a very godly and justifiable
pretension, to think and judge amiss of those, who differ from them in lesser
matters.

In the mean time, whilst every one does foolishly indulge to his ambition,
same, and wit; whilst they most partially favor that side, which either chance
has cast them upon, or prejudice, education, and interest have recommended to
their choice; whilst the love of the world, and a fear arising thence, lest
there should be any abatement and diminution of their secular pomp and
advantage, shut out truth; and whilst perverseness and obstinacy of mind set a
bar against mutual forbearance and condescension: although out of modesty each may
pretend to wish, that an happy end were put to these disputes, and endeavor
with great earnestness to wipe off the envy of such a charge: yet it is too too
evident, that they are kept up and maintained by pride and peevishness and base
interest, whilst they do not follow, according to the excellent and wise advice
of St. Paul, after the things which make for peace, and things wherewith one
may edify another. Romans 14. 19.

It is the design of this paper briefly to enquire, first into the reasons and
causes of these differences arising about Religion, which are still maintained
with so great heat, to the great scandal of so holy and venerable a Profession,
and how it comes to pass, that the mild, the sweet, the merciful temper and
genius, which Christianity inspires her true Votaries with, seems utterly lost,
amidst the noise and fury of those hot debates, that prevail between parties of
different communions: and then, secondly; into the proper remedies of these
horrid confusions and distractions, and see if there be any just reason and
ground to hope for the restoring of Ecclesiastical peace and unity to the
divided countries of Christendom.

As to what concerns the first part of my enquiry, I shall comprehend the
original and causes of the divisions among Christians, and which hinder them
from uniting in the same common worship and service of God, under these four
following heads; all others being of lesser moment, or else easily reducible to
one of them.

The first and principal is this, a manifest and great departure from the
simplicity of faith.

In the first beginnings of Christianity, when the Apostles, every of them in
their distinct provinces, declared to the world the revelation of God our
Savior, it was not, as to what concerns the doctrine of faith, any great
matter of difficulty, nor required any great study or deep research to be a
Christian. The mysteries of it, as to their number, were but few, as is evident
from the Creed, which contains a brief form of words, clearly and nakedly
proposed without any perplexity or ambiguity of expression; so that although
the matter of some of them do transcend the utmost strength and force of humane
understanding, and cannot be comprehended by the most sublime and subtle wit
whatever: yet persons of the meanest capacities and most ordinary understanding
cannot complain, that they were neglected. Now this doctrine of faith was at
first one and the same every where, even in the most distant countries, which
had no commerce one with another. At that time they believed no otherwise at
Rome, Ephesus, Alexandria, or Corinth, than at Jerusalem.

The Apostles being guided by the same infallible spirit, taught the same
necessary articles of faith every where: whence arose that admirable concent
and harmony of doctrine, as if that great work of the conversion of the world
to the faith of Christ had not been done apart, but had been jointly carried on
by the common advice and direction of the College of Apostles remaining in a
fixed place. For then those here in Britain agreed in judgment with those who
were in India, when there was no passage through the great and vast ocean
known, or so much as attempted: the polarity of the magnet being then unknown
and undiscovered: And the like is to be said of the other parts of the world,
as Irenaeus shows in his first book against heresies chap. 3. where being about
to evince the truth of the Catholic faith from the agreement of so many
nations, differing in language, and manners, and customs of living, so many
seas running between, he adds, that there is the same force of tradition,
notwithstanding this great variety of language, and that the Churches in
Germany, Spain, Gaul, in the East, in Egypt and Lybia neither believed nor
delivered down contrary doctrines: but as the Sun, the creature of God, is one
and the same in the universe, so the light and doctrine of truth shines every
where, and enlightens all men, who are willing to come to the knowledge of it.
So that all being admitted by the Sacrament of baptism to the profession of the
same faith, if chance or business, or curiosity of traveling brought
Christians of different nations together, upon the first acknowledgement of
this faith, which showed, that they were Christians, they run into each others
embraces, and found, that they agreed in the same points of religion, as if
they had been bred up under the same masters, and had spent their whole time
together.

And indeed it could scarce be otherwise through the piety, innocence, zeal,
and constancy of those times, not as if there were no opinions started, about
which they might have different sentiments (for that in such great variety and
disproportion of understanding and temper was scarce possible) but they held
fast to the Apostolical doctrine and tradition: and provided, that their faith
in Christ was entire and orthodox, in lesser matters liberty of judgment was
allowed without censure. No one was oppressed with unjust suspicions and
prejudices: they shunned not such an ones company, as if he had been
excommunicated, but received and embraced him as a Brother and fellow Christian.

The holy Apostles, who by their unwearied diligence and preaching had formed
and established Churches every where, that they might make just provisions for
the Christians of all ages after their decease, thought it highly concerned
them to commit to writing the doctrine of faith, which they had taught; that in
case any doubt should arise in aftertimes, and new doctrines should be
introduced by wanton and over curious wits, desirous and over apt to innovate
in matters of religion under a pretense of Apostolical tradition, these
infallible oracles might be consulted, as the measure and standard of divine
truth. Accordingly to these sacred writings they had recourse as to the only
rule of faith: they derived all the streams of saving truth from these
incorrupt springs; here was the trial, whether any one was sound or reprobate
concerning the faith: so the great truths of Religion were preserved entire,
there was no trouble given to any one upon the account of any subtle or nice
questions. All equally enjoyed the same right of communion; they were present
at the same holy offices of religion with a most agreeable piety; they all were
partakers of the same holy Sacrament; from which if any were by the strict
discipline of the Church debarred, it was wholly to be imputed to the
miscarriages of life, whereof they were guilty, which the Church desired to
amend and make them sensible of by this severe course and method.

But when the pertinaciousness of Heretics, relying upon the quirks and
subtilty of unsound wit, would in no wise acquiesce in Scriptural propositions
of faith; when with a sacrilegious boldness they would break into the very
secrets of heaven, which were above the capacity of humane understanding fully
to make out and comprehend; when despising and rejecting the revelations of
Scripture, they disclaimed the profession and acknowledgment of the truths and
mysteries of the Christian religion; and when by their evil designs, arts, and
practices, the weaker sort of Christians, whom they had infected with their
corrupt and poisonous doctrine, were drawn away from the profession of the true
faith; it then became necessary and most worthy the serious thoughts and care
of Constantine the great, and the other pious Emperors, to call General
Councils, in order to prevent those disturbances and breaches of the Churches
peace, which were likely to arise from the change and alteration of faith: and
all the industry of those great men, who were summoned to attend and assist at
those solemn and venerable assemblies, was laid out and employed, not in
inventing and making new Articles, but in interpreting and explaining the old
ones: for both their zeal and piety forbad, that they should give way to any
innovation, or suffer the ancient Catholic faith, which was at first
delivered, to be antiquated, and the profession of it disused. For to use the
words of Commonitor. cap. 32.
Vincentius Lirinensis, what other thing has the Church of Christ designed and
effected by the decrees of Councils, but that that which was before simply
believed, might now be believed with greater diligence: that, which before was
more rarely and gently preached, might now be preached with greater zeal and
concern: and that, which was held and maintained more securely, might now be
studied and maintained with greater care and solicitude? So that to stop the
mouth of heresy, and to give it its deaths wound, those Heroes, mostly and
chiefly relying upon the authority of the sacred scripture, and calling in to
their aid and assistance the constant practice and consent of the Orthodox
Christians of the preceding ages, and ancient and Catholic tradition, made a
most excellent provision for the security of the Christian faith, which Arius,
Macedonius, Nestorius, and the other infamous Haeresiarchs had with their false
glosses perverted, by laying down short forms and professions of faith: that so
the several mysteries of it, upon the belief of which the true religion and the
happiness of its Professors depend, might be better and more easily admitted
and understood.

By this Test the Catholic Church distinguished those of her communion from
the heretics, and by this unity of faith united their hearts in love and
affection; all who made profession of her doctrine, in what part of the world
soever they were, being acknowledged and received for friends, for brethren,
for Catholics. For there was no need of any other character or recommendation:
and hence that pious and laudable custom and practice of keeping up and
maintaining this Ecclesiastical communion by the Epistolae formatae, which were
usually sent from one Bishop to another (nor did the Bishop of Rome exempt
himself) upon their instalment, had their original: nor was there any other
proof exacted or demanded of their retaining the profession of the true
Christian faith, than a firm and hearty assent to those ancient Creeds.

How happy it had been for the Catholic Church, if the terms of communion had
continued thus enlarged, the meanest capacity may easily be sensible of; for
most assuredly, if the ancient faith, the profession of which has saved so many
myriads of Christians, had been preserved incorrupt and entire from the
encumbrance and addition of novel opinions, which owe their original and
propagation to mere phantasy, and superstition, and secular interest; and if
all, who acknowledge that Faith, might have been present at the public worship
and service of God upon the same conditions, as in the first ages, according to
the rules established by the supreme Ecclesiastical authority; there had not
been that great confusion every where in the world, as now there is. By this
just and easy method, schism might have been prevented, and a liberty of
judgment being allowed in matters no way fundamental and essential to faith, an
eternal peace had been established.

Of the violation of which we justly accuse the Roman Church, which, having
wholly neglected and laid aside the rules of primitive Antiquity, has, as
mistress of the faith of all Christians, obtruded new articles, under the
specious pretense and title of Declaration, upon their consciences and
understandings. But what injustice, what arbitrary proceeding, what tyranny is
this, that the faith of the Christian world should depend upon the humor and
pleasure of the Roman Court, and the opinions of the Schoolmen, without any
regard to Scripture and antiquity: and that all other Churches should be
excommunicated, unless they enslave themselves to her Tenants, and that all
should be branded with the odious name of Schismatic and Heretic, who dare
maintain and defend their rights against the imposition of their novelties! Let
the true faith be examined by the rule of Scripture: let the doctrine of the
first times be consulted in the proof and trial of it: let the ancient canons
be restored: let no force be put upon the conscience; and let all unjust
conditions cease, and be for ever abrogated; the peace of the Church will then
return, and we may hope to see good days in Christendom. Which suggests to me
an other hindrance of Ecclesiastical peace and unity, which arises hence,

2. That several opinions and tenants, which without prejudice to the true
faith, we may be ignorant of, are too highly valued and esteemed, and by an
overhasty and inconsiderate zeal are looked upon as fundamental points,
necessary to salvation.

The Apostle Saint Paul takes a particular and wise care in the 14th chapter of
the epistle to the Romans, lest they, who agreed in the Faith of the eternal
Son of God, the true Messiah and Redeemer of mankind, and were called by his
blessed name, should upon some little differences in trivial matters, break out
into hatred and ill will one to another. For there was not the same opinion
among them about the ceasing of the Mosaical institutions. They who had arrived
to a greater degree of faith and maturity of judgment, very much rejoiced in
their happy change and condition of life, that they were delivered from the
grievous burden of the Jewish rites and ceremonies, whilst others, who were not
so well instructed and satisfied in the privileges and liberties of the
Christian religion, very fiercely contended, that no one, at least no Jew, was
exempt and freed from those observances. Hence proceeded bitter and severe
censures one against another, as transgressors of the divine law; and hereupon
they entertained those unjust opinions of one another condition as to the
other world, as if one heaven could not hold two such contrary parties. But
what says the Apostle to all this? he plainly shows, that this sharp,
censorious, and fierce temper of mind is most displeasing to him, as being most
disagreeable to the very rules of Christianity: that in an affair of so slight
a nature, no one runs the hazard of his salvation; that the strong were herein
to indulge and yield somewhat to the weak in faith, who were not so fully
enlightened, as they were; that they who thought that there was an obligation
still lying upon them to observe the law of Moses, had not upon this account
abjured the faith of Christ, and that they, who on the contrary thought that
there was no obligation lying upon them, had not been guilty of the breach of a
divine law: that they were not to abstain from communicating with each other:
that in these matters a liberty of judgment was not to be denied, so they had a
right faith in Christ; that this common faith, in which both parties agreed,
was a sufficient ground of Christian communion: and lastly, that they were to
be more studious of peace and mutual edification, than of useless
controversies, which contributed little or nothing to the advancement of
Christianity, or to their own mutual benefit and advantage, or to the increase
of piety, and good manners.

With what greater modesty and moderation had such, as having laid aside all
thoughts of peace for the sake of opinions of far lesser moment, have gone
about to make divisions in the Catholic Church, have carried themselves, if
they had imitated this Apostle in this his most exemplary meekness and lenity!
Have thou faith? Says this wise and excellent person; have it to thy self
before God. Let every one enjoy his own private opinions, of which sort there
may be many, for the sake of which we cannot, without the highest injustice,
give way to furious passion and strife: at least, if they cannot retain them in
their breasts, but have an itch of venting them; let them not impose them upon
others, as oracles, as if all, who do not assent to them, were in a deplorable
condition. The case is the same about particular Churches, as about private
men: whilst each retains the entire doctrine of the Catholic Church, let them
make what laws, articles, and constitutions they shall think fit, to oblige
their own members to uniformity; this certainly being a privilege, which is
essential to every national Church in order to its better establishment. If
these controversies concerning private and particular opinions had been
confined to the Schools, with a salvo to conscience and free judgment, by the
fierce disputants on either side, the Church might have received no prejudice
and damage by them, and have been wholly uninterested in their quarrels.

For this is to be allowed and permitted to humane wit, to be naturally prying
into secrets and mysteries, and mostly to please it self in new speculations:
and this it may do lawfully enough, so it does not pass those due boundaries,
which Scripture, the Creeds of the Catholic Church, and sober reason have set
and fixed. Let the Schoolmen, overrun with the itch of curiosity, wrangle
eternally, if they please; seeing they not only delight in it, but make it
their trade and business to perplex and entangle the most obvious truths:
although it is very apparent, that in these eager and sharp contentions, they
aim more at victory and reputation than at truth: and let them enjoy the fame
and credit of being accounted great Sophisters and wits: Let them flatter
themselves, that they can explain the most difficult problem, and satisfy the
most confounding objection with their nice and subtle distinctions: let them
enjoy their phansy or their judgment, without the least disturbance and
censure: seeing some are so in love with their errors, that they hate to be
better instructed; and to go about to convince them, is the way to disoblige
them: provided all this be done as a trial of wit, and as an exercise of a
plodding brain. I add further, let any particular Church, to prevent all
disputes, which may have an influence upon its peace, and which, by the cunning
contrivance of designing men, may introduce schism and disorder, make a body of
articles and canons to be subscribed by all, who are entrusted with the
administration of holy things, as an instrument of peace and concord: and where
they pretend to state and determine controversial points, let them be esteemed
by those of that Church never so pious, never so credible, never so probable,
no harm can possibly arise, so long as the summary of the Christian doctrine is
not violated; so long as they are not ranked with the fundamental articles of
faith; so long as they do not impose them upon other Churches, who are no way
subject to a foreign jurisdiction; much less upon the whole body of Christians
in all the parts of the Universe, under the pretense of Apostolical authority,
and under the heavy penalty of an Anathema. But that there should be no
difference put between the novel opinions of the Schoolmen, and the Oracles of
Scripture; that the same deference and honor should be paid to humane
authority, very obnoxious to passion and error, which only infallible truth can
justly challenge; that the phansies of private men, as they were at first,
should, many ages after, by a pretended Church Power, be reckoned as
fundamentals: and lastly, that we should be obliged to profess our assent to
rash sanctions and definitions, which a corrupt part of the Church for secular
ends and advantages has decreed and established; this, this is that, which
scandalizeth Christendom, and obstructs its peace.

This was the just complaint of the former century, which made way for the
Reformation, and which a conviction of the truth and reasonableness of it
extorted from the mouths of several Romanists, who yet had not the courage to
relinquish the communion of that Church, though confessedly corrupt in matter
of doctrine, discipline, and worship. This was the trouble and heartbreaking
of several excellently learned and pious persons in those times, and does still
distract the minds of all good men, even of considering Romanists, not
infatuated with superstition and furious bigotry, who pray for the restoration
of Catholic unity among all Christians. But such a schism, so detestable, so
deplorable, and so big with dismal effects, consequences, and events, has been
brought into the Church by corrupt interest, by base and disingenuous artifice
and subtilty, and by the highest immodesty, and by downright force and
violence, and this, confirmed by the free, holy, ecumenical council of Trent,
as they call it, when God knows it was neither free, nor holy, nor ecumenical,
as that all hope of reconciliation among the different professions and
persuasions of Christians is taken away, unless the Authors of this schism
shall offer terms of an accommodation fit to be accepted, that is, by annulling
or suspending for ever the authority of the Tridentine council, which is a
thing not to be expected from them, or rather, unless the Princes of the Roman
Communion shall force the Pope to call another Council, and in case of refusal,
shall assemble several Bishops and Doctors of their respective countries to
debate the controversies, which are now on foot, and to determine them by
Scripture, primitive Antiquity, and Apostolical Tradition.

It will yield just matter of astonishment to the serious Reader to consider,
that the institution of the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, which Christ left
to his Church in remembrance of his passion and death, and for a pledge of his
love, and as a mark and token of the mutual love of Christians, and of their
faith in him crucified: whom that Sacrament does truly and efficaciously
represent and exhibit, should by the subtilty of the Devil, and the perverse
disputings of interested persons, be so far abused and perverted, that they
should hence take occasion of envying eternal salvation, purchased by his
precious blood, and of denying it too, as much as in them lies, to such, as are
partakers of those holy mysteries according to his original institution.

For what other reason can be alleged for that fury, which under the notion
and pretext of zeal, has taken up arms; as if the cause of God were concerned
in it, and has brought that great confusion upon the world, unless because they
have different notions and sentiments about this tremendous mystery, and
disagree somewhat in their explications of it? What great quantity of Christian
blood has been spilt by an enraged party upon the account of these unhappy
Sacramentary quarrels, which have ended in bloody wars and Massacres! What
great havoc and wast have they made, both by fire and sword, of thousands of
their Fellow Christians, beyond the fury and madness of the Heathen
persecutions, who were in all other points innocent, and were therefore burnt,
and had their throats cut, only for this one great crime, because they would
not admit, believe, and acknowledge, contrary to scripture, reason, sense, and
experience, the portentous and extravagant fiction of Transubstantiation! There
is no Christian, but believes Christ to be really and truly, that is,
spiritually, and to all the real effects and benefits of his Passion and death,
and by the efficacy of his grace and Spirit, present under the sacred Symbols,
which yet retain their true and natural substance, as well as qualities, and
that he receives the mystical body of Christ after the consecration, according
to the words of the institution, upon which the faith of all Christians is
founded, and what has been professed in all ages, and justly esteemed the badge
of Christian communion by all sober persons, whose judgments have not been
perverted by passion and unjust prejudice. If every one, without any curious
enquiry into this mystery, had contented himself with the plain and simple
belief of it, and with all due care had intended the worthy partaking of it; if
the Church of Rome had not first of all in the Lateran council, and after that
in the council of Trent, rashly determined the manner of the presence of Christ
in the sacrament: if the Lutherans and others had only determined for
themselves, without prescribing to, or condemning others; and if an explicit
belief of this monstrous opinion had not been made a necessary term and
condition of communion; how might we have adored before the same altars, (from
which we are now excluded as profane, unworthy and excommunicate persons; and
from which we have reason to abstain and fly, as the primitive Christians did
from the sacrifices of Idolaters) and have been present at the most solemn
services of religion with the same zeal, to the great advantage of Christian
charity and devotion. No Priest would then have been afraid to admit any devout
lay-person, approaching the holy sacrament with due preparation; and no
lay-person would then also have been afraid to receive it from the hand of such
a Priest, rightly ordained and constituted.

The like may be said of many other points of religion, which without any
prejudice to the doctrine of Faith, are disputed and controverted: but whilst,
all other interpretations and expositions being laid aside, men boldly decree
and determine this or that opinion to be de fide; whilst the niceties of the
Schoolmen, and the positions of contentious and Polemical Theology, which idle
men, relying too much upon their subtle wit, and false and sophistical way of
arguing, have introduced, are in such esteem and vogue with some, as to be
looked upon, as necessary appendages of the Christian religion; and whilst
articles of faith, which were altogether unknown to the first ages, are hugely
increased and multiplied, as is too too manifest from the present state and
condition of the Roman Church, and the obscure confessions of other Churches;
what other effect can we expect should proceed from this mighty industry and
zeal, but that Christendom being divided into so many parties and factions, all
just hope of union should be wholly removed and taken away, when the effecting
of it hereby seems to be rendered morally impossible?

3. The arrogant pretensions of the Popes unbounded power contributes not a
little to the heightning and augmenting the difference in Christendom. It does
not seem at this day to comport with the greatness of the Roman Church, to be
content to be included within the ancient limits of the Suburbicary regions.
For not satisfied with a Primacy of order, or with her ancient Patriarchate,
(to whose jurisdiction the Britannick Churches were not of right subject) or
with her other privileges, conferred upon her out of a respect to the Imperial
city; as if the spirit of the old Romans were infused into her, she proudly
affects an empire over the whole body of Christians throughout the world.

If the other Patriachs, who owe that honor and dignity to the same original,
the favor of Princes, and the decrees and constitutions of general Councils
(in the assignment of which, as it is most evident from the 28th Canon of the
Council of Chalcedon, they had only a regard to the privileges and dignities
of cities, to which the Ecclesiastical government was accommodated) defend
their rights and liberties against the attempts and encroachments of the Bishop
of Rome; if they will not submit to a foreign yoke; unless they with a base
and a most unbecoming flattery adore Rome, as their Mistress and Patroness, and
obey her decrees and orders; presently there is an end of them: they are
arraigned and accused as guilty of schism; nor shall they be thought worthy of
the honor and favor of her communion. When some time after the Empire was
divided into East and West, there seemed to be a kind of agreement at least,
and a fair and amicable correspondence kept up, the ambition and pride of the
Bishops of Rome, who would needs busy and interest themselves in the affairs of
the Greek Church, spoiled all. For to no other cause can the original of that
sad and fatal separation be ascribed, although it was afterward heightened, and the
wound festered more and more, when the article of the procession of the holy
Spirit from the Son was added to the Constantinopolitan Creed, without ever so
much as consulting the Oriental Bishops, who upon the knowledge of it soon
after vehemently opposed it; justly alleging, that it was utterly unlawful so
to do, it being expressly against the 7th canon of the council of Ephesus. But
things were more securely advanced and carried on in the Western Empire, by the
artifice and policy of the Popes of Rome: for the opposition, which was made
now and then by two or three honest and stout men, to their tyrannical and
arbitrary proceedings, signified little or nothing, and was run down with
noise, violence, and power.

When then they had no regard to the canons of ancient Councils, by which the
Catholic Church was formerly governed; when they had trodden under their feet
all divine and humane law and right; when they had arrogated to themselves the
disposition of all Church Affairs, and had usurpt a power over all Christians;
and nothing for the future was to be admitted and believed, but what was
agreeable to the Bulls and decrees of the Roman Court; can any one wonder, when
things were brought to this pass, that Christendom should at last awaken from
its deep lethargy, and grown sensible of the miserable slavery of its
condition, should complain of the exercise of this usurped, unjust, and
tyrannical power, and seriously think of recovering its true, ancient, original
(hristian liberty? In the mean time, what did they at Rome? did they enter upon
serious counsels and resolutions honestly and effectually to satisfy the
requests and demands of Kings, Princes, and Republics concerning a
Reformation, which were continually sent thither by their Ambassadors and
Agents? did they restore their ill-gotten goods, which they had seized upon
most unjustly, and as unjustly had detained by force and violence, I mean, the
common rights and privileges, belonging to the Bishops; and to all Christian
people? nothing less: they exclaim, they rage, they are furious and mad, and
let fly their thunderbolts of excommunication from the Vatican hill, and devote
men to hell and damnation, only for this unpardonable fault, because they were
at last quite tired with, and weary of the slavery, which they had labored
under for so many years. This is that, which troubles and grieves them now at
Rome, and which they are endeavoring with so much art and policy to effect and
bring about; and this is that, which unless God shall vouchsafe to avert the
omen, and open the eyes of all such, who are deluded by the witchcrafts and
sorcery of Rome, to forsake her communion, which is so dangerous to their
salvation, will make the schism irreconcilable and eternal. For, as things
stand at present, there can be no peace and accommodation with Rome, unless we
part with our liberties, and our laws, and our consciences, and our religion,
the true Christian religion, and every thing, which is dear to us: nor yet,
such is the restlesness of that party, and especially of the Jesuits, that if
the counsels of such fiery Bigots may prevail, we shall never be at quiet,
unless we submit our necks once more most stupidly to the Roman yoke, which our
Popish Ancestors, even both before and after they were enlightened with the
knowledge of the truths of God, threw off with great indignation, as not being
able to bear it.

Lastly, we are convinced by sad experience, that these differences about
religion, which have divided Christendom into so many sects, to the great
disturbance of its peace and quiet, owe no small part of their original to the
great decay of true solid piety through idleness and carelessness, and to the
departure from the most holy rules of living, which Christ our blessed Lord and
master has prescribed us, which is every where so visible. I need not here
labor in the proof of this by heaping up arguments, when the fact is so
evident; nor shall I tragically exclaim or inveigh against the unmanly
softness, the luxury, the profaneness, the wickedness of the age, and the evil
lives of Christians; this reflection deserving our sighs and tears rather than
satyr and invective.

I do not here mean so much those, whose wicked and corrupt principles and most
scandalous lives sufficiently show, that they have no sense of any religion,
but I chiefly intend such, as make a fair show of Christianity; how little of
true piety is found about them! but how much of superstition, and immoderate
zeal for the peculiar tenants of their sect, by which they would be
distinguished one from another! in compliance of the genius of the age, which
is concerned more for ingenuity, and learning, and the inventing new
hypotheses, and satisfying curious enquiries into nature, than for the
practices of moral honesty and Christian virtue, and how we may foyl and baffle
our adversaries by our wit, rather than adorn our holy profession with suitable
lives. But alas! by how much less pious we are, so by degrees we become more
and more censorious and uncharitable. We bestow all our zeal in lesser matters,
and lay the great stress of our duty upon it, being little solicitous about the
ornaments of a Christian life, as if by this fallacious and flattering kind of
artifice we would compound with God for the want of them. It is in vain to
complain of, and cry out upon the wickedness of the times, when we our selves
are to blame, that they are no better, and if we would our selves, we might
make them so. For if the true Christian piety, and strict discipline, and
integrity of manners, were but once restored; and if we thoroughly minded the
great duties of Christianity, which consist in unfeigned devotion and holiness,
in charity, and meekness, and patience, and forbids all bitterness, and wrath,
and evil speaking, and hatred, and malice, and abstracts from all niceties and
subtilities of disputation, and quarrels about Scholastic notions and
opinions, in which the essence of faith is no way interested; it will be no
vain, idle, or ill-grounded expectation, that we might live to see the
different parties of Christendom united, and Ecclesiastical peace and unity
restored. But whilst ill manners and a careless way of living prevail; whilst
charity and modesty are laid aside, and men grow over-wise and conceited in
their opinions, and despise all others of a contrary judgment; whilst to be of
a Party, and to maintain private phansies with fierceness and heat, is
accounted a good argument of their being godly; whilst being too much concerned
for the externals of religion, and controversial points, we overlook our duty,
and growing secure and careless, seem to have little or no regard to what
Christ and his Apostles command us to look after with all possible care and
diligence, and make our most serious study and business; who can be so void of
sense or good nature, as not to observe with grief and sorrow of mind, that by
this ill employed industry, and by these furious quarrels, Christianity
suffers, and that, new prejudices arising continually, the evil distemper grows
worse and worse, and will soon become desperate and incurable? No serious and
honest Reader can be so unjust, as to imagine, that I plead for a toleration of
vile sects and opinions, or that I think it a matter of mere indifference, to
what communion of Christians we betake and join our selves. We of the Church of
England are obliged to render unfeigned and hearty thanks to Almighty God, for
his great mercy and goodness toward us, that he has made us members of such an
eminently pure and Apostolical part and branch of the Catholic Church; that we
were born and baptized, and live in the communion of a Church, whose doctrine
is truly Christian and Catholic; government primitive and Apostolical; and
Liturgy conformable to the ancient standard, and agreeable to the uses of true
devotion, without the least mixture of superstition and foppery; and where the
Sacraments are administered according to Christ's holy institution: and where all
things necessary to make a true Orthodox Catholic Christian, and to render him
eternally happy in the other world, are to be found and met with.

It highly becomes us in point of duty to be very sensible of this great
blessing: and it ought to be the great comfort of our lives and deaths too: yet
I cannot but oppose to all unjust censure that expostulation of Saint Paul,
Romans 14. 4. Who art thou that judge another man's servant? to his own master
he stands or falls: yea he shall be holden up: for God is able to make him
stand: and will further add, that I doubt not in the least, but that at the
dreadful day of judgment a virtuous, honest, and sober life will be more
esteemed by Christ himself, than niceness of knowledge and opinion, be it never
so true; that no one who has adorned his Christian profession with an agreeable
conversation; notwithstanding his errors and misperswasions, if they be not
aggravated and made pernicious by obstinacy of mind, and a wilful resisting and
refusing the truth, will be rejected, and that those who now out of a furious
zeal, (if yet there be any who do this, besides some of the fiery men of the
Church of Rome, who arrogantly call themselves Religious, and their credulous
and infatuated Proselytes) deny or scarce own salvation possible to others, who
are not of their communion: which is a most unwarrantable, impudent,
scandalously false, and unchristian opinion, the wickedness of which cannot be
sufficiently aggravated: of what party of men soever, and are thus uncharitable
one to another, if an holy and virtuous life be superstructed upon the
foundation of faith, in which they all agree, by the grace and mercy of God,
and the all-sufficient merits and satisfaction of Christ, will be happy
hereafter for ever in heaven.

Hitherto of the causes of those quarrels about Religion which distract the
quiet and peace of Christendom. Let us now briefly consider the remedies. In
general, it is most evident, that all endeavors about composing these
differences, are in vain and to no purpose, and that we cannot entertain the
least ground of hope, to attain to the unity of the primitive Church, unless
all parties relax their censures, which have hitherto excluded love and
charity, and make use of the same means in restoring it, as the Christians of
the first times did in retaining it. If with composed and settled minds and
affections we would agree in this excellent method, we have no reason to
despair, but that the pacifick counsels and pious endeavors of honest men, who
labor after the blessed work of union and reconciliation among Christians,
might be very successful. Now the means of obtaining this Ecclestastical peace,
consist in the removal of the causes abovementioned, which have obstructed it,
and are these.

Whereof the first is, that the ancient, simple, Christian faith, as it is
contained in the Scriptures, summed up in the Creeds of general Councils, and
received in all the Churches of Christ, be only urged as necessary to be
believed in order to salvation. For seeing that this common faith was made use
of by the Catholic Church, as a tie and bond of holy communion; seeing the
Catechumens, after praevious instruction, upon their profession of this faith,
no other condition being exacted, were admitted to baptism, and had a right to
partake of the holy mysteries of the Eucharist; seeing that in the profession
of the same faith, all true Christians do fully agree; (for the Socinians, who
go about to overthrow the whole frame of the Christian doctrine, by arrogant
presumptions of false reasonings, and by sophistical arguments, and by their
blasphemies against Christ, the eternal Son of God, and turn the grace of God
into the lasciviousness of humane wit, and deny the divinity of our Savior,
are not to be honored with this name:) why should not the foundation and
groundwork of Ecclesiastical peace and unity, after the example and practice
of the primitive Church, be laid in the same faith? with what pretense of
reason ought any opinion, after the first preaching and establishment of the
faith all the world over, after the conveyance of it down to so many ages, be
superadded as a necessary point of faith, which was unknown to all Antiquity?
by what right can such a number of articles be obtruded upon the understandings
and consciences of Christians, and especially such, as have been invented and
propagated for base and secular interests and advantages, and to maintain
worldly grandeur and reputation? That Christians do so little agree in some of
their sentiments about Religion, as if there were not the same rule of faith,
equally and under the same obligation proposed to all; this must not be imputed
either to our B. Savior, or his Apostles, or to the nature of his Religion,
which proposes in easy terms and Propositions, to the most ordinary and less
intelligent Christians, enough to conduce to their obtaining eternal salvation,
but to certain fiery Zealots, who venting their beloved tenants and notions for
oracles, impose them upon others under direful curses and Anathema's. What
fuller proof and argument can there be of this surious zeal, than what the
Romanists are guilty of, in inveighing against us, as they do most falsely and
unjustly, for not receiving several tenants, which are but of a few ages
standing, and which are destitute of all authority, whether of Scripture or
Antiquity? But this is our comfort, (if yet it be any comfort to persons in
distress, to have any to share with them in it) we shall not be condemned
alone: but at the same time they condemn us, they must draw into the guilt of
the same heresy, as they are pleased most civilly to word it, all such, as have
a true and just veneration of incorrupt Antiquity: and for this reason among
others, reject the Creed of Pope Pius the fourth. But if we are to think well
of the condition of those, who in the first ages preserved the integrity and
purity of the Christian faith with Creeds, and other holy writings, as so many
sacred amulets and preservatives against the infection and poison of heresy
truly so called; who were ambitious of dying, and lost their lives for the
profession of that faith, and embraced the flames rather than dissemble or
disown it; if the primitive Saints and Martyrs be happy and blessed; we need
not fear the noise of their thunder, which can do no execution upon us, and
which are mere bug-bears to affright persons of weak and childish phansies: we
tread in the steps of those holy Saints and Martyrs; we are safe, we are
secure; provided we copy out their lives, and imitate those glorious examples
they have set up of consummate piety as well as profess the same faith.
Wherever the Christians were dispersed, whether in the Patriarchate of Rome, or
Alexandria, or any other; by virtue of this Profession of faith, they were
received into communion and admitted to the common rights of Religion, not
denying or envying to each other salvation in the world to come, but by joint
exercises of devotion mutually promoting and advancing it: nay their, charity
was so great, that notwithstanding the most unchristian censures and unjust
Schism of the Donatists, they looked upon them as Brethren still, though
horribly perverted by a false and ignorant zeal to make a separation from them;
nay they did not pass a damnatory sentence upon V. Salvian. de gubernat. Dei
lib. 5. p. 100. ex editione Baluzii.
the Arians, nor altogether despair of their s^^^ation, but left them to stand
or fall to their own Master.

2. Upon and after a ready acknowledgment of the articles of faith, without
which no one can pretend to be a Christian, let a liberty of judging in other
less material points of doctrine be allowed and indulged: for variety of
opinions does no more dissolve the unity of faith, than variety of rites and
ceremonies. How had that wide wound, which schism has made in the body of the
Church, been long since closed and perfectly healed, if this sovereign medicine
had been applied, and if they had not proceeded so dogmatically and boldly, by
confessions of faith, and by new and unheard of canons to determine points
uncertain and doubtful! by which way of procedure the minds of Christians are
oppressed, and the doctrine of faith rendered perplexed and obscure by
scholastic subtilties and niceties. It were to be wished indeed, that all
Christians, and especially those, who, for most just and weighty and
indispensable reasons and motives, have relinquished the Roman communion, could
agree in a general systeme of Theological opinions: but because this is not to
be hoped for, considering the different apprehensions, tempers, inclinations,
interests, judgments, way of education, method of study and arguing, and
interpreting scripture, and consequently there not being the same light of
knowledge, the same force and sharpness of wit and understanding, the same
industry and impartiality; why should we not for peace and quiet sake bear with
others, who, though they may differ from us in some particulars, agree with us
in fundamentals, as they are contained in easy texts of Scripture, and in the
ancient Creeds, with all Christian charity, and compassion, and moderation? Let
that evil custom of reviling, which is almost become habitual and natural, and
that odious calling of names and branding private notions with ill characters,
if they may admit of a more favorable interpretation, without prejudice to the
essential truths of the Gospel, for ever cease, and be totally laid aside. For
by this mutual indulgence and condescension, which all Lovers of peace cannot
but acknowledge to be most fit and equitable, there is no one whatever, be his
capacity never so mean and dull, but he will foresee and presage, that a mighty
benefit would redound to Christendom, and a happy stop would be put to the
disorders and confusions of it.

3. Let the ancient canons about Church Government be restored to their full
vigor, and every National Church enjoy its just rights, and the Bishop of Rome
be reduced to his original jurisdiction, and all pretensions to an Ecumenical
power for ever be abolished and annulled. For the Romanists, in the height of
all their pride and usurpations, which have violated the peace of the Church,
of which they cannot but be convinced in their consciences, may remember, that
communion with their Church was never held necessary, but only, as it was a
part, and branch, and member of the Catholic Church. Besides, who can be
ignorant of the great disputes maintained with the Sea of Rome in ancient and
latter times, by the Christians of other communions, in defense of their
rights? The Churches, both in the East and South, divided into several
Patriarchates and Bishoprics, vindicated their privileges, which they enjoyed
according to the decrees of the Council of Nice, in their several limits and
districts. The title of Universal Bishop was not then known or pretended to: no
one had either the vanity or the ambition to usurp such an unlimited power.

This honor was reserved for Pope Boniface the third, and his Successors, as
if all the world hence forward were to be included within the walls or Pomoeria
of the city of Rome. The world was astonished at this procedure, and could not
with any patience admit and suffer so great an imposition. Christian Carthage
despised the insults of the Bishop of Rome, as much as their Heathen Ancestors
did the Senate: and although Constantinople, unwillingly enough, allowed the
honor of the first, and chief See to Rome, yet it ever maintained its own
liberty: and though now horribly oppressed and sadly groaning under Turkish
tyranny, is not so forgetful of its ancient honor, as basely to submit to the
claims of Rome. They would very willingly retain communion with her, and with
all the branches of the Catholic Church, if the hindrances of that communion
were once removed, and that pretended universal authority laid aside: in which
holy desire we join with them. Let the Bishop of Rome be the first of that
order; provided, that he be not looked upon, as the sole universal Bishop; and
that all others be deemed to be, as indeed they are, by the constitution of
Christ and his Apostles, independent, and not his Vicars and Deputies: and
provided also, that their rights, which rely upon the same Ecclesiastical laws,
be reserved to them in their full and just extent; and that the decrees of the
Roman Court be not imposed upon the world with a non obstante to Apostolical
constitutions; and that its jurisdiction be contained within the limits of the
ancient Canons. If this bar were removed, a way would quickly be opened to let
peace into the most divided parts of Christendom. This all good Christians, all
but such worldly-minded men, whose interest it is to keep up these differences,
earnestly wish, sigh, and pray for, and would readily unite upon these honest
and just conditions, if truths necessary to salvation were only proposed to be
believed, according to the ancient forms; if all fiery censures and
excommunications were utterly condemned and abolished; and if superstition were
removed from the service of God, and the public offices of Religion.

Unless this be done, we must, as in the presence of God, and his holy Angels,
and all mankind, lay the schism at the Romanists door, and wholly impute it to
them, that the Catholic Church does not enjoy the great blessing of
Ecclesiastical peace. In the mean while, we of the Church of England, are very
ready to admit of any conditions of obtaining this most blessed and glorious
end, provided that by them the peace of our consciences be not violated and
disturbed; that they do not contradict and thwart the principles and analogy of
faith; that the Scripture, and its best and most genuine interpreter,
Antiquity, be admitted to have the highest and only lawful authority in
determining controversies of faith; that no prejudice be done to Ecclesiastical
Government; and lastly, that all things be tried by the rules and canons and
customs, which were in use in the first ages of Christianity, by which the
Catholic Church was then governed. O happy, O blessed, O glorious day, in
which all these confusions, which no good man can think of without great
disorder of mind, shall be removed, and all, who worship the same crucified
Savior, shall unite in brotherly love, charity, and communion! But the wicked
lives of Christians, and base secular interest will not permit us to expect so
great a blessing. We must first endeavor to restore the piety, the strictness,
the humility, the disinterestedness of the ancient Christians, before we can
pretend to the same hearty unity.

But alas! we degenerate from their examples: religion is no longer looked upon
as a rule and institution of life and manners, but is turned into an art of
disputing, and our vices alienate our minds from all thoughts and designs of
union: pride, and malice, and naughty affections, and love of worldly splendour
and greatness shut out all hope of peace. It must be the work of Almighty God,
and the wonderful effect of his Providence and grace, to dispose the hearts of
the Christian Princes, and great Ecclesiastics of the Roman Communion, to set
upon this great design of reforming in order to a perfect union and agreement:
and I doubt not, but thousands of that communion, especially in the Gallican
Church, where they have set bounds to the exorbitant power of the Pope by their
late decrees, in compliance with the ancient canons, and in vindication of
their own privileges, and where they begin to be ashamed of several gross
errors, which have hitherto passed for good, wholesome, Catholic doctrine, as
appears by their new Expositions, and Interpretations, and Catechisms, long to
see this happily effected: for which purpose it becomes us all, to put up
incessant prayers to God, that all, who call, and own, and profess themselves
Christians, may remember from whence they are fallen and repent, and ever after
exercise themselves in the practices of all Christian virtues, and in the
acknowledging of the truth, which is after godliness, that laying aside all
vain jangling about lesser matters, they may follow after things, which make
for peace and mutual edification, and that being guided and governed by the
good spirit of God, they may be led into the way of truth, and hold the faith,
the truly Christian, the truly Apostolical, the truly Catholic faith, in unity
of spirit, in the bond of peace, and in righteousness of life. May the God of
all mercy and comfort at last restore unity to his Church, now laboring under
grievous distractions, for the merits and intercession of our blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 16. line 30. for contributes read contribute l. 31. for difference r.
differences.

Books Printed for Sam. Smith at the Prince's-Arms in St. Paul's Church yard.
COncio ad Clerum habita coram Academia Cantabrigiensi Junii 11. An. 1687. Pro
Gradu Baccalaur. in S. Theologia. Ubi Vindicatur Vera and Valida Cleri
Anglicani, ineunte Reformatione, Ordinatio. Cui accessit Concio habita Julii 3.
1687. De Canonica Cleri Anglicani Ordinatione, Latin reddita and aucta. A T.
Brown, S. T. B. Coll. D. Joh. Evang. Soc. Annexum est Instrumentum
Consecrationis Matthew. Parker Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis ex MS. C. C. C. Cant.

The State of the Church of Rome when the Reformation began, as it appears by
the Advices givento Paul III. and Julius III. by Creatures of their Own. With a
Preface leading to the Matter of the Book.

Remarks upon the Reflections of the Author of Popery Misrepresented, etc. on
his Answerer, particularly as to the Deposing Doctrine? In a Letter to the
Author of the Reflections. Together with some few Animadversions on the same
Author's Vindication of his Reflections.

Jacobi Usserii Archiepiscopi Armachani, Opuscula Duo, Nunc primum Latin
Edita: Quorum alterum est de Episcoporum, Et Metropolitanorum Origin: Alterum
De Asia Proconsulari. Accessit Veteris Ecclesiae Gubernatio Patriarchalis, Ab
E. B. Descripta. Interpret R. R. E. B. P. Praeterea accedit Appendix, De
Antiqua Ecclesiae Britannicae Liberate, and Privilegiis,

Miracles Work's above and contrary to Nature; Or, an Answer to a late
Translation out of Spinoza' s Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, Mr. Hobb' s
Leviathan, etc. Published to undermine the Truth and Authority of Miracles,
Scripture, and Religion, in a Treatise Entitled Miracles no Violation of the
Laws of Nature.

The Difference between the Present and Future State of our Bodies considered
in a Sermon, by Jeremy Collier, M. A.

The Life of St. Mary Magdalene of Pazzi, a Carmelite Nunn. Newly translated
out of Italian by the Reverend Father Lezin de Saint Scholastique, Provincial
of the Reformed Carmelites of Touraine. At Paris, For Sebast. Cramoisy in St.
James' s Street, at the Sign of Fame. 1670. And now done out of French: With a
preface concerning the nature, causes, concomitants, and consequences of
Ecstasy and Rapture, and a brief discourse added about discerning and trying
the Spirits, whether they be of God.

The Vanity of all Pretenses for Tolleration, wherein the late Pleas for
Tolleration are fully Answered; and the popular Arguments drawn from the
Practice of the United Netherlands are stated at large, and shown to be weak,
fallacious and insufficient.

The Duty of Servants, containing First, Their Preparation for, and choice of a
Service. Secondly, Their Duty in Service, Together with Prayers suited to each
Duty. To this is added a Discourse of the Sacrament suited peculiarly to
Servants. By the Author of Practical Christianity.

The History of the Original and Progress of Ecclesiastical Revenues: Wherein
is handled according to the Laws, both Ancient and Modern, whatsoever concerns
matters Beneficial, the Regale, Investitures, Nominations, and other Rights
attributed to Princes. Written in French by a Learned Priest, and now done into
English.


