REASONS Humbly Offered for the PASING a BILL FOR THE Hindering the Home
Consumption OF EAST INDIA Silks, Bengals etc. And an Answer to the Author of
several Objections against the said Bill, in a Book, Entitled, An Essay on the
East India Trade.

By T. S. a Weaver in London, who would have the Nobility and Gentry of England
have a True Light into that Affair.

WITH A Postscript, containing the French King's Decree concerning India
Manufactures.

London, Printed by J. Bradford in New-street without Bishopsgate, 1697.

REASONS Humbly Offered, etc.
I. THese Goods are directly opposite to the Employment of Two Hundred and
Fifty Thousand Manufactorers, and to the Consumption of Sixteen or Eighteen
Thousand Packs of Long Fine Wool in one Year, of the growth of the largest
Sheep that feed in Pasture-Ground; which Wool is not used in making of Cloth:
These number of People are Weavers, Throwsters, Winsters, Yarn-Men,
Wool-Combers, Hot-Pressers, Callenders, Fullers, Spinsters; whose Dwellings are
in the Cities of London, Norwich, Canterbury; in the Counties of Suffolk
Norfolk, Cambridgshire, Hartfordshire, Essex, Norhamptonshire, some parts of
Yorkshire; In many places besides in the several Counties of England: The Wool
grows most in Lincolnshire, Leicestershire, Norhamptonshire, Bedfordshire,
Rumney Marsh, and of Pasture-Sheep in all Counties, which, by reason of the
length of its Staple, is not used, or can well be used to make Cloth; but is
generally sold to Norfolk, St. Edmondsbury in Suffolk, to be made in those and
other Counties into Yarn, and in Yarn carried to Norwich and London to be
wrought up into Stuffs made of all Wool, or mixed with Silk, one Pound of Silk
to eight Pound of Wool.

II. Employment of these People, is the only way left to give a value to the
Land in those parts, where they inhabit; for poor working People spend all or
most of what they get by working upon the produce of Land; and you will always
find according to the number of People, and according to what they get, so is
the Price of Land; and it is evident all over the World, where the Price of
Wages is low, the value of Land is little; and where many People live, Land is
most valuable, which is the true Reason that Land near London, and other Towns,
where Manufactories are settled, is three four, six times as valuable, as Land
of as good a natural soil, where there is few Inhabitants or Navigable Rivers.

III. These poor People, when employed, highly conduce to the Happiness and
Safety of England. If any Person will please to take a view of England, before
it was a Manufactory, they will find that this Island was often insulted over,
Ravaged and Plundered; yea, Conquered by Scots, Danes, Normans, Saxons, etc. But
since England has been a Place of Manufactury, no Neighbor has dared to
Insult our Coast, or Invade us without our own consent; for these poor People
are not only themselves ready to oppose, but by their Employment, give
Encouragement to Navigation, and to breeding of Sea man to navigate our
Coasting-Vessels to supply their necessities with Coals, Corn, Malt, Cheese,
Butter, etc. by which means the King always has Seamen ready to furnish his
Men of War, that are the Bulworks of the Nation, and our Merchants are supplied
with Seamen for longer Voyages.

IV. I would show the Opposition between this Trade to India, and the English
Manufactories, and that so it is Detrimental to the Nation; The Opposition lies
in its Home Consumption and Foreign Exportation: The Silks, Bingalls, etc. from
India, are used for the same Uses our Manufactures are, and so discourage
Tradesmen from driving larger Trade, it being uncertain when these Ships will
come in, and uncertain what sort of Commodities they bring: Every Tradesman
lies liable to be undone, if he venture to enlarge his Trade, as is plain by
many hundred Instances in twenty Years space: And as to the Foreign
Exportation, these Foreign Manufactures have Spoiled our Foreign Trade for Fine
Stuffs made in Norwich and London, for Women's wear into many places for Crape,
etc. And for our American Plantations, all Persons dealing there, know they
will imitate the Gentry of England, and those Merchant's Commissions run for
Fashionable Commodities: Now if our Nobility and Gentry wear India
Manufactures, our West India Plantations will wear the same; and it is
generally true, so far as the Honor of any Nation extends, so far what they
wear, will be in Fashion. This was the Policy of France, who designing to make
themselves Great, discouraged the Wear and Consumption of Foreign Commodities,
and Encouraged the wearing their own, both at Home and also in England, by
Presents to the English Court, well knowing what the Court did wear, the Cities
and Gountries will not be long without: And by the way, it is my opinion, the
French King and the Manufacturers of Lions, will spend a Hundred Thousand
Pounds to keep the Trade of England for Exporting their Allamodes and
Lutestrings.

But this is not all, the damage this India Trade does, in respect to the
Exportation of our English Manufactures; for it greatly hinders our Turkey and
Italian Merchants, who Export vast quantities of Woollen-Cloth, Serges,
Purpetuanys, Stuffs, etc. and the greatest of their Returns are in Raw and
Thrown Silk, and Grogrom Yarn, which they bring home to London, expecting a
Market among Throwsters and Weavers; But these Tradesmen being undone by India
Manufactures, are not able to buy these Commodities, and so these Advantageous
Merchant, by having their Stocks lie dead upon their hands, can buy no more
Cloth, etc. And the Cloathier, and Serge-maker, and thousands of Families that
do depend upon them, much Impoverished, and many of them reduced to live upon
Charity, to the great damage of the Landlords and Farmers, who, by Law, are
obliged to Relieve them from their Lands.

V. This Trade to India, carries away from England great quantities of Bulloin
and Treasure, which is not only the Sinews of War, but the Medium of Trade and
Commerce: For Money in the Body politic, is as Blood in the Body natural,
giving Life to every part; as for Instance, in an other way of Trade, our
Exporting-Merchant carries away our Manufactures, and for his Returns,
(supposing it be to Spain) he brings Spanish Wool, and Pieces of Eight: these
Pieces of Eight or other Bullion, made into English Coin, go from the Merchant
to the Tradesman, from him to the Weaver, Sherman, Spinsters, etc. From them
all to the Farmer; from the Farmer to the Landlord, and some part sticks every
where, which go to the Shopkeeper, and from him to the Merchant again, and the
whole Nation is hereby easy; but if it go to the East Indies, it never returns
again: But this is not all, the Bulloin in England will not serve this Trade,
though it encourage the Clipping our Coin half away, we must go abroad to
Holland, to Hamborough, to Portugal, Cadis, and where not, to take up Silver,
and thereby run the Nation in Debt, and turn the Balance of the Exchange
against England, and our better Merchants, and then they murmur against the
Government.

I might give many other Reasons for the Bill's passing into a Law, but I
designing Brevity, will pass to give an Answer to some Objections in a Book
lately published: In answering which, I shall enter into the Heart of this
Controversy. This Book is filled up with Flourish, and Rhetoric, and
Conclusions, from false Hypothesis, that it is not easy at once Reading to
grasp it; but my Time allowing no more, I shall do it as I can, not meddling
with any thing but what relates to this Bill now depending: His Objections are
many.

1. Objection. This Trade carries away our Woollen-Manufactures, especially of
late to a great value.

Answer: I confess the English Merchants have had a Trade many Years to Persia
and Armenia for our Commodities formerly: The Turkey Merchant carried Cloth to
Scanderoon, and so to Aleppo, and the Carravans brought great quantities of Raw
Silk, and sold to our Mechants, and for it took our English Cloth: Of late,
Considerable quantities of Cloth, and some other Manufactures, though I believe
not one half what the Company is obliged to carry go by long Sea to India, and
not finding a vent in that hot Climate, it is carried to Persia and Armenia;
But what is this to our Bill, we are not contending which Merchants shall have
this Persia Trade, but the Question is, Whether this be a fit Cover for the
great quantities of Wrought Manufactures from the Bay of Bengall, and other
Places of India, that take off little or none of our Woollen-Cloth, but is
bought with the Money England should have to maintain the War, pay our Soldiers
and Seamen, and keep our Poor at Work.

But it may not be insignificant, to show what a Bargain we have made in
changing Hands for this Persia Trade, the Cloathier has got well instead of
Money for his Cloth, of Good Responsable Merchants, he credits a public Seal,
or he has a piece of Paper, called an East India Bond, which after he has kept
it till he is weary, he may take East India Silks for it at the Iuch of Candle
to cloth his poor Spinners with, or else sell his Bond for as much, or more
loss than he got by his Commodity, and the Nation made a very Indifferent
Change; for whereas the Turkey Merchant did use to bring his Silk home Raw, to
employ multitudes of Throwsters, Weavers, and Sea-mens Wives, and all sorts of
Poor, that spent their Money they got upon the product of Land. These
East India Merchants to enrich the Nobility and Gentry of England, carry their
Raw Persia Silk to the Bay of Bengall, etc. and work it up, that the Money it
cost in Workmanship may enrich the Great Mogull, and employ his Poor.

2. Obj. Against this Bill, The East India Trade is a Beneficial Trade to
England, page 12.

Answ. Let us see the Profit: Is it the Company that get, or he that buys of
the Company, or the Retailer, or the Weaver: As to the Company, I have heard
for what I say, is by Hearsay, being none of them; And therefore take it for
Hearsay, I have been informed they formerly divided Profit and Principle, and
Traded upon the Credit of a public Seal, and sold grent quantities of Goods
by private Contract, and I have heard great Quantities of Guinnies have flowed
about the Exchange and Coffe-Houses, and little more than are has come to be
esteemed worth three or four Millions, and many Honest Gentlemen drawn in to
the Ruin of a Good Estate and Family; but I do not say the Company that
Honorable Company did this; the Company say it was the Stock-Jobbers, But if
so, I would willingly know, whether this Company might not have put out an
Advertisement in some public Print, to hinder such an abominable Cheat: But
they have now a new Subscription of, I have heard 700000, and yet a Man may go
upon the Change and buy, as I have heard, the Stock of this Company, for Five
or Six Hundred Thousand Pound, and no Dividend made this Seven Years. Would not
any Man wonder where the Profit of this Trade is; but still it is a profitable
Trade, but you must know it is a Mystery, and it is not convenient the Nobility
and Gentry of England should know the profit of this Trade: and indeed I dare
not say all I believe, to be true, but so far as I could ever perceive any
profit it is.

First, In buying by private Contract, or at the Inch of Candle, great
quantities of Goods by Persons that understand how things are managed in the
Indies, and Selling their Goods for 10, 20, 30, 40 per Cent profit to the
Wholesale-man, this Wholesale man sells them for 10, 20, 30 per Cent to the
Retailer or Country-Chapman, the Retailer sells them at 10, 20, 30 per Cent
profit to the Gentry, and by this time the Gentry pays as dear always, and
often much dearer than for our own Manufactures which are much better. But pray
all this time, what does the Nobleman, the Gentleman, or Tradesman or poor
Farmer, or Manufacturer get.

These Monopolizers, and Retailers vye with the Nobleman, hector the Gentleman,
trample upon the Manufacturer, and oppose every thing that is for the Nation's
Good, if it cross their private Interest: But still this is a profitable Trade
to England in its Exportation: but what is the Bill concerned in the
Exportation, does that hinder Exportation? I own this may be made a profitable
Trade by due Regulation, and therefore I am for this Bill; for England being
the best Mart in Europe for these Commodities, no Wise Merchant will carry
Goods from the better Market to a worse, if he can help it; but the Design of
this Bill, is to oblige the India Merchant to set up Factories to sell Goods in
Holland, Hamborough, Germany, Portugal, Spain, as well as Manufacturies in
India, to make them, and by this means they will truly bring in Bulloin into
England, as well as carry it to India, and till this is done, we cannot find
such Exportations, though for Four or Five Years past I have searched the Bills
of Entry with all the Eyes I have; I have indeed found some Exports, and till
this last Sale, near as many Imports, under pretense of former Exportation.

But still this would have been a Profitable Trade, if the Company had not met
with men great Losses by the French, and some Ships cast away at Sea: As to
what was cast away at Sea, it is all Merchants Chance, and as to what the
French took, let us consider their first Cost, and no Man strictly Loses what
he never had, and we shall find the prime Cost is 40 Thousand Pound a Ship, 8
Ships 320 Thousand Pound; but what has been lost, if the more than usual
Profit of these Last Ships be considered, the Charles the Second, and the Hawk,
I believe, had I Time, I could bring the first Cost of the Lost Ships, and the
Extravagant Profit of what came in, to near a Balance; and thus you see this
Profitable Trade.

Object. 3. This Bill designs the utter Loss of the India Trade.

Answer. Pray Sir give me a good Reason for it; he gives, several Merchants are
sullen, the Dutch and Scots will have it, and we shall Lose all, as we have
done Bantum, and the Spice Islands; for these Dutchmen and Scotch-men are
dreadful Fellows: As to the sullenness of Merchants, I would to God all the
Merchants in England that carry out our Silver to promote and set up Foreign
Manufacturies, were so sullen as to do so no more, but would Employ their
Stocks in setting up new Species of Manufactures in England, in Towns and
Places where the Poor have no Employment, and I will give them my Assistance to
the utmost of my Ability; and for their Encouragement, there is no Two Cities
in Europe, if joined together, have such a number of Men that understand so
many deffering Species of Commodities, as London have, though now they are
despised and reduced to the utmost Penury, and are willing to work for bare
Bread, and cannot get it, who would be glad to be their Servants? As to the
Dutch getting the Spice Trade and Bantum, Sir, I will tell you what I have
heard and believe to be true, the East India Company set themselves so entirely
to prosecure Manufacturer, and finding the Gentry of England so easy to be
deceived and gulled by them, they slighted all other Trade in the Indies, and
six'd wholly to that which was like to turn to private Interest, with little
respect to public Good, the Dutch took this Opportunity to fall in with those
Trades that tended most to a General Advantage, and slighted Manufactures till
the English Imported upon them, and then were forced to do something this way
in their own Defense, and against their Inclination, and are not yet very fond
of them, as any Man may find, by comparing their Cargoes with ours. If I
remember well, the Martha and Sarah, two of the last Ships that came to
England, had much greater quantities of these Goods than the whole Fleet of 12
Ships that came to Holland, and I despair of ever seeing our English Merchants
endeavor much Trade, that is, for Real Good to England, so long as such vast
quantities of Manufactures are allowed. And as to the Scots Company, I suppose
its Original is well known; I will tell you my Thoughts of it; it was Contrived
in London by Stock-jobbers, and others that designed only to make a noise; or
if in earnest, it was only to bring these Goods to Scotland Custom-free, to
Cheat the King by Running them into England by their Pedlers, and thereby
under-sell our Company, and more effectually Ruin our Manufacturies; and Sir, I
assure you I had this Company in my Eye in promoting this Bill, as well-knowing
it would effectually Cross the Designing-Men in that Company; and whenever it
is past into a Law, there is an end of the Scotch Company.

Object. 4. Against this Bill, No Country Manufactures made so Dear as the
English; and, if we would have a Trade, we must make our Manufactures Cheaper.

Answer. I thought I should understand the Price of Workmanship as well as this
Gentleman, and I will venture to Assert the quite contrary: Do but consider the
Price of Provision in England, and the Goodness of our Work, and we shall see
by examining, as to our Cloth, who work Cheaper? Pray tell me, Do not our
Cloth-weavers work for Five Shillings per Week in the Country, our
Cloth-dressers tied up to a Penny per Hour, our Serge and Perpetuary-weavers
for the same, and often less; our Stuff, Crape, and Fustian, and
Flannel-weavers, for as little, and lower, according to the Price of Provisions
in the Places where they live: Nay Sir, take our Silk-weavers, and do they get
more than Ten or Twelve Shillings per Week, and pay two Boys out of it, unless
they make Rich Works, which take a Month or Six Weeks time before they get a
Penny? And is it not reasonable the Price of this sort of Work, should answer
the Time they lose? And how poorly must Families be Maintained with such Wages?
But these must be Slaves to the Humors of Proud Retailers, and Importing
Merchants, though a Wise Management would make them great Blessings to England.
Sir, what do you think of our English Spinsters and Winsters that work for
Three or Four-pence per Day?

Object. 5. We want more an Act to set up Public Workhouses.

Answer. pray, Sir, first find Employments for them that are willing to work,
if they had it.

Object. 6. This Bill tends to make Wool Dear.

Answer. Pray Sir, it is a great mistake that we should have Wool dear: And
what do you mean by Wool being too dear? The Merchant never thinks Spanish
Wool too dear, or Cotton-wooll too dear: Give me leave to tell you, we have
great quantities of fine long Wool in England, that a Pound of it will run
20, 30, 40 Thousand Yards in length, and make light, fine, thin, strong Stuffs,
much better than India Cotton, and Bengall Silks; nay, outdo by far, for fine
thin Goods, any Spanish Wool, fit to answer all uses for Women and Children,
and no Nation in the World, that ever I heard of, had such a quantity; and it
is a shame to England the Price is so low, as had I Time I could evidence
fully. Sir, you call the Price of Wool unnatural, I fear you imagine you are
at the Bay of Bengall; it is very natural to me to give a just Value to the
Product of my Native Country.

Object. 7. The Public reap no Advantage by Home Consumption.

Answer. Consuming is not a common way of getting, but we have a Proverb, A
Penny saved is as good as a Penny earned; and if we spend our own Produce, we
shall save all our Pence that go to India, and by wearing our own that is
overplus, we should bring our Commodities into general Repute, and by that
means Export more, and we should save by that: And what do we save by paying as
dear for India Goods, as for our own, as I am ready to Evidence we do.

Object. 8. Silk is a Manufactory of Foreign Growth, and if the Luxury of
wearing Silks were Abolished, it would be Beneficial to this Kingdom.

Answer. Pray Sir, how do this and your other Arguments hang together? What
would become of your profitable Trade of Bengall? Sir, give me leave to try to
make the Silk Trade a profitable Trade; and since our Nobility and Gentry like
Silk, let them wear it: Sir, our Turkey and Italian Merchants carry our Cloth
and Serges to Turkey and Italy, and this Cloth being fully Manufactured, Employs
many Thousands of People, and takes off great quantities of Wool. The People
spend their Money upon the Lands, and so work for more; these Merchants bring
Home Silk unmanufactured, and Employ many Thousands of People more, and these
also spend the Money they get upon Land; the Gentlemen wear the Silk, and
thereby consume more Wool, and Employ twice as many People as they would do,
if they wore Woollen Garments.

Now Sir, Is there any false Latin in this way of Trade? And as angry as you
are with the Silk weaver, what would the Turkey and Italian Merchants do with
their Silk, but for them? Would you have them carry it to the Bay of Bengall?

Object. 9. Two sorts of Silks come from India, and only hinder the French,
Dutch, and Italian Silks.

Answer. Sir, I can tell you Twenty sorts of English Stuffs made of Wool, and
Silk and Wool, that they are directly opposite, to which neither French,
Dutch, or Italians ever did, or can pretend to Import upon us, though we have
done sometimes upon them: And as to the Dutch and French, except Alamodes and
Lutestrings, I know of none have come to England for many Years from Italy; we
have some, but nothing comparable to the Woollen Manufactury we carry thither,
though you are pleased to tell us, more Silks are Imported from Holland than
from India. Sir, I know of none but Velvets, besides what come by the way of
Holland from Italy.

Object. 10. We want Hands to carry on our Manufacturies.

Answer. We want Employment for the Hands we have; if we had more Employments,
we might easily have Hands enough.

Object. 11. The East India Trade does not interfere with such Manufactaries as
is the Interest of England to promote.

Answer. Does not this Trade interfere with the Norwich, and London, and
Canterbury Trade; and with the Shallone-makers in Essex, Suffolk, Hampshire,
and the Makers of Rutteens and the new Manufactury at Kettering in
Northamptonshire, and at Peterburrough? Sir, I could compute these to be great
numbers, and to work up 25 Thousand Packs of English Wool, and when Employed,
to get two Millions of Money in a Year: And though this Money is laid out upon
the produce of Land, yet the Farmer and Landlord find the Benefit; and is it
not the Interest of this Nation, to encourage these Manufactories? What,
nothing go down but Cloth? I confess, I love that Manufactory, but what shall
we do with Lincolnshire Wool, etc. You are against burying of it.

Object. 12. No Laws to render this Prohibition Effectual, but summary Laws.

Answer, If it do no good to us, it will do you no hurt; and since you see so
far beyond others, you need not oppose the Bill.

Object. 13. A Prohibition is not to be made in time of War.

Answer, I think it a very fit Time, when we want Money to do what we can to get
it; and the East India Manufactories being bought so Cheap, if Exported, are
very like to fetch us Money; or if not Imported, will hinder the carrying Money
away; and we shall be able to hold out the longer: Pray Sir, is it a fit time
for thousands of Families to Starve, or run to Ireland, or Holland, and there
set up the English Manufactories.

Object. 14. But the want of Employment proceeds not from East India Goods, but
want of Money.

Answer, That want of Money and Credit, is a great Cause of a stop to Trade;
but there is this difference between the Petitioners for this Bill, and other
Manufacturers in England; others can Trade as far as they can, in hope of a
Trade at one Time or other; we have no such hope, we know not, but next Month
more Ships may come from the Indies; though we have enough and too many of
their Goods already; and what sorts they will bring, we know not; and they can
under Sell us, and we cannot be supposed to carry our Silks back again to
Turkey, Italy, or Holland; so that if we lose our own Market for English Silk,
we must take one for India; though we know we go for to Ruin our Native
Country, our Friends and Relations; and though happily you may be willing to
it, I believe, the Gentry of England, that have taken such Care for the
Preservation of the Breed of Cattle, will provide for the Subfistence of some
of the best of Manufactories that ever England or Europe had. This is what of
Argument upon first Reading, I can find against this Bill in this Book; I may
take a Time to examine it Paragraph by Paragraph; in the mean Time, I beg the
Lords and Commons of Englands, to take one Instance, to show the Profit of this
Trade to India,

Suppose Merchants should carry from hence Clothiers, Spinners, Weavers,
Sheermen, Fullers to Spain, and instead of bringing Spanish Wool to England to
Employ our Poor, should carry our Money to Spain to Employ their Poor, and then
bring the Spanish Cloth to England, and under-sell and out-sell our Clothiers,
and when they are Impoverished, and their Poor Starving, should come to the
Parliament for Relief, and these Merchants Cry out, Oh! this is a Beneficial
Trade to England, it is Cramping Trade to touch it; the Clothiers are too
numerous, we will give Money to Ruin them; the Spanish Wool Manufactury is
unnatural to England, as it is a Foreign Growth; and yet this would be a
Tolerable Trade upon many Accounts, compared with that of India.

POSTCRIPT.
WHereas this Gentleman commends the Prudence of the French King, in not
allowing these Goods to be Imported upon France, by any of his Neighbors, but
would insinuate that they are allowed to he brought in and consumed, if brought
from In-India, by his own Subjects: Therefore, to show his Mistake, we have
annexed the French Kings Decree, by which it appears, he allows not of their
Consumption in his Country, though Imported by his own Merchants, or taken by
his Men of War, or Privateers, and so cost him nothing.

A DECREE of the French King's Council of State, Concerning Callacoes, printed
in East India, or painted in the Kingdom, and other China and India Silks,
Stuffs, and flowred with Gold, and Silver; given the 26th of October, 1686.
THE King being informed, That the great quantities of Callicoes, Printed in
East India, or Painted in the Kingdom, and other China, and India Silks,
Stuffs, and Stuffs flowered with Gold and Silver, have not only given occasion
of Transporting many Millions, but also have diminished the Manufactures of old
established in France, for making of Silk, Woollen, Linen, and Hemp-Stuffs;
and, at the same time, the Ruin and Destruction of the Working People, who, by
want of Work, having no Occupation, or Subsistence for their Families, are gone
out of the Kingdom, the which being needful to provide a Remedy for, and for
that effect to hinder the Trade and Sale in the Kingdom of the said printed
Callacoes, and India and China Silks and Stuffs, nevertheless granting to the
Owners a reasonable time to sell them in. Having heard the report of Mounsier
Pelletier, Counselor ordinary of the Kings Royal Council, and
Comptroller General of the Finances; his Majesty, in his Council has ordered,
and does order, that from the beginning of the day of the Publication of the
present Decree, all the Manufactures established in the Kingdom for Painting of
the white Callicoes shall be abolished, and the Moulds serving to the Printing
of them shall be broke and destroyed: His Majesty does forbid most expressly the
Re-establishing thereof: Also to his Subjects the Painting of the said
Callicoes, and to the Engravers the making of any Moulds serving to the said
Impressions, under the penalty of loosing the said Callacoes, Moulds and other
Vtensils, and Three Thousand Livers Fine, to be paid without diminution, one
third part to the Informer, the second part to the Hospitals of the place, the
third to the Farmers of the Revenue. And as concerning the Painted Callicoes,
and other China and India Silks, Stuffs, and Stuffs Flowered with Gold and
Silver, his Majesty has granted, and does grant, to the last of December 1687
next, to the Merchants and others, the permission of Selling them as they shall
think sit: The said time being expired, his Majesty does forbid all Persons, of
what Quality and Condition whatsoever they are, the exposing and selling
thereof, and to particulars, the buying thereof, does order, That those found
in all Warehouses and Shops shall be burnt, and the Proprietors condemned to
the like Fine of three Thousand Livers, paid as above said. His Majesty does
permit, nevertheless the Entry, Sale and Retail, of the said White Callicoes in
his Kingdom, paying for them the Taxes according to the decree of the Council
the 30th of April last, which shall be executed and that of the 15th of the
present Month, to the last of December, 1687 next year. His Majesty does
command the Lieutenant of the Policy of the City of Paris, and the Intendants
and Commissaries of the Provinces and Generalties of the Kingdom, to cause the
present Decree to be executed, being published and affixed in all places where
need shall be, that no Body should be ignorant thereof. Done in the
Kings-State-Council held at Fontainbleau,

Signed, COQUILLE.

FINIS.

