THE True Light Discovered to all who desire to Walk in the Day. In several
little TREATISES Written by that faithful Member of the true Church of Christ
Jesus (lately deceased) STEPHEN SMITH.

Then spoke Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the Light of the World; he that
follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the Light of Life.
John 8.12. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1679.

To the Friends of Truth in the Counties of Surrey, Sussex, and Hampshire.
Friends,
HOw greatly has the Lord appeared in this day, in raising up many Instruments
to sound forth his glorious Truth? yet many are not sensible of it, nor of the
great Work he is a doing, who is a setting up his Spiritual Kingdom, and is
establishing Righteousness in the Earth; and all those that oppose this Work,
shall in ^im be ashamed, and the Lord will go on with his Work, who is come to
restore Man into the primitive purity he was first created in: Man that has
been drove from him into the Earth, by reason of Transgressions, and been a
Servant to sin, and under the power of Satan, and been ignorant of the Life of
God, and of the sweet refreshments of his living presence, not knowing the
motions and leadings of the Father, neither has his ear been open to hear the
voice of God, but has been without any sensible feeling of the Life and Power
of God, and had no savor of the things of God. In this condition is Man, that
is drove from God in the Fall: But now is the Lord come to restore him again by
his beloved Son Christ Jesus, who redeems Man again from his lost estate, and
brings him out of the Earth, and out of all such things which had separated him
from God, to delight in the Lord his Maker again; and from being a Servant of
sin, to be a Servant of God, and of Righteousness and Holiness, and to bring
him again into Innocence, in which he was first created. And this has been the
Work of the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, in all that did receive him, and
it is his Work at this day. The Father of Mercy and great Compassion, he has
considered Mankind who had corrupted his way, and he sent his Messengers to
foretell the coming of the acceptable day of the Lord, and the day of Salvation
of God, who invited all the hungry and thirsty to come and drink at the
Fountain of Life. And this was the free Love of God, to help Man out of the Pit
wherein there was no Water, and to offer him the Wells of Salvation to drink
at, that so he might be washed from sin and from pollution into which he was
fallen, and could see no deliverer, till the Lord was pleased to open a door of
Hope, and to set him free by his Son Christ Jesus, and to save that which was
lost, and to bring Peace and Salvation; whose power is indeed as able to
cleanse from sin, as ever the Devils was to defile and corrupt. This is true,
and witnessed by some, though many cannot believe that ever any can be free
from sin in this life. Now he that is in the first birth, and sees no further,
but is overcome with sin daily, and his mind is earthly and corrupt, and has
never known the power of God to work in him the New birth, and a change from
his sinful Estate, he judges he can be no otherwise while he is here, and so is
like a blind man, who though the Sun shines, because he cannot see it, he will
not believe that it shines, or that others see it. But this must not make the
Faith of some void, who have known the second Adam to be a quickening Spirit,
and have found him able to save to the utmost all that come unto God by him;
and the blood of Christ is to them of full effect, and they witness him to be a
perfect Savior: and indeed for this end was Christ given of the Father, and
for this end came he into the World, and was made manifest, to destroy the
works of the Devil, and to save his People from their sins; and until Christ
has brought Man out of the Transgression he has fallen into, he has not
finished the Work that the Father has given him to do; for as sin has reigned
unto death, so must Righteousness reign unto Life Eternal; and as through the
power of Lust man has been defiled throughout in Body, Soul, and Spirit, so by
the power of Christ is man to be sanctified throughout in Body, Soul, and
Spirit; and being once cleansed by his power, to be saved from those sins which
formerly have defiled him: and by this Man does witness the Restoration by
Christ, and the renewing by the Holy Ghost into the Image of God again, which
he had lost whilst in the Transgression; and so Man comes again into unity with
God, and to know his voice, his motions, and the leadings of his Holy Spirit,
which while he was in darkness, and served sin, he was wholly ignorant of.

This makes Man fruitful again unto God, who before was as a barren Wilderness;
and whereas he was before filled with Darkness, he now comes to be filled with
Light and Life, and now he has Visions and Revelations of Heavenly things:
before he was crying, There was no Revelation nor Vision, they are ceased;
whilst night was upon him he saw no Vision, and because he saw no Vision, nor
had no answer from God, therefore he thought it was so with all others, and
that Revelation and Vision was ceased; and he measured all men by his dark
rule, darkness being over him, and his eye blinded.

Whilst he was in the first birth he was Earthly, his mind Earthly, delighting
in Earthly things; he could not then believe there was any immediate Teachings
of the Father by his Holy Spirit, nor any enjoyment of Heavenly things; neither
was his eye inward, but to an outward Teacher, and outward Books and Writings;
but when the inward ear came to be opened, and the day of the Lord appeared
unto him, then he heard the words of God, and saw the Visions of the Almighty,
and then he began to praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his mercies
which endure for ever.

And now being come to taste of the loving kindness of the Lord, and his heart
being filled with Heavenly blessings, he ministers forth the same to others;
and these are the true Ministers indeed, who are moved by this blessed power of
God to seek the Salvation of Souls: And of this number was our dear Brother
Stephen Smith, (now deceased) a man who labored in faithfulness and constancy,
according to the ability God had given him, to beget others to the Truth; and
was constant in Sufferings, in Travels and Labors, and had a good esteem in
the hearts of many for his faithfulness to the Lord, as you well know, and
therefore I need not write much concerning him, especially since some others
have written so largely of him, but shall remain,

Your Friend and Brother in the Everlasting Truth, Ellis Hooks.
London 28th. day, 3 mo. 1679.
A Testimony of the Work and Mercy of God, particularly in relation to our dear
Friend Stephen Smith lately deceased.
THe most holy and wise God, who has been pleased to make choice of foolish,
weak and contemptible things, to co^^^^nd the wise, and the things that are
mighty, to the intent that no flesh (with its wisdom and strength) might glory
in his presence, but that his Power might appear in what way, manner, or
Instrument soever he pleases, how mean and despicable soever they may seem to
that fleshly eye and mind that takes its measures from outward appearances, and
not from an inward solid principle of sound Judgment: I certify from a living
experience, that this most holy God has appeared and raised up many Witnesses
of his blessed Power and Work in our day; even persons of various degrees,
qualities and capacities, not only some few endowed with Learning, natural
acquirements and parts, but more especially many of the plain, simple and
unlearned, to the end that not only his Power might the more appear, and shine
in its glory over all flesh and the glory of man, but also that God in his
wisdom is graciously pleased to condescend to the lowest and meanest
capacities, in most familiar ways, to direct his speech and Testimony of Life
for the reaching peoples several capacities and consciences, so as to turn them
to that principle of Light and Truth, which through Christ Jesus he has placed
in them: God has in our day, as in former ages, raised up Plowmen, Herdsmen,
Fishermen, Husbandmen, and such like, to be experimental and more effectual
Preachers to men of such capacities, then Academical or Schoolmen with all
their Learning, acquired parts, and School craft; and with a plain Testimony in
the simplicity of the Gospel, condescended to accommodate and answer low and
mean capacities, with that truth and simplicity that is in Christ Jesus, which
has been to the confounding of the wisdom of the wise; so that it may be truly
said, where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of this
World? has not God made foolish the wisdom of this World? and not many wise
men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called, but God has
chosen the foolish things of the World to confound the wise. And although the
following Writings and Discourses of this our dear and honest-hearted Friend
Stephen Smith, now deceased and at rest with the Lord, do not bespeak him a man
educated in artificial Learning, Oratory and Eloquence, yet he was a simple,
plain-hearted and sincere man, to what the Lord made manifest in him, and one
that eyed the power and presence of God in his Life and Testimony, since the
God of all our mercies was graciously pleased to open his understanding, with
the knowledge of his Divine Light and Truth, as it is in Christ Jesus our Lord;
he prized it as his great mercy from the most gracious God, that after his long
and wearisom travels in many Countries, and exercises in the troublesome and
tossing Sea of the World, he at length arrived at his desired Haven of safety,
being brought to know a true stay to his mind, and a quiet habitation of repose
in the Sanctuary and holy Tabernacle of him who dwells in the Light, and has
Immortality dwelling in the Light. I knew this man from the first time of his
being convinced and receiving Gods holy Truth, (which was in the year 1665.)
who in mercy to him made me instrumental therein; and when his understanding
and heart was opened, through the plain evidence and Testimony of the Spirit of
Life, concurring with the witness, manifestation and operation thereof in his
own conscience, (as it always does) he received the Truth in the Love of it,
and gave up to obey and walk in the same, and truly loved Gods faithful
Messengers and People, how despised and suffering soever they were, and freely
gave up to partake with them of their sufferings, and did likewise suffer with
them both in Person and Estate, by Imprisonments and spoil of Goods, for his
tender Conscience and Testimony on the behalf of Christ Jesus; who as he gave
him a Testimony to bear against all Hireling oppressing Teachers and Priests,
who preach for hire, and impose that great oppression and Antichristian yoke of
Tithes, (according as he signifies in some of his Writings) so he gave up to
suffer and endure Spoil, rather then in the least he could pay them, or
gratify the covetous mind or greedy appetite of such Shepherds as feed
themselves, and not the Flock, and make a prey upon people, and with force and
cruelty rule over them. And lastly, as he was a man fearing God, and of good
report in his Country, being an exemplary Preacher of Righteousness in his
Conversation, and one truly kind and ready to do good in his day; so God was
pleased in some measure to endue him with a living Ministry, and experimental
and innocent Testimony to tell of his goodness, and speak forth his praise to
others, from an inward sense thereof in himself, and to the comfort and
encouragement of many that heard him. I speak what I know herein, he having at
sundry times traveled with me in the work and service of God in the Gospel of
his Son Christ Jesus; and we traveled together more particularly at one time
to visit Friends in Surrey, Sussex, and Kent, in which Journey we were much and
often comforted together in the Lords work, and in the Assemblies of Friends,
which was near upon a year before his decease. Well I am satisfied in my very
Soul, that as he is taken away from the Evil to come, so he is entered into his
Rest, and has his portion with the Blessed that dye in the Lord. From a Living
Remembrance of this my dear Friend Stephen Smith, and a real sense of his
Innocent Life, Spirit and Conversation, and in honor and due respect to that
Divine power and work of God in him, I was really concerned in my Spirit to
give this precedent Testimony; truly desiring and praying to God, that all
Friends professing the same Truth, may concur in the same Spirit and example of
Faithfulness to the end; even so as to obtain the same blessed end of the
Righteous, that will crown all our Labors, Travels and Sufferings which in
this World we partake of, and endure for the Testimony of Jesus and of a good
Conscience.

I am a Friend to the Truth, and the Souls of all men, G. Whitehead.
Enfield, the 20th. day of the 1st. month, 1671/9.
Susanna Smiths Testimony concerning her Husband.
MY Testimony for my dear Husband is, That he was a man of an upright heart
toward God and man, and hated deceit; he was diligent and faithful in the
service of the Lord; he did spend and was spent for the Everlasting Gospel, and
is entered into Rest and Peace with the Lord for ever.

Susanna Smith.

The Testimony that lives in my heart concerning the Life and Death of that
holy and worthy Servant of the Lord, Stephen Smith.
O The remembrance of that holy and worthy Servant of the Lord Jesus Christ, by
whose Heavenly power he was made a holy Temple for the Lord to walk in, whose
Earthen Vessel was filled with Gods Heavenly Treasure, by which the Life of
Jesus was made manifest in his mortal Flesh, so that the excellency was of God,
and not of man; so that by Gods holy power he was made a perfect and upright
man, one that feared God, and hated all manner of Evil wheresoever it did
appear: And indeed I can never forget him, whose blameless and innocent Life,
and holy Conversation, when he was amongst us, it was a good pattern unto us;
for he was a man of a meek and gentle, and of a tender Spirit, in which he was
very careful and tender to all in whom the least appearance of Truth did
manifest it self, for which his Travels and his Labors were very great for the
Truth and Christ's sake, in whom he was made very instrumental, as in the hand
of the Lord, that he thereby might beget a People unto the Lord; being not
satisfied to eat his Bread alone, as many yet living can truly testify to the
truth hereof; knowing that he was a true and faithful Labourer in the glorious
Gospel of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, for whose sake he was made willing
to suffer, for he accounted it all joy that he was counted of the Lord worthy
to suffer for his Name sake; who truly trampled upon Aegypts Glory, and chose
rather to suffer afflictions with the People of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of Sin for a season; who often said, he accounted nothing the Lord
had blessed him withal, too dear to part withal for Christ's and his Gospels
sake; concluding that it was but a reasonable Sacrifice to part with Life, and
all that a man has, for Christ's sake; and he that could not part with all for
Christ's sake, was not worthy of him. And he was a man of a tender and of a
broken Spirit, and always constant in his Love to all his Brethren in the
Truth, and having a great esteem of them therein; and whose care was very great
over all the Flock of God, who was filled with the Spirit of wisdom and
understanding, in which he truly labored to prevent all manner of differences
or discord that might happen among Brethren; and if any did happen, he was
always willing to compose and reconcile all manner of differences, which would
have been to the great dishonor of the Lord and his Truth, which was prevented
by him, so that he was a true Peacemaker; and he was as a Father to the
Fatherless, and as a Husband to the Widow; and as a Child, I have been often a
partaker of his Fatherly kindness, and living still in the remembrance of the
same, I hope I shall never forget but to return the honor and glory to God,
who is the Fountain of all our blessings and mercies, from whence flows all
our fresh Springs, in and through Christ Jesus the Son of Gods Love, in whom
was the Spring of Life flowing in and through him, even to the great
satisfaction of my Soul, as one that did but partake of the overflowings of
that Life, in which his Soul was deeply consolated and wrapped up in the Heavenly
Joy of the Lord God: so that in the greatest extremity of his weakness, he
would be very often declaring of the great and mighty loving kindness of the
Lord God, by which he was lifted up above the fear of death: Nor was he afraid
of the terrors thereof, so that a little before his departure, I being present
with him, he being filled with Gods heavenly Spirit, by which he was enabled to
pray and supplicate the Lord God of his Life, in which he was praising and
magnifying that holy and innocent Life of Jesus, saying, Lord and dearest God,
O assist in this Heavenly passage from death to life; who being subject to the
will of his Heavenly Father, said further to me, Now I am going into my sweet
sleep; so that he immediately and innocently laid down his head in perfect
peace with the Lord, and lives for evermore.

O the heavenly and the blessed Testimony of the Lord God, that sprung in and
through him, by a heavenly Exhortation to them that came to visit him, saying,
That it was a blessed and a heavenly thing to have the mind clear and holy,
free from all troubles and cumbers of this evil World, as he truly said his
was; having all given up to the will of the Lord, that it might truly be done
in Earth as it is in Heaven. O what a blessed and a heavenly Habitation is this
for the Soul of man to rest in, which I have a full assurance of! And a little
after there came in one to see him, and he exhorted him, to dread and fear the
Lord God, and to repent of all his wickedness, whatsoever that holy and pure
witness in his conscience makes manifest to be evil: So if happily he may find
mercy with the Lord, which will be better to thee, said he, then all the World
besides. And a little after came in another to see him; so that the mighty
power of the Lord God was seen and felt, whereby he was refreshed again, and
desired her to fear the Lord, that thereby she might be preserved out of all
evil; and desired her to love the Truth above all, for the Truth is a very
precious thing; and to be sure to keep low and humble to it, and not to be
high-minded, nor exalted above the pure of God in her conscience, for that
would he very hurtful to her.

About two or three days after, the blessed heavenly power of the Lord did
arise in him, from which did spring a living and a heavenly Testimony in a holy
remembrance of the tender dealings of the Lord with him, from his Childhood to
this very day; who said to his Sons, That his days were very near drawing to an
end; and declared, how that his Father and Mother cast him off when he was but
a little Lad: But the Lord had always preserved him, and his Blessings did
always attend him, in raising him up by multiplying his Blessings upon him,
having been often in many great dangers and perils by Sea and Land: So, said
he, having my mind chaste and sober to God, and having the fear of the Lord
placed in my heart, by which I was preserved out of evil, and doing the thing
that was right in the sight of the Lord; so that I found favor of the Lord,
and gained the love and savor of all people, in dealing justly and truly with
all people, not wronging any man. So this in charge he gave to his Sons, That
they might always be kept chaste and fober in their minds, having always their
minds to the fear of the Lord placed in their hearts, that thereby they might
be preserved out of evil, and doing always that that is just and right; and to
be sure to be courteous and kind to all, loving the good in all, and bearing
their Testimony against the evil in all wheresoever it does appear. And
whenever (said he) you go about that which is weighty, take counsel of good
and sound Friends, so that all things may be done to the honor and glory of
the Lord and his blessed Truth in which your blessings are all yea and Amen.
And advised them, not to run into the Cumbers of the World, but to wait upon
the Lord, and he will find out a way for them in his time: For the Lord (said
he) is a calling and taking me out and from all Troubles and Cumbers, from the
evil that is a coming upon this wicked World, in a good time wherein I am
assured of that sound and perfect peaee, wherein my Soul rests with the Lord
for evermore; so that I have no more to do now, but desire the Lord to make my
passage easy to his Heavenly Rest.

William Lickfold.
He was born the 19th. of the 7th. Month 1623.

He departed this Life the 22d day of the 7th. Month 1678.



A TESTIMONY FOR THE TRUTH, And against DECEIT and DECEIVERS, WITH A Reproof
unto those who are not Faithful to the Truth which they are convinced of.

By Stephen Smith.

Isaiah 26.11. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see: but they
shall see, and be ashamed for their Envy at the People. Verse 12. Lord, thou will ordain Peace for us; for thou host wrought all our works in us. Printed in
the Year 1679.

A Testimony for the TRUTH, and against Deceit and Deceivers, with a Reproof
unto those who are not faithful to the Truth which they are Convinced of.
FOr as much as it has pleased the Lord in his great love and tender mercy to
visit many who have been long covered with Darkness, and drawn by the Subtilty
of the Serpent, working in a Mystery within, and without in his Instruments,
from enjoying that Love and great Riches which is declared of in the Scriptures
of Truth, which should be revealed in the latter days, in his Everlasting and
Unchangeable Covenant; which Promise of the Lord many who had true breathing
after him, and could not be satisfied with feeding with Swine upon Husks, but
truly breathed after Living Refreshment, and after that Bread which nourishes
that Birth which is Eternal, and have delighted in the righteous Judgments of
the Lord, over the Enemy and Oppressor of man's Soul, through which Judgments
the Love of God has greatly been manifest, having thereby brought to the
knowledge of his Everlasting and Unchangable Truth, to the exceeding great
refreshment and satisfaction of the Souls of many thousands, who have earnestly
desired the same before the World and all its glory; and having received the
same, in the Love of it, and known Freedom by it, in the Enjoyment of the same,
do meet together, as the manner and practice was of those who lived in the Fear
and Dread of the Lord in the Primitive times; so now in the pure Fear and
Obedience to the just and equal requirings of this Creator, (whose Ways are
Equal, Right and Just) meets together to wait on him, to the end they may be
refreshed and fed with the same Bread of Life, that so the Plant which the Lord
has planted may grow, that so they may be changed from glory to glory, till at
length they may come to bear the Image of the Heavenly, whereas formerly they
have born the Image of the Earthly; and those who so meet the Spirit of Truth,
can truly say they never waited on the Lord in vain, but do witness true
refreshment from the God of Love, whether a word be spoken in their Meetings or
no; so that they can truly sing in their Spirits of Mercy with Judgments, and
has not executed Judgment without Mercy, in which has greatly appeared his
wonderful Love to lost Mankind, of which great and unspeakable Love, there are
to this day (to the Glory and Praise of his great Name, even from his own
Works) thousands of Living Witnesses, and hundreds have laid down their Lives
in Nasty Holes, and Stinking Prisons, and many have been Banished, and many
have suffered cruel Mockings, and many thousands the Spoiling of their Goods,
whose Righteous Testimony through the Eternal Spirit of Love and Truth they
have gladly born in this Day of Gods Power, to the exceeding Comfort and
Refreshment of all that are faithful Followers of the Lamb, but is, and shall
be to the astonishment of all who persist in their Disobedience against the
Spirit of Truth, and continue in their Rebellion against it, and this righteous
Testimony, through all who are true Worshippers in the Spirit and Truth, who
are led and guided in all their ways by the Spirit of Truth, being Sons and
Daughters of the Living God, so greatly beloved by him; so those that touch
them in a wrongful manner do touch the Apple of his Eye, who created all things
for his Glory; and though his Mercy is great in not executing Judgment
speedily, but gives space and time of Repentance; yet if they mind it not, but
let the Day of Gods Love pass over their heads, that Terrible Voice they shall
hear, My Spirit shall strive no more, let Flesh know that it is but Grass, and
when the Spirit of the Lord blows upon it, it shall fade as a Flower, and
that in a moment when his Anger is kindled, which may be when the Worker of
Iniquity is in the height of his vain glory, and greatest boasting: so as that
righteous Testimony (through all who are in the true Innocent Seed, unto which
all the Blessings and the Promises of the Lord are) does stand as a true
Witness of the Lords great Love in this day wherein he is making known his
great Power against all Workers of Iniquity, and unrighteous Actions, and
deceitful Workers, who can feign and flatter with all sorts of debauched
Persons, and all dissembling Hypocrites, Persons of unstable minds, joining
with the cunning, twisting, twining Serpent, in all its appearances, in their
earthly, sensual, and devilish wisdom, being in the Adultrous whorish spirit
degenerated from the Spirit of Truth, holding a Profession of the Faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ with respect of Persons, receiving honor, and giving honor,
according to the Customs and vain Traditions of the World, by which means they
have no knowledge of that Honor which is from Above: Yet notwithstanding these
great Abominations which they commit in the sight of the Lord, and all them
which live in their faithful Testimony against them, yet they lean upon the
Lord, and think there shall come no evil upon them; but except such do speedily
repent, and turn from their Abominations, and bow to the righteous Testimony of
God in them, which shows them the deceitfulness of their hearts, to the end
they may above, and before all, desire a clean heart, and a right Spirit, that
so they may be single hearted toward their Creator, and all men; which, except
that be known, the Lord will send a day upon them, wherein shall be weeping,
and howling, and bitter Lamentation; and their Torment shall be so great, that
in the Morning they shall wish it were Night, and at Night they shall wish for
Morning, and many shall desire Death rather then Life: So I greatly desire that
all People would mind, in coolness, how it stands between them and their
Creator, and deal impartially with themselves, for, of a certain, Cod will not
be mocked, but such as they sow, such they must reap: So all mind the Fear of
the Lord is to depart from Evil, that so the Curse of the Lord may be done
away, and his Blessing known and received.

And those that come amongst the Possessors of the Truth, who have heard the
sound of it, and so a belief is raised in their hearts, that God is found by
them that diligently seek him in the Way of Truth; many there be that are thus
persuaded, and so frequent Meetings (together with them that are in the work of
Truth) in a bare Profession of Truth, never thoroughly given up to the end that
Truth may be their Guide in all their ways, but come and sits down with some
reserve in their Hearts, which they covet to keep, as Achan did the goodly
Babylonish Garment, which was appointed for the Fire; but for so doing the
Curse of the Lord followed him, though his covetousness was a trouble to the
Children of Israel for a time, yet at length God made it manifest; and so will
the Lord do those who comes amongst Friends with a reserve in their hearts;
that which is appointed for the Fire, they that covet to keep, notwithstanding
the many Precious Meetings they come to, and hear their conditions plainly laid
open to them, yet still consulting with Flesh and Blood, which will never yield
that true obedience should be given to the Lord, so cannot amend, but continue
in the same course of Life, for not taking heed to the Council of the Lord, nor
giving wholly up to be guided by the Spirit of Truth; such are not in the the
Way of Truth, but sit down as Branches by those of the Vine; but their Fruit
does manifest them: for those that deals so deceitfully with their own Hearts,
how can it be expected they should be true to others? so such becomes an ill
savor to Truth, as long as they continue so, and a burden and a trouble to
them that are in the way of growing in the Truth; but let them know who harden
their hearts against Reproof, and though they do come amongst them that live in
the Fear and Dread of the Lord, and so meet together that they may receive a
continual supply of the Bread of Life, and enjoy the presence of the Lord; yet
their so coming with a reserve in their heart, they cannot profit by it: So at
length, seeing they cannot bring the Way of the Lord to their way, they begin
to grow cold in meeting, and so by degrees the Enemy draws out the mind, and
then gets room for his consultations, and so persuades them to wait no longer,
but that all Places are alike: and so at length some get into the Mass-House,
with other silly People laden with sins, ever learning, and never able to come
to the Truth; and begin to persuade themselves, (or the Enemy of their Souls
persuades them) that there is a little difrence in the Declaration of the
Ministers of Christ and Antichrist; their words, say they, are all good, and so
begin to build Babel again, having rejected that Love which did appear for
their Everlasting good, having chosen to please themselves in some small thing,
which they could not part with, though no better then a Mess of Pottage, for
which many have sold an Eternal Inheritance; so with Cain they are in the
Curse, wandering up and down in that which is cursed of the Lord, and not
beloved of good men; so the Lord has dealt justly in making them manifest,
They went out from us, because they were not of us, but their reward will
follow them. And many others there be that come to Meetings, and hear Truth
declared often, and confesses its the Truth, but when they see, if they come
to obey, they must take up a Cross to Flesh, either in denying to fear man, or
else hazard of losing Goods, and some their Companions and Acquaintance,
(though it may be in iniquity) and such like Baits the Enemy of man's Soul has
ready, for that mind which is willing to catch at them, to save that alive
which is in the Curse; so sometimes they come, and sometimes they stay away,
and then come again, and the Enemy of their Souls gets a wound now and then;
but for want of giving up, at length the Enemy begins to be whole again, and so
the Spirit of the Lord is grieved and quenched by degrees, and the Enemy grows
stronger and stronger; and at length he gets these Reasons in the Creature,
because the Enemy knows many will not be satisfied without some plausible
Reason; so he tells many, why thou art but a poor Creature, or you are but poor
Creatures, and what can you do without power? so here the willing mind readily
catches at this bait: and then when they are asked, why they give not up, O say
they, we want power, O that I had but power to do so and so, how joyful should
I be; and such like stuff the Enemy furnishes them withal, who are willing to
receive it, and in the mean time slight the appearance of Christ, (the Light,
in whom Power is received) by grieving and quenching his Holy Spirit of Truth,
in which is the greatest manifestation of Love that God could bestow on lost
Mankind, in making manifest his Son in their hearts, for the redeeming them up
unto himself, out of their lost condition, in the nature of Adam in the fall,
up into the Nature of the Second Adam, which never fell: but how is this Love
of God slighted by those who thus wilfully yield to the Enemy of their Souls,
and rejecting the Lord, who searches the Heart and tries the Reins, and then
say they want power; and its true, when people have given themselves up to the
power of the Enemy, whose nature is to do all the hurt he can, they may well
say then they want power to do good, that being disesteemed and accounted of as
a thing of naught, having cast behind them the great Love of God in his Son,
and embraced something which the Enemy has set before them, as some glory in
the World, and the like; but as he was always a Liar, (the Devil) so will he
be found in this; for instead of giving them the glory of the World, he is
fitting them for Gods Wrath and Indignation, that so when he is cast out of
those more upright hearts, and more thankful, that he may possess those Swinish
natures, and so throw them headlong into a Sea of Destruction, whith others of
the like bad natures, of whom I shall say something.

Those are they which have heard and seen something of Truth, by reading Books,
or speaking with some in the Truth, whose words being accompanied with power,
proceeding from the Spirit of Truth, they not having been able to resist, but
standing over them, questionings and reasoning have been raised in them
concerning their buildings, whether or no they be upon the right Foundation;
but that being caught too, which shows them their conditions so plain, that
they have no assurance of their well-being, but in doubting, and reasonings,
and fears, through which secretly torment does arise; but their minds being
from him that shows them their conditions, which, though it be the greatest
Love that God could bestow on lost Mankind. yet in that it brings a Cross to
flesh, seeing plainly that if they hearken to it, they must forsake all their
vain Customs and Traditions of the World, with all its Lusts and Vanities;
these things not agreeing with Flesh and Blood, which they are consulting, the
mind being drawn from the Witness for God in their hearts, by their wilful
yielding to the Enemy of their Souls, who is always ready with his Baits to
betray them who desire ease in the Flesh, and whose minds are out in studying
Arguments to keep them in the same, the subtle Serpent being here at work, to
the end that the Creature may partake of his Table, for he knows that then they
cannot partake of Gods Table, as the Scriptures of Truth declares; so at his
Table he hands out curious words, in Prayers, and hanging down the head like a
Bullrush, and with feigning and flattering words to all sorts of Deceitful
Workers, and does help to turn and wind all sorts of Worship, which the Beastly
Nature sets up, and so tells them there is Flesh as well as Spirit to be
satisfied, and that they must live in sin, as long as they have a being here;
and to others, whose natures be inclined to Lust, he provides plentiful Dishes
for them; and others, who are disposed to Drunkenness, he directs them to
Companions, and opportunity; and at his Table are variety of Dishes for the
Covetous man, or Proud, High, Heady, Boaster, Curser, Ranter, for all sorts
that will come to his Table, he has curious Dishes in a plenteous manner, and
in all these he promises content and satisfaction; but as he ever was, so he
is, and ever will be a Liar; for let those speak who has fed most plentiful at
his Table, if ever they were satisfied, but that the more they fed the more
hungry they were; let all these forementioned, and Gamsters speak for
themselves, and Thieves, and Murderers, and the like. But in some he works
more in a Mystery, and furnishes his Table with curious words, and so feeds
them, and decks them; but always at his Table he has this Dish for all sorts
of Professors and Profane, that they must live in Sin, in this Life; this is,
as it were a Chain, by which he holds all (that will believe so,) fast to his
Table; and then let them be as rich as they will, in comprehending, and getting
into the Brain-knowledge the Scriptures, and outward Learning, so though the
work grows so high in the Mystery of Iniquity, that the Enemy of the Soul has
exalted himself above all that is called God, and so makes a show in fine
words, and in long Prayers, and in curious Arts; yet whilst he can keep them in
his Chain to his Table, if they cannot have ease in professing in one Sect, he
will give them leave to profess in another Sect; and if that will not serve he
will give them leave to go into the profession of Truth it self; and further,
to meet together with them in the Truth, any thing but hearing the Voice of the
Son of God, and obeying, which brings to the Table of God, and so overthrows
his Table; to any thing but this his Chain will reach: Now, as to what is
before, those that have seen something of Truth, and some trouble has by
reason thereof risen in them, but for love of a little ease to the flesh, such
their minds being out, willingly goes into the Devils Chain, and so feeds at
his Table, where they are furnished with Arguments against the Spirit of Truth
manifested to lead and to guide into all truth, and so out of Sin, which is the
Devils Chain; but being thus furnished according to their hearts lust, being in
the Adulterous Spirit, takes all occasion to speak evil of Truth, and them that
are in it, who are true Worshippers of the Lord, according to his Will, in
Spirit and Truth; so the god of the World having blinded their minds, an evil
eye gets out, and this watches for the halting of them who are in Truth; and
when the just hand of God is gone out, in making manifest some who have been in
the profession of Truth, who have hardened their hearts against reproof, till at
length their hypocrisy and guile is made manifest; on which, they hereby take
occasion to speak evil of the Way of the Lord, and them that are in it, the
Enemy of their Souls giving them thereby some ease for the present; but it
lasts not long, but the Fame of Truth is sounded in their ears again, by the
Witness of God within, or else from those in whom it dwells without them; then
the Lamb rises, and gives torment again, and their Coverings be too narrow,
and will not serve them, neither shall they; Woe to the Rebellious Children,
says the Lord, that take Counsel, but not of me, and that cover with a
covering, but not with my Spirit: So all unrighteous Coverings which people of
unstable minds are under, the Woe of the Lord is against, so what will become of
them that are under them? O that men would in coolness consider, whose day of
Gods Visitation in Love is not past, least by their often provocations, he
visits in his great displeasure, and says, My Spirit is weary with striving, it
shall strive no more: now for the sakes of many who have yet true Breathings
after Living Refreshment, and are willing to take up Christ's Yoke and Burden,
and to follow him that is meek and lowly in heart, that so they may rest for
their Souls; for their sakes I shall give a brief Relation of the Ministers of
Christ, and of the Ministers of Antichrist: First, The Ministers of Christ must
know Christ, and see him, and believe on him, Joh. 6.40. But some will say, Who
is there that knows not Christ? Does not all that can read see what is writ of
him in the Scriptures of Truth? And is not the Christ which you mean, who
suffered without the Gates of Jerusalem, and the like? Yes, we do own the same
Christ, and that which the Scriptures do declare of him is true, and we do
expect no other; but to know him no further then the report of him, (though
that be true) this is but a poor knowledge, which the Workers of Iniquity have,
of all sorts, that lives visibly in gross and manifest Sins; and
notwithstanding that knowledge, yet live and abound in the same; so that
knowledge only (though that, as I have said, be true) is not sufficient to fit
a man to be a Minister of Christ: But says the diligent Enquirer, What
knowledge then is necessary for a Minister of Christ? To know him as he is the
Mystery hid from Ages and Generations, but now is made manifest to his Saints:
to know what is the Riches of the Glory of this Mystery among the Gentiles,
which is Christ in you the Hope of Glory, Collos. 1.26, 27. To know him as he
is a Covenant given to the People, and a Light to enlighten them, manifested
within them, to give the knowledge of God; and to know that he is the Light of
the World, and how he has enlightened every man that comes into the World: to
know him to be the Word in the Heart and Mouth: to know him to be the
Reconciler unto God: to know him to be the Anointing, which is true, and
teaches all things: to know him to be the Spirit of Truth, which is manifest
to lead and to guide into all Truth: to know Christ's Flesh, and what it is to
eat it: to know Christ's Blood, and what it is to drink it: but some will say
all this may be read in the Scriptures: But by the way, though the words may be
read in the Scriptures of Truth, yet the knowledge of the Mystery which is
declared of in those words, is not attainable by reading them: But because some
are willingly ignorant, and so desires to be, rather then to have true wisdom
in Gods way, and so stumbles at all; I shall say a little concerning seeing the
Son, which is necessary for a Minister of Christ: First, To see him to be the
great Love of God manifested to convince of Sin: to see him to be the wonderful
Power of God, and how that he died, to the end, that whether we sleep or wake
we should live together with him: to see him as he was manifest to destroy the
Works of the Devil. to see him to be the great Mystery of Godliness, God
manifest in the Flesh; and much more might be said of the knowledge and sight
which a true Minister of Christ has, but what has been said is enough to
satisfy the truly hungring and thirsting Soul; but the full loath the
Honeycomb: But is this all the upright-hearted say? Nay, they that thus have
obtained mercy to have the knowledge of what is above declared, must receive it
in the love of it, and this Love of God thus manifested in them they must give
up to obey, being his Everlasting and Unchangeable Covenant, which is the Key
of knowledge, manifested to rend the Vail, and to break the Chain of Darkness,
and to open the Mysteries of the Scriptures of Truth, and to give the knowledge
of God, whom to know is Eternal Life; so Iniquity being taken away, and Sin
being purged through the knowledge of Christ, who is the Power of God, and God
known to walk, and to dwell in them through the Son of his Love, who is Gods
Righteousness, as God has said, I will dwell in you, and walk in you: The Eye
of the Understanding being thus opened, and the Revelation of Christ being
daily witnessed to sit and to furnish them with Wisdom from above, to speak a
word in season unto all conditions; being thus filled with the Love of God, and
his Glorious Appearance, a constraint lying upon them, through the Power of God
that dwells in them, and from the great Love of God in the same, such cannot be
silent, nor eat their Morsel alone; but the Love of God does constrain them who
have Wives, and Children, and Estates, and several others that have no Wives
and Children, to leave their Callings, and several Employments, and go abroad
as Sheep among Wolves, to declare this great and unspeakable Love, to the end,
That People may be turned from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's power, to the
Power of God, that others may partake of the same Love of God in his Son Christ
Jesus with them: But for this their love, how Barbarously and Cruelly they have
been used, many having finished their Testimony in Nasty Holes, and Prisons,
and other great Cruelties, which would be too long to relate; so these thus
furnished with the Love and Power of God, and being obedient to the same, being
Learned men in the Book of Life; these are not to take with them Scrip nor
Purse, so as to be careful of Earthly things, (but as they have received
freely, do Minister freely) but into what house they come, where this great
Love is answered, in the same Love of God in measure, what things such set
before them, for necessity they eat and drink, and the like, seeing it comes
from their Fathers Love: but when they come into a place and cannot see, in the
Counsel of the Lord, that that Love is answered in which they come, there they
cannot receive, though in never so much necessity. True, say some, these are
fit Qualifications for a Minister of Jesus Christ; but be there any such now
adays? How do thou know them? Yes, I do testify, as thousands beside my self
are ready to give the same testimony, that such Ministers, qualified, as
beforementioned, there be many in this Day of Gods Power: But how do you know,
may some say? I answer, By turning us to the great and unspeakable Love of God
manifested in our hearts, which shows us our conditions, how it stood between
us and our Creator, as it had done long before, but we knew not that that was
the appearance of the Son of Love, till those who had tasted, handled, seen and
felt the powerful working thereof told us; but told us also, the first step
must be through Judgment; so a belief thereof being raised, and a clean and a
perfect obedience yielded to it, we in time found its power in us, opening the
Eye of our Understandings, and revealed the man of Sin; and so came the
knowledge of the Spirit of Truth to be revealed in us, and by it we had a sight
of the unfruitful Works of Darkness without in his Instruments, and the sight
of the Spirit of Truth, and those that were Ministers of it: But
notwithstanding this Testimony, if some should be hard to believe, let such
deal so ingeniously with their own Souls, as to go and hear, and try, with a
single heart, and hold fast that which is good; and this is desired, to the end
that others may be partakers of the same Love of God, and of their assurance of
their being reconciled unto him through his Son, to whom be glory for ever. Now
there being a necessity that the Ministers of Christ should be qualified, as is
before mentioned, the Ministers of Antichrist may be easily known; but for the
sakes of such aforementioned, I shall lay down some marks of them: First, They
are such who never knew the Son of God in the Everlasting and Unchangable
Covenant manifested in them, so not learned men in the Book of Life, but are
alienated from the Life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, knowing
him manifested in them, who is Infallible, but in their fallible wisdom, by the
Art of Tongues, gets the Prophets, Christ's, and the Apostles words, and
something out of Heathen Authors, and so in their vain imaginations patches up
another Discourse; and so for the love they have for their god which is their
Belly, they sell their Art at as dear a price as they can, for several hundreds
by the year, some for more, and some for less, but all as dear as possible; as
I heard a Priest say once, if it were not for Tithes who as would should preach
for him: but this being so well known to all, that its alone for their god,
which is their Belly, that their Mouths is opened, there is little need to
speak of that, these being Sayers, but not Doers, so not accepted of God; these
are they which run and are not sent, which speaks a divination of their own
Brain, so not like to profit the people, you may read of them at large Ezekiel
the thirteenth, read the Chapter; from such Priests and Prophets as these is
Profaneness gone forth in all the Land, read Jeremiah the twenty third; so they
are sufficiently marked out in the Scriptures of Truth. But some say, we know
all the Priests now adays are bad enough, and the smoothest of them preach for
filthy lucre sake, but they speak good words; so we may do as they say, and as
they do: O foolish people, is it not because you love such easy Prophets, who
speak peace to you in your Sins, that you thus speak? have you not heard what
the Scriptures of Truth says? Do men gather Grapes of thorns, or Figs of
Thistles? By their Fruits you may know them: Should we not count him a very
Fool that should go look for Figs on Thistles, or sweet water out of a bitter
Fountain? What if they should say the Lord lives, that is a true saying to them
which know it in themselves; but its a Lie to them who say it, and know the
contrary in them; but these Priests which Preach for Hire, cry peace to men
whilst they put into their Mouths, to the end their god may be supplied, which
causes and constrains their Mouths to be open; but in case you deny to put into
their Mouths, then Demetrius like, prepares War; crying out, we have a Law, and
if you will not pay, we will make you pay: But by the way, what compulsive Law of
men does Christ's Ministers use, or were they to use? prove any such thing in
the Scriptures of Truth, that they were to compel any man to give to them: Now,
if God has appointed no such Maintenance by his Righteous Covenant and Law; Is
it not stealth in his sight, to compel and take that by man's Law, which God
has not appointed in his Law? Look about you Priests, for the Righteous Judge
will sit in Judgment, and to the Lambs Bar to give an account you must come,
and then the twisting Serpent will stand you in no stead, but all things will
be laid bare before you, what esteem you have of your god, which is your Belly,
for the serving of which, how have you yielded unto the lying Spirit, and so
like Ahabs Prophets persuaded and instigated many to go on in the Persecution,
though to their destruction. Have you not told the Magistrates that the Quakers
are Ringleaders of Faction, though you never come to their Meetings, nor never
examined the cause why they dissented from you; nor never heard that they went
about to disturb or molest any of their outward enjoyments, but barely because
they bore a faithful Testimony against the twisting twining Serpent, the great
Enemy of man's Soul; which Spirit of Error your god cannot be served without: so
a great stir and ado you make, in being Instruments of casting into Prison,
haling and tearing away the Goods, and the like; from those who lives in the
Fear and Dread of the God Almighty, and in peace with men though in enmity with
the Serpent, the Enemy of man's Soul: so in the Innocent Blood which has been
shed in Nasty Holes, and Stinkiug Prisons, cries aloud unto the Righteous Judge
of Heaven and Earth, who is Lord of all, who created all at his pleasure, and
can destroy all in the same; those that be innocent, out of the revengeful
spirit, have committed themselves, and so cannot use any compulsive way, with
Weapons that are Carnal, but in plain Demonstration and Power of the Spirit of
Truth, and their innocent Cause to the Judge of all they have committed, to be
cleared in his will and time, who will assuredly do it. But further, to clear
that you are the Ministers of Antichrist; if, notwithstanding what is declared,
any yet be in doubt: Hearken what Christ says to the Wicked, I was an hungry,
and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: I was a
stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not: sick, and in
prison, and visited me not. Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when
saw we thee an hungered, or thirsty, or a stranger, or sick, or in prison, and
did not minister unto thee? Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily, I say
unto you, inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not
to me; and these shall go away into everlasting punishment, Matthew. 25. In the
same Chapter he shows the Righteous man's love, and his reward; and how did they
express their love to Christ? Did they do it in speaking great words of his
Name? No, as you may read, they visited his Brethren in their necessities: so
mark by the way, there were Righteous men, and now are, though the Ministers of
Antichrist for the gods sake, would have all err and stray again from the
Lords way; but the Pearl for which they have sold all, and bought, is of more
value then so; but since Christ has Brethren, are not they them which are led
by the Spirit of Truth? and if people be given up to obey it, will it not lead
them out of the Spirit of Error? If so, then must they not depart from your
ways, who are in the Revengeful Spirit? Well then, since those that are led by
the Spirit are Sons of God, as the Scriptures of Truth declare, Romans 8. and
Heirs with Christ; for he that sanctifies and them that are sanctified are all
of one, wherefore he is not ashamed to call them Brethren: now since there is
such an unity between Christ and his Followers, Shall it avail them any thing,
who call upon Christ, yet persecute so near Relations, as his Brethren? And
since those that visited them not in their necessities, received such
condemnation, what will become of you? And you, Generation of wicked Doers, who
have been the cause of the Imprisoning so many of Christ's Relations, where
several hundreds have laid down their lives for their faithful Testimony
against you, because of your Adultery from the Lord, and his Worship, which is
to be performed in Spirit and Truth, and have set up worships according to your
own hearts Lust: and because of the Lords Patience, and Long-suffering, and
great Mercy, how do you harden your hearts against Reproofs, and for good
return evil, and so go on scoffing and mocking: well, though the Lord has
exercised a great deal of patience, it is my belief, it will not last long; but
he will execute Righteous Judgment, and plead the cause of the Innocent, who
has committed all to him, with Praises and Glory from his own works for ever.

Stephen Smith.
The 21th. day of the 11th. Month, 1667.
A PROCLAMATION By way of EXHORTATION Unto all the Inhabitants of England;
Concerning Fasting and Prayer: And that they may come to a certain Discerning
and Knowledge of the Will of God therein, (who is King of the whole EARTH.
[ First by way of Preparation unto a True FAST]
COme all you who expect to be Heard and Accepted of the Living God; Fasting
and Prayer, in the Spirit of Holiness, is required as Necessary thereunto: but
the want of a certain Knowledge Discerning, how, and in what manner the same
ought to be Performed, (therefore it is that people are rejected) being all
Vain Service and Lost Labor, where no Reward is received, or when they ask
amiss, what answer shall such have, judge ye? And therefore, be Admonished, I
beseech you, to mind that which gives you a Discerning and certain Knowledge in
this weighty Work: You may read what the Lord said by his Servant Isaiah, chap.
8. concerning Fasting; and what Christ Jesus said, Mat. 6. but how long may
people read these Sayings. (as well as others) and yet have no certain
knowledge of the Will of God therein? I speak of such who are out of the way of
a True Understanding; which all are who are in a bare Confession, with their
Mouths, that God ought to be feared; but the Heart, that not being right in his
sight, Infidelity that taking place there; from whence a Conclusion is drawn,
That Sin, which is Evil, cannot be parted with; this is a great Evil indeed, set
up in the Heart by the spirit of Antichrist; where a Form of Words, and large
Confessions concerning God and Christ are made; but the Blessed and Effectual
Workings of God's Spirit in Flesh, for the Destroying of Sin, that being
denied, the Enemy's works (which is Sin and Evil) they continue in the Heart
(contrary to the Blessed Will of God) by which means the Nobility of Man's
Understanding that is Clouded and Darkened through Error and Falsehood; by which
means the Minds of Mankind are exercised in a Brutish Understanding concerning
Spiritual Matters; imagining a Performing of Service to God by confessing, That
he ought to be feared, (and yet live out of what they confess in a Talk) that
all good Success and Blessing comes from him, etc. So then, let such be judged
by their own words, who confess he ought to be feared, and yet live in Sin and
Evil, under a strange Delusion, That those Works can never be so destroyed, as
to know Dominion and Freedom from them on this side the laying down the Body,
or at least, till about that time of separation from all outward visible
things: So here Sin, the Continuance of that has been pleaded for by them who
would be called Christians, and would be accounted such who fear God, and that
they are in his Service, though never expect to be free from sin; What Service
is that in Evil? And what Reward shall Evil Works have? Is not sin an Evil work
of the Evil One? And must not the Works of the Evil One, if continued in, have
a Bad Reward?

Oh that people would Fear God in Deed and in Truth! for they that fear him
will do no Evil: So the way of a Right Understanding, that leads quite contrary
to Sin and Evil: So its strong Delusion indeed, to expect a Right Understanding
in an Evil Way; and Presumption indeed it is, to hope for Good out of Evil.

Oh, be Awakened to Righteousness, in which there is no sin! and then will the
Eye of the Understanding be opened to see the Man of sin, who has exalted
himself above that of God in Man, under Confessions and Professions of the Name
of God and Christ, whilst that signified by the Name, which is Power manifested
in Flesh, for the revealing the Man of sin, and destroying his works, that has
been denied by the Exaltation of the Man of sin in man; by whom Mankind has
been exalted above the Pure Principle of God in man, even above the Light of
that Blessed and Unerring Spirit of Christ, by which that which is reproveable
is made manifest: But through Unbelief of God's Love therein, Mankind in a
great part being held under strong Delusions of Satan, their minds being
exercised in a Brutish Understanding, some have called that Blessed Principle
of God in man, a Devilish Light; and others a Bewildering Light, or a Natural
Light; so that all that is of God in man that has been denied (whose Work do
you think this is?) But if it were so, as the Wicked One in the wicked has
concluded, may it not be said now, as it was in the days of old, after God had
created Mankind upon the Earth, and they had corrupted their Ways, which
displeased God, who in his Displeasure said, My Spirit shall not always
strive, etc. Then was not Destruction nigh? but in that there was a time in
which God's Holy Spirit did strive with flesh, it plainly appears, the good
will of God was therein to have had it otherwise; but Mankind resisting his Way
of bringing it to pass, the Way of Salvation that was removed, and a Way of
Destruction let in; so the Way of Salvation then that was by the moving and
working of God's Good Spirit, the which had place in Noah, who was a perfect
man in his day, who being moved in a True Fear of God had a Right
Understanding, in which he was a Preacher according to the Will of God. So that
Blessed Spirit of God, by which Noah had regard and was acted by, though it was
rejected by Mankind in their corrupt Ways, yet it was not Devilish nor
Natural, as Mankind in their Brutish Understanding in great measure have
concluded: but the least measure of that pure Principle of God in Mankind of
his Blessed Spirit, is Unerring; the which in measure, in all Ages, in God's
Time and Season did strive in Mankind, and for the good of Mankind, that
through it they might have been Preserved out of Corrupt Ways and Works, which
Corrupt Ways and Works was and is the Cause of all Heavy and Grievous
Judgments in Ages past, and to come upon Mankind: So its plain and evident, how
Gracious, Merciful and Longsuffering God has been throughout all Ages through
some measure of the shining of the Light of his Unerring Spirit,
notwithstanding the Great and Grievous Provocations of Mankind in their Corrupt
Ways, by which their Understandings were and are darkened, that they could not
come to a clear Discerning what manner of Love of God that was unto them (as it
is written) How often is the Candle of the Wicked put out, Job 21. So its
plain, that was and is the Love of God in the Light of his Unerring Spirit, by
which the Wicked were shown their Wickedness in all Ages; and the putting that
Love from them was, and is the Cause that the Wicked perish in their
Wickedness, through the Hardness of their Hearts, and Unbelief of the Love of
God in his Blessed Principle of Light, which shines sometimes even unto the
Wicked, though they cry, Depart, I desire not the Knowledge of thy Ways: And
though this Wickedness of the Wicked, under many fair pretenses of Confessions
and Professions of God, have labored to put away the way of the Lord, and
through many Devices has the Wicked One in his Agents in their Wickedness, set
up many Corrupt Ways; yet the Way of the Lord remains Pure forever, and can
never be Corrupted, but it remains a True Witness against all Evil and Corrupt
Ways whatsoever. And this Perfect Way of God was the Way of the Upright in
Heart in all Ages, by which they were led out of Evil (though under more
Servitude) before the fullness of time, when it pleased God so to cause his
Light to shine forth in Flesh, in an absolute perfect Dominion over all the
Lusts of the Flesh, where Satan could get no Entrance, though Forty Days
Christ Jesus was Tempted by him; so herein was the Son, who is the Heir of all,
manifested. So all the true Prophets in all Ages, they had their Testimony from
a measure of the Light of that Spirit; and there their Testimony ended (who
were Faithful) and the Law written in Tables of Stone, that was by the Light of
that Blessed Spirit, by which all might see and learn to come to Christ, in
whom the Law is fulfilled: So here is the Prophet, whom Moses spoke of, that
God would raise up, whom all is to hear; and every Soul that will not hear that
Prophet, Destruction attend it.

So let none say in their Hearts, Who shall ascend into Heaven, that is, to
bring this Prophet Christ from above? or, Who shall descend into the deep, that
is, to bring up Christ again from the Dead? For the Word is nigh, even in the
Heart and Mouth; which Word of Faith the Ministers which were True did Preach,
and them which are True do Preach; and herein is the Labor of them whose
Abiding is in the Word, that others may be turned to the Word in the Heart and
Mouth, that by it they may be reconciled unto God: And this Blessed Word was in
the beginning, before words were; All things being made by him, in whom is
Life, and the Life was (and is) the Light of Men, who believe therein: And
though the World did not, nor does not know the Love of God herein, yet he was
and is in the World; and though his Appearance was and is rejected by most, yet
some did and do receive him, who felt and feel his Power to overcome the Lusts
of the Flesh, which is Sin and Evil; which Unspeakable Love of God, shed abroad
in the Hearts of the Primitive Christians, by this Free Gift of his Holy
Spirit, which made them who received the same, who were truly sensible of God's
Love therein, undergo great and grievous things, some things of which may be
read in the Scriptures of Truth. So their Fasting and Prayers being performed
by the Movings and Guidings of that Blessed Principle of God, how were such
preserved by the Power of God, in the Peace of God, wherein their Souls rested
in God? So the Blessed Name of the Lord was unto them a strong Tower (which was
the same to the Righteous in all Ages) but never was a more clearer Discerning
thereof then in this Age; there being a Cloud of Witnesses of the Everlasting
Love of the Everlasting God herein: and so they are Blessed who live up to that
Blessed Principle of God in them, and continue Faithful to the End in the
Testimony thereof: O the Remembrance of them will be had in great Esteem in
Ages and Generations to come.

So now, that which is Chiefest of all, and of greatest Value, let that be
first minded, that all things may be done according to the Will of God; in
order to which a Right Understanding is necessary, the which is better then
Gold and Silver; for the Wicked may possess Gold and Silver, and things visible
to their Hurt, where a Right Understanding is wanting; for if Knowledge and
Understanding be wanting, people perish: Therefore be advised to wait in the
Way of Understanding, the Fear of the Lord God, who made Heaven and Earth, the
Sea, and all things else according to his good Pleasure; here is the beginning
of Knowledge, and to attain to a Right Understanding: for, in the Fear of the
Lord there is no Evil in that Way. So away with Invention and Imaginations of
Fearing God, whilst Conclusions are made, That Sin cannot be parted with; all
Ways made up by men in Sin, are from a Corrupt Understanding: So come to the
Fear of God, and he will teach us his Ways; and all that come there come out
of Evil; for there is no Evil in God's Ways: so that they that are in God's
Way, are out of Evil; by which it plainly appears, that all Ways where
Conclusions are made, That Sin, is in them; or, that they cannot live out of
Sin; or, that they know not a Way out of Sin; all such, where such Conclusions
are made, are out of a Right Understanding, and their Ways are Destructive,
and their Works in them Ways are Destructive, so that all who endeavor to
save their Lives there, do want a Right Understanding; for Transgression, which
is Sin, is the Cause of Death; so all that are raised from Death, are raised
from Sin, the Cause of it: so then, all that keep their Lives there, shall lose
Life; and all that lose their lives there, shall find Life: So Blessed are they
who serve the Living God, they do as they should do; so that is no Evil (but
Good) so let none think in their Perverse Ways, that they shall be fed with
Knowledge and Understanding there (No, no) they will Starve and Perish there
for want of Understanding: so let all deal clearly with themselves, in coolness
and stillness, in the silence of fleshly wisdom, in a true Examination
concerning the ways they live in and let that which is wrong be rejected and
that which is right received; and in that which is Right will be ^^^n what Fast
is Pleasing and Acceptable in God's sight; and that Prayer which will be
Effectual and Prevalent for the good of the Soul in a Right Understanding will
be seen: So now, begin a Fast; come, pity the Oppressed; let the Prisoner go
free; have Compassion on the Poor; break off Imquities by a True Repentance, in
turning from Evil, the Cause of Anguish and Trouble upon the Soul, that the
Soul may be set at Liberty to praise the Lord; and so let hard hearts be melted
and broken down, and the seat of Unbelief, by reason of which the Love of God
in the Light of his Son (...) rejected, and by that means p^^^ souls are kept
in Bondage con^^^^^ ^o the Will of God, let that seat (...) Unbelief be thrown
down; for God (...) greatly displeased at the Presumption of Mankind, who have
exalted themselves in their own wills, where Self exercises Will Worship in a
feigned Humility, whereby the Cross is counted Foolishness. So Christ's
Exhortation, To take up the Cross daily, and deny Self, God's Love therein that
is slighted; the Cross that being without, Fasting that being without, Prayers
that being without, all being done without a Right Understanding; for want of
which Ptetended Fasting is vain, Prayer is vain, and the Conversation of
Mankind is vain and unprofitable, where the will of man is set in Opposition
against the Will of God in his Heavenly Gift, even the Light of his Unerring
Spirit, by which the World is reproved of Evil: and this is, and will be the
World's Condemnation, their sleighting the many Visitations of God's Love, in
that he does manifest unto them what is reprovable in his sight; but they being
unmindful of God's Love therein, by which means their Souls are in great
Bondage under Sin and Corruption; subjected there under a vain Hope by the
Subtilty of the Serpent, That though they live unseparated from Sin, yet they
shall obtain Justification through Christ, and see a good End, or good brought
forth through Sin be never finished; this kind of Persuasion is through strong
Delusions of Satan, whose workings are in a deep Mystery of Iniquity in
pretended Godliness; but his End therein is, to make void that Blessed coming
of Lord and Savior to finish Sin, and to put an End to Unrighteousness, and
thereby to make way for the bringing in Everlasting Righteousness, that souls
in that Blessed Principle of God may rest in Peace.

Now where this is not known, be Awakened, I beseech you, unto Righteousness,
which is God's, and no otherwise man's, but as he becomes stripped of his own
Eyes, and so comes before the Lord with a Broken and Contrite Spirit, and Heart
humbled at his sight, who seacheth it by his Light, and shows to man in the
Cool of the Day what beastly Imaginations are lodging therein; to the end, that
man might lie down at the Feet of his Appearance in a True Fast, in abstaining
from Evil; and Praying in the Spirit, that by the Exercise of God's Love in his
striving therewith, Evil may be overcome, and so the soul set at liberty from
Evil, the cause of Trouble and Anguish, which is upon every soul that is in Evil.

So let every one that names the Name of the Lord depart from Evil. Come Curser
and Swearer, be persuaded to be awakened, and see what a sad Condition thy soul
is in: but if thou will not, but hardenest thy heart, what will the taking the
Name of the Lord into thy Mouth avail thee? Or Unclean Person who art defiled,
and endeavoring to defile others, remember, That none in Vnclaanness can enter
into Heaven; so except thou leavest thy Evil therein, thy Expectations of God's
Kingdom will fail thee.

Come Idolaters, who are making Gods of Gold, and Silver, and Wood, and Stone,
and so are bowing down to the works of your own hands; that is a great
Abomination and Evil, greatly to be lamented, who are so far blinded from the
Appearance of the Light of God's Spirit in your own Hearts, which being taken
heed unto and obeyed, brings to the Knowledge of God; but that Love of God
being rejected, what strangers are you to God, and the Saints of Life? and so
are become Beastly and Brutish in your Understandings, your Bands of
Corruption through sin and iniquity being made strong; and so under strong
delusions are bowing to Pictures to put you in mind of God and the Saints,
though they cannot hear, nor see, nor smell: what savor think you to get out
of them Stocks and Stones? Be Awakened, I beseech you, to Consideration; and
know, that it is some measure of that Grace and Truth which Jesus of Nazareth
was filled with; by Virtue of that all the Saints savor to God, and one unto
another; which Grace has appeared unto all, but the Saints or Believers, were
and are taught by it: so that which convinces of Evil is to them that believe
in it and obey it, an Instructor in the way of Life. So leave your Folly in
Bowing and Cringing to the East, and to you know not what; and answer the Love
of God in his Principle of Light in you, which makes manifest that which is
Evil; and then will the Eye of your Understaning be opened, to the beholding of
him who fills Heaven and Earth with his Presence, so that no Darkness can cover
man from him, who is God of the North, South, East, and West; who will spoil
your glorying, who are boasting your selves of the Antiquity of your Religion,
who first went from the Cross, which is the Power of God, and so got up in a
form of words, and then set the Cross upon the House, of Stone, etc. Alas! your
Religion is seen through; and all who hang upon your Skirts, they must have a
share of the shame, which is coming upon that Adulterated whorish Spirit, which
has led the minds of the people out from a sense of the Royal Law of God
within man, so that the stream of God's Love therein to Mankind, that has been
stopped; and in the Night of Apostasy the stream of Malice, and Envy and Hatred,
that has run in your Streets, where the Innocent Bloodshed lies at your doors.
So it is time you were awakened to a true Repentance, that you may come to the
knowledge of Salvation through the Remission of your sins: for it is the saving
of your souls, I seek, and not the destruction of your bodies; so Truth is my
weapon, which I desire may reach to that of God which is Truth in you; that so
the pure Language, which is Truth, may be restored in all; and the Royal Law of
Love therein may show it self, which gives an Understanding, To love God above
all, and our Neighbors as our selves, and to do to all men as we would they
should do unto us.

Come all you who conceive mischief on your Beds in your hearts, and cannot
rest till you bring it forth into action; now consider what manner of evil this
is, which though it may be covered for a time, if continued in, ruin and
destruction is in the way thereof.

Come you who live in Pride and Idleness, following the lust of the Eye, the
lust of the Flesh and Pride of Life, who live in fullness of Bread and
Wantonness, Feasting and making Merry over the pure Principle of God in you;
this is a great Evil: therefore be admonished to mind that God in you, and
Watch and Pray in the same, that so by that which is good of God, the Evil may
be overcome, and the root and ground judged from whence all evil springs.

Come all you Drunkards and Gluttenous Persons, who waste and spoil the good
Creatures, which are appointed for the necessary use of Mankind; read what is
written in Isa. 5.11, 12. What a miserable life are you in who are attended
with Woe and Misery, who are so far separated from the love of God in his Son,
and the Dominion that is therein to use and order all things aright, according
to the will of God? For want of this knowledge how are many overcome with
Strong Drink? the which having Dominion, how are many there unmanned of that
natural ability of a man, and so lie liable to other Temptations, whereby the
soul lies in bondage? Come now, be persuaded to mind that love of God which in
the Cool, when the Drink is out, shows you what a great evil this is; which if
not departed from, ruin is in that way both of Soul, Body and Estate.

Come you Gamesters of all sorts, who spend your time in Gaming and Sports, who
are coveting an Increase by such unequal and unjust ways, and many spending
their time in such Practices, How many Families are ruined by such a Course of
Life? and what an evil example Parents thereby show to their Children and
Families? This is a great evil, such being an ill savor who are living
therein, both to God, and man who fears God. Therefore be admonished, to break
off these evils by a true Repentance, and learn to redeem time, that a Change
may be witnessed (before you go from hence) by virtue of the Power of Christ,
which often moves against evil: so let not the just always be resisted by the
unjust; but if the just principle of God be minded and joined unto, then will
the unjust be overcome, and the just set up; in which all that dwell will be
good savor in their day, and a good example to all.

Come all you who are exalting a false Birth, where your Ears are stopped and
your Eyes are closed, so that you have neither heard, nor seen, nor handled
that which was from the beginning; even that word of Life (which everlasting
Life was with the Father, and was and is manifested to Believers) from whence
Testimony is given of Gods love therein, where the true fellowship is witnessed
in the Blessed Light of God; which all you, who are exalting a false Birth, do
despise, and speak very evilly of, or at least, very slightly: So the true Heir
has been rejected, and not thought fit to reign; having been called by you who
are exalting the false and untimely Birth, either a Devil (which some have
called him; and others, Natural, or a Fool: by which it may be seen, how the
Serpent's Wisdom has been set by, by the Adulteress, who would fain have her
Bastard to be Heir; for which end how seemingly fair has the Harlot Trimmed
and Decked her self? being arrayed in Purple and Scarlet, and decked with Gold
and Precious Stones and Pearls; her Religion being in her head, from whence
Abominations are let into the Heart; where if the Light appear to search it, it
is mocked and slighted by Ishmael: So that false Prophet he is set up, who
cries out, No Revelation now; so the deceitful heart being after the false
Prophet, gross darkness that covers: so the love of God in the Blessed
appearance of the Light of his unerring Spirit, that is not comprehended; so
the Eye has not seen, nor the Ear heard, neither has it entered into their
hearts, the Mercies and Goodness of God, which is to them that fear him, and
love his appearance in the Heart, where the Light of his Blessed Spirit does
show forth his goodness, from whence is Ministered forth life and strength to
the poor soul, strengthening it against the appearance of evil: so the soul
being made sensible of the Peace of God, and rest through the Revelation of his
Holy Spirit, which causes joy and gladness to the Soul; having found a friend
in its adversity, it sets a high value and esteem of him, and is willing to be
guided and directed by him. So the Harlot is seen, and the false Birth is seen,
and the false Prophet which steals the true Prophets words is seen: so the
Adulteress may Cry long enough, and Scold long enough, and Peep and Mutter, all
her Whineings in seeming Prayers, and Teaching Doctrines all end in filthiness
and sin in her best duties; and yet this Impudent Harlot concludes, There is
none like her; and her Birth is the true Birth; and all the rest are false: But
her deceit is manifest, and her Sorceries and Witchcraft is seen; and a Bed of
Torment is prepared for her: so they are Blessed that fear the Living God, and
sanctify him in their Hearts, who do not commit Leudness with the Harlot, nor
add any thing to the maintaining of her Gallantry.

Come all you Ranters, who have gotten some words of Truth, but do use them in
an exalted spirit, in which you are swimming up and down above the pure stream,
which flows from the pure meek principle of God, the nature of the Water of
Life, which comes from the Fountain of all good, that being to drive away all
filthiness of Flesh; where that has passage, it refreshes and keeps green and
fresh, in a good savor to God and man. But you Ranters having lost its savor,
are exalted above that which is lowly and good, being under a great Imagination
of a knowledge of good and evil, on which, through the subtilty of the Serpent
feeding you, are become dead to any true sense of the Virtue that flows from
the living Power, from whence through disobedience you being shut out: What a
do you are making? some crying out against Meeting, as formal; and that you
feel not the Power that was amongst them: which indeed is no wonder when you
are past feeling, and so being tossed up and down in your minds in an exalted
state, some appearing in a singular pretended Zeal, under a voluntary humility,
as if you were Wiser and Holier then others (the Serpent here having puffed up)
sets a judging the Body, and feeds his members who waits for hurt, as by the
slipping of some through weakness, or the like, and so gets all occasions of
making Parties and Rents, still the Serpent being covered under a pretense of a
higher Attainment; but at length, after some time of exercise in this work, and
through the everlasting love of God in the Body, in preserving it sound and
entire, where his will is done, and a fight given of the Enemy's working
therein, and so not able to prevail: At length many go out in Distraction to
Meetings, and there make sad noises, to prevent (if possible) the going forth
of the Declaration of Truth, as much as in them lies; keeping people from a
Reception thereof by their Babbling and Squalling to Disturb Meetings, it
having plainly appeared. But their Nourishment being from the Vine of Sodom,
disobedience to that which they might be convinced of, being the cause from
whence the first going out was; so the Root being corrupt, the Fruit is
corrupt: so all in time grow dry and withered, being an ill savor therein, and
a stink whilst they live herein upon Earth; so that both the way and end in
that way is destructive. The which may serve for a warning to all who are
convinced of the Truth, to take heed how they slight Gods love therein, in
disobeying that Principle of God in them, which is meek and lowly; and all that
live in true Obedience to it, they live in safety, where evil in uncleanness
cannot enter, nor haughtiness has no place there; but they that answer that
Blessed Principle, they rise in its nature to hate uncleanness and haughtiness;
so in its nature of meekness and lowliness, all who grow here bring forth good
Fruit, which is a Blessed savor in his sight, who is Creator of all; and all
who are grafted into this root, and abiding therein, do feel sap and
nourishment from the same, whereby they spring, grow and flourish in a green,
lively, sensible life of the exercise of God's love to mankind; and so dare not
appear otherwise in the sight of men, then they stand approved in his sight who
sees all things: and so, meeting together to wait upon him, who has all Power
in Heaven and Earth, all gathering together in his Blessed Name, feeling true
Refreshment in his Presence: strength there by is renewed to love God above
all, and to love one another, and to watch for the good in one another; and to
testify against the evil, which may be an occasion of defiling or hurting any;
still waiting in meekness and love, to the end the good may be preserved, and
that which is evil resisted: And though this love by many may be rejected, yet
it is that which will carry them who are exercised therein above the head of
all opposition; and preserve them who keep their Habitation therein out of all
extremes, even to finish their course with Joy and Peace in that Crown of Life
which is everlasting.

Come all you who live in Envy, Hatred, Malice, Strife and Contention, Masters
and Dames of Familes, who are in Branglings, and evil and rash Speakings, and
Discontents; these Fruits proceed from a corrupt and cursed ground; and so is
an ill savor and bad example to your Families: This is a great evil.

And all Children who are Stubborn and Heady, who do not obey your Parents, as
it is meet in the Lord: This is a great evil.

And all Servants who are not Subject and Obedient in your several places, but
are high-minded, and cannot bear Reproofs; but are ready to Answer again, and
to be Disquiet, and Murmur, and Whisper, and to tell Tales to stir up Anger and
Strife: This is a great evil.

NOw to the good in every particular is this writ, even that good Principle of
God; by which if taken heed to, its nature is, to make manifest that which is
evil; and it will not in the least agree with any thing that is evil: That is a
Pearl indeed, which the Earthly mind and wisdom has kept people from the
knowledge of. (but the way of the upright, which was and is out of evil.) And
so the fear of offending God, by obeying his good gift, that is good, and out
of evil; which is a true and right way to a clear understanding what to abstain
and Fast from, and what to Pray in and for according to the will of God. So a
Testimony of the everlasting love of God in his way, which is perfect, many
have received, where the Eye of Understanding has been opened, from which,
that is seen which was from the beginning (even the word of life) in which
there is no Evil: so its good and just that this be confessed to before men, and
great evil to deny it; so its the good which is of God, by which all evil is
overcome; so Blessed are they who overcome the evil by the good, and so are
built and established through the good word of God; by which the soul being
freed from bondage and corruption in sin and evil, from which the soul being
set at liberty, on the unspeakable love of God herein in his Son, manifested to
destroy the Devil's works, which is sin and evil, here is freedom through the
the Son of God's love in Deed and Truth: so that Scripture is fulfilled, If the
Son sets you free, then are you free indeed: whose Blessed freedom is out of
sin and evil.

So the Blessed end of the everlasting love of God, in his coming in the Light
of his unerring Spirit of life and power, to finish sin, and put an end to
transgression, this is seen and known to be the richest and choicest of his
many mercies to mankind; the which mercy of God being rejected, or obstructed
through the vain imaginations and evil ways set up by man's wisdom in the
fallen estate from a right understanding; where conclusions are made, That sin
cannot be overcome: I say to all such who are at ease under that conclusion,
they are fled to lying vanities, where being from a sense of God's mercies in
his Son, and there dwelling and abiding, their habitation is in Darkness, their
Fasting is in Darkness, their Prayers are in Darkness, their Fellowship is in
Darkness, and their Professions and Confessions of God and Christ are in
Darkness, where they know not what they say, or what they do, being in
Darkness; and there reading the Testimony of the holy men of God, they are
quite blind to what the Will of God is therein: so through Darkness the way of
God that being hid, how many ways have been set up in the dark? the Eye, that
should see, that being shut; and the Ear, that should hear, that being stopped;
the Vultures eye, that being open, which could never see the way of God: so
people under gross darkness, being led about there by the Vulterous eye, an
evil eye; how are they on heaps about the words, being on heaps in Parties? so
heaps in Parties being up, one Party cries out, Lo here; another, Lo there: and
so many Parties with their Lo here, and Lo there, are set up; one Party crying
out, Stand further off, my way of building and fashioning in Professions and
Confessions of God and Christ, is better, and more righteous then thine:
Another Party climbing up another way, cries down that fashion, and sets up
another singular way of pretended righteousness; then, Stand further off; my
way of Confession is best of all; (till another rises from the same imaginary
ground,) and so being blind in that eye which should see; and in that wretched
condition, having put evil for good, and good for evil; and light for darkness,
and darkness for light; and so in the darkness and evil, what labor and pains
have the heaps of Parties taken to make darkness light, striving by all the
Arts and means imaginable to Eclipse and Darken the Light of the Son; and for
the effecting their designs, what Curious Workmen in Flourishing, and Painting,
and Daubing and Smoothing have the many Parties set up? being herein agreed, as
plainly appears: That darkness must be light; and whosoever speaks to the
contrary, they all wonder at that work: For say the several Parties in effect,
Though indeed we do much differ in our fashions in Confessions and Professions,
and therein do many times quarrel, and fall out, to the shedding of much Blood,
as by experience is known; yet in this we do much agree [in spurning against
the light which lights all mankind.] And though Christ said, I am the light
of the World; and though God be called, light; and though it be said, In him is
life, and the life is the light of men; and, That God, who is light, searches
the heart, etc. And though those who Ministered from Christ did, by their
Declarations and Writings, endeavor to turn people to the Light (to God, who
is Light) and though he be the Father of Lights, and all that are begotten by
him, are begotten by his light, and brought forth into the light, which shining
in the heart, clears the understanding of darkness and error; and though what
is reprovable be made manifest by the Light (Immanuel, God who is light with
his people.) Notwithstanding all this, and much more that is upon record, how
ignorant are the many Sects and Parties of this way, by reason of the esteem
they have of darkness; wherein they being ignorant of God's Righteousness, how
in their blind zeal do they go about to establish their own ways and
righteousness, and though no better then filthy Rags? So darkness that being
over people, and in the dark, corrupt ways being set up, from whence sin is let
into the heart, and so the soul is in bondage to corruption; the Religions
being in the head, how giddy are these Sects and Parties? turning and wheeling
about, cringing and bowing at every turn, the sting of the Venomous Beast that
being nourished in the heart by the unbeliever; concluding where he takes
place, That it is a dangerous principle to hold forth such a way that is out of
sin, or to tell of perfection? which darkness and blindness of theirs, under
many fair shows of Professions, what strange effects have been brought forth?
through these many Sects and Parties, in their ways by which they are blinded,
and cannot see God's Way, which is Truth, in which there is no Error (therefore
perfect) but for want of the knowledge of this, I say, what strange effects
have been brought forth by the many Sects and Parties? whose strength has been
an Arm of Flesh, the which, whilst one Party has been strongest in, how have
they shown it, in suppressing and keeping down the others? but giddiness being
through the Religions, being in the head, a time of turning round again coming,
how has another Party exercised the same power, and so one after another? A
corrupt fountain of Imaginations and Inventions being opened amongst Apostates
from the Truth: How in this night of darkness has Envy, Malice and Hatred run
currently, and drove Meekness, Holiness and Truth quite out of doors? so the
way of Truth that having been out, the Commandment that was given forth in the
way of God, To love him above all, and one another, that has been out; the
Sects and Parties having been blinded through sin, in that blind Sodomites
estate, how have they (who have had the Names of Christians) been groping and
feeling for the door which lets into Peace? but let them bring forth their
experiences after twenty, forty, sixty years Trial, some more, someless; and
don't think to cover your selves any longer with telling what you read of
others experiences, whilst you are resisting the just pure gift of God; for a
day of search is come, and coming: So Woe to them that cover, but not with God's
Spirit.

So all you Blind Guides, who are leading the blind, you must needs fall into
the pit of destruction together, if you do not repent of your evil in refisting
the just principle of God in you. So do not think by your twining and twisting
in your wise definitions or distinctions about evil, whilst you put good for
evil, that you shall mend the matter thereby; for good is good, and that is of
God, from whence all good comes; and evil is evil, and that is of the Devil,
from whence all bad comes: So plain-dealing is a Jewel, which many Honest
hearts have sought for, and have waited on God to be seasoned therewith, which
makes savoury in his sight who is Creator of all, a Mighty power over all, whom
all the Ministers of Christ turned People to, that they might not continue in
darkness, nor under Satan's power; but that they might know his Light, who has
all Power in Heaven and Earth, and so to live subject under this higher Power,
by which Power the true eye comes to be opened; and by a true understanding is
witnessed God's love to the World in his Son Christ Jesus, and what manner of
love that was in that Blessed Act, in Suffering without the Gates of Jerusalem;
so in the same Will, which was the Sanctifier of Believers, Believers now are
sanctified and cleansed from evil, to make mention of the Name of the Lord in
Truth and Righteousness, in which there is no Evil. So let him that names his
Holy Name depart out of evil, least the good Spirit of God leave striving with
him, and so the soul be sealed down in evil, where Tribulation and Anguish will
never have an end.

Come therefore be awakened, I beseech you, unto Righteousness, and repent with
that repentance never to be repented of, in ceasing to do evil: And let the
example of Nineveh be before you, Jonah 3.8, 9, 10. Cry mightily unto God; yea,
let them turn every one from his evil way, and from the violence that is in
their hands; who can tell if God will turn, and repent, etc. And God saw their
Works, that they turned from their evil way, and God repented of the evil that
he had said, that he would do unto them, and he did it not.

So this by the way; Fast as long as you will, Pray as long as you will, Cry as
loud as you will, if evil be not turned from, all will be vain: So evil, that
is within man, and God's love has been to make it manifest by the light of his
Spirit within; so man being convinced of, and reproved for evil, if he heeds
not reproofs, but perishes in his evil, then his destruction is of himself; but
if through this love of God, shed abroad in the hearts of people, they be
awakened thereby, and so cleave to the good, and follow and obey it, then will
that which was a Reprover for Evil, be an Instructor in a Blessed Life, where
sin nor evil cannot enter (nor be) neither is there any agreement with darkness
in that life in which there is no evil; but the soul being in this liberty,
then, Come, I will tell you what the Lord has done for my soul; and my soul,
and all that is in me praises the Lord. So here is the Blessed Fountain opened,
where the streams of God's love are felt to run, which drive back the streams
of malice, uncleanness and abominations, which have corrupt mankind. So Blessed
are they whose Eyes are to the Living Fountain, and wait for the rising of the
springs thereof in their hearts, from whence the truly thirsting soul comes to
be satisfied, refreshed and strengthened, through a true sense of the springing
up of this Well of Water, which he gives who has all power in Heaven and
Earth; the which Well of Water springing unto everlasting life, all being
dipped or plunged under this, the soul comes to be washed from corruption: and
so made white as Snow; the which is an everlasting ordinance, ordained of God
for a perpetual Covenant; the which all that would know Salvation through the
remission of sins, they must wait to be confirmed in this Blessed Covenant,
where the Blessed Unity stands out of sin; for there is no evil in this
Covenant: So all that come to be concerned here, must first agree in their
hearts to cease from sin and evil, and then to wait for the rising of the Pure,
and so to watch in the Pure against all appearances of that which is corrupt,
and so to grow up in the Pure to a Blessed Dominion over the corruptible; and
so in the pure measure of God's Spirit to receive and use the Creatures of God
with Thanksgiving, where every Creature is good when they are so received: so
to the Pure all things are Pure; but to the Defiled and Unbelieving there is
nothing Pure: So the way of God, that is Pure and Undefiled; and Blessed are
they who are Undefiled and keep (and are kept) in that Blessed way to finish
their days, where the Soul rests in Peace with God, the which is the will of
God (according to which is this writ) So to him be glory and honor, from the
rising of the Pure of himself, forever and for ever, Amen.

By a Servant of the Lord, Stephen Smith.

THE BLESSED WORKS OF THE Light of God's Holy and BLESSED SPIRIT Exalted above
the works of Darkness.
COme, sit down together in a deep Silence out of all fleshly Wisdom, forgiving
all Trespasses; that he that sits upon his Throne, who said, behold I make all
things new, that he may forgive all your Trespasses; and then wait for
acceptance into Gods pure holy Covenant, his holy Law in the Mind that it may
be writ in the Heart, and they shall not teach every man his Neighbor and
every man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord; for all shall know me from the
least to the greatest; for I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and
their sins and inibuities will I remember no more; A blessed day, magnified be
the Lord, whose Works praise him for ever (and not good works out of wicked
workers mouths) to these mighty works of the mighty God, the which he is
working and bringing to pass through his mighty power, are appointed that
mankind should live in the enjoyment of them, to the praise and honor of his
Maker for ever.

And that it may be distinguished between evil workers who have got the good
words, and the good works, from whence all true and good and gracious words
came, (observe.)

In one of the Collects appointed in the Book of Common Prayer, it is thus
written,

Almighty and everlasting God, which of thy tender love toward man, has sent
our Savior Christ Jesus to take upon him our Flesh, and to suffer Death upon
the Cross, that all mankind should follow the example of his great Eumility,
mercifully grant that we both follow the example of his Patience and be made
partakers of his Resurrection, etc.

Now mind; To pray for this, that is common, and used in the old World of
Transgression, where iniquity and sin is, which separates from God, and are out
of his Blessed Work: But to be in the Humility and Patience, this is God's
Work, where his Will is done on Earth as it is in Heaven: So that if people
would but so far condescend to the Will of God, as to sit down in coolness in a
true Silence of all the works of the fleshly wisdom, would they not agree with
us, who are in Scorn called Quakers, in Judgment at least, though it may be not
in Practice, viz. That Words without Effects, are as Dreams and Chass, (to the
Wheat, the Substance.) So he that has a Dream, let him tell his Dream; but he
that has Gods Word let him speak it: What is the Chaff to the Wheat? Is not my
Word like a Fire, says the Lord, and like a Hammer, that breaks the Rock in
pieces, Jer. 23. I am against the Prophet, says the Lord, that steals my Word
from his Neighbor, who use their Tongues, and say, he says, and Prophecy
false Dreams, and tell them, and cause people to err by their Lies and
Lightness. And so now in Coolness, when the works of the enemy are down, viz.
Prejudice and Passion, etc. Then by a little work of God, in its least
appearance, by which mankind is made sensible, they may see by this small
distinction what it is that we, who are in Scorn called Quakers, stand for,
(and against:) And when the Eye of your Understanding is opened, to behold his
glorious works whom you have pierced; then will you love us, whom so many have
hated, because of our Testimony of God's Works. Do but see how you first hated
the Light of God in your selves, before that great Darkness came over you to
hate us, who are called Quakers, because we are bowed unto Christ's Spirit, the
true Christians Spirit, and therein have in some measure partaken of his Cup,
out of which some indeed have drunk very deep, even to the following of his
great Humility and Patience, even to Death, as in the New England Sufferings
may be seen (by those cruel imaginary Christians, whose wicked hands have been
deep in the shedding of Innocent Blood. And though through Ignorance the
Sufferings of God's people has been much in Old-England, yet they have not
been in that desperate kind as there; where doubtless they are more drunk with
the Whores Cup of Sorceries and Witchcraft, then those of that kind are here in
Old-England, whose spirit is felt; but that their Wings are cut, so cannot fly
at that rate, which otherwise they would be at; for now their Hands are tied,
how wonderfully do their Tongues go? by which its plain they have no Bridle,
but are set on Fire of Hell, wondering, despising and fretting against the work
of the Lord in this the day of his power, though thousands are raised by it, to
declare and publish the same words, in life and conversation, etc.

And now you vain and empty Professors and Notion its, who are saying in your
dark and imaginary conceivings of things; that if you had been in the Scribes,
and Pharisees days, you would not have done as they did: But come, be patient
a little; the works of Truth have a good tendency, though they be bitter to the
guilty for the present; come I say, look where you are; by the Light you may
see; you must see by it at last; it were better for you if you would let your
Eye be opened now, and see that offensive Eye pulled out which has been
offended at God's works all this while: So do not harden your hearts in this
day of God's power being manifest, least you be cut off from his rest for ever.
Come therefore you that are judging others that did wickedly in their
Generation, by resisting God's holy Spirit, so had none of the works of
Revelation; come see now what Latitude your works are under: If you be in the
same liberty in the flesh as you were in, its no matter what you say: Come now
to the Trial; what experience have you of the operation of God's Spirit? How
much of the mind and will of God has it revealed to you? Can you say, Thus
says the Lord, by the certain knowledge of the Revelation of God's holy
Spirit? Or have you only talked of it, as the Jews did, who said, we have God
for our Father, when they were doing the Devil's works? Come do not stop your
Ears; Have you heard the voice of God or seen his shape? or are you ignorant of
it, as they were who accused Christ, as if he was bearing false witness? Nay,
come further; Have you not said, That Revelations are ceased, and thereby shut
up the way of the Kingdom of God, and from the knowledge of his Righteousness
by your wicked works, in going about to establish your own Righteousness, and
works therein for term of life.

Come you that have set up the Law and Covenant without (above the Law and
Covenant within; are not these your own works? and have not they made you as
blind as your Fathers, the Scribes and Pharisees, that you can neither see nor
hear?) but in your blind zeal are persecuting Christ's near Relations, who
follow him in their Generation, even by the drawings of his Father's Spirit
unto Humility and Patience, who is the way, in whom God's Will was done: And
did not Christ give Testimony of Relations, his Mother, his Brothers and
Sisters, who did his Father's Will? And is not this to be done on Earth? And is
it not the will of God that we should speak the Truth at all times, and that we
should be led and guided by the Spirit of Truth into all Truth? (is there any
sin in the guide:) And is not this Christ of God the same Anointing or Teacher,
as he was in the beginning of the World? Was not he before Abraham was? And is
not he the same yesterday, to day and for ever, as he was in the beginning, who
was David's Lord, and the Holy men's Lord in all Ages? And is not he the
Covenant by which all must come unto God? Was he not given for a Covenant, and
a Light to enlighten people, and to be their Salvation, to lead and command his
people? And must not his sheep hear his voice? And is not he the same that he
was in the beginning? And is not this the Precious tried Stone, which the Wise
Builders, building without, are confounded and stumble at, even the highest
Notionists in the fleshly Wisdom, in their highest conceivings about the holy
men's words? Come, examine your selves, and see whether Christ be not in you,
except you be Reprobates: You unbelievers, how has the God of the World led
you about, and blinded you, that you cannot see the Light of his Glorious
Gospel? Come see the cause; have you not been making Provision for the flesh in
the first place, and answering the Lusts thereof after the glory of the old
World of sin and iniquity? Has not respect of persons been in your Eye, and
filthy lucre, and praise of men, and greeting in Marketplaces? Have you not
preached and prayed in your own wills, and run for gifts and rewards in your own
wills? and is not all this Honor to be had below? And have you not sought it
before the Honor of God's work in your hearts? And is not this the cause of
your Ignorance of God's Kingdom, and his Righteousness (Christ) and his
Relations, his Mother, Sisters and Brethren, who are sanctified and blessed
through the will of God, where it is done in Truth and Righteousness? and where
that it is done, do not such confirm in truth and reality all God's Blessed and
holy works without in all generations? So do not envy and hate the people
called Quakers, for maintaing the works of God's holy Spirit within them; for
there are many of them have been as high Talkers of the works of God in holy
men without, as you are; but found not such Salvation, as to venture souls, and
bodies, and estates, till we came to cease from our own labors in our own
willings and runnings; and so our hearts were bowed unto God's holy will in the
deep silence of all fleshly reasonings and consultations: So by the works of
God's holy and blessed Spirit the way of God came to be made manifest in us;
the which is a pure, Holy, undefiled way, Christ, the same yesterday, to day,
and for ever, as he was in the beginning without guile, without sin; no
iniquity is in him; he that is the hope of Glory, the great Mystery made
manifest in us Gentiles, who in former times, when without knowledge of him in
the World, had Lords many, and Masters many, and feigned Faiths and Beliefs
concerning him many and diverse: But when we were given up clearly to seek the
Kingdom of God, without any reserve of making provision for the flesh, then the
New Jerusalem, God's building, came down from above, the Mother of all the
Faithful, where no evil can be conceived, whose Children in her are made free
from the Law of sin and death; and this blessed City has no need of the Sun,
neither of the Moon to shine in it; for the Glory of God does lighten it, and
the Lamb is the Light thereof. This blessed habitation is prepared for God's
people, who love the Light of his appearance, and delight to do his will.

So away with all false Accusations from all you false Accusers of the people
called Quakers, who say, we expect to be Saved by a righteousness of our own,
and by works of our own: If it were so, as you falsely and vainly do say, then
might we not keep in the broad way, with you Hypocrites, who are gotten above
the daily Cross, and so led about by the Thief above the door, where you Foxes,
who are cunning in hunting about after others works, have holes enough to creep
and cringe into to keep you in the glory of the World of sin and iniquity,
where you have had a long Trade in your imaginations, conceiving God's works in
his blessed Instruments without you, whose Lines you have long made your boast
of; so your Lies are upon your own heads. For, this I testify, and the
Testimony is the same in thousands, who are witnesses of the works of God's
holy Spirit, in some degree or measure, viz. That it is in Christ, God's
Covenant, in which we hope for Salvation, and in no Covenant or Work of man's;
and in this Covenant we are made a good savor unto God, and one unto another:
And acceptance with God is obtained no other way but by the one pure offering,
without spot or blemish, by the effectual workings of the Eternal Spirit, where
the Blood of Christ is witnessed to be sufficient to purge Consciences of dead
works, and so to serve God in the New and Living way, which he has consecrated
for us through the Vail, his flesh: And therefore all who are thus partakers of
God's works, by the Revelation of God's Spirit, being true witnesses of the
Blessing of God in this one unspotted offering, we cannot but confess him
before men, denying all imaginary offerings in men's wills, where their Garments
are filled with spots and blemishes, and their Consciences are defiled with
dead works of their own Inventions and Works, the which having some outward
show of Holiness may recommend unto man, who lives in the same, but not unto
God; and therefore experience in the works of God's blessed Spirit has taught
us to deny them.

And by this Christ of God, the Mediator of the New Covenant, we have
Acceptance with God, from whence the knowledge of Salvation comes, by the
Remission of offenses and sins; and therefore we deny all false and vain
Mediatorship of vain man in his works of Conceivings and Imaginations
concerning this Mediator; the which is really to be enjoyed and known by the
effectual workings of God's Eternal Spirit, to the Consolation and Peace of
Souls who partake thereof.

And through the blessed Works of this blessed Spirit of God the deaf Ear comes
to be opened, to hear the voice of the one true powerful Shepherd, who alone
does feed the Sheep of his Pasture with that convenient and wholesome Food, the
which causes soundness of Heart and Mind, and therein does he take care to
preserve and keep his Sheep in a living sense of his Love and Fatherly care,
who calls to his Sheep when the Lion, the Woolf and the Bear appears, and
strengthens them who take pleasure in hearkening and obeying his voice. So to
the one Shepherd and one Fold, Testimony is given, unto whom all that are erred
and strayed must return, if ever they witness deliverance from evil and
preservation from danger. So we deny all false Shepherds whose works of
darkness tend to the scattering people in their minds and understandings from
the sense of God's Works in Christ, in reconciling lost mankind, and bringing
them home unto himself (the substance of all) of which the Law outward was but
a shadow of good things the which are enjoyed in this one Shepherd and Bishop,
who takes care and oversight of Souls; magnified and praised be his holy and
glorious works of Redemption for ever and ever.

And so to the Honor of this one blessed Physician of Souls, whose Works are
certain and effectual, the which has been tried by many wounded Souls, who
could find no Cure without by the foolish and vain Physicians without, who are
mere Deceivers, and Daubers up of people through their Enchantments and
Sorceries, by which they have made a long Prey of people through their fair
Speeches, getting their Money through mere Deceit and Flattery, intruding into
things they have no knowledge of, in which Works they are puffed up above the
pure holy Works of God's blessed Spirit, the Revelation of which they have
denied, they in lieu thereof have set up their own Imaginations and Conceivings
in the Revelation of their Singular exalted Spirit, the Flattery and Deceit of
which having taken with people, how are Nations corrupted by it? and what
Misery have these wicked Works brought into this Nation? God having given
signal Testimonies of dislike unto them by Plague, Fire and Sword, and by many
Messengers whom he has drawn near unto himself by his works, by the hands of
them Messengers has he sent warning upon warning, and exhortation upon
exhortation, with tenders of his blessed works of reconciliation upon just and
equal terms, of his enemies repenting, and turning unto him by turning from
their wickedness: But what Entertainment these Servants of the Living God have
found by these foolish Physicians, who are mere Time-servers for their own
ends, whose refuge is an Arm of Flesh to defend their wicked corrupt works,
which have filled the Nations with their Defilements, who by their Flatteries
have drawn a Compliance from Magistrates, to punish the Messengers and Servants
of the most high God for telling the Truth from a certain knowledge of the
works of God's Spirit of Truth, and therein testifying against the works of
error and darkness. But the sufferings that have been for this love of God in
and through them who have been Instruments in his hands, may through search be
known; so Testimony is given against them, who are in the exaltation of works
without, and denying the immediate blessed works of God's holy Spirit in its
Operations and Revelations of the Mind and Will of God unto wounded Souls
within.

And further concerning these blessed works of God's righteous holy Spirit, the
which are attended with Peace, unto which way many have been turned; and
becanse some loiter, and are sloathful, and yet remain unconverted of the old
man's corrupt words and deeds, and therefore not fit to put on the new man,
Christ Jesus; and some who were in the way, do turn out of it again; and some
fall headlong down to Perdition: Oh! what occasion have the watchers for evil
taken at this, and thereby set at naught God's works in his holy righteous
Spirit, and them that abide therein, making conclusions in their dark imaginary
conceivings of the works of God, That he has no such perfect works now adays;
but that all are fallible and changeable: And so measure and weigh the things
of God in their corrupt false measure and balance, which things are
Abomination in the sight of God. So Testimony is given to God's blessed works,
though many are so brittle that they will not abide them; yet notwithstanding
God's works in and through his holy Spirit of Truth, are righteous, holy,
perfect in every degree and measure, and remains firm in goodness, and
unchangeable, there being no spot nor blemish in them, the which praises them
for ever, out of which none shall ever find acceptance of him. Mutter, peep,
whine and scold as long as you will, your works of darkness must down, which
have corrupted the Nations, which is cause of the great Judgments past in this
Nation, and the greater yet to come; For the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of
God, is gone out against wicked workers and works; and thus says the Lord, No
Peace to the wicked, their prayers are abomination in my sight. So whatsoever
your professions and coverings therein be, of your talkings and imaginations
concerning the gift of God, which is Life Eternal, you being really out of it,
in your own imaginary parts and gifts, in comprehending the works done without
you, and so not sensible of any real, perfect, pure work of God's holy Spirit
in you, the which is the cause you are so dark, and wickedly blinded to plead
for sin, the which is accompanied with the wages of death; the cause of death
being sin, the which remaining, the effects cannot cease, even death and
corruption from that venomous sting over all flesh that is corrupted with it.
So for shame leave your false Accusations against an innocent people, called by
the Name of Quakers, for testifying of the works of God's holy Spirit, the
which are perfect in every degree, and therefore there is not the least sin nor
evil in them. So all you who say, You are not without sin in your best duties;
I say, they are all works of your own (which blind and hide God's works from
you.) And as you may read of the works of God's Spirit in Mordicai, how they
could not bow to the Pride and Arrogance of Haman; and also, the works of God's
Spirit in Daniel, how they could not bow to them that would have restrained and
limited them; and also the works of Gods Spirit in Shadrach, Meshech and
Abednego, how they could not bow to the Golden Image, set up by Nebuchadnezar,
though Laws under Penalties of Death in a Cruel manner was before them; and
also, the works of God's holy Spirit in the Primitive Christians, through the
strength of which they under-went hard and grievous things under the spirit of
Antichrist, which got up in a form of good words, in the pleasures and vanities
of the works of the fleshly wisdom, the which have been kept up by the same
wisdom, by the Arm of flesh, under which the Innocent people, who are true
witnesses of the works of God's Spirit have suffered very deeply in this Age,
the which cannot be hid, though the cause for which they have thus suffered is
so far hid that it cannot be believed, though they have been wonderfully
declared of. But it is Mordecai, Daniel, Shadrach, Mesh^ch and Abednego's God,
which we, who are in scorn called Quakers, do worship in and by the effects and
blessed Operation of his own blessed Spirit, wherein stands our confidence, and
not in Flesh; and our Faith, Belief and Hope is in him, that he will turn the
Hearts of our enemies unto us, though many will perish in their gainsaying. So
over all the works and powers of darkness in our Faith and Belief, that the
holy righteous works of God's blessed Spirit shall be exalted, and the God of
Truth in and through his blessed works, in preparing and fitting the hearts of
people, the knowledge of him shall increase, till it spread over all. And for
this purpose has God raised many, contrary to the wisdom of the World, in whom
he has made known his Righteous Works, who have unity and fellowship therein
(who are true laborers therein) purely out of love to God and his blessed
works, in good will and true-love to all men, that all may taste of the
goodness of God, the experience of which will bring mankind to be of one mind
and heart, and therein to agree to praise and magnify God, who shows man his
Thoughts, to whom belongs honor and glory for ever.

And now all you Leaders of the People, in all forms and fashions, who are
denying the works of the Divine Power of God in its blessed operation and
powerful workings, in setting free them who are heavy laden and weary through
the enemies works of sin and iniquity, the which you say cannot be overcome;
therefore you are denyers of the sufficiency of God's works and his kingdom,
wherein dwells righteousness, peace and joy, in and through effectual workings
of God's holy Spirit; the which, though you say in words, Thy Kingdom come, thy
Will be done, etc. But being sayers, and not doers, you are so darkened that
with all your own wills and mights you are strengthening the old Kingdom of
transgression, where sin and iniquity abounds, the Devil's works: Was it not
by reason of transgression that the first Law, the first Covenant, was added,
which was written in Tables of Stone? And was not this in force till the Seed
of Life and Power, the coming of the Messiah, to finish Transgression, and to
put an end to Sin, and so bring in everlasting Righteousness, God's Kingdom?

Now all you blind Leaders of the blind, is not here God's second Covenant,
writ in the heart, into which all must come that come unto God, where his Light
is to shine, who is the True Light that enlightens every man that comes into
the World? And if this righteous Law be taken heed unto, will it not judge Lust
when it rises in the heart? And will it not judge Anger when it rises in the
heart? And will it not judge every desire of breaking Promise, when it arises
in the heart? And will it not judge every hasty and froward Action and
Lightness, when they appear in the heart? And is not all that proceeds from
this righteous Law and Covenant of God in the heart Pure Truth, Yea and Nay?
And what is more then plain Truth, Yea and Nay, is it not judged by this pure
Law in the heart? And are not all fotbidden to Swear by this one Lawgiver, who
is able to Save or to Destroy? And must not his righteous Law and Decree take
place, though many Laws through darkness and Ignorance may be made against it?
And must not all that come to Sion, the City of the Living God, be redeemed
through these righteous judgments? And all that will not come under this
righteous Law and Government, where Mercy and Peace kisses, and Truth and
Righteousness is set over all; is it not just that they be left to Judgment
without Mercy? So is not Destruction from Self-willing and running of people
out of the counsel and knowledge of the will and mind of the living God? And is
not the Salvation of every Soul in and through the righteous Decrees, and just
and holy Laws of God, which is Light in every Conscience? And must not all come
to Salvation come first to the way and means that God has ordained? And is not
the second coming of Christ, in the Light of his Holy Spirit, the way by which
all must come unto God, the which is without spot, without guile? And must not
all that come unto God come unto him in this one blessed savoury offering? And
is not this Christ of God the same yesterday, to day and for ever as he was
before Abraham was, and so the same in the beginning of all things? And must
not all that come to God, come out of Transgression, the cause why mankind was
drove from the presence of God? And is not this Christ of God the way out of
Transgression, who was obedient and subject to the will of his Father in all
things? And must not they, all that are saved, be brought into this blessed
Covenant of Life, the end God's great love in his Son manifested to the World,
that through him they might not abide and perish in Darkness; but through
believing and obeying that second coming and appearance of the Light of him,
they might have the Light and Understanding of the Life of him, the one blessed
Offering, that perfects for ever them that are sanctified?

And now all you blind Leaders of the blind, under all your imaginary lifeless
Confessions and Professions of God and Christ, what strength of Arguments do
you use in your perverse Wills and Affections to strengthen the old World of
Transgression in sin and iniquity? whereby you go about with all your might to
make void the second Covenant which is without fault, and so you shut up the
way to God's Kingdom and the knowledge of his Righteousness, by laboring and
moiling in your vain service and works to establish your own Righteousness, and
dark works therein? And by this fruitless labor and travel, what darkness and
blindness have you brought over the Nations, through your ignorant Conc^^vings
of those gracious words, which were spoken by the effectual working and moving
of God's holy Spirit in and through holy men, the which was for a blessed end
spoken, even to turn people from the darkness, which was over them by reason of
their transgression, unto the true witness in them, the Light makes manifest
all that is reprovable and wicked in mankind, the which being turned from, and
the Light obeyed, that they may be led to the knowledge of God, that they may
not be without God in the World, whom to know is Life Eternal? And so Light is
sown for the Righteous, that through this blessed Seed the Serpen^'s head may
be bruised, and kept under in all; and so is way made to put on the Heavenly
Image again, by being led and guided out of Darkness by the Light of the
Emanuel, in and through every blessed and glorious degree of his works to the
mark of that price, the measure and stature of the fullness of Christ Jesus, the
Heavenly Man, the Heavenly Image; as many as are baptized into Christ, put on
Christ.

Now I say unto you blind Leaders of the blind, who have got some few of the
gracious words and works of the righteous m^n of God, therefore I say but few
of them, because there is but little upon record of those mighty works, which
did then show forth the wonderful power of God in and by the effectual workings
of his holy blessed Spirit, the which, if all had been written, the World could
not have contained the Books; and of that which was written, you have but a
part, with which you blind Leaders of the blind have made a long Trade, in
Wresting, Perverting and Corrupting to your own destruction, making them look
every way but the right in your imaginary Conceivings thereof. So wrong you are
in your Judgments, who have denied the effectual workings of God's holy Spirit,
that what in you lies by your works of darkness, you are making void God's holy
Law and Covenant, as to any true understanding or knowledge of it in the mind
and heart: And so building your selves up in Imaginations and Conceivings, what
strangers are you to God's holy work, in and by the effectual working of his
holy Spirit within man? How brutish are you in your understandings, to stand
and wonder, and some to despise, till they perish at the news of these works,
though God has raised many faithful Witnesses, who have declared and given
Testimony to them, even to the laying down their Lives, and many their
Liberties, and in great measure their Estates, whereby it has plainly showed,
that this is the time and season wherein God is making known his mighty power,
for the subduing and bringing under the power of darkness, that the Kingdoms of
this World may become the Kingdoms of God; and that the Kingdom of his Son,
which is in Righteousness, Peace and Joy of his blessed holy Spirit may be set
over all? And is not this according to that Prayer, Thy Kingdom come, thy Will
be done on Earth, etc. Now consider, are not all those ways destructive to
mankind that are made up in the dark Conceivings of man, without the Light of
understanding the will of God herein? And by your works of darkness, in
opposing the blessed effectual works of God's holy Spirit, what misery and
consusion have you brought your selves and the Nations into, where you lie in
heaps in Controversies about the works and words without, till the enemy's
works of darkness be overgrown in you, by which you are so droven from the
presence of God, and the Light of his Countenance, that you are greatly
confounded, kicking and stumbling at the precious stone, the which in your
fleshly worldly wisdom you think too mean to be in your Buildings? by reason of
which how many fashions are your Building of? reeling and staggering from one
fashion to another, soaring alost in your airy imaginations of the things of
God, in using your Wits and Arts to bend the holy men's Testimonies to your
corrupt Wills and Affections: And so much more as you strive in these works, so
much more you are, and must be confounded: What a sad work have you herein
taken in hand? and what vast Sums of Money have you exacted out of Nations to
maintain the Pride and Arrogance of your hearts herein?

Oh! that there were such a heart in people to sit down before the Lord, that
they may partake so much of his works as to open the Eye of their
understandings, that they see over these works of darkness, where nothing is
good nor pleasant to the truly hungering and thirsting Souls after God's
Righteousness: How miserably have these Nations been cheated by these blind
Guides, who have exacted abundance of Wages under pretense of being Healers and
Curers of the Nations; but are now found by the Effectual Workings of the Light
of God's holy Spirit to be the chief Instruments of the letting in of Darkness,
Corruption and Abominations that reign on the Earth; through that adulterated
Spirit, the Mother of all Harlots, who are departed from the true Spouse, and
so running and hunting after others blessed works and experiences, have set up
Trades in their Arts of telling and boasting of others Lives and Works, where
that adulterated Spirit has covered them, who are corrupted with her Sorceries
and Witchcraft under various fashions of Confessions and Professions of God and
his Christ? But underneath these coverings are the same wicked hands by which
the Just has suffered, and been rejected, and set at naught in all Ages.

And through the blessed works of the Light of God's holy Spirit these corrupt
workers and works of darkness being discovered, and a Righteous Testimony in
Thousands that stand against them; what a sad work do these blind Leaders make
to hide themselves from the wrath of the Lamb that is coming upon them, looking
back to the several Traditions, Customs and Commands of men, from whence they
drive several establishments upon fleshly rotten Foundations, as Covenant, and
Directory, of man's, none of God's Foundation: Christ, God's Foundation, is a
pure, holy, unspotted Foundation, where God's Wisdom and Counsel directs in and
through the works of his holy Spirit, the which are perfect and good in every
degree thereof, by which people are built up a Spiritual house, to the honor
and praise in and through God's blessed works forever.

So to God's Covenant and Works must all mankind be brought under; (that are
redeemed and made alive to God;) therefore we deny the Presbyterians Covenant
and Directory, as being but a mere Parcel of Conceivings and Imaginations,
which tends to hide the holy Covenant, and Foundation of the Righteous people
in Generations past, and now present in being (who were and are built upon the
sure Foundation, which God has laid, and thereon in Covenant with his
righteous holy works.)

And concerning your Foundation, who are built upon a Church-Faith, made up by
an Assembly of Diviners out of their own Brain, in the fleshly Comprehensions;
its man's work, full of blemishes and spots (and not God's,) God's Foundations
and Works thereon are pure and holy, without spot, wrinkles or blemish. And
forasmuch as your made up Faith and Works tend to the making void the precious
Faith of God's Elect, which is the gift of God, the which purifies the heart,
and works by love, and gives victory over the old World of Transgression and
sin, without which there is no pleasing God: And so to this one Faith, one
Baptism, and one Lord, Testimony is given, and against all feigned Faiths, the
works of men's hands, the which are in wickedness, by which the Just was slain.

And concerning that head of the Beast, which is branched out into several
Horns in feigned Humility and Will Worship, intruding into things which they
are not led into by the Light of God's holy Spirit, and therefore their
Foundation being not from a certain knowledge of the immediate works of God's
holy and blessed Spirit in them; But are in their own willings and running into
Imaginations and Conceivings about the Practices of the holy men of God; but
being out of their Spirit and Works therein, what dark works of plungings and
dippings in outward Water, and imaginary fellowships in outward Elements; but
being out of a true sense of the works of God's Spirit, and its inspiration to
enlighten them, and give them an understanding of the Times and Seasons of the
Dispensations and Works of the mighty God; what strangers are they to the New
Birth, and the one Baptism of Christ with Fire and the holy Spirit, to burn and
consume Lusts, and so to bring down every high Thought and vain Imagination
under his Feet, who is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World?
And so by that one pure holy Spirit of God are many baptized into one Body,
where God's will is done on Earth by him that abides forever. So not by the
works of man, is any saved, but by the merciful works of God in his Son, by the
washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the holy Spirit. So into this pure
holy Name must all be baptized, dipped, plunged, the which tends to the
bringing out of all false Fellowships, into that one and only Pure Fellowship,
to walk in the Light of the Lord, where the Blood of Christ cleanses from all
sin: A pure Baptism indeed, a pure Washing in a pure Fountain, where filthiness
that is within man comes to be washed away, and thereby way is made for the
comfortable fresh springs that rise from the Fountain of Love and Mercies, (the
Substance,) of which many outward things are shadows; but the good thing it
self is come, glory to God on high, ( Heb. 9.9, 10.) So to this blessed work,
who must increase, his Testimony is given; and against all the works of men's
hands, the which tend to the making void thereof. So the Fountain of God stands
sure, and must do forever; and all false foundations, whereon people have
built, must be swept away for evermore.

THe blessed and unspotted Foundation the mighty God of Heaven and Earth has
laid, which is Christ, or Unction from the holy God, by the Light and Teaching
of which mankind comes to be inspired with an understanding concerning things
that disser; even that which is precious and wholesome, so good for Food for
every Soul; and that which is vile and filthy, which tends to the defiling and
bringing Souls into bondage. And so John in his 1 Epist. 2.20. says unto the
then Believers, who had received this Heavenly Gift: But ye have an Unction
from the holy One, and ye know all things: Herein was, and is God's Love in his
Son manifested to the World, to destroy his works, who has led mankind into
Darkness; and so through man's obedience in following and believing in these
blessed and unspotted works of God in his Son, the enmity comes to be slain,
that separates mankind from God, and so the blessed works of God in his Son,
reconciling and bringing back them who have been lost by wandering and roving
in their own willings and runnings in this cloudy and dark night, they come to
be seen, felt and enjoyed by them who were and are partakers thereof, even of
God's works in his Son, by which the eye of the understanding comes to be
opened, and so the offensive eye, that is offended at God's works, comes to be
put out: And thus the Light and Understanding of that pure Life comes to be
known, the which has been as a Lamb slain from the Foundation of the world of
wickedness by the subtilty of the Serpent in man's heart.

And now to the praise and honor of God Almighty, who has drawn thousands by
the strivings of the grace of his holy Spirit to the knowledge of his way,
Christ, the Truth, Way and Life, the which is without spot and blemish, the
same pure, holy and unchangeable Way and Foundation on which the holy men of
God were built in Ages and Generations past, Ephesians. 2.20. and are built upon
the Foundation of Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
Cornerstone. So here was the Primitive Christians Foundation, from whence
proceeded and proceeds Heavenly, blessed and gracious words, from the true
sense and feeling of the operation and powerful works of God's holy and blessed
Spirit: And from this holy, uncorruptible, pure Foundation and way of God were
all true Ministers and Teachers of others raised, from the blessed operation of
the Spirit of Truth in themselves, whereby they had and have the Will and Mind
of God unto People, though not all in the same measure or degree: But every one
being faithful to his own measure of knowledge, is therein a Minister of the
universal love of God in his Eternal Spirit unto the World.

So here lies the difference between true Teaching and Teachers, (and false.)
The true Teaching being the anointing of God's holy Spirit and Power, wherewith
mankind being anointed, and taught of God, and according to God's blessed will
therein, in a cross to his own Carnal Will and Affections, speaking forth and
delivering the Truth unto people, as it is in Jesus Lord of all, in whom the
Peace is, and from whom Peace is proclaimed under those Conditions and
Qualifications as it pleases him to make and tender, who is Lord of all. The
false Teaching is that Spirit of Iniquity, the old Deceiver of the World, the
Serpent that worked and wrought under a Mystery, subjecting mankind unto his
will under a vain hope, through which he beguiled him at first, drawing out a
Compliance of his Will unto his delusions, and so to transgress the blessed
commands of his Maker; through which yielding of mankind unto the Serpent's
Counsel, they became Transgressors of God's holy Law and Covenant; and for that
cause was drove from God's Presence, and then Fear entered; and Trouble and
Sorrow entered by man's yielding to the Traitor, by which means he partook of
the Nature of his Cursed works; and being thus drove out of the Garden of Eden,
the Lord placed a Flaming Sword, which turned every way to keep the way of the
Tree of Life.

And now the same Mystery of wickedness, by which mankind was drawn into
Transgression, the same spiritual wickedness got in a high place, above the
pure Seed of God in man, there keeps mankind in bondage to his will under many
fair and specious hopes, That though sin and transgression, (the cause of
death,) be not finished in them, yet deliverance shall be had by the
manifestation and works of the Seed without them. So here mankind being
Imbondaged by these corruptible works under the dark power of the enemy, from
whence arises all corruptible ways, man being gone from the uprightness in
which he was created, goes now abroad hunting about in his Inventions and
Conceivings, being led about by this Thievish Spirit, which first drew his mind
from the will of God, and so in this is climing up and down, every way but the
right door; and so being in this Earthly wisdom from below, by Arts and Trades
set a teaching of their Imaginations and Conceivings concerning the holy works
without, and so here lay down Foundations under Confessions and Professions of
good works and gracious words without, and thereby keep the Serpent's works of
transgression and sin alive within; and here the false Teachers under several
covers of Confessions and Professions in the spirit of Antichrist set up. And
so here being tossed up and down in floods of Inventions, from thence their
shameful works are cast up in the old World of transgression and sin, where
these false Teachers are so rivited, the works of the Enemy being become so
natural unto them by reason of the continuance of time in transgression and
sin, that thereby they are now become impudent and bold, even to dare to plead
for the Serpent's works, (sin,) for term of life; taking it for delusion and
high presumption for any to speak to the contrary: And so here false Teachers
being raised from the works of the enemy, moving in the Earthly wisdom for
Earthly things, being propt and bolstered up through vain glory, praise of men
and weighty Pounds, many Nobles and special Marks, with abundance of Crowns,
and frequent appearances of Angels; in and by which they are so oyled, that
their Tongues run at their own Wills and Lusts, by fair Speeches of other men's
Lines and Works; with which ignoront simple people being taken, have so fed and
oyled the Wheels of these Tradesmen, the which has set them up so strong,
that they make all the defense they can to strengthen themselves and their
Clients in the old World of sin and Iniquity: And so these false Teachers
having put darkness for light, and light for darkness, what strong Pillars and
props they are grown under the Devil's Kingdom and power of darkness, under
several heads, more that might be mentioned, being derived from one beastly
power, from whence is risen several Heads, and so branched out in several
Horns, the which are pushing every way against the Horn of God's Anointing (the
power and strength of the effectual and blessed Teachings of his holy and
blessed Spirit) the door and way by which all must enter that come to be truly
satisfied with God's righteousness (Christ) the same Seed promised in the
beginning to bruise the Serpent's Head; the effectual works and power of which,
according to God's good pleasure, was and is manifest in the World. So to the
praise and honor of God's holy works many can say, Peace from him that is, and
was, and is to come, Jesus, Lord of all, who delivers his people from their
sins. the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World; through which
powerful and blessed works of mercy and Peace is extended to all mankind,
without respect of persons, upon Earth.

So blessed are they that fear God, and are found out of their own willings and
running in their perverse and crooked nature, in a true submission and
obedience to the righteous works of God's righteous holy Spirit, the true
Christian Spirit, that Christianity may flourish again, and that Heathenism and
Paganism under that name Christian may be subdued, and vanish away; and Jesus
Lord of all, exalted in the hearts and minds of people over all his enemies:
Then shall the Nations flourish, and yield Fruit in Season, to the praise and
honor of God forever.

ANd now all you Merchants of Babylon, Howl and Cry, Alas! alas! What! all
these precious Trades, whereby we have gotten so much Gain, must they all down?
Where be all our Mountains and Rocks, that have been so long a making up by all
our Fellow-Tradesmen by Arts and Inventions, in Professions and Confessions of
good works and words without, through Ages and Generations past? Will none of
these Mountains and Rocks cover and hide us from the great wrath of the Lamb?
What must we now bow to his righteous works who takes away the sins of the
World? or else will ye grant us no Peace? Alas! alas! what clothing in Scarlet,
and and Purple, and Fine Linen of Egypt, with precious Stones, will these no
longer hide our sins and iniquities? Must all our works herein, wherein we
thought to have established our own righteousness, must they now all be put off
as dung and dross? Alas! alas! though we have lived so far from the knowledge
of the operation and works of God's Spirit, as utterly to deny its Revelations
now adays, and so have been dark, and void of the knowledge of God's righteous
chastisments, and rebukes therein; yet we have presumed, that by custom of
Confessions and Professions of God's good works, done in and through holy men
without us, would have given us a right to his holiness, thou the lust of the
eye, the lust of the flesh, the pride of life and friendship of the World had
never been wholly subdued in us, but in such a part as might be consistent with
our gain and profit in the World. But alas! alas! our coverings be too narrow,
they will no longer hide us; God's righteous works are abroad in the Earth, who
is inspiring his people with true Light of understanding; and Mordicai sits in
the Gate, and will not bow to wickedness (Haman.) Alas! alas! we have twined
and twisted about through many Crafts and Inventions, some of our best Artsmen
having called the Light a Devil, some others a Natural Light, and others a
Bewildering Light; and likewise many false Accusations have we raised, with
Evil Reports, Scornings and Reproachings of the people called Quakers, for
Confessing to the Works of the Light of God's holy Spirit; yet all our shifts
do not at all help us, but those works prosper, and they are generally a
faithful people to their Testimony. Alas! alas! who would have thought our
Mother would have been such a Harlot? What delicate Enchantments and Sorceries
has she used and trained us up in, that we have been thus deceived, and
thereby have been Instruments of deceiving the whole Nations? Alas! alas! we
can fly into no Corner nor Hole but we are found, out and pursued. Alas! alas!
cannot all the Wisdom of the World, and Arts therein help to hide our sins and
Iniquities from the Light of the Lamb? Is every Creature so manifest in his
sight, that made all things good in the beginning? And is he now at work again?
And must all yield to his works, or be accounted his enemies, and be cast out
of his presence, who is Lord of all, whose is the Earth and fullness thereof?
Alas! alas! words of repentance of sin will not serve now; there must be a true
repentance and forsaking sin and evil, or else we perish forever.

Even so must it be done to you workers of iniquity, who have been and are as
props and pillars, strengthening the Old World of Transgression in sin and
iniquity, the Devil's works, and therein withstood the sufficiency of God's
love manifested to the World in his Son to destroy the Devil's works, which
works of Transgression the old subtle Serpent, the deceiver of the Nations, in
and through his Instrument, is striving and laboring to maintain under several
and very large and specious pretenses of crying out, Lord, Lord: But come
workers of iniquity, these good words will not give you admittance into the
Kingdom of God; its not they that say, Lord, Lord, shall enter therein; but
they that do the Will of God; And was not his Will manifested to the World in
his Son, that they that believed and followed him in doing his Father's Will
might not perish, but have everlasting Life? And do not many of you confess to
this in words? who say in your Prayers, That we may follow the example of
Christ's Humiliation and Patience, that we may attain to his Resurrection, etc.
What brave words have you workers of iniquity got in your Old Bottle, that can
hold none of the New Wine? And so in your corrupt wills what will the using
good words do you good, but thereby add to your Condemnation, who by good
words, and corrupt, and bad actions are withstanding, and have withstood the
good will, pleasure and love of God in his Son to the World. So your works of
Darkness and falsehood are clearly manifested, and you cannot hide them from the
Light: But the Light of the effectual and powers works of God's holy Spirit,
wherein his Will is manifest, is rising more and more, to a more perfect day of
his will being done upon Earth, to the praise and honor of his blessed and
holy Name, whose works are Pure, Holy, Just and Perfect in every degree
thereof, and tend to the true Reformation, Peace, Prosperity and Establishment
of all mankind in God's love and mercy therein forever.

So worshipped be God that made Heaven and Earth, and the Fountains of Waters,
and all things therein, who fills the hearts of the upright with joy and
gladness, through the shinings forth of the light of his Countenance, who sits
upon his Throne and says, Behold I make all things New, (Amen.)

ANd now unto such who are in doubt, Whether God's holy Spirit does so
effectually work now adays as in the Primitive times. Unto you I say, what
flesh could ever have endured such grievous and continued Punishments in Trials
of diverse sorts, by Imprisonments, and Banishments, and Hangings, and Killings,
as in New England (and Imprisonments to Death and spoiling of Goods) in
Old-England, and Cruel Mockings, and Scoffings and bloodshed by unmerciful men?
Indeed some in a voluntary humility have somewhat appeared in Sufferings, but
being in their own willings and runnings and works therein, how have they been
overcome, their strength being an Arm of Flesh, as well as others, and so
fleshly works have been overcome by fleshly works? But it is not so with them
who are in scorn and derision called Quakers, because they have bowed to God's
way, the which is quite different to man's ways, was that name given; but in
God's way has his Arm been revealed, and its strength made manifest in our
weakness: So that to the praise of him that lives forever the operation of his
blessed Spirit is felt, as in the primitive days; and the glory and comfort of
it has ministered strength and refreshment in the time of trials; though this
way of proceeding has been hid from the vulterous evil Eye. So to the praise
and glory of God is Confession made through the operation of his holy Spirit,
through which thousands have been preserved and kept from bowing to the seed of
Cain, Haman and the Beast, which has made the World as a Wilderness, where
wild Fruits and wild Actions spring. So we can truly say, to the praise of God,
let not the wise men in the wisdom of this World glory in their wisdom, nor the
strong men in their strength, nor the mighty men in their might; but let all
wait in that pure measure of the Light of God's Spirit in their Consciences,
that by it they may draw near unto God, that they know his blessed works of
mercy, and love, and judgment in the Earth, wherein that true glory and honor
of God is.

ANd further, concerning Ministry, this I say; as the blessed works of the
Light of God's holy Spirit has place in hearts, and so opens understandings, a
discovery will be made from thence of the false, corrupt and and wicked
Ministers, who open their Mouths for Gifts and Rewards, from whose works in
fair and deceitful Speeches Profaneness is gone out into the World, where the
Revelations of God's holy Spirit is denied and set at naught; they telling
people, Revelations are ceased, they are not to be known now adays, etc. So
the sight of all the good and blessed works of God's good and holy Spirit are
become as a Sealed Book, so that they who have exalted their parts and
knowledge in Hebrew, Greek and Latin above the pure Life of Jesus, they cannot
read in it, because it is sealed; and these Learned men (unlearned in the
things of God) cannot read in it, because they draw near to God with their
Mouths, and seem to honor him with their Lips, but their Hearts not being
right in his sight, therefore are the wisdoms confounded, and understanding in
the Things of God kept from them.

So its such who have nothing to Minister from but a divination of their own
Brain, in conceivings and imaginations concerning the works of God in others,
but from no knowledge of his works in themselves; so they run and Divine for
Money, and Gifts and Rewards in that adulterated whorish Spirit, which has
sat a long time, and reigned over people, who have been as unstable and
unsettled as Waters, reeling and staggering to and fro through the Sorceries
and Witchcraft of that whorish wicked spirit, into which Cup the Kings of the
Earth have drunk, and been made drunk with Envy, Malice and Hatred one against
another; and from Lusts, which have been conceived in that wicked and untimely
womb, have proceeded Wars, and Fighting, and Hatred one against another, and
also hatred against the appearance of God's good works in others.

So its against that bad and wicked spirit, which is not to speak in the
Church, that I am moved to give Testimony in and through the operation of God's
good and holy spirit, the which is mightily at work this Day, wherein his power
is made manifest to destroy the Devil's works, and so a way making for the
pouring forth of God's holy and blessed spirit more and more upon all flesh;
from whence I believe there are at present hundreds of Able and Gifted
Ministers in this Nation, in some degree or measure or other of God's holy
spirit, who can speak experimentally of what they have felt, handled, tasted
and seen of his works thererein, who is the beginning and ending of every good
and perfect work and gift, in and for them, who wait to know his will and do
it: And through these blessed works must the wounded and distracted Nations be
healed and set to rights; and all that hinder these blessed works of God's holy
and unlimited spirit, they are enemies to God, and to their own souls, and to
the Nation and Country where they live.

So to that of God in every ones Conscience I appeal in these weighty and high
concerns, wherein I have done the will of God, I rest

The 9th. day of the 4th. Month, 1673 A Lover of the Truth, wherein I seek the
good of all Mankind. Stephen Smith.

NOw unto you who say, I write out of Enmity: Therein you say true; for in the
true Enmity, which God has put between the two Seeds, viz. The blessed Seed of
the woman, and the Cursed Seed of the Serpent: So that in that which is truly
good, that blessed Seed by which evil is overcome, according to the good will
of God, in that I give Testimony against that which is corruptible and bad, by
which mankind is led away into darkness, and there captivated under the enemy's
power.

But if any shall say, I wish herein any ill to any one's person: I do say in
the Truth and Uprightness of my heart, that such do falsely accuse me; For I
know in the blessed Seed Intercession is made through me and many thousands,
that Light may rise in them who sit in darkness, that mankind, who are dead in
trespasses and sins, may be quickened, and raised into the glorious freedom and
liberty in the Son of God, where we may live together in Peace with God and one
with another, to the praise and glory of his holy Name forever.

Stephen Smith.

A Trumpet sounding in the Ears of all Persecutors, to awaken them out of their
dead sleep, in which they have taken Prey from the Innocent; who have made
themselves drunken with Malice and Envy; and so, Nabal-like, are saying, What
are these, that we should regard them, etc.
COme Persecutors, Awake, Awake, hearken how the Cows and the Oxen Low in your
Ears; when you lie down to sleep, does not their Lowing trouble you? And when
you rise, are not you tormented at the noise of their Lowing? sleep as secure
as you can, you will be awakened at last; and then the noise of the Lowing of
Cows and Oxen will sound in your Ears: In your lying down, in your rising up;
in your Eating and Drinking; in your going about your business; it will be a
dreadful noise, when the cause of the Innocent, whom you have wronged, comes to
be laid before you.

Come Persecutors, Awake, Awake, hearken; do you not hear the Bleating of
Sheep, which have been taken from Innocent people, for keeping the Commands of
Jesus? stop your Ears as hard as you can, they will be opened at last; and heir
Bleating will be so loud sounded in your Ears, that you cannot avoid the
terrible noise thereof.

Come Persecutors, Awake, Awake; hearken what a dreadful noise is amongst the
Pots, Kettles, Skillets, Frying-pans, Dripping-pans, Pewterdishes, Flaggons,
Chamber-pots, etc. the which have been taken from an Innocent people, for
keeping their Conscience void of offense toward God and man; that men take
offense against the Innocent, when no proof can be made thereof; that is the
steps of the wicked in all Ages: But hearken Persecutors, sure you are not so
fast a sleep, but that you may hear the rattling of these things in your Ears;
well, they will make a fearful noise at last.

Come Persecutors, Awake, awake; open your Eyes, they will be opened at last,
and then the Beds, Cloths, Corn, Hoggs, Horses, Butter, Cheese, Bacon, and all
sorts of Commodies taken from Tradesmen, out of their Shops, and working
Instruments from poor people, Shoe-Leather, and abundance of other things, too
long to name; all taken from an Innocent harmless people, who seek the good and
wellbeing of all men: At last all these things shall be laid before your Eyes,
you shall not be able to shut them against them, nor to stop your Ears, from
the several dreadful noises; but they must sound in your Ears, and you must
know, that all these doings proceed from a corrupt rotten heart and mind, which
is abhorred by the living God.

And now after all the spoil, that has been made on the Goods and Persons of
an innocent people, many of whose bloods have been shed in your Streets,
witness Horsly-down meeting: After all this, the matter of Fact which the
Innocent people, called Quakers, have been accused of, it has not at all been
proved against them; neither has there been any cause of a ground given to
suspect their Meetings to be any ways tending to Sedition, etc. They have been
always peaceable on their parts; and therein the peace and well-being of all
has been sought? When you are awakered, and the Book opened wherein your
wickedness is recorded; then will the Meetings of the People called Quakers,
appear unto you as aforesaid. And so all you, who are wondering at a peoples
standing still in Silence to wait upon the Living God, to receive Counsel of
him, that by the same they may be guided in the way and path of Life: would it
not be good if all would do the same? And not run forward in Satan's Counsels,
in envy, hatred, and malice, till you come to be bitten and devoured, one of,
and by another: What is it the near to have the names of Christians, when there
is none of Christ's Spirit or Nature in you. Be not deceived, the Living God
will not be mocked; though in his tender mercy, he has yet spared many Vials
of wrath and has not poured them forth, but instead thereof he has caused
many to go out in dread, and fear, to testify of his good will, upon
repentance and amendment of life, but that love having been slighted, the
contrary will come heavy at last; and then your courage and valor which you
have exercised against an innocent people, that will fail you, and fear, and
trembling, and amzement, that will seize upon you. Brambles and Thorns, whose
nature is to Tear and Rend, cannot stand against a consuming Fire.

Come, hearken all that have a Finger in this Dish; have you not betrayed your
Master? are you not called Christians? and should not Christians have all one
Master? Did not the name of Christian come by him who is Master of all, and
has all power in Heaven and Earth? and was it not given to them who came out
of the Heathenish nature, who came under the power, which was manifest to
destroy the works of the Devil, and the nature of the Devil's power, which is
to Rend, Tear, and Devour; coming in Troops, as he did upon Jobs Goods, in
Troops of Caldeans, and Bands and Troops of Sabeans? So have not you, who are
in the same works now, as the Sabeans and Caldeans were then (in spoiling the
Goods of Innocent men, who love that which is Evil? have you not betrayed your
Lord and Master, having given your selves up to serve a wicked Ruler, he that
is Prince of the power of darkness, who has his rule in his Servants, who are
departed from their obedience to him who is Lord and Master of all, and ought
to be served and feared by all; since there is no blessing, nor any thing that
is good, but what is of him, and from him, who created all, and upholds all,
who is Lord of all, blessed for ever.

Come, be awakened, and hearken; where do you find (by the example or Doctrine
of Christ Jesus, who is Lord of all, and has all power in Heaven and Earth,)
or do you read of any such works aforementioned, done by him or his Followers?
No, no, you have betrayed him, who call him Lord, and yet live in such works of
malice and revenge; he taught, and teaches quite contrary, even to learn of
him, who is meek and lowly in heart, admonishing all to love one another, and
to do good for evil, and to love enemies; who dwell with them that are of a
contrite and humble spirit, who teaches the humble and meek, and who washes
and cleanses his Followers from their filth, as in days past, so to day and
for ever. Oh you betrayers of him, who have rendered him a hard Master, in that
you deny him; for he is righteous, just and true, and gives power to them that
receive him, and obey him patiently, to bear the reproaches, of the wicked, and
to undergo their cruel mockings, and scoffings and spoilings, till his pleasure
is to plead the cause of the Innocent, who have no Arm of Flesh, nor Carnal
weapon; but their trust is in him who is Lord of all, unto whom all Tongues
must confess, and every Knee must bow; though for a while, the wicked, with
their Ruler the Devil, may be loose, he must be chained at last, and cast into
the Lake of Fire, where their part and portion will be, who continue serving
him (a sad Bargain.) So all you betrayers of the just, holy principle of Light
and Life in your hearts, be awakened; come, see what a Dream you have been in,
and what Dreamers you have followed, who are out of the way of the Lord, and
yet for lucre sake, by art and policy, keep people confessing they are out of
the way of the Lord, persuading its not to be found, or as if there were no
such thing.

Oh, be awakened, and see what a Dream you are in, and what silly Dreamers
these are, who have put from them Christ, the way of Truth and the Life, by
which all that ever come to God, it must be by him, whom many have found, so
cannot but confess him before men, there being no other way out of Evil, and
which brings and leads to peace; this is a perfect way, and tried way, into
which no unclean person, nor envious person can come into; he must forsake his
Envy, and uncleanness, and all the Devils works, if ever he comes there.

Come, don't stop your Ears, and shut your Eyes, it will be all in vain; for he
that is Lord, Master and Creator of all, sees and beholds all, you can hide
nothing from him, and he will call you to an account; then, what can the
betrayers say?

Oh, you whose days are not quite over, consider what you are a doing, and
what you are a treasuring up; malice, envy and hatred are from a rupt root and
ground, which is cursing.

Come, be awakened, cease to do evil, then learn to do well, if happily you may
obtain mercy; restore the pledge and repent: Keep nothing back that has been
taken by violence.

Be awakened, and see how filthy your hands are, through Malice and Cruelty,
which has brought a filthy smell and curse upon your Estates; a sad portion
for your Children, for their Fathers to die with their Estates entailed in the
Curse, the which can never be removed, from Father or Child, till the cause of
the Curse be repented of, and done away, and so the hands wasted in innocence;
until which time every one shall bear his own iniquity, because of the accursed
thing that is in their hands.

So out of love to Truth, and good will to all is this written, whatever
construction you may make thereof, into whose hands it may come; in his sight
who sees all things, I am cleared, that herein I wish the good of all.

Stephen Smith.
The 10th. of the 8th. Month, 1670
SOME REASONS AGAINST Paying Tithes, AND Upholding that Ministry that does
Receive the same.
Written in Love to the Truth, and for the sake thereof, and in Love to my
Neighbors, Stephen Smith.
I. CHrist Jesus he is Lord of Heaven and Earth, and has power over all flesh,
by whom the World was made, who is Heir of all things, and has right of
government in the Hearts and Consciences of all people, and over all the
Kingdoms of men, the right of ordaining and appointing Ministers being in him,
and also in giving forth his Righteous Law and Commands in their Hearts, where
he ought to reign, where his Ministers so ordained of him are to wait, with
their Minds staid in his Light, to receive of him freely a supply of wisdom and
power, and to communicate from the same freely, and to be contented with what
provision the Lord is pleased to make for them; and by him there being a change
of the Priesthood under that Covenant given unto Moses and the people of
Israel, there is made of necessity a change also of the Law; and forasmuch as
the Priests in this Age, who are not ordained of Christ, do uphold that which
the Lord has changed, therefore we do deny them, and that which they claim for
their Maintenance.

II. These Priests being not ordained of Christ, nor appointed to that Office
by him, they therefore do usurp that Authority, the which does of Right belong
to Christ Jesus, the which are presumptious sins, and therefore we do deny them.

III. These Priests having denied the Revelation of Christ's Spirit now adays,
and set up the Letter and Law without above the Spirit and Law within, by which
its plain and evident, that they are Strangers to the great Love of God in his
New Covenant, and being void of the knowledge of the gift of God to the World,
they have nothing but Imaginations and Inventions of their own Brain-study, and
out of others Works and Labors, therefore we do deny them.

IV. They not being ordained of Christ they bring forth no pleasant Fruit, as
is evident, but being ordained of man, being man-made Ministers, they are
men-pleasers, so no Servants of Christ Jesus, but of their own Bellies, and for
the sake thereof they are abominable greedy of filthy Lucre, and therefore we
do deny them.

V. They being out of the way of the Lord, and strangers thereunto, therefore
they can be no guides therein, having set up Imaginations and Devices in their
own Hearts, they follow them in defrauding people, therefore we deny them.

VI. Forasmuch as Christ has said, John 10. All that ever came before me are
Thieves and Robbers, or as it may be rendered, All that go before him; (Now
mind) before Abraham was he was, and before the Prophets were he was; so the
true Prophets they did not go before him, they waited for the Signification of
Christ's Spirit, which was in them, the which was their Foundation, and this
was the Apostles Foundation, and the Believers in the Primitive time were built
upon the same; but the Thieves and Robbers were the false Prophets and Priests
that came before him, who steal the true Prophets words, and use them in their
Divination for Money, and Rewards, and Preaching for Hire, the which were
wicked practices, testified against, and cried out against by the true
Prophets; among which wicked practices we finding the man-made Ministers in
this Age and Generation, who go before Christ, and being of that number Christ
Jesus spoke against, therefore we deny them.

VII. All take notice, that the Testimony against Priests that preach for Hire
is no new thing of twenty or thirty years standing, as some do vainly imagine;
those abominable practices were testified against by the true Prophets; read
Micah 3. Isaiah 66. Jer. 5. Ezekiel. 13. Hosea 6. and read Christ's Testimony
against Hirelings, John 10. (and mind) all the holy men of God were and are of
the same mind. And for Priests and People now adays to pretend to Cospel-order
and Gospel-dayes, and to live in the same, and if not worse practices then the
false Prophets, Priests, Teachers and People, who were before the more powerful
manifestation of Christ to flesh, the everlasting Gospel, who is the end of the
Law for Righteousness to all that believe; this is a very great shame even to
the name of Christianity, and the false Teachers the Priests being the Leaders
into these Abominations; therefore we do deny them.

VIII. Paul an Apostle of Jesus, he did exhort the then Believers, to follow
him as he was a follower of Christ, who ever was, and is a blessed Leader out
of Transgression, out of sin, and therefore out of Strife and Contention; he
taught and teaches to love enemies, for this Cause was and is the love of God
in his Son manifest in flesh, even to condemn sin in the flesh, and to destroy
the Devil's works of Malice, Envy, Lust, Pride, Excess, Covetousness, Lying,
Guile, Hypocrisy, Deceit, Fraud, Vain Worships, Vain Services, Persecution,
and all other Abominations that may be mentioned; the true and faithful
witness, even the Light of his holy Spirit in mankind, never did nor will
assent unto to any thing that is evil. And forasmuch as the Priests are led by
another Spirit, and acted by another Spirit, as by their Fruits and Practices
they are manifested, even to be led by the spirit of Cain, he being the first
Persecutor about Religion; and the Priests being in the same steps of
Persecution, they may say if they speak truly, Beloved, be you followers of us
as we are followers of our Forefathers, Cain, the false Prophets and Teachers
in Ages past; they bringing forth the same Fruits, therefore of necessity they
must spring from the same corrupt ground and root; and therefore let all the
wise in heart judge, whether we have not good cause to deny them.

IX. It has been so from the beginning, that he that was born after the Flesh,
persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now; and when we
turned our backs upon ungodliness, and waited in the grace of God, that we
might live godly and righteously in this present evil World, we did believe we
might suffer by unreasonable reasonable ungodly men, who live exalted above the
Grace of God, of which number the Priests are chief; and therefore we deny them.

X. And whereas Christ Jesus, who is Lord of the Sabbath, did above sixteen
hundred years ago set up the everlasting Worship in the Spirit and Truth, and
directed all to take that for their Leader into all Truth, and the Truth and
blessed effects whereof being witnessed to the praise of God this day, as it
was in the Primitive time. And whereas the man-made Ministers of this Age and
Generation, who are not ordained nor sent of Christ Jesus, do teach for
Doctrine the Commands of men, and so worship in vain, and by their Traditions
and vain Customs they have excluded that Worship in Spirit and Truth, the which
Christ Jesus set up; therefore we do deny them.

XI. Whereas the man-made Ministers now adays do make that their Plea for
their Persecution and wickedness, they have a Law, so said their Forefathers,
the Scribes, Pharisees, and Chief Priests, who Crucified Christ, they said,
they had a Law; and what Persecutors about Religion since Cain had not some
seeming pretense and covering? though indeed these in this generation do excel
in rare Arts and Coverings to hide their wicked bloody Spirit of Persecution
under; but he is risen and come that sees through them, and teaches his
Followers of them; and therefore we do deny them.

XII. And we do commend the Reader for his full and complete satisfaction about
the ground and setting ^p of Tithes, since the Gospel-dayes, unto a Book
Entitled, The Great Case of Tithes Revived, by Francis Howgil, who dyed a
Prisoner for the Testimony of Jesus; in that Book are all Reasonable Objections
clearly answered, and there is clearly shown, what a dark night of Apostasy
was over people when Tithes were set up by a Law, and how many hundred years it
was after Christ, before that gross Ignorance was ushered in, in making Laws to
Prosecute and compel about Tithes.

And unto all we do signify, That we have hopes in our Lord and Master, Christ
Jesus, our Savior, that he will maintain us by his Grace, and supply us out of
his fullness of Wisdom and Power to live godly, soberly and righteously in this
present life, giving no just Gause of Offense to any, but in all things to live
an innocent harmless life, keeping our Conscience void of Offense, both before
God and all men: And if any that may be among us, and profess to own our
Principle, should do otherwise then right and just, let none be so rish as to
condemn our just Principle, or those that live in it, because of the
unfaithfulness of some that may make some Profession of it, and not live up to
it: And we do pray for all in Authority, that the Lord of Heaven and Earth man
pour out his Spirit of Judgment and Wisdom upon them, that they may be opened,
and that the Nobility of their Understandings may be cleared from Darkness and
Error, that they may discern between the Precious and the Vile, and that they
may be for the Punishment of them that do Evil, and for the Praise of them that
do well.

The 6th. of the 1st. Month, 1676,
Wholesome Advice AND INFORMATION, In TRUE LOVE to all called CHRISTIANS;
To provoke them to the Royal Law of Love, as it is in Jesus; and to the
Blessed and Effectual WORKS therein.
THe Lord of Heaven and Earth, who by his great power and wisdom did Create all
things good, who in the beginning gave unto mankind Dominion over the Earth,
and God blessed them, and said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and
replenish the Earth, (and subdue it) and have Dominion over the Fish of the
Sea, and over the Fowl of the Air, and every Living thing that moves upon the
Earth: And the works of the Lord were all good (and are all good, savoury
pleasant) being ordered by his universal power and wisdom, by which they were
created.

But mankind being fallen from the sense thereof, they have formed and
fashioned many Inventions in their minds, being captivated under the enemy's
power of Darkness, wherein they are become corrupt and unsavory, having lost
their Dominion, instead of subduing the Earth, they have let the Earth over
them, and being become Earthly-minded, the things that move upon the Earth have
Dominion over them; and thus being captivated under the enemy's dark power, set
the enemy's dark power above the power and wisdom of God, Christ, the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever, by whom all things were created, who is Heir
of all, by whose Power, Life and Immortality is brought to Light; glory be to
him for ever.

But people being imbondaged and corrupted, they are become such slaves
thereunto, and in such a ground of Infidelity, that they cannot so much as
believe in God's power and wisdom, which is manifested to create again into its
own primitive, savoury, holy Life, in Dominion over the Earth; but in the State
of Infidelity, mankind being plunged with their narrow spirits they go about to
measure the things of God, and in their fallen Earthly wisdom to weigh things
of Eternity (and being confounded in their works) what variety of coverings do
people get to cover their shame in all parts of the World, as well as in
Christendom (so called) where indeed they do greatly excel other Nations in
curious Arts to make coverings to hide their great shame; (a miserable Trade!
but very costly in in this Nation.) And forasmuch as the love of God has been,
and is largely manifested, through which many have been, and are redeemed from
that great folly and madness, in that vain travail and labor, in joining with
those Arts-men of the Times, who spend their days and consume abundance of
Treasure in making false coverings to cover their shame; out of which confusion
many being redeemed, who are baptized into Christ, and have put on Christ's
beautiful Garment, and are comely in his sight, who is Lord of Heaven and
Earth, before whom every Creature is manifest: and because such cannot run with
them in the same Excess of Riot, and pay toward the Maintenance of those
Sottish Artsmen, what a wonder they make of it! and cry to the Magistrates for
help, to punish the Innocent people, for keeping their Consciences void of
offense both toward God and man: What Imprisoning, even many to Death, and
Spoiling, Tearing and Rending of Goods, seeking thereby the destruction and
ruin of many thousands of industrious laborious Families.

A practice not so common amongst the very Turks, among whom I having lived, I
did observe something of their Behaviors to the Christians and Jews that live
amongst them, and one unto another; and in many common Civilities, which are
called moral, in which they seemed to exceed many who are called Christians in
Christendom; the Christians that live amongst them of several Opinions agreeing
together in outward concerns, do enjoy the Liberty of their Consciences in
their several ways of Worship; and the Jews have the same freedom, the Jews
observing the Seventh day, and are quiet; and the Christians the First day, and
are not disturbed; and the Turks observe the Sixth day; and I did not perceive
any Penalties inflicted either on Christians or Jews for worshipping of God as
they suppose they should; but they do live quietly and peaceably one with
another in these Concerns.

And concerning the Turks Moderation, in permitting the Christians so quietly
to enjoy their several persuasion in Religious matters, I made some Inquiry,
What reason they could give for the same? and thus answer was returned me, thus
says Turk, In case we should go about to compel or force them to be of our
Religion, fear might overcome some of them, for fear of the Punishment some may
yield; and in case we should persuade them by promises of Cutward Preferment,
for the Advantage sake some might yield; but (says the Turk) when we have done
all, we cannot alter or change their Belief, the which they retaining, though
they may yield unto us, it would be but in Hypocrifie; and in case we should
accept of them on those terms, they then would have an opportunity to do us
hurt. And herein they show more Moderation then the Apostate Christians in many
places of Christendom.

And concerning the Turks Deportment, and Civil respect one unto another, in
meeting and greeting one another; they seem to exceed the Christians in
Morality; it being a cause of Laughter unto them to see the Christians Beggarly
Airy Behaviors one unto another, in Scraping with the Leg, and Doffing the
Hat, and foolish Gestures, too too much used amongst many who are called
Christians, who want the more solid, and more comely, and truly courteous
Behavior, which the Truth guides unto.

But lest any should mistake, who do not know the difference which is amongst
them called Turks, wherein I speak of the Behavior of the Turks, as before, I
do not speak of those Nests and Dens of Thieves and Robbers, who are made up of
Christian Runnagadows, Moors and Turks; neither do I speak of the aspiring
high-minded ones amongst them; but I speak of a plain people, called Turk-men,
whom I have trusted much, and having found them faithful, I perceived they had
an Awe and Fear of God upon them, they often expressing these words [The Lord
is just, and therefore we must do justly] And by occasion having proved a Turk,
I shall in brief give an Instance of his Faithfulness, where in he declared the
Fear and Awe of God that was upon him: Being ordered by a Merchant that then
lived in Aleppo, to send him up 1500 Dollers privatelely from Scanderown, where
I lived; according to order, the Money being delivered, and laid upon a Horse
in a Satchel, as their manner is, the Horse by Chance ran away with the Money
before him, it being in a dark Night he could not find him, and in the Morning
betimes the Horse with the Money was feeding at a Turk-man's Crib, the Turk
taking hold of him, and feeling the Money, and seeing the Christians Mark,
there being none to accuse him but the witness in him, he might clearly have
kept the Money, and turned the Horse going; but the faithful and true Witness
was so prevalent in him, that he took the Money carried it unto an Agaw; which
in that place is somewhat like unto a Lord of a Manner, and after diligent
search; what he had done was showed unto me, and the Money recovered: But mind
the Awe and Fear of God that was upon the Turk, after Inquiry concerning his
Doings, this was his Answer; said the Turk, The Lord has blessed me with
Cattle of several sorts, accounting his Outward Riches; in case (said he) I
should have put that Money to that which the Lord has blessed me withal, that
being none of mine, the Lord would have brought a Curse upon all that I have.
Hear this O Christians, and awake to Righteousness, and don't persist in your
Gainsaying the preaching the Gospel to every Creature, Col. 1.23.
lest you be cut off from the goodness of God through your unbelief and
hard-heartedness; and those whom you so despise, be grafted in; (all things are
possible to the power of the Lord) for of a Truth, as said Peter in another
Case, The Lord is no Respecter of Persons, but in every Nation he that fears
him, and works Righteousness is accepted with him. So mind, it is not a bare
talk of Righteousness that will serve; and what have you more who say, Visions
are ceased, and Revelations are ceased, and the Inspiration of God's Spirit is
not to be known now adays? Oh blind Apostates! what Gospel have you to preach?
No; the Gospel is hid to you, in whom the God of this World has blinded the
minds of them that believe not, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
lest the Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God
should shine unto them: The Confession out of your own Mouths will rise up
against you in the day of account, which hastens: The midnight of it is much
over you, and the day of the Visitation of God's love to many of you is far
spent: Do you think that your having the holy men's Testimonies of the
Righteousness of God will add to your Comfort in the day of account, if you be
found out of the Righteousness there testified of? No; assuredly they will be a
witness against you. The learned Scribes and the Pharisees they had the Law and
the Prophets, which witnessed to the Righteousness of God (but they resisting
the Spirit of God) how blind and ignorant were they of the Law and Prophets! so
that goodness of God they being strangers unto, through their hard-heartedness,
in resisting the Key of knowledge, they were so far from the comfort thereof,
that they took occasion by them to resist the righteousness of God; so those
blessed Testimonies which witnessed to the righteousness of God, were a witness
against them for refusing the same: And forasmuch as the Christian-Nations have
more of the holy men's Testimonies concerning the righteousness of God in the
blessed operation of his holy Spirit, and do grieve it, and do despite unto
it, and are found in the day of account out of the life of the righteousness
thereof, the more and stronger will the Scriptures of Truth be a witness
against them: So then the Scriptures are profitable and comfortable, through
the blessed Spirit that opens them, and gives power to live the life of the
holy men recorded therein: But if the righteousness of God's holy Spirit, which
is witnessed unto throughout the Scriptures of Truth, be rejected, then will
the Scriptures be unprofitable and uncomfortable in the day of account, when
every one shall receive a reward according to their Deeds done in the Body.

Oh! that people would consider, and not go on striving against the works of
the Lord, who is exalting the peaceable Kingdom of the Son of his Love, which
is in righteousness, Romans 14.17.
peace and joy in his holy Spirit. (Oh! its for want of knowledge that people
perish) and rather then they will deny themselves, that they may have knowledge
of the righteousness which is of God, they will persist and persist, and perish
in their own unrighteous Works; For the Wrath of man works not the
righteousness of God: Jam. 1.20.
For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his Ears are open unto
their Prayers, 1 Pet. 3.12.
but the Face of the Lord is against them that do Evil. Oh that people had a
true knowledge of the Scriptures! but they do err, not knowing the Scriptures,
nor the power of God: The goodness and mercies of God, both in the holy
Testimonies, as recorded in the Scriptures of Truth, and otherwise manifested,
should lead unto true repentance of every evil way and work, whereby God's
righteous Spirit is grieved and quenched.

Assuredly the more God's holy and righteous Spirit does strive many ways with
a people or Nation, and they go on, not regarding the operation of the hand of
the Lord therein, but do continue to grieve and quench the blessed motions
thereof, it will be more tolerable in the day of Judgment unto that People or
Nation which profess less, but do more: So it is not a bare Profession and
Confession, what people do that is acceptable; but it is in doing the Will of
God, through the movings of his holy Spirit, in every Nation they that fear God
and work righteousness are accepted; and for that end, that people might fear
God and work righteousness, his universal Love in his universal Spirit and
power does inlighten all mankind, whereby they may see the evil and the good;
and to them that receive him in his tenders of love, he gives them power to
eschew the evil and to love the good, of what Nation, Language or Country they
be of. In the time I lived among the Turks it appeared to me, that they had
more Charity and true Love one unto another, then may be found amongst many who
are called Christians, who live in Error, out of God's way: Surely such
Christians are driven farther from true Love one to another, and Mercy, and
Patience, and Self-denial, then the very Turks: They may be ashamed when they
look back into those malicious works manifested upon an Innocent People in this
Nation; I suppose they are not to be paralleled amongst the very Turks: And for
Christendom, so called, in general, who are apostatized from the Truth, how
many Religions and high Professions there are made of God and Christ, but how
little of the blessed example and humiliation of Christ is followed! Let the
wise in heart take but a view of the greatest part of Christendom, so called
this day, and see what works of Envy, Malice and Hatred (Evil Fruit) is shown
forth, where they seek the ruin and destruction one of another; such wild
Fruit does not proceed from Christ the Vine; no, no; such Fruit proceeds from a
corrupt root, which Ax of the Lord must be laid to, and it must be cut down,
the word of the Lord must come over it, which must be felt a Hammer to beat
down corruption, and a Fire to consume it; this Cross that Christians must take
up, if they arrive at that blessed Haven of rest which the Lord of Heaven and
Earth has appointed for them that love him; thus Christians bowing under the
Cross, the power of God, and Crucifying their corrupt Wills, and Affections,
and Lusts, with that exalted, proud, arrogant spirit, that carries people above
the Fear of God and the blessed example and humiliation of Christ; Christians
(so called) coming under this Cross, then will you be a good example to all
Turks and Infidels in the World, and your good Conversations and true Love one
unto another will convince the Turk that the Lord is with you of a Truth, there
being no other way to true happiness and peace with the Living God, but by
Christ, the Way, the Truth, the Life, which people being converted to and
living in, therein showing forth the great Love of God to the World in his Son;
this will preach forth the righteousness of God unto them who are strangers
thereunto; and the people thus gathered to the Lord, the Lord will be with
them, and plead their Cause, whilst you observe that great and chief
Commandment, in loving God above all, and your Neighbors as your selves; in
doing this you will please God, and reach to the witness in them that do not
know God: But if you continue mere Talkers and high Professors of what you
should do, and leave that undone which should be done, therein you will be a
bad example, and an ill savor to other Nations, and a stink, which the Lord of
Heaven and Earth will never be pleased with; though you may cry Lord, Lord, in
your deep Distress, he will not hear, if you regard Iniquity (the Prayers of
the wicked are abomination to the Lord) I speak the Truth in the love of God
unto you, in dealing plainly, according to his blessed Will: You that say, you
are Christians, examine your selves; will the name Christian avail you, if you
be out of the Christian-Life and Nature? What will it avail you to retain a
Name of being Christ's Followers, and if you be found in the way of the Scribes
and Pharisees, by whom he was Crucified? What will it avail you to talk of the
Truth in the inward parts, that which is lovely in the sight of the Lord, if
you be found in a Spirit of Deceit and Falsehood in the Friendship of the World,
resisting the Just, and he does you no harm? What will it avail you to cry
Lord, Lord, and not wait to know his Will and do it? What is it the near for
you to talk of God's great Love to the World in the Son of his Love, who
invited all to him, who was and is meek and lowly, where the Rest and Peace is
in the joy of the Lord to Immortal Souls, if you be found in froward, peevish,
exalted, imaginary, proud, ambitious spirits? What will it avail you to read
and talk of the holy men's Lives and blessed Practices, if you be found in the
Life and Practice of Cain, Nabal and Hamman? The Followers of Christ Jesus, the
Heavenly man, they were and are to deny themselves, and take up a daily Cross
to Cain 's Nature, to Nabal 's Nature, to Haman 's Nature: The blessed and
effectual Cross that slayes the Enmity, and makes a reconciliation by the
blessed Cross (the Power of the Lord and Savior) Christians being plunged,
dipped, baptized, and brought under Christ, the power and wisdom of God: And in
the blessed Gospel Order established, and therein shining forth to the Praise
and Honor of God; this will preach and reach to the Turks and Infidels in the
World, and overcome them, and make them confess, That Christ Jesus is a blessed
Leader, and all that follow him are blessed and happy forever; and that there
is no other way to true Peace and Happiness, but by following Christ's blessed
example and great humiliation, by all that ever come to attain to his
Resurrection, he must lead them in the way.

So, away with all your Wooden, Brazen, Iron, Golden Crosses, with all your
Trumpery thereunto belonging, The very Turk sees over it.
with all Images, and Religions which are turned into Trades and Merchandise,
whereby spiritual wickedness and the Mystery of Iniquity is upholden; away with
it all, it stinks. Now the great Mystery, Christ in us the Hope of Glory, is
opened, a blessed Fountain to wash in, which makes clean the inside, and fits
and prepares for his glorious and everlasting Kingdom; the desire of all
Nations is come, and coming; blessed are all they that wait for him, and
receive him, where there is neither Greek nor Jew, Col. 3.11.
Barbarian, Scythian, Bond nor Free, but Christ is all and all.

And this Love of God to the World, in his Son Christ Jesus, the Lord of Heaven
and Earth, by his universal Power and Wisdom has raised thousands of Living
Witnesses, who cannot deny him before men, knowing assuredly that the Cause is
the Lord's, and he will plead it with all flesh; and to all faithful and true
witnesses, that continue to the end, they shall have a Crown Immortal Life, the
which Life and Immortality is brought to Light through the Gospel (praises be
to his holy Name forever) So its for True Christianity that many who are called
Quakers have so deeply suffered to this day; and in this true Self-denial and
daily Cross, following our blessed Leader and Commander Christ Jesus, we have
sought the good of all mankind, testifying against Infidelity and Corruption
wherever it appears.

Take but a view of this Nation, and see what abundance of poor distressed
Families are begging up and down, and many are ready to perish for want of
Conveniences; and do but view how others do swell in Pride and Luxury, and
cover themselves over with a Name of Christian; whatever esteem this may have
in the sight of fallen men, I am sure it has none with God, nor those who are
raised unto some degree of knowledge of his divine power and wisdom, by which
all things were created good in the beginning, and by which alone that which is
out of order must be put into order again.

The Lord God prosper his blessed work of Reformation, which he has begun in
the Earth, says my Soul, and the Souls of all who are truly sensible of his
Righteousness therein. By one that did Live several years amongst them. Stephen
Smith.
The 8th. day of the 12th. Month, 1673
THE END.
A Faithful Testimony Concerning the SCRIPTURES, And Dangerous Estate that they
are in, who through their private Interpretations do add unto, and diminish
from, the Holy Prophesies therein Contained:

And do thereby make void the End and Tendency of Gods great Love, through the
Moving of his Holy Spirit in Holy Men, in giving forth those Blessed
Testimonies plainly shown.

And the Blessed Motion, Operation, Revelation and Divine Inspiration of Gods
Holy Spirit in its Blessed Works and Manifestation in this day time (and season
Asserted.)

And an Exhortation unto all to Bow to the Light and Manifestation of Gods Holy
Spirit in them; least the things which concern their Everlasting Rest and Peace
be hid from them. With some brief Instances of Wicked motions, and their
Effects; and Blessed motions, and their Effects, taken out of the Scriptures.

Revel. 22.18. For I Testify unto every man that hears the words of the
Prophecy of this Book: If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add
unto him the Plagues that are written (in this Book.) Printed in the Year, 1679.

A Faithful Testimony Concerning the SCRIPTURES
COme all Professors of the holy Scriptures to the trial, whether there may not
be great and high talking of, by those who are real opposers of the very end
and tendency of that love and mercy of God which through the Scriptures is
testified unto: Come to plain dealing, and weigh things in a true balance; and
let that which is light and vain, which is a let that the Noble Seed cannot
come forth: Let that be cast off, that the Nobility of your Understandings may
be opened and cleared from darkness and error, that the things which concerns
your everlasting peace may be witnessed, before you go from hence and shall be
seen no more.

The 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. Knowing this first, that no Prophecy of the Scripture is
of any private interpretation. For the Prophecy came not in old time by the
Will of man: But holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.
Now mind, since the Prophesies in Scripture is of no private interpretation;
let all who would not be supposed to be of that number, who are giving their
private Interpretation of those weighty and high concerns, consider what Spirit
they are led and acted by therein. For as much as those weighty concerns cannot
be understood, but by the universal love and mercy of God in and through the
manifestation of the Light of his holy Spirit, given to every man to profit
withal: Therefore all had need to consider, whether they feel and understand
the mind and will of God through the manifestation of his blessed Spirit,
leading and guiding them into the knowledge of those Prophesies aforesaid: And
if this love of God in the manifestation of his Spirit, be not taken heed unto,
and received and used for that end it is given; all they who neglect it can
give no other Interpretation of the Prophesies, but what they conceive in their
private Conceptions, the which is a dangerous Estate; the Prophesies being deep
things, wherein the great Salvation of the Lord unto mankind is signified; and
this goodness and mercy of the Lord is only revealed by his Spirit, as said the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.10. But God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit, for he
searches all things, yea, the deep things of God. So its by taking heed unto
the manifestation of the blessed gift of God (by which the love and mercy of
God were witnessed unto by the holy men of God) that the Scriptures of Truth
come to be clearly understood: And this Spirit of God giving to man kind light
and understanding in the things of God; this also pure and holy in man, the
which must be taken heed unto by all that comes to a clear understanding in
those weighty concerns of life and peace under that penalty, least they be hid
from them: Therefore there is a necessity even for all to take heed to that
love of God in the blessed operation and inshining of his holy Spirit in them,
as says the holy Apostle, Romans 1.19. Because that which may be kn^^^ of God,
is manifest in them, for God has (...) unto them.

And therefore a^^ that deny this universal love of God, the moving of his holy
Spirit, and do nor the heed to the manifestation of it in themselves; they are
they who are the opposers of the love and mercy of God signified through the
Scriptures.

And thus in the works of darkness, being found opposers of the (...) intent
and meaning of the will of God, through the blessed operation of his good
Spirit; how are people giving private Interpretations of the Prophesies in the
Scriptures according to their own private Imaginary conceivings, adding and
diminishing to bring them to their corrupt minds and wills: In which works of
darkness they make void the great love of God testified of by holy men
throughout the Scriptures, and so are without the real benefit, which is and
may be received through Faith and Comfort of the holy Scriptures, by them who
do truly take heed to the manifestation of God's holy Spirit in them, which
convinces the World of sin, and therefore universal; and take that for a rule
and guide to walk by out of darkness, and to guide and lead into all Truth. Oh
it is the carnal mind which is enmity against God; Romans 8.7.
for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. It Is that mind
that would make void this love of God in the manifestation of his Spirit to
every man to profit with; as says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.14. But the natural
man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness
unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.
Therefore it is of necessity for all to take heed to the Revelation and
Manifestation of Gods holy Spirit in them, if ever they come to a true
knowledge of the love and mercy of God testified unto in old time: And
therefore it is good for all to consider what state they are in, whether in a
natural or spiritual, whether in a capacity to receive an understanding in the
things of God testified of in the Scriptures, or whether in a natural estate
wresting them to their own destructions: In that state what false conceptions
about the things of God are brought forth, the which genders to bondage and
corruption.

And in this Worldly wisdom, what diversity of Inventions do people get, make
and find out, to keep them from the Cross which Christ exhorted his followers
to take up daily and follow him? Though this may be accounted as foolishness to
them that perish; yet as said the Apostle, But unto us that are saved, it is the
power of God. It was not the intent in the moving of God's holy Spirit (in holy
men, in giving forth those blessed Testimonies of God's righteousness and love
therein unto the world) that people in their carnal minds and natural estates,
should cover their unrighteousness therein, and deck and trim themselves
therewith for some selfish advantage; the which are very presumptuous sins that
have gotten dominion in the hearts of those who do account themselves Leaders
of the people: And indeed if the people did not love to have it so, they would
bow to the manifestation of God's love and mercy in them: But being contrary
minded, then to yield to the good will and pleasure of God in the moving of his
good Spirit; how greatly do they provoke the Lord of Heaven and Earth in
grieving and vexing of his holy Spirit? as said the Prophet Isaiah in another
Case, 63.10. But they rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit; therefore he was
turned to be their enemy, and he fought against them: In that state it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living: I do therefore beseech all
to be considerate in this weighty concern, wherein the Souls Immortal are so
deeply concerned, and let not the day of God's Visitation in and by the
striving of his good Spirit pass over your heads, least you be left mourning
and grieving without God in the World, and so without any certain hope of all
the Saints and Sanctified in the Truth: And through the blessed operation and
revelation of the holy Spirit of Truth, he is now the hope of all them, who are
real denyers of that which has a tendency of grieving and quenching his holy
Spirit; and in this is Christ's Doctrine obeyed, in denying that which is
contrary to the will of God, whose blessed will is the satisfaction of all; and
for that end has he given of his good Spirit unto all, the which ought to be
taken unto by all.

The gainsaying of the striving thereof, was the cause of the Worlds overthrow
of old; in that they grieved his good Spirit, and therein provoked the Lord of
Glory, till in his hot displeasure, he said, his Spirit should not always
strive with them: And the cause of the Scribes and Pharisees Crucifying the
Lord of Glory by their wicked hands, was by their doing despite unto Gods holy
Spirit, they being stiff Necked, did resist the moving and striving of Gods
holy Spirit, as their Fathers did before them, which brought those sad and
miserable Calamities (which may be read of) upon them. And that which was the
cause of Ignorance in Days, Ages and Generations past; is now the cause of
great ignorance in which the people living in error know not the Scriptures,
nor the power of God; and for want of the knowledge thereof, people do perish.

Thus plain and evident it is to all who have the Eyes of their understandings
opened, that they who are true owners of the Scriptures, their sense and
knowledge thereof comes by the moving of the Spirit of Christ, who lights
every man that comes into the world, unto which the true Gospel Ministers
turned people, even from darkness that was in them, unto the Light that was in
them; which Light that shines in Darkness, and the Darkness comprehends it
not. In this principle of the Light of Gods holy Spirit, which makes manifest
the Deeds of Darkness, must all believe, and obey, that come to find Life and
Peace: And read John 1.1. what is there said concerning the word of God, by
which all things were made, the which the Devil is out of; though he may get
the words, and talk and preach of the word: But being out of the word of God,
he cannot preach that: He that can receive it, let him; for in him the word by
which all things were made, is Life; and the Life is the Light of men: And for
the inshining and breathing forth of this Light out of Darkness, must all wait
in the Self-denial of all dark works, taking up the Cross daily thereunto; that
Life and Immortality may be brought to Light through the Gospel: And if this be
hid: It is hid to them that are lost, In whom the God of this World has
blinded the minds of them that believe not, 2 Cor. 3.3, 4.
least the light of his glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God,
should shine upon them. And whilst this love of God testified unto through the
Scriptures, remains hid; what true benefit can such be supposed to have of the
Scriptures, though they may be never such high Talkers and Professors thereof:
Oh that people would consider what they are doing, that they may not labor and
travail all their days in vain, and lie down in sorrow at last.

Come, be sober, be wise you Professors of the Scriptures, and remember that it
is witten: For we must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ; 2 Cor.
5.10.
that every one may receive the things done in the body, whether they be good
or bad: What then will a bare Profession of holy men's words and works wrought
without you, avail you? if you be found in uncleanness, in unsavory words and
works? What will it avail you to have read what blessed and holy Lives the
Saints and Servants of the most High God led and possessed, if you be found in
an unsavory Life, and in an unholy Conversation, in an unclean Possession? If
so, will you not be found denyers of the scope and tendency of Scriptures;
where it is written, to be spiritually minded, is Life and Peace; and all that
possess this are in a clean and holy possession: The Scriptures says, to be
spiritually minded is Life and Peace: So to the blessed motions of Gods holy
Spirit you must turn your minds, and eye its leadings and guidings; this is the
way the Saints and Servants of the most high God were directed to, and guided
in, by the true Preachers of the everlasting Gospel: And therefore unto that of
God which he manifests and shows, you must bring your hearts and minds, before
you can know the law of the Spirit of Life, to set you free from the law of sin
and death: Oh consider, will a talk of freedom avail one in Captivity, whilst
he sees no way but that he must remain so all his Life time? Awake, awake out
of your Dream unto righteou^ness, and sin not, that you may ^now ^he Lord and
his way; the which is above man's ways, as the Heaven is above the Earth: The
Lord of Heaven and Earth has ordained a means and way to everlasting Peace and
Happin^ss, and the Scriptures testify the same: Even of Christ's spiritual
appearance, who is the Way, Truth and Life; so to that of God which is holy,
must every one come that is made holy; unto that which is righteous, must every
one come that is truly made righteous and meet for the Kingdom of God, the
which the unrighteous cannot inherit: Oh hat people would consider their ways
wherein they walk, and not go on in evil ways, and satisfy themselves with a
^alk what they have heard of the righteous way, and live out of it; for the
great love of God in his Heavenly gift to the World, was and is, that people
should be led by it to that repentance never to be repented of, even to forsake
that which is manifest to be wrong, false and evil, by the faithful and true
witness the Spirit of Truth in every one: As it is written, Behold I have given
him for a witness to the people, Isaiah 55.4.
a Leader and Commander to the people: And it is also written, 1 John 5.10. He
that believes on the Son of God, has the witness in himself: Blessed are they
who are in the way of the knowledge of reconciliation unto this faithful and
true witness, and live up unto it; This will be to their joy and comfort in
that life and peace which is everlasting: And to them that do not believe, he
is a witness of their unbelief and hard heartedness, to their shame and
confusion; as you may read, And I will come near to you to Judgment, Malachi
3.5.
and I will be a swift witness against Sorcerers, and against the Adulterers,
and against false Swearers, and against those that oppress the Hireling in his
Wages the Widow and the Fatherless, and that turn away the stranger from his
right, and fear not me, says the Lord of Hosts; read Rom 8.16. Joh. 1.5. By
this you may see how plentifully the Scriptures testify of the Spirit of Truth
witness: And now try in your selves, come to the examination, if any be unclean
in Thought or Action; is there not that within that shows it, and witnesses
against it? If any be unmerciful this witness will witness against it, if any
back-bite, or defraud, or murmur, or lie, or steal, or bear false witness, or
contemn the counsel of the Lord, and proud and high minded in contemning his
holy Law and Commandment; this faithful and true witness will ever be a witness
against all such, and against all that is bad, and has a tendency of defiling
and corrupting any: And therefore all they that deny this, are real denyers of
the love and mercy of God testified unto through the Scriptures: And further,
concerning this faithful and true wirness Christ the word of God; observe what
the Scripture says, Bom. 10.6, 7. Say not in thy heart, who shall ascend into
Feaven? (that is, to bring Christ down from above;) or who shall descend into
the deep? (that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead.) But what says it?
the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart; that is the word of
faith which we preach: (Now mind) are not you opposers of the love and mercy of
God, in the moving of his holy Spirit in those holy men which gave forth the
Scripture; whilst you remain gainsayers of that more sure word, so nigh the
heart and mouth; and in your exaltedness of Spirit in a fleshly worldly wisdom,
being puffed up above what is written; what a vain travail and labor they live
in? In imagining and creating to your selves, a contrary way to what the Lord
has ordained to salvation: Come to the witness in you, and by that (if you
conrinue your subjection thereunto) you will be sensible that it is the love of
God unto you; and in this love be admonisht to give private Interpretations of
the Prophesies in the Scripture, least thereby you provoke the Lord, till swift
destruction comes upon you.

And for your further Information, observe what the Sripture says, 1 John That
was the true light which lights every man that comes into the World; as many
as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God: The Scripture
does not say, as many as profess him, he gives power; but it says, as many as
receive him who lights every man that comes into the World, to them he gives
power, etc. Indeed he is to be received in his spiritual appearance; and for
that end he st^nds at the door and knocks in gentle reproofs and convincement,
whereby the hard heart must be broken, and set open unto him, and receive him,
before the remission from evil be witnessed, and the great horrible clouds of
darkness be expelled, and the vail over the heart rent, and power received to
overcome the wicked one; as it is written, Behold I stand at the door, and
knock: If any man hear my voice, Revel. 3.20.
and open the door, I will come into him, and will Sup with him, and he with
me. This is a great tender of love and mercy; be they not very hard hearted,
that says unto him, depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways;
these are they that oppose the Scriptures Testimony, and shut up the Kingdom of
Heaven against men; Mat. 23.13.
for ye neither go in your selves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to
go in. This was the sad and deplorable condition of those high professors of
the Law and the Prophets, whom Christ pronounced dreadful woe against: And all
that are refisting the Spirits Testimony in themselves, as they did, are in the
same state of Hypocrisy, and under the same sentence of dreadful woe and
misery: Therefore I beseech you to consider what state or condition you are in,
and don't go about to exalt your selves in wisdom above what is written, but
take notice what Christ said, Luke 17. For behold the Kingdom of God is within
you: These are plain and true words, a wiser then he that spoke them never was,
nor ever shall be: Indeed it is very great presumption for any to exalt a wisdom
above his; and to set at naught his blessed counsel in so great and weighty a
concern: And for further proof of the necessity of bowing to that of God in
you; observe also further what Christ said, But whosoever drinks of the water
I shall give him, Joh. 4.14.
shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a
well of water springing up into everlasting life: See how plain and evident are
the Testimonies in Scripture, unto that which is pure and holy of God within:
It must needs also be as plain and evident, that those who do oppose the way to
the knowledge thereof, are real opposers of that love and mercy of God
testified unto by the moving of Gods holy spirit, as recorded in the
Scriptures: Indeed that is a very sad state, and miserable will be the end of
(...) who live and dye in it: Therefore be admonished to take heed to the Light
of Christ within thee, ^^^ch is a blessed leader, proved (...) thousand^, who
are living (...) of its blessed leading, them that are led and guided by it,
out of that which would harm them; an^ a blessed Commander he is, who gives
power to them that receive him t^^k up his Commandments, the which are no way
grievous; and in the doing thereof, there is great peace, as said David, Psalm.
119.165. Great peace have they that love thy law, and nothing shall offend
them: The Law is pure, holy and good, and to be taken heed unto in the heart:
J^r. 31.33.
Come, come to the pure principle of God within, or else you can never know the
Truth and its freedom, not the will of God signified through the Truth, under
what denomination soever; the end and tondency of Gods love thereby, being that
all should come to the knowledge of the Truth and be saved; to which end none
can come, but as they take heed to the blessed motions of Gods holy Spirit in
them: Cease therefore your vain labor and hard travail under that slavish
servitude, where the prince of the power of the Air rules them who does
despite unto the Spirit of Truth; and he blinds and darkens the minds of
people, so that unto them he makes darkness seem as light, and light seem as
darkness; and so he instructs his Vassells and Slaves, to call light darkness,
Isa. 5.20.
and darkness light; evil he calls good, and good evil; and thus in and through
his dark works he brings people, and keeps them under woe and misery. Oh that
people would fear the Lord, and depart from evil, and wait upon the Lord in the
leadings and guidings of his good Spirit in them, the which will draw them unto
the knowledge of Christ in them, the hope of Glory; even unto Christ, the way,
truth and life; the same yesterday, to day, and for ever; the resurrection and
the life, the first born of every creature: who said, Search (or ye search) the
Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life, John 5.
and they are they that testify of me: And ye will not come to me, that ye
might have life of me: It is very plain and evident by what has been said, and
may be said; That except people come unto Christ, the power and wisdom of God
to all that believe, they cannot see life, but the wrath of God abide on them;
and being dead in trespasses and sins, under condemnation, and the wages of sin
which is death: In this state, what ever high talk and profession may be made
from what may be read in the Scriptures of Truth, of the Heavenly gift, which
is Life Eternal; this will but add to their condemnation, who do put Christ at
a distance far from them, and will not receive him in his spiritual appearance;
but do despite to his Spirit of Grace, in quenching and grieving the motions
thereof: Such profane unprofitable talkers, are real opposers of the Spirits
Testimony, the which testifies of Christ: Unto whom all must come, that do
receive Eternal Life; even unto his quickening Spirit, the Lord from Heaven; And
wait to feel his power to raise out of the ways of death and destruction, and
to translate them by the blessed work of regeneration and conversion, into the
way of life and peace: This is the work of the Spirit, and not of the Letter:
For the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives life. (Mind,) It is not the
Letter and Testimony of the Law written, which effects this blessed work, in
giving life ^^^ut that holy and blessed Spirit of ^^^e in Christ Jesus which
sets free from sin and death: The which Law of the Spirit, is testified of, and
born witness unto, by the Letter and Testimony of the Law and Prophets, and the
Apostles and Disciples of Christ Jesus: Therefore I do in the moving of the
Spirit of Truth, according to my measure therein, exhort and persuade all to
take heed unto the manifestation of Gods holy Spirit in them, for the opening
the eye of your understanding in those weighty co^^^^ns of everlasting life, as
testified of through the Scriptures of Truth: And that the Scriptures may Be
set in their right places, and the honor which is due unto the Lord of Heav^n
(...) earth, may be given unto him, who has powerover all flesh. and gives
Eternal Life to all that are freely given up to him; and with whom he is well
pleased, and does accept: As it is written, My sheep hear my voice, and I know
them, and they follow me; John 10.27, 28.
and I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish, neither shall
any man pluck them out of my hand. Oh, be admonished to leave o^^ giving
private Interpretations of the Prophesies, the Seriptures; and bow to the
universal love and mercy of God in the moving of his Spirit of Truto, that
thereby you may be led and guided into all Truth.

And for your sakes, who desire that Truth and Righteousness may (...) place in
the Earth again; for your clearer Information take notice it is written; He
that commits sin is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from the beginning;
Joh. 3.8.
for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the
works of the Devil. (Now observe) what a sad condition they are in, who through
unbelief and hard heartedness, in resisting the spiritual appearance of the
quickening Spirit, the Lord from Heaven, in which works of darkness, do draw
such a vail of gross darkness over them, that they cannot so much as see to the
beginning of that blessed work and redemption from under the enemies power of
darkness in sin and corruption: The which blessed works of redemption, was, is,
and is to be wrought by the manifestation of Gods great love to World in his
Son; but people being darkened, and their minds and understandings blinded,
through the God of this World; they do in this dark and sad condition, plead
and contend for sin, the which is the Devils work, the which through darkness,
they conclude must continue for term of Life: Now mind, he that commits sin
is of the Devil; and therefore this Doctrine of pleading for sin, must also be
of the Devil, sin being the Devils work; those works of pleading for sin must
also be the Devils.

And thus through gross darkness and great and horrid Ignorance, are the works
of the Devil, the grand adversary and enemy of Souls, exalted above the blessed
works of Christ Jesus, who was and is manifest to destroy the Devils works;
Even the Son of Gods love Christ, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever: And
these works of God, in and through the manifestation of the Son his love unto
all mankind, are in every degree righteous, perfect, holy and pure forever; and
herein is his power, dominion and glory seen, felt and clearly understood by
them who are his workmanship, created again unto good works, the which he has
ordained and appointed for mankind to live and walk in. And by and through them
is his power, dominion and glory confessed unto, and set above all, and over
all the enemies works, and power of darkness, as it was in the Primitive time,
by them in whom the Spirit of the Lord had place to live and move in; and in
the blessed motions thereof were those blessed Testimonies in Scripture given
forth, wherein is showed his great love to the World, in the manifestation of
his power and wisdom in flesh, to destroy the Devils works: And by the same
blessed Gospel, through which the righteousness of God was then revealed; by
the preaching of the same Gospel, is now the righteousness of God revealed, and
confessed too by them who are raised by the same power to be the living
witnesses thereof: And to that same power and wisdom, by which the Devils works
are destroyed, and destroying in these last days, is Confession made by them
who are raised in some measure unto the knowledge thereof; and by the same
power and wisdom is Testimony given against the Spirit of Antichrist, the which
came in, in the Apostles days; Having a form of godliness, but denying the
power thereof; 2 Timothy 3.5.
as said the Apostle, from such such turn away. Now take notice, that it was by
this Spirit of Antichrist, That the false Teachers were set up and maintained,
by whom the damnable Heresies came in, 2 Pet. 2.
in denying the Lord that bought them, by whose pernicious ways, the way of
Truth has been, and is evil spoken of: In all the Congregations and Assembles
of unbelievers, where the beast with his many Heads and Horns, does exercise
his power and Antichrists Spirit, is head Leader and Commander: There this
damnable Heresy is maintained, that no more of the Revelation of Gods holy
Spitit, is to be known now adays, say they Revelations are ceased; and they
look upon it to be presumption, and of a dangerous consequence for any to speak
or testify of what the Spirit of the Lord reveals and makes known now adays,
or for any to expect new Revelations now adays: Oh damnable Heresy, what
people that have but the least glimmering of the things of God, would give away
their reason and understanding therein, and maintain such false Preachers, by
whom these damnable Heresies is maintained; this is the work of a subtle enemy,
unto whom people being joined, do betray the light and understanding, the which
in some degree or measure at some time or season, through the striving of Gods
holy Spirit, they have or may be enlightened withal in the things that concern
their everlasting peace and well-being in that world which is without end: For
as much as the good Spirit reaches to all that they may profit in their
perverting their understanding therein, and not profiting thereby, will be no
good answer in the day of account, when the faithful and true witness will rise
up against them, testifying unto what they have had; and how they have betrayed
it: if a Talent or Talents are hid in the Earth, the Earth then shall not be
able to conceal it; but the hidden things must be brought to light, and every
one will be rewarded according to the Deeds done in the body, whether they be
good or evil. It will be a shame to say then, my sins and iniquities were not
manifest unto me by the Spirit of Truth; and so think to hide them and cover
them with lying excuses; saying, it was a natural Light, or as some have called
it, a Devil: Thus mankind being darkened by the enemy, the man of sin; He now
exalts himself above all that is called Gods, 2 These. 2.3, 4.
and sits and judges the motions of Gods holy Spirit to be delusions, or
insufficient to lead and guide out of evil; accounting that Religion good
enough, that can talk of what is recorded in Scripture; how the Primitive
Christians were moved and acted by Gods holy Spirit: But says this man of sin,
to expect new Revelations now adays, this is dangerous; Revelations are
ceased, the operation of Gods Spirit is not to be known now adays; and thus
the man of sin brings a fear upon all his vassals and subjects, that they dare
not own the Spirit of Truth, as manisested in them, to lead and guide them into
all Truth; though Christ Jesus did bear witness to it, and did commend it unto
the world; Even that Spirit of Truth which reproves the World of sin, etc. But
the man of sin teaches his Subjects to deny the sufficiency thereof, and fears
them, and keeps them in such subjection; that they must not so much as confess
to the sufficiency thereof: Now believe in it, says the man of sin, the
Scripture is the only rule of life; and in this belief he keeps them who are
only professors thereof, under his strong delusions in many Sects and Opinions,
wrangling and scolding about their coverings; one Sect of Professors, of what
holy Lives and blessed Conversations the Saints and Servants of the Lord of
Heaven and Earth lived by the guidance of his holy Spirit in the Primitive
time: This Sect cries, my dress, my covering is the fairest and best; another
Sect cries down that dress and covering, and sets up another dress and
covering; and what abundance of these Sects there be, let the wise Judge, who
live under the woe and misery; as is written: Woe to the rebellious Children,
Isa. 30.1.
says the Lord, that take counsel, but not of me; and that cover, with a
covering, but not of my Spirit, that they may add sin to sin: And as Peter said
of the salse Teachers; Having eyes full of Adultery, and that cannot cease from
sin, 2 Pet. 2.14.
beguiling unstable Souls; an heart they have exercised with covetous
Practices, cursed Children: And as Jude in his Epistle said of them who was
then departed from the Faith and blessed works of the holy Spirit; so it may be
as truly said of these: These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having
not the Spirit: But these speak evil of those things which they know not, but
what they know naturally as bruit beasts: And being thus corrupted and exalted,
live above the pure fear of the Lord; they in this exaltedness pervert and
wrest the Scriptures, to bend them to their corrupt wills and imaginations:
They do in the dark works of the man of sin, give their private Interpretations
of the Prophesies in Scripture, and in a mystery of iniquity, they speak evil
of the motions of Gods holy spirit; in which blessed motions, those blessed
Prophesies were given forth; and cannot be understood, but by the blessed
operation and moving of the same blessed spirit; but the moving of this blessed
spirit, being mocked at by Hagar's brood, that Birth after the flesh, which
gendereth to bondage; this brood in their several Sects, do exalt the mystery
of iniquity, and spiritual wickedness in high places; and under this mystery
conclusions are made, that Christ who suffered by wicked hands, has done all
for them; and that their sins are forgiven, in what he did and suffered without
them; and their Confessions and Professions to this purpose, they look upon to
be sound and good Religion, though sin and iniquity they live in, and plead for
it for term of Life: But let all the wise in heart, who have not so far
betrayed their reason and understanding in the things of God, but that some
little glimmering and descerning they have thereof: Consider and judge, whether
the man of sin be not the Author of that Religion; and whether such dark works
have not a tendancy of overthrowing the true purpose and intent of all the holy
men's Testimonies, given forth by the moving of Gods holy spirit, as recorded in
the Scriptures: Much might be written concerning these workers in the works of
darkness; but I give but some brief hints thereof, and leave the wise in heart
to Judge.

And I do ask this question; whether in case the Motions, Operations,
Revelations and Inspirations of Gods holy spirit of Truth, have not the leading
and guiding of peoples hearts and minds in their conversations and all their
ways and works, where this is denied? Whether then does not a spirit of error
and falsehood, deceit and hypocrisy lead instead thereof?

Indeed misery, and miserable will be the end of all those who do persist and
go on under the cover of the Antichristian spirit, to oppose the great love of
God in the manifestation of the Son of his love, who both was, and is manifest
to destroy the Devils works: And in this glorious manifestation of Gods spirit
of grace, light, power and wisdom, is the Lord of Heaven and Earth at work this
time and season, to create again and redeem mankind out of the fall, death and
curse; and is pouring out of his blessed spirit upon all flesh, as was
Prophesied of through the moving of Gods holy spirit in old time by the Prophet
Joel 2.28. And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit
upon all flesh; and your Sons and your Daughters shall Prophecy, your old men
shall dream dreams, your young men shall see Visions; and also upon the
Servants, and upon the Handmaids in those days, will I pour out my Spirit. Now
Hagars brood do object; and say, that this was fulfilled in the primitive
Christians days, but now it is ceased, etc.

Answer, That the spirit of the Lord was poured out upon the primitive
Christians, who believed and waited in the manifestation thereof, that is
evident to all who read what blessed Lives they lived, and boly examples they
were, in their day and generation: And they were built upon the foundation of
the holy Prophets and Apostles; and this was the spirit of Christ, as you may
read 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. The Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when
it testified beforehand the suffering of Christ, and the glory that should
follow: It was by the moving of the spirit of Christ in the Prophets, who
prophesied of the grace that should come: This spirit of Christ in them, was
their foundation on which they built, and from whence they had those blessed
Revelations and Visions of that great salvation, the which through the pouring
out of the same blessed spirit of Christ upon all flesh should come: And those
who denied themselves, and took up the Cross and followed Christ's blessed
example, even in his great humiliation and patience, they were witnesses of the
fulfilling of those blessed Prophesies: And the Apostle in his Epistle to the
Romans, says plainly: Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none
of his: Romans 8.
(Let all take notice) that it is alone by the spirit of Christ that any can be
truly said to be followers of Christ, and so true Christians, as being baptized
by this one spirit into one body (out of the many Sects.) And all them who were
possessers and injoyers of Christ's Spirit: In them was fulfilled the Prophesy
so far, as they were partakers of the spirit thereof.

But unto what a degree of gross darkness are people plunged into, through a
great night of Apostasy; where conclusions are made, that the Operation,
Revelation and Inspiration of this Spirit of Christ is ceased now adays. They
may as well say, Christ has now adays no followers, therefore none are true
Christians; the many Sects and Opinions have gotten varieties of Baptisms, but
all out of the Spirit of Christ: That is ceast (they say) now adays, the
operation and work thereof was fulfilled in the primitive days. Now every one
to his private Interpretations, and build some Babel; the Nations are now
become as waters, and the Whore with her Golden Cup of Sorceries rids over all;
and the Nations have drunk of her Cup of Fornications, and are made so drunk
therewith, that they see no need of the Revelation of Christ's Spirit now
adays: Their Mother Mystery, Babylon the Mother of Harlots; she instructs her
brood of Children to kindle fires of Confession and Profession, without true
Faith and Obedience of what blessed Testimonies are left upon record, and to
warm themselves by the sparks of their fire; and to cover themselves with the
Harlots Attire, even their own self-righteousness, in seigned Faiths, and
feigned Humilities, in feigned Worships, and feigned Beliefs; having denied the
sufficiency of the Arm and Power of God now adays, and the Sanctification,
Wisdom, Righteousness and Redemption of Christ Jesus now adays; contenting
themselves with Profession and Confession of Christ Jesus, that he was made
Righteousness, Wisdom and Sanctification, and Redemption, to them that believed
in the Primitive time, by the pouring out of his blessed Spirit; then the Arm
of the Lord was revealed, and the power of the Lord did redeem people from
under the enemies power, and the Faith of Gods Elect was then very precious:
And the power of Christ Jesus, who has power over all flesh, that then was the
higher power, and people did then bow under it, and confessed him before men;
then indeed Christ's Doctrine and Commands taught and received, and his precious
blood confessed unto by them that were witnesses thereunto, who through the
virtue and sufficiency were redeemed from under the man of sin's power, and so
cleansed from the filthy Garments of sin: Then indeed the Lord had a people the
which were his purchased possession, being sanctified throughout in Soul, Body
and Spirit, by the pouring out and renewings of Christ's holy Spirit: They were
not their own, being purchased and bought with a price; they all confessed unto
the Lord that had bought them, and all the true Preachers of righteousness,
they preached up then the sufficiency of the Blood of the Lamb, and the
uncorruptable word of life, and labored and traveled for the forming of
Christ in the Believers, that they might present them perfect in Christ Jesus:
All this says the Seed of the bondwoman, where Mystery Babylon has her
brood; we cannot deny but that the state and condition of the Primitive
Christians were as aforesaid: But they may say, if they will speak the Truth,
our Mother Mystery Babylon has taught us another Lesson now adays: Alas, for
you our Forefathers, Demas and the Antichristian Spirit, that led abundance
from among the true Christians; many in the Antichristian Spirit went out and
embraced this World, and in the Wisdom thereof, the God of the World blinded
our our Forefathers Minds, and then the Gospel was hid, and in the Apostasy we
grew, being inwardly ravened from the Spirit of Christ, we lost the sense of
the sufficiency of the power thereof: Then the Spirit of Antichrist that led
and became head, and the Beast, and false Prophet, with many Heads and Horns,
some like a Lamb, having received power from the Dragon, became in time such a
great head and mountain, that they made War with the true Woman and her Seed,
and cast out floods of ungodliness against that Birth and Seed that was
conceived by the free Woman; and in such a degree the Beast prevailed, that he
proclaimed open War; saying, who is able to make War with the Beast: Thus the
Seed of the bond Woman, who are conceived and brought forth out of the Womb of
Mystery Babylon, may truly say; the Arm of flesh is now accounted for the
higher power, and we teach for Doctrine the Commands of Men; our Mother has
trained us up, and taught us to deny the power of the Lord to be the higher
power, and to deny the infallible teachings of the Grace of Gods Spirit; and to
deny the Operation and Revelation, and Inspiration of Gods holy Spirit now a
days, and to say that is ceased now adays: And now we can live bravely in the
Lusts of our own eyes, and in the Lust of our own flesh, and in the Pride of
Life, under many Fair Coverings that our Mother has made us; having cast off
Christ's Yoke, we are now at liberty in the flesh to use our Tongues in our own
wills and pleasures; the Beast and false Prophet has purchased this liberty
for us, and our Mother sits as Queen, and says, we shall see no sorrow: It is
service good enough now adays to be high talkers of the holy men's words and
works, and to set them up for Teachers who have an Art and subtilty to please
men best with their good Words and fair Speeches. As for the universal Spirit
and power of the Lord Jesus and his blessed Office to fit and prepare for the
blessed Ministry: Our Mother Mystery Babylon has taught us to deny the
sufficiency thereof; and to set up Universities and Schools to make Ministers
by, and let them be as graceless as they will, so they be Witty and Learned,
and can talk Learnedly of the good words and Testimonies that proceeded from
the moving of Gods Spirit through Fishermen, Shepherds and Herds-men, and the
like: If they can by their floods of Eloquence and high flown Doctrines and
Speeches, under fair shows of Confession and Profession of some things that
have been done, and of some things that should be done, and yet leave all
undone; and stop the very motions of the Spirit of Truth, by and in which alone
every thing that is good is done, and without it we can do nothing that is good
and acceptable and well pleasing to God. We the Children of Mystery Babylon,
may say, if our Preachers and Teachers do so well apply themselves to Learning,
and get such curious Arts and Eloquence, as to stop the motions of the Spirit
of Truth, now adays they do our Mothers work well, and deserves good
Encouragement (some long Coats, some short Coats) some Shopkeepers, and Trades;
(a vast Revenew by the year) some more, some less, according as we and our
Merchants can agree: And for this Trade and Merchandise, we are beholding to
the Beast and false Prophet, who has purchased this liberty for us, to deny
the Revelation, Operation and Divine Inspiration of the Spirit of Truth now
adays: And so to give our private Interpretations of the holy Prophesies in
Scripture, and to make void the very end and tendency of the moving of Gods
holy Spirit through holy men, in giving forth the same.

Thus you may see the Fruit of your Doctrine, you Seed of the bond Woman; who
are nourished and trained up by your Mother Mystery Babylon, in whose Womb all
the Treachery in Cruel Butchery has been conceived and brought forth; who have
been so drunk with the Whores Cup of Sorceries, that you have not spared to
drink the Blood of the holy Prophets, A postles and Saints, and Martyrs of the
living God; and this is, and has been the fruits and effects of the motions of
your own proud, arrogant, exalted spirits, whereby you have disdained and
mocked the very appearance of Gods holy Spirit of Truth, and the Light thereof:
You have contemned and spoke slightly and evil of, and all this have you done
under a Mystery; wherein, in your drunken fits, you have killed and spoiled the
Servants of the living God, and then wiped your Mouths like Sheep-biting Dogs;
and made the World believe that Worshipped the Beast, that you had done some
service for the Lord: You are the Generation whom Christ spoke of, Mat. 23.33.
Ye Serpents, ye generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of Hell?
Fill up your measure, that upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon
the Earth.

For of a Truth, the good Husbandman, the Lord of Heaven and Earth, has all
this while reserved a Seed, as it is written; And as Esaias said before, Romans
9.29.
except the Lord of Sabbath had left us a Seed, we had been as Sodoma, and been
made like unto Gomorrha: And in this is the Lord replenishing the Earth and
making of it fruitful in virtue, in life, in praises to his holy name, even by
the same spirit of Truth that moved in the holy men of God, that gave forth
those holy Prophesies and blessed Testimonies in the Scriptures of Truth: And
this is the time and season wherein the Lord is pouring out his spirit, even
the same spirit as he did pour out upon his Sons and Daughters in the Primitive
time: And its by the Operation, Revelation and Divine Inspiration of the same
spirit of Christ Jesus, in and by which the Holy Prophesies and Testimonies in
the Scripture comes to be understood: And in this spirit the Lord has, and is
ordaining Ministers that they may go, and bring forth fruit, and that their
fruit may remain: And by the power and efficasie thereof, are thousands of
living witnesses raised now in these days, unto whom the goodness, mercy and
loving kindness of the Lord is revealed, even by the Operation, Divine
Inspiration and blessed effects of the same spirit of Christ Jesus, which the
holy men of God were witnesses of in the Primitive days: And in and by this
spirit of power and wisdom, is the Lord made Righteousness, Wisdom,
Sanctification and Redemption unto his people who are believers this day, as he
was in the Primitive days unto his people who did believe in him: And by the
power and effectual works of this spirit of Christ Jesus in these days, time
and season; The Blind receive their Sight, Mat. 11.5, 6.
and the Lame Walk, the Lepers are Cleansed, and the Deaf Hear, the Dead are
raised up, and the Poor have the Gospel Preached to them: And blessed is he
whosoever shall not be offended in me: This spirit of Christ Jesus was the
Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, on which the true Believers (which
were the Church of Christ) was built; and its on this Foundation that the true
Believers (which is the Body of Christ) which is his Church is built this day,
time and season, where Christ is Head, Leader, Lawgiver and Commander; and by
his spirit is the blessed Worship set up now in the Church of Christ, the which
Christ set up in opposition to all false Worships in the Primitive time; as you
may read: But the hour comes, when the true Worshipers shall Worship the
Father in Spirit and in Truth; John 4.23, 24.
for the Father seeks such to Worship him: God is a Spirit, and they that
Worship him, must Worship him in Spirit and in Truth. Therefore yours is the
false Worship now, where the Revelation, Operation and Divine Inspiration of
this blessed spirit of Truth is denied now adays: Your Worship is false,
imaginary and conceited; for none can truly call Jesus Lord, but by the leading
and guiding of the same holy spirit of Truth; and all that makes mention of his
holy Name, let them depart from Iniquity: And all you who do not; but do
continue in the Mystery thereof, in subjection to the man of sin; your Prayers
are the Prayers of the wicked, the which is abomination to the Lord: And your
patcht up Sermons, the which you Study and Frame up in your Brain from the
works of others: They are all alike abomination; and how costly these works of
abomination are, let the Wise in Heart judge: And in all where this blessed
spirit of Truth is rejected and stoped in its motions, and so grieved and
quenched, and another spirit leads; all their labor and travel is vain, and
your Consultations are vain, and whatsoever you form up, be it an Instrument
never so cunningly and wisely wrought in the deepest of your Skill and Council,
in the highest degree of the Worlds Wisdom to oppose the outgoings of this
blessed Spirit of Christ Jesus; it shall never prosper, neither shall the
Contrivers ever prosper in their works: Look back 20 or 30 years past, where
great undertakings have been (even if it had been possible) to have ruined and
spoiled all those who gave Testimony to this Spirit of Truth: And see what sad
effects those works of Opposition have produced; what has your turning of
things upside down availed you? Alas for you, your worth is the product of
ruin and misery; that which you intend to your peaceable Neighbors (will come
upon your selves,) your own works in your singular exalted spirits is the
purchaser thereof. Oh you Ignorant Fools, who are blinded by the God of this
Would, and are so high flown, that you go about to limit the holy God in the
goings out of his holy Spirit; you may as well undertake to alter the course of
the Sun, and stop up the course of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea: Your sins
of Presumption would be much alike, and your Folly will end in as great shame;
Indeed your presumption arises from an Arm of Flesh, and long continuance in
vain Customs, Traditions and Inventions: And because you can clap up in
Prisons, and make Havoc, and Ruin, and Spoil of People and their Goods; your
spirit that leads you in these works, being an envious, Malicious, Cruel,
Abominable, Wicked spirit; therefore proceeds this wrong Judgment from you,
even that Gods holy Spirit in Revelation, Operation and Divine Inspiration, as
moving through holy Men in the Primitive time, is now ceased: But if it were
so, as you vainly Imagine; then show where the difference lies between you who
call your selves Christians, and the Heathens, if the Spirit of Christ Jesus,
the Spirit which people were brought under in the Primitive time, and thereby
to be Baptized into one Body, the which was to be ruled and governed by that
Spirit of Christ. Now if the Revelation, Operation and Divine Inspiration
thereof be ceased, then tell me by what spirit Christians, so called, are
Baptized into so many Bodies and Fellowships, and what Spirit rules and
governs? And what difference there is between them called Heathen in their
Fellowships, and them called Christians in their Fellowships, where the
Authority, Rule and Government of Christ's Spirit is denied.

Come to plain dealing, and don't Shuffl; you have been long enough in that
work already; and the more you persist therein, the more you will be
confounded, and the deeper plunged into the horrible pit, and your Feet will be
faster stuck in the Mire: Therefore be admonished to deal plainly, least you be
your own Executioners through your high presumptuous mindedness in bringing
swift destruction upon you; for of a Truth thousands have been bowed before the
Lord under a sense of their own insufficiency to perform that which is good and
acceptable of themselves, and have truly waited upon the Lord in a deep silence
of the flesh: And indeed Christ has appeared the second time in his blessed
Spirit and power, and has quickened and revived many hungry Souls, and he has
made known his sufficiency and help in the needful time. And all them who have
in Truth laid hold of him, cannot part with him; for it is by him that we can do
all things well pleasing and acceptable in the sight of God and man: And all
that have begun in this Spirit, and are faithful and obedient thereunto, have
Hope, Faith and Confidence to grow up and be made perfect thereby; and so
attain to the mark and prize that is before us: Though many may and do turn
aside through unfaithfulness and disobedience, and the many and great trials
that may be met withal, through the Oppression and Cruelty of the Worlds
Spirit; yet over all that has been, and may be met withal; we have Hope and
Faith, that in and through the assistance of the Spirit and Power of our Lord
and Savior Christ Jesus, we shall persevere and go on, bearing the blessed
fruits of his spirit, which is in all Goodness, Righteousness and Truth,
Patience, Meekness and Innocence, to the finishing our Testimony, and laying
down our heads in Patience and Joy in Life Everlasting.

And further, concerning the outgoings of this blessed spirit, I do testify my
Faith therein; that the Lord of Heaven and Earth will by the Majesty and power
thereof, overturn, overturn, overturn the power of darkness, and destroy all
the cursed fruits that have sprung from the corrupt root and ground thereof:
And by the light of the spirit of Christ Jesus, a sight is given to many
faithful witnesses, that the Ax of the Lord is laid to the root thereof: And
the Lord of Heaven and Earth that has begun the work, will carry it on, and
perfect it, to his own praise, honor and glory; and to the establishment of
his purchased possession, where he Tabernacles and Delights to dwell forever.

And now this root and offspring of David, this bright and moving Star, has
taken deep rooting in many hearts and minds, from whence fruits spring and
grow, to the praise and honor of the Lord of the Harvest; and to the joy and
comfort of all the faithful and true laborers therein, whose outgoings being
in the movings, leadings and guidings of his holy spirit; the which having
taken deep root downwards, now yields fruits upward, in some an hundred, in
some sixty, and in some thirty, fold: As you may read of the Parable of the
Sower and the seed that fell into the good ground: Mat. 15.
And from the Lord of the Vineyard, whose is the Vineyard; he having planted
many Heavenly Branches into the Vine, his good Husbandry and Care is seen to be
over them: And all whom he has, or may ordain to be Instruments and Servants
in this blessed work, he ever did and does maintain them, never suffering them
to lack Food and Raiment, things necessary both for this Life and that which is
to come: But none that keep within the bounds of the leadings and guidings of
his blessed spirit, did ever covet Silver or Gold, or Preach for filthy
Lucre-sake: And now the Lord of Heaven and Earth, having prepared by his
Eternal spirit and power such a Ministry again, and sent forth into the
Nations, who have no such thing in their Eye to draw them out of filthy Lucre;
but purely and clearly do seek the honor and glory of God, and the good and
well-being of people. This makes the corrupt and false Teachers of the Nation,
who are made so by man in the Worlds spirit and wisdom, being drawn out for
filthy Lucre sake; and in more then ordinary manner, coveting after Silver and
Gold; this makes these Diviners mad: The day of Christ being so clearly come,
and the man of sin (their Master) so clearly revealed, and a Testimony so
clearly goes out against them; that their Master the man of sin in all his
Transformations, though he appear in them and they in him, as Ministers of
righteousness, and by all the best arts and cunning in perverting and wresting
the holy men's Testimonies by private Interpretations, adding to, and
deminishing from the Prophesies thereof: And seemingly by casting mists and
fogs before peoples Eyes, they turn the very end and tendency of the holy men's
Testimonies and Prophesies left upon record, to another use then what they were
intended and given forth by the moving of Gods holy Spirit for: And this they
do partly through Ignorance, being so wilfully, to hide their Corrupt, Proud,
Arrogant, Covetous and Idolatrous practices under.

And let all whose desires are after the knowledge of the Lord, and the peace
and rest of their Souls in that unspeakable comfort and joy, in that life which
is everlasting; take but a view of the blessed motions of Gods holy Spirit
through holy men in old time, as is left upon record: And compare the Covetous,
Idolatrous practices of the false Teachers of the Nation, and see how unlike
the good they are; and how just like the wicked they are.

Genesis 4. Cain, who was of that wicked one; he offered, but unto his Offering
the Lord had no respect: Abel offered in Faith, 1 John 3.12.
and the Lord had respect unto Abel and his Offering: And Cain was Wrath, and
envyed him, and Murdered him, because his own works wereevil, and his Brothers
righteous. See your Father all you Persecutors about Religion, and the ground
of his wickedness.

And the Lord said, my Spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he
also is flesh, and God shortened his days; Genesis 6.
and said, every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually; for all flesh had corrupted his way, and the Earth is filled with
violence through them: These were the effects of fleshly motions; But Noah
found grace in the eyes of the Lord; and read what blessed effects his moving
therein had.

The false Prophets moving in a flattering lying Spirit, enticed Ahab to go on
to his Destruction: Micah the true Prophet moving in the Spirit, 2 Chronicles. 18.
of Truth, and for speaking the Truth, was Imprisoned, and Fed with Bread and
Water: The lying Prophets for lying, flattering and dissembling are at Liberty.

Mordicai being one of the Lords people, he could not be moved to bow to Haman,
nor do him reverence, Esther 3.
though he was told by the Kings Servants often that he transgressed the Kings
command: This filled Haman with wrath, and in his wicked motion he sought the
destruction of Mordicai and all his people; but read what became of him and his
motion.

Read what dreadful effects the wicked fleshly motions of the Sodomites had;
Genesis 19.
and the blessed effects of Lot's righteous motions against their wickedness.

Read what the false Prophets moved for; and how the true Prophet was moved to
cry against them, Isaiah 56.10, 11.
and said, They are all dumb dogs; yea, they are greedy dogs, which can never
have enough: They all look to their own way, every one for his gain from his
quarter: And he did not rail in saying so, he spoke the Truth.

Read what wicked motions there was in the flesh, and the motion of the true
Prophet against them; said he, They were as fed Horses, every one neighed after
his neighbors Wife: Jer. 5.
The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and
my people love to have it so; and what will ye do in the end thereof?

Read the true Prophets motion in the word of Truth against the false fleshly
Prophets motion; Who moved for handfuls of Barley and pieces of Bread; Ezekiel. 13.
Read how wicked they were: The wicked false Teachers in this Age, have a
larger and richer Trade; they move for Thousands of Pounds.

The true Prophet moving in the Truth, cried out against the horrible wicked
fleshly motions of the Priests; and said, As troops of Robbers wait for a man,
Hosea 6.
so the company of Priests murder in the way by consent; for they commit
lewdness: Observe they were agreed in their motion.

Read the wicked motions of a wicked spirit in the Presidents, Princes,
Governors, Counselors, who moved the King to make an unalteralterable Decree
to ensnare Daniel, Dan. 7.
because he was Honest and Just: And though Daniel was acquainted therewith,
and knew the penalty; yet he was moved in a good Spirit to open his Windows and
pray as before: And read what became of the motions of the wicked; and also of
the blessed motions.

The good Spirit in the Prophet moved him to testify against the false Spirits
motions, both in head and tail: Said he, The heads thereof judge for reward,
and the Priests thereof teach for Hire, Mic. 3.1.
and the Prophets thereof Divine for Money; yet will they lean upon the Lord,
and say, is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us. Oh the
presumption and confidence of wicked motions; and observe how hireling Priests
were cried out against in former days, as well as in these last days.

Christ in his Doctrine gave people warning, To beware of the Scribes, which
love to go in long Clothing, and love Salutations in the Market places, Mark 12.
and the chief Seats in the Synagogues, and the uppermost Rooms at Feasts:
Which devour Widows houses, and for a pretense make long Prayers: But they are
worse that make Widows, and devour Estates; examine the Jailers Calenders for
near 30 years last past.

Acts the 20. The Apostle was moved by a good Spirit to declare what should
come after him; saying, For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous
Wolves enter in among you; not sparing the Flock. And what a wonderful motion
this wicked generation have had for near this 30 years, let all them that have
heard and seen, and are more moderate and wise in heart, judge.

1 John 2. There you may read that there was then many Antichrists, and the
evil motions of that wicked Spirit, the which was then in the World. Chap. 4.3.
was to deny Christ's coming in flesh.

And John being in the Spirit on the Lords day, had wonderful things revealed
unto him; both of the Beasts rising out of the Sea, and out of the Earth;
Revelation
and with what swelling Pride he exalted himself over the Saints and Servants
of the Lord God: And how that Kings agreed to give their strength and power
unto the Beast with one mind, to make War with the Lamb; and the Lamb shall
overcome them: For he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and they that are
with him are blessed, and chosen, and faithful: And he saw the downfall of
Babylon, and the End of the Beast and false Prophet: Read chap. 19. And this is
coming to pass, and must be fulfilled, glory, praises and honor be given to
the Lord God forever.

And thus unprejudiced Reader, who has some Breathings after the knowledge of
the Lord, and can not take up a rest in a sinful state, but desires that true
Judgment may go forth: Here is plain Truth, and also some brief instances
therein, which is but few to what might be given from Genesis to the
Revelations, of the wicked Spirits motions, and their Effects; and of the
blessed motions of Gods good Spirit, and their Effects; by which thou may
see, by the fruits and practices, who are of that brood and generation of Cain
and his followers; and who are of the generation of Abel and his followers: And
what a wicked, proud, arrogant Spirit that is, which dares presume to limit the
moving of Gods holy Spirit in its Revelation, Operation and Divine Inspiration.
And by which wicked and presumptuous works, that proud, ambitious and aspiring
Spirit, has turned the very end and tendency of the love and mercy of God in
the moving of this holy Spirit through holy Men, in giving forth those blessed
Testimonies and Prophesies in Scriptures, even quite to another use, then
intended.

And how the Antichristian Spirit, which was in the World in the Apostles
days, wrought in a Mystery of Iniquity, and in Confessions and Professions
from the true witnesses Testimony; that Christ was come into the World, and how
he was Born, and how he Suffered, and was Ascended, and will come again (which
is all true.) But under this fair covering, the Merchants of Babylon set up
their Trades, and fraighted their Vessels with the Whores Trumpery, and with
fair Speeches and good Words, out of the Life, out of the Power; they have
deluded poor Souls, making Merchandise of them; setting up that which is
profitable in the way of righteousness, for the way of righteousness; and so
excluded the second coming of Christ in Spirit to them that look and wait for
him without sin unto Salvation: This great mystery, the which is Christ in us
the hope of Glory, the way of Truth and Life, the way of Righteousness unto the
Father, out of which none can come unto him; this by their Arts they have
wholly excluded: And thus having set the Scripture for a chief rule, and only
rule of Life; they have excluded the Spirit of Truths guide and leadings, the
which the Scripture directs unto; and so set the Scriptures above the Spirit,
by the moving of which they were given forth: And the Words and Writings of the
Scripture, they have set up, for the word it self. And this Spirit having put
the Declaration and Writings of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John for the Gospel;
here the Gospel, the power of God, that is excluded, and Christ the word of God
in the heart and mouth, that is excluded: And thus having turned the Scripture
upside down; The man of sin, the Son of Perdition; 2 These. 2.3.
who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God; sits in the
Temple of God, showing himself that he is God: And now saying in effect, that
the day of Christ is past, as touching his appearance and coming in the flesh,
he is at a remoteness or distance from his people. Now Revelations are ceased,
say they, and the best term they can give the Light in man, is to call it a
Natural Light: So Natural and Brutish is mankind become, through the works of
the enemy; and in this Natural State, reading the Scriptures, having put the
moving of Gods Spirit a far off from them, by which alone the things of Cod
therein are understood: They in that Natural Estate, does not understand what
they read, neither can they receive the things of the Spirit of God, for they
are foolishness unto them: Oh people be admonished to come down to the Light of
Christ in you, that makes manifest the deeds of Darkness; and as the man of sin
comes to be revealed in you, by the Light of Christ's Spirit, you thereby will
come to the knowledge of Christ's day and coming in righteousness, to make War
against all unrighteousness, and to put an end to transgression, and finish
sin, and bring in everlasting righteousness: So away with all private
Interpretations and vain Imaginations, and come to the universal love of God
that Spirit or Light; the which makes manifest that which is reproveable, and
turn at his reproof, and he will pour out his Spirit upon you: And thus by the
coming of the day of Christ, the day of the wicked will be seen, and the Bed of
Torment they must lie down in, who go on in wickedness, opposing the Spiritual
appearance of Christ Jesus: Oh sad will their day be, who persist in their
presumption of mocking and scoffing at the moving of Gods holy Spirit now
adays; that is a proud arrogant Spirit, which will lead all that follow it to
the end, to misery, contempt and shame; and at length to everlasting
destruction. Blessed are they that are not defiled with it: And therefore be
admonished to put your whole trust in God; and wait for the appearance of his
grace, that you may have Salt and Savor in your selves; or else,
notwithstanding you may talk high things of what you read in Scriptures, yet if
you be not regenerated and born of the Spirit, you cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. And thus in the Leading, Guiding, Operation, Revelation and
Divine Inspiration of the Blessed Spirit of Truth, am I moved to give Testimony
to the Truth and way of Life and Peace, in true love to all the Creation of
God, for the undeceiving of deceived and deluded Souls, that their
understandings may be cleared of Darkness and Error; and that they may know the
Truth as it is in Jesus, and be saved.

Stephen Smith.
The 11th. Month, 1676.
A Tender Greeting to the Flock of Christ in Bedfordshire and Huntingtonshire.
Dear Friends,
IN the everlasting Seed, Power and Life, keep the substance of all signified
in Ages past, under many Types, Figures and Shadows, now known and dwelt in by
them who have believed the good report of the holy men of God, which is left
upon record, who was redeemed from the Earthly part; even that they might be
Gods witnesses of his Heavenly gift, wherein is all the Treasures of wisdom and
knowledge hid; which Treasure has been freely opened unto us, who through
faithfulness and diligent waiting, have expected the same, as a sure reward of
the bounty and goodness of our Creator for ever. So that all the obedient and
upright hearted can truly say, for ever be the day had in remembrance, when we
were awakned out of Carnal Security, we had in vain Customs and Traditions of
men in the Fall; who have sought out many Inventions, through which comes
blindness, hardness of heart, and unbelief; from whence proceeds envying,
hatred, malice, uncleanness, and all other evils whatsoever: He who is Prince
of Darkness, having his Power and Authority there in blindness and darkness,
carries the Creature into bondage at his will, he being ruler in the Children
of disobedience: But glory and praises be to the Lord our God, who is the great
God, and besides him there is none: It Is he alone that opens the understandings
of them that fear him; who has discovered unto us, the Mystery of the workings
of Satan, and the breadth and length of his rule and dominion, and the end
thereof; for ever is he who thus opens unto them that fear him, greatly to be
admired by all his Sons and Daughters, who are redeemed by his great power out
of Adam in the Fall, up into him that never fell, through whom we have access
into his presence, the which sweetens all to us, and carries all that truly
trust in him through all Tempests and Storms whatsoever: Even by his Arm and
Power, who will and can appease and lay all Tempests and Storms when they have
accomplished that for which they were suffered to be raised, he being seen and
known who walks upon a troubled Sea; as in days past, so yesterday, and to
day, and for ever. So Dear Friends, keep out his appearance, who would work
questionings and reasonings concerning the Rod of the wicked, with which the
Righteous are threatened: (It Is for the Fire) (It Is for the Fire) that is Gods
Word: So all to abide faithful in his power, by whom all appearances of the
wicked one may be resisted in his many wills, who is a Murderer and a Thief;
who walks about in the Earthly mind, compassing there, and betraying there;
and draws back into the Earth there: And then when trials come, the Earth is in
the way; and then the false balance is set up in the heart, and the precious
Jewel being weighed therein, the Earth that appears heaviest, and so carries
the sway in the mind, and so comes to be set up in the heart: So thereby many
come to lose the everlasting reward of peace, and joy, and comfort, which is in
that Life which lives and abides for ever: So Dear Friends, have an Eye to the
reward of well doing; even that Pearl of great Price, and let it have dominion
in the heart, and the Earth set under all; that so we may continue to the end
in all well-doing; and patient and meek running in that race which is set
before us, unto whom belongs the Crown of Immortal Life. When the Lord pleases
to show me a clear way unto you, I shall be willing to see your Faces, to the
end that we may be refresht together; even from that everlasting Fountain, from
whence comes all our fresh springs which glads the Souls of the upright for
ever: But at present I find my Testimony required, where I have had the
greatest time of my Conversation in the everlasting Covenant of Truth, Light
and Life.

That wicked ruler who rules in the Children of disobedience, has many Agents
here abouts, as well as in other places, who have been at work amongst us: They
took from me six Cows, for a Fine of 20 l. for speaking the things of God
according to his will, (but they had great trouble with them:) From my Brother
John nine Cowes, for a Silent Meeting at his house; and from another all his
Beds, Clothes, two Geldings, Pewter, Brass, Leather, and abundance of other
things, to the value, as is supposed, of near 50 l. for a Silent Meeting at his
House: At Kingston on Thames, Friends have had abundance taken from them, and
they kept out of their Meeting place, and not suffered to stand quietly in the
Streets; but some were taken and sent to Prison, and others drove about by
Soldiers in a barbarous manner; and several other Fines have been levied, too
long to mention: And Meetings being disturbed, Friends being haled out, etc.
all which works for good to them that truly fear and obey the voice of the
Living God: The more they strive, the more does Power and Life appear; which
keeps Friends Clear, Sweet and Innocent; even to love God above all, and their
Neighbors as themselves, greatly desiring that they may see a necessity of
building upon the same Rock; even Christ Jesus, who is the power of God, and
wisdom of God, who feeds all that truly hunger with spiritual Meat, and all
them that truly thirst with spiritual Drink; him who was glorified with the
Father in the beginning, by whom all things were made, who continues the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever: Through whom Friends Meetings in these parts
are fresh, lively and constant: But the great Boasters, as Presbyterians,
Independants and Baptists, who have kicked against the Everlasting Covenant of
Late in their own hearts, yet in their Imaginations have said they would follow
Christ, etc. But they now, as in days past, when the storm was up, are drove
into their holes: But they would not believe it in days past, before the storm
was seen, when it was testified unto them: But they are Foxes, they can cover
themselves no more; if they turn not to the Truth now, they stand in danger of
being swallowed up in darkness for ever.

So Dear Friends, that which concerns us, is to be thankful, and to meet often
together, that so we may grow up together, even from one degree to another of
an Heavenly appearnce of him in whom is all glory; that so we may bear his
Heavenly Image for ever. So in true watchfulness, keep over all the appearan^es
of the Enemy: And in true love and tenderness, keep watchful over one another;
seeking one another good, and the strong bearing with the weak, that so all
may be preserved in the way of the upright, out of all evil; that so we may be
sanctified throughout in Soul, Body and Spirit, even to the glory and praise of
the great God, who made all things at his pleasure; who has appointed times
and seasons and bounds to all: Whose work is great which he is bringing to
pass, and in vain do the ^^^herds strive against it; of a certain he will dash
them to pieces: So in the Everlasting Seed is my Dear Love unto all, who loves
and obeys the appearance of him who brings Salvation, who is over all, blessed
for ever and ever.

Stephen Smith.
Pirbright, the 8th. day of the 5th. Month, 1670.
An Answer to a Paper, called, The Christians Vow in Baptism.
A Paper coming to my hands, Entitled, The Christians Vow in Baptism,
Explicated and Renewed; given forth by an unknown Author, who is crept into his
hole again, from whence he brought that bundle; which upon due consideration he
will have cause to be ashamed of, being works of Darkness; where many words are
used out of the wisdom of God, the which has a tendency of darkning and hiding
Gods Counsel from mankind; and therefore that I may be clear in this matter, in
giving check to that high presumption manifestly shown in the said Paper as
above, is this given forth.

First, He calls it, The Christians Solemn Vow; afterward he says, let the
remembrance of the Vow of God in Baptism: Something he would have it, but he
knows not what; and so he colors it over with many Scriptures, wherein Gods
Covenant with man is expressed; where he tumbles new and old together, as one
ignorant of him from whence both came, and therefore unlike to have the
knowledge of either.

So now as one high flown in Imaginations, undertakes to make a Covenant for
others: But the better to color over and usher in his Babel, he takes many of
the true Prophets words, and therewith decks himself over, that he may appear
the more beautiful in the sight of his good Masters. A thing highly esteemed of
by man; but was, and is an abomination in the sight of the Lord. But to begin
with some of his words: Oh wonderful grace, when thou had forfeited all, and
were no more his by nature, then the Devils and damned in Hell!

Answer, In this Confession, what a humble man does he appear to be; see where
he sets you who are concerned with him, even equal with the Devils nature, and
damned in Hell. What a rare Arts-man this would be, if he could make the Devils
nature good; by saying over so many words as he has ordered in his Paper: But
in the dark where he is foaming and tumbling about in an endless work, seeking
to make the Devils nature good, which always was, and is bad and envious
against good: There he is left bound till he repent of his presumption.

Now to Esau's Pottage, which is ushered in as a Prayer after his manner; the
which he would have all to follow, either in that Image, or as like it as he
can. But let all wise people consider, and compare the true Prophets Prayers
with his: The true Prophet taught his followers to Pray, Our Father, etc. as
you may read, every word being of great weight, But all you who are followers
of this Imaginary man in his works of Darkness, see what a broad way your
leader has found, to tell over a pennyworth of Prayers, and then you are fit
for his invented marriage; and in case you should lose that Paper, you may buy
a pennyworth of another sort somewhat like it: So passing by much of his
supposed goodly stuff, come to the Marriage Bond in his words: And do here
solemnly join my self in a Marriage Covenant unto him. Oh blessed Jesus, I come
to thee hungry and hardly bestead, poor, and wretched, and miserable, and
blind, and naked; a most loathsome poluted Wretch, a guilty condemned
Malefactor, unworthy for ever to wash the Feet of the Servants of my Lord, much
more to be married to the King of Glory: But such is thine unparalleled love, I
do here with all my power accept thee, and take thee for my Head and Husband.
Did you ever hear of a more Loathsome, Impudent Harlot, who in all her
filthiness and abominations, presumes to say that God is her Husband: Oh high
presumption, which arises from the nature of the Devil; this is made indeed in
the Earthly wisdom, and there ratified, the which I leave all you to judge who
do return in some degree or measure the Divine, Pure, Holy nature of the Son of
Righteousness, into which all do grow; and so take a view of the Heavenly
Marriage of the Heavenly man, and compare it with that loathsome conceited
marriage, Revel. 19. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him for the
Marriage of the Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self ready: And to her
was granted, that she should be arrayed in fine Linen, clean and White; for
the Linen is the Righteousness of Saints, etc.

Alleluja, for the Lord God Omnipotent reigns; here is a Heavenly melody: Had
the Author of that Paper been so Ingenious to have come to that Marriage
Supper, he might have partaken of the Heavenly joy and comfort, and not have
been left to that great confusion manifested in that Paper: For the Invitation
unto it has gone throughout the Nation, that they that would come, might come,
for the Fountain to wash and prepare for it, has been and is open, glory to
God for ever. But further, see the confusion of the Author of that Paper in
these words: And the Covenant which I have ratified on Earth, let it be
ratified in Heaven: What, after the Marriag is concluded, to be made? What work
is this? he has ratified it on Earth, and would have it done so in Heaven? but
whether he will or no, it seems he does not know; so all is left in doubt and
fear again: What a sad bargain you have made all this while; who spent your
Money and time after such Idle Immaginary doings.

Now all you who have seen and read the Authors supposed Covenant, be so
Ingenious to read how God was pleased to give forth his Law and Covenants, the
which he ratified in Heaven; and compare them with the Authors pretended
Covenant which he ratified on Earth, without any knowledge of the parties
consent, he pretends to be concerned; let any prove the contrary if they can,
and let him show if he can in all the Scriptures of Truth, where God ever left
it to vain man to make a Covenant to be binding to all others in that manner,
etc. That many did vow obedience, and were encouraged in the Covenant of the
Lord, that is true and manifest through the Testimonies of the Prophets; but
where did any presume to bind God in that manner? Oh gross Idolatry; But the
blessed holy God at all times and seasons, according to his blessed pleasure
and good will to mankind, did give forth his Law and Commands, and so
Covenanted to be the God of his people, to keep them in Peace, etc. On
condition of their living in obedience to his will and pleasure manifest in his
time and season, as you may read, Deuteronomy. 5. and Exodus 19. The Lord our God made
a Covenant with us in Horeb: The Lord talked with them face to face in the
Mount, in the midst of the fire; which caused a fear and trembling: These words
the Lord spoke unto all your Assembly, etc. and he wrote them in two tables of
stone: Wherein the Lord showed his glory and greatness; and they said, we have
seen this day that God does talk with man, and he lives: So the Law was added
because of transgressions till the Seed should come, Gal. 3.19. So Christ is
the end of the Law for Righteousness for every one that believes, Romans 10.3.
But concerning the first Covenant which God made with his people when he showed
favor and love; In taking them by the hand to lead them out of Egypt, Heb. 8.
Because they continued not in my Covenant, I regarded them not, says the Lord:
But now mark that second Covenant which is without fault: After those days,
says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their mind, and write them in their
hearts; and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People: And they
shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying,
know the Lord; for all shall know me from the least to the greatest: For I will
be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will
I remember no more: Oh for ever blessed is this Covenant, there is no fault in
it; and that it is a bad nature indeed by which Imaginary Covenants are made,
which has a tendency of drawing peoples minds out from waiting to know this
blessed Covenant in the mind and heart: So to the sober and wise in heart I
write, that they may weigh these weighty things in a true balance, and from
thence give forth true judgment.

And mind further the Authors words: This Covenant you are advised to make not
only in heart, but in word, not only in word, but in writing: Sure he thinks
all is done; but if that must be made or written in the heart, then there will
be no room for Gods Covenant, for that does not at all agree with that confused
stuff; and what pity it is that any should be deprived of Gods righteous
Covenant, since Gods love is universally tendered therein, and inviteth all
unto it, that they may partake of its pure, holy nature to convert sinners, and
make wise simple and Ignorant people, who are ready to perish for want of
knowledge; the which is communicated to them that fear God, and wait to feel
his blessed promise to extend his mercy and goodness therein, to overcome and
give victory over that which is evil and corrupt: But further he advises; To
spread the writing before the Lord, as if you would present it to him as your
act and deed: So here is an act and no act, sometimes presumed to be done and
ratified, then again in doubtful terms; as if you would do so, etc. And says
the Author, when you have done this, set your hand to it. Answer, so you may
stand to it beloved, whilst he that exhorts you runs away, Fox-like, creeping
into his hole, etc. why is not his hand to it. Note further, Keep it, says he,
as a memorial of the solemn transactions that have passed between God and you.
Answer, Since God here is made party concerned; you that concern your selves
therein, had need know when and how God appeared unto you; sure else (if you be
not wilfully blind) you will see all that stuff to be mere Imaginations, if you
cannot see them to be Devilish Inventions, the which indeed they are; Now take
this last advice in these words: That you may have recourse unto it in Doubts
and Temptations; what think you now, either the Paper must be an Idol, or
Christ? It is not Christ, therefore it must be an Idol, then the Author must be
an Idolater; let them that concern themselves with it deny it if they can: Has
not this a tendency of making void the love God through Christ Jesus, who is
the way to God out of doubt, and through his power and wisdom all doubts are
resolved; who also is the succourer of them that are tempted, and the deliverer
of them who are guided by him out of temptations; into his holy Name all are to
be Baptized, Dipped, Plunged, that Sin and Iniquity may be brought under, and
consumed by Fire and his holy Spirit; which is the one true Baptism, through
and by him who is to increase in all his Blessed Office as Priest to Minister
according to the necessities of all that come unto him, as proper to open the
Mysteries that are hid from the Wise and Prudent; a Bishop to oversee what is
lacking in the Church, a Shepherd to lead his Flock in an out, and to Feed them
in Green Pastures of Life and Peace, a Physician to heal the Wounded, a Prince
to give forth his Righteous Laws and Decrees in his Church; where his
Righteous, Holy Laws are written in the Heart, is to be read and spread before
all, that all who are met in his holy Name, may partake of his Divine Nature,
and so become Heirs of his everlasting Kingdom, which never shall have end: So
Blessed are they who believe in God, and do not make haste, but wait patiently
for the fulfilling of his promise; that you may be delivered and kept from
Worshipping the Inventions of men: So in good will to all who have a desire to
Truth is this given forth by.

Stephen Smith.
The 27th day of the 8th. Month 1673.
An Answer to a Paper called, The Gospels Glory.
A Paper Entitled, The Gospels Glory, or the Covenant of Grace; and Grace of
the Covenant, Unfolded.

And for the better understanding of them who Impartially desire to know the
Truth as it is in Jesus, is this brief Answer given.

The Blessed Gospel of Christ, glad Tidings of Christ, The Power of God unto
Salvation to every one that believes; Romans 1.16, 17.
therein is the righteousness of God revealed from Faith to Faith: This was
preached unto Abraham which was hundreds of years before Moses, and therefore
so long before his Writings: And the same blessed Gospel they which are of the
same faith with blessed Abraham, Gal. 2.8.
are blessed with him in the knowledge of; this is invisibly to be felt and
seen, to expel the Clouds of darkness and error, and to rent the vail thereof;
and to break down the Partition wall which is made up through sin and iniquity;
and thus to finish sin and put an end to transgression, and to bring in
everlasting righteousness; and herein is the righteousness of the law fulfilled
in them that believe, through the Gospel of Christ, he being the end of the law
for righteousness to them that believe: And in this invisible glorious work in
opening the understandings of them that believe, is the glory of the Gospel
manifestly showed: 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; in whom the God of
the World has blinded the minds of them which believe not, least the light of
the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them;
so unbelief is the cause why people have not the knowledge of the Gospel which
the Apostle was not ashamed of, it being the power of God unto salvation, the
power of a Savior, the wisdom of a Savior, Christ Jesus the Heavenly man: In
his blessed spiritual appearance for the refreshing of every truly hungering
and thirsting soul after his righteousness: Paul to the Galatians says, the
Gospel which was preached of me is not after man; Gal. 1.11, 12.
for I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ; so that the blessed Gospel is an inward glorious
work, wrought by the Spirit and power of Christ Jesus, the foundation of all
the Prophets and Apostles; on which the true believers were and are built, to
the praise and honor of God for ever.

And whereas he says, the grace of the Covenant unfolded; therein he shows
what birth he is of, which might fitter be employed in its Poetry, in making of
Balads, then to be found so presumptuous in affirming the grace of the Covenant
unfolded in that dark (imaginary stuff in that Paper.)

The grace of God being an invisible appearance of Gods holy Spirit unto all
mankind, which is testified to Paul and Titus: For the grace of God that
brings Salvation, has appeared to all men, (Teaching us, etc.) So here was
and is the universal love of God to all mankind; not willing that any should
perish, but that all might know the Truth and be saved: So in that the grace of
God appears unto all, the renders of his love is therein showed to all without
respect of persons: That in every Nation they that fear God and work
righteousness through the blessed operation of the grace of his holy Spirit,
such are accepted of him: So than they are in the way of a blessing, who
believe in God, and wait in a full assurance: And trust in him, for the
knowledge of the infallible teachings of grace, whereby way is ministered unto a
growth in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus: And
thus far the Apostle did unfold the love of God, from what he had handled, felt
seen, of the mercies and riches of Gods great love to all mankind therein,
being a true witness of the love of God through the grace of his holy Spirit;
by and in which the good of all was and is sought, but indeed there be but few
that does regard it, though his hand of love be stretched out all the day long:
There be so many false Teachers, who by good Words and fair Speeches deceives
poor simple ignorant people, through their great flourishing words about the
grace of God; out of the sensible feeling of its blessed virtue and power in
its infallible Teachings and thereby bringing Salvation: And though this love
of God has appeared to all, all have not the knowledge thereof, as they had
and have, who are true believers in God: As said the Apostle to Titus, Teaching
us, so true believers Baptized by one blessed Spirit into one body; and therein
being received into Gods holy Covenant of grace, cannot but cry out; Oh the
virtue of Christ Jesus by whom comes grace and truth, which is of a healing
nature, glad tidings indeed unto wounded Souls, and none can be further truly
sensible of the unfolding of this love of God, to the refreshing and comforting
of their immortal Souls, but by the feeling of its virtue and power, to
quicken, revive and raise up out of sin and iniquity the cause of death.

And in his Poetry he says; Gods works preach not redemption from Hell, the
name of Christ there is not legible.

Ans. And in and by all Gods powerful and glorious works; both within man and
without, is the blessed and powerful name of Christ to be read and understood:
So its Gods works alone that preach redemption from the power of Hell and
death, 2 Cor. 5.19.
and therein is Christ's holy name legible: But as it is written, that which is
born of flesh is flesh, and so a heap of fleshly works are in that Paper, to
the shame of the Author, in giving them that Title, etc. And as that which is
born of flesh is flesh, so that which is born of the spirit is spirit; and
these two births are contrary, for the birth of the flesh, though it may speak
great swelling words, and tell of the victory of Christ, and triumph in
swelling words of his fame, as in that Paper; yet it being a worker of
iniquity, it must have that Sentence, depart from me; it can in no wise inherit
the Kingdom of God, though it may glory and say, I have preached and done many
things, yet its product is but spiritual wickedness got in a high place, which
the indignation of the Lord is against, so it must be cast out; he that can
receive it let him.

And thus much might be said as to the words in that Paper; but to all
Impartial readers this is sufficient, to convince them that that Paper is none
of the Gospels glory, nor none of the Covenant of grace, neither is the
Covenant of grace at all there unfolded? But it is a mere parcel of conceivings
from the same imaginary spirit, that uses to be Employed about making of
Ballads.

And so in true love to all unto whom this may come, I counsel you to mind the
fear of offending God, that you may be made sensible of the blessed appearance
of the grace of Gods holy Spirit, that you may be received into the blessed
Covenant thereof, and therein be witness of its sufficiency, in teaching what
to deny, and what to do, this being the means ordained of God for the good of
all, and all that becomes sensible of the infallible teachings of the grace of
God; such will not wonder at Silent Meetings, as many do who are out of the
sense of Gods love therein; many such grow despisers, and wonder, and cannot
believe the effectual works of the grace of Gods holy Spirit, though in the
demonstration and power thereof, they be declared and published from time to
time: And I wish all to take heed of being exalted through vain glory in
fleshly works, the which are attended with sorrow and misery, and will bring
all them that rest there to the end, but in the Lord is everlasting glory. And
mind the saying of the Apostle to the Ephesians; But God who is rich in mercy
for his great love wherewith he loved us; even when we were dead in sins, has
he quickened us together with Christ, by grace yea are saved; So mind the
blessed teachings of the grace of God which is pure, holy and perfect in every
degree, and this the mark which all should set before them as they expect to
run well in their Heavenly race, and obtain the blessed peace of God to their
Souls, which is the will of God; and in the knowledge thereof I give this
Testimony, who am what I am by Cods Grace, and therein a well wisher to all who
are truly seeking after the knowledge of Cod, in which love I rest,

Stephen Smith.
The 11th. day of the 11th. Month, 1674.
A Testimony to the way of Truth and Life, with seasonable Exhortations
thereunto.
THat which has been of low degree and little esteem with mankind; now is the
Lord God exalting and will exalt and set over all; the blessed Way, Truth and
Life, Christ the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, the blessed way of the
Lord opened unto the wise in heat, but ever was and is a mystery shut and hid
from the wicked; the Vultures eye has not seen it, nor the unclean cannot
enter into it; but a Fountain is opened (praise to the Lord for ever) to wash
and to cleanse from sin and iniquity, and so to sift and prepare for the way of
Truth and Life. Blessed are they who trust in the Lord, and keep their minds
stayed upon the blessed manifestation of his light, and love and mercy unto
them therein, with their eye single unto the Lord, whose blessed springs of
life and true refreshment, will in the Lords time and season rise in the hearts
of such, to the great consolation, and peace, and rest of their Souls; whom the
Spirit of the Lord will guide unto the knowledge and understanding the pure and
unchangable Religion which comes from above, where the true Worship which
Christ did and does set up in the Spirit and Truth, will be witnessed: And this
being possessed and enjoyed, all the false Religions and Worships which are out
of the way of Truth and Life will be discovered; and keeping low in the silence
of the earthly and sensual wisdom, wisdom which is pure from above will be
manifest, and herein the works of the blessed day of the Lord will be seen, who
is working a reformation in the Earth, in restoring the blessed language of
Truth, and setting up Truth, and Righteousness, and Mercy, and Peace; and
bringing a people to a pure language to speak the Truth, from the guidings and
leadings of the Spirit of Truth, which was Prophesied of; That the Lord would
power out of his Spirit upon all flesh, Sons and Daughters: And the glory of
the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together: Blessed are
they who believe and trust in the Lord, and patiently wait for the fulfilling
of his promise, for the Lord will assuredly stain the glorying of all the
fleshly births; and create and bring forth a spiritual birth, unto which all
his blessed promises are: And the Kingdoms of this World shall become the Lords
and his Christ's, and he shall reign for ever; and he will exalt his everlasting
Kingdom, and of the increase of his Government there shall be no end: This
peaceable Kingdom of the Son of his love, is in righteousness, peace and joy in
his holy Spirit; whose Tabernacle is with men, and the Ark and the Testimony,
and the Mercy Seat over all his works, where he does commune with them; he
takes pleasure in and makes known his good will and pleasure unto mankind, who
receiving freely, communicates freely the good will and pleasure of the Lord;
here is the Wine and Milk without Money or Price: And the Spirit says come,
and the Bride says come, and he that hears says come, and he that will come
let him come, and take of the water of life freely for a fountain is open where
life manifests it self freely; and the streams of Babylon are drying up, where
the Whore with her gilded Cup of Sorceries and Witchcraft has sat; a Cup of
Wormwood and Gaul is filling to her, and a Bed of Torment will be the portion
of her Merchants, and all that receive her mark, and wear it on their forehead,
or in the hand: So blessed are they who do escape out of Babylon, and set their
faces toward Zion the holy City, where the substance is enjoyed, and that
which was figured and typified in the Law and Covenant given forth in Mount
Sinai, in the Gospel in Mount Sion is possessed the blessed Law and Covenant,
in the Mind and in the Heart, Christ in us the hope of Glory, the Substance;
and herein that which the Lord has ordained for peace is witnessed, and in and
by this great Ordinance are all Ordinances necessary to Salvation clearly
understood: So blessed are they who cease from their own vain labor and works,
and believe and wait upon the Lord to partake of his glorious works, to expel
the clouds of darkness, and to command his Light to shine out of it in the
heart to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of
Jesus Christ; here is the pure powerful foundation which God has laid for all
mankind to believe in and build upon, and all that labor in darkness to
comprehend what the Light is, its all vain labor; though Light does shine in
darkness, yet darkness cannot comprehend it; and Christ knew what he said, when
he said, I am the Light of the World, though the World through malice, envy and
prejudice are so corrupted and darkened, that he is become unto them a
stumbling stone and a rock of offense, yet he is the Light of the World, and
does light the Candle of the wicked: but when the wicked are lighted, and their
wickedness manifest, they often hate Light that makes manifest their
wickedness, and puts out the Candle, and so adds sin to sin in getting covers
to hide their transgression: And to such the hands of the Lord is stretched out
in the love and mercy to them, but all gainsayers of it do turn into vanity,
calling good evil, and evil good, light darkness, and darkness they call light,
and herein they reject love and mercy, and embrace hatred, and lay other
foundations which the Lord has not laid, and so labor in vain, and build in
vain, which are all for the fire, and must be destroyed, the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it. Oh that people would consider and be wise, and not go on to
provoke the Lord to shut them out into utter darkness; for out of darkness
people are invited to turn to the Light, and from Satan's power unto God, that
they may have a sense and knowledge of his love and mercy, who gives remission
of sins to them who truly and unfeignedly repent of them, and forsake them,
approving themselves before him in so doing, and imbraceth that love and mercy
and good will therein, and so watching and walking in his light there will be
more light and understanding given of his way, truth and life, the which he is
making known in the Earth and his Salvation among his people.

Therefore be admonished not to provoke him, and harden your hearts against his
reproofs, for in so doing you will be more and more confounded, and your bonds
of corruption in darkness will be made stronger, and when his good Spirit has
done striving, and the light and council thereof be taken from you, then will
you be left in utter darkness where is weeping and gnashing of Teeth: For of a
Truth the Lord is risen in great power to break down all the pleasant pictures
and likenesses which mankind in their corrupt wills and affection have made of
Religions and Worships, and through their dark immaginary works therein, they
have opposed the Lords making known the true Religion and the true Worship
which Christ did and does set up in his Spirit of Truth, and is standing and
remains firm and unchangeable.

And therefore in the bowels of love I admonish all you who are not come to a
true sense and experience of the Lords good will and pleasure in making known
his way, Truth and Life, but are in some tenderness in panting after the Lord
for the knowledge of his good will and pleasure therein: I desire you to be
persuaded to consider whether you have believed in the Light that comes from
him, and leads to him; and if you were true believers in God and in his Christ,
then you cannot deny the manifestation of love and light that comes from him;
for what is known of God is manifest in us, he shows it unto: Oh its a good
thing to wait upon the Lord in Truth, with a single eye unto him who sits with
light and understanding of his blessed way, Truth and Life, Christ that was
before Abraham, and was in the body which was prepared for him to do the will
of his Father, in which he suffered without the Gates of Jerusalem by wicked
hands, and rose again and showed himself unto many hundreds of witnesses, and
has many thousand witnesses this day of his sufferings and resurrection; who
is the same yesterday, to day, and forever; a mystery which is hid from the
worldly wise and prudent, who live in an exaltation above the pure, holy
manifestation of the Light of Gods holy Spirit; and so neglecting the one thing
necessary, do live in the many things where offense to the just is given daily,
and the movings of Gods good Spirit is grieved and quenched; and then comparing
themselves with themselves, and measuring themselves by themselves, they are
not wise in heart; and therefore are they shut out from the knowledge of the
way of Truth and Life.

Therefore I do persuade all to wait low at wisdoms gate for the opening
thereof, that your hearts may be seasoned with grace; and then that which has
been of low degree, as to the esteem mankind has had of it, by the savor of
Gods grace, it will be beloved and esteemed, and exalted; and those dark
immaginary works which has been lets and hindrances of the knowledge of the
Truth, Way, and Life; they will be hated and disesteemed: And things will be
put in order by the true wisdom, to the praise and honor of God, and to the
great peace and comfort of all the truly humble in heart: And thus in a few
plain words is this Testimony of Truth given forth for the Information of the
truly breathing and thirsting Souls after the Way, Truth and Life, and the
righteousness therein: The which the Lord God Almighty exalt more and more unto
the breaking forth of the day of his perfect love unto all them that seek him
in Truth, and with an upright heart.

Stephen Smith.
The 27th. day of the 9th. Month, 1675.
The LIFE OF CHRIST Which is the LIGHT of MEN, Exalted above the WORKS of
DARKNESS.

Being an Answer to a BOOK; Entitled, The Fundamental Error of the Quakers
Detected.

By an Author who has concealed his Name.

Herein is proved, That men may not become Christians by following the Light
within.

Romans 1.18, 19. For the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the Truth in unrighteousness:
Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God has showed
it unto them. Printed in the Year, 1678.

An Answer to a Book Entitled, The Foundamental Error of the Quakers detected;
Or, That men do not become Christians by following the Light within, without
Outward Teaching, etc.
THese are the works of the power of Darkness, to render the Light of Christ
Jesus of it self insufficient to lead into Christianity; wherein the Author of
the Book has sufficiently manifested his folly, in undertaking to detect that
for Error, which is a fundamental Truth.

Indeed he has made a bold attempt in his dark comprehension, in going about
to limit the leading of the Light of Christ Jesus, which shows plainly that he
is not acquainted with the way thereof; and in adventuring to speak and to
affirm things so confidently, that he has no knowledge of; this bespeaks him
to be a rash inconsiderate man: But least we should know him, (like a Coward)
he has concealed his Name. And in our reasonable and faithful confidence in
Christ, the Way, Truth and Life, we cannot give such dark ignorant works better
entertainment then they deserve; and by giving of them their due entertainment
according to Truth, we have cause to believe the endeavors of such dark
immaginary Spirits will grow weaker and weaker, and the turning of things
upside down (as the Author of that Book and his Generation has done) will
prove a miserable hard travel and labor, that will end in great sorrow and
trouble.

But to come to the business in as brief manner as may be, that I may not be
tedious to the unprejudiced Reader: This short answer is recommended, showing
the drift of that dark Spirit; by answering only some particulars: Such manner
of work as this having been often answered by many worthy Servants of the Lord,
the which are faithful witnesses against all such dark works.

By the way let it be remembered. 1. That we truly own the holy Scriptures, and
all true and effectual outward Teaching in their place, as proceeding from the
holy Spirit. 2. That by the assistance of the same Spirit only, the Scriptures,
etc. are truly to be understood and be made profitable. 3. This Spirit works
immediately in the understanding, where ever outward means becomes effectul. 4.
Divine Light and Inspiration being all sufficient to teach immediately, it is
not to be limited to outward means.

First, to prove the sufficiency of the Light of Christ Jesus to lead into true
Christianity, either without outward teaching, or by it: The Lord God of Heaven
and Earth be his glorious and powerful outgoings in the Light, being not to be
limited; take two or three instances out of the Prophets concerning this
blessed leader, the Light of Christ within, Psalm. 97.11. Light is sown for the
righteous and gladness for the upright in heart; and said David, rejoice in the
Lord ye righteous, and give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness: The
which many thousands do this day, (by the springing up of this ever blessed
Light within) even where outward Teaching is not; and by the effectual working
in its powerful operation in springing up out of darkness, many who had the
name of that they were not, were both convinced and converted and led into true
Christianity: And Isaiah prophesying the coming of Christ's kingdom, says Isa.
2.5. O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord; and
in the 55 chap. 4 v. Behold I have given him for a witness to the people, a
leader and commander to the people: And of this Covenant, this light promised
to inlighten the Gentiles: John the greatest Prophet that was born of a woman,
God sent to be a witness that all through him might believe, and this Testimony
of the true light that lighteneth every man that comes into the World, he had
from God who sent him, and not man's Teaching: And Paul says, Gal. 1.12.
speaking of the Gospel: For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught
it; but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ: So here men were made Christians by
Christ the Light of the World, without outward Teaching, and this overthrows
the affirmation of the Author of that Book, who says, That men do not become
Christians by following the Light within, without outward Teaching: But the
Author may know that these men true Christians, and men. But I do affirm that
there was never a true Christian made by men's Teaching, without the leading and
guiding of the Light of Christ's Spirit within; and that is by the leading of
Christ within, that people are made true Christians, and the gainsaying of the
Truth is the cause there are so many false Christians now adays, by reason of
such natural men as the Author of that Book manifests himself to be, being
ignorant of the Light, not knowing the way thereof; neither does he know the
fundamental principle of the people called Quakers, the which is a manifest
token of the gross darkness that he is under, in that he presumes to call that
error which he is a stranger to: But neither he nor any else has yet proved
our opposing the leading and guiding of the Light of Christ within, to its
leadings and guidings in Teaching without: But we do oppose its blessed Leading
within and Teaching without, to such dark unchristian-like Spirits that does
not know the way thereof; who in such like dark works in a high degree of pride
and arrogance, are going about to limit and set bounds to the works of the Lord
God Almighty.

So that which he calls a fundamental Error, is a fundamental Truth; that it is
possible with God this day and time, as well as in days past, to lead by the
Son of his love into true Christianity (with (or without) outward Teaching) of
which Truth the Lord God has raised abundance of living witnesses this day,
and by his arm and power he is raising up more daily, who are built upon the
same foundation that the Prophets, Apostles and the Primitive Christians were
built upon, against which work and foundation the gates of Hell cannot prevail.

This Covenant, this Light, this Witness, this blessed Leader, (Gods love, Gods
gift to the people) all mind that it did not only inspire immediately the
Apostles, but also the people; by which Inspiration people come to understand
when they have done evil, even when none without can accuse them; by this love
wicked people are made sensible of their wickedness, though indeed, as it is
written, the Candle of the wicked is often put out; yet many times they are
overcome with the Light and Love of God therein, that thereby they forsake
their evil (and turn from their wickedness;) and by yielding their members
servants unto this righteous appearance of the grace of God, and by obeying the
infallible teaching thereof, many have been converted into the true Christians
faith; and by the Truth sanctified, and then justified through their obedience
to the Heavenly gift of God are made true and living Christians, abiding the
Baptism of Christ, who Baptizeth with Fire and the Holy Ghost; and therein are
confirmed and settled under the shadow of his wing, whose fruit is very
precious and pleasant: And it is by this Light that the voice of the true
Shepherd comes to be known from the false Shepherd; thus by grubbing up the
root of the tree, the branches must needs fall with it.

Page 4. He proceeds thus, viz. You know it was said by our blessed Savior,
that strait is the gate and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few
there be that find it: And I little doubt but that an appearance at first of a
greater strictness and narrowness in your way, then in theirs that differs from
you; was a temptation to some injudicious persons, etc.

Answer, If we were not in the same strait and narrow way that Christ did speak
of, where we are partakers of Gods great love in that rest and peace which he
has prepared for them that believe, fear and love him, it were an easy matter
to go back again into the broad way; there be opportunities enough given
besides this great one given by this Author of that Book in his gross
abominable Insinuations: But such is the manner of such dark Spirits, to
pretend great love to the Souls of others, and are not in a capacity to pity
and love their own.

But he says, That might have been escaped had we considered that the
strictness and narrowness, consisting in outward austerities and incivilities,
etc. Answer, whither may a rambler go when he is turned into the way of
mischief, and pursues his journey without care of what will be the end of it?
But I perceive this is his great trouble as it was Hamans, Mordicai would not
bow to him; we not going out of the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ into the
respect of persons, but faithfully keeping his commands, and abiding in his
Doctrine; the which is true whatsoever he wickedly suggests to the contrary:
This he accounts Incivilities and a piece of Superstition of our own devising;
and that several orders among the Papists have been built upon the same bottom;
(but mind) all this while his name is concealed, showing that he is not willing
others should know what bottom he is built upon; but who that are wise can
expect any better fruit of such a corrupt tree that grows upon the root of
Imaginations? he has nothing else for his bottom of all that he has said.

And he goes on in page 6, 7. in these words: Ye have taken liberty to walk
loosly and cast off this yoke, and that is in not governing your spirits,
passions and tongues according to the Laws of his Kingdom, etc. And this he
infers from some words he has taken out of Edward Burroughs's Book, as thou
cursed, thou beast to whom the Plagues of God are due, a reprobate, a Child of
darkness thou art thou disobedient one, etc.

Answer, By this it is manifest, that if that Author had been in the false
Prophets days, he would have been as much offended with the true Prophets for
calling the false Prophets greedy dogs, and dumb dogs, and many such like
words; and as David said Psalm. 49.12. Man being in honor abides not, he is
like the beasts that perish; or if he had been in that day of Christ, who
indeed was very humble and meek, but in his reproofs of Hypocrisy he was very
sharp, as appears in these words, Woe to you Hypocrites, likening them to whited
Walls, painted Sepulchers; and he said to them who supposed themselves to be
the Children of Abraham, and that they had one Father, even God; But Christ
said unto them, ye are of your Father the Devil: And he said unto the Scribes
and Pharisees, ye Serpents, ye generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the
damnation of Hell? And the Apostle Paul says, whatsoever he be that preaches
any other Gospel then that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed; Here is but a hint of much that might be said, what the Language of
the Spirit of Truth was in those days against those dark opposite Spirits to
the way of Truth; and there is no question but Edward Borroughs knew what
Spirit of opposition he had to encounter with, that by the Light of Christ
Jesus he knew what was the portion of that Spirit: But let the Author of that
Book, or any for him, prove if they can, that ever Edward Borroughs did do any
wrong either to Man, Woman or Child.

And he says, (speaking of Christ,) he has strictly enjoined his followers to
be humble and lowly in heart, to esteem others better then themselves, to speak
evil of no man, etc. and not to judge, etc.

Answer, But all this while this man that does thus prescribe from what is
written, what others should do, he himself does not so; it appears by
concealing of his name, he is not willing to be known; But sure when he
bethinks himself, he cannot suppose that the spirit of Truth does lead its
followers to esteem Hypocrites, and those that oppose the way thereof (above
them that are led and guided by it.)

And sure the Author by disesteeming of the Light of Christ, that lighteneth
every man that comes into the World, rendering it a natural Light, as he has
done in many places, is become very blind indeed; if he thinks the Spirit of
Truth did forbid the judgment of Truth: by these words of Christ Mat. 7. Judge
not, that ye be not judged, this he spoke to Hypocrites that went about to pull
out a mote out of others eyes, and the beam remained in their own; saying, Thou
Hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye, and then shall thou
see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy Brothers eye: But such gross
darkness has happened to many that do not believe in the Light, and not
knowing the way of the Spirit of Truth; yet for sinister ends in great
presumption, undertakes to correct them who are born of the same, and are in
measure acquainted with the way thereof; as that dear and faithful Servant of
the Lord Edward Buroughs was, as may be seen by his works, which stand a
witness against deceitful flattering Tongues: But this is the old way of the
enemy and adversary of the peace and happiness of Souls, to cover his hatred
and malice with smooth flattery in words: As says David in another case, Psalm.
55.21. The words of his mouth were smoother then Butter, but war was in his
heart; his words were softer then Oil, yet were they as drawn Swords.

But to speak the Truth, by the leading and guiding of the Spirit of Truth, as
the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles did; though in very sharp reproofs to
gainsayers, is not against true humility, nor a speaking evil of any man.

In Page. 11. The Author says, Neither you are not guilty of rejecting Gods
way and method of converting men to, and keeping them in the way of saving
Faith, Repentance and Evangelical obedience; and of inventing and choosing one
of your own, etc. Which method he instances out of two Authors, Edward
Burroughs's Book, and one of William Pens.

The which is as follows word for word.

In the works of Edward Borough, who you are pleased to style that true
Prophet in the Title page, which are published by you; there are these sayings:
In page 252, thus, His pure Spirit is put into the inward parts, to be the rule
and guide of life in all things: And again, Only by the teaching of the eternal
Spirit, is the living God known in the Creature. Again page 408. It is promised
(says he) that the Spirit shall lead into all Truth, and such do own the
Scriptures, but not as their Teacher; for the anointing dwells in them, and
they need no man to teach them, but as that anointing teaches all things; for
all the Children of God are taught of God, and need not any other Teacher, nor
need to say one to another, know the Lord; and all such own the Scriptures to
be the Testimony of that which they believe and have received: And again in
page 834. The only perfect rule of Conscience in the exercise to God is the
Spirit of Christ, and not any other thing: And because something besides the
Spirit of God exercises the Conscience; therefore it is that there are so many
ways and Sects of Religion and kinds of Worship in Christendom and among
Christians, while the Spirit of Christ only is not the rule of Judgment and
exercise of Conscience to God and man: Again page 861. The judgment in that
matter (Heresy) must be just, equal, holy, and (only) by the Spirit of Christ
which is infallible, and gives infallibility of Judgment and discerning into
all cases and things.

Mr. Pen spends the fourth Chapter of his late Book; Entitled, Reason against
Railing, to prove that the Light within, and not the Scriptures is the rule of
Faith and practice, In page. 47. he says, We dare boldly affirm in the name of
the Lord, that the great reason of our belief concerning them, the Scriptures
is not any outward thing; but inward Testimony recorded, and Heavenly Amen,
that we have received from the holy Light within us, to the Truth and
faithfulness of those sayings. Again p. 48. Wherefore the Scriptures are so far
from being the great rule of faith and practice; that the Light of Christ
within us, is both our warrant and rule for faith and obedience to them. Again
page 114. Let it be remembered, says he, that Christ promised to send the
spirit of Truth to lead into all Truth; as much as to say, none are led into
the Truth, nor in the Truth, but by the holy Spirit of Truth; or that their
practice is a lie, or they are led into a lie, who are not led by the Spirit of
Truth, that alone leads into all the ways of Truth; where by Truth is not meant
the mere Letter of the Scripture, which notwithstanding is true: But the living
powerful Truth, Christ the Way, the Truth and the Life; of which the Scripture
is but a record or declaration. And page 115. Many may run into the practice of
several outward things mentioned in the Scriptures, to have been the practice
of Saints in former Ages, and yet not be led into the Truth; for all that is
but Will Worship, imitation and unwarrantable.

Now let all the wise in heart, who do retain so much of sense of the Spirit of
Truths leading and operation thereof in them, as that thereby they are in some
degree in a capacity to judge of spiritual matters, and that have a desire that
God may not take away his holy Spirit from them: I say, let all such in the
cool of the day, when all self Interest is laid aside, judge whether these
men, Edward Buroughs and William Pen, and all them who are of the same Faith
and Judgment with them, do deserve such strange contradicton as the Author of
that Book has raised and made against them.

To be sure their method (as he calls it) is clearly agreeing with Christ and
his Apostles: Christ Jesus the Light of the World, the Way, Truth and Life, did
direct his followers to take heed to the Spirit of Truth that reproves the
World of sin, etc. and he counseled them to take that for their guide into all
Truth: And ought not all Christians to be followers of Christ their Lord and
Master; and how is it possible that any should follow Christ, except they be
led by the Spirit of Truth in themselves? And he that steals away their minds
from that guide, he is a Thief; and as Christ said, The Thief comes to steal,
to Murder and to destroy; but I am come that you may have Life, and that you
may have it more abundantly.

And the Apostle Paul is very open and plain in his Testimony concerning this
matter, in these words, The things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God;
by this the deep things of God are searched out: And are there not many deep
things of God contained in Scriptures? The which is not possible to be
understood and searched out by any other Spirit, but only and alone by the
Spirit of Truth; therefore this must needs be a sufficient teacher of mankind
without the Scripture, as it was to Abel, Enoch, and to Abraham, and the holy
men of God long before there was any of the old or new Testament written.

And it was the great love of God in the moving of his holy Spirit in those
faithful Servants, by whom those weighty things as are recorded in the
Scriptures of Truth were given forth: And it is the great love of God in the
moving of his holy Spirit in its leadings and teaching of his people, through
which the many Types, Figures, Prophesies, and many hard sayings comes to be
understood, and a clear distinguishing comes to be known between the Jew
outward and the Jew inward, between the Law outward and the Law of the Spirit
of Truth inward, and between the shadow of good things, and the good things
themselves; and also between the Spirit and the Letter, the Power and the Form,
etc.

And for want of fearing God, and taking heed to the motions of his blessed
Spirit of Truth; that is the cause there are so many heaps of Opinions about
the Scripture; therefore it is that all learned men in the Spirit of Truth do
so highly esteem the teachings thereof, as absolutely necessary to life and
peace: And all whose minds are converted by the Spirit of Truth, and are
spiritually exercised therein, and feeling the life and peace that flows from
it unto their Souls; this confirms them, settles them, and makes them
unmovable and unchangeable in their Faith in the power of the Lord, who has
been thus merciful in opening this fountain of life and love, where a washing
and cleansing comes to be witnessed, and entrance ministered into the kingdom
of God, and of this day that is breaking forth and shining clearer and clearer:
Edward Buroughs that man of God, was a faithful Instrument in the hand of the
Lord, and his works do demonstrate the same to thrash and cut down hypocrisy
and gainsayers of the Truth and faithfulness of God unto mankind: And in the
succession of this blessed work and service in the everlasting and unchangeable
Truth, the Lord has raised up William Pen with a Testimony: And in his
continuance therein unto the end of his days he will receive the same Crown of
Immortal Life; and their Testimonies which the Author calls their method taken
out of their Books is faithful and true, and does and will appear so to all
that are in the least learned by the Spirit of Truth.

But in contradiction of those faithful and true Testimonies of Edward
Burrough's and William Pen's, the Author of that Book undertakes to prescribe a
method and way, the which he calls Gods method and way; this being a long
ramble too tedious to transcribe, I shall draw up the scope and tendency
thereof.

That (Page 15.) after Christ's ascension into Heaven, he sent the holy Spirit
upon his Apostles, and immediately inspired them with a clear knowledge and
understanding of it (And again page 24.) Although the first promulgator of the
Gospel were enabled by immediate Revelation from Christ to teach it unto
others; yet afterward Gods ordinary way and method of transmitting the
knowledge and faith of the Gospel downwards to others successively, was by such
men's teaching it to others, as had themselves learned it of the Apostles, or
others that taught the same Doctrine as they did. (Again page 28.) And there is
great reason why the same regard should be given to what the Apostles and
Evangelists wrote, as to what they spoke; as long as they either wrote the same
Doctrine, or History upon the same evidence; for the Doctrine is the same after
it is written as it was before, for its being written does not alter the nature
of it: And therefore men must needs be as much concerned in their belief, or
disbelief, obedience or disobedience to it, when it is communicated to them by
writing, as when it is so by preaching; (yea I had almost said, or by immediate
Revelation.) (And again page 33.) I shall conclude what I have said in this
proposition, to show that the same regard is due to the Doctrine of the
Apostles, when written, (as now it is) as when it was preached by them, by
remembering you of this great Truth, that every man shall be tried or judged at
the last day, by the Law he has been under. The Gentiles that are or have been
without a written Law, shall be judged without any such Law, and the Jews which
are under a written Law, they shall be judged by it, Romans 2.12. Even so those
that are under the Gospel written will be judged by that, etc.

Thus then I take the substance of his method to be, that the Apostles were
immediately Inspired and from immediate Revelation; the New Testament was
written, and since that immemediate Revelation and Inspiration of the Spirit
has ceased; and those writings now are become the rule of faith and practice:
And that this Gospel written, as he calls it, has been successively
transmitted to others as they have learnt it; and that this written Gospel (as
he calls it) must be the rule and judge in all matters of faith and practice,
without immediate Teaching or Inspiration.

This then being the method of the Author of that Book, to exclude immediate
Revelation, and set up Tradition in the room.

But this he has manifested by his writing, that he is not in the line of
succession in the holy Spirit of Truth and righteousness; if he had been there,
he would never have opposed the Truth of what was spoken by William Pen and
Edward Buroughs: But who can expect any better fruit from a Plant that has so
little sap and life from the root, and spring of Light, Truth and Holiness to
nourish it.

Page 41. (he says,) That Christ does inlighten all whom he does inlighten in
one or more of these three ways. 1. Either by Natural Light. Or 2. by
Supernatural Revelation. Or 3. by outward speech, or writing, or example, etc.
Would not all that are in their wits judge that this Author of the Book had
better to have been quiet then so presumptuously in his high flown, proud,
arrogant Spirit: So positively to condemn the sufficiency of the Lights leading
within into Christianity; without outward Teaching: Since he is at such a loss,
not knowing what Light it is that Christ does inlighten people with. But in
page 43. there he says, That though Christ do inlighten all men with natural
light; a little before it is, them whom he does inlighten; it is some way, even
what he imagines, wherein he contradicts himself; but what way he knows not:
The Vulture's eye has not seen the way thereof, neither can the natural man
receive the things of the Spirit of God: To be sure the Author of that Book
has not attained to A.B.C. in the way of Christianity, as is manifest by his
dark conclusion, that Christ the Light within men, is a natural Light.

Let all the wise in heart judge how unlikely the Author of that Book is to
show the way of God, who is so far out of it; not knowing the outgoings of the
Lord God who is Light, whose outgoings were from everlasting to everlasting,
nor so much as the first principle of the Oracle of God, which is Light; and
therefore he has not spoken as the Oracle of God: And therefore in saying he
would show the method and way of God, he has manifestly declared his Ignorance
and presumption: But such unlearned men as he is undertake to judge the Quakers
foundation for error; and after they have done, they are to seek what it is:
But let him or any who are of his mind prove if they can, that ever any Quakers
in their Writings have said, That it was by the leading of a natural Light
without, or with outward Teaching, by which ever any one true Christian was
made. No, no, we do know that Christ the true Light that Lighteneth man that
comes into the World, does it with a supernatural and Divine Light (wherein
they that believe and wait upon God, receive Spirit, Life and Power to become
Sons of God.) And that he both has and can by the powerful drawings thereof,
bring them (who wait in the manifestation thereof in themselves) into the true
Christianity: And that the outward Testimony or declaration that was, or is
given forth unto the Sons and Daughters of men from the immediate motion and
flowings forth of the Spirit of Truth; had and has this effect, even to bring
into this name, the Light of Christ within, and from Satan's power unto God,
that the teaching of God within, as well as without, by them who speak as his
Oracle, might be effectual to guide into Christianity: And that the powerful
drawings of the blessed Light of Christ within, has been the only motive to
move many to consider their ways and to turn at the reproofs thereof into the
straight and narrow way that leads into the life of Christianity.

But I do ask a question concerning the Gentiles, that both were and are
without an outward written Law, since they must be judged without any such Law;
for transgressing of what Law must they be judged? it cannot be denied but that
God has given them a Law to walk by, and that it is for the transgression
thereof that they come under condemnation, and must be judged. Before this
question be answered in Truth, that Gospel must be known that is preached in
every creature which is under Heaven.

Page 37. The Author says, we that have the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles brought down to us in the Scriptures, may according to Scripture
Dialect, be said to have Christ and his Apostles; as truly as it was said of
the Jews in our Saviors days on Earth, that they had Moses and the Prophets;
for it was by having in the Scriptures what they said and did, that they were
said to have them; and by hearing and believing the Scriptures of the New
Testament, we may as well be said to hear and believe Christ and his Apostles,
etc.

Answer, That ever such a stranger to Christianity should be so impudent as to
say, I will show you the method and way of God, that does not know himself one
step therein, as appears by his dark arguing. The Jews had the writing of Moses
and the Prophets, and no question but they did believe them to be so; but what
did they profit by them? when out of that Faith and Spirit through which they
are profitable, they did testify of Christ, and were a witness to the
righteousness of God, as says the Apostle; when by them they judged Christ
ought to die, Christ did send the hard-hearted Jews who went about to kill him,
to Moses and the Prophets; saying, Joh. 5.39, 40. Search the Scriptures, for in
them ye think ye have eternal Life, and they are they which testify of me; and
ye will not come to me that ye may have life: And mind what the Apostle says,
Romans 3.12. But now the righteousness of God without the Law is manifested,
being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets; which righteousness the said Jews
did not know, though they had heard what Moses and the Prophets said of it: But
mind the cause of their not hearing so as to understand, Neh. 9.20. Thougavest
also thy good Spirit to instruct them, but the cause of their blindness was
even their rebellion against Gods Spirit: And Stephen said to the Jews Acts
7.51: Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist
the Holy Ghost; as your Fathers did, so do ye: So it is very clear, though the
Jews had Moses and the Prophets writings, yet by not taking heed to the
Instruction of Gods Spirit in them, they were without the knowledge of them;
and thus it is with the generality of those called Christians, they have some
of the writhings which gives a relation of Gods great love to the World in his
heavenly and powerful gift of his holy Spirit manifest in the flesh to bruise
the Serpents head, and to destroy the Devils works: But by disesteeming the
blessed appearance of the Light of the Spirit of Christ in man, as the Author
of that Book does in calling it a natural Light; being thus in unblief, their
foolish hearts are darkened: So though they have the New Testament, as it is
called by many that do not know the Law and the Testimony, though they have
some part of what was writ concerning Christ the Way, Truth and Life of
Christianity: Yet by their quenching and grieving the immediate motions of Gods
holy Spirit in them, they are as clearly void of the knowledge of the end and
tendency of Gods great love in and by the motion of his holy Spirit, that gave
forth those writings with the several blessed Testimonies therein, even as the
hard-hearted Jews were of the Law and the Prophets when they were in the
gainsaying and rebellion against Gods holy Spirit. But such kind of smooth
teaching, as the Author of that Book, who is unlearned in the blessed Teaching
of the Spirit of Truth, is very pleasant to unlearned people in the things of
God; but the Scripture is fulfilled in many of them, Acts 13.41. Behold ye
despisers, and wonder and perish, for I work a work in your days, a work which
you shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto you.

So it is very clear, and that in a true sense, that people may have the
writings and not have Christ nor his Apostles, neither be in their Doctrine;
but in lieu thereof they may have the Spirit of Antichrist, and Doctrine of
Antichrist, and the ravening Woolves nature, though they may have the Sheeps
clothing.

First, The Scriptures we must needs highly own, in that they refer us to (and
exalt) Christ and his immediate teaching of his Divine Light and Spirit within,
as being subservient thereto, where they are received therein.

But since a great part of the work of the Author of that Book is to maintain
the Scriptures, being a rule of Faith and Practice; and to gainsay the
sufficiency of the Spirits teaching without the Scriptures, or its immediate
teaching now adays, without some outward teaching.

I do ask whether the Authority be in the Spirit that spoke the words, or in
the words when spoken or written? if none can deny but the Authority both was
and is in the Spirit: And Isaiah by the same Authority of Gods blessed Spirit,
he can work a saving change in people, either with or without what is written;
therefore it is a high degree of presumption in going about to limit the
blessed holy Spirit of God, as the Author of that Book does.

But what Authority or effect had the true Prophets words in the false Prophets
mouths; this sad effect, they stole away the hearts of people from the living
fountain, and put them upon a vain labor in making broken Cisterns that could
hold no water.

And what Authority, profit or advantage have the true Ministers and Apostles
of Christ's words now in the false Teachers mouths, with their meaning upon
them: Even this sad and lamentable effect; they thereby steal away the hearts
of people from the sense of the immediate motion of Gods holy Spirit in them,
and to gainsay its powerful teachings; and the universal love of God in the
moving of his universal holy Spirit through all the World, in its convincing
and reproving the World of sin, etc. And then to set them upon vain and
unprofitable service: First, having turned their hearts and minds out of the
way that the holy Spirit of Truth leads in, and then set them upon a vain
labor and travail in seeking, but never finding; till at length they conclude
with the Devils Doctrine, that there is no way out of a body of sin and death
on this side the grave: And such flattering and deceitful Teachers are in a
high esteem and account among a flattering deceitful people. So all may mind,
that we do not oppose the in ward Teaching of the Spirit of Truth, to what
outwardly has been taught or written from the blessed motions thereof, or that
may be taught or written by the motion of the same: But we do oppose the true
Teachings thereof, to the false Teaching of all immaginary deceitful Spirits,
who under a pretense of love to Souls, do make Merchandise of them.

And that being the great hinge on which his work depends, in concluding the
Scriptures to be the rule of Faith and Practice, excluding the immediate
Teaching of the Spirit, and the all sufficiency thereof. I do ask whether Faith
be a fruit of the Spirit, or of the Scripture? or whether a true Christians
practice in living peaceably, lovingly, justly, and holy, and mercifully, and
in a clean life and conversation in long sufference, patience, goodness,
brotherly kindness, etc. be a fruit of the blessed Spirit of God, or of the
Scripture? And since it cannot be denied, but that Faith and practice in a true
Christian holy Conversation, is a fruit of the blessed Spirit, and that the
Scriptures say the same.

Then are not all the gainsayers of the immediate Teaching, Opperation,
Revelation and Divine Inspiration of Gods holy Spirit of Truth, a grand cause
that there is so little fruit of the Spirit brought forth in Christendom? And
whether that be not the cause of so many heaps of Sects, Notionists and
Opinions among them, and of so much Pride, Lust, Hypocrisy, Fraud, Deceit,
Wrath, Malice, Murders, Witchcrafts, Sorceries, and all other abominations that
might be mentioned, committed in all the World; (the Lord gives the humble in
heart true Judgment, but the proud he does resist.)

But in Page 42. the Author says, Christ indeed or God Creator, as he is
described in the beginning of that Chap. Joh. 1.9. Does enlighten every one
that comes into the World, with the faculty of reason and understanding, by
which he may know that there is a God, and that he is to be worshipped, and
that he is peaceable, and the difference between moral good and evil, in many
things: But however this may possibly be a light sufficient to direct the
Heathen to as much as God expects from them, (if they live up to it) to whom he
affords no other Light, yet this Natural Light is not sufficient to direct
those that live under the Gospel, to believe, and do what they are bound to
believe, and do upon pain of Damnation, etc.

Answer, He has clearly manifested his ignorance of the Gospel, and what men
are to be brought under that are made true Christians, as if the Light of
Christ within had not Gospel in it, or could not minister Gospel: But by hating
of the Light; how blind are they, who have such low thoughts of thy way
thereof? accounting the Light of Christ natural, yet sufficient to direct the
Heathen as much as God expects of them.

Such is the esteem of them whom the God of this world has blinded their
minds, taking the Jew outward for the Jew inward, and the Christian in show,
for the Christian in Truth: And the wild Heathenish life and conversation of
the Christian in show, for Christianity, if they do but only in words own the
Scriptures to be their rule of faith and practice. And the true Christian that
brings forth the fruits of Gods holy Spirit in life and conversation, and is
not ashamed to confess to the immediate motions of it in its blessed leadings
and teaching to love of God above all, and their neighbors as themselves; and
lives in true fear and watchfulness, that they may not grieve nor quench the
immediate motions of Gods holy Spirit in them; but are careful to live up to
the reason and understanding that Christ has illuminated or inspired them
with, and to eshew the evil and to love the good, being showed it by the Light
of Christ; and that God ought to be worshipped in Spirit and Truth, and is in
the performance thereof according to Gods will, confessing to the blessed holy
Spirit of God to be the rule of Life, Faith practice. Such a faithful and true
Christian as this, having such an account to give, as is given by Edward
Borough and William Pen of the sufficiency of the pure Spirit of God, to be
the Judge of all matters of life and conversation.

Such true Christians are very slightly esteemed by such private immaginary
Spirits as the Author of that Book is manifest to be of in all his works of
darkness in that Book. But I had rather be a Christian, and though I am called
Heathen; then to be a Heathen, and yet to be called and accounted a Christian.

In Page 61. the Author says, Another place misunderstood and misapplyed by
you, is Joh. 16.13. When the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into
all Truth; which is not a promise of sending the Spirit to guide all Christians
by its immediate motions: But a promise to his Apostles, for they only were
then present with Christ at his passover, etc.

Ans. Indeed the immediate motions of Gods holy Spirit, is the great trouble of
them who follow the motions of their own Spirit, and lives out of the way of
the knowledge of the holy Spirit of God, which is Light and Life. But I ask, in
case people are not to follow Christ and his Apostles into the true Faith and
practice of Christianity, by the immediate motions of Gods holy Spirit of
Truth; by the motions of what Spirit are they to be led and guided? since there
is such variety of Sects and Opinions in the motions of their private Spirits,
which of them is to be followed.

But since the Author has limited the immediate motions of Gods holy Spirit
only unto the Apostles: I do ask into what Spirits motions were people
Baptized, and led into the body of Christianity? or are they now to be led into
the same; and how can Christians have the Crown of Immortal Life as Paul had in
finishing his course of life well, and he said, that was not laid up for him
alone, but also for all them that love the appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ:
And who can be a follower of him in the way, if they do not take heed to the
immediate motions of Gods holy Spirit, as he did according to the measure and
manifestation thereof in every one? And again,

What can set people free from the spirit of bondage, or from the spirit of
error or corruption, and deceit, and hypocrisy; but the immediate motions of
Gods pure holy spirit in them?

But such is the dark work of the Author of that Book, even to gainsay, and
limit the immediate motions of Gods holy Spirit, and to set up the private
selfish imaginary Spirit which is not in unity with the Light and Spirit of
Truth.

But if the promise of Christ was only to give that gift of the immediate
motion of Gods holy Spirit unto the Apostles; then to what end did he counsel
the Churches to Pray in the Spirit, to Sing in the Spirit, and to persevere and
go on in the Spirit, and not to quench and grieve the Spirit, and abundance
more to this purpose in Exhortations to the Churches to follow the spirit, and
mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit: Had not Christians need to have
the immediate motions and help of Gods blessed spirit in this work, and to be
their rule of life and guide in judgment, that all wicked malicious spirits
under the cover of the Prophets, Christ's and the Apostles words, may be judged
down, let all the wise in heart consider this and lay it to heart.

What a sad tendency such unprofitable talkers and teaching has, in opposing
the immediate motion, and teaching, and guiding of Gods holy spirit; and
whether such Agents and props in the Devils kingdom and power of darkness, be
not a let to the blessed works of the Lord? who sits upon his Throne, and
says, behold I make all things new. And whether such dark works as are
manifest in that Book, be not the cause that there are so many mockers now
adays at the immediate motions of Gods holy spirit, in and through his
servants, according to their several measures and services therein? But such is
the work of all dark spirits, to pretend love to peoples souls: But in the dark
to work against the great love and mercy of God in the immediate motions of his
holy and blessed spirit, for the bringing of souls to peace and happiness, and
everlasting rest in his heavenly gift, the which is life Eternal.

But by what has been written, as before, the whole drift, scope and tendency
of the Authors spirit in that Book may be seen, where several particulars might
be answered with the same sharp reproof, as that which is answered has: Such
works have been answered over and over again, as may be seen at large in
abundance of Books; but one more especially I refer the Reader to: And that is
a Book Entitled, The Christian Quaker and his Divine Testimony vindicated, etc.
By George Whitehead and William Pen: And though the Author of that Book has
concealed his Name, and covered his spirit of Error with smooth words stolen
out of the Scriptures, yet by the light of Christ Jesus he is seen clearly,
though he calls that Light Natural, and like a foolish builder has built
without the Cornerstone: By the Light of Christ his building is seen to be
raised from no other foundation and ground, but mere imaginations: And that it
must be cast down into the pit of darkness out of which it was raised.

So though he may complain, as he does in the beginning of his Book, of the
entertainment others have had in the like endeavors: Yet unto the Truth and
wisdom of God in all who have not lost the sense of his holy spirit from them,
I do appeal whether this be not an entertainment according to Truth.

And though he has pretended his work to be in love to souls; yet it is
manifest in the Light of Christ, to have this tendency; even to deprive souls
of the infinite benefit of the sense and enjoyment of the immediate motions of
Gods holy spirit, and to make void their Testimonies who are planted into the
same: But to prevent the Enemies works, is this written in love to Truth and
Righteousness, and all people who desire after the same.

Stephen Smith.
Worplesdon in Surrey the latter end of the 5th. Month, 1677.
A Testimony against the Worlds vain Mirth and Pastimes, etc.
BLessed are they who feel the Inspiration of the Almighty giving them
understanding; that in reading the Scriptures of Truth (the Holy-mens
Testimonies) they may be understood, and deliverance witnessed from them who
wrest them to their own destruction.

There is indeed a time for all things, as said Solomon, who in that wisdom
given him, knew that God created man upright, but man found out many
Inventions: And all that Mirth whereby Gods righteous spirit is grieved, they
who live in it; they increase their own sorrow.

The Rejoicing and Melody which David had in his heart to the Lord who gave him
power over his foes, Psalm. 30. And girded him with gladness: But what is this
to them who are overcome with their foes, the lust of the eye, the lust of the
flesh and pride of life: All such have not a true knowledge of that joy and
melody which David witnessed, as being girded with gladness by the Lord; who
said, My soul and all that is in me praise the Lord, and let every thing that
has breath praise the Lord: And figuratively he makes mention of outward
Instruments; all which are but Types in comparison of that heart that is
prepared and put into a right frame, even as a well Tuned Instrument to make
Melody to the praise and honor of God (this is the substance) showed forth by
holy peoples praises to the Lord for his work of deliverance; as is recorded in
the Scriptures of Truth: When the Children of Israel were delivered, and their
foes destroyed: Then sang Moses and the Children of Israel: (and this was the
substance, the Lord shall reign for ever and ever:) And Miriam with the women
went out with Timbrels and Dances in a Heavenly Melody unto the Lord who had
delivered them.

But the wicked and proud who hate to be reformed, they have nothing to do to
take the name of the Lord in their mouths: And none but wicked Instruments dare
bring those Scriptures to stir youth up to be Prodigals, and to spend their
Portion of precious time in riotous living in keeping company with some who
wallow in pride and idleness Sodoms sins; and except such Prodigals do turn
whilst the door of mercy does open, and they find a reception into the Fathers
house, by a true unfeigned repentance; they shall never witness that Melody or
Music (whereby the Soul is made to leap for joy,) which the Prodigal obtained
through a true repentance, and returned to his Fathers house; he had not that
Music and Melody among the Harlots, nor when he kept Swine; mind that, see the
generation of the wicked, Job. 21.11. They send forth their little ones like a
flock, and their Children Dance: They take the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoice in
the sound of the Organ: They spend their days in Wealth, and in a moment go
down to the grave: Therefore they say unto God, depart from us, we desire not
the knowledge of thy ways: What is the Almighty that we should serve him, etc.
See here you wicked generation of proud profane persons, who stir up the lust
of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life one in another, by
your light frothy behaviors in your wicked Inventions. Oh for shame do not go
about to cover your evil works by the instigation of wicked Instruments, who
wrest the holy men's words; which if persisted in, will be to their
destructions, and of all them that follow them therein. See what the Prophet
Amos pronounced to them that chant to the Viol, etc. And are at ease, woe to
them, Amos 6.

And concerning comparisons in the sound of Instruments, being certain or
uncertain; this makes not at all for your purpose who extol that Music by
which the Lord is dishonored, and the seed of life grieved and burdened, so
for shame leave off your lightness and vanity, least you be left as them who
are filthy to be filthy still, and you seek repentance, as Esau did with tears,
and cannot find acceptance.

And see the effects of wicked Dancing, Mat. 14.6, 7. But when Herod 's
birthday was kept, the Daughter of Herodias danced before them: Now read and
see what effects her brave Dancing procured; weigh these things you that have
Children that are Light and Airy, and restrain them from that wicked practice,
least they add sin unto sin, and bring woe upon them, as you may see Herodias
Daughter, who added one wickedness unto another.

Stephen Smith.

To all Bishops and Priests, and all concerned with them in a Book Entitled, A
form of Common Prayer, for Gods blessing upon His Majesty and His Dominions,
and for the averting Gods Judgments, Printed this year 1678.
ANswer, The Lord God has signally shown his great displeasure by Sword, by
Plague, and by Fire, against that opposite spirit that has led into all
rebellion against the motions of his holy spirit, wherein he is making known
his way of blessing, and his saving health among the people. Yet for his great
name sake, and in his love, mercy and pity, he did put a stop to those
Judgments, and has given space and time of repentance; and through many
faithful Servants has the Lord manifested his good pleasure, that all who are
erred from the way of blessing in life and peace, that they might return unto
him and wait upon him who is Lord of Heaven and Earth, for his teachings and
instructions in his holy Covenant of Life and Peace: But how regardless have
you been of the many and frequent Testimonies that have been faithfully in the
moving of Gods holy spirit of Truth, given forth against the swelling and
groaning abominations of the times? So that instead of harkening and obeying
the motions of Gods holy spirit, you have proceeded in vexing and grieving the
same in a most high degree; you have abused the Servants of the Lord God: And
through your pride and presumption you have drawn the heavy displeasure of the
Lord upon you, whose dreadful judgments do hang over you; and will not be
averted or turned from you by any feigned show of fasting made up in the will
of man, contrary to the good will, mind and pleasure of God.

In that which is called the order for Morning Prayer, are these words; Rent
your hearts and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God, for he is
gracious and merciful, etc.

Answer, To them that do in Truth and in unfeigned repentance open their hearts
unto him, with a faithful resignation of heart, soul and body unto the pure
manifestation of his holy Law of his pure spirit of life; unto such he has
shown himself very gracious and merciful, in setting them free from the Law of
sin and death: But how often do you repeat those words, and yet keep your
hearts whole in the friendship of the World, in the lust of the eye, the lust
of the flesh, and pride of life; you have been so far from renting your hearts,
that you have not so much as rent your garments; are not the garments of your
own righteousness (which is no better then filthy rags) whole upon you; and in
that loathsome garment you appearing before the Lord, who seeing your
loathsomness and hypocrisy in imputing the righteousness of Christ unto you,
whilst you are really and truly whole in your loathsome garments of your own
righteousness; where the righteous judge both of the quick and the dead,
beholding you as you are in your loathsome garments, he will never agree with
you in your accounts, whilst you account so falsely of your Interest in the
righteousness of Christ, and yet whole in the garments of sin and iniquity,
doing the things you should not do, and leaving undone the things you should
do; would you when you reckon with your Servants agree with them in such
account, and allow of their doing so all their life, and leave them to account
of your riches; and that you are bound to give it them; sure its time to be
awakened from this misery of ignorance: And take notice of your following
words, Though we have rebelled against him, neither have we obeyed the voice of
the Lord our God, to walk in his Laws which he set before us. (Now mind) was
ever your hearts rent from this condition; do not you persist in your rebellion
and so grieve Gods holy spirit, in keeping your heart whole, in persecuting
them who are led by it: Are not the Priests whole in their sin of preaching for
Hire and for filthy lucre sake, they tell lies in Hypocrisy, promising that to
people, which neither they nor the people have right unto, whilst they are
Servants to sin: Come down from these barren mountains of imaginations, and
rent off these filthy garments, and rent your hearts from these evils, and
follow the example of them who are really in this work, and from the Lords
acceptance have found him gracious and merciful, and in the righteous
government of his holy spirit of Truth, the knowledge of his way of Truth is
known in this World, and in walking therein there is that hope manifest by
Christ's righteousness in us, of having Eternal life with him in that World
which is without end.

And you say, Dearly beloved Brethren, the Scripture moves us in sundry
places, to acknowledge and confess our manifold sins and wickedness; and that
we should not dissemble and cloak them before the face of Almighty God our
heavenly Father, but confess them with an humble, lowly, penitent and obedient
heart, etc.

Answer, Here you acknowledge yourselves to be fallen from the Primitive
Christians guide, and moreover, in the service and work of the Lord they did
speak as they were moved by Gods holy spirit, and did declare the pleasure and
will of God as that gave utterance; and by his holy spirit they were made
Ministers, not coveting any man's Silver or Gold, or Apparel, nor they did not
move for any filthy lucre sake; but how have you erred and strayed from this
way, being lost as to a true and saving knowledge of the motions of Gods holy
spirit: And in this lost Estate every private spirit is set a work, and
imaginations dreams do tell their several conceivings of what was given forth
by the moving of Gods holy spirit; but having erred from the way of the spirit
of God, and being strangers thereunto, they are also strangers to what was
given forth by the Spirit of God; thus being in error, they don't know the
Scriptures nor the power of God: And thus being become strangers to the motion
of the true Christian Spirit, in the Worlds earthly sensual Spirit they move,
and say, the Scripture moves, and under this cover you can dissemble and cloak
your sins, cloaking your selves under the failings of the holy men of God, as
they are recorded in the Scriptures of Truth, but are far enough off their
sorrow and repentance by which they obtained favor with God again; And thus
you go on cloaking your sins, and opposing the motions of Gods holy Spirit,
under a pretense of the Scripture moves us; and under this cover you can
dissemble your sins in persecuting and spoiling the Goods of them who have
truly testified of the motions of Gods holy Spirit in them, against all the
evil motions of the enemy in all his flattering deceitful works and ways: And
to this motion of Gods holy Spirit you must bow if ever you come to know the
way of Truth, you must come to the moving of the Spirit of Truth in you, even
that Spirit which reproves the World of sin, the which Christ Jesus set up to
be a leader and a guide into all Truth: In this Spirit the Lord God is to be
worshipped, it is this Spirit that convinces of sin, that is the way out of
sin, that is it which moves in the heart against sin, and so to confess and
acknowledge sin, and so to repent and forsake sin, and this is the way to
obtain mercy and forgiveness of sin. And by its leading and guiding to abstain
from the appearance of evil, unto this Spirit of Truth you must bow, and take
it for your leader, if ever you come truly to call God Father, and he owns you
to be his Sons.

In your Confession you say, Almighty and most merciful Father, we have erred
and strayed from thy ways like lost sheep; we have followed too wuch the
devices and desires of our own hearts, we have offended against thy holy Laws,
we have left undone those things which we ought to have done, and there is no
health in us, etc.

Answer, And when do you intend to do otherwise, since you have appointed this
form of words to be always said. Oh turn for shame unto the true Spepherd and
Bishop of your Soul; and don't come still with this sad unprofitable story
before the Lord. (Mind) if a man offend against the Laws of the Nation, if it
be but once he is liable to the punishment that is prescribed by that Law, or
if a Servant should but once do the thing he should not do, and leave undone
the things he should do, this would incurr his Masters displeasure; but if he
should continue doing so, he would turn him out of his service and account of
him as he is an unprofitable Servant: How then can you expect to be heard and
received of the Lord, who are always doing that you should not do, and leaving
undone that you should do; you may well say you have no health in you, neither
are you like to have, so long as you continue in these sad practices: And in
that you do offend Gods righteous Law, how can you expect but to be punished by
the righteous Judge? Indeed you have done that which you ought not to have
done, in that you have caused to suffer so many innocent people, both by long
Imprisonment, and spoiling of their Goods; in that you have shown no more mercy
to them, how can you expect to receive mercy at the hand of God, seeing those
sufferers have been a people fearing God, and hoping for his mercy in whom the
Lord takes pleasure, and in his pleasure he has sustained them, wherein many
have been faithful and true witnesses, whereof many have departed this World
under their several confinements in peace; and many remains living to this day
confessing and testifying to the mercies and favor of God in the manifestation
of the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, which sets free them who walk
up to it from the Law of sin and death: And that there is great peace in
keeping this holy Law, this has been, and is the Testimony of them who are,
and have been led by the Spirit of Truth, witnessing unto the Way, Truth and
Life, the way of peace and happiness: And thus in the good will of God in good
will to all mankind, in patient suffering under your wills who have followed
too much the devices and desires of your own hearts, and thereby having
rejected the council of the Spirit of Truth, you have provoked the Lord, as you
say in these words: We have provoked thine anger, thy wrath is waxed hot, and
thy heavy displeasure is sore kindled against us. You have confessed to the
Truth, and when you come to feel the weight of your many transgressions against
Gods holy Law, then you will wish you had been serious in what you have said,
and that you had broken off your sins by a true and unfeigned repentance: And
for this end has Gods holy Spirit strove with you many ways; but see by your
own confession how evilly you have required this love.

Your words are, We sinful people of this land do acknowledge before thee, to
thy glory and our own shame and confusion, that never any Nation under Heaven
had more experience of all the instances of thy goodness, and the methods of
our amendment; nor yet did ever any more shamfully abuse them, when thou gave
us great and long prosperities, we sed our selves to the full, waxed fat and
wanton, and kicked against thee; when thou threwest us into horrid confusions,
from which we saw then little hope of arising, even in the time of that
distress did we trespass yet more against thee, when by miracles of mercy thou
had turned our captivities, we soon returned to folly, to our vomit, and to
our wallowing in our former or greater filthiness, etc.

Answer, This is a very sad miserable condition indeed, much to be lamented;
you had need consider it and be in Truth humbled for it; and to forsake that
evil Spirit that has been your leader in those horrid practices, and to wait
upon the Lord for the leading and guiding of you out of those evils, that you
may have a better account to give unto the Lord in the day of account, as
Hezekiah had when the Prophet Isaiah was sent unto him with this Message from
the Lord: Saying, Thus says the Lord, set thine house in order for thou shall
die and not live; then Hezekiah turned his face toward the wall and prayed unto
the Lord; and said, remember now O Lord I beseech thee, how I have walked
before in Truth, and with a perfect heart; and have done that which is good in
thy sight, and Hezekiah wept sore. And the Lord heard his prayers, and seeing
his tears, he was very gracious and merciful unto him, as you may read: Now
compare his confession with your confession; and seeing you have no better
account to give, you may well be ashamed and confounded at the thoughts of what
acceptance you can think to have, and reward at the hand of the Lord.

And you say these words, The Communion Service, the Priest standing at the
Lords Table shall say: Our Father, etc.

Answer, Here you manifest your selves as deep in the appostasie from the
Communion and the (...) Table, as they were in, who put Lig^^ (...) Darkness,
(and Darkness for Light:) You here plainly show from whence you had your
Ordination and Learning; the least in the School of Christ that has learned of
him, neither Shepherds or Fishermen, sees over the dark works. It Is but in vain
for you to think to make this service pass; no, that Darkness is much
vanquished by the the breaking forth of the Light of Christ out of Darkness, by
which the Table of God, and the Table of Devils is known, and the Cup of God,
and the Cup of the Devil, and at the Table of God, and with the Cup of God,
many thirsting Souls are satisfied, and do truly bless and praise the Lord,
knowing that we cannot partake of the Table of God, and the Table of Devils, or
of the Cup of God and of the Cup of Devils; and therefore are fully satisfied
at the Table of God and with the blessing; and herein do bless the Lord who
has led many from the North, South, East and West by his good Spirit hereunto:
And thus being led by his holy Spirit, we can truly say, our Father who does
feed us in all our trials and afflictions with his bread of Life, and nourish
us with his Cup of Blessing; to him be praise and honor for ever.

Oh Nation of England, how wonderful kind has the Lord been unto thee, in
sending his Servants with warning after warning, even warning thee to break off
thy sins by a true repentance? And in that Fast that is acceptable unto him,
that thee might have been found in turning from the evil of thy doings, and
in answering the Lords just requirings, in doing justly, and walking humbly,
and showing mercy in remembering the meek, and them who fear the Lord, in whom
the Lord takes pleasure, and in renting of your false coverings, and have put
off your loathfome clothing, the which you confess you are under, and to have
rent your hearts in deed and in truth, and to have abstained from the
appearance of Evil, and to have let the oppressed go free: Had you chosen this
Fast, and truly turned to the Lord, and in simplicity to have waited upon him,
to have known his mind and pleasure in his sore and grievous and never to be
forgotten Judgments, with which he did visit you, by Sword, by Plague, and by
Fire: (Oh how can you easily pass over the remembrance thereof.) If I say you
had considered your ways, and by abstaining from the appearances of evil, you
had truly turned unto the Lord; you might then have expected to have found
favor of him, and in his counsel and wisdom you might have been directed to
have been established in the fear of the Lord, and in his righteous way to have
been confirmed; and under the covering of the work of his righteous Spirit you
might have been preserved, as you pray in these words; From all evil and
mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the Devil, and from thy
wrath, and from everlasting damnation, good Lord deliver us.

But turn unto your confession, and take a view of it, and see how short you
have come of this Fast, the which is well pleasing unto the Lord; and how
instead of waiting upon the Lord to know his way made known in the Earth, you
have gone on in your way of grieving and vexing his good Spirit, and provoking
the Lord God against you. But what will be the end thereof?

Stephen Smith.
The 4th. day of the 3d. Month, 1678.
THE END.

