A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Divine Providence, In Relation to NATIONAL JUDGMENTS

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. M DC XCIII.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Divine Providence, In Relation to NATIONAL JUDGMENTS.
NOtwithstanding that it is most consonant to reason to believe, that he who
made the World does govern it, and that all things are subject to the Laws of
Providence, and that the order and course of nature, (whereby things act
regularly, and make up that beauty and harmony, and proportion, which is
visible throughout the World) is not the effect of chance, but of contrivance
and design, and owes its original to the divine will, regulated by an infinite
wisdom; yet such is the pride of some, who yet cannot but be conscious of their
own defects, and how little they are able to do either of themselves apart, or
in conjunction with others, in comparison of what they see done both in heaven
and upon earth, as that they will scarce acknowledge God to be supreme, but set
up for themselves as absolute, and think to reverse his decrees by their wit
and policies, attributing the success of their counsels to the strength of
their parts and wisdom, and never referring their defeats and disappointment to
his overruling power, but to some cross-accident, which they should have
provided against; and then Matchiavel in his Prince, speaking of the ill
success of the counsels, designs, and enterprises of Caesar Borgia, nac que da
una straordinaria and estrema malignita di fortuna. cap. vii.
they cry out upon the extreme malignity and spightfulness of fortune, as they
speak, when all their wicked, and devilish policies have been blasted, and
proved to be nothing but elaborate folly.

Besides, they will have all the great revolutions that are brought upon the
World, to be the results of mere nature, which they set up as a distinct
principle from Providence, that is, that they flow from a series of natural
causes linkt and tied together, and that such a kind of combination necessarily
produces such effects, and that all those astonishing acts of Providence,
which we by a general name call judgments, are natural, and consequently in a
manner fatal and periodical. What is this, but to leave the World to it self,
and to exclude God from having any thing to do in the Government of it, and in
effect to rob him of the glory and perfections of his Godhead? But I know not,
whether the folly or impiety of this opinion be the greater, not to acknowledge
a divine hand in those events, which are confessedly extraordinary.

Let us lift up our eyes to the Heavens, and contemplate the number of the
Stars, their greatness, their inexhausted light, their regular and
uninterrupted motion and order; and let us fancy, if we can, that they made
themselves, or that such glorious bodies resulted from the fortuitous concourse
of little particles, floating up and down, in an infinite space, according to
the idle and precarious Hypothesis of Epicurus: Let us turn our Eyes downwards
and look into our selves, and reflect upon the faculties of our mind; upon the
power and command, which we have over our selves and our actions; upon the Law
imprinted upon our Nature; upon those notions of good and evil, that grow up
with us, and which we can never throw off; and upon the dictates and judgment
of Conscience; and this will show us, that we are fit Subjects, and capable of
a Law. After this, Let us proceed to consider the Original of our being, the
prerogative which reason gives us above other creatures, and the obligations
lying upon us as we are men; and this will prove to us, that we are not only
capable of, but actually under a Law; that we are accountable for the actions
of our lives to a supreme power, and that every violation of the divine law,
the eternal and unchangeable Law of righteousness, which God has revealed and
manifested, not only in the Scriptures, but in our very nature, is justly
punishable by him. This being once granted, we shall be soon made to confess,
except we will do violence to our reason, that God shows his anger against sin
by the judgments, which He brings upon the world, and that nothing of this
nature does come to pass, or can come to pass, without his order and
appointment, and but for some cause. The Prophet Amos chap. iii. verse 6. lays
it down by way of question and appeal to the reason and conscience and
understanding of all mankind, shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord has
not done it? which according to the known laws and methods of arguing, amounts
to this universal negative proposition, that there neither is, nor can be any
judgment in a City or Kingdom, whereof God is not the Author.

Now in the first place, in order to vindicate the honor of the divine
providence, I lay down the following proposition as infallibly certain, that no
evil of punishment which is brought upon the World, happens by chance; and
particularly, that those judgments, which seem to derive from natural causes,
are the effects of his justice and governing power: which I thus briefly prove.

That God does concern himself with the transactions of men, and either does or
will punish them sooner or later, according to their misbehaviour and demerit,
has been the belief of the very Heathen: notwithstanding the corruption and
degeneracy of their manners, notwithstanding that vast number of false
opinions, which they had taken up according to their fancy, and which made way
for others of a fatal consequence, to the great shame and discredit of their
reason, and notwithstanding all those brutish customs, and violations of the
laws of humanity which they had brought into practice the impressions of this
fundamental truth of Nature were made so deep upon their minds, that they could
not totally efface them. In a time of common calamity, for instance, when they
were distressed by an invading Enemy, or when a Plague had diffused its venom
over their Country, or in case of any violent inundation, or famine, or
earthquake, they acknowledged, that this was the punishment and demerit of
their sin; that their Gods were angry with them; and that the way to get these
judgments removed was to appease their anger: whereupon they erected altars,
and heaped up sacrifices upon them: some devoted themselves to death, and
others were offered up alive, they thinking to gain the favor of their Deities
by such kind of barbarous and bloody rites. It Is certain, that they had
corrupted this truth horribly by their superstitions and impieties: but the
foundation and ground was, that there was a vindicative Justice, a Nemesis,
which proportioned our punishments according to the measures and degrees of
guilt.

Now I demand,

1. If all things come to pass of themselves, without being guided and directed
by an invisible hand, how came the belief of the contrary so universal? It is a
blemish to our reason to imagine, that by the constitution of humane nature
false principles should be infused into our minds, and that we should be
fatally inclined to error; or that all the World should mistake in the belief
of this great truth, that there is an all-wise Providence, except a very few,
whose interest it is to wish there were none, that they might live as they
list, according to their corrupt inclinations, without the least molestation or
disturbance. And yet these very men, who deny a Providence, cannot but
acknowledge and confess, that it is agreeable to reason, yea and necessary to
the well-being of the World, that there should be such an overruling power,
regulated and directed by the highest wisdom. For if in a private family there
could be no peace nor safety without rules and orders to be observed by every
one in their respective qualities; if in a Kingdom confusions could not
possibly be avoided without Laws, they being the ligaments of the body
politic, that tie the members of it together, whereby they perform the several
offices of Civil life, in an orderly conjunction: much more would the World,
which consists of such a variety of parts, fail and decay, if the Creator had
not set them a Law which they are not to transgress, and if they were not
restrained and kept in from preying one upon another, and if an omnipotent and
allwise God had not the whole ordering and disposal of them.

2. How came things to be endowed with those qualities, which produce such
strange and admirable effects, as we daily see and hear of? It Is a vain attempt
to go about to explain and solve the appearances of nature by the Mechanichal
Philosophy, how witty, and subtle, and refined soever, without believing God,
not only to have created matter, and put this matter into motion, but to
determine and modify the several motions of it: and tho some effects flow
necessarily from their causes according to the established laws of mechanism,
yet this was wholly according to the will and contrivance of the first causes:
nor can they display this virtue without the divine concourse, all second
causes in their several motions needing the continuation of the divine power
and influence, in order to their operations, as well as to their subsistence.
All things then are at the disposal of God, who makes use of them, as it
pleases him, and the virtue, which they have, derives from him. Even men are
the instruments of his will, and that without any restraint of, or prejudice to
their natural or moral Liberty. He brings about the purposes of his Providence,
by actions which they design to other ends, nay sometimes by their sinful
passions, and the exhorbitances of their temper. Nebuchadnezzar a neighbor
Heathen Prince made war upon the Jews, Gods own people, either to satisfy his
thirst of fame and glory, or to enlarge his dominion, or it may be upon some
pretended affront or injury done him, or the like: and yet God calls him his
servant, Jerem. xliii. 10. because by him he punished that people for their
Sins: and it was upon this account, that Attilas, such another instrument in
the hand of God, as was Oliver Cromwell, when with his barbarous troops he broke
into Christendom, as if he had received a commission from heaven to execute
Gods wrath upon the Christians of that Age for their luxurious and unchristian
lives, had the title of flagellum DEI. None can deny civil war to be a grievous
judgment to a Nation, notwithstanding all the plausible pretensions of cunning
and designing men to draw the people into their party, and to take up arms in
defense of Religion and Property, both which suffer infinitely more by a
Rebellion than by a Persecution, if any such had followed according to their
fears and jealousies; whether well grounded, or ill grounded, it matters not,
yet in every such war God gives commission to the Sword, and says, Sword go
through the Land, Ez. xiv. 17. much more may God make use of all other parts of
the visible creation, which have no principle of Liberty within them. Thus fire
and hail, snow and vapor, and stormy wind, are said, to fulfill his word, Psalm
cxlviii. 8. and thus God did in the plagues of Egypt: and tho judgments be not
always so quick and immediate, but oftentimes advance slowly and by degrees:
Yet this does not hinder, but that they are judgments still; such for instance
are infectious Air, malignant Diseases, blasting and mildew, drought and
barrenness of ground. Deuteronomy. xxviii.

We must then look beyond natural causes, even to the God of nature, who orders
and directs them to their several ends, and overrules them and oftentimes
carries them beyond their usual power, according as it seems good to his divine
Wisdom, and the ends of Providence. In a Pestilence we must not look at the
evil influences of the Air, but at the evil influences of sin, for the
infection comes first thence. God might continue the same temper to the Air, if
he pleased, that it might be for ever healthful; but he suffers those
alterations to be made in it by degrees, and warns a Nation by such slow
approaches of his future intentions. So that notwithstanding we could trace the
natural and immediate causes of it, yet because they cannot act but by virtue
of his influence, and he makes use of the order and course of things, as it
best pleases him; the beginning and progress and decrease of a plague is to be
ascribed to his will and pleasure, as much as that which we read of, 2 Samuel
xxiv. 16. When the Angel of the Lord stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to
destroy it, the Lord repented him of the evil, and said to the Angel, who
destroyed the people, it is enough, stay now thine hand. And as the Angel, so
what is called nature, is the instrument of God; and therefore God is pleased
to ascribe to himself the ordinary works of it. One would judge it necessary
from the constitution of the World, that there be refreshing showers and dews,
to water and moisten the dry and parched ground, whose fruitfulness would
otherwise fail and decay; yet this in the judgment of Saint Paul, was enough to
convince the Heathen, that there is a God, as he tells the people of Lycaonia.
Acts xiv. 7. He left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave
us rain from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and
gladness. To this De Paenitentia ex edit. Rigaltii page 14^;
Tertullian does elegantly allude, Deum in aperto constitutum and vel ex ipsis
coelestibus bonis comprehensibilem ignorari non licet. And indeed if we do but
consider the ordinary works of Nature which we do not value by reason of their
commonness, and therefore pass over slightly, we shall find so much wisdom in
their contrivance, that we must of necessity have recourse to an infinite
Author. If then a fruitful Summer, if a plentiful and seasonable Harvest and
Vintage be a sufficient attestation of Providence; can we think, that
Judgments, tho brought about by natural causes, are not the effects of the
divine anger and displeasure? cannot a Sparrow fall to the ground without the
Will of God? St. Matthew. x. 29. and shall there be any kind of Judgment in the
World without his ordering and appointment?

It being then to be believed and acknowledged, that all Judgments, even such
as flow from natural causes, are the designs and effects of Providence, I will
enquire

2. Into the reasons and ends of Providence in in such severe dispensations.
What desolations are brought upon the World, it is visible every where: there
is no age, which does not furnish us with examples enough, to what great
heights Judgments have advanced from small beginnings; how thousands have
fallen by the Plague, or have perished in the merciless Ocean by tempests and
hurricanes; or have been buried under ruins by Earthquakes; and with what
cruelty the Sword has raged without any distinction of Sex, or age, or
quality. Every one is sensible of the miseries of humane life in common; and
complaints are frequent and too bold; so obnoxious are we to the assaults of a
disease, to the violence of enemies, and to the raging fury of the Elements,
when let loose, that death oftentimes becomes unavoidable.

Some indeed have excluded Providence from having any thing to do with the
Government of the World, because of these seeming perplexities, which they
suppose cannot proceed from a Divine Administration. Hence they very
presumptuously and foolishly ask, why are men, the only creatures, who seem fit
to enjoy the blessings of life, put into continual frights and fears? why
surrounded perpetually with dangers? why so distressed and forsaken, without
being able to defend themselves? But these are the ravings of an impatient and
cloudy mind, which will not consider things, but suffers reason to be
overwhelmed by passion: they are besides oftentimes the product of wretched and
irrational principles; such as these, that a man is under no Law and so not
accountable to any supreme Being; that happiness is to be placed in this World
only, and in the gratifications of the animal life; that it is an injury for
God to deprive him of it, and that it is not forfeitable by Sin; that there is
no such thing as Justice to exact the punishment of guilt; that God is content
to enjoy himself in the heavens, without ever so much as casting a glance of
his omniscient eye upon earth; and that he neither regards the services of his
votaries, nor the impieties and profanation, and sacrileges of Atheists, and
Libertines, and such like bold sinners, who defy his justice, but sits there
unconcernedly without any resentment either way; as one of the number daringly
asserts. Nec been pro meritis capitur, nec tangitur ira. Lucret. Which is in
effect and consequent to deny, that there is a God; and that men are men that
is, that they act freely, or that they deserve either reward or punishment for
their acting well or ill.

But tho this brutish opinion was exploded by the soberer part of the Heathen
world, yet the difficulty remained among several, who were forced, from the
observation of those strange events which they beheld, to confess an overruling
providence, which brought them about, even above the hopes, and contrary to the
expectations of men. This they saw and acknowledged, but they corrupted and
perverted the belief of it, with a mixture of horrid and impious fancies. They
thought, that God took delight in the miseries of men, and that this proceeded
from an envious nature in the Deity, as if all affected and troubled at the
prosperities and successes of mankind: and that therefore he would not permit
them to be long happy, but continually brought upon them some calamity or
other, to take off their minds from the considerations of peace and joy, and to
divide and distract them with cares and fears, as if he could not be happy
while they were so.

Thus Florus says, that a stop was put to the advance and progress of the Roman
arms, sive invidia Deorum, sive fato, at the time when the Galli Senones under
Brennus invaded their City, and disturbed their growing Empire: and that
afterward when they had conquered almost the whole World, (for so they proudly
and vauntingly worded it, Orbem cum totum Victor Romanus habebat). and were
ready to enjoy the benefit of their conquests in security and peace, after the
hardships and fatigues of their long continued wars, and when their Empire
seemed to be so fully united in it self, and grown so great and powerful, as
not to be shaken or molested by any foreign power, invidens fortuna principi
gentium populo ipsum illum in exitium suum armavit, fortune envying the Romans
this glory and happiness, armed them against themselves by raising and
fomenting a Civil war, occasioned by the private passions of Caesar and Pompey:
which caused that proverbial saying, so frequent in the mouths of the Common
Soldiers and Ordinary sort of People, Socer Generque perdidistis omnia.

Such ill representations they made of God Almighty, clothing him with the
infirmities of a base passion, which usually dwell in ignoble and low spirited
persons, and ascribing the effects of his Justice and Governing power to
disorder, and trouble of mind, to envy and ill nature. Whereas right reason
should have taught them, that all imaginable happiness as well as perfection is
essentially included in the Idea of God, who cannot possibly be subject to
envy, which is a troublesome and vexatious passion* and that the only motive of
his framing the World was his goodness. Thou G God, love all the things that
are, and abhorrest nothing which thou have made: for never would thou have
made any thing if thou had hated it, and how could any thing have endured, if
it had not been thy will, or have been preserved, if not called by thee? Wisd.
xi. 24, 25. We must therefore assign other reasons of Gods proceeding so
severely with men, which will fully vindicate his Providence from such an
unjust and impious imputation.

1. The first is to humble us under his mighty hand, and to make us acknowledge
his power and sovereignty. For what can seem more unjust and unnatural, than
that men who owe their being to the goodness of God, and live upon his bounty,
should yet be unmindful of him, that vile dust and ashes should lift up himself
against his maker, and should enjoy the blessings of his providence, and yet
not acknowledge that they are blessings, that is, the effects of his care and
love to mankind? Yet so it is: Pride puffs men up with swelling thoughts of
vanity, as if all they enjoyed were justly due to them: it makes them think too
well of themselves, as if they had no need of a support, or as if it were a
diminution of their greatness to live in subordination to a higher power. And
from this pride proceeds carelessness and forgetfulness of God, as if serious
and frequent reflections and thoughts of him put them too much in mind of their
duty and obligation toward him, and of the vileness and meanness of their own
condition without him. Thus they flatter themselves with dreams of folly, and
are so taken up with thoughts of themselves, that they have no leisure to think
of God; and especially in a course of uninterrupted happiness and prosperity,
the Soul is as it were weakened, and lost, and dissolved in ease and softness;
and the rational faculties are depressed and deprived of their directive power;
and the gratification of a lust is set up in competition with the service of
God, and oftentimes preferred before it, and the pleasures of sense prevail;
and when we are full, we are apt to forget and deny God. Deuteronomy. viii. 11.14.
Prove. xxx. 9. It is but necessary then that men be taught the true and just
knowledge of themselves; which is done most effectually by judgments. This
shows, how they depend necessarily upon God, and how unable they are to stand
before an Almighty power; by this they are sensible, that his anger can consume
them in a moment, and that his power can crush them into pieces. Thou, even
thou art to be feared, and who may stand in thy sight, when thou art angry?
Psalm lxxvi 7. Let us deny, now if we dare (but certainly our fears and our
convictions will not permit us to deny) Gods power over us, when we either hear
on see so many thousands falling before us, and when we see the whole creation
at his command, and doing his will. An apprehension and sense of distress and
danger will bring us upon our knees, and will thoroughly convince us of our
folly, to forget, much more to oppose and defy God; and will force us with
trembling and amazement to acknowledge his Almightiness and power, by the
judgments which he brings upon the World.

2. If we look about us, and observe the horrid violations of the Laws of God
and Religion, we shall soon justify God in his proceeding so severely with us:
for by this he shows his anger against sin, and how jealous he is of his
honor. It is most certain, that this life is for the trial of our faith and
obedience: and that hereafter every one shall be rewarded according to his
works; and that tho God be provoked every day, yet his patience and goodness
seem to lay restraints as it were upon his Justice, from breaking out upon the
Sinner. For if God should punish as often as men sin, and should proceed
according to the rigor of his justice, all mankind would sink under the weight
of his heavy hand. If thou, Lord, wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O
Lord, who may abide it? Psalm cxxx. 3. And we see what ill use is made of Gods
forbearance and long-suffering, how some interpret this in their own favor,
and how others harden themselves in wickedness, and sin the more boldly.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the
hearts of the sons of men are fully set in them to do evil. Eccles. viii. 9.
But to rectify all misapprehensions, that they may not pass into general
opinions, and to show that he will not forbear always, he does often manifest
and signalize his justice, even in this life, and loudly proclaim from heaven
his anger against the unrighteousness of men, and especially by national
judgments, in such cases as these: When Religion is scorned and derided as an
argument of a pusillanimous mind, or as an effect of superstition, or else is
made use of as a cloak to cover maliciousness, revenge, and ambition; when
virtue and modesty are accounted parts of ill breeding; and when wickedness
appears bold and impudent in the daylight; when luxury, and effeminacy, and a
dissolution of manners have overspread a people; when no regard is had to the
sacred ties and religion of repeated Oaths and Sacraments, and to the most
solemn obligations of natural and civil right and justice: when the public
worship of God is slighted, and no check given to Atheism and profaneness; when
men live as if there were no God, or which is worse, cared not for him; when
blasphemies against God, and Christ, and the mysteries of our holy religion are
tolerated, and go unpunished; when such kind of impieties, all or some, more or
less, become common, and prevail in a Nation, ruin cannot be afar off. It is
time for thee, Lord, to work, for they have made void thy law. Psalm cxix. 126.
We may safely and allowably pretend to foretell, that vengeance hangs over the
heads of such a people, unless a general repentance and reformation intervene,
and avert the impending evil. And tho no Prophets are now extraordinarily
commissioned from heaven to prophecy against a nation, Specialiter quaedam
pronunciata generaliter sapiunt. Cum Deus Israelitas admonet disciplinae vel
objurgat, utique adomnes habet: cum Aegypto and Aethiopiae exitium comminatur,
in omnem gentem peccatricem praejudicat. Tertull. de spectaculis ex edit.
Rigalt. p. 91.
and t^ particularize the judgment, which God will inflict, except they amend;
yet we may be as sure of it, that so it will be, and we have as much reason to
expect it, as if there were: because God has revealed his mind and will in his
holy word, and signified his intentions sufficiently, that thus and thus he
will proceed with an obstinate and incorrigible people.

3. Judgments serve for examples and warning to others Punishment is so
essential to government, that without this it would soon be dissolved, and
confusion and all manner of disorder would break in upon the world; it would be
scarce possible to live with any kind of security. It is fear which keeps men
in, and lays restraints upon their passions, which otherwise would break out in
fury and madness: and what the sad and dismal consequences of the passions are,
when once let loose, is easy to imagine; and of which we may frame some
tolerable kind of idea from the murders, the sacrilegious rapines, the
villainies, the desolations, caused by a brutish rabble. So that punishment
becomes necessary, not only that the criminal may make some satisfaction for
the breach of Law, but for security of the public peace; that others, if the
crime be capital especially, seeing his shameful and untimely end, may be
deterred from following his bad example. Which consideration is enough to
vindicate the severity of the Laws upon the worser sort of malefactors; not as
if any delight were designed to be taken by heightning or prolonging the misery
of any one, be his crime never so heinous, but only in terrorem, to affright
those who survive from attempting the like wickedness; and to assure them
withal, what they are to expect, if they do so. This very method God Almighty
is pleased to make use of in the government of the world. His Laws are
established with sanctions of rewards and punishments, according as we either
observe or disobey them. None can pretend ignorance, or complain of a surprise,
that they are punished before they knew the danger of the Sin. For every
judgment is a plain denunciation and threatening from heaven, that if we equal
others in their sin, we may be made equal to them in their punishment. It is
true, God takes his own time to punish: he does oftentimes forbear upon most
gracious and wise designs: he does often let the sinner go on in his sins,
because the sinner is in his power, and cannot escape him: and the like is to
be said of a sinful nation; but then this is only a reprieve and respite; no
revocation of the sentence, which is gone out against it; and it is the highest
provocation of Justice to take no warning; it is an unpardonable stupidity, and
the direct and ready way to ruin.

Whatever judgments are inflicted in this world, concern others, as well as
those on whom they are inflicted. These things are our examples, as Saint Paul
does most rationally conclude from the overthrow of the Israelites in the
Wilderness, 1 Cor. x. 6. to the intent, that we should not lust after evil
things, as they also lusted. Now let us consider, what is it that has ruined so
many famous Monarchies, but luxury, and pride, and base perfidiousness, and
irreligion; how many glorious Cities have been demolished and destroyed by war,
fire, and earthquakes; whose ruins will be eternal monuments of their sin, and
of the divine vengeance. All history abounds with examples and above all the
Sacred, which serves not only to inform us of past events, but for direction
and warning of what will be; they are the standing registers of Gods
proceedings with men: the prophesies against Jerusalem, against Babylon,
against Nineve, in the general are in force still, making allowances for the
variety of circumstances, as to those times and these, as if they were directed
to Christendom, and the Nations out of it, and their Capital Cities. They are
written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the Earth are come. Look
about and see, what desolations are brought upon the Earth; go and enquire of
the ages past, and consider, how God has dealt with them in his anger, how he
has made their own wickedness to correct them: as the Prophet speaks, Jerem.
ii. 19. how he has given up, some to the violence and fury of an enraged
foreign Enemy; others to the more raging furies of a Civil War, how he has sent
pestilential diseases and other plagues among them, and the like. By which
examples God does forewarn all other Nations, as well as the people of the same
in different times, of the certain and woeful, and unavoidable consequence of
Sin persisted in, and unrepented of.

The belief of this truth, that the Judgments which are in the world are the
effects of Gods displeasure, is necessary in order to our receiving benefit,
and making that right use of them to which they are designed. For so long as
Providence is denied, and the justice and power of God called in question, and
the threatenings of Scripture disbelieved, and looked upon as bruta sulmina,
empty sound and noise, and only natural causes supposed to be concerned in the
dismal Judgments, which have been, and are in the world, without the
superintendency of the first and supreme cause, and that all things come to
pass either by chance, as causes, which have no dependence one upon another,
happen to be joined, or by a fatal necessity; it is a very easy consequence,
that men of this persuasion should continue in the same ill course of life and
be never a whit the better for the most astonishing calamities. Fear indeed is
usually wrought in the minds of the stoutest and most resolute by Judgments.
Psalm. lvii. 8. Thou did cause Judgment to be heard from heaven; the Earth
feared, and was still. But this may flow only from a principle of
self-preservation. The most hardy and bold, the wits and the Hobbists, les be
aux et les forts esprits, for all their sophistry and artificial evasions, and
for all their principles of fate and praedestination, have an abhorrence of
sudden death; nor indeed can they think of any kind of death with any patience,
whose hopes are only confined to the animal life: it may also oftentimes be,
and for the most part is, only a kind of present horror, a being troubled at
the danger, lest it may involve them, as well as others; and a mere effect of
surprise and astonishment: like the Emperor Caligula, who was afraid, and
crept under his bed, when it thundered, but as mad and as dissolute as ever, as
soon as the noise was over.

But certainly all sober and serious people will make a better use of the
judgments of God, and in such cases conduct and govern themselves and their
behavior by true measures of wisdom and piety, and especially by these two
following rules.

1. That we look up to God in all times of public distress and calamity. For
will it not be a foolish obstinacy beyond all aggravation to complain of the
stroke and smart, and not see the inflicting hand, which is so visibly lifted
up? No one certainly can be so slight an observer of the age, wherein he lives,
as not to see enough to convince him, that there is a God, who judges in the
earth, and that he brings about those revolutions, which are in the world.
Psalm lxiv. 9. all men that see it, shall say, this has God done, they shall
perceive that it is his work.

But tho we are to observe, and admire, and adore Providence, we must not
presume to justify any evil action by it, as if success of it self were a
sufficient proof, encouragement and approbation of it. For we cannot but
remember, how this was the common theme and topic in the late times, I mean
before the year 1660, of popular discourses both from the pulpit and the press,
to justify the cursed rebellion of forty one, that the God of hosts fought for
his Saints and Servants at Marston-more, and gave them victory over his and
their enemies, that is, their rightful Sovereign, to whom they had often sworn
allegiance; and his faithful Subjects: and appeared most gloriously on their
side at Naseby, and the like: and Bradshaw in his speech, just before his
pronouncing the sentence of death upon the blessed King Charles the first, in
which he most wickedly misapplies Law, and the history of the tumultuous times
of K. Edward the Second, and K. Richard the Second, together with foreign
examples of the like villainy, as if they had been just and authentic proofs of
what they were then acting, appeals to Providence, and says, that God had
dealt gloriously and miraculously for them.

Providence cannot, without an imputation upon the righteous government of God,
be supposed, much more made use of, as a plea or argument, to justify that,
which religion and the divine law severely prohibit: tho judgments, by what
means or instruments soever brought about, are full proof of Gods anger and
displeasure against sin. In every judgment God does as it were thunder out of
heaven, and we must be more than deaf, that is, affectedly stupid, if we will
not hear and take notice. Micah vi. 9. The Lords voice cries unto the City,
and the man of wisdom shall see thy name: hear ye the rod, and who has
appointed it.

2. That we reflect upon our sins, which are the meritorious cause of Gods
dealing thus severely with us. In general, may we not justly fear, that the
Lord has a controversy with England, for the crying sins of it; because there
is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land: by swearing, and
lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery, they break out, and
blood touches blood? Hoseah iv. 1, 2. and have we not reason also to fear,
that the following menace will be fully executed upon us. v. 3. therefore shall
the land mourn, and every one that dwells therein shall languish? But without
descending to a minute consideration of the public sins, wherewith almost the
whole nation in general stands charged, let us, as we are private persons,
reflect upon our necessary dependence on God, that all we have we derive from
his goodness, and that we cannot subsist one moment without his providence,
which continues our being to us; and further consider, that notwithstanding
those obligations to serve and obey him, which our being in the world, and our
being of such an order of creatures, and our daily preservation lay upon us, we
daily provoke God to anger: and if so, when ever we feel the smart of our Sins,
we cannot but bow down our heads humbly before him, and adore his justice,
which yet punishes us less than we have deserved. Righteous art thou O Lord,
and true are thy judgments. Psalm. cxix, 133. He does not afflict willingly the
children of men. Lam. iii. 33. but we our selves pull down these judgments upon
our heads; we will not let God as it were be at rest; we provoke him to wrath
and indignation against us, by our ingratitude, and disobedience, and by an
obstinate continuance in sin. Whenever therefore his hand is lifted up, and
before it be lifted up, let us endeavor to atone his wrath by a hearty and
speedy repentance: let us prostrate our selves before him, and deprecate his
anger, that we be not consumed by the means of his heavy hand: and then we may
be assured, that he will return to us in mercy, and will either avert or remove
his judgments from us, and will heal us, and our Land, and the breaches of it,
tho it shakes, and is ready to fall into pieces.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 20. all mankind. p. 5. l. 26. for have r. had. p. 6. l. 13. for
our r. out. p. 10. l. 7. first cause.


