THE CHARACTER OF A Weaned Christian. OR The Evangelical Art of promoting
Self-denial. BEING An Essay, alluding to the Severities and Advantages of
Infant-Weaning, both Pleasant and Profitable. Grounded On Psalm. 131. V. 2, 3.

By S. S. M. A. Formerly Fellow of St. John Bapt. Coll. Oxon, now Minister of
the Gospel in LONDON.

Matthew. 18.3. Verily I say unto you, Except ye be Converted and become as
little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

LONDON Printed for Dorman Newman, and are to be sold at his Shops, at the
Kings-Arms in the Poultry, and at the Ship and Anchor, on the Bridg-Foot
without the Gate. 1675.

To the Right Honorable Sir Robert Viner Knight and Baronet, Lord Major of the
City of LONDON.
Right Honble.
DIvine Providence designing a Special Kindness to this Metropolis, (for the
advancement of Its Welfare) demonstrated it, by the impatient longing of Her
Sons for your Lordships Election to the Pretorian Chair; in which, You were
lately fixed by the most Unanimous Acclamations, and Solemn Joy of all Ingenuous
Spirits.

They well knew, how Eminently the God of all Grace had qualified your Person
for Government over this Renowned City.

The Obscure Author (therefore) of this weak Essay, humbly craves your Pardon
for his Presumption in sheltring it under the wing of so Judicious a Patron.
But your Honor's Courteous reception, and Equal Encouragement of All the Lovers
of Virtue, begets an hope, That this honest Design to win Souls over to Christ,
by so despised a Method, as a Persuasive to a Weaned Self-denying Frame; may
receive Life and Acceptance from the favorable Cast of your eye upon an
Argument so unpleasing to the World's Fondlings and Admirers.

Your Virtuous Disposition has set an Eminent Pattern, of that Weaned Frame
herein jejunely discoursed of. For your Christian Humility signalizes your Real
Worth; upon which, your political Grandeur only waits, as the Ornamental
Shadowing of some rare Beauty, which needs not any Artificial Commendation.

Your Contempt of the glittering Imbellishments of the World, and resolute
Aversation from Its sensual Blandishments and Delights, is sufficiently known
and demonstrated.

But I desist from speaking Truth in this kind, because You have an Humble
opinion of your Self; and I would not put Your Modesty as much to the Blush, as
(I fear) my Weaning discourse will prove an Appaleing Alarm to persons wholly
Devoted to the pursuit of Sensual Enjoyments, and the sordid Humor of Affecting
to be flattered.

The Author heartily wishes, that the Heavenly Discipline of Christ's Spirit
may allure All Men to the love of Evangelical Self-denial. This would Promote
and Secure their Best Everlasting Interest, by a vigorous pursuit of the Real
State of Blessedness; In which, that your Lordships Person may be preserved and
established, is the fervent Prayer of him, who Dutifully remains,

Your Honors humble, and Deeply obliged Servant, S. S.

TO THE Christian Reader.
SUch is Natures tender Care for the Universe, that those Births prove of the
most Benign Influence to the Babe, whose Parent expires in Travel. Thus, Divine
Providence Delights to display his Power and Goodness where envious Death most
Conflicts, as Contriving to exert It Is deepest Sting. May the Conception and
Edition of this Weak Essay obtain the Blessing of the Spirit of the Holy Jesus:
Then, That Paroxysm of pain which seized on the Author in Preaching on part of
this Argument (and possibly begat a fainter reception of it) will be overruled
to an Advantage, in the lively and deep Imprinting on the Heart, what at first
with some Roughness beat upon the Ear. The Author cannot but apprehend, how
unacceptable Weaning-Counsel is to persons addicted to Sensuality; especially,
when conjoined with Covetousness, which is a Testy Vice, as almost Universally
grown in Fashion. Yet the Father of Spirits is able so to Disciplinate, and
Change the Hearts of voluptuous Epicures, and the Worlds Votaries, that even
Such shall be Reconciled to a Good Opinion of, and Embrace the Seemingly-bitter
Severities of a Weaned State.

This was the chief Encouragement in exposing this Essay, (though of uncomely
and unpolisht Features) unto Public view. Otherwise, as a wounded dispirited
Deer bleeds to Death in some Shrub; so, this Discourse of Spiritual Weaning,
had been stifled under the Shroud of a faint-hearted Obscurity, rather than
have adventured to Lisp out such unwelcome Advice to the Worlds Fondlings and
admiring Paramours.

May the Blessing of Heaven assist every Inspector of this Essay, in applying,
and improving of the Rules herein contained, for the Acquiring and promoting of
an Evangelical Self-denying Frame. Thus, being daily Conversant and skilful in
this Mystery, your hearts will be Abstracted from listening to the Worlds
alluring-Charms and Estranged from pursuing Its vexatious Vanities.

The Vanity and wantonness of our hearts, which sunk into a Sensual Life by
Apostasy from the Chiefest Good, infused a Poisonous Tincture and bewitching
Charm into the External Creation, which was Innocent and safe to Converse with,
by its Primitive Institution: Yet by serious Reflection on the impatient Absurd
longings of our humorsome Curiosity, we might rectify, and set boundaries to
their Exorbitancies.

Thus David poured out the Waters of Bethlehem before the Lord, with as great
an Abhorrency, as He had before expressed an Homicidial Rashness, in jeoparding
the Lives of those three mighty Men, by breaking through the Host of the
Philistines to obtain it. If we would not buy our Pleasures with the danger or
destruction of our Souls, let us argue it coolely, and in sober sadness with
our hearts, when our Lusts grow Rampant. Let us say as David, Are not these the
Price of Blood? It is certain they will prove such: Either of Christ's Blood,
to expiate our voluptuous Surfeits, or of our Own, to expose Us to destruction;
if we Continue to gratify our Flesh-pleasing Sensuality against all Rules of
Sobriety, and the dictates of Right Reason, which should bridle and subdue them.

How do most Men impose a Cheat upon their Souls, while they Symbolically only
seek and expect Heaven, being Customarily buried with their Faces upward; yet
while they live, they are not ashamed to lie bruitishly grovelling with their
Affections on the Earth! Mines which are hid under ground, tempt their
thoughts, and commit a Rape upon their Souls, when the everlasting Joys of
Heaven, (because unseen) are despised by them; Thus the unrighteous Mammon is
Worshipped as a Deity! Yet the very natural form of Minerals which grow (as
Sennertus reports) in the shape of Serpents and of Hairs, might forewarn them
of those mischievous temptations, which Poison and Suffocate all Generous
dispositions Godward.

But weaned Christians foresee, and dread a destructive snare even in those
enticing Objects, which Worldlings inshrine in their hearts; so far are Saints
from paying any Homage (but rather an Holy Scorn) toward whatever defiles and
corrupts the Conscience, or dispirits and divides the Heart from the Fountain
of pure Celestial Joy.

Let us therefore, as we would demonstrate our selves to be Divinely Born from
Above, not lift up our hearts to Vanity, but to the Lords Statutes by a sworn
Allegiance. Let us not suffer Earthly-mindedness to grow in Fashion, when the
most durable Comforts in the World pass away as a Fashion.

Be weaned and estranged from the Antic Customs, Corrupt Examples, and Sensual
Enjoyments of the degenerate World.

So shall you Divinely Caress your Souls, by training them up under the
Severities of an Holy Discipline.

You shall not by any Hurry-Cane of Temptation from without, or exorbitant
Passions from within, be shaken from the Center of true Rest, by delusion in
your Comforts, or Impatiency in your sufferings. You shall possess and secure
your Souls, as to the Excellency of their Divine Constitution, in the quick,
and clear Sentiment of Celestial Joys, by a regular Conception of the Real
Worth of whatever is suggested to their Fancy. You shall become Impregnable in
sincere resolutions, to maintain a Heavenly Conversation, and shall obtain an
Heroic Fortitude under all your Trials. You shall Exercise a Rational Dominion
over all Brutish Passions, which destroy all true Tranquillity of mind, and
Joy in the Holy Ghost. Thus promoting a Weaned Frame, you shall be prepared and
made meet to be received with a triumphant Festivity into the Serene and
Glorious Bosom of the blessed Jesus, who is the perfect Archetype of
Self-denial, and the Universal-Diffusive-Center of true Felicity. To which
State, that you may arrive, is the unfeigned desire of Him, who counts it his
Duty and Privilege to be, and remain,

Your Christian Friend, and Monitor in the Lord S. S.

ERRATA.
Page 9. l. 8. f. command r. commend. P. 116. l. 22. s. crum r. Crumbe. P. 131.
l. 27. f. become Saints, r. Saints become. P. 132. l. 29. f. Eannot r. Cannot.
P. 137. l. 18. f. Chocie r. Choice. P. 138. l. 11. f. Caudidates r. Candidates.
P. 143. l. 7. f. not so, r. not so much. There are some other small Errata's,
which the Author desires the Reader to mend with his Pen.

Psalm. 131. V. 2, 3. Surely I have behaved and quieted my self as a Child that
is weaned of his Mother, my Soul is even as a weaned Child.

Let Israel hope in the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.


THese words are David's Apologetical Appeal to God, the Searcher of all Hearts,
to confute and wipe off that malicious slander, that he was an underminer of
Readiness Regal Authority; and an ambitious Projector to snatch the Crown from his
Head.

Now said he, what Plots can a weaned Child contrive in its Head? I do not
busy my self in Mysteries of State, nor deal in the profound Politics of the
World.

Lord I Appeal to thy alsearching Eye, who know all secrets whatsoever, that
my Heart is not haughty, nor mine Eyes lofty. These, in the casting of them,
speak out much of the frame of the Soul; They are the Heraldry of the Mind: By
the eyes we express and dart forth Pride, Malice, and Lust.

Sobriety, a modest look, without Heart-Humility, is Hypocrifie; and Lowliness
of Heart without a modest Deportment, is but a rude Profession.

In the Words are two General Parts.

1. David's Protestation, under the Form of an Oath; thus some read the Words;
If I have, or, as I have behaved my self as a weaned-Child, then or in so
doing, let the Lord vindicate my Integrity from false Aspersions. So let the
Lord deal by me, as I have in uprightness suppressed all Proud Aspiring
Imaginations and Designs.

Obs. We should be on good and sure Grounds in all those Appeals and
Protestations which we make of our Hearts in the Frame and Working of them as
in the sight of God, who is the Heart-searcher, and Avenger of all Hopocrisie.

Obs. 2. David's Soul was first weaned by the Discipline of God's Spirit,
before he could behave himself as a weaned Child in the several afflictive
occurrences of his Life.

Grace must first be implanted in the Heart, to quiet and subdue its mutinous
Passions, and inordinate affections, before the outward Conversation can be
rectifyed.

The Lord can take no delight in the proud Heart of a froward Sinner.

Yet a Saint may without Presumption plead thus: Lord, own me for thy Child,
for I am one of thy Weanlings, therefore come and take delight in thine own
Work.

David appeals to God, concerning his self-denying-frame, as an evident Sign
and Seal of his Approbation and Promotion.

Obs. Before the Lord bestow great enjoyments of the Creature upon his
Servants, he prepares them by a weaned Frame of Heart, (so as) to be
indifferent about Worldly things.

My Soul.] David was a strong Man in Christ, not a Babe, who thus professed
himself as a weaned Child.

Obs. It requires not only Truth of Grace, but much growth and proficiency in
it, to resign up the Heart to the severities of Mortification, and constant
Discipline of Self-denial.

Obs. David says not my Soul is only meek and humble as a Child, but
submissive, as a weaned Child, to every Divine Dispensation, though never so
harsh and bitter; yea he rises higher, Professing himself to be even as a
weaned Child in all and every Respect.

The Rule of God's Word and Command is a stricter Pattern of self-denial than
any Earthly Type of weaning. No weanling from the Breast should outstrip a Saint
in point of Mortification toward sinful sensual Delights, or
Creature-enjoyments.

Again, David compares himself to a Child which is Passively weaned, not which
weans it self; Weaning is not any pleasant Act of the Child's own seeking or
effecting.

Obs. Mortification of sinful unruly Passions and inordinate affections, is a
Soul- renewed-state, bitter and declined by us at first, we are merely Patients
under this Holy violence, and Soul-saving severity; we are unwilling and unable
to effect in it our selves.

Again, David compares himself to a Child weaned of his Mother, not by some
mercenary Nurse, who being servile in the task proves often as froward and
teasty as the Child.

Obs. Saints should submit to the difficulty of a weaned Frame with a quiet
Heart, because the Lord designs it out of Wisdom, and carries it on with great
tenderness and Compassion.

The weaned Child is not forgotten, much less forsaken, or cast off. Weaning is
an Act and State of necessity and deep affection, ratherthan of neglect or
disesteem.

Hereby it grows up into a more solid knowledge of, and more affectionate
acquaintance with the Parent.

Should Children always lie soaking at the Breast, they would not grow so
strong nor spritely to perform service to their Parents, they would not be apt
to take down more solid Food.

Saints may be froward at present, because they understand not the advantages
of this pitiful severity; yet afterward they shall know and comply with the
Lord's Design in weaning them.

Thus Christ informed Peter, that there was a Mystery in his condescension to
wash the Disciples Feet, the better to induce Peter's compliance with it. Thus
David produces his experience, and makes assurance thereof, to the whole
Spiritual Seed of Israel; that the Lord means no harm but much Spiritual
advantage to his Children, though he express much severity in weaning them.

Obs. Saints ought to quicken one another Graces and Comforts, by holding
forth their mutual examples and experiences.

As if David had said, upon the whole matter thus: Lord, hereby I gathered or
inferred an Evidence, that thou would advance me to the Throne, and
undertake the Protection, Care and Conduct of me, because I have behaved my
self as a Weaned Child. I kept my Spirit low and humble; I did not affect nor
hunt after great things for my self; I was very indifferent as to the outward
enjoyments of the World. Thou have heapt them on me without my seeking. Thou
did prepare me to enjoy with an humble thankful Heart, those accommodations
which I could have been content to have been cut short of.

Lord, thou know how I have carried toward thee as a weaned Child. Thou
also have acted toward me as a tender indulgent Parent, giving me what I could
have born the denial of. Therefore by my Example let Israel hope in the Lord,
even when he is suatcht from the Breasts of worldly enjoyments. O! let Saints
learn to live more dependently upon the Lords immediate Providence, who thus
rewards the self-denial of his weaned Children.

This is the scope and intended meaning of the Words.

The main Doctrine which I shall prosecute is this.

Doct. Every Christian should labor to get and maintain the Frame and Carriage
of a weaned Child.

In prosperity to sit loose from Worldly comforts and enjoyments. In Adversity
to quiet and compose their pirit under all the saddest, severest Dispensations
which the Lord inflicts.

Or, it is the Duty, Character, and Disposition of every real Saint, by Faith
and Self-denial, to quiet their spirits under the nearest and deepest Trials.

By Faith we must live on Christ's Alsufficiency in greatest straits. By
Self-denial we must live to Christ by maintaining an equal indifferency of
Spirit either to retain or resign our Comfortable enjoyments as the supreme
Lord shall dispose of them.

It becomes not that Masculine Heroical Grace of Faith, to produce every petty
service as a Demonstration of its Ingenuity.

Abraham's Trial, was no cheap Act of Religion, when he was called to the foot
of God, to leave his native Country, and become a Pilgrim in the Land of
Promise.

Yet in weaning him from his Beloved Isaac, so as to require him to offer him
up for a Sacrifice; This touched severely upon the very Bowels of Natural
Affection, yea, it seemed to offer violence to his Faith, and the very veracity
of that Divine Promise, that in Isaac should all Nations be called and blessed.

O the height, length, depth, and breadth of this Trial! None could lawfully
impose such a Command but God, nor could any so quickly and fully have Answered
it but an Abraham, whence he deserved the Title of the Father of the Faithful.

He stood not demurring, much less murmured at the Command, but thus he expressed
the Innocence and weaned self-denial of his Heart.

What is it, O Lord, that thou call for? is it my only begotten Son Isaac,
the Staff of my old Age? I love him dearly, but thee transcendently; therefore
he shall be no Corrival. I obtained him by believing, and I shall not lose him
by obeying,

Though I be a Father, thou art God; and what I owe to my Child, must always be
checked and limited by what I owe to thee.

My Natural affection must and shall give place to my Spiritual special Duty.

Though I kill him, thou can quicken him; Though I may part with my Son, yet
I can never lose my Isaac. For thy Promise is sure for evermore, that in Isaac
shall my Seed be called.

Thus Abraham reconciled by a weaned Frame the seeming contradiction of the
Command to the immutability of the Promise, and chose rather to be held Guilty
of Murder, by the verdict of sense and carnal reason, than to be taxt of
mental Idolatry, in an over-fond Affection to his Isaac.

He let God alone to perform his Word, while himself kept an eye upon his Duty.

Do you go and imitate the Father of the Faithful. I mean not in the same
specifical attempt, for it was only a Command by way of Trial, imposed by the
lawful stamp of Divine Authority. No such Revelation is now to be expected; yet
the general and implicit equity of it binds all and every Christian, that we
should always retain a fixed weaned Frame, to mortify all inordinate
Creature-Love; and readily to resign up our nearest and dearest enjoyments,
when the Supreme Lord shall impose the Trial.

So shall you justify the Truth, and command the strength of your Faith, as
Abraham did his by Self-denial, and obtain the Title of a real Friend of God.

Such are content that the Will of the Lord should be served upon them as well
as done by them, or the promises fulfilled for them.

Now for fuller explication of the Nature of this weaned Frame, I shall show,

1. Wherein it does consist. 2. How Natural and Spiritual weaning agree and
differ. 3. The Reasons, why we should thus quiet our Spirits as weaned
Children. 4. I shall produce some discoveries of a counterfeit weaning, which
passes for real and genuine. 5. I shall lay down the true Character or
description of a weaned Saint. 6. Some Motives or Arguments to persuade to a
weaned Frame. 7. and Lastly, I shall lay in some Principles or Rules, whereby
we may get and maintain such an Evangelical Self-denying disposition.
For the First.

1. It is the Judicious Elective Frame of every Regenerate person, whereby he
does with a supernatural Patience silence the mutinous murmuring Passions of
his Soul under the saddest methods which Divine Wisdom makes use of, to
estrange and mortify his fond inordinate Love to every Lawful, much more
sinful enjoyment.

Or, it is such a State in Grace, not in Nature, whereby the Heart is wrought
not only to a patient submission, but a cheerful complacential rejoicing in
whatever the Lord requires or dispenses for the Trial of its Love and sincere
Obedience, both Active and Passive.

Or, it is a choice Christian Frame, received from our Union and Communion with
Christ, and the anointing of his Spirit, whereby we renounce our Carnal Wisdom,
our froward perverse Will, and all inordinacy of fond overvaluing, and
affecting of Creature-enjoyments.

Thus we resign all we are and have, to the Sovereign, Wise, and Holy disposal
of the Lord.

Hereby we testify the sincerity, strength, and perseverance of our Love, as
preferring the Lord alone to our delight before any Competitor whatsoever.

Natural and Spiritual weaning, agree in these Respects.

1. A weaned Child is very humble. It has no proud Heart, attested by any
scornful look or peevish Carriage. They express no boasting Language to the
disdain of others.

So a Saint is weaned from an overfond conceit of his own Worth and Excellency.
Vain Man would be wise, he would pass for such in the Opinion of himself and
others.

But the power of Renewing Grace lays him level with the Dust. Before he walked
in a vain show, strutting and applauding himself in the tinkling of his own
imaginary excellencies, yet by Converting Grace, the, Top-Gallant of his
self-deifying Pride is laid prostrate at the foot of Christ, in admiring only
the Riches of free Grace, and the imputed Righteousness of a Savior.

2. Weanlings express more of Contentation than of Contention or discontent.

All frowardness of Spirit flows from Pride. But you may deal with a weaned
Child as you please. Turn it upside down, strip it of its Ornaments, it
submits, it does not revile nor spurn.

So a weaned Saint complies with, yea reverences, welcomes and embraces every
change and turn of Providence. He expostulates not with the Supreme Lord and
absolute Potter, who has an uncontrouled Dominion over his Person, State, and
Condition in the World.

Thus Aaron repined not to strip himself of his Priestly Robes, and invest
Eleazar with them, though it were solemnized with his own immediate
dissolution. His ambition was subdued, and his affections mortified to the
Pride of Life.

Thus Moses dyed at the Mouth of the Lord, at the Word of his Command, being
satisfied only with a Prospect of Canaan, as the reward of his Faithful tedious
conduct of that mutinous People even to the Borders of the pleasant Land.

Therefore the Lord kissed his soul out of his Body, (as the Rabbis speak:) He
put more signal honor on him, in translating him to the superlative effusions
of his choicest Love; because he so readily went up to the Mount and dyed.

How was David weaned to a wonderment, as if he were at a point whether he died
in persuit of his Rebellious Absalom, or returned in Triumph as a Conqueror, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. If I shall find favor, etc.

Thus Hezekiah said, Good is the Word and Work of the Lord, though Isaiah
threatened that his Kingly dignity should be ecclipst in the future Captivity of
his Nation, and that the Babylonians should possess all his Treasures, which
had been the occasion of his Pride.

3. A weaned Child may bemoan its loss of its wonted delight, in applying to
the Breast, those pleasant Conduits of Nature, yet at last it yields to the
Mothers Act with silence and a quiet Frame.

So Saints do not expect to be always indulged in their Childish will and
Appetite; only here is the difference: A Saint out of a judicious
consideration, cheerfully submits, in preferring a weaned State before the
highest enjoyments of the Creature. He chooses for his happiness to behold the
Face of God in Righteousness, and is satisfied with the Image of Christ upon
his Soul.

Even in his first Conversion, he has a high estimation of Christ and the
things of Eternity, yet because the Scale is but a little turned by a few
grains of Faith and Love, he does not so readily draw off his Affections from
the enchanting Objects of this present Life.

But having attained to a more Masculine State in Christianity, he espyes at
last, a Soul-satisfying fulness-even in a weaned Frame it self.

Thus Paul being filled with the Spirit, had the comprehension of all happiness
furnished out unto him, from the Treasury of Christ's alsufficiency; this weaned
him to contentment with any thing or nothing of the Creature, so that he could
glory in all Distresses, and truly aver, that he needed not any Gift from the
World; for said he, I am full, I abound, I have all. His Bonds were as Bridal
Ornaments, and his very nakedness and stock of sufferings were preferred before
the Wardrobe and Treasuries of all the Kings of Judah.

4. A weaned Child repines not, though it exchange Brest-Milk, which is
pleasant, easy of digestion, for harsher and meaner Food; Because it is not
wise enough to provide for it self, therefore of necessity it lives at the
finding and disposal of the Parent.

So a Saint submits his Will to the Wisdom of Divine Providence, to order and
guide his affections and affairs, to overruled and control his inordinate
Appetite. He knows that among the variety of Estates in the World, he might
mistake Henbane for wholesome Food, a Stone for Bread-Corn, etc.

He is afraid when his Desires grow Feverish and voracious, lest he should
suck Vanity and vexation of Spirit from Worldly Peace, Plenty, and Prosperity.

Therefore he counts it safest to refer himself to Divine Wisdom, who only
knows what nourishment he can best digest, what State of Life he can best
manage and improve.

By self-Abasement he puts no confidence in his own Wit or Strength. He wholly
depends on the Lord's care and Favor. He lives by Faith upon the Promise, and
is content with his allotted Portion in the World. He counts himself unworthy
of the least of mercies; yea, to be quickened up to his Duty by the Rod of God.
His Will and desires are circumscribed and limited by the Wisdom and
Sovereignty of the Lord. He can rejoice when reduced to a state of emptiness
and abasement.

He does not prescribe to the Lord, how he shall dispose of him in his Person
and Relations, Comforts or Trials. But is sutably molded by a ready and
cheerful compliance, to be cast into any form or Condition of Life Divine
Providence shall see fit. This does prove our humble and weaned Frame to be
sincere: for the change of our Condition, and the external Garb of our
Profession does not promote the real Work of Mortification.

The settled Disease of Pride and inordinacy of Affection to the Creature, must
be carried off by sound Repentance, Faith in the Purgation of Christ's Blood;
by a Sympathetical Conformity to his Death and Resurrection, in a Conquest over
our selves, and the irregularities of our hearts, as well as by a professed
contemptuous renouncing of all alluring lying Vanities.

5. The weaned Child is not in so great danger to be overlaid.

Thus the World in its distrusting Cares and distracting Fears, is a strange
ponderous Incubus or Night-Hag, which over-rides and presses its Paramors unto
death.

Sensual Lusts, a Load of Worldly Contrivances to be Rich and Great, yea,
pleasing hopes, and Sensual Joys, those very Comforts and Delights which
promise as Foster-Parents, to batten us by their flatteries, these, even these
betray us, by stifling the Seed-Royal of Gracious Dispositions and Affections
in the Soul.

But a weaned mortified Christian, can vigorously cast off those pressures of
Temptation, the suffocating foul humors of Lusting, which like an Incubus
shorten and obstruct the free breathings of the Spirit of Grace and
supplication: He can strongly cry out, Abba, Father, succor me by thy
preventing assisting-Grace, that I may not be overlaid, nor pressed to Death by
secular Cares, Comforts, or Delights.

6. It Is a very difficult task to wean off a Child from hankring after the
Breast.

So it is very tedious and painful to corrupt Flesh and Blood, which remains in
part unsubdued in the best of Saints, to have so great a change made in their
unruly Appetite, that what before they loved, now they hate, and contra.

This is demonstrated,

1. Because our sensual Hearts make great resistance to this Renovation in the
Spirit. It Is as Death to a Carnal heart, because it is no other than the
dissolution of the Carnal-State of a Sinner.

Some are sooner weaned off with the very Nod and Beck of God. But others, must
be fiercely dealt withal, as Paul.

As the Voice of a Thunderclap makes the Hinds to Calve and cast forth their
young, because they have very narrow passages in Nature:

So Sinners are averse from Spiritual weaning, therefore usually, the Spirit of
Bondage Vshers it in, by some Black Rod, or Apparitor which makes the very
shadow of Death to sit on our Eyelids, before our proud Spirits will be tamed
and brought to hand, by the shaking of an ordinary Rod over us.

Some the Lord weans by the soft gentle whispers of his Spirit, convincing them
of the vanity and emptiness of the whole Creation.

Thus the Lords Word stood for a Law with Levi, who knew neither Father nor
Mother, so as to dispense the Divine Law with Carnalfondness, and partiality of
affection.

The powerful Charms of Divine Love, and the Spiritual appearances of the Lord
in the Luster and Glory of his Alsufficiency and infinite Perfections, prevail
with some to fall off not only from the lank and Crude Breast of the Creature,
but from the fairest and plumpest of their Enjoyments.

Yet neither frowns nor smiles, neither Blows nor Charms of Love, can prevail
with some soaking sensualists to quit the allurements of Lust and the World.

Jeshurun, who carried the Title of Uprightness in their very Name, could not
be weaned from the Garlic and Fleshpots of Egypt, but keckt at Manna, at
Angels Food; yea, snarled at God himself, because their Dog-like Appetite was
not indulged with Quails.

They could not be made fond of their great Redeemer, nor, did they cleave to
him, though he broacht the Rock to satisfy them as with Streams of Honey;
rather they waxed Fat and kicked, by how much the more they were pampered and
indulged.

2. The difficulty of Spiritual weaning farther appears, from the frequent
pains and strange methods, which the Lord himself takes to imbitter the
Creature, using very sharp afflictions to draw off our fond affections from an
Idolatrous doting on the World.

A strange dullness or rather perverseness possesses us, that we must be lasht
into our own Happiness, and beaten into an ingenuous Liberty from the vassalage
of our Lusts.

Lots Wife, though she were fired out of Sodom, yet left her heart behind, for
she looked back, she looked and looked again, till she became sliff and stupid as
a stone.

Thus Agrippina said of Nero, Occidat modo Imperet. Sinners care not if they be
damned, so they may not be damnified in their Worldly Interest.

They will adventure an Eternal Excision or cutting off from the privileges of
Eternal Life, which is worse, than a bare Circumcion in the sorest loss of
their Temporalities, before they will cleave to God himself rather than the
Dinah of this enchanting World. They will part with their Religion, rather than
not enjoy their Wealth and Honor without hazard or disturbance.

Thus we Adore the Creature, and thereby force the Lord to put on the disguize
of an Enemy, to fright us into a weaned Frame.

The Candle of Prosperity must be put out, yea, the whole Heaven over us must
mourn in Sackcloth; the Lord must desert us, and leave us to the amazement of a
wounded Conscience, before we will desist from nestling in the Bosom of that
Creature which we Idolize.

Again, Satan and the World, when we seem to be weaned, renew their
acquaintance, and insinuate their allurements afresh, to reduce us to their
embraces. Thus the Child hardly cleaves to the Parent, when the Nurse studies
and strives to regain the Child's fondness by presenting and tempting it with
Toys and Rattles.

But every Soul which would thoroughly be weaned, must resolve in the Lord's
Strength, not to listen to Satan's or the World's enticing Charms.

Reply, Go Satan, offer these petty Vanities to Children and Fools, who know
not what the worth of Christ, or of an immortal Soul amount unto. I am better
disciplined in the severities of a Holy and Heavenly profession, I am not so
fondly in love with Vanity, as to purchase it with the torment of a wounded
Conscience, by betraying of my Loyalty and the Chastity of my Soul to Christ.

It is just matter of wonder, with what sinful Reverence, sordid and absurd
Zeal, Popish Novices swear subjection to the perverting Rules of some
superstitious Founder.

One, devoted to the Commands of his Superintendent, went barefoot three Miles
thrice in the same day, to fetch Water to pour out on a dry stick.

Yet let the Spirit of Jesus attempt to bring us out of Love with Worldly
Vanities, and the customs of fantastic sinners, how do we cry out of this
Compassionate Discipline, as of an intolerable severity.

What pinching Fetters are Christ's Righteous Laws, to the tender delicate
Lusts of sensual Worldlings.

Let such consider, how dangerous it is, not to comply with the Lord's weaning
Methods.

For as an angry Nuise throws the froward weanling out of her Aims to the Beds
feet: so the Lord will in tossing, toss such is a Ball, into a large and far
Country, where the severity of an Enemy shall insult over them, to break their
proud Spirits, Isa. 22.15. to 20.

7. Though weaning be a work of difficulty, yet it must be carried through,
because it is a State very necessary and not indifferent.

Those Children who suck long, are not so witty nor so vigorous and active, but
more dull comparatively, and effeminate, because they have been made such
fondlings.

The Apostle possibly alludes to the inconveniences of remaining too long in
the State of Babeship in Christianity, Heb. 5.12, 13, 14.

As if he had said, so great is your Spiritual sloth and dullness, in not
understanding the Mysteries of the Gospel, that you have need be set to learn
the very Principles of the Christian Institution.

But the weaned Christian can discover the Mystery of Iniquity; the grand
cheats of Satan and the World. His faculties and affections have a Divine Gust,
or experimental apprehension of what is suitable to the State of a New Creature.

Such can cry out, Poison in the Cup, when a temptation to sin, though never so
sweetly spiced, is amicably presented to them.

2. You cannot, unless you have a weaned Spirit, be in the least capacity of
closing with Christ by Faith.

Till we be estranged from Creature-Dependencies, we will not stoop to Glean
after Christ in the Field of his Righteousness, nor lie at his Feet as Ruth at
Boaz's, by an humble Selfdenyal. Such need not fear, that their Love to Christ
shall be despised, for he will do all that they shall require, when he observes
that they have quitted all Corrivals and are heart-sick in affection toward
himself, by the solid preference of his Favor, before all the delights and
Courtship of the whole Creation.

Thus the Lord's Marab's, his Children, whom he, weans in the bitterness of
their Spirit, shall become his Naomies, his fair Ones, or Spouses of Delight:
yet first they must be desolate in themselves, that they may learn to cleave to
the Lord as the Center of their trust and satisfaction. This is the very Law of
their Espousals unto Christ.

3. There is an absolute necessity of this weaned State, otherwise the Spirit
of the World, Satan, and Lust, will rule in your hearts and hold you under
their Vassalage. How will every petty temptation worry out your formal and
faint resistance? Nay, you will never strike stroke out of the base treachery
of your sensual-hearts. Your Mouths will rather water after forbidden Fruit,
you will tempt the Tempter to tempt you; and cast your selves as a Prey into
the Jaws of this devouring Lion.

How should the Apostasy of such who have surfeited on their Lusts, to a
loathing of all Religion, season our hearts with a Holy-Fear, not to disdain or
oppose this Self-denying Frame!

O do not trust to the Eminency of your present profession, but make God the
Guide and Guardian of your hearts. Get them thoroughly weaned from the Love of
Lusts and the World; otherwise you will be exposed to an open renouncing of the
Faith of Christ.

Voetius in his Disputes of Atheism, relates of one Vaninus, who was a sad
instance in this respect. He wrote a Book entitled the Amphitheater of Divine
Providence, to prove that there is a God; yet afterward he Apostatized into a
mere speculative dogmatizing Atheist, and was burned at Paris for it. Thus the
fairest formalists, make the subtlest Seducers, the fiercest Persecutors, and
most desperate Atheists. This appeared in the said Vaninus, who being advized
at his Execution, to ask God, the King, and his Judges Pardon; thus replied, I
need not ask Pardon of God, for I do not believe there is any, nor of the King,
for I have broken none of his Laws; nor of my Judges, for were there a Hell, I
would send them all thither.

Thus the unclean Spirit re-entred, to take up a surer Station, without any
fear of disturbance, or a future dispossession.

Such will be the End of all Masquarading Professors, who only make a Mock-show
of Religion.

To such the impartial Judge will (one day) say as Isaac, not out of any dimness
of sight but exactness of search, Come near thou Proud Pharisee, thou peevish
Hypocritical Worldling, who did question or quarrel at my Providence, but
never distrustedst thine own heart or ways; Let me feel the Pulse of thy Soul,
how it beats and works toward me in Love and self-denial.

What say thou! Art thou a Weanling of Christ's, or a Nursling and Fondling
of Satan's?

How sad will it then be, to be estranged from the Bosom of the Lord for ever,
because such would not be divorced from the Breasts of Lusts and the World!

Even Children retain in their fancy the bitter severities used for their
alienation from the Breast.

Let soaking Worldlings look on their tractable example, and be ashamed of
their own greedy snatching at Worldly prosperity, though it poison the Vital
briskness of the Soul in not affecting an heavenly Conversation.

The second General Head. How Natural and Spiritual Weaning differ.
1. Some Children never live to be weaned: but every Newborn Babe in Christ,
is actually weaned so as to deny it self, in the Renunciation of Worldly Lusts
and its confidence in its own Righteousness.

A general slight Conviction of the Creatures Vanity, will not prove sufficient
to wean us from all Priding in our own conceited Worth and the Opinion of
self-sufficiency.

Nothing can supply the necessity and Divine Usefulness of Faith or
Regenerating Grace, in working us to a weaned Frame.

For a mere form of Godliness spends it self in airy speculations, and in
boasting of a conceited Conquest over Lusts and the World.

But a Holy Frame of Heart, is the Life of Christ himself, dwelling and acting
in every Newborn Christian, in whom it has a secret Virtue, to accomplish a
wonderful Conquest in weaning of the heart.

The power of Godliness begets Divine Fear, this Contracts the heart toward the
Creature, and unites or inlarges it to God in Christ.

Now a Holy Oneness of Spirit fortifies the affections, as the Rays of the Sun
contracted into one point of the Burning-Glass, inflames the nearest Object. So
a longing desire after Communion with the Lord, consumes the Combustible matter
of all temptations, which damp our Spiritual Joy, and oppress the Activity of
our Obedience. Godliness draws In, and binds fast the heart to delight in the
Lord, abstractly, for his own Divine and infinite perfections.

It brings with it, an ingenuous freedom of spirit, to serve the Lord with
cheerfulness, as his Redeemed and peculiar Ones.

Godliness, sets glorious privileges and high hopes before a Saint; these
animate to do and suffer much for God. Evangelical Promises applied by Faith,
have a purifying virtue in them, whereby they estrange us from inordinacy of
affection toward the Grandeur of the World.

Yea, Godliness gathers strength, by Conflicting with difficulties, thereby
approving the Souls Integrity and Chastity unto the Lord.

2. Difference.] Weaning is a State, Proper and Peculiar unto Infancy and
Childhood.

But every Aged Father in Christ, stands more and more in need of Spiritual
weaning; because being arrived to any pitch in Grace, they let fall their Watch
and Christian-Circumspection: they grow more self-Confident, and the World more
incroaches on them.

Their Love is usually more ardent, and fearful to offend at first: yea, they
are more Cautious and Curious, of what they take into their Bosom, lest they
should transgress the Divine Law of Gratitude in their Espousals unto Christ.

Even David, the Man after God's Heart, prays in the sense of his imperfect
weanedness; Incline my heart unto thy Testimonies, and not to the wanderings of
Concupiscence. Turn away mine Eyes from beholding Vanity, Ps. 119.36, 37.

Nature it self aims at perfection in Generation, and the Growth of all
Creatures. Why should not the New Creature much more, by a Divine Instinct,
pursue the highest seize in the Mysteries of a weaned State?

Paul was so advanced and improved this way, that he professed, that he acted the
Man's part in his Christian high-Calling, and had put away all Childish
Dispositions, Opinions, and Practices. 1 Cor. 13.11.

His (...), or City-Life and Trade was daily in Heaven; thither he was rapt up
in his Spiritual Thoughts, Aims, Affections, and Designs. Yea, he strove to
attain to the very Resurrection of the Dead.

Consider, that Eminent Saints have been often foiled at the Exercise of that
very Grace wherein they have been most expert, for want of a watchful and
progressive weaned Frame of Heart.

Even Abraham the Father and Pattern of the Faithful, how Childishly is he
afraid of losing his Life in Abimelech's Country! He advised his Wife to Guard
her Beauty and Chastity with the Artifice of a notorious Lie, for which a
Heathen King reproved her.

David, out of Unbelief, feigned himself Mad before Achish: He staggered in his
Profession, when he beheld the Prosperity of the wicked. This showed, that
though he preferred the Divine Law before thousands of Gold and Silver, yet, he
was not so thoroughly weaned from admiring and doting on Worldly grandeur.

Hezekiah, who mourned as a Dove under the Sentence of Death, yet, as soon as
recovered, had his Heart lifted up with Pride.

Jehosaphat, who made a Reformation to the terror of his Enemies, yet joins in
Affinity with Ahab: for which, being reproved and punished, yet he afterward
complies with Ahaziah, who did very wickedly.

Job, who was Poor and Patient to a Proverb, had his repining Complaints, and
Curses the day of his Birth.

Nor was Jonah tamed in the Belly of the Whale: how does he rage upon the
withering of his Gourd, as if he did well to be angry to the very death.

Elijah, who undauntedly encountered with four hundred of Baals Prophets, yet
shrinks in his Courage at the Blast of Jezebels threatening, to take off his
head, and prays for death, as the refuge of his Cowardice.

By these strange sudden Ague-fits, we may learn, not to confide in the best
Constitution of habitual Grace, but to exercise a holy jealousy of the
variation of a weaned Frame, when the Souls Pulse is in the best and most eaven
temper of a heavenly disposition.

3. Difference.] Some Children in a Fright or sullen fit of the Frets forsake
the Breast.

But spiritual weaning, is a voluntary Alienation of the heart, from the Love
of sin and the World, to place it upon God, in a universal Conformity to his
Will.

When the World proves Coy, Cursed and unkind, then we can Curse its Treachery.
As froward Children, we bite the Nipple, when it does not so freely spin out to
us a Stream of prosperity suitable to our greedy expectation.

We keck and sputter at Earthly delights, when we are griped with wind in our
Bowels, that is to say, when tormented with the Convictions of our own folly,
and disappointment in Lusting after Vanity.

Thus, while Divine Providence besmears the World's Paps with Soot, and cries
out, do not touch them as you love your Life, we shrink back: but let the World
smile again upon us, and put Honey on its Breasts; then the very Image of Death,
and the Devil sitting on the blackest Temptation, or the most imbittered
affliction, cannot deter us, but we more fondly reingratiate with the Occasions
of our Ruin.

Worldlings by fits, are strangely estranged from their own inclinations:
Pleasures become insipid to their brutish sensuality, yet the Fever of
Concupiscence is no-whit abated, but only intermitted by some check of
Providence.

For let a pleasing Temptation start up, immediately like Asahel, they become
as swift as a Wild Roe in the pursuit of Vanity.

Whatsoever sensual Object comes next in their way, they hug and embrace it,
although the Lord threaten to strike them dead upon the Place, and they be
blasted with the Teats of this Inchantress in their very Mouth. Pharaoh seemed
as weaned from oppression, as those innocent Children cast into the River
Nilus. How self-abasing was he in appearance, for the abuse of his power; The
Lord is Righteous, but I and my people are wicked! Yet this exclamation, was
only in a fit of transient Passion, for he soon stifled the Convictions of his
parboyld Conscience, and returned to a more violent persecution of Israel than
before.

Those Hypocritical Reformadoes in the 10th of Judges, pawned all the hopes of
their pardon and deliverance upon the constant abjuration of their Idols:
without Demur, they put away the strange Gods; yet at Chap. 13. v. 1. they
added, to commit iniquity in the sight of the Lord, because in a fright only
they had promised future Loyalty.

Saul lift up his Voice and wept, he condemned himself, and justified David;
yea, engaged his honor, not to hurt him, yet this smooth Language, was only to
decoy David unawares into his Net of Cruelty. It was a Crocodile whining,
rather than a real weaning, and estrangement from his malice.

Felix was sick of the Staggers, he trembled, his Drusilla grew fulsome, and
Temperance was this Epicures best Physic, while Paul thundered out Judgment to
come. Yet, this true Alarm begat a false weaning. For Paul's denunciation of the
universal Assizes, to be holden in the Conflagration of the World, proved only,
as the dying flash of a few loose Corns of Powder, in a false presentment, so
far were Paul's threats from doing any Execution on Felix's Lusts.

You perceive by these Instances, that there is no trusting to a short weaning
pang of Conscience, which leaves the gastred, but not repenting sinner to pine
away, and dye in his Iniquity.

Many escape the pollutions of the World, by the restraint of Consternation, or
a slight touch of Conviction on their Spirits, who yet do not abhor them from
their own free choice.

Apostates, who like filthy Dogs, take down their Vomit again, have the
Stomachs heat more fortifyed thereby, to digest it as pleasant Food.

Sick Birds, after they have cast their Feathers become more hearty. Scum not
clearly taken off boyls in the deeper.

The fanning Blasts of Divine Truths, where they are dispirited in their
authority which does not thoroughly subdue the heart, more inrage than allay the
Calenture of Lusts.

After Professors have despised Divine Principles, sinning against Conviction,
they soon of mere Scepticks, become Nullifidians; fixing themselves in the
Scorners Chair, which is to commence to the height of wickedness.

It Is very dangerous (you see) not to be thoroughly weaned, and mortified to Lust
and the World.

For a Slight disgust of sensual Charms, alarms the whole Conclave of Hell, to
entangle Formalists, and falshearted Reformadoes in deeper Bondage.

Now, Satan, like the Father-in-Law of that Levit who in a faint Complement
took his farewell, courts the sinner to stay longer in Caressing his Soul on
sensual delights; till all good Resolutions of returning home to God, vanish
and die away.

Thus he flatters sinners in their slight Convictions.

What mean you my Fondlings, to change your minds? Will you break up
good-Fellowship, with your Lusts, after you have found the sweetness of them,
flowing out to the height of your desires? Eat and be merry; Drink away sorrow
for your sinful Surfeits, Banish all Care about your Eternal Welfare. The
assurance of Eternal Life, is but a Lusty strong Fancy; this you may exercise
at the last Gasp, and the best of Saints can pretend no higher.

The very effeminate purpose of Repentance gives a Stab to all the Mirth of
sinners.

How bitter is the very mention of it, as Death it self. And know, that I am
fond of no sort of sinners, but only of such whose presumption and prodigious
wickedness drives away the fear of a wounded Conscience.

Tush! It Is but the faint Echo of a Scriptural threatening, which will die away
of it self, (to be sure it will) if you stupify your Souls, and Caress them
with sensual pleasures, in the gratification of your Lusts.

What sinners! will ye break away from the Worlds soft embraces, and prove
Changelings in the professed Mystery of Iniquity, to take up the severities of a
mortified Conversation? If there be any day of account for all your Vanities
and Excesses; yet you have time enough before you to be Pensive; the Judge of
Mankind is not yet upon his Circuit, nor stands he yet before the door of your
hearts, as ready to depart; that thereupon a Psalm of Mercy should be denied
you, as shut up under final impenitency and unbelief. Thus Satan, the World,
and sinners own sensual Hearts, betray them to their Eternal Ruin.

But the Baits of Riches, Honors, and Pleasures, become Fuel to Lusts, rather
than satisfy a humorsome Curiosity.

They become an Itch to the Pride of Life, which we please oun selves to spread
by rubbing. They are not Restringent to our dropsical Intemperance of
Covetousness, nor any allay to the Tympany of an ambitious Pride.

Covetous Wretches, who undermine others, are like the blind Mole, which spends
its strength and Life in casting up Hillocks of purer Dust; yet, neither are
made to discern their own Misery, till the stroke of Death Irrecoverably seize
upon them.

4. Difference.] The Parent estranges the Child from the Breast, out of
self ends; To avoid the toil of suckling, or to take more liberty and Pleasure.

But the Lord weans every Newborn Christian, for his proper advantage only, to
make him a farther partaker of his Holiness. Heb. 12.9, 10.

The Child is froward, because it knows not the Intention of the Mother: But a
Saint cheerfully submits, ( as Peter at last, to have his Feet washed by Christ)
because he is assured, that in Faithfulness the Lord corrects him, for his
instruction in the Mysteries of the Christian Institution.

O how Justly, yet, with a pitiful severity, does the Lord wean us, to win us
over to himself! Would any one, think of his Creator, or make any serious
provision for the Life to Come, if the Breasts of the World were not
imbittered, by the disappointment of Carnal self-seeking designs? To suffer a
sinner, to draw hard and long from a Lust, is no real indulgence, but an
occasion of the sinners surfeiting and Induration. Ephraim is joined to Idols,
let him alone. His sin shall become his punishment. As that Pope said in
sprinkling his supposed holy water; He who will be deceived, let him be
deceived; So, Sensualists suck Poison, and their own Eternal Ruin, out of
those harmless Creatures, which to weaned Saints are sanctified, sublimated,
and made truly comfortable.

Our folly will be inexcusable, if after all Experiments of the Worlds Grand
Cheats, we shall contribute any Longer, to our own vexation, and self-wounding.

Why should we clog our affections, these Dove-like Wings of the Soul, with
Mire and Dirt; which should by Meditation, lodge in the Bosom of God; there to
Caress us with pure Soul-satisfying Pleasures to all Eternity? Why do we pant
after the dust of the Earth, which is the Serpents Curse? Why do we in a
restless Agony, thirst after such empty Joys which end with a dullness, and damp
upon our Spirits?

2. Difference.] The weaned Child pines and grows weak, when taken from the
Breast too soon, but the earlier we forsake Sin and the World, the better we
thrive in our Spiritual Stock and Stature.

We obtain greater Vigor of Love and Zeal for God; we become more Spiritual in
our whole Conversation; we experiment an increase of sweet Communion with the
Father of our Spirits.

Enoch, being weaned early from the corrupt examples of His Generation, walked
with God hand in hand as a great Favorite.

He soon grew a great Proficient in Grace, therefore he commenced in Glory, by
a skip over the heads of the rest of the Patriarchs.

He lived only three hundred sixty five years, as many as there are days in a
year; as if the perfection of Time, as well as of Holiness were accomplished in
Him. Therefore, he was snatched up to Heaven, as being early ripe for it; and
lest the World should offer Violence to so flourishing a Plant of Paradise.

Weaned hearts, whose Love keeps pace with Self-denial, are less projecting for
the World, and most Officious to advance Christ's Interest.

Satan's Fondlings, must lie at Ease, and are rockt fast asleep in the Cradle of
sinful sloth and security, lest they should cry out of his Cruel Bondage.

A prosperous Estate proves very uneasy; it pinnions all the Faculties of the
Soul, and makes them unwieldy, that they cannot act vigorously, nor cheerfully
in a Course of Righteousness. Yet a weaned Saint mounts his head and heart
above the Skies, while his Feet stand upon the Earth; as a Sea of Glass mixed
with Fire.

He who fears the Lord, shall dwell at ease, as the Psalmist speaks, or lodge
in the Bosom of Divine Goodness, where he may stretch out his affections in
meditation upon the Immensity of Gods perfections, to a full and Infinite
Satisfaction.

Thus, we save the Lord the Labor of acting terrible Tragedies upon us.

Yet commonly, we are Active in increasing our own miseries, when we become one
Spirit, with the defiling Vanities of the World.

As Rangeing-Deer, if we prove Outlawries to Christ's Discipline, and will not
be weaned from such Temptations which dispirit us in his service; we expose our
selves to become the Mark of every Judgment, and to be made a Prey to Satan.

Nor does this weaned Frame fit us only to expedite all Christian Duties, but
it Steels us with Resolution, and Fortitude in suffering for the Name and
Testimony of Jesus.

Worldlings dread the very mention of the Cross, much less are they Conformed
unto it.

But every weaned Saint, is a Cross-Bearer, the greatest Trials, Difficulties,
and Severities of Mortification, are Food to strengthen the Faith of such, yea,
they are Trophies of their Self-denial.

Paul, being weaned, knew what it was to be emptied, even while he abounded. To
be abased in Honor, to be as sorrowing, yet always rejoicing; in distress, yet
not in despair; as Poor, yet making many Rich; as having nothing, yet
possessing all things: Yea, he protested that he delighted to die daily, to the
Vigor of his Lusts, and the Allurements of the World.

Herein, Christ's Weanlings differ from Satan's Sucklings or Hypocrites, who
pretend only to be weaned; that the former have better tempered Eyes, to behold
enticing Objects unto sin, and yet their Mouths not water.

Abraham might look on the Flames of Sodom which Indulgence was forbade to Lot,
lest that Prospect should make an Impression of Lusting on his heart toward his
pleasant accommodations lest behind. This was actually verified in his Wife.
Though she were fired thence, yet she left her Heart behind, therefore she
looked back with some regret, she looked and looked again so long, till she became
as stiff and stupid as a Stone.

The Nazarites might drink Wine, after they had in strictness fulfilled their
Vow; which was not so much as to chew the husk of a dry Grape.

So, Weaned Christians may more safely be permitted, as Gideons hardy
Soldiers, to lap at the accommodations of the World, because they will not
indulge themselves in an effeminate sensuality.

They will not bow down on their Faces, to inebriate themselves with Carnal
Pleasures.

They will not neglect their expeditious March toward their heavenly Citadel
and Country; nor damp their Zeal and Courage against their Spiritual Enemies.
Though they be hardly confined, and straightened in their Provisions, yet they
will not mutiny against their Generals allowance, to snatch at better
enjoyments in the World.

If they be straightly beleagur'd with long afflictions; yet will they not tamely
and treacherously deliver up the Garrison of their Integrity. They rather will
sally out upon Satan and the World; yea, they will maintain an inward Conflict
with the Lusts of their own Hearts, till they have subdued proud Ambition,
sordid Covetousness and voluptuous Sensuality.

A weaned Frame of Spirit, will inure Christians, to digest strong and heavy
afflictions, without repining.

Though they will yield with a tender, melting Disposition, to the rebukes of
Christ's Discipline; yet they are unmalleable and undaunted in Grapling with
most cruel Sufferings for the honor of Christ and Interest of Religion.

Suckling Children are very fearful, and will start aside at every noise.
Worldlings, whose Hearts are not weaned, will prove like Reuben unstable as
Water, in a Religious course; they cannot excel in heroical strains of Faith.

Even a Flint may be broken on a soft Cushion. So, the most Masculine Zeal and
Courage may faint and be blunted in its Edge, by the tenderness and delicacy of
the Flesh.

They say, the Loadstone loses its attractive Virtue, if it be rubbed with
Garlic: So, the excellencies of Christ cannot win our Love and constancy, if
our hearts be infected and besotted with a tincture of Earthly-mindedness. Nay,
the Love of Riches, and a Life of Carnal ease or pleasure, will tempt a
Covetous Judas to betray Christ, and an effeminate Demas to forsake him.

Where the Nest is well-Feathered, Men usually become Night-bird Professors. In
this respect, Nicodemus morally verified the report of Aelian, that those
Fishes which have bright Golden Scales, are most timorous to be taken.

But weaned Nazarites, are resolved to fulfill their Vow of separation from the
World, and Dedication to the Lord, whatsoever sufferings it expose them to.

Yet will they not boast, when they keep closest to their Communion with God
through Christ.

To prevent Pride in a Self-Righteousness, and the strictest Discipline of it;
the Nazarites were enjoined to cut off their Hair, when they had fulfilled
their Vow, though it were the Ornament and Badg of their Profession.

They were commanded to burn it under the Peace Offering; to signify, that
there can be no true quiet to the Conscience, but only in applying Christ's
complete Righteousness and Obedience, which is imputed to expiate the filth of
our imperfect Services and Sufferings.

Weaned Saints are estranged from themselves, so as not to Pride it in their
Spiritual seize, nor in their Conquests over Sin, Satan, and the World.

If Self-Arrogance be not mortified, this alone will undermine our Integrity,
and defeat us of the Glory of the greatest Conquest.

Thus one Eleazar is storied, by unwariness to be pressed to death, under the
Weight of that very Elephant, which he slew with his own hand.

Christ will not give away the honor of his assisting Grace, to the most
Victorious Champion among the noble Army of Martyrs.

These must be weaned from self-applause and wash their Robes in the Blood of
the Lamb; otherwise, Pride will stain the innocence of their Sufferings.
Self-denial is required, even in the midst of their Triumphant Solemnities;
when they display their Banners on the Walls of the Celestial Jerusalem, and
are installed with Christ upon their Thrones of Glory.

Thus the Magnetic force of the Lords infinite Excellencies, become the
attractive Center of all the powers and affections of their Souls.

But Satan's Magic, Inchants the hearts of Worldlings, by causing them to
cleave to a proud Self-Arrogance, under their dissembled Mortification, as if
it were a truly through weaned Frame.

The first sort of such deluded Hypocrites are, Hermits, Anchorets and Monks,
who please and Pride themselves in admiring their own Excellencies and
Paracelsian speculations.

These fly as high as Seraphims, in their Crazy Fancies; while they Perch on
their own Moral Righteousness, which at best, when Idolized as a meritorious
claim for Heaven, is only refined Iniquity.

These rail at the honors and pleasures of a Court, and yet are not weaned by
humility, nor a genuine contempt of the World.

Thus Diogenes scornfully trampled on Platoe's perfumed Bed, with a greater
Pride than Plato himself enjoyed it.

This is to declaim against the World's Vanity with a greater Vanity, yea, the
duplicated deep-dyed Iniquity of Hypocrisy.

This is the only true generosity of Mind, as an effect of Weanedness, to
despise the vain pomp of humane Greatness, while we enjoy it, in a Float, and
not upon the ebbing Stream of Poverty, Disgrace, or Discontent at the Cross
disappointment of our high-projecting Hopes.

Therefore, Charles the fifth, being tired with the Weight of Government, the
Cares of a Royal Court, and the various fickle humors of the Vulgar, was not
truly devout, nor weaned from the splendour of the Empire, though he renounced
it, and withdrew into a solitary Cell.

Let not Hermits boast of their Mortification, because they retire into places
desolate, and full of Solitude.

This is to be innocent by Necessity, rather than by a genuine resolute choice.

To be secured from the World, as a Common Pesthouse, by a faint-hearted
Recess, rather than to be fortifyed against the contagious Seeds of wickedness,
by the sound, vigorous Constitution, and watchful Disposition of a virtuous
mind.

Therefore to make a Man capable of the benefit of a solitary Life, he must
eradicate every Lust, in the predominant Love of it; otherwise he will not only
lose the advantage of his hoped-for Innocence, but will soon become a Tempter,
and Tormentor also unto himself.

Such, out of a sullen humor, while they pretend to Weanedness and Devotion,
rob humane Society of the benefit of a Communicative Life, because they cannot
(as a Blazing Comet) draw a long Tail of Ostentation after them, to the
wonderment and amusing of all Spectators.

They seldom suspect, that the Monster of proud Self-Love, is bred and
maintained by such pretended Self-denial.

They conceit, they are Self-Sole, and Allsufficient to supply and furnish
themselves with all helps of Virtue in a Wilderness; and thereupon are envious
of being examples of it unto others.

2. Another sort of persons pretendedly weaned from the Love of the World are
such, who are Popish mendicants, who vow Poverty where Divine Providence
neither requires nor inflicts it. These proudly afflict themselves.

They involve themselves in want, by a sordid kind of humility, or
Self-abasement, and then boast of their Counterfeit self-denial. They sinck
themselves into voluntary Distresses, and then censure and reproach All, who do
not by their Mad examples quit and abjure their Lawful Comforts and Possessions.

Yet, this is but an Hypocritical device, to palliate their Covetoushess. It is
but a topical and false Cure of their Concupiscence.

It is so slender a Remedy to resist and expel the Contagious Seeds of Lusting,
that a black patch applied to the Face, may as probably recover a Consumptive
person out of his Hectic, when it is commenced into a burning-Fever.

It is alike irrational, to fancy that the lankness of their Estates is an
Indication, that their hearts are as humble as their Purse is empty. For they
remain as Covetous and Ravenous, after those Accommodations which they want, as
the Rich are swollen with Pride in their Excesses.

For, Covetousness is to be measured by the Inordinacy of Men's desires,
discontent at their present Station and Condition; and envy at others Worldly
Grandeur, rather than by a bare valuation of ones self, by a perverted fancy,
according to the outward vastness of the Estate.

Such, are not truly weaned from the pursuit of the Worlds gilded Vanities,
who, though extremely poor, yet are as deeply proud of their Cynical contempt
of Riches, yea, are secretly discontented with their low station and short
allowance in sensual and terrene enjoyments.

Thus their superstitiously-contracted Poverty, allays not the burning Fever of
Concupiscence while it bespots the Soul, and blisters the tongue, in a secret
murmuring at God's Dispensations, as if they were too severe, unequal, or
unjust.

Is not this for the Clay to make a proud insurrection against the Universal
Potter, and Governor of the World?

Another sort of persons pretendedly weaned from the World, are such, who in
discontent at disappointments in their affairs, cast aside their Trades, and
then, like the Hedg-hog, wrap up themselves in the soft Down of a sensual
voluptuous Life, and please themselves, that they are mortified, because of
their voluntary Lazy retirement, from the Tumult (as they call it) of Worldly
business. These turn out the Bristles of a venomous reproachful Tongue, to
censure all, who do not cast off their Lawful Calling and Employment, that they
may more freely converse with God and their own Hearts.

What a Vain and Hypocritical pretense is this, to nurse up Idleness, and fill
the World with a swarm of Beggars!

These seeming Zealots, make the Tables of the Divine Law to Clash; while they
make their Heavenly and Civil Calling to be Inconsistent; whereas, the Heavenly
supports the Earthly, and this, sets a whet upon the other; so far is it from
being any impediment, if subordinated and rightly managed. Serious, sincere
Souls, are weaned In, and not from their Civil Stations and Employments, be
they never so mean, and full of Cares or Difficulties.

To leave off any Civil Calling because low and mean, is to rebel against the
Sovereign and wise disposal of God, the only Governor of the Universe. It is
to renounce His Charge, and that Station in which He has set a Man, to his own
dishonor, as well as discomfort in the blasting of his new Projects and
Designs.

Such should not disdain the lowest Sphere of Employment, in Imitation of the
blessed Angels.

These Heavenly Courtiers are not sullen, because their Creator has Assigned
them to come down upon the Earth, and become Ministering Spirits, for the relief
of the Saints necessities.

They are content to be weaned for a season from an immediate beholding the
Face of the King of Glory, and condescend to wait upon poor frail Mortals.

Their Rare example should Tutor us in selfdenial, to resign up our Wills to
the Sovereign Disposal of the Lord and not to quarrel his Providential
Assignation of our Lot and Portion or Station in the World.

We must not grow sullen because our Creator sets Laws; and boundaries to our
exorbitant Desires, in a wise though unequal distribution of his Favors.

Whosoever therefore, shall out of discontent, or under a pretense of Zeal in
Religion, cast away his Civil Calling, is a Hypocrite, rather than a genuine
weanling unto Christ.

The Lord never Condemned publickness of Spirit, which seeks the good of human
Society, but only the pragmaticalness of a private Spirit, which seeks its own
Advantage, out of a sweat of Covetousness, rather than of Lawful Industry.

This is to be truly weaned to the World, to discharge our Earthly Calling
faithfully, and cheerfully, yet not to overcharge our selves with excessive
Cares, like a Gun, Rammed and Laden so full, that it must needs recoil and fly
in pieces.

The Lord will one day produce Abraham, Lot, and David; persons very active in
their Generation, and full of weighty business; yet these were weaned Saints,
who set Him apart for their Portion and time apart for Communion with Him.

Christianity does not uncloath us of Humanity, it does not eradicate natural
desires, but only transplant, purge, defecate and Sanctify them, by setting
them on their right Objects, in a due manner and measure, to a right end. Grace
does not cancel, but order, and guide the true lawful use of the Creature, and
of a civil Calling.

This is the Character of a Saint truly weaned from the Love of the World, who
lawfully pursues his Trade, and Commerce in it.

He will be no wiser than the Rule of the Word allows him to be; no happier,
nor Richer than the Lord will make him.

He can cross the Corruptions and politic disguises of the places and times he
lives in.

He is not inthralled to common Hopes and Fears, to such sensual enjoyments and
delights which Worldly Men are carried down the Stream withal. He exercises
Sincerity in all the Common ordinary Actions of his Life, and therefore is
alike acceptable to the Lord in these, as in works properly Religious, in which
God himself is the more immediate Object.

He Eyes in his Civil Calling, the Institution of God, the Conduct of his Word,
and pleads the Promises in Prayer for his encouragement in difficult Attempts;
yea, for discretion to order his Civil Affairs, as becomes a Man and a
Christian.

Yet he is diligent, not slothful in business, but fervent in Spirit, serving
not his Worldly Interest, but the Lord; that is, he waits on the Providence of
God, in the use of Lawful Means, committing the success to Divine Benediction.

He will not lean to his own natural Sagacity, or prudential management of his
Affairs. He quiets his Passions under all disappointments. He seeks a
sanctified improvement of all Losses and Crosses. If he prosper he ascribes his
success to Gods Fatherly Care, Wisdom and Love; he improves it to his Glory, in
the promoting of his Christian Religious Course. Thus the Lord is the Alpha and
Omega of a weaned Saints Being, and Acting in the World.

4. Another sort of persons, pretendedly weaned from the World, are such, who
stint their desires in the pursuit of an Estate; who propound to themselves,
that they will keep the World upon the Chase, and turmoil hard in it, till they
have Feathered their Nest, arrived to such a degree of Honor or Wealth, and
then they will surcease and commendably give way to youngsters, who may grow up
in their Lot of Trade.

Are such weaned in good earnest, and not rather surprised with the spice of
secret Atheism? would they otherwise be such doting Projectors for their
Worldly Interest?

Is it in their own power, to be the Carvers of their own Prosperity, while
they thus strenuously lay and contrive the Scheme of it?

Cannot the Lords Countermining Providence change the scene and scotch the
Wheels of all humane industry, in defeating and blasting of such antedated
hopes, purposes, and projects?

What ridiculous folly is this to walk in a vain show, to strut our selves in a
false scene of imaginary Happiness, while we resolve to heap up Riches, and
know not who shall gather them!

Is not this like some silly Bird, with great toil (every day) to bring now a
stick and then a straw, now a little Moss and then a few Feathers, to build our
Nest (as we conceit among the Stars) and then to promise our selves that we
shall snug therein, wa^m and secure from any hand of violence; yet on a sudden,
either by death, we and our Nest come tumbling down together?

Or, how soon may we and our young ones be driven out of the possession of what
we have labored for, with toil and anxiety of Spirit; and yet neither we nor
they shall dare to peep or move the Wing, to make any sign of the least
resistance, or discontent? Isa. 10.14. Some think themselves weaned, because
they Grasp not the whole World in their aspiring thoughts; though (as Gehazi)
they anxiously project and design how to purchase by their stinted Talents
Olive-yards and Vine-yards, that they may promote a sensual and voluptuous Life.

To such (I affirm) that this Imagination is but a reserved, and more modest
Cheat of Coverousness, which falsely promises to sit down contented, and at
Ease; when the Estate shall amount to a Man's present wish or desire.

For no Man has hitherto been contented with that Estate and Condition, in
which his own choice planted him, merely upon this mistake that it should fully
satisfy him.

For the most prosperous Estate, is like the fullest Sea, Stormy, Raging,
Unquiet and Unsafe.

Yea, we admire what is out of our Reach and Possession; yet loath the same
fancied gilded felicities, when they come under our Trial and Enjoyment.

For Worldly-minded persons, being sick with false Opinions of the worth of
sublunary Objects, with foolish hopes to derive happiness from them with
impotent, impatient, restless desires after the grasping them, and fond designs
to heap up Vanity upon Vanity, confirm rather, than shake off their disease of
mind.

This makes them complain of their present State, when as that they would
exchange it for, would not mend the matter, but possibly may prove more uneasy
and uncomfortable; because such carry their disease rooted in themselves.

What a Cheat do such put on themselves, who fancy, that being Rich or Potent
to such a degree, they shall take up in a Station of Contentment.

For our luxuriant desires will not be bounded, they will still fly out and get
the Start of our enjoyments.

So that, if we arrive at a higher State, we do not lose, but only change our
Cares, and try all variety of Conditions, rather than rest pleased with any.

Thus, we may as well sit down content where we are, as where we hope to be.

For that which is our Happiness, and can only terminate our desires, must be
more Divine than our selves. Otherwise, it cannot perfect, satisfy, nor make
us happy.

Indeed we cannot be made miserable, but only by the consent of our own
deluding Hopes, or wild, wanton, foolish Fancies.

These they are, which over-rate Worldly Conveniences, while we profanely
degrade our Heaven-born Souls for very Vanity: For this, we part with our
Freedom, true Tranquillity, and Generosity of Spirit; yet finding our selves to
be gulled by these erratick Fires, we too late complain, that they have
exhausted the Divine Vigor of our Souls, and misled us into the miry Bogs of
sensual and destructive Pleasures.

Nay, did we enjoy the Creature purely and perfectly, to our own desires; yet,
the longer we enjoy any thing, the more insipid or distastful does it prove: we
sooner suck Wind, than Satisfaction from the Worlds delusive Breasts.

Nay, we are not able to bear the constant sallies, and extension of our
affections, on the most delightful Object in our own Possession. Our Familiar
Converse with it, and reiterated enjoyment of it, tires out our Appetite, and
deceives our Hopes of Satisfaction. The very quintessence of Pleasure without
any Intermission, proves an Oppression to our Spirits.

Nay, suppose we were sure to obtain and grasp what we eagerly desire, and much
more; yet, consider, that some Children with a flush of Milk on a sudden, have
been quackled and strangled.

So, the flowing in of the Worlds prosperity, has proved the Death of the Soul
Godward, and stifled all real desires, after the Life and Power of Religion.
However, we are prone to be Rockt fast asleep, in the Devils Cradle of
security, where we lie batt'ning and playing with the Paps of sensual
abundance, till Afflictions or Death awaken us. Then the deluded, neglected
Soul finds it self hungerstarved, nothing having been caress't, but it is fancy.

As a Dream when one awakes, so O Lord, thou will despise their Image, Ps.
73.20.

The Representation which a Dream makes, seems very brisk, lively, and
pleasant; yet when we reflect upon it, with our waking thoughts we find it
confused, and impertinent to our eternal Happiness, because nothing remains,
but the fiction of a Dream, the shadow of a shadow.

Thus, that most stately Representation of their Prosperity; by which, they
conceit an Hope to be had in everlasting remembrance, proves at most, but as a
fond, foolish Puppet-Play.

5. Another sort of persons pretendedly weaned from the World, and the sensual
pleasures of it, are such who impose superstitious and unreasonable Severities
upon themselves, to palliate the secret Abominations of their Souls.

This cannot be lasting and effectual to Cure the Paroxysms of inward Lusting,
because it is a Severity not of Divine prescription, and therefore not under any
Promise of success.

For, as the Weapons of a Christians Warfare, so the methods of his weaning
should not be Carnals Such may as well hope to run at Tilt, and defeat Satan
with a Spear of Bulrushes.

If you run a young skittish Horse up a steep Hill to break his Metal, you may
sooner make him broken-winded and unserviceable, than expect thus to tame him.

The Body is the Souls Ass, which will no longer be able to carry it, than you
allow it fitting Fodder.

There is an honor, a due and just Debt to Nature, in the harmless
Constitution of it.

Though we are not Debtors to the Flesh to Pamper it, lest it should Cast its
Rider; yet we must supply it with necessary Recruits.

This is far from making Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof.

The Apostle Paul, who beat down his Body, who gave it Club-Law, the Black and
Blew Eye, that it might not cast an Amorous wanton Glance, to court sensual
Vanities; yet, knew how to observe a fit moderation in it.

He Censures all monastic, self-imposed Severities, which spare not the Body,
as a Device of Satan, to destroy it rather than to bring it in subjection to
the Spirit.

Christ himself would not have New Wine put into Old Bottles; To signify that
immoderate Fastings, Humicubations, Pilgrimages and all extraordinary
Sufferings, or Tamings of the Flesh, are not suitable to young Converts, newly
weaned; lest they deter them from a cheerful embracing the Christian
Institution, and a constant Progress in Religion.

Pride usually springs up from the Root of such bitterness against the harmless
support of Nature: Popish Severities fatten Lusts, while they starve the Body;
and while Men thus threaten to stub up their inordinate desires, they water
their Root the more, by a secret compliance with them.

This Irregular Zeal, blazes like Moses Bush, in a threatening of Men's Lusts;
yet there is no heat of a just Revenge which may quite consume them.

Sinners deceive and more pollute their Souls by false Counterfeit,
un-Scriptural Arts, and Rules of weaning.

6. Another sort of Sinners not really weaned are such, who being twitcht and
bitten with the Worm of Conscience, have a false Appetite raised toward the
Bread of Life.

Thus the Capernaits cried out in a transient Passion, Lord! evermore give us
of this Bread.

And Marcella in the Crowd of Christ's Auditors, brake out into this exstatical
Applause, Blessed is the Womb which bare thee!

Such are not weaned from the Love of their Lusts, who commend the Preacher,
that they may be excused from being commanded by that Doctrine, which he
presses upon them for Obedidience unto Christ.

Others have too gross and carnal a conceit of Spiritual Ordinances, who think
these appointed to allay the sharp bitings of an inflamed exulcerated
Conscience, while they sin presumptuously.

By immoderate Belchings and stretching of their Appetite after Worldly,
flatulent, crude Joys, they eject and Vomit up the good juice of the Word, and
other Ordinances, which should nourish their Souls to Eternal Life.

But if they do not puke and keck at the wholesome Food of Divine Truth; yet
there remains a Lipothymia or general faintness and failure of true affection,
which chills all endeavors after a Heavenly Conversation, by too great
Evacuations of that Spiritual nourishment, which before was taken down.

Hence the solid parts of Christianity are dissipated and melt away; so that
the means of Grace which should allay their hunger toward the World, become
unprofitable. This proves fatal, because sinners easily deceive themselves with
this Distemper, as if it were a genuine hunger toward the Ordinances.

The Word Preached may raise strains of great Joy in the hearing; yet, the heart
not be renewed, nor subdued to Christ's weaning Discipline. Sucking Children,
have their smiles at their own pretty Fancies; yet are not able to act their
Reason, in any reflection upon the Vanity and Deception of those Imaginations.
Phrentick sinners may Cant it in Religious Notions, which is but a false
conception of Spiritual Joy; because it is only a transient passion raised from
the briskness of the animal Spirits, which fly up into the head, yet infeeble
afterward the Executive faculties of the Soul, because they have no tendency
to produce a siricter course of Life.

Culinary fire may scorch more than Elementary; yet this, by a more Vital
kindly heat, best conserves health, and ripens Fruits.

So, violent sudden passions in sinners, may transport them beyond the ordinary
rank of Christians, in some extraordinary services, and sufferrings; yet such
seeming Zealots are so far from being weaned by self-denial, that they were
never sensible of the proper and real dispositions, which introduce the form of
a New-Ceature in Christ.

7. Another sort in the contrary extreme, are the Devils weanlings. I mean
such, who pretend to be Comprehensors in the Christian State, and to have
arrived at perfection in Holiness.

These are really possessed with a Dumb and Deaf Spirit; they neither pray for
Pardon of sin, nor attend on any Gospel Ministry, because out of Pride,
Curiosity, Fancy, and Self-Conceit, they presume they have Graspt the
perfection of Divine Wisdom as a Monopoly to themselves.

How are such deluded, being sensual, and not having the Spirit of Christ, whom
they pretend to only. Let such know, that a State of Spiritual weaning, does
not infer a Contempt of Gospel Ordinances; it rather increases a genuine,
strong Affection in hungring and thirsting after them.

The weaned Saint forsakes not his proper Spiritual Food for Wind and Trash;
but rather renews more earnest desires after the sincere Milk of the Word of
Righteousness.

He lives not a separated Life from the Communion of Saints; only, he exchanges
his former Diet, which was the Dust of the Serpent, for more solid and refined
nourishment.

He forsakes not the first Principles in Christianity, as contemptible Milk for
Babes, but proceeds to grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of God in Christ.

This more humbles and meekens him toward his Fellow-Saints, by Self-denial. It
makes him more Holy, and Heavenly, more estranged from the World, and the
Vanities of it.

Like David, he is driven into the Wilderness, he does not choose to want
public Ordinances. When he does; his Soul even then pants after the
Living-God, he thirsts with a more restless, strong and impatient appetite, to
see the Lords Power and Glory, so as he had enjoyed him in the Sanctuary.

8. Sort of sinners not weaned, are brokenwinded, and impatient Suitors for
Relief in their distress. Such are not prevailed with, to give Christ the quiet
and full possession of their hearts in an universal Dominion over them, because
they are not content that he should speed or delay, grant or deny their desires.

The Israelites were counted estranged from God, because they waited not for
his Counsels, neither were steadfast in his Covenant. While the Lords
dispensations pleased them, they sang his praises. What a strong Rock, what a
pitiful Redeemer had they to befriend them!

Yet, let him try their Patience in suspending his help, how soon do they
forget the wonders of his hand, grow weary of his conduct, suspect his care and
faithfulness, reproach him, and fall to their old hank of murmuring.

But a Saint truly weaned, does not Antedate Divine Promises, nor slack his own
purposes of Obedience. He does not anticipate deliverance, nor with a
short-winded impatient peevishness, snatch a Mercy out of the hand of the Lord,
before he be willing to bestow it.

Our mouths must not water after the forbidden Fruit of Sin, nor after the
overhasty fulfilling of any Promise.

Raw Fruit breeds Worms in Children.

Not to wait silently for the Ripening of deliverance, is the ready way to
blast it, or to anticipate it with a Curse.

Even Manna over-eagerly hoorded up stank; and suddenly became as much loathed
as it was impatiently longed for. Had Jacob (as plain a Man as he was) been
thoroughly weaned from Self-seeking and Unbelief, he had never attempted to have
snatched at the Promise, while the Fruit hung unripe upon it, nor to have
forestalled the Blessing of his Father, by the disguize of an Artificial Lie.

A weaned Saint, (so far as such) will not turn aside to crooked ways and
unlawful shifts, to accomplish his design.

Faith does not set a Man upon preposterous Courses.

Therefore let none pretend to trust in God's Promises, while they make void
his Laws.

That is an Orthodox Regular Faith, which so bears Witness to the Truth of the
Promise, that it will not betray the Trust of Duty.

There is Power and Wisdom enough in the Womb of every Divine Promise, to bring
it self to the Birth, without the Midwifery of any sinful expedients, or
excentrical practices to uphold the Lords fidelity by our dissimulation.

Therefore a weaned Frame does not only produce a Working, Suffering and
Abstaining Patience from the forbidden Fruit of Sin; but also an Expecting,
Waiting Patience, in order to reap, when Ripe, the Blessing of every delayed
Mercy.

A weaned Saint, had rather have the Boon which he asks denied, than cross the
Rule in asking. He is more troubled if his desires prove Inordinate, than that
the Lord takes no Order to speed and gratify them.

He is very full and pregnant with holy desires, yet his Importunity does not
justle out his Modesty. He is a self-denying Supplicant, his desires are
neither peremptory nor impatient.

He will lie at Heaven-Gate, though Relief do not hasten to him.

He esteems an heart made willing and able to wait, as a Mercy equal to that he
waits for. And indeed, it is part of an Answer as well as a Pledge of gratifying
his Request.

9. The ninth sort of Sinners not truly weaned, are such who are Dumb under the
Lord's weaning strokes; which is more sad and dangerous than any sting of
Affliction whatsoever.

There is a false quietness, or silence of Spirit under Cross disappointments
and sufferrings, which differs very much from the generous Divine Submission,
and Acquiescency of a weaned Saint.

1. It arises from want of inward Conviction of sin. A spurious Patience is the
sullenness and stoutness of a rebellious, proud, impenitent, hard heart.
Foulness of Guilt produces Felness of Spirit.

2. It flows from utter despair, because such who are constrainedly patient,
and repine though they do not Rage, conceit that the stroke of their wound is
unparalled and incurable, Amos 6.10. Hold thy peace; be silent even from
praying, for we have played the part of Hypocrites so long, that Now, we may not
make mention of, much less Glory in the Name of the Lord.

3. Reason or Common sense, may Argue sinners into a mere Moral Patience,
making a Virtue of Necessity. Because when the Lord of Hosts takes hold on
Judgment, no Created power can strike his Sword out of his hand. And what is
without all Remedy, must by silence be endured.

But a truly weaned Saint, does not only submit out of Duty and Conscience,
rather than Constraint, but can also Cleave to God; he will Clear and Justify,
yea Bless him with a thankful heart, and a Fruitful Life; when he lays his Ax
to the Root of his dearest enjoyments.

Faith welcoms Afflictions as good Angels sent for its Instruction, because
they Cure our sinful Surfeits, and Bleed us in the Master-Vein.

A weaned Saint, counts himself less than the least of Divine Mercies, even
below the Lords condescension to Correct him.

He will join, and take part with God against his own Interest and Enjoyments.

Yea, he rejoices in the Lord abstractedly for himself, when he is stripped
naked of all Earthly Comforts.

A supernatural Patience can rejoice in Bonds, sing in Prison, Glory in
Tribulation, Triumph in Sufferings, and count it self exalted in the deepest
abasement for Righteousness sake.

A Real Christian maintains a Consistency in the tranquillity of his Mind,
while he Ploughs the Waves of every amazing Providence, with the steedy Helm of
an Heroic Faith, guided by the Pole Star of the Word of God.

He is anointed with the Spirit of Holiness as a Son of Peace, therefore he
murmurs not. Thus, Oil asswages the Tempestuous Raging of the Sea.

His Faith works by Love, and this puts a good Construction on every Divine
Chastisement.

But now the Hypocrite who seems weaned by submissiveness in suffering, sets a
demure Countenance on a froward Heart.

His Patience is (most-what) selfish and theatrical, to gain the Reputation of
a Generous and Heroic Mind.

Yet, out of desperate presumption he courts Death, as the only Refuge of his
Cowardice:

The Hypocrite studies his Hearts-ease in his seeming Patience. He well knows
that a Bird by fluttering draws the snare the straiter upon it self, that a
Fellon who attempts to break Prison is loaded with a heavier Chain, that the
stubborn Child by fretting and kicking, gets nothing but more stinging Lashes.

Thus, a Malefactor lays down his neck upon the Block as eaven and cleaverly as
he can, lest if he should startle or resist, he should increase his Torture.

But now a weaned Saint is patient, because he espies Love in the Correction,
and hopes to experiment spiritual Advantage from his sufferings. He can espy a
bright Lamp of Salvation, in the midst of the smoking Furnace; Honey in the
Carcass of a Lion; Halcyon-days in a Storm, and is assured that of Thorns he
shall gather Grapes, and fetch Meat, the hid Manna of Divine Consolation, out
of the Eater of some wasting devouring providence.

The Hypocrite may pretend to some degree of Softness of heart, while scorcht
by Affliction; yet, he soon returns to the folly of sin, and discontent at his
sufferings; As the Flesh of a Peacock Roasted, turns Raw again after a few
hours Reservation.

(On the contrary) the magnanimous patience of a weaned Saint, being
insuperable is not stinted, nor ordinarily Ruffled or discomposed by the
severest sequestration of his nearest and dearest Earthly Joys.

His Faith can divorce the heart from the Heart, the renewed part of a
Christian from the Carnal, and make the Soul forget its wonted Acts of excess,
in the Fond sallyings out of his Affections to the Creature.

All the use of mourning for the want or loss of Worldly accommodations, is
only This, to revenge himself on his Lusts, which he made the Idols of his
heart.

He knows, that sighs are too Spiritual a blast to be spent on any thing but
his Sins.

Being fixed in the admiration of the Lords infinite excellencies, no Worldly
loss or gain can divert his entire Communion with the Fountain of pure Joy.

Thus, he stains not his Christian profession with any sullen Tears in a Low
afflicted state; nor is transported with fond delights, in an High-estate. For
he well considers that it is from the same Love, that the Lord strikes and
strokes a Saint.

Thus, his Faith can turn an Hell of deep disquietment in Sense, into an Heaven
of Joy and Triumph.

A weaned Saint highthens his contentment to a thankful Spirit for Afflictions,
as happy opportunities of Improving a Gracious Frame.

This thankfulness is conjoined with a Resolution, to hold fast his Integrity,
though the Lord smite him into the place of Dragons, and cover him with the
shadow of Death.

Yea, a weaned Saint is quickened to become more Active in Obedience, by how
much the more he is deprest in grievous exigencies and distresses.

Thus the Ball struck with the Racket rebounds the higher: The Vine being
pruned, bleeds not to death, but weeps it self into greater Fruitfulness.

Again, a Saint Censures not the Lords weaning Methods before the Result and
winding up of the design.

When the Lord fires him out of all his Earthly enjoyments, yet he knows that
the good will of the Lord dwells in the Bush, to make it flourish in the midst
of the consuming Flames.

Therefore says he, it is good to draw nigh to the Holy One, when his
Dispensations are most dreadful and severe.

Thus his Faith informs and assures him, that he can as little want the
Discipline of the Cross, as an Heavenly Inheritance.

That by deep and heavy Trials, the Lord stamps a Badg of honor upon him,
accounting him to be his Champion and a resolute defender of the Faith of
Christ.

Thus weaned Saints quiet themselves under all their distresses, yea Triumph in
the Cross of Christ as the top of their felicity and the Crest of their
preferment.

10. The tenth sort of Sinners not thoroughly weaned, are partial, but not
Repenting Reformadoes.

A Child withdrawn only from the Breast, yet brought up by hand with the Bottle
and the Spoon, is not weaned in as proper strict Sense; but only equivocally,
till it can acquiesce in a more Manly kind of Food.

So, though Sinners lie not soaking at the Breasts of the World, by some
accidental diversion from the more Usual and common ways of cherishing their
Lusts; yet if they find pleasures from some more Refined methods and secret
contrivances in sinning; which more sutably promote their present design; they
cannot be said to be weaned in any tolerable sense.

Lust is Lust, whether it be maintained by secret immediate Self-Love, in Acts
of Self-seeking, self-confidence, and self-exalting, or from the Bottle and
Spoon of some foreign collateral succors, which more visibly tend to the
sensual gratification of our fleshly Appetite.

There is a strange kind of sinful metempsychosis, the strength of
concupiscence may pass out of one extreem into another. Lesser Lusts may be
intent upon feeding the main Spring, as paying a Homage to it; yet are they no
Losers by this Officiousness; for, they are not starved hereby but strengthened.

Thus diverse parts of the Body serve to convey nourishment to the Liver, as the
Fountain of Blood, from whence they are moistened and supplied afterward with
an Addition of growth and strength.

So little are our hearts weaned from the Love and Reign of any sin, while its
proper operations are suspended to uphold the design, or gratify the Interest
of some Capital Lust.

Every Breast does not agree with the Constitution of every Child. Nor does
every particular kind of sin suit the desire of every sinner. Some, as Romulus
and Remus, suck a Wolf, in the Exercise of Oppressive Power. Others though they
live not on Rapine, and sucking of Blood as Eagles; yet as the Salamander, they
take delight to frisk in the Flames of Contention.

And as the Cameleon, they pant and gasp after the pleasing, yet fickle Air of
popular applause. The Epicure, though he do not make the Wedg of Gold his
Confidence, yet he makes his Belly and sensual Pleasures his God.

As Cleopatra, who at one draught exhausted as many dissolved Pearls as
amounted to the value of a Kingdom. Such dig their Graves with their Teeth, and
are buried Alive in their excessive Riots, as Sardanapalus that Monster of
Intemperance.

11. The Eleventh sort of Sinners not really weaned are such, who though they
may comply with easier and plain commands; yet remain partial in their
Obedience, and limp like a Badger with one Leg, when Commands are difficult, or
lie cross to Carnal Reason, personal Credit or Worldly Interest.

For the Former, this is a deep trial of self. denial, when an Injunction is
put on a person, the dutiful observance of which seems to Contradict Duty. When
the precept of trial seems to thwart the settled Precept of ordinary Obedience.

Nay, to justle and run counterwise against the Promise of God. When a Man can
hardly obey God, but he must make him a Liar. As in Abraham's Case, he could
not offer up his Son but he must violate that Command, Thou shall not kill;
yea, if he had consulted Carnal Reason, he must have offered some Violence to
his Faith and seemingly to the Veracity of God, that all Nations should be
called and blessed in Isaac. Now different Obligations begetting cross
apprehensions in the Soul, do exceedingly puzzle, oppress, and distract it,
yea, increase its trials and troubles to a perplexing height.

Yet, a Weaned Soul, who is not selfconceited, nor strives for the supremacy of
his own Will, can reconcile seeming contrariant Precepts in the Holy Unity and
simplicity of the Divine Nature. For the very Command of the Lord stamps
Holiness on that very Action, which otherwise were unlawful.

You must know, that other Actions which are only indifferent in their own
nature, yet become absolutely necessary upon a Divine positive Law injoyning
them.

Some are commanded because precedently good in their own Nature, as to love
God for himself, to hate sin as an unnatural Act to a Man's self. Moral Duties
are generally and universally known by the very Light of Nature; and are
grounded in their necessity and suitableness, on the very notion of the Deity
and his unchangeable Holiness. But particular positive Duties which bind by
express Revelation are good and necessary to be fulfilled, because of the
Wisdom and Authority of the Lawgiver, though Carnal Reason cannot guess at
their Equity, usefulness or necessity: Of this Nature, were the Jewish
Ceremonies, which yet were punctually in every Circumstance observed by the
Faithful Forefathers.

What Reason can be assigned, why the Jews should be prohibited, such and such
sorts of Meats, which were pallatable and wholesome, yet they were tutored in
their Bill of Fare, and trained up to Self-denial in these severe restrictions.
Though (I suppose) some Moralities might lie couchant in them.

As they might not plough with an Ox and an Ass, nor sow diverse Seeds
promiscuously, in the same plat of Ground, nor wear a Garment of Linsi-Woolsie,
to signify how hateful to God all impure mixtures are in his Service, or any
disagreeing Principles in Religion. But if such Mysteries never were made known
in these positive Laws, yet the bare Authority of God, is Reason sufficient and
obliging, why the minutest Circumstances of any Action otherwise indifferent
should be observed and punctually fulfilled.

Thus it is with weaned Saints, for true Obedience is uniform and universal.

As Saints will impose no Laws in Divine concernments upon themselves, as
absolutely necessary: so they are very cautious in abstaining from all the
occasions and appearances of evil. They are weaned from the Bottle and the
Spoon, from all the accessory helps and encouragements of their Lusts, as well
as from the Breasts of more visible pleasing and grosser Temptations to Sin.
They are troubled for an impure Dream and will not speculate the least
iniquity, so much as in their fancy.

Also, they are Curious about the least Circumstance of every Action, that it
be done for Manner, Measure, Time, and Place, to a right End, and in a due
Order and Decorum. Moses and Noah in erecting the Tabernacle and Ark were in
every Circumstance directed and limited by Divine appointment. Weaned Souls are
faithful in every punctilio of their charge.

But Hypocrites make Laws and impose severities on themselves, as pleasing
Bonds, whereas Christ's Laws are Yokes and pinching Fetters, which they strive
to dissolve, and break away from.

This shows, they are not weaned from an opinion of self-superintendency, and
the admiration of their Carnal Wisdom.

The great Contest 'twixt God and Sinners is, whose Will shall stand for a Law
and Rule in the Ordering out of their Affections and Actions.

Yet our Wills are too big and headstrong for our blinded corrupt
understandings to Govern. Hence we are guided by no fixed strict Rule, but
hurried by Pride and Passion, issuing from our darkened and mistaken
apprehensions of the chiefest good.

Therefore, we had need be weaned from self-Supremarcy, that we may be directed
safely, according to the Wisdom of God revealed in the written Word, and not
led by Fancy, or the impulses of a private Spirit. For we easily are induced to
believe that Lawful, necessary, and commendable, which we have a mind to in
gratifying our Lusts, or advancing our Worldly Interest.

But, in a truly weaned Frame of Submission to all God's Laws, in every
Circumstance, consists our true Liberty, Safety, Wisdom, and Magnanimity of
Spirit. Otherwise we shall soon become Captives to Satan, and our Lusts.

Moralists and Hypocrites may proceed far in a course of Obedience; and yet not
be truly weaned, because not thoroughly brought off from the Dictates of Carnal
Reason, to subscribe only to the Lords good Will and Pleasure, in ordering out
the minutest Circumstances of their Actions.

The strength of Wisdom and sincerity of Obedience is seen most, in a strict
Observance of all due Circumstances. These many times amount to more
considerable weight in the Lords account, than either the matter of Duty, or of
Sin.

Therefore, David prays, Order my steps in thy Word, as cautiously and
curiously, as they who climb Rocks, or dance upon a Rope.

How severely has the Lord punished an Error, or failure in the very
Circumstance of a Command? When the Commission has not been fulfilled to the
least tittle and punctilio? Such, who are not thoroughly weaned, conceit, they
may make bold in the manner, or measure, or Order of managing a Duty, according
to the module of their Carnal apprehension, and that this oversight, or rash
Zeal, in underacting or overacting, may plead an indulgence of Course. But, the
Lord has given Instances to the Contrary: viz. in Saul's sparing Agag, and in
his not staying for Samuel, when he was distressed by the Philistines.

In Lots Wife looking back. In Vzzah's touching the Ark, and the Bethshemites
prying into the Ark, when recovered from the Philistines. In the young Prophet
going back with the Old, to eat and to drink, (1 Kings 13.18.) though he were
over-reacht by the pretense of an Angelical Revelation.

A weaned Saint is Cautious about the least Sin, and very Curious about the
least Circumstance of a Duty. Therefore, Naaman was not thoroughly weaned, when
he excepted against washing his Leprosy seven times in the Waters of Jordan.
Nor those who walked to go down into Egypt, who surrounded the Borders to espy
where they might find out the most convenient passages to slip into Egypt,
without any suspicion of a Design in it, Isa. 30.1, 2.

Yet how did these Hypocrites profess a weaned Frame, in Jer. 42. Whether the
Lords Answer be good or evil; ( Politically they mean, and not morally) yet, we
will obey, though to our inconvenience and disadvantage.

So that person (in 1 Kings 20.35, 36, 37.) was more nicely and superstitiously
Conscientious, than truly respectful to the Prophet who refused to wound him by
a Divine Commission: therefore he was slain by a Lion, not because he had a
Cowards heart, but for his pretended Sanctity, and the scrupulosity of an
Hypocrite.

So that weaned Saints do not Judge of the Equity or necessity of Divine
Commands, by outward appearance to their Carnal Reason, but readily obey their
Commission when they espy the stamp and warrant of Divine Authority, though the
matter, or Circumstance of the Command, seem unreasonable and ridiculous. Yea,
lie Cross to their personal Reputation and Worldly Interest.

I may instance in Noah's building the Ark, for which he was flouted, as if he
doated, and would set a ship to Sail on dry Land.

In Joshuah's compassing Jerico seven times with the blast of Rams Horns;
which seemed a foolish stratagem to any politic Engineer. Yet being weaned
from self-guidance, he was assured of victory, made ready to his hand, and that
he should dispossess the Canaanites as easily as he could put off his Shoos.

Gideon also slew the Midianites as one Man, because he was weaned from his own
Carnal Wisdom, and did not dispute the unlikeliness of the means.

Some proud huffing Alexander would have laughed at the blast of Trumpets, at
Lamps enclosed in Earthen Pitchers, as a likely Stratagem, by the dashing of
which in pieces, the destruction of so Potent an Enemy was to be obtained.

But Gideons Faith silenced all Carnal Reason, so that by a weaned Frame he got
the Conquest.

A rare Example for us Christians, if we would defeat our Spiritual Enemies,
not to dispute much less despise the Institutions of Christ in the Gospel,
though they seem never so inconsiderable, slight, idle, vain and foolish.

The Apostles as despicable as they seemed to be, yet being weaned by Christ's
Call from their Carnal Wisdom, and the Worlds splendour, proved Men of Courage,
because of Self-denial.

They endured hardship, as Gideon's reduced three hundred Soldiers, who did
not bow down upon their knees in a sordid Compliance with sinners humors, or
any excess in Worldly pleasures, but were wholly intent upon their March and
Message.

By these despicable Babes and Sucklings did the Lord ordain strength to still
or stop the Mouths of the Enemy, the Atheist and Avenger, viz. the persecutors
of the Gospel.

By these weanlings, the Lord confounded the Carnal Wisdom of the chiefest
Philosophers and Politicians among the Gentile Nations.

They only carried forth the Light and Treasure of the Gospel in Earthen
Vessels, in frail Bodies, the very breaking of which by persecution, caused the
sound and same of their Constancy to scatter the darkness of Satan's Kingdom and
confound the rage of all their Enemies.

So strong and Victorious are Bulrushes in the hand of Omnipotency, to gain a
Conquest over the powers of Hell.

12. The Twelth sort of sinners, not truly weaned, are Civilized Moralists, who
perch on their own Righteousness and Center there, as a meritorious Title to
claim Heaven by. These despise the Infinite satisfaction of Christ, even the
whole undertaking of his Mediatory Righteousness and Obedience; as also the
conjunct inseparable Impressions of his Sanctifying Spirit.

Some Sinners think themselves thoroughly weaned and estranged from their Lusts,
because they have quitted their sensual Excesses; yet, the Spirit of Satan may
still Reign in them though it do not Rage to that degree of Bruitishness as
before.

Thus, some Bethelamites because they Rattle not their Chains as pleasing
Music, Fancy they are thoroughly recovered of their Frenzy, yet the hidden
distemper and Original cause Remains.

Because at present they Rave not, because their Keeper has indulged them to
walk into fresh Air, to put on better Clothes, which they tore of before [and
they are let out of their Denn, to Converse with such who are possessors of
right Reason, as Masters over their passions: These whimsical persons presently
conceit that no spice of Phrensy lurks about them. They think they need no
longer the Inspection, Care and Conduct of their Keeper. Hence, being
over-confident of their Cure, they relapse into the former Paronysms of Raving
Madness.

I may apply this, to all such sinners, who are not convinced of the absolute
necessity of Christ's Imputed Righteousness, to cover the shame of their
nakedness.

Yet, is not this sufficient, to declare these Lunaticks fully settled in their
right Minds; unless by Self-denial they be made willing to sit at Jesus Feet,
and learn from his Spirit the Mystery of a Sanctified State, which can only
cure the craziness of their natural corrupted Faculties, and the Frenzy of
their Souls.

Justified persons, united to God in Christ, need the Judicious Guidance, and
Guardship of the Spirit of both, to Sanctify and head the imbred hereditary
Corruption of their Nature.

For pardon of Sin, is but the half-State of Gospel-Salvation in restoring
Sinners.

This alone cannot satisfy the mind of a Genuine Heaven-born Christian.

There must also be the Infusion of a loyal disposition to seal and manifest
the Pardon, even, a renewed Frame of heart in this weaned Self-denying
disposition, to suit and and comply with all the serious, most difficult duties
of the Christian-State.

Sinners must not only be weaned from their Excesses in their Surfeits, but
must also be winnowed from the Chaffy Imperfections, and defilement of their
own best Righteousness.

Yea, they must submit themselves to the Cure and Conduct of the Spirit of
Sanctification: In both which Respects he is styled the Spirit of Judgment and
of Burning; to Consume all Self-Arrogance, which trusts in, and boasts of a
Self-Righteousness, as well as to purge out all the Relics of sensual, fond,
foolish Affections to defiling Lusts, and the inordinate overvaluing of
Creature Comforts and Enjoyments.

Otherwise, there is no true weaning by the Spirit of Holiness, but only the
sweeping and Garnishing of a rotten Sepulcher, into which, standing empty, the
unclean Spirit will re-enter, and more confirm his Title, without any Fear of a
real dispossession. Lusts, by moral Convictions may be disturbed, and not so
often Rant and Rave as formerly, by the present restraints of a civilized
Temper and Disposition.

Such sober Frenzy, as it is less suspected, so it is more hardly cured,
because mistaken for the perfect Recovery of the Sinner, to a right Frame of
Mind.

How hard is it to Convince Pharisaical Spirits, and Self-Justiciaries, of the
necessity of applying Christ's Righteousness, to lead a true valid Title to
Eternal Life; Or to lay prostrate their Spiritual priding of themselves in the
tinkling of their own Imaginary Excellencies!

It Is usual for Frantic sinners, to please themselves in their Crazy Fancy,
and strongly to imagine, that they Reign as Kings over their impetuous Lusts;
when as they are deeper possessed by, and inslaved unto them.

That Hectic Fever, which lurks within, and preys upon the Vital Spirits is
most dangerous. So is formality the bane of sound Religion. Slight Professors
of Christianity sport themselves with their masquing Mock-showes in a pretended
Reformation. Such are not truly weaned from Lusts, and the Love of the World,
to Christ.

Therefore at last their Surfeit breaks out to a loathing of the very form of
Godliness, because they despised and denied the power.

It is not a Cynical, sullen Raillery at the Worlds Treachery and adulterate
Beauty which can alienate our Hearts from an Amorous pursuit of it; unless True
Grace subdue our inclination to admire it.

Concupiscence cannot be extinguished, or overpoized, but only by the Intenser
flame of a Chaste Love to God for himself, as the Essence and perfection of our
Happiness.

This is Real Evangelical weaning, when the Pride of our Carnal Wisdom, the
stubbornness of our perverse Wills, and the Exorbitancy of our wild humorsom
Affections, are deaded by the power of Christ's Death, and the Lovely Beauty of
a Crucified Jesus.

Yea, the Life of Jesus must be made manifest in our mortified Body, to Eclipse
all Creature-Excellencies that we may be quickened to a Life of Sole-dependency
upon the Lord's Alsufficiency, to influence the Soul in the Vigorous pursuit of
all Relative Duties toward God and Man.

A truly weaned Frame, is no other than the Judicious Elective State of every
Regenerate Person.

This flows from Union with Christ by Faith.

This obliges to Heart-purity and Chastity; not to cast the least wanton Glance
toward the defiling Vanities of the World.

Besides, the Unction of Christ's Spirit works in truely-weaned Persons, a
Sanctified Judgment whereby they can make a right, and due estimation of
Persons and Things.

Therefore, such cannot conform to the Dictates of Carnal Reason, nor inebriate
themselves with the Cares and Pleasures of a Sensual Life.

Such being Renewed by Gracious Principles, their hearts and Affections are set
Right; the bent and poize of their desires is carried out to prove and delight
only, where God himself does.

Saints are weaned, because the Son of God has made in their behalf, a
complete Conquest over the World, in all its dissembling Artifices, affrighting
Menaces, bewitching Allurements and Temptations. As he has won it, so he will
Maintain it, in all such, who being Born of God, aspire to a Divine Generosity,
and Ingenuity of Spirit; to follow the steps and example of their great General
and Redeemer.

For a truly-weaned Frame, though it arise from Faith in Christ, working
Self-emptiness and Self-Abasement, yet it grows up to a Holy-stateliness of
Spirit, whereby the renewed Soul grows coy to all Temptations which study to
defile its Virgin-Chastity.

This is that Spouse-like Girdle, whereby the Christian is kept cleaving to the
Lord's Alsufficiency for him, to constitute the Essence of true happiness.

The Lord alone is the Foundation of his weanlings future Hopes and present
Comforts; For, being United to him by Faith, they cleave to him as the Center
of their Love and Delight; deriving all their satisfaction from his infinite
and most amiable perfections.

Thus Faith and Self-denial, are the two main Poles, on which, the whole weight
of Christian Religion depends; and the Practical improvement of it, turns it
self.

Hereby, we are demonstrated, to be truly weaned or mortified, when all
Self-arrogance or Confidence in our own Righteousness is rejected; and the
Creature becomes Nullified, that Christ alone may be Magnified as all in all,
to complete our Eternal Happiness. To which must be added, an Universal, Free,
and Cheerful Resignation of our whole Man, to the Government of Christ's Word
and Spirit.

Natural Carnal Men are only pretenders unto this Frame of heart; whatever
specious semblances thereof, they may hold forth in the moral strictness of
their Conversation.

For is it possible that persons should Evangelically be weaned by solid
Conversion to the Lord; and yet despise, or oppose the genuine inseparable
effects of it?

Without the power of Godliness, of which Self-denial is the Spring or Soul;
there can be no through estrangement from the Love of Lusts, or the Allurements
of Worldly Vanities.

Therefore, to beget, increase, and maintain a weaned Frame of heart; I shall
lay down these following Rules.

Rules to become truly weaned.
1. Take heed of abusing Christian Liberty in the immoderate Use of things
Lawful.

Thus Christ advised his very Apostles, though weaned to a very high Degree, in
forsaking all things to testify their sincerity, in embracing the Christian
Institution: Take heed lest your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting an the
Cares of this Life.

Commonly, we fear not a Snare in those Accommodations which the Lord of the
Creation allows us, for our refreshment in our Pilgrimage.

These must not prove as the Fruit of the Lote-Tree to some Travelers, to make
us forget our Divine Original, our Heavenly Country, while we sing the Worlds
Tune in a strange Land, viz. What shall we Eat, Drink, or wherewith shall we be
Clothed? never caring to return to the Bosom of God, as our Rest and proper
Center.

Remember Sisera's Fate, when the World Jael-like has made us drunk with
secular Cares and secured us in its Tent by gross stupidity; it discovers its
Courtesy to be full of Craft and Treachery: For, after an officious
Indulgence, which will exceed our desires in Kindness, it will drive home the
Nail of self-perplexing Fears and Sorrows, not only to our Head, but very Heart
it self.

Thus, the Gnostics sported themselves with their own deceivings, while they
pleaded Christian Liberty, that the whole Creation was purchased by Christ, to
maintain them, as the only Iluminated Ones, in all excess of rioting.

Thus, they crossed the design of Gospel Grace which appeared to teach us to deny
all ungodly Lusts, and to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present
world.

Thus, (...) pleases it self so long in dancing about the Candle, till it
singes its Wings or consumes it self.

2. Take a true estimate of the Creature in its Natural Worth, rather than in
that false Dress, which your Imagination tricks it up in; strip all Earthly
Vanities out of their deceitful Varnish. For, Satan casts a strange Mist before
our Eyes, and perverts our Fancy, to make us miserable by our own Consent.

Hence, we expect more from the Creature than it can yield in its most
quintessential enjoyment or sublimated improvement. How many who suppose
themselves Rich in Grace, have Worldly Designs, as the Philosophers Stone,
beggared and made miscrable! But weaned Saints are wary, and advertised of this
Delusion. They will make use of the World, but not trust to it to make them
happy. Therefore although they attain not that prosperity, which Worldlings
seek; yet, in their way to true happiness, they meet with (in their experience
of the Worlds Vanity) many rare and choice discoveries of divine Mysteries
which they value before all enjoyments of the whole Creation.

3. Study the Dignity of your precious immortal Heaven-born Souls. Esteem of
World^y enjoyments at present, as you will view and value them at Death, as you
will find them to bear a Rate in the dismal conflagration of the Universe. Then
the World shall undergo the punishment of a Witch, for enchanting and deluding
poor Mortals, who have loved Vanity, and trusted in the lying shadow of a
tearing Bramble, to despise the true Vine and Olive, viz. the Sweetness of
Christ, who can only yield us perfect satisfaction.

4. Maintain a mortifying Frame of Self-denial, while you lie sucking at the
Breasts of prosperity. Put suppositions to your selves as Habakkuk, of the
Creatures failing you; That the fullness of its enjoyment, may possibly be
imbittered with a mixture of Vexation.

So shall it not overlay your Hopes by disappointment; nor will your selves
overcloy and surfeit your affections with forbidden Fruit, in perverting of the
true Use of Creature Comforts and Enjoyments.

5. Do not count your Happiness and Peace of mind, to lie in the Change of your
outward condition, but get your dropsical Distemper Cured. The sick Child may
shift the Breast, and yet not be reduced to a quiet Frame, or vigorous State,
till it acquiesce in a Manly kind of Diet.

Christians, would you recover any Consistency in your Spiritual State, and
Souls-health? Then resolve, not only to weep out your sinful surfeits, but be
content that the Lord should bleed you in the Master-Vein.

A Revulsion of your Feverish and Voracious desires toward Creature-enjoyments,
will purify the Vital Affections of your Souls, by settling them on the Lord
himself, in a due measure and Order. Yet afterward your selves must endeavor
to maintain a more strict Discipline or Regiment over the Corrupt humors and
fond foolish extravagancies of your desires.

6. Esteem not of that to be real Mortification, or a genuine weaning, which
only deads Corruption yet flows not from a through Renovation of the heart.
Sinners may abstain from their sinful Surfeits, yet never abandon nor abominate
them.

A thorow-weaned Frame is not the approving of Godliness in the General, where
the power is despised or hated; Nor is it the condemning of Sin in general, or
the grosser Lusts of the Flesh; though Men live in the allowance of secret
sins, and under the Dominion of speculative, more retired, refined Acts of sin.
What is this, but to graft a new sin on the stock of an old Lust?

All sin grows deeper rooted and ingratiated by such a cleaverly conveying out
of sight the chief favorite, fallen into some disgrace at present, rather than
any true Disgust which seeks the utter destruction of it.

A slight dislike of sin, trusted to, gives Satan a more quiet and deep
possession.

The sinner may be weary of his Life, because of the bitter effects of sin, yet
his heart is secretly espoused to it.

He may repent of his dissembled severity, and wish that himself may die,
rather than that his corrupt inclination should be pinioned or put into little
ease.

Rather strive to break the heart of old Adam, to kill the very Root of an
Hellish-Nature; seek the destruction of whatsoever is disgustive to the
Constitution of the new Creature, that there may be no more hope of
reconciliation unto sin, than of the meeting of Heaven and Hell together.

Lay not down your sins as Weapons at the Foot of God as a Conqueror, when you
can no longer naintain the fight, but out of Loyalty execute them with your own
hand.

Cast them not only away in a Fright, upon the Hue and Cry of your Conscience,
but pursue them to the Horns of the Altar, drag them thence, where they expect
Protection, and Sacrifice them with cheerfulness, otherwise they will mar and
defeat all your Religious Services, and the hope of future Glory.

Formalists descend to Hell, more unsuspectedly under the Garb of Religious
Vows, and severe threats against their Lusts.

Thus, some Parents in a short Passion Rate their Children out of their sight,
when they have done a shrewd turn, yet they can immediately turn their Faces
aside and smile at their unlucky Wit, or after a short time, cocker them the
more.

Satan as a cunning Spinster, leaves on the Distaff of a depraved Nature, such
pretended good resolutions, as a Lock of Wool, as a Pledge or advantage of
future returning, to draw out the Web of Iniquity to a greater extension than
before.

Thus many Sinners purchase the Infamous Title of Skeptical Futurists in
Repentance, as they prove themselves to be Platonic Lovers of Virtue, only in
speculation. For their Vows of Reformation, must be interpreted as we read the
Hebrew Dialect, altogether backward.

Thus, the more they tamper with, and strain the Rusty Wards of a dissembling
heart, with some false Key of slight Reformation, the harder it will be to open
to the Motions and convictions of Christ's Spirit.

7. Improve weaning-Considerations, such as these.

That persons of strong and fond affections to Creature-enjoyments are usually
persons of strange and deep afflictions. It Is thought that Abraham was toying
and sporting with Isaac a little before the Command came to Sacrifice him.

Usually we follow our Idolized Comforts to the Grave with Mourning; as
Phaltiel did Michal to Bahurim, when Ishbosheth snatched her from him.

When the Lord observes that we grow fond of Strangers, and familiar with the
Worlds Temptations, he puts out the Candle of prosperity, and Seals up the
Starlight of all Creature Comforts, with which we have wantoniz'd in our fond
admiration, that we may depend on Him Alone, as the God of our Light, Comfort
and Salvation.

When a dark Night of Affliction Steals on us then we run home to nestle in the
Bosom of Divine-Alsufficiency, though we had our Vagaries before, in Courting
every foreign Creature-Comfort to support and gratify our fleshly sensuality.
I will go and return unto my place, that is, confine, and shut up my self in
Heaven; I will get me out of sight and Call, that their weaning being
apprehended more grievous, they may under the depth of their distress, seek me
more early, and earnestly Hos. 5.15.

David, the Man after God's heart, was chastened every Morning, because when
the Lord came to feel his Pulse, how his Love and delight beat toward him, he
found the Frame of his heart to vary and faulter. His very flesh and heart
failed, that he might cling the closer in distress, Then, Whom have I in Heaven
but Thee!

Thus Israel became Jezrael, the scattered Flock, and her weaning by Captivity,
was in order to her betrothing.

Some there are, whom neither smiles nor frowns, neither Blows nor Charms of
Love will wean.

Yet, it is more ingenuous to be estranged from our Lusts, by the Gracious and
Spiritual appearances of the Lord, than by imbittering the Breasts of the
Creature, or forcing the Lord to put on the disguize of an Enemy, to affright
us. Usually we will not be weaned, till we observe the Image of Death to sit
upon the Eyelids of our dearest Comforts.

Make therefore a wise contemperament of Love and Fear in your own Souls; be
won by the former, and awed by the latter. Fear may enter as a rivetting Wedg,
the first contest with our darling Lusts, but Love can only complete the
Conquest.

A Child is weaned rather by singing to it, than by blows.

8. Be convinced of the Lords Love and Compassion in weaning you, then you will
more cheerfully comply with the severest method of estranging you from a fond
nestling in the bosom of any Lust.

The Lord's End is, that you may arrive to a masculine State and Spirit in your
Christian course, that you may be fitted for more eminent service.

Thus, Covenant-afflictions which are the Lord's Graving-Tools, whereby he
polishes his Saints for Glory, are to be preferred before common Mercies; and
Right Hand weaning strokes, before Left Hand Comforts and enjoyments.

It is for our Spiritual advantage, that the Lord thus instructs us with
severity, by desertions, persecution of Worldly Men, and the frequent Alarm of
temptation; Therefore we should suit our selves to him, we should not be
humorsome and discontented, at this necessary though bitter work.

In measure will the Lord debate it with his people in such a season.

How does he bear long with their froward manners, as with Israel in the
Wilderness!

Ephraim resisted the Lord's weaning-strokes, yet he did not give him over to
the hardness of his heart. He rather pittyed, healed, and led him, restoring
Comfort to him, when himself and others looked upon his State as desperate.

The Lord applied his Ear, and when Ephraim bemoaned his youthful Pranks and
Excesses, then the Lord's Bowels were troubled for him, and he had Mercy on him
as a pleasant Child, when himself was ashamed in bearing the Reproach of his
Youth.

How does the Lord sing to his Childrens hearts, while he weans them in a dark
night of Affliction, Isa. 66.13.14. As one whom his Mother Comforts, so will I
Comfort you!

And when you shall see this, What? The happy Effect and Issue of your
Captivity, that I weaned you from the enjoyments of your own Land for your
Spiritual advantage, your heart shall rejoice and your Bones shall flourish
like a green Herb, though you despondingly said, they were dry, and scattered
as Chips about a saw-pit.

Abraham made a Feast, when he weaned Isaac; so God and his Angels rejoice, to
see a Nursling of Satan, become a Weanling unto Christ. Such are now Feasted
with the hidden Manna of Divine Consolation in their Wilderness-distresses;
they are Beautified with the white-Stone of Absolution, as a peculiar remark of
favor, and honored with the new Name of the Lord's adopted Darlings; yea,
themselves can now rejoice, to tear the Body of sin, Limb from Limb, and can
sing Triumphantly in the Funeral of the Old Man, because it is the Festival of
their Spiritual Liberty, in their Conformity to Christ's Death and
Resurrection; therefore get a good Opinion of the Work, and it will succeed
accordingly.

For, the Rod (as Aarons) often Blossoms and brings forth the precious Fruits
of Righteousness Is not this more Eligible than for tasting only a little Honey
in any unlawful delight, without the allowance of your Heavenly Father; (as
Jonathan) to incur the Penalty of Death it self?

Therefore in the next place shut fast the Cinque-port of your Senses, and
clear up the Eye of your Faith, to take a view of the Creatures Vanity, in
order to admiring God in Christ.

Watch your hearts if you would get them weaned. Keep them with all Diligence.

Sobriety and Watchfulness, must be conjoined in Christ's Nursery, as well as in
the Discipline of his Camp.

Labor to be well read in the Anatomy of your deceitful hearts, to understand
your Constitution, Inclination and Disposition. For Satan has Snares of all
sorts and sizes to suit and please the several humors of sensual Sinners.

He is a cunning Angler, do not you nibble at his Temptations, lest as those
Fish which Frisk and Play in the fresh Waters of Jordan, you unawares stream
down into the dead Sea of Worldly corrupt examples.

10. Take heed of the occasions of sin. The Rechabites would not chew the Husk
of a dry Grape, lest they should be enticed to drink Wine.

Pray as St. Augustine, that when thou have a heart to sin thou may want a
Temptation, and when a Temptation is presented, thou may want a heart to
comply with it.

This, is the very Dialect of the Devils Sophistry, you may come within the
smell of sin, and yet not be infected: but you cannot play on the hole of the
Asp, or Cockatrice and yet be safe or secure.

If Satan like Archimedes, can but have so much scope in thy heart, as to place
there his Engine of temptation, he will soon shake and dissolve the whole Frame
of thy Integrity, if it be merely Moral.

Besides, to venture on the occasion, shows that there is a secret liking of
that sin it leads to, though we conceit our selves to be weaned from it. Nor
will the Lord ordinarily keep us from the sin if we keep not our selves from
the temptation, and then we are sure to fall.

11. Let this weaning design be your daily work, upon which you are most
intent. It Is dissicult, and not rid off with lazy wishes. Augustine while he
prayed to be weaned from his youthful incontinency, secretly wished he might yet
be spared in his vain excesses. We say of every darling Lust, let Reuben Live
and not dye.

Indulge not therefore your flesh, though it cry out in a render delicacy, that
you would pity and indulge it.

You must not desist from the severity of this work for your hearts sullenness
and frowardness.

That Parent who spares to correct the Child for its crying, hardens and
confirms it in its Rebellion.

Thus it proves the future grief and shame of the Parent, as well as the
present disquietment of the Family.

Be not slight and remiss in weaning-attempts. If so, you must begin again as
the Nazarite, who had transgrest against the strict Law of his scparation.

The work will prove more difficult, uncertain, and hazardous as to its happy
Issue. Carry through this weaning design, begin not in the Spirit to end in the
Flesh. If a Man omit a stroke in swimming, he is soon carried down the Stream.

12. Improve the Christian Sabbath especially, to promote this Design. As it is
the fittest season, so Satan most watches to render it unsuccesful. He then
uses the same stratagem which the Benjamites did, Judge. 21.19, 20, 21. to
snatch them up Wives from among the Daughters of Israel, to enlarge their
almost extinguished Tribe.

When Christians come forth in Spiritual Dances, to celebrate this holy
Festival to the Lord; then Satan lies in Ambuscado behind the Vineyards of
Worldly profits and pleasures: Thence he sallies out with his Temptations, to
commit a Rape upon the Virgin-purity of our Souls which should be espoused only
to the Lord.

But do not drive on this Task of weaning only during the Sabbath-space.

How should Lusts, which have been rooting all the Week, nay possibly our
Life-long; be plucked up in one hours formal attendance on the Ordinances?

13. Therefore begin this weaning task betimes, in Youth, before you and your
Lusts be grown into a strict familiarity, hardly to be shaken off.

David complained, that the Sons of Zerviah were too hard for him, while he was
newly entered on his regal power. But do you execute your Lusts, (as the Jews
did Christ) early in the Morning? You will otherwise by indulgence and
connivence, give them greater advantage against you.

It Is dissicult to pull up Weeds when the Garden is overgrown, and they have
spread their Roots, by long neglect to clear the Ground.

So is it to break off a settled long confirmed habit in Vice. Do not accustom
your selves to lie soaking at the Breasts of Lusts and the World, especially
being prompted to it by a Natural Instinct. Our corrupt Nature is not as green
Wood, which needs much help of Art to make it burn; but as Touch-wood, the
least spark of Temptation, which lights on us, fires all that train of
Corruption, yea, the Magazine of Hell, which is stored up in our degenerate and
wicked hearts.

Therefore improve the soaking Showers of Divine Mercy and Goodness, to soften
your hard hearts, that you may more easily root up your Lusts. Maintain also
the Love of Christ shed abroad in your Souls.

This, as a more intense Divine flame, will overpower and extinguish the
Fireballs of Lust and Temptations, which Satan darts into your Spirits.

14. Again, go not out in the strength of your own Resolutions and Covenantings
to Reform: these, without renewing Grace cannot work any estrangement from your
Lusts.

Rather look up by Faith to a pierced crucified Jesus. Fetch Life from his
Death.

Be so sixth to his Cross by Meditation, that if a Temptation pass by before
you, bow the head, and Court you, you may not be at leisure to observe it, much
less to descend and embrace it.

Say as Nehemiah to Sanhallat, Why should this Work of the Lord slack, while I
parle with Satan, to neglect the Building up of my Soul in Holiness.

More earnestly implore the confirming Aid of Christ's Mortifying Spirit, to
superaded his anointing Grace, to thy Baptismal Vow, that thou may
beincouraged to conflict more resolutely, against the Temptations of Sin,
Statan, and the World.

While the Lock of your Faith is growing, and spreads in Prayer; your strength
to resist and Conquer your Philistin-Lusts, will renew, and not suffer you to
be defeated of your Hopes of Triumph.

15. Despise those Reproaches, which sensual Sinners cast upon a weaned Frame.
It Is no more than you were forewarned of, and fore-armed against, when you
first entered upon the Christian state. They think it strange that you run not
with them to all excess of Riot, therefore speak they evil of you.

Ye may be counted, and pointed at as Monsters of singularity; but better be
weaned with the best, than damned with the most. This is a very excellent and
blessed Frame in Christ's Esteem. Consider, Christ will come to Judgment, and
single out Scoffers at Religion, to punish them, as the firstborn of the Devil.

Your Enemies are your Observers, and may truly inform you of the Complexion of
your Souls; when friends will connive at your remisness, in the exercise of
Grace, or, immoderate pursuit of Earthly Vanities.

If mortified Saints, shall not escape the Censure of such, who surfeit on the
World's Luscious delights; How much more would they revile thee, if thou
should not live up to thy Profession of a weaned Frame? If thou should
always continue a Babe in Swaddling Clothes? Or, pretend to be a strong Man in
Christ, and yet not be alienated from secular cares, but be distracted 'twixt
Hope and Fear continually? Therefore Watch, that you may answer the height of
your Profession, and may not afford just matter of Defamation, in being
strangers to a Self-denying Frame. If otherwise, wear it as your Crown.

16. Delight in the Company of weaned Saints, and in their advice. David, blessed
God for Ahigail's moderating Counsel, who prevented him from avenging his own
Quarrel upon a Churlish Nabal.

If one Child see another lie soaking at the Breast, it will emulate it, and
repine. So, if a newly weaned Saint Converse with Worldlings, who suck in full
delights from Creature Enjoyments, till they be even quackled with a flush of
prosperity; It may incline him to Envy, while himself is made to hancker after
the same excess.

Rather set before you the eminent Patterns of weaned Saints; especially, that
transcendent exemplar of Christ's Self-denial, and alienated heart-Frame from
the Inordinate Love of the World, not only by virtue of that habitual Grace
which was inseparable from his humane Nature, as united to the Deity, but by
that Actual contempt of sublunary Enjoyments, which he expressed by choice rather
than any providential or imposed Necessity.

Christ as the Creator of the Universe and supreme Lord of all things, yea the
infinitely wise disposer of them, best knew how to rate or value the Creature,
not by Fancy, but its real Worth. Yet he chose to make himself poor and of no
reputation, that we might not Idolize sublunary Vanities, nor make Worldly
prosperity the Badg of God's Good Will and Favor.

17. Hearken not to Satan's Cavils against a a weaned State, nor to his
sophistical Pleas and Allurements to continue thee in thy sensual surfeits and
excesses, when Convictions prompt thee to quit his enchanting pleasures.

Believe not his perverted Quotation of Scripture, to maintain a Carnal Worldly
Frame and Course.

He will plead, has not Solomon said, that the Lord has set the World in Man's
heart? Eccl. 3.9, 10, 11, 12.

But how? To study the Lord in it, not to satisfy us, in becoming of our
Portion.

That Text, is only meant of the innocent Scene of the Visible Creation, and
the Works of Divine Providence transacted upon the Stage of the World. We are
to Eye God in the Creature, but not to make a God of the Creature.

We must take a Prospect in our deep Contemplation of the wonderful perfections
of God Beaming forth in the works of his hand. Therefore he took up six days to
make the World in, to signify that we should not slightly and cursorily
meditate upon the harmless Scenes of Natures Workmanship. We ought to fetch
from the Book of the Creature, Rational Arguments to drive home and clinch down
the supernatural Truths of the Scripture, which were before entered by the
Spirit of God, as the Wise Teacher of his weaned Saints. From the constant
Tenor of the Covenant of Nature, we may and ought to confirm our Faith in the
Covenant of God's Grace. This method himself prescribes, viz. we must study the
Creature, to know the Creator by it, to make it a scaling Ladder to improve us
in Heavenly Meditations. We may descant on the Lord's perfections shining in
the admirable Works of Creation and Providence; yet must we not pervert the
study and use of the Creature to place it next our hearts, as our desired
Portion, to seek satisfaction in it as the Center of our desires and delights.
Quaenam insania, frui utendis, uti fruendis! What folly and madness is it to
enjoy the Creature which we should only make use of, and to seek unto God only
in distress, whom we ought to enjoy by an Eternal complacential satisfaction!

Another Plea of Sinners is this, Why should we be weaned from the World,
seeing the Lord when he took a survey of every Creature, gave this Judgment of
it, that it was very Good?

I Answer, 1. But we are very Bad, in perverting the Innocent Workmanship of
God, made for an help and encouragement to promote Virtue, to become the Snare
of a Vicious Life.

The Creature in it self is very good, but thy sin (O Man) has put Vanity into
it, and subjected it to the Bondage of Corruption, in forcing it to serve the
humor of thy ranting imperious Lusts.

2. Thou had need be Watchful and shy how thou transactest with the Creature,
because thou have Corruption too too much in thy heart, to make the most
Innocent Creature prove the most deadly Snare.

In this respect the Ass reproved the madness of the Prophet, when it bruised
his Foot against the Wall, to stop him in his Design of Covetousness, and
Execration of the Lord's Inheritance.

Was I ever wont to start aside, or to serve so shrewd a turn upon thee? But
wonder not, for thou have rebelled against thy Maker, therefore thou have
prompted me thus to put thee into little Ease, by the disappointment of thy
Hopes.

Thou have not resigned up thy self to God, but have run a-madding after the
Idols of thy heart; therefore no wonder if the Creature whence thou expectest
service, fling thee out of the Saddle of thy prosperity, and prove vexation to
thee.

Say not when thou art tempted or corrected by the Creature, that the Lord laid
the Snare, or delights in punishing thee.

Has he not writ Vanity in Capital Letters on the Forehead of the Creature,
and thereby sorewarned thee not to trust in it?

Does he not cry out O mortal Men, how long will ye love Vanity, will ye still
pursue your Lusts, hang about and cleave to them, when they expose you to the
greatest shame and mischief.

Chrysostom said, if the whole World were to be his Auditory, he would choose
that awakning Text to Preach on. Yet though we Arm the Creature against our
selves, and infuse Poison, yea, Treachery into it, by our Lusts, perverting the
right use of it, we securely repose our confidence in it, till it betray us to
our utter Ruin.

18. Have we not good Reason to use all the Arts of weaning from the Creature,
which thus bewitches and insnares us?

1. Do not smile upon it, as being in deep friendship with it, but draw a Veil
over its false Artificial, enticing Beauty.

Put the Creature into the very same Dress, into which the Apostasy of the
first Adam betrayed it: This made it not to be valued; and shall we not stand
at a distance from it in its Temptations?

2. Speak not kindly nor familiarly to your Lusts, to renew their old Fondness
and acquaintance. The Nurse keeps a deep silence, when she would wean off a
Child from cleaving to her.

Chide away a Temptation when it whispers in your Ear, as Satan's Factor to
decoy you.

Hanker not after your Lusts, as David after Absalom, but hew them in pieces as
Samuel did Agag.

Have you betrayed the honor of Christ, and the integrity of your Souls, in
cleaving to Vanity, and will you yet countenance, cocker and plead in defense
of your Lusts?

3. Sing to your hearts, be quieting them in the Lord's tender Faithfulness,
Compassion, and Alsufficiency; when you are under the severest Method and
course of weaning, Psalm. 101.1. David resolved that of Mercy and Judgment he
would sing. For, all the ways of the Lord are Mercy and Truth, to such who keep
his Covenant.

The 32. of Deuteronomy, which consists of Mercy and Judgment is called Moses
weaning Song to reduce Israel from a pursuit of their Idols, as lying Vanities,
and to reunite and knit them to the Lord.

4. Keep a Record of all you experiences, how the Lord sustained you, when your
Spirits were sinking in your weaning distresses, Isa. 63.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

5. Let your weaning Design be carried on by degrees, not with violence.

Judahs Reformation, was not Lasting, because it was set on foot by the rapid
Motion and over-bearing Authority of Josiah only, Jer. 3.3, 4, 10, 11, 19, 21,
22.

6. Use no severity, which is not of Divine prescription.

7. Withdraw out of sight the Fuel, Baits, and Provocatives of your Lusts.

19. Again would you be weaned, then Covet to be dissolved in Affection from
Worldly Vanities, before you be dissolved in Person.

Weaned Saints covet to dye, but dissolute Epicures groan because they must
dye, as having not answered the end of their Being, and placing their Portion
and Felicity in sublunary Enjoyments.

They Carowse so long at the Devils Wassal-Bowl, till being intoxicated with a
Reprobate mind, they meet their Eternal destruction with laughter in the Face.

Labor to be above the fond Love of Natural Life, and the slavish Fear of
Deaths Artificial Cruelty.

Life were not worth the accepting, it is attended with so many miseries; were
it not to make Provision for Eternal Happiness. Neither is Death to be dreaded
by such, who demonstrate the Temper and disposition of a Pilgrim.

Charles the fifth forbade Death to be named in his Court, under the penalty of
Death.

But Moses dyed at the mouth of God, readily at his Command, because he had
long before put off his Shoes, the servile fear of Death, in casting away all
defiling terrene Affections which cling about a Worldling, and make Death
unwelcome.

Saints may well bow the head in submission, and covet to dye, because then,
and not till then, they are perfeclty weaned, when the Lord kisses their Souls
out of their Bodies, as welcome Guests to Glory.

It was reported of Ottomans great Horse, that wheresoever he set his Foot, no
Grass could grow in that place.

So soon as a Saint (by Death) sets his Foot within the Portal of Celestial
Glory, the Weeds of his Lusts dye at the very Roots, the Pride of all Flesh is
stained and vamshes.

Again, take beed of being hardened in Sin, by Antiquity of Custom, or by the
outward successes and prosperity of Sinners, Jer. 44.15.16, 17. The Prophet
refutes this Plea, at 20, 21, 22. Ps. 73.1 to 15.

Lastly, Wisely and Faithfully Improve all the Lords weaning-strokes on your
selves or others.

Let others who have been Thunder struck and blasted, even while they have lain
soaking at the Breasts of the World, and have dyed lamenting their own Folly,
and the Worlds Treachery too late, be your warning-Peals.

But we readily turn off the prognostics, yea, the very Executive part of
God's Wrath, as if our selves were not concerned in the dreadfulness of either.

An instance of the former, you have in Vespasian, who, when he saw a Blazing
Comet and a gaping Sepulcher, thought to wave his own destiny, with this
profane Jest, that the former portended only the Death of the King of Persia,
who at that time wore long Hair, The latter, the death of the old Empress
Julia, who having one Foot in the Grave, must of necessity suddenly yield to
the stroke of Fate.

Wherefore (think you) has the Lord (of late) made such changes in
overturning, overturning, overturning by Pestilence, War, and the desolating
Conflagration of our City, but only to awaken us out of that pleasing Dream of
sensuality, into which the pleasures and profits of the World had insensibly
betrayed us.

And yet how sottishly stupid are Sinners, bewitched with the Sirene songs of
Lusts and the Worlds Flatteries!

Though frequent Earthly disappointments sing out the Passing Bell of our dying
Comforts, and write a mournful Epitaph over the withering Glory of
Creature-Enjoyments; Yet we mind it not, but cross the Lords wise Holy and
Gracious designs, by our security and clinging faster to the Creature.

We still pursue the Vanites of the World, little considering that they will
prove our vexation, or our Ruin.

Like dying persons we grasp the harder, whatsoever Vanity takes us by the hand.

Like drowning Men, we catch at straws though they sloat swiftly away upon an
ebbing Stream.

Sinners! will ye still proclaim your folly and Phrensy, in cleaving to an
Aguish Breast, which is cracked and chapt with flaws of disappointment? which
can yield nothing but corrupt humors, and windy crudities, which will gripe and
torment your Consciences, which will inflame your Pride and sensuality to the
certain Ruin of your Souls?

Wherefore has the Lord stained the Glory of all human Pride, but to bring us
low upon our Knees that himself alone may be exalted, in reigning over our
hearts and affections, in which he will endure no Corrival or Competitor.

Yet still we more eagerly Court lying Vanities by how much the Lord would Rend
them from us, as the Pillows of our Security, and the Purveiors of our Lusts.

Let me therefore in the fear of God, and Love of your Souls, persuade you to
sit Loose from the fancied felicity of the World.

It Is both our Curse and Folly that we make our Lives uncomfortable, to gather
only Fuel for our Lusts.

The World will deal as Treacherously with us, as Absolom's Mule did by him;
when we have most need of relief, it will run from under us, and leave us
hanging in despair 'twixt Heaven and Hell.

Labor therefore to be Divinely born of God, then you will trample the World
under your feet, and become sick of Love to Christ; so shall you Act suitably
to the Law and Dignity of your Divine Original.

Then the World will not cast you into a deep sleep of Security, that it may
take away your Rib, the strength of your Activity and Resolution to serve the
Lord.

Consider, that if you be not Weanlings unto Christ, this impartial Judge will
at the last day reject you from his Bosom, because you would not be estranged
from the Breasts of sensual pleasures.

Not to be weaned, is the ready way at present to be dismounted from the pitch
of worldly Excellency; because we thought we ascended by our own wit and
strength as the Carvers of our own Prosperity.

Now that you may not desist from the severities of this weaning Design, but
carry it on cheerfully; consider the present Advantages, and the future Reward
of it.

For present advantages: This Frame will make Divine Commands prove delightful,
and not grievous; as pleasant Bonds, and Bridal-Ornaments. No Trial will sink
you into a desponding fullenness, or ignoble cowardice.

You will deport your selves as Pilgrims in a Land flowing with Milk and Honey.
The World may tempt you, but it shall not corrupt the Virgin-purity and
integrity of your Souls.

You will calmly bear and wisely improve reproofs from Men and Afflictions from
God, though they lay you prostrate in the dust.

You will not make a timorous retreat, nor shameful Apostasy, from the Truths
and ways of Christ.

You will not wender nor wander after the Antichristian Whore, to be poisoned
by the enchanting Cup of her Abominations. You will be able to tread Antipodes
to Corrupt Customs and Examples; and not be carried down the stream of
Profaneness with Atheists, Worldlings, and Epicures.

You will trade every Talent faithfully, thrive under Ordinances fruitfully,
bear Afflictions manfully, and destroy your Lusts in the minority of your
Christian State.

You will worship the Lord with freedom and Ingenuity of Spirit, not out of a
sordid mercenary disposition, nor with a slavish distraction.

You will serve your Generation with a public Spirit, not macerate your selves
with Envy, at the prosperity of the Wicked, nor run over to them in Antic
Fashions, foolish Vanities and sensual Excesses.

You will compose the mutinous, repining thoughts of a discontented Spirit.

By Recumbency on the Lords Alsufficiency in straits, you will fetch in
Serenity of mind and infinite satisfaction to your wants.

In the want of any thing the Lord will be to you instead of all things. And in
the Enjoyment of all, himself abstractedly will be better than all, because he
is All and in All, in every Creature-Excellency and Enjoyment.

If the Lord call you to lie prostrate in a Low condition, you will come to his
foot with submission and a ready cheerfulness.

If you be sent on the forlorn hope, a weaned frame of Self-denial will make
you adventure All for Christ and his Interest.

You will run out of your Estate, Credit, Safety, and Life it self, to give a
proof of your weaned Frame and the vigor of your Love.

You will live on the Light of God's Countenance and not on the Smiles or
Applause of Men.

You will loath your own Righteousness as deformity it self, and be content to
shine in the Rays of Christ's Compleatness.

You will be strangers to the Dunghil-profits and sensual-delights of the
World; but not to God, nor the Frame of your hearts.

Your eyes will not be dazzled with the Honors and Splendour of a Court, your
Zeal will not be muzzled by Self-Interest, nor emasculated by the pleasures of
this Life.

From the Mount of Communion with the Lord you will look down with contempt on
the glory of Kingdoms, and your Head not turn Giddy.

In the float of your Enjoyments you will be content to be empty by an Ebb of
Riches.

In the height of your indowments you will descend by humility, yea, you will
prefer one Crum of the hidden Manna before Crowns and Scepters.

You will ambitiously pursue no other Conquest, than those of your own Lusts;
neither will you desire to run out an Eternity in the Enjoyment of sinful
sensual pleasures.

You will be as content to bear the Cross of Christ as to wear his Crown.

You will enjoy your selves most Comfortably when you most cross your own
Wills, to comply with Divine Commands, and complete your Obedience.

You will deny your Carnal Wisdom, and subject it to the supposed foolishness
of the Christian Institution.

You will come off roundly from all prejudices against the terms of closing
with Christ that you may enjoy him.

You will be willing to be abased, so the Lord may have Honor by your
Reproach; as knowing that His Glory like the Sun, is in a Declension, when the
Shadow of the Creatures Fame and Pride is longest.

You will Justify God, in Condemning your selves, and keep up honorable
thoughts of him though he feed you with Gall and Wormwood.

You will cleave to the Lord, when you cannot Judge of his Actings in the World;
and will follow him in the Race of Obedience, when you cannot trace out the
hidden footsteps of his Providence.

You will prefer Subjection to Christ, before Domination in the World, and
Poverty of Spirit, before the Luster of the greatest Natural indowments or
acquired Excellencies.

You will mind high-things, aspire to the Knowledge of Heavenly Mysteries, and
yet not be high-minded.

You will keep so much Stateliness, as not to act below your Heavenly descent;
nor will you wilfully defile your selves with the least spot of Sin, or Society
of sinners.

You will come up to the pitch of Holiness, as choosing it for it self, though
it come not attended with the outward accommodations and imbellishments of the
World.

You will be patiently weaned from your own Peace and Comfort, when the Lord
hides his Face and favor, for the Trial of your sincerity; yet even then you
will prize Communion with God, in Order to greater Degrees of Divine Conformity.

You will be Spiritual in all your Natural and Civil Transactions, and when you
have acted to the utmost in your Duty, you will Judge your selves defective and
unprofitable.

You will contemn the World, by living much in Heaven: your spiritual Life will
be acted and carried on, by the Unction and Conduct of Christ's Spirit; So as to
delight your selves in the Lord for his Infinite Perfections, although you be
stripped of all Earthly Enjoyments.

But You will demand of me: May not a Christian, whose Conversation is in
Heaven, take delight in his external Comforts, and yet not violate the Rule of
Sobriety; nor cast off the strict Discipline of Soul-weaning Mortification?

I Answer. He may. But with these Cautions and Limitations.

1. He must distinguish betwixt the Use and the Abuse of the Creature. Then we
pervert the right Use of it, when we install it in the Throne of our
Affections, admiring and adoring it as God himself. The Lord has rankt the
Creature in a Sphere subordinate unto himself; Heaven must not change place
with Earth, nor things Temporal justle out of our hearts the pursuit of our
Eternal Interest.

When sublunary Vanities, like Hagar, aspire to the pre-eminence, they must be
cast forth with disdain.

2. You must distinguish 'twixt a Transient delight by way of surprizal, and a
settled resolved delight by way of plenary consent.

The Discipline of Christ's Camp will not Indulge so large Articles to the
World, as to resign up the heart to the inordinate Love of the most excellent
Creature. This is spiritual Adultery and Idolatry. This Treachery is an
inconsistent, Heterodox practice, to the power and purity of Christianity.

Every glance of admiration cast upon mundane Objects, and which terminates
therein, is a great disloyalty, and high breach of the Mariage-Covenant 'twixt
Christ and the Soul.

As Solomon said to Bathsheba when she petitioned that Abishag the Shunamite,
might be given to Adonijab to Wife; Do thou know what thou have asked? Thou
might with as little peril have ask't the Kingdom for him, 1 Kings 2.22.
There is no less than Treason in such a Request. So, when we importunately ask
this, and that, and the other unsuitable boon at the hand of God; may be not
Reply, Ask the Kingdom also? For thou seek Covertly to reject thy Allegiance
unto Me, to prefer Earthly Vanities for the gratification of thy Lusts.

Many times, we beg the fullness of the Creature to our own destruction, at
least, against the Comfort of our Life; when the Lord Curses and Blasts it, or
crosses us by it; though we do not forfeit our Interest in God himself.

3. You must distinguish 'twixt a Gradual and a Superlative Delight, 'twixt a
Subordinate and an Inverted Love, so as that the Creature should sway, and
overruled the poise and bent of our Souls.

4. You must distinguish 'twixt Loving and delighting in the Creature
abstractedly from God, for it self, and a complacency in it, only as it is a
Lower Pledge of our Heavenly Fathers providential Love and Bounty.

For though the Lord give us all things liberally to enjoy; yet, it is with
this reserved Limitation, that we should enjoy God in the Creature, and the
Creature for God.

5. You must distinguish 'twixt Tasting of the Creature by way of Trial and
experience, (as Solomon's, who distilled all the Quint-essentials of their
excellencies, that he might sum up Vanity at the Foot of his Survey and
Account) and betwixt Resting in, and Trusting to the Creature, as if it had any
inherent power to make us happy.

6. You must distinguish 'twixt a moderate limited delight; and a passionate,
importunate Transporting Complacency, which will not be delayed, much less
denied; or confined to any Competent allowance of Earthly Comforts. This proves
fatal, when the Soul grows Dropsical, and impetuous in its desires; crying out,
as Rachel, Give me Children, or I dye. When as ravenous Harpies, we will
adventure to snatch any Worldly accommodation out of the hand of God without,
or against his Will, and Consent;

Such supplies, are our Snares, they are not the gifts of Divine Bounty, but
the Fuel of our Lusts; and yet we esteem them as an Adequate portion to make
up true Happiness and Contentment.

7. You must distinguish 'twixt an indifferent mutable delight, because the
Creature in its own Nature is transient and perishing, and a resolute fixed
delight, which terminates in it, as the Center of satisfaction.

A Carnal heart which designs to be Rich, will dive and digg as low as Hell,
to the bottom of the Stygian Lake, for the engrossing of Golden Sands: But a
Spiritual heart refers it self to God's allowance, in these temporal Mercies.
It sets not up its Rest in the Creature, as resolving not to seek any Happiness
beyond it; but uses it only as a Staff to lean on in its Pilgrimage; not as a
Bed, to lie down on for Repose and Tranquillity of mind, or in the midst of
distresses.

Indeed, the Bed is too short, and the Covering too narrow, to wrap up our
Contentment in it.

Earthly things are my Provisions in the way to Canaan, but not a suitable,
sufficient Portion to make me happy.

A Carnal heart loathes even Manna in the Wilderness, and says, it is better to
sit down by the Fleshpots of Egypt.

But a Gracious Soul, will only Taste of the Creature, as Jonathan did a little
Honey, dipping the tip of his Rod in it. He stays not on this side Jordan, but
advances in his March toward Canaan. The World is not his Rest, he seeks a
Heavenly Country, and is not satisfied till he lie in Abraham's Bosom. He does
not so stupidly caress his Soul with sensitive Enjoyments, as to make him
Careless, whether he travel Homewards; rather as the industrious Be, he
lightly touches on Worldly delights, in Order to the stocking the Hive of his
Soul with an increase of Grace and Comfort.

8. You must distinguish, 'twixt delight in the Creature, as it is a shower of
common Bounty, and as it is a Gift which comes from the Heart and special Love
of God.

The former Dispensation, gives only a Civil Right unto our Enjoyments, but the
latter, Sanctifies and improves the true Use of the Creature, for the Lord's
honor, and our Spiritual advantage.

Therefore, if we would keep our hearts in a weaned Frame, let us bound and
moderate our affections to the Best of Creatures; otherwise, we shall discover
an Impotency in Grace, if not a Nullity.

As we must put the Sacrificing Knife of mortification to the Throat of every
Rampant Lust; So, the moderating Restriction of Sobriety to the least
extravagancy of our inordinate desires.

The Jews cried up those superstitious ordinances, viz. Touch not, Taste not,
Handle not, to the infringement of their Spiritual Liberty.

But it will be our Wisdom and safety, to impose necessary Laws on our unruly
and unsatiable affections toward Earthly Vanities.

So shall we not mistake wherein our chiefest Happiness consists, neither shall
we be slack, and slight in pursuing it, when discovered.

Some Hounds while they Course along pleasant Flowery-Fields, are so taken with
the fulsome Scent thereof, that they either lose, or forget their Prey.

But weaned Christians, while they pass through variety of Creature-Delights are
not so prone to be ravished from the Contemplation of the Chiefest Good.

They lose not the exquisiteness of their Spiritual Sagacity, neither do they
admiringly dote on sublunary Profits and Pleasures, nor neglect to pour out the
strength of their Love and Delight on the Lord of the Creation, as the only
Center of true felicity and satisfaction.

Every Man has some delightful Object or other to which he sacrifices his
time, and the strength of his Affections, as to a Deity.

In this Sense, we should make the Lord our Delight, that we may say with
David, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none on Earth,
whom I desire in Comparison.

This Spiritual Delight in the Lord contains not only the serious Contemplation
of his Divine Excellencies in their suitableness to our present, and future
State of Happiness; whereby, a restless Desire to enjoy Union and Communion
with God, in and through Christ, is begotten; but delight is the highest step or
Degree of Love, whereby a Soul weaned from Lusts and the World, Rests fully
satisfied in the choice of the Lord for its Portion and Pattern.

Thus, that Witchcraft which Creature-Vanities fastened on the Affections is
taken off; by the more powerful Charm of Divine Love; and Man's besotted desires
are reduced in some good Degree to their Original Liberty, Excellency and
Purity; by fixing them on the Basis of true Felicity.

For, who could desire more happiness, than to have a permission to delight in
the Lord, who of and in himself is Sole,-and All-sufficient for his own infinite
Contemplation and Enjoyment.

Here weaned Souls may be swallowed up in admiration, by a Constant, bound less
transcendent Delight. Here alone is perfect satisfaction, so as to look out no
farther for true felicity.

To make up this Delight, there are all its Ingredients Essentially in the Lord.

1. Reality of Worth. 2. Variety of Excellencies. 3. Sutability to the Soul. 4.
Sufficiency to give Satisfaction, and a solid Permanency.

1. Reality of matchless Worth. Therefore, it is folly and madness in sinners,
so to observe any lying Vanity, which has but a shadow of Beauty, as to
neglect or contemn the chiefest Good, which is the Idea and Original of all
Perfection.

2. In the Lord alone, absiractedly considered from all Creatures, are all
Excellencies Eminentially and transcendently, without any Composition,
Multiplication, or Division. For himself is One Single, Entire, Absolute, and
Infinite Perfection; without Variety or Variation.

Yet shallow Mortals, nay glorified Saints and Angels, cannot conceive of this
Infinite Perfection without forming distinct, successive apprehensions of the
Divine Essence. For that Excellency which is in God, is not presented all at
once. The sublimest, and purest Seraphim cannot mount up to him, to get any
comprehensive discoveries of that Divine Beauty and Glory which so
transformingly, irradiates, and transcendently Constitutes them in an estate of
Happiness.

This is the Reason, why glorified Saints and Angels are constantly and
immutably delighted in God; because, himself being the Essential Object of
their satisfaction, is Eternally One and the Same. Yet, he transcends all those
distinct, successive apprehensions which are formed by them in a Glorious
Variety. This is both Beautiful and Satisfying: It wins and holds Created
Spirits Close to it, with Admiration, and a boundless Complacency. It presents
and unfold; the Divine Essence in a fresh degree of sweetness, and it sets an
Edg on the Souls delight with an eager kind of fixedness.

Consider, that the Lord delights in himself, because he is Optimus Maximus,
the chiefest Goodness, and his own Ultimate End, into whom, all his Love and
Delight expressed upon the Creature, is Resolved. Therefore, his Glory Beaming
forth in the Creation, must be reflected upon himself who only sees himself in
his own Light of Purity, and enjoys himself in his own unparalled Beauty.

In a strict sense, the Lord cannot look off from himself, nor rejoice, nor
take complacency in any Created Excellency; because himself shed it in measure
on the highest Order of Angels that he might be more acknowledged and admired.

Now, if there be a suitable Alsufficiency in God to satisfy and delight
himself in himself to all Eternity, then it is but equitable, that Saints should
conform to this Duty, purely to delight in the Almighty for himself.

It is the Lord's peculiar and sole Prerogative, to challenge the delight of
Saints and Angels. This is our safety rather, than servitude, or the
Consinement of our Affections, to refer all our desires to his Wisdom, that he
should Judge of them by approbation or dislike: This is to resolve our very
Being and Acting in the World, into the Sovereignty of his Will, which is our
Privilege, and the Restoration of our degenerate Nature to its Divine and
Primitive Integrity.

The Soul is in a manner deprived of it self, of its true Rest, Contentment,
Liberty, and Dominion over all passionate sensitive Desires, while it Centers
not in the Chiefest Good which is more amiable than the Soul it self.

It Is thirsty propension will never suffer it self to be controuled nor
satisfied by any of those sensual Delights, which our Fancies offer to it.

Thus the rarest Music will not quiet the hungry Child, without the Mothers
Breast.

It is only That Self-sufficient Goodness and unstained Archetype of Beauty and
Blessedness, which our delight should be constantly catching after, and
conversing with. This only can beget true serenity of mind, because it is
Adequate to, yea, infinitely excels and exceeds the vast unbounded desires of
our Souls.

O the Happiness of That Christian, who by Mortification of Self-Love,
stretches out the affections of his Soul upon the Immensity of perfection with
the greatest Freedom and Delight.

Weaned Saints, know how to live out of themselves, in and upon God in Christ.
In Their Divine embraces, is only safety and satisfaction to be expected, and
not in those tender Endearments, and sensitive Gratifications, which we
contrive or compass for our selves.

Indeed, the Soul is too bigg for Earthly Designs and Interests. This is the
most Divine Life, when a Man Acts in the World upon Eternal Designs; and is so
wholly devoted to the Lord, as not to cast the least glance of Idolatrous
Admiration toward any sordid secular advantage, whereby the Heaven-born Soul is
inthralled, even while sensual Lusts are gratified.

These cause Man to degenerate from himself, to Pinion and Debase himself, in
extending his Affections upon Earthly Vanities.

Would Christians be more weaned from the pursuit of Lusts, and Worldly
projects? Let them aspire to be more suitable in their Disposition and
Conversation to the Father of their Spirits.

It is only the Restoration of the Divine Image (which produces an Harmony
betwixt the Lords Will and ours) which can elevate our hearts, and refine or
spiritualize our Affections to delight in God abstractedly for himself, though
he allure us not thereunto, by pouring in upon us the Confluence of
Creature Comforts.

It is no less than an Almighty Power, which can thus oversway the Natural
inclination of the Soul, that it shall desist from living on the Creature
without God, (which is Rapine and Sacriledg) and shall settle its Choice on the
most Absolute, Entire, Universal Archetype of Beauty and Goodness.

Let this therefore, be a Demonstration of our Holiness, and the strength of
Renewing Grace, that we can cheerfully sink and reject our own Interest, that
the Lord may not be disappointed of the End of our Being and Acting in the
World.

Do not adopt his Interest unto yours only to serve your selves upon Him, and I
dare say, the whole Creation shall serve you, to Facilitate your Obedience.

This shall be the Happiness of every weaned Self-denying Saint, whom the Lord
delights to honor.

If we prefer him to our Delight, before all the compounded, shallow, fading
Excellencies of the Creature, He can give us our hearts desires to the full,
and will add no Sorrow with it.

Together with the Confluence of Creature Comforts, grow up greater Cares; our
Table many times proves a Snare, and our Supplies our Surfeits.

But in the Complacential Love of God, is no danger, no fear of Excess, or of
making any forfeiture. Here is no occasion of Repenance, for misplacing of our
hearts.

Other Delights cloy and satiate, but do not satisfy. But Spiritual Joys yield
fresh sweetness without Satiety.

When we settle our Affections upon the Lord and his Excellencies, we
transplant them from Earth to Heaven, to ripen in a better Climate.

We lose not, but only exchange our Joys for more solid durable refined
Comforts.

Regeneration, Adoption to an Heavenly Inheritance, and the Kisses of Christ's
Spirit, Sealing Communion with God through Christ, is a greater Cause of
Glorying, than the highest Preferments in the World. Therefore let poor Saints
rejoice, that they are exalted in being weaned even to a Contempt of gilded
Vanities; and let Rich Saints Glory in this, that they are Spiritually abased,
and made vile in their own Eyes, as considering that Man is altogether Vanity
in his best Estate: For when his Gracious endowments are improved to the
highest pitch of excellency, they would yet fade away as the Beauty of a
Flower, were they not rooted and preserved in Christ Jesus.

What Hypocrites become by the Art of dissimulation, appearing to Be that, and
Do that, which they neither Are, nor Act in Truth.

Such should Saints become, by the right Art of Spiritual weaning;

In the prudent regulation and composure of their Natural passions, they should
carry it so as if they were not Men, but Acted like Angels while they walk in
the pathetick strains of Nature.

They must so contrive to bound and conceal their Passions for the want or loss
of the Creature, as if there were no reality in their weeping: Yea, in the
highest Springtide of prosperity, they must rejoice as if they rejoiced not.

Yet in the Exercise of Holy Duties, they must so express reality, as if they
were All Affection, made up with nothing else.

They must so weep for Sin, as if their Head were a Fountain of Tears; and so
rejoice in the Lord, and his Image drawn out upon their Hearts, as if they were
Joy it self. They must so Commerce and Trade with Heaven, as if they were a
Flame of Zeal, an Holy-Covetousness, and Emulation it self.

Yet, Saints are so weaned from Ostentation by humility, that though they be
full of Holiness they pursue after more eminent Degrees as if they had none at
all.

In point of Self-denial, he mourns for Sin, as if he mourned not, because he
counts it no Compensation to Divine Justice. He rejoices in the Acting of his
Graces, as if he rejoiced not, because, though they be admirable endowments of
the New Creature, yet they Eannot Create a Title unto Heavenly Glory as the
Meritorious Cause thereof. He trades with Christ in Holy Duties, as if he
traded not, because he attributes no success to his own skill and industry,
yea, his Spiritual gains or advantages are reaped and possessed without
observation by Carnal Persons; toward whom his Conversation in Heaven, (while
himself remains a Pilgrim on Earth) is altogether a Mystery and a Riddle.

A weaned Self-denying Saint is silent and reserved in driving on secret
Communion with the Lord, yet is he not slight and remiss, but sincerely fervent
and fruitful in all the ways of Righteousness.

Thus Saints being weaned from their own Credit and Applause, make the fittest
and most active Projectors for Christ's Honor and the Propagation of his
Kingdom.

But here it may be Objected by Christ's weak Babes, I fear I am not
Spiritually weaned, because I cannot affirm that my Delight is fixed in the
Lord.

How little is my Mind Abstracted from Conversing with empty shadows, and how
deeply Immersed in sensitive feculent Delights! How seldom do the discoveries
of the Lords infinite Excellencies transform me into a God-like Life.

To this I Answer, thus in the General.

I intended That foregoing Character of weaned Saints, rather for the Imitation
of Babes in Christ, than to assert it to be the minimum quod sic, the least
Essential qualifications, or Constitutive Properties of sincerity in
Evangelical Weanlings.

Christians who falsely argue for a Nullity of Grace in themselves from its
Impotency, must consider, that the right Art of Spiritual weaning is not easily
learnt and practiced, because it is a Sacred Mystery.

Yet, Newborn Saints are under the Conduct of Christ's Spirit, who safely and
tenderly leads them through the Labyrinth of the Worlds Perplexing Cares and
Temptations, that they may not be devoured by the Minotaur of a Flesh-pleasing
Sensuality. Christ's very Babes have a supernatural Sagacity and Instinct to
foresee their Dangers; and being conscious of their own Infirmity to resist
Temptations, they have so much strength as to cry out incessantly, Abba,
Father, succor me with thy preventing assisting Grace, that I may carry on
that Weaning-Design, to which by Baptism I stand obliged.

They can and do claim spiritual Kindred with God himself, nor will they desist
from pleading their spiritual Interest in his Wisdom, Power, Love, Goodness and
Faithfulness, to shield them from Temptations, and to promote their Self-denial
to the Pitch of Heavenly-mindedness.

They will creep as well as they can, into the Presence of their Father; when
they cannot run the way of his Commandments with inlargment of Affection
answerable to their desire.

They testify their Love and Gratitude, their Prowess and Resolution against
sin, Satan and the World, as they are Able; therefore, they shall (though
weakly weaned) divide the Celestial Inheritance equally with the Angels who
Excel in strength.

Take a really weaned Saint at the lowest Ebb of his Affections Godward, yet,
he is to be preferred before the most Zealous Hypocrite; because as the World
and his Lusts are the Joy of his Soul; so the Creature is the Soul of his Joy,
and his Joy only the Blaze of the Creature.

But the Newly weaned Christian does not so eagerly intermeddle with worldly
concernments, as quite to Degenerate and Degrade himself from his Spiritual
Constitution, by becoming One Spirit with Sensitive Objects of a Base alloy.

He never so mixes his Heart with, nor lifts it up to Creature-Vanities as
quite to lose the Sagacity of his Soul, in not apprehending any quick touch of
the Divine Greatness, or not relishing the sweetness of the Infinite Goodness
of the Lord.

Still there is a more potent supernatural Principle within him drawing off his
heart from a Pursuit of the Dunghil-Profits and besotting-Pleasures of the
World. So that, as the Needle in the Mariners Compass, he is still restless
till he Center in the Increated Perfections of the Supreme Being, and Original
Source of All things.

Still he prays wean me and I shall be weaned, for thou art my Praise, that is,
the superexcellent Object of my Love and Delight. If at any time Christ's
weaned Babes wonder at the Grandeur, and wander after the Allurements of the
World, by a short Gratification of their Senses; yet they soon check their
folly, repent of it, lay a solemn Charge on their deluded Souls that they
should return to the Lord, as their Genuine Rest, by complete Satisfaction in
Him alone. They beg to be established by the Magnetic Power and the most
endearing Obligations of Divine Love.

They exercise on themselves all the Rules of Spiritual weaning, with the
greatest strictness and severity.

Their Self-denial holds Pace with their gradual discoveries of the Lord's
Excellencies. The motion of their Souls Heavenward, mounts up sutably to their
Acquaintance with their Heavenly Father. Their Spiritual Light and Life, are
commensurate.

The weakest Babe in Christ digests his Knowledge into studious and sincere
Obedience, although he be not swift upon the Wing, because a dull Earthly Body
clogs his Generous Soul. Yet, That Divine Nature, which he has received, will
grow up to a stronger Constitution, till it cast and work out all those
Obstructions of sensual Passions, which at present damp his Spiritual Zeal and
Comfort.

There is such an implanted principle of a Divine Life, displaying it self in
every Newborn Christian; that the estimation of the Lord's lovely Beauty and
infinite Worth Preponderates the excellencies of the whole Creation.

If the Weakest of Christ's Weanlings were put to his Choice, whether he would
lose an Interest in God or the Creature; he would rather reject with the
greatest abhorrency the the Worlds softest and tenderest Embraces, than those
purest Delights, which endear his heart to the Lord, in the midst of all
Temporal wants and losses.

If the Lord should say to a truly weaned Saint thou shall be freed from Hell,
twelve Princes shall proceed from thee, but I will not by Covenant bestow my
self upon thee, this very Restriction would be an Hell. For it is only
Propriety in God himself, which can satisfy a Gracious heart. It will deny it
self to enjoy an Interest in God, but if the Lord deny his Loving Kindness
which is better than Life; all other Enjoyments will be Joyless; a weaned Saint
will write upon them all, The Glory is departed.

Then will Worldly Men believe, that you are in good earnest in Professing your
selves to be Pilgrims on Earth; that there is a Kingdom which cannot be shaken,
which you are Expectants of, and Candidates for, when you most deny and debase
your selves, that God may be All in All.

Weaned Saints will descend by Humility, when they are advanced to the pitch of
Heavenly-mindedness, or the greatest Communications of the Lords Grace and
Favor.

Then they see most cause of abasing themselves by constant Dependency on the
Lord.

Creatures the more excellent they are in their Being and Operation, the more
frail and brittle they would become, if left to a Self-subsistency.

Even the Spirits of Just Men made perfect modestly, and cheerfully acknowledge
that they shine with a Precarious Excellency borrowed from that Fountain of
Light, who Enamels their Crowns with Stars of Glory; therefore they cast them
down at the Foot of the Lamb. These Celestial Favorites applaud not their own
perfections; but while they sun themselves in the Rays of Christ's Divinity,
they pay a grateful Homage of Adoration to the Archetype of their Blessedness.

The perfect Vision of the God of Glory begets perfect Transformation in a
Glorions State. Yet, the Saints Satisfaction is only in his Union with, and
Enjoyment of the Lord Himself, as the Essential and Infinite Object of
Happiness.

In the mean time, as Sojourners upon Earth, they tread all sublunary Vanities
under their Feet.

Weaned Christians who wait upon the Lord, are compared to Eagles, Isa. 40.31.

This King of Birds has a strong Wing, a swift Flight, a quick piercing Eye,
and is usually secure from the stroke of Thunder. Heavenly contemplative Souls
(while such) are above the reach of Satan's Temptations. It is for Batts and
Owls to fly near the foggy dull Earth. But the Soul of a weaned Christian is
of too Noble an Original to stoop so low, as to think it can be beautified by
the accession of any worldly accommodation.

They affect Earthly Conveniences no further than they may be Advantages in
seeking Heavenly Graces. By an Art of Spiritual Chemistry they can sublimate
the unrighteous Mammon into true Charity, Honor into Humility, and Worldly
Pleasure into a Recreation of Divine Joy, becoming the New-Man.

They Spiritualize all the dross of the Creature, they make a Divine
improvement on that very indifferent Comfort, which Satan would Convert into a
Snare.

They account a weaned State to be the Life of Heaven upon Earth. Thus they
take a Survey of the Holy Land, and enter Paradise in their thoughts before
they take possession in their Persons. Little do Worldlings know what
transporting Delights weaned Saints enjoy in their secret Retirements from the
World.

These Doves which seek Solitude for Holy Meditation, have the fullest
discoveries of Heavenly Glory. How are their Wings covered over with Golden
Apparitions, in clear Revelations from the Spirit of Truth, when their
Judgments are not clouded with the gross Fumes and Vapors of Terrestrial
Delights; nor their Affections clogged by sinking in the Bogs of Sensuality!

The very Vices of Worldlings are improved by Christ's Weanlings, unto a
Religious Imitation. Covetous Men (like Nero) cruelly dig into the Bowels of
their Mother-Earth, to search for Veins of Gold and Silver, which the God of
Nature has on purpose hid, lest they should prove Traitors to his Majesty, by
winning over our Affections unto Vanity. Yet, such is their folly, that like
Antaeus or Consumptive Persons, they think to recover the strength of
Contentment by smelling to, and embracing of the Earth.

But weaned Saints dig into the Rich Mines of the Scriptures, thereby to
discover and possess themselves of Christ, in whom are hid all the Treasures of
Divine Wisdom, and the unseen Joys of Celestial Contemplation. Yet, are they
not inquisitive by a bold Curiosity, where God would have them Ignorant.

Weaned Saints being mindful of their Divine Original, make every
Creature-Comfort a distinct round in Jacob's Ladder, whereon they climb to
Heaven; that they may obtain fuller Communion with the Father of their Spirits,
to beget sweeter and more satisfying Tastcs of Divine Love and Bounty.

They count it Honor enough to be Newborn from Above; and esteem it a Chiefer
part of their Felicity, that they are made meet and fit for Heaven, than that
their Names are engraven on their Celestial Mansions, before they take the
Triumphant Possession of them.

They are highly Ambitious even in their Pilgrimage; yet it is only to please
the Lord in their Conversation, which is carried on in a Mystery toward the
World.

They constantly Lie sucking In pure Delights from the Ocean of Immense
Felicity, with more than Epicurean grediness. When they obtain the Choicest and
Richest Effusions of Divine Love, they are Covetously restless; and Impatiently
thirsty after more of the Invigorating Influences of the Holy Spirit.

They Bathe their Dove-like Minds not in the Lethean Lake of Sensual Pleasures,
but in the Crystal Streams of Truth and Righteousness. They Prune their Wings
(viz.) the discomposed Affections of their Souls by Heavenly Circumspection and
Curiosity. Their hearts are impregnated with Zeal by the Spirit of Life and
Righteousness, yet are they not puffed up with Pride, nor a conceited
Self-Sufficiency, under their highest seize in Holiness, or in Comfort.

Other Creatures may forget and forsake the Damme when weaned; but every
Self-denying Christian, more cleaves to, and waits upon the Lord, as not able
to subsist Alone, nor lead a Separate Life from the Fountain of pure Joy, when
most incompast with the Enjoyments of the World, or the Comfortable quickening
influences of the Holy Spirit.

Even in Heaven they shall Most and Best admire, yea Adore the Infinite
Perfections of God in Christ. They shall Eternally Acknowledge and
Complacentially Descant on that Divine Power which subjected them to a weaned
Estrangement from the World, or any Confidence in a Self-Righteousness,
according to that Assertion of the Prophet Isa. chapter 45, v. 25. In the Lord
shall all the Spiritual Seed of Israel be Justified, and shall Glory.

Thus they shall rejoycingly Acquicsce, not so in the State of their Personal
Salvation, as Triumph in the Lamb of God, who Redeemed them by his Blood, from
Worldly Allurements, and all pollutions of Flesh and Spirit.

To this Author and Finisher of our Faith, to this Pattern of Self-Abasement,
who humbled Himself to the Death of the Cross, that he might wean us from
doting on Earthly Vanities, and raise our hearts to admire and choose the
ever-Blessed Deity, for our Al-satisfying Portion; be ascribed, as is most due,
All Honor, Adoration, and Glory, both Now, and to all Eternity, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

