A SERMON Concerning the Doctrine, Unity, and Profession OF THE Christian
Faith. Preached before the UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD. To which is added An APPENDIX
concerning the Apostles CREED.

By THO. SMITH, B. D. and Fellow of St. Mary Magdalen College, OXON.

London, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. M. DC. LXXXII.

Admodum Reverendo in Christo Patri ac Domino, HENRICO, D. Episcopo LONDINENSI,
Sacelli Regalis DECANO, Regiae Majestati a Secretioribus Conciliis; Natalium
Splendore, Morum Sanctitate, Fide, Prudentia ac invicta animi fortitudine
contra infensissimos Eccl. Ang. hosts; Caeterisque dotibus, quae Virum
Apostolicum plane decent, Illustri: T. S. Concionem hanc de Unitate fidei,
coram Academicis Oxoniensibus in Templo B. Mariae non ita pridem habitam, una
cum Appendice de Symbolo Apostolico, gratitudinis and observantiae ergo, L. M.
D. C. Q.

Ephesians. 4. Ver. 5. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism.
IT is sad to consider, how that Christianity has suffered more by the Factions
and Feuds of Christians themselves, than by the Fury of its Professed
Adversaries; that Schism has done more Mischief to the Church of God than all
the Persecutions of the Heathen Roman Emperors, who made it their business to
abolish and destroy the very name of Christian out of the World; and that
Christians should treat one another with that despite and Malice, as if good
Nature and Charity, and a mutual forbearance were things of mere indifference:
As it has happened between Churches of different Communions in the East and
West, and in these Northern parts of the World since the Reformation, either
because they would not own an Usurpt and pretended Universal Authority, or else
because of some little disagreement in Opinion, or the Usage, or Non-usage of a
Ceremony, which every particular Church, in dependence upon, and in conjunction
with the Civil Power, has a right to Ordain and Constitute, and which all its
Members are Obliged to conform to, out of a Principle of Conscience. For
hitherto must be referred, as to their chief and proper Causes, all those
horrid Tumults and Separations of Parties, which have so much distracted the
Peace of the Church from its first Beginnings and Infancy to this day, however
blancht over by some with subtilty and Artifice of Wit, and by others with
pretensions of Zeal, to color their Ambition and their Pride, and to render
their ill Designs the more plausible and successful. Here it is (for I cannot
be so unjust and partial, as to charge the Romanists only with the fault,
though they are deepest in the Guilt, and more blameable than the rest) that
all take Sanctuary, and think to justify their ill will one to another this
way; that they, from whom they divide and separate themselves, entertain
different Notions of some points of Religion, though perchance they be not
Essential to the Faith; or else use other Rites in their Religious Worship,
which yet may be as decent, and as useful, and as significant, as if this were
to renounce Christianity, and to forsake the Communion of the Catholic Church.

How has this fond Opinion broken Christendom into pieces, and shut Unity and
Peace out of it! Private Passion, and a false Zeal corrupting our Judgments and
Practices so far, that instead of joining in the same Public Worship and
Service of Christ our Common Savior, and Living together in Holy Communion and
Love, we can scarce think well one of another; we are afraid of one another
Company, in a Church at least, as if it were Infectious; we use most unjust and
most unchristian Censures; we malign and hate one another to the Death, and, as
much as in us lies, we send one another to Hell by our evil and uncharitable
surmises, and by peremptory Sentences of Excommunication.

To prevent which dismal and bloody effects of Schism, the Apostle, in the
beginning of this Chapter, lays down and prescribes a Method, which would prove
most effectual, if we understood our Duty and our Interest so much, and had but
the Honesty and the Conscience to put it in practice and execution; which is,
to walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith we are called, v. 1. That is, to adorn
the Doctrine of God our Savior with a suitable Conversation, and as it becomes
true followers of Christ, to live up to those Excellent Rules and Institutions
which he has Published, and not only to make an outward Show and Profession of
Christianity, but to justify and demonstrate the Truth and Power of it by the
Example and Practice of the severest Virtues; and especially in this great
Instance of it, With all Lowliness and Meekness, and Long-suffering, to forbear
one another in Love, v. 2. That is, to make some (...) -- as in that Excellent
Speech of the Emperor Constantine to the Bishops, upon the breaking up of the
Council of Nice, just before their departure to their respective Dioceses: In
Eusebius, in his Life, Lib. 3. Cap. 21.
allowances for the faileurs, and imperfections, and infirmities of the
Understanding, not to be peremptory and dogmatical in matters of Opinion to the
prejudice of Unity, nor to be over-fierce and severe in Condemning little
mistakes and mis-apprehensions of things, but to keep the Unity of the Spirit
in the bond of Peace, v. 3. That is, to maintain this Spiritual Communion with
all Peaceableness and Moderation; as being all Members of one Body, the
Catholic Church, 1 Cor. 12. 13.
actuated by one Spirit, and called together in one Hope of our Calling, v. 4.
That is, by virtue of the same common Christianity, all alike pretending to the
hopes of the same common Salvation; all Disciples of the same Lord, and
initiated into the same Faith by Baptism. So long as there is no breach made
upon the Articles of Faith, and the form of sound Doctrine is retained in its
full sense and meaning, there can be no just cause for Censure and disunion:
All other differences of Opinion in Matters of Doctrine should be tolerated and
forgiven, if they have no evil influence upon Religion, Morality, and
Government; if there be no Schism or Sedition in practice or behavior, and so
long as the Unity of Faith is preserved entire, and kept inviolate, there being
as but one Lord, so but one Faith, and one Baptism.

From which words I shall endeavor to make good these three following
Propositions.

1. That the Doctrine of Faith is to be derived only from the Revelations of
Christ. One Lord, one Faith.

2. That the Unity of Faith only respects the Fundamentals of the Christian
Religion. And,

3. That all, who are Baptized, and consequently are by this Sacrament of
initiation admitted and received into the Communion and Society of Christians,
are to make Profession of this Faith. One Faith, one Baptism.

1. That the Doctrine of Faith is to be derived only from the Revelations of
Christ. One Lord, One Faith.

That it is not in the Power of Humane Wit, how prying and industrious soever,
to raise it self up to the Contemplation and Knowledge of Supernatural Truths
without the assistances of Divine Revelation and Grace, is no disparagement to
our Reason to acknowledge; it being the effect of an irrational Pride, and a
foolish and idle Presumption to think otherwise: And particularly, that the
Mysteries of the Christian Religion lie out of our reach and ken, appears by
this unhappy Proof, that upon their first publication at that time, when all
the Treasuries and hidden recesses of Nature were thrown open, and laid common,
when nothing seemed to escape the curiosity of bold and industrious Enquirers;
and when the Studies of Philosophy seemed to exalt Reason to the highest pitch
and degree of Perfection that it was capable of, they stood amazed at the
strangeness of this New Doctrine, not agreeing with their Principles, and no
way to be accommodated to any of those numerous Hypotheses which they had taken
up; and from this amazement they soon advanced to a downright and violent
Opposition of it, andused the utmost Forces of their Wit and of their
Eloquence, and of their Learning, to deride, and decry, and suppress the
further growth and spreading of it. And the Jews too, though they daily turned
over the leaves of the Prophets, which pointed out in part those Glorious
Discoveries of the Secrets of God, which were to be made in the times of the
Messiah, were so besotted and wrought upon by the suggestions of a gross Fancy,
and an ill-grounded Prejudice, that neither the exact and punctual fulfilling
of those Prophesies, even in their minutest Circumstances, nor continued
Miracles wrought before their Eyes, the highest and most rational grounds of
Credibility, could prevail upon them to admit a Doctrine, which was so much
above their mean apprehension of things, and seemed to thwart and cross and
contradict those Foolish Idea's and Childish Fancies, wherewith they had so
long pleased themselves.

The World was now to be Instructed with a better and more Heavenly Doctrine,
and all just motives of persuasion were used and proposed to satisfy their
Reason, and to work them up to a full belief of it, enough to lay the whole
blame of their Infidelity upon themselves. The Will of God was Revealed by
Christ in plain and easy Propositions, without the least Ambiguity: And the
Authority wherewith they were proposed, rendered them Infallible; for how could
they well doubt of, or deny the truth of a Doctrine, which they saw attested
and confirmed by Omnipotence?

The ground then of our Faith is the Revelation of God by Christ. My Doctrine
is not mine, says our Blessed Savior, but his that sent me, St. John 7. 16.
And He that sent me is true, and I speak to the World those things which I have
heard of him, St. John 8. 26. And as my Father has taught me, I speak these
things, v. 28. All things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known
unto you, Chap. 15. v. 15. And I have given unto them the words which thou
gave me, and they have received them, Chap. 17. v. 8. He is the Author and
Finisher of our Faith: He it is, who Commissioned his Apostles to Publish the
Doctrine which he first taught, from him, and in his Name, to go about the
World, and make Proselytes to his Religion, and Proclaim the Saving Virtues and
Merits of his Cross, and the Glories of his Resurrection. And what one of the
number says concerning the Institution and Celebration of the Blessed Sacrament
of the Body and Blood of our Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 23. I have received of the Lord
that which I have delivered to you, is to be said of the whole complexion and
comprehension of the Articles of Faith. This was their Profession, wheresoever
they went; there was no mixture of their own Fancy and Invention in the case;
St. John 14. 26. and Chapter 16. 13. 1 St. John 1. 1.
they were Infallibly secured from the least Error in their Doctrine by the
Guidance of Gods Spirit; That which was from the beginning, which they had
heard, which they had seen with their Eyes, and which they had looked upon, and
their hands had handled concerning the World of Life, they declared, and
nothing else: Nobis nihil ex nostro arbitrio inducere licet, sed nec eligere,
quod aliquis de arbitrio suo induxerit. Apostolos Domini habemus auctores, qui
nec ipsi quicquam ex suo arbitrio, quod inducerent, elegerunt; sed acceptam a
Christo Disciplinam fideliter nationibus adsignaverunt. Tertullianus de
Praescripti: haeret. Cap. 6. Expedite praescribimus adulteris nostris, illam
esse regulam veritatis, quae veniat a Christo, transmissa per comites ipsius,
quibus aliquanto posteriores diversi isti Commentatores probabuntur. Apologet.
Cap. 47.
That is, they spoke nothing concerning Christ, either his Person or his
Doctrine, but what they were Infallibly assured of, what they had heard Christ
say, and declare to be his Will, and what they had seen him do.

The Foundation of Faith being thus established, I shall hence deduce these
following Conclusions.

1. That no Doctrine can or ought to be proposed as an Article of Faith, but
what Christ has revealed, and what the Apostles from him have declared in their
Preaching, and in their Writings.

2. That since the times of the Apostles, and the Sealing up the Canon of
Scripture, no new Doctrine can or ought to be added, as Essential to the
Christian Faith.

3. That it is not in the Power of the Church in general, much less of any
particular Church, of what denomination soever, to lay down any Doctrine, as
necessary to be believed in order to Salvation, but what is expressly Revealed,
or clearly deduced out of the Writings of the New Testament, and was
acknowledged in the first Ages of Christianity.

1. That no Doctrine can or ought to be proposed, as an Article of Faith, but
what Christ has Revealed, and what the Apostles from him have declared in their
Preaching, and in their Writings.

All Articles of Faith relying upon the Revelation of God by Christ, as we
cannot deny such a Testimony, which God has given of his Son, without making
him a Liar, as St. John speaks, first Epist. 5th. Chap. 10th. ver. So nothing
more can be required of us, than to believe that, and that only, as necessary
and with a Divine Faith, which he has been pleased to Reveal: Hanc tibi fossam
determinavit ipse, (Christus) qui te non vult aliud credere, quam quod
instituit, ideoque nec quaerere. Tertul. de Praescript. Cap. 10.
Because what he has thought fit to Communicate of the Mind and Will of God, in
Order to the constituting a Church upon Earth, and bringing us to Heaven, must
needs be judged sufficient, as it is indeed most sufficient, to effect this
double end.

Now, because Christ did not leave behind him a System or Body of Articles in
Writing, (most of which refer to himself, that is, as well to that wonderful
(...), or Dispensation and (...), as the Greek Fathers call it, and so
comprehending his Conception and Birth, and the several Acts of his Life, and
his last Sufferings; as that He was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, Born of a pure
and spotless Virgin, did such and such stupendous Miracles, Suffered by way of
Atonement and Expiation for the Sins of the whole World; rose again from the
Dead, and ascended Bodily into Heaven, and the like, as to the (...), or
transcendent Excellencies of the Divine Nature; as that He is the only Begotten
Son of God, Begotten of the Father before all Worlds, and God of the same
Substance with the Father, and the like, which were to be the Fundamentals of
his Religion) but left the business of propagating a Church, which he had
Founded by his Blood, to his Apostles, to them we are to have recourse, V.
Tertullianum de Praescript. haeret. Cap. 21.
as to the Infallible Relators of his Mind and Will.

Here then is to be the Trial of a Doctrine proposed to us, as a Matter of
Faith. Is it any where to be found in the Discourses of our Blessed Savior,
preserved in the History of the Gospels? Did the Apostles teach it their first
Converts? Is it agreeable to, or founded upon true Apostolic Tradition? Is
this Tradition un-interrupted, and derived down pure from the first Ages of the
Church? Was it received universally by the whole number of Christians in their
time? Is it any where to be met with in their Writings, either in express
terms, or by a just, and clear, and necessary consequence? For though the
Doctrine of the Christian Religion was Preached and received before any word of
the New Testament was Penned; yet to say, the Apostles taught many Points of
Doctrine, which they did not put down in Writing, and much more, such Points,
as consequentially overthrow and destroy the plain sense and letter of the
Text, is a very groundless and scandalous Supposition: And besides, the injury
done to the Scriptures, which contain in them all Points necessary to be
believed, is confuted by the Authors of it, who pretend to fetch Proofs of
their fansied tenants out of them: There having been that great Veneration
shown to the Inspired Writings in all Ages, that Heretics, and other kind of
Innovators have chosen rather to bend and warp the Scripture, and pervert its
true sense and meaning in favor of their tenants, than not seem to have the
Countenance of its Authority.

2. That since the times of the Apostles, and the Sealing up of the Canon of
Scripture, no New Doctrine can or ought to be added as Essential to the
Christian Religion.

For all which is Essential to the Faith was delivered by the Apostles to the
Church at first, otherwise the Rule of Faith had been imperfect, and would have
had something wanting to its completion, to be supplied in aftertimes; which
is to cast a slur and a blemish upon those first Ages of Christianity, which
were fully Instructed in all things fit and necessary for Christians to know
and believe by the Apostles themselves, without the stamp of whose Authority no
Doctrine could be Authentic. For what ever was believed as necessary, derived
only from them, as the Instruments, which Christ made use of to convey his
Doctrine to the World; which they did fully, and carefully, and successfully by
the mighty aids of his Spirit, according to the trust reposed in them. They
established the belief of the Christian Religion in the hearts of the Faithful:
They concealed nothing of the mind and will of God. Churches were formed and
modelled according to their direction and command; and Episcopal Government
with the inferior and subordinate Orders settled for the better preservation
of Unity and Communion. The Faith of Christ was professed and acknowledged, as
they taught and delivered it. Their Writings were among them, exactly agreeing
in all things with what they had Preached, and were to be the standing
Monuments of the will of Christ, Registered by their Pens, to direct all
succeeding Generations of Christians in their belief, and in their practice.
After their Decease no new Revelation was to be expected, only a delivering
down of the same Apostolical Doctrine to after-ages, in which the Faith, nay,
the Curiosity of all Christians ought to acquiesce.

3. That it is not in the Power of the Church in general, much less of any
particular Church, of what denomination soever, to lay down any Doctrine, as
necessary to be believed in order to Salvation, but what is expressly revealed,
or clearly deduced out of the writings of the New Testament, and was
acknowledged in the first Ages of Christianity. For if so, they must pretend to
the same Authority, and produce clear and convictive Evidences of such
Revelations to make them credible, and lay an Obligation upon the Consciences
of all Christians to receive their Propositions under the grievous penalty of
otherwise disobeying the voice and will of God. This dotage indeed Montanus,
and such kind of Enthusiasts, have been guilty of: But their pretensions were
rejected as dreams of folly, arising from mis-interpretations of Scripture, as
if there were to be new Revelations made in aftertimes by way of
super-addition and supplement, (into which errors they were led by their pride
and conceitedness, and an ill habit and temper of body) and the Authority of
the Scriptures, and the Praescription of the precedent Ages were justly
objected against them. See Vincentius Lirinensis excellently treating of this
Argument in the 32 Chapter of his Commonitorium.
All that the Church can pretend to is only this, not to define and make a new
Article of Faith, but only to declare what before was revealed and
acknowledged, though not so clearly understood, till the iniquity of the times
made it necessary for the Church in a general Council to interpose her
Authority in the determination of Controversies of Faith. And where this
pretense is true, her Authority ought to be submitted to, and her Proposals
embraced: That is, if the Doctrine proposed be the just and natural result of
an Article of Faith expressly revealed in the Scripture, and understood in that
manner, and acknowledged as such by the first Christians, Contemporaries and
Successors of the Apostles, and constantly received from that time downward by
the generality of Christians. For the opposition of a few after the first and
general reception of a necessary truth is not considerable; who through
prejudice, or out of design to raise troubles in the Church, or out of Ambition
to be the Chiefs of a Faction, or through a pretended dissatisfaction at the
Mysteriousness of it, or through wantonness of Wit and Humor, have been so
obstinate, as not only to refuse to make the same acknowledgment, but to
maintain the contrary with violence.

To all which, that is, to Scripture, Apostolic Tradition, and universal
consent, the Fathers Assembled in the four first General Councils had regard in
their determinations against the Heretics of their time. They only fixed what
was Catholic Doctrine, and what was believed in the Ages before they were
born. They founded their Declarations upon Scripture and universal Tradition:
And to silence all Disputes, and to prevent Schism, and to direct their own and
aftertimes in the belief and understanding of the great Mysteries of Faith,
they reduced the Doctrine of it, as it lies scattered in several parts of
Scripture, into a form of plain and intelligible words, and enlarged themselves
in the explication of it, as we shall see anon: (...). Theodotus Ancyranus in
expositione symboli Nicaem Romae 8. 1669 Speaking of the Union of the two
Natures in the single Person of Christ. page 26.
It being the very same Faith which the Apostles Preached, and which the
Scriptures hold out to us. All the Anathema's are founded upon that of St.
Paul, Gal. 1. 8, 9. Though we or an Angel from Heaven Preach any other Gospel
unto you, then what we have Preached unto you, let him be accursed. If any Man
Preach any other Gospel unto you, than that you have received, let him be
accursed. And if there cannot be another Gospel, there cannot be another Faith:
The Gospel being the Revelation of God by Christ, and that Revelation full and
made but once in the days of his flesh. Whatever therefore the Church believes
or proposes to be believed, must necessarily be founded upon such a Revelation;
and consequently, that Doctrine, if it be of Faith, must Originally derive from
Christ and his Apostles; the Doctrine of Faith being nothing else but what He
and They from Him have delivered, and consequently, one and the same,
yesterday, to day, and for ever: That is, in all Ages. Now, into the Unity of
this Faith, and wherein it consists, I shall enquire, in the next place, which
brings me to

The second Proposition, That the Unity of Faith only respects the Fundamentals
of the Christian Religion.

In order to the clearing of which, I will premise these two things:

1. That there was a form of words containing a brief Summary of the Principles
of the Christian Religion in the Apostles times. This seems to be presupposed
in the writings of the New Testament, and most probably may be the same with
the (...), or form of sound words, which St. Paul advises Timothy to hold fast,
2 Epist. 1. 13. and the (...), or the good depositum or Doctrine committed to
his trust; which undoubtedly refers to the grounds and fundamentals of
Christianity, purely and abstractedly considered as the rule of Faith, to which
he was precisely to adhere against all the noise and clamours of vain and
idly-curious talkers, and the contradictions of the Gnostics, (the Heretics
of that Age, who not content with the express and plain Revelations of the
Gospel, pretended to higher and greater degrees and measures of Divine
knowledge) as is plain from 1 Timothy 6. 20. O Timothy, keep that which is
committed to thy trust, avoiding profane and vain bablings, and oppositions of
Science, falsely so called: It being most agreeable in the nature of the thing,
if there were no places of Scripture to countenance and make out the
supposition, that the Apostles should, for the use of the new Converts, put the
necessary Articles of Faith together into certain heads of Discourse, and that
to these they should refer as to a Rule, Gal. 6. 16. Phil. 3. 16. as to a form
of Doctrine, Romans 6. 17. as to the first Principles of the Oracles of God, Heb.
5. 12. as to the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6. 1. and as to the
Faith once delivered to the Saints, Jude v. 3. All which several
circumlocutions are expressive of the same thing, and suppose those Doctrines,
whatsoever they were, universally taught, and as universally acknowledged and
received.

But But of this see the Appendix.
whether this form be the same with that, which bears the name of the Apostles
Creed, (which undoubtedly in the main is very ancient, and most probably as
ancient as their time; the Church, in succeeding Ages indeed, to serve and
maintain the interests and necessities of Religion against the innovations and
assaults of Heresy, adding several clauses and expressions to it) is not here
to be disputed at large. But however this is certain, that long before the
times of the Council at Nice there was a Confession of Faith in use among
Christians as the Standard of Catholic verity, as is demonstrable from the
Testimonies of Irenoeus, Tertullian, and others: which Creed Sciendum sane est,
quod in Ecclesiae Romanae symbolo non habetur additum, descendit ad inferna:
Sed neque in Orient is Ecclestis habetur hic sermo. Vis tamen verbi eadem
videtur esse in eo, quod sepultus dicitur. Rufinus.
(though there might be some variation of expression in it, that is, Rufinus
Presbyter Ecclesiae Aquileiensis in expositione symboli Apostolici. Priusquam
incipiam de ipsis sermonum virtutibus disputare, illud non importune
commonendum Puto, quod in diversis Ecclesiis aliqua in his verbis inveniuntur
adjecta. In Ecclesia tamen Urbis Romae hoc non deprehenditur factum. Quod ego
propterea esse arbitror, quod neque heresis ulla illic sumpsit exordium: Et mos
inibi servatur antiquus, eos qui gratiam baptismi suscepturi sunt public, id
est fidelium populo audiente, symbolum reddere: Et utique adjectionem hujus
saltem sermonis eorum qui praecesserunt in fide, non admittit auditus. In
ceteris autem locis, quantum intelligi datur, propter nonnullos haereticos
addit a quaedam videntur, per quae novellae doctrinae sensus crederetur excludi.
might be more contracted or enlarged at different times, yet agreeing in the
main as to the sense and wording too of most of the Articles) being of general
usage, and of great Authority, deriving neither the one nor the other from the
Canon or Decree of any Council, it may more than probably be supposed from the
spreading and universal reception of it in the Churches of the East and West,
and from the general silence of its first establishment, that it was delivered
down from the very first Ages, as having the Apostles for its Authors.

Against this if it be objected, that if such a Creed had been extant at that
time, the same respect and reverence would have been given to it as to their
other writings, and consequently that there would have been no addition nor
alteration of it, much less any new form, as the Nicene may seem to be, framed
and introduced, as if the other had been defective, it may be fully and
satisfactorily replied, that whosoever considers the estate of the Church in
the Southern parts of the Empire; V. Eusebium de vita Constantini. Lib. 3. Cap.
4.
that is, in Egypt and Libya, and Thebais, under Constantine, how it was rent
and torn, and the dissolution of its very Being threatened by the new and
blasphemous Opinions of Arius and his numerous followers, he will quickly find,
that the Fathers, who were convened at Nice to put a stop to those Commotions,
and allay the fury of the Tempest, which began to shake the foundations of the
Government as well as of Religion, lay under a necessity of fencing about the
hitherto uncontradicted and established Doctrine of Christianity with a larger
and more explicit form of Words, retaining for the most part (though with some
little interpolation referring to the Arian controversies, which they hoped to
put an end to this way) the old form, which Eusebius, Bishop of Coesarea in
Palestine, presented the Emperor and that Council, as having received it from
the Bishops his Predecessors, and which himself and the Catechumeni were first
taught, and professed at their Baptism; and by these means Epiphanius in
Anchorato versus finem. (...).
adding a Commentary and explication of what was more closely couched in the
Apostolical form, which they did not pretend to alter, but to draw forth in its
full meaning and consequence.

For it was not enough for the Arians to say, which is the Plea of the
Socinians at this day, that they acknowledge the Apostles Creed, and are
willing to subscribe to it, unless at the same time they will admit the full
sense of the words with the several propositions, that are necessarily included
in them, as they are and have been understood by the Catholic Church from the
first times of Christianity. For if they pretend to say, they believe Christ to
be the only begotten Son of God in a private sense of their own, to the
prejudice of his Godhead, that is, if they will not for all this believe him
to be God, begotten of his Father before all Worlds, but fancy there was a
time, when he was not, and so make him a Creature, though the most glorious and
perfect of all the Creation, and so deny him to be of the same substance with
the Father; what is this but to destroy the Faith of Christ, which is built
upon this Foundation, to make a mock-profession of Faith, to retain the
Apostles words only, and deny in the mean while the truth of the Doctrine,
which they were intended to establish? And so afterward when the Heresy of
Macedonius brake out, threatening new troubles, and distracting the minds of the
People with their Blasphemous Novelties. V. Theodotum Ancyranum in exposit.
symb. Nic. page 88. Et professionem fidei a Romano Pontifice haberi solitam in
libre diurno Pontif. Roman. page 35. -- Secundum Constantinopolitanum adaeque
Sanctum; certum quoque quinquaginta Patrum Concilium sub Imperialis memoriae
majore Theodosio, in Regiam Urbem concurrens, quod symbolo deesse putabatur
exposuit, and gratia Spiritus Sancti in lustrante, Deum esse Spiritum Sanctum,
Patrique and filio, utpote consubstantialem, coadorandum annexit.
The Article concerning the Holy Ghost was enlarged by the Assessors of the
first General Council held at Constantinople under Theodosius the Emperor; by
which enlargement all good Christian People were to be established in the
belief of the Catholic Doctrine, declared so to be, according to Scripture and
Universal Tradition.

By these mighty Arguments they convinced the Heretics, and justly subjected
them to the Punishment which their refractoriness and guilt deserved. They
settled the Peace of the Church, and secured the Faith from the like assaults
in aftertimes. Their Creed was the Test by which they discerned Truth from
Heresy, and it was received and acknowledged as such, Athanasius Epistola ad
Jovianum Imperatorem, de fide. Of the Nicene Creed, (...). And a little after,
(...) -- Theodotus Ancyran. (...). page 30. (...) -- p. 31. Si quis hanc fidem
non habet, Catholicus dici non potest; quia Catholicam non tenet fidem, and
ideo alienus est and profanus, and adversus veritatem rebellis. V. Fidem S.
Ambrosii apud Lambec. Lib. 2. Comment. de Bibl. Caesar. Cap. 5. p. 268.
by all the Orthodox Christians in the Churches of Greece, the lesser Asia,
Syria, and Egypt, and taught the Catechumeni as a necessary qualification of
their admission into the number of the Faithful, which is the true reason that
the other short form, which had been in use hitherto (the sum and substance of
it with all its necessary deductions being transfused into this) began to be
dis-used, and in process of time wholly omitted and left out of their
Liturgies. Whereas at Rome, and in the other Churches of the West, where those
Controversies about matters of Faith, which had exercised the Wits and
Curiosities of the Orientals, (whose prying and restless Genius drove them upon
those subtilties) never were admitted, or made no considerable progress among
them; they continued constant and steady in the profession of the Ancient
Faith, and therefore stuck to, and retained the old form of words, as they are
summed up in the Creed, which we call the Apostles, with some little addition,
and needed not a larger explication.

2. It follows from this, that S. Leo in sermon 23. qui est de nativitate
Domini IV. Nisi una est fides non est.
the Doctrine of Faith must necessarily be one and the same every where,
according to the assertion of the Text: It was the common Faith, Tit. 1. 4. not
appropriated to any particular Sect; but it lay in common, and open to all: The
whole Faith, that is, so much as was necessary to denominate them true
Believers, was received by all without any difference in the main points of it.
For how could it be otherwise while they adhered so close to the Doctrine of
the Apostles, who all Preached the same Faith in the most distant parts of the
World, between which there could not possibly be, as the times stood then, that
is, before the Polarity or directive virtue of the Lodestone was known, any
communication or intercourse? There was a perfect agreement and harmony of
Confessions among all who had embraced the Doctrine of Christianity. The
Christians here in Britain believed no otherwise than those at Jerusalem, and
those in India, whom St. Thomas Converted, and all who lived in the
intermediate spaces between those two vastly distant extremes, which were the
boundaries of the then known World, exactly agreeing with both. Though they
differed in Language, Customs, Laws, Behavior, and way of Living, and were
under different Governments, yet they all held the same thing: Which Argument
is excellently handled by Irenoeus, in his 1st. Book, 3d. Chap. adv. Hoereses.
There cannot be a more convictive Argument of the truth of the sense of the
Articles of Faith, which the Heretics reject, than the profession of them in
all Churches of the World. For how came this universal Consent established, but
from the soundness of the Doctrine, and the Authority of its first Publishers?
Among that great variety of Opinions, which prevailed every where, there were
certain essential points of Faith, wherein they were all unanimous, and so long
as they were held and maintained, a liberty of Judgment and Opinion was allowed
in lesser matters, witness those Ancient forms beforementioned, long before
the Civil Power took the Christian Religion into its protection; which
whosoever admitted and processed, was received into their Communion. So that
from this Unity of Faith, which was received every where by the whole number of
Christians, except some obstinate Heretical Dissenters, who were a small and
inconsiderable Party at first, in comparison of the rest, the Christian Church
was styled Constantiue, in his Letter to the Churches concerning the Nicene
Council, Apud Eused. in vita ipsius. lib. 3. cap. 18. -- (...).
Catholic, or Universal, just as the great Ocean is one and the same, though
it receives particular denominations from the several shores which it washes,
as the British, Cantabrian, Atlantic, and the like, and not from any
pretended subjection to one Sovereign Pastor: And the word Catholic became
another name for Orthodox; and the Bishops afterward subscribed themselves
Bishops of the Catholic Church of such a place, as founded on the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles, Universally received throughout the World, and by
virtue of the same Faith in Communion with all Christians.

Upon these two Suppositions I shall lay down these following Propositions:
That,

1. Diversity of Opinions in matters of Religion of less moment does not
interrupt and dissolve the Unity of Faith.

Opinions arise either from want of Evidence in the things themselves, which
causes a fluctuation and unsettlement in the mind, as not knowing where to fix
and rest; to which we yield a wavering kind of assent, more or less, according
to greater or lesser degrees of Probabilities; or else from the weakness of the
understanding, which not being able to take a comprehensive view of things, and
resolve them into their first Principles and Original Causes; or for want of a
sure Foundation, whether of Nature or Reason, or Authority, or Revelation,
takes up with Arguments and motives of assent, which fall short of certainty,
and which cannot quiet the mind, and secure it from all suspicion and fear of
the contrary. And indeed considering the great variety of men's tempers and
complexions, Education and Interests; and the greater or lesser degrees of
Knowledge, Industry, Curiosity, and the like; there is a Moral impossibility,
that Opinions should be one and the same. And where God has left a liberty, no
Power upon Earth can oblige the Conscience and Understanding to admit them any
otherwise than as Opinions: That is, either as true in their kind, but far from
the Infallibility of Divine Revelations; or as pie credibilia: Or as means and
instruments of Agreement and Uniformity in Judgment, to prevent Schism and
Confusion; so as yet no one particular Church shall prescribe to another, but
leave each to its liberty of securing their peace and quiet by what Confessions
they judge best for that end; and nothing be imposed as a matter of Doctrine,
which thwarts the Ancient Christian Doctrine and the Catholic Tradition of the
Church.

2. All truths are not fundamental and necessary to be believed with the same
firmness of assent: For several Propositions may be true and useful, and yet
not necessary and essential to the Faith; the ignorance or dis-belief of which
does not throw a man out of the Communion of the Church. The neglect of this
distinction has been one great cause of the troubles and turmoils of
Christendom, whilst fierce and eager Disputants have been engaged in the
defense of several tenants, which have no necessary dependence on the Doctrine
of Faith, and which are not determined in the Scriptures, and by reason of
their difficulty, and the various apprehensions and prejudices of men not like
ever to be fully and satisfactorily decided; and which indeed are but niceties
and trifling subtilties in comparison; while they put a greater value upon them
than the nature and matter of them will bear; and whilst they Sacrifice Unity
and the Peace of the Church, and the grand and real concerns of Religion to
Passion and Humor.

3. Much less are doubtful Consequences and Philosophical Opinions to be
admitted and reckoned in the number of Fundamentals. At first certainly, and
for several Ages together, there was no great subtilty required in order to be
a good Christian. The Institutions of Christianity were not Laborious and
perplexed: Nothing was required but a firm assent of the mind to a few
Propositions, whose matter indeed was Mysterious, but what had the highest
ground of Credibility to make the assent to them just and rational; but when
once a bold Curiosity, and an unlawful, and an over-affected subtilty made men
depart Theodotus speaking of the Nestorians of his time -- (...). page 7.
from the simplicity of Faith, and Religion, instead of being the Rule of Life
and Discipline, became an Art of Disputing; and Scripture and Antiquity no
longer made the Judges of Controversies, but every man's particular Reason,
though never so much biased and perverted by the prepossessions of fancy, and
by the heat and influence of his Passions; then Articles of Faith began to
multiply, and every nicety and far-fetched consequence was called by that name,
and Magisterially imposed, and the Philosophy of Aristotle and Plato was
brought in to their assistance, till the substance of Christianity was even
lost in the Quarrel, and the very Foundations of it undermined, and Faith
swallowed up in wantonness of Wit, and Peace shut out of the World by Faction
and Schism. The result was, that they were the worse Christians; more talkative
and curious perhaps, but less strict and Religious, and Charitable; nay, less
knowing than they were before they let loose the Reins to their fancy, and
leapt over those boundaries which God and the Church had set.

4. Whatsoever was not Fundamental in the Apostles time, cannot be so now. If
it be a true way of defining an Article of Faith, that it was revealed by
Christ to the Apostles, and as such, imposed by them upon their Proselytes,
without the embracing of which they could not be Christians; and that it is to
be found in the writings which they left behind them, either expressly or by
necessary consequence: Then the contrary also, that is, whatsoever is not found
in their writings, either directly, or by just and necessary consequence, and
was not proposed to the first Believers, cannot be Fundamental; and
consequently no one is bound to believe any Doctrine, but what was then
revealed, and afterward acknowledged by the Catholic Church; and whatever
proposal is made by the Church, is no farther to be believed, than as it is
consonant to the Scripture and the Doctrine of the Apostles; this declaration
not being of it self sufficient to make an Article of Faith, but as it is
founded upon Scripture and Apostolical Authority. How had the Peace of
Christendom been still preserved, if these Rules had been followed and kept in
after-ages? That is, if new Opinions, whereof some are very dangerous, to which
the Christian Church was a stranger for several Centuries of Years, and all
uncertain at the best, if mere fancies, to which Superstition and Ignorance
have given Birth; and if the niceties and subtilties of the Schools, and things
impossible to be thoroughly known, and matters of mere speculation, that tend to
the disservice of Religion, and do not slow in the least from its Principles,
had not been adopted Articles and Points of Faith, (all which we justly object
to the Church of Rome) and made necessary conditions of Communion. How might we
have adorsed before the same Altars, and gone together to the House of God as
Friends; and have been partakers of the Mysteries of the Body and blood of our
Savior, if they had not determined the manner of the presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, and brought in a new Doctrine, which contradicts the whole circle of
Sciences, and the sense and experience of all mankind; and tied all others to
believe an unnatural sense of the words of the Institution? making the
differences irreconcilable by their Trent Canons, and shutting out all
possible hope of Peace, till God shall open the eyes of the Christian Princes
of that Communion to see the fallacies and cheats of the Court, and the errors
and corruptions of the Church of Rome, to call a free and truly General
Council, to debate the differences which are now on foot, to the great scandal
of Christianity, upon the Principles of Scripture, Primitive Antiquity, and
genuine Apostolical Tradition, and which considerations of Worldly Interest and
Grandeur keep up; this being the only way left to restore Unity to the divided
Catholic Church.

It Is the glory as well as happiness of the Church of England, that the Rites
she uses in her Religious Worship are decent and Solemn, and every way serving
the purposes of Religion; that her Government is Apostolical, that her
established Liturgy is according to the Primitive Standard, and which no wise
and good man can justly be offended at, unless perchance, he thinks this a just
reason, because it is a set form; that she holds nothing as necessary and
essential to Faith, but what was held so in the first Ages of the Church, and
can be proved out of the Scriptures; that she rejects no Tradition that can
prove it self to be Apostolical; that she receives the Articles of the
Catholic Faith, held Anciently for such, in their received sense, and as they
are laid down in the three Creeds, and admits all, who receive them, into her
Communion; that her determinations of Opinions in her Articles are modest, and
far from the high-flown pretense of Infallibility, and designed as an
Instrument of Union; that she is willing to communicate with Christians of what
denomination soever, where the terms of the Communion are Lawful, so as it may
be done without sin, without prejudice to truth, and the Fundamentals of Church
Government confirmed by universal Practice and Canons of Councils, and without
violating the Rights and Privileges of the Catholic Church, as well as her
own in particular. Let the Romanists single out any one of her professed
Tenants, which she holds as essential to Faith, and necessary to Salvation,
which is not exactly agreeable to the first Antiquity. They cannot deny, that
she holds nothing amiss herein; only they pretend, that she does not hold
enough: That is, that we reject Transubstantiation, and the Sacrifice of the
Mass, Invocation of Saints and Angels, Worshipping of Images; that we do not
admit the Pope to be the visible Head and Monarch of the Church, and the Vicar
of Christ, and that it is necessary to Salvation to be Subject to him, and the
like: All which are mere Fancies and Usurpations. But if the Primitive
Christians were in the right, if a good Life (for that is a Fundamental and
most necessary point of Christianity, and without which all our belief, be it
never so Orthodox, will signify nothing) added to an entire and found Faith,
carried them to Heaven, we may be secure; it is enough for us to follow them
and tread in their steps: We retain the same Faith; the Reformation of the
Church of England conformed it self to their Practice and Example. Our Church
has been the great Eyesore of Rome ever since, and especially of late, when
they had such mighty hopes of prevailing, to which the froward and perverse
humor of the Non-Conformists, and chiefly the Presbyterian Faction, the
Original and source of all our Church-divisions, have given so great advantage.
So that the Wise and most Learned King James, of Blessed Memory, may seem to
have been a Prophet in this too, That if ever the Pope were brought into
England, it would be upon the back of a Puritan, as well as in that remarkable
saying, No Bishop, no King; the truth of which was most sadly justified and
made out in the late most bloody and unnatural Wars, and by the most horrid
Murder of the best of Princes, Charles the Martyr, whose Righteous Soul must
needs be troubled (if any thing of pity, which is a troublesome Passion, can be
supposed to reach the Blessed) at our present Distractions, and the dismal
consequences of them. They envy her Beauty and Order, the discreet Piety of her
Service, and the Regularity and exactness of her Discipline, and the
Apostolicalness of her Government, and the flourishing of her Universities.
This makes them rage and swell, and for want of better Proofs and Arguments,
accuse and arraign, as guilty of Heresy and Schism, and Innovation, the purest
and most Apostolical Church of the World. But wise and considerate men are not
to be frighted out of their Senses, and out of their Religion with hard and big
words, and with reproachful Language. The dissolute and debauched may easily be
reconciled, as the new word is, to a Religion that is so favorable to them,
and gives them hopes of going to Heaven after a careless and wretched Life, if
upon a Sick Bed they begin to be afraid, and profess a little sorrow, and can
but send for a Priest, and be Absolved; and the ignorant and weak may be
wrought upon by little tricks and pieces of Sophistry, and cheated and
trapanned out of a Church, the Doctrine of which they did not thoroughly
understand. For it is impossible for one who understands aright the Grounds and
Principles of the Reformation, upon which this National Church proceeded, ever
to renounce her Communion, unless he first makes Shipwreck of his Honesty as
well as of his Conscience, and is swayed wholly by Worldly respects and
interests. But we need value their Censures the less, not only because they are
unjust and uncharitable, but because they involve the Primitive Christians in
the same guilt with us, and all the Christian Churches this day in the World,
that will not own that grand Fundamental Article of the Roman Faith, the Pope's
Jurisdiction, and be content to receive their Christianity from Rome, and
acknowledge all her determinations to be truly and really, as they in the
ordinary Court-stile call them, Apostolical. Let us in the name of God justify
the Doctrine of our Church by the strictness and exemplariness of our Lives, as
well as by Arguments and Discourses of Reason. Let us reform our selves not
only from the Errors and Superstitions, but from the Vices that are too
commonly practiced in Catholic Countries, as they call them, though thanks be
to the great industry and kindness, and charity of their Missionaries of late,
they would be content, I will not say (though perhaps I might justly enough)
make it their business, that Atheism and Profaneness, and Debauchery should
overspread the Land, rather than that the name of the Church of England should
be any more in remembrance. In times of such defection to Socinianism and
Popery on the one hand, and to Fanaticism on the other, let us take heed to our
selves, that we be no way biased or wrought upon to desert the purity and
integrity of the Christian Doctrine, as it is taught in this Church, in any one
point of it; and withal let us seriously consider and remember, that it is not
enough to believe it with our hearts, unless we make open and public
profession of it with our Mouths: Which brings me

To the third Proposition, That all who are Baptized, and consequently are by
this Sacrament of Initiation admitted and received into the Communion and
Society of Christians, are to make profession of this Faith; One Faith, One
Baptism.

It was the undoubted Practice of the Church in the first Ages, that the
Candidates of Baptism should make profession of that Faith, into which they
were to be Baptized, some previous time being allowed for their Instruction in
the Doctrine of it, as Mos inibi (Romae) servatur antiquus, eos qui gratiam
Baptismi suscepturi sunt, public, id est, sidelium populo audiente, symbolum
reddere. Thus he: Leo Magnus, Epist. 24. ad Flavianum Episc. contra Eutychem;
quam eruditionem de Sacris novi ac veteris Testamenti paginis acquisivit, qui
ne ipsius quidem symboli initia comprehendit; and quod per totum mundum omnium
regenerandorum voce depromitur, istius adhuc senis cord non capitur. Epistolu^
97. ad Monachos Palaestinos -- quae tanta extitet decipientis astulia, ut
obliti Prophetarum and Apostolo lorum, obliti symboli salutaris and
confessionis, (...) pronunciantes coram multis testibus, Sacramentum Baptismi
suscepistis, diabolicis vos illusionibus sub leretis? This for the Western
Church. For the like Practice of the Eastern Churches, we have the Authority of
Eusebius apud Socratem, Hist. Eccles. lib. 1. c. 5. and Theodorit. l. 1. c. 12.
and of the Fathers of the Council held at Constantinople under Theodosius, in
their Synodical Epistle to Pope Damasus, St. Ambrose, and the other Bishops of
the West, speaking of the Nicene Creed then established, but referring also to
the Ancient Oriental Creed, and the practice of the Ages before them. (...) --
apud Theodore lib. 5. c. 9. Besides others elsewhere mentioned.
Rufinus, a Presbyter of Aquileia, who Lived almost 1300 Years since, in his
Exposition upon the Creed, assures us for his own time, and says, it was then
an Ancient Custom, and so may be justly referred to the very times of the
Apostles. It Is to be acknowledged indeed, that St. Luke, in the History of the
Acts of the Apostles, gives us this account only in general, that the new
Converts were required to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; as in the case of
the Prisonkeeper, Converted by the Preaching of St. Paul, Acts 16. 31. And that
after St. Philip had convinced the Eunuch by Preaching to him Jesus, and
explaining the Prophesies which foretold him, so as that he desired to become
a Proselyte of Christ, as he had hitherto been of Moses (a Devotion to whose
Law had brought him to Jerusalem) and had also farther acquainted him, that if
his request to be Baptized were more than a Complement or Curiosity; if it were
real and sincere; if his Faith proceeded from a thorough conviction of mind, he
was qualified for Baptism, and not otherwise: If thou believe with all thy
heart, thou may. The Eunuch makes no other Confession but this, I believe
that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, Acts 8. 37. This Objection was made of
old, that is, in St. Augustines time, as appears by his Book de fide and
operibus: To which he returns this just Answer, cap. 9. Nunc ergo placet, ut
hoc solum homines respondeant, and continuo baptizentur, nihil de Spiritu
Sancto, nihil de Sancta Ecclesia, nihil de remissione peccatorum, nihil de
resurrectione mortuorum, postremo de ipso Jesu Christo nihil, nisi quia filius
Dei est; non de incarnatione ejus ex Virgin, de passione, de morte crucis, de
Sepultura, de tertii diei resurrectione, de ascensione ac sede ad dextram
Patris aliquid dicendum est Catechizanti, ac profitendum credenti? By which it
appears, that it was his judgment, that a more explicit form was then made,
and consequently that this bare Confession was attended with it, or at least
does necessarily suppose and involve it. See more to this purpose in the same
Author at large.
But then it is evident, that in this one Proposition the whole Doctrine of the
Creed is virtually contained, and that it draws necessarily all the other along
with it, and that this general belief was deduced into its severals afterward;
and that for a more explicit and particular enumeration of the Articles of the
Christian Faith, we are to have recourse to the Apostolical writings, in which
they confirm the new Christians in the Faith which they had been taught to
believe and acknowledge. By all which it may appear, that,

1. Divine Faith in general is necessary to the Being of a Christian, and that
without it we, to whom the Gospel is Preached and made known, cannot pretend
either to Christianity, or to any hope of Salvation. For, as the Apostle St.
Paul says, if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thine heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved, Romans 8. 9. Where this Article of the Resurrection of Christ from the
dead supposes the rest, and is here expressly mentioned, as the confirmation of
the truth of Christ's Mission and Doctrine.

2. That it is a very grievous Error to fancy, that it is a matter of mere
indifference what our belief is in particular, and that it is enough, that we
believe that Christ is the Son of God, without obliging our selves to believe
all the just and necessary consequences of that Proposition, merely because
that one single Act of Faith qualified the first Converts for Baptism; when
that only is mentioned, as the Foundation and Basis of all the rest, and does
Necessarily include all the other Doctrinal Points, that depend upon it.

3. That we are obliged to profess our belief of the whole Doctrine of
Christianity, as it lies in the writings of the New Testament, which is the
Rule of Faith, and as out of them it is briefly summed up in the Creeds, the
explication which the Catholic Church has made of that Rule. So that as on the
one hand after this acknowledgment, it is unjust to demand a more particular
and distinct account or catalogue of the Fundamental Articles of the Christian
Faith necessary to be believed in order to Salvation; (that being sufficient
for the Catholic Church in all Ages, which was so in the first) so on the
other hand, to believe less, and to reject any part of the Christian Doctrine,
and teach the contrary, is justly chargeable with the guilt of Heresy, and is
not the effect of wariness, but of pride and obstinacy. The command of God to
believe the Testimony that he has given of his Son, and the revelations of his
will, and the Divine Authority, on which they are founded, are sufficient
Arguments to move us to assent to the truth of them, though the matter of them
be so far above our comprehension. They are Mysteries, and necessarily must be
such, and therefore are to be adored and submitted to, with that humility, that
befits Creatures conscious of their own weaknesses and faileurs, and of the
infinite and incomprehensible Majesty and perfection of God. And if this
troubles them, they may as well murmur, and quarrel, and find fault with the
dispensations of Providence, as obscure and un-intelligible: There is enough to
satisfy all, who will be content with just Proofs of it, though not to take
away all possible doubt: and by this means they must side with the followers of
Epicurus in their idle and foolish, and impious attempts to raze the very
notions of a Deity, out of the minds of Men, and extinguish and destroy all
Religion out of the World. This is not imposing upon them, or doing violence to
their Reason, as they object, only upon this pretense, because the Mysteries of
Religion are not as evident and clear to their understanding, as visible
objects are to the Eye in a clear and full light: For then they would cease to
be matters of Faith, and lose their name, and fall under the comprehension of
Science. And indeed so long as they retain this unreasonable Principle, that
all the Mysteries of Christian Religion are to be tried and judged by the
narrow Rules of Philosophy and natural Reason (which can be no proper medium of
proving things only knowable by Revelation) they may well pretend that it is not
in their own power to change their Opinions, and that it is not possible for
them to bring their understandings to admit them. But can they hope, that this
should justify their pertinaciousness, and excuse them at God's Tribunal? Is
it not to be feared, that the unjust prejudices which they entertain, arise
from a perverse will, and from obstinacy and pride, and peevishness, and not
from any dissatisfactoriness at the inevidence and incertainty of the grounds
and motives of their Credibility? It is only God who can convince such men by
the mighty influences of his Grace, and remove these prejudices, which obstruct
the reception of his truth, to whose Mercy we leave them. For us, let us hold
fast our Profession of Faith without wavering; for God is faithful who has
called us to the knowledge of his Truth. If you understand aright the
Principles of the Christian Religion, and the Principles of the Protestant
Religion, it is impossible for you to be debauched and perverted either by
Socinian or Jesuit, or Sectary. All their pretended demonstrations (for error
and delusion are usually very bold and confident) are mere Sophisms and
Arguments of deceit, tricks, and artifices of Wit, without any foundation of
true Reason in the one, or of Scripture or Apostolical Tradition in the other.
If, as I said before, the Primitive Christians went to Heaven, you may be
assured of the same hope of Salvation in the Communion of the Church of
England, if you add to a sound Faith the practices of a Virtuous, and Holy, and
truly Christian Life; and if you perform the Vows you made at your Baptism, and
renew every time you receive the most blessed Sacrament, and so adorn the
Primitive Faith with Primitive Purity and Holiness.

Appendix concerning the Apostles Creed.
THis form of Faith is called by Lib. 1. adv. haereses, cap. 1.
Irenaeus (...), or the invariable Rule of Faith, received and openly professed
and acknowledged by the new Convert at his Baptism; (...) And so in several
other places he refers not only to the Christian Faith in general, but to a
fixed and known rule of it: As lib. 1. cap. 19. Cum teneamus autem nos regulam
veritatis. And lib. 2. cap. 43. Nusquam transferentes regulam, neque errantes
ab artifice, neque abjicientes fidem -- This rule of Faith is called somewhere
by him, (...), or little body or System of Articles, containing the sum and
substance of the Christian Religion. Tertullian does also often mention the
regula fidei, as a thing every where known and acknowledged; as in his Book
against Hermogenes, in the beginning, de praescript. cap. 13. Apol. cap. 47.
And in his Book, de velandis Virginibus, in the beginning, Regula quidem fidei
una omnino est, soia, immobilis ((...)) and irreformabilis; and is the same
with what he calls soon after, Lex fidei, or the unalterable Law of Faith,
which admits of no change; whereas the Church has a Power in matters of
Ecclesiastical Discipline and external behavior, to make what alteration shall
be judged most suitable to the rules of Piety, Prudence, Decency, and to
variety of Circumstances of places, and times, and other accidents. Hac lege
fidei manente, caetera jam disciplinae and conversationis admittunt novitatem
corrections, operante scilicet and persiciente usque in finem gratia Dei. Thus
in general there was an explicit rule of Faith, or form of words in their
times, who lived toward the end of the second Century.

That this form was the same in the main with what we call the Apostles Creed,
is next to be made out, which I shall do by laying down the words and Articles
of that Form. I begin with Irenaeus, l. 1. c. 2. Ecclesia per universum orbem
usque ad fines terrae seminata, and ab Apostolis, and a Discipulis eorum
accepit eam fidem, quae est in unum Deum Patrem omnipotentem qui fecit Coelum,
and terram, mare, and omnia quae in eis sunt; and in unum Jesum Christum,
filium Dei, incarnatum pro nostra salute, and in Spiritum Sanctum, qui per
Prophetas praedicavit dispositiones Dei, and adventum, and eam, quae est ex
Virgin generationem, and passionem, and resurrectionem a mortuis, and in carne
in Coelos ascensionem dilecti Jesu Christi Domini nostri, and de Coelis in
gloria Patris adventum ejus, ad recapitulanda universa, and resuscitandam omnem
carnem humani generis. Here is an explicit acknowledgment of the Doctrine of
the Christian Faith, received all the World over by all Orthodox Christians,
wherein they profess to believe in one God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven
and Earth, the Sea, and all things which are therein: And in one Lord Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, incarnate; that he was born of a Virgin, suffered, rose
from the dead, ascended into Heaven, and that he shall come again in the glory
of the Father, and that he shall raise the dead; and in the Holy Ghost. It is
not here undertaken to be proved, that it is the same in every expression of
it; for that is variable; or in all its clauses, several of which were added in
after times for wise and just reasons and ends mentioned before by Rufinus. But
it is evident, that the beginning was ever the same, the Article of one God,
Almighty, maker of the World, or of all things, or of Heaven and Earth: For
they were not confined to a Phrase, and the explication was various: And then
immediately follows the Article concerning our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ,
the Son of God, our Lord -- this Solemn Profession being so common and
universal, that the Fathers who refer to it, in all probability thought it
unnecessary oftentimes to repeat any more than the beginning, the rest being
easily understood. So, l. 1. c. 19. Cum teneamus nos autem regulam veritatis,
id est, quia sit unus Deus, omnipotens, qui omnia condidit per verbum suum and
aptavit, and fecit ex eo, quod non erat, ad hoc, ut sint omnia -- lib. 2. cap.
43. Nunquam transferentes regulam, neque errantes ab artifice, neque
abjicientes fidem, quae est in unum Deum, qui fecit omnia. lib. 4. cap. 45. Hi
and eam, quae est in unum Deum, qui omnia fecit, fidem nostram custodiunt, and
eam, quae est in Filium Dei, dilectionem adaugent, qui tantas dispositiones
propter nos fecit: And to the same effect cap. 62. Omnia er constant, and in
unum Deum Omnipotentem, ex quo omnia, fides integra, and in Filium Dei Christum
Jesum Dominum nostrum.

He supposes all along, that this Confession of Faith and particular form,
agreeable to what we find in the Creed, was handed down in the way of Tradition
from the Apostles. Thus, lib. 3. cap. 3. speaking of St. Clement, he says, that
in his Epistle to the Corinthians, he did annuntiare quam in recenti ab
Apostolis receperant traditionem, annuntiantem Unum Deum, Omnipotentem,
factorem Coeli and terrae: But more expressly and fully in the 4th. Cap. Quid
autem si neque Apostoli quidem Scripturas reliquissent nobis, nonne oportebat
ordinem sequi traditionis, quam tradiderunt iis, quibus committebant Ecclesias?
Cur ordination assentiunt multae gentes Barbarorum, quorum fortasse aliqui qui
in Christum credunt, sine charta and atramento Scriptam habentes per Spiritum
in cordibus suis salutem, and veterem traditionem diligenter custodientes, in
unum Deum credentes, fabricatorem Coeli and terrae, and omnium, quae in iis
sunt, per Jesum Christum Dei filium. Qui propter eminentissimam erga figmentum
suum dilectionem, eam quae esset ex Virgin, generationem sustinuit, ipse per
se hominem adunans Deo, and passus sub Pontio Pilato, and resurgens, and in
claritate receptus in gloria, venturus salvator eorum, qui salvantur, and judex
eorum, qui judicantur, and mittens in ignem aeternum transfiguratores veritatis
and contemptores Patris sui and adventus sui.

To this form or rule Tertullian plainly alludes in his Book against Praxeas,
making it as Ancient as the first Preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles, cap.
2. Nos vero and semper and nunc magis, ut instructiones per Paracletum,
deductorem Scil. omnis veritatis, unicum quidem Deum Credimus, sub huc tamen
dispensatione, quam Oeconomiam credimus, ut unici Dei sit and filius sermo
ipsius, qui ex ipso processerit, per quem omnia facta sunt, and sine quo factum
est nihil. Hunc missum a Patre in Virginem, and ex ea natum hominem and Deum,
filium hominis, and filium Dei, and cognominatum Jesum Christum, hunc passum,
hunc mortuum, and sepultum secundum Scripturas, and resuscitatum a Patre, and
in Caelos resumptum, sedere ad dextram Patris, venturum judicare vivos and
mortuos, qui exinde miserit secundum promissionem suam, a Patre, Spiritum
Sanctum, Paracletum, Sanctificatorem fidei eorum, qui credunt in Patrem, and
Filium, and Spiritum Sanctum. Hanc regulam ab initio Evangelii decucurrisse
etiam ante priores quosque haereticos, nedum ante Praxean hesternum, probabit
tam ipsa Posteritas omnium haereticorum, quam ipsa novellitas Praxeae hesterni.
But more contractedly in his Book de velandis Virginibus, thus, Regula quidem
sidei una omnino est, sola, immobilis, and irreformabilis, credendi Scil. in
Unicum Deum, Omnipotentem, mundi conditorem and Filium eius Jesum Christum,
natum ex Virgin Maria, crucisixum sub Pontio Pilato, tertio die resuscitatum a
mortuis, receptum in Caelis, sedentem nunc ad dextram Patris, venturum judicare
vivos and mortuos, per carnis etiam resurrectionem.

Novatianus, a Roman Presbyter, who lived about the Year 240, thus begins his
Book de Trinitate. Regula exigit veritatis, ut primo omnium credamus in Deum
Patrem and dominum omnipotentem, id est, verum omnium perfectissimum
conditorem. Cap. 9. Eadem regula veritatis docet nos credere, post Patrem,
etiam in Filium Dei, Christum Jesum dominum Deum nostrum, Dei filium, hujus
Dei, qui and unus and solus est, conditor scilicet rerum omnium; ut jam and
superius expressum est. Cap. 29. Sed enim odorationis and fidei auctoritas,
digestis vocibus and literis Domini, admonet nos post hoc credere etiam in
Spiritum Sanctum.

That the Apostles made a Creed, and that this according to the limitations
laid down above, is that Creed; both History and Tradition justly induce us to
believe, and it appears hence, that it is a mere Fancy and conjecture of
Vossius, dissert. prima de tribus symbolis, Sect. 24. When he says, that it was
composed by the Bishop and Clergy of Rome, (he means Pope Damasus) about the
Year of Christ 400. For besides what has been said already, Rufinus, who lived
at that time in the Neighboring Church of Aquileia, speaks of it, as of a most
Ancient form in use in the preceding Ages: And Vigilius, lib. 4. contra
Eutychem, who lived about the Year of Christ 500, under Zeno and Anastasius,
puts it out of all doubt, quoting the words of St. Leo, and answering the
objection from the variety of the reading. Universitas prositetur credere se in
Deum Patrem omnipotentem, and in Jesum Christum silium eius Dominum nostrum.
Huic capitulo ob id iste calumniatur; cur non, dixit, in unum Jesum Christum,
silium ejus, juxta Nicaeni decretum consilii? Sed Roma and antequam Nicaena
Synodus conveniret, a temporibus Apostolorum usque ad nunc, and sub beatae
memoriae Caelestino, cui iste rectae fidei testimonium reddidit, ita sidelibus
symbolum tradidit, nec praejudicant verba ubi sensus incolumis permanet. This
Creed was in use in the Roman Church long before the times of the first Council
at Nice; yea, from the first times of the Apostles. St. Leo, in his Epistle to
the Empress Pulcheria, Epist. 27. Ipsius Catholicae symboli brevis and perfecta
confessio, quae duodecim Apostolorum totidem est signata sententiis, tam
instructa sit in munitione Caelesti, ut omnes haereticorum opiniones solo
possint gladio detruncari. Sermon. 24. Catholici and Apostolici symboli regula.
Sermon. 60. Qui est de Passione Domini Christi hac sidei regula, diledissimi,
quam in ipso exordio symboli per auctoritatem Apostolicae institutionis
accepimus. Sermon. 93. Instituto a S. Apostolis Symbolo repugnantes. And above
one hundred Years before him, Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 7. (...) 1614. (...) 1538.
(...)
St. Ambrose, and other Bishops with him, in an Epistle to Pope Syricius,
Credatur Symbolo Apostolorum, quod Ecclesia Romana intemeratum semper custod^t
and servat. The Confession of Faith made by Marcellus, Bishop of Anerra, during
his stay at Rome with Pope Juli^^, agrees almost in every particular with the
Apostolical form; which I shall here set down out of Epiphanius, haeres. 72.
Sect. 3. (...).

This must be before the Year 352. in which Pope Julius dyed: And Marcellus
himself, who had been made Bishop in the Reign of Constantine, as appears by
his Subscription to the Ancyran Council, which was held some few Years before
that at Nice, only lived to the Year of Christ 373. So that these instances
sufficiently demonstrate, that this Apostolical form was used in the Roman
Church before the Year 400, which is the assertion of Vossius, page 18. But
whether it was used elsewhere or no, we shall see presently.

It will be altogether impertinent to allege, that this is to be understood of
the Creed, as now we have it, totidem syllabis: For this no one ever thought
of; but the question is double, whether the Apostles made a form of Faith for
the use of the new Converts, or no; and whether this form is not the same in
the general, notwithstanding those few insertions and variations, which were
made before it was thus fixed. For the affirmative of both which, we have
positive Proofs, and nothing of any moment is alleged by Vossius to invalidate
either them or the Tradition of the Church. All his other Arguments are such as
these; that if the Apostles had agreed upon any form, St. Luke, who wrote their
Acts, would not have omitted it, or at least, some of the Apostles themselves
would have transcribed it into their Epistles. But the Creed is supposed all
along in the Apostolical writings, which were written to such, as had been
already Converted to the Christian Faith, and so are not to be looked upon as
an Institution, so much as a Direction to and confirmation of them in the
Christian Doctrine: And besides, there was no necessity that it should be put
down in writing, it being short, and easily remembered; as St. Hierome justly
supposes, ad Pammachium, 61 Epist. In Symbolo fidei and spei nostrae, quod ab
Apostolis traditum, non scribitur in charta and atramento, sed in tabulis
cordis carnalibus. Rufinus in expositione Symboli idcirco non scribi chartulis
atque membranis, sed retineri cordibus tradiderunt: Ut certum esset neminem
haec ex lectione, quae interdum per venire etiam ad Infideles solet, sed ex
Apostolorum traditione didicisse. Facundus Hermianensis in defensione trium
Capitulorum Concilii Chalcedonensis, lib. 8. cap. 7. Sic nec generali Symbolo
fidei Christianae, qua initiamur, quicquam est fortius, quam vis non Scripto
non tradatur.
Again, he pretends, that if there had been such a form, it would have been the
same every where. I am sure it was so in effect, and in the main: And we shall
show presently, that the Oriental Creed was not so different in the expression,
but that at first it might be the very same, those varieties happening upon the
occasions above mentioned, to secure the Catholic Doctrine against the
innovations of Heretics. Again, he pretends, that granting such additions to
have been made, nothing can be imagined more irreligious, than to suppose the
Holy Fathers of the Primitive Church to have razed many things out of this
Apostolical form; but this is a bare supposition of his own; nor can it be
proved, that ever any such thing was so much as ever attempted; for they only
added a few words for necessary explication. Again, he pretends, that no
Ecclesiastical Writer or Council make mention of it. To the former part of his
Assertion we oppose the Authorities of Irenaeus, Tertullian, Novatianus, St.
Ambrose, St. Hierome, Rufinus, St. Leo, Vigilius -- And for the Greek
Historians, we shall find, that they, following the Opinion and Acknowledgment
of the Nicene Fathers, looked upon that form, making some allowances, to be
derived from the Apostles, not only as to the sense of the Articles, but as to
the expressions: (...). Epiphanius in Anchorato, just after he had repeated the
Nicene Creed. We are therefore in the next place to enquire, whether there was
not a form of Faith used in the Oriental Churches, long before the Council at
Nice, and what that was.

In Epistola ad suos Caesarienses apud Socrat. Histor. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 8
Theodorit. Hist. Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 12.
Eusebius Pamphili, Bishop of Caesarea in Palaestine, proposed a Creed, or form
of Faith to the Emperor and Nicene Fathers, which, he says, he had received
from the Bishops his Predecessors, and had been taught and Catechized in, and
made profession of at his Baptism, according to the establishment and order of
the Catholic Church. The ground of this, those great and wise Men, who were
Assembled in that Council, thought sit to retain, making some alterations and
additions, which were judged necessary to confound the Heresy of Arius, which
had distracted the minds of the People, and disturbed the Peace of the Empire.
The Theodorit. lib. 5. cap. 9.
Fathers of the first Council at Constantinople call this Nicene form, (...),
most Ancient, and what was pronounced by the Candidates of Baptism. If the form
of the old Jerusalem Creed were entirely extant (part of which we have in the
Liturgy of St. James) the matter would then be put out of doubt; for that it
was more contracted than that form, which St. Cyril about the Year 350
explained in his Learned Lectures or Institutions, to those who had been
Baptized, appears by the Fragment preserved.

The form which Eusebius presented to the Emperor and Council, was thus. We
believe in one God, the Father, Almighty, Creator of all things visible and
invisible; and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Word of God, God of God, light of
light, life of life, the only begotten Son, the firstborn of every Creature,
begotten of God the Father before all Worlds, by whom all things were made, who
for our Salvation was Incarnate, and conversed among men; he Suffered, and rose
the third day, and ascended to the Father, and he shall come again with glory
to Judge both the quick and the dead -- We believe also in the Holy Ghost -- I
do not pretend to say, that this was the old form used from the beginning; for
it is plain from the very contexture, and from the omission of some Clauses by
the Nicene Fathers, that they looked upon this as interpolated. It being certain
and undoubted, that there was an old Apostolical form, or form used from the
very beginnings of Christianity to be professed at Baptism, the Bishops of the
chief Sees thought themselves at liberty to explain or add, as they judged most
proper for the time wherein they lived; which is the true Reason, as I must
intimate again, why the forms are so various. And especially when we consider,
that according to the form of Baptism, the chief design of this Profession of
Faith made at the receiving it, was an explicit acknowledgment of each of the
three Persons of the Blessed Trinity: And accordingly here the Nicene Creed
stops (for that which is commonly called so, ought, upon the account of the
several additions, to be called the Constantinopolitan Creed.) Though that in
some other old Creeds were added the Articles of the Resurrection of the Flesh,
and of everlasting Life, appears from the Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Confession of the Bishops met at Antioch not long after under Constantius. And
that of one Church also, in others, as St. In Symbolo fidei and spei nostrae,
quod ab Apostolis traditur, non scribitur, in chartis and atramento, sed
tabulis cordis carnalibus, per confessionem Trinitatis and unitatem Ecclesse,
omne Christiani dogmatis Sacramentum carnis resurrectione concluditur. Epist.
61. ad Pammachium adversus errores Joannis Hierosolymitani.
Jerome positively asserts. And that of Remission of Sins, and everlasting
Life, is clear from St. Epist. 70. Sed and ipsa interrogatio, quae fit in
Baptismo, est testis veritatis. Nam cum dicimus, credis in vitam aeternam and
remissionem peccatorum per Sanctam Ecclesiam, intelligimus remissionem
peccatorum non nisi in Ecclesia dari. Epist. 76. Magno. Quod si aliquis illud
opponit, ut dicat eandem Novatianum legem tenere, quam Ecclesia Catholica
teneat, eodem Symbolo, quo and nos Baptizare, etc. Nam cum dicunt, credis
remissionem peccatorum and vitam aeternam per Sanctam Ecclesiam, mentiuntur in
interrogatione, quando non habeant Ecclesiam.
Cyprian. Agreeably to this, Vossius supposes the old Eastern Creed to be
this, or after this manner. I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of all
things, visible and invisible; and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only Begotten
Son of God, who for us men, and for our Salvation came down from Heaven, and
was Incarnate, and was made man: He suffered, and rose the third day from the
dead, and ascended into the Heavens, and he shall come again to judge both the
quick and the dead. And (I believe) in the Holy Ghost.

If this should be allowed him, which has no other Authority but his own
conjecture, yet we may hence conclude, that both the Eastern and the Western
Churches may well and justly pretend to derive their forms from the Apostles:
Which must be understood as to the ground of each Creed, and in the general.
For that the Apostles did Pen every word, or every Article of the Creed, which
now bears their Name, was never pretended or asserted by any one: Nay, the
contrary is now, and was Anciently acknowledged, and the variety of forms in
the chief Apostolical Sees, used according to the exigence of the times, is a
convincing Proof. But this does not hinder, but rather suppose; that there was
a short Form proposed by the Apostles, as the Ancient Writers have asserted:
And that the old Oriental Creed, and the old Roman are almost in expression,
but wholly in effect, the same, and consequently Apostolical.

FINIS.

