THE CHARGE GIVEN BY Sr William Smith, Brt. At the Quarter Sessions of the
Peace held for the County of Middlesex, at Westminster, on Monday the 24th of
April, 1682.
Gentlemen,
I Have had the honor to discourse to the Country from this Bench several
times, and the Advice which I gave them, was to seek Peace, and study Unity.
Advice I thought very necessary, and that which would contribute most to the
welfare and happiness not only of this County, but of the whole Kingdom. This
is a Trading Country, and nothing can encourage and advance Trade more than
Peace, nor can any thing procure Wealth sooner than Trade, nor will any thing
secure it better than Unity. The King by his Wisdom and Care has hitherto
preserved Peace without the help of Unity; for certainly no Nation can be more
divided than this is; it is high time for every honest man, especially
Magistrates, and those in Authority, to speak plain English: and since this
Honorable Bench has thought fit to command me to this Service, I shall
endeavor to discharge my Duty and Conscience in that particular. It troubles
me to say it, but it is true, that this is a divided Nation, divided into two
opposite Parties, the Church-Party, I mean the Church of England as by Law
established, and the Anti-Church, for I know not by what other name or
denomination to style the Dissenters (I mean Dissenters of all sorts) unless I
should use the Scripture-word Legion, for they are many; and although they are
divided amongst themselves toto Caelo, yet they agree in this tertio, to
torment the Government. I will give you a short Character of these two Parties;
the Church-Party are those who worship and serve God in the place appointed for
it; the Church, they honor and obey the King, and submit to the Laws; the
Dissenters do none of these, they do not approach the Church, and to some of
them it is an abomination; they are so far from honoring the King, that both
his Person and Government are defamed by those Pamphlets which go about the
Town, neither do they obey him, or submit to the Laws; for very lately the King
out of his great concern for the public Peace, thought fit by the advice of
his Majesty's Privy Council, to command that Conventicles should be suppressed
according to Law, the Dissenters have been so far from obeying his Majesty's
Command, that they have contended for the Conventicles, as if they had been
their Inheritance, and have abused and reviled those Officers and others, who
in obedience to this Command have endeavored to put the Laws in execution: Now
I would ask any sober-thinking person, to which of these two Parties his
Prudence would invite him to adhere, whether to that Party where he may be safe
under the Kings Protection, and where his Liberty and Property may be well
secured by the Laws? Liberty and Property so much talked of, and by some very
unduly sought; or to that Party which will lead him into a Wilderness of briars
and thorns, where he shall never know his way, or into slippery places; where
he shall never be able to stand his ground, or shall, as it were, make him walk
upon the edge of a Knife, and always be in danger. Self-preservation is natural
to every creature, and methinks men who have reason should seek it much more
than others.

The King and the Laws have long fingers, and sometime or other they will reach
the tallest Malefactor. It is true the King is a gracious and merciful Prince,
and that perhaps may be an encouragement to some men's disobedience; but
patience may be provoked too long, and too far, and then Laesa patientia sit
furor, when the Lion rouseth all the Beasts of the Forest tremble.
Notwithstanding all these provocations, the King (by the Divine assistance)
has hitherto preserved peace, peace at home and peace abroad; for we have
peace with all the Christian World; when at the same time most of the
neighbour-Nations are in wars and troubles. The King has taken care of Places
related to England. A terrible Rebellion broke out lately in Virginia, which
had almost destroyed that Country, the King at a great charge sent Ships and
Soldiers thither, reduced that Rebellion, and settled the Country in peace.
Tangier was lately attakt by a numerous and formidable Enemy, and most of us
here gave it for lost; some were so impudent to say it would be sold, the King
sent a timely Relief thither of Men, Money, and all other necessary Provisions,
and did preserve that Place, so that it is neither lost or sold, and has now
made a lasting Peace with the Emperor of that Country; and it is to be hoped
that place will prove very advantageous for the Trade of England: but this has
cost the King a great sum of money. The Trade of Turkey has been of late years
very much disturbed by the Pirates of Algiers, and his Majesty has received
notice that many of his Subjects have been carried captive thither; the King to
prevent those mischiefs for the future, has at a great charge, for several
years together, maintained a considerable number of Ships in the Streights, by
which the Algerines have received so great losses, that they are ready to beg
Peace. The King has taken care of the Walls and Bulwarks of this Kingdom, the
Shipping: You know the Parliament appointed thirty capital Ships to be built,
and gave six hundred thousand pound for the building of them; but when
Shipwrights and others came to consult about them, they found that Sum of Money
would not do it, to make them so strong and serviceable as they ought to be;
the King was forced to advance a hundred thousand pound and more, out of his
own Purse, to perfect that Work, and I have heard these several Charges and
Disbursments do amount to near eight hundred thousand pound. These are all
accidental Charges, and if the established Revenue will not balance the
necessary and common Charge of the Government, (as I have heard it said in the
House of Commons by those who should well understand it, that it will not)
where then shall these accidental Charges be born? The King cannot do it, the
People then must. Why then the King has lent this great Sum of Money to his
Subjects, and certainly it ought to be repaid with interest and with thanks,
and doubtless had been long since, if the Dissentions and Differences which are
amongst us had not prevented it. Is it not therefore high time that all
possible Endeavors should be used to put an end to these Divisions and
Differences, that the Kingdom may be no longer exposed to those Dangers which
at present it lies under? And this, very wise men are of opinion, will never
be, until the Conventicles (which continually blow the Coals) are suppressed.
The Learned tell us, that the Plague is spread by the Effluviums of the Mouth,
the Attomes of an infected person are infected, and when they are sent out by
the breath, and received by those in the company of the Infected, they thereby
become infected; and we are told, the infected person has a strong appetite
and desire to infect others. Faction is thus communicated; the venom of it, by
the mouths of the Preachers and Teachers in Conventicles, is transmitted into
the ears of the Auditors, who thereby become infected; and when they are so,
they infect others. And until these Effluviums, these mouths are stopped, it is
not probable this Plague will cease; and there is a ready way to do it, the
putting the Statute of 17. of the King in due execution. And do you not think
this is very necessary? For if the numbers of these Dissenters should be
suffered to increase, in time they might be formidable to the Government; for
we see although they are divided in Opinion, yet they agree and join together
for their common Interest. I have seen in a fallow Field a great Herd of Swine,
the Hogs of a whole Parish, the Hogs of several Farmers, and others, and if the
Herdsman chastises any one of them for a fault, the whole Herd run together in
a body, to condole with their companion for his misfortune, and as much as in
them lies to endeavor his rescue; and these are a very untractable Creature,
which will neither lead or drive. Do not the Dissenters do the same? If any one
of them is touched by the hands of the Law, they lay their Heads and Purses
together for his relief: I would not be mistaken, I do not compare Beasts to
Men, Comparisons are odious, Similes are to illustrate a Proposition, not to
make a Parallel, Sic parvis componere magna solebam; but if I had done so, I
have a good President for it; St. Paul tells us, He fought with Beasts at
Ephesus, and those were no other but unreasonable Men; and if the Apostle had
sought Ephesus, and all the Parts about it, I am persuaded he could not have
found more unreasonable Men, than some we have in England. I have heretofore
had an indifferent good opinion of some of the Dissenters, I thought they had
been (as they pretended) a peaceable, quiet, and sober sort of persons, and
that they had desired nothing but Connivence or Indulgence; they had an unruly
Conscience to deal with, and that they had only desired some toleration for it;
but I find the crafty had a farther aim: You know there is a Lord Mayor's Day,
and that consists of a Show in the Streets, and a Feast at Guild Hall; the Show
in the Streets is the Pageants, they draw the Vulgar, the Mobile together,
which gives them opportunity to make a noise, and throw about their Squibs; and
when they have spent some time in that, and gazing upon the Pageants, they go
home very well satisfied; but the wiser and better sort of Citizens are
entertained with a Feast at Guild Hall. This Toleration seems to me to be a
kind of Pageant, held sorth to entertain the vulgar and unthinking Crowd with
some Speculations which may please them; there is something in it very taking
to some people who look not far, Liberty of Conscience, and Ease of tender
Consciences: But the wiser and designing sort look farther; I am afraid they
aim at Dominion over the Lives and Liberties of their Fellow Subjects, and to
feast themselves upon their Estates: This has been, and therefore may be. This
word Feast, puts me in mind of a Pamphlet I read the other day, where I found
an Invitation (by Ticket) to a Feast at Haberdashers and Goldsmiths Halls:
Those Names made me call to remembrance the severe Discipline some of the
chiefest Nobility and Gentry heretofore had at those Places; I am sure I feel
the smart of those Strokes to this day: I was afraid that Meeting might be to
view those Halls, to see since they are new built, if they were fit for the old
Uses. This associating by Tickets is an odd way, it looks like blowing the
Trumpet, and making Proclamation, Who is on my side, who? What the Law may make
of it, I cannot tell, but methinks these persons adventure very far; all
Rebellions are not actual Arms; in God's sense the Rebellion of Corah and his
Company, (which went no farther than to associate and murmr against the
Governors) was such a Rebellion that he thought fit to punish with death. But
the same Pamphlet says, there was a Feast of the Artillery Company, (which is
an Anniversary Feast) at which there was but 200. but at this Feast there would
have been 1000 of Nobility, Gentry and Ministers. So to me this seems to be a
Trial of Skill; which puts me in mind of Moses and the Magicians: God commanded
Moses to cast down his Rod, and that should become a Serpent; the Magicians
tried their skill, and threw down their Rods, and they became Serpents; but
Moses his Rod, (which was but one) devoured their Rods which were many. The
King he has his Rod too, which is his Scepter, which I hope will be able to
break the Rods of these unquiet People, that they may not again scourge and
whip the Nation. But what became of these Magicians? Why, when they could show
no more Tricks, God set a Mark upon them, Botches and Blains; and if the Law
cannot reach these subtle men, divine Justice may. The word Magi signifies wise
men, and our Savior tells us, That the children of this world are wiser in
their generation than the children of light: And it appears so, for they
confederate for the mutual assistance of each other upon all occasions; they
will spare no pains nor cost for the advancement of each others Interest; they
trade for the most part with no other but themselves; they will have no manner
of Commerce (if they can avoid it) with any of the Church-Party; so that they
do not make a separation only in Religion, but in all other dealings
whatsoever, which is, to set up a Commonwealth in a Kingdom, a most dangerous
thing! The Church-Party, the Children of Light, they trust a good Cause, put
out their own eyes, and will neither see their danger or Interest: Most of them
endeavor to build upon their own Ground, and raise to themselves Pyramids of
Honor and Riches, and have not much minded those of the same Party, who are
forced to shift for themselves as well as they can; but if they should still be
neglected, they must, like Snails, shrink into their shells; what will be the
consequence of that? The Enemy when he finds his strength will quash them to
pieces with his foot; what then will become of the great man Estate? It must be
put into Handycap with the Cobler's Last, and if the Cards be again shuffled,
it is probable the Cobbler will draw the Estate, and the late rich man will have
the Last, and perhaps may need it to help make him a pair of Shoes; what has
been, I say again may be: I have seen in the last Rebellion, Noblemen and
Gentlemen not have a Horse to ride upon, or scarce a Shoe to their feet.
Methinks the Natural Body should instruct the Body Politic: In the Natural
Body, if the Head be assaulted, the Hands are presently lifted up to defend it;
if any Limb be in pain, the Head and Heart are sensible of it; if there be but
a small Excressence upon a Toe, the Hands are immediately at work to relieve
and ease it; and thus every Member gives mutual assistance to each other, by
which the whole is kept in health and vigor. Should not the Body Politic do
the like? Ought not all the Members defend and support the Head, (where is the
seat of Wisdom and Direction?) Ought not the Head, and the nobler Parts of that
great Body, encourage and succor the inferior, that so all the Parts with
consent and pleasure may stick close together for their common defense? which
if they did, they were invincible, Vis unita fortior. Rewards and Punishments
ever did and ever will govern the World, it is the method of Heaven: It Is true,
there are many generous Spirits, who are contented with their own Virtue for
their reward, but Prudence should not trust to that. Quis enim virtutem
amplectitur ipsam
Praemia si tollas?
Virtue is like a choice Plant, or a Tree which bears excellent fruit, but the
Gardener must nourish and cherish this Plant and Tree, or else the Plant will
dwindle, and the Tree in time bear sour fruit. I have heard it esteemed policy
to make a golden Bridge for an Enemy to pass over, but it was, that he might be
gone, and trouble us no more, but I could never think it advisable to purchase
Enemies, and put them into ones bosom, to give them Places of Trust and
Profit, this is to make them more potent Enemies than they were before. I hope,
for the Honor of the King, and Safety of the Government, no man for the future
shall be employed, until he be first sifted and winnowed, and if one grain of
Faction be found in him, that he shall be laid aside. This is reasonable, and
therefore just, and Justice, Gentlemen, is one of God Almighty his chiefest
Attributes: When there was a contention between that and his Mercy, nothing but
the precious Blood of the Son of God could reconcile them; of that esteem is
Justice in Heaven. This Justice God has sent into the World for the use of
men, and expects it should be esteemed here; he has not sent it by a common
Envoy, but by his Vicegerent, not only to be distributed, but to be enforced,
where it will not be kindly received. God tells us, By me Princes decree
Justice; Deeree signifies Power and Authority: God has not entrusted the
Prince to decree Justice only, but to govern the People committed to his
charge, to preserve them from themselves, and from their Enemies. God says, By
me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice, and surely he is to be believed. I
wonder therefore at the strange Opinion which some men have of late spread
abroad, That the People make the King, and give him his Authority: A strange
Opinion, and as presumptuous as false. Is not God the Ens Entium? Is not Man
and all other Creatures Emanations from that Fountain? Does he not give us our
day Bread, the former and the latter Rain, and all things else whatsoever? If
all things are his, Power and Authority more; the People then cannot give it:
Nemo dat quod non habet, and Quicquid effecit tale est magis tale. The King
has his Authority from God, and to him alone is to be accountable; Ipse sub
nullo nisi tantum sub Deo. But I believe the mistake came from this: Some men
might take the Law for the Authority; the Law it is true is the Rule by which
the King is to administer; but the best Law, and most useful that ever was
made, would lie still for ever, if it was not acted and quickened by some
Authority. This Authority is the King's, which he had from God, and his Majesty
transmits it to us and others, who act by his Commission to put the Laws in
execution. God fashioned Adam into the shape of a man, but he was a useless
Creature, until God was pleased to give him life and motion by his breath. The
Laws are likewise to be quickened by that which must move and quicken them. The
King, I told you, is to be accountable to God, and must render an exact account
of the Power God has put into his hands, and how it has been administered for
the good and welfare of the People committed to his charge: The King therefore
ought not to be importuned by the People, to do any thing which he knows is
contrary to his Duty and Trust, for he alone must answer for it, not they.
Joshua made peace with the Gibeonites, which they obtained from him by fraud,
pretending they were strangers, came from far, and none of the Canaanites; but
in two or three days the Israelites came to the knowledge that they were of the
Race of the Amorites, (who God commanded to be destroyed) and did urge Joshua
to break the Peace; but he refused them, and would not be unjust at their
importunity, and they were satisfied: Princes must be just, even against the
importunities of their Subjects. The King, I have heard, was pressed to exclude
the Duke of York, pray examine the Justice of that: Can it be just to punish a
man in praesenti, for a fault to be committed in futuro? If a Bill had been
presented to you Gentlemen of the Grand Jury against any man, upon presumption
he would commit such or such a crime a year hence, surely you would not find
that Bill. This of the Duke is of that nature; this could not be a fault until
he was to succeed to the Crown, and that is uncertain whether ever or never. It
is true, God has given this Crown of England to this Royal Family, who have
enjoyed it in Succession many hundred of years, but he has reserved to himself
to determine the Person of that Family from time to time to the Government; and
when God has made his Election, is it for us to say, Nolumus hunc regnare?
Would not this be to question the divine Wisdom, and to usurp upon God's
Prerogative, in whose hands are the issues of life and death, and all other
events, to which all men in prudence ought to submit, because they know they
must do it whether they will or no? Men ought not to pry into the Arcana of
Heaven; God is a jealous God: The Bethshemites were smitten for looking into
the Ark, and so was Uzzah for touching it, although 'twas done with a good
intent. This act of Wisdom and Piety will make the King's Name be celebrated in
Story: Fears and Jealousies ought not to transport Subjects to the desire of
unreasonable things of their Prince, for he must answer for them, not they. I
will teach you an Experiment (without a crime) that you shall never fail of a
good King: It is to be a good People; for God (who is infinite Goodness) gives
an ill King for the punishment of an ill People, and you cannot displease and
provoke him more, than when he has given you a good King, if you do not treat
and esteem him as you ought. The King which he has been pleased to bless us
with at this time, is, I may say, with great truth, the best Prince in the
World, (whom God long preserve) and if we honor and obey him as God expects,
and our duty requires, God will not fail to send a good Successor. The Peace of
the Kingdom is and ought to be the King's Care, and it could not be expected
that the Duke should have sat still under such an Indignity; and if he had,
the Princes of Christendom to whom he is allied, (and he is allied to many, and
the Greatest) would have taken up the Quarrel, and then our Fields of Peace
would have been turned to Fields of Blood. Those who read History, may find
what Miseries this Kingdom for many years suffered, when the Dispute was
between the two Houses of York and Lancaster, how many noble Families were
destroyed, and many thousand of men lost their Lives, and if God had not had
compassion of this Kingdom, and provided an Expedient to unite them, the misery
of War, for ought I know, might have continued to this day. Wars are not so
soon or so easily ended as begun; and it is very observable, that the
neighbour-Princes made it their business to continue that Difference; some
Prince or other always took part with him who was conquered, and so vicissim
with him who was down, not out of any other consideration than their own
Interest, that they might keep England imbroiled at home, which they knew was
the true way to keep Wars and Troubles from their own doors: I hope England for
the future will never be so unwise, as to give them the like advantage.

Gentlemen, The proper business of a Charge is to acquaint you with the Laws
and Statutes of this Kingdom, their Usefulness and Penalties; that I have done
heretofore to former Grand Juries, but it has not had so good effect as I
could have wished: Amongst others I did acquaint them with the Statute of 13.
of the King, which was made for the preservation of his Majesty's Person and
Government; it did provide against Treason, against seditious Preaching and
Printing, and against setting up Votes of one or both Houses of Parliament to
be effectual as Laws. But notwithstanding that and other Statutes, we find that
Persons have been lately accused for Treason, defamatory Pamphlets and Libels
are sold about the Streets as good merchantable Wares, and Votes of the House
of Commons printed to give check to Laws. Men are grown to a strange boldness,
and outdo Pasquil in Rome; he tells bold Truths, but these here wicked and
impudent Lies. The sin of Cham, and that which clave to his Posterity, was,
that he uncovered his Father's nakedness; and the greatest Crime of that Tyrant
Nero, was, that he ripped up the Belly of his Mother. Gentlemen, The King is
Pater Patriae, and the Commonwealth is our Mother, and he who rips up her
Bowels and shows her Weakness or Deformity, or abuses his Father, forfeits his
very nature, and is more wicked then either Cham, or Nero; until men come to
have a sense of Religion, and obey for Conscience Sake, I shall be hopeless
that Laws will prevail; and yet I shall adventure to recommend one Statute to
you more, a Statute not made by Kings, Lords, and Commons, but by their King,
the King of Kings, and it is this, Statutum est omnibus semel mori, a Statute,
Gentlemen, which was never repealed, or ever will be; and those who shall be
indicted upon this Statute, no Ignoramus can prevent their Trial, nor shall the
credit of the Evidence be questioned, and the Sentence will have speedy
Execution: Those who shall be found Innocent, their Sentence will be Venite
Beati, but those who will be found Guilty, Ite Maledicti, a dreadful Sentence
that, not like the Sentence we have here, Go to the place from whence you came,
and so to the place of Execution, and there hang by the Neck until you are
Dead: Or as we have it by Tradition, to be hanged in Chains alive until you are
starved to Death. These are easy Sentences, because a little time determines
the pain; but this dreadful Sentence of Ite Maledicti, sends the Criminal to a
place of horror, and darkness, where his Meat and Drink will be Fire and
Brimstone, his Companions such who he durst not look upon when he was in the
World, Devils, and Furies, not to make him sport and pastime, but to torment
him; and that which aggravates this punishment is, that it is attended with
despair, never to come out of that place of Torment. If this was well
considered and laid to heart, could a reasonable man be invited by any
temptation whatsoever to gratify his ambition or other appetites with those
things (which will be enjoyed but for a very short time, and adventure this
Sentence of Ite Maledicti? but pray let us consider what to do to avoid this
fearful Sentence. The Psalmist instructs us, he who will ascend the Holy
Mountain must have clean hands, a pure heart, must not lift up his mind to
vanity, and must not be sworn to deceive his Neighbor; he must have clean
hands, not subject to Bribery or Corruption, a pure heart; he must design
nothing injurious to God, his King, or his Country; he must not lift up his
mind to vanity, but must lay aside all ambitious thoughts, and be contented
with the Station where God Almighty has placed him; he must not be sworn to
deceive his Neighbor; this last is part of the Law of Nature, and one of the
Precepts of the Moral Law, Thou shall not bear false Witness against thy
Neighbor; under this Head comes all Perjury, Subornation of Perjury, Lying,
Deceit, Treachery and Falsehood; the Psalmist lays before us our Duty at this
time, and if we perform it justly, we may avoid this Sentence of Ite Maledicti.
Gentlemen, we have all sworn you, the Juries of Constables, to present without
favor or affection, hatred or malice, and you ought to present all those
Crimes which are committed within your several Parishes and Precincts, against
the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom; and you Gentlemen of the Grand Jury, are
likewise sworn to present without favor or affection, hatred or malice, and we
upon the Bench are sworn to do Justice according to the best of our skill and
knowledge; we are not only sworn, but we have likewise made a Covenant with God
to be just according to our Oaths; at the end of our Oaths we say, so help me
God, which is as much as to say, we desire no help from God in our needs, if we
do not do that which is just, according to our Oaths. Now I would advise all
men to consider, that humane Nature is liable to many Infirmities and
Accidents: To Sickness, past the help of a Physician; to Oppression, above the
help of Law and Lawyers; to Poverty, and have no Friends to afford relief. In
all these Cases, when humane Helps fail, Nature points out the ways to address
to God: But with what confidence can we do it, when we call to mind we broke
Covenant with him at such and such a time? which we cannot fail to do, for
Conscience is a most certain Remembrancer: Is not a man a most silly Creature,
who shall adventure to break this Covenant to gratify any Appetite, and please
any Party, and by it put himself out of Gods Protection, and from under his
care in this World, and without Gods infinite mercies to come under that severe
Sentence of Ite Maledicti in the next? Gentlemen, Grand-Juries have always been
esteemed the Honor of the Government, and the great Security of the Lives and
Liberties of the Subject; they are to be Probos and legales Homines, and so is
a golden Chain as well for Ornament as Security: If they should prove
otherwise, this Chain of Gold would be turned into Gives and Fetters of Iron
and Brass, and we should be greater Slaves here in England than they are in
Algiers; our Ancestors have taken great care that the Grand-Juries should be
such as they ought to be, and as you may see the Statutes made in that Case,
provide; but for all that, it is happy for the people, that the King has the
Nomination of the Sheriffs, by whom the Juries are to be returned: It is a
Prerogative of great consequence, and not to be entrusted in the hands of any
Subject or Subjects whatsoever; the King sits aloft above all, and looks down
upon all his Subjects, and like the Sun, sends forth his Beams upon all alike;
his Spirit is as high as his Place: when God intended to remove Moses, and had
appointed Joshua to succeed him, he commanded Moses to put some of his Honor
upon him, and that the Text explains to be the Spirit of Wisdom, which is the
Spirit of Government, and that no Subject has: He is not therefore to be
equipped with too large a Sail for his bottom, for fear it should overset; the
Kings Prerogative, (if it was well understood) is the Subjects chiefest safety,
and ought not to be in a Subjects hand, for the Subjects sake, and it is to be
hoped no man for the future will presume to advise the King to part with any of
it. Every thing is most natural when it is in its proper Place; the King is to
govern, the people to obey; this is harmonious, and no wise or good man will
make discord; he who is for the King is for People, and he who is truly for the
People, is as truly for the King: They cannot be divided but they must be in
danger to be destroyed; it is therefore folly, as well as mutiny to say, I am
for the King, or I am for the Country, except in Conjunction; he who is not a
friend to both, is not a friend to either: I have ever esteemed Monarchy as the
best of Governments, (it is the Government of Heaven) and ours the best of
Monarchies, and if it be possible, I now esteem it much more than ever; I am
not afraid of the King, I am sure he will do me no hurt, if I keep the Law,
but, I must confess, I am afraid of some of my Fellow Subjects. Story will tell
you, there was a great Faction in Italy between the Guelfes and the Gibelines;
the great and rich City of Florence was almost destroyed by it, sometimes one
got the upper hand, sometimes the other; but God was pleased to put an end to
the Miseries of that City by a Monarchy, under which it has been happy ever
since. Pray Gentlemen, let us make it our Business, as it is our Interest, to
preserve our Monarchy from being shaken: This is to be done by universal
Justice, that is the chiefest Pillar which supports Monarchies, and if any man
shall by fraud undermine that Pillar, or by force shake it, he will like
Sampson, pull the whole Fabric upon his own head, and destroy himself: But
they will differ in this; Sampson had great provocation, his eyes were put out
by the Philistines, and they made him their sport and pastime; but whosoever
shall shake this Pillar here, do it from the force of a wicked inclination to
destroy the Government, under which he may live happily and safely if he will,
and so adds the sin of Ingratitude to that of Disobedience. Gentlemen, I have
troubled you too long, but what I have said, I hope will not be wholly useless;
God, who is the searcher of all hearts, knows, I have not spoke from the spirit
of bitterness, to blow the Coals, or rub the old Sore; I have no Animosity
against any man living; my design was to lay before you the danger of
Divisions, and making Parties, and so exhort you to Peace and Unity, and not
throw away the Blessings we enjoy, and make our selves ridiculous to all the
World. The matter of a Charge, as it respects the Laws and Statues, I have
caused for your ease and help to be contrived into Articles, which shall be
read to you. Mr. Clerk of the Peace pray read them.

Articles to be presented by the High and Petty Constables to the Grand Jury,
and to be inquired into by the said Grand Jury.
1. IMprimis, You are to present all petty Treason, Misprisions of Treason; all
Priests, and Jesuits, and others, that have received any Orders from the Church
or See of Rome.

2. All Murders, Manslaughters, Robberies, Burglaries, Breaking of Houses in
the day time, Fellonies, Petty-Larcenies, and the Accessories thereunto.
Committed and done within your several Hundreds and Precincts.

3. You are to present all Popish and other Recusants that do not come to their
several Parish Churches within your Divisions.

4. You are to present all unlicensed Alehouse-keepers, and what disorderly
Alehouses you have within your Divisions.

5. You are to present the neglect of Hughs and Cries of and in whose default.

6. You are to present all Highways and Bridges unrepaired, within your
Hundreds and Parishes, and who are to repair them.

7. You are to present all that erect Cottages, or that continue Cottages, not
having four Acres of Land to be occupied by the Inhabitants, of the said
Cottages within your Divisions.

8. You are to present all profane Swearers and Cursers within your Hundred and
Liberties.

9. You are to present all common Barretors, common Disturbers, Libellers, and
others, that break the Kings Peace, all Outcrys and Bloud-sheds that happen
within your Liberties and Precincts.

10. You are to present all Forestallers, Regrators, and Ingrossers, all
Embracers of Juries, that you know of within your Hundreds and Precincts.

Gentlemen,

IT is your Duty to present what shall come in proof before you upon these
Articles; and first you must take care of Religion, to enquire after Priests,
Jesuits, Popish Recusants, and all other Dissenters from the Church; you must
enquire after all Treasons, which although they cannot be tried here by virtue
of our Commission, yet they ought to be presented; you are to inquire after and
present all Murders, Burglaries, Robberies, Felonies, and all other Crimes
against the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom. I wind up all with this Advice,
that you will Serve God, Honor the King, Love one another, and take heed to
those who are given to change.

THe Court observing that the Charge was taken in Writing, commanded it should
be delivered to the Clerk of the Peace, that it might not be published without
their direction; but finding in a printed Pamphlet published by R. Janeway,
that their Chairman is very unworthily reflected upon, and some part of the
Charge misrepresented: They have thought fit to order it, to be printed, to the
intent the whole Kingdom may see their opinion, (which this Charge unanimously
is) with hopes that all His Majesty's good and peaceable minded Subjects will
be of the same.

ORdered by this Court, that the Charge given in Sessions by Sir William Smith
be printed; and that the thanks of this Bench be given to Sir William Smith for
his Prudent Care, and constant endeavor in the management of Affairs, for the
preservation of the public Peace, and His Majesty's Government: And this Court
does declare, they will adhere to Sir William Smith and stand by him.

Per Cur. Adderley.

London, Printed by Tho. Hodgkin. 1682.


