THE Blessed Works OF THE Light of God's Holy and BLESSED SPIRIT Exalted above
the Works of Darkness.

With some Informations how to escape out of Sin and Iniquity, and a clear Way
discovered into the Truth.

With a short Testimony of the Cry of Babylons's Merchants by reason of the Day
that is coming upon them.

Stephen Smith

2 Peter 3.12, 13. Looking for and hasting unto the Coming of the Day of God,
wherein the Heavens being on Fire shall be dissolved and the Elements shall
melt with fervent Heat; nevertheless according to his Promise, we look for new
Heavens and new Earth wherein dwells Righteousness. Printed in the Year 1673.

THE Blessed Works OF THE Light of God's Holy and BLESSED SPIRIT Exalted above
the Works of Darkness
COme, sit down together in a deep Silence out of all Fleshly Wisdom, forgiving
all Trespasses, that he that sits upon his Throne, who said, behold I make all
things new, that he may forgive all your Trespasses; and then wait for
Acception into God's Pure Holy Covenant, his Holy Law in the Mind that it may
be writ in the Heart, and they shall not teach every man his Neighbor and
every Man his Brother, saying, know the Lord; for all shall know me from the
least to the greatest; for I will be merciful to their Unrighteousness, and
their Sins and Iniquities will I remember no more; a blessed day, magnified be
the Lord, whose Works praise him forever (and not good Words out of wicked
Workers Mouths) so these mighty Works of the mighty God, the which he is
working and bringing to pass through his mighty Power, are appointed that
Mankind should live in the Enjoyment of them, to the Praise and Honor of his
Maker forever.

And that it may be distinguished between Evil Workers who have got the good
Words, and the good Works from whence all true, and good and gracious Words
came, (observe).

In one of the Collects appointed in the Book of Common Prayer it is thus
written,

Almighty and Everlasting God, which of thy tender Love toward Man, has sent
our Savior Jesus Christ to take upon him our Flesh, and to suffer Death upon
the Cross, that all Mankind should follow the Example of his great Humility,
mercifully grant that we both follow the Example of his Patience and be made
Partakers of his Resurrection, etc.

Now mind, To pray for this, that is common, and used in the old World of
Transgression, where Iniquity and Sin is, which separates from God, and are out
of his Blessed Works: But to be in the Humility and Patience, this is God's
Work, where his Will is done on Earth as it is in Heaven: So that if People
would but so far condescend to the Will of God, as to sit down in Coolness in a
true Silence of all the Works of the fleshly Wisdom, would they not agree with
us, who are in Scorn called Quakers, in Judgment at least, though it may be not
in Practice, viz. That Words without Effects are as Dreams and Chaff (to the
Wheat, the Substance) So he that has a Dream, let him tell his Dream; but he
that has God's Word let him speak it: What is the Chaff to the Wheat? Is not
my Word like a Fire, says the Lord, and like a Hammer, that breaks the Rock
in pieces, Jer. 23. I am against the Prophet, says the Lord, that steals my
Word from his Neighbor, who use their Tongues, and say, he says, and
prophecy false Dreams, and tell them, and cause people to Err by their Lies
and Lightness. And so now in Coolness, when the Works of the Enemy are down,
viz. Prejudice, and Passion, etc. then by a little Work of God, in its least
Appearance, by which Mankind is made sensible, they may see by this small
Distinction what it is that we, who are in Scorn called Quakers, stand for (and
against) And when the Eye of your Understanding is opened, to behold his
Glorious Works whom you have pierced, then will you love us, whom so many have
hated, because of our Testimony of God's Works. Do but see how you first hated
the Light of God in your selves, before that great Darkness came over you to
hate us, who are called Quakers, because we are bowed unto Christ's Spirit, the
true Christians Spirit, and therein have in some measure partaken of his Cup,
out of which some indeed have drunk very deep, even to the following of his
great Humility and Patience, even to Death, as in New England Sufferings may be
seen (by those cruel imaginary Christians, whose wicked Hands have been deep in
the shedding of Innocent Blood. And though through Ignorance the Sufferings of
God's People has been much in Old England, yet they have not been in that
desperate kind as there; where out of doubt they are more drunk with the
Whore's Cup of Sorceries and Witchcraft, then those of that kind are here in
old England, whose spirit is felt; but that their Wings are cut, so cannot fly
at that rate, which otherwise they would be at; for now their Hands are tied,
how wonderfully do their Tongues go? by which its plain they have no Bridle,
but are set on Fire of Hell, Wondering, Despising and Fretting against the Work
of the Lord in this the Day of his Power, though Thousands are raised by it, to
declare and publish the same in Words, in Life and Conversation, etc.

And now you Vain and Empty Professors and Notionists, who are saying in your
Dark and Imaginary Conceivings of things, That if you had been in the Scribes
and Pharisees days, those learned Rabbis, you would not have done so wickedly
as to Crucify the Just, and call for his Blood to be upon your Heads. But
come, hearken in the Cool; Did not those Scribes and Pharisees say the like of
their Fathers, who Stoned and Killed the Prophets whom God sent in Love to
them? And were not they in a worse Practice (though they spoak otherwise?) And
was not the Cause of their Blindness from resisting God's Works in his Spirit,
by which means they had no Revelation there of the things of God,
notwithstanding they had the Scriptures without, which testified of him; yet
they being so Wicked to put out the Candle that should have lighted them in it,
they saw not the Substance spoken of in the Scriptures, were more darkened,
judging by that Law that Christ was a Devil, and a Deceiver, and so ought to
dye, without any regard to his Innocent Holy Life, and his great Humility and
Patience: But though they crucified him, yet they could not so bury him but
that he rise again, and appeared in diverse manners; and after he was risen
opened the Scriptures to his Followers, who loved Him.

Therefore Professors of Works without, who are not Possessors of God's Blessed
Holy Works within; What though you do say, If you had been in your Fathers the
Scribes and Pharisees days, you would not have done as they did: But come, be
patient a little; the Works of Truth have a good Tendency, though they be
bitter to the Guilty for the Present; come, I say, look where you are; by the
Light you may see; you must see by it at last; it were better for you if you
would let your Eye be opened now, and see that offensive Eye pulled out which
has been offended at God's Works all this while: So do not harden your Hearts
in this Day of God's Power being manifest, lest you be cut off from his Rest
forever. Come therefore you that are judging others that did wickedly in their
Generation, by resisting God's holy Spirit, so had none of the Works of its
Revelation; come see now what Latitude your Works are under; If you be in the
same Liberty in the Flesh as they were in, its no matter what you say: Come now
to the Trial; What Experience have you of the Operation of God's Spirit? How
much of the Mind and Will of God has it revealed to you? Can you say, Thus
says the Lord, by the certain Knowledge of the Revelation of God's holy
Spirit? Or have you only talked of it, as the Jews did, who said, We have God
for our Father, when they were doing the Devil's Works? Come do not stop your
Ears; Have you heard the Voice of God or seen his Shape? or are you ignorant of
it, as they were who accused Christ, as if he was bearing False Witness? Nay,
come further; Have you not said, That Revelations are ceased, and thereby shut
up the Way to the Kingdom of God, and from the Knowledge of his Righteousness
by your wicked Works, in going about to establish your own Righteousness, and
Works therein for term of life.

Come you that have set up the Law and Covenant without (above the Law and
Covenant within; are not these your own Works? and have not they made you as
blind as your Fathers, the Scribes and Pharisees, that you can neither see nor
hear?) but in your blind Zeal are persecuting Christ's near Relations, who
follow him in their Generation, even by the Drawings of his Father's Spirit
unto his Humility and Patience, who is the Way, in whom God's Will was done:
And did not Christ give Testimony of his Relations, his Mother, his Brothers
and Sisters, who did his Father's Will? And is not this to be done on Earth?
And is it not the Will of God that we should speak the Truth at all times, and
that we should be led and guided by the Spirit of Truth into all Truth? (is
there any Sin in the Guide:) And is not this Christ of God the same Auointing
or Teacher, as he was in the beginning of the World? Was not he before Abraham
was? And is not he the same yesterday, to day and forever, as he was in the
beginning, who was David's Lord, and the Holy Men's Lord in all Ages? And is
not he the Covenant by which all must come unto God? Was he not given for a
Covenant, and a Light to enlighten people, and to be their Salvation, to lead
and command his People? And must not his Sheep hear his Voice? And is not he
the same that he was in the beginning? And is not this the Precious and Tried
Stone, which the wise Builders, building without, are confounded and stumble
at, even the highest Notionists in the fleshly Wisdom, in their highest
Conceivings about the Holy Men's Words? Come, examine your selves, and see
whether Christ be not in you, except you be Reprobates: You Unbelievers, how
has the Godd of the World led you about, and blinded you, that you cannot see
the Light of this Glorious Gospel? Come see the Cause; Have you not been making
Provision for the Flesh in the first place, and answering the Lusts thereof
after the Glory of the old World of Sin and Iniquity? Has not Respect of
Persons been in your Eye, and Filthy Lucre, and Praise of Men, and Greeting in
Marketplaces? Have you not preached and prayed in your own Wills, and run for
Gifts and Rewards in your own Wills? And is not all this Honor to be had
below? And have you not sought it before the Honor of God's Work in your
Hearts? And is not this the Cause of your Ignorance of God's Kingdom, and his
Righteousness (Christ) and his Relations, his Mother, Sisters and Brethren, who
are sanctified and blessed by the Will of God, where it is done in Truth and
Righteousness? and where that is done, do not such only confirm in Truth and
Reallity all God's blessed and holy Works without in all Generations? So do not
envy and hate the People called Quakers, for maintaining the Works of God's
holy Spirit within them; for there are many of them have been as high Talkers
of the Works of God in holy Men without, as you are; but found not such
Salvation, as to venture Souls, and Bodies and Estates, till we came to cease
from our own Labors in our own Willings and Runnings; and so our Hearts were
bowed unto God's holy Will in the deep Silence of all Fleshly Reasonings and
Consultations: So by the Works of God's holy and blessed Spirit the Way of God
came to be made manifest in us; the which is a Pure, Holy, Undefiled Way,
Christ, the same yesterday, to day and forever, as he was in the beginning
without Guile, without Sin; no Iniquity is in him; he that is the Hope of
Glory, the great Mystery made manifest in us Gentiles, who in former times,
when without the Knowledge of him in the World, had Lords many, and Masters
many, and feigned Faiths and Beliefs concerning him many and diverse: But when
we were given up clearly to seek the Kingdom of God, without any reserve of
making Provision for the Flesh, then the New Jerusalem, God's Building, came
down from above, the Mother of all the Faithful, wherein no Evil can be
conceived, whose Children in her are made free from the Law of Sin and Death;
and this blessed City has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in
it; for the Glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof.
This blessed Habitation is prepared for God's People, who love the Light of his
Appearance, and delight to do his Will.

So away with all False Accusations from all you False Accusers of the People
called Quakers, who say, We expect to be Saved by a Righteousness of our own,
and by Works of our own: If it were so, as you falsely and vainly do say, then
might we not keep in the Broad Way, with you Hypocrites, who are gotten above
the daily Cross, and so led about by the Thief above the Door, where you Foxes,
who are cunning in Hunting about after others Works, have Holes enough to creep
and cring into to keep you in the Glory of the World of Sin and Iniquity, where
you have had a long Trade in your Imaginations, conceiving God's Works in his
blessed Instruments without you, whose Lines you have long made your boast of;
so your Lies are upon your own Heads. For, this I testify, and the Testimony
is the same in Thousands, who are Witnesses of the Works of God's holy Spirit,
in some Degree or Measure, viz. That it is in Christ, God's Covenant, in which
we hope for Salvation, and in no Covenant nor Work of Man's; and in this
Covenant we are made a good Savor unto God, and one unto another: And
Acceptance with God is obtained no other way but by the one pure Offering,
without Spot or Blemish, by the effectual Workings of the Eternal Spirit, where
the Blood of Christ is witnessed to be sufficient to purge Consciences of dead
Works, and so to serve God in the New and Living Way, which he has consecrated
for us through the Vail, his Flesh: And therefore all who are thus Partakers of
God's Works, by the Revelation of God's Spirit, being true Witnesses of the
Blessing of God in this one Unspotted Offering, we cannot but confess him
before Men; denying all imaginary Offerings in men's wills, where their Garments
are filled with Spots and Blemishes, and their Consciences are defiled with
dead Works of their own Inventions and Works, the which having some outward
Show of Holiness may Recommend unto Man, who lives in the same, but not unto
God; and therefore Experience in the Works of God's blessed Spirit has taught
us to deny them.

And by this Christ of God, the Mediator of the New Covenant, we have
Acceptance with God, from whence the Knowledge of Salvation comes, by the
Remission of Offenses and Sins; and therefore we deny all false and vain
Mediatorship of vain man in his vain Works of Conceivings and Imaginations
concerning this Mediator; the which is really to be enjoyed and known by the
effectual Workings of God's Eternal Spirit, to the Consolation and Peace of
Souls who partake thereof.

And through the blessed Works of this blessed Spirit of God the Deaf Ear
comes to be opened, to hear the Voice of the one true powerful Shepherd, who
alone does feed the Sheep of his Pasture with that convenient and wholesome
Food, the which causes Soundness of Heart and Mind, and therein does he take
Care to preserve and keep his Sheep in a living Sense of his Love and Fatherly
Care, who calls to his Sheep when the Lion, the Wolf and the Bear appears, and
strengthens them who take Pleasure in hearkening and obeying his Voice. So to
the one Shepherd and one Fold Testimony is given, unto whom all that are erred
and strayed must return, if ever they witness Deliverance from Evil and
Preservation from Danger. So we deny all false Shepherds whose Works of
Darkness tend to the scattering people in their Minds and Understandings from
the Sense of God's Works in Christ, in reconciling lost Mankind, and bringing
them home unto himself (the Substance of all) of which the Law outward was but
a Shadow of good things the which are enjoyed in this one Shepherd and Bishop,
who takes Care and Oversight of Souls; magnified and praised be his holy and
glorious Works of Redemprion forever and ever.

And so to the Honor of this one blessed Physician of Souls, whose Works are
certain and effectual, the which has been tried by many wounded Souls, who
could find no Cure without by the foolish and vain Physicians without, who are
mere Deceivers, and Daubers up of people through their Enchantments and
Sorceries, by which they have made a long Prey of people through their fair
Speeches, getting their Money through mere Deceit and Flattery, intruding into
things they have no Knowledge of, in which Works they are pufft up above the
pure holy Works of God's blessed Spirit, the Revelation of which they have
denied, they in lieu thereof have set up their own Imaginations and Conceivings
in the Revelation of their Singular exalted Spirit, the Flattery and Deceit of
which having taken with people, how are Nations corrupted by it? and what
Misery have these wicked Works brought into this Nation? God having given
signal Testimonies of Dislike unto them by Sword, Plague, Fire and Sword, and
by many Messengers whom he has drawn near unto himself by his Works, by the
hands of them Messengers has he sent Warning upon Warning, and Exhortation
upon Exhortation, with tenders of his Blessed Works of Reconciliation upon
just and equal terms, of his Enemies repenting, and turning unto him by turning
from their Wickedness: But what Entertainment these Servants of the Living God
have found by these foolish Physicians, who are mere Time-Servers for their own
Ends, whose Refuge is an Arm of Flesh to defend their wicked corrupt Works,
which have filled the Nations with their Defilements, who by their Flatteries
have drawn a Compliance from Magistrates, to punish the Messengers and Servants
of the Most High God for telling the Truth from a certain Knowledge of the
Works of God's Spirit of Truth, and therein testifying against the Works of
Error and Darkness. But the Sufferings that have been for this Love of God in
and through them who have been Instruments in his hands, may through search be
known; so Testimony is given against them, who are in the Exaltation of Works
without, and denying the immediate blessed Works of God's holy Spirit in its
Operations and Revelations of the Mind and Will of God unto wounded Souls
within.

And further concerning these Blessed Works of God's Righteous Holy Spirit, the
which are attended with Peace, unto which Way many have been turned; and
because some loiter, and are sloathful, and yet remain unconverted of the Old
Man's corrupt Words and Deeds, and therefore not fit to put on the New Man,
Christ Jesus; and some who were in the Way, do turn out of it again; and some
fall headlong down to Perdition: Oh! what Occasion has the Watchers for Evil
taken at this, and thereby set at naught God's Works in his Holy Righteous
Spirit, and them that abide therein, making Conclusions in their dark imaginary
Conceivings of the Works of God, That he has no such perfect Works now adays;
but that all are fallible and changeable: and so measure and weigh the things
of God in their corrupt false Measure and Balance, which things are
Abomination in the Sight of God. So Testimony is given to God's blessed Works,
though many are so brittle that they will not abide them; yet notwithstanding
God's Works in and through his holy Spirit of Truth are Righteous, Holy,
Perfect in every Degree and Measure, and remains firm in Goodness and
unchangeable, there being no Spot nor Blemish in them, the which praises him
forever, out of which none shall ever find Acceptance of him. Mutter, Peep,
Whine and Scold as long as you will, your Works of Darkness must down, which
have corrupted the Nations, which is the Cause of the great Judgments past in
this Nation, and the greater yet to come: For the Sword of the Spirit, the Word
of God, is gone out against wicked Workers and works, and thus says the Lord,
No Peace to the Wicked; their Prayers are Abomination in my Sight. So
whatsoever your Professions and Coverings therein be, of your Talkings and
Imaginations concerning the Gift of God, which is Life Eternal, you being
really out of it, in your own imaginary Parts and Gifts, in comprehending the
Works done without you, and so not sensible of any Real, Perfect, Pure Work
of God's Holy Spirit in you, the which is the Cause you are so Dark, and
wickedly Blinded to plead for Sin, the which is accompanied with the Wages of
Death; the Cause of Death being Sin, the which remaining, the Effects cannot
cease, even Death and Corruption from that venomous Sting over all Flesh that
is corrupted with it. So for Shame leave your false Accusations against an
Innocent People, called by the Name of Quakers, for testifying of the Works of
God's holy Spirit, the which are perfect in every Degree, and therefore there
is not the least Sin nor Evil in them. So all you who say, You are not without
Sin in your Best Duties; I say, They are all Works of your own (which blind
and hide God's Works from you.) And as you may read of the Works of God's
Spirit in Mordecai, how they could not bow to the Pride and Arrogance of Haman;
and also, the Works of God's Spirit in Daniel, how they could not bow to them
that would have restrained and limited them; and also the Works of God's Spirit
in Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, how they could not bow to the Golden Image,
set up by Nebuchadnezer, though Laws under Penalties of Death in a Cruel Manner
was before them; and also, the Works of God's Holy Spirit in the primitive
Christians, through the Strength of which they under-went hard and grievous
things under the spirit of Antichrist, which got up in a Form of the good
Words, in the Pleasures and Vanities of the Works of the fleshly Wisdom, the
which have been kept up by the same Wisdom, by an Arm of Flesh, under which the
Innocent People, who are true Witnesses of the Works of God's Spirit, have
suffered very deeply in this Age, the which cannot be hid, though the Cause for
which they have thus suffered is so far hid that it cannot be believed, though
they have been wonderfully declared of. But it is Mordecai, Daniel, Shadrach,
Meshach and Abednego's God which we, who are in Scorn called Quakers, do
worship in and by the Effects and blessed Operation of his own blessed Spirit,
wherein stands our Confidence, and not in Flesh; and our Faith, Belief and Hope
is in him, that he will turn the Hearts of many of our Enemies unto us, though
many will perish in their Gainsaying. So over all the Works and Powers of
Darkness is our Faith and Belief, that the Holy Righteous Works of God's
blessed Spirit shall be exalted, and the God of Truth in and through his
blessed Works, in preparing and fitting the Hearts of people, the Knowledge of
him shall increase, till it spread over all. And for this Purpose has God
raised many, contrary to the Wisdom of the World, in whom he has made known
his Righteous Works, who have Unity and Fellowship therein (who are true
Laborers therein) purely out of Love to God and his blessed Works, in
Good Will and true Love to all men, that all may taste of the Goodness of God,
the Experience of which will bring Mankind to be of one Mind and Heart, and
therein to agree to Praise and Magnify God, who shows Man his Thoughts, to
whom belongs Honor and Glory forever.

And now all you Leaders of the People, in all Forms and Fashions, who are
denying the Works of the Divine Power of God in its blessed Operation and
powerful Working, in setting free them who are heavy laden and weary through
the Enemies works of Sin and Iniquity, the which you say cannot be Overcome;
therefore you are Denyers of the Sufficiency of God's Works and his Kingdom,
wherein dwells Righteousness, Peace and Joy in and through the Effectual
Workings of God's Holy Spirit, the which, though you say in words, Thy Kingdom
come, thy Will be done, etc. But being Sayers, and not Doers, you are so
darkened that with all your own Wills and Mights you are strengthening the Old
Kingdom of Transgression, where Sin and Iniquity abounds, the Devil's works:
Was it not by reason of Transgression that the first Law, the first Covenant,
was added, which was written in Tables of Stone? And was not this in Force till
the Manifestation of the Seed of Life and Power, the Coming of the Messiah, to
finish Transgression, and to put an End to Sin, and so bring in everlasting
Righteousness, God's Kingdom?

Now all you blind Leaders of the Blind, is not here God's Second Covenant,
writ in the Heart, into which all must come that come unto God, where his Light
is to shine, who is the True Light that enlightens every Man that comes into
the World? And if this Righteous Law be taken heed unto, will it not judge Lust
when it rises in the Heart? And will it not judge Anger when it rises in the
heart? and will it not judge every Desire of Breaking Promise, when it arises
in the Heart? And will it not judge every Hasty and Froward Action and
Lightness, when they appear in the Heart? And is not all that proceeds from
this Righteous Law and Covenant of God in the Heart Pure Truth, Yea and Nay?
And what is more then Plain Truth, Yea and Nay, is it not judged by this pure
Law in the Heart? And are not all forbidden to Swear by this one Lawgiver, who
is able to Save or to Destroy? And must not his Righteous Law and Decree take
place, though many Laws through Darkness and Ignorance may be made against it?
And must not all that come to Sion, the City of the Living God, be Redeemed
through these Righteous Judgments? And are not the great Mercies of God
witnessed in and through these Righteous Judgments? And all that will not come
under this Righteous Law and Government, where Mercy and Peace kisses, and
Truth and Righteousness is set over all; is it not just that they be left to
Judgment without Mercy? So is not Destruction from Self-willing and Running of
people out of the Counsel and Knowledge of the Will and Mind of the Living God?
And is not the Salvation of every Soul in and through the Righteous Decrees and
Just and Holy Laws of God, which is Light in every Conscience? And must not all
that come to Salvation come first to the Way and Means that God has ordained?
And is not the Second Coming of Christ, in the Light of his Holy Spirit, the
Way by which all must come unto God, the which is without Sin, without Spot,
without Guile? And must not all that come unto God come unto him in this one
Blessed Savoury Offering? And is not this Christ of God the same yesterday, to
day and forever as he was before Abraham was, and so the same in the beginning
of all things? And must not all that come to God come out of Transgression, the
Cause why Mankind was drove from the Presence of God? And is not this Christ of
God the Way out of Transgression, who was obedient and subject to the Will of
his Father in all things? And must not they, all that are saved, be brought
into this blessed Covenant of Life, the End of God's great Love in his Son
manifested to the World, that through him they might not abide and perish in
Darkness; but through believing and obeying that Second Coming and Appearance
of the Light of him, they might have the Light and Understanding of the Life of
him, the one blessed Offering, that perfects forever them that are sanctified?

And now all you blind Leaders of the Blind, under all your Imaginary Lifeless
Confessions and Professions of God and Christ, what strength of Arguments do
you use in your perverse Wills and Affections to strengthen the Old World of
Transgression in Sin and Iniquity, whereby you go about with all your Might to
make void the Second Covenant, which is without Fault, and so you shut up the
Way to God's Kingdom and the Knowledge of his Righteousness, by laboring and
moiling in your vain Service and Works to establish your own Righteousness and
dark Works therein? And by this Fruitless Labor and Travel, what Darkness and
Blindness have you brought over the Nations, through your ignorant Conceivings
of those gracious Words, which were spoken by the effectual working and moving
of God's Holy Spirit in and through Holy Men, the which was for a blessed End
spoken, even to turn people from the Darkness, which was over them by reason of
Transgression, unto the true Witness in them, the Light that makes manifest all
that is reprovable and wicked in Mankind, the which being turned from, and the
Light obeyed, that they may be led to the Knowledge of God, that they may not
be without God in the World, whom to know is Life Eternal? And so Light is sown
for the Righteous, that through this blessed Seed the Serpent's Head may be
bruised, and kept under in all; and so is way made to put on the Heavenly Image
again, by being led and guided out of Darkness by the Light of the Emanuel, in
and through every blessed and glorious Degree of his Works to the Mark of that
Price, the Measure and Stature of the Fullness of Christ Jesus, the Heavenly
Man, the Heavenly Image; as many as are baptized into Christ put on Christ.

Now I say unto you blind Leaders of the Blind, who have got some few of the
Gracious Words and Works of the Righteous Men of God; therefore I say but few
of them, because there is but little upon record of those mighty Works, which
did then show forth the Wonderful Power of God in and by the effectual Workings
of his holy blessed Spirit; the which, if all had been written, the World could
not have contained the Books; and of that which was written, you have but a
part, with which you blind Leaders of the Blind have made a long Trade, in
Wresting, Perverting and Corrupting to your own Destruction, making them look
every way but the right in your Imaginary Conceivings thereof. So wrong you are
in your Judgments, who have denied the effectual Workings of God's Holy Spirit,
that what in you lies by your Works of Darkness you are making void God's Holy
Law and Covenant, as to any true Understanding or Knowledge of it in the Mind
and Heart: And so building your selves up in Imaginations and Conceivings, what
Strangers are you to God's Holy Works in and by the effectual Working of his
holy Spirit within Man? How brutish are you in your Understandings, to stand
and wonder, and some to despise, till they perish at the News of these Works,
though God has raised many faithful Witnesses, who have declared and given
Testimony to them, even to the laying down their Lives, and many their
Liberties, and in great measure their Estates, whereby it has plainly showed,
That this is the Time and Season wherein God is making known his Mighty Power,
for the subduing and bringing under the Power of Darkness, that the Kingdoms of
this World may become the Kingdoms of God; and that the Kingdom of his Son,
which is in Righteousness, Peace and Joy of his blessed holy Spirit may be set
over all? And is not this according to that Prayer, Thy Kingdom come, thy Will
be done on Earth, etc? Now consider, Are not all those Ways destructive to
Mankind that are made up in the dark Conceivings of Man, without the Light of
understanding the Will of God herein? And by your Works of Darkness, in
opposing the Blessed and Effectual Works of God's holy Spirit, what Misery and
Confusion have you brought your selves and the Nations into, where you lie in
Heaps in Controversies about the Works and Words without, till the Enemy's
works of Darkness be overgrown in you, by which you are so droven from the
Presence of God, and the Light of his Countenance, that you are greatly
confounded, kicking and stumbling at the precious Stone, the which in your
Fleshly Worldly Wisdom you think too mean to be in your Buildings? by reason of
which, how many Fashions are your Buildings of? reeling and staggering from one
Fashion to another, soaring aloft in your airy Imaginations of the things of
God, in using your Wits and Arts to bend the Holy Men's Testimonies to your
corrupt Wills and Affections: And so much more as you strive in these Works, so
much more you are and must be confounded: What a sad Work have you herein taken
in hand? and what vast Sums of Money have you exacted out of Nations to
maintain the Pride and Arrogance of your hearts herein?

Oh! that there were such a Heart in people to sit down before the Lord, that
they may partake so much of his blessed Works as to open the Eye of their
Understandings, that they may see over these Works of Darkness, where nothing
is good nor pleasant to the truly Hungering and Thirsting Souls after God's
Righteousness: How miserably have these Nations been cheated by these blind
Guides, who have exacted abundance of Wages under Pretense of being Healers and
Curers of the Nations; but are now found by the Effectual Workings of the Light
of God's holy Spirit to be the chief Instruments of the letting in of Darkness,
Corruption and Abominations that reign on the Earth; Through that Adulterated
Spirit, the Mother of all Harlots, who are departed from the true Spouse, and
so running and hunting after others Blessed Works and Experiences, have set up
Trades in their Arts of telling and boasting of others Lines and Works, where
that Adulterated Spirit has covered them, who are corrupted with her Sorceries
and VVitchcraft under various Fashions of Confessions and Professions of God
and his Christ? But underneath these Coverings are the same wicked hands by
which the Just has suffered, and been rejected and set at naught in all Ages.

And through the blessed Works of the Light of God's holy Spirit these Corrupt
Workers and Works of Darkness being discovered, and a Righteous Testimony in
Thousands that stand against them; what a sad work do these blind Leaders make
to hide themselves from the Wrath of the Lamb that is coming upon them,
looking back to the several Traditions, Customs and Commands of Men, from
whence they derive several Establishments upon many Fleshly rotten Foundations,
as Covenant and Directory, of Man's, none of God's Foundation: Christ, God's
Foundation, is a Pure, Holy, Unspotted Foundation, where God's Wisdom and
Counsel directs in and through the Works of his Holy Spirit, the which are
perfect and good in every degree thereof, by which people are built up a
Spiritual House to the Honor and Praise in and through God's blessed Works
forever.

So to God's Covenant and Works must all Mankind be brought under (that are
redeemed and made alive to God) therefore we deny the Presbyterian's Covenant
and Directory, as being but a mere Parcel of Conceivings and Imaginations,
which tends to hide the Holy Covenant, and Foundation of the Righteous People
in Generations past, and now present in being (who were and are built upon the
sure Foundation, which God has laid, and thereon in Covenant with his
Righteous Holy Works.)

And concerning your Foundation, who are built upon a Church-Faith, made up by
an Assembly of Diviners out of their own Brain, in their fleshly
Comprehensions; its man's Works, full of Blemishes and Spots (and not God's)
God's Foundation and Works thereon are Pure and Holy, without Spot, Wrinkles or
Blemish. And forasmuch as your made up Faith and Works tend to the making void
the precious Faith of God's Elect, which is the Gift of God, the which purifies
the Heart, and works by Love, and gives Victory over the Old World of
Transgression and Sin, without which Faith there is no pleasing God: And so to
this One Faith, One Baptism and One Lord Testimony is given, and against all
feigned Faiths, the Works of Men's Hands, the which are in Wickedness, by which
the Just was slain.

And concerning that Head of the Beast, which is branched out into several
Horns in Feigned Humility and Will Worship, intruding into things which they
are not led into by the Light of God's holy Spirit, and therefore their
Foundation being not from a certain Knowledge of the immediate Works of God's
holy blessed Spirit in them; But are in their own Willings and Runnings into
Imaginations and Conceivings about the Practices of the holy Men of God; but
being out of their Spirit and Works therein, what dark Works of Plungings and
Dippings in outward Water, and imaginary Fellowships in outward Elements; but
being out of a true Sense of the Works of God's Spirit, and its Inspiration to
enlighten them, and give them an Understanding of the Times and Seasons of the
Dispensations and Works of the Mighty God; what Strangers are they to the New
Birth, and the One Baptism of Christ with Fire and the Holy Spirit, to burn and
consume Lusts, and so to bring down every high Thought and vain Imaginations
under his Feet, who is the Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the World?
And so by that One Pure Holy Spirit of God are many baptized into one Body,
where God's Will is done on Earth by him that abides forever. So not by the
Works of Man's Righteousness is any saved, but by the Merciful Works of God in
his Son, by the Washing of Regeneration, and Renewing of the holy Spirit. So
into this pure holy Name must all be Baptized, Dipped, Plunged, the which tends
to the bringing out of all False Fellowships, into that One and Only Pure
Fellowship, to walk in the Light of the Lord, where the Blood of Christ
cleanses from all Sin: A pure Baptism indeed, a pure Washing in a pure
Fountain, where Filthiness that is within man comes to be washed away, and
thereby way is made for the Comfortable Fresh Springs that rise from the
Fountain of Love and Mercies (the Substance) of which many outward things are
Shadows; but the Good Thing it self is come, Glory to God on high ( Hebr. 9.9,
10.) So to his blessed Works, who must increase, is Testimony given; and
against all the Works of Men's Hands, the which tend to the making void
thereof. So the Fountain of God stands sure, and must do forever; and all False
Foundations, whereon People have built must be swept away for evermore.

THE blessed and unspotted Foundation the Mighty God of Heaven and Earth has
laid, which is Christ, or Unction from the holy God; by the Light and Teaching
of which Mankind comes to be inspired with a right Understanding concerning
things that differ; even that which is precious and wholesome, so good for Food
for every Soul; and that which is vile and filthy, which tends to the defiling
and bringing Souls into Bondage. And so John in his 1 Epist. 2.20. says unto
the then Believers, who had received this heavenly Gift, But ye have an Unction
from the Holy One, and ye know all things: Herein was and is God's Love in his
Son manifested to the World, to destroy his Works, who has led Mankind into
Darkness; and so through Man's Obedience in following and believing in these
blessed and unspotted Works of God in his Son, the Enmity comes to be slain,
that separates Mankind from God; and so the blessed Works of God in his Son,
reconciling and bringing back them who have been lost by wandering and roving
in their own Willings and Runnings in this cloudy and dark Night, they come to
be seen, felt and enjoyed by them who were and are Partakers thereof, even of
God's Works in his Son, by which the Eye of the Understanding comes to be
opened, and so the Offensive Eye, that is offended at God's Works, comes to be
put out: And thus the Light and Understanding of that pure Life comes to be
known, the which has been as a Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World of
Wickedness by the Subtilty of the Serpent in Man's Heart.

And now to the Praise and Honor of God Almighty, who has drawn Thousands by
the Strivings of the Grace of his Holy Spirit to the Knowledge of his Way,
Christ, the Truth, Way and Life, the which is without Spot and Blemish; the
same Pure, Holy and Unchangeable Way and Foundation on which the holy Men of
God were built in Ages and Generations past, Ephesians. 2.20. and are built upon
the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief Cornerstone. So here was the Primitive Christians Foundation, from
whence proceeded and proceeds Heavenly, Blessed and Gracious Words, from the
true Sense and Feeling of the Operation and powerful Works of God's holy and
blessed Spirit: And from this Holy, Uncorruptible, Pure Foundation and Way of
God were all True Ministers and Teachers of others raised, from the Blessed
Operation of the Spirit of Truth in themselves, whereby they had and have the
Will and Mind of God unto People, though not all in the same Measure or Degree:
But every one being faithful to his own Measure of Knowledge, is therein a
Minister of the Universal Love of God in his Eternal Spirit unto the World.

So here lies the Difference between True Teaching and Teachers, (and False.)
The True Teaching being the Anointing of God's Holy Spirit and Power, wherewith
Mankind being anointed, and taught of God, and according to God's Blessed Will
therein, in a Cross to his own Carnal Will and Affections, speaking forth and
delivering the Truth unto people, as it is in Jesus, Lord of all, in whom the
Peace is, and from whom Peace is proclaimed under those Conditions and
Quallifications as it pleases him to make and tender, who is Lord of all. The
False Teaching is that Spirit of Iniquity, the Old Deceiver of the World, the
Serpent that worked and wrought under a Mystery, subjecting Mankind unto his
Will under a Vain Hope, through which he beguiled him at first, drawing out a
Compliance of his Will unto his Delusions, and so to transgress the blessed
Commands of his Maker; through which yielding of Mankind unto the Serpent's
Counsel, they became Transgressors of God's Holy Law and Covenant; and for that
Cause was drove from God's Presence, and then Fear entered; and Trouble and
Sorrow entered by Man's yielding to the Traitor, by which means he partook of
the Nature of his Cursed Works; and being thus drove out of the Garden of
Eden, the Lord placed a Flaming Sword, which turned every way to keep the Way
of the Tree of Life.

And now the same Mystery of Wickedness, by which Mankind was drawn into
Transgression, the same spiritual Wickedness being got in a High Place, above
the pure holy Seed of God in Man, there keeps Mankind in Bondage to his Will
under many fair and specious Hopes, That though Sin and Transgression, the
Cause of Death, be not finished in them, yet Deliverance shall be had by the
Manifestation and Works of the Seed without them, So here Mankind being
Imbondaged by these Corruptible Works under the Dark Power of the Enemy, from
whence arises all Corruptible VVays, Man being gone from the Uprightness in
which he was created, goes now abroad hunting about in his Inventions and
Conceivings, being led about by this Thievish Spirit, which first drew his Mind
from the Will of God, and so in this is climing up and down, every way but the
right Door; and so being in this Earthly Wisdom from below, by Arts and Trades
set a teaching of their Imaginations and Conceivings concerning the Holy Works
without, and so here lay down Foundations under Confessions and Professions of
Good Works and Gracious Words without, and thereby keep the Serpent's works
of Transgression and Sin alive within; and here the false Teachers under
several Covers of Confessions and Professions in the spirit of Antichrist set
up. And so here being tossed up and down with Floods of Inventions, from thence
their Shameful Works are cast up in the Old World of Transgression and Sin,
where these False Teachers are so rivited, the works of the Enemy being become
so natural unto them by reason of the Continuance of Time in Transgression and
Sin, that thereby they are now become impudent and bold, even to dare to plead
for the Serpent's works, Sin, for term of Life; taking it for Delusion and high
Presumption for any to speak to the contrary: And so here False Teachers being
raised from the works of the Enemy, moving in the Earthly Wisdom for Earthly
Things, being propt and bolstered up through Vain Glory, Praise of Men and
weighty Pounds, many Nobles and special Marks, with abundance of Crowns and
frequent Appearances of Angels; in and by which they are so oyled, that their
Tongues run at their own Wills and Lusts, by fair Speeches of other Men's
Lines and Works; with which ignorant Simple People being taken, have so fed
and oyled the Wheels of these Tradesmen, the which has set them up so
strong, that they make all the Defense they can to strengthen themselves and
their Clients in the old World of Sin and Iniquity: And so these False
Teachers having put Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness, what strong
Pillars and Props they are grown under the Devil's Kingdom and Power of
Darkness, under several Heads more that might be mentioned, being derived from
one Beastly Power, from whence is risen several Heads, and so branched out into
several Horns, the which are pushing every way against the Horn of God's
Anointing (the Power and Strength of the Effectual and Blessed Teachings of his
Holy and Blessed Spirit) the Door and Way by which all must enter that come to
be truly satisfied with God's Righteousness (Christ) the same Seed promised in
the beginning to bruise the Serpent's Head; the effectual Works and Power of
which, according to God's good Pleasure, was and is manifest in the World. So
to the Praise and Honor of God's Holy Works many can say, Peace from him that
is, and was, and is to come, Jesus, Lord of all, who delivers his People from
their Sins, the Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the World; through
which Powerful and Blessed Works Mercy and Peace is extended to all Mankind,
without Respect of Persons, upon Earth.

So Blessed are they that Fear God, and are found out of their own VVillings
and Runnings in their perverse and crooked Nature, in a true Submission and
Obedience to the Righteous Works of God's Righteous Holy Spirit, the true
Christian Spirit, that Christianity may flourish again, and that Heathenism and
Paganism under that Name Christian may be subdued, and vanish away; and Jesus,
Lord of all, exalted in the Hearts and Minds of people over all his Enemies:
Then shall the Nations flourish, and yield Fruit in Season, to the Praise and
Honor of God forever.

ANd now all you Merchants of Babylon, Howl, and cry, Alas, alas! What! all
these precious Trades, whereby we have gotten so much Gain, must they all Down?
Where be all our Mountains and Rocks, that have been so long a making up by all
our Fellow-Trades-Men by Arts and Inventions, in Professions and Confessions of
Good Works and Works without through Ages and Generations past? Will none of
these Mountains and Rocks cover and hide us from the great Wrath of the Lamb?
What must we now bow to his Righteous Works who takes away the Sins of the
World? or else will he grant us No Peace? Alas, Alas! What Clothing in Scarlet,
and Purple, and Fine Linen of Egypt, with precious Stones, will these no
longer hide our Sins and Iniquities? Must all our Works herein, wherein we
thought to have established our own Righteousness, must they now all be put off
as Dung and Dross? Alas! Alas! Though we have lived so far from the Knowledge
of the Operation and Works of God's Holy Spirit, as utterly to deny its
Revelations now adays, and so have been Dark, and void of the Knowledge of
God's Righteous Chastisments, and Rebukes therein; yet we have presumed, that
by Custom of Confessions and Professions of God's Good Works, done in and
through Holy Men without us, would have given us a Right to his Holiness,
though the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, the Pride of Life and
Friendship of the World had never been wholely subdued in us, but in such a
part as might he consistent with our Gain and Profit in the World. But Alas!
Alas! Our Coverings be too narrow, they will no longer hide us; God's Righteous
Works are abroad in the Earth, who is inspiring his People with True Light of
Understanding; and Mordecai sits in the Gate, and will not bow to Wickedness
(Haman) Alas! Alas! We have twined and twisted about through many Crafts and
Inventions, some of our best Arts-Men having called the Light a Devil, some
others a Natural Light, and others a Bewildering Light; and likewise many False
Accusations have we raised, with Evil Reports, Scornings and Reproachings of
the People called Quakers, for Confessing to the Works of the Light of God's
Holy Spirit; yet all our Shifts do not at all help us, but those Works prosper,
and they are generally a Faithful People to their Testimony. Alas! Alas! Who
would have thought our Mother had been such a Harlot? What delicate
Enchantments and Sorceries has she used and trained us up in, that we have
been thus deceived, and thereby have been Instruments of deceiving the whole
Nations? Alas! Alas! We can flee into no Corner nor Hole but we are found out
and pursued. Alas! Alas! cannot all the Wisdom of the World, and Arts therein
help to hide our Sins and Iniquities from the Light of the Lamb? Is every
Creature so clearly manifest in his Sight, that made all things good in the
beginning? And is he now as work again? And must all yield to his Works, or be
accounted his Enemies, and be cast out of his Presence, who is Lord of all,
whose is the Earth and the Fullness thereof? Alas! Alas! Words of Repentance of
Sin will not serve now; there must be a true Repentance and Forsaking Sin and
Evil, or else we perish forever.

Even so it must be done to you Workers of Iniquity, who have been and are as
Props and Pillars, strengthening the Old World of Transgression in Sin and
Iniquity, the Devil's works, and therein withstood the Sufficiency of God's
Love manifested to the World in his Son to destroy the Devil's works, which
works of Transgression the old subtle Serpent, the Deceiver of the Nations, in
and through his Instruments is striving and laboring to maintain under several
and very large and specious Pretenses of crying out, Lord, Lord: But come
Workers of Iniquity, these Good Words will not give you Admittance into the
Kingdom of God; its not they that say, Lord, Lord, shall enter therein; but
they that do the Will of God: And was not his Will manifested to the World in
his Son, that they that believed and followed him in doing his Father's Will
might not Perish, but have everlasting Life? And do not many of you confess to
this in words? who say in your set Prayers, That we may follow the Example of
Christ's great Humiliation and Patience, that we may attain to his
Resurrection, etc. What brave Words have you Workers of Iniquity got in your
Old Bottle, that can hold none of the New Wine? And so in your corrupt Wills
what will the using good Words do you good, but thereby add to your
Condemnation, who by Good Words and corrupt and Bad Actions are withstanding
and have withstood the Good Will, Pleasure and Love of God in his Son to the
World. So your works of Darkness and Falsehood are clearly manifested, and you
cannot hide them from the Light: But the Light of the Effectual and Powerful
Works of God's holy Spirit, wherein his Will is manifest, is rising more and
more, to a more perfect Day of his Will being done upon Earth, to the Praise
and Honor of his blessed and holy Name, whose Works are Pure, Holy, Just and
Perfect in every degree thereof, and tend to the true Reformation, Peace,
Prosperity and Establishment of all Mankind in God's Love and Mercy therein
forever.

So worshipped be God that made Heaven and Earth, and the Fountains of Waters,
and all things therein, who fills the hearts of the Upright with Joy and
Gladness, through the Shinings forth of the Light of his Countenance, who sits
upon his Throne and says, Behold I make all things New (Amen.)

AND now unto such who are in Doubt, Whether God's Holy Spirit does so
effectually work now adays as in the Primitive Times. Unto you I say, What
Flesh could ever have endured such grievous and continued Punishments in Trials
of diverse sorts, by Imprisouments, and Banishments, and Hangings, and Killings,
as in New England (and Imprisonments to Death and Spoiling of Goods) in Old
England, and Cruel Mockings, and Scoffings and Bloodshed by Unmerciful Men?
Indeed some in a Voluntary Humility have somewhat appeared in Sufferings, but
being in their own Willillings and Runnings and Works therein, how have they
been overcome, their Strength being an Arm of Flesh, as well as others, and so
Fleshly Works have been overcome by Fleshly Works? But its not so with them
who are in Scorn and Derision called Quakers, because they have bowed to God's
Way, the which is quite different to Man's ways, was that Name given; but in
God's Way has his Arm been revealed, and its Strength made manifest in our
Weakness: So that to the Praise of him that lives forever the Operation of his
Blessed Spirit is felt, as in the Primitive Days; and the Glory and Comfort of
it has ministered Strength and Refreshment in the time of Trials; though this
Way of God's Proceeding has been hid from the vulterous evil Eye. So to the
Praise and Glory of God is Confession made through the Operation of his holy
Spirit, through which Thousands have been preserved and kept from bowing to the
seed of Cain, Haman and the Beast, which has made the World as a Wilderness,
where wild Fruits and wild Actions spring. So we can truly say to the Praise of
God, Let not the Wise Men in the Wisdom of this World glory in their Wisdom,
nor the Strong Men in their Strength, nor the Mighty Men in their Might; but
let all wait in that pure Measure of the Light of God's Spirit in their
Consciences, that by it they may draw near unto God, that they may know his
Blessed Works of Mercy, and Love, and Judgment in the Earth, wherein that true
Glory and Honor of God is.

ANd further, Concerning Ministry, this I say; As the Blessed Works of the
Light of God's holy Spirit has place in Hearts, and so opens Understandings, a
Discovery will be made from thence of the False, Corrupt and Wicked Ministers,
who open their Mouths for Gifts and Rewards, from whose Works in fair and
deceitful Speeches Profaneness is gone out into the World, where the
Revelations of God's holy Spirit is denied and set at naught; they telling
People, Revelations are ceased, they are not to be known now adays, etc. So
the Sight of all the Good and Blessed Works of God's Good and Holy Spirit are
become as a Sealed Book, so that they who have exalted their Parts and
Knowledge in Hebrew, Greek and Latin above the pure Life of Jesus, they cannot
read in it, because it is sealed; and these Learned Men (Unlearned in the
Things of God) cannot read in it, because they draw near to God with their
Mouths, and seem to Honor him with their Lips, but their Hearts not being
Right in his Sight, therefore are their Wisdoms confounded, and Understanding
in the Things of God kept from them.

So its such who have nothing to minister from but a Divination of their own
Brain, in Conceivings and Imaginations concerning the Works of God in others,
but from no Knowledge of his Works in themselves; so they run and Divine for
Money, and Gifts and Rewards in that adulterated whorish Spirit, which has
sat a long time, and reigned over People, who have been as unstable and
unsettled as Waters, reeling and staggering to and fro through the Sorceries
and Witchcraft of that whorish wicked spirit, into which Cup the Kings of the
Earth have drunk, and been made drunk with Envy, Malice and Hatred one against
another; and from Lusts, which have been conceived in that Wicked and untimely
Womb, have proceeded Wars, and Fightings, and Hatred one against another, and
also Hatred against the Appearance of God's good Works in others.

So its against that bad and wicked spirit, which is not to speak in the
Church, that I am moved to give Testimony in and through the Operation of God's
good and holy Spirit, the which is mightily at work this Day, wherein his Power
is made manifest to destroy the Devil's works, and so a Way making for the
Pouring forth of God's Holy and Blessed Spirit more and more upon all Flesh;
from whence I believe there are at present Hundreds of Able and Gifted
Ministers in this Nation, in some Degree or Measure or other of God's Holy
Spirit, who can speak experimentally of what they have felt, handled, tasted
and seen of his Works therein, who is the Beginning and Ending of every Good
and Perfect Work and Gift in and for them who wait to know his Will and do it:
And through these Blessed Works must the Wounded and Destracted Nations be
healed and set to rights; and all that hinder these blessed Works of God's Holy
and Unlimited Spirit, they are Enemies to God, and to their own Souls, and to
the Nation and Country where they live.

So to that of God in every ones Conscience I appeal in these weighty and high
Concerns, wherein I having done the Will of God, I rest

A Lover of the Truth, wherein I seek the Good of all Mankind, Stephen Smith.
The 9th Day of the 4th Month, 1673.
NOW unto you who will say, I writ out of Enmity: Therein you say true; for in
the true Enmity, which God has put between the two Seeds, viz. The Blessed
Seed of the Woman, and The Cursed Seed of the Serpent: So that in that which
is truly good, that blessed Seed by which Evil is overcome, according to the
Good Will of God, in that I give Testimony against that which is Corruptible
and Bad, by which Mankind is led away into Darkness, and there captivated under
the Enemy's Power.

But if any shall say, I wish herein any Ill to any one's Person: I do say in
the Truth and Uprightness of my Heart, That such do falsely accuse me; For I
know, in the Blessed Seed Intercession is made through me and many Thousands,
that Light may rise in them who sit in Darkness, that the Cause of Enmity
against the blessed Seed may be slain; and that Mankind, who are dead in
Trespasses and Sins, may be quickened, and raised into the Glorious Freedom and
Liberty in the Son of God, where we may live together in Peace with God and one
with another, to the Praise and Glory of his Holy Name forever.

Stephen Smith.

THE END.

