THE TRUE NOTION OF Imputed Righteousness, AND OUR Justification thereby; BEING
A supply of what is lacking in the late Book of that most Learned Person Bishop
Stillingfleet, which is a Discourse for Reconciling the Dissenting Parties in
London; but dying before he had finished the two last and most desired Chapters
thereof, he has left this main point therein Intended, without Determination.

By the Reverend M. S. a Country Minister.

But now the righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, being
witnessed by the Law and the Prophets: Even the righteousness of God, which is
by Faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all that believe, for there is no
difference: For all have sinned and come short of the glory of God: Being
justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.
Romans 3. 21, 22, 23, 24. LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and
Three Crowns, near Mercers-Chappel in Cheapside. 1700.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THese Sheets were sent from an humble and modest, and therefore the more
considerate Minister of the Country, to a Minister in London, to be printed as
he thought meet. They came up without any Title at all to them, and without any
Partition; and the Title therefore and the Sections are put to them by another,
when they came hither. It is like that the Author never saw nor heard of this
late Book of the Bishop, seeing few that see it and read it but are displeased;
and they may well be so, with that Person, or Persons (whosoever they be) who
were entrusted with his Papers, that they should give an unfinished Discourse
to the Bookseller or Printer (who for their part yet cannot be faulted for
accepting their profit) to be published, to the great disappointment of so many
as expected satisfaction from such a hand. The truth is, they have herein dealt
with the Bishop's Book, as Hanun dealt with David's Servants, they have sent
the poor thing out with the garments, as it were, cut off in the middle, and
thereby (as it needs must be) greatly ashamed. If for the covering this
nakedness now we should have made use of any present clouts that were at hand,
though we had no such rich attire for it as himself would have put on it, we
might be excused: But seeing the Clothing we bring is for being homespun and
Country made, the more substantial, it may not only be excused but accepted;
as like to serve the purpose better then if it were finer, in regard to such
for whom intentionally the sheets were written.

By one who was desired to peruse the Manuscript, but unknown to the Author.
THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
Readers,
HAving done my Book, there is one thing you are to understand, or I am farther
to acquaint you with, that whereas my Adversaries charge me with contradicting
our Reformers, and being one with the Papists; they cannot make good the
charge, and therefore it is a slander. For our Reformers, what they writ upon
the point was against the Papists, who contended for Justification by inherent
Grace and good Works, as a Conformity to the violated Law; i. e. the Law of
Innocence, and also that this Righteousness was in its own Nature Meritorious
of Justification and Salvation; but here, or in this I do as much oppose the
Papists as our Reformers, and so am one with them in this respect in the point,
so far am I from contradicting them: So that if the Persons my resolved
Adversaries will have me to be one with the Papists and against our Reformers,
when I affirm that Faith in Christ is the qualifying, though not the meriting
matter of our Justification, or that which is the Qualification, giving right
to Christ and his purchased saving benefits which follow hereupon, they must
prove that it is so accounted by me, as it is a Conformity to that Law which
requires sinless perfect Works, and condemns for nonperformance of the same,
and also to be meritorious of Life according to that Law, or else all they say
contradicts not me, and if not, then all their noise is but a beating the Air,
and so to no purpose, seeing they are quite off from the matter in question.
The Papists affirm that the Law of God may be perfectly kept in this Life, and
that they intend the Law injoining perfect sinless Works, is manifest; seeing
that our Protestants in opposition assert, that no mortal Man is able to keep
the Law of God perfectly in this Life, and that it is no way possible to keep
the same perfectly; for if Man by Grace (as the Papists say) might perform the
Law, he might deliver himself by Grace from the Curse; but now are we redeemed
from the Curse only by Christ who was made a Curse for us, and again say they,
if the Righteous Man keep the Law, then he is without Sin; for where there is
no transgression of the Law there is no Sin but no Man is without Sin; so that
the opinion of the Papists upon the point is, that the uniea formalis causa
Justificationis, est justitia Dei, qua nos justos facit, quam quisque in se
recipit. i. e. The only formal cause of our Justification is the Righteousness
of God, whereby we are not reputed just, but are made just indeed, This is the
Righteousness which a Man has within himself, and is inherent in him, and this
justice or Righteousness it is plain they account an exact Conformity to the
Law which requires perfect sinless Works; for they teach that it is not only
possible for Men to keep the Law of God in this Life but to do more than is
prescribed or commanded; in that Men of their abundance may allot unto others
such works of supererogation. These therefore who bring me into such worthy
company as Mr. Baxter, Mr. Humfrey, Mr. Clerk, whom they charge with Popery, as
they do me, in the Doctrine of Justification, because they affirm a practical
Faith to be the qualifying matter of right to Christ, and his saving purchased
benefits which follow thereupon; when every where they deny it to be the
meriting matter, asserting that to be Christ's Righteousness and his only, do
manifestly wrong and slander them and me, for before our Adversaries can make
us one with the Papists upon the matter in Question; i e. in the point of
Justification, they have to prove that we hold these following things. (1.)
That a Man in this Life by the Grace of God received, may be perfectly
conformed to that Law which requires sinless Works. (2.) That Grace and good
Works in their own nature considered as inherent do justify. (3.) That they do
so in the account of the above mentioned Law which injoins sinless Works. (4.)
That the same Law which requires sinless Works, is the Instrument of our
Justification, or that by which God does judge or account Persons righteous
upon their Conformity thereunto, and so justifies them by it. Now these things
are so far from being holden by us, as that we oppose them more than any of our
Adversaries, who account themselves such great Antipapists, yea and are further
of from the Papists herein than they, for upon the principles our Adversaries
go in the point, it cannot be avoided but they make that Law which injoins
perfect sinless Works (which as such condemns us all) to be God's Instrument
whereby he justifies, seeing that they say the matter of their personal
justifying Righteousness (not only meriting, but qualifying, or else they
oppose not us, observe that) must be that which is every way perfect in the
sense of the violated Law of Innocence: And indeed were we to be justified by
that Law we must say the same with them. So that let any Man who is not
altogether prejudiced against the cause, judge whether those Men be not much
nearer the Papists in this point than such as they charge to be one with them:
for the Reverend Persons named above, and others with them, proceed in this
point upon another Principle, then either the Papists or such as profess to be
their Adversaries; holding God's Covenant or Law of Grace, to be the rule of
judgment, and so the Instrument by which God does justify us, or that by which
God does justify for the sake of Christ's satisfactory and meritoriorious
Righteousness, when by the Grace of God we are conformed thereunto, which
Conformity consists in a turn from Sin, and an unfeigned consent sincerely to
be Obedient unto Christ and his Law to our Lives end; upon which God does
account or reckon us Righteous in the sense of the Gospel, and so such who have
that right unto and interest in Christ, (which impenitent and disobedient Souls
have not) and this for the Righteousness sake of Christ, as I have sufficiently
proved. And whereas (Readers) some Persons would bear you in hand that we give
Repentance and Faith the place, Office and use of Christ's Righteousness, and
look to be justified only by this as inherent; it is either an Ignorant or
Malicious slander: for we say that although the Lord Jesus has satisfied
offended Justice and merited all saving privileges, yet we can neither have
peace with God nor right to Christ, nor his purchased benefits, nor be accepted
of God through Christ, until we be qualified with that Grace the Gospel
requires, which Grace does not give us the right in its own Nature, or as it is
inherent, but as God accounts and reckons it to do so; that is, as he imputes
it for Righteousness. The Papists place Justification in the Infusion: We in
the Imputation. Whatever you hear therefore from Adversaries or read in any
Books, that is, or shall be an endeavor to prove these forementioned Persons,
or others of their mind to be one with the Papists in the point of
Justification, you may assure your selves it is nothing but a slander; and the
slanderers are nearer themselves in the point to the Papists, until they have
fully proved, that we whom they abuse, do hold the four particulars I have
mentioned above, which I am sure they cannot do so long as they have a Tongue
to speak with, and if they cannot, all their attempts against us are in vain,
and not to be regarded: for if they do not this, they do nothing to invalidate
our Doctrine, and therefore I desire you Readers, to observe this, that if any
Answer be made to mine, that you will see whether in the pretended Answer, it
be proved that I hold the four things above mentioned; and if you find they
prove not that (which they are not like) you may assure your selves their
Answer is none.

M. S.

An Advertisement.
WHereas the Author of this Book seems warm against the Righteousness of Christ
being the formal cause of our Justification, and argues that if it be so, then
it must be the Believer's proper personal Righteousness (which those Divines
who say that Christ and the Believer do so coaless into one Person, that his
Righteousness is transferred to them upon that account, must assert) and if it
be his personal Righteousness, his Person, being not seperable from his Nature,
which is himself, then he must be the subject of Christ's Righteousness, and
consequently it must be inherent in him as the subject thereof; the candid
Reader is to observe* First, That he drives the Argument thus home for
conviction only of his Adversaries, who know that Imputed and Inherent is a
Contradiction: Secondly, That he understands well they need no driving to a
concession that his Righteousness therefore is not, and cannot be the
Believer's Physically, but they say Legally only, and by Imputation;
nevertheless so long as they say it is imputed so as to be his formal
Righteousness, the Absurdity remains: Thirdly, That to hold Christ's
Righteousness, to be the Believer's, or accounted his legally, or in a
Law-sense, so as God looks on him as having fulfilled all Righteousness in
Christ as our legal Person, is that Doctrine which Mr. Baxter has set himself
to oppose in all his Books, as such which subverts the Gospel; and he that will
go about to maintain it must Answer his Arguments, which I suppose cannot be
done by any: Lastly, That if the more Judicious of his Adversaries would
consider a little more of the matter, and come to be content with such an
Imputation of Christ's Obedience as answers the End of his performance of it,
which is that upon our believing Men shall enjoy the benefits, then would they
soon find out the right knowledge how to give a fair construction of what is
said by former Divines, who agreeing in this, that there is indeed an
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to the Believers, but because it is not
express in Scripture, they not considering or mentioning any such distinction,
are misconstrued to understand an Imputation in se, when there is indeed (or
can be) no such, but Quoad fructus aut Effectus only.

By the Hand unknown aforesaid.
THE TRUE NOTION OF Imputed Righteousness, AND OUR Justification thereby, etc.
SECT. I. The Subject Matter proposed.
SEeing the apprehensions of Persons are so different about the Doctrine and
Nature of Justification, and so much depends upon the having a right notion
hereof: At the entreaty of some of my Friends, for their satisfaction, and for
the benefit of others, I shall (God assisting) with all possible plainness
declare my Sentiments in this particular.

1. I do believe that by and through the satisfactory and meritorious
Righteousness of our Redeemer the Lord Jesus Christ, a Covenant of Grace has
been purchased for, and granted by God unto sinners, after they by their sin
had violated or broken that Law which injoined perfect sinless works, and
thereby made themselves incapable of performing obedience to that Law, which at
the first it required as a condition of life, and so of having Justification
thereby. Heb. 12. 24. Christ is called the Mediator of the new Covenant, and
that because he has purchased by his death a grant of pardon and life by
promise for sinners upon their sincere repentance and faith. There are promises
of pardon and everlasting life to sinners that repent and believe, Acts 3. 19.
John 3. 16. Now for any to affirm that these promises are made, and the grace
promised granted to sinners who repent and believe, without regard had by God
unto Christ, as the purchaser of them by his meritorious satisfactory
righteousness; is for them to affirm, that God grants and gives saving grace to
penitent sinners which Christ never purchased nor merited, and this is for none
but the Socinian to hold.

2. This Law or Covenant of Grace thus purchased and granted, injoins sinners
faith in Christ, which faith is never without repentance nor sincere obedience,
if the believer be continued after the gift of faith; for undoubtedly if the
believer live in this World after the gift of faith, so long as he does live,
through the grace of God he continues obedient, 1 John 3. 23. Matt. 21. 30.
Heb. 5. 9.

3. Christ by his righteousness has purchased and merited the Holy Spirit to
work faith in the hearts of all those sinners who thereby are brought to
believe, John 14. 26. John 15. 26. The Spirit is sent by the Father in Christ's
name; and sent by Christ from the Father. Let any one now prove, that what the
Father gives in Christ's name, and what Christ sends from the Father is not
purchased and merited by him. And the Spirit is called the Spirit of Faith, i.
e. the principal Efficient, or Author of it, 2 Corinthians 4. 13.

4. I believe that all those who by the Grace and Spirit of Christ do sincerely
believe, shall for and upon the account of Christ's satisfaction and
meritorious righteousness be saved: but as for such as live and die in
infidelity they shall be ^amned, notwithstanding Christ's merits; and that
because they have rejected the remedy through their unbelief; I speak of the
Adult, John 3. 16. 18. 36.

5. I do believe that as the first Covenant did require sinless, perfect
constant obedience, Galat. 3. 10: so this obedience performed by innocent Adam,
would have been his justifying righteousness, or that righteousness upon which
this Law or Covenant would have justified him, or given him a right to Life
promised, which is all one with Justification, if confusion can but be removed,
and this without any regard had to the righteousness of another, Romans 10. 5.

6. I believe that as the second Covenant, i. e. the Covenant of Grace does
require true Faith; so where there is this true Faith, which is the
righteousness this Covenant calls for on the Sinner's part; this Covenant does
as certainly justify the sinner thereupon; i. e. give him a right to Pardon
and Life, as the Covenant of works would have justified Adam, and given him a
right to life, had he continued in the state of integrity. Though observe, That
it is with regard had to the righteousness and satisfaction of Christ, that
this Faith is accepted and accounted by God in the Covenant of Grace for a
sinner's personal justifying righteousness, instead of that sinless perfect
righteousness which the Covenant of Works injoined; And is not this wonderful
Grace? I add, it is Faith in the sense of the Gospel gives Sinners interest in
Christ, and a right to all saving benefits he has purchased and so merited;
which right given by the Covenant of Grace is its justifying the Soul as God's
moral Instrument. Though still I most firmly hold, that it is for the sake of
Christ alone and his righteousness that the believing sinner has this right;
and that this his Faith, which is the gift of God, is accepted as a personal
righteousness, instead of sinless perfect obedience I do not say by the same
Law; i. e. the Law of innocence or perfect works no, but by the Covenant of
Grace which accepts of sincerity instead of strict legal perfection. I deny
then with abhorrence, that Faith is any such thing, as a satisfactory and
meritorious righteousness in whole or in part, such a righteousness being
proper to our blessed Mediator the Lord (...): But then I do not deny, but
affirm that a true and living Faith is by God in the Gospel constituted, that
righteousness which gives sinners right both to Christ and all the blessings
of the Covenant of Grace. And grant me but according to Scripture, Romans 3. 21,
22. Romans 4. 13. Philipp. 3 9. that Faith is a righteousness, and such a
righteousness as the Gospel calls for, and that it gives right according to
the Gospel promise to Christ and his purchased benefits, and see then what
ground there is to deny it the place of a justifying righteousness. I ask does
it give any interest in Christ, and right to the blessings he has purchased?
if not, then an Infidel must have as great an interest in Christ, and as much
right to Pardon and Life as a believer. If you say, that Faith does give
interest in Christ and right to these blessings, then you say the same with me;
i. e. that for the sake of Christ God by the Gospel has constituted Faith to
be our personal justifying righteousness, or that which gives us interest in
Christ, and an actual right to the blessings purchased by, and promised through
him, and this is the justification by Faith I intend, and all that I know of in
and by the Gospel.

Justification by all is acknowledged to be a Law term, if so then, the matter
of Justification is jus secundum legem, a right in Law, and this right in Law
results immediately from a conformity to that Law, and the conformity to that
Law is the righteousness which that Law requires: And the Legislator or
Lawmaker justifying a person, is his judging, asserting, or accounting by this
his Law a person upon his conformity thereunto, to have right to the
privileges contained in the premiant or rewarding ^art thereof.

If the matter stand thus then in the nature of Justification, as is clear,
none can be justified by the Law of Innocence, or that Law which injoins
sinless perfect works, for we can have no right in or by that Law to Pardon and
Life; and that because tha^ ^^w relates to Man considered in the state of
sinless ^ntegrity, who as such having no need of Pardon, it makes no provision
for it; And, 2 We cannot have right in or by that Law to Life, seeing none of
the fallen race of Adam can yield conformity thereunto, and so cannot have that
righteousness which answers this Law. And if so, as is plain, then God the
Legislator or Author of this Law does not, cannot judge, assert, or account
that any have a right in or by this Law to Pardon and Life, and so does not,
nor cannot justify us by it, and if not, does not, nor cannot account a
perfect legal righteousnes^, such as Christ's is, to be our personal justifying
righteousness, for if so, then we should be personally righteous in the sense
of the Law of Innocence.

But are we? If it be said, not in our selves, but in Christ we are, I answer,
if not in our selves, then we are not, nor cannot be personally righteous, or
righteous in our own persons by a perfect legal righteousness, and so according
to your grant, the righteousness of Christ is not nor cannot be our formal
personal righteousness, seeing that, that is a perfect legal righteousness. If
it be said we are personally righteous in the sense of the Law of Innocence in
Christ; then we must be righteous in our selves, and this contradicts the
former, that we are not thus righteous in our selves; for how can a Man be
righteous in his person, but he must be righteous in himself? Find me who can,
the person of a Man without the nature of a Man? and further, to say we are
perfectly legally righteous in another, suppose by imputation, or in God's
account in our own Persons, is to say that God accounts us to he perfectly
legally righteous in our selves^ for so he must, if he account us thus
righteous in our own Persons, and not to be perfectly legally righteous in our
selves, because only so in another, and not in our selves, and does this become
the infini^^ wise God of Truth?

Now then if Justification be a Law act, or the act of God as Legislator by his
Law, and it is not, nor cannot be the act of God by the Law of Innocence: then
we must either have another Law, and such a righteousness as is a conformity to
that Law, or else we must have no Justification. And look what Law it is,
conformity to which gives us for the sake of Christ a right to Pardon and Life,
that conformity must be our justifying righteousness, and God by this Law does
judge, assert, or account (which is all one with ^mp^tation) that we have a
right for Christ's Merits sake to the privileges above mentioned; what Law now
can this be, but the Law of Grace the Gosp^^ called the Law, of Faith; because
it commands Faith, and threatens damnation in case of unbelief, and promises
^or Christ's sake Pardon and Life upon believing: Joh^ ^. 16. This Faith is a
practical Faith, and so includes the whole of what the Gospel commands and
consequently repentance and sincere obedience to (...) of the Moral Law, (Isa.
55. 3.) for I am for from thinking that a notional Faith is a (...) ^^ne,
manifest it is, that God by his Law (...) justifies us for the ^^isfaction and
merits of Christ upon conformity hereunto, and this conformity in our personal
righteousness, or that which gives us right by this Law to the benefits,
respecting eternal Salvation which Christ has purchased, and thus it must be,
unless Persons will say and prove, that to justify is not to have a right in
Law; and then Justification must not be a Law act, if it be granted it is, then
this right must be a righteousness, and the righteousness of our persons, as we
through God's Grace in our own persons do yield conformity to it.

But some may say, it must (...) sinless perfect righteousness which must
justify us; but Faith is no such righteousness. This Objection speaks great
Ignorance in the Objectors; 1. Of the nature of the two Covenants, i. e. the
Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace; and, 2. Of the nature of
Justification, or justifying righteousness as it is jus secundum legem, a right
in Law: But to the Objection I Answer, If you speak of Justification by the Law
of Works, I grant it must be such a righteousness; but what do you hope to be
justified by that Law? if so, you must not be offended if I tell you in the
words of the Apostle, you are fallen from grace, Galat. 5. 4. But if you speak
of Justification by the Gospel, which is the Justification I plead for, and I
hope shall ever stand by, then such a righteousness is not required, but faith
is that righteousness, as has been proved; though still this faith is neither
accounted nor accepted for a justifying righteousness, but for the sake of a
sinless perfect righteousness; that is to say, the righteousness of Christ God
man Mediator, Romans 3. 24, 25, 26.

But it may be further said, faith is our own righteousness, and if we be
justified by faith, we must be justified by our own righteousness.

I Answer, that we are justified by faith relatively, or as it respects Christ
as the Object, the Scripture is express and full for it, Romans 3. 30. Gal. 3. 8.
Romans 3. 28. Romans 5. 1. Galat. 2. 16. Acts 13. 39. let any Man prove that in
these Scriptures faith is not intended, but only its object. But further for
Answer, if by our own righteousness be meant such a righteousness, of which we
are the Efficient Causes or Authors, or the purchasing meritorious Cause; I
deny that faith is our own righteousness, but if by our own righteousness be
meant such a righteousness as is the gift of God, and the fruit of Christ's
Merits, and of which we as qualified Subjects are the performers, so I grant
faith is our own righteousness, and though we are justified by it, yet we are
justified freely by Grace. Romans 4. 16. Ephesians. 2. 8. But the Objection may be
retorted, when it is said Christ's righteousness in its self, or in its own
nature in our Justification is by God accounted our very ^ormal personal
righteousness; does not God so far as he accounts it make it ours? if not, then
we have no propriety at all in it, and if not, how can it then be our very
formal personal justifying righteousness? if he do make it ours in this
imputation, then it must be ours by gift, and what is ours by gift, must be our
own. So that those who are for this strict imputation of Christ's
righteousness, must hold also Justification by their own righteousness, or by a
righteousness which by God is accounted their own.

But again it may be said, if we be justified by faith we must be justified by
an inherent righteousness and we are not. I Answer, if God's imputing or
accounting by his Law or Covenant of Grace, faith for righteousness, which is
the form of Justification, be Justification by inherent righteousness, then
God's imputing Christ's righteousness unto us for Justification, must be
justifying us also by an inherent righteousness, for the form is the same in
both; and if it be the form that makes the justifying righteousness inherent,
then justifying righteousness must be inherent in the one as well as the other.
But the form speaks that Justification is not by Faith absolutely inhering.

But if it be said further, that Christ is the subject of that righteousness,
which is our formal personal justifying righteousness, but we are the subjects
of Faith; I Answer, if the righteousness of Christ be our formal personal
righteousness, then whatever Christ be, we must however be the subjects of this
righteousness; and if so, it must be our inherent, as well as our imputed
righteousness. Thus then for the making this good, I proceed. To constitute
Christ's satisfactory and meritorious righteousness according to Scripture, we
must suppose,

1. That he was sinless, and perfectly Holy in his very Nature, Luke 1 35.

2. He must be sinless, and perfectly Holy in the whole tract of his Life, 1
Peter 2. 22.

3. That he was perfectly Holy in his suffering^ Hebr. 9. 14.

4. That his righteousness might be a satisfactory and meritorious
righteousness, the conjunction of his Divine righteousness was necessary, and
this did result from the personal union of both natures, John 1. 14. I will
grant then upon the matter, that this righteousness, the whole of it is the
satisfactory and meritorious righteousness relating to my Person; i. e. that
which satisfied offended Justice, removed the punishment due (mark my
explication) for the violation of the Law of innocent Nature, and has m^erited
all good, and for which I and others have a right to, and interest in all
saving good promised, upon true Repentance and unfeigned Faith, which
Repentance and Faith, I and others have wrought in us (if we have it) for and
upon the account of the merits of his righteousness: But then that this
righteousness of Christ is the formal righteousness of mine or another Person,
here is my stick, for (to me) if this righteousness of Christ (above described)
be the sole formal righteousness of my Person then it is only this that must
constitute my Person righteous, and by which I am denominated righteous; and if
so, it must be my inherent as well as my imputed righteousness; for if it be
the righteousness of the Person, it must be the righteousness of the Nature,
and if it be the righteousness of the Nature than it must be inherent, seeing
it is that which makes the very Nature righteous, and from whence it is so
accounted. And can any Man that is well in his Wits think, that Christ's
perfectly Holy habits, acts, spotless sufferings all in conjunction with his
righteousness as God, is the righteousness, and the sole righteousness of every
individual Believer and so inherent? if so, then every individual Believer must
either be the proper subject of this righteousness, and so it must not be
Christ's at all, or else the common, and so it must be attributed to Christ and
them as a generical, or specifical Nature, let what part will be taken it is
gross and irrational: therefore we must (until further light) stick to this,
that if God do account the righteousness of Christ to be the very righteousness
of our Persons, he must also account it to be the righteousness of our Nature;
for to say that Thomas is personally righteous by such a righteousness, and yet
not righteous by it in his Nature, is to say that Thomas is a Person without
the specifical and individual Nature of Man, than which nothing can be more
absurd, seeing that the Nature goes to the constituting of the Person. There
may indeed (as in Christ) be the individual Nature without the personality; but
there cannot be the Person without the Nature. So that if Persons will have the
righteousness of Christ (above described) to be the only formal righteousness
of their Persons, it must also be the righteousness of their Natures, and so
inherent. And thus that which is called sanctifying Grace, is taken away as
needless; for if Persons be righteous in their very Natures subjectively by the
righteousness of Christ, which (it is evident) they must be, if it be the
formal righteousness of their Persons, it cannot be avoided, but in God's
account, and so really and indeed they must be sinless and perfectly Holy,
unless they imagine the righteousness of Christ to be imperfect: so that I have
cleared this, that such as hold the righteousness of Christ in their
Justification, is made by God, or accounted by him to be the very formal
righteousness of their Persons, must also hold it to be the righteousnss of
their Nature, and so inherent, and as such themselves to be the subjects of it.

But to advance a little further upon this, thus then, agreeable to the
righteousness of the Nature, such must be the acts which proceed from that
Nature, so or after such a sort righteous: If therefore the righteousness of
Christ be the righteousness of our Nature, which it must be if it be the formal
righteousness of our Persons, (as has been proved) then they ^ust not only be
sinless, but satisfactory and m^^^toriou^ acts, of which that righteousness is
the principle, which we in our own persons exert and put forth; yea such as do
answer the infinite Justice of God, they being acts of which not only an
Humane, but a Divine righteousness in conjunction is the principle, for such
was Christ's righteousness.

Now it is no small matter of wonder that Men should be charging me and others
with holding merit, and setting up our selves, and making Saviors of our own
Duties, all which we deny: while they themselves must hold merit and
satisfaction in the strictest sense in their own persons, they expressly
affirming, they have a righteousness to be the formal righteousness of their
persons, which has this efficacy; and if this be not more gross than ever any
merit was that the Papists held, I will leave to any thinking unprejudiced
Person to determine. One would think Men professing the Knowledge of Christ
above many, bearing the name of Christians, above all about them, should know
and acknowledge the righteousness of Christ (above described) to be essential,
and so proper to him as Mediator; and how or after what manner then this same
righteousness must be the personal righteousness, and that only, of every
particular Believer, I profess is strange. But if it be said, they affirm it to
be the personal righteousness of a Believer by God's Imputation. I Answer, God
in this Imputation they speak of, either communicates after some sort the
righteousness of Christ, or he does not, if he do, then it cannot be essential
and proper to Christ; if he do not after any sort communicate it, then how can
it be the formal righteousness of any Man's Person? Can a Man's Person be
righteous, with a righteousness that is altogether incommunicable, except in
its fruits and effects? Will God impute that same righteousness to me, so as to
account me to be only righteous formally in my Person by it, which he knows ^
neither have nor can have in whole, or in part it self, it being essential and
proper to his Son as Mediator? Men that shall endeavor to persuade me this is
so, or that it may be so, must deprive me of the free exercise of my Reason
first.

I have made it appear, that if Christ's righteousness be the formal
righteousness of our Persons, then it must be the righteousness of our Nature;
if any contradict it they must know, they have this to prove; i. e. that God in
justifying Peter, or any other does account them to be formally righteous by
Christ's righteousness as Persons, but not as they are Men, and if so, then
they must prove the Person is justified, but not the Man; or the Person is
formally righteous with Christ's righteousness, but not the Man: how this will
be performed, if the proof of it be undertaken, I cannot tell.

But before I pass this, I further urge, if Christ's righteousness be the
righteousness of our Nature, which it must be if it be our formal personal
righteousness; then it must be a quality inhering, and if it be a quality
inhering, then we are made the Subjects; and so we must have that which is
proper unto, and inseparable from such a Subject; i. e. Christ, removed, and
existing separate from its own proper Subject, in this and the other Believer,
which cannot be the Subjects thereof, no more than Christ's Body can be the
Subject of the accidents of Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper: Alas! alas,
that Men should be accounting the Popish Transubstantiation such a Monster, and
yet cannot nor will not see what they themselves are forming. And upon the
matter, I would desire it might be considered, whether there be any such thing
as a personal justifying righteousness, the matter of which is not inherent.

But it may be further objected, if Faith be our formal personal justifying
righteousness, is not the difference betwixt Justification and Sanctification
hereby taken away, and so these two great privilege which in Scripture are
spoken of as really distinct confounded, and jumbled into one?

By what has been said above, the Objectors if they will but consider, are
strangely intanged in the briers of this Objection themselves; asserting
Christ's righteousness to be their formal personal righteousness, and so the
righteousness of their Natures, and so make the sanctifying Grace of the Spirit
of no use. But however for Answer to the Objection, I shall (I hope) make it
appear, that although I affirm that Faith is our personal justifying Gospel
Righteousness, and also own it to be a sanctifying Grace; that Justification
and Sanctification are yet distinct, and by this Doctrine not con^ounded, but
still keep the difference assigned unto them by God in his Word.

Faith then as sanctifying is that which purifies the Heart, Acts 15 9. it is a
renewing by the Spirit of the moral Image of God, consisting in Knowledge,
Righteousness and Holiness; Coloss. 3. 10. Ephesians. 4. 24. so that the Soul which
was only carnally disposed and inclined before, is having Spiritual
Illumination, disposed and inclined principally to embrace Spiritual Objects;
and here we consider Faith absolutely as a change of the Nature. Faith as
justifying gives a right to Christ, and for his Merits sake to Pardon and Life,
by virtue of God's gracious appointment in his Covenant of Grace, in his
Imputation of it to give this right; and here I consider Faith relatively as a
change of the state; i. e. the Sinner that before was a Child of Wrath, and an
Heir of Hell, upon a sincere Faith has that relation changed, and is accounted
by God for Christ's Righteousness his Child by Adoption, and an Heir of Heaven
and Eternal Life, John 1. 12. Galat. 3. 26. Faith as sanctifying relates to
Christ, as Physician healing by his Spirit of Grace the sinful distempered
Soul: Faith as justifying relates to Christ as Rector and Judge, who by his Law
of Grace hereu^^^ does declare that Soul who was as a Criminal, was condemned
in Law before, now to be pardoned, and to have right to everlasting Life. There
is as much difference betwixt Faith as it Sanctifies, and as it Justifies, as
betwixt an healing Medicine, and a Title and Right in Law to Pardon and an
Inheritance: So that as the same Person may have diverse Offices, and may be
distinguished according to his Offices; so is the same Faith distinguished as
sanctifying and justifying: The same Man may be both a Physician, and a Judge;
Now will any Man that is right in his Head say, that the administering of
Physic, and the dispensing and executing of Law are both one, because both
performed by the same Person? Those who accuse me and others of confounding
Justification and Sanctification, when we say that Faith is our personal
justifying Righteousness, according to God's gracious Constitution or Law, they
themselves say, that Faith does not only Sanctify, but that it is the
Instrument of Justification. Now give me leave upon the Point to ask these Men,
whether they themselves do not make a difference betwixt Faith as it
Sanctifies, and as it is an Instrument of Justification? if they say, yea they
do; do not they then themselves according to their own notion, distinguish of
the same Faith as sanctifying and as justifying in their Sense; and seeing they
will not call this a confounding of Justification and Sanctification, What
reason have they to call our Notion so? when we consider Faith as absolute in
Sanctification, and relative in Justification, as has been cleared.

If this be so, then it may be said, Sanctification must be before
Justification; I Answer, They that make the Objection, say this as much as we,
in case they will have Faith to be the Instrument of Justification; for surely
Faith must be had before it can be an Instrument, unless they can prove a Man
may use Hands that has none. But however, since this is cast in our way, we
shall a little essay to clea^^. If we take Sanctification then for the very
first Seeds of Grace, which in their own Nature have a virtue to dispose and
incline the Soul to a thankful acceptance of Christ; so that the real consent
of the Will is gained, thus Sanctification is before Justification: But if we
take it for a more fixed and rooted habit of Grace, so it is after
Justification. The Heart must be first disposed and inclined to open to Christ,
that so he may have it for his habitation before it will actually open. Hence
so soon as ever the Soul upon this disposition does give its consent to accept
of the Lord Jesus to be its only Propitiation, Head and Teacher; the Sinner
has interest in him, and by virtue of the Gospel promise has an actual right
unto the blessed benefits of Pardon and Life purchased by him. It Is said of
Lydia, the Lord opened her Heart, and so, Revel. 3. 20. But it may be said, are
not the first Seeds of Grace saving? I Answer, The Seeds of Grace considered as
such, they have an healing or saving virtue in their own Nature; but they are
not actually healing or saving to me, until they prevail against the corrupt
sinful disposition and inclination of my Will. I know in what Soul so ever God
Sows the Seeds of true Grace, those Seeds shall prove healing and saving
through Christ; they shall prevail against the sinful corrupt disposition of
the Will, 1 Peter 1. 23. but they are not thus healing and saving to any Soul
until they do so: Such a Medicine appointed for the recovering of Health, it
has an healing quality, but though it be taken, it is not actually healing to
the Sick, until it prevail against the Distemper, and it is so with Grace. And
thus it may be known in what Sense Sanctification is before Justification.

Touching the gift of the first Grace, know there is much good purchased by
Christ, and given without respect to any condition on Man's part, and thus the
gift of the first Grace, God ordinarily by his Word (...) Spirit, concurring
does convince, humble, and incline the Sinner to accept of Christ in all his
Offices; i. e. to be Propitiation, Head and Teacher; and when the consent is
gained, then has the Soul an actual interest in, and right unto the Lord Jesus
to be his Propitiation, etc. to the sanctifying Spirit, to Reconciliation,
Adoption, and Glorification. The former work was to prevail with the Soul for
its consent, but when prevailed with, then has it an actual interest in and
right unto Christ, and the saving blessings of the Covenant promised upon
consent. A Man that Courts a Woman for her Consent to be his Wife, until this
be given by her, and she actually give up her self unto him to be his Wife; she
has no interest in him as her Husband, nor interest in nor right unto any of
his Goods as one in that relation, and thus it is in the Case before us. If any
Man, says Christ, hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and
sup with him, and he with me, Revel. 3. 20.

SECT. II. How the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness is to be held, and how
not.
AFter these things cleared, I proceed to tell the World how I do, and how I do
not ^(...)^ the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness. I do not deny, but affirm
God's Imputation of Christ's Righteousness in these following Senses.

1. God so far imputes it, as that he accounts it was for our Redemption and
Salvation. Romans 3. 24, 25.

2. God so far imputes it, as that he accounts it to be the sole or only Merit
and Purchase of the New Covenant, and the benefits thereof, Heb. 7. 19. 2 Timothy
1. 10.

3. God so far imputes it, as that he accounts it to Merit the Blessed Spirit
for us, to work Grace in our Hearts. John 1. 16. Ephesians. 1. 3.

4. God so far imputes it, as that he accounts it is for this that all the
Grace and Duties of his People are accepted, Ephesians. 1. 6.

5. God so far imputes it, as that he accounts it is for this he pardons us,
and receives us into his favor, and justifies us by his Covenant of Grace upon
believing, and so accepts our Faith for Righteousness; it is not without
Christ, but for him; Acts 13. 38, 39. Golos. 1. 21, 22, 23.

6. I do believe that what Christ did and suffered, he did and suffered for us
in the Person of a Mediator; and God does account what he did and suffered as
Mediator, does and shall avail as much for the obtaining of Pardon and Life
for us upon Faith, as though we had been able to have done and suffered the
same in our own Persons 1 Pe^^r 3. 18. Heb. 9. 15. 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. Romans 4. 23,
24, 25. John 3. 16.

Now I desire to know in what any Christian in his Practice can make further
use of the Lord Jesus, than in those particulars forementioned; and if he
cannot make any use of Christ by Faith, but what may be reduced to some of
those particulars; Can it be thought that God does make over Christ unto him
after some sort wherein he shall be of no use? If not, then ^ desire to know
what needs any further, or any Imputation of Christ's Righteousness of another
sort than has been expressed? I desire it may be taken notice of, that whereas
I have been accused by some as an Adversary to all Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, they have misrepresented me, and so have wronged me. And I
challenge any Man to show in this Profession wherein I have detracted from the
Grace of God, or Merits of Christ.

But now having shown in what Sense I hold the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, I must plainly tell the World, that God does not so impute the
Righteousness of Christ unto us, as that he accounts it in it self to be our
very formal Personal Righteousness, reckoning that what Christ did and suffered
as our Mediator, we did and suffered in our own Persons; i. e. obeyed in him,
and suffered in him in the Sense of the violated Law of Innocence. This is that
I profess I dare not believe, and the reason is the many gross, and to be
dreaded consequences with which such a Doctrine as this is loaded.

1. It charge God with an untruth, for God judges of things as they are, and
not as they are not; if we then affirm that God accounts that what Christ did
and suffered for us, we did and suffered in our own Persons, in the Sense of
his violated Law, (which he must do, if he account the very Righteousness of
Christ to be ours in it self) then he must account us to have done and suffered
that in our own Persons which he knows we neither did nor suffered, and if so,
then let it be considered what must follow.

2. If Christ's Righteousness be imputed in it self, then the Law of perfect
sinless Works must justify us; for if God in our Justification do account the
Righteousness of Christ in it self to be our formal personal justifying
Righteousness, then he must account us to be such as have a sinless perfect
habitual and active Righteousness: for such was the Righteousness of Christ,
and if God do account us to have such a righteousness as this in our own
Persons, then it must follow that the Law of Innocence must justify us as well
as it did Christ; for what should hinder if we have the very same righteousness
which is Christ's to be our formal personal righteousness? and have it we must,
if God do impute it unto us in it self, and account it in that Imputation to be
such a righteousness as formal and personal. And from hence we must implicitly
hold that God in our Justification does account us to be as righteous as
Christ, which some have had the Confidence to affirm, and all from this
Doctrine; for I hope People are not to learn that Christ's righteousness
habitual and active was a perfect conformity to the Law of Innocence, and if we
be such in the Sense of that, it accounting that what Christ was and did, we
were and did in him, in point of conformity, then in this very account it
justifies us.

3. God must account us such as are habitually and actively sinless and Holy,
such as have neither Sin in our Nature and Life, for Christ was such, and if we
have the very same righteousness personally which he had (which we must have if
God account us, as they say, to have it) then how can we choose but be such as
have neither Sin in Nature nor Life.

4. That follows which has been asserted, and is yet asserted by some, God
neither sees nor can see Sin in his People; and indeed how should it be, if he
account them habitually, and actively sinless and Holy, for where it is thus,
there can be no Sin in their Natures, and if so, then no Sin of Omission or
Commission in the Life, and if no Sin neither in Nature nor Life, how should
God see any?

5. If we be such as God accounts in our Justification to be both habitually
and actively Holy and sinless, then we need no Pardon, for there needs no
Pardon where there is no Sin nor Fault, and if we who are justified have no Sin
to Pardon, then there needs no Confession of Sin, nor Repentance, nor Faith in
Christ for Pardon, and so no Gospel Obedience; seeing we have the same legal
Righteousness (as they say) in God's account which Christ had, and so we must
be justified by the Law of Works as he was; and thus the Gospel and Covenant of
Grace which offers Pardon to Sinners upon Confession, Repentance, and Faith,
becomes a mere nothing, and the whole frame of Christianity is taken down.
Well, but they may say we are not inherently righteous by Christ's
Righteousness; I Answer, if they be personally righteous with Christ's
righteousness, they must be inherently righteous with the same, as I have
before manifested.

6. If God impute the righteousness of Christ unto us in it self, and so in the
Sense of the violated Law of Innocence reckon us to have done what Christ did,
and to have suffered what Christ suffered in our own Persons, then he must
reckon us such as have performed the very acts of Mediation and Redemption; for
wherein did Christ's Mediation and Redemption consist, but in his Obedience and
Sufferings (I speak of this his work upon Earth) which constituted his Active
and Passive Righteousness: And if so be that God in justifying of us do account
us to have the very same righteousness which Christ had for our formal personal
righteousness, then he must account us to have that which is and was a
mediating and redeeming righteousness, and so to have that of our own by his
gift, as our very personal righteousness whereby we may be Mediators and
Redeemers for our selves and others.

7. If God impute the righteousness of Christ in it self, and account it our
formal personal righteousness, then it is only the righteousness of Christ he
imputes as Man: or the righteousness of Christ as God man. If the former, then
they must hold that the righteousness of Christ as Man only is efficacious, and
he needed not be God; if the righteousness of Christ as Godman, then God must
account them such as have a Divine righteousness as well as an Humane to be
their formal personal righteousness, and if so, then that opinion hereby is
established of being Godded with God, and Christed with Christ, and what I
dread to say, they must implicitly affirm themselves to be partakers of the
very Essence of God, and so God's Essence must be divided into so many parts as
there are justified Believers, and these Believers must be made partakers of
the incommunicable Attributes of God.

Now upon the matter, to hint it again; when I say that Faith is our Gospel
Righteousness, and that God by the Gospel does account it our personal
justifying Righteousness, it is manifest from what I have already said, I do
not intend only the ^^NR^^ credere, or the very act of Faith without relation
to its Object Christ and his righteousness: though some for all I have said
have been bold to affirm I do; for that would be no true Faith at all, and far
then from justifying, for Faith justifies as it unites unto, and gives the Soul
interest in Christ, and this it does as it is the Souls free consent to take
Christ (as it is to be said) in all his Offices, upon which the Soul has an
actual right unto him, and the benefits of the Covenant purchased by him, and
this is plain Gospel Justification; as for instance, Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved, Acts 16. 31. When therefore any Soul believes
this his Faith is his Obedience and Conformity unto the Gospel command, and so
his Gospel Righteousness, and as such his actual right through and for Christ,
to the Salvation promised. Would the Jailer have had a right unto the promised
Salvation had he not believed, I mean an actual right, must it not be said no?
Upon his Faith then he had a right, and this his Faith was his obedience to the
Gospel command; therefore it was his obedience to the command which was his
Gospel Righteousness, and so his right by Christ (according to God's own fixed
Law of Grace) unto Salvation. Has any Man an actual right to Heaven but a
Believer? if he have, let it be proved from Scripture; if none have but such an
one, then the Believer only (I speak of the Adult) has the actual right, and
is it not plain then, it is his Faith that gives him this right. To illustrate
this, such a Man makes a Purchase of an Inheritance: After Purchase, bequeaths
it by Testament or Will, to this or the other Person, upon the performance of
such or such conditions specified in the Testament or Will; if the conditions
be performed according to the Testament of the Donor, then he has an actual
right in Law unto the Inheritance, if not, he has no right of claim: if he
perform the conditions, the Law will vindicate his right, and the Judge by Law,
if he do Justice, if he do not perform the conditions, the Law cannot nor will
not give him a right to the Inheritance, nor the Judge by Law; it is just thus
in the matter before us, and the application is easy.

SECT. III. Scripture to prove the Imputation of Faith, and an Answer to such
Texts as are alleged for Imputation of Christ's Righteousness.
IF I should pass on further to prove from Scripture that not Christ's
Righteousness in it self, but Faith as it accepts of Christ, as offered in the
Gospel, is now a Sinners formal justifying Righteousness before God, I should
have a large Field, and might multiply express Scripture Texts for the
Imputation of such a Faith, but not one express Text in all the Bible can be
found for the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness in it self, nay nor
implicit. Let us consider a few Texts among many, Romans 4. 3. Abraham believed
God, and it was accounted unto him for righteousness. What was accounted unto
him for Righteousness? Well, say they, not Faith, but its Object; i. e. the
Righteousness of Christ. But pray where have we any such word in the Text? and
besides here is the object of his faith express, and that is God, Abraham
believed God, now if they will have not Faith but its Object to be counted for
Righteousness, then the words must be read thus, Abraham believed God, and God
was counted unto him for Righteousness, and if they will have Christ's
Righteousness brought in here, then we must read the words thus, Abraham
believed God, and God was counted unto him Christ's Righteousness for
Righteousness. I would desire them to tell us what Sense they can make of
either reading? So Verse 5th. But to him that works not but believes in him
that justifies the ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness. And Verse
9th, For we say that Faith was reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness. The
Scripture says expressly, Faith was counted, and Faith was reckoned for
Righteousness; they say nay, but by Faith is meant Christ's Righteousness; now
let any Man judge whether we are to believe the Scripture or them. Though let
it ever be marked when I according to Scripture say Faith is counted, imputed
or reckoned for Righteousness. I do not (as I have said) exclude the object
Christ, or God in Christ, but say it is not Christ's Righteousness in it self
that is accounted by God to be my formal personal Righteousness, but that Faith
which does accept of the Lord Jesus as offered in the Gospel, this Faith gives
me interest in him, and right to Pardon and Life, and as such is my justifying
righteousness in the Sense of the Gospel, and that because God by the Gospel
does declare unto me, and assure me, that if I thus believe in Christ, I shall
both be pardoned and everlastingly saved. I must still urge that Text, John 3.
16. For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son; that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life, and
let it I pray be well considered, for what can God's declaring and assuring by
the Gospel be, that I shall have these great benefits upon such a Faith, but
his justifying me thereupon, or his accounting by this his express word my
right to these blessings upon such a believing.

But it will be said, do you not bring Faith into the very matter of
Justification?

I Answer, I shall distinguish of matter of right,

1. There is the meriting purchasing matter of right, and this is solely or
only Christ's Righteousness.

2. There is the qualifying matter of right, and this is Evangelical Obedience
included in Faith, seeing that without Faith it is impossible to please God,
now if Persons judge, when I say Evangelical obedience is the matter of right,
that I intend the purchasing meriting matter of right, here they mistake me.
But if they judge when I affirm Evangelical Obedience to be the matter of
right, that I only intend the qualifying matter, in this they bit right. As
thus now, Persons will grant me there are such gracious benefits as these; i.
e. Pardon, Reconciliation, Adoption, Acceptance of the services of a real
Christian, etc. The purchasing and meriting Righteousness then of all these
benefits is only the righteousness of Christ. But now consider me or any other
Person as an Impenitent Infidel; the Question will be whether as such an one, I
have an actual personal right unto, or interest in these blessings? I think it
will not be said, as such an one I have, for then I should be in a saving
state, while in a state of Impenitency and Infideli^y, which is manifestly
repugnant to the Scripture. If not, then I must be a Person or Subject
qualified with something, that according to God's appointment must give me
interest in and right unto, I mean an actual right unto these benefits which I
had not while an Impenitent Infidel: And what must this be? not the
Righteousness of Christ, for that cannot be a qualification in me; and if not,
then Faith and Repentance, by which of an impenitent Infidel, I come to be a
penitent Believer. And this I would have observed, that those which are against
my notion; yet if they be true practical Christians, their practice must and
does agree with my notion. To instance in one thing, I offer up Prayer and
Supplication to God, they do the same, I know my Prayers will not be accepted
in themselves without a Mediator, they know the same, I say here, I must have
right to Christ as my Mediator, by accepting of him and trusting unto him as
such, and pleading the promises of grace in his Name, they say the same. I say
further, I may hope for acceptance of my Prayers for his meritorious
intercession, if I have the qualification requisite, and that is Faith.
Whatsoever, says Christ, you shall ask in my name, believing ye shall receive;
so that this Faith is not the merit of my acceptance, but the gracious
qualification of my Person, without which I cannot have an interest in, or
right unto (in this particular) Christ's intercession, seeing that is offered
up with the Prayers of Saints, and these most certainly must be Believers. Now
are not they of the same mind? see then if their practice do not agree with my
notion more than their own. And it look's odd on it, that Men should contend
against that which must be found in their own Practice if they be true
Believers.

Having proceeded thus far, my next undertaking shall be to examine a little
their gloss upon some of the main Texts they bring for the proof of this their
rigid Imputation of Christ's Righteousness.

1. One is Psalm 37. 1. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose
sin is covered. Here is the Pardon of Sin express, but not a word of the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness in it self; it is said indeed whose sin is
covered. But what can the meaning be, but that God for the sake of Christ's
Merits and Satisfaction so pardons Sin to a Penitent Believer, as that it shall
never be brought in against him, or laid to his charge in judgment to his
condemnation and everlasting shame, and thus it is said to be covered, and thus
covered for Christ's Righteousness.

But seeing that Christ's Righteousness is the cover, How is it so in their
Sense? well, they say, as a Garment or Robe; if it cover then as a Garment or
Robe, Will they say that properly, or that it is really, and in it self a
Garment or Robe; i. e. Physically so? surely no, for this would be gross, to
conceive it to be a Coat or Gown, etc. if not properly a Garment or Robe, then
improperly they must say it is so, and so comparatively in respect of it is use.
A Robe or Garment then it may have these uses, to cover our nakedness, to
defend from cold and storms, to keep our bodies warm, and to adorn: We will
grant then that Christ's Righteousness may be compared to a Robe or Garment in
regard of these uses, considered as satisfactory and meritorious. It is for
this that a true penitent Believer having his Sins pardoned, shall be delivered
from everlasting shame; it is for this he shall be secured from the storm of
God's eternal wrath and displeasure; it is for this he is adorned and
beautified with the Graces and Gifts of the most Holy Spirit; it is for this
that he has all the Heart quickening influences of the blessed Spirit. But then
if I be a Believer, that I have it in it self, and that it is of all these uses
to me, as it is accounted by God to be my formal personal Righteousness, this I
must deny; for if so, it must not be the Righteousness which is Christ's, and
proper to him as Mediator, for which a Believer shall be delivered from
everlasting shame, and secured from God's wrath, but the Righteousness of
Christ as it is a Christian's formal personal Righteousness, and so as a
quality in himself; and it must not be the Graces of the Spirit, and so not
God's moral Image wherewith the Soul of a true Christian is adorned, nor the
Holy Spirits influences whereby it is quickened; but only the Righteousness of
Christ imputed in it self, and so accounted to be his formal personal
Righteousness: And if it be thus, then the Righteousness of Christ as
Mediator, and the qu^ckning and sanctifying operations of the Holy Spirit must
be needless. For whatever is a Believer's formal personal Righteousness, it
must not only be imputed unto him, but be a quality in him, as I have cleared
above, that whatever is the formal Righteousness of the Person, must be the
Righteousness of the Nature; if therefore the Righteousness of Christ (as they
say) be the formal Righteousness of the Person, then that Person who is
formally righteous by it, must be perfectly righteous, seeing Christ's
Righteousness in it self, which they say, they have to be their personal
Righteousness is such: And if so, what need of the Righteousness of a
Mediator, or the graces and influences of the Holy Spirit for a Christian, he
being perfectly righteous in his very Nature with Christ's Righteousness? Now
they will say this they will not own, and if not, then why do they own and
stick by such a Doctrine, which has such natural and unavoidable consequences
as these?

I would gladly have these Persons consider, whether they dare trust to this
Righteousness of Christ for their Justification and Acceptance, as it is their
formal personal Righteousness without any further regard had to Christ as
Mediator without them: if so, then what need of Christ's Mediation without
them? if not, then they must have Christ's Mediation without them for the
acceptance of Christ's Righteousness upon them, and does Christ's own
Righteousness stand in need of Christ's Mediation for its Acceptance? I know
not how they can come off here, without either denying that a Person considered
as justified needs Christ's Mediation, or accounting the Righteousness of
Christ upon them in the Sense of the Law of Innocence to be imperfect. Take the
former, and they exclude Christ from being a Mediator for a justified Person
as such: take the later, and they destroy their own Assertion, that there is no
Justification but by a perfect legal Righteousness, but I shall leave them in
their own sna^e, and pass on, and I am like, for they will not suffer me or any
Man to help them.

2. Another Text alleged to prove that Christ's Righteousness is imputed to
Believers in it self, and so is their formal personal Righteousness, and so
accounted by God, is Jer. 23. 6. And this is his Name, whereby he shall be
called, The Lord our Righteousness. That Christ is the Lord our Righteousness I
grant, but where is it said in this Scripture, that his Righteousness is
accounted ours, as to be the formal Righteousness of our Persons? And if it be
said, Although it be not expressed, yet it is intended, I Answer, it cannot be,
for Christ's Righteousness being a satisfactory and meritorious Righteousness,
it must be proper ^o him as Mediator, and what is proper to him as Mediator
cannot be in it self the formal personal Righteousness of another, nor so
accounted by God; for God does not look upon any Believer to have a
satisfactory and meritorious Righteousness (which he must have if he have the
Righteousness of Christ to be his personal Righteousness) for his personal
formal Righteousness: But God does account every true Believer to have that
Righteousness, or to be so personally Righteous by the Righteousness of Faith,
as that he has right by virtue of the promise of grace to those blessed and
glorious benefits purchased by Christ, by whose satisfactory and meritorious
Righteousness this his Faith is accepted for Righteousness, upon which Christ
is the Lord of this Righteousness, this Gospel Righteousness, as the Purchaser,
Lord-Treasurer and dispenser of all Grace, and may well then be called the Lord
our Righteousness: but then it does not follow that the Righteousness of Christ
which is proper to him as Mediator (and so for us) is ours in it self, and our
very formal personal Righteousness.

3. Another Text is in Isa. 45. 24. Surely shall one say in the Lord have I
righteousness and strength. We may from this Scripture groundedly conclude,
that a satisfactory and meritorious Righteousness is to be found only in
Christ, and that this is sufficient to satisfy offended Justice, and merit all
good for us: but what is this to prove that God accounts this his righteousness
to be our personal formal Righteousness: The Text says no such thing: and if
it mean Christ's Righteousness as Mediator, the Text says expressly it is in
him, and the Believer does acknowledge it so to be, and therefore not in
himself, which yet it must be if it be the Righteousness of his Person, as has
been already shown.

4. A fourth Text is in Isa. 61. 10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my
Soul shall be joyful in my God: for he has clothed me with the Garments of
Salvation, he has covered me with the Robe of Righteousness, as a Bride. groom
decketh himself with Ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth her self with her
Jewels. That this Text cannot be meant of a Believer's being clothed with
Christ's Righteousness, as a Robe in a proper Sense has been made manifest,
and if it be so improperly; i. e. a Robe, then only in a comparative Sense as
to its use, and that it may fitly be compared unto a Garment or Robe, as to its
use as satisfactory and meritorious, with respect unto a Believer; I grant, but
that it has the use of a Garment, so as to be any Person's formal
Righteousness; this I deny, and that upon the Reasons above given, which
Reasons are sufficient to manifest that whatever Text of Scripture be brought
for proof that Christ's Righteousness is a Robe in their Sense is mistaken by
them.

And whereas they allege among the rest, that in Revel. 19. 8. speaking of the
Church, And to her was granted, that she should be arrayed in fine linen,
clean and white: for the fine linen is the righteousness of Saints. It Is not
said this fine linen is the Righteousness of Christ, though the Righteousness
of Christ (we acknowledge) did purchase and merit it: But the Righteousness of
the Saints; i. e. the purity and holiness of the Saints, and that it is so, let
the Psalmist determine, Psalm 45. 13, 14. The King's daughter is all glorious
within; her clothing is of wrought gold. She shall be brought unto the King in
raiment of Needle Work: the Virgins, her companions that follow her, shall be
brought unto thee: And so the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Husbands,
love your Wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it:
That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water, by the word:
That he might present it to himself, a glorious Church not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing.

5. A Fifth Text is in Romans 3. 22. Even the righteousness of God which is by
faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe: for there is no
difference. This Righteousness of God, say they, is the Righteousness of Christ
imputed and accounted to be a Believer's formal personal Righteousness; but
that by the Righteousness of God in this Scripture, and others cannot be meant
the Righteousness of Christ is manifest.

1. Because this righteousness which is called the righteousness of God is
opposed unto the righteousness of the Law, and is said, ver. 21. to be without
the Law: But the righteousness of Christ is not opposed to the righteousness of
the Law, he being conformed unto the Law both in habit and act.

2. By the righteousness of God cannot be meant God's righteousness it self, I
hope they will grant, and if not, then from it they cannot gather that the
righteousness of Christ in it self is imputed, seeing it is a divine as well as
an humane righteousness: unless they will say it is the humane righteousness of
Christ only which is imputed in it self, and if so it could nothing avail them,
for though it be true the humane righteousness of Christ would have availed
himself, as the Law of Innocence justified him thereupon as a righteous Man.
Yet it would have availed us nothing at all without the conjunction of his
divine righteousness, seeing without this it would not have been for others
satisfactory and meritorious: therefore I conclude, that Faith in Jesus Christ
is the righteousness which is here called the righteousness of God, and that
because God by the Gospel has constituted and appointed this to be that which
he will accept instead of legal perfect righteousness, and for the sake of
Christ's satisfactory and meritorious righteousness will justify us by his Law
of Grace, and thereby give right to Pardon and Life. What has been said to
this Text, may be sufficient to give light to understand the meaning of that
Text so much urged, Phil. 3. 9. And be found in him, not having mine own
righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. And so Romans 1. 17. For
therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith: as it is
written, The just shall live by faith. Romans 10. 3. For they being ignorant of
God's righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have
not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God. 2 Cor. 5. 21. For he
has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him.

6. The sixth Text is, Romans 4. 6. Even as David also describes the bless^dness
of the Man unto whom God imputes righteousness without works. This
righteousness say they, which God in this Text is said to impute, can be no
other but the righteousness of Christ. There has been enough said to show it
cannot be righteousness of Christ in it self which is imputed. I would gladly
have Men to consider, what the Apostle in this his dispute undertakes to prove;
can any thing be more clear than that it is Justification by Faith, in
opposition unto the works of the Law, both of Innocence and Moses. But here is
the grand mistake of these Men, when the Apostle is only excluding works with
relation to the Law of Innocence, or the Law of Moses from Justification; they
understand him universally, as excluding also Gospel works, such as Faith, etc.
which yet nothing can be more express and plain the Apostle is pleading for
Justification by; Verse 9. For we say that faith was reckoned to Abraham for
righteousness. And this Apostle at the fifth ver. of this Chapter affirms, that
faith is accounted for righteousness. And if so, which is express, then faith
must be the righteousness of which the fifth Verse speaks. Well but say they it
is not faith that is this righteousness, but the object Christ's righteousness,
if they mean it is not faith abstracted, or separate from its object that is
this righteousness, I say the same, for it is no true faith which has not
Christ for its object. But if they mean that it is the object it self that
justifies, and not faith with relation unto the object, here I must leave them,
and that because I must believe the Apostle before them, and there is nothing
in all the Scripture more manifest, than that though there be neither
conformity to the Law of Innocence, nor the Law of Moses, though a Man neither
can nor shall be accounted by God righteous in the sense of these Laws; yet
where there is a consormity to the Gospel Law, we have David's testimony, says
the Apostle, that Man shall be blessed, and this his conformity shall be by God
accounted for righteousness. And what wonderful grace is it that God will
accept for the sake of Christ, the sincere obedience of faith instead of a
sinless perfect obedience.

But say these Men if you are justified by faith, you are justified by works,
and so exclude the grace of God. The Apostle says the contrary, Therefore it
is of faith that it might be by grace, Verse 16. But this I suppose they cannot
or will not understand, but think that if it be by faith, it must be by a work
exclusive of grace. They consider not that faith is the free gift of God
through Christ, and that it is by grace that God saves through faith. Ephesians. 2.
8. For by grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is
the gift of God. A Soul being by the Holy Spirit convinced of its own sinful
and lost condition, and its own inability and insufficiency to save it self out
of this condition; by the light of the Gospel it has a discovery there is a
sufficiency of Satisfaction, Merit, Power, and Spirit in Christ for its Pardon
and Life; beside a free offer herein of this grace unto it immediately as it is
really burdened with Sin, and under the fears of eternal perishing, and so
truly willing of Christ and his Grace above all the World; upon which the Soul
penitentially renouncing the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, gives its actual
consent to accept of Christ for its Propitiation, Head, and Teacher, and so to
be subject to God in him by the Holy Spirit. Here now is the union of the Soul
with Christ by Faith, and so its actual right hereupon through Christ to Pardon
and Life; and this ^aith as it is the matter of right, is the Souls personal
justifying Righteousness, and the Gospels afferting such a Soul; i. e. a
Believer to have this right is God's mediate justifying act. Consider still,
John 3. 16. For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.
See then upon the matter if it be not of Faith that it might be by Grace, and
pretend not to exclude Faith for fear you should exclude Grace, but fear to
exclude Faith, seeing that if you do, you most certainly exclude Grace, for the
more of the Obedience of Faith, and the more is the creature depressed, and God
in Christ exalted. Romans 4. 20. He staggered not at the promise of God through
unbelief: but was strong in faith, giving glory to God.

7. A Seventh Text they would have speak for them is, Romans 5. 19. For as by one
Man's disobedience many were made sinners: so by the obedience of one, shall
many be made righteous. If they mean, by what this Scripture says, that God
did account Adam's act of his disobedience in violating the Laws to be ours: so
he accounts Christ's obedience in fulfilling the Law to be ours in it self, and
that we fullfiled the Law in him, I Answer, God did not account Adam's act in
eating the forbidden Fruit so to be ours, as though we had eaten our selves;
for God knows we neither took, received, nor did eat of the Fruit in our own
Persons, our Persons then having no Existence or actual Being: And God is true,
and will not account that to be done by us which he knows we did not. Indeed we
partake of the sad Fruits of that disobedience, having derived from Adam
originally by natural Generation, a nature sadly corrupted and violated: and so
are guilty before God, and are accounted both by him and his Law really to be
so: And so God does not account the Obedience of Christ in his fulf^ing the Law
to be ours, as though we had performed it in our own Persons, for he knows, and
we may know our selves we did not. But this God does for and upon the account
of Christ's sinless perfect meritorious righteousness, constitute us righteous
by his Gospel Law upon true Faith, and accounts us as we are Believers for
Christ to have an actual right to Pardon and Life.

8. Another Text is, Romans 8. 4. That the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. I take the
meaning of this Text to be this; i. e. Christ Jesus having answered the ends of
the violated Law by his perfect Obedience and Suffering, has obtained hereby
that a Christian's sincere Obedience, which consists in conformity to the Law
of Grace, shall be accepted for Christ's sake as really by God, as though he
had fulfilled or perfectly obeyed the Law of Innocence in his own Person, which
now as a fallen Creature he is incapable of doing. The ground of this my
apprehension are the words that follow; who walk not after the Flesh, but after
the Spirit. Now though every true Christian, as to the bent of his Heart and
Life does walk after the Spirit, and not according to the Flesh or corrupt
Nature; yet it cannot be that by this the Law of Innocence is fulfilled in him,
seeing that it must be a sinless conformity that must be a fulfilling of that
Law; now mark the Text speaks of a personal fulfilling, and this by a walking
according to the Spirit; therefore this Law which is fulfilled in them or by
them must be the Law of Grace, and not the Law of Innocence. And let not Man
say still that God accounts that a true Believer does fulfill the Law of
Innocence in Christ, for if so that Law must justify and the Covenant of Grace
be made void. Christ fulfilled that Law for us, but we did not fulfill it in
our own Persons in his fulfilling of it.

9. The Ninth Text is in Psalm 71. 16. I will make mention of thy
righteousness, even of thine only. What is there in this Text to prove that God
accounts the righteousness of Christ to be the formal personal righteousness of
every Believer? Plain it is the Text speaks of God's righteousness in keeping
and fulfilling his gracious Promises, which righteousness is no other but his
truth and faithfulness. But suppose we this Scripture to speak of the
righteousness of Christ as Men would have it, what will it still be to their
purpose; all that they can gather from it upon any likely ground upon this
supposition, is only that David would make mention of Christ's righteousness as
the merit of all the good which he both had and did expect, and the ground of
his acceptance, which is a great truth in it self: but I do not say it is that
which by the Holy Spirit is intended chiefly in the Text.

10. Another Text is in Ezech. 16. 14. And thy renown went forth among the
Heathen for thy beauty, for it was perfect through my comeliness which I had put
upon thee, says the Lord God. This comeliness, say they, which God put upon
this People, and from whence they had their beauty, was the righteousness of
Christ imputed in it self. Now if the People would but a little consider what
follows, they might see this comeliness God put upon them spoken of here was a
civil comeliness; i. e. the Peace, Plenty, fulnses of all temporal good things;
the Honor, Greatness, Dignity, etc. that God had advanced them unto,
especially in David's and Solomon's times above their Neighbors. But come on,
if so be they will have the righteousness of Christ meant, then belike it must
follow.

1. Believers how mean or contemptible soever they be in this World, must be
renowned and very famous among the very Heathen for Christ's imputed
righteousness. And yet alas! the poor Heathen are mere strangers to it, knowing
nothing of it, and here is the wonder indeed.

2. Believers they may trust too much to Christ's righteousness; now I ever
thought these Men that are for this strict Imputation, had been of a mind that
a Person could not trust too much to Christ's righteousness, but its like
Persons may, if by this comeliness be meant Christ's righteousness, as they will
see ver. 15. But thou did trust in thine own beauty, and playedst the harlot,
because of thy renown, and pouredst out thy fornications on every one that
passed by; his it was.

3. Persons valuing Christ's righteousness too much, and trusting too much unto
it, may thereby be drawn to commit Spiritual Whoredom, to break their Covenant
with God, and become Apostates from God by falling into Idolatry, etc. If they
will have the righteousness of Christ meant by this comeliness, and the beauty
that was upon this People, then they must have these consequences, as is plain
from the 15th and 16th Verses. This may be enough to convince any Person that
has not drunk in a fixed prejudice, that their cause must be very weak, who
are put for the vindication of it so manifestly to pervert the Sense of
Scripture, as that a Child of an indifferent capacity who can but read may with
a very little ado understand it.

11. Another Text is in Matt. 22. 11, 12, 13. concerning the Man which had not
on the wedding garment. This Wedding garment, say they, is the righteousness of
Christ. I shall give here the Sense of the Reverend Dr. Manton upon this. In a
Sermon upon this Text he puts the Question, what this Wedding garment is? To
find out this, let me tell you, says he, First, That it is usual in Scripture
to set forth Sin by nakedness, and Grace by a garment, that one place which we
have in Revel. 3. 17, 18. shows both thou art wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked. Therefore I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in
the fire, that thou may be rich, and white raiment that thou may be
clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear. Graces are a
beautiful ornament to the Soul, as garments are to the Body, therefore we are
said to put on the new Man, which is created in holiness and righteousness.
Ephesians. 4. 24. And again, to put on, as the elect of God holy and beloved,
bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering.
Coloss. 3. 12. It is such a garment as becomes the solemnity of the Marriage
feast of the King's Son; Christ's Gospel-feast is a Royal feast, and a
Spiritual feast, becoming the nature of God's Kingdom; Therefore the ^^NR^^,
the Wedding garment is that new array which becomes such a solemaity. As it is
a Royal feast, it must be something more than ordinary excellency that is
required of us at a Spiritual feast, a Spiritual excellency. Therefore the
Wedding garment is holiness, habitual and actual, which is the glory of God and
the beauty of God and his People. Habitual holiness, Revel. 19. 8. And to her
was granted, that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white: for
the fine linen is the righteousness of Saints. ^^NR^^, the righteousness of
Saints; these are those graces which constitute us Saints.

By the way Observe, how far this Reverend Author was from thinking that, which
is here called the righteousness of Saints to be the righteousness of Christ,
as some have taken it, and Mr. Hildersham among the rest. And then says he,
actual holiness is an holy conversation. Philip. 1. 27. Only let your
conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ. Ephesians. 4. 1. I therefore
beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called. We
put on the Wedding garment to honor the Marriage; Therefore those that come to
the Wedding feast without a Wedding garment, who take up a bare profession of
the Gospel, without newness of Heart and Life, which may be an honor and
ornament to it, are a dishonor and disgrace rather unto it. Thus far this
Pious and Learned Author. And let me add Christ and his righteousness together,
with the gracious privileges of the Gospel are the feast; now certainly the
Wedding garment must not be the same thing with the feast.

12. A Twelfth Text is in 2 Corinthians. 5. 21. For he has made him to be sin for
us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. The
meaning is, God made him who was an Innocent Person to be a Sin-offering, or a
Sacrifice for Sin, that we for his satisfactory and meritorious righteousness
might be made and accounted righteous according to the Covenant of Grace by
Faith in him. For observe, that which is the meritorious cause of a thing, the
thing of which it is the meritorious cause, cannot be the same thing with that
which merits it, but the effect of it: therefore plain it is the righteousness
of God here spoken of must be the effect of the meritorious righteousness of
Christ, or the thing merited by it, and so cannot be the righteousness of
Christ it self, but a righteousness appointed by God hereupon, which he will
accept as the righteousness of our Persons, for the righteousness sake of
Christ, instead of sinless perfect righteousness, and that righteousness is no
other but the righteousness of Faith, which is a conformity to the Gospel Law,
which Faith as it is the Souls free consent to accept, and take the Lord Jesus
not only to be its Propitiation; but also its head and teacher, includes a real
engagement sincerely to be obedient to all his commands, and so to trust only,
and depend upon him in faithful Obedience for the gift of all necessary and
saving good he has purchased, and God for his sake has promised. Hence we
read of the obedience of Faith, Romans 16. 26. Romans 4. 20, 21.

13. Another Text is in 1 Corinthians. 1. 30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus,
who of God is made unto us wisdom and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption. Because, say they, it is said, that Christ is made righteousness
unto us of God, therefore Christ's righteousness in it self is imputed unto us
by God. I Answer, if so be that it will follow that Christ's righteousness in
it self is imputed unto us by God, because he is made righteousness unto us of
God, then it must also follow that the Wisdom of Christ, and the Holiness of
Christ in themselves must be imputed unto us, because he is said to be made of
God unto us Wisdom, and Sanctification, for after what manner he is said to be
made of God righteousness unto us, after the same manner is he said to be made
Wisdom and Sanctification, etc. Now if he be not made of God unto us Wisdom and
Sanctification by this strict Imputation, then neither righteousness in that
Sense. As Christ then by God is made over to all his People to be the Purchaser
and Author of their Spiritual Wisdom and Holiness, so is he also made over to
them to be the Meriter and Efficient cause of that Gospel righteousness; i. e.
a practical Faith, which God for his sake accepts instead of a legal perfect
righteousness, which the Law of sinless works injoins.

SECT. IV. Reasons against the Imputation of Faith, and for the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness answered.
HAving spoken something to the principal Texts urged for the strict Imputation
of Christ's righteousness, and showed that they can be no proof that Christ's
righteousness is our formal personal righteousness; let us now hear what in
reason may yet be said against the Imputation of Faith.

1. Say they, Faith is no Righteousness, and therefore cannot be imputed for
righteousness. I Answer, If the Antecedent can be proved in that Sense in which
faith is called righteousness, the Consequent must be granted. But know,
Conformity to the Law of Innocence that is a righteousness, but faith is no
such righteousness: Conformity to the Gospel or Law of Grace that is a
righteousness, and faith is this righteousness, it is a conformity unto the
Gospel command. John 3. 23. And this is his commandment, that we should believe
on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave
commandment. And it is expressly said to be counted for righteousness, in the
4th of the Romans. Therefore if there be no righteousness but what is a
conformity to the Law of Innocence, so indeed faith is no righteousness, seeing
it is not a conformity to that Law, and thus the Antecedent would be true but
know there is a righteousness which is a conformity to the Gospel Law, and
faith is this righteousness, seeing it is a conformity to this Law. And thus
the Antecedent appears to be false, and so the Consequent.

2. Say they, Faith is not our personal justifying righteousness because it is
a work. I Answer, This Argument supposes that there is no Justification by a
personal righteousness, and if no Justification by a personal righteousness,
then there must be no such thing as a Justification of any Person at all; for
if there be a Justification by a personal righteousness, then there must be
Justification by a work: for to tell of Justification by a personal
righteousness, and yet also to tell that there is no such thing as
Justification by any work, is to say that there is a Justification by a
personal righteousness, and there is not a Justification by a personal
righteousness, because no Justification by any work; than which nothing can be
more absurd. But it may be said there is no such thing as Justification by a
personal righteousness of our own. I Answer, To tell of a personal
righteousness, and yet say it is not mine after any sort, is as much as to say
a personal righteousness and not a personal righteousness, which still is a
manifest contradiction, for how can I be personally righteous with a
righteousness that is not mine after some sort? Yes, it may be it will be said
Christ's righteousness whereby we are justified is our own by Imputation: If
so, then God accounts it to be the righteousness of your Persons, or how can
your Persons be justified by it? And if God account it to be the righteousness
of your Persons, then he must account you in your own Persons to be conformed
to some Law hereby, (or else how should Justification, as all that call
themselves Protestants confess, be a juridical or Law act) And can you be
conformed in your own Persons to a Law without a work? We are, you may say,
conformed to the Law in our own Persons by the work and obedience of another;
i. e. Christ, to that Law. This now is as much as to say, that you are
conformed to the Law in your own Persons, without any personal conformity,
still contradiction. Well, but Christ's personal conformity to the Law is
reckoned by God in our Justification to be our personal conformity; if so, then
God must account you to be perfect fulfillers of the Law, and if God do this,
he must account you also to be performers of the obedience that Law calls for,
or he cannot account you fulfillers. After all this, now here is the mystery,
still you will deny that you are justified by a Covenant of Works, or by any
work accounted by God to be your own. Here is the Riddle, look who can unfold
it; so that plain it is, some Persons will not have Faith to be a justifying
righteousness, because it is a work, and yet they themselves according to their
own notion must and do hold Justification by perfect legal works, which are
excluded from Justification by the Holy Scripture, while it speaks expressly of
Justification by Faith, as has been shown above.

Well, but we are not justified by any works subjectively in us, or done by us.
I Answer, you say they are yours by Imputation, and if so, God must account
them not only to be done by you, but to be subjectively in you, for if God do
account me to have personally done this or the other (which he must do if he
impute what Christ has done to me, and so account his obedience to be my
formal personal righteousness) he must account me to be or to have been the
subject of that work. Actiones sunt suppositorum, but this I have cleared above.

But why will they not admit of Faith as justifying righteousness because it is
a work? I suppose they think it would occasion boasting, now the Scripture
speaks far otherwise. The Holy Spirit in it says, where all is received of
free gift, there is no ground for boasting, and sure I am nothing is more
express than Faith to be freely given. And the Apostle is express, that
boasting is excluded by the Law of Faith, or that Law which commands Faith in
Christ, and if by the Law of Faith, then by Faith it self where it is: for true
Faith where it is, it is of that nature as to set the Crown wholly upon Christ's
Head, and keep the Soul that has it low and humble. But now as to the other
Law; i. e. the Law of perfect sinless works, such works as have no Sin attends
them, if we seek for Justification by a righteousness which is a conformity
thereunto, here is a foundation for boasting, and that because if I be
justified by it, I must merit and deserve in my own Person Life by my
conformity thereunto, and so the merit of another must be wholly excluded, this
is that now which some Persons do not take heed unto, when they say that Gospel
works such as Faith in the matter of Justification, I mean the qualifying
matter; lays a foundation for boasting, they should prove, before they can have
ground for their Assertion; that Faith has a purchasing meritorious efficacy,
but this they do not, nor cannot. For though Adam had what he had both of Moral
and Natural integrity by the grace of Creation; yet had he continued to have
yielded conformity to the Law of Innocence, he might have boasted in this, and
depended upon it as a righteousness which would have merited and deserved the
continuance of Life for him. Persons may be high pretenders to exalt Christ and
his righteousness; but if they will have a righteousness which is a conformity
to the Law of Innocence to be their personal justifying righteousness, they
must have a personal meritorious righteousness, and these must open a wide door
for boasting. But if Persons will have Justification by Faith, as a personal
Gospel righteousness to give them right, which is for this constituted by God
for Christ's Merits, this wholly excludes all boasting as to the having a
personal righteousness that is in it self, or in its own nature satisfying and
meriting, and thus Christ and the grace of God in him in a Sinner's
Justification and Salvation is exalted. This Law of Faith is that which the
Apostle opposes to that Law he speaks of in Philip. 3. 9. the righteousness or
observation of which ^e disclaims in point of Justification, or as that which
gives any right to Christ, Pardon and Life. And therefore the righteousness of
this Law; i. e. the Law of Faith is called by the Apostle in this Verse, the
righteousness which is through the Faith of Christ, and the righteousness of
God by Faith, this, this is the righteousness which has Christ for its Object,
and is appointed by God in his Covenant of Grace to be our personal justifying
righteousness. This was the righteousness the Apostle would have that he might
be found in him; i. e. united unto him. Very few of our Divines but they hold
we are united to Christ by Faith, and this was that the Apostle valued above
all union with him; seeing then the Apostle opposes that which gives interest
in Christ, and union with him unto his own righteousness in this Verse, that
which gives interest then and unites must be Faith, and so he must be far from
disclaiming it as dung. Now if so Persons will have the righteousness of Christ
meant by this righteousness through Faith and by Faith, then it must be the
righteousness of Christ which unites to Christ, and so the same thingmust unite
unto, and give interest in it self; But whoever said this?

But to proceed no further in this, let us hear what they have to say for the
vindication of this strict Imputation of Christ's righteousness.

1. Christ's righteousness (say they) must be our only personal justifying
righteousness, because there will be no standing in judgment before God, unless
we be clothed with a perfect righteousness, and there is no such
righteousness, but that of Christ's.

I Answer, if the process in judgment should be according to the terms of the
Law of Innocence; i. e. that Sentence must pass upon Persons according to
conformity or nonconformity to this Law, then the reason would be cogent: But
seeing it shall not there is no force in it at all. That it shall not, See Romans
2. 16. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of Men by Christ Jesus
according to my Gospel. 2 These. 1. 7, 8. And to you who are troubled, rest with
us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels,
in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: which Scriptures with others make it
manifest, the Gospel shall be the rule of judgment. Hence therefore as Persons
in judgment shall be found, such as have been obedient or disobedient to the
Gospel, so shall the Sentence pass to Life or Condemnation, John 3. 36. He that
believes on the Son, has everlasting LIfe; and he that believes not the Son,
shall not see life: but the wrath of God abides on him. Though know it shall
be for the sake of Christ's perfect righteousness, that such as are found true
penitent Believers shall be adjudged to eternal Life at that day; seeing had it
not been for this his meritorious righteousness, there had been no Covenant of
Grace, and so no accepting of any to Life upon such terms as the Gospel
requires; so that the whole glory of Believers Salvation must redound to him, I
speak here of the Adult, unless Persons have an interest in and a right unto a
perfect righteousness, and so unto the righteousness of Christ, they shall not
be cleared and adjudged to Life in judgment. But the Question is, Whether all
have an interest in, and a right unto his righteousness? If not, Who are they
that have? Will you say any, speaking of the Adult, that live under the sound
of the Gospel, but such as are found obedient thereunto? And are not true
penitent Believers the Persons which are obedient? if so then, they are the
Persons who shall be cleared and adjudged to eternal Life in judgment. But it
may be said not for their Repentance and Faith. I Answer, still not for these
as the purchasing meriting causes: but upon these as the qualifying matter of
right, which qualifying matter of right, though it be not as is acknowledged a
righteousness answerable to the Law of Innocence, and so can be no justifying
righteousness in the account of that Law, yet is a righteousness agreeable to
the Gospel; and so is a justifying righteousness in the judgment of that Law.

2. Christ's righteousness, say they, must be our only personal justifying
righteousness, because all that are justified are justified by the
righteousness of another, and this other by whose righteousness they must be
justified can be none but Christ's.

I Answer, I do not deny but affirm that those that are justified are justified
by the righteousness of another, and that by Christ's, and his only as the
purchase and merit of Justification: But then that this is the qualifying
righteousness of mine or another's Person, which gives interest in Christ, and
a right to Pardon and Life according to the Gospel, this I deny. For though it
be for Christ we are justified; yet it is by Faith in him as imputed by God we
are formally justified and made righteous, which Faith though it be our own,
and so our own righteousness by free gift and possession, yet is none of our
own, but Christ's in point of Merit, and thus we are justified by a
righteousness Christ has merited, and God's in point of Efficiency, as he by
his Spirit is the Author of it. And there is this I would ask by the way; i. e.
Whether Justification be not a Gospel privilege? if it be, as I hope it will
not be denied, Then are not all Gospel privileges purchased and merited by
Christ? if so, then certainly Justification among the rest. And if
Justification, give me leave further to ask, Did Christ purchase and merit his
own righteousness? you grant he purchased and merited the privilege of
Justification, and you say that Christ's righteousness is the only formal
justifying righteousness of our Persons; must you not then also say that he
purchased and merited his own righteousness, certainly, yes. Now pray! When, or
how, or by what did Christ this? if you say that Christ did not purchase and
merit his own righteousness; then I ask, How did he purchase and merit
Justification? And how is Justification then in your Sense a Gospel privilege
purchased and merited by Christ? It may be you will say that Christ purchased
and merited that his righteousness might be imputed by God unto us for our
Justification; grant this, still you must say that he purchased and merited not
that which you call the matter of your Justification, and so what you say must
come to this that Christ did not merit and purchase that which justifies you,
and if so, then that which justifies you must not be that which is purchased
and merited by Christ. See then however in this, if the charge of Socinianism
do not fall foul upon your selves, as to the material part of your
Justification. Whereas the Scripture says we are justified by his blood; i. e.
his Blood must purchase and merit that which justifies, as well as God's
Imputation of it; but will you say that Christ's Blood purchased and merited
Christ's righteousness, which you say is the very matter of Justification.

3. Christ's righteousness only, say they, must be our justifying
righteousness, because Believers have union and communion with him.

This is no Argument; we grant that all true Believers have union and communion
with Christ; but then it is affirmed generally this union is by Faith, and
communion of his part not by the communication of his righteousness, which is
proper to himself as Mediator, but by the communication of his Grace the fruit
of his purchase, by virtue of his righteousness the merit hereof.

4. Christ's righteousness, say they, must be our only justifying
righteousness, because this was the end of his fulfilling the Law.

I Answer, if they speak of Christ's Obedience to the Law of Innocence, I grant
he yielded perfect conformity to that Law both in habit and act: But then that
this was the end that his righteousness should be imputed unto us as our very
formal personal righteousness remains to be proved; for if they speak of
Christ's active Obedience here, it was an ingredient into the meritorious cause
of our Redemption, Reconciliation, and Acceptance; Galat. 4. 4, 5. For when
the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made
under the Law. To redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive
the adoption of Sons. Heb. 7. 26. For such an High Priest became us, who is
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the
heavens. And as such it cannot be imputed unto us as our personal righteousness
as is manifest. And there is this upon the matter I would have considered; i.
e. in God's justifying you does he account the righteousness which you say is
the very matter of y^^r Justification, to be Christ's, and his only, or does he
account it to be the righteousness of another; if he account it to be his only,
then how does he account it to be your personal righteousness? If he account it
to be the personal righteousness of another, suppose of a Believer, then how
does he account it to be Christ's, and his only? That which is Christ's, and his
only cannot be mine in it self, that which is mine and the very formal
righteousness of my Person cannot be Christ's, and his only, because God must
account it to be mine as well as Christ's. True indeed, Grace is Christ's, and
his only both as the purchaser, Lord Treasurer, and the great mean of
conveyance; but then Christ's righteousness which is proper to him, is nor
cannot be for communication to us as grace is, seeing it is for satisfaction,
and so respects God immediately, and for merit and so the grace of
Justification, Adoption, etc. must be the blessed fruits hereof. We have upon
Repentance and Faith, Reconciliation and Peace with God, for the satisfaction
given to God; but we have not that which made satisfaction; we have likewise
Justification, Pardon, and Life for his Merits, if true penitent Believers; but
we have not that in it self which merited this Grace. It is very strange that
Persons should so much as think that that which was the satisfaction and merit
should be given to them in it self, and that God should account them such as
satisfied God's Justice in Christ, and merited Pardon and Life in Christ. These
Men they condemn the Papists, for saying Christ merited that we might merit,
and yet cannot nor will not see that they are holding the same themselves in
the strictest Sense. True it is, for Christ's satisfaction we have Peace, and
for his Merits, we have Spirit and Grace: But then to tell of our satisfying in
Christ, and meriting in Christ, as though we might have Peace for our
satisfying in him, and Grace for our meriting in him, it is mighty gross. I know
here they will say, they hold no such thing; I Answer, If ^en will hold that
they either do not, or will not understand, what, or who can help them? But it
would do well if they would consider that so long as they hold Christ and
themselves to be one legal Person, it is not possible whatever their practice
be, they should hold any less in the notion.

5. Christ's righteousness, say they, must be our only justifying
righteousness, because we are debtors to the Law, both to perform perfect
obedience, and also to suffer punishment for the violation of it. Now seeing,
say they, we can do neither so as to make satisfaction, and have Justification;
the righteousness of Christ in it self must be our personal justifying
righteousness, and so accounted by God.

I Answer, Though we can neither by our Obedience nor suffering make
Satisfaction and have Justification by the Law; yet for Christ's Satisfaction
and Obedience whereby the Justice of God is answered, and the repute and credit
of God's violated Law is kept up, and the ends of God's governing Justice
secured: there is no obligation lying upon any Believer, seeing a new Covenant
is purchased, to perform perfect Obedience; nor can any true Believer be under
obligation to suffer the punishment threatened by the violated Law, seeing that
such an one is actually delivered from the execution of the Curse by Christ's
satisfactory righteousness. Galat. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the
curse of the Law, being made a curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every
one that hangs on a tree. Romans 8. 1. There is therefore now no condemnation
to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit, true soul uniting Faith to Christ, giving him a right hereunto for
Christ's sake, and this God imputes unto them for righteousness, according to
the Law of Grace.

6. Christ's righteousness, say they, must be our only justifying
righteousness, because Do this i. e. perfectly obey the Law and live, is a
fixed Rule; but no Man can perfectly fulfill the Law of Innocence, therefore
Christ's righteousness must be so imputed by God, that so in his account
believers may be said to have done this, i. e. perfectly fulfilled the Law that
they may live.

It is manifest by this Argument the Objectors will have Justification by that
Law which requires perfect sinless works. But let them know do this according
to that Law and live or be justified, is not a fixed stated Rule to any Man
upon Earth, but believe and live for the sake of Christ, John 3. 26. For God so
loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Mark 26. 26. He that
believes, and is baptized, shall be saved: but he that believes not, shall be
damned. Acts 26. 31. And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shall be saved, and thine House. Therefore the Reason given is of no force, for
the strict Imputation of Christ's righteousness.

7. Christ's righteousness, say they, must be our only personal justifying
righteousness, because it is that which God accepts on our behalf.

I Answer, If they mean that God accepts the righteousness of Christ on the
behalf of Believers, so as to account it a sufficient satisfaction for them,
and the merit of all good, which they partake of, and that for which he accepts
all their sincere duties, I grant them the whole: But if they mean, God so
accepts it on their behalf, as to account it to be the very righteousness of
their Persons, by which their Persons are righteous according to the Law of
Innocence; this I deny, and they can never show any solid proof for what they
affirm.

8. Christ's righteousness, say they, must be our only personal justifying
righteousness, because Christ was a public Person standing in the place, and
stead of all those that should believe in him, so that all that he did and
suffered are to be looked upon, and are reputed by God as done and suffered by
them, and consequently are imputed to them.

I Answer, That Christ did sustain the Person of a Mediator, for the making
atonement, and purchasing reconciliation; I grant, but that he sustained the
Person of all those (as a sinner) that should after believe in him; this I
deny, seeing then he should have been accounted the offending party, and so as
such had been incapable of purchasing and making peace betwixt the offending
and offended. For he that is accounted guilty, and so an offender should have
needed a Mediator and reconciler for himself; but this Christ did not,
therefore to tell of Christ's being a public Person in this Sense is false,
and not only so, but destructive of his Office as Mediator, and so also of his
Satisfaction and Merit, as is manifest. And whereas it may be said, How could
he have suffered, if by the Law he was not accounted guilty, and an offender? I
Answer, The Law did not account Christ as guilty, or an offender, nor did it
ever condemn him; but on the contrary it accounted him a righteous Person (not
considering him at all as a Mediator or Surety) and justified him as a
fulfiller of it both in Nature and Life, and therefore he was under no
obligation at all by the Law of Innocence to Suffer, but the obligation was
from the Law of Redemption or Mediation, by his own free and voluntary
susception, according to the paction betwixt him and the Father. The just
suffered for the unjust, that he might bring us to God. If just, then by what
Law was he just? He that is just in Law, by that Law that accounts him just, as
such he cannot be accounted guilty or an offender, but Christ was just in the
account of the Law of Innocence. Hence therefore that which they would gather
from Christ's being a public Person must fall with its foundation, for neither
the Law, nor God by the Law did account that Christ did so personate Sinners,
as to reckon what he did and suffered, they did and suffered. What Christ did
and suffered, it was accounted to be done and suffered for us, but not
accounted to be done and suffered by us; for if so, then God should accept
satisfaction immediately from us, and not from Christ, and God must account us
immediately to have merited, and not Christ; i. e. Christ should only be
accounted by God as the means whereby we satisfied his Justice, and merited
Life for our selves; for if all that Christ did and suffered be by God reputed
as done and suffered by us, then I ask for what end? for that which was done
and suffered by Christ was satisfactory and meritorious; now if Christ obeyed
and suffered for this end, that God might account what he did and suffered to
be done and suffered by us, then Christ must have obeyed and suffered for this
end, that God might have satisfaction from us, and that we by his means might
merit a right to Life. Can they prove this, think thou, Reader?

9. Christ's righteousness, say they, must be our only personal justifying
righteousness, because we cannot be justified by it any other way, than by
God's imputing it to us as such.

I Answer, If this be so, there must be no Justification of a Sinner at all,
for no Sinner is nor can be formally, personally, righteous with Christ's
righteousness, and therefore God does not account him to be so, as has been
proved above.

10. If we may truly be said to be dead, and crucified with Christ, to be
quickened with Christ, to have risen again with Christ, to sit in heavenly
places in or with Christ, etc. then may we be said to have fulfilled the Law
with Christ also, and consequently the fulfilling of the Law by Christ is
imputed to us, and accounted ours.

I Answer, The Scripture it is granted says concerning true Believers that
they are dead, and crucified with Christ, etc. But what are they said to be so
properly and personally? Did they lay down their natural lives with Christ, and
a^ise in his rising again, unto a corporal and glorified Life? Or did God
account them so to have done in Christ, when he knows they did not? If not, as
is plain, then the meaning is by way of efficacy and likeness. Christ indeed
has merited the Holy Spirit, and this Spirit is given for the sake of his
Merits unto his People, by the power and efficacy of which Spirit sin is
mortified, the Heart crucified to the World, and the Soul made alive to God,
raised from a Death in Sin to a Life of Grace and Holiness, and the affections
are set upon things above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God; from
whence results a Christian, assimulation, or likeness to Christ, in his Death,
Crucifixion, Resurrection, Ascension and Exaltation. But what ground from hence
to draw such an inference; i. e. that we have fulfilled the Law in Christ's
fulfilling of it. Plain it is no ground at all; but the consequence leans to
that false supposition, that what Christ did and suffered, God accounted us to
have done and suffered, which beside what has been said already, if true, then
God must account us if Believers, to have been born of a Virgin in a Stable, to
have been circumcised, to have disputed with the Doctors in the Temple at
Twelve years of Age, and to have been subject to Joseph and Mary as our
Parents, to have been baptized by John the Baptist, to have wrought Miracles,
etc. in Christ. But who will say this? if none, then all must hold the thing
supposed formerly by many, must be false, and if they will let the notion go,
the consequences are none of theirs.

11. Christ's righteousness, say they, must be our only justifying
righteousness, because all are and continue Sinners while they live, and
therefore cannot be personally righteous, but by God's accounting Christ's
righteousness in it self to be theirs, or accounting them righteous in their
persons with Christ's righteousness.

I Answer, This Argument supposes that Persons may be formally personally
righteous with a sinless perfect righteousness, for such is Christ's, and so
accounted by God, and so sinless and perfectly righteous in their nature, as
has been shown before, and yet for all this are and remain Sinners, which is a
contradiction. Now I grant that all Men that are justified are and do remain
Sinners in the account of the Law of Innocence, but as justified they are
accounted though not sinless, yet righteous by the Law of Grace, being true
penitent Believers, for Repentance and Faith, etc. are a Conformity to what it
commands, upon which Conformity it asserts and maintains their interest in
Christ, and right to Pardon and Life. There is no satisfaction for a Sinner,
nor merit to procure him any good, but in and by a sinless perfect
righteousness, which is Christ's, but then that God accounts the sinner whom he
justifies to have such a righteousness to be the very righteousness of his
Person, so as to be formally righteous by it, this I deny.

12. Believers, say they, are righteous with Christ's righteousness, seeing
they are members of that mistical body of which he is the head.

I Answer, I do not deny but Believers are members of that mistical body of
which Christ is the head; but though it be so, yet it does not follow, that
they are righteous with his righteousness, and have it to be their formal
personal righteousness; indeed they are righteous for it but not with it, for
though Christ be the head of his Church, and his Church and each member has
benefit from him as such; yet I hope none will say that each member of Christ's
mistical body is accounted by God to perform the very function and office of
Christ as head, which they must say and prove too, or else this they bring for
an Argument bears no proportion, and so is of no force; Christ is a governing
head, Will they say that God accounts each of his members to be so? He as head
communicates spiritual Life, Sense and Motion to his members, Will they say God
accounts each member to do so?

13. Say they, Believers are married to Christ; now as a Woman's debts in Law
account when married are her Husbands, and all that he is possessed of is hers:
so it is betwixt Christ and those that are united unto him by a spiritual
Marriage Covenant, he has in Law sense their debts, and they have his
righteousness.

I Answer, Similitudes illustrate, but they are no proof, neither do the things
compared in all points bear an equal proportion; We grant then that Christ and
true Believers are really, though mistically united in a Marriage Covenant, and
that as Believers they have forgiveness of Sin for the sake of his meritorious
and satisfactory righteousness; and all that he has done and suffered, and
hereby purchased is for them in special, and their benefit; but then it does
not follow hereupon, that the Law of God violated by them does account that
they have fulfilled it in Christ, and suffered the penalty for their violation
in him, for if so the Law should adjudge them first to be perfectly righteous,
and then after that apply forgiveness unto them as Sinners, which is a manifest
contradiction; for he that the Law does account to be perfectly righteous (I
speak of the Law of Innocence) cannot be a Sinner, and if so must need no
forgiveness. If it be said the Law first acquits from guilt, and so forgives,
this is no other but to make it a Covenant of Mercy and Life, and if it account
a Person after the first forgiveness perfectly righteous in Christ, then he
must not after that be a Sinner, and so need no Pardon. Christ cannot in a
sound Sense be said to have taken our debts upon him any otherwise than he
voluntarily and freely undertook to satisfy for our offenses as Mediator,
neither was he under obligation hereunto by any Law, but that of mediation. And
further as to Believers having his righteousness, this can be no further than
it may be of use and benefit unto them; and the use and benefit Christ's
righteousness is of unto Believers, What is it? sure, it is for the satisfaction
of an infinite God offended; and what does God account it to be their personal
righteousness as to this use? If so, then God must account he has satisfaction
from them in their own Persons. And as to its further use and benefit unto
Believers; What is it? certainly, to merit all the good of Grace and Glory. And
what now does God account it to be their personal righteousness as to this use?
If so, then God must account them to be righteous in their Persons with such a
righteousness as merits all the good of Grace and Glory. Now true it is
Believers have Christ's righteousness, or interest in it, or right unto it, as
that for which God is reconciled unto them, and for which they shall have Grace
and Glory, but they have it not so, nor are interested in it so as to be
personally righteous with it, neither does God account them so to have it. If
they say God does not account it the righteousness of their Persons, or that
their Persons are righteous with it, as it is satisfactory and meritorious, it
cannot be the righteousness of their Persons under that formality. If they
grant this, then I say they cannot have it all, so as to be personally
righteous with it, for a righteousness divested and stripped of satisfaction
and merit can be none of Christ's, for it is essential to his righteousness, as
Mediator to be satisfactory and meritorious; and if it be none of Christ's
which is accounted by God to be their personal righteousness, or the
righteousness their Persons are righteous withal for Justification; pray, What
or whose can this righteousness be which they say is accounted by God to be
their personal justifying righteousness, beside that of the righteousness of
Faith? let them exclude Faith and tell us.

14. Say they, the Gospel is nothing but a Revelation or Declaration of what
Christ has done and suffered, and that by his obedience and suffering he has
fulfilled the Law and satisfied God's justice; So that Christ having thus
answered for us, upon believing neither the Law, nor Justice of God has any
thing against us, because the righteousness of Christ whereby he has fulfilled
the Law and satisfied Justice is made over to us by God's Imputation, as though
we had wrought it out in our own Persons.

I Answer, it is granted the Gospel does repeat what Christ has done and
suffered, etc. But then that it is nothing but a revelation of this sort, this
I deny, for besides this, it injoins us Repentance toward God and Faith in
Jesus Christ, Acts 20. 21. Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks,
Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ; and it threatens
the Impenitent Unbelievers with God's eternal wrath, Mark 16. 16. He that
believes, and is baptized shall be saved: but he that believes not, shall be
damned. Luke 13. 3. I tell you, nay, but except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish. Now to say that Christ having satisfied Justice, and fulfilled
the Law, neither the Law nor Justice has any thing against us, what is it but
to say the Law accounts us righteous, and so indeed the Justice of God can find
no fault in us; and if so, then we must have no Sin, and if no Sin, then no
need of forgiveness, and if no Sin, and so no need of forgiveness, then no
place for Repentance and Faith. I have granted and do grant that Christ has
satisfied the Justice of God, and fulfilled the Law for us, that we for and
through this his righteousness might have Pardon and Life, upon our Conformity
to the commands of the Gospel: but then if he have satisfied and fulfilled the
Law for this end that neither the Law nor God's infinite strict Justice may
have any thing against us, how comes David to pray, Psalm 143. 2. Enter not
into judgment with thy Servant: for in thy sight shall no Man living be
justified. And how come the best of God's People many times to be under
desertion and temporal Afflictions? If it be said, it is not for Sin, I Answer,
let the Scripture determine, Psalm 51. 12. Restore unto me the joy of thy
Salvation: and uphold me with thy free Spirit Psalm 89. 30, 31, 32. If his
Children forsake my Law, and walk not in my judgments: If they break my
statutes, and keep not my commandments: Then will I visit their transgression
with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes. If it be said to this, it is not
in pure Justice God Afflicts, grant this: yet I hope they will not deny, but
that Afflictions are from God, and he is just in what he does. They are
castigatory, yet none of them are satisfactory, nor are they exercised with
them for that end. But there is this I would take notice of, whereas they say
the Gospel reveals what Christ has done and suffered, they destroy this by
another assertion, and so confound Law and Gospel, in making the very
threatening of the Law of I^nocency to reveal Christ and Salvation by him. In
the day thou eatest thereof thou shall die; i. e. say they, either thou or thy
surety, so that here they make the very penal sanction of the Law to be their
Gospel. And as a learned Person observes, If this was the meaning of the penal
sanction or threat, then it must follow that a Mediator was promised before
the fall: for this Covenant; i. e. of Works was struck with Man in Innocence.
And that either Adam understood not his Covenant that was made with him, or
else knew of a Surety and Redeemer before his fall, at least being in a
readiness for him, in case he should fall. And I add, if this be the meaning of
the threatening, that either thou, or thy surety shall die, then upon the
sureties undertaking and suffering Sinners must be immediately cleared, seeing
the penal sanction or threat had all that which it required, and so there can
be no punishment due unto them at all in the Sense of that Law; neither must
they be under the curse of it, nor in danger at all of condemnation by it, and
so however the Elect cannot be Children of wrath by nature, though the
Scripture says they are. Ephesians. 2. 3. Among whom also we all had our
conversation in time past, in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of
the flesh, and of the mind, and were by nature the Children of wrath, even as
others.

15. Christ's righteousness, say they, must be accounted a Believer's personal
justifying righteousness, because it cannot be consistent with the Justice of
God, to justify without such a righteousness.

I grant, according to the Revelation of God's pleasure it cannot be consistent
with the Justice of God to justify without such a righteousness as Christ's:
but it does not follow that therefore he must account it a Believer's personal
formal righteousness, indeed if there had not been satisfaction given to the
justice of God for the securing the honor hereof, there had been no such thing
as the Justification of a Sinner; but now God having received satisfaction from
Christ, it is very consistent with his Justice and Honor thereof, to justify
a penitent Believer, for the sake of his satisfactory righteousness by virtue
of his Gospel consti^ution, Romans 3. 25, 26. Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation, through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. To declare, I
say, at this time his righteousness; that he might be just, and the justifier
of him which believes in Jesus. The Reason above alleged for the strict
Imputation of Christ's righteousness, supposes that Christ's righteousness is
not satisfactory for any Sinner, until it be made over by God to be the
Sinner's personal formal righteousness; but so soon as it is the Sinner's
personal righteousness then it has the actual virtue, or is actually
Efficacious to be satisfactory for that Sinner, but not before, and thus it is
further evident from this their Doctrine, that a justified Soul has a
righteousness to be its formal righteousness which is satisfactory to God's
infinite strict Justice, and so (as has been said before) God must immediately
receive satisfaction from the Soul, accounted by him to be personally righteous
with the very righteousness of Christ, and thus God must not look upon the Soul
in and through Christ, and accept it immediately for him, but through the
righteousness of Christ, as it is upon it self, and as (according to them) the
Soul is clothed with it.

But here I shall take notice of an Exception made, Although say they, we
affirm Christ's righteousness and obedience unto the Law is made ours, and so
in him as our Surety we fulfill the Law; yet does it not follow that we are
justified by the Law, and that because it is not the righteousness which we in
Person have wrought.

I Answer, This Reason will not invalidate the consequence; for if so be that
Christ's righteousness and obedience unto the Law be so made ours, as that we
are counted by God to have fulfilled the Law in him as our Surety; then God
must account us to have obeyed the Law in his obeying of it, for how can he
otherwise account us to have fulfilled it in him? and ^^ God do account us to
have performed in Christ that obedience the Law requires, then certainly he
must account us to be righteous in the Sense of that Law; and if so, How then
can that Law choose but justify us? Can any Man account me in truth to have
obeyed such a Law in another obeying of it, and yet at the same time account
me a Transgressor of it? so that plain it is, if God do account us to be the
fulfillers of the Law in Christ, he must account us as such to be righteous
according to that Law, and if righteous then justified by it.

SECT. V. The Nature of Gospel Justification farther opened.
HAving briefly dispatched the Objections which are most material; I shall
proceed a little further to open the Nature of Gospel Justification.

1. God endued Man at the first not only with Natural but Moral perfection;
having adorned him with his own Image. Genesis 1. 26, 27. So God created Man in
his own Image, Male and Female created he them: and this Image of God which we
call Moral, consisted in Knowledge, Righteousness, and Holiness, Coloss. 3. 10.
And have put on the new Man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the Image of
him that created him. Ephesians. 4. 24. And that ye put on the new Man, which after
God is created in righteousness, and true holiness. He had Light for his
Understanding, Holy Love for his Will, Righteousness for his Life and
Conversation.

2. Man being such a Creature must be capable of Moral Government; i. e. of
being ruled by Law; for that Creature which is capable of knowing, loving, and
obeying God, must also be capable of being ruled by the Law of a Wise, Holy,
and Righteous God.

3. God therefore from the first put Man under a Law. To say that God did not,
is to affirm. That the capacity which Man had of knowing, loving, and obeying
God resulting from his Moral perfections was in vain: but God gave Man nothing
in vain. And it would be to affirm that God did not stand in relation to Man as
his Rector and Governor, nor Man in ^elation to God as his Subject by right.

4. God ever suited his legal Constitutions or Laws to the state and condition
of Man; in the state of integrity God suited that his state with a Law
requiring personal perfect Obedience. Man considered as fallen from that
integrity into a state of Sin and Misery, God suited this his state with a Law
injoining sincere Obedience, and this not only initial, or upon his first
subjection, but continued, and constant to the end of his Life: the one for
giving him right through Christ to Pardon and Life, the other for continuing
that right.

5. Both these Laws, i. e. that of Innocence and that of Grace, have their
sanction both premiant and penal; i. e. a promise of reward in case of
Obedience, and the threatening of punishment in case of Disobedience.

6. These things being so, I put the Question, whether Innocent Adam's
Obedience to the first Law, would not have given him right unto the Life
promised? And whether this same Law of Innocence would not have maintained this
his right? The first we must grant, or else say, that the promise gives no
right to the benefits promised, though the condition be performed, which to say
is against the rule of common equity: we must grant the latter also, or else
say that the very Instrument God has appointed for the conveying of right to
Life to Innocent Adam, should not be regarded by him in point of claim for all
Adam's perfect Obedience, suppose his right should have been called into
Question, which to say must needs be to charge God with unfaithfulness and
injustice.

Now if so be (as is clear) Adam's Obedience to the Law of Innocence would have
given him right to the Life promised, and also maintained this his right; then
will not our Obedience to the second Law; i. e. to the Law of Grace give us
right unto the reward promised, and secure us through Christ from the
punishment threatened? And secondly, Will not this same Law of Grace also
maintain our right? It must, or else we must say, that the promise gives no
right unto the benefits promised, though the condition required be performed by
the Grace of God, also that the very instrument God has appointed for the
conveying of right unto us should by him not be regarded, or not be at all of
any benefit unto us, notwithstanding our performance of the condition, if our
right should be called into question.

To illustrate what I have said, suppose that we should have a deed of gift of
such an inheritance upon the due performance of such or such conditions therein
expressed; Will not the performance of these conditions give us right according
to the deed unto the inheritance? and if so be our right be called into
question, what must vindicate our right but the deed whereby it was given and
granted unto us upon the performance of the conditions expressed. If then these
things be so (as is evident) then I gather from hence that which I intended; i.
e. that there must be such a thing as Justification by constitution or Law, and
seeing there can be no Justification by the Law of Innocence, or Covenant of
Works; then there must be another Law which we must have Justification by, and
what can this be but a Law of Grace and Mercy, which is the same with that we
call the Gospel; now if Persons will not grant such a Law, then Justification
must either be by the Law of perfect Works; i. e. by the Covenant of Works, or
that Justification we now have must be no Law act, and if so they who contend
against us to destroy their own declared Opinion, asserting that Justification
is a juridical or Law term: those therefore that deny the Gospel to be a Law,
they must either deny Justification by it, and so account we are justified by
the Law of Works, or else they must contradict themselves in affirming
Justification not to be by Law.

But because some Persons do not only deny but ridicule such a thing as a Law
of Grace, calling it an humane invention; it will not be amiss a little to
clear this that there is a Law of Grace distinct from that of Works.

Observe then, I hope those that oppose us will grant that God required of Man
while in the state of integrity a sinless Obedience; Now the Question will be,
seeing Man is a fallen Creature, whether God does require any Obedience of him?
If not, then Man must be at his own will to do what he lists; and is he so?
If God does require Obedience, what is it? Is it sinless Obedience? If so, then
all Mankind must be lost, for none of the fallen race of Adam can perform it.
If they say that Obedience is performed by Christ for us. I ask, Has Christ
performed this Obedience that we might be exempted and obey none at all? If so,
then he obeyed to set us free from all subjection to God, if not, then it
remains, for all Christ perfectly obeyed that, yet still we are under
obligation to obey in our own Persons. Seeing then we cannot yield sinless
Obedience, or Obedience without Sin attending it; Are not we through the
assisting Grace of God to perform sincere Obedience? If not, then none at all;
if we are, then it will either be accepted of God, or it will not: If it will
not, Then to what purpose is it performed? If it will, Then is it of Grace that
God accepts it. And if of Grace, must it not be accepted in and through
Christ's Satisfactory and Meritorious Righteousness? If so, then it must be
revealed by God in his word to be his will that we should thus obey; i. e.
sincerely, and that we shall be accepted through Christ hereupon: this will of
God commanding is either a Law or it is not? If not, then there is no
Transgression if we do not obey; if it be, then they must grant us a Law of
Grace which for the sake of Christ will accept of sincere obedience instead of
perfect; and also they must grant that Christ has purchased this, or else they
and all Mankind (upon a supposition that God had continued Man) should still
have been obliged to sinless obedi^^ce, as a condition or qualification of
Life; and so for want of obedience of this sort, we should all have been left
to the execution of the Curse, and been damned for ever. And observe this Law
of Grace of which we speak does not destroy the Moral Law summarily contained
in the Ten Commands, for we say still we are under obligation to have respect
unto, and obey all its commands in avoiding Sins which are forbidden, and
performing the duties which are commanded therein. But this is that, we say
that we cannot nor do not perfectly obey, though we have a principle of Grace
wrought in us by the Holy Spirit; but yet we sincerely obey, and have respect
unto its commands, this shall be pleasing and acceptable to God for the sake of
our blessed Mediator. And seeing such obedience would not have been accepted
of God (upon a supposition that fallen Man could have performed it of himself,
which I am sure he could not) had not the Lord Jesus Christ by his Satisfaction
and Merit procured it should; is not here a plain different constitution, and
so a new Law purchased by Christ distinct from that which Adam in the state of
Innocence was under.

But upon the matter some say the obedience injoined Adam, and the obedience
commanded us now is the same specifically or in its own nature, and differs
only gradually, and therefore the Law must be the same, and there is no
necessity of a new one; I Answer, grant we that the obedience does only differ
gradually considered materially, yet the obedience injoined us formally differs
from that of Innocent Adam's, and therefore cannot be of the same nature with
his, for our obedience is to be performed by us as penitent Subjects, not so
innocent Adam's, and also in Faith of acceptance through a Redeemer and
Mediator, but not so innocent Adam's, so that our obedience now formally
differs from that of Adam's in Innocence, and therefore differs from it
specifically, and not only gradually, and hence there must be a new
constitution or Law injoining it, Or else what warrant have we for it? But
suppose there should be only a gradual difference, when indeed there is more as
is manifest, yet it does not follow that the Law commanding is the same; for it
is sinless obedience the Law of Innocence requires, and it will accept of no
less; now if less be accepted we must have a new Revelation, and so a new
warrant for it from a command, or else what foundation for it, or encouragement
unto it, and seeing we have a new Revelation, and so a new warrant from God's
command of this obedience, then we must have a Law to which it relates distinct
from that given to Innocent Man; but in the very matter of obedience, we shall
find that injoined us, which was not commanded Adam in the Law of Innocence,
nor indeed did suit at all with the nature of such a Law; which will make it
further evident we must have a new Law as fallen Creatures distinct from that.
Isa. 1. 16, 17, 18. Wash ye, make you clean: put away the evil of your doings
from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, Learn to do well, seek judgment,
relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow. Come now, and
let us reason together, says the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they
shall be as white as snow: though they be red like crimson, they shall be as
wool. Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous Man his
thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him;
and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. Ezech. 18. 21, 22. But if the
wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my
statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall
not die. All his transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be
mentioned unto him: in his righteousness that he has done, he shall live. Acts
3. 19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted
out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord,
etc. What is required in these Texts, is the revealed will of God which Sinners
through his Grace are to be subject unto; And is not subjection where it is
yielded obedience? Can this will of God then thus commanding be any other than
a Law, seeing that nonperformance must be a manifest transgression and
disobedience?? Let it be considered then if what we find commanded in these
Texts, was enjoined Adam before his fall; had he needed to wash him and make
him clean, and put away the evil of his doings? was he then wicked, and called
upon to forsake his wicked ways and sinful thoughts, and turn unto the Lord,
before he was guilty of any transgression, was he called upon before his fall
to repent and be converted that his Sins might be blotted out, before he had
any Sin? and to believe in a Redeemer that he might be saved? or are these the
commands of the Law requiring sinless works? One would think those that oppose
us should not affirm it and if not, is not all this required of Sinners? and
must not that be a distinct Law by which it is required? and is not God's own
constitution? how dare some Men then call it an humane invention? It shall come
to pass in the last days that the Mountain of the Lord's house shall be
established, and many People shall go and sup, come ye, and let us go up to the
house of God, and he will mark us his ways, and we will walk in his paths; for
out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the word of the Law from Jerusalem.

SECT. VI. Justification described, and made good, partly in this, and partly
in the Sections ensuing.
HAving proved that there is a Law of Grace distinct from that which requires
sinless works, and that God justifies by this Law, you may take this definition
or description: of Justification; i. e. Justification is God's asserting and
maintaining act by his Law of Grace of our right to Pardon and Life for the
sake of Christ upon our believing.

1. It is an act, and that ad extra, an act which makes a relative change, and
the subject upon whom this relative change is made is Man, a guilty and
condemned Sinner, one upon whom the sentence of condemnation is passed by the
Law, and he under obligation thereby to suffer eternal punishment, this is
Man's condition antecedent to God's act of justifying, Romans 3. 19. Now we know
that what things soever the Law says, it says to them who are under the Law;
that every mouth may be stopped, and all the World may become guilty before
God. Galat. 3. 22. But the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the
promise by Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. John 3.
18. He that believes on him, is not condemned: but he that believes not, is
condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only
begotten Son of God. Ephesians. 2. 3. Among whom, also we all had our conversation
in times past, in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh,
and of the mind, and were by nature the Children of wrath, even as others.

2. In this act of justifying there is the term from which, or the state from
which Man a Sinner is brought upon his Justification, and that is from an
obligation to punishment, and the omission or loss of right to Life and
Happiness. Every poor Soul before Faith is under an obligation to Eternal
Punishment, and must lose Heaven and Eternal Happiness if he leave the World in
this condition. How much then should it be our concern to see that we have true
Faith, that we have thankfully accepted of, and are sincerely subject unto
Christ, that so we may have through him a right to Pardon and Life. John 5. 24.
Verily, verily I say unto you, He that hears my word, and believes on him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation: but
is passed from death unto life. Romans 8. 1. There is therefore now no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh,
but after Spirit.

3. In justifying there is the term to which or the state a poor Sinner is
brought into, and that is a right to this Pardon and Life spoken of before. No
sooner is a Sinner justified, but Pardon and Life are his; they are by Gospel
or Covenant right his. John 3. 16. For God so loved the World, that he gave his
only begotten Son: that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life; and Verse 36. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting
life: and he that believes not the Son, shall not see life: but the wrath of
God abides on him.

4. There is the agent or he that justifies, and that is God, we are before
Repentance and Faith guilty and condemned, and until God do justify us we
remain in that guilty and condemned state; therefore if ever we have a right to
Pardon and Life God gives it, Romans 3. 26. To declare, I say, at this time his
righteousness: that he might be just, and the justifier of him which believes
in Jesus. Rom 4. 5. But to him that works not, but believes on him that
justifies the ungodly: his faith is counted for righteousness. Romans 8. 30. 33.
Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called and whom he called,
them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified. Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? it is God that justifies. 1.
Hence learn first, how much we should adore and admire the riches of mercy in
Christ, that after we had greatly offended him, and exposed our selves to his
wrath and displeasure everlastingly; having involved our selves in a state of
guilt and condemnation, having forfeited all right to Life; I say, that after
this, all this, yet he should be willing to become our justifier the forgiver
of our Sins, and the Donor of a right to Happiness, and this upon honorable
terms with relation to himself, and reasonable with respect to us; How much
does this call for our Admiration and Adoration, certainly it will be the work
of Heaven. 2. How great folly are poor impenitent Sinners guilty of, for though
God be willing to justify, ready to pardon, and receive into his favor, and
make over unto them a sure title to Erernal Life, if they will but now humbly
come in upon his call, and thankfully accept his Son to be their Propitiation,
Head, and Teacher, and be subject to him in Christ; yet they refuse, they hold
fast deceit, and will not return; they set no value upon this great good
offered, they prefer their Soul damning Lusts, and the Profits and Pleasures of
a vain transitory World, they content themselves to live unforgiven, at enmity
to God, Heirs of Hell, destitute of right to Life and Salvation. O what folly
How much is the condition of such to be lamented, who choose death before Life,
guilt before Pardon, execution in Hell before the fruition of a glorious rest
in Heaven. God calls them to incline their ear and come unto him, hear, and
their Souls shall live, and he will make an everlasting Covenant with them,
even the sure mercies of David, Isa. 55. 3. he assures them by his promise that
if they will forsake their wicked ways, and sinful thoughts, he will have
mercy, and abundantly pardon; Verse 7, but alas! all this moves them not, they
are still as unconcerned as before. 3. That Justification is not from Eternity.
For any to affirm this is to affirm a contradiction; i. e. that we were both
guilty, condemned, and justified from Eternity; for who now are justified but
such as before were guilty and condemned: so that first God condemns us from
Eternity as guilty, and then justifies us from Eternity according to these Men;
touching what they allege; i. e. God's purpose and decree, they may as
groundedly gather from it that Persons are effectually called from Eternity,
conformed to the Image of Christ, and glorified from Eternity.

5. In the description, I say, it is God's act by his Law of Grace, it is not
by an immediate, but a mediate act that God justifies, seeing it is God's act
by this his Law; and that it is will appear further, if we consider that we can
neither be justified by the Law of innocent Nature, nor by the Law of Moses.
And if not, then by some other Law, for as condemnation is by Law, so
Justification. As disobedience then to the Law of Grace brings upon us
condemnation; so obedience to the same Law gives right to Pardon and Life which
is Justification: If so be that Sinners remain impenitent unbelieving Rebels
against Christ, by this Law they are condemned; but on the contrary, if they
through Grace become Penitent, Obedient Believers, then this Law intitles them
to impunity and Life. Prove. 17. 15. He that justifies the wicked, and be that
condemns the just, even they both are an abomination to the Lord. Now then if
both these be an abomination to the Lord; he can neither do the one, nor the
other; i. e. he will neither justify the wicked, nor condemn the just; but on
the contrary he will justify the just. The Judge of all the Earth will do
right. Genesis 18. 25. He will undoubtedly act according to his Prescription.
Deuteronomy. 25. 1. The Judges were to justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked;
so then, as a Man must be wicked before God condemn him; and just before God
justify him; then he that is wicked must be so accounted from his disobedience
to some Law; to say a Man is wicked, and yet he is not disobedient to some Law,
is to say there is no transgression where there is no Law; and seeing those are
only wicked who go on in the practice of Sin unrepented of, and will not
believe, nor give their consent to be subject to God in Christ, then such must
be accounted wicked from their rebellion and disobedience to the Law of Grace,
seeing it is this Law only that requires Repentance toward God, and Faith in
our Lord Jesus Christ: But then on the contrary a Man must be accounted just
also by his Conformity to some Law; to say a Man is just and righteous, and say
he is not in Heart and Life conformed to some Law, is to frame a righteousness
without relation to a Rule, which cannot be. Now seeing those are righteous who
are penitent Sinners, obedient Believers; they must be accounted such by the
Law of Grace, seeing this is the righteousness which it does require; and
whoever they are that have this righteousness the Law of Grace will for the
sake of Christ justify them hereupon; i. e. they have a right hereupon to
Impunity and Life, both which are promised by the Covenant of Grace to all
Penitent and believing Sinners. And further both Justification and Condemnation
are accounted to be acts of a Judge, and a Judge he both justifies and condemns
according to Law; so that in Law a Person is either justified or condemned
before the Judge by public Sentence do justify or condemn. Thus then, as God
has constituted a Law, according to which he will both justify and condemn,
it is manifest that this Law of God, which is his Instrument, does it self
condemn or justify before God's public Sentence as Judge either of
Condemnation or Justification; hence it is ordinary for Persons to say, they
think such an one is guilty in Law, or clear in Law before they come upon their
Trial before the Judge, or he pronounce them either clear or guilty. Seeing
then that, Christ is the great Legislator, Lawgiver, and Judge; Isa. 33. 22.
For the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he
will save us. Then he must have Laws from whence he has this Title and Office,
and if he have Laws, he must rule by Law, and so by Law he must justify and
condemn: so that manifest it is before Christ do pass the Sentence either of
Justification or Condemnation, Persons are justified or condemned by that Law
which he has appointed to be the Rule of Judgment, and this Law is no other
but the Law of Grace, called the Gospel. Romans 2. 16. In the day when God shall
judge the secrets of Men by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel. As the Gospel
or Law of Grace is the Instrument whereby Christ does justify or condemn
Sinners now; so it is the Rule according to which he as the righteous Judge
will pass Sentence at the great day to everlasting Happiness or eternal
Damnation. To illustrate the matter, suppose a Person has committed a capital
Crime, i. e. a Crime for which he is to die, the King draws up, and sends unto
him a conditional Act of Grace, in which he offers Pardon; and not only so but
his favor and great advancement, in case he will perform such or such
conditions expressed in that Act; if the Criminal consent, he is pardoned ipso
facto, immediately by virtue of the Act, and also has right unto the favor
and advancement promised, and this before the Judges acquitment according to
the Act, and this right thus to be acquitted did result from his consent: this
is just the case with us, we all deserve Death, and that Eternal; now the great
King of Heaven as it were has drawn up and sent unto us a conditional Grant or
Act of Grace, in which he offers Pardon, and not only so, but his favor, and
the greatest advancement, in case he will perform those conditions, offering us
his Grace that we may, now if we perform, then we immediately for Christ's sake
have right to his favor, and this high advancement, before the Judges public
Sentence.

Seeing further that there is the Preceptive and Retributive part of the Law of
Grace; i. e. that part which commands duty, and that part in which God does
distribute rewards or punishments: The Question will be what part it is whereby
God does justify? I Answer, The command it self when obeyed, does implicitly
justify, sincere obedience to the commands of the Gospel implies our right, in
that we cannot hereupon but beactually justified: But then directly and
actually I take it to be the Gospel promise which does justify; for obedience
to the command which is the performance of the condition, has resulting from
it a right to the promise both of Pardon and everlasting Life, and it is by the
promise that God does assert us to have this right, which is his justifying of
us, and will maintain this our right if called into question. A little for the
proof of this, He that confesses and forsakes, shall find mercy, confessing
and forsaking of Sin is that which God commands, now this being obeved; i. e.
if there be an unfeigned confessing and forsaking of Sin; then saving mercy is
by God through Christ conveyed in the promise, and this same promise asserts,
and vindicates in this conveyance the Souls right, which is its justifying act.
That also, Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous Man his
thoughts, and turn unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our
God, and he will abundantly pardon; Now upon the wickeds forsaking his ways,
and the unrighteous Man his thoughts, the promise annexed makes over his right
(which consists in his obedience to the preceding command) to the Pardon and
Mercy promised; and will maintain and vindicate this his right in case it be
called into question. Now those Persons that will not admit of a Justification
of this sort, they will urge (that if we be Penitent returners) to flee to the
Promise, and plead the promise, and will tell us that we have right unto the
good promised, forasmuch as God by his Spirit has wrought the qualifications
which gives right, and if we must flee to the Promise and plead the Promise, as
having a right through Christ upon such qualifications which are of Grace; Does
not this speak that the Promise does both assert our right, and also will
maintain our right to Pardon and Life? And what is it but justifying? Says a
Reverend Divine, you shall hear a Protestant in his Prayer appealing from the
Tribunal of God's Justice, to the Throne of his Grace, and yet in his Sermon be
telling the People, that it is nothing else but the perfect Obedience and
Satisfaction of Christ imputed to them (you must know, to be accounted by God
as their personal righteousness) that saves them; which is to bring them back
from the Throne of his Grace, to the Bar of his Justice to be judged.

6. When I say that Justification is God's asserting act by his Promise of
Grace our right to Pardon and Life for the sake of Christ upon our believing, I
do not think that Pardon is any part constituting our Justification, but a
benefit which does immediately follow thereupon. For consider we Justification
first, Actively, so it consists in God's giving us a right through Christ by
his Promise upon our obedience to the preceptive part of the Law of Grace; or
if you will, upon our performance through his Grace of the conditions of the
new Covenant, I mean such upon which we have a right at the first, or at the
first an interest, or our first acceptance into favor through Christ, Ephesians.
1. 6. To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted
in the beloved. Or 2ly, Consider we Justification passively, so it is our
having this right. Now observe, Pardon is that which God gives right to by his
promise, and which we have right to, considered as subjects qualified; i. e. as
true penitent Believers, and so must be a precious benefit devolved upon us as
Persons who have right. But seeing that many worthy Divines have affirmed, and
undertaken taken to prove that our very justifying righteousness consists in
Pardon of Sin, I shall here give my thoughts and the grounds of them upon the
point, and shall not impose upon any, but leave Persons to take or leave as
they shall have light and evidence.

SECT. VII. Wherein Pardon and Justification agree, and wherein they disagree.
I Shall then first show wherein Justification and Pardon agree.

1. They agree in the principal Efficient, which is God, it is God that
Justifies, and it is God that Pardons. Romans 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of God's elect? it is God that justifies. Ephesians. 4. 32. And be ye
kind to one another, tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for
Christ's sake has forgiven you. 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.

2. They agree in the Meritorious Cause, Christ has purchased the one and the
other, it is for his Merits we are Justified, and for his Merits we are
Pardoned. Romans 3. 24. Being justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Romans 5. 9. Much more then, being now
justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. Matthew. 26.
28. For this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many, for the
remission of sins. Acts 13. 38. Be it known unto you therefore, Men and
Brethren, that through this Man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins.

3. They agree in the Subject, both Justification and Forgiveness relates to a
Penitent Believer, and such an one only (I speak of the Adult) that is
Justified, and it is a Penitent Believer, and such an one that is Pardoned. Acts
10. 43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name whosoever
believes in him shall receive remission of sins. Acts 3. 19. Repent ye
therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times
of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.

4. They agree in the Instrumental Cause, and that is the Covenant of Grace, or
God's gracious Promise, for this is God's Instrument whereby he does convey a
right to Pardon, not only Pardon, but a right unto it. Isa. 43. 25. I, even I
am he, that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not
remember thy sins. Isa. 44. 22. I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy
transgressions, and as a cloud, thy sins return unto me, for I have redeemed
thee.

5. They agree in time, when a Person is Justified, he is Pardoned, there is no
time wherein a Person is Justified, but he is Pardoned, nor wherein he is
Pardoned, but he is Justified.

I proceed Secondly, To show wherein they differ.

1. And First, They differ as Justification has the priority of Nature; i. e.
Justification is in order of Nature before Pardon, a Man must in order of
Nature have a right to Pardon before he have it, he must Repent and Believe,
and so be conformed to the Gospel Law, before he be righteous in the Sense of
that Law, and so have right to Pardon.

2. They differ in their habitude or relation, Justification properly relates
to a false Accusation, Pardon of Sin to a true and just one, he that is accused
falsely (when his Innocence is cleared as to the Crime of which he is accused)
may be said to be justified. Deuteronomy. 25. 1. If there be a controversy between
Men, and they, come unto judgment, that the judges may judge them, then they
shall justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked. But now he that is truly
and justly accused, he may have Pardon of the Crime committed, but he cannot by
that Law whereby he was Convict be justified, or accounted as righteous, with
respect to the Crime of which he has been truly and justly accused. He that is
accused of Impenitency and Unbelief, if the Accusation be false, the Law of
Grace accounts him righteous, and so justifies him against that Accusation; But
if a Person accused of Impenitency and Unbelief, and the Accusation be true and
just, this Law will Pardon upon Repentance and Faith through Christ, but it
will not justify upon Repentance and Faith, as a Person that has been falsely
accused, for he was truly and justly accused before he did Repent and Believe,
though not when he believed.

3. They differ in their Essence or Nature, that which constitutes
Justification is our Conformity to the Law of Grace, upon which God in his
gracious Promise through Christ accounts us righteous, but that which
constitutes Pardon is not a Conformity or Obedience of this sort; but our
acquittance and discharge from obligation to Punishment due, true it is upon
this Gospel Righteousness for Christ's Satisfaction and Merits we are pardoned,
but yet Pardon is not nor cannot be that Righteousness which the Gospel calls
for to our Justification; for if so, we should first have forgiveness, and then
forgiveness upon the account of that forgiveness, and so Pardon of Sin should
be a condition of it self, and be in order of Nature before it self, which I
know not how to free from a contradiction.

4. They differ in the different formality of the Subject to which they do
relate, for the Law of Grace in justifying considers Persons as conformed to
its commands, and upon that accounts them through and for Christ righteous; but
in pardoning it considers them previously as transgressors, though yet as those
who have right to Pardon by reason of their Conformity through Grace unto its
Precepts; and therefore for Christ's sake assures them of Pardon hereupon, for
upon Confession and forsaking of Sin, and turning unto the Lord, God by his
gracious Promise assures us of Pardon. And that the Gospel Law in pardoning
does previously consider the Person as a transgressor, appears, for as much as
it Pardons not only such as have right to Pardon, but those who have need of
it, and who have need but such as before Pardon are altogether in a special
sort unpardoned transgressors.

5. There is a difference betwixt Justification and Pardon, as touching the
Moral Efficiency of the Law of Grace justifying and pardoning; for in the one
it asserts a Person's right, but in the other it conveys that which it asserted
his right unto. These things being laid together, and duly considered, to me
it is evident that Justification and Pardon cannot be the same, nor yet that
Pardon can be our justifying Righteousness, but a special benefit immediately
following our Justification.

But it may be said Condemnation and Justification are opposed, and therefore
as Condemnation consists in the Laws Sentence of a Sinner to punishment: so
Justification must consist in acquitting the Sinner by Law Sentence from
punishment; and if so, Is not here Pardon? and if Pardon, Then must not
Justifification consist in Pardon?

1. I Answer; First, Justification and Condemnation are opposed materially, for
as the matter of Justification must be a Righteousness: so the merit of
Condemnation must be Unrighteousness; or thus, the matter of Justification must
be Conformity to a Law: the merit of Condemnation must be the violation of that
Law.

2. They are opposed in the different account of the Law, for whom the Law
Condemns, them it accounts. Guilty: But whom it Justifies, those it accounts
Righteous. But now though Justification and Condemnation be thus opposed, yet
it does not follow that what is the form of the one, the contrary to that is
the form of the other; or it does not follow that as Condemnation consists in
bearing the Laws Sentence to Punishment, so Justification in acquitting from
Punishment. (Indeed all justified Persons are most certainly acquitted, but
Justification in its own nature is not an acquitment). Pardon and Condemnation
are thus formally opposed, but not Justification and Condemnation. But it may
be said further, must he not be innocent, who is acquitted? and is not every
innocent Person righteous? I Answer, an acquitment implies the Person who is
now acquitted was once guilty of that from which he is now acquitted; and so by
Innocent, here can only be meant one that is discharged from deserved
punishment, and such an one is clear indeed, but then this his clearing does
imply a right by some pardoning act, or act of Grace. Every justified person is
discharged from the Condemnation of the Law, or the Execution of the Law's
Sentence, but then this discharge implies a previous Righteousness, not for
which, but upon which he is accounted to have right to that discharge, and
without which he might not have it, for he that believes not is condemned, and
the wrath of God abides upon him, so then a Person is righteous formally by
this previous Righteousness, and not by his discharge, for that is only, as is
plain, the immediate fruit of his Righteousness.

SECT. VIII. How our right to Pardon and Life is through Christ, and how he is
our Surety, and has procured the New Covenant for us.
I Come now to show that it is through Christ that Sinners have right to Pardon
and Life upon believing; and it is through Christ in a double regard. In regard
to a Ransom paid, and Covenant obtained.

It is through Christ in the first place, as having paid the Ransom for Sinners
Redemption. Matthew. 20. 28. Even as the Son of Man came not to be ministered
unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many. 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6.
For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ
Jesus. Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time. We are
all by Nature Sin's Slaves, Satan's Captives, loving the World, and the things
of the World, cursed and condemned by the Law, being Transgressors, liable to
the intolerable wrath of an Almighty God; Christ paid a sufficient Ransom by
his Obedience and Sufferings, From the power and dominion of Sin. Titus 2. 14.
Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify
unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good works. From the thraldom of
Satan. Coloss. 2. 15. And having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a
show of them, openly triumphing over them in it. Heb. 2. 14. Forasmuch then as
the Children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took
part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of
death; that is, the Devil. From this present evil World. Galat. 1. 4. Who gave
himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil world,
according to the will of God and our Father. From the Curse of the violated
Law. Galat. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being
made a curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a
tree. From the wrath of an offended God. This ransom paid by Christ gave such
satisfaction to an offended God as that he deals with none of the Sons and
Daughters of Men, now upon terms of the violated Law of works: but is so far
through this satisfaction given reconciled, as that he grants them a reprieve
from Hell, and much riches of goodness and mercy to lead them to repentance;
yea, and reveals himself further willing in a saving manner to be at peace
with, and reconciled unto Sinners, upon their subjection to the Gospel Law, who
have the explicit offer. And this satisfaction given by Christ's sufferings was
no strict fulfilling of the Law threat, but a fulfilling the Law of Mediation
or Redemption, for the Soul that sinned was to die; though for the satisfaction
given by Christ a stop was put to the execution of the Law threat. When Persons
say that the satisfaction Christ gave by his sufferings was a fulfilling of the
threatening, part of the Law of Innocence which Man had broken, it is a great
mistake, for in what was threatened by the Law, was included corporal
distempers, and spiritual and eternal death and damnation. But Christ though he
suffered did not suffer after this sort, or in this kind, and therefore as is
plain his sufferings could not be a strict fulfilling of the threatening part of
this Law; though yet observe his sufferings were for us and in our place and
stead: But yet so as God did mercifully accept of these sufferings of Christ,
as a sufficient satisfaction instead of that which we deserved to suffer for
ever.

Satisfaction is not the giving or paying the same which was due in Law; but it
is the giving or paying something to the offended party which is equivalent, or
that does amount to as much as though that same had been given or paid which
was due in Law; it is granted by the most of Divines that Christ, though he did
not, nor could not suffer the Idem, or that same which was due to us, yet as
his sufferings were a satisfaction, they were the Tantundem; they were
equivalent, yea, infinitely more in value, than the sufferings of Mankind in
Hell, for these could never have pacified an offended God, made atonement, nor
procured new terms of Peace, being only the sufferings of finite Beings; but
the sufferings of Christ were the sufferings of an infinite Being; i. e. the
sufferings of that Person who is God as well as Man, and therefore must have an
infinite virtue and efficacy in their own nature. Acts 20. 28. Take heed
therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock, over which the Holy Ghost
has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased
with his own blood.

But did not Christ fulfill the Law by his Passive Obedience?

I Answer, First, There is a strict fulfilling of the Law by Passive Obedience,
and that is when the very same in kind is suffered which was threatened, this
Christ neither did nor could suffer, as has been showed above. Secondly, There
is a virtual fulfilling of the Law, by Passive Obedience, and that is when
satisfaction is given hereby to the Lawgiver, who has left himself a liberty
to accept of such satisfaction, and so dispense with the threat as to its chief
and main execution, and thus Christ by his sufferings may be said to have
fulfilled the Laws threat.

But Christ was our Surety, and as such he must be under the same obligation
with us.

For Answer to this, let us enquire in what Sense Christ cannot be said to be
our Surety, and then in what Sense he may.

1. Then Christ in undertaking for Sinners was not such a Surety, as bound
himself to pay or discharge their Debt in case of non payment, upon good
Security from them: There are such Sureties as these, as oblige and bind
themselves to a Creditor for others, upon good Security from them, so that if
the Creditor come upon these Sureties in case of the real Debtor's non-payment,
they again may come to save themselves harmless upon the Debtor, or such as
were bound for him. But Christ was no such Surety for us, he did not engage to
pay our Debts upon good Security from us, that we would pay them our selves, or
if we did not, he might by virtue of our Security recover his own of us. I
think none will say Christ was such a Surety as this.

2. Christ was not such a Surety as put himself into the same bond with us, and
obliged himself to pay the same in kind which was due unto us; for let us put
the Question, Whether he was immediately upon Man's transgressions bound over
to suffer by the Laws threat, or did voluntarily engage himself to make
satisfaction for Man's offense? If the former, then he must have been bound for
Man's performance of the condition of the first Covenant; for if he was not,
How could he have been immediately bound over to suffer by the Laws threat?
Immediately to fall under the penalty for the nonperformance of another,
supposes he that does was bound for that other he should perform; and if it be
thus, then Christ must have been a Surety for Innocent Man that he should
perform personal, perfect, and perpetual Obedience, and so the first Covenant
must have Christ a Mediator and Surety, and yet Man fell too. If he did
voluntarily engage himself to suffer for Man's offense, then I ask by what Law?
If it be said by the Law of Works, in putting himself under it as Man's Surety,
I grant under the preceptive part of this Law Christ put himself voluntarily,
and therefore is said to be made under the Law. But that he was under the penal
part, so as that the Law did account him Man's Surety, that had bound himself
in the same bond with him to suffer for him in case he did transgress, this
could not be; for this runs us upon the former, i. e. that Christ must be bound
for Man as his Surety upon the drawing up of the first Covenant, while Man was
yet in his integrity, to suffer the punishment threatened in case he did
transgress: or else how could the Law as they say immediately proceed against
him in binding him over to punishment upon Man's offense? and if it be said, he
voluntarily put himself into our bond upon the breach of the Covenant, then it
must be proved, that the Law did make provision for and accept such a Surety
for fallen Man, and his sufferings for his discharge from the penalty due; and
if it be so then this Law must immediately without any more to do acquit Man
from guilt, and so be a pardoning Law, which yet curses and condemns all
Mankind as transgressor; for observe if a Law do accept of the sufferings of
another in my stead who have violated the Law, it must acquit and discharge me
from punishment which was due hereupon.

It may be said were not the sufferings of Christ in our stead and place? I
Answer, yes, though not accepted by the Law as such but by the Lawgiver: for as
I have said, so I say again if they be accepted by the Law of Works in our
place and stead, then it cannot choose but be a pardoning Law, and if so it must
be the same with the Gospel. Hence then

1. Christ is such a Surety as interposed for us, and obliged himself freely to
make satisfaction for us poor offenders, who were altogether insufficient.

2. Christ is such a Surety, as by the consent of his Father did make
satisfaction, or give a valuable consideration for our acquitment and discharge
from the Curse and Condemnation of the Law, upon condition that we offenders
should have no benefit by this his satisfaction but in and through and from
him, and that upon his own appointed terms.

Seeing I have above put the Question by what Law Christ was bound to suffer, I
shall a little more fully and distinctly resolve it, before I pass further.
Distinguish we of Laws.

1. There is the Law or Covenant of Works made with Innocent Man; that Law
which promised the continuance of Life and Happiness upon condition of
personal, perfect, and perpetual obedience, and threatened Man with everlasting
death upon his disobedience. Now this Law first, did not only bind us to obey
God our Creator, and Rector, but Christ also as Man, for Christ considered as
God Creator and Rector, he cannot be under a law given to his Creatures; but
then as Man partaking of the same Nature with us, he must be under this law as
binding him to obedience, I mean, as to the preceptive part. But then Secondly,
This Law transgressed by us, does only bind us to suffer punishment, not
Christ; and the reason is because the Law does not bind any to suffer the
penalty it threatens, before it by them be violated and broken; now we have
violated and broken the Law, and it binds us over immediately to suffer the
punishment threatened, but not Christ, and that because Christ considered as Man
was ever Innocent, and never in the least violated or broke the Law of Works,
and therefore could not be bound by this Law to suffer the penalty, not for
himself, it may be said, but yet for us as our Surety; I Answer, No, he was not
bound for us by the Law of Works to suffer as our Surety, and that because the
Law of Works reveals nothing of, nor makes any provision for a Surety.

2. There is a Covenant or Law of Grace, and by this Christ was neither bound
to Obedience, nor suffering; for the Covenant or Law of Grace, it commands
Faith and Repentance, and threatens damnation to the unbelieving and
impenitent: But Christ is not by this Law or Covenant to believe or repent:
indeed he has bound himself in the promissory part of this Covenant to give
the saving blessings thereof to all believing and penitent Sinners; but he is
not bound by the preceptive part to repent and believe, or by the threatening
part to suffer in case he do not.

3. There is the Law of Mediation, that which Divines call the Covenant of
Redemption, in which he freely engaged to purchase our Redemption, and this is
the Law by which Christ was bound to suffer for us, to satisfy, and make
atonement, and this both by his Father's appointment, and his own free consent.
John 10. 17, 18. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life,
that I may take it again. No Man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my
self, I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This
commandment have I received of my Father. It is plain from this Scripture that
Christ was obliged by no Law, but his Father's command, and his own consent,
and in what Law shall we find the Father's command to Christ to lay down his
Life, and Christ's free consent thereunto, but in the Law of Mediation? As
thus, such a Man has committed a capital Crime; i. e. a Crime that deserves
Death, another freely consents and engages to suffer in his stead; now this
Man that thus freely consents and engages himself, no Law previous to his own
consent and engagement does bind him thus to suffer for the other, seeing he is
Innocent as to the Crime, and so cannot be charged with the Crime the other is
guilty of, and this was the case in Christ's suffering for us; so that from
what has been said, it is granted that Christ as our Surety has suffered in
our place and stead; but that this was according to the intention or direction
of the Covenant of Works, this I deny. I will grant that if the Covenant of
Works had not been broken, Christ had not been our Surety, nor suffered to
satisfy Justice, and make our atonement; but then that eventually, Christ
actually became our Surety, was from the purpose of an all-wise, just, holy,
and merciful God above and besides either the intention or direction of the Law
of Works. Him has God set forth to be a Propitiation for Sin. Romans 3. 25.

As it is said before, he became actually Surety by his own free offer to make
satisfaction to the justice of God by his Death, for Man's breach of the Law of
Works, and God he accepted the offer, and this not according to any thing
intended of this nature in the Law of Works; but of his mere grace and good
pleasure toward us, and yet with a design both to secure the glory of his own
justice and holiness, and to declare the glory of his own Wisdom and Mercy, and
to keep up the repute of his Law which Man had wilfully violated.

These things are clear from Scripture.

1. That God accepted of the offer of Christ's Mediatourship, or Suretiship of
his mere good pleasure. Having predestined us unto the Adoption of Children
by Jesus Christ to himself according to the good pleasure of his will.

2. That God accepted of this offer with a design to advance the glory of his
Justice. Romans 3. 26. To declare, I say at this time his righteousness; that he
might be just, and the justifier of him which believes in Jesus.

3. That he might advance the glory of his Wisdom and Mercy. Ephesians. 1. 6, 7, 8.
To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in
the beloved. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of
sins, according to the riches of his grace. Wherein he has abounded toward us
in all wisdom and prudence.

4. That he might keep up in the World the repute of his Holy Law, in that he
would not dispense with the breach thereof without satisfaction. Isa. 42. 21.
The Lord is well pleased for his righteousness sake, he will magnify the Law,
and make it honorable.

2. It is through Christ, in the second place by his meritorious and
satisfactory righteousness, procuring the grant of a remedying Covenant or Law
of Grace, a Covenant or Law of Grace suited to Man in his lapsed or fallen
state; for whereas it was become naturally impossible for fallen Man to have
Justification or right to Life by the Law of Innocent Nature. Christ he
purchases a new Law, that should be a remedy to fallen Man, notwithstanding
his violation of the first Law: So that now if Man do perform the conditions of
the Covenant of Grace, his Sin shall be pardoned, and he shall have right to
Life; so that it is Christ who has purchased the new Covenant, and it is upon
the account of Christ's Merits that God will mercifully accept the obedience
which this Covenant requires (instead of that Innocence which the Law of
perfect Works called for, I mean works without any Sin attending them, or works
performed by an Innocent Creature) and justify, and give right to Pardon and
Life thereupon. When I say that God upon the account of Christ's Merits will
mercifully accept the obedience which the Covenant of Grace injoins instead of
that Innocence the Law of sinless perfect Works called for; the meaning is not,
as some are prone to imagine, that our Evangelical or Gospel Obedience will
answer that law, or be accepted by that law, or that that law will justify us
upon that Obedience, No, no, for it is only the obedience of Christ that
answers that law, removes the Curse of it, and merits Pardon for our breach of
it; but the meaning is, that whereas God might in justice after Man's wilful
fall, have insisted upon the very terms of that law which was violated, he was
pleased in his abundant free grace and rich mercy for the sake of Christ, to
declare by the new Covenant, that now he would accept of the sincere Obedience
of poor Sinners, and account them Subjects united to Christ, and as such having
right through him to Pardon and Life, which is his justifying of them. Now
because not only such as profess themselves Socinians; but also those that
pretend to be Enemies unto them do deny the Covenant of Grace to be purchased
by Christ, exclaiming against me at a great rate, and saying, O, he is wrong in
the very foundation, he holds Christ has merited the Covenant of Grace, when
it is only the free gift of the Father. I judge it a fit place under this head
a little more fully to correct the Socinian Spirit in these Men, who yet know
not it is any such thing that they are in the least possessed with; and this by
clear proof from Scripture, that Christ has purchased this Covenant.

That then which constitutes the Covenant of Grace betwixt God and Man is God's
gracious promise on his part of the gift of saving benefits to Man, and Man's
engagement on his part through the grace of God to perform all that which may
give him right unto and interest in the promised benefits. Now if I prove from
Scripture, that there is no saving benefit which God promises to give unto
Man, nor yet any grace which is required of Man to give him right unto and
interest in these benefits: but Christ has purchased them, I hope I shall
sufficiently have discharged my province in proving the Covenant of Grace to be
purchased by Christ.

1. In the first place let us consider the benefits that by God are promised,
or offered in the Promise to Man, and as we go along prove that they are
purchased by Christ.

1. God promises Justification. Isa. 45. 25. In the Lord shall all the seed of
Israel be justified, and shall glory. Christ has purchased Justification, Romans
5. 8. 9. But God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us: Much more then being now justified by his blood,
we shall be saved from wrath through him.

2. God promises reconciliation and peace, Isa. 27. 5. Or let him take hold of
my strength that he may make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me.
Christ has purchased this, Romans 5. 10. For if when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son; much more being reconciled, we shall
be saved by life. Colos. 1. 21, 22. And you that were sometimes alienated and
enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now has he reconciled In the body of
his flesh through death, to present you holy, and unblameable, and
unreproveable in his sight.

3. God promises remission of Sin. Isa. 43. 25. I, even I am he that blotteth
out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. And
this is purchased by Christ. Matthew. 26. 28. For this is my blood of the New
Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins. Ephesians. 1. 7. In
whom we have redemption through his blood, according to the riches of his grace.

4. God promises Redemption, Psalm 34. 22. The Lord redeemeth the Soul of his
servants, and none of them that trust in him, shall be desolate. Christ has
purchased this Redemption from Sin. Titus 2. 14. Who gave himself for us, that
he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar
People, zealous of good works. From Hell and wrath. 1 These. 1. 10. And to wait
for his Son from Heaven, whom he raised from the dead even Jesus, who delivered
us from the wrath to come. From the Curse and Condemnation of the violated Law.
Galat. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree.
From the power of the Devil. Heb. 2. 14. Forasmuch then as the Children are
partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same,
that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is,
the Devil.

5. God promises Adoption, 2 Corinthians. 6. 17, 18. Wherefore come out from among
them, and be ye separate, says the Lord: and touch not the unclean thing, and
I will receive you. And will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and
Daughters, says the Lord Almighty. And this is by Christ merited. Galat. 4. 5.
To redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of
Sons.

6. God promises Eternal Life. John 3. 16. For God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life. Christ has purchased this. Ephesians. 1. 14. Which is
the earnest of our Inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased
possession unto the praise of his glory. Romans 5. 21. That as sin has reigned
unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life,
by Jesus Christ our Lord.

This I have proved that the rich benefits promised by God, which are his part
of the Covenant, are purchased by Christ.

I will proceed to prove also that what Grace is required of Man to give him
right to and interest in these benefits of the Covenant is purchased by Christ.

1. We cannot have right to, nor interest in any of the above mentioned
benefits without Repentance, for without Repentance we must perish. Luke 13. 3.
I tell you, Nay: but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Christ
has purchased this. Acts 5. 31. Him has God exalted with his right hand, to
be a Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of
sins. And for certain Christ gives nothing but what he has purchased, or the
Spirit for this end to work it.

2. We cannot have right to, nor interest in any of the above mentioned
benefits without Faith, he that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him.
Now Christ has purchased this. Philip. 1. 29. For unto you it is given in the
behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake.

3. We cannot have right to, nor interest in any of the above mentioned
benefits without sincere Obedience, which is virtually included in our first
consent to be the Lord's. Heb. 5. 9. And being made perfect, he became the
Author of eternal Salvation, unto all them that obey him. And this Christ has
purchased. Titus 2. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works.

This I have also proved, that what is required on our part Christ has also
purchased; and if Christ have purchased all that which constitutes the
Covenant; i. e. God's gracious promises, and grace to enable us to perform the
duties required to give us a right to and interest in the above mentioned
benefits, then let the Reader judge, whether he be of the foundation that holds
Christ has purchased the Covenant, or he that denies it.

It is through Christ furthermore, that Souls have right to Pardon and Life
upon true Faith, as God upon the account of his Meritorious Righteousness, and
all prevailing Intercession, communicates still further and further aids of
Grace for Believers perseverance. As Faith and Repentance are required by the
Gospel to our initial Justification or right to Christ, and the benefits of
Pardon and Life through him, so perseverance in Grace is required to our
continued and final Justification. He that endures to the end the same shall
be saved. And Christ has merited persevering Grace. John 10. 10. The thief
comes not but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they
might have Life, and that they might have it more abundantly. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26,
27. Husbands, love your Wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave
himself for it; That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of
water by the word. That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not
having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing: but that it should be holy, and
without blemish. Heb. 2. 19. For it became him for whom are all things, and by
whom are all things in bringing many Sons unto glory, to make the Captain of
their Salvation perfect through sufferings.

From what has been said we shall Observe, That none of Mankind now can be
accounted righteous, and so have Justification by the Law that injoins sinless
perfect Works, for if so, we must in the account of the Law be sinless and
perfectly righteous: And if so, it must either be by having such a
Righteousness of our own; but this cannot be, there being no mere Man that has
such a sinless perfect Righteousness of his own as this Law requires; or
Secondly, It must be by having such a Righteousness of another; but this
cannot be, for there is no Righteousness of another that can answer the Law of
Innocent Nature, but Christ's; and this Law neither does nor can account us
sinless and perfectly righteous with Christ's Righteousness; for if it should
or could account us perfectly righteous, by accounting the Righteousness of
Christ in it self to be ours; or accounting us perfectly to have obeyed and
fulfilled it in Christ's Obedience: It must account us to be thus righteous,
either absolutely, or upon performance of some condition by it required. If
upon the performance of some condition, it must either be the condition it
required of sinless Man, which is personal, perfect, and perpetual Obedience;
and if we could perform this we should not need Christ's Righteousness at all;
for there had been no necessity of Christ's Righteousness, if Man had continued
to have performed a personal perfect Righteousness: or it must be upon the
performance of the condition of a sincere Repentance and Faith: But the Law of
Innocent Nature reveals not, and therefore cannot prescribe such a condition,
upon the performance of which it will account us perfectly righteous through or
by Christ's Righteousness; for if it did, it is evident there would have been no
need of God's publishing the new Covenant, or of promulgating the Gospel. If it
account us to be thus righteous, absolutely without any condition at all, then
it either accounts all Mankind to be perfectly righteous by Christ's perfect
Obedience; or only some part of Mankind: if it account all Mankind to be
perfectly righteous through Christ's Righteousness, then all must have
Justification, or a right to Life, and none of Mankind must perish, and if so,
then we must have universal Salvation. If it account only some to be perfectly
righteous with Christ's Righteousness, then it must consider them either as
Elect, or non-elect; if it do not consider them as Elect, then the
forementioned consequence is established. If it consider them as Elect, then
the Law of Works must consider them as Sinners, and so make provision for the
Salvation of some, and none for the Salvation of others, that which I do not
know, any that will undertake to prove. But if it should be granted that the
Law of Innocent Nature absolutely, without requiring any condition of them
should account the Elect righteous upon Christ's perfect Obedience or
fulfilling of it; then it must follow that Christ's sufferings are a mere
nullity, and there is no need of them: for if upon Christ's active Obedience
the Law do account all the Elect sinless and perfectly righteous (which it must
do if it account them righteous personally with Christ's Righteousness) and
justify them as such who have perfectly obeyed Christ's perfect Obedience,
then it cannot require suffering too, seeing that it only calls for suffering
in case it have not the actual Obedience it requires. And it must follow
further that there is no need of a Covenant of Grace, nor Repentance and Faith
commanded therein, if the Law of sinless Works do account us perfectly
righteous in Christ's perfect obeying it for us. But none of these things can
be, as is plain if Persons will lay aside prejudice and consider. And if so,
that cannot be sound and true which some have affirmed, that Christ and we are
one Legal Person, or that Christ and Believers are one Person in Law Sense, the
Law accounting that what Christ did they did

But it may be said, when Persons become true Believers then the Law of Works
(...) them righteous with the Righteousness of Christ, this is as much as to
say, the Law of Works justifies upon Persons performing of the condition of the
Gospel, and it knows nothing of, nor does it prescribe any such condition, and
so if it justify, it must justify upon terms unknown, and therefore
unprescribed in it self, and thus it is made a sort of a blind justifying
Instrument.

SECT. IX. Faith described and explicated, in order to our Justification by it.
HAving shown how it is through Jesus Christ that God does assert and will
maintain our right to Pardon and Life: I shall proceed to show what Faith is,
which is the thing required to give us right. John 3. 16. Acts 13. 39. Acts 16.
31.

An acute Author gives us this Description of it, it is a believing acceptance
of Christ a Savior, it is a short one, but yet a full one; for it implies
First, Assent, Secondly, Consent, and Thirdly, our resolved following of Christ
in his way, trusting and relying upon him whatever we meet withal.

First, It implies Assent, to these following things.

1. That by Nature we are all lost perishing Creatures, for how should a Man
look after, or be concerned about Salvation by Christ, if he be not convinced
of, and give his assent unto this, i. e. that in himself he is in a lost
helpless condition. Luke 19. 10.

2. That Sin has brought Mankind into this condition, Man was not in a
perishing case, as he came forth of God's hands; but Sin has made him
miserable; a Subject liable to all the Miseries of this Life, and to the Pains
of Hell for ever. Romans 5. 12. 18. and 6. 23.

3. That God made Man sinless and upright, Man came not out of God's hands a
crooked, but a straight piece of Work: He had not only the Natural but Moral
Perfections which he was capable of, God saw all that he had made, and it was
good; i. e. had the Perfections which were suitable and agreeable unto its
Nature. Eccles. 7. 29.

4. That as God made Man a sinless upright Creature, and capable of Moral
Government, so sinless and perfect Obedience from Man became due unto God.

5. That God gave Man a Law as the Rule of his Obedience, and this Law did
require of Man personal, perfect, and sinless constant Obedience, promising
Life upon his Obedience, and threatening Death upon his Disobedience.

6. That this Obedience the Law required was due unto God from Man, as his
absolute Owner, rightful Governor, and great Benefactor: for whom should Man
obey, but him who made him, has the absolute dispose of him, the absolute
Authority over him, and from whom he has all his good.

7. That we have by our Sin violated the righteous Law of an Holy God,
alienated and estranged our selves from him, cast off his Government, and made
our selves voluntarily Vassals and Slaves to Satan, and thus have cast off our
best good and last end, and are turned to the Creature, and so have forsaken
God the Fountain. Jer. 2. 13.

8. That by this our Sin we have brought upon our selves the doleful Curse and
Condemnation which the Law threatened against the Transgressors.

9. That we cannot deliver or save our selves from this cursed condemned state;
seeing that it is impossible that he who has once sinned should be accounted by
the Law an Innocent Person, or one that never sinned; and so also it is
impossible that finite Creatures who are Transgressors, should ever pay a
sufficient Ransom, or the full price of Redemption to offended Justice.

10. That there is need of a Savior or a Redeemer for such poor lost undone
Creatures, one that may be an Innocent Person, and able to make full
satisfaction to God for Man's offense.

11. It implies an assent that there is a Savior, and this Savior is
appointed by God, and that he is able to save, yea, mighty to save.

12. That this Savior is the only begotten Son of God given and sent by God
for this purpose. John 3. 16.

13. That God by the Gospel did reveal and promise this Savior to our first
Parents upon their Apostasy. Genesis 3. 15. And so also to us. 2 Timothy 1. 9. 10.

14. That this Gospel in which Christ a Savior is revealed is true, the very
truth of God. Coloss. 1. 5.

15. That it was the mere love and mercy of God that moved him to give and send
his Son to be a Savior, no previous deserts in Man could be the motive. 1 John
4. 9, 10.

16. That Christ our Savior is true God, of the same Essence with the Father,
equal in Power and Glory. Romans 9. 5.

17. That Christ that he might be a fit Savior though he was God yet became
Man, not that he ceased to be God, but by becoming what he was not, God and Man
in one Person for ever. It was fit he should be Man that he might obey, and God
that his obedience might be meritorious: it was fit that he should be Man that
he might suffer, and God that his sufferings might be satisfactory. Heb. 2. 14.
16. Philip. 2. 6, 7, 8. John 1. 14. Galat. 4. 4.

18. That he was conceived by the Holy Ghost in the Womb of the Virgin Mary;
and born of her, and that without Sin. Matt. 1. 20. Luke 2. 6, 7.

19. That his Name was given him according to his Office, and the great work
appointed for him by the Father; i. e. Jesus, because he should save his People
from their Sins. Matt. 1. 21.

20. That this Lord Jesus having lived upon Earth, in perfect constant
Obedience without the least Sin, teaching and preaching the way of Salvation,
working many Miracles for the testimony and confirmation of the Divinity of his
Person, and the truth of his Doctrine and Office; he freely gave himself to be
a Sacrifice for our Sins to pay our Ransom, and make our Atonement in suffering
the shameful and painful Death of the Cross, and also to free us from the Curse
of the Law. Heb. 4. 15. Heb. 7. 26. Heb. 2. 3, 4. Titus 2. 14. Heb. 9. 26.
Matt. 20. 28.

21. That he expired, died, or gave up the Ghost upon the Cross. Luke 23. 46.

22. That he was taken from the Cross and laid in the Grave. Luke 23. 53.

23. That he rose again the third day; though he did really die, and was laid
in the Grave, yet he saw no corruption, he could not be holden by the bonds of
Death, but arose by his own Power. Luke 24. 46. Acts. 10. 40.

24. That he about Forty days space after his Resurrection ascended
triumphantly into Heaven, in the sight of many Witnesses. Luke 24. 50, 51. Acts
1. 3. 9, etc.

25. That he is advanced Lord over all in Dignity, Honor, Power, and Glory
with the Father. Acts 10. 36. Acts 2. 36.

26. That he has by the Gospel purchased a Covenant or Law of Grace, and
appointed that those in and among the Adult shall be saved, who do unfeignedly
repent, believe in him, and love him above all things, and persevere in the
following of him in the ways of Holiness unto the death. Acts 2. 38. Ephesians. 6.
24. Heb. 5. 9. Revel. 22. 14.

27. It does imply on the contrary, that such as do not sincerely repent,
believe, and obey the Gospel, and persevere in the ways of Holiness, they shall
lose Salvation, and have Damnation for their everlasting portion. Luke 13. 3.
John 3. 18.

28. That Christ has appointed and set up a Gospel Ministry, and injoined them
to cry aloud, to give Sinners warning, to offer them terms of Peace, and
beseech them to be reconciled.

29. That though Christ be ascended and exalted in Heavenly Glory, yet he is
appointed by the Father to be the judge both of the quick and dead, and will
render to every one according to their Works. Acts 10. 42.

30. That though he be now exalted on the right hand of the Majesty on high in
Heaven, yet he will descend from thence with Angels and glorified Spirits, and
will by his glorious and mighty Power raise all the bodies that now are, and
shall be then found sleeping in the dust, in order to judgment and a final
sentence. Acts 1. 11. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. John 5. 28, 29.

31. That all both good and bad, that ever have been, now are, or shall be in
this World, shall be gathered before him; the good shall as Sheep be set upon
his right hand, and the bad as Goats upon his left. Matt. 25. 31, 32, 33.

32. That he will sentence those upon his right hand to everlasting Happiness,
but those upon his left to eternal Punishment. Matt. 25. 34, to 41.

33. That according to the sentence given by Christ the righteous and impartial
Judge, so must execution be done both upon the good and bad; there shall be no
appealing from his sentence, nor no repealing of it. Matt. 25. 46. Matt. 3. 12.

Let Persons consider upon the matter, that there are none that assent to the
truth of this aright, that Christ is a Savior, but they do and must assent
unto the truth of all these things which are above mentioned. And seeing that
Christ a Savior will save and does save by the Spirit proceeding both from the
Father and the Son; it will be necessary to know what truths we must assent
unto with relation to the Spirit.

1. An assent, That he is true God of the same Essence with the Father and the
Son, and that appears, seeing those who are baptized are to be baptized into
the Name of the Holy Ghost, as well as into the Name of the Father and Son.
Matt. 28. 19. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. He is expressly said
to be one; i. e. one God with the Father and the Son. 1 John 5. 7. For there
are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost:
and these three are one. Those that lie or act hypocritically they lie or deal
hypocritically to God; and this God is the Holy Spirit as well as the Father
and the Son. Acts 5. 3, 4. But Peter said, Ananias why has Satan filled thine
heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land?
Whilst it remained, was it not thine own? And after it was sold, was it not
thine own power? why have thou conceived this thing in thine heart? thou have
not lied unto Men, but unto God. We find Omnisciency and Omnipotency attributed
unto him. Isaiah 40. 13, and so on, Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord,
or being his counselor has taught him? etc. 1 Corinthians. 2. 10. But God has
revealed them unto us by the Spirit: for the Spirit searches all things, yea
the deep things of God. He is both the Author of Gifts and Grace, 1 Corinthians.
12. 11. But all these works that one and the self same Spirit, dividing to
every Man severally: as he will. We find the work of Creation ascribed unto
him. Psalm 104. 30. Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, they are created: and thou
renewest the face of the earth. Immensity or Infiniteness is attributed unto
him, he is omnipresent. Psalm 139. 7. 8. Whither shall I go from the Spirit? or
whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art
there: if I make my Bed in Hell, behold, thou art there.

The Power of the Highest or Almighty God is ascribed unto him, Luke 1. 35. And
the Angel answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and
the Power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that Holy thing
which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. We find the
fitting and furnishing of Christ for the Office of Mediator or Redeemer is
attributed unto him, Isa. 61. 1, 2. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me,
because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek, he has
sent me to bind up the broken hearted to proclaim liberty to the captives, and
the opening of the prison to them that are bound. To proclaim the acceptable
year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all that
mourn. The Miraculous work of casting out Devils is ascribed unto him. Matt.
12. 28. But if I cast out Devils by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God
is come unto you. He may be sinned against unpardonably. Matt. 12. 32. And
whosoever speaks a word against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him: but
whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this world, neither in the world to come.

2. An assent that this Spirit as to its personality proceeds both from the
Father and the Son: Hence we find him sometimes called the Spirit of the
Father. Matt. 10. 20. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your
Father which speaks in you. Sometimes the Spirit of the Son. Galat. 4. 6. And
because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts
crying Abba, Father.

3. An assent that he has his mission, or is sent both from the Father and the
Son. John 14. 16, 17. 26. John 15. 26.

4. An assent that this Spirit was sent both from the Father and the Son for
these ends and purposes. 1. To move and infallibly guide those who were
Prophets and Apostles, that they might perfectly declare the Doctrine of Christ
respecting our Salvation. 1 Peter 1. 10, 11, 12. 2. By many and plain Miracles
and wonderful gifts this Holy Spirit might be the great witness of Christ, and
of the certainty of his blessed and holy word. Heb. 2. 3, 4. 3. To take up the
Hearts of all true Believers for his habitation, and operate powerfully and
savingly in them. 2 Corinthians. 6. 16. Philip. 2. 13.

5. An assent that this Spirit does unite such as by the Father are drawn to
Christ as their head. Ephesians. 4. 15. 1 Corinthians. 6. 17. Into one Church, which is
the body of Christ. 1 Corinthians. 12. 12, 13. That so these being pardoned, and
made the Children of God, they may be a peculiar People sanctified to Christ.
Acts 10. 43. John 1. 12. Titus 2. 14. That they may morti^ie the Flesh with the
Affections and Lusts, obtain Conquests over the World, and vanquish the Devil
according to their Covenant in Baptism. Galat. 5. 24. 1 John 5^ 4, 5. James 4.
7. That they might serve God with an Holy Heart in Righteousness of
Conversation. Luke 1. 74, 75. That they may live in love unto, and communion
with the People of God John 13. 34. Acts 2. 42. That they may live in hope of
Christ's coming and eternal Life. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 5.

The sum of these things may be found in the Worcestershire Agreement. Now I
shall put the Question, Whether is not the belief of all these abovementioned
Articles included in a Person's believing in Christ a Savior, and if they be,
whether can any one (I speak of the Adult) have Salvation by Christ who denies
these, and refuse to give their assent unto them? If they cannot, how can they
be justified without such an assent? Being thus, it may be said, you will have
many assenting acts of Faith unto Justification, or in that Faith which
justifies. I Answer, implicit I will grant, explicit I deny. As thus, Suppose I
propound the abovementioned Articles to any in order to his assent, as I read
these Articles, if he give credence, he implicitly gives his assent to each
Article, as I go along: But then after that I have read them, I ask him whether
he does assent to the truth of the whole, if he say, yea, it is manifest his
explicit assent is but one, or one explicit act, which we call assent.

But besides assent, our consent is requisite to the constituting of true
Faith, and this consists best in a cordial accepting this one only God to be
our God, giving him the pre-eminence in our affections. Exodus 20. 2, 3. An
accepting of him to be our chief or best good, that God who is essentially
good, the fountain of all goodness. Hence he is the principal object of our
love, desire, and delight. Psalm 73. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and
there is none upon earth I desire besides thee. And besides it implies a free
consent to be disposed of by him according to his good pleasure, and a being
freely willing to be ruled and governed by him according to his Law and holy
Commands.

2. A consent to take Christ Jesus to be our only Propitiation, all prevailing
Intercessour, and also as our head and Teacher; i. e. Christ in all his Offices.

3. An accepting of the Holy Spirit to be our Sanctifier, to mortify Sin, to
bring our hearts in love with holiness, to assist us in duty, and excite grace
in the performance, to alienate our Hearts from this World, and fix them upon
Heaven and heavenly things.

4. A sincere consent to perform our Baptismal Vow or Covenant, renouncing the
World, the Flesh and the Devil, resolving through God's grace for the future to
be his obedient Children and faithful Servants, fighting against all his and
our spiritual Enemies. Those who are our Opposites, I would gladly know of
them, or rather I desire them to know of themselves, whether any less than such
a sincere consent as this above spoken of can bring or put them into a saving
justified state, or give them (which is all one) a saving interest in Christ,
and a right to Pardon and Life through him? If they say, less will, let it be
made appear from Scripture; if not, then why do they make any opposition? upon
this consent sincerely given follows practical trust; i. e. a well grounded
confidence upon God in and through the Lord Jesus by the Holy Spirit, that God
for the sake of Christ will be faithful to his promises, and make them good
unto such who reduce their former consent into persevering practice, such who
by patient continuance in well doing seek for Glory, and Honor, and
Immortality, Eternal Life. Romans 2. 7. Though many times under dark and
afflicting providence and dispensations. Thus Abraham against hope believed in
hope, he staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief, but was strong
in Faith, giving glory to God: And being fully persuaded that what he had
promised, he was able also to perform, upon our first assent and consent we
have an initial right to Christ and Life: upon our practical trust we have this
right continued, which practical trust does include sincere Obedience, and when
a Believer is incapacitated for the act and exercise, the principle or habit is
accepted. The heart of Asa was perfect all his days. 2 Chronicles. 15. 17.

This practical trust is our adherence to God in Christ by the blessed Spirit,
in the ways of holiness notwithstanding opposition. Acts 11. 23. Who when he
came, and had seen the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted them all, that with
purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord.

Having showed what a Faith it is which is requisite both to our initial and
continued Justification, or what Faith it is which is requisite both to our
initial and and continued right to Christ, and to Pardon and Life purchased by
him. Let us now consider what this Faith includes, as it gives the initial
right, and so I consider it especially as consisting in consent, assent being
previous.

1. Repentance is included, for in our sincere consent to take God to be our
God, Christ to be our Redeemer, which includes an accepting him in all his
Offices, and the Holy Spirit to be our Sanctifier, there is implied a cordial
confessing and forsaking of all Sin, and this with self loathing, self judging,
enmity, and opposition in the Heart against it.

2. Love to God and the ways of holiness is included; for it cannot be that
ever any should sincerely consent to be the Lord's, and make choice of the ways
of holiness to walk in, unless there be such a sight of their excellency and
amiableness as draws their Love from Sin and the World, and fixes it
principally hereupon.

3. This consent includes Obedience radically, for there can be no real consent
to be Christ's, unless there be a full resolution to do and suffer whatsoever
he calls us unto, this consent we speak of brings Christ and Souls into the
Relation of Master and Servants; and there cannot be a real consent to be
Christ's Servants, unless there be a willingness to do the work which he
commands us, and a resolution through Grace to continue in it, so that it is
manifest that Faith which justifies or gives right to Pardon and Life, it
includes Repentance, Love to God, and radically new Obedience; and though it is
like upon the matter, I may procure to my self the name of a Papist, I must not
for that be affrighted from owning a truth that bears its own evidence before
it: But by the way, I would have such Persons who are so ready to fix such
names upon others as they judge may render them odious to consider, what our
Divines mean when they say that where there is one Grace, there is every Grace;
and tell me where there is the act and exercise of that Faith which unites to
Christ, whether there can be this without the exercise of Repentance and Love
inclusive? what has been said may give sufficient light to know how to answer
the Question, to such as desire to learn, and think not themselves wise enough
already. Though seeing I am upon this, I shall take leave further to offer this
to consideration, and let it be under correction, that where there is the
exercise in truth of Grace, the exercise of that one Grace, (I speak of the
sensible exercise) does include the exercise of the most, if not the exercise
of all Grace. As thus, Suppose we the exercise of true Repentance, there must
be a real willingness in the Soul that sincerely repents, to deliver over
himself to be taught and ruled by Christ: and to trust to God's ability and
faithfulness by virtue of his promise to Pardon, and save him through and for
Christ's satisfaction and Merits, which is Faith. And where there is this
Faith, such a Soul must hate Sin, and love God in Christ, and his grace and
favor above the best of this World; and where there is such a love there must
be self denial, the Soul must be free to let all go for its part in God and
Christ, and the things above. And where there is this self denial, there must
be an heart actually disposed patiently to bear and endure all the trials and
troubles the Soul may meet with, and thus the affections must be heavenly and
the Souls greatest hopes must be there. Though some may quarrel at this, as
they are ready to do at all things which have not their sentiments to be their
measure and Rule: yet I do think this much may be a great help unto a Soul
under darkness and casting down, and so in the exercise of true humiliation,
for if it can but clear up this, it may have ground to conclude the rest of the
graces are included or are exercised implicitly. I look upon one grace drawn
forth into exercise, to be as the Wheel in a Clock, which set upon motion, the
rest move together with it.

But to offer further light upon the matter, I am inclined to think that one
grand occasion of Persons mistakes at this day about the great Article of
Justification, is their looking at and insisting upon the Priestly Office of
Christ, so as that they regard little, or very much overlook his Prophetic and
Kingly Office, not that we exclude the Priestly Office: But let us see to it in
our believing that we have such a Faith as accepts of whole Christ, Christ in
all his Offices, and not such a Faith as pitcheth upon his Priestly Office
only, for this is no other but a dividing of Christ; therefore whoever they are
that do not look at whole Christ, and embrace him in all his Offices as the
object of that Faith which justifies they are under a mistake. The Apostle
counsels the distressed Jailer, when he seriously enquired what he might do to
be saved to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, was not the Faith here spoken of
such a Faith as gave right to and interest in Christ and Covenant benefits? And
what as such did it only respect Christ as Priest? If so, then my consent to
take Christ in part, or to take Christ as Priest will give me a right and
interest in him as divided from my consent to take him as a Prophet and King,
and will it so? no surely, for know that we can have no right to Christ nor
benefit by him as a Priest, unless we consent to take him as Prophet to teach,
and King to rule us, is evident from Scripture, Acts 3. 22, 23. For Moses truly
said unto the Fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of
your Brethren like unto me, him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall
say unto you. And it shall come to pass, that every Soul which will not hear
that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the People. Luke 19. 27. But those
mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and
slay them before me.

There are these few things which I would gladly have Persons understand, which
if they do, and make a Christian use of them, they need not much to trouble
themselves with disputes upon the matter, though they should by degrees
endeavor to increase in knowledge.

1. Christ has merited all saving blessings.

2. Persons so long as impenitent and unbelieving have no right to nor interest
in Christ, or any of his purchased benefits. But

3. So soon as God gives Souls the Grace to turn from Sin, and give their
unfeigned consent. 1. To take Christ as the meriter of all saving good. 2. As
the satisfier of offended Justice. And, 3. Become sincerely willing to be
taught and ruled by him as Prophet and King.

4. Resolve through his Grace to walk in all Holy Obedience before him.

5. Depend upon his Mediator and intercession alone for the acceptance of all
their services and duties, then they have a right unto him, and interest in all
his benefits, and are most certainly in a justified state.

Now whereas some Persons affirm that all our Righteousness is as filthy rags;
If they mean by our Righteousness a mere external hypocritical Righteousness
where there is neither the Truth nor exercise of Grace, I grant them this as
filthy rags, it is an abomination to God: But if they mean by our Righteousness
true Repentance, Faith, sincere Love, and Gospel Obedience, that this is as
filthy rags, an abomination to God, this I deny, and the Scripture that is
brought to prove the contrary, does not intend it; i. e. Isa. 64. 6. but only
an hypocritical Righteousness for the Prophet in the Verse foregoing says,
Thou meetest him that rejoices, and works righteousness, those that remember
thee in thy ways. And if so then that Righteousness here spoken of, cannot be
an abomination to God; for God will not meet, own, or grant such his gracious
presence who work an abomination, neither will he account such to remember him
in his ways. The Sacrifice of the wicked indeed is an abomination to the Lord;
but the Prayer of the upright is his delight, And the Righteous Lord loves
Righteousness, and his countenance beholds the upright. But now says the
Prophet implicitly confessing Sin in the person of the People, They are but
few that are such as rejoice and work Righteousness, etc. for take us generally
and we are so degenerate and hypocritical, that we are but as an unclean thing,
and all our Righteousness are as filthy rags, and what is added, Verse 7th. is
a further proof of this Exposition. And there is none that calls upon thy
name, that stirs up himself to take hold of thee, which cannot certainly be
meant of the sincere, or those spoken of at the 5th Verse. But if this
Exposition will not give content, let Persons read the Assemblies Annotations,
and Pool's English Annotations upon the place, and those that can may consult
Pool's Critics in locum, and see wherein I and they differ. And there are such
as are for having our sincere Christian Righteousness to be no better than
filthy rags will find three of the Romish Church to be of their mind. Not that
I think this to be any argument, suppose what they hold to be a truth, but I
allege it because these Men profess themselves such Antipapists, as that they
judge it a sufficient Argument (so far as I find by some of them) against what
others hold, that is contradictory to them, if a Papist do but hold it, or seem
so to do.

But say they again, Did not Paul account his Christian Righteousness, the best
of his grace dung? I Answer, no, if we may believe his own express words, for
he says Philip. 3. 8. that he counted all things but loss for the excellency
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord; and was his knowledge of Christ no
part of his Christian Righteousness? or was it no Grace? or did it not include
Faith? if so, then how could he account it dung? or how did he so? But it may
be said, Suppose that a Person be sincere, and a true Believer, Does not Sin
attend the best of his Graces and Duties? I Answer, Yes, for certain. But then
is Grace and sincere Obedience in it self or in its own nature Sin? Surely no.
Persons would do well if they would distinguish betwixt Grace and Sin, I am
sure God does, and that both those that are in Heaven and Hell know; Sin, I
grant, is dung and filth wherever it is, but so is not Grace, true Grace.
Indeed I must say to such as are sincere Christians, you have cause and
occasion to bewail and beg Pardon for the want of the free exercise of Grace;
i. e. of Repentance, Faith, love to God, etc. in duty. But then do you, or ever
did you mourn and grieve and sorrow because you have Grace? I trow not. And
what is it which hinders the free exercise of Grace but Sin; this you are to
bewail, and crave pardon for, and believe assuredly that your duties cannot be
accepted without the Mediation and Intercession of Christ.

Well, but it may be said further, our Repentance and Faith we account them
only dung in point of Justification, I Answer, they are so I grant, if either
you or I set them in Christ's place, or make them that which they neither are,
nor can be; i. e. the merit of our Justification, or a meritorious
Righteousness; but they are not so, as they are appointed by God in the Gospel
to give right unto, and interest in Christ.

For let me ask Persons whether they think that God does ever accept any of the
services and duties of his People? Must they not say yes, through Christ and
his Mediation? And so say I, I do not expect the best of my duties should be
accepted any other way. Well then, if God accept the services of his People, I
ask again, whether God will accept of Sin or no? must it not be said no; if so,
that God will accept of his Peoples duties, and yet neither can nor will accept
of Sin, then how can their duties be Sin? But it may be said again, our best
services are no better than Sin till they be offered up by Christ, I Answer,
still I grant that Sin attends our best services, and so we need pardon in our
best performances, and the Mediation of Christ for their acceptance: But now
if our best services in themselves be no better than Sin, until Christ offer
them up; then Christ does either tender to God that which is no better than Sin
in it self; or else he makes our Christian duties another thing than they were,
and so offers them up to God: And if so, it is not the very service he tenders,
but another thing; a thing of another nature: and if so, the consequence must
be, that Christ does not at all offer up a Believers service to God. This then
is that which I believe upon the matter.

1. That God for Christ's sake pardons the Sins that attend the sincere
services of his People.

2. So far as they are sincere he is well pleased with them, and accepts them
for Christ's sake.

3. Whoever they are who are not sensible of, and lament the Sins of their best
duties: Look not unto, and rest not upon the Merit of Christ for Pardon: And do
not rest alone upon Christ's Mediation and Intercession for their Acceptance,
their duties cannot be pleasing to God. And I shall take leave here to tell
such as make Conscience of the performance of Christian duties, if you have
true Faith and the exercise of it in a duty, it will direct you to trust to,
and rest in Christ alone and his Mediation for your acceptance. It is of the
very nature of true Faith exercised in a duty to lead the Soul to rest upon and
trust unto a blessed Mediator for its acceptance: and whoever they are who
pretend to Faith, and yet do not make this use of Christ, I must tell such
their Faith is not true; for I say, it is of the nature of true Faith not to
lead Persons to rest in themselves, nor to rest in their duties; but to rest in
a Mediator alone for the acceptance both of their Persons and duties, and
therefore I conclude, that if Persons be such as have true Faith, and the
exercise of Faith in a duty, it is not possible for them to rest in that duty,
or in themselves as performers of it.

SECT. X. Concerning resting in Duty, Pride, of Grace, and an unopperative
Faith, with some sensible concluding Instructions thereupon.
MUCH has been said to caution Persons against resting in their Duties and
Graces, and I am satisfied was well meant, and I do not deny but that Persons
may rest, yea, and I am afraid too many do rest in their Duties, but that any
Person does rest in the performance of Duty, where Grace is in exercise, this I
deny. For when a Person in the performance of Duty does rest upon Christ and
his Mediation for Acceptance; it is either one that has Faith, and the
exercise of it; or it is as he who is destitute of Faith and so of the exercise
of it; If the former, manifest it is, that where there is true Faith in its
exercise, that Soul cannot but rest upon Christ; if the latter, then the
consequence must be supposing that a Person perform Duty, that is destitute of
true Faith, and so without the exercise of it; he is a Person that rests upon
Christ, and whose duties shall be accepted when yet the Scripture says, that
without Faith it is impossible to please God.

Touching Persons trusting in their Graces, and making Saviors of their
Graces, I affirm in like manner, that where there is the truth and exercise of
Grace, it is impossible for that Person to rest in his Grace, or make a Savior
of it, and that because (as before) it is of the very nature of Grace to lead
thither from whence it came; i. e. to God in Christ as the Souls rest and
Center, whatsoever is from our selves, leads us into our selves; but whatsoever
is from God, as a moral good, tends toward God. Well, but say some, though
Grace be from God, and so be good; yet it no sooner passes through us, but it
is defile^. I wonder for my part what notion Men have of this Allusive term
passing through, or when they say that grace passes through us: but I shall
let that pass, as a thing I understand not, neither I think they that use the
Phrase. But if Grace be defiled so soon as we are the subjects of it, or so
soon as it is given unto us or wrought in us, then how comes it by this
defilement, it must either be from some change, or it remains what it was; if
it be from some change that it is defiled, seeing that this defilement must be
moral, then it must partake of the nature of Sin, and if so, it must cease to
be Grace, and if it do, and become Sin, as it must if it partake of moral
pollution, then in whom will mortifying and sanctifying Grace be found? If
Grace remain what it was, and it was pure and good, as granted, as it had the
Spirit as its Author, then how comes it to be defiled? I do not deny, but there
is Sin, and much Sin, where Grace is, but then that this Sin pollutes Grace, so
soon as it is given, and so it becomes morally defiled, and partakes of the
nature of Sin, this I cannot reach, for I think that what is morally evil must
be sin, and what is morally polluted, must either be sin or sinful; and to say,
sinful Grace and Holiness sounds harsh.

But (it may be said) does not a true Christian exalt and set up his grace
above Christ in a time of temptation to spiritual pride, because of his grace,
if the temptation prevail? I Answer, in a time of temptation to pride, if the
temptation prevail, a Person that is a Christian, does exalt and set up
himself; but he cannot be said to set up and exalt his grace above Christ
hereby, nor indeed does he exalt grace at all, because this exalting and high
esteem of himself, is a depressing of his grace, and a putting a stop unto its
exercise, whereby he should exalt Christ: so that grace cannot be the cause of
this his pride, for it is against its nature; but the suppressing of grace, or
a putting a stop to its exercise, by the prevalency of the contrary corruption.

So then, you I say, a Man cannot be proud of his grace; I answer, he cannot be
proud of his grace, that has his grace in exercise, because a Person is never
more humble, nor is God in Christ ever more exalted by him, than when grace in
him is most exercised: for it is of the very nature of true grace to depress
self, lay low the Creature, and exalt God and Christ, so that the more of grace
and the exercise of grace, and the more of this.

But may not a Christian be proud of the exercise of grace? I Answer, he may be
lift up in himself, and proud of himself after the exercise of grace, not that
this exercise is the cause hereof, it may be an accidental occasion, but then
it is the abuse both of grace and the exercise of it. The truth is, Christians,
if you would be secured from spiritual pride, be kept humble, labor to be much
in the exercise of grace, fear not that the exercise of grace should lead you
to rest either in it, or in your self, for it is against the very nature of it,
the more of the exercise of grace, the more does the Soul take up its rest in
God through Christ.

It is very strange in some Men, O, say they, you must cast away all your
graces and sincere duties, and account them as dung, and rest wholly upon
Christ and his Righteousness, just as though there was such an inconsistency
and opposition betwixt Christ and the graces of his Spirit, and Holy Obedience,
as that Christ and his Righteousness could not be relied upon and trusted to
for acceptance, except we laid by grace and sincere duty as useless here, when
for my part it is a matter quite beyond my reach, to know how, or with what, or
in what to rely upon Christ and his Righteousness for my acceptance without
grace and the exercise of it in holy duties, for think I, if I rely upon Christ
and his Righteousness, I must have some way in which, and something by which I
must thus rely, or how can I? But it is like some Men will have neither, if
both grace and sincere duty must be accounted and cast away as dung here: O,
but say they, you must beware of resting upon your grace, and sincere duties
for your acceptance, and so of making a Christ of them; I Answer, for my part
I do not fear this, if I have but the truth and exercise of grace, for God has
given grace, and draws forth grace into exercise for this very end, that
Persons should rest upon and trust unto Christ's M diation for their
acceptance; and sure I am, grace where it is in act, will act according to its
nature, and this is to lead the Soul that has it toward God in Christ, as its
center and rest, and therefore if some Persons will amuse themselves and others
unnecessarily, I cannot help them: but I shall pray the Lord to measure my
Faith, and quicken Grace, and grant me the free exercise of it in every duty,
and then I know I shall be humble, advance Christ, and rest upon him as my only
Mediator to obtain for me the grant of all saving good, both Grace and Glory.
For in whose Hearts soever the Lord is pleased to suppress Pride, Hypocrisy,
and Formality; and keep them humble, sincere, and lively in the practice of
Piety; it is not possible but such should depend upon Christ both for pardon
for the iniquities which attend their best duties, and also for their
acceptance: for whose Hearts so ever are kept humble, sincere, and lively in
grace, and so in obedience, such Persons cannot choose but see and know their
own sinfulness, nothingness, spiritual emptiness, as considered morally in
themselves; and so on the contrary admire and adore the grace of God in Christ
Jesus by the Holy Spirit, for any thing of distinguishing grace and love
toward their Souls, and is this some resting in themselves, and in their own
graces and duties? The grace and love of God in Christ Jesus, certainly is the
most highly advanced in Heaven, and what is the reason? but because their grace
is perfected in the Spirits of just Men: hence therefore the nearer any Soul
upon Earth comes toward this Heavenly perfection, by the growth and exercise
of grace, the more humble that Soul will be, and the more God in Christ will be
adored and glorified in and by that Soul. John 15. 8 Herein is my Father
glorified, that ye bear much fruit: so shall ye be my disciples. So that while
some Persons caution others against resting in their grace: I say, beware of
Pride, Hypocrisy, and formality; and endeavor after the growth and exercise
of grace, and then no danger, while grace is in its growth and exercise. I wish
it be not the case of many Professors, that while they are pretending highly to
advance the Lord Jesus, and to rest in him, and trust solely unto him, they do
not content themselves much with formality, and take little care to see they
have that grace in truth and the exercise of it by which the glory of Christ is
exalted, and he rested in as the only Savior and Mediator; for sure I am, how
high soever their pretenses may be without true grace and fruitfulness in it,
they neither do nor can do that which they themselves pretend unto.

What some Men have been doing, and what their thoughts are as to matters of
this nature, I shall leave, only they seem strange to me; for after I have
affirmed that such as have the exercise of true Faith and other graces, it is
not possible while it is thus for them either to rest in Grace or Duty: they in
opposition have asserted that such Doctrine is the high way to make formalists
and hypocrites, but then you must know it was without proof, and it was like to
be so; for sure I am that such as perform duties without true Faith, and the
exercise of Grace, they have nothing wherewith to rest upon Christ or his
Mediation, and so must content themselves with the work done, and these are and
can be no other while it is thus but formalists and hypocrites. What it is to
some Persons I know not, but to me it is a Paradox, that true grace and sincere
obedience should lead off from Christ and God in him, and that Men should be in
danger thereby, while it is prevalent, to degrade Christ and set up themselves:
it is just as if a Man should say, such a Servant as is faithful, diligent in
his Master's service, and very obedient, his Master is in danger so long as he
is such to be robbed of his due honor by him, while yet the Master accounts it
a credit and honor unto him to have such a Servant, and loves him entirely,
and intrusts him with those secrets that he will not entrust with the rest,
though know the Servant does but what he ought to do in all this. And thus the
best and most faithful of God's Servants, after all they have done in God's
service, must account themselves unprofitable to God, because they make no
return of any thing unto him, but what they first have received from him
through Christ by the Holy good Spirit, though observe where there is
faithfulness they shall reap the profit, for God will for Christ reward his own
work in them, and that which is done faithfully by them. He that comes to God,
must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of such as diligently seek
him. Eliphaz. intimates, Job 22. 2. that though no Man can be profitable to
God, yet a wise Man, one that is spiritually wise, says Mr. Caryl, may be
profitable to himself. And he has this Observation upon the words, He that is
truly Wise, Godly, and Holy shall find fruit and benefit by it, we car, says
he, never want fruit our selves, while we are bringing forth fruit unto God,
all obedience, i. e. which is sincere, is attended with a blessing. For my part
with relation to what has been said, I do not think that any thing is
accounted by God morally unclean and filthy but Sin; and therefore must be yet
to learn that sincere obedience to the commands of the Gospel is Sin: if it be
said (as usual) it is so, as it is in us. I Answer, as it is in us so Sin
attends it, I grant as we are sinful and unclean in our selves, and this Sin
must needs be filthy and abominable but then that obedience which is the
obedience of Faith and Love considered in it self as abstracted from our Sin,
that this, I say, is filthy and abominable, I dare not affirm, but indeed must
deny: for the principle must needs be the work of the Spirit, and the
performance must be by the Spirit's assistance, and as such then the obedience
must be accepted of God. Now how that which is a work of the Spirit, and
performed by the assistance of the Spirit, and offered up to God by Christ
through his intercession can be filthy and abominable in it self, I shall leave
under consideration, whether is it rational to think that Christ will offer up
to God by his intercession that which is filthy? or suppose he should, whether
will God accept it. But it will be said (as before) it is only filthy in point
of Justification; I Answer, if it be not filthy in point of acceptance through
Christ and for his sake, it cannot be filthy in point of Justification so far
as it has its use and office there, for will God accept that for the sake of
Christ, which he will not so far as he accepts it, justify us upon? God
accepts of a Soul's sincere obedience, which is the obedience of Faith through
Christ, as it his Spirit's work, and a Conformity to the Gospel Law; now what
is Gods acceptance but his being pleased with the Soul and its service through
Christ, which well pleasedness implies his judging that Soul to be one that
has right, (as it is a sincere obedient Soul still for Christ's merits) to the
blessings promised unto such, and what is God's judging a Soul to have right
but his justifying of that Soul? It is very odd to hear some Persons in their
confessions casting away all that is in them, and all that is done by them in
the special service of God though sincere as dung, and yet profess they will
rest and depend upon Christ's Intercession for the acceptance of that which
they called and accounted dung; as though Christ would offer up to God on their
account by his intercession, or that God would accept that which is as dung,
and so filthy and abominable in a moral sense. And then further these very
Persons in the same duty will thank God for any ground of hope he has given of
the truth of a work of Grace in their Hearts, and the exercise of Grace in the
Duty, and the hopes they have had of the Spirits assistance, and yet all this
before in their confessions they cast away as dung. I do believe many have
meant well in all this, and were for the main good Christians; but plain it is
matters were not so well considered as they should have been here. Think of it,
we have all Sin to bewail which attends us in our best services, and to crave
pardon for through Christ; but then so far as our Hearts are sound and sincere,
and we find the exercise of humiliation, Faith, and love to God in the
performance of that service; we have ground to believe it shall be accepted of
God in Christ, and therefore may depend upon his Mediation for this very thing,
being encouraged by God's gracious promise, and if so, we neither may, nor
ought to look upon such a service in it self to be dung, and so an abomination
to God.

Now the reason that some give for accounting our Gospel holiness dung is this;
i. e. because of its infirmity and imperfection. This reason implies that all
that Grace and Holiness which is not a perfect conformity to the Law of
Innocence is as dung, and so abominable to God, and sure I am this looks odd
on it; for is not this Grace and Holiness a work of God? and is not every work
of God perfect in its kind? has not a perfection of parts been all along
granted? and is there not an Evangelical perfection consisting in sincerity,
which has been and is acknowledged by Divines? was it a strict legal
perfection, or a perfection consisting in sincerity that David intended when he
gave Solomon his Son the charge to serve God with a perfect heart? and so when
it is said of the People they offered with a perfect heart. 1 Chronicles. 29. 9. Was
that a strict legal perfection in Heart and Life that was so sweet to Hezekiah
in the reflection, after he had received the sentence of Death in himself. Isa
38. 3. And said, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before
thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in
thy sight: and Hezekiah wept sore. Mr. Caryl from that part of Job's
description. This Man was perfect, says, not that he had a legal perfection,
such a perfection as the Papists now contend for, and assert to be possibly
attainable, yea, actually attained by many in this Life: But, says he, the
perfection here spoken of is the perfection of sincerity, and he observes from
the words after his explication. First, It is sincerity that especially
commends us to God. Secondly, Says he, sincere and sound hearted Persons are
in God's esteem perfect Persons. It is not all that you can do, or all that you
can say, or all that you can suffer, or all that you can lose that can make you
perfect in the esteem of God without sincerity; add sincerity but to the least,
and it gives you the denomination of perfect. Thus far this Reverend Author,
which Doctrine some Men call Popish, so well are they acquainted what Popish
Doctrine is.

Some Men separate Faith and good Works, and speak of them so, as though there
might be good Works without Faith. Now for my part, I know no good Works
formally in a Theological sense, but such as are done in Faith, and I know
nothing done in Faith that leads not to Christ and God in him, and therefore
for Persons to speak of good Works as such separate from Faith, and to speak of
Faith leading the Soul off from Christ, is manifestly vain. Some Men will not
grant that Faith is a qualification of right to Christ, and his benefits, and
^et they say to justify is to make one legally just, or just in Law; so say I,
and can a Man be legally just without a legal righteousness? and is not that
which is a Righteousness a quality? how then can a Man be just legally and not
qualitatively? Find me a Man that ever was legally just, and yet not personally
just in the sense of that Law which accounted him just, and if personally just,
then primarily inherently just, and if personally just, just in his nature. As
I have said above, so I must here say again, let it be proved that Thomas is a
Person without the nature of a Man, or that the nature does not go to
constitute the Person; when I speak of Faith as the qualifying matter in a
Gospel sense, some Persons have inferred from hence, that this is all I intend
in Justification, whereas there is the form (as I have said) i. e. God's
imputation by his Law of Grace, his accounting such a Faith as accepts of
Christ as our great Propitiation, Head, and Teacher, by this his Law for the
sake of Christ's satisfaction and Merit, for Righteousness and forma dat esse.
Hence their inference is a mere fallacy, a dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter. Will the Gospel assert a Person's right to Christ and his benefits
before conformity thereunto? and when through grace any Person yields
Conformity, is it not a Gospel Righteousness? and is not a Gospel Righteousness
jus quoad eam legem, a right in that Law to Christ, Pardon, and Life promised?
and is jus ad rem, a right to a thing no qualification in a legal sense? if
not, then the consequence must be, that a penitent Believer as such
subjectively has no more actual right to Christ and Life according to the
Gospel promise then an impenitent Infidel; I speak not of a right by merit, but
both by qualification unto him that has merited, and unto Pardon and Life
merited by him for us.

Faith it self as it is the Soul's first consent to accept of Christ to be its
Propitiation, Head, and Teacher is really Gospel Obedience; Romans 16. 26. But
now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the Prophets, according to the
commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all nations, for the
obedience of faith, and that because it is the Soul's conformity to the Gospel
command. 1 John 3. 23. And this is his commandment, That we should believe on
the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, love one another, as he gave us commandment.
And Faith thus considered is that which unites to Christ, and the qualifying
matter which first gives the right. John 1. 12. But as many as received him, to
them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his
Name. And as Faith is the Soul's consent to accept of Christ, etc. this consent
includes the Soul's free engagement sincerely to be subject to what Christ
commands, so long as he continues it in the World, in a dependence upon his
power and faithfulness. And this sincere obedience performed according to the
Soul's first Covenant consent during its abode in this World, is that whereby
its right to Christ, and saving blessings is continued. Revel. 22. 14. Blessed
are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of
life, and may enter in through the gates into the City. And this is agreeable
to the mind of a Reverend and Judicious Divine, as he Illustrates it by a
Marriage Covenant including constant fidelity. And this Faith with him is a
condition as it relates to the Covenant, and a Righteousness in the sense of
the Gospel as it is the performance of the condition. And when he speaks of
Christ's Righteousness being the cause and matter of Justification, his
declared sense is the meriting matter, not that we might merit, but have that
by virtue of his merit, which the Gospel requires to give us right to Pardon
and Life, and what is this but our sincere consent, which is Faith?

Our Divines excluding good Works from the matter of Justification, spoke of
good Works with relation to the Law of Innocence, (and indeed Evangelical
Obedience will be no qualifying matter of right in the sense of that Law) and
that they did so is plain, forasmuch as their argument is, because they are
imperfect, perfect, therefore, (say they) it must be a perfect sinless
Righteousness, even the Righteousness of Christ that must justify, because no
other Righteousness can be adaequate to the Law, and we say the same with them,
that if we are justified by the Law of Innocence, no less than a perfect
sinless Righteousness would avail us here; but we are not, (as has been made
appear) but by the Gospel: and though I affirm that Faith is our personal
justifying Righteousness according to the Gospel Law, yet it does not follow
from hence, that Believers shall stand upon their points with God in judgment
according to his strict Justice; no, they must say with David Psalm. 143. 2.
And enter not into judgment with thy servant; for in thy sight shall no Man
living be justified. But I say upon conformity to the Law of Grace, they have
interest in Christ the Mediator, and a right to his Righteousness, upon which
they do depend and trust for the satisfaction of God's offended Justice, and
the answering the violated Law, for the procuring of their acceptance with
God, and a grant of all saving promised good: so that as to process in
judgment, my thoughts are that Believers shall not personally plead at all, but
Christ as their blessed Advocate for them: But then this he will do for them as
such who have been, and are found recti in curia Evangelica, right in the
Gospel Law, which still I say is and shall be the Rule of Judgment, Romans 2. 16.
In the day when God shall judge the secrets of Men by Jesus Christ, according
to my Gospel, and so justified by this his fixed constitution. The ground I
have is Matthew. 25. from Verse 34 to 41. Whereas some that they may hold their
ungrounded and unscriptural notions do confidently affirm that our Faith,
Repentance, and sincere Obedience has only the place of an Evidence; I do not
deny the Obedience of Faith to be an Evidence, but then I must not confound but
distinguish of its primary and secondary use and office, and the result of
both, Christ says, John 15. 14. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I
command you. Dare any Man say they were friends actually, before any subjection
to Christ? if not, was not this their subjection a conformity to the Gospel so
far as revealed? And is there any conformity to the Gospel without Obedience to
its commands? And is there any Obedience to the commands of the Gospel in
truth, which is not the obedience of faith? Those who will contradict, let them
prove, and then take the cause. If they cannot, then they must give us leave,
and if they will not, we must make bold to take it, it being allowed by one
that is greater than they to distinguish of the Obedience of Faith, as it
constitutes us friends through Christ's Mediation, continues us friends, and as
it is an evidence resulting from both, where God is pleased to give the light.

Say some, Job when accused by his friends for being an hypocrite, pleads his
own Righteousness as much as any; But as to Justification thereby before God he
speaks otherwise, Job 9. 20, 21. If I justified my self, mine own mouth shall
condemn me: if I say, I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse, Though I
were perfect, yet would I not know my Soul: I would despise my life. Now will
this, or the other really and in it self justify a Person from the charge of
hypocrisy before Men, that will not so far justify him from the charge or
accusation in God's account? when a Person is falsely accused of hypocrisy as
Job, must not he so far as he has a discovery of his sincerity, plead this to
justify him against that accusation, and if he be sincere is he not so in
God's account? and so clear of that predominant hypocrisy of which he is
accused; and does not God so far as he accounts a Person clear of a false
accusation justify him? Let Persons who contradict prove if they can, That
sincerity will only justify a Person from the charge or accusation of
hypocrisy before Men, while yet the accusation stand^ in full force before
God, and he accounts the Person who is in himself sincere to be a downright
hypocrite. The meaning then of the above quoted Text in Job seems to be this;
If I justify my self as one unjustly afflicted by God this very Justification
of my self and charge uttered against God would be sufficient to condemn me; if
I say I am in a strict sense legally perfect, and so have no Sin, for which God
may correct me, this very boasting would prove me perverse and sinful: yea,
though I were perfect, yet would I not know or look upon my self as such an one
whom God might not deal withal as he pleased considered as absolute Lord and
owner. Now to argue from this Text according to this clear Exposition that
Faith is no qualifying matter of right to Christ, Pardon and Life, is no better
than to argue a bacculo ad angulum, ut patet attendenti. From what I have
affirmed above, i. e. That there is no danger of a Soul's resting in duties,
where true Faith is in exercise, seeing the exercise of Faith will lead that
Soul to rest in Christ and God in and through him for acceptance; it has been
inferred, that such as have thoroughly imbibed this opinion, are if unregenerate
in the snare of Satan almost secure from conviction. And if this be so, then
these Men who draw up such a conclusion from the Doctrine have this to prove,
look where they will find a proof, that whoever holds that there is no danger
of a Soul's resting in duty where true Faith is in exercise, etc. he is in the
snare of the Devil if he be unregenerate, and like to be, for this Doctrine
will keep him there. And if this Doctrine be it that will keep an unregenerate
Person in the snare of the Devil, how can any one be out of his snare that
holds it; for if it be the Devil's snare, he that holds it must needs be in it:
If then a Person have been regenerate before, yet according to this assertion,
if he imbibe this Doctrine, it brings him back into the snare of the Devil, so
that he must fall from grace, falling from a regenerate state, and I for my
part, by these Men sentenced to the black Pit, and in their account there is no
hope for me; but by the grace of God in Jesus Christ, I do not dread their
Sentence. This intus existens prohibens alienum is very much to be lamented at
this day, seeing it opposes manifest truth.

I suppose the consequences that I have deduced from the common Doctrine of
Justification are very offensive to some, and they call them absurd. But I say
again, whosoever they be that holds Christ's Righteousness in it self to be
their very personal formal justifying Righteousness, the inferences are natural
from the Notion, and whereas they are called absurd, the contradiction betwixt
the abovesaid Doctrine and the inferences must be shown, or else when Persons
call them absurd they understand not what they say, Dans formam dat
consequentia formam. And has it not been generally affirmed, That the
Righteousness of Christ considered as Mediator, is made the Believers by
Imputation as really as if it had been wrought and performed by them: and it
being the sole matter of their Justification, they are made formally righteous
hereupon by God's Imputation? who knows not that has read any thing almost,
that the active and passive obedience of Christ by the most that have been
accounted Orthodox has been made the material, and God's Imputation the formal
cause of our Justification. And yet some have made a challenge, saying, Where
did any of our Orthodox Writers ever assert or intend that we were justified by
the very formal, personal, numerical, intrinsic Righteousness of Christ?
Whoever imagined that the Righteousness of Christ by Imputation is made ours
according to its universal value, but according to our particular necessity? I
Answer, Certainly tell I cannot, who these Persons mean by Orthodox Writers;
but this I know, that many of those Holy Men of God whose works are extant, and
who were very Orthodox in their Lives, and in the most of things in their
judgment also, yet held as much in this point of Justification as what is in
the challenge comes to Mary, says Mr. Norton in his Orthodox Evangelist, under
the Cross was more just imputatively than Christ, which was also true of every
believer then living. If Adam's peace had been perfect in case of his
fulfilling all Righteousness, then the Believer's Peace is perfect, who has
fulfilled all Righteousness in his surety; Page 324. In Justification, says
Mr. Tho. Vincent, we are not only acquitted from guilt, but accepted as
perfectly righteous in God's sight through the Imputation of Christ's perfect
righteousness. Supplement to the Morning Exercise. Page 716.

Having spoken of Pardon, the other part of our Justification (says Downham)
is that whereby God imputes unto every believer the righteousness of the
Mediator Jesus Christ, as if it were properly their own, and performed by
them, that being clothed therewith they may be perfectly righteous in God's
sight, and so obtain right unto everlasting life and happiness. Christian
Warfare. Lib. 2. Cap. 50. Page 271. But it is needless to take up time or fill
up Paper in quoting Authors, Dr. Manton might have served for all, whom I
account as moderate a Man as any that dissent, yet hear what he says upon
Hebr. 11. 4. Being united to Christ, we are interested in all his actions, as
if they were ours, for when we are one with him in the Spirit, we are
considered by God to be one with him in Law; therefore by union we are said to
put on Christ with all his personal merits and righteousness, upon this God
looks upon us as righteous, and this by the donation and application of
Christ's Righteousness, and this righteousness must be in justification, and is
such a righteousness as satisfies God's justice, and the Law. Now upon the
matter I ask, can God look upon us as righteous, and this by the donation and
application of Christ's Righteousness, which is such a Righteousness as
satisfies God's justice, and the Law; and put us on, upon union with Christ,
with all his personal Merits and Righteousness, and yet we not have the very
formal, personal, numerical, intrinsic Righteousness of Christ? What is not a
satisfactory and meritorious Righteonsness the very essential, formal, and
numerical Righteousness of Christ's Person as Mediator? And is not this
affirmed to be imputed in it self in our Justification, and to be in it self
our personal justifying Righteousness? If not, why am I and some others so much
opposed for the denying of it, and holding that it is only imputed unto us in
its fruit and effects? If they affirm it is imputed or accounted by God to be
in it self our personal justifying Righteousness; then I ask, how can it be
accounted ours in it self for our Justification, and not be one and the same
essential, formal, and personal Righteousness of Christ as Mediator? can that
be the Righteousness of Christ in it self, that is not one and the same
essential formal Righteousness which is Christ? If so, then we may say idem non
idem, the self same and not the self same, which is manifestly absured and
contradictory.

And whereas it is said further, whoever imagined that the Righteousness of
Christ by Imputation is made ours according to its universal value? I Answer,
he that says the Righteousness of Christ is imputed in it self, and not only in
its blessed effects; how can it be it self, and want its full value? let any
Man find me that can, a Righteousness of Christ as Mediator that is not
satisfactory to infinite justice, and meritorious of all good, and is not here
its full value? take away, as I have said above, it is satisfactory and
meritorious property from Christ's Righteousness as Mediator, which is its
value, and see then if that which remains can be the Righteousness of Christ. I
am afraid if some men were left to act according to their own notions, it would
be an odd sort of a Righteousness they would make at last to be their
justifying Righteousness, for according to what they say it cannot be Christ's,
and Faith it must not be, and what then must it be, it is well if they know
themselves, for sure I am I do not. And what can a Man think of that which
remains? which is, that the Righteousness of Christ is made ours by Imputation
according to our particular necessities. But that in the opinion of these
Persons God does divide and parcel out Christ's Righteousness one part to this,
and another part to that Believer; and that some have need of more, and some of
less, of it: and is this God's manner of the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness? According to these Men it is, but I say it is not; and for any
to assert such a thing is grossly absurd. Indeed I had like to have said this is
a notion but of yesterdays coining, but I find the substance both of this
latter, and the former part of that I have now spoken to by Mr. Burgess, in his
Book called, Vindiciae Legis, Page 135.

As for me, I say, I must either have interest in and a right unto the whole of
Christ's Righteousness, or I am undone; for no less than the whole will
satisfy God's justice for any Soul, or merit Pardon and Life for it: And when
I plead with God for Pardon, Life, and Acceptance, I plead the whole, and not
a part only of Christ's meritorious and satisfactory Righteousness; but then
observe, I plead it as it is properly Christ's as Mediator, and so in it self
incommunicable, though some Persons speak of its communication to us, which in
its blessed fruits I grant, but in it self I deny. For the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness in it self, and against the Imputation of Faith as it
unites to Christ, the greatest Argument is Authority, what Orthodox Divines as
they call them say; In Answer to which I shall say as the Divines did at the
late Portsmouth Disputation, My Religion is in the Bible, I own my self a
Protestant, and with such it is a fundamental or Principle, that the greatest
and best of Men are fallible, and therefore our assent is not concluded by mere
words of one or other name how great soever; we pay a very just deference to
the Worthies these our Adversaries intend, but we cannot think our selves
obliged to believe every thing they have said: we must not turn Papists yet,
and satisfy our selves with a mere implicit Faith, a judgment of discretion,
whether some will allow us or not, we must make bold to take; It is not very
rational for Men to be angry, because we will not shut our own Eves, and see
altogether with other Men's. He that is first in his own cause seems just, but
his Neighbor comes and searches him.

FINIS.
A DEFENSE OF THE Foregoing Doctrine, AGAINST SOME Glowing Opposition, Among
Neighbors, Ministers, And Others.

Printed in the Year 1700.

A DEFENSE OF THE Foregoing Doctrine, Against some glowing Opposition among
Neighbors, Ministers, etc.
PART I.
HAVING for avoiding the offense of good Men drawn up a Confession of my Faith,
and sent it abroad for the satisfaction of some that were overmuch concerned at
my delivery of something which disgusted them in my preaching: A Friend of mine
transcribed and sent the same Confession to one that goes under the Name of an
Antimonian Preacher (what he has that name for I know not) whom he knew, with
others of his professed who Friends had been hot against me: This being
received, he, whether with others I know not, took himself so far concerned as
that some time after whether by his doing or no I cannot tell, there came forth
in his Name a Manuscript consisting of 27 Articles of his Faith, and at the
back of those 25 Interrogatives or Queries, all which were intended in
opposition to me, though not by him sent directly and immediately to me, I
thought sometimes it would not be worth the while to meddle with such matter;
but finding my Name so frequently made use of by him, and the Doctrine I had
preached and writ even scorned and derided, I thought it no less than duty for
the good of others; i. e. for their better information in the truths of the
Gospel, to take a little notice of, and animadvert a little upon some of the
Articles of his Faith. In the first place,

1. I believe, says he, first, that the Justification and Salvation of poor
sinners had its beginning and rise in God's eternal purpose of love and grace.

Answer, I deny not God's eternal purpose of love and grace; but I am far from
thinking that any were justified from eternity, if that be intended by him in
this Article: and that there is no such thing, I have shown above. And though
God had an eternal purpose of love and grace; yet know God purposed to justify
and save none but by Jesus Christ. I do not believe that God did decree the
justifying or saving of any sinner without Christ.

2. I believe, says he, that God in his eternal purpose and counsel secret to
us, has freely from the good pleasure of his will chosen a certain number of
Persons to Salvation without respect to foreseen Faith, Repentance, or any
other work whatsoever as a condition of the grace of Election.

I grant that neither Faith, nor Repentance, nor any other work foreseen were
the Impulsive or moving causes of God's choice of any; the Impeller being only
God's free love and good pleasure: but then that God did choose to bring any to
Salvation who live under the Gospel (I speak of the Adult) without Faith,
Repentance, and sincere Obedience, this I deny.

3. I believe, says he, that in order to the manifesting and bringing forth of
the eternal purpose of grace and love for the Salvation of the Elect, a
Covenant of Grace was made, past, and agreed upon between God the Father and
God the Son in the early morning of eternity, etc.

I grant the Covenant of Redemption or Mediation had respect unto the Salvation
of sinners, and so the making of it with Christ was of Grace to them; but it
was not a Covenant of Grace and Mercy with him as Man's Mediator, who was by
virtue of this Covenant to fulfill the Law and satifie God's Justice. God
indeed deals with sinners in a way of Grace and Mercy for Christ's satisfaction
and Merit, but he did not deal in a way of Mercy and Grace with his Son as our
Mediator, but in a way of strict justice. Here observe, he confounds the
Covenant of Redemption with the Covenant of Grace.

4. Says he, I believe that this Covenant is a free, immutable, and
everlasting Covenant that stands fast in Christ with whom it was made, and in
whom all the conditions of it are found.

I grant (if he speak of the Covenant of Mediation and Redemption made betwixt
the Father and the Son) it was freely made on the part of both confederates; i.
e. the Father and the Son, and that Christ is the only performer of what was
required on his part in this Covenant: But I do not think that Christ is bound
unchangeably and everlastingly by this Covenant to be fulfilling the Law in a
state of humiliation and suffering of death upon the Cross, etc. and therefore
as to Christ's performing the conditions of this Covenant it was not immutable
and everlasting, though as to the benefits and blessed fruits thereof, the
enjoyment of which constitute everlasting happiness, it will be granted him it
is so, we do not deny but affirm the Covenant of Mediation was betwixt the
Father and the Son from before all time: But then that those Texts he
alleges, 2 Samuel 23. 5. Hebr. 13. 20. Ezekiel. 37. 26. Do speak of this Covenant
of Mediation betwixt the Father and Christ, this cannot, nor must not be
granted him, seeing they speak of a distinct Covenant from that; i. e. the
Covenant of grace, betwixt God and his People, as is express; and if he should
say this cannot be because of the term everlasting which is the Adjunct of this
Covenant, and there could not be a Covenant made betwixt God and his People
from everlasting distinct from that which was made with Christ, because they
only have a being in time: I Answer, it was agreed upon from everlasting
betwixt the Father and the Son, that for the satisfaction of Christ Sinners
should have Pardon and Life, upon a practical Faith; i. e. a Faith (as I have
before showed) inclusive both of Repentance and sincere Obedience, for all the
chosen of God were given to Christ in his purpose from eternity to be brought
in time to glory in this way, and upon these terms, and so in this respect the
Covenant is everlasting, though the publication of it was but in time, and the
actual conferring of the benefits; as the virtues of the Covenant of
Redemption, and Christ's performance, his actual performance of the conditions
of it were but in time, yet these did not hinder that Covenant from being
everlasting.

5. I believe, says he, that as Christ was chosen and constituted the Covenant
head of his People, and the Covenant made with him as the person undertaking,
so the Elect were therein given to him by the Father to be redeemed, as his
People, Children, Seed.

That there is a number according to the Election of Grace, I grant, and that
all the Elect were given by the Father to the Son in the Covenant of Mediation
to be redeemed by him; not because as he intimates they were in his People,
Children, and Seed^ by mere Election, but that they might be so by Redemption,
and the participation of the benefits thereof. Ephesians. 1. 4, 5. According as he
has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be
holy, and without blame before him in love. Having predestined us unto the
adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure
of his will. Titus 2. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good
works. I deny not Election, but do not lay that stress upon it, as to think the
chosen of God are thereby constituted his People and Children, as though
Redemption by Christ and the work of the Spirit of grace upon Souls were not
necessary. Christ is the head of the Covenant of grace made betwixt God and his
People in and by him, as the Purchaser, Efficient, Author, and the great mean
of conveyance of all good therein, I grant: but then that such a Covenant as
this should be made with Christ, this I deny; for this Covenant is a Covenant
of reconciliation, and it was not Christ, but poor miserable Sinners that
needed peace with God. Whatsoever this Man thinks, I am certain according to
the Scripture, that the Elect themselves before effectual vocation are enemies
to God both in Heart and Life, (I speak of the Adult) 1 Colos. 21, 22. And you
that were sometimes alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now
has he reconciled, In the body of his flesh through death, to present you
holy, and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight; and if so (as is
manifest) they must be so wrought upon by the blessed Spirit to give their
consent to be subject to God as his Children and Servants, before God after a
special sort be reconciled to them as his Friends, and is there not implied in
this their renouncing their former Masters, the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil, and devoting themselves to God and his service sincerely, upon which for
the sake of Christ, God becomes by promise their Sin pardoning God and
reconciled Father, and is not here a Covenant in form struck betwixt God and
them? of which Christ though he be the head in the sense mentioned above, yet
he cannot be a party.

6. I believe, says he, the Covenant of grace was made with Christ the second
Adam, and with all the Elect in him as his Children and Seed, As the Assemblies
Catechism says.

It must be granted him, the Assembly says the Covenant of Grace was made with
Christ as the second Adam, and in him with all the Elect as his Seed. But if it
be as they say, then that which they call the Grace of God manifested in the
second Covenant in their Answer to the following Question, must be given to
Christ, for with whom a Covenant is made, of what nature soever the Covenant
be, to him must be given that which is promised in that Covenant upon his
performance of the conditions: so that if the Covenant of Grace be made with
Christ; then God must provide and offer to him as a Sinner a Mediator, for this
is one part of the Grace of the second Covenant, and Christ must be obliged to
perform the condition of this Covenant which the Assembly say is Faith to
interest him in this Mediator, and this Covenant must promise and give the
Holy Spirit to Christ as the Elect to work in him that Faith with all other
saving Graces, and to enable him unto all Holy Obedience, as the evidence of
the truth of his Faith, and thankfulness to God, and as the way which he has
appointed him to Salvation. But seeing the Assembly do apply expressly this
Grace of the second Covenant to Sinners of mankind, the Covenant of Grace must
upon a practical Faith he made with them and not with Christ, unless this Man
will say, and prove this Reverend Assembly do contradict themselves. And if so,
it is a wonder he should make what they say in this particular an Article of
his Faith. I would have this considered by the way, i. e. did not Christ freely
engage himself to be a Mediator, and so oblige himself to fulfill the Law of
Innocence violated by Man, make himself a Sacrifice for Sin to satisfy God's
Justice, and so merit Pardon and Life; now was any of mankind in this same
Covenant, and bound under the same obligation with him; If any say yea, then
they must be under obligation as well as Christ to do and suffer, to satisfy
and merit Christ, if not, then how could Christ and any of mankind with him be
in the same Covenant? for to be in the same Covenant, must needs be to be under
the same obligation. If it be said Christ bound himself freely to do and suffer
all this for us; we deny it not, but what is this to prove, That Christ and we
were in the same Covenant, and so bound in the same bond? Let it be proved,
that ever Christ was under a Covenant of Grace, and that he was dealt with in a
way of Mercy, and not in a way of pure Justice; and will any say that God's
dispensations toward his People are in a way of justice, and not in a way of
Mercy?

7. I believe, says he, that as Adam was a public Person, and common head in
whom his posterity were to stand or fall, Romans 5. so Christ as a common head
and public person is the head and Representative of all the Elect in whom
their state and standing is sure and safe, so that they shall never fall nor
finally perish.

I grant all that are given by the Father to the Son shall come, and that being
brought over effectually they shall have persevering grace. John 10. 27, 28,
29. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, they follow me. And I give unto
them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them
out of my hand. My Father which gave them me, is greater than all; and none is
able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand. And that this their standing is
secured by the merits and intercession of Christ, Luke 22. 31, 32. And the Lord
said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has desired to have you, that he may sist
you as wheat. But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: and when
thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. And that Christ is the Head of his
Church, which is called his Body, I deny not: But then that Christ was a
public Person in such a sense, as that the Law of Innocence accounted what
Christ did, the Elect did, and what he suffered they suffered, I deny; and have
showed the vanity of this above: And though this Man speak not out plainly, yet
this seems to be at the bottom, and the comparison betwixt Christ and Adam will
afford him no such thing. I grant that as all mankind were seminally in Adam as
the common root, so in that respect they fell in him, as the prime progagator
of a guilty and corrupt nature to his posterity, to all that were to proceed
from him by natural Generation, yet that if Adam had stood, and had propagated
an Holy Seed; that this Seed thus propagated had been secured in their standing
by their Parent standing, and had not any of them fallen, this I want a word
from God for its warrant, I dare not make it an Article of my Creed: Let him
find me a promise in the Bible that runs thus, or to this purpose either
expressly or implicitly; Adam, if thou keep thy standing, then an Holy Seed
proceeding from thee, by virtue of thy standing shall most certainly stand too,
and then I will be of the same Faith with him, but until then he must excuse my
dissent, for this is certain to me, that though Adam had stood and propagated
an Holy Seed, yet that Seed would have been under the same Law with their
Parent, and must have performed in their own Persons the same obedience that
Law required of their Parent, or else the Law would have condemned them,
notwithstanding the obedience of their Parent; see then if his obedience would
have secured their standing without their own personal obedience; and that all
mankind should have performed a personal constant obedience to the Law of
Innocence, suppose Adam in his own person had never fallen, this we want proof
for. And so that Christ has secured by what he has done, and suffered the
state and standing of all the Elect, without obedience to the Law of Grace, (I
speak of the Adult) i. e. though they live and die impenitent, disobedient
Infidels, I deny: for all such shall most certainly be brought to Heaven in the
way of Repentance, Faith, and sincere Obedience, and the reason is because the
Lord Jesus Christ has merited this for them; but let it be proved by them that
can, that Adam besides his own Justification had he continued Obedient, would
over and above have merited assuredly grace and strength for the infallible
standing of all his posterity, which this Man's notion, and the notion of
others with him upon this point implies. Men talk against, and decry works of
Superarogation holden by the Papists, and see not how near they come to this
themselves in attributing so much to a mere Man, and to his Righteousness.

8. I believe, says be, that the Lord Jesus Christ the second Person in the
blessed Trinity did when the fullness of time was come according to God's
purpose and promise (for the fulfilling of the conditions, and bringing forth
of the Grace and Life of this Covenant) take upon himself the Nature, Flesh,
and Humanity of the Elect, and become God-man, having both Natures, in the
unity of his Person, the Godhead and Manhood.

I grant that Christ the Son of God did in time take upon him Man's Nature, and
united that Nature into one and the same Person with his Divine Nature: but he
would have done well if he had shown first, the difference betwixt Christ's
Nature, Flesh, and Humanity, considered as Man, and secondly, how the Nature,
Flesh, and Humanity of the Elect differ from these in other Men.

9. I believe, says he, according to the Scriptures that as Christ the
Covenant head of the Elect was made under the Law, so he was thus made and
constituted in the room and stead of his Elect.

There is nothing in this Article of his Creed, but what I have spoken to
before.

10. I believe, says he, according to Scripture (he should have said so far as
I understand it) that the Father by way of Imputation laid all the iniquity and
sin of the Elect upon Christ the Son of his love, that he was made sin in a
Curse for them, and that he bore their sin in his own Body upon the Tree.

My reply is, that Christ who suffered for us was an Holy, Innocent Person,
Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, separate from Sinners; He knew no Sin, neither was
guile found in his mouth. The Sacrifices under the Law they were to be without
blemish, and without spot, and as such were types of the sinless purity of
Christ the great Sacrifice. He by the eternal Spirit offered up himself without
spot to God. The Apostle Peter says, the just suffered for the unjust, and we
are redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish,
and without spot. Therefore Christ as our Mediator did not take our Sin upon
him, so as to be accounted by his Father (as some say) guilty of our faults and
offenses; nor did God the Father account and reckon him as such, indeed by his
free and voluntary undertaking to satisfy offended justice for us, he obliged
himself to suffer for our Sins; but he never so took our Sins upon him, as to
be accounted and esteemed by God one that was wicked, or a Sinner; for if God
his Father had thus accounted him, as such he must have hated him, but did God
hate Christ, either in his own Person, or as our Surety? Surely no. The
contrary is plain; this is my beloved Son, and we are said to be accepted in
the beloved. He was the Holy and Just one in his sufferings, yea, as our
Mediator, for he suffered as such.

Whereas then it is said, Isaiah 53. that God laid upon him the iniquities of
us all, and by the Apostle Peter, that he bore our Sins in his own body upon
the tree, we are to understand by sin and iniquity, punishment; for Christ's
satisfactory sufferings were a punishment, though not inflicted upon him,
considered as a Sinner, or transgressor of any Law, but voluntarily undertaken,
and suffered by him in our place and stead for the making our atonement. A
punishment Christ's sufferings were, but yet not with relation to any Sin in or
upon himself, as our Mediator: but with relation to our Sins, which were the
remote occasion and procuring cause of his suffering, though not as God did
account them to be his, but as he voluntarily suffered for them, which would
not have been, had we never sinned. Christ was not immediately obliged by or
upon our sinning to suffer whether he would or no, as a surety in the same bond
is immediately obliged in Law to discharge the debt whether he be willing or no
in case of the failure of the principal Debtor. No, for it so, his undertaking
to suffer would not have been in its nature voluntary and free, which
undoubtedly it was. By this little, Readers, you may understand in what sense
Christ's sufferings were a punishment, when therefore you read of our
Iniquities and Sins being laid upon Christ, you are to understand that
punishment which he suffered for us in the sense above. It is like some Men at
this day do esteem Christ to have been stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted,
as he was reputed by God to be the greatest Sinner, but God tells such that he
was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed
Isaiah 53. 3, 4, 5. Now whereas it is said according to our Translation in Isa.
53. 6. The Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all, we shall find the
like in very many places of Scripture translated punishment. To instance in
some. Levit. 26. 41. If then their uncircumcised Hearts be humbled, and they
then accept of the punishment of their iniquity ^^NR^^ the very same word with
that in Isaiah, translated iniquity is translated punishment, only the affix is
added. In 1 Samuel 28. 10. Saul speaking to the Witch of Endor, assures her that
no punishment should happen unto her for that thing, uses the very same word
^^NR^^ which we have in Isaiah, translated iniquity. But it may be said, what
will you say to that Isa. 53. 10. When thou shall make his Soul an offering for
Sin? The word translated an offering for Sin is ^^NR^^ guilt, and so some read
the words when thou shall make his Soul guilt, or guilty, and does not this
clearly hold forth that Christ had our Sins translated upon him, and was really
reputed the Sinner, the guilty Person instead of the Elect? I Answer no, for it
is manifest the trespass offering was denominated or called ^^NR^^ guilt, not
because it was guilty, or reputed so to be by God, but because by its Blood as
a typical Sacrifice, it was to expiate and make atonement for the Sin and
guilt of the Person for whom it was to be a Sacrifice, as many things both in
our common acceptance, and in the Holy Scriptures receive their denomination
from their end and use. And further the Learned tells us when this word ^^NR^^
is applied to Christ, and to the offerings for trespass as types of him, it
signifies an expiatory Sacrifice, a Piaculum, a Sacrifice to atone for heinous
crimes. These words in Isaiah, when thou shall make his Soul an offering for
Sin, Musculus reads thus, Si posuerit, vel posita fuerit anima ejus ^^NR^^,
sacrificium pro peccato; i. e. if he shall lay down his Soul, or if his Soul be
laid down a Sacrifice for Sin: And in his application of the Text, he further
says, Utitur Propheta voce legali ^^NR^^ quae in Levitico, cap. 5. pro
oblatione sumitur, quae offerenda erat pro delicto. The Prophet uses this Law
term ^^NR^^ which in Levit. 5. is taken for an oblation, which was to be
offered for a fault or trespass. And he goes on, cum ergo^hic dicit ubi
posuerit se anima ejus ^^NR^^ nihil aliud intelligit, quam sacrificium pro
peccato; fecit hoc Christus in cruce, in qua semet ipsum Deo Patri pro peccatis
nostris sacrificicium expiatorium obtulit. When therefore he says in this
place, when his Soul shall make her self ^^NR^^ he intends no other, but a
Sacrifice for Sin, and this Christ performed on the Cross, upon which he
offered up himself an expiatory Sacrifice to God the Father for our Sins.
Another thus upon the words, cum subjecerit seipsum paenis, when he shall
subject himself to punishments or sufferings. And Buxtorf himself a Person
familiarly acquainted both with the Rites and Dialect of the Jews reads this
word ^^NR^^ oblatio pro reatu, an offering for guilt, or for the guilty.

But it is said, Verse 12th he bore the sins of many, and the word in the
Original translated Sin is, ^^NR^^ and where do you find that this is
translated punishment?

I Answer. In Zechar. 14. 19. This shall be the punishment of Egypt, the word
in the Hebrew for punishment is ^^NR^^. And let it be observed, this very word
translated punishment here is the very same in form with that which is
translated Sin-offering, denoting that it was so called because it suffered and
was offered up for, and instead of the Sinner to atone for him. And thus and
upon this account did Christ the great Sacrifice suffer, and was offered up, of
whom all the Legal Sacrifices were types.

But it may further be said, was not Aaron the High Priest a type of Christ our
great High Priest?

I Answer, Yes. If so then, it is said that Aaron as a type of Christ was to
bear the iniquity of the holy things of the Children of Israel; which imports
that Christ was to have the Sins of all the Elect charged upon him, and be
accounted by God the Sinner.

I Answer, It is a manifest mistake in this, sc. that the Persons of Believers
are accounted by God clean, and their services clean and holy, by their having
the Sins of those services and duties laid and charged by God upon Christ, and
reputed his. But it is manifest that the Persons of Believers and their duties
are accepted by God, and the Sins that attend them and their duties pardoned
upon the account of Christ's Sacrifice, his holy Merits, and spotless Mediation
and Intercession. If Christ take away the filthy garments of his People, so as
I have shown, when they approach the presence of God, and rebuke Satan for
them, I dare not say, let them that will, that either God or he puts them upon
himself. And it is to be observed, the word ^^NR^^ translated to bear, Exodus
28. 38. has various acceptations in Scripture, and among the rest it
signifies, deportavit, he has born away or exiled, and not only so, but
condonavit, he has pardoned, Numb. 14. 19. Pardon, I beseech thee, the
iniquity of this People according unto the greatness of thy Mercy, and as thou
have forgiven this People from Egypt, even until now. The word in the Hebrew
translated thou have forgiven, is ^^NR^^ the same as to the root we have in the
Text before quoted; so that the intent of the Holy Spirit therein comes to
this; that the Lord Jesus Christ, our great High Priest, and so our
Intercessor, by the sweet Incense of his Mediation obtains Pardon for all the
Sins and iniquities which attended the Holy things of his People; so that all
their iniquities are hereby born away, and as it were exiled, and their
spiritual performances made acceptable to God. But say some further, the word
translated Sin^ offering we find to be, ^^NR^^ which signifies the Sin.

I grant this word in Scripture is translated Sin, where it can admit of no
other acceptance: But then when it is applied to that which was to be
Sacrifice for Sin; if these our Adversaries must needs have it read in the
abstract in this acceptance Sin: I would have them to consider, it may be more
fitly translated expiation than Sin; and the reason for this is, because as
Buxtorfius observes, the Verb from whence this Noun comes, in the same
Conjugation Pihel signifies mundare, purgare a peccato, expiare, i. e. to
cleanse, purge from Sin, and expiate, or make expiation. And so we find the
word used, Levit. 14. 52. And he shall cleanse the house with the blood of the
bird, etc The word for he shall cleanse is ^^NR^^, which I hope none that
understand themselves will read, he shall Sin the House with the Blood of the
Bird. And we find the same word translated to bear loss, Genesis 31. 39. That
which was torn of beasts, I brought not unto thee, I bear the loss of it
^^NR^^, which Buxt orfius renders thus, Ego expiabam illud, id est, luebam pro
illo. I did expiate that, i. e. I suffered for it, I paid for it, or made
satisfaction. Now I would gladly know of them we have to deal with, how did
Jacob make expiation or satisfaction, what by taking upon him the form of the
Beast that tare it, or by sustaining the Person of the Thief that stole it? or
was this at all requisite? would this have given any satisfaction to Laban, let
Men consider. We have indeed torn as it were the Law of God by our
disobedience, and offended the justice of God, now our Lord Jesus Christ did
not expiate or make satisfaction in our stead by sustaining our Persons as
Rebellious and disobedient, and as an offender of justice; but as Jacob
suffering for us, and making full recompense. These observations have been
occasioned to be taken by me on another account, but do well serve my turn here.

Touching that Text by the Man I have to deal with alleged; i. e. 2 Corinthians.
5. I have above spoken somewhat unto it.

This Assertion that Christ took our Sins upon him is grounded upon a false
supposition, which is, that Christ did not only take our nature upon him, but
also our legal Person; i. e. our Persons in a Law sense. Now if Christ was the
same Person in the sense of the Law with Sinners: then there could be no such
thing as has commonly been affirmed; i. e. Christ's active perfect obedience
to the Law, for the Law of Innocence accounts us all as transgressors, and if
it account Christ also a transgressor, which it must do, if he be the same
Person with us in Law sense, where then shall we find his active perfect
obedience thereunto? He that is looked upon to be of the same Person legally
with him that breaks the Law cannot be looked upon as a perfect obeyer and
fulfiller of the Law; what can be more plain?

Touching the passive obedience of Christ, i. e. his sufferings, if Christ be
accounted the same Person with Sinners in the sense of the Law, then his
sufferings could not be a satisfaction, and if not, then not accepted by God
for that purpose. And the reason is, if they had been the sufferings of a
Person accounted by God as our Mediator a Sinner, they would have been the
sufferings of a Sinner, for God judges always according to truth, for the Law
does and ever did since the fall account us Sinners, and if Christ be the same
Person with us in the sense of the Law, then by the Law he must be looked upon
as a Sinner, and if as a Sinner, then his sufferings must be accounted by God
the sufferings of one that was a Sinner, and if so, how could they be a full
satisfaction to Justice? But that Christ's sufferings were not the sufferings
of one accounted by God a Sinner, it is plain from Ephess. 5. 2. And walk in
love, as Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering
and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor. And Hebr. 9. 14. How much
more shall the blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit offered himself
without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works, to serve the living
God.

But suppose I should grant these Men what they would have; i. e. That the Lord
Jesus Christ did perfectly obey, suffer, and satisfy in our legal Person,
which I have proved could not be; I hope they will give me leave to show them
what will follow upon it, and after this I shall leave them to determine
whether this notion can be right or no, if they will but follow the conduct of
Scripture. If therefore the Lord Jesus Christ did perfectly obey, suffer, and
satisfy in our legal Person, that is, the Law accounting him the same Person
with us; then it must follow that even the Elect themselves in the sense of the
Law, did perfectly obey, suffer, and satisfy. And if they (Christ obeying and
suffering in the sense of the Law) did obey, suffer, and satisfy in him in
their own Persons, then these things must follow according to the Law.

1. It must discharge them from all Sin, as it accounts them perfect fulfillers
of it in their legal Person.

2. It must discharge them from all obligation to punishment, as it accounts
them to have suffered and satisfied in their legal Person.

3. In the sense of the Law of Innocence (according to these Men) it must be
injustice in God to charge any Elect Soul either before or after conversion
with Sin, and he cannot now afflict them for Sin, but must be bound in the
sense of these Persons to give Eternal Life to the Elect for perfect legal
obedience performed in the account of the Law in their own Persons, as Christ
and they (say these Men) are one legal Person.

But it may be said, was not Christ our Surety? Yes. Did he not undertake as
our Surety to satisfy for our Sins? Yes. And was not Sin debt? No. It was that
which brought us under the obligation of suffering, but it was not our debt:
that is a Man's debt which he is under obligation to pay, but were either we or
Christ bound to pay Sin? I trow not.

Does not Christ cry out upon the Cross, because of the Father's forsaking him?
I Answer, though he did, this was no total withdrawment of Divine favor and
love; for God loved Christ as our Mediator while upon the Cross, but a
withdrawment of his sensible comforting presence, and as a Reverend Divine
says, letting ^ut upon his Soul a deep afflicting sense of his displeasure
against Man for Sin, which was his penalty as he was our Surety, and suffered
in our stead a Sacrifice for Sin.

But again say they, could Christ be afflicted in his Soul for the Sin of Man,
if it was not accounted his own, and so laid upon him? I Answer, can we think
that Men can be ignorant this might very well be in this case, and was so? when
many of the Servants of God were greatly afflicted for the Sins and Miseries of
others, as David and Jeremiah, and those that were mourners in Jerusalem,
though they were not as Christ, to suffer in their stead for them.

If they say, they do not think that God accounted his Son in himself to be a
Sinner, but as he was our Surety. I Answer, If God did account Christ as our
Surety, a Sinner, and so guilty, pray! what did he account him guilty of as our
Surety? there are these things in Sin, the Act, the Pollution, and the
Punshment. If then God the Father did account Christ as our Surety guilty of
the Act, then he must account him the actual Sinner. If of the Pollution, then
one that was morally impure in his Nature. If of the Punishment, so far as it
includes his suffering to satisfy for our Sins, and make our atonement from
his own free and voluntary obligation, this I grant. For if this were so that
God the Father did account our Lord Jesus Christ considered in relation to us
as Mediator to have been guilty of the Sins of all the Elect; then as such (as
I have said) he must have been odious to God, and if so, how could those acts
respecting our Redemption and Reconciliation performed by him as our Surety or
Mediator have been of a sweet smelling savor to God? It would be as much as
to say, God the Father loved superlatively his Son in himself: but abhorred him
considered as Man's surety and Mediator; and if so, those acts which were of
the greatest moment, performed by him in this relation to us, such as giving
himself to be a Sacrifice, must have been odious to God; and if so, where must
we state our hopes of Salvation? It is certainly a vain and ungrounded
distinction to say that God accepted of the act of Obedience as they were acts
of the Person without Sin, but condemned him as standing in the relation of our
Mediator as a Sinner; ^eeing that whatever acts are relative acts, those also
are the acts of the Person standing in that relation, for actiones sunt
suppositorum. And besides the very typical Sacrifices (which the Adversaries
allow) are a clear evidence of this; i. e. that Christ the great Sacrifice, and
our Sacrifice to be offered for exp^ation and making atonement must not be so
much (under that notion) as reputed a Sinner, much less the greatest Sinner;
for these were to be without blemish and without spot, (as has been said) and
as such offered up unto God. Surely they will not say here, they were to be so
considered in a Physical, but not in a Legal sense; for God did repute them so
in a Legal sense, seeing they were appointed by the Law for the Peoples typical
expiation, we find Levit. 6. 25. the Sin-offering by God is called most Holy;
or as the words in the Original are, Holiness of Holiness ^^NR^^ and the LXX
^^NR^^; now how dare any Man contradict the word, and say, these were by God
accounted legally unclean, what reputed by God Holiness of Holiness, legally
most holy; and yet also uncleanness of uncleanness, legally most unclean? Let
them reconcile this that can. And if so be those typical Sacrifices were
accounted by the Lord legally most Holy; then undoubtedly the Antitype the
great Sacrifice for expiation; i. e. our blessed Lord Jesus, must be so
accounted in the offering up of himself. As Christ's Righteousness (say some)
is imputed to us, so our Sins are imputed to Christ. They that affirm this,
some of them say, that it is not only passive, but the habitual and active
Righteousness of Christ which is imputed. Pol. Syntagma. p. 457. If therefore
our Sins be imputed to Christ, as Christ's Righteousness in his sense is
imputed to us, then from this Doctrine it must follow, that our habitual and
actual Sins must be imputed to Christ; i. e. both the corruption of our nature,
and all our actual transgressions, seeing then that to impute signifies to
judge, account, or reckon, the sense of these Persons must be, that God did
account and reckon the Lord Jesus Christ as our Surety or Mediator to be both
an habitual and actual Sinner, and was Christ so in God's account? Christ is
said to be made a Curse for us, as Mr. B. says, by suffering as a Sacrifice
for us a cursed death, not that he was under either in himself, or as our
Mediator a Spiritual or Eternal Curse, or as some may mean, cursed by the Law
as a Sinner, which is all one, for the Law of Innocence justified him.

11. I believe, says he, that Christ by his obedience active and passive in
his holy life and bitter death of the Cross has completely fulfilled the Law,
and perfectly satisfied the offended justice of God for all the Elect.

I Answer, Christ did both obey and suffer, he yielded conformity to the Law,
and suffered and satisfied the offended justice of God for Sinners, and this in
their place and stead. The sufferings of Christ were a full satisfaction to an
offended God, and the principal way and means for the securing the Glory of his
Justice and Holiness, and for the manifestation of the Glory of his Wisdom, and
Mercy in the Salvation of Sinners: But then that Christ did properly fulfill by
his sufferings the threat of the Law of Innocence, which we had viola^ed, this
I deny: for if so, then he should have suffered the same Spiritual and Eternal
as well as Corporal punishment in kind which was due unto transgressions; and
if so, where had our Redemption been? our Divines generally have said, Christ
did not suffer the Idem, or the same that we should have suffered, but the
Tantundem, what did avail, yea, infinitely avail to make satisfaction for our
offenses; for any Man to say the Laws threat was properly and perfectly
fulfilled in Christ's suffering, it includes a contradiction, for eternal
sufferings were included in the Laws threat; but seeing Christ's sufferings
were long since finished, they cannot be said to be eternal: Now for any Man to
affirm that Christ properly and perfectly fulfilled the Laws threat without
suffering such a death as the Law threatened, if it be not a contradiction, it
looks as like one as ever Man saw. But of this I shall say no more, having
spoken of it above. Only there is this which seems intimated further in this
Article of his Faith; i. e. that what Christ did and suffered was only for the
Elect, and that others have no benefit thereby; which if intended by him, I
must make bold to tell him, it is a great mistake as I have also shown above:
for I do not think that any in the World enjoy any Mercy, but upon the account
of Christ's undertaking, upon which he is said to be the Savior of all Men,
though in a special distinguishing sort of those that believe.

12. I believe, says he, that the obediential righteousness of Christ is by
the act of God's free grace counted, imputed, and reckoned to the Elect as the
material formal cause of their Justification in the sight of God, and yet we
are not Godded with God, nor Christed with Christ, (as such an one says,
mentioning me) for I believe, says he, that in Christ there is four sorts of
righteousness; three of which cannot without blasphemy be said to be imputed
unto us. First, there is the righteousness of his Godhead. Secondly, Of his
Manhood. They are Essential to his two natures and cannot be imputed. Thirdly,
The righteousness of both natures united together in one Person, which is the
righteousness that qualifies, fits, and makes him meet for the Work and Office
of a Mediator, and is Essential to his Office as such, and thus he is God's
righteous Servant, Jesus Christ the righteous, a faithful High Priest.
Fourthly, There is the righteousness of his obedience in his life and death, to
the holy and just Law of God, and this is that righteousness which is imputed
to sinners for Justification.

Now he has led us into the clouds to purpose, here is darkness and confusion
with a witness, yea, and such as we have his own testimony for, as will be
manifest.

1. He intimates the Elect are justified, but whether as such only while in a
state of impenitency and infidelity, he tells us not. If he intend they are
while in that state, then they must be justified and condemned at the same
time, for he that believes not is condemned already, John 3. 18.

2. He says that Christ's Righteousness is counted, imputed, and reckoned to
the Elect as the material formal cause of their Justification; and yet, says
he, we are not Godded with God, and Christed with Christ. I grant indeed
neither he nor any other whoever they be, are or ever shall be Goded with God,
or Christed with Christ: but that this must be the consequence (which is the
thing I say) if they hold the Doctrine of being formally, personally Righteous
with Christ's Righteousness, this I have given reason for above.

Touching his distribution of Christ's Righteousness into four sorts, his first
and second sort supposes that the humane nature of Christ did once exist
separate from the Divine, seeing he says the third sort is the righteousness
of both natures united. Now if the humane nature after it did exist, never did
exist but in Union with the Divine; what ground can there be for this
distinction; First, The Divine Righteousness; Second, The Humane; Third, The
Righteousness of both Natures united. I would know when and where they were
disunited after the humane nature had once an existence? I deny not that
Christ's Righteousness as God is distinct from his Righteousness as Man, as
well as humane nature is distinct from the Divine, though united in one and the
same Person: But this is that I desire to know when or where there was a
Righteousness of both these natures considered as existing disunited? If not,
to what purpose then is that which he calls his two first sorts of Christ's
Righteousness; I mean the distinction of his Righteousness into Divine and
Humane from the Righteousness of both natures united? And how can he make three
sorts, go we upon his own supposition? for he says there is the Righteousness
of Christ as God, and his Righteousness as Man, and then the Righteousness of
both natures united. Now if he consider the natures as divided, and if again as
united; He has but still the Righteousness of the Divine, and the
Righteousness of the Humane nature, which righteousness is but twofold, where
now is his third sort, or where will he find it? His fourth sort of Christ's
Righteousness (as he calls it) is his obedience in Life and Death, and this,
says he, is the Righteousness which is imputed: Now as he makes this a fourth
sort, and so specifically distinct from the other, then this obedience of
Christ according to him must neither be his righteousness as Man, nor his
righteousness as God, nor his righteousness as God and Man united; for it is
blasphemy, quoth he, to say that any of these sorts of Righteousness as he
calls them are imputed; and if Christ's Obedience in Life and Death be none of
these, what or whose Righteousness must it be? it cannot (according to what he
says) be the Righteousness of our Lord Jesus, for he is both God and Man, and
his Righteousness then must be the Righteousness of that Person who is both God
and Man: And if this Obedience in Life and Death, which he says is the
Righteousness imputed, be neither the Obedience of the Divine, nor the
Obedience of the Humane nature as he supposes in separation; nor the Obedience
of the Divine and Humane nature in union, then it is manifest it cannot be
Christ's according to his Doctrine. Has not this Man think thou Reader, run
divisions to a p^rpose, in Christ's Righteousness until he has who^ly cut off
and cast away from him his active and passive Righteousness, besides his
dividing the Righteousness of his Divine and Humane nature which are but two
into three. Consider, consider, I beseech you, you that are so stiff for such
an Imputation of Christ's Righteousness as to be formally in your own Persons
righteous with it, what this Doctrine leads to, shut not your Eyes against
clear light; The Lord make it a conviction unto you, when you hear that Men
will have the active and passive obedience of Christ to be that they are
materially and formally righteous with; and yet will not have this active and
passive obedience to be either the righteousness of Christ as God, or the
righteousness of Christ as Man, or the righteousness of Christ as God and Man,
and so to be none of Christ's Righteousness at all. So that now according to
this Man, we must have a righteousness, and a righteousness imputed for our
Justification, which is the active and passive obedience of some Person, but
whose I cannot tell, seeing he excludes the righteousness of Christ as God,
Man, Mediator, saying it cannot without blasphemy be said to be imputed to us,
and without doubt the active and passive obedience of Christ was a
righteousness, and the righteousness of Christ God, Man, Mediator; and such a
righteousness as was Essential to his Office, seeing he would not have been a
Mediator without it.

But some may say Christ's active and passive obedience was essential to the
execution of his Office as Mediator, but not to the constitution. I Answer,
yes, to the constitution, as an actual and perfect Mediator, so far as
respected his undertaken work both upon Earth, and now in Heaven, Heb. 5. 8, 9
Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered.
And being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal Salvation unto all them
that obey him* Heb. 9. 14. 15. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who
through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, to purge your
Conscience from dead works to serve the living God? And for this cause he is
the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of death for the redemption
of the transgressions that were under the first Testament, they which are
called, might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore
he is able also to save them to the utmost, that come unto God by him, seeing
he ever lives to make intercession for them.

But it may further be said (for I shall deal fairly, and let him have what
advantage upon the point he can) He speaks only of the righteousness of both
natures united in Christ, and intends this is not imputed.

I Answer, there cannot be the imputation of the active and passive obedience
of Christ in his sense without the Imputation of this, for consider we his
obedience in Life and Death, as the obedience of one who is not God, Man
united, and so essentially, infinitely righteous as God, and perfectly in his
nature righteous as Man, that obedience could not be the obedience of Christ,
but if we consider his obedience in Life and Death, as the obedience of one who
is God, Man united in one Person, and so essentially infinitely righteous as
God, and perfectly in his nature righteous as Man; then if it be imputed in
this Man's sense, it must be imputed as the obedience of such an one; and how
can the righteousness which constituted him a ^it Mediator not be imputed;
when the acts as they are the acts of such a Person, a Person so and so
qualified are imputed? And were Christ's acts any further satisfactory and
meritorious than they were the acts of such a Person as he was? If not, then
take away that which qualified and made him meet to be a Mediator, and see
then if his acts in obeying and suffering can be satisfactory and meritorious;
and if the Persons have satisfactory and meritorious acts imputed unto them in
this Man*s sense, then that which makes them such they must also have imputed.
And if they say, they have not the righteousness of Christ as satisfactory and
meritorious imputed, then they must not have it imputed at all, and
consequently deny all imputation of Christ's Righteousness in any sense, which
I do not; for (as I have said above) if we could take away from Christ's
Righteousness, (which we cannot) it is satisfaction and Merit, that which
remains with respect to our Justification and Salvation will be none of his.

But further, says he, it is the acts, works, doings, and obedience of this
blessed Mediator that are imputed and counted to the Elect for their
justifying Righteousness. Mark, if God do impute or count the very acts, works,
doings, and obedience of the Mediator to the Elect for their justifying
Righteousness, or as he says in this his Article to be the material and formal
cause of their Justification, then God must account them to have that
Righteousness which in its own nature is a Mediatory Righteousness (for such
were Christ's acts as Mediator) to be their personal justifying Righteousness:
Now if any Man be accounted formally righteous in his own Person, with that
Righteousness which in its own nature is Mediatory, then he must be counted to
be righteous personally with such a Righteousness as is satisfactory and
meritorious after an infinite sort; and if he be one that is personally
righteous with a satisfactory and meritorious Righteousness, and this of an
infinite value, for such was and is Christ's, then how should he choose but be
Godded with God, and Christed with Christ, and be accounted to have that
whereby he may be a Redeemer, Savior, an^ Mediator both for himself and
others, yea to have Christ's Office wholly put into his hand; now I have so
much charity for this Man, though he be my professed Adversary, and for others
that have the like notions with him, as to believe that they do neither hold
nor intend these consequences which are so gross; but they themselves lead me
by their hot opposition to show that these are the unavoidable consequences of
such a Doctrine; if peradventure they may be convinced. It is out of doubt with
me, that many good and gracious Persons have imbibed and stuck to this notion
of the strict Imputation of Christ's Righteousness in it self, who yet have
abhorred the consequences that have been natural therefrom: But then their
practice has ever contradicted this notion, and hereby they were kept in the
way of safety. But then I think it somewhat dangerous when God has set up
before Persons more clear light, and yet they are so hot in their opposition,
as that they will not take time to consider whether it be light from the word
or no, but almost upon the first hearing, or upon a very slight trial, cry out,
Popery, Quakerism, Arminianism, Socinianism, and what not. Suppose we now that
such as pass under any of these names do hold this or the truth, what must it
be a sufficient Argument for me to relinquish that truth because they hold it?
for my part I do profess to the World, let Men think and say what they please,
that I am for Catholic truth, that is, truth wherever or in whomsoever shall
be owned by me, so far as I can have evidence; for the Devil himself believes
that there is a great, dreadful and terrible God, and I believe the same, and
am certain in that I do well, James 2. 19. And I must not therefore because the
Devil believes this, turn Atheist. But after these Men have done what they can,
they can never make that they oppose into what they fain (I am afraid) would.

13. I believe, ^aith he, that by this obediential Righteousness of Christ, all
the Elect of God are or shall be freely justified from all things, Acts 1^. 39.
for it is by the obedience of one (and not by the Faith and Obedience of many)
that many are justified and made righteous R^m. 5. 19.

Observe, the Scripture Acts 13. 39. (...) that believe are justified, and he
says, all the El^ct, (...) seems he likes not this Scripture expression, his
Wisdom thinks another better, and therefore, for all that believe, he puts in
all the Elect; perhaps he is for Justification before Faith, and so thinks
Elect a term more agreeing to his purpose than believe, and he thinks not far
amiss if that be his notion; but then it might be asked from whence he had his
dispensation for such a change. I believe according to that Scripture, Acts 13.
39. that by Christ and his satisfactory and meritorious Righteousness, all that
truly believe are justified from all things, from which they could not be
justified by the Law of Moses; i. e. according to the Covenant of Grace, have a
right to Christ, Pardon and Life purchased by him, and also I believe the truth
of that Text, Romans 5. 19. that by the obedience of one, i. e. the Obedience of
Christ, many shall be made righteous, but this not by accounting the
satisfactory and meritorious Righteousness of Christ to be the formal
Righteousness of their Persons, for this is proper to him as Mediator, and
cannot be appropriated to them. But by this, i. e. for the sake of this
Righteousness of Christ, all those that by Faith accept him shall by the
Covenant of Grace be accounted Righteous, or their Faith shall be accepted for
Righteousness. Romans 4. 5. But to him that works not, but believes on him
that justifies the ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness. And
whereas he adds in this Article, for it is by the Obedience of one, and not by
the Faith and Obedience of many, that many are justified, that is a mere
jumble, for who says that it is by the Faith and Obedience of many that others
are justified? And who says that any are justified without the Obedience of
that one; i. e. Christ, giving that its proper place and office? which is to be
a meritorious Righteousness. And whereas they themselves make Christ's
Righteousness to be the meritorious cause of our Justification; and yet after
that make it the material cause, or that with which we are personally
righteous: they themselves affirm hereby, that justified Persons are righteous
in the sense of the Law, and in God's account with the meritorious
Righteousness of Christ; and how Persons can in God's account have a
meritorious Righteousness with which they themselves are in Law-sense
righteous, and yet be wholly stripped of that in their own Persons that will
merit, is a great Paradox, for Christ's Righteousness is denominated
meritorious from its inseparable property merit, as he is our Mediator.

14. I believe, says he, that this Obedience and Righteousness of Christ
imputed is as able, powerful, and certain for the Justification of the Elect,
as the Disobedience and Sin of Adam was for the condemnation of him and his
posterity.

It may be doubted whether this Man do believe that those he calls the Elect
were of Adam's posterity, seeing that he opposes them in this Article, and
touching Adam's Disobedience and Sin which he calls his ability and power
implicit for the condemnation of him and his posterity; alas, it was his moral
impotency! if he had said it was that which merited, procured the condemnation
of him and his posterity as they derived a guilty and corrupt nature from him,
it had been more like and near the truth. And thus I grant that Christ's
Righteousness had infinitely more merit in it to procure Justification for
Sinners upon their believing, than Adam's Sin had merit to procure his own or
his posterities condemnation.

15. I believe, says he, that Jesus Christ by his Death, Blood, Merits,
Righteousness, and obedience has purchased, bought, and redeemed his Elect
Church and People: but that he obeyed and died to procure and purchase a new
Law or Covenant with terms and conditions to be performed by them to give them
a right and title to Justification. I see no ground as yet to believe.

Indeed I believe him, such a stranger belike is he to the blessed Covenant of
Grace, and yet for sure he looks upon himself to be a Gospel Preacher, if there
be one in the World. In this Article further he wants my proof, that there is a
Law or Covenant of Grace with terms and Conditions to be performed by Souls to
give them a right and title to Justification, and this purchased by Christ.
That I have already done, as he may find above, and if it would do him any
good, I should be glad of it.

16. I believe, says he, that the satisfaction made by Christ to the Law and
Justice of God gives the Elect a right to Justification and Life, in way of
title, and that the Adult by Faith receive and enjoy that right.

That Christ gave full-satisfaction to an offended God, I grant; but then that
that satisfaction consisted in Christ's suffering the same in kind which was
due to us transgressors by the Laws threat, which I suppose is that which he
aims at, this I deny, and have showed above it cannot be. I believe that Christ
has undoubtedly purchased a right to Pardon and Life, which is Justification
by his satisfaction and merit for all those the Father has given him: But then
that any of these (I speak of the Adult) have an actual interest in him, or
right and title to Pardon and Life so long as impenitent unbelievers, this I
deny, seeing so long as they remain such they are in a perishing condemned
state. Luke 13. 3. I tell you, Nay: but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish. John 3. 18. He that believes on him, is not condemned: but he that
believes not, is condemned already, because he has not believed in the Name
of the only begotten Son of God. And is it like Persons should have an actual
interest in Christ, and an actual right and title to Pardon and Life by the
Gospel, so long as they are in a perishing condemned state in the account of
the Gospel? And then further, says he, the Adult by Faith receive and enjoy
this right. I say the Adult receive Christ (which receiving is not Physical,
but Moral) which consists in a sincere consent to take Christ to be their
Propitiation, Head and Teacher; and by this consent which is Faith they are
united to Christ, and have an actual right hereupon to the great privilege of
Adoption, which includes Pardon and Life. John 1. 12. But as many as received
him to them gave he power, or the right of privilege, or the privilege of
right to become the Sons of God, and this right is continued by our yielding
that subjection through Grace to Christ which we promised in our first consent,
or when we first did consent to be his Servants. Revel. 22. 14. Blessed are
they that do his commandments that they may have right to the tree of life, and
may enter in through the gates into the City.

17. I believe, says he, that all those thus elected and chosen and by the
Father given to Christ, redeemed, etc. are in God's appointed time, the day of
his power effectually called from a state of nature, sin, and death to a state
of Faith, Grace, Justification and life: and that all those who live and die in
infidelity being Adult shall as certainly be damned as though they were in Hell
already.

Mark, Reader, how he has confirmed by thus much what I have said above. But
then, says he, that any of the Elect being Adult shall live and die Infidels,
such an one speaking of me, quoth he, has not yet proved. That many of the
Elect do live many years in Infidelity is out of doubt with me: But that any of
them shall die Infidels, this I never said nor thought, for says Christ, John
6. 37. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me: and him that comes to
me, I will no wise cast out. And therefore he accuses me falsely.

18. I believe, says he, that as one great end of the Father in electing, and
of the Son in redeeming was the making of the Elect holy: so the blessed Spirit
the third Person in the glorious Trinity (which is as free in working Faith,
Regeneration, and Sanctification, as the Father in electing; or the Son in
redeeming) does in time make the Elect Holy, Humble, Heavenly, righteous,
sincerely Obedient, and fruitful in good works contained in the first and
second table of the holy Law.

Very good thus far, I deny not, but grant the same, only there is this I would
have him reminded of; i. e. How it comes about, or what revelation there is for
it in the word, that God will now accept of sincere obedience to his commands
through Christ, whereas sinless perfect Obedience was once injoined Man? That
it is pleasing unto and accepted by God through Christ is certain, I mean
sincere Obedience to his commands: But that it should be so without any further
revelation that this is the will and command of God, beside what was commanded
Adam in Innocence, as he insinuates when he says in scorn he is not acquainted
with my new Law, this rests upon him to prove, and is like to do. It would be
his mercy if God would convince him, and humble him for his deriding of that as
my Law, which he must shortly know is God's Law, and that which he will judge
him by.

19. I believe, says he, the Elect, the redeemed and justified by Christ are
under the greatest obligation to duty both moral and positive in their own
house and God's house, in the Church and in the World, (this Man has words
enough) And that those that talk of Election and Justification by free Grace,
and yet live either in practical wickedness, or in the wilful neglect of
Christian duties in their Families or Closets, or slight the appointments and
Ordinances of Christ in the Church when they have opportunity, are the greatest
enemies that Christ has, that they have caused many to stumble at the truth,
and tempted some to lay out their parts, Wisdom, and Reason, (all which should
be used for God) in opposing the truth, stadying out ways, words, and methods
to cloud and render it odious, and these abusers of grace by their Omissions
and Commissions do cause the way of truth to be spoken of; so they hereafter
shall m^et with the greatest condemnation, and shall have the hottest place in
Hell except they repens, for whose practice I never have, nor shall I hope be
an Advocate.

The most of what he here says is truth in it self, only as for his own
practice he speaks of, I can neither say with it nor against it, being very
much a stranger unto it, but if he mean by truth, what he has drawn up as
A^ticles of his Faith, I grant and accept somethings in some of them to be
great truths: but as for very much contained in them, I do not at all question
but they are great untruths as I have made appear, and may yet further do,
though I will have this charity for the Man, that he does not think or intend
them to be so, though in the mean time he deceives himself, and is in danger of
deceiving others with false notions; though I grant a contrary practice, a
practice that is repugnant to false notions, so long as Persons do not
willingly oppose clear light, it alters the case very much as to Persons states
and safety.

20. I believe, says he, those Scriptures, Romans 3. 21, 22. Philip. 3. 9. Romans
4. 13. which such an one, speaking of me, brings to prove that Faith it self is
our Justifying Righteousness are not for his purpose; the two first speak of
the Righteousness of Christ God, Man, which Faith apprehends, embraces, and
takes hold of and clothes the Soul with as the best robe, and whether the word
Righteousness of Faith in Romans 4. 13. ought to be understood of the object, or
of the act of Faith, I shall leave to consideration, being persuaded the
Scriptures ought not to be expounded against Christ, but for him of whom they
testify.

Mark, Reader, upon this Article, he says Article 12th, that to say the
Righteousness of Christ's Godhead or his Manhood, or the Righteousness of both
his natures united is imputed is blasphemy; and here he says that Faith
apprehends, embraces, and takes hold of the Righteousness of Christ God, Man,
and clothes the Soul with it as the best robe, and how he will free himself
from the heavy charge of Blasphemy propronounced by himself, he must see to it.

Touching the Righteousness of Faith spoken of in the forementioned Texts, the
Apostle either speaks of Faith, or wholly excludes it, if he speak of and
include Faith, then how can the object; i. e. only the Righteousness of Christ
(as he says) be intended? unless he think that Faith goes to the constituting
of Christ's Righteousness, but surely he will not say this; if Faith be wholly
excluded, and the Righteousness of Christ, and only this meant, then why does
the Apostle mention Faith? If he say because it takes hold upon, and embraces
the Righteousness of Christ, I ask then where this Faith is, if the Apostle
only speak of the object, Christ's Righteousness in these Texts? He cannot find
it, unless he will say that Faith it self is part of this object, and if so,
then it follows, First, That Faith is a part of Christ's Righteousness. 2ly,
That Faith takes hold of and embraces Faith for Christ's Righteousness; and
so Thirdly, That one part of the object takes hold upon and embraces another.
Thus Persons may see if they will not on set purpose shut their Eves what a
confusion and jumble this makes; i. e. the asserting the Righteousness of and
by Faith to be Christ's Righteousness, not Faith, but the object ^nly. But if
this Man will take notice, and labor ^o understand, I will tell him again what
I hold in this particular; i. e. Faith as it is the Souls consent to renounce
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and thankfully to accept of Christ to be
its only Savior, which includes his taking him in all his Offices, and a
purpose through assisting Grace of Obedience to the Death, is a conformity to
the Gospel which is Christ's Law of Grace, and as it is a conformity hereunto
by the Scripture it is called a Righteousness: and this Faith justifies not,
nor gives any Soul interest in Christ, and a right to the blessings purchased
by him contained in the Covenant of Grace as a mere act, but as by it the Soul
renounceth all Christ's Enemies, and accepts of him in all his Offices, etc.
and so relatively, so that this same Man with others do me open wrong, in
bearing Persons in hand that I affirm that Faith justifies or gives right as a
mere act.

21. I believe, says he, that such an one, naming me, charge many things
upon I know not who, and question whether he do or know; for where is the Man
that ever affirmed that God reckoned that we did, and suffered in our own
Persons what Christ did and suffered. I am sure the Scripture asserts the
contrary, saying, he trod the winepress alone, and there was none with him.

As to that which he calls a false charge, thou may Reader, look back unto
his 12th Article, and see if it be not true of himself however: there says he,
it is the acts, works, doings, and obedience of this blessed Mediator that are
imputed and counted to the Elect for their justifying Righteousness; so that
from hence he may judge; If God does account the very acts, works, ^oings, and
obedience of Christ as Mediator to the Elect for their justifying
Righteousness, how it can be avoided but he must reckon them to have in Christ
performed those acts, works, doings, and obedience of Christ the Mediator, and
what are they to whom God does reckon those acts, works, doings, and obedience
of Christ the Mediator but their own Persons? does God account Christ's acts,
works, doings and obedience to such as are no Persons? God indeed accounts what
Christ did and suffered for the good, and in the place and stead of and poor
lost Sinners. But then does he account them in their own Persons in the sense
of any Law to have obeyed and suffered in Christ, which he must do, if he
account the very acts, works, doings, and obedience of Christ as Mediator unto
them, as this Man says? for if God do impute the very acts, works, doings, of
another in obeying and suffering unto me, and reckon them as mine in
themselves: then he must either account me to have performed those very acts,
works, and doings in that others obeying and suffering, or he must not. If he
do, then the charge is true, and just against himself, I mean this Man who is
so brisk and confident: If he do not, then how can they in Law sense be imputed
and reckoned to me as mine in themselves. I suppose the mistake of this Man is
here, when I speak of Persons in a Legal sense, he would have me understood in
a Physical sense only, and whether he do this on set purpose or from ignorance
I know not. But ^urther having proved that that which he calls a false charge
is true of himself from his own assertion, I shall inform him of another, and
that a Person in his day of worth and learning who says, Christ stood in a
double relation for us unto God, First, Of a Surety. Se^ondly, Of a common
Person. And a common Person, says he, with, or for another he goes for, is one
who represents, personates, and acts the part of another, by the allowance and
warrant of the Law: so as what he does as such a common Person, an^ in the name
of the other, that other whom he personates is by the Law reckoned to do; and
in like manner, what is done to him (as being in the others stead and room) is
reckoned as done to the other. Mr. Tho. Goodwin in his Treatise of the support
of Faith from Christ's Resurrection. Cap. 2. Now let any judge if what he says
in this matter be not the same with that which he calls my false charge. And in
his Application. Cap. 4. Sect. 3. says he, Christ was considered and appointed
by God as a common Person both in what he did, and in what was done to him: so
as by the same Law what he did for us is reckoned or imputed to us as if we our
selves had done it; and what was done to him tending to our Justification and
Salvation is reckoned as done to us.

22. I believe, says he, that in this weighty point of Justification, such an
one, naming me, is one with the Papists, Arminians, Socinians, and Quakers, and
against the ch^^f of those counted Orthodox since the Reformation, as Luther,
and worthy Calvin of old, etc. And Thomas Goodwin, Dr. Owen, and Mr. Chancey of
later times.

I Question not if this Man had been acquainted as he should what I hold in
this point, and such as go under the names he mentions, that he durst not have
made this an Article of his Faith. But what will not malignity say? and leave
all without proof, as this Man does this Article of his Creed; It is like he
expects his testimony should be received without any more to do, and here he is
saying as they did in Jeremiah's time, come, let us smite him with the tongue;
and I do expect if any thing come forth that will bear the name of a reply to
this of mine, it will be railing language much what of the same complexion with
this, though indeed if this Man had offered any likely proof for the truth of
this his charge, as I do where I apply any of these names; I should not so have
called it; When therefore he has made it good,

1. That I hold Justification by an inherent Righteousness which is a
conformity to the Law of sinless perfect Works, or that Faith is a meritorious
Righteousness, or that Christ merited that we by Grace or Duty might merit. Let
him make it good

2. That I hold, that the (...) credere, or the very act of Faith justifies; i.
e. as an act. Or

3. That I hold, that Christ did not purchase the Covenant of Grace; or that I
deny Christ's Merit and satisfaction; and place grace or sincere duty in the
room and place of Christ's Meritorious and Satisfactory Righteousness.

4. And when he has made it good that I hold, I need no more to answer the Law
of Innocence, or to free me from the curse and condemnation of it, and procure
Salvation for me, but what is inherent, and a walking accordingly. When he has
proved, I say, that I hold all these above mentioned things, then I will
confess he believes a truth concerning me: But so long as he does not, and that
because he cannot, I must say he believes a lie, until he retract, and
acknowledge he has wronged me in saying I am one with the Papists, Arminians,
Socinians, and Quakers in this point of Justification.

Touching those he says I am against in this his Article, I have this to say,
whatever unwary expressions our Reformers, and others that follow their Phrase
may have left in their Writings, with which so far as their notion did agree,
it was not sound; yet to me it is out of doubt, that as to what is the main in
this point, and respects especially the practick part, both Luther, Calvin, and
the rest of our Reformers as such never held that any Man or Woman ever had (I
speak of the Adult) actual interest in Christ, and right to Pardon and Life,
while remaining in a state of Impenitency and Unbelief, and Rebellion against
God. And if not, then wherein am I against them in this point.

If it be said, but where will you find in their Writings that Faith is
imputed, or that it is our formal justifying Righteousness?

I Answer, Luther in. Galat. 3. 6. says, Christian Righteousness is an
affiance or faith in the Son of God, which affiance is imputed unto
Righteousness for Christ's sake. And in the same place not long after; God for
Christ's sake in whom I have begun to believe, accounts this my imperfect faith
for perfect Righteousness; And in the 2d Cap. 16. says he, For the
Righteousness of the Law a Man is not pronounced righteous before God: but the
Righteousness of Faith God imputes freely through Grace for Christ's sake. And
a little after, says he, wherefore, God does accept or account us righteous
only for our Faith in Christ.

Calvin on Romans 4. 3. says, Wherefore Abraham by believing does only embrace
the grace tendered unto him, that it might not be in vain. If this be imputed
unto him for Righteousness, it follows that he is no otherwise righteous, but
as trusting or relying upon the goodness of God, he has boldness to hope for
all things from him.

Bucer on Romans 4. 3. says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him
for Righteousness, that is, he accounted this faith or believing for
Righteousness, so that ^y believing he obtained this, that God esteemed him a
righteous Man.

Musculus on Galat. 3. 6. says, What did Abraham that should be imputed unto
him for Righteousness, but only this that he believed God?

But it may be said, they make the Righteousness of Christ, i. e. the
Imputation of it, the formal cause of our Justification.

As to this if some Men be guilty of self contradiction, I am prone to think
they did not intend it. But now these worthy Men, who say the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness is the formal cause of our Justification, if they mean
only by God's Imputation, that God does account the Righteousness of Christ to
be that, and that only which has the form of a Satisfactory and Meritorious
Righteousness, and so as such for which God justifies us upon believing, then
there is no contradiction. And in the judgment of charity, I think no more was
intended, notwithstanding their unwary expressions which many have made but a
bad use of: seeing that they have ever affirmed this Righteousness of Christ,
which they call by God's Imputation the formal cause of our Justification, to
answer for the violation of God's Holy Law, satisfy God's Justice, remove the
curse of the Law due unto us Sinners, purchase Pardon and Life; and yet that
none shall have in or an actual right unto Redemption from the curse, special
Reconciliation with God, Pardon and Salvation, but such as truly believe. And
therefore when they speak of being clothed with Christ's Righteousness, as a
robe and garment, I would think they mean no more, but that it is this which is
the screen or sanctuary to secure all true penitent believers from the
execution of the Laws curse, or the wrath of God; but then not this as it is
the only Righteousness of their Persons, but as it is the proper and only
Righteousness of their Mediator, though the blessed benefits hereof, as is
plain, redounds to their Persons. And thus as it was for them to remove the
great evil that was due, and procure all saving good, so it is (as I have above
expressed it) the formal satisfactory Righteousness for their Persons by God's
Imputation, but then not the formal Righteousness of their Person's by God's
Imputation; i. e. God does for this Righteousness of Christ account them upon
such a Faith as I have above described, personally righteous in the sense of
the Gospel, and so to have interest in Christ, and a right to Pardon and Life
promised; but then not personally righteous with it, seeing, (as I have said)
it cannot in it self after any sort be communicated to Believers, although it
be in its fruits and benefits. I think if this little which I have here
inserted was but well considered and our old Divines thus understood, the
difference would not be great betwixt them, and those that are called new upon
the matter. But the holding ungrounded notions from the manner of expression
keeps us far from an accommodation: And if some Men will stick by such notions,
the consequences we have collected from the very nature of the thing whether we
will or no devolve upon them, though as to such as are practical Christians,
their practice (as I have said) must contradict such notions, and agree with
those very same I have laid down, wherein through Christ is their safety,
though yet holding such notions from whence such consequences flow, I know from
mine own experience, they must be attended with confusion, and act but in the
dark, while yet they may think they have the greatest light, for whatsoever the
notions of a true practical Holy Christian are, yet I am certain he dares not
conclude his interest in or right unto Christ Pardon and Life purchased by him
any further than he has ground of hope that he is a true penitent, sincere
obedient Believer. And sure I am when he pleads with God for Pardon, Grace, and
Acceptance, he dares not plead, as the Merit of this, any Righteousness upon
himself, or wherewith he is formally personally righteous with Christ's
Righteousness, yet he dare not plead this, no, but only the Righteousness of
the Mediator Jesus Christ without him, as the merit of Pardon, Grace, and
acceptance, and this includes the whole that can come within a Christians
practice upon this matter. I dare appeal to any practical Christian herein. And
though this be that I hold in this point, yet says this Man, if this opinion
prevail, both Law and Gospel is overthrown, truth and saving light
extinguished, and we lose our Crown, and that which we have labored for: This
as much as if he had said, that which must and will be found in every true and
real Christian's practice, if this prevail, both Law and Gospel is overthrown,
etc. And not having done enough he adds, and many Holy Men of God lose that
they have labored for, and lost their lives. What a Man is this, did he ever
know or hear, or read of any of the Holy Men of God who lost their lives for
the opposing such notions, the practice of which as Holy Men must unavoidably
be found in their own practice. Let him give me an instance any where, at any
time, of any one Holy Man of God indeed, or Woman, that lost their lives, and
so suffered Martyrdom for opposing this Doctrine; i. e. That true Faith unites
to Christ, gives interest in him, and so through and for him an actual right to
Pardon and Life; and that no true Christian dare conclude, that he has this
union, interest, and right any further than he has ground of hope that he is a
true penitent sincere obedient Believer; and that he dare not plead any
Righteousness that is in him, or upon him, as the merit of Pardon, Grace, and
Acceptance, but only the Righteousness of Christ the Mediator without him. I
say, let him give me but an instance of any one Holy Person indeed that
suffered and lost his Life, because he would not comply with such Doctrine as
this but opposed it, and I profess and promise I will then believe what h^
says, but I know he cannot, and yet he dare write this, and not only so but
make it an Article of his Faith.

23. I believe, says he, that such an one, naming me, in this point is
contrary to the 11th, 13th, and 17th Article of the Church of England, and to
the Assemblies greater and lesser Catechism.

As to this my reply is, If I did as much contradict in opinion the Articles he
mentions, as he does that in the 27th Article of the Church of England; i. e.
the Baptism of young Children is in any wise to be retained in the Church, as
most agreeable with the Institution of Christ, I should account my self no
better than perjured; look what he does with it, seeing he either has or
should have subscribed it, I cannot tell. And as for those that he mentions
which he says I am contrary to, I challenge him or any Man else to show me in
any thing I have writ or preached that I do contradict them. As for the point
in hand, I affirm with this 11th Article and agree fully with it, That it is
not for the merit of our own works we are accounted righteous before God, or
for our own deservings but only for the merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ by Faith, which is the very same Doctrine I have been and am pleading
for. I wonder what this same Man thought of when he writ after this sort,
unless he thought himself that he had a dispensation to write what he pleased,
and no Man must examine it, though concerned so to do.

And then he says further I am contrary to the Assemblies greater and lesser
Catechism, If he intended the whole of what is contained therein, I must say it
is as grand an untruth as ever was told, and if he intended their definition of
Justification that I am contrary to, this taken in a sound sense sure I am he
cannot prove; and seeing that particular Men have taken the liberty to put
their own interpre^ation upon what the Assembly say Justification is, why may
not I? If this then be meant, when they say that Justification is an act of
God's free grace, whereby he pardons all our sins, and accepts us as
righteous (...) ^ight, only for the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, and
received ^y Faith alone; i. e. That God of his free Grace fort^e Righteousness
sake of Christ accounted by him to be the only satisfactory and meritorious
Righteousness for us upon our sincere Faith accepts or reckons us righteous in
the sense of the Gospel, and pardons all our Sins: In this I am not contrary to
them, but one with them. And let him prove if he can that his Exposition is
contradictory to the Scripture. And whereas he alleges, I have expressed my
self formerly in this matter otherwise than I do now, I acknowledge the truth
hereof, and have occasion to lament, that as many others are, I was lead too
much by an implicit Faith, forming notions according to the ordinary Phrase of
such whose practice contradicted their notion in th^s matter, (as I have shown)
without examining whether or no they were concordant to the Sacred Text.

24. I believe, says he, that God sees no sin in his Children and People that
by Faith and Regeneration are in Christ, from which they are not justified. And
here he makes a challenge! Let those that hold the contrary tell me the meaning
of these Scriptures, and he heaps up a great many, as Numb. 23. 21, etc. And
yet, says he, God's People have daily need to confess their sins, and pray for
pardon.

Now here I would ask, whether they are pardoned or un^ardoned Sins they are to
confess and seek pardon for? If he say pardoned Sins, then it must be God's
Peoples daily practice to acknowledge themselves to be under the guilt of that
Sin which they are not, and to make no other confession of Sin; and also to
crave pardon for that Sin and no other which is already pardoned, and if any
can make this good they may. If he say that it is Sin as unpardoned they are to
confess and crave pardon for, then there must be unpardoned Sin in God's
Children and People that by Faith and Regeneration, as he says, are in Christ,
and can there be unpardoned Sin, or the guilt of Sin in such: and God not see
it? If so, then God must never pardon it; for God does pardon only that which
he sees and knows to be Sin; and if God never pardon it, then the guilt must
remain, and if the guilt ever remain, the consequence must be they die bound
over to Eternal punishment, and so must Eternally perish, though such as were
by Faith and Regeneration in Christ.

Touching that Text which is alleged by him, and others have urged before him;
i. e. Numb. 23. 21. He has not beheld Iniquity in Jacob, neither has he seen
perverseness in Israel: the Lord his God is with him, and the shout of a King
is among them. The occasion was, Balak would have had Balaam to have cursed
Israel in the name of God, or to have obtained God's curse upon them; says
Balaam implicitly this I cannot do, for though there be Sin in them and among
them as well as in and among other People; yet God sees not that Iniquity and
perverseness in them, for which he will suffer such a curse to pass upon them
as thou would have. Now what an arguing is this of this Man which he has
from others, it is a particulari ad universale; i. e. because God beheld not
that Iniquity in Jacob, no^ perverseness in Israel for which he would suffer
Balaam to curse them, therefore he beheld and see no Sin at all in them. It is
just as if a Man should argue, God sees no such Sin in this or the other
Person, for which they should justly suffer, or be executed as Thieves or
Murderers, and therefore he sees no Sin at all in them. There is this further
I desire may be observed, this Text he alleges either refers to the whole
body of the People, or but to a part; If but to a part, then Balak would but
have had a part of them cursed: If to the whole body, then according to this
Doctrine this Man has from others, they must every individual of them have
been justified and been in Christ by Faith and Regeneration, and can we have
ground for this, that there was not one Unbelieving, Unregenerate Soul then
among the whole body of the People? This is not to be imagined by any.

He further quotes Psalm 32 1, 2. Romans 4. 5, 6, 7. but these I have explained
already.

Another he alleges is Cant. 4. 7. Christ speaking of his Church says, thou
art all fair, my love; there is no spot in thee. The meaning is, she was so in
an Evangelical, but not in a Legal sense, sincerity or true grace was the
prevailing Principle; and in that respect he accounted her (for his Merits) all
fair, and without spot. When Christ said concerning Nathaniel, an Israelite
indeed, in whom is no guile, he intended no more but an upright sincere Soul;
Christ, such is his love, he denominates his People from the better part. If
therefore his meaning be that God sees no Sin in his People, so far as they
are sincerely conformed to the Gospel Law, this Conformity in it self being no
Sin, but a Righteousness, or that God sees no Sin which he has fully pardoned
to be unpardoned; or that God does not so see Sin, as everlastingly to condemn
a true Believer for it in denying him Repentance, Faith, Pardon through the
merits of Christ, I am of his mind. But then if he intended which I suppose he
does, that God sees no Sin in his People, as they are accounted personally
righteous for their Justification with Christ's Righteousness, that there is
any such thing as this, I deny; and therefore there cannot be the other upon
that account, or, for that* The rest of his Texts are not to the purpose.

25. I believe, says he, that such an one, still naming me, ought to let Men
state their own judgments, and give their own sense of what they say and hold,
and not state the same for them, and draw his own absurd consequences, and
fight with them against he knows not who.

This is a pretty Article of a Man's Faith in the point of Justification; but I
must say something unto it* Well then either this Man's judgment (if he know
what he holds himself) does upon the matter in question, contradict what I
affirm, or it does not; If it do not, why does he oppose me? If it do, why does
he complain as though I did him wrong? And when he talks of drawing absurd
consequences, ^tis well if he know what an absurdity is; although he himself be
guilty enough in this kind in what he has writ. But let him find me if he can
that any of the consequences of which he speaks do contradict the Doctrine I
draw them from; and if he disown the Doctrine, and hold the contrary, I charge
not the consequences upon him. But then he must first retract that which he
makes an Article of his Creed; i. e. that Christ's acts, works, doings, and
obedience in themselves, (for that he must mean or el^^ he contradicts not me)
are imputed and counted to the Elect for their personal justifying
Righteousness.

But he faith further, I sight with my consequences against I do not know who.
If I do not, it is like he does, or else why should he take himself concerned
to oppose, unless he has a mind to kick before he be pricked. But he goes on,
and tells us, he believes that I am guilty of the breach of the 9th Command in
bearing false witness. But let me tell him here, if he were no more guilty upon
the matter in Question, of false Accusation against me than I am against him or
others upon the point, I should have been ashamed to have said thus much by
him. I desire him then to consider, if he be not very guilty of that which he
charge me with; while he insinua^es.

1. That I hold that some of the Elect being Adult, shall live and die Insidels.

2. That I in the point of Justification am one with the Papists, Arminians,
Socinians and Quakers.

3. That I contradict the 11th, 13th, and 17th Articles of the Church of
England.

4. That my consequences are absurd with relation to the Doctrine they are
ded^ced from.

5. That I am guilty of the breach of the 9th Command in applying that Doctrine
to any, when plain it is it has been held, and still is by many that Christ is
one Legal Person with the Elect, and that Christ obeyed and suffered in the
account of the violated Law not only as a Mediator, but as a common public
Person representing all the Elect (and this he says himself) in what he did
and suffered, so as by the same Law what he did for us is reckoned or imputed
to us, as if we our selves had done it; and what was done to him tending to our
Justification and Salvation is reckoned as done to us. And does not this agree
with the Doctrine I draw the consequences from.

6. That I affirm Faith to justice as an act without relation to its object
Christ, with others I might mention, none of which he can prove against me, and
who is it that bears false witness now, I or he? But he has more yet, quoth
he, speaking after a scornful sort concerning me, he matters not that (he means
the breach of the Ninth Command) being now got under a new Law, which will be
more favorable than the old. This new Law he scoffs at, I have shown is the
Gospel or Covenant of Grace, and have proved above that there is such a thing,
and that it is a Law, and that Christ has purchased it, though the Socinians
deny it, and so he with them. And therefore I must make bold to tell this Man,
and that not without warrant from the Holy Scriptures, that he must either be
brought under this new Law which he derides, or he perishes for ever; for if
he think to be justified and saved upon the terms of the Old Covenant he will
find himself wretchedly mistaken. Galat. 3. 10. For as many as are of the works
of the Law are under the curse: for it it written, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law to ^o
them. 2 The^. 1. 7, 8. And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming Fire,
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And let him not think that the Gospel Law, or the Gospel
which is a Law gives liberty to Sin, or exempts from a due and sincere
Obedience to all God's Holy Commands, for the contrary is plain. T^us 2. 11,
12. For the grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared to all Men,
Teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly
righteously, and godly in this present World. But if he look for no favor from
God, but in the way and upon the terms of the Law of Innocence he never shall
have any; nay, he never would have had any so much as common.

26. I believe, says he, that that Righteousness wherewith God justifies the
Elect is a Righteousness which his Holy Law approves and accepts of.

Though he make no distinction, yet by Righteousness, I take it for granted he
intends the Righteousness of Christ, and by Law, the Law of Innocent Nature
violated by Man's Sin. This then is that which he must intend, i. e. that the
Law of Innocence approves and accepts of Christ's Righteousness. Grant I must,
that Christ as Man was conformed to the Law of Innocence both in Nature and
Life, and that his Sufferings were in the place and stead of those Sufferings
which were due unto us in Law for our Violation thereof; and that both his
active and passive Obedience was for us in a way of Mediation and Redemption.
But then that either the active Obedience of Christ considered as our Mediator
was approved and accepted by this Law for that Obedience which was due unto it
from us in our own Persons, or his passive Obedience for those sufferings which
were due unto us by this Law threat, this I deny; for this Law. knows nothing
of a Mediator for us, for if so, provision should have been made for such an
one ^y it and in it; but who will say this? It is then the great Lawgiver that
approves and accepts of the Righteousness of Christ for us as satisfactory and
meritorious, having left himself a liberty to dispense with his own Law as to
the strict exaction and execution of it, upon valuable consideration given by a
Mediator whose Obedience should be of infinite worth. For if the Law of
Innocence violated by Man's Sin should approve and accept Christ's
Righteousness for Sinners, as their Surety and Mediator instead of that
Obedience they were bound to perform, then it must account them righteous in
Christ's performance, and if it account them righteous then it must justify
them, and if it justify them, it must account them such as are sinless and
perfectly Holy in Nature and Life, for it will justify none else. Let me not
be mistaken here, I deny not, but affirm that the Law of Innocence did both
approve and accept of the Obedience of Christ, or else he had not been
justified by it: But then that this Law did approve and accept of this
Obedience of Christ as our Surety and Mediator, as to account it was so for
us, as that we obeyed in him, this I deny: For if so, it cannot choose but
discharge us, and we must need no Pardon; for he cannot be said to have a
Pardon, that in the Laws own sense and acceptance pays the whole of what it
requires either by himself or by another the Law allowing. And he adds that the
exact justice and free Grace of God do not only agree and kiss each other, but
that they are both exalted and glorified in the Justification of a Sinner. I
grant him the whole of this, for it is of Faith that it might be by Grace; and
it is by Faith in such a way as justice has full satisfaction, yea, and all
the glorious perfections of God shine forth, and must do for ever.

Further, says he, how any Man can find his consequence (I suppose, he either
would or should have said his conscience) free from the accusation of the Law
without such a ^^ghteousness, I cannot yet see.

To this I shall say we have all transgressed the Law, it has concluded us all
under Sin, and as such condemns us, and if we be convinced, our Consciences do
and must accuse us as guilty, and bear witness for the Laws equity in this its
process: so that there is no stopping the execution of the Laws sentence by the
procuring of Pardon, or an act of Grace by any thing but by the satisfactory
and meritorious Righteousness of Christ; and this Righteousness shall not
actually avail any for the purpose above, but the penitent Believer, for he
that believes not remains condemned, and he that repents not continues
unforgiven as to special Pardon, as the Scripture is plain for the purpose. Our
Consciences then accusing us as Sinners, for nonconformity unto, and violation
of this Holy Law of God (which we must acknowledge so long as we live we are
justly accused of, or else we must deny our selves to be Sinners, and affirm we
are counted by this Law to be sinless and perfectly righteous) that which must
quiet our Consciences here, and free us from fear and terror of having the Laws
curse inflicted as to its full and eternal extent, must be only the
satisfactory and meritorious Righteousness of Christ by which we are delivered
from the execution of its curse. But if our Consciences accuse us of
Impenitency and Infidelity, and so to be such as have no actual interest in or
right to Christ and his Righteousness for the purpose above spoken of; there is
nothing can quiet our Consciences here, or remove our fear, but our having of
true Repentance and Faith found in us. But again, faith he, nor can I see
without such a Righteousness how the Doctrine of Faith establishes the Law. I
grant him that without the Righteousness of Christ, the Doctrine of Faith
neither does, nor can establish the Law; But then how, wants explication. I say
then upon this, Although the Doctrine of Faith, or the Doctrine of
Justification by Faith does make void the Law (suppose we the Law injoining
perfect sinless works) as a Covenant of Life, and so as an instrument of our
Justification, not from any default in it self, but from our moral infirmity or
weakness; yet the Doctrine of Faith does not make it void as a Rule of
Obedience; seeing the Gospel, which is the Law of Faith, besides its own proper
precepts, has also this proper unto it self to injoin us sincere Obedience to
the Moral Law, which shall for Christ be accepted instead of strict Legal
perfection, and thus the Law is established by Faith. But if this may not
content, I shall show him and others another way of Faiths establishing the
Law, and that is thus, God accepting now the Obedience of Faith according to
the Gospel Law (which includes sincere Obedience to the precepts of that which
is ordinarily called Moral, as we consider Faith practical) and this for the
alone satisfactory and meritorious Righteousness of Christ has hereby
manifested, that he could not so dispense with this his righteous and Holy Law,
as to pardon the violation or transgression of it without full satisfaction
given to his governing Justice, which satisfaction he has had, so that now in
his justifying of a Sinner through Christ by Faith, he keeps up the repute and
credit of this his Law, and so has established it as a righteous and holy Law
according to the Scripture. Isa. 42 21. The Lord is well pleased for his
Righteousness sake, he will magnify the Law, and make it honorable. Romans 3.
25, 26. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his
blood, to declare his Righteousness for the Remission of Sins that are past,
through the forbearance of God, To declare, I say, at this time his
Righteousness: that he might be just, and the justifier of him which believes
in Jesus. He concludes this Article thus; yet are we not justified by the Law,
though in a way of Law and Justice; but freely by grace through the Redemption
that is in Christ Jesus.

That we are justified freely by his Grace through the Redemption that is in
Christ Jesus, and also that we are not justified by the Law of Innocence, and
yet in such a way wherein God keeps up the honor of his Law in receiving full
satisfaction for our violation of that Law unto his governing justice from our
Mediator, I firmly hold, but what his meaning is, I shall leave, and not
trouble the Reader with conjectures about it.

27. I believe, says he, this Righteousness whereby God graciouly justifies
his Elect, and which they receive by Faith without wavering or violating his
Holy Law resides subjectively in the person of Christ, and yet may be ours by
way of gift and Imputation without being subjectively in us, else how is God
our God, Christ our Savior, Redeemer, Prophet, Priest, and King, are these
subjectively in us?

I suppose by being subjectively in us, he intends that we are the Subjects;
And proved I have above, that we must be the Subjects of Christ's Righteousness
if God account it to be the very formal Righteousness of our Persons.

And whereas he puts the Question, how is God our God, and Christ our Savior,
Redeemer, Prophet, Priest, and King, what are these subjectively ours? I
Answer, If he will say, as he seems to intimate, that God and Christ as Savior
and Redeemer in all his Offices are ours after the same manner that he faith
Christ's Righteousness is made ours; i. e. by God's Imputation, or his
accounting it in its self to be the formal Righteousness of our Persons, he
implicitly says this; If he will say that God's infinite perfections which are
his Essence, and so God himself are made by his Imputation, or are in his
account the perfections of every Believers Person; and that Christ's Offices as
Prophet, Priest, and King are made by God's Imputation, or are in God's account
the Offices of every Believer's Person; then he must also say, that their
Persons in God's account are the subjects of Divine perfections, and of
Christ's Offices as Mediator, which would be Blasphemy to affirm. That God
then is so in any Believer as to communicate unto, or make his Person a
partaker of his Divine perfections, or give unto him his Divine perfections in
themselves, so as that it may be affirmed of his Person it has Divine
properties, such as Omniscience, Omnipotency, etc. to say this would be horrid
Blasphemy. And so that Christ as Savior and Redeemer is so in any Believer as
to communicate unto, or make his Person the subject of those Offices which he
himself executes as Mediator, so as it may be affirmed of the Believer he
executes those Offices in his own Person, is a like horrid Blasphemy. But now I
will tell this Man for all this, that it is affirmed in Scripture, that God,
Christ, and the Holy Spirit do dwell in the Hearts of Believers, 2 Corinthians. 6.
16. And what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? for ye are the Temple
of the living God: as God has said; I will dwell in them, and walk in them;
and I will be their God, and they shall be my People. Ephesians. 3. 17. That Christ
may dwell in your hearts by faith. 1 Corinthians. 3. 16. Know ye not that ye are
the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? Yea, and is
their God hereupon, as it may be found in the abovesaid 2 Corinthians. 6. 16. But
then it is not by giving unto them after any sort what is proper to God and
Christ, or that whereby God is God, and Christ is Christ, and so
incommunicable: But by giving them that which may be communicated; i. e. the
effects of God's gracious and merciful Power, and the fruits of Christ's
Mediation, such as the quickening, healing, enlarging, teaching, sanctifying;
Sin mortifying Grace of his Holy Spirit, which Grace is from the Father as the
fountain through Christ as the Mediator, and by the Spirit as the proximate
Author and worker, and as this Grace is wrought in them, and they after a
spiritual sort are quickened, healed, enlarged, taught, sanctified, and have
their Sin mortified hereby, they are the subjects of it. Now for any to talk of
Christ's Righteousness being given to them in it self to be their personal
Righteousness, or that Righteousness wherewith their Persons are made formally
righteous for their Justification; and yet say he is the only subject of it,
and that it is proper to him as Mediator, and cannot be communicated to any
Creature, is a contradiction; for if it be given to any in it self to be the
formal Righteousness of their Persons, it must be communicated to them in it
self; for how should any Man's Person be formally righteous with that
Righteousness, which after no so^t in it self can be communicated to his
Person? In its blessed fruits and effects, I grant, Christ's Righteousness is
communicated to every true penitent Believer, but in it self not, I wish it may
be considered. Thus I have done with his Creed consisting of 27 Articles
respecting Justification.

PART II.
BUT he has 25 things yet behind which he calls Questions, which I question
not he judges unanswerable. But I shall however since I am doing make an Essay
and try what may be done by me through God's assistance in answer however to
some of them, though the most of them are odd, and not worth a Man's while to
take up time about them.

Quest. 1. If the Covenant of Grace was made with Christ as the second Adam,
and with all the Elect in him as his Seed, as the Assemblies Catechism says.
Then how is Christ the purchaser, does he purchase a Covenant that was made
with himself as the undertaker, and stands fast in him?

I Answer, Nothing will serve this Man, but he will be a downright and
barefaced Socinia^^; he will by no means hear that Christ has purchased the
Covenant of Grace: But I have already showed that it was no Covenant of Grace
which was made with Christ, though it was of Grace to us as it had respect to
our Redemption and Salvation. And that the Assembly could intend no such thing,
though he allege their Authority, (as I have also cleared) unless he will show
us that they contradicted themselves, therefore this Question is ungroundedly
stated.

Quest. 2. If Christ himself be the Covenant given by the Father as it is
written Isa. 42. 6, 7. and 49. 8, 9. How then does he purchase the Covenant,
does he purchase that which he is the subject matter of? then he purchased
himself.

Answ. Reader, What think thou by such Questions as these? Well, he says,
thou feast, the Covenant of Grace was made with Christ. Now if Christ himself
personally considered, as he intimates in his Question, be the Covenant it
self; how then, say I^ could this Covenant be made with him? I must answer
according to the nature of the matter before me, Can a Covenant be made with it
self, or is the Covenant of Grace a Person consisting of two natures? or did
God make a Covenant of Grace with a Covenant of Grace? Christ indeed was given
of the Father to reconcile God to Sinners by his Blood, and Sinners to God by
the Holy Spirit given Ephesians. 2. 13. But now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes
were far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. Coloss. 1. 21. And you that
were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your minds by wicked works, yet now
has he reconciled. And so he is the Efficient and meritorious cause of the
Covenant of Grace, and the gift of the Covenant, so far as he makes over
himself and the blessed fruits of his purchase thereby to his People, but to
talk of Christ being the Covenant it self, and so to purchase himself if he
purchase the Covenant of Grace, who could have thought that any Man should have
offered such raw conceptions? for certainly the end of Christ's Death was to
reconcile God and Sinners, and are God and Sinners reconciled so long as
Sinners continue in actual rebellion against him? If not, then are not Sinners
to cast away their weapons, their Sins whereby they have been warring against
God? And are they not to come in upon his Proclamation of Grace, and humbly
submit themselves to his sacred Majesty, promising through Grace to be his
loyal Subjects for the time to come. And is not this an engagement on the
returning Sinners part to be the Lords, when he says implicitly herein (and so
answers Gods call) as it is said Jerm. 3. 22. Return ye back^sliding Children,
and I will heal your backslidings: Behold, we come unto thee, for thou art the
Lord our God. Isa. 26. 13. O Lord our God, other Lord besides thee have had
dominion over us: but by thee only will we make mention of thy name. And has
not God promised to accept receive, pardon, etc. for Christ's sake such a
Sinner? and is not this God's gracious engagement on his part? and is not here
the form of a Covenant? But was there ever such a Covenant made betwixt God and
Christ? True indeed it is in and through the merits of Christ that God thus
condescends, but plain it is this Covenant which is a Covenant of Grace to
Sinners is made betwixt God and them. Can these Persons understand the nature
of Mercy and Grace as they should, who talk of a Covenant of Mercy and Grace
made with Christ? Well, but say they, it was made with Christ for us, and with
us in him.

I Answer, If they speak of the Covenant of Redemption, I grant it was though
made with Christ, yet so for us as that it was in order to our Redemption and
Salvation by him: but if they speak of the Covenant of Grace, such a Covenant
as I have described above, that this was made with Christ for us, this I deny;
for if so, then Christ must be bound to perform that duty on his part, which
God in the Gospel requires of Sinners, and will they say this? That he has
engaged himself in the Covenant of Redemption to give Grace to all the Father
has given him (I speak of the Adult) to enable them to perform the duty which
the Gospel injoins, and if this be all they intend by the Covenant of Grace
being made with Christ for Believers, they do not differ from me in the thing;
though yet observe their notion confounds in the matter the Covenant of
Redemption made with Christ, making it the same with that which is made with
Sinners, which is strictly in its own nature, and in the very matter of it a
Covenant of Grace and Mercy. And further when they say the Covenant of Grace as
such in its own nature was made with us in Christ: If they mean with us in
Christ as the purchaser (which this Man denies in scorn) or the great mean of
conveyance of the blessings hereof; or with ^s in Christ, as we have interest
in it (after a special sort) upon our Union with him by Faith, I am of the same
mind. But if they mean it was made with us in Christ, as that he is the only
Confederate for us, who obliged himself to perform what is required of us, and
so to repent, believe, and obey the Gospel for us, this I deny, and so the
Assembly as appears in their Answer to this Question; i. e. How is the Grace of
God manifested in the second Covenant? A. In that he freely provideth and
offers to Sinners a Mediator, and Life and Salvation by him, and requiring
Faith as the condition to interest them in him, promises and gives his Holy
Spirit to all his Elect, to work in them that Faith with all other saving
Graces, and to enable them to all Holy Obedience, as the evidi^nce of the truth
of their Faith and thankfulness to God, and as the way he has appointed them
to Salvation.

Q. 3. If Faith be our formal justifying Righteousness, then how is Christ the
Lord our Righteousness, or all the Seed of Israel justified in him?

A. This I have fully answered above, and from thence he may know by Efficiency
and Merit.

Q. 4. If God justify the Elect by a Righteousness, which answers not the
Law of Innocence, then how does he administer grace in a way of justice, or
what does he justify them from, or how is he just in justifying him that
believes in Jesus, and faithful and just to forgive us our Sins? seeing what
he does seems to interfere with Law and Justice.

A. He supposes first, That God justifies the Elect, if he mean only as such
before Faith, and so without Faith, it is not true. 2ly, He supposes that God
justifies by a Righteousness that answers the Law of Innocence. If he mean
by such a Righteousness as is the Merit, I grant, but if he mean by such a
Righteousness, a Righteousness which we are personally righteous with, this I
deny: If God says he does not justify the Elect by a Righteousness which
answers the Law of Innocence, How then, says he, does he administer grace in
a way of justice? I Answer, God does justify by that Righteousness which
answers the Gospel, or God's Law of Grace, (if he mean by answering a
conformity to the precepts of a Law) i. e. the Righteousness of Faith. And in
this he administers Grace in the way of Justice,

1. As he accepts Faith for Righteousness, and gives us an actual right
thereupon to Pardon and Life for Christ's sake, whose active Righteousness was
a conformity to the Law of Innocence, as it required sinless perfect rectitude
both in Nature and Life, and his Sufferings which are called his Passive
Righteousness, which were instead of the penalty due unto us for our violation
of this Law, both which are meritorious and satisfactory on our behalf, and
thus the Law is answered for us in the account of the Lawgiver, and justice
fully satisfied. And thus, Readers, you must understand me when I speak of
Christ's fulfilling the Law, and in what I have spoken of that.

2. God administers Grace in a way of Justice as he is faithful to his promise
he has made of Pardon and Life through Jesus Christ upon our obedience to the
Gospel. And if he would know what he justifies from, and for what, and upon
what, God tells him, Acts 13. 38, 39. Be it known unto you therefore, men and
brethren, that through man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins. And by
him, all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be
justified by the Law of Moses. And if he would know further how he is just in
justifying him that believes in Jesus. I Answer, Christ having yielded such a
conformity as I have spoken of to the Law of Innocence for us in the account of
the Lawgiver, and satisfied the justice of God; his glorious attributes are so
much honored and advanced, and the repute of his violated Law kept up, as that
God can for and upon this meritorious and satisfactory Righteousness of Christ
without any wrong to his Justice, or any other his Attributes, or injury to his
Holy Law, justify the Sinner upon Faith in Christ, or give him an actual right
according to the Law of Grace to Pardon and Life. And from what has been said
it is manifest he is faithful and just in forgiving of Sin, when and where he
does forgive it, and what God does herein according to the explication I have
given neither interferes with Law nor Justice.

Q. 3. What is the Rule of this righteousness of Faith, which is the formal
cause of our Justification (he should have added by God's imputation) for if it
be a justifying righteousness, it must be by some Rule, not the Law of
Innocence for it requires a perfect righteousness, but faith is an imperfect
one. Then it is the new Law or Covenant that Christ has purchased that must be
the Rule: well then I ask, is an imperfect Rule, the Rule of our justifying
righteousness? or does the same justify by that which is imperfect? or does
this New Law justify us with the allowed brea^ of the Old? how then is it a
better Covenant, or how is the Law given honored thereby?

In this his 5th which he calls a Question he inquires first, what is the Rule
of this Righteousness of Faith, which is the formal cause of our Justification?
I Answer, the Gospel in which this Faith is commanded, John 20. 31. But these
are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and
that believing ye might have life through his Name. 1 John 3. 23. And this is
his Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ,
and love one another, as he gave us Commandment. And Obedience to the Gospel is
this Righteousness of Faith. But says he, this Faith is an imperfect
Righteousness; so it is, if the Law of Innocence which injoins sinless perfect
works be made the measure of it; but not so, if we bring it to the Gospel,
where it is commanded, that accepts of sincere Obedience, and such is the
Obedience of Faith in all God's People, for in them strict legal perfection
cannot be found. But to pass on, this Man accounts the Gospel an imperfect
Rule: If compared with the Law of Innocent nature and what it requires, I grant
it, but that it is so absolutely or in its own nature I deny, seeing it
contains the whole of that which God wills and requires to give us interest in
Christ, and a right to Eternal Salvation, by way of direction or instruction.
Let him prove the Gospel to be insufficient here, and then let him scoff at it
as the Papists, calling it an imperfect Rule. If he judge that what God
commands in order to Salvation be imperfect, he must tell us what is wanting,
and so see if his wisdom can make up the defect. In the mean time I shall hold
that the Righteousness of Faith is perfect with relation to the Rule; i. e. the
Gospel, which it is a conformity unto, our Divines have ever distinguished of a
Legal, and Evangelical perfection, but of this I have spoken more above. And
whereas he adds in scorn, does this New Law, which I call the Gospel, justify
us with an allowed breach of the Old? I Answer, God does not allow of Sin so as
to approve of it in any, he being an infinite Holy God, and Sin being so
opposite to this his nature: But I would have him know, Christ having made
satisfaction to justice, God is pleased for the sake of this Blessed Redeemer
and Mediator in his abundant Grace and Mercy to Pardon the Sins of all sincere
returners, and accept of their sincere Obedience of Faith to the Gospel instead
of strict Legal perfection. God justifies not, pardons not upon sincere
Repentance and Faith without a satisfaction given to him as Lawgiver, and when
God insists upon satisfaction for the violation of his Holy Law; and will not
pardon any Sinner, though a penitent Believer, without this, when then
satisfaction is given and accepted, if God hereupon according to the Gospel
justify and pardon a penitent and believing Sinner as such, does he by this
justify and pardon with the allowed breach of his Law? If so, this is as much
as to say, God allows of Sin when for the sake of Christ he justifies and
pardons any Sinner upon sincere Faith and Repentance. How the Lawgiver is
honored though he justify by ^he Covenant or Law of Grace upon a true Faith,
I have elsewhere showed.

Q 6. Seeing Faith must be our formal justifying Righteousness; then I ask
(says he) what degree, or how many acts of Faith are required to constitute
this Righteousness that justifies us? Is it the faith of adherence, or the
faith of assurance? Is it our first act of faith that justifies, or our whole
life of faith, which consists of many acts? If by our first act, then all after
acts are insignificant as as to Justification.

Mark here, Reader, this Man by this last branch grants, that not only the
first act, but all after acts of Faith are significant as to Justification; for
he says, if we are justified by the first act of Faith, then all after acts
are insignificant as to our Justification, which plainly implies that he
accounts not only the first act, but all after acts of Faith to be requisite to
Justification, or else he understands not well what he has writ. And thus he
runs himself upon that which follows this with a design to ensnare Men; i. e.
If by our whole Life of Faith (Mark, it is like the Life of Faith consists only
in act according to this Man, so that there must be no Life of Faith in a Soul
but so long as it is in exercise) which consists of many acts of Faith, then
our Justification is suspended till our lives be finished; then (says he)
where is the Man that is justified, or sure that he shall be?

I never (and I question whether any beside this Man, and such as are of his
party) did before, see such long winded complicated and confused Questions.

What a Faith it is which justifies, I have at large shown above; And shall
further give him to understand again, that Faith as it is the Souls consent
(inclusive of assent) to accept the Lord Jesus as offered in the Gospel gives
the Soul interest in Christ, and an actual right to Pardon and Life; so
perseverance in sincere Obedience, which is consent in practice (inclusive of
affiance and reliance) is that which continues the interest and right. And so
Justification is not a simulaneous act, but a continued act of God by his Law
of Grace. Romans 2. 7. To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for
glory, and honor, and immorality, eternal life. He that endures to the end,
the same shall be saved. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a
crown of life. And that it must not be a simultaneous, but a continued act,
most of our Divines m^st grant, who assert Pardon to be a constitutive part of
Justification, and yet say that future sins are not pardoned before they be
committed.

But it may be said, when a believer falls into Sin, and continues for some
time, as in the case of David, without Repentance, may he then be said to
persevere? If not, then his justified state cease.

I Answer, as to the act and exercise of Grace he does not persevere, but as to
the habit of Grace he does, which habitual Grace (as the first Grace gave him
right) continues his right to the further exciting and quickening of the
Spirit, whereby he shall actually repent; and thus he persevereth, and falls
not totally and finally away, neither does he cease to be in a justified state^
Psalm. 37. 24. Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down: for the Lord
upholdeth him with his hand. Jerem. 8. 4. Moreover, thou shall say unto them,
Thus says the Lord, Shall they fall, and not arise? Shall he turn away, and
not return? So that I affirm Justification is perfect as it is a right at the
first; but not so as to the full possession of that right, if so be the Person
justified live for some time after he has given his first sincere consent; for
if a Person should die immediately upon his first sincere consent given, he
most certainly should be saved, but then if he live for some time after that,
there is more required to continue his right to the the gift of further grace,
and also of glory, and that is the performance of that which was included in
his first consent, as it gives him a right for Christ to other Covenant of
privileges, so also to this; i. e. the gift of persevering Grace. And though
this may not (as it seldom is) be without some actual failure; yet it never
does nor never shall habitually fail. And the proof of this may be drawn first,
from the nature of true and saving grace. 1 Peter 1. 23. Being born again not
of corruptible seed but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which lives and
abides for ever. 2dly, From the perpetuity of the Covenant of grace, which all
are taken into (I speak of the Adult) who give a free and sincere consent.
Jerem. 32. 40. And I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will
not turn away from them to do them good; but I will put my fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me. 3dly, From Christ's constant and
all prevailing intercession. Hebr. 7. 25. Wherefore he is able also to save
them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them. Luke 22. 31, 32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold
Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as Wheat: But I have
prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: and when thou art converted,
strengthen thy brethren. Let not Persons from hence gather, that such may then
take liberty to Sin, for this cannot be; seeing that such a liberty would be
inconsistent with true and saving Grace, and so with a sincere consent.

Q. 7. Seeing it is written the just shall live by Faith, what are they to
trust and live by Faith in but that which is their justifying Righteousness?
then not in Christ, for he is none such Righteousness.

He intends that Christ is none such Righteousness in my account, and herein he
is a false accuser, for when or where did I assert, that any Person is
justified without the Righteousness of Christ; Have not I said the contrary in
affirming, that Faith is accepted for our Gospel Righteousness for the alone
meritorious and satisfactory Righteousness of Christ. And by the way, Reader, I
would have thee take notice that the strongest Arguments the Men of this stamp
have for what they hold are either first, an implicit Faith, or secondly,
Accusing of those that oppose them, as deniers of that which yet they affirm,
^or this Man would ins^nuate in what he faith, that I wholly exclude the
Righteousness of Christ from the Justification of a Sinn^r, than which I abhor
nothing more. But it may be said, do not you exclude it from the matter of
Justification? I Answer, from being the qualifying matter, I do, but not from
being the meriting matter; for it cannot be that the Righteousness of Christ
should be communicated to me in it self, so as to become the qualification of
my Person, or that which in it self must qualify me as a subject of right, or
one that has right hereby to Christ and his benefits.

But now whereas this Man says what are they to trust and live by Faith in but
that which is their justifying Righteousness, he by this must make our
justifying righteousness very extensive; i. e. God and all his glorious
perfections, his promises, etc. for these we are to trust and live by Faith in;
and if we are to trust and live by Faith in nothing but that which is the
matter of our justifying Righteousness, then these must be the matter
(according to him) of our justification, as well as Christ's Righteousness,
true we are to trust and live by Faith in God's glorious perfections and his
faithful promises through Christ; but though it be so, yet these are not the
Righteousness of Christ which he accounts justifies us as our formal
Righteousness, nor any part of it. The just then so live by Faith, as that they
trust and depend upon God's glorious attributes and his gracious promises
through Christ for strength, support, and comfort in their faithful Obedience
to his commands, hoping only for their acceptance for Christ's all prevailing
merits and satisfaction.

Q. 8. If Faith as it is our act be our justifying Righteousness, what then
mean those many places of Scripture, that speak of Justification, and Pardon by
Christ, his Righteousness, knowledge, grace, freely by grace, through the
Redem^^ion that (...) in him?

This Question is built upon a false supposition, i. e. that I hold Faith
justifies as an act, whereas I deny it, and therefore it is a wonder how Men
da^e appear in writing to the world, charging a Man with that which he disowns,
and which they cannot prove against him, and whereas this Man insinuates that I
hold Justification by the simple act of Faith without relation to its object;
He says as much as that I hold Justification by that which is not Faith, for
Faith without relation ^o its object is no Faith. How Faith justifies, I have
shown, and also how we are justified by Christ, and his righteousness.

Q. 9. What is that wedding garment, that best robe, that change of raiment,
that garment of Salvation, and robe of righteousness, that fine linen that is
white and clean? Are these our acts of Faith and Obedience, or Christ's
Righteousness imputed?

He ^till sings over the old Song, and if he would have an Answer, if he will
take pains to look back thither where I treat of these matters he may find one.

Q. 10. If Justification be an act of God's free grace, wherein he pardons
all our Sins, and accepts us as righteous, in his sight, only for the
Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, and received by Faith alone, as says
the Assemblies: How then is Faith itself our justifying Righteousness, seeing
it does but only receive Christ's Righteousness which God imputes?

This he has pu^me to answer before in speaking unto the 23d Article of his
Faith.

Q. 11. Whether was it not as possible and easy, nay, whether was it not more
easy for Adam to have obeyed the Law of Innocence, being free from sin in his
nature; as it is for fallen Man dead in Sin to believe and keep the conditions
of the new purchased Covenant? If so, then (says he) how does the exceeding
riches of God's grace appear thereby, according to such an one, that ^^ me,
whom he names.

What a Man is this to bring such a thing into question. Have I any where or at
any time affirmed, that it is as easy for a Man dead in Sin to believe, and
keep the conditions of the Covenant of Grace, as it was for innocent Adam to
have obeyed the Law of Innocence? Thus it is in the practice of such Men as
this in the first place falsely to charge such as they know oppose them, and
thus beget a prejudice in others against them, and so bring them over to their
own party, and keep them fast to them. He supposes, nay takes it for granted,
that I hold that which yet I deny; i. e. I deny that Sinners have any moral
power to repent or believe without the renewing and quickening power of the
Spirit of God: and seeing his supposition is false, his Question is ungrounded,
and therefore is vain and frivilons, for whether he will know it or no, I
affirm, that by grace they are saved, who are saved through faith, but yet not
of themselves, it is the gift of God.

Q^ 12. Has Christ purchased a Covenant which accepts of that which is
imperfect, as such an one, still naming me, grants Faith to be, and so morally
evil? Is this to honor the Law of God, or the death and obedience of the Son
of God? or to set up the golden calf the fruit of our own brains drawn out of
the forge of our imagination and dance about it, saying, this is thy God, O
Israel, that justifies and saves thee?

Though I have already said enough for the solution of this, yet there is in
this which he calls a Question I would have taken notice of; i. e. He
supposes, seeing that the sincere grace and duties of God's People do not
answer the Law of Innocence, nor are not a conformity in full to that Law,
therefore they are morally evil; i. e. in plain terms they are no other but
Sin; for he supposes Faith to be so, and if Faith, then all other graces and
duties. Now I grant, that although Persons have true Faith, and performs
sincere Obedience, yet the Law of Innocence in it self, or as such a Law
condemns them for all this (though through and for Christ they are delivered
from a condemned state, so as that the Laws sentence shall not everlastingly be
executed upon them, Romans 8. 1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them
which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit:
And that because Faith in a Redeemer and sincere Obedience is not that
conformity to this Law it calls for: But then that true Faith in a Redeemer,
and sincere in Obedience as such, are morally evil in themselves, and so Sin,
this I deny; for they are both commanded, where then or in whomsoever they are
found they are a conformity to the will of that God who commands them. And can
that which is a conformity to God's command be morally evil in it self, or in
its own nature, and so Sin? If this were so then it would be all one for
Persons to continue disobedient Infidels as to be obedient Believers, and this
is uncouth Doctrine. Indeed neither Faith in a Redeemer or Mediator, nor yet
sincere Obedience under that formality only are commanded by the Law of
Innocence, seeing it is sinless perfect Obedience, or obedience in a Subject
where is no Sin that it requires; seeing then that both the Faith and Obedience
above spoken of are commanded, they must be commanded by some Law, and what Law
can this be, but a Law of Mercy and Grace, which for Christ accepts of the
sincere obedience of Faith, when God might have insisted upon perfect obedience
in a sinless subject. Manifest it is that Man (as he gathers from others)
confounds Law and Gospel, which sets him and keeps him sadly wrong and dark in
the Doctrine of Salvation by Grace through Christ. And yet notwithstanding I
have ground enough to think that he judges himself to be exceeding clear in
the matter, and looks upon me to be a silly deceived Creature, and that there
is no Salvation for me, if I die an opposer of his confused notions, seeing
that by what he says in this which he calls his Question, he accounts me no
other than a gross Idolater, that forms and frames a God (intending hereby the
Doctrine I own) out of the forge of my own brain and imagination, calling it a
golden calf, which I dance about, and call upon others to worship: By such
disdain as this, this poor M^n discovers what his Spirit is; And though I could
retaliate, yet I do not think it my way, and therefore all I shall say to this
(which is downright calumny, for he cannot prove what he has said) is, I wish
there may be the like convictions, and hopeful work upon his Soul, which
sometime since were manifest; And that the Lord of his abundant Mercy in Jesus
Christ, if there be the truth of grace in his heart, would take away all that
which obstructs the exercise of spiri^^al light, life, and love, with relation
to the truths of the Gospel, and if there be not, that God would work it: God
in some measure I hope helps me to discharge that commanded duty of praying for
and wishing well to the Souls of mine Enemies.

Q. 13. Whether a Covenant with terms and conditions for fallen Man to perform
to give him right to Justification and Life, be properly a Covenant of Grace,
yea or nay?

I have shown there is a conditional Covenant, or a Covenant that insists upon
such or such conditions to be performed by Man through assisting grace
purchased and given, before Man have any interest in Christ, or right to Pardon
and Life after an actual sort. Texts of Scripture might be multiplied for the
proof, which are very express both in the Old Testament and New. In the Old
Testament such as Isa. 1. 16, 17, 18. and 55. 7. Ezech. 18. 21, 22 In the New
Testament, Luke 13. 3. John 3. 16. Acts 3. 19. 10. 43. and 13. 38, 39. God in
these Scriptures through Christ offers and promises Pardon and Life to all
penitent believing obedient Sinners, upon which then I put the Question,
whether Sinners (I speak of the Adult) have actual pardon and right to Life
after a special sort, while yet they remain in a state of impenitency and
unbelief, and so in actual rebellion against God: or the grant of pardon and
right to life is suspended until such time as they by grace become sincere
penitent Believers. If any should say the former, then they must hold that an
impenitent unbelieving Soul, one that is and continues an actual Rebel against
God may yet have special pardon, and an actual right to Salvation which is
plainly repugnant to Scripture. If it be said that these benefits as to the
actual donation are suspended until Repentance and Faith, must they not then be
the terms of conditions upon which these blessings are made over to Sinners? If
they were not, then I ask why the actual donation or gift of them is suspended
until Repentance and Faith?

If it be said first, They are no such terms or conditions which Sinners as
Efficient causes do work in themselves or perform without the special
concurrence and assistance of the Holy Spirit, I grant it.

If it be said 2dly, They are no such terms or conditions, (which though they
be wrought by the Holy Spirit, and performed by the concurring assistance
thereof) as are meritorious of or do purchase a grant and donation of the
forementioned blessings, this I also grant.

If it be said 3dly, That they are no such terms or conditions which in their
own nature procure our acceptance with God, this I as the former grant, for
they themselves are accepted of God only for the meritorious and satisfactory
Righteousness of Christ.

But now if Persons will grant that God has so knit and joined the blessings
of Pardon and Life with Repentance and Faith, as that none (I speak of the
Adult) shall have through Christ any interest in or actual right unto these
benefits, but such as are qualified by the Holy Spirit with this grace whereby
they may turn from Sin, and give their consent sincerely to be the Lord's
Servants, and own this to be the order or method in which God through Christ
dispenses us saving grace, they say the same I intend, for I intend no more
when I speak of conditions and terms in the Covenant of grace.

And this same Man after he has made a great pother and stir in stating most
of his remaining Questions with respect to the denial of the condionality of
the Covenant, yet under his 24th Question, he grants, if he will stick to what
he has writ, that Faith is a condition of Connection and Order; so that if he
grant thus much which I affirm with relation to the conditionality of the
Covenant, which he must do or he understands not himself when he says that
faith is a condition of connection and order, he owns as much the
conditionality of the Covenant as I. And if so be he own condition of the
Covenant of this sort, then he must hold that Pardon and life, as connected to
Faith do immediately according to God's appointed order in the Gospel devolve
upon him that has this Faith, or else he must eat his words and deny a
connection. And if so be that these benefits according to God's appointed order
in the Gospel immediately devolve upon him that has this Faith, then they must
be promised unto him as such an one, (and so they are as the Scriptures I have
mentioned above are express) and if they be promised unto him as such an one,
then he must have that right to these blessings promised which another that
wants this condition of connection and order has not. Now then to our purpose
I ask, is it Christ that this condition of connection and order respects, or is
it a Sinner? if Christ, then we must suppose him, antecedent to this Faith,
which he calls a condition of connection and order, to have been an unbeliever;
if the sinner, then this condition of connection and order must be on his part,
and not on Christ's, and when he has it, he must be a confederate and not
Christ, according to this Man's own grant; and if the believing Sinner be one
of the confederates hereupon, then God promising the blessings that are
connected with this Faith must be the other, and that with relation to the
believing Sinner, seeing the blessings of Pardon and Life connected with his
Faith respects him, and not Christ; for Christ himself needed pardon, or a
right to Life; for he never was that I can find in a guilty perishing condition
as a Sinner^ So that now if there be no Covenant of grace (as this Man has
affirmed) made betwixt God and Sinners, but only betwixt God and Christ. And
yet Christ can be no pa^ty in this Covenant, but believing Sinners, go we upon
his own concession, how must these things be reconciled? or this Man be
consistent with himself? I shall leave it, he may see what he can make of it,
for he has granted a condition of the Covenant on our part, and this there
cannot be without a Covenant respecting us, which has no relation to Christ as
a party; i. e. in his sense.

There have been many and great contests about this matter; i. e. some
affirming the Covenant of grace to be absolute, others conditional. Now in my
thoughts there might be a very fair accommodation, for under a different
consideration the Covenant may be said to be both absolute and conditional:
Absolute, as the whole of the grace and saving benefits of it are free of mere
favor through Christ, without respect to any merit or procuring desert in us.
Conditional, as God in his infinite wisdom has stated in his order of
dispensation by Christ, that there shall be such a connection or conjunction
betwixt true Faith, Pardon and Life, as that none (I speak of the Adult) shall
have any actual interest in or right to this Pardon and Life without Faith
previous thereunto in order of nature, and whoever they are that will deny
this, they must deny the plainest part of Scripture. But it may be said, do not
you affirm that the performance of the condition is required of us? I Answer,
true, and the Scripture is express, we are injoined to repent, believe, and
obey, and not Christ for us; does not this suppose us then, it may be said, to
have a moral power in our selves to repent, believe, and obey antecedent to the
disposing and assisting grace of the Spirit? I Answer, no, God indeed by his
command makes it our duty to repent, believe and obey, his infinite wisdom
having ordered this as the best way or means to our having Pardon and Life
through Christ, and therefore for this purpose will have the commands of the
Gospel pressed upon Sinners. But then his promise of the gift of this grace
through and for Christ to enable us hereunto supposes our want of moral power,
and so our insufficiency and inability in our selves to perform, which the
Spirit convinces of: so that God's commanding us that which we have not in or
from our selves to perform without the renewing and assisting grace of his
Spirit does not suppose us to have the moral power of our selves, but it only
speaks God's order of acting in his dispensations toward Man whom he works
upon as a rational Creature, who after he is convinced of his Sin and Misery
must be acquainted with what is his duty in this case; and for this God gives
his command, as in the case of those at Peter's Sermon, and the Jailer, etc.
But then after acquaintance with his duty, and conviction of his own inability
to perform, God by his promise conveys the grace of his Holy Spirit to give him
that ability; so that now Man repenting and giving his sincere consent to be
obedient to God in Christ, the blessings of Pardon and Life according to the
tenor of the Covenant of grace devolve upon him for Christ, as the subject of
the right; i. e. as a penitent Believer. So that in what I have said, it is
manifest, the terms and conditions of the Covenant performed by Man through
assisting grace are no other but terms and conditions of connection and order,
as has been explained. And here observe, this is so far from destroying, as
that it does establish the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, or that Doctrine
which teaches Faith to be our formal personal Righteousness, or that upon
which God does account us by the Covenant of grace subjects that have right
through Christ to Pardon and Life; seeing that God has so connected true Faith
and these saving benefits as that it is his fixed order by this his Covenant to
dispense the latter to such and such only (I speak of the Adult) as are
qualified with the former. And if so, then such must have a legal right; i. e.
a right in Law, and what is a right in Law, but a Righteousness in the sense of
that Law? and seeing we cannot have a right in the account of the Law of
Innocence, we cannot have a Righteousness in the account of that Law. And if
not, then we must have another Law, and this can be no other, if a Remedy as we
are fallen Creatures be but a Law of Grace and Mercy; and if this must not be,
then we must have no legal right at all, and if no legal right, then no
Justification, there must be no such thing, and if there be no such thing, then
let Persons contend no more about it. And though it be true these conditions
which are conditions of connection and order have not the Causality of the
Efficient or meritorious cause, yet they have the place of the matter disposing
and qualifying together with the form, which is God's accounting them as
qualifying matter, they constitute the Sinner a Subject that has right
according to the tenor of the Gospel to Pardon and Life through and for Christ,
and this is the nature of Justification.

But though this Man in his 24th Question has granted Faith to be a condition
of connection and order (which is all that I intend, as I have explained my
self, when I speak of the condition of the Covenant) and so granted hereby a
Covenant of grace made betwixt God and believers, (as I have shown), yet his
14th, 15th, 16th, 17th, 18th, and 19th Questions, they all respect the same
thing; i. e. his denial of the conditionality of the Covenant, so consistent is
this Man with himself; but if he had not granted what he has, yet what I have
said upon the former Question; i. e. his 13th may be a sufficient solution to
these I have mentioned, and therefore I shall not take up time, nor fill up
Paper, nor trouble the Reader with them, only seeing I have answered him so
many Questions, I will request the same favor from him, that he will answer me
these few upon the matter.

1. Whether he do Baptize (as he calls it) Persons Adult considered as so and
so qualified: or has he no regard to any qualification, but administers the
O^dinance to any that offer themselves, suppose they be Turks?

2. Whether there be any such a thing as any Persons being in Covenant with
God? If there be; then^

3. Whether are they taken into Covenant as Infidels or as Believers? If there
be not; then

4. What is that which Baptism is a sign and Seal of? And

5. Who have right to this Seal, and that whereof it is a Seal? It is only
these few I shall propound, I desire weight; let him glory in number.

Q. 20. I pass on to his 29th Question, If there be no right to Justification
and life but by Faith, how then or by what are dying Infants saved; or by
virtue of what Covenant have Infants right to Baptism?

I Answer, By the Covenant of Grace upon the Faith of their Parents. He needed
not (but it is like he would have had the number) to have sought the solution
of such a Question as this; seeing I have at large before answered it in a
Manuscript sent to one of his fellow Laborers, which it is strange if he have
not seen; but however to this I remit him, and pass on to his.

Q. 21. Does not such an one, naming me, herein render the Doctrine of the most
of those accounted Orthodox both Ancient and Modern to be false, the prayers of
the most sincere impertinent, made in Sin and Ignorance, and the sufferings of
the Martyrs to be foolishness.

The greatest part of this I have answered already in what I have said to the
22d Article of his Faith; only as to that wherein he charge me as one that
renders the Prayers of the most sincere impertinent, made in Sin and Ignorance.
My Answer is, I do most firmly hold, that a sincere Prayer (though much Sin and
Ignorance do and will remain in the Person who put up such a Prayer so long as
in this Life) is not impertinent as to the intentions and desires of his Soul:
though yet he may have uttered many impertinent words and expressions in that
Prayer.

Q^ 22. Then whether is it not time for Ministers to repent of their errors,
and tell the People plainly their forme^ mistakes, and for Christians to reform
their impertinent P^^ers, and never more to pray for the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness nor to be found in him?

I Answer, If so be a Minister have further light from God by his word, to
discover any thing that he has formerly held and p^eached to have been an
error, he is to be thankful to God for that light, and to tell the People
plainly of his mistakes in that point, and thus to repent: The People likewise
so far as they have light to discover the impertinencies of their Prayers, are
to reform. Will any wise or good Man deny this? But now this Man supposes in
his Question, that a Minister is free from error if he preach but up the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness in the sense he would have it; and the
People clear of impertinencies in their Prayers, if they pray but in his sense
for the Imputatition of this Righteousness, because he fixes upon this, after
he has spoken of the errors of the one, and the impertinencies of the other.
But grant at the best, that he intends no more but this, that if it be an error
for a Minister to Preach up the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, and for
People to pray for it: then Ministers should repent of this their error, and
People reform in their Prayers in this particular. I Answer, He would bear
People in hand by this that I absolutely deny the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, which is false; for I have showed that I hold it in six
particulars grounded upon Scripture, that which I deny upon the point, I have
again and again declared, sc. that Christ's Righteousness is not so accounted
by God unto us as in it self to be our personal formal Righteousness, or that
our Persons are righteous with it in it self, or that God in Law sense accounts
what Christ did and suffered, we did and suffered in him, as he was a common
Person, and our Representative. Therefore whoever they are that hold such an
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness as this, I look upon it as an error and
mistake in the notion, though such may be right in their practice acting
contradictory thereunto, as I have shown.

And touching that which he adds, i. e. of being found in Christ, this is no
other but by union with him, and this union (as the most of our Divines have
acknowledged) is by Faith. But when he speaks of praying for the Imputation of
this Righteousness, he either means till they have some ground of hope that it
is imputed: or they are to pray for it in ordinary, after they have this ground
of hope that it is imputed. If the former only, then it must beimpertinent to
pray for it in ordinary after some ground of hope that it is imputed. And
further if a Person is to pray only for the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness till he have some ground of hope that it is imputed, then
according to this, a Man is no longer to pray for the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness than he accounts or fears himself to be in an unjustified state.

But now if Persons are to pray for the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness in
ordinary after they have ground of hope that it is imputed; then they either
pray for it because they have lost it after this and the other Imputation of
it; or they pray for a further and further Imputation of it, because all the
former were imperfect, they having not so much of it imputed as they could
desire at this or the other time, let them take what part they will, they may
easily find what briers it runs them into, and if after fight hereof they will
resolve to stick there, who can help them; for if they take the former part
that runs them upon an holding that a Man may fall from a justified state,
which yet they deny: if they take the latter, then they cannot avoid but
implicitly affirm, that they are imperfectly justified, and also that there may
be a further and further augmentation of Christ's Righteousness in it self, it
being only imputed by degrees, both which they will deny; and further it
implies that Christ's Righteousness is divisible in its own nature. If they say
that Persons are not to pray for the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness after
ground of hope that it is imputed^ then for any of these to pray for it, their
Prayers must be impertinent. Lord! what a jumble is here! for my part when I
pray, I hope both to have the sins pardoned that attend me in the duty, and to
have the duty accepted on^^ for the satisfactory and meritorious Righteousness
of (...) blessed Mediator, and this is the simple and plain truth in this
matter, and satisfied I am this is it that is in the practice of every sincere
Soul in this duty, and which agrees with Gospel simplicity; whereas the other
notion (as is manifest) is strangely complicated and confused, and draws after
it such consequences as the abettors themselves will not own but are ashamed of.

Q. 23. Is the promulgation of the Covenant of grace in absolute or conditional
promises? If in absolute then how is the Covenant conditional?

I have said enough to this before under his 13th Question.

Q. 24. Is not the Covenant of grace and that which some call the Covenant of
Redemption one and the same in matter and substance? or has God properly made
any more Covenants than two for Salvation and Life, commonly called the
Covenant of ^^orks, and Covenant of Grace?

I have said that under the 6th Article of his Creed, which may be a sufficient
Answer to this, to which I remit the Reader, and also in other places have made
it manifest that the Covenant of grace through and for Christ the purchaser is
made by God with Believers, who are under it as actual consenters. But if all
this will not do, let it be further observed, that we find in Scripture the
Fathers designation or appointing his Son our Lord and Savior to the office of
Redeemer; where it is said, him has God the Father sealed, John 6. 27. and
that he was fore^ordained before the foundation of the World for to be our
Redeemer, yea, and to redeem us with the price of his precious blood, 1 Peter
1. 18, 19, 20. and received a commandment from his Father for the laying down
of his Life, John 10. 18. Christ agrees hereunto, is willing to undertake for
Sinners, become their Mediator, pay the price of their Redemption, and thus he
consented. And does not this much include the fo^m of a Covenant? and such a
Covenant as could not be made with us in Christ, but was peculiar to him as
Redeemer and Mediator, and therefore by Divines has been called the Covenant
of Mediation or Rede^^tion.

Let this Man, or any for him that can, prove that Christ took upon himself the
Office of Mediator and Redeemer, without the Fathers designation and his own
consent; I still grant, that his Covenant was made for us, i. e. with a design
to procure our Redemption and Salvation; yea, and the means whereby we might in
time be actual partakers. But then to tell of such a Covenant being made with
us in Christ, must bring us under the same obligation with Christ, and what the
consequence of this would be, Persons may see if they will but open one of
their eyes. And that there is a Covenant made betwixt God and those that are
his People, distinct from this Covenant made with Christ, besides expres^
Scripture, is evident from Christ's being the Mediator of the Covenant. Now
was Christ a Mediator of a Covenant made with himself, or with Believers? did
he not mediate for reconciliation, and was he to be the party reconciled, or
that stood in need of reconciliation, or Sinners? Is there any Covenant or none
s^aled in Baptism and the Lords Supper? if there be, it is a Covenant sealed to
Christ, or to Believers? if to Believers, how then can Christ be a party in
that Covenant which is not sealed to him, but others?

They urge that Text as the main proof that the Covenant of grace was made with
Christ; i. e. Galat. 3 16. Now to Abraham and his Seed were the promises made.
He says not, And to his Seeds as of many: but as of one. And to thy Seed,
which is Christ. Our Divines say, not Christ personally, but Christ mystical is
to be understood in in this place: But however grant we that Christ personal be
meant, let us see if it will afford them what they will needs have.

God promises to Abraham and to his Seed, Genesis 12. 3. and 22. 18. that in
them all the Families and Nations of the Earth should be blessed. How blessed
in Abraham and his Seed? Well, as Christ according to the Flesh should proceed
from him and his Seed, by (...) through whom Abraham's blessing; i. e. of God's
being a God to him and to his Seed, might come upon the Gentiles, and thus God
would have a covenanted People among the Gentiles as well as among the Jews,
which covenanted People both of Jews and Gentiles should be Christ's Seed, both
as purchased by him for this purpose, and regenerated and converted by his word
and Holy Spirit. Now says the Apostle the promises of this sort were not made
to Abraham and his natural Seed, such as should proceed from him, and his
immediate Seed Isaac, as though for and in them as such all the families and
nations of the Earth should be thus blessed no, but to Christ, the seed of the
Woman, the principal promised seed, the Savior of the World, that through and
for him this blessing of Abraham, of having God to be his God, and the God of
his seed might come upon the Gentiles, which Exposition of the Text fitly
agrees with those promises made to Christ as Redeemer. Psalm 2. 7, 8. I will
declare the decree, the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my Son, this day have
I begotten thee. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance: and the uttermost parts of earth for thy possession. And he shall
see his seed, and he shall see of the travail of his Soul; and Isa. 55. 5.
Behold, thou shall call a nation that thou know not, and nations that knew
thee shall run unto thee, because of the Lord thy God, and for the holy one of
Israel; for he has glorified thee. Let it now be considered whether it be
rightly concluded from this Text that the Covenant of grace is made with Christ
and not with Believers through and for him. And whereas he puts the Question
further, Has God properly made any more Covenants than two for (...) and Life
commonly called the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace? I Answer, I
do not say that God made any more Covenants with Man but two; i. e. the
Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace; the one respecting Man in his
state of Integrity, the other in his lapsed or fallen condition: but from hence
it does not follow, that there was no Covenant made with Christ distinct from
both these, peculia^^ him as Mediator, respecting his redeeming work. But now
with this Man's good leave, if the Covenant of Grace be made with Christ, then
God never made any more Covenants than one with Man; i. e. the Covenant of
Works; and thus no believer must be in Covenant with God, unless he be under
the Covenant of Works, which indeed his Doctrine if he understood it tends to,
in that he would have a legal righteousness to be the justifying matter of his
Person, I mean a Righteousness adequate to the Law of Innocence, so that in his
account such a righteousness must be the formal righteousness of his Person,
and if so he must be under the Law according to his own notion as a Covenant of
Works. If Adam had performed the conditions of the Covenant of Works as he once
had power, undoubtedly life would have been continued unto him hereupon; but
now to say such a Covenant was made with him for Salvation sounds harsh; for
Salvation properly supposes a Person is, or has been in misery, or in an
actual danger of perishing. And was Adam's case such, when God struck this
Covenant with him? But he has yet one Question more which is this.

Q. 25. But wherein, says he, does such an one (naming me) in his supposed
large acknowledgment of free grace, and imputation exceed or ascribe more to
the grace of God and merits of Christ than Bishop Gardener does in those ten
positions which he endeavors to maintain against those worthy Martys of Jesus
Christ, Barnes, Hierome, and Garret, who sealed the contrary Doctrine with
their dearest blood.

This same Man in this has reference to those six particulars according to
which I affirm the Righteousness of Christ is imputed. And therefore Reader, I
here give thee th^se ten (...) of Gardiners, of which he speaks; and then again
the six particulars in which I acknowledge Christ's Righteousness to be
imputed, and shall leave thee according to Scripture to consider both parts;
nay, to consider the things themselves, so as to judge whether what I affirm in
this matter, be the same (...) what Gardener says.

Winchester's Articles.

1. THE effect ^f Christ's passion has a condition; the fulfilling of the
condition diminishes nothing the effect of Christ's passion. If he meant, by
the effect of Christ's passion Pardon and Life pu^chased thereby, and that
these have a condition of connection and order, (as I have explained above) he
says no more but what this Man has granted himself: But if he intend by
condition, any thing that in its own nature is meritorious of such effects of
Christ's passion, (as I suppose he does) I utterly disclaim any condition on
Man's part of this sort, and so cannot be one with him.

2. They that will enjoy the effects of Christ's passion must fulfill the
condition. If he meant they must fulfill it by the assistance of God's grace,
as a condition of connection and order, it is true; but if he meant they must
fulfill it so as that they may merit or deserve it from the very nature of the
thing, (which I think he did) according to the Popish Doctrine, that Christ
has merited that we might merit, then it is false.

3. The fulfilling of the condition requires first knowledge of the condition,
which knowledge we have by faith. Perhaps he meant by faith, a blind implicit
faith, that which is so much in vogue and cried up at this day even among such
as account themselves the greatest Anti-papists.

4. Faith comes of God, and this faith is a good gift, it is good and
profitable to me, it is profitable to me to do well and exercise this faith. So
it is I must confess if he spoke of that faith which according to the Scripture
is true and saving for and through the merits of Christ, and not such a faith
that does deserve of itself, or in its own nature the reward, for I know no
such faith) therefore, faith Gardener further, By the gift of God, I may do
well before I be justified. In the following Article he further explains
himself.

5. Therefore I may do well by the gift of God before I am justified toward
the attainment of my J^^ification. If he meant by way of merit to procure
J^stification ex opere operato, from the very work done, it is false, and I
disown it.

6. There is ever as much charity toward God as faith, and as faith
increases, so does charity increase. If this be taken absolutely, every one
may judge of it as they have light.

7 Toward the attainment of Justification is required Faith and Charity. If he
meant still as meriting procuring causes in their own nature, I disown it.

8. Every thing is to be called freely done, whereof the righteousness is free,
and at liberty without any cause of provocation. This is a jumble like some
other things I have met with of late, and therefore I shall leave it to such as
this Man, who account themselves much wiser than I to find out the true intent
and meaning, and shall not trouble the Reader with conjectures.

9. Faith must be to me the assurance of the promises of God made in Christ (if
I fulfill the condition) and love must accomplish the condition, whereupon
follows the attainment of the promises according to God's truth. This does
not much differ from the Doctrine of such as place the very Essence of Faith in
assurance, I speak as to the first branch of it, and for the rest I leave it as
confused.

10. A Man being in deadly Sin may have grace to do the work of penance,
whereby he may attain to his Justification. If he meant that though a Man may
be bound over to eternal death by Sin, and live in a state of impenitency, yet
God may give him the grace of repentance, who can fairly deny this? but then
that such an one by his repentance does merit by it in its own nature that God
should justify him, this is false, and I disown it. It was not my province to
say any thing upon these Articles; but only barely to transcribe them, that the
Reader might compare them and mine, and see whether they be all of a piece, as
this Man insinuates. Hence mine follow, Touching Christ's Righ^ousness and the
Imputation thereof, I affirm,

1. God so far imputes it, as that he accounts it was for ^ur Redemption and
Salvation.

2. God so far imputes it, as that he accounts it to be the sole or only merit
and purchase of the new Covenant, and the benefits thereof.

3. God so far imputes it, as that he accounts it to be the merit of the
blessed Spirit to work grace.

4. God so far imputes it, as that he accounts it is for this that all the
duties and graces of his People are accepted.

5. God so far imputes it, as that he accounts it for this he pardons us, and
receives us into favor, and justifies by his Covenant of Grace upon believing,
and so accepts our Faith for Righteousness: It is not without Christ but for
him.

6. I do believe, that what Christ did and suffered, he did and suffered for us
in the Person of a Mediator; and God does account what he did and suffered as
Mediator, does and shall avail as much for the obtaining of Pardon and Life
for us upon Faith, as though we had been able to have done and suffered the
same in our own Persons.

Now, Reader, compare, and be judge whether Winchester's Articles and mine in
this point of Imputation do so agree as this Man has the modesty to affirm;
and if thou be such an one as Calumniations have weight with, thou may have
enough in him.

But further, says he, the Martyrs before named sealed the contrary Doctrine
with their dearest Blood; i. e. the Doctrine contrary to mine as well as that
of Winchester's, for this he must chiefly intend in affirming Winchester's and
mine; i. e. my six things before mentioned do so agree, that I in them do not
exceed nor ascribe more to the grace of God and the merits of Christ than
Winchester does in his. Be it known then unto all Men, That if this Man, or any
other for him, can find me any one either in the Scripture, or in that which
has been accounted the Church of Christ by the Reformed since the Apostles
times, that was reckoned a faithful Servant of God, and yet sealed, as such, a
Doctrine contradictory to what is contained in the six particulars with his
(...) her dearest Blood; and I profess I will retract them, if so, then such an
one should have holden and this agreeable to the Scriptures, and the common
suffrage of the Church of Christ, That Christ's satisfactory and meritorious
Righteousness was not nor is not accounted by God to have been for our
Redemption and Salvation, nor to have been the sole purchase and merit of the
new Covenant and the benefits of it together with the Holy Spirit, nor to be
that for which God accepts of the graces and duties of his People, nor to be
that for which God pardons and receives penitent believing Souls into favor,
etc. Let him prove now if he can that Barnes, Hierome, and Garret, sealed such
a Doctrine thus contradictory to mine with their dearest Blood. Hierome and
Garret agreed with Barnes in the Doctrine of Faith, and we find Barnes
affirming, that good works are to be done, and they that do them not shall not
come into the Kingdom of God; and we find him only excluding them from
Justification and Salvation in point of merit, making Christ and the death of
Christ only meritorious of these. Wherein now do I contradict these Holy
Martyrs in this. And whereas he says that these Men sealed the Doctrine
contrary to Winchester's (and so to mine which he would make to be of the same
piece with his) with their dearest Blood, he insinuates the cause of their
Death to have been known unto them, when yet they themselves enquired after the
cause and could have no account as to any particular in this matter of which
this Man speaks. But he has not done yet, I must have another cast of his
Office before he leave this his Question; and that is, that really and in truth
he doubts whether I hold any Imputation of Christ's Righteousness at all in a
Protestant sense. So that in his account he must be no Protestant that holds,
that God reckons the satisfactory and meritorious Righteousness of Christ to
have been for our Redemption and Salvation; or to have been the merit of the
Covenant of Grace and the promised benefits thereof to ^^evers; or to have been
the merit of the acceptance ^^eir grace and duty, etc. And if he be no
Protestant that holds these things, then those that hold things
concontradictory unto them, must be the only Protestants for aut hoc aut ejus
contradictorium, and who can these be but the Socinians. So that plain it is
none are Protestants with this Man but such, as to this point. Thus I have done
with his Interrogatories.

The next province he has entered upon has been to transcribe Mr. Troughton's
Theses and Antitheses, to which there is enough said already in answer, so that
to speak to these particularly will be but actum agere, to do that which is
already done.

But for all that Mr. Troughton has said in his Book to render the Doctrine I
have been insisting upon, and according to my weak ability vindicating, odious.
Yet if I mistake not, Page 121, says he, Faith is the means whereby the
obedience and death of Christ is applied to us, not, says he, by a physical,
but a moral application giving us a right to all the benefits of them. Benefits
of what? why, of Christ's obedience and death. So that plain it is Christ's
Righteousness which he makes consist in his active and passive obedience is not
made over to us, quoth he, by physical application; i. e. not in it self or in
its own nature; but by a moral, Faith as a moral means giving us a right to all
the benefits of them; i. e. of his obedience and death. And what can be more
fully said to our purpose or on our part than this. And he adds, God having
promised Salvation upon the account of his Son's satisfaction to all that come
to him, and believe in him, Page 122 he says, there being but these two ways
by which Man can be saved, either by fulfilling the Law of God: or in case of
Sin, by fleeing unto, and trusting in the mercy of God, if so, then Faith must
give the interest, Page 23. Faith is not a proper condition, but a
qualification capacitating the Soul to receive benefit of Christ appointed by
God for that use, and having the promise of success, Man being a rational
Creature cannot be taken into God's favor without his own consent, nor can he
be made partaker of any promise without accepting of it, and (...) ing in it.
An heir, says he further, if he live not (...) lack understanding, cannot
inherit the estate though never so absolutely purchased, and yet life and
discretion are not conditions of the purchase, (mark here he only denies Faith
to be a meriting or purchasing condition, and he does well) but qualifications
of the subject necessary to enjoy it, it is well if he and some do not part for
this; but he goes on, these qualifications are not in Men's power, as Faith is
in Christ's power to give it, (very good still true) he having purchased faith
and perseverance for all those he died for; which binders not his purchase from
being full and absolute, whereas to suspend it upon any condition does not make
it not full. We will not differ about a term, seeing he fairly grants the
thing; i. e. that faith is a qualification capacitating the Soul to receive
benefit by Christ, and is a moral means giving right to the benefits of
Christ's obedience and death, which is only made ours in its benefits hereby,
by which he must grant an Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us only in
its fruits and effects.

Toward the Conclusion, says he, I mean the Man I have had to deal with, you
may as well seek to rend the skin from my flesh, as cause me to let go Christ's
imputed Righteousness, I may not, I dare not, etc. If he mean in it self, he
will find it neither is nor can be his so, neither does God account it to us
after a Physical sort; and therefore he need not fear that any should robb him
of this, for no Man can take away that from another, that he neither has nor
is ever like to have. Christ's Righteousness is his own, proper to him, and it
is for this we have the application of saving good upon repentance and faith;
but it is not for us to be made righteous with, in our own persons; If it be in
it self for impetration, it is not in it self or in its own nature for
application; i. e. to be applied unto us, but only in its benefits upon Faith.
Here he brings in one that respect and reverence forbids me to name, saying,
Christ's Righteousness imputed is the sweetest word in all the Scriptures; yea,
and says this Man again, we find the Apostle expressing the same ten times in
the 4th Chapter of the Romans, when yet there is no such expression in all the
Bible; it is a wonder how Men dare say, that God in his word says such a thing
expressly, when yet no such expression is there to be found. I have made it
evident that I deny not the thing in a sound sense; but so as some Men will
have it, this I must deny for reasons already given.

Thus I am brought nigh to the Conclusion of this work which I have endeavored
to perform according to the rule and line of the Holy Scripture. I impose
nothing herein upon any, (...) desire the Readers to lay aside prejudice, and
judge ac^^^^ing as matters herein contained will bear weight in (...) balance
of the Sanctuary, imploring the conduct of the Holy Spirit which leads into all
that is truth. And if any shall account it their concern to oppose judging me
to be Heterodox, I desire they will produce argument, and this particular and
distinct, and such as may be concordant to the Sacred Text, and carry in it
convincing evidence: that hereby I having a discovery of my mistake (for I have
not attained to a state of sinless unerring perfection, though at the present I
am satisfied touching the substance of what is mine that it is truth) may learn
more; for though I be by Office a teacher of others, yet I am but a disciple my
self, and desire further and further instruction from my great Master, and if
it appear that it is his, I hope I shall take it, let the Instrument be what it
will that he is pleased to make use of.

If any shall be offended because the work is not so accurate nor in such a
fine dress as they think it should have been, I must tell them. I did not study
to please such, but my aim was the information and edification of those who
desire more sound knowledge for practice, than the subtilty of wit, or the
sound of words to please the ^ar: And therefore if this of mine will not
please, because it wants the dress they desire, they are at liberty to let it
alone, and cook and dress something for themselves and their own guests of this
nature; and serve it up in a dish in which it may be more grateful, and go
better off.

And whereas Readers, you may meet with the repetition of some things, know it
was not with a design to fill up Paper, or make a great deal of a little; but
because many things did occur which did require it, seeing that many Persons
will scarce take the pains to look back to what they have had, though I have
put them upon it in several parts of this work.

And my request to you, Readers, whosoever you be, is that you will not content
your selves with the notion of truth, it is good in it self, yea, and it is
necessary to have your judgments as clear and sound as may be; but know if this
be all, you are but passing for all your light toward utter darkness.
Christian practice according to knowledge, and the increase thereof is the life
of the matter, he that knows his Master's will and does it not, shall be beaten
with many stripes. For a Man to have a head full of light, so that he can both
discourse of, and defend the truths of God; and yet have an heart stuffed with
pride, hypocrisy, formality, love of the World, desires after its profits,
preferments and honors, and a life alienated from the life of God, living in
(...) formity to this vain World, a stranger to a Spiritual and (...) venly
conversation; alas, this light will but prove an ^(...)^ tion of his
condemnation! whatever light of the truth any Man has that makes him not more
holy, humble, and heaven^y in heart and life, unites him not more to God in
Christ, makes not Christ more precious, and this world with all the fading
enjoyments of it of a small value compared therewith, and is not improved by a
close walking with God according to the rule of his word; this his knowledge,
though good in it self, yet it is unprofitable for him. Such an acquaintance
with God in Christ by the Holy Spirit from the word as enricheth a Soul with
experience of God's favor which is life, and his loving kindness which is
better than life, and so excites and quickens love to God, desire after him,
delight in him through Christ, as that such a Soul resolves to follow God and
adhere to him by faith in self-denial and crucifiction to this World for all
the trials and matter of discouragement it meets with this, this is the Soul
which has that knowledge of God in Christ which is life eternal begun. John
17. 3. And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

Sirs, Converse with God through Christ by the Holy Spirit in all his
ordinances is that which I beseech you be concerned for; and though some deride
this, yet know that all your devotion is to no purpose, if you live and die
strangers to it, for why, well, it is but cold, formal, and customary without
it: it is not a living, but a dead service in which persons are and continue
unacquainted what converse with the living God means, that God who is the
Infinite Ocean of good through Jesus Christ. And though it is true there is not
the like sensible enjoyment of God's quickening presence at all times, yet it
is that which a Child of God desires, and cannot content himself without; and
therefore when he waits upon God and finds it not so as he desires, this is an
affliction unto him: for this is that which he values before, and which glads
his Soul above the best of Creature confluences, when it is enjoyed. Psalm 4.
6, 7. There be many that say, who will show us any good? Lord, life thou up the
light of thy countenance upon us. Thou have put gladness in my heart, more than
in the time that their corn and their wine increased. These lower things are
but insipid and unsavory compared where this is enjoyed. Know therefore upon
the matter, whoever they a^e that deny communion with God, they must at the
same time deny that there is any such thing as a superlative love of God: for
if they will grant this, then there must be communion, seeing that which any
Man loves above and before all other things his heart cannot but be united
unto, and (...), his thoughts will with the greatest sweerness be exer^^spam^^
upon it, and his desires work warmly after it; if absent; and his chief delight
be in it if present and enjoyed, and is not here communion? and thus it must be
where there is a superlative love to God, (which undoubtedly is in the heart of
every true Christian) and so both union and communion.

In a word Sirs, consider your all of good is from God through Christ by the
Spirit, from the Father as the ^ountain, through the Son as the purchaser, by
the Spirit as the principal applier and worker; nothing of good is from your
selves purchased and merited by your selves, or by you wrought in your selves.
Keep humble then, admire and adore the love, grace, and mercy of the Trinity of
Persons in the unity of the God^head in all the good you receive and enjoy, and
say of thine own we have received, and of thine own we give thee back again And
in the work and way of sincere constant obedience to God's commands according
to your vow and promise in Baptism, look by faith unto, and plead the
satisfactory and meritorious Righteousness of Christ, for the acceptance of
all your duties, which retains and will do its mediating virtue, for which be
you ever, ever, ever thankful, Coloss. 3. 17. And whatsover ye do in word or
deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father
by him. If this be your practice which the Doctrine I have delivered, and have
been vindicating in these few sheets directs to, you will find the blessed
fruit of it through and for our blessed Mediator. And though Men of a contray
mind set themselves to oppose, judging themselves hereby wise enough already,
and not only so, but reproach such as will not make their measure their Rule,
as proud, conceited, and self righteous Persons, who make light of Christ's
Righteousness, and accounting themselves and such as are on their part, the
only grave, serious, humble Christians, I mean these that do thus oppose; yet
let not u^ render evil for evil, but earnestly desire of God that these Me^ may
be found such as they account themselves to be; And tha^ none of us through our
abuse of light may be found such proud conceited, Pharisaical Persons, as these
Men have passed the doom I am sure if we do, the Doctrine will not be in the
fault for i^ has a contrary tendency, as has been shown. Heb. 10 20, 21 Now
the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great
Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, Make you
perfect in every good work to (...) will, working in you that which is well
pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

