woman playing lute, with viol and another lute in foreground, part of formal
garden and country house (?) in background, and hand reaching from clouds
holding a book open to pages of musical symbols labeled Concordia^ and
Discordia^ An Essay To the Advancement of Music. by Thomas Salmon M.A.


AN ESSAY To the Advancement of MUSIC, BY Casting away the Perplexity of
DIFFERENT CLIFFS.

And Uniting all sorts of Music Lute, Viol, Violin, Organ, Harpsechord, Voice,
etc.


In one Universal Character.

By THOMAS SALMON, Master of Arts of Trinity College in Oxford.

Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora. LONDON, Printed by J.
Macock, and are to be Sold by John Car at the Middle-Temple-Gate. 1672.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THere is not any Art which at this day is more Rude, Vnpolish'd, and
Imperfect, in the Writings of most of the Ancient and Modern Authors, than
Music; for the Elementary part thereof, is little better than an indigested
Mass, and confused Chaos of impertinent Characters, and insignificant Signs.

It is intricate and difficult to be understood; it afflicts the memory, and
consumes much time, before the knowledge thereof can be attained: Because the
Cliffs are diverse; their Transposition frequent; the Order and places of Notes
very mutable; and their denominations alterable and unfixed.

These things being considered by the Ingenious Author of this Book, (who
endeavors only a reformation of the Regulative Principles of Practical
Music) he has here presented thee with an Expedient, for the redress of these
Obstacles, which do hinder the Practitioners of this Art from arriving in
convenient time, at the end of their Labors; which is, Perfection in the
knowledge and Performance of Music.

Perspicuity and Brevity facilitate: And here is a well-designed Epitome of
Practical Music. For by this happy contrivance, the Cliffs, which were many,
are reduced into an Universal Character; the various shifting of Notes in a
Systeme, or staff of lines are fixed: the necessity of their Transpositions
taken away; So that he that can Sing or Play any one Part, may Sing and Play
all Parts; And he that shall know his distances in any one Part, may know them
in all Parts.

And so great will the Benefit of this Essay be, to those who will make use of
it, that I don't know what to request more advantageous for its acceptance,
than an Experiental trial. Reader, I shall therefore think it needless to treat
you with an Apology, where your advantage is like to be proportionable to your
pains. And truly you will find such pleasant variety, and profitable Novelty,
that I am confident every Ingenious Musician will be satisfied with his
entertainment, sufficient both for his Fancy and Judgment.

There can be no true Lover of Music, but will be favorable to the arguings,
for its institution and advantages: No Industrious Scholar, but will
congratulate his knowledge, enlarged by an Universal Character. No Faithful
Masters, but will rejoice at, rather than envy the facility and advancement
thereof. Nay further, will certainly applaud the Proposal; where that which
makes the advantage, makes it also easy, and requires but half the pains to
double the Accomplishment. Wherefore, I hope, that they, who at present are the
most glorious in their attained difficulties, and so firm to that Practice,
which for want of a better, is at present received; will, when they have
experience of this way, consult their own Ease and Agreement with it.

This I was willing to premise, lest the out-crys of some should prepossess the
Reader with a Practical impossibility; notwithstanding the Proposal is most
evident and plain. Which moved me to be very earnest with this Gentleman, to
give me this opportunity of being serviceable to all true Lovers of Music, to
whom there is none more devoted, than

Their Humble Servant John Birchensha.

The Contents of the Chapters, and Advantages which arise from this Essay.
CHAP. I.
Music truly valued from its Authentic Creator; its Ancient Patronage, and
that proper faculty, which was created for its reception. (Page 1.2, 3.) The
Advantages whereby it excells all other recreations in best accomplishing its
performers, and re-disposing them for any employment, (Page 6.)

CHAP. II.
The Scale of Music reduced to seven Notes, encircling themselves in several
Octaves, expressed by the seven first Letters of the Alphabet. (P. 11.) Whence
it follows, That the hard names of the Gamut, and its conjuring repetition
backwards and forwards, become unnecessary; and the perplexed computing of
Consonant Notes are brought to one plain account.

CHAP. III.
The same seven Notes and their Octaves are ever situated upon the same lines
and spaces. (Page 23.) So that we have no troublesome variety of signed keys,
none of their perplexed Transpositions; but a constant and Universal Character,
the same in all parts of Music upon all Instruments. Hence also it follows, he
that knows his Notes in one part, knows them in all parts.

CHAP. IV.
The Design Applied.

I. To Composition; that the consonant and dissonant intervals, being ever
situated upon the same places in all the several Parts. (Page 32.) You may more
clearly perceive which they be, and where they are to be written down.

II. To Vocal Music, where a regular b' flat can be placed only upon the
second line and third space; whence arises a most perspicuous easiness in the
Sol-fa-ing of Notes; so that Mi has the same situation in all parts. (Page
35.) Whence it follows, That one who can Sing a Treble part, can immediately
Sing that which is written for the Base or any intermediate parts. Because the
situation of Notes is always the same, which require but four lines more easily
to be apprehended by the eye. (Page 38.)

CHAP. V.
The Design applied to Instrumental Music, and first;

I. To the Violin, (Page 42.) where G being set in the lowest line. You will be
exercised, in the common character, to play readily those Lessons, which were
writ for any other Instruments, upon the Violin: And then the highest and most
lively Notes will fall most conveniently within the compass of the lines.

II. To the Viol, where the different Cliffs being laid aside, and the Notes
rightfully inheriting the places of their Octaves. (Page 46.) There is not half
the time and pains required to be perfect in the book as formerly; and he that
shall, or can already play only by the pricking of the Base; shall be able to
play the higher parts; and whatsoever was writ for any other Music, which ever
conforms it self to this its constant foundation.

An Universal Tuning proposed for the Viol, (Page 51.) whereby it is made
capable, at once to express the melody of a Lyra tuning, and the intelligence
of Notes.

III. To the Organ, Harpsechord, or Virginals; in which all things are carried
by the exact resemblance of Octaves, as the eye may most readily apprehend
them, both upon the Book and Instrument, (Page 57.) whereby we avoid, 1. The
perplexed care of different Cliffs for each hand at the same time. 2. The
invincible difficulties of their arbitrary transposition. 3. That distracting
multiplicity of six or more lines, which are here reduced to five.

IV. To the Lute, for which there is a Scheme proposed, (Page 66.) wherein all
the strings, both open and stopped, are expressed by Notes; which never change
any place or Cliff upon the Book; and always belong to the same place upon the
Instrument. Whereby it is much easier for one who already understands any thing
of Notes, by the practice of some other Music; and even altogether as easy
for a new beginner to play upon the Lute by Notes, as by Letters. For the same
time, in which they learn the names of the strings and their stops, would be
sufficient to instruct them, what Notes those strings and stops are; which also
appear more rational and plain upon the Book, than the present letters do,
(Page 65.) since all the Octave Notes have the same names and the same places,
which by Letters required different situations and variously shaped Characters.

And for encouragement, he that plays on the Lute by Notes,

1. Truly understands his Lessons, and sees into the whole composure and
contrivance of them.

2. He may by the Scheme proposed, write any Lessons of the present Tableture,
into Notes, for the Harpsecord or any other Music.

3. He may take any Treble and Base, which were designed for any other Music,
and play them upon the Lute. And,

4. Has broke Prison, and may by this use of Notes, come to arrive at
perfection in composing for, as well as playing upon this supreme Music.

None of which could in the least be done, though one practiced an hundred
years by letters.

CHAP. VI.
The Objections Answered, (Page 74.)

The Conclusion.
A Compendious review of a Learners task, being only the knowledge of the same
seven Notes in several Octaves upon the Instrument, by the seven first Letters
of the Alphabet, ever applied to the same seven places upon the Book. (Page
85.) So that for all the forementioned advantages, there is but half the pains
required, which people take to be without them.

The Necessity of a Master, the Advantage from the most Skilful, who is
entreated to savor his Scholars requests, and perfect their accomplishments,
by a generous discovery of the nature and composition of Music; (Page 88.)
which might be easily brought to pass by their conduct, and a good Musical
ingeny.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 12. for Nations, read Notions, p. 6. l. 9. for now, r. new, p. 7.
l. 20. for repair, r. require, p. 11. l. 2. for verifies, r. terrifies, p. 11.
l. 5. for fictions, r. fictitions, p. 14. l. 28. for iet, r. set.

AN ESSAY TO THE Advancement of Music.
CHAP. I. The Advantages of Music.
AMongst those many Recreations which sweeten the life of man, and with a
pleasing variety refresh his wearied mind; none can plead more advantages, or
more truly justify it is practice, than Music; which needs nothing else, nor
can have any thing greater to command acceptance, then a challenge of it is
institution from Divine Providence it self: For upon this account God has
created a peculiar faculty of hearing, to receive harmonious sounds, clearly
different from that by which we perceive ordinary noises; insomuch, that those
who have not this Musical hearing, are by Nature as incapable to understand
Harmony, as a Horse is to receive the civility of a Complement. And indeed as
each particular sense is subordinate to, but distinct from the common; so here
is some specific power which sub-divides this more private faculty from the
common nature of hearing: Or else what can be the reason, why all men that have
ears enough to entertain sounds in general, should not be able to discern the
pleasure of Music (which is a combination of sounds as they are proportioned
in numbers) but because they want that faculty which is fitted with a peculiar
power for their reception.

He that has any one sense good, is capable of all objects that fall under
such a sense; one that can see a horse, may see a house, but he that can tell a
clock, cannot always tell the movements of a lesson, and the Harmony of its
consenting parts, which is the object of a more special power. Neither can this
be thought to proceed only from a more nice acuteness of the ear, since that
several persons, who betray much deafness in their common discourse and
converse, are able exactly to Tune their Musical Instruments, and discover the
jarring of any dissonant note, though but softly pronounced: Whereby it appears
that this peculiar faculty does not merely arise from an excellency of the
common hearing, and consequently that they are not the same. But whether the
distinction comes from a different formation of the little intrigues of the
ear, or only from an improvement that some men's souls are able to make of
sounds so qualifyed and represented to them; it is hard to determine, and
needless for my purpose, so long as we find de facto, that there is such a
Musical hearing, and that God has given some men such a particular faculty,
wheresoever it pleased him to place it.

Now lest this faculty should seem to be any time created in vain, Holy Writ
but succinctly describing the infancy of the world, yet vouchsafes to mention
Jubal, the Musical Father of those who handle the Harp and Organ.

So that whosoever shall consider the Authentic creator of Music, it is
ancient Patronage, and moreover, the practice of all civilized Nations, yet
shall condemn it as silly and trifling, as unworthy of generous and heroic
minds; not only slight those reasons which obtain in far greater matters, but
also betray themselves to be ignorant of those exalted Nations, and noble
Sentiments, which make it honored both in Peace and War: And indeed to have so
little ingenuity, that they can never apprehend its excellency, wherefore they
neglect what is above them, and take up with some rustic pastime which is
common to Clowns and Fools.

Now to enumerate the Advantages Music has above other divertisements, it is
necessary to allege its incomparable pleasure, which makes it the greatest
recreation; but because that is only known by hearing, and its self best
expresses its own sweet eloquence, I must remit you to its practical and
delicious entertainments, where you shall seldom meet with people so rude, but
they will be attentive, in pretense, to that accomplishing Genius, which they
are ashamed it should be known nature has denied them. Though you shall have
some men so importunate to show themselves wits, and tell stories of the great
Turks impatience, that they will break out in the midst of a suit of lessons,
and then call for Bobbing Jone, or the Nightingale; as if their brisk fancies
were not to be damped with the gravity of an Almain, and they knew better from
their Country Scrapers, then what these troublesome Contrivers of Consort
perplex them with.

It may seem impertinent to prove a recreation profitable, or to respect
interest in the choice of pleasure; but that gain is such a taking thing in the
world, as if we can make out Music in this kind advantageous to the practicer,
it will be treated with a double welcome. To this purpose let us but a little
consider other Sports, as Cards, Tables, Chess, etc. and you will find that its
expenses may be esteemed good husbandry, though for its excellency it deserves
to be purchased by the greatest charge, since by its refreshing sweetness it
lulls the soul into its own pacate posture, and gives ease and quiet; when
other games in their diversion only rack and torment it. But let us pursue the
comparison.

1. Those are mere pastimes, which when we have spent many hours in
frequenting, do not redispose us to undertake now business, but leave the head
hot, the faculties tired, and the man quite disabled to study or work; whereas
his recreation ought to fit him for it; but after the hearing some brisk Airs,
or melodious Consort, the mind is raised, the fancy enlivened, care and sorrow
suppressed, and an inclination produced ready to dispatch any employment. Such
a noble power has Music over the soul; which though it is not (as Plato
thought) only Harmony; yet Harmony may claim very great acquaintance with it,
since 'twas used as a sacred means to allay Saul's anger; and does still set the
Soul in order, charming the madness even of one bitten by a Tarantula.

But to the pleasure and preparation for business, there is another profit
superadded, that when one has spent some hours in this Recreation, he has
attained an Art, which wherever the person comes, shall bring him in esteem,
and create a delight to the society he is in; whilst what glory is it to
shuffle and cut the Cards well? or dexterously to jog the elbow, unless in a
discreditable phrase? and I don't doubt but this argument will be valued
amongst those that are ingeniously covetous of accomplishments.

2. The charges of this recreation are much less then of others; for no
Gamester will play, unless his wager be considerable enough to oblige his
attention; if then we suppose a Gentleman to keep within moderate bounds (so he
plays like himself) he may easily lose more in one night, then his Music will
re quire for a month; but how often does a bewitching passion prevail to double
the stakes, and then venture at all, till at last a cross cast ruins his
estate, and miserably destroys a Noble Family; many sad examples can prove
Gaming guilty of this: but though Music was never famous for enriching men, it
was never known to have beggered any.

I am persuaded that were the minds of our English youth, more possessed with
this delightful and innocent recreation, which is hardly capable of excess,
they would afterward value it above their vainer Sports, and by their esteem
and pleasure in it, be fore-stalled against any extravagant debauchery. It may
therefore upon this account seem a more ingenious piece of policy, for some
progging Guardians to educate their Pupils in this advantageous divertisement,
rather then to instill their sneaking principles of covetousness, which if they
take effect, render them base on one hand, but oftenest on the other break out
into a contradictive prodigality; as we daily see the most subtle scraping
fellows are usually followed by the wildest heirs.

In Country Recreations (which Citizens enjoy not, neither are like Music,
always in season, but depend much upon the time of the year, and the weather)
there is not much to be valued, except the wholesome exercise, and the fresh
air, which are things altogether extrinsical, in respect of the Sport, whose
quarry is always unworthy so great pains, and the charges of maintenance
without proportion. Many a Gentleman has had his estate devoured by his
ravenous Hawks, and undergone the fate of Acteon, who still remains an emblem
of those Hunters, that have been eaten up by their own dogs.

I know nothing that can be alleged against Music, but that it is too
sedentary and unactive; which (if it should be so) is no more then the
forementioned unprofitable Games, may be justly accused of; yet being further
considered, it may vie wholsomness with the best; for there is nothing so
efficaciously opens the breast, as Singing, which exercises the Lungs, and
consequently puts the blood into a brisker motion, whilst some warbling thrill,
strains those parts, and assists in the separation of the sluggish phlegm: They
that practice on the Viol, are able to overcome the cold of a Winters morning,
and excite a ruddy warmth, which, by Physicians, is set as the boundary of an
wholesome exercise.

After all these Advantages of Music, which is so noble and gentile, that it
may not unbecome the highest honor or most serious gravity. I could not but
admire the Learning was so little frequented, and the exercise less, but
observing how many in vain attempted its dark and tedious principles; how many
more were utterly discouraged by the ill success of others; I found it was the
difficulty lay in the way, and hindered access to this, as it does to all other
brave accomplishments. Wherefore the design of these Papers is to take away the
affrighting bugbear terms, to reduce the confused cliffs into one established
order; and if there be any faith had to reason and experience, to show a way
for the attainment of Music by Notes, in much less then the usual time
required.

CHAP. II. The Gamut Reformed.
THat which first of all terifies a beginner, is a long discourse of Gibberish,
a Fardle of hard names and fictious words called the Gamut, presented to him
perfectly to be learned without book, till he can readily repeat it backwards
and forwards; as though a man must be exact in the Art of Conjuring before he
might enter upon Music. But I am certain if he can say G, A, B, C, D, E, F, G,
it will do to all intents and purposes as well. For the plain truth is, there
are but seven Notes in all, only repeated over and over again in a double and
treble proportion.

That an Octave is merely a Note doubled, any Musician will tell you, and a man
may easily satisfy himself, if he will but stop with his finger in the middle
of a string; for he shall then find, that either of those two parts will be an
Octave to the string open. This also Kircher in his Musurgia, proves by an
ingenious experiment; take two drinking glasses (says he) and fill one half
way with water, and the other with the like quantity of some grosser liquor,
just of a double thickness, then draw your finger pretty stiff about the brim
of the glasses several times, till the parts are put in motion, and you will
hear a Musical murmuring of Octaves from these new kind of glass instruments.

An Octave therefore being the same in all respects with its original Note,
like some beloved Son, who is the pretty Picture of his Parent, and will serve
at any time in his Fathers absence; it will be the same thing, if after I have
passed one Octave, I begin a new to reckon the rest, and so round, as if I
ascended in the present variety from eight to fifteen, and so to two and
twenty. Hence I make my Scale or Musical Ladder but seven rounds high, which,
while I make three or four several marks for as many different Octaves one
higher then another, shall be able to reach the tallest Note in Music; for it
will be all one, and much more perspicuous to say a fifth in the second Octave,
than a twelfth that is D la sol re, is an Octave and a fifth from Gamut, than
(which is the same) twelve Notes distant.

And now you may discern the convenience of this way of accounting for a young
Composer, will much sooner ken the Intervals of seven Notes only, then if they
were continued up to thirty; especially if you consider how the Musicians
reckon inclusively, as if eight and eight were fifteen, and eight more two and
twenty, which makes the intermediate Concords lie after this rate much at
random. I confess if Music divided it self by tens, as suppose eight should
have for its equivalent concords eighteen, and eight and twenty; this would be
a good clear way to reckon our Notes, but since in respect of Gamut, or the
Note from whence we reckon, a third, a tenth, a seventeenth are the three B's,
or Notes of the same composing value, we make a very confused computation,
which would be avoided by the ^ound about of an Octave.

I will give you one true and most evident comparison; the Musicians at present
reckon their Notes at length, as the Jews of old did their months by a
continued number of days; but as our custom is easier, which computes them by
weeks, and comes about again with the same days, and the same number of days,
so with great facility shall I cast up my Musical account within the
circulation of an Octave; for it will be all one if I say, I will do a thing
one and twenty days hence, or this day three weeks; and besides, I escape the
difficulty forementioned, that lies in the cross situation of equivalent Notes.

That those foresaid hard names are nothing to the purpose; I thus prove it;
for they should either distinguish what Octave the Note is in, or signify the
placing of Mi.

1. They cannot declare a Note to be in a different Octave, because their names
are not different in every Octave; as that F fa ut is always the same, and G
sol re ut, Alamire and most of the rest differ not in the upper Octaves:
Wherefore really to distin^guish them, I will at the beginning of every lesson
in the place of three (in themselves insignificant) cliff characters, iet those
letters which express the part wherein the Music is placed; as B for the base,
so called (and ought to be writ) because it is the si or foundation of Music.
M for the mean or middle part; Tr. for the treble, and if it be requisite to
use the Notes in Alt, you may for an higher Octave put double Ttr.

2. If the fictitious words of the Gamut were originally designed to show the
place of Mi, yet must they now be useless for this end also, because Re and Ut,
which chiefly compose these seigned names, are by English Musicians already
laid aside; so that I cannot tell any thing that persuades Musick-Masters to
trouble their Scholars with an impertinent difficulty, but a pernicious humor
in some men still to do what has once been done, howsoever useless and
unprofitable; or else an opinion that Music will appear in the greater
grandeur by bearing such mysterious terms in the front.

But how ever the Gamut has been ^till continued, the Musicians themselves
have thought it insufficient for the purpose alleged. Wherefore that we may
know how to place Mi, they give us this rule which always holds good, viz.
before Mi ascending to name fa, sol, la, mi, and after mi descending, scending,
mi, la, sol, fa. Now that which they are to be blamed for in this is, that when
they have given their Scholars a Notional understanding of this direction,
their practice is to take their rise from sol, and sing sol, la, mi, fa, sol,
la, fa, sol; as though sol was the syllable from whence they should take aim,
by which means they never perfect their main rule; and so as Mi alters, are
confounded in naming their Notes; whereas, if in their practice they begin with
mi, and so sing forwards, mi, fa, sol, la, fa, sol, la, mi, they would at once
learn to rise an Octave with their voice, and gain a readiness in this rule,
which they are always to account by in whatever condition they find Mi.

It is to no purpose to plead that sol is for the most part in the cliff line,
and therefore ready to begin with as they go upward; because these syllables
are practiced only in order to other Singing; now Songs begin not with sol, and
go forward in that method, but upon any note, and so skip about, that no rule
can be observed, but that which we contend for always to be practiced.

I shall now present you with the Old and New Gamut.

The Old Gamut.
E la D la sol C sol fa B fa b mi A la mi re G sol re ut F fa ut E la mi D la
sol re C sol fa ut B fa b mi A la mi re G sol re ut F fa ut E la mi D sol re C
fa ut B mi A re r ut
The New Gamut.

G.A.B.C.D.E.F.G.

We are sure, what we have undertook, is sufficiently proved, that G, A, B, C,
D; E, F, G, will do as well as the old hard names; and for the placing of Mi,
you must take the usual Monosyllables, so you order them in the most
practicable method, viz. Mi fa sol la fa sol la mi.

I come now to my chief Design, which is, the Reduction of Cliffs into one
established Order: whose clear and facile Method, will so bribe the
Practitioner; and whose Universal Character will assord him such Catholic
converse in Music, that I don't doubt, but being strengthened by so great
Conveniences, it will be able to graple with any imputation of Fancy and
Novelty.

CHAP. III. The Cliffs reduced to one Universal Character.
THAT intolerable perplexity which arose from the Alteration of Cliffs, caused
some charitable, but lazy Wit, to invent Tableture; whereby the Notes are
Mechanically clouded in Letters, and so darkly, that the most quick-sighted
Musick-master himself, cannot tell what they mean, till he finds out the Tuning
of the Instrument, and then produces the Sound; which if expressed in Notes,
might be understood at first view: whilst that the Scholar who is this way
instructed, is condemned ever to be ignorant of the rational part of his
Music; and never to Play any thing, but what he has practiced before; or else
is well acquainted with the humor of it.

For the Voice, and those Instruments that are not able to be expressed by
Letters, people learn by rote, and quickly forget again, what like Parrots they
ignorantly prated. I would therefore by one steady settlement, bring Notes to
be as easy as Letters; and so introduce our forementioned Practitioners into
a more understanding way; as also to save that Infinite Expense of Time and
Trouble, which some Lovers of Music were content to undergo.

The present Practice is to make three Cliffs, whose Notes, by which they are
called, are a fifth above one another; and according to the most convenience in
writing, are usually assigned to their places in the Scheme.

five-line staff with the note names shown on each line and space for each of
the three traditional clefs, from bottom line to top line ^ * g a b c d e f g a
* f g a b c d e f g * e f g a b c d e f



Where you first learn to know the Notes in such a different situation, that
sometimes the lowermost line is g. sometimes f. sometimes e. and consequently
all other lines and spaces suffer the like perplexed variety. Where, who can
conceive how great the difficulty must be, if from only observing the Cliff
Notes at the beginning of the line, we must suddenly, but exactly, know the
Intervals of all the Notes; however they skip and jump to the end of the
Lesson: or else have the lines and spaces so clearly sixed in our heads, that,
without any Computation, we may apprehend them as barely situated in the
threefold difference.

And after all this is attained (which one would think insuperable; but that
many years practice, and the vast pleasure of Music, has been able to
overcome any thing) you must, from the supposition of placing any one Note in
any place, by a quick way of reason, argue the situation of all the rest,
disordered by the Transposition of the signed Keys.

Which difficulty and confusion appears, by the following Scheme.

depiction of various placements of the three clefs with flats: G on the 2nd
line with B-flat, 1st line with B- and E-flats; C on the 4th and 2nd lines with
B- and E-flats, 3rd and 1st lines with B-flat; F on the 4th line with E-flat,
3rd line with B-flat, E-flat, and A-flat ^ Treble Mean Base



For Musick-masters, that their Lesson may fall best within the compass of five
lines, place the Cliffs in any line; by which means there are, in truth, as
many Cliffs as lines; and as many alterations, as both lines and spaces can
make.

Perhaps some will say, they only observe the Intervalls of following Notes,
and so care not upon what lines and spaces they are situated; which, indeed, is
the best way as things are; but this will not do. For no Scholar is capable to
make use of it under a years practice, nor can a Musick-master himself trust to
it, in the passage from one Cliff to another. As when a Violist passes from F
fa ut, to C sol fa ut Cliff; the Notes must not be played according to their
Intervall; but there must be a new aim taken from the Cliff Character, as is
already related. Though this is so far from thwarting my Proposal, that if you
follow it, the last Objection is taken away, and the Intervalls will be always
true; only in another Octave.

And now, I only fear, my Reader should think me obscure; whereas the business,
as it is now practiced, is so difficult, that I could hardly conceive it my
self; and therefore, I doubt, have not clearly explained the Confusion of the
former way of pricking.

I could not think it feasible to reduce these entangled perplexities into one
Order, or that such Pilgrim Notes could be sixed in any constant dwellings, but
that the following Contrivance shows me it may, and is here already
accomplished.

depiction of the range of notes in each octave, with G on the bottom line of
every staff, in four parts: two trebles, mean, and bass; 5th (top) line of each
staff labeled as a ledger line The New Scheme for the constant situation of the
same Notes, and their Octaves, on the same Lines and Spaces.
^ This upper line lies Lieger for the business of an higher Octaue.

g a b c d e f

Treble

The Lieger line

g a b c d e f

Treble

The Lieger line

g a b c d e f

Mean

The Lieger line

g a b c d e f

Base



As it is easier to find a Man, who always keeps his home, than if he spent his
time in continual Rambling; so I suppose, none can deny, but the Notes may be
more readily known, when they are perpetually rivited into the same places,
then if they were shuffled up and down in their former Alteterations.

I would not therefore be tedious, in further pursuing so plain a
Demonstration, but that Musick-masters, who have by the practice of their whole
Lives, attained this laborious Art; (this now troublesome and insignificant
Excellency) will be loath to consent to a Way, wherein every young Practitioner
may Rival them; who by exercising himself only in that one Method proposed,
shall be as nimble at his Book, to play by sight in a year, as they are in an
Age.

For do but suppose all the labor that was spent in practicing three Cliffs,
had been bestowed upon one; and that distracted variety (which in perfecting
one did, as it were, imperfect another) was contracted in our United Order, how
great would the Perfection be. And let me tell you, though the other way may
serve for those, who, all their life time, and every day, make a trade of
Music; yet, Gentlemen, who take it for a Recreation, and therefore must
discontinue their practice as business requires, are never able to maintain
such a knowledge, as consists in confusion; and consequently, will be daily
impaired, if at all omitted. And I can here plead the sad experience of this,
which makes me so zealous in the Remedy. For after I had with much trouble
overcome the Diversity of Cliffs, two or three months absence from my Music,
cast me into such a Relapse, that I could scarcely, in so much time, recover
them again.

Wherefore, having made this Proposal to some Musick-masters; they returned me
such Objections, as partly betrayed their mis-apprehensions of my design; but
chiefly their unwillingness it should come into practice. Upon which account, I
put my self upon the trouble of writing these Papers; that they might the more
clearly perceive the convenience of this Hypothesis. And if afterward they
should remain peevish, and obstinate against the use of it; their Scholars
might be able to Right themselves, and demand a Remission of more then half
their slavish task. For, to learn the Notes, and Con their Places, is the very
Drudgery of Music. And who is it that would be willing thus to undergo a
tedious half year, before he comes to enjoy, the delicious sweets of Consort,
if he knows how to remedy so great a labor? And whereas they told me it might
do, but would be never practiced; let them not take care for that; when once
men find it will save them more then half the Trouble, they will embrace it as
readily, as if I was Emperor of the world to command it. For Convenience is an
Universal King.

It is the Interest of Musicians to have their Art understood; for there is
nothing so much its hinderance, as ignorance of its Excellency; neither let
them think, that the sooner Learned, the sooner left off; for whereas many
faint in their first Essays, and others contend to conquer it, so long only as
their patience will last; if the way was more plain, these might arrive at some
Perfection, and practice it ever after, as the chief Recreation of their Lives.

But if after all this, Musick-masters shall double the time in teaching their
Scholars, in hopes of double Gain; or their Scholars be such Fools to undergo
that Expense of Time and Trouble; give me leave to laugh, and let them have
their labor for their pains.

CHAP. IV. The Design Applied; and first to Vocal Music.
THAT this way may not seem an Airy Notion, or Speculative fancy at large,
which is not capable of convenient practice: I shall now apply it to particular
Music, and show that it will not only serve for all Instruments and Voices;
but that some other considerable Advantages will accrue in every one of them.
One thing of no small account, is, that whatsoever Music is writ this way, is
equally proper; and as I may say, peculiar to all manner of performances.

Suppose an Air thus pricked; you may indifferently play it with French Lute,
Theorb, Viol, or Violin, etc. or Sing it with either Base, or Treble Voice. The
Players, indeed, will find it but in one, yet every ones Native Language
(though I must acknowledge that the Dialects of Instruments are different) and
the various Practitioners will admire their Instruments, Harmonious in their
Pricking too. Like that late ingeniously invented Universal Character, which,
expressing things, and not words, is common to all Countries; and may be read
by those who agree not in speaking, neither at all understand one another
Discourse.

I confess this might possibly be done by those, who have perfectly overcome
the Difficulties related in the beginning of the last Chapter; but they are
only the absolute Masters of Music; that when I say any Scholar who learns
only upon one Instrument, shall be able to do it, as well as if he had learned
of all. I may assert, that to be done by this, which could not be done before;
and that to be brought into common use, which was scarcely in Speculation,
except amongst Musick-masters themselves. How could one that learned only upon
the Violin, and consequently was exercised only in G sol re ut Cliff, play an
Air writ for the Viol in F fa ut, and C sol fa ut? or a Voice that was used
only to the Base, Sing a Tune in the Treble Cliff? It neither was nor could be.
Wherefore it is much more advantageous for a Scholar, who, when he begins, is
indifferent to all, to learn this way; by which, Music is brought to such a
general Consent, that from his own Instrument he understands all others, and
gains a Catholic knowledge in the Art.

Neither is this Proposal fit only for the infancy of Music, or a device
suited to young Beginners; but it is of as great use in Composing, as Practice.

In many parts you shall see the Concords lie in such Order, and every
Harmonical Relation in so plain a Method before your Eyes; that you may
perceive the Distances of Notes at first view; and without any laborious
computing, be made privy to the whole contrivance of Composition. For here
every Octave stands upon the same Line; each Fifth, two Lines higher; and all
the other Notes in such like constant respect; whilst as they were before in
the Systeme of five Lines, sometimes they stood higher, sometimes lower, and
danced up and down, according to the variation of the Cliff. Upon which
account, Master Sympson, perceiving it impossible for a Composer to have ready
enough in his Eye, the Concords as they were placed; and yet knowing it
necessary for a man to carry in his mind, how frequently he used his Distances,
lest two fifths, or two eighths come together, and many more inconveniences;
He does in his Book of Composition, advise a man to set the Figures between the
parts, whereby he may remember what Concords he has, and shall for the future
make use of; which Mechanical Trouble is here taken away.

The following Scheme, on the other side, shows the Intervalls of all Notes in
their constant situation.

fifteen pitches labeled with their intervals from the bottom line of the staff
in any octave (treble, mean, or bass), from unison to octave ^ Greater 6th
Les^er 7th Defect 8 Greater 7 8 4th Imperfect 5th Greater 4th 5 Lesser 6th
Unison Lesser 2d Greater 2d Less^r 3d Greater 3d



Thus all (...) Notes and their intervals are Situated in all parts whose (...)
and practicableness you may see in ye next cut of 8 parts.

And as they are placed in one part, so in every part; but (as you might
observe in my Explication of the Gamut) according to the old way; the Composer
must be troubled to find out his Concords, because they lie cross in computing
before he writes them down: So that according to the two former Hypothesis, I
will make a wild Comparison, how madly custom persuades Musicians to reckon.

Upon Thursday the fourth of February, suppose I write a Letter to my Friend,
and calling that day Gam ut; I tell him, I will will give him a visit on Ela,
which happens to be Shrove-Tuesday, the three and twentieth of that month. He
must first reckon how many Notes there are betwixt Gamut, and E la, viz.
twenty, inclusive. Then what Musical proportion there is in that Interval; and
afterward Compute where to write it down. All this is done betwixt every
Consonant Note; and almost as much in the progress of every stroke in a Lesson;
whereas, if he had expressed himself by the Notion of two Octaves and a Sixth;
he would immediately have known, that the value of that Concord had been a
Sixth; and with as much ease understood it, as the Gentleman would, if I had
assigned my time by next Tuesday come three weeks.

But then if the Cliffs be moveable, he must take aim according to their
variation; just as if to find the Shrove-Tuesday appointed; I must reckon by
the new Moons when Easter fell; and so learn that moveable Feast. Though this
may seem very extravagant, yet it is no more then the thing it self; and in my
judgment, I think it much harder to be perfect in the Cliffs, then to Calculate
for Almanacks.

Whatsoever is most natural, is always most easy: Now, Nature her self has
made this Division by Octaves; and af^^^ the completing of them, brings her
M^^^ck into the same posture; which assu^es me, that however use has hitherto
obtained to make five Notes the distance of a Cliff, yet I have a good
Foundation to justify my altering the present way of writing, and to establish
it only by Octaves. I will tell you a pretty Experiment of a Pipe, or
Flageolet, to this purpose; blow with a soft, or gentle breath, one of the
lower Notes of the Pipe, and let the stops remain the same, only increasing
your breath by degrees, and you shall find, that no intermediate higher Note
will sound, till at last it breaks forth into an Octave.

Thus the voice does naturally incline to alter it self by eight Notes, and
consequently, will best conform to the writing by this supposition, though it
understood not the change upon a fifth; and therefore a Song was always carried
on in the same Cliff it begun; yet if it shall be found troublesome to alter the
Octave in the middle of a Song, though eight Notes be completed in four lines,
yet you may write upon five or six; and as you did before continue up the
Notes, which will be no trouble, if so be you never make, nor change any Cliff;
for it is easier to find the Notes that are fixed upon five or six lines, then
those that wander, and are uncertain upon three.

I now begin with Vocal Music, whose worth justly gives it the Pre-eminence,
and may claim Birthright from Nature, whose melodious daughter it is.
Instruments depend upon Art for Contrivance, and still require some trouble to
relieve their disorders: but this is always framed, and ready tuned by its
first Parent, the Harmonious Engineer of the world. And it pleases me well,
that the Music, which is the most Excellent, should receive the greatest
Advantages from this present Proposal; for hereby we shall not only escape the
difficulty of Cliffs, and consequently much other trouble, which I have hinted
before, and is common with the rest; but also attain a steady settlement in the
situation of Mi. which is always necessary to be known, before we can name any
of the other Notes, and will now be easily discerned and remembered; since a
regular flat can be only placed upon the second line B, and the third space E;
whereas heretofore Mi was so fickle and uncertain, that there was never a line
or space, but in some of the old signed Cliffs or other; B flat, would intrude
and dispossess him of his seat.

And by how much Musicians have been wanton in their various Cliffs for
Singing, (which is most of all perplexed with the manifold movements of C sol
fa ut Cliff, and the consequent disorders of Mi) they bring in evidence of the
mischief it makes; for where one Scholar learns to Sing or Play on the
Harpsechord by Notes, ten do on the Viol and Violin.

And, indeed, all grave and solemn Music, has thereby become so intricate and
troublesome, that for ease sake, many Gentlemen had given themselves over to
whistling and fidling upon the Violin and Flageolet, till they were so rivaled
by their Lacques and Barbers boys, that they were Musical example of a song in
four parts (two trebles, mean, and bass) of the author's proposed musical
notation system, which replaces all other clefs with octave or multi-octave
transpositions of the bass clef The Song
^ When Aurelia etc.
When the Notes of a Base fall upon higher lines, than their Concords would
stand upon it is Treble; Compute your chords by the Gamut-Letters, and place
them in their own seats; the Composition, will of necessity be right and the
same in all Parts.

forced to quit them, as Ladies do their fashions, when the Chamber-maids have
inherited their old clothes.

But that you may see how unnecessary those former various Cliffs are, how
conveniently a Song will fall in the Systeme of five lines (for though an
Octave is completed in four, yet you may take such a liberty) written
according to our Hypothesis of every part beginning with G, in the lower-most
line. I have given you an example of a Song in Four Parts, composed by the
Eminent, and Ingenious Mr. Humphries, where you may observe the concords keep
an exact respect to one another; the B flats always in the same lines and
spaces, such a pleasant agreement and familiar likeness through the whole
course of it, that at first view, you may discern what kindred and relation
there is betwixt every consenting Note, viz. all the Octaves standing upon the
same lines and spaces, the fifths two higher, etc. proportionably after the
same manner.

Here insert the Plate for the Song Aurelia.


In all writing you must strictly observe to assign that Octave, to which the
Notes do most properly belong, and in which they will be most compactedly
comprehended, and then it will be very rare but the Songs will conveniently
fall within the compass of the lines; and if otherwise they should prove at any
time unruly from some enlarged fancies, yet there be several ways to remedy
their Efforts, and comprehend their widest latitude, without any prejudice to
our Hypothesis; nay, with greater advantage by it, than any other way; for
besides, the drawing an ascititious line over or under upon lesser occasions,
you may;

1. In any place, where the Notes rise or fall an Octave (which is usually the
cause of greatest distress in this case) set the next Note in the same place,
only changing the letter of the Octave, which will direct you to Sing it an
eight higher or lower; as you may see these three Notes, which required three
different Places, in three different Cliffs, are here situated all upon the
same line, only with the letters of their Octaves prefixed at first sight
palpaby, discovering what they stand for.

contrasting examples octave alteration using F, C, and G clefs ^ How to alter
the Octave in a Song or Lesson.

octave alteration using the author's letter designations B (bass), M (mean),
and T (treble) ^ This of excellent use in Dialogues.



By which means the Octave only, not the Cliff is altered, neither is there the
lest shadow of the old confusion; for the G, which I instanced in, or any other
Note in this case, will stand in every part in the same place. And certainly,
one that has but very indifferent skill in Singing, can rise or fall an Octave,
when the prefixed letter shall give him timely warning of it.

2. If the Notes ascend, or descend by degrees, and you have occasion to go far
into another Octave, when you come to an higher G, alter the Signal Letter, and
it falls upon the lowermost line; the like discretion also must be used in
descending: by which means, and good fore cast, no Song can be so spiteful and
unlucky but may be evidently, and conveniently written in the compass of four
lines, which is the statute of our Hypothesis, the lowermost beginning with G,
the uppermost ending with F; and the higher and lower Notes than these, by the
change of the Signal Letter, ought to be lodged in their own Octaves, to which
they do belong.

But because many Instruments contain thick and complex strokes, and it would
be too much to alter the Octave upon the account of any single Note. It is left
to the pleasure and contrivance of the Musick-Master, to use either four, five,
or six lines, as his Instrument requires; where the ascititious lines also will
enjoy the benefit of our constant Universality; for the uppermost line of five
will be always, and upon all Instruments A, the uppermost of six C, and by how
many the more the lines are, the more necessity there is, that they should be
constantly, and universally the same.

Now the reason why I would advise to four lines, rather then more, is, not
only because our Essay of an Octave is completed therein, but that the lesser
variety there is, the more perspicuous they are to the eye; which has need of
all advantages we can contrive for its help, especially in the full speed of a
quick division: But for the lessons which are compounded with three or four
Consonant Notes in one stroke, it is most convenient to use five or six lines,
and according to the generally received custom, we have formed all our examples
in five lines; because we desire not to contend, unless absolute necessity
requires, or else there be very good advantages to be gained thereby.

CHAP. V. The Design applied to Instrumental Music, and first to the Violin.
THIS way of Writing may not seem so very necessary for the Violin, as the
Voice, because most Lessons crowd themselves into one (G sol re ut) Cliff, as
it is already placed; whereas the various parts of the Voice did indispensably
require many.

But let a Musician consider, whilst he strives by that means to hook in both
the higher and lower Notes, he gains neither conveniently; and by playing in
his old prescribed Compass, condemns this most spritely Music to a drowsy
Melancholy. Upon which account, the French Musicians already place G in the
lower line, (though without any thoughts or respect to our Hypothesis) as we
propose.

All this, methinks, should persuade a man to remove his Notes one line lower,
and spend a week or two in practicing the same position of two different
Octaves, whereby his lessons will always fall more conveniently in the Systeme
of lines, and himself be admitted into the privilege of this Universal
Character; but see the Gamut both ways.

contrasting ways of indicating the two-octaves-and-a-fifth range of the violin
(G3 to D6) with lowercase letters on five-line staves the "old" treble clef,
requiring two ledger lines below and two above the staff, The Old.
^ the "new" system proposed by the author: treble (G4 up) and mean (G3 to G4)
octaves notated identically, requiring only one ledger line (above the treble)
to accommodate the five notes above the treble octave (A4 to D5) The New.
^ Any Violin Lesson of the French pricking will serve for an example.



But when I consider the Viol, it more absolutely presses for relief, and
desires it may no longer suffer its present distractions; for it was never able
to shrink it self into one Cliff, or be a recreation to the Player, till he
had, with more then double pains merited his pleasure.

Wherefore, since it is so important to be an easy delight, and it is the
Masters interest to make it so; I would have him, after he has asked his
Scholar, whether he would learn by Notes or Letters? Ask him in the second
place, whether he desires to learn his Notes in one month or two? if in two
months or more, let him learn his two Cliffs with all their variations, if in
one (as who desires to be kept longer in the slavish principles of a Science
than he must needs) instruct him in this plain and united method: For why
should you bring him unnecessarily into those perplexities, which less than the
constant practice of a year can never perfect?

I have already showed the trouble of different Cliffs, and the clear order
which arises from their union, which I omit to apply here, lest I should be
tedious, when my Reader's apprehensions cannot but be fully satiated. Only, let
me observe, how rightfully the Notes succeed one another in this alteration by
Octaves; how much justice there is that C sol fa ut, should come into the place
of C fa ut, and C sol fa into his; by which they do, as it were, possess the
very inheritance of their Fathers: Whilst before reason had no foundation to
argue the place of any Note, but by an unjust use we were to know B fa b mi, in
the middle Cliff, where C fa ut stood in the Base; where also Ala mi re was
wont to justle it self in upon the Treble.

An example of a Viol Lesson, moving up and down the lower and middle Octaves.
It was altogether needless to insert this example, but that I would avoid the
least suspicion; that this Essay is obscure or unpracticable; for this is all
that is to be observed in the Writing any Viol Lesson (as might have been
collected out of what I said before, viz.) The Base part remains here and every
where else, the same it was; and the Notes of the middle part are only removed
from the lines, into the spaces underneath them; that is, the Notes stand in
the same places as they do in the Base, and the Signal M, gives notice to play
them an Octave higher. You need never alter the B flat, which remains ever
constant to the same place.

And methinks, Violists should become Patrons of this Proposal, not only from
the allurements of convenience, but from a grave and noble pride, that all
other Music conforms it self to the writing of the Base, which the Viol is
most concerned in, and that part being truly the foundation to the rest of the
Music; it was most necessary to conform to that, in the contrivance of all our
Superstructures.

You have already seen the convenience, and because I would rather be
troublesome than obscure, give me leave a little further to argue, what, and how
small the alteration is. For F fa ut, or the Base Cliff is the same it was
before; and they who understand it, have not only advantage to be perfect in
this, but also to play by the pricking of all other Music, which is to be
conformable to this it is steady foundation. So that all the conditions we treat
for, in this uniting of Music are, that in the middle part the Notes should be
removed from the lines into the places underneath them; and in the Treble, from
one line to the next immediately under; the spaces proportionably after the
same manner.

Certainly, the change is so inconsiderable, that I should think this unworthy
my pains, unless the difficulty was so great, which demands redress, and
necessity required me to answer the perverse obstinacy of some, who would
oppose even the justest alterations; as Quintilian observed in his days, Vitio
malignitatis humanae, vetera semper in laud, praesentia in fastigio esse.

But if any shall contemn this as a small petite invention, because it is so
easy and natural, let them remember what a grave company of such contemners
were baffled in setting an egg upright upon the table, before they were showed
how. And I cannot think that any Ingenious person, can impute the facility of
this Proposal to its disgrace, since I have taken care by summing up its
advantages to make it appear as profitable as easy.

I have one more Essay (though independent upon the former Proposal) to make,
before I dismiss the Viol, which upon many accounts has been esteemed by many
impartial and understanding persons. And that which gave the first occasion of
this surmise, was the odd inconvenient situation of the Notes upon the old Viol
Tuning, which with their Concords lie so crossly, that in all Consort we are
forced to play the single Notes only, or else undergo very difficult stops.

viol music notated according to the author's proposal for notes placed the
same way on the staff in bass, mean, and treble octaves An Example of a Viol
Lesson in three Octaves
^ Mr: Chri: Simpson


I would therefore play by Notes upon some pleasant Lyra Tuning, that the most
frequent Notes be always struck open, that their Concords may be their nearest
neighbors, and at last the whole Viol, with an unstop'd freedom, may echo
forth a full Consort-stroke, usually the key of the Lesson.

And what should hinder, but this might be done? for all the Notes which are
upon the Viol De-Gambo, are also upon the Lyra Viol, though in other places;
but that those other places on the Lyra Tuning, are most convenient, is proved
by Musick-Masters themselves, who generally set their sweetest Airs, and
pleasantest Suits of Lessons that way.

Whereas we are now forced to learn both by Notes and Letters, which are
answered with two different Tunings, and a trouble into the bargain of the
strings going continually out of tune; we might do (according to this Proposal)
all under one.

But that which is here most really worth our consideration, is; that if we
play the most noble and sociable way by Notes, the Viol is not able to express
its self in its fullest Harmony, when otherwise it might be a little Consort,
within a Consort, (like the most worthily admired but too soft and silent Lute)
it is now forced to grumble a dismal Base, which shows neither excellency in
the Player, nor any sweetness in the instrument, without the treble of some
other Music, which is to give it life and perfection.

I make choice of this following Tuning; whose two lowest strings are the same
notes they were before, the two next their Name-sakes; where the Octave Notes
lie upon the same frets, and each other string open, only the second string is
B, sharp or flat as the lesson requires, and the treble D, as was the Fourth
and Sixth strings.

two ways of depicting the tuning of the six strings of the consort lyra ^
notes on a five-line staff (with one ledger line above and one below); octave
indication: B[ass] The Consort Lyra tuning by Notes.
letters on a six-line staff; no clef or octave indication By Letters.


And so soon as these are known to be the places of the Notes upon the Viol,
you may play any ground or division by sight upon this, though it were composed
for the other tuning; not only, because they chiefly consist of single Notes,
which are all here with less trouble to be found; but the Consort strokes also,
when they occur, are situated in a nearer, and more friendly neighborhood. So
that by this advantage, we may justly expect in those Lessons, which are
composed Note-ways for the future, a more frequent and amorous consent of
double strings; a full Symphony continued without distraction of the hand,
heretofore distorted by the gripes of many a malicious stop.

Hereby also may those Lyra Lessons (which are already to be had upon this
tuning) quit their a, b, c, rudiments of Letters, and be understood and
honored in the character of Notes; from whence will arise such an entire
agreement in the practice of the Viol, as will bring the Learner to a much more
early perfection.

And indeed, here lies the happiness of this Proposal, That you may at once
have the melody of the Lyra, and yet the intelligence of Notes; which are both
equally capable of having the Graces adjoined, and may be indifferently used
upon this present tuning.

Though if at any time the Scholar be idle, or else there be some extraordinary
Lessons, consisting of many thick and full strokes, troublesome with the
frequent occurrence of flats or sharps; you may prick them by letters, as some
Musick-masters already do (upon this account) their hardest lessons upon the
old Viol tuning.

It may be enquired, perhaps, whether or no I allow but one tuning upon an
instrument?

Yes; once at a Wedding, and upon some unusual occasions; but then, that
present variety, which is many times so causlessly affected, I cannot but
dis-allow. That Scholars, after every suite of lessons, should travel into an
unknown Region, to see fashions in another tuning (when their lessons might
have been as well set upon their old; neither do they become any wiser than
before) does not proceed either from an English constancy or wisdom; and is
usually desired by those that are fickle and unskilful, who are well
recompensed with the trouble of tuning, which I don't grudge them. I know
composers may possi^bly contrive their lessons upon such keys, and beginning
upon an unlucky note, may carry the air such a compass up or down that it will
not go with a pleasant convenience upon the common tuning; but I speak not of
their powerful abilities and phansies, which I would still have them by all
means practice and please themselves in.

I say therefore, for the common use of Music, especially among Practitioners,
and in all Consort (as is already generally observed) it is impertinency and
wantonness to affect various Tunings; since also those of the Lute and Viol
here proposed, set the instruments at a good correspondent pitch to the
Harpsecord, that you may tune together Notes of the same denomination. But
because the bigness of instruments are so various, you must not expect any
constant unmovable law for the tuning them together; yet setting the lesson
higher or lower, will be very nigh sufficient to reconcile them to a perpetual
and peaceable conformity.

I would not have a flat or sharp Tuning make any difference betwixt us; for a
good natured man would let them both go for one, since their alteration and
trouble are so small, being brought to pass by the kind compliance of the B
strings, tuned up or down, as occasion requires; which you will further see in
the tuning for the Lute.

The Design applied to the Organ and Harpsechord.
I come next to the Organ, Harpsechord, and Virginals, which, besides, the
forementioned Difficulties, common to all other instruments, have so many
proper to themselves, that I have known an hundred learn, and not three by
Book; so troublesome was it always esteemed to attain. Wherefore in Holland they
have found out an idle Tableture of Figures, which was invented to relieve the
memory of their Women, who after a lying in, or the like, were wont to forget
all their Lessons, and must begin a new; and indeed, marriage has been ever
thought very fatal to this withoutbook Music.

Now, that I may further satisfy and persuade my Reader, I shall a little
explain the trouble, and show how easily it may be remedi'd; whereas we play
upon other Instruments but by one Cliff at a time; here the perplexity is
doubled, and we always use two different together. We should divide o^r soul,
and employ one part to consider the right hand, the other the left; and indeed,
in such a various and distracting position of the Notes, which are to be at
once considered; a man does as necessarily need two heads, as two hands to play
with.

And then if you talk of changing the Cliff (as many good Lessons do frequently
require) give me a man of three or four heads; for on the left hand, the
lowermost line, which was G, is immediately transformed into D; thus also is
the right disquieted with another different alteration; neither when you have
this far passed the pikes, will you find any rest or settlement, but all the
lines and spaces will become any thing, by the arbitrary and tyrannical power
of C sol fa ut; which, if you consider, is required to be done at a sudden upon
six lines; I believe it is sufficient to appale the warmest confidence; and
could a Master but rightly instruct his Scholar to apprehend so terrible an
intricacy, without doubt, it were enough to cure an Ague, and which is all (as
I know) it would be good for.

Now in the way here proposed, he has the same universal law for both hands, G
is always the lower line, and so forward the same for ever in the Base and
Treble: And if at any time the right has occasion to descend, or the left to
move upwards, it is but altering the signal Letter of the Octave, and without
any trouble, you may play in what place, and with what hand you please; because
every particular Octave has such a different prospect, and systeme within it
self. That you will find but very little inconveniency, when you shift your
writing by eight Notes, which lie round about, and come over again so much the
same, that I take the keys of an Harpsechord to be an exact emblem of our
Hypothesis, as we before explained it; and consequently they be most suitable
to that method they so much resemble.

The Plate for an example of the Harpsecord.


And here I expect to fall into the unmerciful hands of an Objecter, who would
undo me all at once, because I alter my Octaves, as often as he does his Cliffs.

But to satisfy him, and save my self, I suppose, it will be sufficient, if I
prove, that every thing remains the same, and so our alteration be as good as
none at all.

1. In our movement by Octaves, all the lines and spaces do ever remain
possessed of the same Notes. Archimedes's Engine, with which he thought himself
able to move the world, had he but footing out of it; is much too weak to stir
G from the lowest line, or disorder any of the rest from their fixed settlement.

2. The Keys signified by those Notes, are specifically and in kind, though not
individually the same, which is so very equivalent, both in show and reality,
that I dare trust my cause to any ones serious observations; but to help his
thoughts, let him consider how the jacks of an Harpsecord are ready cut out
into Octaves, and have the very face and eyes of our proposal. As for example,
betwixt every eight Keys, there are placed three sharps, and two sharps, which
the sight apprehends together, as the ent^re Systeme of an Octave; when
therefore you see a Note placed 8 bars of harpsichord music in D minor notated
according to the author's proposed method, with T, M, or B indicating the
octaves An Example of a Lesson on the Harpsechord
^ Almain

W ^
Directions for altering the Octave see Page. 39

upon the middle line of five, it signifies the key betwixt the two sharps, and
if Tr is placed before the Note, then the key betwixt the two upper sharps is
intended; if M, the key betwixt the two middle sharps, if B, that between the
two lower, and so of the rest, which is the only alteration I require. And who
can here find in their hearts to be quarrelsom and unkind, when I save them so
much, and put them to so little trouble? As that Almain I have instanced in,
cannot be pricked in the way now used under eight lines, mine requires but five.

And for the satisfaction of any, how much the several Octaves both appear, and
are the same, let them but begin their lessons eight keys inclusively, higher
or lower then they learned them, and they shall find themselves able to play
them, as far as the compass of the instrument will permit; but if any should be
put out by their fancy let them set their hands right, and shut their eyes, and
I Will warrant them they do it.

It must not be expected that this will fall out so very pat on other
instruments, except in the Tuning of the Viol last proposed; neither is it my
fault, for I have not undertaken to alter the situation of the Notes upon the
Instruments, but in the Book; that the Reader must all along remember that this
proposal is only concerning the Orthography of Music, it is performance and
harmony remaining untouched.

The Lute has always had an undeniable sovereignty over other instrumental
Music, since that it self is a complete Consort, sounding with such a soft,
but powerful sweetness, as if it were well acquainted with all the intrigues of
the mind; sometimes disarming anger, and with its gentle breath, cooling a
revengeful rage; sometimes, by a contrary power it kindles a delightful flame,
and raises a kinder, but no less fiery passion; as it is observed, that Music
does always promote that humor, which a man is most inclined to; though there
are also several lessons, which in their own nature have a greater tincture of
mirth or melancholy.

But upon what account soever it is, you may observe the Lute to be in so great
esteem among all Romancers, that they never make mention of any other Music,
than this with the Voice; for if they can but get a moments leisure to place
their Heroes in an arbor, amidst the green Ornaments of the Spring; they
present them with a Lute to Court those Mistresses, all the world knows they
have deserved, but are at last forced to use this overcomnig Music, as being
of proportionate power to charm, with that of their prodigious swords to
conquer.

And even the grave Philosophers themselves have so great a reverence for it,
that their Musical experiments are always quoted in the name of a Lute-string.

But the Lute is so generally acknowledged supreme, that it is as needless for
me to prove it, as it is impertinent to my purpose; wherefore, we will now only
enquire, what concerns it has in our present proposal; though, indeed, the
Tableture, by which we play upon the Lute, is so convenient, that except a
Scholar knows the Notes already by understanding other Music, or else has
some further design of Composing, he may possibly content himself with that
practical writing.

Yet since the building is so high and noble, who would not take a little more
pains to lay a better foundation? we must spend some years in attaining it, and
many more in the enjoyment; and shall we never come to so much perfection, as
to understand what this Music is that pleases us so well?

And if we consider it, the difficulty will not be found sufficient to
countermand such great conveniences, as will flow from hence; for if one can
but tell how the Gamut is situated (as the next cut explains it) he may write
out any treble upon the Lute; and a little more knowledge will contrive a Base.
Now if a Scholar should make no further progress than this, yet it would be a
pretty accomplishment to be able to set a Tune.

And for one that is well versed in Notes, it is much better to play his
Lessons writ in this kind, for he does not only get a particular light into the
composition of his Lessons, but continually perfects that way, which is common
to all his Music.

depiction of the author's proposed system of notation system as applied to the
lute, with staff notation above and lute tablature (?) below The Scheme for the
Lute, where the Notes are expressed by Letters, and the tuning by Octaves.
^ Ee Ff G A B C D E F g a b etc. All the thumb-^trokes fall upon this line.
Where the Base requires a distinct time, contrive it by a Rest over it is head
in the Treble.
Arron's Gigue in the author's proposed system of notation Arrons Gigue by
Notes.
^ Arron's Gigue in lute tablature (?) By Letters.
^

I confess, when it was necessary to manage the Lute in two or three different
Cliffs (like the old way for the Harpsechord) it was too troublesome to
undertake, and too private a design to be concerned in; but since the Lute is
reconciled to it self and all other Instruments, that by an united
acquaintance, and happy league, they assist to one another's attainment; it is
a most general interest to practice it by Notes.

Because few or none at present, write their Lute lessons by Notes, I have
taken liberty to propose such a Scheme, as I could possibly contrive with the
most convenience and perspicuity.

It must be considered, that the Lute (being it self a Consort) is of very
great compass, and contains two Octaves, besides the Base; so that there must
be a Mean and Treble, which may be successively placed upon a Systeme of four
or five lines, by the alteration of the signal letters, and that without any
great trouble, either to write or understand; because the change is by Octave
Notes, which once known upon the Lute, will be easily found upon the book,
where the namesake Notes have all the same position.

There must be a time, before you can tell the strings open, by the names of
Treble, Second, Third, etc. and the Alphabet of stopped frets; now a little
more time would perfect the Gamut, and I am confident it is a^together as easy
a way, when one is first of all to begin.

Now for the Base, because the time of it is known by the Note, under which it
stands, and will do well enough, if so be we strike it with the string
appointed, which is all the direction we have, now-adays, given us. As also,
that it is not so frequently stricken, as to deserve a Systeme of lines to it
self. I have resolved the Notes of the Base, into their own significative
letters, which are much more plain to be understood, then if they lodged up and
down the lines and spaces.

And in this I am sure, the now Tableture has not the better of me; for why
should not E e (that is double E la mi) fignifie the twelfth, which Note it is,
as well as a figure of five, 5? or G the tenth, as well as an A with three
heavy strokes upon his back.

Surely that is most natural and easy; but why a figure of five should stand
for the Twelfth, and a figure of four for the Eleventh, I could not a long time
understand the Etymology, till at last I remembered there was six lines for the
six first strings, under which the poor Seventh stands without ever a stroke;
but how unjustly, let them answer, that originally robbed him of it; though,
for my part, I believe, it was done with a good intent for saving a stroke:
well then, do but suppose the A that is absent, and five strokes to be added to
the Seventh, and there is a lawful Twelfth sterling; which is a conceit, I
confess, that though a man had thought on it before he went to bed, yet he
might possibly have never dreamed on it all night; neither, indeed, is it to be
remembered by a young beginner at once telling.

Wherefore all the odds, I know, betwixt the letters I have proposed, and those
old figured Bases, are, that any Musician may understand what my written Base
means; but the other is some private conjuring of a Lutinist.

When the Notes of the middle part are to be struck with the thumb, I have
noted them with the smaller letters of the Alphabet; as you have an example in
Arrons Jig, which are there associated to the Treble, to make a convenient
satisfaction for the absence of the farther distant Base.

Here insert the Plate for the Gamut upon the Lute, and Arrons Jig.


I have chose this tuning, not only as it is that which the most excellent
Lutinist, Mr. John Rogers ordinarily teaches in London to his Scholars; but
also, because the Notes lie here in their most natural position, as you may
find by computing their distances one from another; to which the Tuning of the
strings does exactly agree. Only observing that, F fa ut, is usually sharp in
this, as in many other keys, where Mi is not displaced by a b flat.

I know many make the eighth string Gamut, and the fourth, G sol re ut, but a
little consideration will satisfy them, it cannot be so here; for when we
alter the Lute to a flat Tuning, we let down the fourth and the eighth; now the
first b flat does not use to stand upon G, but B; whereas, therefore, they make
the fourth string G, and the tuning shows Mi to be placed there, it must needs
be false; and the fourth, by right, be assigned to B, which is the very country
where Mi was bred and born.

This is also proved by the tuning of the Bases; for it is but half a Note from
the eighth to the seventh, which by their account will happen betwixt G and A,
but by ours, betwixt B and C, according to their just distance in a sharp
tuning.

One thing may seem to thwart our design of playing on the Lute by Notes, which
is, that several suits of lessons require different tunings, and will thence
breed a confusion, because the same string will not always be the same Note.

And indeed, this argument may as well be urged against playing by Notes upon
any Instrument that has diverse tunings; wherefore this one proposed, is to
serve for Consort, and all ordinary occasions; and this I say, from a desire
not to contend, for I know there is sufficient variety upon this one tuning,
and as good suits of lessons as ever were played upon any.

But you must remember that under this one tuning, I comprehend both sharp and
flat, which gain such advantage by altering the tuning of some strings, that
you cannot but be pleased with the consideration.

For, first, in the alteration of Bases, we do not change them from one whole
Note to another; but sometimes the flat Notes are made sharp, and sometimes the
sharp are turned into flat.

Now, whereas otherwise we have a sharp or flat prefixed at the beginning of a
line or space, and are forced all along to remember, that whenever a Note
occurs thereon, it must be stopped according to its prefixed qualification; here
we need only strike the Note and by the tuning, it is provided to be true.

Thus, instead of a continual B flat, we tune down the eighth, the fourth, and
the Treble, which will require you to observe; that as when a B flat was placed
upon a line, all the Notes upon that line were stopped a fret lower; so here
the string being tuned half a Note lower, all the Notes upon that string will
fall a fret higher.

Hence K fret, which is hardly ever used upon the sharp tuning, is upon the
treble in the flat tuning, G sol re ut it self; but this trouble is only upon
that one string, and that one stop of C sol fa ut upon the Fourth.

And now we may dismiss the Lute, having in our Scheme assigned places to all
its Notes, whose compass it cannot exceed; for though the Viol would oftentimes
sally forth to the utmost inch of finger-board, yet this never condescends to
move below the frets, and therefore will be obedient to the lines and spaces
allotted.

Having thus explained my Hypothesis, showed its convenience, and applied it in
particular to the most considerable Music; I come now to answer those
Objections, which may seem to contradict it.

CHAP. VI. The Objections Answered.
Obj. 1. I First of all meet with some peevish piece of Antiquity, that
commends only the Golden days of his youth, and is now weary of the world, and
the world of him; but if there be any good in it, it is that which he received
from his forefathers, and not what this degenerating age has corrupted.

He therefore defies our present innovation, and abhors such a confusion, as
would bring the Notes of C sol fa ut cliff, from the spaces wherein they were
placed, and set them upon the lines underneath, which was never yet known.

Answ. I. Innovation is either of that which is bad, or that which is good; if
then this be bad or inconvenient, reject it upon its own account; if good, what
hinders but it should be embraced? and prithee tell me, if a Scholar shall
learn in half the time others have done, will he much care ^f they call him
Innovatour? why should not we accept an Universal Character in Music, as
Arithmaticians have done that noble way of accompting by Decimal Fractions,
where all things are brought to one Catholic numeration?

Ans. II. Confusion is when things are different and perplexed; method, when
they all agree and are united. Now I leave it to an impartial Reader, which
upon this account ought to be censured this way or that.

Object. II. The Cliffs always stand in a line, for they are five Notes
asunder, if therefore in the Base you set F fa ut upon the line, and in the
middle part C sol fa ut in the space, you make them but four Notes distant,
which is false Music; and besides, that very Numerical, G sol re ut, which
stood in the uppermost space of one five lines; in the next five lines, will be
in the lowest line.

Answ. I can hardly think any one will be so dull, to read thus far, and then
make this Objection; but lest any one should still run droaning in his own way,
I shall mind him of ours, and tell him again, we do not reckon upwards, as if
the lines were continued together; neither make we any Cliffs five Notes
asunder, but we complete an Octave in the Systeme of four lines, which reaches
to F fa ut, and then begin the Systeme of the next four lines, in the middle
part, with G again; as after Saturday night comes Sunday morning.

But then, if for convenience of pricking we allow the Systeme to be of five or
six lines, why must he fall to his old continuation? for herein the Notes of
any higher Octave are Exoticks, taken in only strangerwise for their trade and
commerce; and therefore must not be looked upon as at home; neither is it
necessary they should, for he that plays, minds only the part before him, not
what the Base was, or the Treble might be, but what his present task is; and
should he look after more, he will find a dearer sympathy of the agreeing parts
in this, than in any other way of writing.

Object. III. Are we not already provided with a way that will do? and are not
Musicians versed therein? would you have them forego their former pains, and
take as much more only to the same purpose?

Answ. For those who have attained that laborious, but unnecessary excellency,
let them, if they please, enjoy it. But if there be a nearer and easier way,
why should not those Guides be so honest to lead us in it? Must every poor
Schoolboy run the risquo of his Master's antiquated studies? And truly, if
Musick-masters will continue obstinate, to maintain such needless difficulties,
they may, like some (Musicians heretofore) be left to play by themselves in
Fiddlers Island.

We have the experience of the former age, and our own too; that standing upon
the shoulders of our Ancestors, we may surely see further than they, and
discover what they never saw; if then there be a shorter cut, why must we go
about?

comparison of traditional and proposed notation for four bars of music in
eight parts An Example of Eight Parts
traditional notation with G, C, and F clefs; numerals indicate intervals
between each part and the bass With Cliffs.
^ Treble 1 5 5 3 3 5 5 3 6 6 3 8 3 8
Treble 2 3 3 8 8 3 3 8 3 3 8 5 8 3
Alt 1 8 8 5 5 8 8 5 8 8 5 3 8 5
Alt 2 5 8 5 3 5 8 3 3 6 5 8 5 8
Tenor 1 5 5 8 3 3 5 8 3 3 3 5 8 5
Tenor 2 3 3 3 8 5 8 5 6 8 3 3 5 3
Bass 1 3 6
Bass 2
author's proposed notation, with octave designations (T, M, B) rather than
clefs Without Cliffs
^ Treble 1.
Treble 2.
Alt 1
Alt 2
Tenor 1
Tenor 2
Bass 1
Bass 2
Mr. Simpson's Compend: P: 75.

It Is needless to set the Figures where no cliffs are because the Concords are
always situated in the same respective distance as if there were but one part.
The Octave letters B M T only suppose a different Octave which also the Cliffs
(and more obscurely) do But they do not suppose the various removals of all
or any of the Notes as the Cliffs do which being 2 * 5 * 2 * in all 9)
multiplied with the 5 lines and four included spaces do demonstrate that the
former way did therein require 81 different suppositions.



Suppose the old project was brought to pass, that the nook of Land, which
joins Africa to the continent of Asia, was divided, and so a passage out of the
Mediterranean, opened into the Red Sea; would the Apprentices of all former
Merchants be ever obliged, when they took a Voyage to the East Indies, to
measure the same wide circuit their Masters did; to double the cape of good
Hope, twice cross the scorching line, and suffer even the Southern cold, when
they might return in less than half the time by the Streights of Gibralter? And
with no less folly, must Musicians be still condemned to steer their wandering
course through many Cliffs, because their Predecessors went that way before
them.

Object. IV. But certainly, the design must be very forced and unnatural, which
shall oblige all Instruments of such different shapes and compass, and way of
utterance, to the same manner of writing, and that too clouded in the darkest
obscurity, by the abrogation of Cliffs, which are the only directions to inform
us where any Note stands.

Ans. Though Instruments are various, yet all Music is fundamentally the same;
there is the same beloved interval betwixt all consonant strokes, the same
perpetual Economy of an Octave wheresoever it dwells, that all our several
Music is but the same kind of harmonious soul embodied in different shapes;
for if it were otherwise, the same lesson could not be played upon several
Instruments. Wherefore, though their stops and strikings be various, but the
thing the same which is to be stopped or struck upon them; it is evident that
one way of writing may be sufficient.

As if there was a common Character for a horse; from thence a Frenchman would
call it Cheval, a Dutchman, Pfert, etc. For the thing being once known which is
represented to them, they would from the same character express it according to
the different dialect of their Nations.

And thus the tune of all Music consisting in the same Notes, and the same
method of Notes; why may they not have the same situation, and be reduced to
one universal character? which allowing the latitude of four Octaves, is
spacious enough for the widest compass of any Instrument; and more might be
granted if occasion does require.

And then for abolishing Cliffs, it is very reasonable, that their perplexity
and variety being taken away, they themselves should also perish; which is so
far from causing obscurity, that it is the very thing which makes it clear and
easy: For is it not much better to have G always the lowest line, than to have
an informing Cliff to tell you, it is sometimes G, sometimes F, sometimes E,
and so to distinguish what it is upon every particular occasion where it varies.

If then an universal and constant order be not most plain and intelligible! If
this be a wonder! I Will give any man leave to cry out -- Help me, Ralpho, with
thy Prophetic Spirit; Deliver me Bacchus from thy dozy fumes: Pity me ye
confounded Sons of Nimrod, that I must still suffer the curse of my old
confused disorders.

Object. V. But will not Music hereby become common and contemptible,
prostituted -- to the weak and rabble? and be no longer the delight of Princes,
but the mean pastime of the vulgar.

Answ. Which if this Essay be guilty of, it is a contradiction to cry out of
it is obscurity; but I answer.

Since that Music is no juggling, cheat, or empty toy, but an innocent and
substantial pleasure, a natural branch of one of the most noble Sciences; it
fears not to discover it self to any, and being of the liberal Arts, humbly
admits access to the meanest admirer. For they the more generally known they
are, the more excellent they appear; and upon this account, the most Ingenious
and Learned Men I meet with, are always most liberal and communicative of their
knowledge: And this they do without any prejudice, nay, with the greatest
advantage to themselves; for there is so great a depth in all Learning, that
they do thereby only dispose people better to understand and admire their
excellencies.

And particularly in Music, there are such various, such large
accomplishments, that will suit every ones quality and capacity. A brisk and
lively Air will penetrate the thickest skull, and actuate the dullest rustic
with joy and dancing: But then there are Quires of Consort for nobler
entertainments, above both the skill and charges of the common people.

And were Music in more frequent use, we should not see it more despised, but
more generally esteemed; It Is custom makes it understood, and brings it into
reputation. Thus when every Swain had his rural ditty, and the Shepherds sat
Singing their Eclogs on the Plains of Peleponnesus, than did the Athenian
Princes love and honor these Musical delights: And Epaminondas himself, that
renowned Captain of Thebes, learned both to play and sing of his Master Denny;
(as Cornelius Nepos thought it worthy to report among the great actions of his
life.)

Was ever Mathematics contemned, because a Carpenter understood his Rule? or
fair Writing under-valued, because many ordinary persons more excel in it, than
Noblemen and great Scholars? neither will Music be cast away, because
performed by the hands of the vulgar.

I should not have been so long in confuting an Objection, which is so plain a
mistake, but that upon this account some have so stomached this Essay: And
since they do so urge me, I don't care, if I do fall under the dint of their
Argument, viz. That Music is hereby exposed to the world habitable -- that it
may possibly be more generally practiced, and a perfection sooner attained by
the learner.

Object. VI. But what shall become of the lessons already written? or when we
come amongst them of the old way, how shall we Consort with them?

Ans. Many Scholars would be glad to arrive at this objection; if they could
play all that was set them, they would think themselves well enough. But this
is not all, for they may be able to play any Base by sight, which is the same
it was before; and for other quicker lessons, (which are seldom performed
without practice) any servant may transcribe them, who though he cannot
practice for his Master, and transfer his skill, he can his writing.

And though this should be a trouble for the present, yet time will quickly
abolish it; the daily composing and learning new lessons, wipe away the old
ones; so that such alterations in Music as this, already have, and may as well
now find this inconveniency insensible.

And for transcribing lessons out of the old, into this new method, there
remains no difficulty, it is but (as I said before) removing the Notes of the
middle part out of the spaces, into the lines underneath them, and in the
treble to set G in the lowest line. But Scholars need not trouble themselves
for this, no Master will be so dis-ingenious, but upon their entreaties, to
direct them this way. And I have heard the most eminent, Master Theodorus
Steskins, and Mr. Matthew Lock, (whose excellent compositions I cannot but tell
the world, how I admire) affirm, we might use this way if we pleased; the
former of which, once transcribed for me the Song, which I have given you for
an example, according to this present proposal.

I have now passed the Objections, and made a shift to escape alive; but
because I have been so long engaged in them, I am willing to give the Reader
some account thereof.

It must be expected when any thing is proposed entirely new (as this is the
first attempt was ever made of this kind in Music) it should appear a little
strange and surprising; and therefore our former and more acquainted notions of
things, which have already possession of our minds, suggest all manner of
Objections to keep out any new intruding proposal: And I have upon this account
been frequent in discourse with persons conversant in Music, that
understanding their suggestions, I might in some sort allay the heats of their
surprizal. Neither do I think this argumentative method is more litigious than
profitable; for I have always found my self better able to understand any
Phoenomenon by reading such Authors that contraverted it, rather than those
that only laid down the direct definition.

I would not therefore have my Reader terrified at these objected difficulties,
not for their number, because they are for the most part but some shie
surmises, which better acquaintance, and more familiarity, will easily wear
away; nor for their largeness, which I purposely designed, that by the more
exact search and enquiry therein, every particular might be more thoroughly
apprehended.

So that this design being acquitted of its late impeachments, comes more
boldly with its two old arguments to claim acceptance, viz.

1. By assuring its favorers a remission of more than half their task in the
tedious principles.

2. And an universal knowledge and practice, from the common pricking of all
sorts of Music.

So that I have nothing more, but to sum up my accounts, and conclude with a
compendious narration of the whole.

The Conclusion.
I Come now to review a Learners proceedings, which as they lie in the dark,
are thought difficult and tiresome; whereas, if he had a short Landscape of his
pleasant journey, and always in his eye a prospect of his desired end, the way
it self would be satisfaction, and his practice only a continued pleasure.

His first business is a perfect knowledge of the seven Letters, and I think
none undertake Music, but are thus far skilled in their Alphabet.

Then he must know the seven particular places, to which these Letters do
belong, as G for the lowest line, A for the first space, B for the next line,
and so forwards; whose respective seats upon the Instrument being known and
applied to the book, render him capable to express the Tune of any lesson; and
for the Time, after you have understood the comprehensive value of each Note;
it is but a knack to stamp at every Emphatical Note, and (as a jesting observer
of the motion of the foot told me) a man will be thorowpac'd in the Musical
amble.

And this is all that is requisite to play in Consort, which without doubt may
be brought to pass in a little time, by frequent practice, and the conduct of a
Skilful Master.

To whose judgment I readily submit any thing this Essay has proposed, not
only, because a stander by may perceive more, than he who manages the Game; but
also one whose employment it is, may be better able to improve it, than one who
takes it up only for a divertion.

Wherefore if a Lute-master shall think it more convenient to use two Systemes
of lines, instead of those Letters for the Base Octave; or any Musician (for
the reasons alleged) conceive it more distinct to use but four lines in a
Systeme, or the like; I shall most readily comply with any thing their judgment
and experience shall find best.

Let them, to whom it belongs, have the honor of it is perfection; it suffices
me to be instrumental to its advancement; which cannot but be promoted, by
abrogating the perplexed variety of Cliffs, and establishing all Music in one
constant and universal order, by the foundation law of Octaves.

As I think it of absolute necessity for a beginner to have one to instruct
him, so in my judgment, it will be certainly most advantageous for him to make
choice of such an one, as begins at the bottom, and leads him the most
understanding way; to instruct him (for instance) that an Octave is a complete
Cycle of Music, that all the intermediate Notes, in their natural position,
are two half Notes distant, except C and F, which when he knew where, he would
also know why they were so placed; and thence understand the nature of Flats
and Sharps; he would apprehend the disposition of his Instrument, and collect
the reason of its tuning. He that takes such a course as this, viz. to be
instructed in the Fundamentals of Music, may (perhaps) be thought to go the
most difficult and furthest way about; but they will at last find it, much the
nearest way home.

But why must we now Sacrifice to Hercules, and hang up our imperfect Trophies
upon his Pillars? we are arrived ('it is true) at the usual boundaries of a
learner's knowledge; but the glory and satisfaction, the triumphing perfection
is still behind.

It Is an incomparable pleasure to play an Airy Tune, or well contrived Consort;
but to be Author of it, is a kind of unknown delight. I have heard many
Scholars, in vain, importune their Masters for some directions to this purpose,
that they would crown their pains and joys, with this last consummating
kindness.

Whose Charity, notwithstanding has been so straight, or else their ignorance
so obstinate, that those just entreaties were frustrated.

I would therefore a little plead this cause with the skilful Musician, and see
whether it would not be a small trouble, yet a great advantage for him to
comply: For with what ease might he explain Simpson's Compendium, and by
reducing it all along to practice, and delightful examples, drive on pleasantly
through the very intricacies of composition.

Did but a Scholar understand the mode of lessons, the smooth nature of a
Treble, the proper movements of a leaping Base; how Consort is generally by
Fifths, Thirds, and Eights, with some few directions for their use; he needs no
more but to fancy what he would write down, and write down what he fancies.

These things of themselves lie something deep and obscure; but if they were
undertaken by a good Musical Ingenuity, and assisted by the directions of a
learned Master, may be quickly brought to pass, both with ease and pleasure.

And I cannot think what reason any Ingenuous Musician can have to be shie
herein, for his labor would then be a continual exercise of his chiefest
excellency, and his employment only to manifest his learning; whereas, now he
is ranck'd in the same order with those Empyrical Traders, who have a parcel of
Musical Receipts, but understand not one Note of their composure.

The world would hereby more know and value his worth, and so he would be
separated from the disesteemed crowd of the lower rank, and live, and be
esteemed like a Master of an ingenious profession.

It Is strange that so many arguments must be urged to persuade men to embrace
their own interest; but after all, methinks, a desire to see Music advanced,
should be something prevalent with them. For it might then come to pass, that
instead of drinking, or some such entertainments and ligaments of company, a
Musical Consort might be introduced, which would be much more happy and
innocent: How would it resemble virtue and charity, if the subject of a merry
meeting was Harmony it self? and neighboring Gentlemen made their mutual
Treatments of that Music, which their own Fancies composed, and their own
hands performed? This would not impair the Musick-masters livelihood, but bring
him more into request, make his employment more constant, and that too in the
heights and excellencies of Music; for it cannot be supposed, that Gentlemen
should ever arrive so far, without some to instruct them.

And thus far we may extend the bounds of Practical Music, which are laid upon
such a noble foundation in the Mathematics; that as there is scarcely any
thing there more intricate, so there is nothing more ingenious than this.

Many an industrious Scholar studies the Trigonometry of Signs and Tangents;
only that he may erect a Sun-Dial, or take the right ascension of a Star, which
perhaps he has never occasion afterward to practice; who, if Musically
inclined, may as well favor his Genius therein; since the same kind of studies
might satisfy him in the Harmonical Division of an Octave, and discover to him
how the agreeing concords oblige themselves to observe their Arithmetical laws.
What pretty Philosophy there is in the vibration of strings, and how each
various stroke is at last reconciled by an uniting coincidence.

But this is so far from our Practical Proposal, that it may suffice to have
given these hints, and so withdraw, lest while I plead for Music, as a noble
and lawful divertisement, it should be found guilty of encroaching upon those
more serious studies, to which it is to be only a recreation.

FINIS.
ALL sorts of Music Books and Instruments, Lutes, Viols, Violins, Gittars,
Flageolets, Castenets, etc. with great choice of strings.

As also the best Consort, Suits of Lessons, and the Newest Airs ready pricked
according to this Universal Character.

Are to be sold by John Carr, at the Middle-Temple-Gate.


