A True ACCOUNT of the BEHAVIOR, CONFESSION, AND Last Dying SPEECHES Of the 15
Criminals that were Executed On Monday the 22th of December, 1690.
THe Ordinary visited them every day after their Condemnation, and on the last
Lord's Day a Sermon was preached to them, on this Text, Deuteronomy 32.29. O that they
were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end.

Whence five things were observable, 1. The Benefit and advantage of a
Religious Consideration in general. 2. The no less advantageous Benefit of
considering our latter end in particular. 3. That to consider our latter end,
is an Argument of our Wisdom and Understanding. 4. Some Seasons and particular
Occasions were instanced wherein consideration of our Latter End is more
especially necessary. 5. That Discourse was concluded, with some Motives for
the putting in practice this important Duty, then a Charge given to the
Condemned as follows.

O that you were wise, that you understood this, that you would consider your
latter end.

I know you do consider it in one sense, that is, your minds are in continual
fearful Apprehension of it, but this is not that considering of your latter
end, which the Text exhorts to, this is the minding in such sort their Deaths
and Departures, as to prepare and make ready for them.

O that I may dye the death of the righteous, is the ardent Wish of every one;
but O that I may live the Life of the Righteous of how very few. Sirs, deceive
not your selves, there is no having your latter End like the Righteous Man, but
only by having your precedent Life like his.

What? Will not you consider your latter end, so as to prepare for it, who have
it in so near a view, and Death stares you in the face, and are you yet
unprovided against it?

O certainly it is your Wisdom, it is your Understanding, to consider the
things belonging to your everlasting Peace, before they be for ever hid from
your Eyes. How utterly inexcusable will you be, if you do not, to morrow, to
morrow my Friends will be the latter end as to this Life. O that to morrow may
be the beginning of an Eternity in Blessedness unto you.

Take care therefore that they be in a due Qualification for Heaven and
Happiness; take heed that they be mere to be partakers of the Inheritance of
the Saints in Light and Glory.

This Life is the only State of Trial and Probation, there is no amending in
the other World what was left defective in this Work of Conversation, at our
departure out of this.

Therefore let us now give all Diligence to make our Calling and Election sure,
let us work out our Salvation with a cautious Fear and Trembling, lest our
Contrition be imperfect, and our Repentance unsincere.

O blessed God! is this the business you are employed about for an endless
Eternity, and can you be too careful concerning it? Think not a few Tears,
Sighs, and Lord have Mercy on me, to be Repentance. This is not so cheap and
easy a performance, especially when there is a whole course of Life of
wickedness to be repented of. Oh, no! it imports all the painful Throws and
Pangs of of a second Birth, of a life of Regeneration. It imports a broken and
contrite Heart, an Hatred and Detestation of Sin, as well as a Sorrow for it.
Sincere and steadfast Resolution of new Obedience, yea, an actual ceasing to do
evil, and learning to do well. And, oh! may your Repentance be such! may if be
a repenting you more that you have offended a good and gracious God by your
impieties, than that these have exposed you to condign temporal Punishment.

O cause you new Joy in Heaven by your Repentance, as you have formerly
grieved, quenched, and offered dispight to Gods Holy Spirit by your obstinately
wicked and impenitent Lives. Think it not enough to say within your selves, We
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, for he is no
Propitiation for your Sins, unless you truly repent and forsake them. The
Redemption purchased by our Savior, and the Promises of his Gospel, belong not
to you, if you have not the Qualifications of Redeemed ones, nor the performed
Conditions of the Gospel-promises, viz. Truth Faith, Repentance and Amendment:
Without Holiness there is no Happiness without beholding Gods Face in
Righteousness here, there is no beholding that in Glory hereafter. And
therefore see that you have a Divine and Holy Nature implanted in you in this
Life, and then departing hence, meetly disposed for eternal blessedness, when
at the Resurrection from the Dead you awake up, after Gods likeness, you shall
be endlesly satisfied therewith.

I shall proceed to give an account of the Condemned Criminals, as to their
former course of Life, and in what frame of Heart they were for a blessed
Eternity.

I. John Bennet alias Freeman, but more notoriously known by the name of the
GOLDEN FARMER, condemned for the Murder of Charles Tailor, and several
Robberies, to the value of some thousand Pounds. I was with him several times
in his Chamber, and exhorted him to disburthen his Conscience, by a free
Confession of his Evil Courses, yet after much Advice for his Souls Welfare,
and many Prayers that God would work his Heart to Repentance, nothing more than
what follows could be obtained: That he had been a great Sinner, and was guilty
of most Sins. That he was not so much grieved for the Shame of this condign
Punishment, as for offending God. And that he was not solicitous to lengthen
out his Life upon Earth, but to get his Pardon sealed in Heaven. He shed many
Tears, yet said, That he trusted only in Christ's Righteousness for Pardon and
Peace in Conscience. He was exhorted chiefly to be deeply humbled for the
Murder he had committed, and upon reading to him David's Penitential Prayer,
in these Words, Deliver me from Blood guiltiness O God, and my tongue shall
sing of thy righteousness, he gave some Signs of great Remorse; yet I told him,
That his Tears could not expiate his great Provocations of God, for they stood
in need of cleansing by the Merit and Efficacy of Christ's Blood shed, This be
acknowledged. Then I endeavored to make him more sensible, offering Violence
to the Dictates of his own Conscience, before he could so long proceed in the
wicked Trade of Robbing, and putting many Persons into affrightment of losing
their Lives: He did acknowledge this Crime, whereupon I exhorted him to make
Restitution to the utmost, of what remained in his Hands, otherwise his
Repentance could not be sincere: He thought this to be strange Doctrine,
whenas, he said, he dyed for robbing. I told him, that he paid his Life to the
Justice of the Law, it made no Satisfaction nor Recompense to those he had
despoiled of their Estates. And added farther. That he should nor conceit that
his former Supplies of the Wants of the Poor was any true Charity in God's
Account, who abhors Robbery, though it be intended for a Burnt offering: And
that I feared his Pretension to Charity was designed by him as a covert of his
robbing to be less suspected, however, that it could not atone God's
Displeasure and incensed Justice against him, for so many Acts of Violence as
he had used toward the Persons and Estates of many: This he acknowledged. I
exhorted him to make a more through Discovery of his wicked Life; but he often
refused to do it, saying I could not pardon him. I told him, not
authoritatively, this is God's sole Prerogative, yet as a Gospel Minister, to
whom the Word of Reconciliation is entrusted, I might furnish him with good
Grounds of a Lively Hope of Pardon and Salvation, if be did not hide
obstinately his Sins, by which he had given public Scandal to the Christian
Religion, and therefore his Repentance ought to be as Public and Exemplary, as
his Course of Life had been more notoriosly sinful than other Men's: But I could
not prevail with him to give any Testimony of his sincere turning to the Lord,
to whose all-discerning Eye and determination of his Soul's State I must leave
him.

II. William Jones, condemned for Felony; he is aged about 21 Years, was an
Husbandman, came to London for Employment, but fell into bad Company, because
he said that he seldom prayed that God would keep him from Temptations of
Sinners; he broke the Sabbath, was sometimes overtaken with excessive drinking,
would swear sometimes, and before he was married, he kept company with Red
Women. I hope he was penitent.

III. Francis Yates, condemned for Felony and Burglary, aged 31 years: His
Employment was to turn Throwsters Mills: He joined with bad Company, was
guilty, he said, of Swearing, Drunkenness and of walking in the Fields on the
Sabbath day.

IV. Richard James, condemned for Felony and Burglary: He was very obstinate,
as to the receiving of any Good Instruction, he would not give any account of
his Employment or Conversation, only acknowledged that he had been a sinner, as
all Men are: He showed no Sign of Repentance, and would not declare whether he
were a Protestant or a Papist.

V. George Hutton, condemned for a Rape, aged 22 years, he was a Carman: He
kept bad Company, among whom he would be drunken and often swear.

VI. Thomas Diggs, condemned for clipping the Current Money of this Kingdom,
aged 33 Years: He was a Sea-Surgeon, but said he left that Employment because
he was sick: He said that he seldom prayed, would swear, break the Sabbath, and
kept lewd Women Company before Marriage.

VII. Charles Wells, condemned for Felony and Burglary, aged 22 Years, he was a
Tailor: He said that he stayed at home on the Sabbath, and went not to the
Public Worship, for which, he thought, together with other Secret Sins, that
this Distress did befall him.

VIII. Peter Heysy, condemned for Felony and Burglary: He said that he had been
a great Sinner, in profaning God's Holy Name, and had kept Lewd Company.

IX. John Ray, condemned for the same Crime, aged 22 years: He was a
Shoemaker, and confessed that he had been a great Sinner.

X. John Earl, condemned for Felony and Burglary, aged 17 years: His Father
brought him up to the Trade of a Bricklayer; but he was disobedient, and stole
10 s. from his Father for Idle Expenses: And upon this, fearing his Father's
Displeasure, he ran away from him. He was exposed to bad Company, and was burnt
in the Hand last Session, and now is condemned for a worse Crime, because he
would not take warning by an easier Punishment.

XI. Benjamin Harvy, condemned for Felony and Burglary, committed three Years
since: He confessed that he had been guilty of most Sins; he was a Seaman, but
left that Service, and minded not his Duty to God, not any thing which was
serious. He seemed Penitent, and gave a better account what Saving Faith and
Repentance are than most of the other Criminals.

XII Elizabeth Mackdonel, condemned for Cliping, Filing and Diminishing the
Current Money of this Kingdom. She said that she had led a very evil Life.

XIII. Constance Wainwright, condemned, with three Women more, for firing
Newgate; She was an old Offender, and not sensible of this Crime, nor of the
Course of ill-spent Life; and yet said, That she trusted in God's Mercy for
Pardon and Salvation, though she was ignorant of the Qualifications to obtain
either, and yet was very confident that these Qualifications were performed by
her.

XIV. Mary Jones, condemned for the same Crime, said, That her Employment was
to make Gold and Silver Lace; but of late she became Idle, and fell into bad
Company, by which she was tempted to break the Sabbath, and that she did not
reprove Swearing and Cursing when she heard it; but she now repents of all her
Misdeeds. I hope she was penitent.

The day of Execution being come, viz. Monday the 22d instant, Mr. Ordinary
attended the Prisoners, and labored (...) bring them to a fight and sense of
their Sins, pressing them to a serious consideration of their approaching end,
future State, and a Preparation for another World: And about half an hour past
9 in the Morning Anne Hereford, one of the Women that set fire to the Prison of
Newgate, and received Sentence of Death upon that Account, was brought down and
tied up to a Gibbet in Newgate street, where, after some deploring her untimely
End, and showing a Reluctance for her Misdoings, she was turned off.

Immediately after John Bennet alias Freeman otherwise called the Golden
Farmer, was put into a Cart. and conveyed to Salisbury-court end in
Fleetstreet, near the Place where he committed the Murder, for which he
received Sentence, where a Gibbet was erected for his Execution, and there
having made a short Prayer, he gave the Executioner the Word or Sign to do his
Office, and was accordingly executed, without making any Speech or Exhortation.

This Execution done, George Hutton, Francis Yates, Richard James, Charles
Wells, Peter Heasey, William Jones, John Earl, John Wray alias Ray, Sarah Cane
alias Moor. Constance Wainewright and Elizabeth Trant were conveyed to Tyburn
in several Carts, Thomas Diggs and Bartholomew Mumsord, drawn on Sledges for
Cliping as in Case of High Treason; when being tied up, they expressed, as well
in Gesture as Countenance, a very sorrowful demeanor for the failings and
misdemeanors of their past Lives, desiring God to have mercy upon their Souls
in this their last and greatest Extremity, several of them acknowledging
themselves to have been notorious and incorrigible Sinners, owning the Justice
of God as a Scourge for their Impieties, in bringing them to a place of
ignominy, and temporal Punishment. Mr. Ordinary prayed with them in
extraordinory Zeal and Fervor, laboring with all diligence to make them
sensible of their Conditions, how they stood upon the very brink of Eternity,
and wanted but a few Moments to plunge them into it, which they ought to use
for a Redeeming the time they had spent or squandered away in trifling
Vanities, and things that had proved distructive to their Bodies; he then
admonished them to pray for themselves, desiring to hear them pray, which some
readily did, but others declined it, desiring to be excused by reason of the
Extremity of the Weather, their uncomposedness, or some such like Excuses. The
Ordinary reproved some of them of their neglect of the good Offices he loboured
to do them in Prison, for the Health of their Souls* To which Richard James
answered, he was execeeding sorry he had not given more heedful Attention; and
others replied much to the same purpose. Then the Ordinary set and sung with
them the 25th. Psalm suitable, and fitly applied to so Melancholy Occasion,
which most of them sung with an audable Voice. Then he prayed, and recommending
them to the Protection of the Almighty, took his leave, when soon after the
Cart drew away, and their Souls were committed into the Hands of their merciful
Maker and Redeemer, whilst their Bodies remain in hope of a glorious
Resurrction to the Life Immortal.

This is all the Account I can give of this Session.

Dated this 20th of December 1690. Samuel Smith Ordinary.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
* The Triennial Mayor, or the New Rapparens: A Poem sold by the Booksellers of
London and Westminster, Price 6 d.

* These are to give Notice to all Persons, for the Benefit of the Public,
That Mr. Elmy, Professor of Physic, and Operator, of known Integrity, and
above 25 Years practice, Lives at the Blue Ball in Whale-Bone Court, at the
Lower End of Bartholomew-lane by the Royal Exchange, who most safely and
expeditiously Cures Deafness and Noise in the Ears in any of what Age soever,
(if Curable) and at first Sight, by Inspection, Resolves the Patient if so or
not, as most Eminent Persons of Quality in this City can Testify. He has
likewise a most excellent Gargarism or Mouth-Water, which will make black or
yellow Teeth as white as Ivory, in a few times using; and it will certainly
cure the Scurvy, and all other Diseases incident to the Mouth, Teeth and Gums,
which in many persons causes a stinking Breath, which (by the Blessing of God
and the use of this Water) I dare affirm you will be freed from those Maladies
beforementioned, with Directions. His Pills only prepared for the French
Disease, and the Running of the Reins, may be had in Boxes of several prices,
with other Venereal Arcana's, as occasion serves.


