A LETTER FROM Mr. RICHARD SMITH TO Dr. HENRY HAMMOND, CONCERNING The Sense of
that Article in the CREED, He descended into Hell. Together with Dr. Hammond's
Answer.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1684.

TO THE READER.
THESE two Letters are no spurious things obtruded upon the Names of the Worthy
Persons betwixt whom they passed (as some have shamefully done of late with the
Reverend Author of the Whole Duty of Man, and some Others) but are real and
genuine: They were found in the Study of Mr. Richard Smith (a Gentleman well
known to most of the Learned of his time) amongst many other choice Papers
which he had carefully collected and laid up with a more than ordinary regard;
and are now made public with Advice.

R. Chiswell.

Reverend SIR,
TAKING notice not long ago of the various Expositions of learned Men of the
Sense of the Article of the Creed of Christ's Descension into Hell, and
therewithal considering, that the right understanding of that Article (as well
as of any of the rest) is of such concernment, that (if we believe Athanasius's
Creed) Whosoever does not believe it (with the other Articles therein
contained) he cannot be saved: I made more diligent Inquisition hereinto; which
having done, by perusal of the Works of diverse Writers and Expositors of the
Creed, the Arguments, Reasons and Testimonies produced by them to justify
their several Opinions of the true meaning of this Article, seemed to me to be
much contradictory, obscure and uncertain, so that I could not resolve, how any
man confidently or assuredly could fix a firm Belief, or rely upon any one of
those different Expositions, cashiering all the rest, which must be done, there
being but one Truth to insist upon; for to believe this or that, is to believe
we know not what.

Thus being not able to give my self any satisfaction herein, at last I called
to my remembrance that once it was told me, that Mr. John Seldom, that learned
Lawyer and famous Antiquary (now in Abraham's bosom) held a singular Opinion
of his own touching this Article different from all others, much afterward
approved by many judicious Men: Hereupon (for my own satisfaction) being
desirous to know what was his Opinion herein, I went purposely unto him to be
resolved thereof; who freely at my request, declared to me his Opinion thereof,
which was this, That by these words in the Creed, He descended into Hell, was
meant, that the Soul of Christ resting in Heaven, whither it went immediately
after his death (like as we believe all the Souls of the faithful do) making
good his promise to the good Thief on the Cross, saying to him, To day shall
thou be with me in Paradise, Luke 23. 43: That Soul of Christ, I say, the third
day after his Body had lain interred in the Grave (according to Christ's
prediction, and application of the Prophet Jonas lying three days and three
nights in the Whales belly, Matt. 12. 40.) did descend from Heaven into Hell,
(that is, into the Grave, usually in the Scripture called Hell) and then
uniting it self to his Body, did quicken and raise it up again from the dead,
or place of the dead, which was the Grave, unto life in an instant; all which
is undeniable; herein fulfilling the Prophecy of King David, Psalm. 16. 10.
(though otherwise expounded) Thou shall not leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer
thine Holy One to see corruption: Which place of Scripture (granting that by
this word [Hell] in the Creed is meant the Grave, as the Original will carry
it) may very aptly be applied to this Descension into the Grave: thus, It
cannot be denied but that his Soul was in the Grave in his Body the third day
after his burial, descending thither to raise it up again to life; for without
the Soul, the dead Body of it self naturally could not move nor remove: and so
the Soul being thus descended into Hell or the Grave, was not left there at all
(as it must be granted by them of the other Opinion, that it was left in Hell
the place of the Damned, though for no long time.) For if it had continued any
space of time in the Grave termed Hell, it so continuing there (though never so
little time) might have been said to have for that time been left there; and so
this Prophecy in that point had not been fulfilled. But I think, no man will
deny, that the Soul, so soon as ever it descended into Hell or the Grave into
the Body there lying, both Soul and Body without any staying there, was not
left there, but in the twinkling of an Eye being united together, immediately
rose again from the Dead, (that is from the Grave, the place of the Dead) and
so I say, was not left at all in Hell, that is in the Grave; Whereby the
Prophecy in this point (in leaving the Soul in Hell) was upon the Resurrection
fulfilled. The last part of the Verse of this Psalm is also fulfilled by the
raising of the Body incorrupt (by the power of the Deity) of which there is no
Question or Scruple made.

In this Opinion of Mr. Selden's (granting the word Hell to signify the Grave)
there is no Tautologie, or twice re-iteration of the self same thing, no
acurologie or impropriety, contradiction or absurdity, no hysteron-proteron, no
disorder in the position of it in the Creed, but placed orderly in its proper
place according to the Series of the Creed; nor is it involved in any Mystical
Sense, Trope or Figure (unmeet for an Article of our Faith). But it is a true
and Orthodox Opinion according to the Exposition thereof, plain and easy to be
understood of the meanest Capacity. Moreover I observe, that there may be a
considerable use made thereof, thus expounded according to Mr. Selden's
Opinion, to wit, That hereby is manifested the Reunion of Christ's Soul unto
his Body in the Grave at or immediately before his Resurrection, with the time
and manner thereof, which in no other Article of the Creed, not yet in any plain
place of the Scripture (that I remember) not having a various Exposition, is
directly averred.

Now besides the several Texts of Scriptures produced for proof of this Opinion
of Christ's Descension into Hell, the place of the Damned, variously expounded,
the constant belief and profession of the Catholic Church for many Ages
hitherto, and the Opinions and Judgments of many of the ancient Orthodox
Fathers, and learned and pious Doctors of the Primitive times agreeing
unanimously in the same Opinion, are strongly urged in behalf of that Opinion,
which are not easily to be expunged; thereby inferring, That, say they, to
introduce a new Opinion of yesterday's standing into an Article of our Faith,
never heard of before, against and disagreeing with the general Opinion of the
Church throughout all Ages hitherto observed, might prove a matter of very ill
consequence, and breed much disturbance and confusion in the Church, not to be
approved of by discreet rational men, but rather (with more reason) for the
unity of the Church, worthy to be exploded.

Answer; If it were certain, That such an Exposition of Christ's Descension into
Hell, the place of the damned, as is before suggested, were the true sense and
meaning of the said Article of the Creed, there would be no reason to leave
that ancient Exposition for a new; but rather a necessity to subscribe to it,
and acknowledge it as the true and proper sense of that Article; But such
Interpretation being questionable, dubious, and contradicted by many other
different Opinions of learned and pious men (though of later times) the
probability or possibility only of the truth of that former Opinion (though
never so strongly backed by learned, pious, and Orthodox Fathers and Doctors,
who may and have had their failings) cannot bind the Consciences of other men
unto an implicit Faith, but they may be at liberty to adhere unto such an
Opinion (though lately published) which may by the judgment of other learned
Orthodox Christians, compared with the sacred Scriptures, savor in their
apprehension of more probability of the true sense of that Article, than the
former Opinion.

It may peradventure be likewise objected, That if this Opinion of Mr. Selden's
had been intended by the Composers of the Creed, it is likely, that the time of
such descension into the Grave, would have been expressed in that Article as
well as the time in the Article of the Resurrection.

Answer; The time of the descension into Hell the place of the damned is not
set down in the Article; the knowledge whereof would have been as necessary, as
of this, and which is far more intricate to discover than this is: and
therefore, if the time of the descension had been thought material, it is
likely, it would not have been omitted, being a point controverted; but in this
other Exposition, it is not so requisite to be set down, for that the punctual
time of his descension into the Grave, is apparent to be at the very instant
time of the Resurrection, being both acted together as one individual Article
in a moment of time: For by an old Tradition, as some say, The division of the
twelve Articles of the Creed was first made by the twelve Apostles, every one,
say they, setting down one single Article; wherein this Article (made, as goes
the report, by S. Thomas the Apostle) Descendit ad Inferos, tertio die
resurrexit, containing both the descension and the Resurrection, is joined
together in one Article; and therefore, not improperly, it may be thence
inferred, that as they were made at first one Article jointly, so the time of
the descension of Christ's Soul into Hell or the Grave, and of his Resurrection
were both at one time; and the time of the Resurrection is rather mentioned,
than of the descension into the Grave, to fulfill the Scriptures, which mention
the time of the Resurrection, but not of the descension: yet the Lutherans
guess at a time when he descended into Hell, the place of the damned, which
was, as they say, between his Burial and Resurrection in body and soul; for
they will have it to be after his Burial, and before his Resurrection, that it
might concur with the Order of the place thereof in the Creed, which is between
his Burial and Resurrection: And others think, wresting Psalm 119. v. 62. to
their purpose, That he descended thither in body and soul about Midnight, and
rose again about five of the Clock the next Morning. Cramerus de Descensu
Christi, Cap. 5.

Now, Sir, my request to you is, that you will vouchsafe me your Opinion (on
which I much rely) concerning this Opinion of Mr. Seldom, which I have opened
unto you; I hope you shall not find me averse from Reason, though I may incline
happily to one side more than to another, till my Judgment be better informed.

I have perused some Psalm. 16. 10.
principal places of Scripture Psalm. 68. 18.
cited for confirmation of the Hos. 13. 4.
Opinion of the local Descent of Christ into Hell (noted here in the Margent):
Matt. 12.40.
I have likewise taken notice of several Opinions of the Calvinists and others
touching that Article, Ephesians 4. 8.
with Answers thereunto; Colos. 2. 13.
all which being well known unto you, 1 Pet. 3. 18.
would be tedious to recite at large; wherein I observe, that some Opinions are
more probable, and come nearer to the truth in all likelihood, than others: But
those and all others being but Opinions and not undeniable Truths, some more
probable than others, I know not (among so great Variety) which one Opinion
solely to fasten on; for as I said, there is but one Truth, which cannot
consist in contradictions or variable Expositions, but to find out that one
Truth, hic labor, hoc opus est.

I confess, I have been too bold with you, being (as I conceive) a stranger to
you, howsoever an illiterate Old man not worthy of your acquaintance, yet a
well wisher to Learning, and (though no Philosopher yet) a lover of Wisdom and
Wise men: I should not have adventured to have been thus bold with you, but by
the persuasion of Mr. Royston, Bookseller, my Friend and old Acquaintance, and
one that I presume will acknowledge himself obliged unto you for real
Courtesies. If I have been too troublesome to you, as I confess I have, Mr.
Royston must bear part of the punishment being accessory ante factum. Thus with
my love and respects unto you, I commit you to the Almighty, resting

Your affectionate Friend and Servant, R. Smith.
Little More-fields April 1659.
Indorsed, To his much Honored and Reverend Friend Dr. Henry Hammond.
Dr. HAMMOND's ANSWER TO Mr. SMITH's LETTER.
SIR,
TO your Proposal I offer my sense in the Method you have used; And first to
your suggestion from Athanasius's Creed, that without a right understanding of
this and all other Articles, a man cannot be saved: It is sufficient, that I
mind you, That as there is nothing said in the Nicene Creed in lieu of this
Article; so there is no word of Explication of it in the Athanasian. The former
Articles concerning the Trinity and Christ incarnate, Godman, which had been
invaded by Heretics, are there largely explained; and it is reasonable thence
to say, that the right understanding of them, such as is there set down, and
which false Teachers had opposed, was strictly required of all men, by
authority of all those Universal Councils, which had thus defined sub
Anathemate, or pain of Heresy, and which that Athanasian Creed recited: But
for other Articles, though it require the believing of them, yet not giving any
limited sense of them, it binds not to what it has not declared, i. e. to any
other determinate sense of them; which seems to me to leave it free and
dangerless, to use all sober means, that search of Scripture or Tradition,
together with the use of the words, especially in the sacred Dialect, can help
us to, for the finding out and resolving the true or (if there be a competition
of more possible) the probablest meaning of it.

To come then to that Enquiry; There have been three (and now as by you it
appears, there is a fourth) senses of it.

First, That Christ in his Spirit, went to the place of Souls departed.

Secondly, That his animal Soul descended into, and continued in the state of
the Separation from the Body.

Thirdly, That Hades signifies the Grave, and so that descending thither, is
but an Explication of his Burial.

Fourthly, That his Soul descended from Heaven into the Grave, and raised the
Body.

The first of these Opinions is subdivided again, some making the place to be
Hell, or the place of the damned; and Mr. Broughton contending against Bishop
Bilson, That it is Paradise; and Durand interpreting the Descending, only of a
virtual motion and the efficacy of his Death, to the Souls detained there; and
Calvin, and our Parker from him, understanding by it the torments of the
damned, affirm Christ's descent, to signify the suffering of them, especially
in his Soul. You demanded not of me the Reasons of not approving any of these,
but only my Opinion of that which you call Mr. Selden's, and I have set down
for the fourth. And because I see no cause to approve of that, it will be
reasonable, that I point out, what I do adhere to, and upon what grounds I
prefer it before Mr. Selden's. That which I adhere to, is this:

That as Christ's Body after his Crucifixion and Death was disposed of in the
Grave, so his Soul descended to, and continued in the condition or state of the
Dead till the third day, meaning hereby the very same thing which I suppose to
be meant by the first Opinion [ that Christ in his Spirit went to the place of
the Souls departed] abstracting only from the ends, which have been variously
assigned, by several men Ancient and Modern, for his thus descending. That he
descended for the freeing some out of Hell, has been the Opinion of some of
the Ancients; as of others, for the opening Heaven to those that were formerly
kept out of it, and of others for the triumphing over the Devil in his own
Quarter, and showing openly the Victory he had gotten over Death and Hell; The
last of these I abstain from condemning, having less prejudice to it than to
either of the two former, and therefore have set it down in the Practical
Catechism, as that which may piously be believed: But I now desire, I say, to
abstract from every of these ends, and not to fix on any other end, but
whatshall necessarily and unquestionably arise from the Article most simply set
down: and herein I suppose I shall best comply with the Doctrine of our Church,
Article 3. defining no more than thus, (and abstaining from what had been
expressed in the Article of Edward the Sixth.) [That as Christ dyed for us and
was buried, so also it is to be believed that he went down into Hell] without
any Explication: For supposing the word [ Hell] in the Article to be answerable
to (...), and that word by the Origination, to denote (...), invisible, and
that by the aequivalent (...) disappearing, it is to me perfectly indifferent,
whether this be understood of a State or a Place, so it be the common place of
the dead or Souls departed, and not any impalement of those, either to Torments
or Bliss. Let it be taken for the common place of Souls, not limited either to
that on one side, which we call Heaven; or what we call Hell on the other; or
any third middle Place: but indefinitely for the place of Souls, i.e. of all
Souls departed (wheresoever they are) and then it will be hardly intelligible,
how this differs from a State; for Place properly so called it cannot be, that
Notion belonging to Circumscription or Definition; and as Circumscription is
only of Bodies, so Definition which is of Souls, will not be commodiously
attributed to an indefinite, i. e. the common place of Souls; but some one
place, be it Heaven or Hell, or a third; and then taking it for a place only
improperly, that is all one with that which I call a State; This I say, because
against the interpreting (...) for the State of the Dead, I see it pressed by a
very learned Man of our Church, that among Heathen Authors (...) always
signifies a Place; and this evidence brought for it, because they that killed
themselves, and c. and so were dead, and the Souls in the state of the Dead,
were yet by the Heathens believed not to be admitted into (...), as from their
Writers is fully testified. But to this I answer, That making no question of
the truth of the observation, I think it perfectly reconcilable with my Notion
of (...) for a State; for (...), quasi (...) being aequivalent to (...),
signifies not only the estate of Death, but of disappearing, and then the Souls
of the (...) and (...), those that dye untimely being by the Heathens supposed
to walk and appear; and so of those whose Bodies are unburied, they could not
say of them that they were in (...), which of all others which disappeared was
affirmed by them, which being equally true and applicable, whether to the
Notion of a Place or State (for I deny not that in their Opinion the Soul of
one unburied was in the State of (...), though he were in State of Death, and
both of them are denoted, say I, by (...), as I interpret that a State) the
Argument is of no force against me, who mean that very same thing by the State
of the Dead, which they meant by (...), when they denied the (...) to descend
or to be admitted thither. In like manner when they say that Christ by his
Spirit or humane rational Soul descended to (...), and I, that the Animal Soul
thus descended, I suppose those two to contain no real difference (as to this
matter of the Descent); for I use this Phrase, because it is by the Animal Soul
in proper speaking, that any one lives, and that is common to Man with all
other Animals, and yet in a man this is not improperly called Spirit also (as
breath and life are all one) man's becoming a living Soul, being an immediate
consequent of Gods breathing into his nostrils the breath of life, Genesis 2. 7.
But because there is another Notion of Spirit, for the upper Immortal Soul
which passes not into the condition of Death, but was by Christ committed into
his Father's hands (in respect of which I suppose it was that the Thief
received promise to be with him that day in Paradise, the Thief's immortal
Soul, with Christ's immortal humane Soul) and that distinguished from the
living Soul, as both from the Body, in settingdown the (...), the whole of us,
1 These. 5. 23.
1 These. 5. 23. Therefore I choose rather to say the Animal Soul, for
distinctness sake, but mean the same that they mean, who either say Soul
simply, or (...), Spirit, in the Notion wherein we render it Ghost, Mat. 27. 50.
Matthew. 27. 50. where it is said of Christ, He yielded up the Ghost, which
proceeds not on such a critical distinction of Ghost from Soul as that place to
the Thessal. does. To either of these equally belongs the force of an Argument
lately made use of by learned Mr. Pearson (on the Creed page 480.) to prove,
that the meaning of the Article is, the Motion or Translation of Christ's Soul
to the place of Souls. The Argument is taken from an opposition which the
Fathers made to the Heresy of the Apollinarians, which consisted in this, That
Christ took on him our humane Flesh, without the humane Soul, (his Deity
supplying the place of that:) Which Error of theirs the Fathers refute by this,
That in his Death his Soul was separated from the Body, in respect whereof he
went to (...). This Heresy of theirs equally deprived Christ of the Rational
Intellectual and of the Animal Soul, teaching, that his Flesh was (...),
without Soul and without mind; and so the Fathers Argument against them founded
in Christ's Descent to (...) is of equal force, whether it were in his (...) or
(...), mind or Soul that he descended, their Heresy belonging to both, that is
indeed to that Soul by which he exercised all the Acts both of Life and Reason
when it was in the Body, and by Separation of which from the Body, he was truly
dead, his Soul departing to the Condition or Habitation of Souls, as his Body
was laid up in the Grave.

Having thus far explicated this Opinion, to which I adhere; and in doing so,
adhere to that other (abstracted from all consideration of the end) which has
always been accounted the Doctrine of the Church of England, ordinarily styled
the Local Descent; I shall not need any farther to confirm it (having largely
done it in the Practical Catechism, L. 5. Sect. 2. page 288. etc.) than by
reflecting on the exact propriety this bears both with the Order and Contexture
of the Creed, and with that one eminent Text cited by the Apostle from the
Psalmist, Acts 2. 31.
wherein beyond all other Texts this Article is undoubtedly founded. Psalm. 16.
10.
For in the Creed, after his Crucifixion, and remaining so long on the Cross
till he was dead, commending his Spirit into the hands of his Father, it
follows, his Body was interred, and his Soul (in Separation of which from his
Body, the reality of his Death consists) descended, departed into the common
place, habitation, state, condition, of the Dead (hovered not above the Grave,
as the Heathen phansied of the (...) (underwent the very same fate that the
Souls of all other Dead men do, and so continued till the third day, and then
he rose again. And lest it should be suggested (as I see it is,) Mr. Pearson,
page 476.
that taking (...) for the State of the Dead, descending to that, shall
signify no more, than to be Dead: I answer, That if this were supposed to be
the utmost that the words by their own force do signify (as when Jacob said,
(...), I shall descend to Hades, it is acknowledged it does) yet the position
in the Creed, will assist it to signify thus much more; for if (...) be a
State or Condition or Habitation or Place, though but improperly so called, yet
descending to Hades being immediately attended with [ the third day he rose
again from the Dead] this must in all reason extend the act of Dying to a
duration, and that duration or space of continuance among the dead as far as to
the third day, else there would be (which is not to be imagined) a Chasme in
the Creed, no full enumeration of all the parts and steps of the Story; but
being thus understood, nothing can be more punctual and complete in all the
circumstances, than the Order observed in the Creed, is. And for the Text of
the Psalmist recited by the Apostle, Thou shall not leave my Soul in Hades,
etc. it is now most expressly fulfilled in, and recited by this Article; That
though his Body were laid in the Grave (where if it continued above three days,
(the term observed in Nature for the revolution of the humors) it would
naturally tend to corruption and putrefaction, and stink, as it is said of
Lazarus where he is (...), John 11. 36.
four days dead) and his Soul gone to Hades, the habitation or condition or
common place of Souls; yet being there really, in as perfect Separation from
the Body as any Soul of dead man is, yet it should not be left there, forsaken
there, or in any degree destitute by God; but before the Body should begin to
putrefie, that is, in three days space, the Eternal Spirit his Godhead
inseparably united both to his Soul and Body, should reunite them again, and
then it follows the third day he rose.

Having given so full, and as I suppose clear unquestionable account of the
meaning of this Article, that it belongs to Christ's Humiliation, the reality
and continuance of the Separation of his Soul from his Body, and its being in
Hades, as that is the place or habitation or condition of separated Souls, and
being applied to Souls cannot possibly signify the Grave, the Repository only
of the Body, I need add no further prejudices to Mr. Selden's Opinion; Which
first if this be true, cannot be the truth; Secondly, belongs not to Christ's
Humiliation, but is all one with his Resurrection; Thirdly, is a Descent from
no place, no Ascent being before mentioned; Fourthly, is not compatible with
any stay of his Soul in Hades; both which yet the Psalmist, rejoicing that his
Soul is not forsaken and left there, must import, and the subsequent mention in
the Creed of the third days rising intimates the third day, the Stay, the
Rising, the Humiliation: Fifthly, Is founded in Hades, signifying the Grave or
Repository of the Body, which generally and by the Origination of the Word
belongs to the Habitation of Souls, and is used in Scripture sometimes, where
it cannot be meant of the Grave, as Genesis 37. 35. I will go down to the Grave,
(we render,) to my Son mourning, spoken of Jacob in relation to Joseph, whom
yet he believed torn in pieces with wild Beasts and not at all interred.
Sixthly, if this be not sufficient, then remember that it was God, Romans 4. 24.
Acts 3. 26. the Spirit, that is, Divine Spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 18. Romans 8. 11. that
raised up Jesus from the Dead, and therefore it may not be attributed to his
Animal or Humane Soul going down into the Grave and fetching out the Body; at
least thus it cannot be in the place of the Psalmist; Psalm. 16. 10.
for there it is equally attributed to God, that he shall not leave his Soul in
Hell, and not suffer him (in respect of his Body) to see corruption: Which must
therefore unquestionably be understood, First, of Gods doing the whole Work in
General; Secondly, in Gods rescuing the Soul from Hades, in which he was
detained (and preserving the Body from corruption to which it was liable.)
Which is quite contrary to Mr. Selden's Interpretation, which supposes the
Soul not to be at all detained there, and consequently not the Patient but the
Agent in the Rescue, when it is evident that God is the Agent, equally in
respect both of Soul and Body, and the Soul as the Body, the Patient, and
therefore the word is (...) in the Passive. Seventhly, one Argument more I
shall propose to you against this Sense; The Aquileian Creed is observed to
have been the first in which this Article is expressed, and in this there was no
mention of Christ's Burial; the same is visible in that which we call the
Athanasian: Now though from hence I conclude not (as some have done) that it is
all one with Burial (for it may be Burial, and somewhat more, disposing of the
Soul as well as the Body, during the space of Separation) yet sure this may I
conclude, That it cannot with any probability refer to the Raising him out of
the Grave (as Mr. Selden's fancy imports) when there had no mention of His
being there, preceded: For what tolerable Sense would there be in the words of
the Aquileian Creed thus understood? The words of that are, Crucifixus sub
Pontio Pilato, descendit in Inferna, which Mr. Seldom may have thus
interpreted, Being Crucified under Pontius Pilate, his Soul went into the Grave
to raise his Body thence: This I say were absurd; without mention or intimation
first given of his Body being at all there. So in the Athanasian, He suffered
for our Salvation, descended into Hell, rose again the third day from the Dead;
where there is mention of no more, but of his Suffering, but neither of his
Death or Burial (if descending to Hades signify them not) with what propriety
could it be added immediately, that he went down into the Grave to raise the
Body thence? If these Arguments, any or all, prevail with you, to reject this
Interpretation, I need add no more; if they do not, I shall then recommend one
thing more to your consideration, That some Opinions are so remote and
improbable, that it is hard to produce any Argument to make them more so, than
of themselves they are, and this is fit to be in front of such; That of Ramus,
that Burying does not signify Burying but Embalming (that so descending to
Hades may be left to signify Burial) being though not more true, methinks more
ingenious and probable than this; and yet against this, it will be hard to
produce above one Argument, (and that with him a begging the Question, which
among Logicians goes for the most fallacious way of Disputing) viz, that (...)
among all Authors, Sacred and Profane, signifies Burial not Embalming.

Having said thus much to the Main, I shall now review your Letter, and give it
what reflections seem yet to be needful: And First, When you think it is an
inconvenience that the Opinion contrary to Mr. Selden's is pressed with, to
acknowledge in the Text, Psalm 16. 10. That Christ was left in Hell the place
of the Damned, though for no long time; you now see, First, that Hell
(signifying not definitely the place of the Damned, any more than definitely
Heaven the place of the Glorified; but indefinitely, the common Place,
Habitation, Condition of the Dead, Christ being there some time, and the third
day recalled thence) is not his being left in Hades, but the quite contrary to
it, his being rescued thence timely, which yet he could not properly be, if he
were not there for some time* The Phrase which from the Psalm the Apostle
uses, Acts 2. 27. (...), Thou shall not so leave, as to forsake destitute. But
then Secondly, It is most certain, that Christ's Divinity was inseparably united
both to the Soul and Body of Christ, and so according to your hearts desire,
though Christ's Soul were (as my Opinion holds) in Hades, State or place of the
Dead, for some space, yet God left it not, forsook it not there one minute.
Next, when you say, There is a considerable use of this Opinion, the
manifesting the Reunion of Christ's Body and Soul in the Grave, with the time
and manner thereof, at, or immediately before his Resurrection, which you say
is in no other Article, nor in any plain place of Scripture averred. To this I
Answer, First, That as a supposed incommodity does not solve, so a conceived
advantage does not competently found an Argument; Secondly, That your own
confession, That there is no plain place of Scripture that averrs this, is a
valid Argument of probation, that it ought not to be esteemed any part of our
Faith, nor consequently, any Article of our Creed; Thirdly, That when in the
Creed [whatsoever may be said of the Scripture] the Separation of his Body and
Soul, together with the time and manner of it, is no otherwise set down, than
by his being affirmed to be dead; so is there no kind of need, that the
Reunion should be more particularly set down, than by teaching us, that the
third day he rose again, it being certain that he is the whole Christ that
dyed, and so both Soul and Body, and so the affirming that he rose again is
perfectly aequivalent and tantamount to his Soul being reunited to his Body:
Then for the time, that is also mentioned in that Article, the third day; as
for the manner, this Interpretation sets not that down truly, as was said; For
the Resurrection of the Body was the work of his Divinity, and not peculiarly
of his Animal or Human Soul, but as of the Instrument used by his Divinity.
Next when you propose an Objection in behalf of the Opinion of the Descent into
the place of the Damned, and give answer to it, I shall thus far interpose;
First, that the Authority of the Ancient Church in a matter of this moment,
depending on what was delivered by the Apostles to the Churches, is, and ought
to be of great weight against all novel Heterodoxes, so far as those of the
Ancient Church agree among themselves: Now though as to the end of Christ's
descending, and to the Definition of the Place, the Ancients consent not, but
differ very much from one another (which is showed at large by Mr. Pearson) Mr.
Pearson, page 479.
and therefore in these particulars our Church defines not, yet there is
nothing they more uniformly agree in, than that the Soul of Christ really
descended into the habitation of Souls; for which I likewise for brevity sake
referr you to Mr. Pearson, page 479. And therefore thus far we ought in all
reason to come up to them, which he cannot, that according to Mr. Selden's
Opinion, interprets Hades of the Grave, the Repository of the Body only.
Lastly, For the Old Tradition, that mentions the Descent and Resurrection
together, as one Article composed by Saint Thomas, there is little heed to be
given to that Tradition, or indeed to the foundation of it, that every Apostle
cast in his particular shot: For first it will be hard to deduce the Creed in
the very form we have it, from the Apostles immediately, it being so variously
set down, in the first times, and the Article of the Descent omitted in many;
and the Aquileian being the first which delivers it in our present form:
Secondly, It Is most certain, that every Apostle preached the whole Faith, and
at their parting from Jerusalem agreed in common upon a (...), form of wholesome
words, not committing to writing, or obliging it to the very same words, and
this was called their Symbolum, as that signifies a tessera militaris, by which
Christians were known from others; and not from the notion of a Shot which
belongs to (...) rather than (...); so that you are not to think that old
Tradition, which in respect of true Antiquity, is but a novel Fable of no
authority, and founded in a manifest mistake, will be fit to assist Mr.
Selden's, or any other Conceit.

This is all I see occasion to reflect on in your Letter, and so I have expressed
my self perspicuously (of which you will not judge aright, till you have read
over the whole): I shall hope I have performed what you seem to require, First,
Given you my Sense of Mr. Selden's Opinion: Secondly, Represented unto you the
one matter of Faith in this Article; which being received, there is no more
required de fide: and then all Error and danger will be in Dogmatizing, or
Teaching for Faith, what is more than this, which our Church wisely prohibits
us to do: and then what need we trouble our selves with the various Opinions of
men about other Circumstances, which are at the best, but Opinions and
Conjectures, and perhaps never an one of them the truth, or any part of the
meaning of that Article.

I have now held you so long, that you will have no reason to imagine your
Letter came unseasonably to me: the truth is, it came in a point of time,
wherein I had a perfect vacancy from businesses that had formerly engaged my
attendance; and if it prove of any use to your satisfaction and repose of mind,
I shall think my time has been very well disposed of, that has been thus laid
out. And so I take my leave of you, and remain

Your affectionate Friend to serve you, Hen. Hammond.
April 28. 1659.
I received this Letter from Dr. Hammond, by Mr. Rich. Royston on Tuesday May
3. 1659. thus only indorsed:

For Mr. Smith in Little More-Fields, These.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Richard Chiswell.
FOLIO.
Speed's Maps and Geography of Great Britain and Ireland, and of Foreign Parts.

Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fathers, in 2. Vol.

Dr. Cary's Chronological Account of Ancient Time

Sir Tho. Herbert's Travels into Persia, etc.

Wilson's Complete Christian Dictionary.

B. Wilkin's real Character, or Philosophical Language.

Parmacopoeia Regalis Collegii Medicorum Londinensis.

Hooker's Ecclesiastical Policy.

Winch's Book of Entries.

Guillim's Display of Heraldry with large Additions.

Dr. Burnet's History of the Reformation of the Church of England, in 2. Vol.

Dr. Burnet's Account of the Confessions and Prayers of the Murderers of Esquire;
Thyun.

Burlace's History of the Irish Rebellion.

Herodoti Historia Gr. Lat. cum variis Lect.

Rushworth's Historical Collections the 2d. Part in 2. vol.

Rushworth's Large account of the Trial of the Earl of Strafford, with all the
circumstances relating thereunto.

Bishop Sanderson's Sermons with his Life.

Fowlis's History of Romish Conspir. Treas. and Usurpat.

Sir Walter Raleigh's History of the World.

The Laws of this Realm concerning Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Recusants, the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance explained by diverse Judgments, and
Resolutions of the Judges; with other Observations thereupon, by Will. Cawly,
Esquire;

William's impartial consideration of the Speeches of the five Jesuits executed
for Treason, 1680.

Josephus's Antiquities and Wars of the Jews with Fig.

QVARTO.
DR. Littleton's Dictionary, Latin and English.

Bishop Nicholson on the Church Catechism.

History of the late Wars of New England.

Dr. Outram de Sacrificiis.

Bishop Taylor's Disswasive from Popery.

History of the future State of Europe.

Dr. Fowler's Defense of the Design of Christianity against John Bunnyan.

Lord Hollis's Relation of the unjust Accusation of certain French Gentlemen
charged with a Robbery 1671.

Cole's Latin and English Dictionary.

Dr. Jane's Fast Sermon before the Commons, 1679.

Mr. John Cave's Fast Sermon on the 30th. of Jan. 1679.

Mr. John Cave's Assize Sermon at Leicester, July 31. 1679.

Dr. Parker's Demonstration of the Divine Authority of the Law of Nature and
the Christian Religion.

The History of the Powder Treason, with a Vindication of the Proceedings
relating thereunto, from the Exceptions made against it by the Catholic
Apologist and others.

Speculum Baxterianum, or Baxter against Baxter.

Mr. Hook's new Philosophical Collections.

Dr. Burnet's Relation of the Massacre of the Protestants in France.

Dr. Burnet's Conversion and Persecutions of Eve Cohan a Jewess of Quality
lately Baptized Christian.

Dr. Burnet's Sermon before the Lord Mayor upon the Fast for the Fire, 1680.

Dr. Burnet's Fast Sermon before the House of Commons, Dec. 22. 80.

Dr. Burnet's Sermon on the 30th. of January, 1681.

Dr. Burnet's Sermon at the Election of the Lord Mayor, 1681.

Dr. Burnet's Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Houblon, 1682.

Dr. Burnet's Answer to the Animadversions on his History of the Rights of
Princes, 1682.

Dr. Burnet's Decree made at Rome 1679. condemning some Opinions of the
Jesuits and other Casuists. Published by Dr. Burnet, with a Preface.

Dr. Burnet's A Letter giving a Relation of the present state of the difference
between the French King and the Court of Rome.

Bibliotheca Norfolciana, sive Catalogus Lib. Manuscript. and impress. in omni
Art and Lingua, quos Hen. Dux Norfolciae Regiae Societati Londinensi pro
Scientia naturali promovenda donavit.

OCTAVO.
ELborow's Rationale upon the English Service.

Bishop Wilkin's Natural Religion.

Hardcastle's Christian Geography and Arithmetic.

Dr. Ashton's Apology for the Honors and Revenues of the Clergy.

Lord Hollis's Vindication of the Judicature of the House of Peers in the case
of Skinner.

Lord Hollis's Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in case of Appeals.

Lord Hollis's Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in case of Impositions.

-- Letters about the Bishops Votes in Capital Cases.

Dr. Grew's Idea of Philological History continued on Roots.

Spaniard's Conspiracy against the State of Venice.

Dr. Brown's Religio Medici: with Digbies Observations.

Several Tracts of Mr. Hales of Eaton.

Dr. Simpson's Chemical Anatomy of the Yorkshire Spaws; with a Discourse of
the Original of Hot Springs and other Fountains.

-- Hydrological Essays, with an Account of the Alum works at Whitby, and some
Observations about the Jaundice.

Organon Salutis: Or an Instrument to cleanse the Stomach. With diverse new
Experiments of the Virtue of Tabaco and Coffee: with a Preface of Sir Hen.
Blunt.

Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity, in three Parts.

A Discourse of the Nature, Ends, and Difference of the two Covenants, 1672.

Ignatius Fuller's Sermons of Peace and Holiness.

A free Conference touching the present State of England, at home and abroad,
in order to the designs of France.

Mystery of Jesuitism, Third and Fourth Parts

Doctor Sanway's Unreasonableness of the Romanists.

Dr. Ashton's Cases of Scandal and Persecution.

The Trials of the Regicides in 1660. Certain genuine Remains of the Lord Bacon
in Arguments Civil, Moral, Natural, etc. with a large account of all his Works,
by Dr. Tho. Tennison.

Dr. Puller's Discourse of the Moderation of the Church of England.

Sir John Munson's Discourse of Supreme Power and common Right.

Dr. Henry Bagshaw's Discourses on select Texts.

Mr. Seller's Remarks relating to the State of the Church in the three first
Centuries.

The Country man's Physician; for the use of such as live far from Cities or
Market Towns.

Dr. Burnet's account of the Life and Death of the Earl of Rochester.

-- Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England.

-- History of the Rights of Princes in the disposing of Ecclesiastical
Benefices and Church Lands.

-- Life of God in the Soul of man.

Markham's Perfect Horseman.

Dr. Sherlock's Practical discourse of Religious Assemblies.

-- Defense of Dr. Stilling fleet's Unreasonableness of Separation.

-- A Vindication of the defense of Dr. Stillingfleet in Answer to Mr. Baxter
and Mr. Lob, about Catholic Communion.

The History of the House of Estee, the Family of the Duchess of York, Octavo.

Sir Rob. Filmer's Patriarcha, or Natural Power of Kings.

Mr. John Cave's Gospel to the Romans.

Dr. Outram's 20. Sermons preached on several occasions.

Lawrence's interest of Ireland in its trade and wealth, stated.

DVODECIMO.
HOdder's Arithmetic.

Grotius de Veritate Religionis Christianae.

Bishop Hacket's Christian Consolations.

An Apology for a Treatise of Humane Reason, written by M. Clifford Esquire;.

The Queen-like Closet, both parts.

Valentine's Devotions. 24.

Pharmacopoeia Collegii Londinensis reformata. 24.

Books lately Printed for R. Chiswell.
AN Historical Relation of the Island of CEYLON in the East Indies: Together
with an Account of the detaining in Captivity the Author, and diverse other
Englishmen now living there, and of the Author's miraculous Escape:
illustrated with fifteen Copper Figures, and an exact Map of the Island. By
Capt. Robert Knox, a Captive there near 20 years, Fol.

Mr. Camfield's two Discourses of Episcopal Confirmation, Octavo.

Bishop Wilkin's Fifteen Sermons, never before extant.

Mr. John Cave's two Sermons of the duty and benefit of submission to the Will
of God in Afflictions, Quarto.

Dr. Crawford's serious expostulation with the Whiggs in Scotland, Quar.

A Letter giving a Relation of the present state of the Difference between the
French King and the Court of Rome; to which is added, The Popes Brief to the
Assembly of the Clergy, and their Protestation. Published by Dr. Burnet.

Dr. Salmon's Doron Medicum, or Supplement to his new London Dispensatory,
Octavo.

Sir James Turner's Pallas Armata, or, Military Essays of the Ancient, Grecian,
Roman and Modern Art of War, Fol.

Mr. Tanner's Primordia: or, the Rise and Growth of the first Church of God
described, Octavo.

A Letter writ by the last Assembly General of the Clergy of France to the
Protestants, inviting them to return to their communion; together with the
Methods proposed by them for their Conviction. Translated into English, and
examined by Dr. Gilb. Burnet, Octavo.

Dr. Cave's Dissertation concerning the Government of the Ancient Church by
Bishops, Metropolitans, and Patriarchs: more particularly concerning the
ancient Power and Jurisdiction of the Bishops of Rome, and the encroachments of
that upon other Sees, especially Constantinople, Octavo.

-- His History of the Lives, Acts, Death, and Writings of the most eminent
Fathers of the Church that flourished in the fourth Century: (being a Second
Volume) wherein amongst other things is an Account of Arianism, and all other
Sects of that Age. With an Introduction containing an Historical account of the
state of Paganism under the First Christian Emperors, Folio.

Dr. J. Lightfoot's Works in a 2. Vol. Fol.

Mr. Selden's Janus Anglorum Englished, with Notes: To which is added his
Epinomis, concerning the Ancient Government and Laws of this Kingdom, never
before extant. Also two other Treatises written by the same Author: One of the
Original of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of Testaments; the other of the
Disposition or Administration of Intestates Goods: now the first time
Published, Fol.

D. Spenceri Dissertationes de Ratione Rituum Judaicorum, etc. Fol.

Sub prelo.
Disquisitiones Criticae de variis per diversa loca and tempora Bibliorum
editionibus, quibus accedunt Castigationes Theologi cujusdam Parisiensis ad
opusc. Is. Vossii de Sibyllinis Oraculis and ejusdem responsionem ad
objectiones nuperae Criticae. Quarto.

Jus Regium, or the just and solid Foundations of Monarchy in general, and more
especially of the Monarchy of Scotland, maintained against Buchanan, Napthali,
Doleman, Milton, etc. by Sir George Mackenzie his Majesty's Advocate in
Scotland. 80.

FINIS.

