THE Religious Impostor: OR, THE LIFE OF Alexander, A Sham-Prophet, Doctor and
Fortune Tellers.

Out of LUCIAN.

Dedicated to Doctor S -- lm -- n, and the rest of the new Religious Fraternity
of Free-Thinkers, near Leather-Sellers-Hall.

By ^^^^stian Smith, Esquire

AMSTERDAM, Printed for the Company of the Saints of the New Stamp, in the
first Year of Grace, and Free-Thinking, and Sold next door to the Devil.

To the Worthy Doctor S -- lm -- n, and the Company of the Saints of the new
Impression, alias, The Free-Thinkers.
I Have been long doubtful to whom the following History ought to be Addressed,
but cannot find any one to whose Patronage it might so properly be recommended
as Yours, Worthy Sir. And, indeed, the Analogy that is betwixt the Hero of
this Piece, and your self, seems to challenge your Protection. For, were I a
Pythagorean, I should swear that our Alexander animated and informed your
numerical lump of Clay, as sure as ever Pythagoras himself was Homer, or
Euphorbus; and that your Face was much more truly Brass, than ever his Thigh
was Gold. But let that pass, those Opinions are worn out long since, and
nothing will satisfy this incredulous Age but demonstration; however, I shall
unburthen my Conscience to you and all the World, and let 'em see what reasons
I have for my Opinion. This Alexander, when a Boy, was Apprentice to a
Mountebank, under whom he served as Whachum to his Sidrophel, and used to
inveigle and divert the amazed silly Rout, with tumbling through a Hoop and
Vaulting, and amuse 'em with Tricks of Legerdemain, and Sleight of hand,
conveying Money nimbly and dexterously out of the Spectators Purses, Pockets,
or Handkerchiefs, which his Master was to Conjure for, and restore for a
Reward: He served him likewise in several other Capacities; as, Jugler,
Sub-Conjurer, Astrologer, Ganymede, and Orator, made Speeches, and wrote
Panegyricks in praise of his Master's Panacea's, Panchymagogons, Family Pills
and Powders, Cephalicks, Antipodugricks, Alexipharmacks, Antiscorbuticks,
Hystericks, and what not; He wrote Almanacks, to direct the taking of his
Medicines, and made the Stars vouch for their Virtues, and was as well a
written as breathing Dispensatory of his own Receipts: He Calculated
Nativities, Told Fortunes, had admirable Secrets to Soddercrack'd Maidenheads,
and incomparable Philtre's for the Consolation of Dispairing Damsels. Besides
all this, which his Master shared with him, he had one Trade to himself, whose
Revenue was his sole Propriety, which was letting out his Postern (for he was a
good smug young Rogue.) All this he did under his Master for an honest
livelihood; but his Master dying, and the growth of his Beard, and decay of his
Face, beginning to put the Counterpart out of Repute, he sets up and succeeds
him in his business, and a Quack he was for some time. But the Novelty of the
Cheat being over, Trade began to grow dull, and the Scene must be shifted, so
our Doctor packs up all, and away he marches, through several Countries he
strowled; but after all, the Profits arising from this course of Life were not
sufficient to satisfy his Ambition; so that some new Project must be started:
In order to which, he associates to himself a Fellow, whom he had in his
Travels scraped acquaintance with; he was a kind of Medley, part Author, part
Bookseller, one that published and sold his own Works, whom he observed to have
an excellent knack of Canting and Counterfelting Religion, and to have cunning
enough to Cheat his Neighbors. To this Man he imparts his design of setting up
for a Prophet, and invites him into the Partnership of his Stratagem; and
together these crafty Complotters set forward for Paphlagonia our Hero's Native
Country, which they chose for the Scene of their Actions, because the
Inhabitants were a sort of stupid Blockheaded People, of large Faith, and very
little Sense, easy and credulous, Lovers of Novelty, and addicted to
Superstition. Here they put in execution their Plot, gave out Oracles for 12 d.
a piece, and soon grew into mighty Reputation among these sottish Gulls. What
methods they took to bring their design to perfection, I need not inform you,
who are already sufficiently versed in all the measures requisite for such
Undertakings.

It is easy to apprehend for what end I give you this Summary of the History
of Alexander, whom I take to have been a Type of You: For your Parts have been
no less exercised than his, Your Education and Profession the same: If he made
himself known to Foreign Countries, surely you have not sat idle at home; the
Church Yards and Burying-Places are every where ample Witnesses of your
Travels. If Statues were raised to his Memory, Millions of Gravestones, and
Monuments of Marble and Brass will perpetuate your Name. Was he free of his
averse Venery? You have been no niggard of your Talent on the other side,
infinite numbers have tasted of your Benevolence, as well Sisters as others:
You have Cultivated the neglected Soil, and by You the Barren has become
Fruitful: You have Sowed where you have not Reaped, and Strewn where you have
not Gathered. All Climates and Conditions have reaped the fruit of your Labor.
You have been, as it were, the common Father, and have raised up Seed not only
to the Faithful, but even to the Gentiles also, so extensive has your Charity
been. Was he beneficial to the World by his skill in Medicines? You have
surpassed him in that too, as far as the Substance does its Shadow: You teach
when to cut Corns, and Let Blood: By you old Nurses are instructed to make
Carduus-Possets, and Chalybeat-Pancakes: Bawds to cause Abortions, and to
propagate the Pox: Strumpets to counterfeit Maidenheads, and provoke Venery. In
a word, your Dispensatories are inestimable Jewels in the public Treasury;
there may be learned to Cure Scald Heads, the Itch, Corns, Chilblains, and
Kib'd Heels, with many Secrets more of equal value. Nor are you inferior to
him in point of Prediction: For your Almanacks, and Treatise of Chiromancy,
have made all the World Prophets: You can make the Stars depose whatever you
please; and the very Lines of every Man's hand confirm what you say of him: You
can tell at first sight, That he that is born to be Hanged shall never be
Drowned, and, That the Pope of Rome shall not be Lord Mayor next Year. But oh!
the unhappy State of Merit! it is very rarely regarded, and truth is seldom
credited; this Cassandra experienced many Ages ago; and your representative
Alexander, for some time labored under. But he found means to surmount all the
difficulties he met with; and the very same expedient relieves you. Religion
was his Asylum, and it is your Refuge; it was his Stalking Horse, and is your
Decoy. Well, Sir, speed you in your Design, it is a Pious Project, and may your
Success be as much greater than his, as your Enterprise is more difficult and
hazardous: His Scene was a Country of Sots, and his Auditors a parcel of Fools,
ready gathered and prepared to his hand: Yours is an intelligent and populous
City, and your Cullies must be picked and broken to your use, by your own
Industry and Cunning. It Is true indeed your Instruments and Methods are the
same, but there is a vast disparity in the matter to be wrought upon. He
answered all Questions, so do you: He proposed Remedies for all sorts of
Grievances, so do you: He advised Physic, so do you: He used the assistance of
a crafty Fellow, so do you. Only he met with no opposition, all believed him,
so they do not you. However, proceed, let your Courage carry you through all
Obstacles, and your Conscience be your Comfort: You know the old saying, Non
sit sine periculo, etc. Faint Heart never won Fain Lady. It is no easy matter
to found a new Church, Paul's, you see cannot be built in a day. But great will
be the Honor when the Feat is done, adding one point to our Faith, is adding
to the compass by which we steer to Heaven, our Directions are the more exact.
Go on, regulate the whole Compass, and be your self the needle to point out the
way. None but evil-minded Men can think our Spiritual Navigation sufficiently
improved: I think he that finds out a shorter cut to Heaven, is a greater
Benefactor to Mankind, and deserves more Honor than if he found the North East
Passage to the Indies. Who would wait a tedious Passage by a Wagon, who might
go by the Penny-Post. Correct the Geography of Religion, and show us a better
Map of the Roads to the next World. Outdo Bunyan, and all the Spiritual
Chorographers that have gone before you. Oh how happy you whose Souls have been
anointed and tarr'd all over with his Doctrine, and liquor'd like Carriers
Boots, to take off the Scabs of Prejudice; Whose Scirrhous Consciences have
been softened by an Emollient Cataplasme of Argument? Who have taken an Emetick
Dose of Repentance, and the Cathartick Pills of Contrition? Who have patiently
endured a Diaphoretick Dialogue, and whose Concupiscence has been Flux'd and
Salivated by the Precipitate of Spiritual Admonition, whose Appetites have been
raised by a Stomachick Whet of Pious Curiosity, and satisfied with a Meal of
Ghostly Comfort? Whose Spirits have been raised by the dear Cordial of Zeal,
and whose strength supported by the precious Aliment of Faith, and whose Carnal
Itches have been killed by the Unguent of Mortification, and whose inward Aches
have been taken off by the Opiate of Election. To recount here the infinite
advantages you, who are his Disciples, have by this Physician Spiritual and
Temporal, were too tedious at this time, since what is past must make all the
World as well envious as sensible of your Happiness. I shall conclude with a
small Request to your great Master. In a word then, Pious Sir, May you never
cease to hold forth the Sucking Bottle of the Gospel to the Babes of Grace, and
the Crutches of Faith to the Crippled Saint. Satisfy the craving Sister, and
assist the impotent Brother; so may your Predictions of the Weather always hold
good, and your, Almanac be filled with Saints of your own Cannonizing, which
is the Prayer of, Pious Sir,

Your Devout Admirer, Sebastian Smith.

THE PREFACE.
THE Reader is desired to take notice that the Translator has not tied himself
to a Literal Version, but contented himself barely to give him the full
Substance of the History, which he hopes he has not wronged, either by adding
or substracting any thing material: He has taken a larger Liberty with the
Oracles, some of which he has omitted, and given a new turn to the rest; as
thinking them to contain nothing that might either Inform or Divert the English
Reader: In the whole he has chiefly followed the Example of Monsieur
Abancourt, whose Version is to be found in Dr. Spon's Recherches curieuses del
Antiquite. But besides, the Worthy Doctor, who had the Honor of our Epistle
Dedicatory, there are Two more of the Gang, whose Characters follow. One of
these Spiritual Navigators, a weak help to the new-founded Triumvirate,
assisted his Two Brethren to facilitate their Voyage, by finding out the
shortest Passage to their Wits end, and that is no far Journey you will say. He
is a great Friend to the Crooked Bodice-Seller in Cheapside, and Counselor in
Ordinary to his long-nosed Madam. This wonderful Caco-Coxcomb, called so not
from the Greek, but from the good luck of beshitting himself, in a Conflict
with a surely Low Country Captain, who happened to have more Brawn than the
other had Brain to prevent (like Pen) any farther Quarrels, though good to turn
Religionist. This Learned Juris-concealer was, to ever blessed Remembrance,
born a Goose and bred a Gown-man, so no swap in the changing of his Trade, and
a Divine Quaker has well observed in his Poem, called the Blockhead's Blockade.

In Bitching still the Sot affected change.
Constant to nothing but a Dunce's Brains;
Though his ill face and worser ills applied,
Makes me believe a roguish Poet lied.
And so in Dad I have done with Father D -- -- dly.

The other is an Honest Man, of some Learning, and a great deal of mistaken
Zeal, drawn in to be their Apollo, but he soon found that the other Legs of the
Cricket were not in proportion to his Strength, and so that Oracle ceased,
spoiling a good old Proverb in the fall; not between two Stools, but a Seat of
one Leg, the Arse of two Thirds of the Learned Triumvirate went to the Ground.

ALEXANDER: OR, The False Prophet.
Out of Lucian.
YOU imposed no small task upon me, my dear Celsus, when you enjoined me to
write the Life of Alexander the pretended Son of Podalirius, For so he called
himself.
which for variety of incidents, is no less famous than that of his Namesake
Alexander the Great, since the latter has not signalized himself more by his
Noble Exploits than the former has done by his wellmanaged Impostures. However,
out of Compliance with you, I undertake it, and will endeavor to acquit my
self of the performance as well as I can, provided that you carry a stock of
good Nature about you to supply my Defects, and pardon my Infirmities. At the
same time, I am not without my apprehensions, that the World will be apt to
condemn both of us; me for publishing so many Villianies, and you for putting
your Friend upon the Employment: For though the Hero of our Drama justly deserved
to have his Carcass torn in pieces by Beasts of his own Complexion; yet few
Persons will be so complaisant to his Memory, as to think he deserves to have
his Name recorded in History. But if any one shall Attack me upon this Article,
I will even defend my self by the example of Arrius, the Disciple of Epictetus,
who thought it not below his Learning or Quality to oblige Posterity with the
History of a Famous Robber. As lately one of the greatest Ornaments of our
Nation has condescended to write the Life of Et caetera Young.


Behold then, after so authentic a President, the Life of a remarkable
Ravager, not one who made Mountains and Forests the solitary Scene of his
Actions, but Towns and Cities, and did not overrun Deserts, but ravaged a
whole Empire. To begin with his Description: He was of a good Shape and Mien, a
lively Eye, his Complexion black, a clear Voice, a sweet and affable Tone, with
a little thin Beard, and some false Hair so dexterously mext with his own, that
one could not easily distinguish them. So was Mahomet, and so were most of the
new Religion-Founders; for without that the^ could never h^^e to (...)ceed with
their best Clients the Women.
Besides this, he was furnished with several good Qualities, quick Apprehension,
a tenacious Memory, a great Vivacity of Thought, but these Talents he wholly
Consecrated to Mischief, and made no other use of them than to raise him above
all those Impostors of cursed Memory, that ever visited the World. He never
showed a geain of Modesty but once, and that was in a Letter to his Son-in-law
Rutilianus, wherein he compared himself with a great deal of Self denial to
Pythagoras: But, with Pythagoras's leave be it spoken, if Pythagoras had lived
in his Time, he had been but a Pigmy to our Giant: Not that I would in the
least compare that Philosopher to such a profligate Rascal; but only observe,
That all that is falsely faid of Pythagoras is not to be named the same Year
with what is really true of our Alexander. In short, before you proceed any
farther, imagine to your self an abridgment of all sorts of Cheats, Lies,
Perjuries, and Impostures, accompanied with a sprightly bold designing Spirit,
and carried on by a Person who had the knack of making People believe whatever
he pleased, but so reserved and cautious, that no body ever parted from him but
with this Opinion, That he was certainly one of the Honestest, Godliest Men in
the World.

His Education.
Being, as we have described him before, very handsome in his Youth, but
miserably Poor; he was obliged, in his own defense, to prostitute himself to
all sorts of Customers, and particularly to a certain Charlatan or Quack that
set up for a Conjurer, sold Charms and Philtres, cut Corns at the full of the
Moon, Calculated Nativities, helped People to stolen Silver Spoons, and could do
a thousand things of the like nature and importance. I must (en passant) do the
Fellow so much Justice as to own he was somewhat skilled in Physic; and that
he knew several Receipts, some good and some bad; which is no wonder, for he
was one of Apollonius Tyanaeus's Countrymen, and was no Stranger to his Person.
You see what a blessed Country our Quack had his Education in, and hence may
conjecture that he was no little Scoundrel, but a Rascal of good Figure and
Address. As Notorious an Impostor as our Alexander.
He observing the quick lively Spirit of our young Alexander, took a great deal
of Pleasure in Instructing him, being as much taken with the Boy's Beauty, as
the Boy was with his Master's dextrous way of living, who, in a short time, of
a Disciple made him his Companion: By that time Alexander was grown up to Man's
Estate, his Tutor and his Face were gone the way of all Tutors and Faces; in
plain English his Tutor was dead, and his Beauty was gone, so his Necessities
drove him to find out some new extraordinary Project, whereby he might be in a
capacity to keep Body and Soul together.

In his Travels he picked up a Penny Chronicle-Writer of Byzantium, one of
them, whom in Modern Language we call a Son of Grub-street, one that was a
steadfast hardened impenitent Rogue. He took one Cocconas for his Companion.
These two, after some Oath of Secrelie on both sides, beat the Hoof together,
and as they marched, Cheated a World of poor ignorant silly People, that had
the Misfortune to fall into their Clutches. At last they dropped into the
Acquaintance of an old Gentlewoman who had two commendable Qualities; for first
she had store of Old Gold by her; and secondly, was of a Temper easy to be
imposed upon. She was born at Pella, formerly the Capital City of Macedonia,
now in a manner a Desert, and only Inhabited by a few sorry Mechanics, our two
Sparks followed her from Bithynia to this place, eating and drinking all the
while at her Expense; for why should the Godly Starve, and the Rich only Riot?
Being arrived here, and observing a sort of large Serpents, so exceeding tame
that they would kiss the Women, nay, suck their Breasts, and play with the
Children without doing them any Mischief (from whence undoubtedly came the
Story of Olympias) they bought one, the biggest and the most beautiful they
could find, and with no other Stock than this same Animal, and their own
assurance, managed all the strange adventures I am going to relate. Who
pretended to have been obliged (the Ladies know my meaning) by a Serpent.
These two blessed Rake-hells (I beg their Pardon, I should call them
Philosophers) observing that Hope and Fear are the two Poles upon which Mankind
turns; and indeed the whole Foundation of Curiosity and Superstition, were
resolved to make both these Passions further their Ambitious Designs, and so
set up an Oracle, which met with a success infinitely above their expectation.
It was some time before they could pitch upon a place where to begin the Farce.
Cocconas looked upon the City of Chalcedon to be the properest place for their
design, because of the mighty confluence there of the several Nations that lay
around it: But Alexander preferred his own Country, and alleged for his
reason, the great Stupidity and Superstition of the People, (both which you
know are very necessary toward the establishment of a new Religion) who no
sooner hear of a new upstart Mountebank, but they meet him with beating of
Drums, with Flutes and Cymbals; and in short, Worship him as heartily as if
they had seen him drop out of the Clouds.

This advice being, after some debate resolved upon, they privately hid a
Copper-Plate in the old Temple of Apollo at Chalcedon, whereon was written,
That Aesculapius with his Father Apollo, would shortly come and fix his
Habitation at Abonoteichos. That was the Cities Name where our Impostor was
born.
After this, they so contrived matters, that the Plate was found bearing this
wonderful Inscription, the news whereof immediately spread it self through all
Pontus, Bithynia, and particularly alarmed the Town abovenamed; so that the
Godly Inhabitants, in one of their public Meetings, decreed a Temple to these
Gods, and began to lay the Foundation of it. All this while Cocconas turned the
Penny by retailing false and ambiguous Oracles at Chalcedon, but unhappily died
in one of his D^unken Debauches; Cocconas dies.
and soon after Alexander succeeds him in his Function, with his Hair spread at
full length about his Shoulders, a Vest of Purple, bordered with White, over
all this a Surplice, and in these Formalities pretended to Preach the Will of
Heaven to the People. The wretched Paphlagonians, although they very well knew
both his Father and Mother, who were kept by the Parish; yet for all that were
such incredible Sots as to believe a Lying Oracle, published by our Impostor,
in which he called himself the Son of Podalirius, who must certainly have been
put to very hard shifts for want of a Bedfellow, if he were forced to come from
Trica as far as Paphlagonia, to lie with this Juggler's Mother.

He shamm'd another Oracle upon the People, under the name of one of the
Sybill's, wherein he talked of a Deliverer or Restorer, who was speedily to
appear; but all this was disguised in such a mystical Jargon, that though nothing
could be made of it, yet the People fansied some deep Mystery lay at the bottom.

Alexander therefore coming into his own Country, after these Predictions, you
may swear he was followed and respected, and entertained like any God. His
Reception when he came to his own Country.
He feigned himself sometimes to be possessed with a Divine Fury, and by the
means of the Root of a certain Herb, commonly called Fuller's Herb, which he
chaw'd (as Modern Sir Davy Dunce, in the Play, does his Tobacco) he would foam
excessively at the Mouth, which these ignorant Blockheads attributed to the
force of the God that possessed him. He had not long before dressed up a
Dragon's Head made of Linen Clouts, very much resembling a Man's Face, which was
taught to open and shut its Mouth, by the means of some Horse-Hairs. Now this
was to act in Concert with the Serpent abovementioned, which was to sustain the
principal part in the Comedy. A little before he began the Show, he slily
conveyed himself to the place where the Foundations of the Temple were a
laying, and meeting with a puddle of Water, he hid a Goose Egg in it, wherein
he had enclosed a young Serpent that was but newly hatched.

Next Morning he came all naked to the Marketplace, saving that he wore a Scarf
with a Gold Fringe about his Wast, to cover his Nudities, holding an Axe in his
hand, and throwing his Hair about his Shoulder, as the Priests of Cybele are
used to do. Then mounting upon a high Altar, he began to tell the Mob, how
happy the City was in being honored with the Birth of a God.

At these words, all the People, who had left their Houses to behold so
surprising a Spectacle, fell a Praying and Vow-making like stark mad, while our
Religious Rascal was bantering them in Hebrew or Phoenician, which almost
scared them out of the little remainder of their Wits. At last he runs to the
place where he had hid his Goose Egg, and entering the Water begins a Te Deum to
Apollo and Aesculapius, humbly beseeching the latter to descend and show
himself to Men. Aesculapius, the God of Medicine was represented by the
Ancients, under the shape of a Serpent, with a human Head, as appears by
several Medals, and a Bass-relief still extant.
These words were no sooner pronounced, but he strikes the Water with his Wand,
and takes out the mysterious Egg, which had a God enclosed in its Shell; and
having it now in his hand, he assures 'em that Aesculapius was come. Every one
was attentive to contemplate this pretty Mystery, when our Impostor breaking
the Egg-shell, lo! out comes the little Serpent I told you of before, and
turned and wound himself nimbly round his Fingers.

It Is impossible to describe the admiration and joy of the multitude at this
wonderful fight: The Sky was filled with Acclamations, Praises, and
Thanksgiving: One fell down on his Marrow-bones, and begs the God to restore
him his Health; a second prays to be an Alderman; a third to bury his Wife with
all speed; and so on, as their several Inclinations led them.

In the mean time, our Holy Prophet runs home as hard as he could drive,
holding this new riggling Divinity in his hands, and followed by an infinite
press of People, of all Ages and Conditions, who were transported out of their
Wits, to think that a God was so kind as to come and take up his Quarters among
them.

He locked himself up in his Apartment, till his God, meaning the Serpent, had
arrived to his just length and proportion; and one day, when the tag rag and
long tail of Paphlagonia was got there, and his House crammed with People from
the Cellar up to the Garret; he seated himself on his Bed in his Prophetic
Habit, and holding that great Serpent in his Bosom, which he had brought with
him out of Macedonia; he began to show him twining about his Neck, and drawing
his long Tail after him. He publicly shows the Serpent, pretending it was
Aesculapius himself.
But he purposely hid his Head under his Armpits, showing only the Linen
head, which somewhat resembled that of a Man; so that the Spectators were
filled with the greatest surprise imaginable.

We must here remark, That the Chamber was somewhat dark, and that the Company
was principally composed of poor senseless Idiots, who were already Cheated out
of their little sense and reason by the gibberish and illusions of this Holy
Counterfeit. To this we may add, that they did not stay long enough to discover
the Cheat, but that as they entered at one door, so they went out at another
immediately, to make way for the mighty throng of People that came in
perpetually.

This Spectacle continued for some days without intermission; and afterward
was renewed as often as any Person of Quality arrived in those Parts.

We are not therefore to wonder, if the stupid ignorant Mob swallowed his
Miracles with so much alacrity, since even those of better understandings could
not tell what to think, when they saw and touched a Dragon, who was the other
day hatched before their Eyes, grown on a sudden to such a prodigious
Greatness; and what was the greatest Riddle of all, having the Face of a Man.

An Epicurus, or a Democritus, or, in short, any of the ancient Philosophers,
who were well versed in nature, would without any difficulty have pronounced it
to be a juggle at first sight, although they could not discover the mystery of the
operation: But as all people have not the luck to be Philosophers, the
Inhabitants of Bythinia, Galatia, and Thrace went in shoals to satisfy their
eyesight with those Miracles, of which Fame had already made such prodigious
relations. Having established his Reputation amongst the People be sets up an
Oracle.
His Picture was sold every where, with Statues of Silver and Copper, after the
life. Nay, an Oracle was published, which foretold his name, and styled him,
Glycon, the third of the race of Jupiter, who brought light to men. By himself
to be sure.
So then our Impostor finding a favorable opportunity for his purpose, sets up
for an Oracle-monger, and sells his Predictions for Money; following the
example of Amphilochus, who after the death of his father Amphiaraus, being
ejected out of Thebes, withdrew into Asia, where he told the Barbarians their
fortune for twopence apiece. No Penny, no Oracle.
To bring this about, he in forms the people that the God was inclined to answer
all manner of questions himself at such an appointed time; and that they should
write down whatever they demanded a resolution for, in a Letter sealed up.
Cheap enough of all conscien^e.
Then shutting himself in, the Sanctuary of the Temple, which by this time was
finished, he caused all those persons who had given in their Letters to be
called in order one after another, and there to have 'em restored to them again
sealed up as they were at first, with the Gods answer. It would have been an
easy matter for a man of a tolerable capacity to have found out the Cheat, but
these Sots did not perceive that he unsealed the Letters in private, and after
he had enclosed what answer seemed fittest for him, returned them back to their
respective owners, sealed exactly as at first. For there are an hundred ways of
breaking open a Letter, without doing any injury to the Impression; and I shall
here set down one or two of them, that so for the future mere slight of hand
may not pass for a Miracle. In the first place, one may with a hot Needle
disjoin the Wax that fastens the Thread to the Letter, and not do the least
damage to the Seal, so that after he has read as much as he-pleases, he may
rejoyn it as it was before. That was the old way. Hence the Phrase linum
incidere, to break open a Letter.
There is likewise ^^other invention, which is as follows: The party takes Lime
and Glue; or else a Mastic composed of Pitch, Wax, and Bitumen, mingled with
the powder of a very transparent Stone. Of these ingredients he makes a Ball,
upon which, when it is as yet soft and tender, he takes the impression of the
Seal, after he has gently rubbed it with Oil or Hog's Grease: for it hardens in
a moment, and will serve to seal the Letter again full as well as the very
Seal. There are several other Secrets of the like nature, my dear friend, which
it is not necessary for me to acquaint you with, since you have made mention of
them in your Treatise of the Artifice of the Magicians, which is an excellent
Book, and very serviceable to undeceive those ignorant people, who are so apt
to be abused by their own credulity. But to reassume our story.

Having thus set up for himself, he used the greatest address and dexterity he
was master of, for fear of being found out in his Roguery; His caution in
telling of Fortunes.
and to that end always entrenched himself behind obscure and ambiguous
answers, according to the custom of all Oracle-mongers. One while he
encouraged, and at another time dissuaded people from such and such
enterprises, as he saw most convenient: Sometimes he prescribed certain
Remedies, or a course of Physic to the fick; for to give him his due, he knew
several pretty Secrets in that Science. As for what related to successions and
inheritances, he ever took care to delay his answers to such questions,
referring them to a better opportunity, or till his Prophet was in humor; for
this impudent Visionary always personated the God, and spoke in his name. His
price was about 12 pence for every Oracle, which amounted to a considerable
sum, for he retailed threescore or fourscore thousand of them in a year. Nor
are we to wonder at it, for the people were so besotted with these fooleries,
(as it is the nature of the two legged herd to run after novelties, and be
inquisitive of future things) that the same person made sometimes a dozen or
fifteen demands, at twelve pence apiece for each of them; for it was not
allowed them to put up two in the same Billet. But all the Money he received
did not go immediately to his own Coffers, for he maintained abundance of
Officers under him, some of whom put the Oracles into Verse, others subscribed
them, or sealed them, or interpreted them, or kept them; and every one had a
Salary proportionable to his place and merits.

Besides this, he had his Spys and Emissaries in the remotest Countries, who
spread the reputation of his Oracle in all places, assuring the people that it
foretold things to come, discovered hidden treasures, helped the right owners
to what they had lost, healed the sick, and in fine did ten times more than can
be expected. No Cheat to be carried on without assistance.
Multitudes flocked to him from all parts with sacrifices and presents, as well
for the God, as for the Prophet; for in one of his Oracles he commanded them to
be kind to his Minister, as having little need of their Offerings himself. No
sooner had several men of Worth and Learning discovered the deceit, and
particularly some Philosophers of Epicurus's sect, but he endeavored all he
could to affright 'em, crying aloud that all the Country was overrun with
Christians and impious Persons, who raised Calumnies against him, and commanded
the People to stone them, if they had a mind to ingratiate themselves with the
God. This has been the artifice of corrupt Priesthood in all Ages and
Countries, to set the Mobb upon the Discoverers of their wicked designs and so
to have them knocked in the head for Gods sake.
Being once demanded, how it fared with Epicurus in the other world, he
replied, that he was duckt over Head and Ears in a nasty Puddle, and loaded
with Chains of Lead. The reason is plain, he owed him a spite for laying open
all these Villainies and Impostures, that walk up and down the world, under the
pretense of Religion: But Plato, Chrysippus and Pythagoras were his good
Friends. He had a particular aversion to the City of Amastris upon the account
of some of Lepidus's acquaintance there, as also of several Epicurean
Philosophers, and would never return an answer from his Oracle to any of its
Inhabitants. But happening once to return one to the Proconsul's brother there,
he made but a mock of him, ordering him to take a Hogs foot and some Mallows,
for a pain in his stomach, and that in such ridiculous terms that no body could
tell what he meant. Whether it were because he had none of his Officers at that
instance near him to compose the Oracle, or because he could not tell what
answer to make.

In the mean time he frequently showed the Serpent to those that had a mind to
see him, but he still kept the head of it in his own bosom, and would not
permit them to touch any part of it but his body and his tail. Having a design
one day to improve his imposture, he told them that Aesculapius would answer
visibly, and this he called Answers from the Gods own mouth. He effected this
by the help of a Cranes sinews, dexterously placed in the Dragons head which
was made of Linen, and served in stead of Organs to carry the voice of a man,
who stood in the next room; but this Trick was not to be shown every day, and
was principally calculated for Persons of Condition. The answer he made to
Severian, concerning the enterprise of Armenia, was of this number: in which he
promised him Victory, but after his Defeat, he substituted another in the room
of it, which seemed to dissuade him from this attempt. The truth on it is, he
had impudence enough to correct his Oracles, when they did not succeeed, and if
it so fell out that he promised health to a sick party who afterward happened
to dye, he published another quite contrary to the former.

However to gain the good graces of the Brotherhood, as Mallus, Claros and
Didyma, where their Oracles told full as many ^es as his own, he frequently
commanded his Querists to consult them, but especially when he was hard put to
it, and had a mind to evade a pinching Question. Rogues will always collogue
with one another.
Thus I have told you what passed in those places that were near his
habitation, but when once his Reputation was spread in Italy and Rome, every
one almost either visited or sent to him and particularly men of the first
Rank, and such as were interested in their Prince's favor. The chief of these
was Rutilianus, who had signalized himself on several occasions, and was a very
honest Gentleman, but so excessively superstitious that he could not for bear
kneeling before all the stones he met on the road, upon which any effusion had
been made, or a Garland placed. This was frequently practiced by the devouter
sort of Pagans, as we may see at the beginning of Minutius Felix.
He was once in a mind to quit the Army, which he commanded at that time, to
make our Impostor a visit at his own house, but upon second considerations,
dispatched Messengers upon Messengers thither. As the persons he sent were only
Varlets, it was no difficult matter to deceive them, and these Blockheads still
adding new lies to those which their Fellows told before them, in order to make
their relations the more agreeable, it increased his passion, and gave new
vigor to his curiosity.

In the mean time being acquainted with most of the considerable Persons of
Rome, he recounted to them all that had been reported to him, and as the custom
of the world is, mingled something of his own invention, to make the Legend
more entertaining. Rutilianus helps to carry on the cheat.
So that he filled the whole Town with these Impostures, and engaged abundance
of his friends to consult the Oracle to know their fortune. They were very
kindly received by our Prophet, who made them several Presents, that at their
return they might speak well of him, and publish his praise. He made use of
another trick, and that was this; if after he had perused their questions, he
found some of them too bold, he kept the Billet without returning any answer to
it, to have it as a pledge for the fidelity of the person that sent it; who by
this means was constrained to keep fair with this Rascal, instead of
complaining of him.

And here I have a fit opportunity to recount to you some of the Answers he
made to Rutilianus. This Nobleman having demanded of him, What sort of Master
he should place over his Son? he answered, in ambiguous terms, as your Rascally
Oracles have always used to do, Pythagoras and Homer. A true Church trick for
they generally reserve a loop-hole for themselves to creep out of.
But the Child dying some time after this, and our Fortune Tellers being in some
pain how to defend his Oracle, Rutilianus helped to put the Cheat upon himself,
and gave out that he had foretold the death of his Son, in assigning him for
his Masters those that were out of the World. At another time the same Nobleman
having asked him, according to the doctrine of Pythagoras, what he had been
before he was what he is now, and lastly, what would become of him hereafter?
He told him that he had been Achilles, then Menander, and that he would become
a ray of the Sun after he had lived a hundred and fourscore years. But for all
that he died of Melancholy at the Age of seventy, contrary to the direct
promise of the Oracle, although it seemed to be one of the most authentic it ever
uttered. Rutilianus entertaining thoughts of a second Marriage, our Prophet
offered him his Daughter, whom he pretended to have begotten of the Moon who
fell in Love with him, as she did in the days of Yore with Endimion, and
commanded him to marry her. All which he did without any farther consideration,
after he had offered some Hecatombs to his Mother in Law, and thought himself
already made free of Heaven.

After this mighty success, our Impostor fell upon higher designs, and
dispatched Messengers into all Countries with his Oracles, admonishing some
Cities to preserve themselves from Plagues, some from Fire, and others from
Earthquakes; with a promise to send them effectual Remedies, to prevent all
these dismal accidents. A Quack this last year in Barkshire sold Pills to the
Country People to preserve them from Earthquakes.
He likewise published an Oracle, as if it had immediately proceeded from the
God's own mouth, to serve as a preservative against a Contagion which then
raged with extreme violence. One might have seen it written on the doors of
most Houses, being supposed to be a Sovereign remedy against this calamitous
distemper; but by misfortune these Houses were first visited with it, because
out of a vain confidence or security they neglected their own preservation.

He had several Setters at Rome, who acquainted him with the humor and
inclination of all the great men there; and sent him beforehand all the
Questions they intended to ask him when they arrived thither, that he might
have leisure enough to prepare his Answers. He institutes a religious
procession.
He also established a sort of Society or Fraternity, where they carried
lighted Torches in their hands, with diverse Ceremonies, that lasted three
days. On the first, Proclamation was made as they do at Athens, If there be
here any Epicurean, or Christian, or impious person, who comes on purpose to
ridicule our mysteries, let him immediately withdraw: but let the faithful be
initiated, and not lose the opportunity. Then he marched at the head of them,
crying aloud, Christians be gone; and all the multitude answered, Away
Epicureans. After this they celebrated Latona's lying in, with the birth of
Apollo and the marriage of Coronis; all which was followed with the arrival of
Aesculapius. On the second day was solemnized the nativity of Glycon, and on
the third the Marriage of Podalirius and the Mother of our Prophet, and then
the Torches were all lighted, from whence the whole Ceremony borrowed its name.
There were likewise represented the Amors of our Prophet and the Moon, of whom
the Wife of Rutilianus was born, and he composed himself to sleep in the midst
of the Ceremony like another Endimion. At the same time a handsome Lady
descended down from a Machine who represented the Moon, She was Wife to the
Deputies Steward, and had the Impudence in her Husbands presence to kiss and
embrace our holy Impostor, and perhaps the affair had been carried farther, if
it had not been for the Company, for it is well known that they had no aversion
one to the other.

At another time he made his appearance in his Pontifical Habits, Our Sham
Prophet would have made a good Master of the ceremonies to the Pope.
keeping at first great silence, and then cried out all on the sudden Io
Glycon, to which a large Chorus of Musicians answered Io Alexander, followed by
the Heralds of the Country, who were huge lusty Clod pates, in Fantastic Garbs.
All this while as the procession passed along with Flambeaux, and many
misterious antic gestures, he took care ever and anon to discover his golden
thigh, which he did to Counterfeit Pythagoras, and effected it, as I imagine,
by the means of a gilt skin, that made a glittering, reflection by the light of
the Torches. This business raised a mighty debate between two Philosophers,
viz. whether he had not the Soul of Pythagoras as well as his Thigh, but it was
referred to the decision of his Oracle, which answered that the Soul of
Pythagoras arose and died from time to time, whereas that of our Prophet, was
immortal, and of Divine extraction.

Although he forbid the love of Boys as damnable and detestable yet he commanded
the Cities of Pontus and Paphlagenia to send him such to consult his Oracle,
and sing the Praises of his God. It Is no new thing for the Priesthood to preach
agalnst the things they recommend by their practice.
In persuance of this Order they sent him every third year Boys born of good
Parentage, and the handsomest they could find, whom this Pious Letcher made use
of in his secret Pleasures. He had established a pleasant custom, which was,
that none should presume to kiss him if they were above eighteen years old: by
which politic he only kissed those that were young, whom for this reason he was
used to call his kissing Children. As for other People he he gave them his hand
to kiss.

Behold after what a prodigious manner he abused these poor believing wretches,
who took it for a great favor to see him caress their Wives and Children: Nay
some of the women openly boasted that they were with Child by him, and forced
their Husbands to witness as much. The true reason why the women were always so
fond of the Ecclesiastics.
But setting aside such stories, I will here relate to you a Dialogue bethe God
and a Priest of ^^o, whose inclinations you will be able to guess at by his
answers, as I my self did, who read the whole passage at his House.

A pleasant Dialogue between a Priest and the Oracle.
Question. Tell me, John Case, who art thou?

Answer. I am the new Dr. Saffold.

Q. Art thou Dr. Saffold himself, or some body else that resembles him?

Answ. It is not permitted to reveal these Mysteries.

Q. How many years will thou continue here to give Oracles near Ludgate?

A. More than a dozen.

Q. Where do thou intend to go after that?

A. To White-Fryers, then to Moor-fields, to honor the Out-skirts of the Town
with my presenc.

Q. Are the Oracles of Gadbury, Dr. Partridge, and Poor Robin true Oracles?

A. Don't desire to know forbidden things.

Q. What shall I drink when I go from hence?

A. First Flip, then Cherry-brandy, next Sherry and Sugar, next Brandy and
Gunpowder, and lastly a Dose of Liquid Brimstone to fettle your Stomach for
Eternity to prevent any farther curdling of Conscience, or Paultry pukes of
Grace:

This was the sum and substance of the fine Conversation between them. Who put
no great Faith in his Miracles.
But our Quack knowing this Priest to be a Friend of Lepidus, he must needs
trump up an Oracle to prevent all future correspondence between them, in which
he presended that Lepidus threatened to put him to a cruel death: For he feared
Epicurus and his Followers, as being sworn Enemies to his impostures, so that
he employed all his efforts to get a poor Epicurean trussed up, who had the
hardiness to reproach him, with causing several innocent persons to be put to
death by the means of his lying Oracle, which happened after this manner.

He had advised a certain man of that Country, Here is a Specimen of Religion's
Mercy.
to accuse his Slaves before the Governor of that Province, as accessory to the
death of his Son, who sailing up the Nile, was persuaded to go as far as the
Indies, without saying a word of the matter to his People, whom he left behind
him at Alexandria. These Fellows bearing no news of their young Master, gave
him for dead, and so returned home to his Father, who accused them, as I told
you, before the Proconsul of Galatia, at the instigation of this Oracle, and
had them hanged for it. Some time after the execution was over, and the poor
Wretches dispatched into another world, comes home the dead Son who justified
their Innocence, but now there was no remedy for what was past. Our Prophet not
being able to endure the many just reproaches that were made him upon this
score, commanded those that were about him to stone the Accuser, unless they
were minded to be his Accomplices; and the Mob had most assuredly done as they
were bidden, if one Demonstratus who happened to be upon the spot had not
immediately rescued him. As for my self, I should not have complained much, had
the business taken effect; for why the Devil should a man of sense hazard his
life to undeceive a parcel of Sots that don't deserve it.

He did another thing, which occasioned no less clamor. It was his fortune to
light upon a book that contained the principal doctrines of Epicurus. In a fit
of Zeal he sentences an Epicurean book to the Flames.
It Is in my mind one of the noblest remainders of antiquity, and purges our
Souls of its infirmities much better than all the Ceremonies of Purification;
for it not only heals and cures us of our extravagant passions, but delivers us
from all superstition, and those vain fantoms that fright us out of our Senses.
Having found this book, as I have already told you; he publicly burnt it,
after he had forged an Oracle to countenance the business, and threw the ashes
into the Sea. But now prepare to hear the most impudent untruth that ever was
uttered.

As he had got his admission into the Court, by the means and interest of his
Son in-law Rutilianus, A true trimming Court Divine will never be in the wrong.
he sent an Oracle to the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who was at that time making
War in Germany, wherein he commanded him to throw two Lions into the Danube
with several Ceremonies, giving him an assurance of an immediate Peace, which
should be preceeded by a remarkable Victory. These Lions crossing the River
were killed by the Enemy, and soon after the Barbarians defeated the Romans,
who had like to have lost Aquileia, after the total overthrow of Twenty
Thousand of their men. But this hardened Villain to save his Bacon made use of
Apollo's Artifice to Croesus, pretending that he had rightly foretold a great
Victory, but never declared the name of the Conqueror.

Now vast Multitudes of People flocking to him from all parts, and the
smaliness of the City, where he lived, not being able to contain such
prodigious numbers, much less to feed them, he invented Night Oracles, for so
the Beast named them, which he managed as follows. Our Prophet has more Strings
to his Bow than one.
After he had received his Questions he went to sleep, and gave out that he was
informed in a Dream of the Answer he was to make, which was always either
doubtful or obscure especially when the Letter was too accurately sealed to be
opened without danger. In such cases he generally returned the first Answer
that came into his Head, either because such a conduct looked most like that of
other Oracles, or because it brought him in the greatest grist to his Mill: for
he had several Interpreters about him to explain these Night. Oracles, each of
whom presents him yearly with a Talent by way of recompense, instead of
receiving any appointment from him.

Sometimes when he had no body to consult him, he forged new Oracles to amuse
the Sots, How strangely be abuses the credulity of the People.
as for instance this, which says, Search the Prentice in whom thou confidest
most, for to revenge the injuries thou have done him, he carries a Pen Knife in
his Pocket, and lest thou should discover it, thy Wife Kate and He design to
swear thee into a Plot, by the same token that thy maid Joan is an accomplice.
Who is the Democritus that would not have been imposed upon, after so many
circumstances? but he was immediately laughed out of the trick after it was
once discovered. If a Question was put to him in a strange Language, he
deferred the Answer to gain time to return it in the same Tongue; and when he
had no body to help him off at such a pinch, he was obliged to make a virtue of
necessity, and answer it in his own, as once he did when he said, Stranger
return into thy own Country, for he that has sent thee hither waas murdered
yesterday by John a Styles, and the Assassinates are all in the Gazette.

I must now beg leave to recount some of the Oracles, which he was pleased to
communicate to my self. Lucian puts the Doctor upon the Oracle.
One day when I had enquired of the God (and 'twas a question not easy to be
resolved) whether his Prophet was in a milk diet or no, he answered me in his
hum drum way, Tom Thumb Son to William Thumb, and Nephew to Adoniram Thumb the
Grocer has sold himself to a Tobacco Plantation. At another time having writ
the same demand in several Pillets, all which were brought to him from
different places, that he might mistrust nothing, he ordered me in his Answer
to visit the Bagnio in Covent Garden, and forbear Claret, having been deceived
by the Fellow that brought him the Billet; who told him that I asked a Remedy
against pissing of Needles. Nevertheless my Question was, who stood Godfather
to the Monument. In another, without taking the least notice of the Monument or
Fish-street hill, he very gravely forbad me to call at Putney, being in like
manner bantered by the Footman who presented him the Billet, and assured him
that I only enquired which was the best way for me to return to back to
Moreclack.

I bethought my self of several other inventions to discover his Roguery, as
for instance, to put only one demand in a There are more ways to the VVood than
one.
Billet, and to pay as if there were several tacked together, for his custom
was to give you just so many Oracles as you paid Shillings, and these had no
manner of relation either to themselves, or to the Question. Having therefore
manifestly discovered the juggle, I used all my endeavors to disengage
Rutilianus from any alliance with him, which made the lying Bard conceive a
mortal hatred against me, and he was not unmindful to quit scores with me as
soon as he saw a fair opportunity. For when Rutilianus consulted the Oracle
concerning me, he answered, That I loved young Boys, and forbidden Pleasures. I
remember I went to see him once, having two Soldiers in my company which the
Governor of the Province, who was my very good friend, sent along with me,
lest he should do me a mischief. As soon as he heard of my arrival, he
dispatched one of his Servants to invite me to his house, and in appearance
received me with great civility. Nevertheless I so perfectly hated him for his
damned Villainies and Cheats, that when he gave me his hand to kiss, I could not
forbear biting it, and that with so good a Stomach, that it is strange he did
not set his Myrmidons upon me to teach me better manners, by knocking out my
brains; and so much the rather, because I called him by his name, without
giving him the title of Doctor to usher it in.

To say the truth, this old Rascal bore the affront with wonderful patience; It
is not always convenient for a man to discover his designs.
he told me he had a mind to show me that his God could calm the most
outrageous Spirits: After this, making signs for the company to withdraw, he
complained of me for endeavoring to make a breach between him and Rutilianus;
telling me I took very wrong measures to quarrel with the man who was in a
capacity to make my Fortune when he pleased. I seemed to listen very
attentively to his discourse, to save my self from the danger that threatened
me, and departed in very good terms from him, which still more and more
astonished the standers by.

Resolving at last to embark, he sent me several presents, furnished me with a
Felucca and men to row her; Oh the great Bowels of your Pretenders to Santship!
which made me believe that he designed to gain me over to his party by this
extraordinary favor. When we were got far enough from any shore, I perceived
the Bilot weeping, and disputing it very earnestly with the Seamen. This
alarmed me with distrust of my safety, and so much the more, because I had but
one of my Servants with me, having sent back the rest to Amastris with my
Father. I enquired what was the occasion of the dispute? and he told me, That
being now old, and having always behaved himself like an honest man, he was not
willing in the last scene of his life to sully all with a wicked action, nor
expose his Wife and Children to divine vengeance. When I still pressed him to
tell me what was the matter, he confessed that he had orders to throw me over
board. Upon this information I desired him to set me ashore at the next Port;
where meeting with some Ambassadors, who were going to carry their yearly
Tribute to the Emperor, I told them my adventure, which made that impression
upon them, that they gave me room in their Vessel, and landed me safe at
Amastris.

After the Villain had served me this Dog trick, I declared open War against
him, and was upon the point of summoning him before his betters, as several
other Gentlemen were ready to do; Lucian resolves to be even with him, but is
dissuaded.
but the Governor of the Province earnestly desired me to let the business
fall; adding, that tho I should discover never so many of his Impostures, yet
so long as the Rascal had Rutilianus's ear, it would signify just nothing; for
whilst he was in credit with a person of his quality, the Law would never reach
him. This advice prevailed with us to desist. But to pursue my History: What an
intolerable insolence was it in our Quack, to petition the Emperor to change
the name of the City, and call it Ionopolis? Or who can ever forgive a
Scoundrel of his infamous Character, for ordering Medals to be stamped, bearing
the figure of a Serpent on one side, and his own on the reverse, with the arms
of Aesculapius, and the Ax of Perseus, from whom he pretends himself to be
descended on the Mothers side? These Medals are to be seen in Dr. Spon 's xxi.
Dissertation.


In fine, (for I am abominably weary with raking this Dunghill so long) he
foretold that he should dye by a Thunderclap, like Aesculapius, after the term
of a hundred and fifty years; The miserable end of this Juggler.
but for all his Predictions, he perished miserably before he had fully
completed seventy of them, of a nasty purulent Ulcer in his Leg, which seized
upon all his lower parts, and filled him with innumerable vermin. At this time
it was first known that our sham Prophet was bald, when the Chyrurgeons applied
Plasters to his Head, to assuage the pai^. Behold the Catastrophe of this
Emperic, which was but a just punishment for his other crimes. He wants nothing
now but an Epitaph and a Successor worthy of him; but I my self dare pretend to
Prophecy so far, as to affirm that he must be content to go without both, and
that for the same reason: for as no Epitaph can possibly be made bad enough to
be worthy of him, so no Villain now living can plead merit, that is, Villainy
enough to entitle him to his Mantle. Nature as well demands time to breathe
after she has formed an accomplished thorough paced Rogue, as after she has
made a perfect Hero. Perhaps some dozen ages hence, and in a distant Climate, a
person may arise with all his qualifications and endowments;
but till then we must not expect such a Phoenix: she has exhausted all her
store in our Alexander, and must be allowed sufficient time to recruit herself,
before she can afford to produce another.

The Conclusion.
Thus, my dear Celsus, I have given you the abridgment of this Impostors Life;
which I undertook partly to gratify your Curiosity, and partly to disabuse
some well meaning persons, who have been imposed upon by him in his life time.
Tho it was a nauseous employment, yet I was not able to refuse it either to
your friendship, or the profound esteem which I have of your probity; not to
mention the greatness of your merits, and your love for truth, which are topics
too brillant, to be handed in so inconsiderable and short-lived a Paper as this.

To the Unknown Translator, by a young Married Woman.
MOst unseen Sir, who e're you are,
You Have drawn a canting Quack so fair.
So painted the Religious Creature,
Shown every Lineament and Feature
That as I am a breeding Woman,
You Have set me longing for some Salmon.
Should I miscarry, troth it may be,
The utter Ruin of my Baby.
At least some Fishes signature,
Upon his Face, or Back for sure.
Which to prevint I went to hear him,
But could not for the Crowd come near him.
Some bid Money for the whole,
I for the Tail-piece, or the Jole:
But Middle-piece upon examen,
Was found worth all the rest o'th Salmon.
A Fish-wife for him agreat Stickler,
('It Is thought by some the Quack did tickle her)
Told me, she was with him beyond Sea,
Yet never did so fine a man see.
I asked her where. She said New England,
And further than the English Kings Land.
Our Neighbors told me, that this Quack,
Came home with Mermaid on his Back.
And if it be true, all that we hear,
She spawned at Gravesend her Cavere; This holy Sister, was delivered of a
Child at Gravesend.

Till Charge and Clamor 'gan to tire him,
He parted with 's beloved Siren.
It Is Task too tedious to pursue,
His Story longer -- so adieu.
FINIS.

