Dr. Salmon's Pills, Spirit, Drops, and Balsam.
Prepared and made at his House at the East End of Paul's, next door to the
Free School, London.
Published by Authority.

I.

OUR PILLS cure the Scurvy, Dropsy, Jaundice, Gout, Agues, Fevers,
King's Evil, Rickets, Melancholy, Lethargy, Frenzy, Madness, stinking-breath,
shortness of Breath, Green Sickness, want of Appetite, Vomiting, stoppages of
the Stomach, Liver and Spleen, Worms, stoppages of the Reins and Bladder, heat
of Urine, Barrenness in Women, stoppage of their Courses, Fits of the Mother,
and other Diseases belonging to that Sex; Dropsy, Scurvy, Gout and Agues they
have often cured (in a month, three weeks, yea in fourtee^ days time) and that
some^im^s when hope of Recovery has been past. They are an excellent, safe, and
gentle Purge, purging by Stool, Phlegm, Choler and Melancholy. They dispose old
Ulcers, Fistulaes, running Sores, or other breakings-out, to a speedy healing,
by purging away the evil humors which feed them. They rectify most Distempers
of the Head, quicken the Senses, clear the Sight, add a good color to the
Face, and make the Body able to withstand Diseases. They purify, cleanse, and
sweeten the Blood, resist Corruption and Putrefaction of Humors, and Diseases
thence proceeding, afflicting the Head, Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Gall, Reins,
Bladder, or Joints. In a word, these Pills are a cheap, certain, and easy help
for most Diseases happening to the Bodies of Man, Woman, or Child, as some
thousands of persons in this Kingdom can upon their own knowledge testify;
Performing what is here spoken of, without hazard of Body, Purse, or Reputation.

II.

Our SPIRIT cures almost all diseases of the Head, Breast, and Lungs; as
Headache, Vertigo or Giddiness, dimness of the (...) ^^^^^ness of Breath,
difficulty of Breathing, (...) worms, (...) ^ickets, Dropsy, Scurvy, and Gout;
dissolves and ^ring (...)y the Stone and Gravel; and indeed performs all things
that Our Pills do, containing all the Virtues of them in as full and ample
measure as we have before declared: For this is only the Spirit of our Pills,
being extracted from them, and only prepared for the sakes of Children, and
such other persons as cannot swallow Our Pills; and therefore every one may
choose which they like best. It is exceeding pleasant, and purges nobly without
making sick.

III.

Our Cordial DROPS are a wonderful Restorative in Consumptions (curing those
which have been given over by many Physicians ^^storing ra^^^cal moisture, and
comforting every member and part of Man's Body. They give ease in the Toothache
immediately, ^^d in pains of the Ears; helping most Diseases of the Breast and
Lungs, as Coughs, Defluxions of Rheum Vomiting and Loathing of Meats. They ease
almost in a moment any pain and griping of the Breast, Bowels or Joints
proceeding of Wind, Colds or Surfeits, or any other cause whatsoever; making a
lively countenance, a cheerful heart, and a healthful disposition. They give
ease instant^y in the Stone and Gravel, whether in the Reins or Bladder,
breaking, dissolving, and bringing of it away. They are (...) against all
manner of Poison, Venom, biting of Man (...) ^^^ellent thing against many other
Diseases, as well in the humors and solid pai^s, as in the Spirits; taking away
heaviness and melancholy; performing all their operations with great safety,
speed, dexterity, and ease; being fitted for all persons of what age, sex, or
quality soever; strengthening (...) Brain and Memory, fortifying the Senses,
chearing, the (...), comforting Nature, restoring the Body, and reviving all
the Spirits, natural, vital and animal.

IV.

Our BALSAM is eminent against Pains, Sprains, Swellings, Bruises, Burns,
Scalds, Scabs, Wounds, Sores, old Ulcers, Fistulaes, and the like, though of
long standing. It is very good against the Itch, Pimples, Tetters, Ringworms,
Morphew, Scurf ^ B^^sts, or any deformity or breaking-out whatsoever. (...) the
part (...) therefore is of good use in weak Limbs, shrinking of the S(...)ne^^,
and for any Wound, Cut or Bruise in the Head, or any other part. It is very
good to anoint with in Palsies, Gouts, Sc^^^^ca, Numoness; for which (...) no
ourw^ Medicine is better. It comforts the Nerves and Joy^ is very good against
the Cramp, or any outward pain^ truly Noble Balsam, doing of it self all the
intention, (...) Curing: It ripens Swellings, cleanses Ulcers, breeds Flesh,
and skins any Wound or Sore, not suffering corruption, putrefaction, or dead
flesh there; being really and in truth the poor Countrymans present help to
have recourse to in time of need.

V.

With these Medicaments we cured one Elizabeth Peter's, a Shoomakers Wife in
Angel-Alley in Bethlehem, of a deep Consumption: We cured one Ambrose Webb, at
the three-Compasses in Westbury-street, of a great bleeding at Nose, and the
Scurvy. We cured a Servant of the said Ambrose of the Scurvy and Dropsy. We
cured the same Servant afterward of malignant Ulcers in his feet and toes. We
cured a Man who had gotten the POX, after he had been twice fl^xt with
Ointments. We cured another of the POX, (who must here be nameless) when he was
broke out into Botches, Boyls and Ulcers almost all over his whole body. We
cured a Youth, the son of one William Ogbon a Tailor, near the Black-Boy in
Barnaby-street, of a long tedious Ague and Madness. We cured one Edmond
Whitaker of a languishing disease, when hope of Life was dispaired of. We cured
one John Leek, at the Fishmongers-Arms without Cripplegate, extremely diseased
of the Gout. We cured one Robert Cotton at Greenwich of a long and tedious
Quartan-Ague. We cured one Cox in Well and Bucket Alley in Old-street, of great
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and of the Scurvy. We cured one Fruin a
Cutler, next door to the Bull in Cheapside, of the Scurvy, Melancholy, and a
Pestilential Tumor under one of his Armholes. We cured a Cornishman (at one
Mary Bouchiers at the Corner house by Long-Alley end in great Moor fields) of
the Gout, although near threescore years of age, and having gone for about
twelve years on Crutches. We cured one Tho Chew at the Green-Man and Still, a
Distiller without Smithfield-Bars, of the Gout. We cured one John Clark a
Tailor, at the Castle without Smithfield-Bars, of a Surfeit and violent Fever.
We cured one Elizabeth Speed at an Oyl-shop in Duke street near
Lincolns-Inn-fields, of terrible fore and painful Breasts. We cured one Eliz.
Frankton, a Cutlers Wife in Petty-France, of a violent Fever and Surfeit. We
cured one John Kni^ ^n Wheeler-street of the Scurvy and Gout, pains all over
his body. We cured one Nicholas Earl at the Cup in Long-Alley, of the Dropsy.
We cured one Oaks in Fox-yard in Whitecross street, of an eminent and painful
Tumor in the Cods. We cured one Joan Ingram, near the Bear in Moor-fields, of
the Gout. We cured one Anthony Gesture, at the Cock in Wapping, of a
Consumption. We cured one Abigail Knight, at the Hospital gate in Smithfield,
of a Pleurisy.

Together with more than a thousand others, which Secrecy, Brevity, and our
private Interest engages us to conceal: these things being only related for
confirmation of the Truths aforesaid, and satisfaction of the Incredulous.

VI.

Lastly, the full use of these Medicaments in every Disease mentioned, is
contained in a little Book, which is always given with them, where you may
find directions at large. The price of a Box of Pills (containing five, six,
seven, or more Purges) is Two shillings sixpence; the price of a Glass of our
Purging Spirit, the same: the price of a Glass of Our Drops (containing six,
seven, eight, or ten Doses) One shilling sixpence: And of a Box of our Balsam,
a shilling. These Medicaments are cheap, safe, and durable; for they will keep
many years, and work all their good effects as well ten or twenty years hence,
as now. They are sealed up with our proper Signet, bearing a Lion couchant with
a Star over him: And are to be sold by

Mattha Frip at Cows in the Isle of Wight.

And at the Author's House at the East end of Paul's, next door to the
Free School; where he may be spoke with every day from morning till four in the
afternoon; and will with the blessing of God, undertake the Cure of any Disease
(if curable) in Man, Woman, or Child, and perform the same with as great Care,
as much Ease, in as short time, and for as small Charge, as may in Reason be
expected, as some thousands in this City can upon their own experience witness.

FINIS.

