A SERMON OF THE Credibility of the Mysteries OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION,
Preached before a LEARNED AUDIENCE.

By THO. SMITH, Fellow of St. Mary Magdalen College in Oxon.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Roycroft, for Ric. Davis Bookseller in Oxford, 1675.

Imprimatur,

Sept. 7h. 1674. C. Smith R. P. D. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domest.

Nobilissimo Viro,
D. ROBERTO BOIL,
Verae ac Solidae Pietatis,
Summae eruditionis,
Instaurandae sanioris Philosophiae,
Optime de literis tam Sacris quam
Humanioribus merendi
Fama long celeberrimo,
Magno aevi Exemplo and Ornamento:
T. S.
Hanc Concionem (una cum Appendice)
coram Academicis Oxoniensibus,
solenni S. Marci Evangelistae Festo,
In sacello Collegii B. Mariae Magdalenae
Superiori anno habitam,
In debitae observantiae (...),
Lubens merito dedicat consecratque.
ERRATA.
P. 7. l. 10. -- (...). p. 15. l. 13. belief. p. 17. l. 7. the ordin* l. 23.
ingenious. p. 21. l. 24. for its read his. p. 26. l. 10* revealed,. p. 28. l.
15. when. p. 34. l. 14. belongs. p. 42. l. 5. for I, read we* p. 45. l. 12* the
only. p. 48. l. 24. -- (...).

The Appendix refers to Page 47.

A SERMON Preached before a Learned Audience.
1 TIMOTHY III. the former part of the 16. verse. -- Without Controversy great is
the Mystery of Godliness.
HOW much the Doctrine of Christianity tends to the improvement of Reason and
Learning, how it has brought into the World a better and more certain knowledge
of God and of our selves, how it has advanced the common notices of nature, and
has chased away with the clear evidences of its truth those thick shades of
error, that had darkened the understanding, and has removed all those
prejudices, that were taken up from sense and a very partial and deceitful
observation of things, may be fully demonstrated by comparing the former estate
of Mankind, before the coming of Christ in the flesh, with the present,
wherever it is received in its truth and power. Men before were led by opinion
and conjecture and fancy only, as to matters of Religion and the concerns of
another World: They had fears upon them indeed of a divine justice, that would
revenge the violation of the law of nature either here or hereafter; and a
reflection upon the strange traverses and difficulties of life had taught them
to expect another life after this: but their eyes were dim however, and they
could not see far into futurity; they could have no clear deductions of
particular truths for want of a right knowledge of true and certain principles:
hence it was, that they were so inconstant and wavering, and knew not well
where or what to fix on. But Christ by his appearance and manifesting the will
of God to us, ^ Tim. 1. 10.
has brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel, and children
and persons of an ordinary reach and capacity may now easily apprehend those
things, that is, in reference to God and his attributes, the misery we are in
by sin, the means of our recovery from this woeful estate of life, the
immortality of the Soul, and the like; which before those great Philosophers,
notwithstanding all their vaunts and quests after learning, notwithstanding
they set up Schools and were ambitious to give names to Sects, had but a very
imperfect knowledge of.

But while these truths were received by those, that were willing to be taught,
and to submit themselves to the dictates of reason, and convictions of
miracles, which were added to give all possible satisfaction to the
understanding, others, who were resolved before hand not to be convinced, who
had rather remain in their ignorance and idolatry and their sins, then be
converted to a new Religion, and reduced to such strictness of life, as that
requires, from their debaucheries and brutish pleasures, who had rather fall
down before a Statue or a Picture, because their Fathers had done so before
them, and because it was the established Religion of their Country, than
acknowledge and adore a Crucified Savior, reject it upon the account of the
Mysteries of Faith, without ever examining the weight of the arguments, that
would have enforced them upon their belief: They could not in the mean while
but acknowledge the happy and glorious change, that Christianity had wrought in
the World, how much it exceeds and goes beyond all the morality of the wisest
and best Lawgivers and Founders of Republics, how it not only lays down rules
for the right ordering of life, but furnishes its votaries with a power to
practice them; not only shows us a way to walk in, but takes us by the hand and
leads us in it: but the difficulties, it seems, that are to be met with in
conceiving some of its mysteries, offended them. This was their pretense and
their plea for their infidelity; they would have demonstration for every thing,
they would be taught and convinced by Syllogism, their Pride and their
Self-conceit and the opinion they had of their own learning would not permit
them to believe. They made their understanding the measure of all truth, and
what did not suit with those narrow and low principles they had taken up, was
scornfully rejected by them. The Jews, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. 22, 23.
require a Sign, and the Greeks seek after Wisdom; but we preach Christ
crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness. But
how irrational was the demand of both? for what greater sign could there be to
the Jews, than the fulfilling of all the Prophesies in the person of Christ,
even to the minute circumstances of his life and death, and those mighty
miracles that showed forth themselves in him? what greater wisdom could the
Philosophers pretend to or desire, than the wisdom of God in a mystery, as it
is called, 1 Cor. 11. 7. than those clear discoveries of the divine nature and
the essential perfections of the Godhead, than the admirable contrivances of
the redemption of mankind by the sufferings and death of Christ, the Son of
God, than the ways and means of recovering the dignity of our nature, and of
living here like men, and of living hereafter like Angels? Such a wisdom, as
will not only gratify our earnest desires and pursuits after knowledge, but
will make us happy too for ever. Their weak and blear eyes could not endure
such a great light that brake in upon them, and therefore they were desirous to
retire into the shade. They could not fully conceive and comprehend them, they
seemed therefore foolish and impossible notions, that were owing wholly to an
ungoverned imagination. And hereupon Thus Eusebius sums them up in general, it
being the common argument of the Heathen Philosophers against the Christian
religion -- (...). p. 4. Parisiis, A. C. 1628.
they proceed to calumniate the Christians as a company of well-meaning and
honest and good-natured, but very simple and over-credulous people, who took
all things upon trust, without enquiring into their truth, and certainty; for
such were the slanderous accusations of The words of Celsus, as we find them,
in Orig^ns first book against that Epicurean Philosopher, are these -- (...).
p. ^. edit. C^ntab. In this latter part he alludes to S. Paul's words, 1 Cor. 3.
18. which he most horribly and maliciously perverts, as Origin shows p. 12. He
had before, out of his great Philosophical wariness, advised his readers not to
take up opinions upon trust, without following reason and a rational guide,
which he imputes to the Christians, and reckons them among the (...), etc. such
as rashly believe juglers and pretenders to Legerdemain tricks, whose credulity
and simplicity they aluse to evil designs and intents. So in the third book* he
most falsely accuses the whole body of Christians, (...), as diving away every
wise man from the doctrine of faith, and only admitting persons void of
understanding, and of a base and servile temper. p. 121.
Celsus, De morte Peregrini, speaking of the Christians, whom he makes a
company of idiots, easily cheated -- (...).
Lucian, and In Eusebius, in the confutation of his impious book (which he
intitl'd (...)) wherein he compared Apollonius of Tyana to our most blessed
Savior, where he objects to the Christians -- (...) -- lightness and easiness
of nature, p. 512. and calls them -- (...) -- fools and rusiicks. p. 514. edit.
Paris: in fine librorum de demonstratione Evangelica.
Hierocles, and the rest of the learned enemies of the Christian Religion: They
upbraided the Christians of their times, with whom they conversed, in their
writings and in their discourses, that they received all (...), with an
irrational Faith and an hasty assent, past without any examination, that they
could bring no proof or demonstrative argument of what they held so
pertinaciously, that nothing was required to make a Christian a Believer, as
they used to speak by way of Scorn, but (...), an unjudicious and groundless
Faith; yes certainly, a good life and a sanctified understanding, and an humble
opinion of a man's self. But these are but words, and men are not to be laughed
and rallied out of their faith and a well-grounded persuasion; there is nothing
of argument in scorn and passion; they only show the weakness of the cause, and
want of reason in those, who make use of them.

But now after so many myriads of Converts to the Christian Faith, after the
attestation and consent of so many ages, who have examined severely the
principles, on which it is founded, who would expect that any one should dare
now to question the truth of it again, that men who have been baptized into it,
should abjure and renounce it, should no longer acknowledge Christ their
Savior, should deny him to be God, or that he had any commission from Heaven
to institute a new Religion, should act over the part of the Jews, and arraign
the Son of God as an impostor, and side with the Heathen Philosophers against
Christianity, as a doctrine not to be endured and embraced, and make use of
their very arguments for the defense of their infidelity? But we know whence
the malice and the infidelity of these Theists proceed; they have abandoned
themselves to a wicked life, they are immersed in sensual pleasures, which they
make the only end of life. They are convinced, that Christianity, which is a
Doctrine according to Godliness is not consistent with such practices, which
yet even nature and right reason utterly condemn.

The Mysteries of Faith do not so much trouble these men, as the severity of
its commands. These they cannot away with, their lusts help them to arguments
against the other, and they content themselves with little pieces of Sophistry,
and think to vindicate the ill course of life, they have taken up, this way.
Natural conscience and an ordinary reflection upon the works of nature will not
permit them, it may be, to deny a God, though they live, as though there were
none: They will acknowledge him, it may be too in a good humor, the Creator of
the World, but not the Judge and Governor of it; they look upon themselves, as
only born to gratify their sensual appetite; They declare equally for a
liberty of living and thinking as they please. They will have no restraint laid
upon their understanding, or their lives. Christianity is too strict, and
therefore too difficult for them; They may have the wit perchance, but not the
morality of the Philosophers, whose very lives notwithstanding will condemn
them as much as the Christian doctrine* Their evil education and custom and
prepossession, those great hindrances of truth, made their refusing
Christianity the less inexcusable upon the account of its mysteries, while they
acknowledged the rules and institutions of it to be according to the highest
reason, and the exaltation of the humane nature, while these men pretend its
mysteries to be therefore incredible, because the rules of it, which thwart
their lusts so much, are so severe. Little or no good I know is to be done upon
these men by persuasion or argument, of which they are scarce capable, who turn
all things into Burlesque and ridicule: They it seems are too witty (for so
they call their boldness and want of judgment) either to understand or embrace
the principles of Christianity; but their ill lives show, that were they as
clear as the principles of Geometry, so long as a strict and holy life is as
necessary and essential to the being of a Christian, as a right and sound
faith, they would except and cavil at them, and at last reject them; and if the
Gospel be hid, be esteemed after so many clear and undoubted revelations, after
such evident proofs and convictions, an obscure and incredible doctrine, it is
hid to them that are lost, or rather, (...), in them that are lost; it is only
so to such desperate and obstinate wretches, whom reason it self cannot
satisfy, in whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of them which
believe not, least the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image
of God, should shine unto them. 2 Cor. iv. 3, 4.

But these are wild and extravagant persons, of debauched understandings and
lives, and only to be confuted by the severity of laws; and of the two the
Christian religion has suffered more by the secret underminings of Heretics,
than by their bold attaques. These are the more dangerous enemies, who deny the
truths and mysteries of it, upon a pretense of wariness and caution, and go
soberly about to destroy it. But all their objections, how plausible soever,
must at last resolve into obstinacy and pride: They fancy things must be, and
are, as they would have them, or else they cannot be at all: They vainly
suppose themselves able to search into the depths of all divine and humane
knowledge, and being once prepossessed with this conceit, they grow peevish and
angry because the Christian Religion proposes things to their belief, which
they cannot grasp, and are too big for their understanding; and rather than
forego this beloved Principle, they will destroy the Fundamentals of
Christianity, and to apply that of In Apologetico cap. 5. where he mentions an
old decree of the Ron an Senate, Ne qui Deus ab Imperatore consecraretur, (...)
a Senatu prebatus; and hereupon he tells us, that the Emperor Tiberius moved by
the report of those [mighty] works, which declared the truth of our Saviors
Divinity, he received out of Pal^stine, detulit ad Senatum cum praerogativa
suffrag^i sui; though the Senate were not disposed to admit him into the number.
Tertullian to them, nisi homini Deusplacuerit, Deus non erit, homo jam Deo
propitius esse debebit: Christ shall not be God, nor satisfy the divine
justice for the sins of mankind, because this seems incongruous to them; it is
a difficulty, that does puzzle their understanding; it is above the strength of
their fancy; their reason, they say, tells them, this cannot be; allowing of no
such thing as faith, which is the great duty of the Gospel, and forgetting,
that Christianity is, as it is undoubtedly, the great mystery of Godliness.

Thus under a pretense of clearing the truth of Religion, and making it the
more easily intelligible, to Turks and Jews, they resist it in the true notion
of it, and corrupt and destroy it; to whom fully agrees that character, which
St. Paul gave of the followers of Simon Magus, 2 Timothy iii. 8. (...), men of
corrupt minds, and reprobate concerning the faith; such whose understandings
are wholly vitiated and perverted, notwithstanding the great and fierce claims
they laid to knowledge, as if they were the only men, that understood the will
and mind of God; such who reject the established truths of the Gospel, who have
no regard to the heavenly doctrine of the Evangelists and Apostles, the truth
of which they sealed and confirmed with their blood; but do (...) (...) to use
the words of St. (...): ex editione Reverendissimi Usserii Armachani, p 20.
This perchance more particularly respects Marcion the heretic; for by that
name he called him to his face: as we read in Irenaeus 3. lib. adv. haereses,
cap. 3.
Polycarp in his Epistle to the Philippians, that is, by their fraudulent
devices model the oracles of God according to their own fancies and lusts; who
set up a new Religion, which the Catholic Church of Christ never knew or was
acquainted with, and endeavor to destroy the faith of Christianity, and think
in the mean while they have reason on their side for so doing: and how far by
their arts and subtilties and plausible insinuations, by this their slight and
cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive (for it is nothing
else, however blancht over and disguised with shows of sober reason) they have
prevailed upon this Age, is too sad to consider; so that now it chiefly
concerns us to secure the groundwork, the principles of the doctrine of
Christ, and to oppose this growing evil, to watch and stand fast in the faith,
and quit our selves like men, and not to be like children, carried away with
every blast and wind of doctrine, and especially of the vain doctrine of
Socinus, as it will appear, when the varnish and false colors are washed of,
but to be established in the truth of the holy Gospel, as the Church has taught
us to pray in the Collect of this anniversary of St. Mark.

To evince therefore the unreasonableness of their pretensions, I shall
endeavor in the following discourse to make out these two particulars.

1. That the great mysteries of Religion cannot, and ought not to be any way
prejudicial to the truth of it.

2. That the Christian Religion requires us to believe these mysteries, upon
such grounds, as we cannot reject, without doing violence to our faculties, and
consequently, that the rejecting and disbelieving them must be unreasonable.

1. The great mysteries of Religion cannot and ought not to be any way
prejudicial to its truth.

They who find fault with Christianity for proposing such great mysteries to
our beliefs, and would have all things so plain and obvious, that they should
command and force assent, should first try their reason in solving the
difficulties of nature; and if notwithstanding all their labor and toil, after
the most accurate researches into the nature of sensible beings, of things that
we daily see and handle, of things that seem to lie level with our
understanding, and are no way disproportionable to it, they cannot pretend to a
perfect knowledge of them, if the ordinary operations of nature be so abstruse,
and unintelligible, and these depths are not to be fathomed, if her secrets are
beyond the discovery of the most piercing judgment and reason; Religion with
greater reason must be allowed to have its mysteries; there being such a vast
disproportion between things relating to God and his nature, and the things of
the world. The contemplation of nature is curious and useful; it is a part of
the service and worship we owe to God the Creator, to admire his wisdom and
power in the beautiful frame and order of things, which is best done by
enquiring into their natures and properties, into their powers and operations
and qualities, by examining the curious contexture and the fitness and
usefulness of their parts, and there is nothing in the whole universe, but
deserves to be considered, and very much conduces to this end.

This is the business of Philosophy, and what contemplative minds labor in the
search of, to discover and make out how things were at first made, and are
still continued in their being, and to find out their peculiar virtues, whereby
they produce such a variety of effects, and how they may be altered or improved
for the farther use and benefit of mankind. Nothing of which can be effected,
at least but very imperfectly, and in a way scarce tolerable, by acquiescing in
general observations, derived from weak and slight notices, without descending
to severe trials and experiments, or by relying upon the principles of ordinary
Philosophy, that are confessedly unintelligible, and which instead of
explaining nature, do but perplex and confound the understanding, and which
have nothing to maintain and keep up their credit, but the authority of a name
and the immoderate love of antiquity. But whatever hypothesis we fix upon, they
who have the deepest insight into nature will be forced to confess, they see
but a little way, and all that they can pretend to is but conjecture and
probability, that when they may seem to arrive at some satisfaction in the
order and connection of things, it is very possible and likely, that things may
be made and exert their causalities otherwise, than they suppose, be their
fancy never so ingenuous, and their reason never so profound and strong (for
who will be so presumptuous, as to limit either the wisdom or power of God,
that he can do no more, or must do what they fancy?) that there are thousands
of things, that they cannot give any satisfactory account of, and that the more
they seek to comprehend the reason of things, the more they are at a loss, the
more they are dissatisfied, and the effect of their study is nothing but
disorder and trouble of mind.

Now if we are convinced of the weakness and insufficiency of our reason in our
ordinary speculations, if it fails us, when we attempt to give an account of
our selves, and the operation of our minds, and when we have to do with plain
matters of sense, how unfit and unable must it be to comprehend and make out
things, that stand at that infinite distance from it, to which it bears no
proportion? They may as well pretend that all these great difficulties and
perplexities, we meet with in the conceptions of things, should be taken away,
that all men ought to be born complete Philosophers, and be inspired with the
perfect knowledge of things, which they cannot attain to after several years,
spent in labor and study, that nothing should exist, but what we can conceive,
and that the truth and possibility of things should not derive from the will
and pleasure of God, and from that Idea he has in his divine understanding, but
only take their measures, and be judged by those narrow conceptions, we borrow
from sense. Men are not to be disputed out of the belief of their senses, that
there is no such thing as motion, or continuity of parts in extended matter,
because of the great difficulties, that attend the conception of them, and
things are daily produced and by degrees arrive at the perfection of their
being, and perform actions suitable to their respective natures, though
Philosophers disagree in their opinions, and are dissatisfied one with another,
and cannot tell how or in what manner they do all this.

2. Thus Nature has its Mysteries; and who will undertake to explain Secondly,
the Mysteries of Providence, and account for all those extraordinary events,
which have happened in all ages of the world; O the depth of the riches both of
the wisdom and power of God! how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways
past finding out! Romans xi. 33. It is presumption to enquire too busily into the
ends and reasons of God's proceedings with men, as well as impiety to find
fault with them. This should satisfy us, that God, who is of infinite
perfection, neither does nor can do any thing, that is unjust; that he governs
the World by an infinite wisdom, that he permits men to act according to the
liberty of their will; and that they stand accountable to him for the actions
of their lives; and that they are but his instruments to bring about his
eternal purposes and decrees; and that nothing comes to pass without his
ordering or foresight; and that all those cross dispensations are for wise
ends, best known to himself. Why things are thus, for instance, why the Jews
were selected by him to be his peculiar people; why the coming of the Messiah
in the flesh was deferred so long; why so many Heathen Nations lie yet
unconverted, and the like, must be referred wholly to his divine will and
pleasure, which is guided by rules of eternal rectitude and wisdom. Let it
abundantly content us in all changes and chances of this mortal life, in all
those distinguishing acts of Providence, that are every where visible between
Nation and Nation, or between man and man in respect of the outward conditions
and states of being, that God will have it so. God is wonderful in his doings
with the children of men. These things call for our admiration: They are
secrets not to be enquired into; which way soever we look, whether up to
heaven, or down upon the earth and sea, and observe what is done in each, or
whether we turn our eyes inward, we shall find our selves surrounded with
wonders, too great for our knowledge, and enough to baffle and confound our
curiosity, and to convince us, that there is as well an infinite distance
between God and us, in respect of wisdom, as of power. Now would these men have
the state of things altered and changed, and the world new modelled, and new
laws given to mankind, and a new nature too, and all things reduced to an
easier order, and regulated by their fancies, that so nothing may be above
their capacity and understanding? What is this, but the effect of a foolish
pride, that is discontented and troubled, that so many things are out of his
reach and power, and that will scarce be brought to acknowledge, that God can
do, more than they fancy or comprehend?

3. Besides, those who object against the instituted religion of our Savior,
the greatness of its mysteries, may use the same arguments against the
principles of natural religion. That there is an infinite being, in whose Idea
is essentially included all possible perfection, is the voice and dictate of
nature, right reason, and conscience, and evidenced by the constant and
uninterrupted order and course and frame of the universe, and by the universal
consent of mankind, who have rites and ceremonies of religion, their Priests
and their Sacrifices, to whom they offer up prayers and oblations, to whom they
appeal for justice when injured, and to whom they fly for refuge and succor,
when they are distressed and in danger, as it were by instinct, and without any
deliberation. But notwithstanding this evidence and clearness and demonstration
of the existence of a God, they will not pretend to understand fully the nature
of the Godhead. That God is infinite in essence and power, and that all things
owe their being to his will, they must be forced to confess, or else deny his
being, and fancy an infinite series of causes, infinite periods of motions, and
an infinite succession of generations, which is absurd and contradictious and
impossible, though they have only a negative notion of infinity. Our
understandings cannot reach so far, as to have a complete and comprehensive
notion of it* and when we cannot give satisfactory accounts concerning the
affections of a natural body, as motion, place, time; much less can it be
expected, that we should do this concerning eternity, immensity, or the other
necessary and essential attributes of God: so that the difficulty of conceiving
a thing does not any way hinder the truth and possibility of its existence.
However the most scrupulous and inquisitive may be satisfied, that there are
such attributes, and that consequently upon a reflection, not only on the
nature of God, but on the scant measures of knowledge in creatures, it is
necessary, they should be above our reach and comprehension. As we may discover
much in a curious piece of art, or wonder of nature, as the Lodestone, or any
Electrical body: we may find out some virtue in a plant, or mineral, or
peculiar sort of earth; and yet oftentimes after a laborious search, the best
Naturalists are forced to confess, that there is or may be at least a great
deal more, than what they have discovered.

But here, they say, that the understanding neither does nor can admit of any
thing incredible; and we say so too. God does not, and consequently the
Christian Religion, which is the doctrine and revelation of God, does not
propose any thing to us, as the object of our faith, that is really impossible
in it self, and involves in it a perfect and manifest contradiction; and
nothing less can or ought to be judged incredible. But when they pretend, that
no proposition ought or can be believed farther, than it may be cleared up to
the understanding by the evidence of natural reason, or of the things
themselves contained in it, we reject it as an unjust and unreasonable demand,
which will fully appear by showing the falseness of both parts of the
supposition.

1. It is utterly false, that nothing is credible, but what can be proved and
made out by reason. There are indeed several degrees of credibility, according
to which the mind does admit some things with a greater ease and freeness than
others. But however be the matter proposed never so unlikely or unusual, if the
authority be just and good, it must not therefore be pronounced incredible,
because perchance it is not fully agreeable to the present state of affairs and
practice of the World, or because I have some little prejudice against it. For
as in a matter of fact, where there are sufficient proofs given of a Relators
both honesty and knowledge, when I have all the assurance in the World, that
such a matter is capable of, and that he could not mistake in understanding it,
and that his words and thoughts do not in the least disagree, when I can object
nothing but a groundless surmise, that possibly, and for ought I know, it may
be otherwise, this will challenge my assent, and be a sufficient warrant to me
to believe it, whether I have a clear Idea of it or no: for this unlikeliness
and seeming repugnancy of it, may arise from my being ignorant of several
circumstances, the knowledge of which would render it probable and easy: so is
it in matter of Doctrine; whatsoever is proposed by God, becomes thereby
immediately credible, and my assent is rational and just, though the thing be
above my apprehension; and this I must ascribe to the greatness of the object,
and the imperfections of my reason, which neither is nor can pretend to be an
arbiter and judge in such matters, which are too high for it: so that before a
man can safely pronounce a doctrine, that is revealed, incredible, and reject
it as such, he must question the power and veracity of God, and maintain, that
nothing is possible, but what we can comprehend; and thus under a pretense of
caution, betray the greatest immodesty in the world, when he himself believes
several other things, upon the bare testimony of men, which neither his wit nor
curiosity, nor his reason can ever be able satisfactorily to make out and
demonstrate.

2. It is equally false, that no Proposition ought to be believed, but what may
be cleared up to the understanding by the evidence of the things themselves.
The falseness of which assertion I shall fully evince in these three
particulars; by showing

1. That it destroys the nature Faith.

2. It takes away the blessedness and rewardableness annexed to it.

3. It reflects on the Wisdom and Sovereignty of God, who may, if it pleases
him, propose such things to us, and command us to believe them.

1. It destroys the nature of Faith. To believe in general, in the proper
notion of it, is to assent to things upon the discovery and attestation of
others, which are not evident and apparent of themselves; that is, when I have
no demonstrative or sensible knowledge of things, I admit and judge them to be
true, not because I either saw them, and can assure my self of them by any of
my other senses, or because they are so evident to my reason, that I must needs
embrace them, as a principle or conclusion in Philosophy, but because I have
received them from another, who informs me and gives me this account of them,
for whose sake I assent to them as real and certain. By which it is
distinguished from science, which is grounded upon the evidence and clearness
of the apprehension of the respective propositions or objects, when things are
so plain that they do necessitate our assent, as that the opposite members of a
true and perfect contradiction cannot belong to the same thing at the same
time, that equals added to equals make equals, that in a triangle, three angles
are always equal to two right angles, and the like. And the like assurance and
certainty of knowledge is gained, when we draw conclusions according to rule and
the laws of method from first principles, which are assented to, as soon as they
are proposed, and the terms understood; whence there is an immediate dependence
and connection of things, and one thing naturally follows another; Then we are
said to know a thing, when we can run it up to its first principles, can trace
its original and cause, and understand its effects and operations.

This distinction being so just and natural, to call for evidence and
demonstration in things proposed to be believed, is to confound different
assents of the mind, to turn Religion into Science, to destroy the truth of
History, and Tradition, and Revelation, and to fall into Skepticism, and doubt
whether any thing be certain, but what we see and can prove and represent by a
Scheme, and at last question whether our Sense, and what we call our Reason do
not deceive us, or else, which is the effect of a greater frenzy, run our
selves into this gross absurdity, that we are as wise as God, and that he can
do no more, than what our gross fancies will have him.

That then some of the grand articles of Religion are not so clear, as
Propositions in Metaphysics or Theorems in Geometry, or indeed are not clear
at all, cannot be objected against their credibility. They are in themselves as
certain and as infallible; nay more certain and more infallible, if
infallibility may be supposed to admit of degrees; but in reason, it cannot be
expected, our knowledge of them should be as explicit and as clear: Supernatural
Truths are not, cannot be determined or judged of by proofs, derived from
nature or sense; they have proper proofs of their own, as all other arts and
sciences have.

To judge of these things therefore by our narrow conceptions, is a most false
and unwarrantable way of procedure; and indeed it cannot seem strange, that so
much Error and Blasphemy and all that direful train of Heresies, in matters
relating to God and Religion, which have so much disturbed the peace of
Christendom, should spring from this one absurd and corrupt principle. Hence
it was also, that See the excellent discourse of Plato about this subject,
toward the latter end of his second book de Republica, p. 377. etc. lomi
secundi ex editione Serrani.
Orpheus, and the other Greek Poets have dressed up their Gods in the habit and
figure of men, and clothed them with all the infirmities and passions incident
to humane nature, and hereby made way for all the debaucheries and
superstitions, that lust could possibly suggest, or a troubled fancy invent.
They made use of no other faculty to judge of God, but a gross imagination; In
his Epistle to Herodotus, as it is extant in Diogenes Laertius -- (...). edit.
Londinensis p. 285. -- This he established as one of his (...), or main
principles of his Philosophy, (...), p. 300. and laid down therefore in the
first place by his great admirer and follower Lucretius in the beginning of his
philosophical Poem, to make the better way for the Atheism, which was to
follow, that is, to exclude God, with a fairer pretense, from having any thing
to do, either with the framing or governing of the world, and to deny a
providence: that censure, which Cotta in Tully mentions to have bin past upon
him by several, being exactly true -- Video non^ullis videri Epicurum, ne in
offensionem Atheniensium caderet, verbis reliquisse Deos, re sustulisse. lib.
1. de Not. Deorum, speaking of this very Atheistical afhorism.
Epicurus upon this very slight pretense excluded God from having any thing to
do in the ordering and governing of the world, because he fancied, this could
not be done without anxiety and trouble, like the due management of a great
charge or employment, which takes up ones whole time, and requires contrivance
and study and foresight to keep things in an equal poise, to prevent disorders,
to apply remedies to the least inconveniences, that otherwise might quickly
grow and improve into a mischief, and to secure all by an equal distribution of
rewards and punishments; forgetting that God's power is infinite and
inexhaustible; that his eyes reach from one end of the world to the other, and
see into the very essences of things; that all things are at his absolute
disposal and command; that trouble only arises either from fear of success, or
when we are overwhelmed with business, or our strength is not proportionable or
any way sufficient to sustain so great a weight. Aetius presently rejects the
eternal generation of the Son of God, because this does not in all things agree
with natural generations; and because it cannot be so with men, he impiously
and dogmatically concludes, it is an impossible notion, and thinks he has
reason for his blasphemy and peremptoriness, by laying down seven and forty
arguments for it, as they are numbered and confuted by In haeresi An^maeorum,
quae est LXXVI.
Epiphanius in his Panarium. The same gross fancies have the Mahometans of this
article of faith to this day, who deride the Christians, by asking impious
questions concerning it, and even in their Devotion renounce it with a great
deal of earnestness, with a far be it from thee, what the Christians impute to
thee; as if man were the measure and standard of all things, even of God
himself, who made him, and who is of infinite perfection, beyond the utmost
reach of fancy, or conception. His actions and understanding must needs as much
transcend ours, as does his essence. His ways are not as our ways, nor his
thoughts as our thoughts. Isa. lv. 8.

2. This Hypothesis of theirs, that nothing is or ought to be believed but what
is cleared up to the understanding by the evidence of the things themselves,
does wholly take away the Blessedness and Rewardableness annexed to Faith.

One necessary condition to make any action capable of reward or commendation
is, that it flow from a principle of liberty; and herein man, who is endowed
with reason, the only true foundation of it, has the preeminence above all
other creatures, that act only by instinct, or the force of appetite, or by
necessity of Principiorum Philosophiae part prima, sect. XXXVII.
Nature; He becomes hereby as it were Lord of himself, and can act or not act,
according as he is guided by counsel and rational motives, or merely as it
pleases him; and according either to the right or ill use of this liberty, he
is to be judged, whether he has deserved well or no. That Chrystals shoot out
into curious and exactly regular figures, that the flakes of Snow are
Hexagonal, and ten thousand other Rarities of Nature, are not to the
commendation of the things themselves: They show admirably the wisdom of the
first contriver of them: the Artist, not the Pendulum, is praised, though it
measures time so exactly, and performs all its various motions without any
interruption or inequality, because this necesssarily arises from a due
proportion of weights and wheels, and from a just adaptation of the several
parts of it; it is the perfection of a man, that he acts freely, and
consequently that he is virtuous out of choice, notwithstanding all the
allurements and inclinations of sense. And the like is to be said of the
several assents of the mind; if the truths of Religion were in themselves so
clear and evident, that we could not but assent, whether we would or no, if
they could be proved by arguments, derived from sense or nature, where then
would be the blessedness of Faith our Savior speaks of, Joh. 20. 29.
which belong to those, who have not seen, and yet have believed? when we have
a clear and distinct perception of a thing, then we know it; and he must be
very stupid and very pertinacious, that ^ill not submit to the truth, and
evidence, and conviction of a demonstration. How ridiculous would it be to
raise a dispute, and heap up arguments against clear evidence, and pretend
dissatisfaction in the midst of so great certainty, as science affords? If
there were no difficulty in the notions, where were that Obedience of Faith,
the Apostle St. Paul mentions? where would be our submission and humility? for
a trial of which I am persuaded, that many Mysteries are now proposed by God,
which hereafter as a reward of our Faith shall be more clearly made out to us,
and that this shall be one principal part of the glory that shall attend the
blessed in the other world, when we shall be divested of those circumstances,
that now hinder the exertions of Reason, when our understandings shall be
enlightened, and our capacities enlarged, and our thoughts heightened and
exalted; not that it is possible for the most refined and raised intellect ever
to attain to a full and comprehensive knowledge of them (for the Angels, those
glorious spirits, who attend the throne, and are continually in the presence of
God, humbly vail their faces and adore) but that what we now know by Faith and
Revelation only, we shall have a somewhat clearer insight into, and be as fully
and satisfactorily convinced of, as for instance, that there is a Trinity of
Persons in one undivided Essence, as if we understood the manner of their
several subsistences.

3. It reflects upon the Wisdom and Power of God, who may, if he please,
propose these things to us and command us to believe them. For that God may do
this, who can question? or deny, that we are as much obliged to give up our
judgments and understandings, as our wills, to his will, to assent to any
speculation or truth of doctrine revealed by him, as to any mode of instituted
worship commanded by him, or any precept of Morality; and that I am not to
object and throw in my little conjectures and probabilities, because it is not
altogether, or in the least, evident to my reason, when the nature of the thing
renders it impossible that it should, or if it did not, yet his command should
be enough to force my assent? now to fancy, that nothing is or ought to be
credible, but what can be made out and cleared up to the understanding by the
evidence of the things themselves, destroys this supposition, which has its
certainty from, and is supported by, several of the divine attributes. The
Wisdom and Power of God are both infinite, and therefore he knows more, and can
do more, than what we possibly can conceive: otherwise we must equal our little
knowledge, which we chiefly derive from the images and representations of things
in our minds, and which every contemptible insect and vegetable is too big for,
with his; and upon the same account, we must fancy our power equal too: which
is the effect of an irrational pride and madness, like that of the Apostate
Angels, and by consequence, throw off our dependence upon him, and deny to
yield obedience to his laws, because they do as much cross our vicious and
corrupt inclinations, as the Mysteries of our Faith do our narrow conceptions
and sentiments. An infinite understanding only can fully comprehend an infinite
perfection; such a proportion between the faculty and the object being
altogether necessary: for if it could be comprehended by a finite intellect, it
would immediately cease to be infinite. How insufferable then is such an
insolence! How vain and foolish are such imaginations! and every high thing, as
the Apostle speaks, extravagant fancies and conceits, that get into the brain,
that exalt themselves against the knowledge of God, which ought to be captivated
and made subject upon the highest Reason in the World to the obedience and
doctrine of Christ: which will appear by descending to the

2. Second Particular, I proposed to make good, that the Christian Religion
requires us to believe its Mysteries upon such grounds, as we cannot reject
without doing violence to our faculties, and consequently, that the rejecting
and disbelieving them must be unreasonable.

Now the grounds are chiefly these two.

1. That we believe and admit the divine Revelations.

2. That we yield obedience and submit our understandings and all the powers of
our minds to the Will of God.

1. That we believe and admit divine Revelations; because God is of infinite
veracity, and to deceive is repugnant to the holiness of his Nature; there is
an utter impossibility in it. Now if we repose so much trust and confidence in
a friend, because we have tried him, and know that he is a man of great
integrity, and that he abhors the very thought of deceiving any one with the
least falsehood, and speaks exactly according to his knowledge without any
reserved or secret meaning or equivocation, or concealing part of the
proposition in his mind that it may be otherwise understood than he intends it;
much more with all the readiness of submission of mind imaginable are we to
receive, whatever comes from God, without the least demur, or doubt, or
contradiction. This an infinite and eternal rectitude does justly challenge
from us; for God may as soon deny his being, as falsify his word; so that
whoever goes about to question or disbelieve any thing that God has revealed,
will run himself upon one of these two gross and absurd impieties, either doubt
whether God himself has an exact and perfect knowledge of those things, he has
proposed to our belief, or whether he has been just and true to deliver what he
knows. It is a most rational conclusion of St. John 1 Epist. v. 10. he that
believes not God, has made him a liar. No difficulty then can or ought to
deter me from the belief of a thing, if God has once revealed it; nor can the
mind of man possibly desire a greater satisfaction than this.

2. That we yield obedience and submit our understandings and all the powers of
our minds to the will of God, for

1. That there are thousands of things de facto above our knowledge and
conception cannot be deemed by any, without the highest immodesty, an unjust
postulatum.

2. That all or at least most of our knowledge deriving from sense, the more
things are freed and abstracted from the entanglements of gross matter, the
more difficult is the conception; because they fall less under the examination
of our senses, from which we receive so great prejudices in our infancy and
childhood, which make that deep impression on our fancies, that they are not
easily to be removed.

3. God by virtue of his absolute dominion and sovereignty may command us to
assent to things above our reach, and conception, and knowledge. Faith is not to
choose its Object, no more than a man's will can prescribe and set to him a Law,
because its whole and only power consists in the liberty of obeying or not
obeying of a Law prescribed by a superior Power. Whatsoever Doctrine therefore
is delivered and revealed by God, becomes immediately credible, by reason of
the authority, that does accompany it, and enforce it upon us. The Articles of
Faith carry along with them sufficient motives of Credibility, but then these
motives must not be fetched from the nature of the things themselves, as if
they were to be so evident, that our Reason might fully discover their
connection and dependence, but from without; that is, my Faith is rightly
grounded, and an obligation lies upon me to believe, what is proposed by God,
if it be evidenced so to be, by just and rational proofs; and if the authority
be certain and infallible: God therefore declaring his Will, and confirming the
Revelations he has made of it by his divine Power, this latter is a sufficient
proof, and a just and rational ground of my Belief; for how absurd would it be
for any one, because he cannot comprehend and make out a thing fully, which in
the nature of it, and by reason of our weakness and incapacity, is
incomprehensible, and which he ought to acknowledge to be such, unless he will
presume to measure Eternity and grasp Infinity with a span, therefore to doubt
of so plain a truth, as this is, that the divine Power cannot be made use of to
confirm any Proposition, but what is exactly true and certain? so that this is
not to forego our Reason, as the Socinians plead, for nothing is more agreeable
to the principles of right Reason, but to act according to it: and therefore to
say that we Believe I know not what, if they mean, that the objects of our
Faith cannot be proved to exist with the same kinds of proofs, as what is
presented to our senses, or as a propriety may be demonstrated of the subject
of a speculative Science, this cannot be any prejudice at all to our belief,
because in all Faith, whether Humane or Divine, there cannot be the same
clearness and evidence, but that there are such Objects of our Faith we are as
certainly assured, as if we had a particular demonstration of each.

Now that the Mysteries of Christianity are confirmed by such an authority, and
therefore are to be believed by us, and consequently that the Christian
Religion requires our assent to no more, than what is apparent to be God's
Will, we have this assurance, that they were attested and made good by the
miracles of our Savior; by these he proved his Commission to be derived from
Heaven. This was the belief of the Jews in general, both Learned and Unlearned*
Nicodemus was fully convinced of the truth and evidence of it, Joh. iii. 2.
Rabbi, we know, that thou art a Teacher come from God, for no man can do those
miracles, that thou do, except God be with him. In the case of the blind man,
who was restored to his sight, the doubt was rational, How can a man, that is a
sinner do such miracles? Joh. ix* 16. If this man were not of God, he could do
nothing, v. 33. that is, he could not do such things, as are above the power of
a mere Man, which we see him do. It was nothing, but a most unjust prejudice to
our Saviors Person, and to the meanness of his Birth and Parentage, arising
from a false principle concerning the temporal Kingdom of the Messiah, through
a misunderstanding of the Prophesies, that made them, against their Belief and
Conscience, reject the authority of so many evident and often repeated
miracles; and though they would not acknowledge him for their Messiah, that came
in a way of humility and meekness, so opposite to their humors and
expectations, who thought of nothing, but triumphs and revenge; yet they are
forced to acknowledge, that the Messiah could not do greater; and lastly our
blessed Savior appeals to miracles, as to his credentials, as being a most
rational motive to work faith in the minds of the most scrupulous; if ye
believe not me, believe the works that I do. This then is a sufficient
confirmation of our Saviors mission, and of the doctrine He and the Apostles
delivered from him, and preached through the several parts of the World, which
they traveled, and after put in writing for the benefit and greater
satisfaction of all succeeding Generations. Nor are we now at this great
distance of time to call for new signs from Heaven, or to desire a farther
confirmation of what has been received so universally for so many successions
of Ages. The holy Scriptures are the authentic Registers of the Doctrine and
Revelations of God, and that I may add this by the way, were they but of humane
authority, they deserved not to be drolled upon, but to be treated with an
equal, if not a greater, respect, than Polybius, or Livy, not only upon the
account of their Antiquity, but for those excellent remarks they contain, and
the Theists of our Age may as well doubt, whether there were such a man as
Cyrus and Alexander, as Moses and Joshua, and question whether Cicero wrote
those Orations, and the other excellent Books, that go under his name, or
Virgil those admired Poems, as whether St. Matthew or St. John, who were the
known Disciples of Christ, and conversed daily with him for above three years
together, wrote those Gospels, which contain the History and Acts of his Life
and Death.

Upon these evidences our assent is raised, which make it rational and just;
our Faith is resolved into the testimony of God, which is only the rule of it,
we believe nothing, but what our Savior and his Apostles taught, for which we
have the authority of their words, and what the whole number of Christian
People embraced and received, as the just and true meaning of them. Now because
we cannot reconcile these express and clear Revelations of the Gospel, laid
down in plain expressions, as that Christ is the son of God, was in the
beginning with God, before the world was made, God manifested in the flesh, God
blessed for ever, and that he and the father are one (not to descend to the
other Articles, which are laid down as clearly) with our narrow conceptions of
things, is most irrationally to conclude against God in favor of our selves,
merely for this only reason, because we cannot tell or understand, how it can
or should be, when he has told us expressly it is so. Hereupon they heap up
strange and absurd interpretations of Scripture, and which are impossible to be
true; they deny to words their proper, and natural and genuine significations;
they fancy nothing but improprieties and ambiguities of expression; and admit
of absurd notions for all their high vaunts and pretenses to reason, which
destroy the very design and institution of Christianity. Thus our most blessed
Savior, the only begotten son of God must be only so (...), or (...), God only
by grace and favor, and for the holiness and excellence of his life, as (...).
Epiphanius in haeresi Ebionaeoru^* q^ae est XXX. sect. XVIII, ex edit. Pet^vi^.
Peris^is 1622. page 142.
Ebion, and Epiphanius in haeresi A^i^ncrum, quae est LXIX. sect. XVIII. p. 741.
Arius, and Gregorius Abulpharagius, in historia Dynastiarum, Arabice, p. 129.
edit. Oxon. 1663. Eu^ychius in Annalibus Alexandrinis Arabice, edit. Oxon.
part prima p. 397. and 441.
Paulus Samosatenus used to blaspheme of old, or Deus Factus, a Created God
only, such by Designation and Office, as our modern Socinians impiously
distinguish, when, not only the name, but the essential Attributes of the
Godhead are ascribed to him. Thus the Doctrine of the Ever blessed Trinity,
which is clearly contained in the form of This argument drawn from the Form of
Baptism, is generally made use of by all the ancient Fathers, against the
blasphemy of Sabellius, Arius, and the rest of the Heretics, who had departed
from the true faith, established at first, to follow phansies and inventions of
their own. But reserving these numerous citations for another work, I shall
content my self at present to say with the Author of the Breviarium fidei
adversus Arianos, who lived above 1200 years since, put out by the most learned
Sirmondus, to whom the world is so much obliged, for his publishing several
writings of the ancients, out of MSS. -- Qui [Spiritus sanctus] si Deus non
esset, non in baptismo in uno nomine Deitatis patris and filio sociaretur,
sicut scriptum est, ubi regulam baptismi posuit ipse Dominus: Ite, inquit,
baptizate omnes gentes in nomine Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti. Quod
solum testimonium deberet haereticis sufficere ad credulitatem insiparabilis
Trinitatis, quia nec ipse audent aliter baptizare, ne regulant Domini
corrumpere videartur. Et ubi unum nomen dicitur, ibi and mejor and miner
excluditur.
Baptism, as might fully be made good against the exceptions and cavils of
Wolsogenius, and in St. Joh. v. 7. (a Of this see the Appendix.
Verse written by the same hand that wrote all the rest of the Epistle, as it
is most evident from the verses in conjunction with it, which would be
altogether defective and imperfect without it, however it be omitted in the
Alexandrine Manuscript, rather by chance (for that is not the only omission in
that Copy) than design, as if it had favored the Heresy of the
Antitrinitarians;) this Doctrine of the Trinity, I say, must be exploded,
because they cannot satisfy their bold curiosity, as why the emanation of the
Deity stops at three Hypostases, that is, why the Divine Essence is not
communicated to more than Three Persons, and how it can be Communicated, and
yet altogether remain Undivided, and the like. That this Article was explicitly
believed in the very beginnings of Christianity, may, to omit at present other
ways of proofs, be evinced hence, that the Heathens of those times used to
upbraid the Christians with the belief of so unlikely a Doctrine. Thus Critias
in the Dialogue Philopatris (which if not Lucians, was written however in
Trajan's time, whose victories and successes in the East, and particularly in
the taking of Ctesiphon and Babylon and other places from the Persians, and in
repressing the incursions of the Scythians, as happening just at that time, are
there mentioned) when Triephon had expressed the belief and sense of the
Christians about this Article, by adjuring (...), makes a mock at it, and
replies with a great deal of impudent raillery, (...). So far is that from
having the least truth in it, which the Enemies and Opposers of this Doctrine
affirm, without the least show of Reason and Authority, that it derives wholly
from Pythagoras and Plato, and was learned in their Schools, and afterward
dressed up by the Fathers, who were admirers of that Philosophy, and not heard of
till the Third or Fourth Century. So that upon the whole it will appear, that
the Christian Religion has just and sure evidences, and therefore to fancy,
which is the only thing they can allege in behalf of their Unbelief, that
nothing is or can be believed, but what ought to be fully comprehended by the
Understanding, is so foolish, so unjust, so unreasonable a thing, that nothing
but intolerable Pride and Obstinacy can possibly suggest such a Thought, and
consequently that before any one can become an Arrian or a Socinian, he must
forego his Reason, and forget that God is of infinite Perfection, and forget
too, that he himself is a Man.

To draw toward a Period. Christianity being a Great Mystery, and necessarily
such:

It is but a natural inference, that all our enquiries into the Articles of it
be sober and modest; that we expect not a comprehensive knowledge of them; that
we be not too busy and curious in our Searches into the Secrets of God; that
being conscious to our selves of the defects, and shallowness, and weakness of
our Reason in lesser matters; how imperfect and untrue oftentimes our
collections are of sensible beings, to which our faculties may seem
proportionate; and to what errors and delusions we are subject, by taking up
false notions, by fancy and prejudice; we learn to be wise unto sobriety, and
not to think of our selves, above what we ought to think. It was nothing at
first, but an overbold curiosity, not content with Revelation, and with just
proofs of it, that raised in the mind thoughts of Disbelief; but it stopped not
here; it soon improved into a proud conceit of mastering all the difficulties
of Religion by the strength of Reason; and to this we may justly impute the
original and growth of all those Heresies and Blasphemies, that have been
vented from the very first Preaching of the Gospel to this day. It is a vain
thing to think to do this; it is a passing beyond the bounds which God and our
own Nature has set us; a piece of Sacrilegious rashness, as Salvian justly
words it, in his third Book De Gubernatione Dei, speaking of the various
dispensations of Providence: Hoc ipsum genus quasi Sacrilegae temeritatis est,
si plus scire cupias quam sinaris: The Articles of Faith, as they are not to be
tried, so neither to be proved by the Principles of Mathematics or Natural
Philosophy. It is as great folly to attempt it, as to expect it, both arising
from a wantonness of Wit, which quickly looses it self in a Labyrinth of wild
Opinions, and pleasing it self with new Notions and Ideas, is more and more
perplexed and entangled, and is scarce ever reducible to a right and sober
temper.

What ill success the Schoolmen have had in their attempts this way upon the
Articles of Religion, Christendom has long since had sad experience of; these
men guilty of the other extreme would scarce acknowledge any thing of Mystery in
it; all things seemed so clear to them, as if they had had a particular
Revelation; they have thrown open the Vail, that covers the Ark; they define
boldly, and obtrude their Conjectures for Oracles. St. Paul and St. John shall
be explained and proved by the Writings of Plato and Aristotle; thus
prostituting the Majesty of the Sacred Scriptures, and corrupting the
Simplicity of the Christian Religion by their niceties and subtilities of
Distinctions, and exposing it the more to the Cavils of Heretics, who
observing the falseness of their Principles, and the weakness and incompetency
of their Proofs, are more encouraged to reject the truth of it. Hereby too a
Contentious and Disputative Theology has been introduced in the Schools; and
unnecessary and bold questions started, impossible to be resolved with any
satisfaction, which perplex and confound the Understanding, and are so far from
Building us up in our Holy Faith, and from explaining the Doctrine of it, that
it has scarce suffered by any one thing more. Some things we may understand,
but we see more to admire, which with all our art and subtility we can never
attain to. It is enough, that the Christian Religion does persuade us by
Rational Arguments to the acknowledgment of its Doctrine, that it lays down
sufficient grounds of the certainty and necessity of our Belief, that it gives
us all the assurance we can, with any modesty, pretend to, and all the proofs
the nature of the things, proposed to our belief, are capable of and will bear.
It Is Faith in Christ, that He is the Son of God and the Savior of the World,
that denominates us Christians; to deny this, how excellent a Person soever we
make him for Meekness and Holiness of Life, is to renounce Christianity, and in
effect to turn Mahometans; for they acknowledge Christ to have been a Great
Prophet, to have been born of a Virgin, to have been assumed into Heaven, and
the like. Satis sit pro universis rationibus Author Deus; as the same Salvian
has it. This is that, that is equivalent to ten thousand Demonstrations; this
will level all those objections, that are raised against the Mysteries of
Christianity; that will silence all the Sophistry of Corrupt Reason, and cut
off all those Arguments, which presumptuous Men are wont to make: and certainly
if we rightly consider it, the Mysteries of Christianity, as they are proposed
in the Scriptures, are by reason of the great difficulties, that attend the
conception of them, so far from being incredible, that they ought thereby to
become more credible; that is, they are more worthy of the infinite Majesty and
perfection of God, by how much they are above the reach of our Faculties.

2. Let us remember that Christianity is a Mystery of Godliness, and
consequently that the Great Mysteries of it ought to have an influence upon our
Lives and Practices. As on the one hand, to say, that these Great Articles of
our Faith are nice Speculations, and the explicit Belief of them, as they are
proposed, not necessary, and to question that Sense of them, in which they have
always been received by the Catholic Church, is to undermine the Fundamentals
of Christianity; So on the other side, it takes off very much from the
obligation to Obedience, and dulls those affections, which a reflection on these
Great Mysteries must needs cause in the mind.

That God should send his Son into the world to discover this Mystery to us in
Person, and in order to our Redemption, was the Effect of an Infinite Wisdom,
and of an Infinite Love; that God should be Manifested in the Flesh for our
sakes, and submit himself to the weaknesses, and imperfections, and contumelies
of the humane nature; that the Second Person of the Trinity, Co-essential and
Coeternal with the Father, should condescend to assume flesh, and therein to
suffer; a reflection on this cannot but fill us with admiration and love. One
great part of the Worship we owe to God consists in our admiring his infinite
Perfections; all our Praises and Thanksgivings are but the outward
significations of this, and faint expressions of our thoughts, which loose
themselves in the contemplation of them. Now these Mysteries afford us eternal
matter for our admiration. Besides, what greater obligation to Obedience can
there possible be, than the Revelation of this Mystery, upon which our
Salvation is founded? A Holy and Religious Life then is the best evidence of
our belief of these Articles of Christianity beyond all subtility of
Disputation. This especially concerns us, who are dignified with the Holy
Priesthood, who are Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God.
This shows, that we do more than barely assent to the truth of them, when they
produce in us all, both Priests and Lay, these effects, for which they were
principally discovered; that so living in obedience to the will of God revealed
to us by his Son, whom he sent out of his own Bosom, and in all holy
conversation and godliness, we may at last be admitted to the sight and
fruition of his glorious Godhead, to sing Praises and Hallelujah's to the
blessed Trinity for ever and ever, Amen.

Appendix.
IT must be confessed, that this Verse is not to be met with in several Old
MSS. as particularly in the mentioned Alexandrine, now in the Kings Library at
St. James', brought out of Egypt by Cyrillus Lucari, when he removed from the Sea of Alexandria to the Patriarchate of Constantinople, who was strangled by
the Turks in the year 1638, and sent to K. Charles I. though not so ancient, I
believe, as is pretended, as if it had been wrote by the hand of Thecla, an
Egyptian Woman of an honorable Extraction, and a Martyr for the Christian
Faith, condemned to the Amphitheatre under Dioclesian, as Eusebius relates in
the Supplement to the Eight Book of his Ecclesiastical History, which is found
in several Copies, if it be his ( cap. 3.) before the first Council of Nice,
which is barely said and conjectured; and I suppose, that it may be proved,
that the Vatican exemplar is the more Genuine of the two, and comes nigher the
Original. It is omitted also in an ancient Manuscript in the Archives of our
College Library, containing the New Testament entire (except the Apocalypse)
with the Psalter and several Hymns collected out of the Old Testament, the
words (...) being also wanting in the eight verse, and in several others. Upon
this the Enemies of this Doctrine triumph and boldly pretend, that it was
inserted by the Catholics: Thus to mention only one for all, Socinus himself
in his Commentary on these words -- Satis constat illa esse Adulterina, and ab
hominibus, qui suum dogma de trino and uno Deo quacunque ratione defendere and
propagare volebant, in hunc locum infarcta. But let the appeal lie to any
indifferent Person, which is most likely, that those, who professed their
belief of this Doctrine, which was grounded too upon several other Texts of
Scripture, and was derived down to them from the first Ages of the Church, and
which they contended for with so much earnestness, should without any necessity
dare commit, such a Forgerie, which could not but be taken notice of by their
watchful Enemies, or that this should be done by the Opposers of this Doctrine,
who were arraigned in general, by all the Catholic Writers, who had to do with
them, as falsifiers of the sacred Records, and were so much concerned to do it
in defense of their private tenets and fancies, and especially to raze this
Text, with which they were so oppressed, out of several Copies, from which by
Transcripts it might easily be propagated into others: And consequently it is
not to be admired, that several of the Fathers, no not Athanasius himself, nor
Cyril of Alexandria, not St. Hilary, who defended with so much learning the
truth of this great Mystery, did not make use of this Testimony, they lighting
upon some of these Transcripts; which is to be said also for St. Austin, in his
Book 3. Chap. 22. against Maximinus an Arian Bishop, for St. Leo in his Epistle
to Flavian Bishop of Constantinople, against the Heresy of Eutyches, Ep. 10.
Cap. 5. for Eucherius de questionibus N. Testamenti, and for Oecumenius in his
Commentary on this Epistle, and several others. The same reason holds for the
omission of it in the Syriack, Arabic, and Aethiopick Translations, the two
former of which, as they are now extant, as is most probable, were made long
since the times of Arius, notwithstanding the pretensions of some to a far
greater Antiquity, the last is confessedly of a later Date. The scarcity of
Copies in those days, and the malicious industry and cunning of the Heretics
render the conjecture sufficiently probable, if no Copy were to be found with
this Verse entire, and that we had only the authority of some of the Ancients,
who cite it as authentic, as having met with it in their Books. The Divines of
Lovain in collating the N. T. with a great number of Latin Copies, found it
only wanting in five. R. Stephanus in his Edition of the N. T. had the use of
fifteen or sixteen old Greek MSS. above half of which retained it. So the
Edition of the N. T. at Complutum compared with ancient MSS. printed in the
beginning of the Restoration of Polite Literature in Christendom, at the
expenses of the great Cardinal Ximenes, only with this variation, (...). Thus
Erasmus confesses he met with a Manuscript in England, which he calls by the
name of Codex Britanicus, which had the whole seventh Verse, as we now read it,
and the eight Verse, the latter part thus altered, (...). I shall lay no stress
upon two Writings, which pass under the name of Athanasius, where this Verse is
cited, because it is not to be met with in those larger works of his, which are
acknowledged genuine, the one is an account of a disputation, according to the
title, had with Arius in the Council of Nice; but the title is faulty, as
appears from the Discourse it self; nor was Arius the Person disputed with
there, but one of his followers; and the reason of the mistake of the title may
be ascribed to an ignorant Librarius, putting down Arius for Arianus, and the
Dialogue not real, but supposed, as was usual amongst the Fathers, introducing
the Heretics pleading their Cause, and the Orthodox refuting their Cavils and
defending the Truth. And if this may pass for likely, there can be no great
reason to suspect the Authenticalness of it, the 1 V^l. p. 147. Paristis. 1627.
words are, (...). The other is in a Book extant only in Latin Tom. 2 p. 55^.
lib. 1. de unita Deitate Trinitatis ad Theophilum, dicente Joanne Evangelista
in Epistola sua, tres sunt, qui testimonium dicunt in Coelo, Pater, and Verbum,
and Spiritus. But this piece, I confess, is very justly rejected as none of
his, though perchance wrote not many years after his time. St. Cyprian, who
suffered Martyrdom about the year of Chapter 258. Galienus and his Son Valerianus
being then Emperors, about sixty years before the calling of the Council of
Nice, in his book de unitate Ecclesiae Catholicae, cites this Text expressly, as
found in the Copies of his time: -- Dicit Dominus, Ego and Pater unum sumus,
and iterum de Patre and Filio and Spiritu Sancto, and hi Tres unum sunt. It is
not any way material to the design and purpose of this Scholion to inquire, in
what sense St. Cyprian understood these words, but only to vindicate the
antiquity of the Copies, that retained this reading, though it might easily be
proved that it was a thing usual with the Fathers, as no one can be ignorant,
who has turned over their Writings, to interpret places of Scriptures
sometimes, not according to their primary intent, but by way of accommodation.
Which testimony is so clear and convincing that Sandius in his Appendix
quaestionum Paradoxarum, p. ^8^.
uses all his art and skill to avoid the force of it, by pretending, that
several things have been changed, added, taken away, and some other way varied
in the Epistle, as appears by the observation of Possevinus, who took the pains
to compare the printed Copies with four MSS. and the acknowledgment of others,
Perkins, James, and Rivet: from which premises he concludes very boldly upon a
mere possibility, that this place was never cited by that blessed Martyr, but
put in by some body else; Quam facile itaque etiam hic locus interseri potuit
ab his, qui non exhorruerunt sacras literas corrumpere propter metum
Hereticorum. But first this is barely said without the least proof, and without
the authority of any MS. Secondly neither Pamelius nor Rigaltius, nor any
other, as I know of, who put forth St. Cyprian, make mention of any various
reading in this place, all agreeing in it. Now that this Epistle is St.
Cyprians is undoubted: St Cyprian himself referring to it, and that the reading
is the same now, as it was in the old Copies written above eleven hundred and
forty years ago, appears from Fulgentius, who not only cites this seventh verse
in his book de fide Catholica adversus Pintam Episcopum Arianum, p. 772.
in his testimonies del rinitate, and in his book de Trinitate ad Felicem
Notarium, c. 4. which thus begins, En habes in brevi alium esse Patrem, alium
Filium, alium Spiritum sanctum, alium and alium in persona, non aliud and aliud
in natura; and idcirco ego, inquit, and pater unum sumus; unum, ad naturam
refer nos docens, sumus, ad personas: smiliter and illud. Tressunt, inquit
qui testimonium dicunt in Coelo, Pater, Verbum, and Spiritus, and hi tres unum
sunt. Audiat Sabellius, sumus: audiat tres: and credat esse tres personas, and
non sacrilego cord blasphemet, dicendo, ipsum sibi esse Patrem, ipsum sibi
Filium, ipsum sibi Spiritum sanctum, tanquam modo quodam seipsum gignat, aut
modo quodam a seipso ipse procedat, cum hoc etiam in naturis creatis minime
inveniri possit, ut aliquid seipsum gignere valeat. Audiat scilicet and Arius
unum, and non differentis filium dicat esse naturae, cum natura diversa unum
dici nequeat, p. 591 ex Editione Theophili Ranaudi, Soc. Jesu, ^arisiis 1671.
printed with St. (...) Maximus T^urinensis, and four others which make up the
^^pras ^raesulum.
but cites this very place of St. Cyprian, in his book contra objectiones
Arianorum, in his answer to the tenth or last objection. His words are these,
P. 447.
In Patre and Filio, and Spiritu sancto unitatem substantiae accipimus,
personas confundere non audemus; beatus enim Johannes Apostolus testatur,
dicens, tres sunt, qui testimonium perhibent in Coelo, Pater, Verbum, and
Spiritus, and hi tres unum sunt. Quod etiam beatissimus Martyr Cyprianus in
Epistola de unitate Ecclesiae confitetur, dicens, qui pacem Christi and
concordiam rumpit, adversus Christum facit: qui alibi praeter Ecclesiam
colligit, Christi Ecclesiam spargit. Atque ut unam Ecclesiam unius Dei esse
monstraret, haec confestim testimonia de Scriptur a inseruit, dicit Dominus,
Ego and Pater unum sumus, and iterum, de Patre and Filio and Spiritu sancto
scriptum est, and hi tres unum sunt. If it be said, that St. Cyprian cited only
the latter part of the 8. v. where the vulgar Latin has those very words, and
hi tres unum sunt lib. 1. p. 16. ex Edit. I. Sirmondi Parisiis 1629.
and that thus Facundus, Episcopus Hermianensis, in the time of Justinian, to
whom he dedicates his book, which he wrote pro desensione trium capitulorum
Concilii Chalcedonensis, seems to understand it, without taking any notice of
the 7. v. citing this place of St. Cyprian, though by a lapse of his memory he
says it is to be found in Epistola sive libro, quem de Trinitate scripsit: I
reply first in general that [ in] might easily be left out by the oscitancy of
the Librarii, not to say, razed out by the Heretics; the Syriack Interpreter
reading in his Greek Copy, what we find in ours, as to the latter part, (...),
and accordingly translating it so, and tres sunt testes, Spiritus and Aqua and
Sanguis, and hi tres in uno sunt (...) Bechad, and so the Arabic Interpreter
(...) in uno, only the Aethiopick conforming to the present reading of the
vulgar Latin. But what will they say to the Alexandrine MS. which they so much
adore, which has the same reading, (...); which are the words also of our MS.
so in the Copies, which Oecumenius followed (...) St. Hierom's translation
leaves out in the 8. v. and hitres unum or in unum sunt, and so the Greek of
Arias Montanus, and the Complutensian Edition; in the Margin of which later it
is noted, that Aquinas in the exposition of the second decretal de summa
Trinitate against Abbot Joachim, who perversely interpreting the end of the 7.
v. of the unity of will and consent, alleges the end of the 8. v. for his
authority and justification, had made this observation, sed hoc in veris
exemplaribus non habetur, sed dicitur esse appositum ab Hereticis Arianis ad
pervertendum intellectum sanum auctoritatis praemissae de unitate essentiae
trium personarum. I suppose the great respect Aquinas had for the vulgar Latin,
made him rather suspect the whole to be added, than that it was ill translated,
which he would easily have acknowledged, had he consulted any Gr. MS. But this
kind of learning they were not acquainted with in that Age of Scholastical
ignorance and barbarousness. Secondly, as they take it for granted, that this
was the reading of the vulgar Latin at that time, so they more vainly and
weakly suppose, that St. Cyprian made use of the same vulgar Latin edition,
the contrary of which appears in several of his citations, and it is more
likely, that he might translate so literally the latter part of the 7. v. and
not at all regard the 8. v. or the vulgar translation, and so it appears from
the testimony of Fulgentius, cited above, that he understood it.

Afterward when several, out of an evil design to overthrow the Mystery of the
most blessed and adorable Trinity, omitted in their translations of the
Scriptures into the Latin Tongue this Verse (a liberty which, it seems, every
Pretender almost made use of, and it may well be suspected, that an Arian then,
as a Socinian now, in his translation would be overfavourable to his own
opinions, by leaving out and putting in what might make for them, and
accordingly interpreting what was retained to their best advantage: This
Preface is printed in an old edition of the N. T. with the interlineary Gloss,
and I find it in several MSS both in the Bodleyan and our own Colledg-Library
before the Catholic Epistles. The Style is exactly St. Hierom's and
questionless his, and acknowledged as such, both by Erasmus and Socinus,
however omitted by Erasmus in his edition of St. Hierom's works at Basil.
St. Hierome in his preface to the Canonical Epistles, vindicates the ancient
reading, and lays open the baseness and perfidiousness of these men. I shall
here put down the whole Preface; Non ita ordo est apud Graecos, qui integre
sapiunt, and fidem rectam sectantur Epistolarum septem, quae Canonicae
nuncupantur, sicut in Latinis codicibus invenitur: Quod quia Petrus primus est
in numero Apostolorum, primae sunt etiam ejus Epistolae, in or dine caeterarum;
sed sicut Evangelistas dudum ad veritatis lineam correximus, ita has proprio
ordini Deo juvante reddidimus. Estenim prima earum una Jacobi, duae Petri, and
tres Johannis, and Judae una. Quae si sicut ab eis digestae sunt, ita quoque ab
Interpretibus fideliter in Latinum verterentur eloquium, nec ambiguitatem
legentibus facerent, nec sermonum sese varietas impugnaret, illo precipue loco,
ubi de unitate Trinitatis in prima Johannis Epistola positum legimus, in qua
etiam ab infidelibus translatoribus, multum err atum esse a fidei veritate
comperimus; tria tantummodo vocabula, hoc est, aquae, sanguinis, and spiritus
in ipsa sua editione ponentibus, and Patris verbique ac spiritus testimonium
omittentibus, in quo maxim and fides Catholica roboratur, and patris ac filii
ac spiritus sancti una divinitatis substantia comprobatur. In caeteris vero
Epistolis, quantum a nostra aliorum differt editio; Lectoris prudentiae
derelinquo. Sed tu Virgo Christi, Eustochium, dum a me impensius Scripturae
veritatem inquiris, meam quodammodo senectutem invidorum dentibus corradendam
exponis, qui me falsarium corruptoremque sacrarum Scripturarum pronunciant. Sed
ego in tali opere nec aemulorum meorum invidentiam pertimesco, nec sanctae
Scripturae veritatem poscentibus denegabo. Erasmus and Socinus are so urged
with this testimony of St. Hierome, that they are forced to make use of very
pitiful and dis-ingenuous arguments to invalidate it. Socinus had said before
-- fortasse ante Hieronymum vix ullus invenietur, qui testimonium istud hoc in
loco plane agnoverit, the falsity of which conjecture, however so warily laid
down, has been disproved; hereby craftily concealing the citation out of St.
Cyprian, he very boldly accuses St. Hierome of Forgery, who having got a Copy
or Copies, in which this verse was added, adversus fidem aliorum omnium
exemplarium, tam Latinorum, quam Graecorum, lectionem particulae istius tanquam
germanam defendere and promovere coepit, conquerens public eam culpa and
fraud hereticorum abrasam a vulgatis codicibus fuisse. But St Hierome has
sufficiently confuted the falseness and boldness of this Cavil. He was used to
this kind of language, as if he had corrupted the Scriptures, but he was no way
moved by it; though this accusation of those of his own time perchance may not
so much be referred to this place, as to his translation in general, and may
proceed not so much from heretical malice and pravity, as envy of several of
his contemporaries, who were orthodox in the faith, but were no friends to his
new translation. He charges the omission upon these unfaithful Translators
(questionless Sabellians and Arians) and upbraids them with it as a thing
manifest and notorious, and easily demonstrable; and certainly he would not
have made himself so obnoxious, unless he had grounded his confidence upon the
authority of several Greek Copies: with what little pretense of reason
therefore Erasmus and Socinus fancy St. Hierome to have changed the public and
common reading, let any indifferent person judge. But supposing that the Copies
of those times varied, which Erasmus grants (and therefore St. Hierome is most
falsely and unjustly accused by Socinus to have been the author of this
interpolation) He enquires, quonam argumento docet utrum sit rectius, utrumve
scriptum sit ab Apostolo, praesertim cum quod reprehendit, turn haberet
publicus usus Ecclesiae? To this it may be answered, 1. that some vitiated and
defective Copies, ought not to prejudice the authority of entire and better
Copies, whether Latin or Greek. 2. that St. Hierome had reason to prefer and
vindicate that reading, which gives such an evident proof of this great Article
of the Christian Religion, agreeable to the doctrine of the Catholic Church,
derived down to them by an universal Tradition, and acknowledged as such, by
all, excepting a few, whom either discontent, or pride and conceitedness of
their own parts, and a love of innovation and of being the author of a Sect,
had drawn into the contrary heretical opinion. Besides, his words are so clear,
that one might justly wonder, that Erasmus should pretend any difficulty or
perplex sense in them, as he does in his, non satis video, quid sibi velit hoc
loco Hieronymus; but that we have too just cause to suspect, how that great
Scholar was biast and perverted in his judgment, concerning those great
mysteries of Faith; though he is so wary and cunning, as not to discover
himself too openly. He indeed is forced to confess the nature of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost to be simple and undivided, and the essence the same,
though he is peremptory, that it cannot be proved from this Text, constat hic
agi de fide testimonii, non de substantia personarum, herein followed by de
illa ((...)) ut mihi quidem videtur non agitur hoc in loco; quod and glossa
ista interlinearis, quam vocant, agnosci^.
Beza, and with a great deal of ceremony confesses it to be pious to submit our
understanding to the judgment of the Church, as soon as she shall declare
herself (as certainly she has done in this in her public Creeds, to the great
shame and conviction of Heretics, who reject her authority) yet still for all
this demureness, he pleads for a liberty of interpreting Scripture, as if the
truth were not yet wholly revealed, and the Church might err in her
declarations, nec interim nefas est citra contentionem scrutari verum, ut Deus
aliis alia patefecit (which is also the pretense of Socinus and his followers:)
and accordingly he interprets several places of Scripture in favor of Arius
and the other Heretics, and particularly this, cum totus locus sit obscurus,
non potest admodum valere ad revincendos Haereticos (the same pretense being
made use of for all places, though never so plain) and endeavors to elude the
force of that famous place in 1 Timothy 3. 16. by expunging the word (...), as
much as in him lies, that is, by pretending it was added by the Arian
Heretics. So that we need the less value the censure he passes upon S. Hierome
in this matter, where nothing but pure zeal for the truths of God could make
him so concerned and fervent -- Ille saepe numero violentus est parumque
pudens, saepe varius, parumque sibi constans.

Idacius Clarus a Spanish Bishop, who died about the year 388, at what time the
elder Theodosius and Valentinian were Emperors, cites both verses, though as
to their order transposed, and with a little alteration, in his book against
Varimadus an Arian Deacon, Tom. 4. Bibliothecae veterum Patrum. Paris. 1610.
page 372.
responsione 3. -- Item ipse (i.e. Johannes Evangelista, whose Gospel he had
just before cited) ad Parthos, tres sunt, inquit, qui testimonium perhibent in
terra, Aqua, Sanguis, and Caro, and tres in nobis sunt: and tres sunt, qui
testimonium perhibent in coelo, Pater, Verbum and Spiritus, and hi tres unum
sunt; which very citation is made use of, as being borrowed hence, by the
author of the collections of the decretal Epistles, which beyond all doubt are
proved to be counterfeit Consule Epistolarum Pontificalium censuram a D.
Blondello editam Genevae. A. Chr. 1628. page 190.
and supposititious, in the 1 Epistle of Hyginus, and by this is to be
corrected, Item ipse ad Parthos, tres sunt, qui testimonium perhibent in
terram, Aqua, Sanguis and Caro; and tres in nobis sunt, qui testimonium
perhibent in coelo, Pater, Verbum, and Spiritus, and hi tres unum sunt. There
is like variety of reading in both verses in several old Copies, some leaving
out (...) and (...), others retaining them* For this [ in terra] Socinus
confesses to be found in quibusdam emendatis exemplaribus, though that we may
gain nothing by this confession, he tells us immediately after, it is not
extant in emendationibus. It might easily be foreseen, that if either had been
lest, and particularly this latter; the one would have inferred the other justly
and necessarily, and therefore it cannot seem strange, if the first corrupters
of this Scripture, to make all sure, and to render their false and perfidious
dealing the more unsuspected, omitted both; so too in that ancient MS. Grotius
made use of, though he gives us no proof of its antiquity in that place, and
suppose it were written a thousand years since, we are not to be swayed by it,
as if it were authentic, (...), and no more, who thereupon conjectures these
words (...), with the former verse to have been added by the Arians to prove
the father, son and holy ghost, to be one in consent only, but afterward
removed and altered by the Catholics, and added to the former verse, which is
said without any the least proof either from reason or antiquity, and has
nothing to maintain the fancy, but the great name of the Author of it.

That which In appendice Interpretationum Paradoxarum p. 381.
Sandius and several others allege in the first place, that eo omisso meliorem
esse verborum connexionem, the connection is far better, if the 7 v. were
omitted, and that therefore it ought to be so, and was anciently omitted; if
the supposition were true, is not only vain and frivolous, but very bold and
immodest to ty the spirit of God to such a way of writing, as pleases their
humors and fancies best, and savours most of humane artifice, and by the same
argument they may reject not only verses, but whole chapters in the N. T. for
the meanness and inaccuracy of the style, and the seeming carelessness of the
method, which is not always conformable to the rules of the Gr. eloquence. 2.
Indignum est summo Deo esse testem, inio coram quo judice testis foret? is a
groundless and bold cavil; for this witnessing is nothing else but the
declaration of God to mankind by evident signs and tokens concerning our
Saviors being the true Messiah, and of his being born in the flesh, and that
he came from him. This God has attested and sufficiently made known to the
World, and in this sense the Word often occurs in the Scriptures, without the
least indignity offered to the Divine Nature. The only pretense he has for his
fancy is a base and unworthy comparison he conceives in his mind between Gods
being a witness, and man's being a witness in our Courts of Judicature,
forgetting the genuine and easy sense of the word, as I have above expressed
it. 3. That it is highly probable that this verse was inserted by a Sabellian,
the contrary whereof is most true. 4. That in several MSS. and Editions of
modern languages, there is a transposition of these two verses. The same before
was acknowledged to be found in some Greek copies, which no way proves the
pretended interpolation, but only that ancient copies do not all agree. 5. That
this v. does very highly favor the Arians, but this is such a strain of fancy,
that he may as well allege the first words of the Book of Genesis, to prove
Aristotle's opinion of the eternity of the World. If men out of a prejudicate
opinion, against the doctrine of the Catholic Church, allow themselves to
interpret Scripture according to their own fancies, it cannot seem strange to
any, that they should go about to prove and justify their blasphemies from the
plainest texts of Scripture, that in the judgment of all sober persons, who are
free from those prejudices, do most evidently refute them.

FINIS.

