THE FOUNDATION OF True Preaching Asserted.

In Opposition to a Counterfeit Sermon pretended to be Preached before the
People called Quakers, in the Park, Southwark, 27th of 9th 1687.

That all those that feign themselves Ministers of the Gospel Dispensation, may
see that all Preaching without the Holy Spirit, and a Real Call by the Grace of
God, working in their Hearts, and immediately leading them thereto; is nothing
but the mere Notion of their own Brains, and not for the Advancement of Pure
Religion.

By R. S.

If any Man Speak, let him Speak as the Oracles of God: If any Man Minister,
let him do it as of the Ability which God gives; That God in all things may be
Glorified through Jesus Christ: To whom be Praise and Dominion forever and
ever, Amen. 1 Pet. 4.11. LONDON, Printed, by Andrew Soul, in the Year 1687.

To the READER.
I Hope that no Person will believe that that Counterfeit Sermon was Preached
by any Person that was called a QUAKER, but will think that it was a mere
Fiction, as it really was. And the Author, in my hearing Confessed, It was a
little Trick, or a Nack, to get Money.

And therefore in Answering which, I shall not insist on any Particular in his
Sermon, but to show the Emptiness and Vanity of all such Preachers and Sermons
that are not as the Oracles of God, and from the Ability that God gives, which
is a sufficient Reprove to this and all that Preach without a real Call.

R. S.

THE FOUNDATION OF True Preaching Asserted, etc.
THE Holy Scriptures, and the Histories of the Primitive Times, do abundantly
Demonstrate and set forth by what Means and Methods the Gospel of Christ, which
is the Power of God to Salvation, made its own way into the World; and how the
Preachers thereof were Qualified, and Unassisted by any Secular Power or
Interest, Triumphed over all Opposition that was made against it; and at the
appearance of which, the Religion of the Gentiles, that was the standing
Religion of the Roman Empire many Years together, flunk away into Obscurity,
and the Darkness of Pagan Idolatry and Superstition fled away, and as the Light
of the Gospel prevailed, the clearer it discovered the Folly and Impiety of
their Worship, their Solemn Rites appeared more Trifling, their Sacrifices more
Barbarous and Inhumane, their Oracles became Mute and Silent, and the very
Priest Ashamed.

That it was not by Humane Learning, School Divinity, or the Notions of Plato
and Aristotle, but by the alone Power and Wisdom of God: And the Preachers of
the Gospel being Divinely Inspired by the Holy Ghost, called of God as was
Aaron, Qualified by his Grace in their Hearts, as will appear hereafter.

God who in former Times communicated the Law to the Children of Israel, by the
Ministry of Moses, in the Wilderness, from Mount Sinai, after a long Succession
of many Ages, for the great Blessing of the Promised Seed, thought meet in his
own appointed time to put an end thereto, and to perform the Mercies Promised
to the Fathers, and accordingly in or about the Year of the World Four
Thousand, and the declining part of the Reign of Augustus, the Empire enjoying
a Universal Peace, God sent his dear Son, as an Ambassador from Heaven, to
Reconcile the World, and having fulfilled the Law, and the Righteousness
thereof, for which he was sent, to put a Period, and to enlarge the Bounds of
Salvation, to admit both Jews and Gentiles to the terms of the Gospel, and
being the Mediator between God and Man, he Preached the Gospel of Repentance,
and the Remission of Sins, to all them that obey his heavenly Message.

And having approved himself, and the excellency of his Doctrine, by many great
and wonderful Signs and Miracles, he gave Commission to his Disciples, and his
Power and Presence for their Assistance, in his saying, Math. 28. All Power in
Heaven and Earth is given unto me, go ye therefore and Teach all Nations,
Baptizing them, (...), in No-men, into the Name of Father, Son and Holy Spirit,
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have Commanded you; and lo I
am with you always unto the end of the World, Amen. In which there is two
things to be considred, first his Command, Go ye Teach, Baptizing all Nations
into the Name (that is, into the Power and Virtue) but some may say, That the
Work to Baptize is Christ's, and not Man's; to wipt off that, I answer, to
Baptize with the Spirit, though not wrought without Christ, and his Grace, is
many times instrumentally done by Men fitted of God for that purpose, and
therefore no Absurdity follows, that to Baptize with the Spirit should be
expressed, as the action of the Apostle; for though it be Christ, by his Grace,
that gives Spiritual Gifts, yet the Apostle tells of his imparting to them some
Spiritual Gifts, Romans 1.11. And the Corinthians, That he had begotten them
through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15. And yet to beget People to the Faith is the
Work of Christ, not of Men; to Convert the Heart is properly the Work of
Christ, and yet the Spirit oft-times ascribes it to Men, as being the
Instruments; and the Apostle was sent to turn Men from Darkness to Light, from
Satan's Power to God, though that be not done without Christ Cooperating by his
Grace; and in like manner may Baptizing with the Spirit be expressed, as
performable by Man, as the Instrument, though the Work of Christ's Grace be
needful as the principal Cause; so that it is no absurdity to say, That the
Apostles did administer the Baptism of the Spirit.

Secondly, his Promise, And lo I am with you to the end of the World; which is
a lively Demonstration, that the Church and People of Christ shall never want
his Presence by his Spirit to Instruct and Assist them, whether to Preach or to
Pray, he will be with them; and he tells his Disciples, As my Father sent me,
so send I you; here we may see the Apostles had an immediate Call to the
Ministry, to Preach the Gospel; yet they were to wait for the Holy Ghost to be
poured on them, as a further Commission; and in pursuance of his Command they
met at Jerusalem to receive Power from on high, and being met, they were all
filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with new Tongues, as the Spirit
gave them utterance: By this Commission the Apostle Peter, and the other
Apostles, being filled with the Holy Ghost, as the best Qualification, Preached
to both Jews and Gentiles; and afterward the Apostle Peter visiting, by his
Epistle, the scattered Disciples, says, As every man has received the Gift,
even so Minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold
Grace of God: If any man Speak, let him Speak as the Oracles of God: If any man
Minister, let him do it as of the Ability which God gives; that God in all
things may be Glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom be Praise and Dominion
forever and ever, Amen.

By which we may see that the true Preachers of the Gospel of Christ, which is
the Power of God to Salvation, was not made Ministers thereof by Human
Learning, but by the inward Power and Virtue of the Spirit of God in their own
hearts drawing them thereunto; such Ministers we own as are called immediately
by the Grace of God, but all those that come in without the Call, Moving and
Leadings of the Spirit of Christ, come in not by Christ, who is the Door into
the Sheepfold, but clime up some other way; and therefore Christ proclaims them
Thieves and Robers, whom the Sheep ought not to hear; such Ministers and
Preachers we utterly disown and deny.

And we may further observe, that these that Minister, must Minister according
to the Gift and Grace received; but they that have not such a Gift, cannot
Minister according thereunto, and as good Stewards of the Grace of God; but how
can a man be a good Steward of that which he has not; can Ungodly Men and
Wicked Preachers, that are not Gracious themselves, but live more like Gentiles
then Christians, in that they strive to imitate the one, rather then to live
the Life of the other, and think it strange that others run not with them into
the same Excess of the Gentiles, which is Lasciviousness, Lust, Excess of Wine,
Revilings, Banquetings, and abominable Idolatry, be good Steward of the
manifold Grace of God? and therefore in the following Verses he makes an
Exclusive Limitation of such as are not thus furnished, saying, If any man
Speak, let him Speak as the Oricles of God, and if any man Minister, let him do
it as of the ability that God gives; which is as much as if he had said, they
that cannot thus Speak and thus Minister ought not to do it, seeing no man
ought to take this Honor to himself, but he that was called of God, as was
Aaron: For the Particle [If] denotes a Necessary Condition. Now what this
Abilyty is does appear from the former Words, to wit the Gift Received, and the
Grace whereof they are Stewards, as by the immediate concern and dependency of
the Words does demonstrate; Neither can it be understood of a mere Natural
Ability, or acquired Parts and Laerning, because man in this Posture, in this
Natural State and Condition knows not the things of God, and so he cannot
Minister them to others, of what he is Ignorant himself, and the following
Words show and Illustrate this also, in that he immediately Subjoyned, That God
in all things may be Glorified: But surely God is not Glorified but greatly
dishonored when Wicked men undertake to Preach, notwithstanding their great
Learning, and acquier Parts, an^ from their mere natural Ability meddle in
Spiritual things which they neither Know nor Understand, as says t^^ Apostle,
As no Man knows the Mind of a Man, but the Spirit of a Man; so no Man knows
the things of God, but by the Spirit.

Thus far we may see how the Gospel of Jesus Christ was Preached in the Purity
of it without any Mixtures of self Wisdom, Human Learning, School Divinity, or
the Notions of Plato or Aristotle; but they that Preached Speak as the Oracles
of God, and those that did Minister, did it of the Ability that God had given
them, that God in all things might be glorified.

But When the Power and Life of Religion went down, up went Schools of
Learning, and the Philosophy of the Gentiles embraced, and Men's Religion was
turned into Notions, out of the Heart into the Head, and they forgot the
Command of Christ, who said, Observe all things whatsoever I have Commanded
you, and lo I am with you to the end the World; but he is not with those that
breaks his Commandments, and will have none of his Counsel, nor obey his
Doctrine, which was, Abide in me, and I in you; as the Branch cannot bear Fruit
of it self, except it abides in the Vine; no more can ye except ye abide in me.
I am the Vine, ye are the Branches: He that abides in me, and I in him, the
same brings forth much Fruit; for without me ye can do nothing. If anyman
abide not in me, he is cast forth as a Brand, and is Withered.

So all those that abide not in Christ are cast forth and withered, and in that
withered State and Condition they Preach the Figments of their own Brain, being
Qualified with Humane Learning, and School Divinity, and the Wisdom which this
World teaches, which the Apostle Paul utterly Rejected and Reproved, Acts 17.
both at Athens, (being then the most Famous University in the World) and at
Corinth, a famous City of Greece; to the Philosophers and Orators he taught
nothing among them, but Christ Crucified; to the Jews a Stumbling Block, and to
the Greeks Foolishness, but to them that believe, both Jews and Greeks, Christ
the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. And that he made use of to
Convert those that were counted the Wits of the World: So in 1 Cor. 2. He
plainly Renounces and Rejects the Wisdom of it, saying,

Verse. 1. And I Brethren when I came to you, came not with excellency of Speech
or Wisdom, declaring unto you the Testimony of God.

2. For I determine not to know any thing among you, but Jesus Christ, and him
Crucified.

3. And I was with you in Weakness, and Fear, and much Trembling.

4. And my Speech was not with enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, but in
demonstration of that Spirit and Power.

5. That your Faith should not stand in the Wisdom of Man, but in the Power of
God.

6. Howbeit we speak Wisdom among them that are Perfect, yet not the Wisdom of
this World, nor of the Prince of this World which comes to naught.

7. But we speak the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, even the hidden Wisdom.

V. 13. Which things also we speak, not in the Words which Man's Wisdom
teaches, but which the Holy Spirit teaches; comparing Spiritual things which
Spiritual things.

By which we may see, that the Apostle made use of no other Philosophy then the
Wisdom of Christ, in comparison of which the Wits of Athens, and the Learning
of the whole World is but Foolishness, and as Dross and Dung in comparison of
the Cross of Christ.

And in our Age especially God has determined to show his Power by weak
Instruments, which he has raised up, and has furnished them with his own
Power, Life, and Virtue, though despised, because Mean and Illeterate; and
therefore seeing in and amongst them my self with many, others, have found that
heavenly Pearl, that gives Contentment, which is the only Learning, to be
sought after, and waited for, forever and ever.

THE END

