Ars Chirurgica. A COMPENDIUM OF THE THEORY and PRACTICE OF SURGERY.

In Seven BOOKS.

CONTAINING I. The INSTRVMENTS and OPERATIONS of the ART. II. The Removal of
DEFILEMENTS. III. The Cure of TVMORS. IV. The Cure of WOVNDS. V. The Cure of
ULCERS. VI. The Cure of FRACTVRES. VII. The Cure of DISLOCATIONS.


SHOWING The Names, Causes, Signs, Differences, Prognostics, and various
Intentions of CURING all kinds of Chirurgick Diseases, from Head to Foot,
happening to Human Bodies.

To which is Added, Pharmacopoeia Chirurgica; or, The Medical Store, Latin and
English: which contains an absolute Set of Choice Preparations or Medicaments,
fitted for the Complete and Universal Practice both of PHYSIC and CHIRVRGERY.

The whole Work Galenically and Chymically performed. The like yet never
Published in any Language whatsoever.

BY WILLIAM SALMON, M. D. Living at the Great House by Black-Friers-Stairs,
LONDON.

LONDON, Printed for I. Dawks, in Wardrobe-Court, in Great Carter-lane: And
sold by S. Sprint, G. Conyers, in Little Britain; Roger Clavel, in
Fleet Street; J. Jones, and R. Knaplock, in St. Paul's Churchyard; B. Aylmer
in Cornhill; and E. Tracy on London Bridge, M.DC.XCVIII.

To the Honorable, THOMAS GARDNER, Esquire Serjeant-Chirurgeon to His Majesty, AND
Surgeon to His Household. Present MASTER of the Company of SURGEONS: AND
To the Honored ASSISTANTS, And the rest of the Worthy Members of that
Honorable Society.
SIRS,
THAT I might approve my self grateful, and worthy of the Honor of being
received into, and entertained as a Member of your Honorable Society; I, like
the Widow in the Gospel, come with all the Cheerfulness imaginable, to cast my
Mite into the Corban. The Offering is not great, nor may I commend it, but
submit it to your more serene Judgments; who, I am very confident, will pass a
Censure upon it according to Truth.

IF you disapprove of it, it must sink like a dead Weight, into its own Abyss,
and be for ever lost; as that which never yet had a being in the World. But if
you like and approve of it, I know it will live, and grow up under your benign
Rays, to be a Tree of great magnitude, bringing forth desirable Fruit; and be
in after-Ages a Monument of your Goodness: which neither the Malice of the
present or future Times shall ever be able to obliterate.

IN this short Practice of Chirurgick Physic, I have endeavored to present
you with the direct Line of Practice, laid down not from Opinion only,
Prejudice, or Custom; but from Principles of Art, superstructed upon the solid
Foundations of Reason and Truth, and confirmed by the Experience of all
precedent Ages.

THE Direct Line of Practice. This I say, because I have not gone about the
Circle, where I could go directly over; nor crooked, where I could go straight:
this Adage was present in my Mind, Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per
pauciora; to go the nearest Way to the Wood.

LAID down from Principles of Art. I thought it reasonable, that we should walk
by the Precepts of that Art which we profess: if we walk by them, then it is as
reasonable, that all Methods should be squared according to their Directions:
and where there is an aberration in the Method, it is just that we should
dissent, and endeavor to come again into the Right Way.

IF we ought not to walk by them, (as some great Doctors maintain) it then
renders the Principles fallacious, and the Art precarious; and makes the
Professors and Doctors of such a Science, to be little less than Fools or
Knaves, and possibly to be both.

BVILT upon Solid Foundations. That is built upon a Rock, upon such a
Foundation, where though the Rain of Ignorance may descend; and the Floods of
Malice shall beat; though the Warwick Lane Wind of swelling and vain Titles may
blow, and the Storms of Incogitancy assault; yet shall Our Building be secure
from Danger, and contemn the utmost Force.

FOUNDATIONS of Reason. This I say, because they agree with the Intellectual
Sense and Understanding, deduced from a Chain of Consequences; by comparing and
laying things together, 'till that which is sought after, becomes self-evident.

AND Truth. That is, such a Certainty, as is confirmed to us by an infinite
number of Experiences, from the Nature of the Things themselves; showing and
pointing forth with the Hand, to those Methods, which both agree with the
Principles of the Science, and the Safety and Health of the Patient.

AND Confirmed from the Experiences of all preceding Ages. That is, excerpted
and gathered out of the Leaves of Antiquity, and the continued Observations of
the Great Men and Professors of these Arts, through the Series of all Times. This
is that which is the Duty of every Professor; and without the Knowledge of
which, as no Great Works can ever be performed; so none can attain to any
Honor or Glory in their Profession.

THESE Things being said, I profess that I have opposed nothing of Ancient or
Modern Practice, but what disagrees with the Fundamentals of Our ART: nor have
I laid down any thing, for Doctrine and Practice, but what I conceive may
easily be made good (from the best Authorities) in the Face of the whole World.

I KNOW to whom I speak; to Men of Sense, Learning, and great Experience; to
Men of Honesty, Integrity, and Honor; to Men that are the true Physicians, and
greater than Doctors; and without whom, the latter are a kind of Precarious and
Useless Animals, the Mighty Encumbrance of the Learned World.

I HAVE Studied the Arts of Physic and Surgery for above Forty Years, and
have gone through the Practice of them for above Thirty-four Years last past; and
I believe that I understand both the Theory and Practice of the same. I Build
upon Principles, and Square all my Practice upon these Foundations.

I PURSUE Truth as fast and as far as I can: and therefore if I differ in any
thing from others, it is not for Difference-sake: I profess the contrary: for
were the opposite Opinions to mine Truth, it would be no less my Interest to
pursue them, than those I now do.

THE Health of the Sick, and Welfare of the Patient, is that which ought to be
Our greatest Aim, so far as relates to Our Art. And therefore it ought to be
all one to us, by what Methods it is attained, so that the poor Patient is but
secure. And this I think ought to be the great Endeavor of every good Man.

AND upon this Account it is, that I have Labored at the Oar here, to
Advantage the Public, as much as may be; and to open the Eyes of such as have
been lulled asleep under the Shadows of Authority, without Reason, and settled
upon the Lees of blind Obedience. That this may be accomplished, is my great
Design, and to promote as much as may be the Prosperity, Honor, and Glory of
this your Ancient and most Honorable Society, (of which I am one but of the
least Members,) and from which I shall not desist, but with the last Period of
my Life; who am,

Honored SIRS, Your Faithful And Humble Servant, W. SALMON.

THE PREFACE.
I. Although I have been continually worried for almost Six Years together by a
Company of Warwick Lane D's, yet it has pleased God singularly to assist me in
performing this following Work, nor has the Persecution, Abuses, or fear of my
Adversaries, had any such Influence upon me, as to deter or hinder me from
effectually going on with the same; but I have endeavored with all my might to
bring it forth to public View, for the general Good of Mankind.

II. I have not Personally, or by Letter, consulted with any Man, living or
dead, concerning the Composure of the same, as to the whole, nor any Part or
Paragraph thereof; and therefore it is possible it is not so perfect, as it
might be desired; yet this we say of it, that it is so well completed in all
its Parts, that an Intelligent Artist may be sufficiently directed to do any
thing thereby, intended by it.

III. I have not been sparing through the whole Work in consulting variety of
Authors, (with whom I am not slenderly stored) and observing their Sentiments
in most particulars. And that the young Artist might not take with my Opinions
only, I have generally Quoted them, and mostly in their own words, that I might
not impose upon the unwary Reader; nor have I quoted any Author in this whole
Work, or any of my other Books, but what I have by me of my own, and in my own
Possession and Library.

IV. I know I have Detractors enough, and such as will be lavish with their
scandalous Tongues, to asperse me for Writing this, as well as several other of
my Books, but the Happiness of it is, that I lie not within the reach of their
Lash; and these kind of Men are such a Contemptible Sort of Ignorant,
Malicious, and Mean-spirited Animals, that their Obloquy deserves no
Observation, but like their Eulogies, to be slighted with Contempt.

V. It is not unknown to me, that there are many other Species of Chirurgick
Diseases, the which I have not so much as named in these Discourses, more
especially in the Book of Tumors: But as we have been Copious in handling the
Generick Kinds, so we think enough may be educed from them, for the Cure of any
of their Species not here mentioned, for as much as the Indications of Cure,
and particular Intentions, are for the most part one and the same.

VI. I aim in this, as in all the other things I have done, only at the Public
Good; and if that is but served by me, I have all that I desire; I value not
what the Monopoly-men say of me, nor how much they envy or spite me, for they
are such a vain sort of Blades, as are only fit to play with Cockle-shells and
Hodmon^ods: If they aim at any higher things, it is at no greater Discoveries
than the Metaphysical Consideration to know what NOTHING is made of.

VII. And though the Sparks of the Monopoly, still continue basely and
maliciously to Persecute me only for their Malice sake, yet (through God's
Assistance) I shall still proceed on in my Duty: For as I have no reason to
love such a sort of Ignorant and Malicious Fellows, so I thank God I fear them
less; nor shall I ever stoop or bow, so much as the breadth of a Hair, to the
Gods they so much adore, their Envy, Folly, Ignorance and Pride.

VIII. It was not long since discoursed to me by some of their Gang, that I
ought to have come to them for a License to this my Ars Chirurgica: But alas!
How should they approve of any thing of mine, whilst they so basely Abuse and
Persecute me who am the Author? And endeavored with all their might to seize
and suppress the Sheets of my Seplasium or Druggist's Shop, and of my
Pharmacopocia Bateana: But after all, I see no reason for such a vain
Application, it being to such as have nothing to do with the Art: And pardon me
(if I think or say amiss) when I think and say, that I faithfully believe, they
understand little or nothing of the Matter; and yet I will include into the
number the Caution-Doctor also.

IX. I would not have them be offended, that I call them Mandamus Doctors,
Grace Doctors, Proxy Doctors, ad eundem Doctors, Caution Doctors, Master
Doctors, and No Doctors, because these are their proper Epithets or Titles: Nor
did the most of them Commence with any other Degree, as appears by a Catalogue
of Doctors lately emitted into the World: None of these thus Qualified, ever
did their Exercises for their Degree in any University, but only by the Virtue
of Purchase Money, or Partial Favor, came out with this pitiful Feather in
their Caps. And some of them having been Graduated in a Foreign University for
two or three Crown Pieces, as your Miserable Padua Doctors, and Leaden Doctors,
under the pretext of such a Foreign Diploma, come vaunting out ad cundem in one
of our Universities here.

X. This is the plain and naked Truth of the Business; so that I see no other
difference between one of these Fellows, and an Honest, Ingenious and
Industrious Physician, who has served his time with some Able Apothecary, or
Skilful Chirurgian, but this, that this latter may be much the more Learned and
Skilful Man in his Profession, and I think, a Thousand times more to be trusted
to, in the Cure of any Disease, than any of the former; for that these latter
have the Practical Knowledge of Pharmacy, Chemistry and Surgery to boot,
which the others generally want.

XI. Those Monopoly-men are for the most part pitiful Fellows, and know little
or nothing at all of Physic to which they pretend, being the most Impudent
Quacks that are in Nature, and yet under the Titles of Doctors of Physic, they
strut up and down, and who but they; and think an Honest Physician not good
enough to be one of their Fellows; though God knows, notwithstanding their Pride
and their Ignorance, (being much alike equal) they are not worthy to keep an
ordinary Farrier Company.

XII. These are the Men who call all but themselves Quacks, though indeed it is
truly a Scandal to be one of their Monopoly or Conventicle: The most Ignorant
Man living, may come out a Doctor of Physic after their manner and way of
Doctorizing, and be (I verily believe) as good a Doctor as any of them: This is
truly an abuse upon the People of this Great City of London, and an Impudent
Cheat which is put upon the whole Nation; under the burden of which, the Great
and the Rich are destroyed, and the Wretched and Miserable groan.

XIII. Whatever their Qualifications were before, whether a Preacher, a Reader
of Prayers, an Atheist, a Public Debauchee, a Barber-Surgeon, a Serving-man, a
Footman, or a Bellows-blower, or Nothing at all, it matters not much, for at
once, in the twinkling of an Eye, as it were, after a Miraculous manner, they
can mount from the profoundity of Ignorance to the Pinnacles of Knowledge; from
the Abyss of Nothing, to the Altitude of being Doctors of Physic, intruding
into Our Business with all the Impudence imaginable, to the great Abuse and
Scandal of the Medical Art.

XIV. I have for my Supporters, against the Deluge of their Fury, two
Invincible Pillars, Charity and good Success, which bid defiance to all the
Torrents of their malice: I know they have threatened to Rivet me, as of late
they did one, (which is a sending a Man to Newgate without Bail or Mainprize,
if three or four of them shall think fit, unless he will pay them 20 l. down
upon the Nail;) and not long since another: But they have had such ill Success
in Riveting this latter, that I am persuaded, they will be very Cautious for
the future, how they use any more those Instruments of a Foolish Shepherd.

XV. Now what a sad thing it is, that nothing but downright Blows will beat us
into any better Manners; and yet when they do come to that way of Fencing, they
are always so unhappy, that though they strike even boldly and home too, yet they
ever miss the Mark, and strike besides, to the great Damage of the unfortunate
Paw, that grasped the untoward Weapon.

XVI. What a wretched thing is it, that Fools and Fiddlers (I mean fidling
Fellows) should be put in such Posts of Management, that know not in Truth how
to manage themselves; that such sorry, mean, low-spirited, sneaking, cautionary
Fellows or Fops should be trusted with the Key, who know not so much as how to
put it into the Lock, much less which way to turn it, so as to manage their
Mystery of Iniquity, to the best advantage.

XVII. But all this, is that they may show, not their Skill in, but their Zeal
to the Mysteries of their God Dagon, who is neither good Flesh, nor good Fish,
but a Heterogeneous Mixture of part Brass, and part Clay, which makes the
Compositum of their Hellish Monopoly: Concerning which I ask this Question,
Whether it is not upheld by the feeble Props of Subornation and Perjury; or by
the Scandalous Helps of Mercenary and Hired Witnesses?

XVIII. When they Sue a Man at Law for Practicing, do they ever prove his
Practice by any Patient of his? Or, do they not PROCURE some Mercenary Fellows
or Persons, and send them, who are to pretend themselves to be Sick, and
require some Medicaments for their fained Disease, which Medicines being
obtained, they carry away; and this One Adventure, do they not bring in as a
proof of One whole Months Practice, though the Mercenary Fellow was in Truth,
never any Patient, nor then ailed any thing, nor ever took so much as one Grain
of the Medicaments he carried away?

XIX. What can any Honest and Ingenious Man think of this way of Dealing? Is it
not Wicked with a Vengeance? Can there be any Practice of Physic without a
Patient? And can any One be a Patient, who ails nothing, or takes none of the
Physic? And if such a Person as this is brought to prove Practice, who is
Originally PROCURED for Money (for certainly no prudent Persons would Forswear
and Damn themselves for Nothing, or Swear a Lie for no Profit, only for their
sweet Faces sake;) I only ask, Whether such a One is not PROCURED and Suborned?
And whether that is the Practice which the Law intends? And whether the playing
of such Pranks as these with an Honest and Innocent Man, will make him guilty
of the Breach of any Law?

XX. If such a Person who is not Sick, nor ever took any of the Physic, can be
no Patient, how can such a Witness as this be brought in, to Swear himself such
a One, and be made a proof of the Practice of Physic? And how can such a Man
as this (who goes to the Physician but one Day in a Month) truly Swear a whole
Months Practice, when (if it was truly Practice) it could prove the Practice
but of One Day?

XXI. I suppose the Law never called the Selling of Medicines (especially to
such as are not Sick, nor ever took any of them) the Practice of Physic; nor
do these Impudent Fellows Practice that way themselves. If so, What are such
Witnesses as these? Are they not Suborned and Perjured Witnesses? What can any
Honest Jury man think of this Barbarous and sticked way of Dealing? And may
they not justly think that those Persons who can PROCURE such Evidences, are
Wicked in the highest degree; and ought indeed to be Indicted and Prosecuted
for Subornation of Perjury?

XXII. May we not suppose the Skill of these Monopolizers in Physic, to be
equal to their Honesty, and both to their Religion, who make no Conscience of
such Dealings as these? Where is the Honor of these Men, who can bow and
submit their Souls to such Meanness and Vileness as this? And what trust can a
Man who wants a Physician, put in Men of such base Minds as these are, who can
do Acts infinitely below the Barbarism and Baseness of Pagans or Heathens?

XXIII. And yet notwithstanding all their Malice, they are not become their
Crafts-masters in their New Trade of Justicing or Mittimus-making: It Is
necessary that a Man should serve some time to his Business or Calling, before
he pretends to be Master of it; but these Blades have taken up the Trade of
Warrant-making, just as Monsieur Caution took up the Trade of Doctorizing, viz.
to pretend to Commence Doctor, without coming to the University; and to pretend
to be a Vniversityman, without being of any College: As it is possible I can
give Instances by Name, of a full Hundred, all of whom live within a Mile of an
Oak.

XXIV. It Is probable that some may think this to be hard Language, yet it is
certain, that it is nothing but Truth: However I think, they ought to give the
Loosers leave to speak: I know they will not spare me to the utmost of what
lies in their Power; for what Reason then, (since it may do Service to the
World) should I spare for speaking Truth of them? They have continually done
their worst to me, and why should not I publish it? Unless you will say, that
it may be lawful for them to do some Damnable and Villainous ill things, which
are not fit afterward to be told again. But the Truth of it is, I speak of a
sort of Profligates, who I fear are past Grace, and count nothing a shame,
which is not enough to hang them.

XXV. There is no Reason, but that I should be even with them; it is natural for
a Man who goes but to Market, to have a Penniworth for his Penny; why then
should not I have some Satisfaction, for all the Money I have spent? If I say
nothing, they will do no less, nor be in the least more respectful to me; and
if I say and do all this, and a thousand times more, they can do me no more
Prejudice; so that since I am like to have none of their Favor, nor can fear
no more or greater Mischief, I am Ignorant for what Reason I should be silent,
and not lay them open to the whole World.

XXVI. It Is a foolish thing for Dogs to grin, and show their Teeth, when they
cannot bite; but it is the Nature of some Currs always to be Curning; but
thanks be to God, I never saw a Cursed Cow, but she had ever short Horns. It may
be, that some may think by this, that I call my Malicious Adversaries Beasts;
truly I do not, though I think, by their thus continually worrying me for almost
these Six Years together, they act like Beasts; and if Men will make Beasts of
themselves, how can I help that? It Is my Duty to defend my self, as much as I
can, from their Claws, their Teeth, and their Horns.

XXVII. I would gladly know of them, for what Reason it is, that they call Men
Quacks: Whether it is from their Ignorance of the Art of Physic; or, from
their not being Members of their Damnable Monopoly? If it is from the first
Cause, then a great many Learned Gentlemen whom they so call, they abuse;
because they cannot be such, for that they very well understand the whole Art
of Physic in all its various Parts: And those Learned Persons think, that upon
this score, that Scandalous Term of Quack, belongs properly to the greatest
part, if not almost to the whole of their own Conventicle: But if from the
latter Cause, then since truly to know the Art of Physic is no proper
Qualification of a Monopoly Doctor, any Man, though he abounds never so much with
Ignorance, so he has but Money enough, and will but part with it to them, may
be immediately abscinded from his old Title of Quack, and presently become as
Venerable a Monopoly-man as any of them all.

XXVIII. I do not think I am obliged to subsede to the proudest Fellow of the
Pack; my Skill and Abilities in my Profession are manifest by what I have
already done; and my Books already published, speak more for me than I can do
for my self, they being an evident demonstration of what I can do in the
Faculty: I have Composed and Published more Books of the Arts of Physic,
Surgery, Pharmacy, Chemistry and Anatomy, than all the Monopoly-men have
done, ever since they have been a Body to this day, and I believe the greatest
part of them may yet learn and inform themselves, out of my Writings, unless
they be absolute Dunces. It Is possible I was better fitted and qualified, and
more able to Compose and Publish those great Works, than any of them, as being
Master and Possessor of a larger and better Library than any other Physician or
Doctor in England, that Worthy and very Learned Gentleman Dr. Francis Barnard
only excepted.

XXIX. And I hereby Challenge all those Pragmatick Fellows, not to outdo, but
only to equal any thing of mine; let them show themselves, and their Parts, if
they have any, and make a proof to the World, that they do understand some few
things in the Art they pretend to: Let them cease from their Rhodomontading,
and Hectoring, and Worrying, those who are better than themselves, and from
their Malicious Prosecuting at Law, such as are more Excellent, and have more
Judgment in the Faculty (and it is possible in all other Natural Learning too)
than ever the best of them dare to pretend to: Let them show themselves Men,
and come upon the Square; let them try their Skill to the utmost, and let us
see whether they do indeed understand the Books which I have already wrote, and
which in a great measure I have levelled even to low Capacities: If they would
do this, it would look something like: But as they and their Case now stand, it
is impossible for the greatest Orator to defend them: Nor can the Tongue of an
Angel be able truly to speak the least word in their Defense.

Thus much upon the Grievance of the Nation, now to the Work in ^and.

XXX. At the Conclusion of Our Pharmacopoeia Chirurgica, the Cista Chirurgica,
or Chirurgians Chest, ought to have followed, fitted up with Medicaments from
that Storehouse; but through overmuch haste of the Work, was there forgot: Now
that we might not deprive the young Artist of such a helpful Compendium, so
useful as well at Home as Abroad, in all Foreign Expeditions, whether by Land,
or Sea, in the Camp, or in the Navy, we shall here give you the same: It Is true
it is out of its proper place, yet better so, than to be totally omitted.

XXXI. As for the Instruments, whether Small or Great, and the Accessaries,
they are the same here which we have named in Our Repository, lib. 1. cap. 5.
sect. 69, 70, and 71. of this Work following: and the Chief Simple Medicaments,
whether Vegetable, Mineral, or Animal, are those which we have enumerated in
lib. 1. cap. 56. sect. 4. ad 33. or from sect. 34. ad 36. or this following in
the three next Sections, which differs something therefrom.

The REFORMED CHEST.
1. Vegetable Simples. Aloes fine, Balsams natural, Cambogia, Camphir, Cream of
Tartar, Bayberries, Elecampane, Frankincense, Gum Guajaci, Jallap, Jesuite's
Bark, Liquorice whole and in ponder, Liquorice juice, Mechoacan, Nutmegs,
Opium, Potashes, Rhubarb, Rosin, Saffron, Scammony, Sena, Tobacco in small
rowls, Turpentine. 2. Mineral Simples. Alum Roch, Antimony, fine Bole, Catechu
Chalk, Filings of Iron, Nitre, Osteocolla, Oil of Peter, Quicksilver Tutia,
Vitriol white, Common, and Roman. 3. Animal Simples. Blood dried, Cantharides,
Civet, Cochinele Crabs Eyes, Honey, Ox Gall, Sal Ammoniac, Wax. 4. Tinctures.
Antimonii Purgans, Cordialis, Exfolians, Martis, Mirabilis, Opii, Stomachica.
5. Spirits. Cordialis, Mirabilis, Opiatus Compositus; Salis, Salis Armoniaci,
Universalis. 6. Oils. Anisi, Limonum, Succini, Sulphuris, Tartari per deliq.
Terebinthinae, Vitrioli. 7. Balsams. Mirabilis, Saturni Sulphuris. 8. Elixirs.
Antepilepticum, Cranii Humani, Proprietatis, Sanguinis Humani, Viperarum. 9.
Potestates, or Powers. Anisi, Carui, Caryophyllorum, Cornu Cervi, Juniperi,
Lavendulae, Limonum, Pulegii, Rosmarini, Salviae, Succini, Terebinthinae,
Virtutum. 10. Salts. Aluminis, Armoniaci Volatilis, Lapis Infernalis, Nitratum,
Prunellae, Succini Volatilis, Tartari, Tartar Emeticum, Tartari Vitriolati,
Vitriolatum. 11. Mineral Preparations. Amalgama of Jupiter and Mercury, Bezoar
Minerale, Ceruse, Copper burnt, Crocus Metallorum, Crocus Martis Astringens,
Crystalli Lunae, Flores Sulphuris, Litharge, Minium, Mercurius Vitae, Saccharum
Saturni, Sal Martis, Vitrum Antimonii, Verdigrise. 12. Mercurial Preparations.
Arcanum Corallinum, Arcanum Jovis, Argentum Vitae, Aurum Vitae, Cinnabar
Artificial, Gryphs Mercurii, Mercurius Dulcis, Princes Powder, Precipitate Red,
White, and per se, Sublimate Corrosive, Turpethum Minerale. 13. Syrups.
Simplex, Volatilis, Antifebriticus, Limonum, Catharticus, de Meconio Mel
Rosarum. 14. Pouders. Antimonii, Antifebriticus, Cachecticus, Catharticus,
Cornachini, Emeticus, Herculeus 15. Electuaries. Catarrhale, Theriaca Chymica,
Stomachicum ad Tussim. 16. Pills. Catharticae, Family, Hystericae, ad Luem,
Laudanum Specificum nostrum, Laudanum Catharticum nostrum, Laudanum Volatile
nostrum, Laudanum Samech, Mirabiles. 17. Externals, and first of Waters.
Regulata, or Ophthalmica, Styptica, Calcis cum Mercurio, Mercurialis, Lac
Mercurii. 18. Oils. Calefaciens, Refrigerans, Anodynum, Diacolocynthidos, ad
Vermes, Butyrum Antimonii. 19. Balsams. Anodynum nost. Amicum nost. Arthriticum
nost. Gummi Elemi, Mel Saponis, Ophthalmicum, de Sapone, Vulnerarium nostrum.
20. Ointments. Aegyptiacum, Album, Basilicon, Cosmeticum, Mercuriale,
Nicotianae nostrum, Populeon, ad Scabiem, Tutiae. 21. Pouders. Errhina, ad
Hypersarcosin, Mercurii Coagulati, Stypticus, pro Ulceribus, pro Ulceribus
Venereis. 22. Cerates. Album, de Galbano, Gummi Elemi, Nigrum, ad Tophos,
Viridum. 23. Emplasters. Album, Arthriticum, Diachylon Simplex, Diachylon cum
Gummi, Epispasticum, de Meliloto, de Minio cum Sapone, Mercuriale, ad Strumam,
Vulnerarium.
Thus much for the Reformed Chest. Some it is possible may desire to know why I
writ the Pharmacopoeia part, in Latin as well as English, the Answer is, it is
probable it may fall into other Hands than English, who understand nothing at
all of our Language, to whom, if it had been only English, it would have proved
wholly useless; therefore confidering the very great Usefulness of the Work,
and that it might be universally serviceable to Mankind, we determined to make
it speak also the Learned Language.

Thus have we at length, through the Blessing of God, brought this Great and
Good Work to an End, and in some measure completed a System of Surgery,
which no Language, not the profluent Latin could ever boast of before: I pray
God his Blessing may go with the use of it, and make such as Study and Practice
it, highly Beneficial to Mankind, that this may be accomplished, you have the
earnest Desires and Prayers of

W. Salmon.

THE VIRTUES and USES OF THE BALSAM de CHILI,
1. IT is an excellent Balsam, differing both from that of Peru and Tolu, but
no ways inferior in Virtues and Excellency. It is without doubt, the most
precious of all Natural Balsams, by reason of its great Virtues, and admirable
Odor, excelling all others, even the most fragrant.

2. It eases all manner of Pains in any part of the Body, coming of Cold or
Wind, chiefly Pains of the Stomach, Indigestion, and want of Appetite,
corroborating and strengthening of it, after a wonderful manner. It Cures all
Ulcers of the Breast and Lungs, Reins, Bladder, or Womb, inward Bruises,
Spitting of Blood, and such like. It helps Shortness of Breath, Coughs,
Consumptions, Wheesings, Hoarsness, Asthma's, and other Diseases of those Parts.

3. It is excellent against Convulsions, Palsy, lethargy, Tremblings, old
Head-achs, Megrims, Vertigo's, and other cold and moist Diseases of the Brain
and Nerves, being inwardly taken, as shall be hereafter directed; and outwardly
anointed upon the Part. It strengthens the Brain, comforts the Memory, and
fortifies all the Senses both internal and external, beyond any other Natural
Balsam.

4. It kills Worms, Cures Ruptures, and dissolves the Stone, and expels it; as
also Sand, Gravel, or Slime, or any other thing which may obstruct the Urine,
or stop up its passages; so that it is believed there is scarcely a better
Remedy for that purpose upon Earth, for it gives Ease in the most vehement Pain.

5. It eases also all Colic Pains, Gripings, Wind in the Stomach or Bowels,
and perfectly Cures Deafness, Pain and Noise in the Ears to a wonder, a Drop or
two being put into the Orifice of the Ear, and kept in with a little Cotton
dipped in the same.

6. It provokes the Terms in Women, Cures also Barrenness, promotes Conception,
and causes easy and speedy Delivery to Women in Travel; and in a great measure
prevents or takes away those After-pains, being taken in a Glass of Juniper or
Cinnamon Water.

7. It heals all manner of Green Wounds, Rotten Ulcers, Fistula's, new or old
Running Sores in any part of the Body; as also Punctures or Hurts of the Nerves
and Tendons, Aches, Pains, Lameness, Weakness of the Limbs or Joints, being
dropped into the Wound or Puncture, or otherwise applied thereupon, with a Tent,
Lint, or Leather, etc. and so bound up, and not stirred in twenty four Hours.
It commonly Cures at four or five times Dressing, sometimes at two or three
times, and sometimes at the first Dressing, though the Wound be very deep,
contused, or large.

8. It is an assured Remedy to Cure the Palsy, (if not inveterate) Trembling,
Gouts of all Sorts, and any Weakness of the Nerves and Joints coming of a cold
and moist Cause, by anointing the afflicted Parts therewith; and taking of it
inwardly, as shall be immediately directed.

9. The Way and Manner of taking it inwardly: In Diseases of the Head, Brain,
and Nerves, give it in Rosemary, or Juniper Water, or in Canary. For the Stone,
and other Diseases of the Reins and Bladder, you may give it in Rhenish-wine:
For the Colic, and Diseases of the Reins and Bowels, you may give it in
Juniper-water: For Palsies, Gouts, and Weaknesses of the Nerves and Joints, you
may give it in some Antiparalytick Wine. First, grind or mix it with a little
of the Yolk of an Egg to open its Body, and then mix it with the Liquor you
would give it in.

10. It may be given mixed with any proper Syrup, or it may be made up into
Pills with some fit Powder, as of Zedoary, Cinnamon, Bayberries, Cubebs,
Liquorice, or what the Physician shall think more proper, and so gilded. You
may give it from ten Drops to twenty five or thirty Drops, according to Age and
Strength; and it may be given Morning and Night for a Month, or two, or three
together, without any prejudice.

11. It ought to be constantly given, and in a due Dose, and with those
Advantages that it may not nauseate the Stomach: So taken, it performs more
than any other Balsam: And it is certain, that this Balsam is one of the
greatest Specificks in the Cure of the Palsy, Scurvy and Gout, that is, it
transcending all other Medicaments.

12. It cleanses the whole Body of all Impurities, mundifies the whole Mass of
Blood, heals all inward Bruises, Wounds, Ulcers, or Excoriations, whether in
the Bowels or Lungs; and otherwise restores decayed Nature to a Miracle,
carrying off all its Foeculencies by Urine and Stool. Price 18 d. the Ounce, or
24 s. the Pound.

This Balsam de Chili is Sold only by Dr. Salmon at the Great House by
Black-Friars-Stairs. London.
ERRATA.
Page 172. a. lin. 33. r. Sinapi, Pimentum. Page 173. b. l. 35. r.
Mustard Seed, Jamaica- Pepper. Page 179. a. l. 32. and 34. r. vivae. Page 184.
a. l. 16. for Utitur r. usurpatur. Page 190. a. l. 10. r. librae tres. Page
191. a. l. 26. r. per optimum. Page 191. a. l. 32. r. malignas. Page 228. a. l.
18. r. diffectorum and. Page 245. a. l. 12. r. ascenderit in. Page 301. a. l.
7. r. libram unam and semis. Page 301. b. l. 10. r. lbjss. Page 303. a. l. 7.
r. addantur Sacchari. Page 306. a. l. 32. r. lentigines. Page 312. a. l. 32. r.
Aloes, Mastiches. Page 312. b. l. 32. r. vi. Aloes, Mastich. Page 321. a. l.
19. r. Boli Armenae. Page 322. a. l. 22. and 23. for Racides. r. folia and
foliorum. Page 322. b. l. 24. r. Asarabacca Leaves. Page 323. b. l. 26. r.
Asarum Leaves. Page 445. b. l. 28 r. Palliatives. Page 561. a. l. 2. r. (...).
Page 574. a. l. 25. and 26. r. Haematitis. Page 602. b. l. 27. r. upon the.
Page 602. b. l. 28. r. Sacred Majesty. Page 637. a. l. 20. r. cortex Peruanus.
Page 699. b. l. 37. r. many Medicines there are. Page 731. arg. l. 13. r. X. Of
Curing by the Second Intention. Page 732. arg. l. 8. for Thorax, r. Neck or
Throat. Page 816. b. l. ult. r. place, is filled. Page 858. b. l. 27. r. feels;
as also. Page 969. a. l. 2. for ULCERS, r. WOUNDS. Page 1104. b. l. 5. for
Spirit, r. Syrup. Page 1122. b. l. 39. r. Rape Root. Page 1123. b. l. 44. r.
ij. ad iv.
The Medicinal CHARACTERS.
lb A pound. An ounce. A dram. A scruple. gr. A grain. M. A handful. P. A
pugil. p. A part. No. Number. A. Ana, of each a like. ss. ss. half any
quantity. q.s. quantum satis. q.v. quantum vis. Recipe. S.A. Secundum Artem.
Saturn or Lead. Jupiter or Tin. Mars or Iron. Sol or Gold. Venus or Copper.
Mercury or Quicksilver. Luna or Silver. Antimony or Stibium. arsenic. arsenic
Arsenick. {sulphur} Sulphur. {cinnabar} Cinnabar. {salt} Salt. {nitre} Niter.
vitriol vitriol vitriol Vitriol. alum. alum Alum.. {sal ammoniac} Sal
Armoniack. tartar Tartar. Sal Gem. ashes Ashes. Urine. glass Glass. vinegar
Vinegar. talc. Talck. subli. Sublimate. Spirit. quicklime Quicklime. fire Fire.
{water} Water. {oil} Oil. B. Balneum. BM. Balneo Mariae. BV. Balneo Vaporis.
alembic. Alembick. aqua fortis. AF. Aqua fortis. AR. Aqua Regia. AV. Aqua
Vitae. SV. Spirit of Wine. SSS. Stratum super stratum, or lay upon lay.
Note, Twenty Grains make a Scruple. Three Scruples make a Dram. Eight
Drachms make an Ounce. Twelve Ounces make a Pound. lb


depiction of the facade of a Greek gymnasium KAINON GYNASION IATPIKON.
ARS CHIRURGICA, A GUIL. SALMONE. M.D.



ARS CHIRURGICA. LIBER PRIMUS. Of Instruments and Operations.
I. Of the INSTRUMENTS.
CHAP. I. Of Surgery in General.
I. THIS Art is called in Greek (...), operatio quae fit manibus, (...). Ars
Chirurgica, Ars quae manibus exercetur, seu quae manus opera indiget: in Latin,
Chirurgia: in English, Surgery and Surgery: and the Artist is called (...),
qui manu opus facit: Chirurgus, a Chirurgian, or Surgeon.

II. Surgery therefore is an Art, which teaches the way of removing and
curing Diseases of the Body, by the Assistance of the Hands.

III. It Is true, says Barbet, that External Accidents require not only the help
of the Hands, but also Internal means, therefore it is no wonder for a part of
Physic to require the whole; so that it was that great Man's Opinion, That a
Chirurgian ought to understand so much of Physic, as to know how to give
internal Remedies upon any occasion which falls in his way, otherwise, in my
Opinion, he cannot be said to understand his Art, or be thought fit to Practice
the same.

IV. Surgery being a Part which depends upon the Body of Physic, the
internal Medicines we impart to you not as Chirurgians, But as Physicians. So
that it is necessary for a Chirurgian to understand the Medical part of Curing,
and to be withal a Physician; and that this is true, is as apparent as that the
Sun is up at Noonday; for produce me any Book of Surgery, or Work teaching
that Art, which does not instruct its Pupils in giving Internal Remedies in all
such Cases where they are required, and I will immediately give up the Cause.

V. It Is certain, that a Chirurgian is a Man having a Rational Soul, and
Reasonable Understanding, as well as any He, who pretends to be a Doctor of
Physic, and if so, I see no reason why he with Labor, Pains, Reading, and
Industry, may not attain the Medical part of the Art as well as another: and to
reverse the Tables, I affirm it is possible for a good Chirurgian to be Master
of the whole Art of Physic, (and I think, it is his proper Province only)
whereas a Doctor, simply considered, can pretend to nothing more but one part
of the Art; which part also he can never perfectly understand, without a
substantial knowledge of Chirurgick Operations; so that a Doctor (simply a
Doctor in Physic) is at best but a piece of a Physician, whereas an able and
truly Learned Chirurgian, such as Sennertus, Paul Barbet, Fabritius Hildanus,
etc. are the only complete Physicians, whatever the REVELATION-MEN may say to
the contrary, let them talk till Doomsday.

VI. Surgery consists of two parts, 1. That which respects the OPERATION. 2.
That which respects the DISEASE.

VII. As to the Operation, it is considered with relation to the Instruments
performing, and Medicaments to be applied; or to the Action it self. The
Instruments are, 1. Small, which are mostly proper for the Pocket. 2. Large,
fit only for the Repository; of all which in their order.

VIII. The Medicaments to be applied are those selected ones contained in the
Pharmacopoeia Chirurgica, here following, which are to be fitted and
proportioned to the Arca Chirurgica, or Chirurgians Chest; this we have done
English and Latin for the sake of Strangers.

IX. The Operations of Surgery, singly considered, as to the Action it self
is sixfold, viz. 1. Synthesis. 2. Diaeresis. 3. Exaeresis. 4. Aphaeresis. 5.
Diarthrosis. 6. Prosthesis. To which six we have added as an Appendix, 7. The
Order and Method of making Reports. 8. The way of Embalming.

X. Synthesis teaches how to unite Parts which are disjoined: Diaeresis teaches
the separation of what was united together: Exaeresis teaches the removing of
things hurtful: Aphaeresis teaches the removing of things superfluous:
Diarthrosis teaches the Reduction of Parts disordered by ill conformation:
Prosthesis teaches how to supply Parts which are wanting. The making of
Reports, is the Relation made before a Magistrate upon the view of a wounded
Person. Embalming is the Preserving of dead Bodies.

XI. The Operations of Surgery simply considered, we have made to be six;
whereas some other Authors make them but five, making Exaeresis and Aphaeresis
but one part, and comprehending both under the former Title.

XII. The second part of Surgery, which has respect to Diseases, is also
sixfold, viz. 1. Defedation. 2. Tumors. 3. Wounds. 4. Ulcers. 5. Fractures. 6.
Dislocations; of all which we shall (God willing) treat in order. Wherein we
show the Medicinal Part, of giving proper internal Remedies, which every
Chirurgian ought to know, maugre the snarling and Usurpation of the
REVELATION-MEN, who, in truth, know nothing at all of the Matter.

XIII. It is true, that some Authors make but five Divisions of this part of
the Art, bringing Defedation or Defilement, under some of the other Titles; but
as that is a force upon the Method, so we thought good to separate all things
of that nature, and put them in a Title apart, which as they offer themselves
first to consideration, and are the easiest part of the Art, we have put them
in the first place.

CHAP. II. Of the Small Instruments.
I. THE Incision Knife is used to cut the Skin or Flesh, where need is; to pare
away the putrid part of a gangrenous Member; in making Issues; opening
Apostems; in Scarifications and Cupping. Tab. 6. Let. F.

II. The Scissers are to cut Cloth for Rowlers, Lint and Emplasters: to clip
off proud Flesh, or putrid loose Skin, ends of Sinews, etc. See Tab. 5. Let. R.

III. The Spatula is used to spread Emplasters, mingle Unguents on the palm of
your Hand, or otherwise, cover the Pledgets, and to stir and mingle Ointments
and Emplasters in the Composition. Tab. 5. Let. E.

IV. The small Probes are with one end to sound the depth of a Wound or Ulcer:
with the other end (by arming the Eye thereof with Lint) to wipe or dry a Sore
or Ulcer: Or by dipping it in some Oil or Liquor, to convey it to the bottom of
the Ulcer or Fistula, thereby to mundifie, corrode, or heal it, according as
need requires. Tab. 5. Let. N. O.

V. The Uvula Spoon serves to put Powder or the like to the palate of the
Mouth, (if it be sore, raw, or inflamed) blowing the Powder into the Cavity
behind it, through the hollow Pipe: as also to melt Unguents, to dip Tents in:
and to pour scalding Oil or Liquor into a Wound. Tab. 6. Let. Q.

VI. The Levatory is an Instrument to raise up a depressed Skull, (but be not
too rash on hasty in using of it, for if no evil Symptoms appear, the depressed
Skull may rise, and scale of it self:) it serves also to take off the scale of
a Bone after Amputation. Tab. 5. Let. LL. Tab. 6. Let. M. N.

VII. The Director is to guide and direct the Incision Knife in dilating or
enlarging of a Wound, when you are near any Vessels, it is also used in Cutting
for the Stone. Tab. 4. D.

VIII. The Forceps are used to take off Emplasters, Pledgets, and Tents, the
Spil of a Bone, to hold up the Flesh or Skin, the better to cut it with the
Scissers or Incision Knife; to take out any thing which lies in the Ears,
Nostrils, Mouth or Throat, or a Bullet lying within reach. Tab. 6. Let. G. H. I.

IX. The Speculum Linguae; the one end thereof is to hold the Tongue down, when
you inject any Liquor into the Throat or Mouth, or apply any Medicine thereto;
or when you would make any Inspection into the Mouth or Throat, as in Quinsies,
Cankers, etc. The other end thereof is to scrape the Tongue, if it is furred in
Fevers, etc. Tab. 5. E.

X. The Fleame is used to open the Gums, and to separate them from the Tooth
which you mean to pull out, compassing the Tooth with the round sharp end
thereof, close to the Tooth; and piercing deeper by little and little, until
you feel it as low as the Jaw Bone.

XI. The Rasour is used in shaving the Crown of the Head; and cutting Hair off
of other places, where you intend to lay a Plaster, that so it might not hurt
in pulling off. Tab. 5. F. G.

XII. The Stitching Quill is that which holds the Needles; the Needles must be
ready armed with green or red Silk oiled, to sew up the Lips of Wounds, to
fasten Rowlers, and other things which need sewing. Tab. 5. C.

XIII. The Case of Lancets must always be in a readiness, clean, well set, not
too square pointed, nor too thin, for then they will not make a good Orifice;
their use is to let Blood withal.

XIV. The Salvatory is to keep Ointments in; and ought always to be furnished
with these following, 1. Basilicon. 2. Apostolorum. 3. Aureum. 4. Album. 5.
Dialthaea. 6. Linimentum Arcaei. If you design eight places in your Salvatory,
you may supply the two last with de Minio and Diapompholigos.

XV. The Plaster Box consists of two principal parts. The first and largest
place is to hold the aforementioned Instruments; which is the upper part of
the Box: The lower and lesser part is to hold Emplasters ready spread, with
Lint and such like. The Emplasters most usual here are, Diacalciteos, Sticticum
Paracelsi, de Gummi Elemi, de Lapide Calaminari, Oxycroceum, de Meliloto
simplex, de Mastiche, Catagmaticum.

XVI. The Incision-Knife is commonly put in the Case of Launcets; so also the
Rasour, or in a Case by it self.

CHAP. III. Of the Larger Instruments for the Closet and Chest.
I. THE Dismembring Knife, has an use according to the Title, viz. in
Amputation, or to take off any Member or part of Man's Body, so far as respects
the fleshy or soft parts, even to the Bone. One may serve for the Chest,
provided it be sharp, well ground, of good Metal, and not too thin edged Tab.
8. F.

II. The Trepan is of use for Fractures of the Skull, where there is Contusion,
and a depression of both the Tables. 1. Be sure the Instrument be good, and
without faults, and clean from Rust. 2. The place where the blow was given is
not always to be chosen to set the Trepan upon, sometimes the Fracture is found
at a good distance off, and therefore you must consider the complaint of the
Patient, with respect to the feeling of your Fingers. 3. When the place is
found, the Hair is to be shaved off about the breadth of four Fingers round. 4.
This done, have in a readiness all fit Medicines and Instruments to apply to,
and bind up the Wound again, as Spunges, Ligatures, Hot-water, etc. and if a
Flux of Blood hinder not, foment with Posca, or Wine and Honey. 5. It will do
also well to have a Restrictive ready made with Bole, Water, Vinegar and an
Egg; or the Pulvis Astringens, as also Oleum and Mel Rosarum, Linimentum
Arcaei. 6. The Germans seldom or never use this Instrument: nor is it to be
used too hastily; for we daily see many dangerous Fractures healed without it;
there is not one in ten that justly requires it. 7. Therefore by reason of the
danger, the young Artist may first make Experience upon a Calves or Sheeps
Head, till he can well and easily take out a piece of the Bone. See the further
use hereafter. The Instrument, see Tab. 1. Let. A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. M.
The Male Trepan E. F. The Female G. H. I. M. the point of the Male. A. B. the
head of the Trepan.

III. The Trafine is an Instrument only of Iron; the use thereof is necessary
in pricking of the Skull, that does not penetrate both the Tables, that with
them the print made upon the Skull may be taken away. See Tab. 1. Let. K. L.
Tab. 7. Lev. K. which is the Instrument it self. One of the Shanks may be
Triangular, and then it may be used for the small Trepan.

IV. The Levatory large. It is an Instrument used in the depression of the
Skull: this raises with more force than that little one before described for
the Plaster Box; because it has firmness, not only in the Hand of him that
raises it, but also in its Head. See Tab. 5. L. L. Some make the Levatory with
three parts, having three spears or points to thrust forwards.

V. The Head Saw. It is an Instrument with which a vent may sometimes be given
through the Cranium, whereby the use of the Trepan is sometimes happily forborne.
Sometimes a small ragged piece of the Skull may so hang, that this Instrument
may be used to saw it away. But the young Artist ought not to be too busy in
sawing, plucking away, or raising the tractured Bone, more than mere Necessity
urges to, lest dreadful Accidents (not to be remedied) follow: If the Bone be
nearly loose, or in sight, take it away, if not, forbear to pluck much at
first; for Nature is exceeding helpful in ejecting unnatural things in that
part. See Tab. 5. H. I. Tab. 7. A. B.

VI. The small Head Saw. It is that with which some Men cut away the distances
between the holes made in the Skull with the Trepan, as also rifts like Hairs
that do not penetrate, and scrape away the rottenness of the Cranium. Tab. 3. L.

VII. The Dismembring Saw. It is a great and terrible Instrument, ordained only
for Amputation, or dismembring: It ought always to be ready and clean kept,
with two Blades thereunto, though one good Blade well used, may serve the
Artist his whole Life. Tab. 8. E. E.

VIII. The Lenticular. It is an Instrument which Levigates the Brims of the
Hole made, lest pricking the Membranes, they might cause Pain and Inflammation.
See Tab. 7. I.

IX. The Rasour-Knife, or Penknife. It is used as an Incision-knife, and when
there is no fear of the parts underneath, namely in dividing the Scalp of the
Head as far as the Skull, and in opening Nodes of the French Pox, especially
upon the Shin-bones and elsewhere, and in dividing the Caruncles of the Matrix.
See Tab. 2. O.

X. The Membrane Preserver. It is a Silver Plate (for it must never be made of
Iron, because of the Inbred cold thereof, which is hurtful both to the Dura and
Pia matter, which cover the Brain) made firm, somewhat crooked and smooth on the
outside, used in great depressions of the Skull three or four times with the
Trepan, and to cut forth the spaces between the holes: for then the Plate is
let down between the Skull and Dura matter, that the outward part of it may be
nearest the Brain, lest by the sharpness of Pincers and Saws, the Membranes of
the Brain should either be pricked or cut unawares. Celsus calls it (...),
Meningophylax. See Tab. 5. K.

XI. The Dismembring Pincers. They are intended for the immediate separation of
Fingers and Toes. See Tab. 3. Let. G. They are now much out of use, because
they often introduce ill Accidents, a fine little Saw being introduced in their
place.

XII. Dismembring Chizel. Their use is the same with the former, and much more
commendable: but a fine Saw as aforesaid, is used in place of them both, being
much more safe. See Tab. 3. I. Tab. 8. D. G. H.

XIII. The Mallet or Hammer. It is commonly made of Wood, some have them made
of Lead, and some of Iron: it is generally used with the Chizel, See Tab. 3. K.
You may also have it made of the common fashion.

XIV. Speculum Oris. It is an Instrument which takes hold of the Tongue, and
under the Chin at once, being a very necessary Instrument to hold open the
Mouth for the better applying Medicines to the Throat, as also to the Uvula,
and other parts. Tab. 8. O. P. Q.

XV. Speculum Any. It is an Instrument by which the Diseases of the Intestinum
Rectum, and Neck of the Womb are seen by opening of those parts. If there
happen in the Orifice of the Fundament, or Neck of the Matrix any excoriation
or exulceration, Medicaments cannot well be brought to the grieved part, but by
the help of this Instrument; nor can the grief be seen without it. See
Scultetus Tab. 17. fig. 2. and 3. Yet let not the young Artist be too busy in
using of it, without Necessity, or where an Injection may do the feat. For if
the Sphincter Muscle should not easily give way, but make resistance, (as in
many Patients it will against their Wills) it may easily be bruised or hurt,
and so thereby you may create a new Disease. It has a Male part for Men, and
Female for Women. Tab. 8. M. N.

XVI. Speculum Matricis. It is an Instrument only used for Women, when the dead
Child is to be cut out, or some Ulcer of the Matrix is to be viewed, for which
purpose it is of excellent Service. Tab. 7. C.

XVII. Actual Cauteries. The Use of these are very needful in Amputation, for
the Cauterizing of any Vein or Artery, in strong fluxes of Blood, which cannot
otherwise be stayed. In the Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness, they are often used
with good success; as also to make a Fontanel or Issue in the Neck or hinder
part of the Head, and in the Cure of the Lethargy and Apoplexy. Anciently they
were used for the opening of Apostems, but now that practice is quite laid
aside. When a Member is amputated, sometimes the whole end of the Stump is
Cauterized, and sometimes but the great Vessels only. Tab. 6. A. B. C. Tab. 8.
A. B. C.

XVIII. Actual Seton Cautery. It is also called the Needle for the Seton, which
must neither be too long, lest the point should miss the opposite hole, (but
about a Hand breadth in length:) neither must it be very small or gross, but
answerable to the Holes of Seton Pincers, only a little smaller, and so being
made very red hot, it passes through most nimbly, making the Seton without
almost any pain. See Tab. 3. E.

XIX. Cautery for the Ranula. The Ranula is a Tumor under the Tongue which
corrupts the Speech: this if it be any otherwise abated, except by the burning
Iron, it will grow again: It is thus used, first frame a plate of Iron
(hollowed on the inside) having a hole in the midst, which (the Mouth being
wide open) apply to the Tumor, so that the hole therein may fall just upon that
part of the Tumor which you would open: then with this Instrument red hot
pierce the Tumor, which with your Thumb under the root of the Chin, a little
bear up by strength and force, that it may pierce the deeper. Tab. 5. S. T.

XX. The Catheter. It is a kind of Probe, by which being thrust into the
passage of the Yard, and into the Bladder, way is made for the Urine, or the
Stone is felt and removed: When therefore you have occasion to use it, put it
in gently, so far as it can well go, being first anointed with Oil of Almonds
or of Roses: thrust it in without much force; then feel by the root of the Yard
near the Fundament, where the Catheter rests or bears out, and so by guiding,
thrust it in farther toward the Fundament, pressing or bearing down (as it
were) a little, the lower part of the Instrument, with the upper hand, which
stays the Catheter, then (with the help of the lower finger of the other hand)
turn the Catheter upwards, putting it also withal forward a little, so will it
slip into the Bladder. Then draw out the inner Wier, and the Urine will come
forth; keeping still the Instrument carefully within the Bladder till all be
run out, which will come without forcing; moreover, you may by putting up your
finger in Anum, the Catheter being in the Bladder, and the Water drawn out,
easily feel the Stone in the Bladder, if any be, the Sick standing and bending
his Body also forwards. It is made of Silver that it may be bent; and very
smooth that it might not hurt; with many little holes perforated at the end,
that the Pin being drawn back, the Urine may freely come forth. Tab. 4. A.

XXI. The Directory. It is a Silver Probe, which must be so bent, that its
fissure, which it has in the middle, as far as the end of it, may be on the
backside, or Gibbous part thereof. It is called a Directory, because being
thrust into the Yard, it does most exactly show the Neck of the Bladder; and
upon that must Incision be made, to take out the Stone. See Tab. 4. D.

XXII. The Dilatatory. It is an Instrument used for enlarging of a Wound, when
Arrowheads, Bullets, or other Foreign matters are to be taken forth, out of the
Fleshy or Brawny parts. Tab. 7. H.

XXIII. The Wound Hook. It is of use in all such Wounds where there may be some
pieces of a Link of a Chain, or Mayle, or other like matter lodged therein, to
pull them out. It is called the Hooked Probe, and is useful in Wounds made with
Gunshot. Tab. 6. O.

XXIV. Terebellum Hildani. The Wimblet of Hildanus for bringing forth Bullets,
and such like. It consists of three Parts, to wit, a Piercer, in a double case:
We shall mention it, and show the Use thereof hereafter, See the Figure it
self. Tab. 2. A. B. C. D. and E. F. G. H.

XXV. The Scalpra. Scraping Tools, to scrape or shave Bones withal, where there
is occasion; you ought to have diverse of them, and of several Fashions: Those
for the Head are commonly of one Fashion, those for other Bones of another.
When a rotten Bone is to be scraped in the extreme Parts, as the Thigh Bone,
Shin Bone, Shoulder Bone, Arm-bone, greater and stronger rasping Tools must be
provided for them. Now every rasping Instrument is made of most pure Steel,
that it may have an Edge, that will perfectly rasp away. The Ancients did fit
proper hafts to every scraping Instrument; but our modern Artists provide one
handle of Wood, Bone, or Ivory, which they fasten to the Instrument by a Screw.
See Tab. 2. N. Tab. 7. N.

XXVI. The File. It is an Instrument of common Use in cleansing, smoothing, and
making even the Teeth. See Tab. 4. H.

XXVII. The Pliers. It is an Instrument to take out an Arrow head, or the head
of any Weapon which is hollow, for the shanks being divided in that hollowness,
will hold the Arrow head firm and fast, and so draw it out. Tab. 7. G.

XXVIII. Pliers with a Screw. It is an Instrument having a Screw running though
its handles, or cross its shanks. The end of which is like the Crows Bill, or a
little flatter. This Screw does open and close the Crows Bill, as you please to
take hold of the Head of the Weapon, though it be buried in the Flesh. See Tab.
7. D.

XXIX. Hooks to draw out the dead Child. They are made of various Fashions,
according to the Use and Place of application; but are never to be made use of,
unless the Child be dead; nor then, if Nature be able to expel it, as many
times she is. See Tab. 2. I. K. L. M.

XXX. Hook to draw Stones out of the Bladder. It is to be used when the Stones
are many, or little, or in pieces, or cannot be easily brought to the Neck of
the Bladder. See Tab. 4. E.

XXXI. Decussorium, an Instrument to press down the Dura Matter. It is used
after Trepanning the Skull, as often as you dress the Wound; wherein, pressing
it down to the Dura Matter, you must bid the Patient to strive to put forth his
breath, stopping his Mouth and Nose, so that the Matter may more easily be
evacuated. This Tool must have the end round, polisht and smooth. See the Fig.
Tab. 7. M.

XXXII. The Gouge or hollow Chizel. It is of use to make an entrance into the
Bone, for the fixing of other Instruments, as the Trepan, etc. The use hereof
is common with Carpenters and Joiners. See the Figure, Tab. 3. H.

XXXIII. Seton Forceps. They are of several Forms, the two principal of which
we have exhibited Tab. 3. A. and Tab. 4. P. The first is a pair of Pincers,
having holes in their upper Part, with a certain Cavity, which is closed by the
Chirurgians hand; with these hold is laid on the Skin of the Neck, and with the
Needle Tab. 3. E. being red hot, the Skin is perforated through the holes at B.
The latter are of the same use as the former, save they have a holdfast at R.
which of its self binds, or holds close the Instrument or Pincers. These are
only of use when the Chirurgian has no Servant, which may deliver to him the
red hot Needle.

XXXIV. Seton Needles. These are to be used, either red hot, or cold: that
which is used red hot, is that before mentioned, Tab. 3. E. That which is used
cold, is sharp and with edges, being only first anointed with Oil of Roses. See
it Tab. 3. F.

XXXV. Needles for a Hare Lip. They ought to be made of Steel, sharp, three
square, and of about two inches and a half long. The thread must be well waxed,
that it break not; the Needle must be run through both sides of the Wound or
Breach, taking up all the Flesh of both Lips, and in the same manner, another
short Needle (as the place will bear) must be thrust in the midst, cross the
former, and under the Flesh as the former is. Then the Thread which was in the
Eye of the first Needle, must be strained cross about all the four ends of the
two Needles, 7 or 8 times or more, to hold the Lips of the Breach firmly
together, till the union be perfected, after which the Needles must be taken
away, and the Wounds they made, healed according to Art. See Tab. 8. I. K. L.

XXXVI. Needles for Wounds. These are chiefly for Wounds of the Peritonaeum,
but they are made use of in other Wounds also. The manner of the using of these
Needles, we have at large declared in Cap.. Sect.. following, and in other
places. Tab. 6. D. E.

XXXVII. Needles for Couching Cataracts. They are often made of Silver, but in
my Opinion those made of Steel are much better. See Tab. 4. L M N O. they are
commonly inserted into a handle of Silver, which is an Octagon, that on both
sides has a perforated glans or Ivory head, through which the Needle passes. L.
is a Silver Case; M. is the Needle with a Haft and Case of Silver, fitted for
the curing of a Cataract or Suffusion; O the Needle in its haft, and its
Capsula or Cover. The way of using see Cap. 31. Sect.. following.

XXXVIII. Hollow scraping Levatorie. It is of singular use after trepaning to
take away the Splinters, and smooth the inward edge of the Skull, least the
little bits or splints should hurt or prick any of the Membranes: It is smooth
on the outside, and hollow within, that it may receive and hold whatever it
shaves off, from falling in upon the said Membrane. See Tab. 6. K.

XXXIX. Forceps to break off Bones of the Skull. These may supply in part the
use of the former, for want thereof, as also to take out bits, splints, and
such like, which are already fallen down upon the Membranes: See Tab. 1. N. The
Crows Bill, without Teeth. And P Q. the Hollow Forceps, or Parrots Bill.

XL. The Crows Bill Forceps with Teeth. They may be for the former use in
Fractures of the Skull: But their chief Intention is in Amputation, to draw the
Vessels out of the Flesh, that thereby they may be tied up to stay their
Bleeding, which is done with a double and strong thread: after which you shall
with a sharp Needle and Thread, take four stitches deep into the Flesh, which
makes a cross, like the Letter X; sow up the Flesh and Skin, somewhat loosely
to cover the end of the Bone, that it take not the Air; for if you should
endeavor to draw it close to make the Skin meet, the Skin would break, and
your work would be spoiled. See Tab. 1. O. and Tab. 5. M.

XLI. Cranes Bill Forceps straight. They are the straight Instrument of
Hieronymus Fabritius ab Aquapendente, for to draw forth a Polypus, being made
of Steel, Unequal outwardly, but inwardly Concave, having an edge inwardly bent
backwards, wherewith we can cut nothing but the Polipus now laid hold on. They
are of use also to take forth small Bullets, and other strange Bodies, gotten
into Wounds. See Tab. 6. I, L. and Tab. 2. P.

XLII. Goose Bill Forceps. Their general use is in Wounds, to take forth
Bullets which are large, and other things of an Orbicular or round form. Their
Magnitude and Forms may be various, according to the diversity of the occasion,
and situation of the Wound, as little, great, straight, crooked, broad,
narrow, toothed or smooth. See Tab. 4. F. G. Tab. 6. G.

XLIII. Crooked Forceps or Pliers. They are an Instrument wherewith the Polipus
is cut and drawn forth, which by the holes of the Nostrils, leads in the Pallet
to the Throat, thereby threatening to choke the Sick: They are also of use in
taking Bones or Splints out of Wounds, whose Cavities make an Oblique Angle.
Tab. 6. H.

XLIV. Crooked Toothed Cranes Bill. It is an Instrument, altogether like the
straight Cranes Bill at Sect. 41. save the Bill of the Instrument makes with
the shanks an oblique Angle: The uses of it also are the same, though used in
different kinds of Wounds: The straight Cranes Bill, is only used in straight
Wounds; the crooked Cranes Bill in such as are the Oblique, being directed to
take forth Bullets, or other strange Bodies from Wounds having an oblique Angle.

XLV. Myrtle Leaved Penknife. It is a Knife with two edges; and resembling the
form of a Myrtle Leaf, used with its proper Pincers, to cut a Seton in the
Neck. Tab. 4. I. K.

XLVI. Seton Point. It is a long narrow Point, to the end of which is fastened a
Seton, or round line of Purple Silk, which being, drawn to the middle, is left
in the hole: to the point at D. is fastened a small button of Wax, that it may
pass through without delay or pain. See Tab. 3. C. D.

XLVII. Terebellum for the Head, or Head Piercer. It is used in the same manner
as is the Trepan or Trefine; but chiefly in those cases where a single hole may
be of service enough to discharge the purulent Matter from the Meninges of the
Brain. Tab. ^. K. L.

XLVIII. Lapidillum. It is a Spoon made of Latten, wherewith the Stone is taken
forth out of the Urinary Passages; namely a Probe, which on that part, where it
is made hollow like a Spoon for the Ears, is put into the Conduit of the Yard,
so that it may pass beyond the small Stone above it, and may lay hold on it
with its Lips and Cavity. This done, Oil of sweet Almonds is poured through the
hollow Passage (which has a large Orifice) into the Urinary Passage, that it
may become slippery: Afterward the Probe is gently drawn forth, and the
Conduit is pressed behind the Stone with the finger, till it be driven forth.
Tab. 3. M.

XLIX. The Goose Bill Spatula. It is an Instrument provided to receive and take
forth Bullets, or other round Bodies, out of Wounds, for such like Intentions.
See it Tab. 4. B.

L. Fistula Syringe, with a long slender Pipe. It is used to inject Lotions,
into hollow Wounds, Ulcers and Fistula's, and to wash other obscure Parts,
which can no otherwise be come at. Tab. 9. D.

LI. The Ear and Yard Syringe. It is altogether like the former, save the Pipe
at the end is all of one piece with the Body of the Syringe, short, viz. about
an inch long, and so thick as to fill the Cavity of the Ear and Yard. The chief
uses of it, are to inject liquid Bodies into the Ears, Nose and Yard. By this
Instrument, if well made, you may inject into the Bladder it self. Tab. 9. A.

LII. The Womb Syringe. It is a straight hollow Cane, made of Pewter, of about
seven or eight inches long; smooth, equal, and about the thickness of a Man's
Thumb; having its end perforated with five or six small holes. It serves to
cast in injections to wash the Womb, cleanse it, and to deterge Ulcers,
Fistulas, and such like, stop the Whites, etc. Tab. 9. B.

LIII. The Clyster Syringe. It is a Syringe with a long Pipe, like that at
Sect. 50. save the Pipe is much thicker, and has a larger Orifice: And the Body
of the Syringe is so large, as to hold near a Pint: It is a most admirable
Instrument to exhibit a Clyster with, casting it in much farther than can be
done by any Clyster-pipe. You may have them of several sizes. Tab. 9. C.

LIVE. Clyster Pipe. It is an Instrument made of Box, Bone or Ivory, about three
Inches and a half long, hollow, having its least end (which enters into the
Anus) perforated in the sides thereof with five or six holes: the larger end is
tied fast to a Bladder with a Cork and thread; which Bladder holds the Clyster
till it is administered: Its use is to exhibit Clysters, instead of the Clyster
Syringe, if it be wanting.

LV. Weights and Scales. These are Instruments so necessary, that the Artist
can in no ways be without them, the Life of the Patient often lying at stake,
for a little fault or error, committed by a Mistake in the Dose of a
Medicament. The Scales ought to be Gold Scales, bright, smooth, equal, with a
delicate Beam, which may turn with the tenth part of a Grain. The Weights are
gr. j. ij. iij. iv. v. vj. half Scruple ss. j. ij. half a Dram ss. j. ij. half
Ounce ss. j. ij. all which Weights ought to be double, lest any should be lost.

CHAP. IV. Of the Form of the Chirurgians Chest.
I. THE old form of the Chest was this: It was first divided into three parts,
1. The Left Hand part. 2. The Middle part. 3. The Right Hand part; and each
part has an Upper and a Lower division: The upper of which is to be taken out,
and put in again at pleasure, to make way to come at the things which are in
the lower part.

II. If the length of the Chest be five Feet, from inside to inside, the
breadth may be 20 Inches, and the depth 20 Inches; and this is the best
proportion, whether it be greater or lesser than the numbers limited: and the
upper and lower parts may be divided one from another just in the middle.

III. If the length be five Feet, the Left Hand may be two Feet of the length,
the middle part one Foot of the length; and the Right Hand part two Feet of the
length; which divisions may aptly enough serve both for upper and lower parts.

IV. The breadth of the Chest at either end (both for upper and lower parts)
may be divided into five divisions; and the length of each end may be divided
equally into seven parts; leaving the middle part to contain the Instruments,
Weights, Scales, Tow, Rowlers, etc. as the Chirurgian shall think most fit for
his Occasions.

V. According to this division, each end of the Chest will have twice thirty
five divisions, viz. 70 parts, and both ends one hundred and forty; for 5 x 7 =
35 x 2 = 70 the number in either end, and 70 x 2 = 140 the contents of both
ends, and such a number of Medicines an ordinary Chest may contain.

VI. But if the Chest be larger, you may increase the number of the Divisions
in proportion to its largeness, to make it receptive of what quantities and
numbers you please.

VII. This is the old form of the Chirurgians Chest, which is well enough known
to most, but the Contrivance thereof not so absolutely convenient and useful as
might be wished for; for which cause sake we shall here propose a new form,
having greater conveniences, more security, less trouble, and vastly more
useful.

VIII. Let it be made absolutely in the form of a Nest of Drawers; two Feet and
eight Inches high; 20 Inches deep backwards: and three Feet three Inches from
inside to inside in length; or four Feet four Inches, or five Foot five Inches,
according to the number and quantity of the Medicines it shall contain: and let
the divisions go all perfectly home to the Back.

IX. Let the length, (if it be but three Feet three Inches) be divided into six
equal parts, and the height into five, dividing the uppermost row into two
divisions only, for keeping of Instruments, Box of Weights, Tow, Rowlers, and
other Necessaries belonging to the Chirurgick Practice.

X. The four under rows then being divided into six equal parts, will make the
whole Nest of Boxes to consist of twenty four several Drawers: let each Drawer
be divided broadways into two equal parts, and backwards into six equal parts
(so as to take the divisions out if you think convenient) so will the whole
Nest contain 288 several Boxes, nearly 2 Inches square.

XI. If you make it four Feet four Inches in length, then divide it into eight
equal parts, which multiplied by four, the number in height, makes thirty two
several Drawers; each of which being divided, as the former broadways, exactly
in the middle, and backwards into six equal parts, will make your Nest of
Drawers to contain 384 several Boxes, which will hold as many several
Medicines, or half as many, (by diminishing their numbers, and augmenting their
quantities) or a quarter of the number, according as your Occasions may require.

XII. To this Repository thus constituted, let be affixed two substantial
Doors, which may open in the middle, one of which is to have Bolts above and
below on the inside to keep it fast and firm. The other a substantial Lock in
the middle, to keep them closely shut, that the Drawers may not fall out of
their places.

XIII. Thus have you a Receptacle large enough for any ordinary Practice
whatever, which may contain (though of the least size) 288 several Medicines; or
144 if you double their quantities; and 72 if you Quadruple them; which is a
thing very considerable, to be kept in order in so small a place; and the top
of it will serve as a Table to lay your Instruments on, dispense Medicines,
spread Plasters upon, etc.

Of the Vessels holding the Medicines.
XIV. Let all Liquid Things, as Waters, Spirits, Tinctures, Wines, Vinegars,
Menstruums, Oils, Syrups, and Salts, be put up in Glasses; let the Glasses be
made purposely in a Mould, for this design, nearly 2. Inches square, and five
Inches and half high, and all of them stopped with Corks (except the Syrups) and
covered with Pewter Screws, upon the Neck of which let be Engraven or Written
the Name of the Medicine.

XV. Let Pouders, Electuaries, Extracts, Pills, Troches, Balsams, Ointments, be
put up into Pewter Pots with Pewter Covers; and let the Pewter Pots be also
cast, or made nearly 2 Inches square, and near six Inches high, with square
Covers, to slip on and off; and upon the sides of these Pewter Boxes, (and on
their Covers) let be Engraven or Written the Names of the Medicaments contained.

XVI. Cerates and Emplasters, may be rolled up in Papers or Bladders; Roots,
Herbs, Seeds, and Flowers, wrapped up in Paper, or put into small Paper Bags; all
which may be made of a just length, viz. near six Inches long, and of such a
bigness as to go easily into the Receptacle, upon each of which set the Name
fairly, and at length: Thus will the Repository be easily and completely
furnished, and fitted for a present and ready use.

CHAP. V. The Furniture of the CHIRURGIANS CHEST.
I. THat we might as well fit the Camp as the Court, and as well accommodate
the Physician by Sea as by Land, we thought good here to exhibit several
Repositories according to the Institution of the most excellent and approved
Men Learned in this Art.

II. The first which we shall here present you with, shall be the Arca
Chyrurgica, or Cista Militaris of the Famo is Gulielmus Fabritius Hildanus. The
second shall be the Viaticum of that Able Chirurgian John Woodall our
Countryman. The third shall be an Institution of Our own, which we wrote some
Years since, at the request of a Worthy and Ingenious Man of Our own Nation.

III. The reason of all this Variety is to satisfy the Curiosity of the
Industrious Student of Our Art; for as much as the Institutions of One Man,
which may please one Artist, may displease another; we have therefore exhibited
this variety, that by various Exemplars of this kind, if nothing which we shall
here say, can please, or be without exception; the Judicious Professor may from
hence take a Pattern, and furnish his Repository with such things as may best
fit his Intentions, or Answer his desired End.

IV. For as all Men are not alike wise, so no one Man can know all things:
every Artist may have some one particular Secret or another, for which he may
have a particular estimation, and with which he desires his Chest to be
furnished; so also his Judgment or Experience, or both, may lead him to choose
several things which we have rejected, from his certain knowledge of their more
powerful effects; and to reject many things which we have chosen, from his own
knowledge of the imbecility of their Powers, being compared with those he
intends to substitute.

V. In all these Cases every Man is left free: nor do I know any reason why any
Man should be bound up to things Opposite to his Knowledge. For this Cause sake
I here show you variety: forasmuch as others may differ as much from us, as we
here differ one from another.

I. CISTA HILDANI.
VI. Purging Simples. Agarick, Aloes, Rhubarb, Cassia, Crocus Metallorum,
Colocynthis, Diagridium, Sena, Hermodacts, Manna, Mecoachan, Myrobalans, Juice
of Damask Roses, Troches Alhandal, Turbith.

VII. Purging Compounds. Benedicta Laxativa, Confectio Hamech, Diacarthamum,
Diaphenicon, Diaturbith, Electuarium de Succo Rosarum, Electuarium Lenitivum,
Pulvis Senae Brassavoli, Syrup of Roses solutive, Pilulae aggregativae, Pilulae
Auraeae, Cochiae, de Agarico, Lucis majoris, Ruffi, Extractum Rudii, Species
for Suppositories.

VIII. Cordial Pouders and Electuaries: Aromaticum Rosatum, Fine Bole, Camphir,
Confectio Alkermes, Confectio de Hyacintho, Coral prepared, burnt Hearts horn
prepared, Cream of Tartar, Diaireos, Diamargariton frigidum, Diarrhodon
abbatis, Diatragacanthum frigidum, Diatrion Santalinum, Flos Sulphuris, Bezoar
Stone, Pearl prepared, Mithridate, Meconium, Opium, Laudanum Opiatum,
Osteocolla prepared for inward use, Philonium Romanum, Pulvis ad Epithemata
Cordis, Hartshorn rasped, Lapis Prunellae, Tartar Vitriolate, Terra Sigillata,
London Treacle, Venice Treacle, Diatessaron.

IX. Aromatic Spices. Calamus Aromaticus, Cloves, Cinnamon, Saffron, Galingal,
Mace, Nutmegs, Pepper, Ginger, Sugar.

X. Waters distilled. Of Sorrel, Aniseed, Borrage, Bugloss, Marigolds, Cinnamon
Distilled without Wine, Bawm, Plantane, Roses, Aqua Vitae, Wormwood-water,
Mint-water, Treacle-water, of Juices of Barberries, of Citrons, of
Pomegranates, Wine Vinegar, Vinegar of Roses.

XI. Syrups. Of Sorrel, unripe Currants, Barberries, Bugloss, Citrons, Quinces,
Pomegranates, Limons, Liquorice, Poppies, Red Roses, dried Roses, Violets,
Honey of Roses, Oxymel simple and with Squills, Diamorum.

XII. Roots. Of Althaea, Angelica, Birthwort long, round, Bistort, Briony,
Avens, Onions, Succory, Comfrey, Sow-bread, Elecampane, Eringo, Fennel,
Gentian, Swallow-wort, Orrice, White Lilies, Liquorice, Parsley, Burnet,
Plantane, Polipody, Squills, Tormentil.

XIII. Herbs or Leaves. Wormwood common, Roman, Agrimony, Ladies Mantle, Jack
by the Hedge, Althaea, Betony, Carduus Ben. Centaury, Knotgrass, Cuscuta,
Dittany of Creet, Horse-tail, Eyebright, Fumitory, Hypericon, Marjoram, Bawm,
Mint, Mercury, Nep, Origanum, Plantane, Self-heal, Winter-green, Ribwort,
Rosemary, Rue, Sage, Sanicle, Scabious, Scordium, Golden-rod.

XIV. Flowers of Betony, Borrage, Bugloss, Camomil, Dill, Elder, Marigolds,
Melilot, Mullein, Pomgranates, Primrose, Roses, Rosemary, Sage, Violets.

XV. Seeds. Of Anise, Coriander, Carraways, Cummin, Dill, Foenugreek, French
Barley, Line, Parsley, Plantane, Quinces, Radish, Mustard.

XVI. Fruits. Almonds, Bay Berries, Acorns, Acorn Cups, Figs, preserved
Cherries, Quinces, Galls, Cypress-nuts, Oranges, Limons, Pomgranates, Lupins,
Myrtle-berries, Rose-hips, Prunes, Tamarinds, Raisins.

XVII. Oils, Natural and Artificial. Of Almonds sweet, bitter, Dill, Aniseeds,
Balsam of Tolu, Vigo's Balsam, Oil of Carraways, Cloves, Wax, Camomil,
Cinnamon, Quinces, Fennel Seed, Hypericon, Juniper Berries, white Lilies,
Earthworms, Mastich, Mint, Myrtles, Nutmegs, Olives, Roses, Scorpions,
Turpentine, Violets, yolks of Eggs, Petroleum, Foxes, Elder, Linseed.

XVIII. Ointments Simple and Compound. Aegyptiacum, Album Rhasis, Apostolorum,
Aureum, de Minio Camphoratum, Defensivum Chalmetaei, Dialthaeae,
Diapompholigos, Nicotianae, Populeon, Rosatum, ad Ambussa Hildani, Basilicon,
Linimentum Arcaei, Martiatum.

XIX. Fats, Suet or Grease. Of Geese, Beef, Capons, Deer, Goats, Men, Hens,
Hogs, Bears.

XX. Emplasters. Apostolicum, Basilicum, de Betonica, Diapalma, Diachylon
simplex, Diachylon compound, de Meliloto, de Mucilaginibus, Oxycroceum, de
Ranis, Paracelsi.

XXI. Gums and Rosins. Ammoniacum, Benjamin, Wax, Colophony, Elemi, Euphorbium,
Mastich, Myrrh, Olibanum, Pitch, Styrax Calamita, Turpentine, Tragacanth.

XXII. Minerals and such like. Alum crude, Alum burnt, Antimony crude,
Arsenick, Lime washed, Ceruse, Crocus Martis, Gypsum, Lapis Calaminaris, Lapis
Causticus, Medicamentosus Crollii, Sabulosus, Litharge of Gold, of Silver,
Quicksilver, Mercury Sublimate, Praecipitate, Nil praeparatum, Niter crude,
prepared, burnt Lead, Realgar, Seif album, Brimstone, Tutia prepared, Vitriol
crude, Vitriol burnt.

XXIII. Meals or Flowers. Of Bay Berries, Beans, Barley, Lentils, Darnel,
Lupins, Wheat, Mill-dust, Powder stopping Blood.

XXIV. Small Instruments for the Pocket. 1. A Plaster-Box. 2. A Rasor. 3. A
pair of Scissars. 4. Incision Knife. 5. Four Lancets. 6. A crooked Knife to
open Apostems. 7. A Fleam to divide the Gums with in the Toothache. 8. An
Extractor to take things out of Wounds. 9. A pair of Forceps for the same use.
10. Needles great and small to stitch up Wounds. 11. A stitching Quill. 12.
Spatula's great and small. 13. Probes. 14. Speculum Oris, one end whereof is to
depress the tongue, the other to scrape it. 15. Uvula Spoon. 16. A Borax quill,
to sprinkle Pouders on Wounds or Ulcers. 17. A Hook single at one end, double
at the other. 18. A small Hone to set the Incision Knives and Lancets.

XXV. The Salvatory. Furnished with, 1. Unguentum Basilicum. 2. Aureum. 3.
Apostolorum. 4. Nutritum. 5. Album Rhasis. 6. de Minio, or Desiccativum rubrum.

XXVI. Large Instruments for the Chest, 1. Trepans. 2. Levatories. 3. Scalpras.
4. Great Speculum Oris. 5. A Speculum Oris to force open the Mouth. 6.
Tooth-drawers. 7. Forceps to draw forth Bullets. 8. Great Saw for Amputation.
9. Little Saws for dismembring Fingers and Toes. 10. Amputating-Knife. 11.
Crooked Knife. 12. Cauterizing Knife. 13. Catheters. 14. Syringes. 15. Paraeus
his Pully, with Girdle and Remora, for reducing broken Bones and Dislocations.
16. Clyster Pipes. 17. Mortars. 18. Strainers or Sieves. 19. Skillets. 20.
Splints.

XXVII. Accessaries. Linen Cloth, Linnen-Rowlers, Boulsters, Tow, Pledgets of
Tow, Lint, Tents of Lint, Tents of Gentian Roots, Spunges, Oxbladders. Thus far
Hildanus.

II. WOODALL's VIATICVM.
XXVIII. Large Instruments, 1. Incision Knives. 2. Dismembring Knives. 3.
Catlings. 4. Rasors. 5. Trepans. 6. Trafine. 7. Levatories. 8. Head Saws. 9.
Dismembring Saws. 10. Dismembring Nippers. 11. Chizel and Mallet. 12. Speculum
Oris. 13. Speculum Oris, with a Screw. 14. Speculum Linguae. 15. Speculum Any.
16. Cauterizing Irons. 17. Storks Bills. 18. Ravens Bills. 19. Crows Bills. 20.
Terebellum. 21. Incision Shears. 22. Probes or Flamules. 23. Spatula's great
and small. 24. Spatula Mundani. [25. for Teeth, Paces. 26. Pullicans. 27.
Forcers or Punches. 28. Crows Bills. 29. Fleames 30. Gravers. 31. Small Files.]
32. A Bundle of small German Instruments. 33. Clyster Syringes. 34. Small
Syringes. 35. Catheter. 36. Wax Candles. Those for the Lid of the Chest, till
the Chirurgian see cause of removal.

XXIX. Salvatory. Furnished with the aforenamed usual Ointments, specified at
Sect. 23.

XXX. Pocket Instruments. 1. Plaster-Box. 2. Scissers. 3. Forceps. 4. Spatula.
5. Capital Instrument. 6. Probe. 7. Stitching Quill. 8. Needles. 9. Lancets.
10. Borax Pipe. 11. Levatory. 12. Uvula Spoon.

XXXI. Accessaries. Cupping Glasses, Brass Basin, Blood Porrengers, Diet Pot,
Skillet, Chafing Dish, Clyster Pot, Funnel, Cups to give Potions in, a Board to
spread Plasters on, Pestel and Mortar, Weights and Scales, Sieves, Searces,
Strainers, Splints, Junks, Tape, Tow, Spunges, Clouts, Rowlers, Paper white,
Brown, Empty Pots, Glasses, Needles and Thread, Wax Candles, Lanthorn,
Tinder-box furnished, Ink, Quills, Close-stool, Bed-stood, Brass Pail, Bricks
to heat, Pipkins, empty Bags, Skins of Leather.

XXXII. Emplasters. Stycticum Paracelsi, Diachylon cum Gummis, Diachylum
simplex, Diacalciteos, Oxycroceum, de Meliloto pro Spleen, de Meliloto simplex,
de Lapide Calaminari, de Minio, Calidum.

XXXIII. Ointments. Basilicon, Apostolorum, Aureum, Aegyptiacum, Album
Camphoratum, Diapompholigos, Pectorale, Rosarum, Nutritum, Populeon, de Mele
and Sapo, contra Ignem, contra Scorbutum, Dialthaeae Compositum, Simplex,
Potabile, Mercurii, Linimentum Arcaei, Aragon, Martiatum, Axungia Porcinae,
Cervi, de Melle simplex.

XXXIV. Waters or Liquors. Aqua Composita, Coelestis, of Dr. Stephens, Rosa
Solis, of Cinnamon, Limons, Rosemary, Sassafras, Aniseed, Wormwood, Bawm,
Angelica, Mint, Carduus, Treacle-water, [Simple of Damask Roses, red Roses
musked, Plantane] Aqua Fallopii, Aqua Viridis, Aqua Fortis, Lotions, Lixivium
strong and common, Wine Vinegar, Vinegar of Roses, Verjuice, Liquid Caustic.

XXXV. Spirits, of Wine, of Vitriol, of Turpentine.

XXXVI. Salts, of Wormwood, of Niter, Sal Gem, Lapis Infernalis.

XXXVII. Oils Galenical, of Roses, Dill, Camomil, Worms, Lilies, Hypericon
simple, cum Gummis, of Elder, of Linseed, of Eggs, Bays, Wormwood, Poppies,
Scorpions, sweet Almonds, bitter Almonds, Petroleum, Balsam natural, artificial.

XXXVIII. Oils Chemical. Of Vitriol, Sulphur, Cloves, Cinnamon, Mace, Bricks,
Anise, Turpentine, Juniper, Spike, Antimony, Amber, Wormwood, Origanum.

XXXIX. Syrups. Of Wormwood, Limons, Poppies, Cinnamon, Roses simple, Solutive,
Violets, Oxymel simple, Honey of Roses, Diamorum, Horseradish, Prunellas.

XL. Conserves. Of Roses, Rosemary-flowers, Barberries, Quinces, Wood Sorrel,
Sloes.

XLI. Electuaries. Catholic Extract purging, Extract of Rudi^s, Di^catholicon,
Diaphenicon, Diapranum, Confectio Hamech, de Succo Rosarum, Diatrion Piperion,
Theriaca Londinensis, confectio Alkermes de Ovo, Mith^idatum, Venice Treacle,
Diatessaron.

XLII. Opiates. Laudanum Paracelsi, Diascordium, Diacodium, Philonum Romanum,
Persicum, Tarsense, Aureae, Alexandrinae.

XLIII. Juyces. Of Wormwood, Liquorice, Limons, Pulp of Tamarinds, Acacia.

XLIV. Pills. Of Agarick, Aureae, Cochiae, de Euphorbio, de Cambogia, Ru^.

XLV. Troches. Of Wormwood, Alhandal, de Spodio, de Minio.

XLVI. Pouders. Aurum Vitae, Pulvis Sanctus, Arthriticus.

XLVII. Purging Simples. Scna, Rhubarb, Agarick, Scammony, Aloes, Hermodacts,
Polypody, Euphorbium, Turbith, Myrobalans, Cambogia, Cassia Fistularis.

XLVIII. Simples Alteratives. Saffron, Opium, China, Sarsa, Sassafras,
Guajacum, Cortex Guajaci, Liquorice, Common Barley, French Barley, Aniseeds,
Fennel seeds, common, sweet, Carraways, Cummin seed, Parsley seed, Line seed,
Foenugreek seed, Dill seed, Poppy seed, Plantane seed, the four greater Cold
Seeds, the four lesser, Sugar, Almonds, Raisins, Starch, Sumach, Galls,
Bayberries, Juniper Berries.

XLIX. Spices. Cinnamon, Mace, Pepper, Cloves, Nutmegs.

L. Gums. Camphir, Guajaci, Opoponax, Bdellium, Ammoniacum, Sagapenum,
Galbanum, Myrrh, Mastich, Labdanum, Styrax Calamita, Liquida, Benjamin,
Tragacanth, Ship Pitch, Rosin, Amber, Sanguis Draconis.

LI. From Animals. Ivory, Hartshorn, Wax, Mummy, Album Graecum, Sperma Ceti,
Wolfs Blood, Cantharides, Spodium.

LII. Minerals and Earths. Antimony crude, Stibium, Sulphur, Roch Alum, Burnt
Alum, Vitriol Common, White, Burnt, Lapis Prunellae, Venetian Ceruse,
Litharge, Verdigrise, Tutia, fine Bole, common Bole.

LIII. Flower or Meals. Of Wheat, Beans, Barley, Bran, Flower, White Starch.

LIVE. Herbs most fit to be chosen. Rosemary, Marjoram, Mint, Melilot, Sage,
Time, Wormwood, Carduus Ben. Bawm, Savin, Scordium.

LV. Roots. Of Althaea, Horse Radish, Pyrethrum, Angelica, Comfrey.

III. WOODALL's EPITOMY.
LVI. Instruments. 1. Dismembring Saw. 2. Dismembring Knife. 3. Incision Knife.
4. Head Saw. 5. Trefine. 6. Clyster Pot. 7. Clyster Pipes. 8. Small Syringes
with Pipes. 9. Catheter. 10. Speculum Oris. 11. Cauterizing Buttons. 12.
Flamula, 13. Forceps straight. 14. Forceps crooked. 15. Paces for Teeth. 16.
Forcers or Punches, 17. Crows Bills. 18. Spatula's, 19. Weights and Scales. 20.
Pestle and Mortar. 21. Strainers. 22. Spunges. 23. Skillets. 24. Chafing dish.
25. Pankin. 26. Chizel and Mallet. 27. Blood Porringers. 28. Cupping-Glasses.
29. Potion Cup. 30. Large Spoon. 31. Tow. 32. Funnels. 33. Cap Paper. 34. Skins
of Leather. 35. Large Skillet. 36. Clouts and Rowlers. 37. Bladders. 38. Bags.
39. Pots. 40. Glasses.

LVII. Emplasters. Sticticum Paracelsi, Diacalciteos, Oxycroceum, de Minio, de
Meliloto, de Cumino.

LVIII. Ointments. Basilicon, Viride, Populeon, Album, Triapharmacum,
Dialthaeae, Diapompholigos, Egyptiacum, Linimentum Arcaei, Digestive, Mel
S^ponis, Hogs Lard.

LIX. Oils Galenical and Chemical. Of Whelps, Hypericon with Gums, Roses,
Camomil, Dill, Lilies, Linseed, Chemical Oils of Vitriol, Turpentine, Origanum.

LX. Pouders. Restringens majus, Defensative, Pulvis Sanctus, Arthriticus,
Barley Meal, Bean Meal, Aurum Vitae.

LXI. Herbs. Wormwood, Mint, Rosemary, Time, Centaury, Hypericon, Scordium.

LXII. Syrups. Of Violets, Limons, Mint, Roses Solutive, Diamoron, Oxymel, Mel
Rosarum.

LXIII. Conserves. Of Roses, Sloes, Barberries, Scurvygrass.

LXIV. Electuaries. De Ovo, Diascordium, Mithridatum, Philonum Persicum, Venice
Treacle, London Treacle, Treacle Diatessaron, Confectio Hamech, Confectio
Alkermes, Diatrion Piperion, Diacatholicon, Diaphenicon, Lohoch Sanum,
Laudanum, Aquila Vitae, Catholic Extract purging.

LXV. Pills. De Euphorbio, Ruffi, Cochiae, Auraeae.

LXVI. Liquids. Aqua Coelestis, Cinnamomi, Rosarum, Mint, Carduus Ben.
Plantane, Aqua Vitae, Angelicae, Lotions, Spirit of Wine, Wine Vinegar.

LXVII. Purging Simples. Fine Aloes, Sena, Rhubarb, Colocinthis, Cambogium,
Stibium.

LXVIII. Simples. Fine Bole, common Bole, Lapis Calaminaris, Alum crude, burnt,
Vitriol white, green, burnt, Precipitate, Sublimate, Ceruse, Juice of
Liquorice, Juice of Limons, Mastich, Myrrh, Greek Pitch, Opium, Turpentine,
Lupines, Pomgranate Peels, Galls, Roots of Liquorice, Seeds of Anise, of
Fennel, of Cummin, of Line, of Foenugreek, Bayberries, Juniper berries, Barley
Common, French or Hulled, Flowers of Camomil, of Melilot, Cantharides,
Hartshorn rasped, Hartshorn burnt, Mummy.

IV. SALMON's REPOSITORY.
LXiX. Small Instruments. 1. Salvatory. 2. Plaster-box. 3. Scissers. 4.
Forceps. 5. Probe. 6. Spatula Linguae. 7. Uvula Spoon. 8. Borax Pipe. 9. Fleam.
10. Stitching Quill. 11. Needles. 12. Lancets. 13. Incision Knife. 14. Rasor.

LXX. Larger Instruments. 1. Dismembring Knife. 2. Dismembring Saw. 3. Head
Saw. 4. Trepan. 5. Trefine. 6. Terebellum. 7. Cauterizing Irons. 8. Crow Bills.
9. Forceps strait. 10. Crooked. 11. Paces for Teeth. 12. Directory. 13.
Levatory. 14. Bone Scrapers. 15. Files. 16. Plyers. 17. Catheter. 18. Clyster
Syringe. 19. Fistula Syringe. 20. Yard Syringe. 21. Womb Syringe. 22. Large
Spatula's. 23. Cupping-Glasses. 24. Dismembring Chizel.

LXXI. Accessaries. 1. Blood Porringers. 2. Searces. 3. Strainers. 4. Pestle
and Mortar. 5. Weights and Scales. 6. Tape. 7. Junks. 8. Tow. 9. Clouts. 10.
Spunges. 11. Wax Candle. 12. Leather.

LXXII. Roots. Asarum, Elecampane, Liquorice, Mechoacan, Rhubarb, Snake root.
Barks. Guajaci, Mace, Peruanus. Woods. Guajacum, Nephriticum. Herbs. Carduus,
Sena. Flowers. Saffron. Fruits. Winter Cherries, Cloves, Figs, Nutmegs. Seeds.
Cardamums, Granadillas. Meals. Beans, Barley, Bayberries, Orobus. Ashes.
Potashes.

LXXIII. Gums. Aloes, Balsams of Chili, Peru, Tolu, Cambogia, Colophony,
Guajaci, Opium, Scammony, Strasburgh Turpentine. Juices. Chermes, Liquorice.
Oils. Olive, Petroleum.

LXXIV. Animals, and their Parts. Cantharides, Cochinele, Feathers burnt,
Hartshorn calcined white, Hogs or Ox Gall, Honey, Hog-lice dried, Musk, Ox
Blood dried, Ox-horn, Sal Armoniack, Suet, Wax.

LXXV. Minerals. Amber, Alum, Antimony, Bole, Nitre, Quicksilver, Steel or
Iron, Terra sigillata, Vermilion, Tin, Vitriol white, Hungarian, Roman, Sal
Gem, Tartar.

LXXVI. Metalline Preparations. Burnt Lead, Ceruse, Saccharum Saturni, Arcanum
Jovis, Crocus Martis Astringens, Vitriolum Martis, Sal Martis, Verdigrise,
Aurum Vitae, Angelus Mineralis, Crystals of Luna. Mercurial Preparations. Red
Precipitate, White Precipitate, Arcanum Coralinum, Princes Powder, Turpethum
Minerale, Corrosive Sublimate, Mercurius Dulcis.

LXXVII. Preparations from Antimony, Bezoar Minerale, Crocus Metallorum, Vitrum
Antimonii, Butter of Antimony. From Salts. Volatile Sal Armoniack, Sal
Prunellae, Nitre Vitriolated, Tartar Emetick, Tartar Vitriolated, Salt of
Tartar Vitriolated, Nitre Vitriolated. Salt of Vitriol, Burnt Alum, Lapis
Infernalis. From Sulphurs, Flowers of Sulphur. From Stones. Pulvis Ostiocollae.

LXXVIII. Spirits. Spirit of Wine Tartarized, Spirit of Sal Armoniack, Spiritus
Vulnerarius, Spirit of Nitre. Spirituous Waters. Angelica, Wormwood, Aqua
Bezoartica. Tinctures. Antimony, Aurea, Castorei, Cathartica. Elixirs.
Proprietatis, Vitae nost.

LXXIX. Oils distilled. Anise, Cinnamon, Cloves, Juniper, Mint, Turpentine.
Powers of Amber, Carraways, Hartshorn, Juniper, Lavender, Limons, Mint,
Mercury, Pennyroyal, Rosemary, Sassafras, Sage, Turpentine. Oils from Minerals.
Of Amber, Sulphur, Vitriol, Balsam of Sulphur common and Anisated.

LXXX. Liquors. Mercurii Sublimati, Salis Tartari. Wines. Benedictum,
Antimoniale. Vinegars. Squills, Spirit of Vinegar. Syrups. Acetosus simplex,
Limonum, Violarum, de Spina Cervina, Poppies, Mint, Volatile.

LXXXI. Quiddonies. Barberries. Extracts. Pectorale nost. Laudanum Vol. nost.
Aloes, Opium. Electuaries. Theriaca nostra, New London Treacle, Diacatholicon.

LXXXII. Pouders. Antifebritick nost. Royal nost. Hercules nost. Styptick,
Bezoartick. Rosins. Jalap. Pills. Family-Pills, Panchymagogue.

LXXXIII. Waters, Lotions. Aqua Regulata, Styptica, Ophthalmica. Oils.
Anodynum, Paralyticum, Refrigerans. Balsams. Amicum, Arthriticum, Lucatelli,
Vulnerarium, Polychrestum.

LXXXIV. Ointments. Album, Aegyptiacum, Basilicum minus, Fuscum Wurtzii,
Narcoticum, Nicotianae. Cerates. De Ammoniaco, de Galbano. Emplasters.
Cephalicum, Diapalma, Diachylon cum Gummis, Diasulphuris, Epispasticum, ad
Herniam, Meliloto simplex, de Minio, Oxycroceum, de Ranis cum Mercurio,
Sticticum Paracelsi.

LXXXV. Hitherto of the matter of the Repository, out of which the Ingenious
Artist may choose what likes him best, toward the furnishing of his Chest. But
it is not necessary that he should have all things that are here enumerated; if
he has any thing more excellent of his own, he has the liberty of substitution.
We have but delivered these things as Exemplars, from whence he may form new ad
libitum. But these we have here insisted on, are the very choice and best of
those things now in Use.

II. OPERATIONS CHIRVRGICAL.
I. SYNTHESIS.
CHAP. VI. Of FRACTURES.
I. (...) Compositio, (...), quod est, componere. Synthesis or Unition is that
which teaches how to unite parts disjoined, and it is twofold, 1. What regards
the hard and bony parts. 2. What regards the soft and fleshy parts.

II. The Unition of Bones, is either the Setting of Broken Bones; or the
Reduction of Bones out of Joint: the first is called a Fracture, the other a
Dislocation.

III. A Fracture, is the Solution of Unity in the hard or bony Parts of the
Body, caused by some external Violence upon the Part. Yet sometimes a Fracture
may come without any such external force, as when a Bone is corrupted by the
Scurvy, Pox, Gout, or Leprosy.

IV. The general Causes, are either Falls or Blows, and by whatsoever is able
to break, bruise, or cut.

V. The Differences. 1. From the manner, some being transverse, which are
properly called Fractures: others according to the length of the Bone, called
Fissures: others Comminutions, when the Bone is broken into small parts.

VI. 2. From the Part, it being sometimes in the Head, Shoulder, Clavicula,
Arm, Cubit, Ribs, Thighs, Legs, etc.

VII. 3. From Accidents, as being sometimes accompanied with a Wound,
Dislocation, Inflammation, Gangrene, etc.

VIII. The Signs. If a Bone be transversly or obliquely broken, it may be known
by handling it, wherein you will find an inequality, the Patient being scarce
able to move the part affected, and sometimes that part is shorter than the
other.

IX. If the Thigh, Leg, or Foot be broken, the Patient cannot stand at all (but
he may a little, though with pain, in a Dislocation,) and this is the surest
difference, between a Fracture and a Luxation.

X. A Fissure is discerned by the thickness, pain, and unevenness of the part,
which a skilful Chirurgian is only fit to judge of.

XI. A Comminution or Bruising, wherein the Bones are shattered, is perceived
by the Bones being very unequal, and yielding here and there to the Fingers.

XII. The Prognostics. A transverse Fracture is more easy to Cure than an
Oblique, or when accompanied with apparent inequalities.

XIII. A Fracture where but one Bone is broken, is easier to Cure than where
there are two, or where the Bones are much shattered.

XIV. A Fracture in the midst of a Bone, is also easier to be Cured, than that
which happens to the Head, or lower end of the Bone; so also a single Fracture
more easy than a Compound.

XV. If it remains undressed beyond the seventh Day, there will be danger of
Mortification; so also many times, if the Part is too hard bound.

XVI. In Setting of a broken Bone, there is Extention, Conjoining, Ligature,
and well Placing.

XVII. 1. Extention is an Operation performed with pain; which being done
aright, must be greater or lesser, according to the time of the Fracture, age
of the Patient, and magnitude of the Bone. A new Fracture, tender or young
Patient, and a small Bone, require a gentler Extention; an old Fracture, strong
Patient, and a big Bone, a greater.

XVIII. This Extention is to be so done, that the Muscles do not labor; for
then it will be with much less pain: The Part must be so laid, as when in
Health, they could longest endure it without tiring: But the exact manner of
doing this, is better learnt by Practice than by many Words.

XIX. 2. Conjoining the Bones is the next Operation; in doing of which, be
cautious lest the Muscles be wrested from their natural Position and Figure: It
is well done, if the Bone be any thing firm, and all the places about the
Fracture be found equal.

XX. 3. Ligature is done with a double Rowler: The first is to be thrice rolled
about the Fracture, and then upwards: The second (which must be twice as long)
is to be once wound about the Fracture, proceeding downwards, and then upwards
again, a little higher than the first Rowler; to which you may add convenient
splints (of Wood or Past-board) round about the Member.

XXI. Let not the bandage be too straight, lest it cause pain, or endanger a
Gangrene, by robbing the part of its Nourishment: nor too loose, lest the Bones
slip out of their Places: This you will find to be well done, if the Patient
soon after he is dressed finds his Pain abated, and on or after the third day,
the ligatures seem loose, and the place a little below the binding be a little
swelled.

XXII. At the second Dressing, it must be bound somewhat closer, and afterward
changed yet but once every four, five, or six days.

XXIII. 4. Well placing is the last of the prescribed Operations, which ought
to be softly, evenly, and a little raised; if you lay it too low, the Bone will
bend outward; if too high, it will bend inwards: This you will find to be well
done, if in the second dressing you find all even.

XXIV. Before you roll the Ligature about the Member, bath the Part with S.V.
or with Oil S.V. and Vinegar mixed together: Or lay Oxycroceum, Opodeldoch,
Catagmaticum upon it; or lay a Cataplasm of fine Bole, Wheat, Meal, Whites of
Eggs, Bole, Frankincense, Dragons-blood, and a little Camphir, which let go
round the Part, and about three Inches below the Fracture.

XXV. But at any time you may apply this following, Mastich, Catechu, a. iij.
Olibanum, Frankincense, a. ij. Aloes, sanguis Draconis, fine Bole, Gum
Tragacanth, Lapis Haematitis, Talck calcined, a. j. Whites of Eggs and Oil of
Roses, a. q.s. make a Plaster.

XXVI. If there is an Inflammation in the Fracture before Extention, foment it
with an Emollient Oil; or lay the part in warm Cow Dung, which will digest and
ease pain.

XXVII. If the Fracture is accompanied with a Wound, then extend the Part
first, (but gentler than in a simple Fracture) next join the Bones together;
then have respect to the Wound, to unite the Lips thereof with Plasters, rather
than with the Needle, and to guard it with a defensative; lastly, bind up the
Part with Rowlers, and lay it conveniently, or easily.

XXVIII. If it be a Comminution, or shattering of the Bones, joined with the
Wound; those which are small and loose remove with the Forceps: Those which are
any ways fixed, leave to Nature, for she will throw them out of her own accord,
though somewhat later; and if they be not too much displaced, she will
sometimes unite them again (by a Callus) to the whole.

XXIX. But to make the matter the more easy, you may assist Nature with the
following things, Ashes of Earthworms, Bone-ashes, a. iv. Olibanum ij. Myrrh i.
Honey ij. mix, and make an Ointment. Or this, Powder of Comfrey roots, round
Birthwort, a. ss. Olibanum, Mastich, a. iij. Euphorbium ijss. Aloes, Myrrh,
Catechu, a. jss. Wax, Turpentine, a. q.s. which with a little Oil of Ben, make
into an Ointment.

XXX. If the Bone it self be naked, cover it with its own Skin and Muscles, and
defend it from the Air as much as is possible.

XXXI. If it be naked and started out, endeavor to reduce it again into its
place; but if be naked, and too far, take away the piece or pieces thus started
out with a proper Saw, or a pair of Nippers.

XXXII. These four Manual Operations being this well performed, you must now
come to act the Part of a Physician, prescribing to the Patient a good Diet,
and some proper Purge, according to the Quality of the Humor abounding.

XXXIII. In Fractures of the lower Parts, Purging is not so convenient; but if
the Patient is Costive, a Suppository may be exhibited.

XXXIV. But in Fractures of the upper Parts, Purgings and Clysters may be often
necessary, according to the following Directions, and which you are to observe
in all other Accidents and Cases, wherein the skilful Artist sees need of
Purging.

XXXV. These among Simples are said to Purge Choler, Rhubarb, Cassia, yellow
Myrobalans, Tamarinds, Manna, Scammony. Among Compounds, Syrup of Succory with
Rhubarb, washed Aloes, Angelick Pills of Grulingius, Diacatholicon, Hiera
Picra, Lenitivum, Pilulae de Aloe Rosata, Rudii, Ruffi, etc.

XXXVI. Among singular Compounds we have these; Lenitive Elect. Cassia
extracted a. ij. Cremor Tartari j. Spirit of Sulphur gut. x. ad xx. black
Cherry-water q.s. mix, and make a Potion.

XXXVII. Or this, Rhubarb, Sena a. ij. Cremor Tartari i. Aniseeds ss. Water
q.s. mix and Infuse scalding hot for two hours, and at last give it a walm or
two; strain out and give it.

XXXVIII. Our Family Pills are inferior to no other for this purpose; but if
the Sick is in great pain, and wants rest, you may give this: Angelick Pills of
Grulingius a gr. xv. ad i. of our Volatile Laudanum gr. ij. iij. or iv. mix for
a Dose. Give it over Night, it will give pleasant Rest, and a Stool, two, or
three the next day.

XXXIX. A Purging Powder may be thus made: Resinous, Scammony a gr. vi. ad x.
or xij. Sal Prunellae, Cream of Tartar Antimony diaphoretick a. gr.xij. Tartar
vitriolated gr. vi. mix for a Dose.

XL. These following Purge Phlegm and Watery Humors: Roots of Asarum, Mechoacan
white and black, Colocynthis, Myrobalans Belliric, Emblic and Chebuls, Agarick,
Turbeth. Among Compounds these, Syrup of Diacarthamum, Electuary of Hiera with
Agarick, Diaphoenicon, Diacarthamum, Confectio Hamech, Pilulae Cochiae minoris,
ex duobus; our Family Pills, our Panchymagogue Pills, Troches of Agarick, of
Alhandal.

XLI. Among singular Compounds we have these: blew Flower-de-luce Roots,
Troches of Agarick, Sena a. i. Aniseeds ij. Mechoacan ss. Water, or
Parsly-water q.s. Infuse three hours, boil a little, strain, and sweeten with
Syrup of Roses solutive, or with Manna i, and then give it for a Dose.

XLII. Or this: Syrup of Roses solutive i. Powder of Jallap i. Cream of Tartar
ij. Scammony gr. vi. Decoction of Aniseeds q.s. mix, and make a Potion.

XLIII. Or you may give Our Family Pills from i. ad ij. Or this, Scammony in
fine Powder a gr. x. ad xvi. plus minus; of our Volatile Laudanum a gr. ij. ad
iv. or vi. mix, and make Pills: Give it over Night, it will make the Patient
easy, and not work, or but rarely, till the next Day.

XLIV. Or thus; Pilulae ex duobus ss. of our Laudanum Volatile gr. ij. ad vi.
mix for a Dose. Or, Scammony gr. viij. Troches Alhandal gr. ij. ad iv. of our
Laudanum Volatile gr. ij. ad vi. mix, and with the Pap of a reasted Apple make
a Dose to be given overnight.

XLV. These among simple Medicaments are said to Purge Melancholy; Sena, Roots
of black Hellebor, Indian Myrobalans, Lapis Lazuli. Among Compounds, Syrup of
Roses solutive with Sena, Diacatholicon, Confectio Hamech, Pulvis Diasena,
Troches Alhandal.

XLVI. Among singular Compounds we have these. Sena ij. Indian Myrobalans i.
Aniseeds ij. Liquorice bruised ss. Water q.s. Infuse two hours, then boil a
little, strain out, and add Syrup of Roses with Sena vi. Tartar vitriolate gr.
x. mix for a Potion.

XLVII. Or this, Syrup of Sena i. Scammony, Jallap, a. gr. x. Cremor Tartari
ij. Decoction of Aniseeds iv. mix and make a Potion.

XLVIII. Or you may Purge with our Family Pills a i. ad ij. Or you may give
this, Sena in Powder i. ad iss. Ginger gr. xij. Sal Gem gr. vi. Laudanum
volatile gr. ij. ad vi. mix, and with Honey, or pap of an Apple, make Pills, to
be given over Night, which will work kindly the next Day.

XLIX. Or thus; Sena in Powder ss. Scammony gr. vi. Colocynthis gr. iij.
Aniseeds, Ginger a. gr. viij. Sal Gem gr. iv. Volatile Laudanum gr. ij. ad vi.
mix and with Honey make a Dose of Pills, to be given over night, if the Patient
be in much Pain.

L. Lastly, this is to be noted, that in all these Prescriptions, the Dose is
to be proportioned according to the Age and Strength of the Patient; the
Quantities here in these Recipes prescribed, being for Men, and such as are
grown to their full Strength.

CHAP. VII. Of DISLOCATIONS.
I. A Dislocation is the forcing of a Bone out of its Place or Cavity, or
natural location, into another hindering voluntary Motion.

II. The Causes. They may be said to be twofold, 1. External, from Falling,
Beating, Running, Wrestling, vehement Extention and over-straining, as it often
happens in flinging of Stones, Leaping; and to Women in Labor, through the
unskilfulness of Midwives, etc.

III. 2. Internal, by the Afflux of Humors, which falling upon the Joints,
relax, and resolve the Ligaments, thereby causing the Bones to slip, or fall
out of their places.

IV. The Differences, 1. From the manner; for sometimes the Bone is altogether
forced out of its place, and that is properly called a Luxation or Dislocation:
Sometimes its out but a little, or half way, and that is called Subluxation, or
Elongation.

V. 2. From the Cause, some are from external Accidents, as Falls, Wrestlings,
etc. some are from internal Causes, as the Afflux of Humors.

VI. The Signs. If the Dislocation be in a lean Body, it is plain enough. The
Bone causes a Tumor to be in the place to which it is forced; and a Cavity in
that from whence it is forced.

VII. If there is a perfect or complete Dislocation, the Member will be drawn
up as it were, and shorter, unless it be caused from the Laxity of the
Ligaments, and then it will be longer; the part is painful, chiefly in motion.

VIII. In a Subluxation or Elongation, the Accidents are lesser, and not often
all together.

IX. The Prognostics. In Children and other delicate and tender Bodies, the
Bones may be reduced the more easily; but are kept in with more trouble and
difficulty, and e contra, in full grown and strong persons.

X. If the Dislocation be of the Head, it is mortal; that of the Vertebrae is
dangerous; and that which is inveterate, or of long standing, is hard to be
cured.

XI. If it proceeds from an inward cause, the Cure is very slow; and when
restored, it is apt to come to its old state again.

XII. The Cure. In Dislocations or Bones out of Joint, you make the reduction,
by those four manual Operations used in Fractures, which you must perform
either by Hand or Instrument, as the nature of the part affected will declare
to you.

XIII. Extention must be made so great, that there may be a Cavity between the
Bones disjointed; to the end that in Setting, the one may not rub against the
other, whence oftentimes arises extreme, and sometimes incurable Accidents.

XIV. In the Conjoining, you must be careful not to wrest the Bones or Muscles,
but that they may keep their natural Figure.

XV. Before binding up, be sure to preserve the part from Inflammation, and
Flux of Humors, by applying Emplasirum Metropropto icon, Gummosum Paracelsi,
or ad Herniam Schroderi.

XVI. Or this which is excellent: Olibanum, Mastich, Frankincense, Dragons
blood, Catechu, Terra sigillata a. vi. white Starch i. Comfrey roots ss. Goats
suet iv. Wax q.s. mix and make a Plaster.

XVII. Or thus; Ceruse, Wax, Frankincense a. iv. Olibanum, Mastich a. i.
Turpentine ij. Oil of Ben iij. mix and melt, and add to them Comfrey roots in
Powder, Catechu, white Starch, Terra sigillata a. iij. Tragacanth i. mix and
make a Plaster.

XVIII. If the vehemence of the pain, or other Symptoms, do not require it, you
are not to unbind it before the fifth, sixth, or seventh day; and then it is to
be done with as little trouble or motion, as possibly may be.

XIX. And the part is to be laid in such an even and easy posture, as the
Patient can find most repose in, which is mostly that, when sound, it can
remain longest in without trouble.

XX. If the Dislocation is accompanied with Inflammation at first, beware of
extending the Part, or making any progress to the reduction, before that be
removed, which you must first do with Emollients, as Balsamum Vulnerarum
Samaritanum, Vng. de Althaea Compositum, or Laurinum Vulgar, and then with
Discutients, as Emplastrum de Minio Simplex, de Mastiche, or de Lapide
Calaminare.

XXI. An Emollient Ointment: Veal fat vi. Sperma Ceti iij. Oil of Ben q.s. mix
and make a Liniment, adding Oil of Fennel-seeds gut. xxx. A Discutient
Emplaster: Frankincense, Rosin, Gum Elemi, Mastich, Pitch a. i. Galbanum,
Ammoniacum a. vi. Cummin and Fennel seeds a. i. Wax, Oil a. q.s. mix and make
an Emplaster.

CHAP. VIII. Of RUPTURES.
I. RVptures are of several kinds, of which some be Proper, some Common, others
Remote.

II. Proper Ruptures are threefold, viz. 1. Hernia Intestinalis seu Enterocele,
a falling down of the Bowels into the Cod. 2. Hernia Inguinalis, seu
Bubonocele, a Rupture or falling down into the Groin. 3. Hernia Omentalis, seu
Epiplocele, a falling down of the Cawl, called also Hernia Epiploica.

III. Common Ruptures are sixfold, 1. Hernia Aquosa, seu Hydrocele, when Water
falls down into the Cod: 2. Hernia Ventosa, seu Pneumatocele, or the
Wind-Rupture: 3. Hernia Carnosa, seu Sarcocele, a fleshy Rupture: 4. Hernia
Varicosa, seu Circocele, a dilatation of the Veins which nourish the Testicles:
5. Hernia Humoralis, seu Hygrotocele, a repletion of the Testicles by a
defluxion of unnatural Humors falling on the Cods: 6. Hernia Vasis deferentis,
seu Spermatocele, which is when the Vas deferens falls twisted into the Scrotum.

IV. The Remote are chiefly two, 1. Hernia Gutturis, seu Bronchochele, a
Swelling in the Throat: 2. Hernia Vmbilicalis, Exomphalos, seu Omphalocele, a
Rupture of the Navel.

V. Now of all these there are but four, which are the proper Subjects of this
Chapter, viz. the three Proper, and the last, viz. the Hernia Vmbilicalis: The
other Eight belong to another place; where we intend to describe and treat of
them.

VI. We shall begin with the Synthesis, or Re-unition of the broken
Peritonaeum, which sometimes gives way to the Intestines, sometimes to the
Cawl, and often to both, letting them fall out of their natural places into the
Groins or Cods; where if the Guts come out, it is called Enterocele. or Hernia
Intestinalis, as abovesaid: But if the Cawl be out, it is called Epiplocele, or
Hernia Omentalis.

VII. The Causes of a Rupture are either Proximate or Remote. The Proximate is
the stretching, enlarging, or bursting of the Peritonaeum, which is made up of
two strong, yet soft Membranes, which so hold in, all that is included in the
Abdomen, or Belly, that nothing may fall out: In Women it terminates as it were
at the Os Pubis: In Men, its outermost Membrane reaches farther, and
constitutes the first proper Coat of the Testicles; and in the Groins, it
comprehends the Seminal Vessels as in a sheath, called Processus seu Productio
Peretonaei. The Groins then, and this Process, are the usual places of
Ruptures; but a Rupture may happen (though seldom) above the Navel, also
beneath it, and on either side of it; which Barbett says he has often seen, and
which some Chirurgians mistaking, have dressed like an Abscess, as not thinking
them to be the places of a Rupture.

VIII. The Remote or External Causes of a Rupture of the Peritonaeum, are
Falling, Leaping, Wrestling, Blows, violent Straining, carrying heavy Burdens,
vehement Coughing or Vomiting, straining at Stool, and Wind pent up that it
cannot get out, with other vehement Motions of the Body.

IX. Most commonly it is the Ileon which falls down, yet sometimes the other
Guts fall with it, and press into the Scrotum; in this case, it cannot be a
simple distention of the abovesaid Process; but certainly, in all such great
Ruptures it must be broken.

X. The Signs. A Rupture is known by the Tumor being sometimes bigger,
sometimes lesser, sometimes wholly gone, but easily returning upon the least
Motion.

XI. And though the Intestines or Cawl, be never so much fallen down, they may
easily, without any pain, be thrust in again, unless Wind or Excrements hinder,
in which case it is very painful.

XII. If it proceeds from Wind, it is known by hardness of the Belly, and
breaking Wind upwards, and downwards, and the swelling, weight, and hardness
gradually increase.

XIII. If the Peritonaeum be only stretched and relaxed, the Tumor or Swelling
is but little at first, and grows bigger by degrees; but if it be broken, it
suddenly descends.

XIV. The Prognostics. Ruptures happening in Infants and little Children, are
easily cured, and Nature many times does the work alone. But in middle aged, or
old People, it is slowly cured, and many times not at all.

XV. If the Bowels be filled with Wind or Excrements, so that there is vehement
Pain, and no Reduction can be hoped for, or that it cannot suddenly be removed,
Inflammation and Gangrene is to be feared, and at last Death it self.

XVI. The Cure. In this Case you must lay the Patient upon his Back, with his
Legs elevated, and a little opened, by which the Cawl of the Intestines may
return of its own accord, or otherwise be pressed up gently with your Fingers.

XVII. But if through hardened Excrements or Wind, you cannot do this, you must
first exhibit Enema ad Iliacam Passionem Mynsichti (See Our Pharmac. Land. lib.
5. cap. 8. sect. 5.) once or twice, giving mean season Diacassia with Manna
iss. or ij. Bath the Bowels for half an hour with Oil of Roses, applying over
the Bowels and Tumor Cataplasma Resolutivum Foresti ( Pharm. Land. lib. 5. cap.
7. sect. 11.)

XVIII. If Wind seems to afflict, anoint with this Ointment against Flatulency:
Oil of Ben iij. Veal suet i. distilled Oil of Juniper vi. mix them. Or this,
Oil of Nutmegs by expression, Oil of Mace a. i. Oil of Fennel ss. mix them. And
inwardly give the Powers of Anise, Carraways, Fennel, or Juniper Berries, in
whatsoever they drink.

XIX. After anointing with the former Ointment or Oil, you may apply the Cummin
Plaster, or this following: Sticticum Paracelsi, Tacamahacca, Galbanum,
Ammoniacum a. i. melt and mix; to which add Chemical Oil of Fennel seed ss. and
make an Emplaster.

XX. This done, after some 12 hours, attempt the reducing of it: which being
performed, with convenient Bands or Trusses, keep the Bowels so long up, till
the broken Peritonaeum be firmly knit together, or conjoined to the Muscles of
the Belly, that nothing may fall out any more.

XXI. For this purpose you must apply over the Rupture Empl. ad Herniam, or
Catagmaticum, first or second, or ad Herniam Schroderi, or ad Herniam Nostrum,
removing and applying a new Plaster once a week, or when it ceases sticking.

XXII. Inwardly let the Patient take Blood of Comfrey, Morning, Noon and Night,
in a glass of good Alicant, or Balsam of Sal Gem, Powder of Parsly-seeds,
shell, or black field Snails, or Rupture-wort.

XXIII. To this purpose also, a continual Diet of Gelly of Ho s, Calves, or
Neats Feet, made strong, sweetened with Sugar, and aromatized with Cinnamon, is
inferior to no one thing yet known.

XXIV. Let the Sick eat Bread well baked with Anise, Fennel or Caraway-seeds;
his Food light, meat roasted; and let his drink be Alicant, Rod-wine, Tent, or
some such astringent Liquor; let his Diet be slender and sparing, keep his Bed
during the Cure, and if it be an old Rupture, lie on his back for the space of
forty days.

XXV. If his Belly should be bound, give him new damask Prunes raw, taking once
a week the Angelick Pills of Grulingius. After forty days are past, let the
Patient rise, yet continuing his Plaster and Truss, for at least sixty days
longer.

XXVI. This Emplaster is much commended: Catechu, fine Bole, Myrrh, Mastich,
Olibanum, Galls, powder of Comfrey Roots, a. i. Dragons-blood, Aloes, powder of
Earthworms, Sarcocol, Mummy, a. iss. Loadstone, Crocus Martis, Rosin, a. ij.
Pitch iv. Frankincense viij. Turpentine q.s. make an Emplaster.

XXVII. Barbett commends this Apozem to be taken v. at a time, and two or three
times a day. Osmund Royal, Rupture-wort a. M. i. Roots of Comfrey, Bistort a.
iss. Flowers of Hypericon M.i. Aniseeds ij. Red Wine q.s. boil to a pint and
half, then strain, and add Fernelius his Syrup of Comfrey ij. mix and make an
Apozem.

XXVIII. He also commends these Pills: Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar. ij Mummy
i. powder of Earthworms ij. Myrrh, filings of Steel, dried. Hares-dung a. ss.
make them into Pills about the bigness of great Pease.

XXIX. This Cure in old Ruptures and aged People is seldom or never performed,
because the edges of the burst Peritonaeum are many times Callous, that though
they be never so well brought close to one another, yet they will never grow
together; in this Case Bands will do the best.

XXX. But in young Children they easily grow together, and here Trusses are
better than the best Bands. Those made with Steel Springs are best; which if
they be well fitted to the Patients Body, are of good use.

XXXI. If by a Wound the Intestines come out, reduce them before the natural
heat is exhausted, if you intend to preserve Life: If the Bowels themselves be
wounded, stitch the Lips together with a waxed thread, and gently return them
into the Body.

XXXII. So also the Omentum being slipped out, unless it has lost its natural
Color and Heat; in which case, tie it in the place which is sound, cutting off
the part which is putrid, then reduce it into the Belly, leaving the thread
hauging out of the Wound, that being suppurated, it may be drawn out without
trouble.

XXXIII. This being done, stitch together the Wound and Peritonaeum, thus;
Thrust a needle with a waxed thread, from without, through the Skin and
Muscles, into the very Peritonaeum, leaving it on this side untoucht, but
laying hold on the other side: and pierce it through, the Muscles and Skin
also; draw the Lips together; and passing over the space of an Inch, put in the
Needle on the same side again, on which it was drawn out last, leaving again
the Peritonaeum, on the same side untoucht; but holding it on the other side,
thrust it through the Skin and Muscles, and so onwards.

XXXIV. Now, by reason of the motion of the Belly, and haste here used, the
stitches may easily be undone; for which cause sake, you must always apply over
the wound a sticking Emplaster.

XXXV. Exomphalos seu Hernia Umbilicalis, a Rupture of the Navel: It may be, 1.
From Blood, Aneurisma; 2. From Flesh, which is hard; 3. From the Caul, where
the Tumor is soft; 4. From the Guts, which is unequal.

XXXVI. The two first admit no Cure: the latter two must be reduced, by laying
the Patient backwards, and proceeding as at Sect. 16. aforegoing.

XXXVII. But it is to be observed, that the Peritonaeum seldom breaks in this
part; for the learned Barbett diverse times found, and showed in Dissected
Bodies, that the Navel, together with the Intestine following, stood out bigger
than a Man's Head; insomuch, that the right Muscles of the Belly were pressed to
the side, and severed from one another; and yet the Peritonaeum was but
stretched, and no where broken.

XXXVIII. Dr. Thomas Gardner, chief Chirurgian to the Kings Household, healed a
famous Exomphalos, of so great a Magnitude, that it is almost incredible; It
was done upon one Mr. Styles, at the Lock and Key in Smithfield: It mortified,
and broke of its own accord outwardly, out of which a Worm peept, which he
taking hold of, pulled out about 38 Feet in length, which then breaking off,
was alive, and crawled upon the ground; (Mr. Horsenail a Chirurgian being also
present:) his Food and Excrements coming forth of the Wound, for some Weeks.
That Excellent Artist, Dr. Gardner, healed it up, and he walked several times
after it, to Ha^nstead on foot; after which giving him a Specific Medicament
against Worms, viz. a strong Infusion of Garlic, he voided about 20 Yards, or
60 Feet more of the same Worm dead, (which kind are called Lati) and so became
well beyond all expectation.

XXXIX. After the Exomphalos is reduced, you are here to observe, that upon the
Emplaster, which ought to be round, you must put Bolsters of Leather or Wax, or
some other hard thing, according to the bigness of the Rupture; for so by this
means it will with good Bandage or a Truss, be sufficiently and perfectly kept
in.

CHAP. IX. STRUTTING out of the EYE.
I. IT is said to strut out when it comes forth beyond its C^it, so as the lid
cannot cover it, or not well cover it.

II. It is known by Sight: The Causes are mostly inward, as Inflammation,
Blows, hard Labor, Straining vehemently, Strangling.

III. The Cure. Let it be gently put into its place (otherwise, if it cannot be
reduced, it is to be removed:) and being reduced, let it be kept in its place
by a fit Bandage; a Bolster being also applied, dipped in our Aqua Ophthalmica,
described in our Pharm. Land. Lib. 5. Cap. 1. Sect. 14.

IV. Or you may dip it in our Aqua Regulata, described in our Phylaxa, Lib. 1.
Cap. 1. Others advise to dip it in a Decoction of Sloes; or in this: Pomgranate
Peels and Flowers, Nut-galls, Sumach Berries a. i. red Wine q.s. boil and make
a Decoction.

V. The Bolster you may make of red Rose-leaves, Rosemary-flowers and
Camomil-flowers; which being put into a Bag, may be moistened with any of the
aforenamed things.

VI. Apply to the Forehead a Defensative; for which purpose you may use
Mynsichts Cataplasm of a Swallows Nest: Afterward apply to the Forehead and
Temples Emplastrum Cephalicum.

VII. An Eye hanging out of its Orbit the breadth of a Finger, was put into its
place, and cured with the following Cataplasm, without offense to the Sight.
leaves of Mallows, Marshmallows, Rue, Housleek a. M. i. whites of Eggs No iv.
Meals or Flower of Barley, Beans, and Linseed a. ss. Camphir, Saffron a. ss. Oil
of Roses iss. Breast-milk ij. Rose Water q.s. mix and make a Cataplasm, by only
mixing, without boiling; and apply it warm.

VIII. At opening of it, drop into the Eye our aforementioned Aqua Regulata; or
put in this Ointment: fine Aloes, Camphir, long and round Birthwort-roots a. i.
red Coral, Pearl prepared a. iss. Sief Album ij. Crocus Martis, levigated Calx
of Flints a. iij. Glass of Antimony i. white Sugar Candy ij. clarified Honey
iv. boil a little, and make an Unguent.

CHAP. X. FALLING out of the WOMB.
I. PRolapsus seu procidentia Vteri, is next to be considered: But the Womb
does not easily fall down by Relaxation, much less by Laceration of its broad
Ligaments, as most Authors imagine.

II. But by hard Labor, or a violent and unskilful bringing away of the
Afterbirth; it has been of ten seen, that the bottom of the Womb has been
plainly inverted, so as the most inward Parts have showed themselves outward.

III. Or rather, the wrinkled part of the Sheath, whose innermost wrinkled
Tunicle, by Relaxation, may fall down, which is often taken for the Womb it
self.

IV. The Causes. They are, 1. External, from the Rash laying hold of it by the
Midwife, mistaking it either for the Child or the Afterbirth, and so drawing it
strongly, causes it to recede from its proper place.

V. 2. Internal, by the vehemence of the Pangs, or the Child's Head being bigger
than ordinary, displacing it; which happens in diseased Bodies, and where there
is much weakness, and a great Flux of moist, watery, slippery and slimy
Humors, flowing to it; whereby it is made to sink more and more, till at
length by its bigness, it comes forth of the Body.

VI. It is known by sight, and feeling of the Part, with the Hand of the
Midwife, or the Patients own hand.

VII. The Prognostics. In the beginning some think it to be easily cured, by
Astringents used for a Month, the part being put up for a Month: But this is
very rare to be seen; for though taken in the beginning, the Cure is very
difficult to be performed.

VIII. If it is great, and the Protrusion far out, and of long continuance, it
can never be cured; but being replaced, it may be kept up with a Pessary.

IX. If it cannot be put up, by reason of its bigness, but shall chance to
Gangrene, it is to be cut off; which you may do thus: Draw out the hanging
part, so far as to tie it with a Tape, or Silk string, to hinder bleeding;
which done, cut it off at once with a Knife, which will be with little effusion
of Blood: Then it is to be healed with such things as digest, cleanse, and
resist Putrefaction.

X. That this thus cut off, is not the Womb, appears from these Words of
Barbett. We have found (says he) especially in those who were subject to
Costiveness or Belly-ach, that the Membranes of the Pudenda, or Vagina, were so
far stretched out, that the Unskillful had taken it for the Womb it self, and do
so still. But though many Authors have dared to write, that the Womb may be cut
off, without danger of Life, seems altogether Impossible to a Skilful Anatomist.

XI. To reduce it, lay the Patient on her Back, her Knees high, and Legs
asunder, and so, if possible, put it up gently with your Hand; if it be
tumified or inflamed, so as it will not go up, follow our Directions for a
Rupture, Sect. 16. Chapter 8. aforegoing. Then reduce it; putting up a Pessary,
that may in bigness and proportion answer the end.

XII. Make it with Cork, which cover, with Wax, mixed with a little Castoreum
and Assafoetida: Let it not be too thick, but perforated long ways for the
Humor to pass through: This continue there, and let it be kept with a fitting
Bandage, applying over the Belly Emplastrum ad Herniam, Catagmaticum, or that
of Schroder.

XIII. Let the Patient be still for ten or twelve days, with her Legs a cross,
forbear loud speaking, and as much as may be Coughing or Sneering, or whatever
may occasion violent Expulsion. Inwardly observe the Method in Ruptures, except
in the time of the Courses.

XIV. Barbett, after he has advised the Patient to be laid on her Back, as
before directed, orders to take a Wax Candle of a competent thickness, and to
mix therewith some Castoreum, or Assaf^etida, and with it gently to press the
Womb inwards; and having fastened the Candle with a Bandage, to apply outwardly
to the Belly Emplastrum Barbarum, or this following: Roots of Cypress, Bistort
a. i. Galls, Acacia a. ss. Cypress-nuts, D^te-stones, Myrtle-berries a. i.
Pitch, Colophony a. q.s. mix and make a Plaster.

XV. Great care is also to be taken, that your Wax-Candle be not too thick:
lest by its continual Friction it should cause the Whites, and so weaken the
Body.

XVI. Others advise (after it is put up with the Hand) to support it with a
Ball of the bigness of a Ducks Egg, or bigger, dipped twice or thrice into some
strengthening Emplaster, in which there may be a hole to discharge the Menses;
through which may also be put a Copper Wire, with a string fastened to it, to
draw it the more easily out of the Body.

XVII. But that which exceeds all these things, almost a thousand fold, is a
Ring which may be made of Silver, Pewter, or Wood, as of Box, Cocus or
Elder-wood, from an Inch and half to two Inches and a quarter in Diameter, from
outside to outside; and the turned Substance of the Limb of the Ring, ought to
be as thick as the round part of the largest Swans Quill, or rather thicker.

XVIII. This Ring thus made, may be smeared with some proper Emplaster, and so
put up: It is without trouble; nor will it fret or gall the Part, or obstruct
the Act of Generation, and withal may easily be taken forth when the Patient
pleases. See the Third Edition of Our Synopsis Medicinae, Lib. 5. Cap. 72.
throughout.

XIX. This (though the Cure is never performed) so absolutely serves the
Patient, that she goes up and down, and performs all her other Duties, and
lives as much at Ease, as if she ailed nothing at all, and answers all the Ends
and Intentions of any prescribed Medicine whatsoever: So that now, it would be
labor lost to use them.

CHAP. XI. FALLING out of the FUNDAMENT.
I. PRolapsus seu Procidentia Any, is known by Sight, and it proceeds from the
Looseness, or Relaxation of the Sphincter Muscle.

II. The Cause. It is from Cold, or Weakness of the Tone of the Part, too much
straining, etc. usual in Tenesmus, Dysenteries, Diarrhaeas, etc. As also from
Blows, Leaping, and Ulcers in or near the Part; and is common to Children.

III. Prognostics. It is not of difficult Cure if it be recent, or in one
young, and of a good Habit of Body.

IV. But if it be of long standing, accompanied with a perpetual Costiveness,
or a constant Diarrhaea, and in aged People, of a cold and moist Constitution,
it will be of Difficult Cure, and sometimes not to be done at all.

V. The Cure. The Gut being fallen down, anoint it with Oil of Roses and
Myrtles, mixing a little Powder of Sumach, Galls, or Catechu with it; and then
with your Fingers, and a small Linen Rag, put it up.

VI. If there be Pain, Tumor, and Inflammation, which may hinder the reducing
of it, then bath or anoint the Anus with this mixture. Oil of bitter Almonds
ss. Oil of Mace by expression, ij. Oil of Amber j. mix. them. Or with this; Oil
of Ben i. Oil of Nutmegs by expression ss. Oil of Rue Chemical, or of Aniseeds
iss. mix them.

VII. Being well anointed, strew over it astringent Crocus Martis, or Catechu
in fine Powder, and then endeavor its Reduction. If all these things will not
do, you must foment it an hour or longer with red Wine, by the help of Spunges,
applying them as hot as the Patient can well endure.

VIII. But you must take great care that the Part takes no cold, lest
Putrefaction or a Gangrene ensue, with which you may be surprised sooner than
you are aware of; for which cause you must do your utmost to put it up again
with all imaginable speed; endeavoring in the mean time, with the former
Prescribed Medicines, by Bathing, Fomenting, and Anointing, to preserve its
Natural Heat.

IX. Being put up, wipe the Part very clean, and apply a Sponge dipped in this
following Liquor: Red Wine viij. Alum ss. Tincture of Catechu ij. mix, and dip
the Sponge therein, being warm, and apply it as hot as may be endured.

X. And bind it on with a Swathe, which put about the middle, and from the same
let fit Ligatures come between the Legs, and fastened well to the Swathe, both
before and behind.

II. DIAERESIS.
CHAP. XII. The OPENING of a VEIN.
I. (...), (a (...), divido) Diaeresis, a dividing asunder, is the second part
of the Operations of Surgery, and shows the separation of Parts, whether
naturally or unnaturally joined, by Manual Operation.

II. It teaches the opening of Veins and Arteries, the Windpipe, Breast, Belly,
closed Orisices, Ustion, making of Issues, applying the Seton, Scarification,
opening of Abscesses or Apostems, dividing of Bones by Perforation, Excision,
Scraping, Filing, or Sawing, together with the Application of Cupping-Glastes,
for the drawing forth of Blood out of the fleshy Parts, etc.

III. The Way and Manner of opening a Vein. Make a Ligature about the Arm,
about 2 Inches above the place you intend to cut, of a Woman's Fillet, or the
like, so as it may be easily loosed, if need be; then put a thick Staff into
the Patients hand to gripe fast, and with your hand, chafe well the Vein, that
it may rise full. If it lies deep and small, foment it with warm water, rubbing
it hard with a Linen Cloth, till it sufficiently appear; make the Orifice
large, not deep: If it be too small, it will soon puff up with Wind. Strike the
Vein (not just along, nor quite over-thwart, but) slanting. If it be not deep
enough at first, quickly thrust into the same place again deeper; but before
you cut it, lay your thumb gently upon the Vein, just by the place, and with
the Lancet, between the finger and thumb, in the other hand (the other singers
leaning upon the Arm, to keep your hand the more steadier) gently thrust in the
Lancet, as far as you think may reach the Vein, a little stretching up your
hand, by which you shall enlarge the Orifice.

IV. Bleed as much as may be convenient; then by loosing of the Ligature, the
Blood will stay. with your Finger squeeze the thickened Blood out of the
Orifice, lay on a Pledget of Lint, dipped in cold water, and a Linen Cloth, two
or three times double upon that, (which ought to be in a readiness beforehand;)
then with a Band or Ligature, bind up the Arm, going cross above and below the
Elbow, making the Band to cross upon the Boulster: then pin or tie it fast, so
as the Patient may endure it, which let remain till the next day, letting the
Arm be held up, or with a Linen Cloth be fastened to the Breast.

V. It is in vain to tell you all the particular Uses and Intentions, for which
Our WARWICK LANE BLOOD-SUCKERS institute Bleeding: It Is a General and Universal
Remedy with them, against all Diseases, at all Times, and in all Persons, of
what Age, Sex, or Constitution soever: So that should we particularly enumerate
them, from their admired Practice, it would not only be Labor in vain, but
also cost me many Sheets of Paper to do it, which now I have saved in these
very few words; and told you in a Sentence, whatever you are to expect from it,
according to the REVELATION-MENS way of Quacking.

VI. What our own Thoughts are of it, we have in part told you in the Third
Edition of our Synopsis Medicinae, Lib. 1. Cap. 77. Sect. 20. ad 46. Where we
have laid down several Propositions, self-evident, against the received way of
using it; but because possibly that way of arguing, may be above the Capacity
of OUR WARWICK LANE SPARKS, and that Discourse not thought satisfactory in
every respect: We, for the Satisfaction of every sincere Inquirer, will here
resume the Argument again; and, by a new Set of Propositions, demonstrate that
to the very external Senses, which before we proved only to the Internal.

VII. Prop. 1. Though we deny not, but that there may be a Vacuum in Nature; yet
Nature generally abhors it. This is evident in Water Pumps, and in many other
things, where there is a violent Suction, by reason of the Protrusion of the
Air.

VIII. Prop. 2. That in any long and narrow Cylindrical Body, if it be filled
with a continued and liquid Matter, that Matter will not easily run out, unless
it may receive a supply at the other end, or some other parts of the Cylinder,
where there are Pores or Passages. This Children demonstrate with a Reed,
where, putting it endways into the Water, it will fill, and then nipping the
upper part of it close, though they take it out of the Water, yet will not the
Water easily fall out of it, unless they open it at the other end again.

IX. Prop. 3. That the Veins and Arteries may not unfitly be compared to
Cylindrical Bodies, yet with many capillary Pores or Passages into their larger
Cavities. This is manifest from the Capillary or small Twigs of Veins and
Arteries, derived from the greater Stocks, Arms and Branches.

X. Prop. 4. That these Cylindrical Bodies are filled with a continuous and
flowing Liquor, which is the Blood. This is evident in Phlebotomy and
Dissection.

XI. Prop. 5. That there are no Anastomoses between the Arteries and Veins, yet
discovered by any Anatomist, except that famous one of the Splenetick Artery,
with the Ramus Splenicus of the Vena Porta; and possibly some of the Arteria,
with the Vena Pulmonaris of the Lungs. This all the latter Scrutinators of
Anatomy affirm and maintain; and why we should believe that to be, which was
never yet seen, I see no reason for.

XII. Prop. 6. That there being a Circulation of the Blood, proved by the
Experience of these last Ages, and Ocular Demonstration, if there be no general
Anastomoses over the whole Body (as none have yet been discovered;) the
Arteries in this Circulation, must cast their Blood every where, into the
Substance of the Flesh. For the Flesh being any where cut, bleeds.

XIII. Prop. 7. That to maintain and continue this Circulation, the Blood must
be protruded, out of the fleshy Mass or Substance, into the Capillary ends of
the Veins; where filling them, it smoothly slides out of the smaller Veins into
the greater; and from them into the Vena Porta and Cava; and out of the Vena
Cava into the right Earlet of the Heart; from thence into the right Ventricle,
and so by the Arteria Pulmonalis into the Lungs, out of which it is sent by the
Vena Pulmonalis into the left Earlet of the Heart, and so into the left
Ventricle of the same; where, by the Motion or Pulsation of the Heart, it is
obtruded into the Aorta.

XIV. Prop. 8. That this Liquid Substance or Blood contained in the aforenamed
Vessels, is generated of the Nourishment we daily receive; which if it be
irregular, corrupt, or not well concocted, receives into its Substance several
heterogene and corrupt Particles. This is evident; for if the Matter of which
any thing is made be corrupted, the thing constituted must have some of the
Particles of that corruption.

XV. Prop. 9. That the Blood consists of a grumous Matter, a watery Substance,
and a Spirit or Life; by the latter of which it is agitated and stirred up, to
make a separation of those corrupt Particles it may contain, which in its
Circulation are cast forth into the Substance of the Flesh, and from thence
sent in a humid form into the Skin, Cuticula, and Habit of the Body. This is
evident from the Small Pox, Botches, Boils, Scabs, Erysipelas, Tettars,
Ringworms, Herpes, Morphew, Scurff, Leprosy, and other defilements thereof.

XVI. Prop. 10. That this Corruption remains in the Substance of the Flesh, and
Habit of the Body, till Nature is able to expel it, and cast it totally forth,
or till she is assisted with proper Medicines to do the same. This is evident
in all such as are troubled with Scorbutes, Botches, Boils, Scabs, Leprosies,
etc.

XVII. Prop. 11. That the Blood having once cast forth this Heterogenous and
Corrupt Matter into the Substance of the Flesh, by virtue of its Vital Potency,
is not apt to receive it in again of its own accord; but on the contrary, still
continues its Action, of expelling and casting out. This is apparent from the
long continuance, and increase of the aforesaid Habitual Defilements: For if
that which was once cast out was wasted and gone, the evil would cease; which
we see it does not; and therefore must be continued by that means, by which it
first began.

XVIII. Prop. 12. That since Nature willingly admits not of a Vacuum, by Prop.
1. That by taking away the Blood out of the Veins, such a Vacuum would
necessarily follow, unless they were supplied with other Juices, out of the
Substance of the Flesh, by Prop. 2. This is evident by the Construction of that
second Proposition: And by Prop. 5. and 6. where it is proved, that there being
no Anastomoses, the Veins receive their bloody Juice out of the Flesh.

XIX. Prop. 13. That then to avoid such a Vacuum in the Veins, if the Veins
(upon Blood letting) receive in of the Corrupted Juices of the Body, through
the whole Universal Habit, to repleat them; it follows, that the Universal
bloody Mass must be at once Corrupted, and defiled with an almost indelebile
Pollution. This is so manifest of it self, that it needs no other Explication.

XX. Prop. 14. The Blood, by this diminution in Quantity, and loss of Spirits
therewith, is so depauperated in Quality, and so truly enfeebled, that by many
such Outlets, it seems to be overcome, yield up its active Potency, and submits
to the over-powering Tartarous and Corrupt Matter brought in. By which it is
clear, that Blood-letting pollutes the bloody Mass, and causes it to imbibe the
corrupt Juices of the fleshy Substance which it had before cast out; whereby
Diseases are, after that Operation, made ten times more rebellious and
difficult to Cure, than they were before; and the universal human Nature
becomes ten times (as I may say) more depraved, whereby those Patients are left
in a deplorable, and sometimes in an incurable State. Which, before the many
repeated Acts of BLOOD SVCKING, were in a very tolerable and hopeful Condition;
which is the thing that was to be demonstrated, in opposition to the horrid
Practices of the BLOOD SVCKERS of our Times.

XXI. Besides, their drawing Blood in all sorts of Fevers, to me is a Paradox,
not to be unfolded: For a Fever may rationally enough be compared to a boiling
Pot: Now when a Pot, through the Fury of the Heat, is ready to run over, what
Course is to be taken to quell its Outrage, and stop the boiling over? To this
the greatest Country Clown that is, will make you a ready Answer; viz. either
to put in some cold Water into the Pot, or to diminish and take away the Fire:
For if you take away any of the Liquor out of the Pot (which answers to Blood
Sucking and Blistring) the rest of the Liquor must needs boil the faster,
because the same fire or heat, has a less quantity of Matter to exercise its
fury upon.

XXII. So that in the main, this is found to be an Operation of as little use
as any, in the whole Art of Surgery; and if it is to be used at all, these
four cases are the chief, viz. 1. A Quinsey: 2. A Pleurisy: 3. A Peripneumony:
4. An inward Bruise, or Hurt in the Thorax: Which yet, if a Skilful Physician
has the Matter in hand, he will easier, safer and sooner perform, by the
administration of some inward Specific, as Spirit or volatile Salt of Man's
Blood, or Flesh, or Urine, etc. than any BLOOD SVCKER of them all can do by
Bleeding. But of this, at present, enough.

CHAP. XIII. OPENING of an ARTERY.
I. THE former Reasons which have been just now offered against Bleeding of a
Vein, may serve here: To which add the dangerous and frightful Operation, by
reason of which, none of the Moderns but dislike it; yet for the Curiosity of
such as desire to know how it is to be done, and whom substantial Reason cannot
persuade out of their Road, we will here show the way.

II. Some tie a Bandage about the Neck, but seeing, when it is hard bound, it
is very troublesome; others think it better the the Ligature be made under the
Armholes, which must be so straightned, that the Jugular Veins and Carotide
Artery, may appear both by swelling and touch; then let the Arteries be
compressed by the Thumb, a little below where you intend to make the Incision.

III. Being opened (which must be done by a steady and strong hand) take forth
what Blood you intend; which done, strew some Astringent Powder upon the Wound,
then put over it a double Linen Cloth, with a Plate of Lead, after bind it up
with a fit Bandage, which in five or six days will be perfectly well.

IV. The Intentions for which these kinds of Artists open an Artery, are
against inveterate Headaches, Megrims, Palsies, Madness, Epilepsies,
Inflammation of the Eyes or Ears; for which purpose they open the Arteries of
the Forehead, Temples, or those behind the Ears, or Arteria Puppis, all of them
Branches of the external Carotide.

V. In the Inflammation of the Liver and Diaphragma, the Arteries between the
Thumb and forefinger. In Palpitation of the Heart, either that, or the Saphena,
is to be opened.

VI. Other Arteries are not to be opened, except a Bone lies under them, for
fear of an Aneurisma.

VII. The motion of the Blood in the Arteries, is by leaping, as it were
forwards, by reason it goes out of the greater Arteries into the less; whereby
it is by a struggling motion forced to make its way; and this struggling leaping
motion is that, which where it may be felt, is called the beating of the Pulse;
by which is known the State and Affections of the Heart and Vital Spirits.

VIII. Whereas the Motion of the Blood in the Veins, is smooth and flowing,
because it goes out of the lesser Veins into the greater, in its return to the
Heart, whence it follows, that if the; Blood be taken too liberally out of
them, the Heart is robbed of so much of its Pabulum, that the Vital Spirits
thereby fail.

CHAP. XIV. OPENING of the WINDPIPE.
I. BRonchotomia seu Laringotomia, is the opening of the Windpipe, when
Persons are troubled with that kind of Quinsey, called Cynanche, where the Sick
is in danger of Suffocation, that Disease being more dangerous than this
Operation.

II. Let the Sick bend back his Head, both to stretch out, and better show the
Aspera Arteria: Draw a Line with Ink from the middle of the Neck before, almost
to the Cavity of the Jugulum: Divide the Skin, according to the length of the
Larinx unto the hollow: let him that stands by to assist, pluck by the Skin on
each side, that the Artist may see and remove the two long Muscles, called
Sternohyoides, with a Knife made either with Wood or Bone: The Larinx then
appearing, make an Incision in the middle, between the third and fourth
Annulary Cartilage, taking heed that you hurt not the Cartilages themselves.

III. When you find the Breath to come forth, take out the Incision Knife, and
put into the place a Pipe of Silver or Lead, yet not so deep as to reach the
hinder part of the Windpipe, lest it cause a continual Cough.

IV. The danger of Suffocation being over, which is generally about the third
or fourth day, take forth the Pipe and cure the Wound, as you do others.

V. Before you do this Operation, beware lest the Lungs, Pleura, Gullet, etc.
be not also inflamed, or already full of Matter: An Inflammation and Corruption
of the Larinx, is most commonly mortal: If therefore upon these Accidents, you
attempt this work, the death of the Patient may prove matter of Scandal.

VI. The Epiglottis may sometimes be so indurated, that it may not only hinder
speaking, but also hinder swallowing, except of great pieces of Meat; for
Drink, and all other liquid things, run into the Wind pipe, as not being well
closed by the indurated Epiglottis: This Affect is incurable.

VII. The Glottis, or Chink of the Larinx, either from Food or Physic, is
sometimes so straightly wrung together, that the Patient cannot make any Noise:
for this purpose some commend this; Cows Milk lbi. Yolks of Eggs Noij. treble
refined Sugar i. mix and dissolve, of which the Patient may often take three or
four Spoonfuls.

VIII. Or you may give this; English Saffron ss. Olibanum in fine Powder i.
Juice of Liquorice iss. white Sugar ij. Gum Tragacanth iij. mix, and with
Damask Rose Water make Troches, to be continually chewed in the Mouth, and
swallowed.

IX. This following is of good use, and has been often proved; Syrup of Sugar,
Oil of sweet Almonds new drawn ana iij. put them into a Glass, and shake them
well together; of which let the Patient swallow a spoonful at a time, five,
six, or eight times a day.

X. If it be inveterate, and not easily Cured, you must mix with the former
Composition Powers of Aniseeds iss. or, for want thereof, of the Oil of
Aniseeds ij. which mix well by shaking together, and let it be given as the
former.

CHAP. XV. OPENING of the BREAST.
I. THIS Operation is performed in two Cases: 1. In a Hydrops Pectoris vel
Pulmonis, wherein Water is collected into the Cavity of the Thorax, either by
Rupture of the Lymphaeducts, or too great a waterishness of the Blood. 2. In an
Empyema, which follows an Inflammation of the Throat, Lungs, Pleura, etc. where
in Matter is collected; which upon the breaking of the Apostem, falls also into
the Cavity of the Thorax.

I. Of a Dropsy of the Breast.
II. Signs. It is known by a dry Cough, a painful heaviness, and a difficulty
of Breathing, even to Suffocation; there is also great Thirst, little Appetite,
and a paleness of the Countenance; sometimes there is a swelling of the Legs;
and now and then it is accompanied with a Fever.

III. The Causes. They are before declared, to which add an Obstruction of the
Lymphaeducts, as it often happens.

IV. The Prognostics. If it be recent, it is easier cured than when
inveterate: So also, if it be in a Person Young than in one Old: But in whom
soever, and though Recent, yet it is a thing of difficult Cure.

V. It often degenerates into an Ascites; and if the Bowels be hurt, it is
incurable.

VI. If the Water cannot be expelled by Diaphoreticks, Diuretics, nor by
Purging Medicines, then we must come to the Manual Operation, as at Sect. 18.
following. See the Third Edition of Our Synopsis Medicinae, Lib. 4. Cap. 26.
throughout.

II. Of an Empyema.
VII. The Signs. When the Inflammation of the Lungs or Pleura, will not, upon
Bleeding or other fit means, be removed, you may then judge a Collection of
such Matter to come, within 12, 14, or 16 days.

VIII. The Patient finds a great heaviness in his Breast, without considerable
Pain; but if it be with Pain, it is commonly with a new Afflux of Humors,
which they divert by Revulsion.

IX. There is a difficulty of Breathing, and in Motion the Patient finds a
rumbling; and is sensible that the Matter changes place, and the side affected
is hotter than the other.

X. He casts up, with violent Coughing, a purulent Matter, having a continual
Fever, or rather a Continent; (for such as I have seen afflicted with this
Disease, had no remission of the heat:) The Appetite is depraved or weak, and
he finds Anxiety or Pain at Heart.

XI. The Cause. It proceeds from a Fever, which many times putting the Blood
and Humors into violent Motions, lodges them in the Lungs, Membranes of the
Pleura, or Parts adjacent.

XII. The Differences. One is in the Lungs it self; another in the Membranes of
the Pleura: Or, One arises from a Peripneumonia; another from the Pleurisy.
One is from a Rupture of some preceding Apostem, as aforesaid. Another from a
Vein opened, broken, or gnawn asunder; whence comes Blood, which issuing forth,
is converted into Pus, forming it self a Cystis. Another from an afflux of
Rheum, or Humors, into the Thorax.

XIII. The Prognostics. All Empyema's are dangerous, and Death is rather to be
feared, than Life hoped for. But that, in a strong Person, and on the right
side, and where the Pus is voided white, and without any great Pain or
Coughing, it is the more hopeful.

XIV. So also, if, upon opening, the Sick has an Appetite to Meat, the Thirst
goes away, and the Fever leaves the Sick the same Day, there is hopes; and
contrariwise.

XV. Between the thirtieth and fortieth day, the Apostem commonly breaks; and
if it be not spit forth in Forty Days, it commonly turns into a Consumption.

XVI. But, if upon opening, the Pus be of an ill Color or Savor, somewhat
Bloody, or Water flows forth in great quantity, or it colors the Probe red,
the Sick, for the most part, dies. See the Third Edition of Our Synopsis, Lib.
4. Cap. 22.

XVII. The Cure. If now the Humors collected connot be expelled by
Expectoration, nor by Urine, or Medicines, we must then come to Manual
Operation, which is performed according to this following Method.

XVIII. The way and manner of Opening the Breast, both in a Hydrops Pectoris,
and an Empyema. The place of opening, is said, by some, to be between the third
and fourth Rib; by others, between the fourth and fifth; and others say,
between the fifth and sixth (reckoning upwards;) this last is thought safest;
for if higher, the Pericardium may be hurt, if lower, the Midriff.

XIX. But as in other Tumors, so in this, the most raised place is most fit. So
that if a Tumor appear on either side, make the Apertion four or five inches
from the Sternon, and nearer to the lower, than the upper Rib, because under
each Rib there lies an Intercostal, Vein, Artery, and Nerve.

XX. First, mark the place to be cut, with Ink; and charge the Sick to hold his
Breath, as long as he can, mean season make an Oblique, but small, Orifice,
into which put a Pipe of Silver or Lead; at which suffer iv. or v. to run out
in a day.

XXI. If the Matter run not well, place the Sick on the wounded side, and make
him Cough. If yet it will not come, by reason of its toughness, inject into the
Cavity some abstersive, healing, and drying Medicine, as Decoctum Vulnerarium,
Decoctum Fumaria compositum. See Pharm. Land. Lib. 4. Cap. 14. Sect. 8, and 17.
or Infusum seri Lactis Mesuae; letting the Patient take inwardly, Decoctum
Vulnerarium Mynsichti (at Sect. 30. of the aforecited place) of which he may
drink often in a day, about two ounces at a time.

XXII. If the Sick be weak, and the inward parts corrupted, this Operation is
more dangerous, otherwise it has proved more effectual, than in the
Paracentesis, for a Dropsy in the Belly. But before you do it, first try all
other means, as Expectoration, Purging by Vomit, Stool and Urine, Sweating,
etc. and if they fail, then make use of Surgery.

XXIII. If the Matter runs not, by reason of its toughness, Barbett advises to
inject this: Goats Whey xviij. Honey of Roses iv. Juices of Celandine and
Smallage a. vi. mix.

XXIV. Or this; Comfrey-roots i. Roots of Sanicle ss. Leaves of Agrimony,
Betony, Burnet, Periwinkle a. Mss. the Cordial-flowers P. ij. Seeds of
Hypericon, Carduus, Roman-Nettle a. ss. boil in Water and Honey q.s. to a pint
and half, then strain out; with which Inject, letting him drink also a little
of it twice or thrice a day.

XXV. Sometimes the collected Matter is contained in a Membrane of its own, and
by its rising, manifests it self from without. This the Latins call Vomica
Pulmonis. In this case, you must not stay till the Membrane breaks of it self:
For, by delay, the Matter flowing up and down, will be more difficulty got out
of the Breast; but it ought presently to be opened, choosing no other place for
the Apertion, but the most raised part of the Tumor.

III. Of a Pleurisy.
XXVI. And because an Empyema mostly follows a Pleurisy, I shall show in this
place, so much concerning it, as is necessary for a Chirurgian to know, because
many of them are apt to mistake any Pain in the Side, though arising from Wind
only, for a Pleurisy.

XXVII. A Pleurisy then is an Inflammation of the Pleura, and many times of
the Lungs themselves (but that is rather a Peripneumony) arising from an Afflux
of Blood, attended with, 1. Pain; 2. Cough; 3 Shortness of Breath; 4. Spitting
of Blood; 5. Continent Fever; 6. And a quick Pulse.

XXVIII. The Cause. It is chiefly from Blood, or Blood and Humors,
overheated, and put into a violent Fermentation in the Lungs or Pleura.

XXIX. The Differences. It is, 1. Sincere, when it proceeds from Blood alone.
2. Bastard, when it comes from Blood mixed with other Humors. 3. Of the Lungs.
4. Of the Pleura.

XXX. The Prognostics. If the Patient Spit not the third or fourth day, he
will scarcely live to the seventh: And therefore the sooner the Matter is
concocted, and the whiter and easier it is ejected, the sooner and safer will
be the Cure.

XXXI. And if upon a plentiful Expectoration, the Cough and Difficulty of
Breathing lessen not, it is an evil Sign: So also, if upon Bleeding, or other
proper applications, the Pain ceases not; for then the Sick must either die, or
the Pleurisy will turn to an Empyema, or a Consumption.

XXXII. The Cure. Authors prescribe Bleeding largely, as one of the most
necessary and safest means of Cure. However, Experience has confirmed the
admirable use of the volatile Salt, or Spirit of Man's Blood, or Man's Flesh, and
for want thereof, the same Preparations from Bulls Blood or Flesh; Spirit of
Sal Armoniack, and many other things of like nature.

XXXIII. But if a Vein be opened, let it be on the same side the Pain is of;
for thereby the Sick is much more and sooner relieved, than when it is done on
the opposite side: If the Pain ceases not in twenty four hours, they sometimes
Bleed twice or thrice on the same Arm, but with respect to the Patients
strength.

XXXIV. After Bleeding, sometimes Purging, Sweating, and Expectorating
Medicines are very good; this is commended by Barbett, (after once Bleeding) by
an Experimental Success: Juice of Dandelion ^iss. Plantane-water ij. Waters of
Carduus and Scabious, Syrup of Corn Poppies a. i. Crabs Eyes ss. mix them: and
give the Sick every half hour, two Spoonfuls of it, for some time: The rest of
the Cure seek out in the Third Edition of Our Synopsis Medicinae, Lib. 4. Cap.
27.

CHAP. XVI. OPENING of the BELLY.
I. THIS Operation is called Paracentesis; and although it signifies all sorts
of Punctures, yet Custom has only appropriated it to the opening of the Breast,
in an Empyema, and of the Belly in a Dropsy; yet more to the latter, than to
the former.

II. This Work is generally performed upon such as have a Dropsy of the Belly,
called Ascites, or Tympanites; thus,

III. If the Navel stands forth, make the Apertion there; but if not, which is
usual in this Case, then make it three inches below the Navel, on the Muscles,
called Obliqua descendens, near the side of the right Muscle, but so much,
whether on the right or left side of the Belly, as the breadth of two fingers
or more.

IV. Then mark the place with Ink, and make the Operation according to the
Ductus of the Fibers, a little obliquely thus [/] on the right side, and thus
[\] on the left side; piercing the Skin, Muscles and Peritonaeum, taking great
care, that the Omentum or Guts be not wounded.

V. As soon as you perceive the Water come forth, put in a Pipe of Silver or
Lead, which is smooth, fixed at Head with broad Wings, perforated with three or
four small holes on the sides of that end which is put into the Apertion, no
longer than the thickness of the dissected part, which is about an Inch,
somewhat crooked at the end, and exactly fitting the size of the Orifice; which
put into it, laying over it a sticking Emplaster, and upon that a sponge, or
fourfold doubled rag, all which bind on very well, and let the Sick rest for
two or three hours.

VI. Then open the Bandage, and take away one, two, or three quarts of water,
and sometimes more at a time; this repeat once or twice a day, till the Water
is almost discharged: For to take away all at once, would so chill the Parts,
as to endanger the Life of the Patient. The Pipe is to remain all the time of
the Cure, at last remove it, and Cure the Apertion as an ordinary Wound.

VII. But this Operation is better performed by the Steel Pipe of Paul Barbett,
made with an end like a Lancet, and sharp, with holes on the sides: This is to
be thrust into the Cavity of the Belly, through the right Muscle, where the
Orifice is soon healed, taking out but a Gallon or two of water at a time.

VIII. This done, take out the Instrument, and lay upon the hole only dry Lint,
with a sticking Emplaster over it, which will keep the Water in, two, or three,
or more days; after, according to the Strength of the Sick, repeat it, either
by opening the first Orifice again, or making a new one, if the Artist find the
Water to be drawn another way.

IX. But before these Operations be performed, consider, that the Body be not
too much emaciated or wasted. 2. That the Dropsy be Recent, at least, that the
great bulk of the Tumor be but of short standing. 3. That the Patient have no
Fever, nor difficulty of Breathing. 4. That the Noble Parts be sound and
uncorrupted. 5. That the Person be of middle Age, or at least very strong;
because in Children and aged People, it succeeds not well. 6. Take care to
preserve the natural Heat, for after Opening, the Parts easily Gangrene or
Mortify.

X. In an Hydrocele ( when the Water falls into the Scrotum) you may make a
discharge of the Humor, by the last mentioned Instrument, so dexterously, that
the next day, you shall hardly be able to find where the hole was.

XI. You may apply this Instrument very facetiously to an Empyema, and to a
Dropsy of the Breast, in Chap. 15. aforegoing.

XII. This Operation is of Ancient Use, yet full of Danger, but many times
preserves the Life of the Patient, and the Success which has been in the Use of
it, emboldens us now and then, to draw it into Practice.

XIII. But we find Experimentally, 1. That the Parts debilitated, and deserted
of their natural Heat, after opening, do easily Mortify. 2. That, together
with the Water, the Spirits do also Issue out.

XIV. However, after all has been said that can be said, the Apertion is best
to be made at the Navel; where it is certainly done with the least trouble to
the Artist, and without any Pain to the Patient, and with less danger than in
any other place.

XV. It may be opened with a Lancet, where the Water will issue forth, without
the help of a Pipe; and when you think a sufficient quantity is taken away, you
may stop it with a little dry Lint, and a sticking Emplaster, gently binding it
on with a Swathe.

XVI. If therefore the Navel struts out of its own accord, that is the certain
place to be chosen for this Operation; but if otherwise, it is best to be done
(as is practiced upon Negroes in many Places of both Indies) by raising it into
a Bladder with Cupping-glasses, and then pricking it, as is before directed,
and as if it was raised naturally of it self.

XVII. I remember that once I saw Dr. Gardner, Chief Chirurgian to the King's
Household, open the Belly of one that had an Ascites. He did it at the Navel,
without any Pipe, as before directed; and it was done with that dexterity, and
easiness, that I never saw the least Operation in Surgery performed with the
like Facility, and not the least Pain to the Patient.

CHAP. XVII. OPENING of Closed ORIFICES.
I. WE shall begin with them that are highest, or in the Upper Parts of the
Body; of which, those of the Eyes offer themselves first to consideration.

I. Closed Eyes.
II. Ancyloplepharon, Coalitus, the Eyelids growing together, or else, to the
white and horny Coat, or both together. If before Birth, or naturally so, they
are carefully to be divided by an Incision-Knife; on the Point of which is to
be a little Knob; after which they are to be kept asunder with Lint, and fit
Medicines.

III. If after a Wound, not being healed according to Art, so that the Eyelids
grow together; put in a small Probe by degrees, at the Corner next the Nose,
and bearing it up, divide the joined Lids all along: Or you may do it with an
Incision-knife, after the manner of the former Operation.

IV. If the Eyelids should adhere to the Coats, by reason of Ulcers ill cured,
etc. they are carefully to be divided with the like Incision-Knife, rather
leaving some of the Eyelid on the Coat of the Eye, then cut the Tunicle, for
that what remains may be taken off afterward.

V. This done, Rose Water and Whites of Eggs, beat them together, and dip
Pledgets therein, which apply, to hinder growing together again: Then let the
Sick be often moving their Eyelids, and wash often with our Aqua Regulata, or
Aqua Ophthalmica.

VI. Or, you may wash with this; Rhenish-wine, Red-wine, Damask-Rose-water a.
iij. Tutid prepared iij. Myrrh in powder ij. Scammony in powder i. boil till a
third part is wasted; strain, and hang in a Nodule, Verdigrise, Camphir a. i.
digest a Week-strain again, and keep it for use.

II. Orifice of the Ears closed.
VII. The Passages of the Ears may be stopped, either visible, or scarce so: If
they be visible, they may easily be divided, and after Cicatrized with fit
Medicines, done round about a Pipe, which may be put into the Ear.

VIII. If they be so deep, as that they are scarcely to be seen, it is
dangerous so to open them; and they are rather to be eaten away with eroding
Medicines, but you ought to apply them with that Caution, as to save harmless
the Drum of the Ear.

III. The Nostrils closed.
IX. They may be closed up, either almost, or altogether. They are both cured
one and the same way; first open them with an Incision-Knife, and then dilate
them with prepared Elder Pith, or Puff-balls, or Sponge prepared, etc. which
done, put up a hollow Pipe, anointed with Vnguentum Diapompholigos.

IV. The Mouth closed.
X. It is either almost closed, or quite closed; in both Cases it is to be
opened with an Incision-Knife, then dressed with Balsam de Chili, Peru, or
Tolu, applied upon dry Lint, and so gently bound up; which will heal them at
one Intention.

V. The Praeputium closed.
XI. Whether it be from ill Conformation, or Ulcers, closed at the end, or
sticking to the Glans; it is first to be divided with a crooked Incision-Knife;
after which, a thin plate of Lead is to be put between, sprinkled with Ceruse,
Litharge, or burnt Lead in fine Powder.

XII. The first dressing may be Lint dipped in Whites of Eggs; afterward for
three or four days, with some digestive Mixture; as this, Honey, Turpentine a.
ss. Yolk of one Egg, mix them together by grinding; lastly, apply the Lead,
Ceruse, etc. to dry and heal.

VI. The Glans not perforated.
XIII. It is to be carefully opened with a Lancet, after which you may put a
small leaden Pipe dressed with some fit Balsam or Ointment into it, where it is
to be kept till it is well.

XIV. If it be not rightly perforated, having a small hole near the Fraenum
only, so as that neither the Urine nor Semen, can pass directly out, whereby
Procreation may be hindered: In this case, you are to extend the Praeputium with
the left hand, and divide the Glans to the hole, using a Pipe as before.

XV. If in Infants the Orifice be too little, make use of Elder Pith
compressed, anointing it with Vng. Rosatum, not using Incision, as in the
former.

VII. The Anus in Infants not Perforated.
XVI. This may either be in part, a small hole remaining, or else closed all
together: If in part, it is carefully to be opened with a Lancet and Scissars,
on both sides; after which you may do it with Tents or Pledgets dipped in
Vnguentum Tutiae, or any other drying Ointment, to prevent Bleeding: Thus it
will be cured in a few Days, without a Leaden Pipe.

XVII. But if it be wholly shut, and the end of the Intestinum Rectum is
covered with a Membrane; if it be thin, it may sometimes be opened with the
Fingers; but if thick, with a Lancet, or small Incision-Knife, longways,
(taking great care of the Sphincter Muscle) and then kept open with a small
Leaden Pipe, and drying Unguents; or an Elder Pith dressed with the same.

VIII. Pudenda Virginum closed.
XVIII. This is many times external, wherein the Vulva is quite closed with a
preternatural Membrane, or only a very small hole left: And this is either
naturally so from the Birth, or joined together upon an ill affected Ulcer:
These you must open long-ways with a sharp Incision-Knife, in part wound about
with Linen Rags, and then the Wound is to be cured the common way.

XIX. Sometimes a preternatural Caruncle shuts the Os Vulvae; here you must
have a Speculum Matrices; and in the latter end of the Cure, a small Pipe,
perforated throughout, in length, to help the Cicatrizing.

XX. If there be a Membranous Coalition of the four Carneous Monticuli, whereby
the fore Parts of the Vulva are shut up, sometimes very close; it may easily be
perceived by the Eye or Touch. Let the Legs be held a sunder upwards, then make
Incision, beginning from beneath, not making the opening too small, lest in
time it should hinder delivery, (yet carefully taking heed not to hurt the
Bladder) then dress the Wound with thick flat Pledgets (that cannot easily fall
out) dipped in cooling and drying Ointments; and so managed, that what has been
parted, may not grow together again.

IX. The Vagina closed.
XXI. This may be closed either in part, or wholly; if in part, whether
naturally, or through an Ulcer, it may be either in the beginning, or the
middle, a hole being in the midst to discharge the Menses, and for admission of
Seed.

XXII. If it be wholly closed, it is in many caused through hard Labor; in
which it may be hurt, inflamed, and made raw, and by that means grow together:
Sometimes it is also caused by some fleshy Excrescence, arising in the
French Pox, or otherwise.

XXIII. The Signs. It may easily be known by feeling of a skilful Chirurgian or
Midwife; the Husband also, by his not being able to enter. The Patient also
complains of great Pain in the lower Ventricle and Loins, on that side where
the broad Ligaments are connected with the Os Ilium. The Color is pale and
unhealthful; and at the New Moon they are apt to Vomit Phlegm mixed with Blood,
because they want their Menses.

XXIV. The Cure. The Patient is to be laid on her Back, with her Head low, her
Loins raised with Cushions or Bolsters, her Knees high, and separated wide
asunder; then with the Hands, the Vulva being kept open, a crooked
Incision-Knife is to be conveyed to the upper part of the Membrane, cutting it
through downwards toward the Intestinum Rectum, going in a direct Line, and
shunning the other way, for fear of hurting the Bladder.

XXV. Being thus opened, there is to be put up a Pessary, made of a dry Sponge,
and moistened with Oil of Eggs, Earthworms, or Nervinum, mixed with Oil of
Mastich.

XXVI. The Place being widened with the Sponge, you may then put in a Pessary
of Wax, moistened with Oil of Eggs, applying a thick Bolster and Bandage, not to
be removed, but upon making Water, or to use an Injection to cleanse the Part
of the Pus, which is so long to be used, till it is perfectly healed. The
Pessary may also be made hollow like a Pipe, and of Silver or Lead, as you see
occasion.

XXVII. Or the Woman being put into a due posture, the part may be dilated with
the Speculum Vaginae, or Matricis, and so be divided with a crooked
Incision-knife tied to the Forefinger, cutting from the upper part downwards,
etc. as before directed.

X. The Inward Orifice of the Womb closed.
XXVIII. It may be so closed as not to admit of a small Probe, caused through
cold Humors, Seed, or Menses long kept, whereby when they are heaped upon it,
it becomes so swelled, as to close the Mouth thereof: In some the Mouth of the
Womb is hard, from Wind, and Humors heaped up therein, which cause great pain
both in the Belly and sides thereof.

XXIX. If it be very hard, tapering out, and sunk down, so that little good can
be done by Emollient and Discussive Fomentations and Ointments, it is then to be
enlarged with Gentian Root, or prepared Sponge, by which it may be widened, and
come to its due purgation.

XXX. Being thus widened, there may easily be put in an Instrument of Silver or
Ivory, after the fashion of a Screw, the one end thicker than the other, and
within hollow, through which the Menses may flow, being assisted by Coughing,
Sneezing, Laughing, or some other violent Motion.

XXXI. This may be carried without any trouble or inconveniency, and it is
better than Incision, which is certainly dangerous, though sometimes (all other
means failing) it may be attempted: But if there is an insensibility in the
part, or no sharp pain, or there is a thin, fluid, or stinking, black Matter,
the affect is Incurable.

CHAP. XVIII. OPENING of APOSTEMS.
I. AN Abscess or Apostem, is a Tumer containing a Matter cast forth by Nature
for its relief, and gathered together into one place, which if Nature her self
perfects not, is brought to suppuration or ripeness by Art, except in some
cases, wherein we dare not stay for a perfect Maturation; as, 1. When the
Matter is very sharp or malign, so as it may corrupt the neighboring Parts, as
Nerves, Tendons, Bones. 2. When it may affect a more noble Part. 3. When it is
in the Joints. 4. When cast forth by a Crisis.

II. Before you come to the Work it self, you must consider of the Instrument
with which it is to be done: Some open it with a Lancet or Incision-knife,
others with a Potential Cautery.

III. If with the Lancet or Incision-knife, the Apertion is made as l^ng, and
as deep as you think fit, (yet you are not to thrust the Lancet in too deep,
nor farther into the Cavity than to the Matter,) and the undigested Matter
remaining will be sooner Concocted by Application of fit Medicines, given both
Internally, and applied Externally; nor will there be any long Gleet, which if
it happens, is certainly the fault of the Chirurgian.

IV. First, consider whether the Matter be contained in its own proper Cistis
or Tunicle, or not. If it be in a Tunicle, and be small, make the Incision
long-ways; and as soon as you perceive the Cistis, draw the Incision-knife a
little back, and turn the point upwards, making your opening through the Skin so
big as may afford the Pus a free vent. If it be big, make a double Incision;
viz. Cross-ways; but beware of touching the Cistis, lest you have a foetid, and
almost incurable Ulceration.

V. The Apertion being made wide enough, press out with your Fingers the whole
Vesicle, or Body of the Apostem, which seldom or never sticks to the Skin, and
will easily come forth: but have a care, that not the least particle of the Bag
remain behind, lest it gather again.

VI. Those Apostems which happen behind the Ears, in the Neck, Arm-holes, or in
the Groin, spring from Indurated Glandules, repleat with a praeternatural
Humor, comprehended in their own Membranes, which being touched either with
Instrument or Caustic Medicines, there follows a Gleet of the contained
Humor, which will continue till the whole Glandule and Tunicle are both
consumed, and it may be also in the mean season corrupt some of the adjacent
Parts.

VII. If it be without a Tunicle, then make the Apertion in the right Line,
observing the Fibers of the Muscles: In the head, according to the position of
the Hair, long-ways: In the Eyelids transverse: In the Nose, Neck, Breast,
Back, Arms, Feet, Joints, long-ways: In the midst of the Belly, long-ways, in
the Sides a little slanting; in the Groins transverse, but not very deep, by
reason of the subjacent Seminary Vessels.

VIII. And always take heed, lest you touch any great Vein, Artery or Nerve,
though you cut the Fibers across, lest from a lesser evil you create a greater.

IX. The place of opening is the highest and softest part of the Apostem, and
if possible, in the depending place thereof, that the Pus or Matter may the
more easily be discharged: To which purpose, you are with a Tent to keep it
open, till the Part being wholly cleansed, may return to its prestine Health.

X. Some open it with a Lancet, others with a potential Cautery made of
Quicklime, and Holland, or black Soap. The Cautery is best for Timorous
People, and is without great pain (unless very Corrosive) working deep enough
into the Flesh.

XI. But in a Contained Abscess, it may eat too deep, and according to the
place, do much Mischief; besides which, it commonly spreads it self farther
than it should, notwithstanding the defensative. And it is found by Experience,
that in some it has eaten through the Skin and Muscles, and in Tumors of the
Belly, eaten to the very Cavity; in others wounded the Processes of the
Peritonaeum, together with the seminal Vessels therein.

XII. It is also some Hours in doing the operation, and it may be at last (the
Escar not falling presently) you must be forced to make use of the Lancet or
Incision-knife; whereas with the Lancet or Incision-knife the work is, 1.
Safely. 2. Speedily. And, 3. Without much pain performed, by which the Patient
has immediate Relief.

CHAP. XIX. OPENING of the SKIN.
I. THere are many kinds or ways of opening the Skin, according to the number
of the Intentions for which it is done, of which these are chief. 1.
Vesicatories. 2. Making Issues. 3. Applying the Seton. 4. Applying of Leeches.
5. Cupping-glasses. 6. Scarification. 7. Ustion or Burning, which is the
Application of the Actual Cautery. 8. Haemorrhoids. 9. Varix.

I. Vesicatories, or Blistering.
II. It is done by Application of the common Epispastick or Vesicatory of the
Shops, Examples enough of which you may find in Our Pharmacopoeia's, Doron,
Seplasium, and other Books. The Epispastick is spread upon Leather, and laid on
generally at going to sleep, that the Patient by sleeping may be the less
sensible of the pain: and it is continued on, sometimes 8, 10, 12 or 14 Hours,
according to the Place and Nature of the Part it is applied to.

III. At the time appointed, it is taken off, the Blister clipped, and the Water
let out; at which time some Artists take off the Skin wholly, but others as
Learned and Experienced in their Faculty, let it lie on, over which they lay a
Melilot Emplaster which generally (better and more easily) pulls it off; or for
want thereof, the smooth side of a Colewort Leaf, (which is said to be drawing,
the contrary side drying and healing:) And with this Emplaster or Leaves it is
dressed first twice a day, till the chief of the running is over; after once a
day, till it is whole.

IV. As for taking off the Skin when the Blister is drawn, they say they do it
that the Sore might run the more plentifully, freely, and longer: To which we
answer, 1. That the taking off the Skin puts the Patient to a vast deal of pain
more, than the letting it lie on. 2. That we have tried by many Experiments,
that by Application of the Emplaster or Colewort Leaves, we have found the
running as free and plentiful as by the former way of taking the Skin off, and
sometimes the running to last much longer. 3. That the pulling off the Skin by
means of the Emplaster or the Leaves, is not the tenth part of the pain, which
that is, that is taken off by the Hands at time of drawing; for all which
reasons that way is to be chosen, which being as advantageous to the Patients
as any, puts them to the least pain.

V. The Uses of Blistering are manifold, (though we exclude their vulgar use in
all sorts of Fevers, which we think not much less pernicious than the
exhibition of Poison:) 1. Where any vehement pain is settled in any Part. 2.
Where any Tumor is fixed that cannot be otherwise moved. 3. For Derivation,
where there is a Flux of Humors, that can no otherwise be mastered: As a Rheum
falling upon the Eyes or Teeth; a Catarrh upon the Palate; a defluxion upon any
particular Joint, etc.

VI. The place of their Application is generally, 1. For the removing of Pain,
upon the very place pained, for if it be but two or three Inches, above, below,
or on either side, I have experimentally found, that it does no good at all,
whereas applied upon the very place, it generally does the work effectually. 2.
Upon the very place of the Tumor afflicting. 3. If for Derivation, upon those
parts which will easily derive from the Parts affected, as upon the Nape of the
Neck, for a Rheum in the Eyes, etc.

VII. How often they are to be applied. Many times the Disease is inveterate,
and the Humor malign and stubborn, and it often falls out, that at once or
twice blistering the Cure cannot be done; and if any part of the malign Humor
is left behind, it is as good as doing nothing, for that will quickly increase
and grow as bad again; for this cause they must be so often applied till the
Cause is wholly removed, which in some may be done at the first time, in others
at the second, in others at the third or fourth Application; and in some cases
they may be applied five or six times.

VIII. If any shall object, that by this often Application, a Humor may
possibly be drawn into a Part; we affirm from a large Experimental Knowledge
the contrary: For a Vesicatory is so far from drawing an Humor into a Part,
that it always draws the Humor out; for by its potency, and speedy way of
Action, it draws with that violence, that it breaks, and as it were, disjoints
the Humor, and so takes it forth; and not as other lazy Attractives, which by
long lying, draw and affix Humors in a Part, without drawing them out at all.

IX. As to their use in Fevers, we have very much to say against them; but
because we design brevity in this work, shall refer it to another place, and in
part mind you of what we have said already on this Subject, Chap. 12. Sect. 21.
aforegoing.

X. The danger and ill effects of Vesicatories, are Heat and Scalding of the
Water, difficulty of Pissing, and sometimes Pissing of Blood. This is remedied
by plentifully drinking an Emulsion of the four cold Seeds; or Barley Water
mixed with Milk. Thus, hull'd Barley viij. Water three Pints or more, boil, and
cast away the first Water; add two Quarts more, and boil till the Barley is
broken, adding a double quantity of Milk; strain, and sweeten it a little with
fine Sugar, of which let the Patient drink liberally.

II. Fontanels, or Issues.
XI. An Issue is a little Ulcer made by Art, in a sound part of the Body, by a
red hot Iron, Lancet, Scissars, or corrosive Medicine, to evacuate superfluous
Humors, and so either to Prevent, or Cure Diseases.

XII. Let them be made between the Muscles, not in the beginning, middle, nor
end of a Muscle: If you make an Issue in the Head, let it be in the middle of
the Coronal Suture: In the Neck, between the Shoulders: If on the Arm, about
the middle space between the Shoulder and Elbow, toward the outside.

XIII. If on the Thighs, let it be on the inside, two or three Fingers breadth
above the Knee; if on the Leg, as much below the Knee.

XIV. The way of doing of it, is by Incision, Caustic, or Burning. 1. By
Incision. Take up the Skin on both sides, either with a pair of Forceps, or
your Hand; which done, divide it in the place you intend, (first marked with
Ink) with a Lancet, Incision-knife, or a pair of Scissars.

XV. 2. By Caustic. The place being first marked with Ink, apply a Plaster,
with a hole in the middle over it, in which hole put the Caustic, over the
place marked; over which lay another Plaster: After three or four Hours take
off the Emplasters and Causticks, and apply on the Escar a Plaster of Diapalma,
dressing it twice a day, that it may the sooner separate.

XVI. For a Caustic, you may use Lapis Infernalis ( in our Pharmac.
Londinensis, Lib. 3. Cap. 11. Sect. 102.) or that made of Silver (at Sect. 20.
Cap. 2. Lib. 3. of the said Book.)

XVII. 3. By Burning. Apply the Cautery red hot, yet so, as that the Skin be
not wholly penetrated, lest you hurt too much the subjacent Muscle; after
remove the Escar, as before. The Escar being fallen, take little hard Dossels
made of Lint, upon which spread some detersive Medicine, and press them into
the Ulcer, till they have made some Impression, then put into the hole a little
Ball of Wood, Wax, Elder pith, Silver, or a Pea, etc. which are often to be
taken out, and renewed continually, till the Disease be Cured, or weakness
hinder, applying over only green Oiled Cloth.

XVIII. If the Issue should grow up, make Balls of Gentian, Hermodact, Orrice,
etc. so may you remove the proud Flesh: A Ball made with Precipitate and white
Wax, will keep it open.

XIX. If hot scalding Humors flow, apply to it Unguentum Album Camphoratum,
mixed with an equal quantity of Populneum: If it smells ill, wash it often with
generous Canary, mixed with an equal quantity of Rhenish Wine.

III. The Seton, in the Nape of the Neck.
XX. The Seton is no more but one of the kinds of Issues, made after another
manner, and chiefly applicable to the Nape of the Neck; though it may be made in
other places too.

XXI. A Seton is much a greater trouble than an Issue; yet this advantage
arises from it, that what evils two Issues will not remove, is oftentimes done
by one Seton.

XXII. It is made in many places; as, Arms, Legs, Breast, Ears, Region of the
Liver, Spleen, Navel, Scrotum, etc. But the chief place is the Neck, between
the first and second Vertebra, or second and third, or which is best, between
the third and fourth.

XXIII. Take up the Skin, with a perforated pair of Forceps, nip it pretty hard
to stupifie it. Through the perforations of the Forceps and Skin, pass a Needle
red hot, after which, with another Needle, bring through the silken String or
Cord.

XXIV. The first day to ease pain, apply to the part, Lint dipped in Whites of
Eggs and Rose Water mixed together, then procure digestion with convenient
Medicines; afterward let the String be drawn every day sometimes to this side,
sometimes to that, that the mattery part may hang out of the Wound: The Ulcer
is thus to be kept open, as long as need requires.

XXV. But Barbett tells us, it may be much easier, and better performed thus.
Let the Artist take up the Skin in one Hand, and his Servant with another; and
in the place he intends (first marked with Ink) let him pass it through, with a
sharp-pointed Needle, not made hot, to which let be first tied a convenient
Cord of Silk or Thread, rubbed over with Wax.

XXVI. This Operation evacuates from the Head, Eyes, Nose, Teeth, and causes
derivation from the Mouth, Breast, Spinal Marrow, and Joints; it Cures Headachs,
Megrims, Vertigo's, Fistula Lachrymalis, Hydrocephalus, etc. In Scrotum, Hernia
aquosa, etc.

IV. Application of Leeches.
XXVII. Leeches are said to be more advantageous than Scarification, and safer
than Bleeding, because they draw forth the Extravased Blood, which is in the
Flesh; and they may with benefit be applied, as well in weak as strong Bodies,
they drawing chiefly from the Cutaneous Parts, by which means they often Cure
Cuticular Diseases.

XXVIII. Leeches are applied to the Veins of the Arms and Legs, to
Haemorrhoids, Vulva, Gums, Lips, Nose, Ulcers, after scarifying in Gangrenes,
Herpes, etc. and that in general Evacuations of the whole Body.

XXIX. When you apply them, make the place clean with Milk and Sugar, rubbing
it till it grows red; then hold them near the Head in a Rag, and so apply them
to the place, it being first moistened with Pigeons Blood.

XXX. If you would have them fall off before they have done, cast Salt on them:
If you would have them suck longer than full, cut off their Tails.

XXXI. Choose them in clear Water, sandy and gravelly Ponds, whose Heads are
little, Bodies small, Bellies red and round, and Backs streaked like Threads of
Gold. They ought to be kept twelve days at least before they are used.

XXXII. You may keep them a Year in Water with a few Crumbs of Bread, changing
the Water once in four days.

XXXIII. Those in muddy, filthy and stinking Ponds, with great Heads, greenish
color, and blew streaks on the Back, are poisonous and dangerous, exciting
Venomous Tumors, Inflammation, Ulcers, Convulsions, and sometimes Death.

XXXIV. They are often used in Melancholy Diseases, Leprosy, Ringworms,
repletion of malign Matter, Pleurisies, Inflammation of the Lungs, Phagedena,
Furunculus, Vertigo, Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Megrim, old Headachs, Diseases of the
Eyes, and many other desperate Diseases.

XXXV. However, because some Leeches may be Venomous, and it is hard to discern
which are not so, it will be good after Application, and that they are fallen
off, to foment the Part well with Red or Claret Wine, as hot as it can well be
endured, by which means, the Apertions will not only bleed the better, and the
Effects of their Application be the more substantial; but the Venom they may
have left behind, (if any be) will wholly be extracted or drawn forth.

V. Applying of Cupping-glasses.
XXXVI. They are applied either without Scarification, or with Scarification.
The Modus of Application, is either to stick dried Flax with soft Wax to the
bottom within the Cup, or put in loose, after set it on Fire, and presently
clap it on. Some heat them very hot, in hot Water. Others stick in a little bit
of Wax-candle lighted, and so apply them.

XXXVII. They are made of differing matters, and of various forms: Some are to
apply and suck up withal, others are Blind.

XXXVIII. If you do it with Scarification, having applied them as before, and
taken them off, then Scarifie the part, which is to be done either
superficially or profound, as the Nature and Constitution of the same will
permit. The best time of Application is in the Full of the Moon (not in the
New) about Two or Three in the Afternoon; and they may continue on about half
an Hour.

XXXIX. They are used to draw the Morbifick Matter out of a Part wherein it is:
and to draw deep Apostems more outward; as also Matter in the more deep or
noble Parts, to Parts more superficial and less noble.

XL. They are of Use also to stop Gangrenes, to warm Parts that are cold, by
drawing Blood and Spirits into them; to reduce Parts elapsed, to draw out
Flatulencies and thin Matter, and to ease Pains.

XLI. To ease Pains in the Head, or any other Part, they are to be applied upon
the very spot or place pained: To the Mold of the Head to stop Catarrhs, draw
up the Uvula, etc.

XLII. To the Neck, for the Palsy, Numbness, Weakness in the Limbs: To the
Scapulae, for the Apoplexy, and all sorts of sleepy Diseases, and Diseases of
the Head from cold: To the Nape of the Neck, for the Quinsie.

XLIII. To the Navel, in the Procedentia Vteri, Wind Colic: To the Flanks, for
Wind in the Spleen: To the Vreters, to attract the Stone and Gravel into the
Bladder.

XLIV. To the Ribs, for reducing them: To the Orifices of Ulcers, and the Ears,
to draw things out of them: To the Bitings of Venomous Creatures, to draw out
their Venom and Poison.

XLV. To the midst of the Shoulders, for a Cough, difficulty of Breathing,
Diseases of the Breast, Pleurisies, etc. To the sides of the Neck and Chin, in
Diseases of the Mouth, Gums, Teeth: On the Region of the Reins, for Apostems of
those Parts, and of the Liver.

XLVI. To the Arms, Thighs, Legs, etc. for pains in them: To the Os Sacrum, for
Fistula's, Haemorrhoids Ficus, etc. To the Thighs, Legs, and Ancles, for the
Strangury, pain of the Womb, Reins, Bladder.

VI. Scarification.
XLVII. Scarification is performed with a Lancet or Incision-knife: the
Ancients have done it alone, without Cups, the Moderns use it not without
Cupping.

XLVIII. It is intended either for Revulsion or Evacuation, sometimes of the
whole Body, sometimes only of particular Parts.

XLIX. It has been used in Acute, Putrid, Malign and Pestilential Fevers,
chiefly in Children, and that with great success; in Apoplexies, Frensies, and
all Affects of the Senses.

L. In Affects of the Gums, all outward Pains, Ulcers, Ecchymosis or Gangrene,
where it was either present, or might be feared; in which Case it might be said
to be either Therapeutick, or Prophylactick.

LI. It Is performed sometimes very superficially, not passing he depth of the
Skin, sometimes more deep in the Flesh; and is best done with a Lancet fixed to
a Spring, which being done momentarily, the Patient is not so fearful, nor yet
so sensible of the pain.

VII. Vstion, or Burning.
LII. This is of Use, when neither Medicine nor Knife will bring Relief, as
well in the soft, as the hard Parts; but in all sorts of Burning, great care is
to be taken, that the adjacent Parts be not hurt; to prevent which you must
defend them with Lint, cold Iron, and other Defensatives.

LIII. It is performed either with actual or potential Cauteries. The Actual
are the better and most certain, the Potential are more acceptable, because of
Peoples fearfulness.

LIVE. The Actual is done with a cauterising Iron, (made at the end in form like
a Button) the Potential with Lapis Inferrnalis, and other Caustic Medicaments.

LV. The Intention is, 1. For Making Issues. 2. For Application of the Seton.
3. To Stop Bleeding after Amputation.

LVI. In removing of the Eschar, beware of using Oil alone, Butter or Grease,
for Barbett has observed, that they have occasioned a Gangrene; and therefore
he advises to Empl. Diapalma, or Lint wet in Wine, which will be sufficient.

LVII. Vstion is called the Actual Cautery, and has its Uses as before
specified; but Art has found out better, and more safe means, which I should
advise the Young Chirurgian with all Industry to pursue.

VIII. Hemorrhoids.
LVIII They are either External, which being opened, diminishes the Plethora of
the Part, and are of good Effect in Diseases of the internal Parts, etc. Or
Internal.

LIX. Hemorrhoids are opened by Frictions, Fig Leaves, course Cloths, Juice of
Onions, etc. If outward; but by sharp Clysters and Suppositories, etc. if
inward or blind; being opened, they help Diseases of the Bowels, Womb, Reins,
Bladder, Joints, Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, etc.

LX. Being suppressed, they are tumified and painful, of various Magnitudes and
Colors, and in some not very much unlike a small bunch of Grapes; whence they
have various Names.

LXI. If they swell and inflame, they are in danger to Gangrene; to prevent
which, you must immediately apply Leeches: And, if the Tumor be very great,
you must apply many Leeches, by which a great quantity of Blood is to be drawn
away; after the removing of the Leeches, to prevent Fistulating, you must
foment for an hour or more with hot Red Wine.

LXII. If they suppurate and open, they may possibly leave a Fistula in Ano,
which is many times incurable, especially without cutting: Juice of Mullein,
Oil of Ben, Oil of Roses a. ss. Yolk of Eggs No i. Honey, Turpentine a. ij.
beat them well together, and keep it for use; applying it with Lint or Linen
Cloth, and give every day Electuarium Lenitivum.

IX. The Opening of Varix.
LXIII. It is done by Incision all along the Tumor, having first tied both
ends: others, having found out the extent of it, divide the Skin at both ends,
where having taken up the Varix, and tied it, they make Apertion in the middle,
and then heal it as an ordinary Wound.

LXIV. But Scultetus says, both ways may prove unsuccessful, and therefore
advises rather to the Application of Topical Remedies.

CHAP. XX. DIVIDING of Closed PARTS.
I. Hydatis, a fat Substance under the Skin of the Upper Eyelid.
I. IF it proceeds from serous Humors, the Eyes look red, and flow with Tears,
not being able to endure the Light. If it be old, and included in a Cistis,
divide the Skin, and take it out; on which apply Whites of Eggs beat with
Rose Water.

II. If it be recent, fasting Spittle may remove it, or it may be fomented with
a Decoction of Wormwood and Camomil Flowers; after which apply Empl. de Ranis
cum Mercurio, or Diachylum with Gums, into which a little Sal Armoniack is put.

II. Hordeolum, Tumor like a Barley Corn.
III. It arises from thick Phlegmatic Humors mixed with Blood; and is to be
opened on the Inside of the Eyelid, pressing out the Matter within; but some
open it on the outside; sometimes it is taken away by Application of a Plaster
of Sagapenum.

III. Grando, the little round moveable Swelling.
IV. It arises on the Eyelid, from a hard stony Matter: It is opened with a
Lancet, and removed with its Cistis: Some mollify and dissolve it, by applying
Empl. de Galbano Crocatum Mynsichti; or a Plaster of Ammoniacum, or de Ranis
cum Mercurio.

IV. Lagophthalmos, when the upper Eyelid covers not the Eye.
V. It may be caused either Internally, by ill Conformation; or Externally, by
Wounds, Burns, etc. If by the last ways, it is incurable.

VI. If by the former, divide the Skin of the Eyelid like a half Moon, with
the Horns in this manner; keeping the Edge of the Incision open, and cure it as
a green Wound; but in Cutting, beware of the Gristle.

VII. Others use the Dry Stitch, with Emplastrum Glutinos. laying on a Plaster
on the Eyelid; and another pretty low on the Cheek, that the Indents of each
may answer; and then stitch them together, by which the Eyelid will be drawn
down to cover the Eye.

V. Ectropion, the lower Eyelid fallen down.
VIII. If it be so fallen down as it cannot be shut (which often happens to
Aged People) it is curred by the Dry Stitch, as the former, only the one
Plaster is there to be laid upon the lower Lid, and the other above the
Eyebrows.

IX. The same observe if the upper Eyelid be relaxed, so that it keeps shut,
and cannot lift it self up.

X. This Emplastrum Glutinosum is thus made: Dragonsblood, Frankincense,
Sarcocol, Mastich, a. ij. make a Powder, which mix well with Whites of Eggs, to
the thickness of Honey, as Scultetus has taught.

VI. Hypopion, Matter between the Horny and Grapy Coat.
XI. It arises either from Internal or External Causes, as Inflammations,
Blows, Bruises, etc. After Universals premised, use Cupping, with
Scarification, Digestives, and Anodyn Collyriums.

XII. When it is come to Matter, you must open the Cornea at the Iris; then
press out the Quitter, and cleanse the Ulcer with Hydromel, or some such like.

VII. Tongue tied.
XIII. Some Children are born Tongue-tied, whereby they are deprived, first of
Sucking, then of Speaking: This is remedied by cutting the String of the Tongue
transverse, with a pair Scissars, and besmearing it afterward with Honey of
Roses, three or four times a day.

XIV. In Cutting, the neighboring Parts and Veins must be carefully shunned;
for sometimes the Nerve of the sixth Pair, or its Branches, run so near the
string, that a deep Incision may easily do much hurt, and bring upon the
Patient sad Accidents.

XV. But there is not one Child of an hundred, scarcely of two hundred, which
needs this manual Operation: And those Midwives are Ignorant, who in all
newborn Children forthwith dilacerate this Fraenum or String, whereby the Parts
being hurt, evil Symptoms succeed, and sometimes death.

VIII. Cutting the Gums of Infants.
XVI. The Gums in Infants are sometimes long in Cutting, whereby Death
oftentimes ensues: if extremity urge, make a gentle Apertion with your
Incision-Knife; so may you happily save the Life of a Child, which otherwise
would be lost.

IX. Growing together of the Fingers and Toes.
XVII. If the Fingers and Toes grow together, whether Naturally, or by
Accident, you must divide them with an Incision-Knife, (unless conjoined by
Nerves, Tendons, or Arteries) then strew them with some Astringent Powder,
laying over Cloths dipped in the white of an Egg, beaten with Rose Water and Oil
of Earthworms, after which, perform the Cure, as in other Wounds.

XVIII. Where note, that in this and in all such like Operations, use
preparatively, general Evacuations.

X. Cutting of a Wry Neck.
This, though it is not a closed Part, yet is a contracted Part, and may well
enough have place in this Chapter.

XIX. This Operation is performed after two manners: The first is done by the
Hook, the other without it.

XX. The Wry Neck is caused from the Contraction of one of the Muscles of the
lower Jaw, called Musculus Latus, or Quadratus, which arises from the upper
part of the Sternum, Clavicula, and Acromium, and is inserted into the inferior
Jaw, and firmly fixed in the middle of the Chin.

XXI. But where is this Muscle is very broad, so, seldom or never is it
contracted in its whole Latitude, but sometimes more forward, sometimes more
backward, and sometimes more laterally, and accordingly the Seat of the Chord
appears.

XXII. Adjacent to this Chord, are the Jugular Veins, the Arteriae Musculae,
the Recurrent Nerves, and Nerves of the hindermost Branch of the seventh Pair
arising from the Neck.

XXIII. These in Cutting, ought all (if possible) to be avoided: chiefly the
Jugular Veins, because of the mighty Flux of Blood, endangering the Patients
Life: Also the Recurrent Nerves (which spring from the external Branch of the
Par Vagum;) for that if they be wounded, or cut asunder, the Voice is lost, and
the Creature becomes dumb.

XXIV. Now this Contraction seems for the most part to be in the Tendons of the
Quadratus, chiefly where it is joined to the Clavicula; but, by reason of the
exceeding shortning thereof, the Muscle (in length) seems to be a continued
Chord.

XXV. This Chord in many Persons (especially if grown into Years) becomes not
only very hard, but perfectly Cartilaginous or Gristly: So that in Cutting, its
hardness has caused a kind of cracking noise.

XXVI. The Cutting of a Wry Neck by the Hook. You must carefully avoid all the
before-named Vessels, and make a Transverse Apertion of the Skin over the
Chord, about an Inch or somewhat more on each side; then with a Hook (made of
Steel for this purpose) being put under the said Chord, you must gently pull
the contracted part forth, which must immediately be cut completely through by
an Incision-Knife, advising the Patient the while to hold his Neck up.

XXVII. This done, you must heal it as a Green-wound, committing withal the
Sick to his Bed. This is the old Butcherly way, which puts the Patient to great
pain and danger; and withal, a long Cure.

XXVIII. The Cutting of a Wry Neck, by a new way, without the Hook. Here you
must strongly take hold of the Chord with your Thumb and Forefinger, with
which feeling for the Vessels (chiefly the Jugular Vein, whose Approximate is
the Recurrent Nerve) you must carefully thrust it by, Then having fast hold of
the Chord with your Thumb and Finger, you must warily thrust in your
Incision-Knife, as it were beyond the Chord, and just above your Fingers; then
making the Patient hold up his Head, the Chord will be a cut asunder, the
outward Skin remaining whole; thus will the work be done, with no more but a
prick appearing outwardly, and the Wound will be well in about twenty four
hours, without any effusion of Blood.

CHAP. XXI. DIVIDING of BONES.
I. Trepaning, or Perforation.
I. WHere it is needful to apply the Trepan, it ought to be done as soon as
possibly it may; viz. on the third, fourth, or fifth day, lest the putrefying
Blood should cause greater Evils, but to know whether it be needful to be
applied or not, is our first enquiry, because it is an Operation of great
danger.

II. It is of great Use when the Bones are very foul; but of greatest use where
ill Symptoms follow a Fissure, or Fracture of the Skull, or a Contusion.

III. Yet a Fissure, or a Fracture, simply considered, require not the Trepan,
as an Instrument without which they cannot be Cured: and a slight Contusion
does not always cause such dangerous Symptoms as that Operation of Trepaning
does; a small quantity of extravasated Blood, being oftentimes in strong People
discussed by the strength of Nature it self.

IV. Now as Blood is oftener extravasated between the Dura Matter, and the Pia
Matter, than in other places; so there the Trepan can do but little good; but in
this Case Barbett would advise to divide the Dura Matter; for that Experience
has evinced, that by the help of Art, an Incision, yea a Gangrene of the Part
it self has been Cured.

V. So that for the most part, the Trepan is required but in three cases; 1.
Where the loose pieces of the Bones prick and wound the Meninges. The signs are
a continual pricking pain, from the very moment of hurt (if the Sick be
sensible, if not, he is always feeling the Part affected with his Hands:) There
are likewise Contortions of the Membranes of the Eyes, and Convulsions of the
Limbs; to which add, the Quality of the Instrument making the Fracture.

VI. 2. Where the first Table is only depressed, but the second broken, there
being no way to remove the pieces how well soever separated, but by this of
Trepaning. The signs are Dimness of Sight, Giddiness, Fever, Vomiting, feeble
Pulse, especially about the Temples, and sometimes an Apoplexy.

VII. 3. Where there is an Extravasation of Blood, upon which follows
Putrefaction, and if not soon remedied, Death. The signs are a Continent Fever,
Head inflamed, Restlesness, unquiet Sleep, Watchings, Inflammations of the
Eyes, and a light Delirium: And if the Sick be Sanguine, there are also
Laughing, Talxing idly, Redness of the whole Face: If Choleric, Yellowness of
Face and Eyes, great Heat, Madness: If Phlegmatic, the Symptoms are less, but
accompanied with a Palsy or Apoplexy: If Melancholic, there are Fear,
Laughing, and Impertinent Talk.

VIII. The manner of Trepaning is thus; the Hair being shaved, let the Skin be
divided with a double Incision in form of a Cross, to the Pericranium, avoiding
with the greatest diligence always the Temporal Muscles, and Sutures of the
Head.

IX. This done, bind up the Wound, unless the Haemorrhage be small (which
sometimes is so violent as to hinder the Artist for some days from his Work) if
it will then give leave, divide the Pericranium from the Skull: After a few
Hours (the Skull being bare of the Pericranium) let the Patient be well placed,
his Head firmly held, and his Ears stopped with Cotton.

X. Then set on the Trepan with a Pin, which ought neither to be upon the
Fracture, nor the Sutures, (as some have done it) and holding the Instrument
with the Left Hand, with the right gently turn the Trepan about, till it has
taken good hold round; now take out the Pin, and set on the Trepan again
without it, moving it still about.

XI. If there be any filings of the Skull, take off the Trepan, and wipe them
away; the Trepan you may sometimes Oil, that it may go the easier: and
sometimes wet it with Water, that it may not grow hot.

XII. If Blood appears, be sure the Trepan has past the first Table, after
which you must have greater care, lest it unawares should slip in, and wound
the Meninges, from whence oftentimes follows sudden Death.

XIII. The Dura Matter invests the inside of the Skull, in the same manner as
the Pericranium does the outside, but is not so strongly joined to it, but that
a Fall or Blow may easily separate them.

XIV. The piece of Bone separated by the Trepan, beginning to be loose, with a
little Instrument, viz. the Levatory put in between the Skull and the Trepan,
free it from the hole, and take it out with a pair of Forceps.

XV. If any inequality yet remain in the inside of the inward Table, which may
hurt the Meninx, take it away with the Lenticular, or Scraper. The coagulated
Blood and Matter take away with Spunges, Lint, etc.

II. Scraping, Filing and Sawing.
XVI. Parts of the Bones are removed by Scraping, which is of use in Fissures
and foul Bones, as also in the Teeth, being crusted over with a Blackish,
Tartarous Substance. The Bones are to be scraped till you come to the sound
Part, which is white and solid; upon the Bone thus scraped, strew some Powder.

XVII. But before you go about this Operation, you must separate the
Pericranium and Periostium; for they are no ways to be touched with Instrument,
neither the Lips of the Wound.

XVIII. 2. By Filing. This is chiefly used to the Teeth, when they stand
unnaturally, either too high, or too far forth.

XIX. 3. By Sawing. It is done with a Saw in a mortified Part, of which we
shall speak when we come to Amputation.

III. EXAERESIS.
CHAP. XXII. BIRTH of a Living CHILD.
I. (...), Exaeresis; detractio, evulsio ( ab (...) evello, from (...) capio)
is that which teaches the way and manner of removing, or taking away things
hurtful; the chief of which are, 1. The Living Birth. 2. A Dead Child. 3. The
Secundine, or Afterbirth. 4. A Mola. 5. The Caesarian Birth. 6. The Stone in
the Bladder. 7. Teeth. 8. Bullets, Arrows, Thorns, Bones. 9. Urine stopped: Of
all which in their order; and first of the Birth of a Living Child.

II. The time of Travail being come, known by the breaking down of the Water,
unusual and strong Pains, and other Signs, the Woman is to be put into a fit
posture, some put them to a Stool, (made on purpose, but now of little use)
others put them on their Knees; some cause them to lean on Women's Shoulders;
some to sit on Women's Laps; and others to lie on a Bed or Pallet.

III. Let her not strive till strong Pains come upon her, then let the Midwife
put up her Hand, being first anointed with Oil of Roses, or rather with this.
Oil of Ben, or of Bitter Almonds j. Oil of Savin gut. 30. mix them. Then when
the Thro's come strong and quick, and Nature helps forward the Expulsion, with
her Hand, let her draw away the Child.

IV. But if she proves faint and weak, give her some Cordial Julep, as this;
Black Cherry Water iijss. strong Cinnamon Water j. Confectio Alkermes ss. Syrup
of Citron Peels vj. mix them. Or this: Black Cherry Water iv. Spirit of Saffron
and Angelica, a. ss. Syrup of Citron Peels vj. mix them, of which give now and
then a Spoonful, two, or three, as you see need.

V. If the Travail be slow, you may hasten it by giving this: Aqua Elementaria
(the making of which you will have in the Pharmacopoeia following) iv. Tincture
of Saffron j. Tinct. of Castor ss. Juice of Pennyroyal iij. mix, and sweeten
with double-refined Sugar; of this give her a Spoonful or two often.

VI. Or in place of the former, you may give this: Borax ij. Saffron, Salt of
Amber, a. ss. mix, being in Powder, give them in a Glass of White Wind. Or
this: Powder of the Livers and Galls of Eels j. Borax in fine Powder, Saffron,
a. ss. mix for a Dose, to be given as aforesaid. But before these things be
given, you must be sure that the Child is in a right posture.

VII. If the Head offers it self right, with its Face toward the Anus, receive
it, if otherwise, endeavor to place it right: then turn your Fingers round
about gently, thereby to make way for the Birth.

VIII. If it comes any other way, endeavor to gain the Feet, and bring it
away, which is then more certain than the Head; but be sure the Child's Face is
right.

IX. If the Birth be slow, give the aforesaid Medicines, or the Pulvis partum
provocans, with a Spoonful of Cinnamon Water, mixed with a little Spirit of
Castor.

X. If the Labor has been long and hard, give Sperma Ceti j. in a draught of
Julepum Rosatum, Morning and Night: being in Bed, keep her quiet for a Week.

XI. If she has Gripings, anoint the Lower Parts, and indeed all the Belly,
with Oil of Amber, applying warm Flannel very hot over the same, moistened with
the said Oil.

XII. If those Gripings be extreme, give the Liquor Vitae Anodynus, (see Our
Pharmacopoeia Londinensis, Lib. 4. Cap. 11. Sect. 11.) to a quarter of a
Spoonful, in a Glass of Sack.

XIII. I have often used the Oil of Amber, and this Liquor Vitae, in this Case,
and in all After-pains, with admirable success, yea when the hope of Life has
been past, which, as a grateful acknowledgment of the Goodness of God, I now
here publish.

XIV. The Child being Born, bring away the Afterbirth, (as we shall hereafter
teach) and in this, trust not to the string, but rather, by it being directed,
put up your Hand gently; and lay hold on the Secundine, and bring it away
gently; for doubtless the Hand may easily go up, where the Body of the Child
comes out.

XV. If she goes not to Stool after three days, give a Clyster made of near a
Pint of Milk, in which about two Spoonfuls of Sugar is dissolved and strained.

XVI. The Child is to have the Navel-string tied with a double twine-thred, a
full Inch from the Belly, some say two: About an Inch from which Ligature it is
to be cut off.

XVII. But if the Child be weak, first put the Blood back toward the Belly,
then tie it. After the Section, apply a double Linen Cloth dipped in Oil of
Roses.

XVIII. After which you may either cleanse the Child with dry Cloths, or wash
it with Water warmed, mixed with Red Wine.

XIX. If the Child has Fainting Fits, give it two, three, or four drops of
Blood squeezed out of the Navel-String, in a Spoonful of Breast Milk.

XX. Otherwise, let the first thing which is given to the Child, be Magistery,
or Powder of red Coral, gr. x. or Powder, or Magistery of Man's Skull, gr. x. or
Pulvis Epilepticum Mynsichti gr. x. mixed with as much white Sugar Candy, and so
exhibited with a little Breast Milk.

XXI. Authors say, these things prevent the Child for ever having Convulsion
Fits, or the Fallingsickness.

XXII. If the Child has Gripings, give fine Powder of Aniseeds to i. in some
Pap, etc. and increase it till the Child goes well to Stool; it has excellently
succeeded in Children, till they have been a quarter or half a Year old.

XXIII. If the Labor has been long and hard, give Irish Slate ad i. or Sperma
Ceti ad ij. in a draught of Camomil Possetdrink, which she may take Morning,
Noon and Night: Or this; Irish Sl^e, Sperma Ceti a. i. Borax, Saffron in Powder
a. ss. mix for a Dose.

CHAP. XXIII. BIRTH of a dead CHILD.
I. AS a dead Child is to be removed by Manual Operation, so also a living on,
if it be too big, or the Passage is too straight, or that it cannot possibly be
turned, or it be too weak, so as it cannot help it self.

II. Let the Woman be put into a fit Posture also, as we have advised for that
of a living Child, Chap. 22. Sect. 2. aferegoing; and at that time when the
Woman finds strong Pains coming upon her; then, your hands being first
anointed, by Sect. 3. Chap. 22. put them up, and draw forth the Birth.

III. But if this proves vain, you must then use Instruments, though terrible
and difficult, the chief of which is the Hook, as the expert Scultetus has
taught us.

IV. This is a dreadful Operation; but it is better to save one Life, than to
lose two; my advice therefore is, That the Artist be not too rash in doing this
Work, but to be sure that the Child is dead, and then to do it as carefully and
tenderly, in respect of the Woman, as he can.

V. The Signs of a dead Child. If the Afterbirth be excluded before the Child,
and if Water and stinking Matter flow from the Womb, and the Child falls heavy
on the side when the Woman turns; these are Signs the Child is dead.

VI. If the hand, being dipped in warm Water, be laid on the Woman's Navel, and
Cordials be given the Mother, and yet neither she, nor they, feel it move, the
Death of the Infant may be suspected.

VII. If the Mothers Face grows pale, her Breath stinks, the lower Parts of her
Belly, and extreme Parts grow cold; and there be Pains of the Head, Fever and
Fainting, or Convulsions and Delirium; the Child is more than to be feared
dead, and it is possible, the Mother will not long continue.

VIII. The Causes. They are generally, debility of the Expulsive Faculty, the
over greatness of the Child, or the posture of its lying in the Womb, not being
right: to which add, thickness of the Membranes of the Womb, straitness of the
Passages, and weakness of the Mother, or Child.

IX. Another Cause may be, the Child's Head coming with its Face toward the
Mothers Belly, and so stopping against the Os Pubis; in this Case the Child
cannot be delivered, except the Head be a little raised, and the Birth be
turned toward the Back, in its due Posture: To which add, the Bunchings in of
the Vertebrae of the Os Sacrum, which where it is found, it is scarcely possible
for a live Child to be brought forth.

X. If therefore the Child be dead, it must immediately be extracted, lest the
Life of the Mother also be lost: And this must be done by Manual Operation.

XI. The Hook is to be fixed to some part of the Head, as Ears, Eyes, Mouth; if
that cannot be done, you must fix it where you can, always taking care in
drawing, that, if the Hook should slip, you may neither offend the Womb, nor
Neck thereof.

XII. The Child being thus brought away, you must put up your Hand, and bring
away the Secundine, or Afterbirth.

XIII. If an Arm or Leg be forth, and it cannot be returned to stay, the Arm
must be taken off, if possible, at the Shoulder: The Leg, as high as may be, at
Knee or Hip, and then you must six your Instrument, where you can easiest fix
it fast, or secure from slipping, etc.

CHAP. XXIV. EXTRACTION of the SECUNDINE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...); in Latin, Secundas and Secundinas; in
English, the Secundine and Afterbirth.

II. It consists of two Parts, 1. Placenta Vterina, or Hepar Vterinum, the Womb
Cake, or Womb Liver. 2. Membranae, the Membranes which circumvolve the Child in
the Womb.

III. The Placenta resembles the form of a Cake, and is knit both to the Navel,
and to the Chorion, and makes up the greatest part of the Secundine, or
Afterbirth.

IV. The Flesh of it is like that of the Liver or Spleen, soft, and of a
blackish red, and has very many small Veins and Arteries in it, and certainly
the chief use of it is, for the firmer containing the Child in the Womb, and
through its Vessels to convey to it its Nutriment.

V. The Membranae are threefold, 1. The Chorion, which is the outwardmost
Membrane, which involves the whole Foetus. 2. Allantoides, which is the middle
Membrane involving the Foetus: And, 3. Amnios, which is the inmost Membrane,
which immediately contains the Child, not joined to the Chorion in any place,
except where the Vmbilical Vessels pass through them both into the Placenta.

VI. The Afterbirth has oftentimes been unhappily left by Midwives; sometimes
wholly, and sometimes but in part, thereby destroying the Patient.

VII. It is removed Manually, thus: Put up your Hand, guideing it by the
String; which done, lay hold on the Secundine, removing it gently, and by
degrees: After which put a Closure to the Woman, bidding her keep her Legs
close, that it may be kept there, and cold prevented from entering into the
Womb, which might then destroy the Woman.

VIII. After which, being laid in Bed, give her a little Water Gruel, made of
three parts of Water, and one of White Wine; or of Water and strong Beer.

IX. 2. By Medicine it is best done with Pulvis partum provocans aforesaid,
which for security sake you may give, although beforehand, it was done
Manually, lest any part or parts thereof should be left behind.

X. Some commend this; Choice Myrrh, Venetian Borax a. ss. choice Saffron,
Livers and Galls of Eels in powder a. ss. mix and make a powder for two Doses.
It is also said, that a Decoction of Squinanth with a little Saffron, and Juice
of Camomil, has effectually brought away the Secundine, and eased the Pain.

XI. To facilitate the Birth beforehand, and afterward to ease the pain of the
Parts hurt, you may anoint with this Oil: Oil of Ben. or Oil of sweet Almonds
i. Chimical Oil of Camomil, or Fennel, gut. 80. mix them well by shaking.

CHAP. XXV. EXTRACTION of a MOLA.
I. AMola, or false Conception, is a Mass of Flesh without Bones or Bowels;
made through fault of the Seed, of one or both Sexes.

II. Signs. It Is known (but scarcely till the fourth Month is past) by a
beating and trembling Motion, falling like a Stone to the part the Woman turns
to.

III. And in this Disease the Belly is sooner great, and grows harder than in a
true Birth or Conception, and is much more troublesome to carry.

IV. There is difficulty of Breathing, pains in the Back and Groins, and no
Milk in the Breasts, and the Substance the Woman goes with, is without any
self-motion.

V. The Cause. It is mostly a defect in the Seed, with Weakness of the
formative Faculty, either in its self, or from too much Blood flowing into the
Womb; and therefore a Conception in the time of the Menses flowing, does many
times prove a Mola.

VI. The Prognostics. If it has been of long standing, as a Year or two, or
more, the Cure will be very difficult: and if, upon the delivery of it, a great
Hemorrhage follows, it is very dangerous.

VII. The Cure. 1. Medicinal. Purges ought to be given, and such as are strong,
made chiefly of Aloes, Scammony, and Colocynthis, and often to be repeated.

VIII. After which, you are to give such things as strongly provoke the Terms;
for all such things expel a Mola.

IX. Myrrh, white Amber prepared, Borax a. iij. Livers and Galls of Eels dried
ij. Assa foetida, Saffron a. i. mix, and make a Powder. Dose i. in a strong
Decoction of Pennyroyal.

X. Also the Pulvis Partum provocans (which see in Our Pharmacopaeia
Londinensis, Lib. 4. Cap. 21. Sect. 90.) given i. at a time in Rhenish Wine, is
an excellent thing; and these may also be of use for the bringing away of a
dead Child.

XI. Zacutus gave this; Euphorbium i. make it into a fine powder, and with
Syrup of Mugwort make it into Pills: These were given four times in the space
of twelve days, being given every day, three hours after Supper.

XII. And by the means of this Medicine (says he) with great Labor and Pain,
after the manner of Childing Women, she voided eight Moles bigger than Hens
Eggs; consisting of Membranes, with small Veins: After which, being Purged, she
grew well. Zacut. Prax. admirand. Lib. 2. Obs. 145.

XIII. 2. Chirurgical. If these things do not, you must come to Manual
Operation, which is performed with the Griffins Talon, or the Hook; but with
this Caution, that if it should chance to slip (as it easily may, where it is
only a Lump of Flesh) you be very careful that you wound not, or hurt the Womb.

CHAP. XXVI. The CAESARIAN BIRTH.
I. THis is that which teaches the Extraction of the Foetus out of the Womb by
Section, where it cannot otherwise be delivered.

II. And if both Mother and Child be alive, it is so to be done as to respect
both, that both may be saved; but if the Mother be dead, and the Child only
alive, so as to save it.

III. It is a dangerous Operation, yet has been many times successfully done,
even where both have been living; the Incision having been so made, to save
both Mother and Child, and that several times on one and the same Woman,
without prejudicing her Breeding again.

IV. If it be done on a living Woman, it is not to be attempted, till all other
means has proved unsuccessful: Yet it must be before the strength be too far
spent.

V. If the Mother be just ready to die, and the Child alive, the Chirurgian
ought to be ready at hand, that the work may be immediately performed, as soon
as the Woman is dead, to save the living Child.

VI. There are several Causes why this Operation should be done, 1. Those which
respect the Child: As, 1. Its being too fat and big. 2. When more than one are
striving to come forth together, one being dead, and lying in the others way.
3. When it is a Monster with two Heads, more Arms than usual, etc. 4. When
dead, and putre^ed or rotten, or is wasted to Bones.

VII. 2. Those which respect the Mother; which are, 1. When the passages are
too narrow, she having been Married too Young or too Old. 2. When the Parts by
some Scar or Hurt are hardened, made narrow, or grown together. 3. When there
is a large fleshy Excrescence in the Vagina. 4. When the Os Pubis is grown
unnaturally big, or stands out. 5. When there is a fleshy swelling within the
Womb, or its Neck, etc.

VIII. Before you begin the Work, have in a readiness all your necessary
Instruments; as a Pen and Ink to mark the place, an Incision-knife, four or
five Needles threaded with Silk, three soft Spunges, several Bolsters of Cloth,
a fourfold doubled Napkin to put round about the Belly, and two Rowlers six
Inches broad, to roll the Belly, and stop the Blood.

IX. As to Medicines, these must be also had in a readiness. 1. Decoctum
Traumaticum, made only with Red Wine. 2. A Restrictive Powder, thus made: Take
white Starch xij. Olibanum, Mastich, a. x. Rosin vj. fine Bole, Catechu, a. iv.
Sanguis Draconis, Comfrey Roots, a. ij. make all into a fine Powder, and mix.
3. A Vulnerary Balsam, as Balsam de Chili, Balsamum Vulnerarium, or some such
like.

X. This done, and having considered the strength of the Woman, give her an
Emollient Clyster to empty the Guts; let her also make Water to empty the
Bladder, and give her a good Cordial, or a Glass of Wine, to fortify her
Spirits.

XI. Then mark the place you intend to open with Transverse Lines, the length
of half a Foot; let the Woman lie on her Back near the edge of the Bed; let two
strong Persons hold her, keeping her Legs close, laying a great Pillow under
her Head; and let the soundest side be pitched on, unless there be a Rupture,
for then that side is to be taken.

XII. But if the Woman be dead, take the place you judge fittest, which let be
two or three Inches beneath, and on the side of the Navel, and as much from the
Lower Part.

XIII. First cut open the Belly to the Fat, then through the Muscles and
Peritonaeum, till you see the Womb; having obtained it, open it in the middle,
but with great care as to the Child, that it, nor its Bandage or Ligaments be
not wounded, and then take forth speedily the Child, Secundine, and
Navel-string, delivering them to the Midwife.

XIV. If the Child be Weak, or Convulsed, sprinkle the Secundine with warm
Wine, and lay it to the Child's Belly.

XV. And if the Woman be yet alive, immediately wash the Womb with the
before-named Decoctum Traumaticum, which will stay its Bleeding, and cleanse it
from the Blood and Filth.

XVI. Presently after you must stitch up the Wound, as you stitch up a
Hare-lip, only keep open a place with a Tent, in the most depending part; and
lay over the afore-described Restrictive Powder, mixed with the Whites of Eggs
and Vinegar beat together.

XVII. The Bleeding being thus stayed, heal the Wound at one Intention with the
aforenamed Balsam de Chili, or Vulnerarium, or any other of like Nature and
Properties.

XVIII. After the first, and so in the rest you are to use the Bolsters, and on
them the Napkin, and then the Rowlers.

XIX. The Womb it self is not to be stitched, but to be healed by Injections,
but such as may not hinder the Lochies, by which the Pain will be mitigated,
Inflammation prevented, and the Womb it self comforted and strengthened, and
made able to expel its Recrements.

XX. The Tent is to be kept in t^ the great danger is over, and the usual
Symptoms are vanished; and such Emplasters, etc. may be used, as are applied to
other Wounds of the Belly.

XXI. Lastly, let her Diet be such as is used in other great Wounds and Ulcers
of the Belly; as good strong Broths, Gellies, Chickens, Poached Yolks of Eggs,
Gravy of Mutton, Veal, etc. and more especially the last, to prevent her being
costive, which if it should so happen, it must be remedied with Emollient
Clysters.

CHAP. XXVII. CUTTING out the STONE.
I. THE Stone bred in Man's Body, is from a Tartarous Pituitous Matter, Saline
and Earthy, arising from a peculiar Lapidescent or petrefactive quality,
causing pain, obstruction of Urine, Fevers, and other Symptoms.

II. The Cause. It is from Tartar and Salt joined with a proper Acid; this is
apparent from the mixture of the Salt or Liquor of Flints (which contains
Alcalious Salt joined with many Earthy or Tartarous Particles,) with an Acid,
it presently causes a Coagulation, which turns into a hard Stone; and doubtless
after the same manner it is, that Stones are formed in several Parts of our
Bodies.

III. The Signs. The Urine is Pituitous, White, Crude, and Troubled, suddenly
adhering to the Vrinal; being sometimes Bloody, and sometimes with Sand or
Gravel, and sometimes full of little Threads.

IV. It is oftentimes stopped, and when made, it is with great desire, beat, and
pain, and a pain at the end of the Yard, which continues: There is great
thirst, and a frequent making of Urine, but with pain, and by drops.

V. The Patient often holds his Privy Part in his Hand, and is pressing the
bottom of the Belly, and in the Region of the Belly a Weight is perceived, the
Patient (especially if young) seldom making Water without going to Stool, and
many times the Intestine falling out.

VI. But these, as they are the signs of the Stone, so they may be the signs of
the Strangury, where there is no Stone, but only a Tartarous Slime, or Sand
obstructing; therefore before you come to Cutting, you ought to be upon sure
grounds, lest you put the Patient in peril of his Life to no purpose.

VII. Formerly they passed a Catheter through the Vreter into the Bladder, then
thrusting one or two Fingers into the Anus, they searched for the Stone, and
found its bigness. But this way is so very painful, that through fear, it is
difficult to have it permitted.

VIII. But now the searching is after this manner, the Artist (who ought to
have long Fingers) puts his Fingers up the Anus, and (the Patient being held in
a manner upright) pressing upon the lower parts of the Abdomen or Flank, with
his other Hand he forces the Stone upon the Fingers, if there be any, whereby
he finds the certainty of its being, and the magnitude thereof.

IX. The Prognostics. A crumbling Stone is seldom dissolved, a hard Stone
never to be wasted by Medicines; but sometimes it is so soft, that by the very
Catherer it self, it may be broken to pieces in the Neck of the Bladder, and so
brought forth.

X. If it be very small, it is many times pist forth whole; if it sticks in the
Vrethra, it cannot be removed without danger and great pain.

XI. If it sticks in the Tunicles of the Bladder, or grows to the superficies
of its interior Coat; it cannot be taken away by Section, without the Death of
the Patient.

XII. And by so much as the Stone is greater, by so much is the Operation more
dangerous and painful. But in Women, Stones of about the bigness of a large
Olive, a skilful Artist has taken out by dilatation, without any Incision at
all.

XIII. The Cure. We speak not here of the Medicinal Cure, for that we refer you
to the Third Edition of our Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 5. cap. 39. and 40. where
we have handled the Matter at large; as also to Our Medicina Practica, lib. 1.
cap. 19. where, as to that point, you may find plentiful satisfaction.

XIV. We treat here only of the Manual Operation, or the manner of taking them
forth by Incision, for which there are several ways proposed by Authors, viz.
1. The Apparatus Minor. 2. The Apparatus Major. 3. Apparatus Hypogastricus, of
all which in order.

XV. But before you begin this Work, you must have all your necessary
Instruments in a readiness, as Catheters, Probes, Director, Incision-knife,
Conductor, Specula, Lapidillum, Pincers, Small Hooks, Forceps, Spunges, Rags,
Rowlers, etc.

XVI. For Medicines, 1. A Cordial; as Black Cherry Water vj. Our Aqua
Bezoartica, Spirit of Angelica, a. jss. Syrup of Citron Peels, or Syrup of the
Juice of Alkermes ij. mix them. 2. An Astringent Bathing: Water Gal. iv.
Self-heal bruised M. viij. Oak Bark lbjss. Catechu viij. mix, and boil for an
Hour, then strain out. 3. Astringent Pouders. 4. Balsam de Chili, and Balsamum
Vulnerarium. 5. A Sticking Emplaster.

XVII. Before you begin the Operation, it will be also necessary that the
Patient may have had a Stool, and made Water, leaping and jumping also a little
beforehand; and if a Child, let him be well shaked by the Armpits, that the
Stone may fall as much as may be to the Neck of the Bladder.

I. Apparatus minor.
XVIII. Lithotomia, by the Apparatus Minor. Let the Child, (for it is chiefly
used to Children) be placed on a soft Pillow, in a strong Man's Lap (after
three, or four times jumping from a fitting high place) tie both his Hands to
the Soles of his Feet; and let two standers by hold each Knee, pulling them as
far asunder as may be.

XIX. Then his Fingers being anointed with Oil of Roses, let him take the first
Finger of his Left Hand, or, if necessity requires, the two first Fingers, and
thrust them up the Fundament, with his Right Hand let him gently compress the
Parts above the Os Pubis, so that the Stone may slip down under the Os Pubis
into the Perinaeum, which when brought thither by the aforesaid Fingers.

XX. Make an Incision with a sharp Knife, in the Left Side, between the
Testicles and the Anus, near to the Suture of the Perinaeum, cutting to the
very Stone it self: If it comes not out of the Wound of it self, nor by the
thrusting forth of the Fingers, which are in the Intestinum Rectum, draw it out
with a pair of Forceps, or which is better, with the Lapidillum or Spoon.

XXI. The Stone being taken out, and all the Ligatures loosed, apply Medicines
stopping Blood, as Meal mixed with Bole, etc. then bind it up according to Art,
taking care to consolidate it, as soon as possible, lest the Patient have a
dropping of Urine through the Wounded Part.

II. Apparatus major.
XXII. The second way of Cutting, called Apparatus Major. Put the Patient on a
Table, being first bound, and held, as above: then through the Vrethra pass a
Director into the Bladder to the Stone: After make an Incision, as aforesaid,
in the hollow of the Director; put in the Conductor, taking the Director out;
then pass through the Wound the Forceps or Lapidillum, or other fit Instrument,
by which the Stone may be both laid hold on, and drawn forth, not making use
of the Fingers in the Anus, except great necessity urge it.

XXIII. If the Stone is bigger than the Orifice, so that it cannot come forth,
the Wound must be enlarged either by Incision, or the Dilator; or else the
Stone must be broken in pieces by the Forceps, and so drawn forth in Parts;
after this, dry, stop the Blood, bind up, and consolidate, as we taught before.

XXIV. But if the Wound be too great, give it a stitch, and put in a Silver
Pipe two or three days; that thereby the concreted Blood, Slime, Tartarous
Matter, and Sandy Urine may be completely brought forth, before the healing up.

III. Apparatus Hypogastricus.
XXV. Lithotomia by the Apparatus Hypogastricus, which is the third way of
Cutting. The manner is thus: Let the Patient be laid and held fast, upon a
Matteress or Quilt; then let a Servant thrust his fore and middle Fingers one
after another into the Anus, up the Intestinum Rectum, to make the Stone rise
as high as one can; this done,

XXVI. Let the Operator make Incision gently above the Groin, and on the side
of the Linea Alba, to wit, in the Right Muscle above the Os Pubis, according to
the Ductus of its Fibers, and by the assistance of the Lapidillum or Forceps,
take forth the Stone.

XXVII. The bottom of the Bladder may without doubt be opened without hurting
the Parts of the Abdomen, because it is situated between the duplicature of the
Peritonaeum: And the fuller it is of Urine, the more apparent it will be.

XXVIII. The Cure is to be performed as of Simple Wounds in the Abdomen; or you
may otherwise change the Method, according as Symptoms are present; and
Experience has taught us, that Wounds of the Bladder are not Mortal.

XXIX. De Franco was the first that practiced this Operation, which is called
Apparatus Hypogastricus, or the High Operation, because it is performed in the
Hypogaster; and though he does not advise the doing of it, yet if there be a
necessity for it, he says it is not impracticable.

XXX. If any one would practice this High Operation, it would be necessary for
him to try many Experiments on Dead Bodies, after the Water is taken out of the
Bladder: Yet after all, by reason of the danger thereof, it is now quite out of
use.

XXXI. The manner of performing these Operations in Women is the same, save the
Fingers are not put into the Anus, but into the Vulva, where the Catheter and
Director must be straight, and much shorter than those used for Men: But Stones
are often drawn out of Women's Bladders as big as a Walnut, and that without
Incision, only by forcing it with the Fingers.

XXXII. Note also, that whereas at Sect. 23. above, advice is given to break
the Stone with the Forceps, it may prove of ill consequence to the Patient, if
any bits of it remaining within, should be the occasion of its breeding again:
In this Case therefore, it will be much better to make the Orifice so wide at
first, as that it may be taken out whole.

XXXIII. The Cordial aforeprescribed, is to be given upon Fainting or
Convulsions, or any kind of Sickness at Heart. The Astringent Bath is to put
the Patient into, as soon as Cut, as warm as he can endure it, in which he is
to sit for some time, according to the Method of some Practisers. The
Astringent Powder is for stopping of the Bleeding; and the other things, as
Balsams and Emplaster, are after to be applied, according as the Intentions of
the Cure require.

CHAP. XXVIII. DRAWING of TEETH.
I. THE Drawing of Teeth is generally occasioned from Pain, Rottenness, or
Looseness of the Teeth: The Pain is caused by the hurt of the small Nerves,
scattered about their Roots: Rottenness, from the Afflux of a sharp, corroding,
or putrefactive Humor: And Looseness, from the weakness of the Parts holding.

II. The Signs are needless, unless to discover the Causes. If it be from hot
Humors or Causes, the Pain is more vehement and intense, and the Habit of the
Body is hot; with a sense of heat in the Part, and Inflammation of the Gums,
wherein hot Remedies increase the Pain, but cold things give ease.

III. If from a cold Cause, or Humors, the pain is more obtuse and dull, with
a kind of heaviness in the Part, and the other Symptoms present, are all
opposite to the former.

IV. If from Worms, the pain is by fits, soon ceasing, and as soon returning;
and sometimes the Motion of the Worms is perceived in the part.

V. If from sharp and corrosive Humors, the Pain is very vehement and biting;
sometimes there is a solution of Continuity, and the Teeth seem to be eaten
away, and sometimes to be hollow.

VI. The Prognostics. When the Gums and Cheeks begin to swell, the pain
usually goes away: If it be from hot and sharp Humors, the pain is the
shorter; but if from cold Humors, it is (though gentler, yet) of longer
continuance: If the Teeth be hollow or rotten, there will be no absolute Cure
without pulling out.

VII. The Cure. Whether it proceeds from a hot, or a cold Cause, Purging with
proper Catharticks is good: If from a hot Cause, you may Purge with Pil.
Cochiae, our Family Pills, or Extract of Cassia, because it derives from the
Head by the Reins.

VIII. Behind the Ears apply Vesicatories, and sometimes they are profitable to
derive, being applied to the Scapulae, or Nape of the Neck: So also Cups with
Scarification; and if the Body is bound, an Emollient or Cathartick Clyster is
to be exhibited.

IX. After Purging, give every Night of our Laudanum, gr. ij. ad iv. or vi. to
thicken the Humor, stop the Flux, and give ease of the Pain.

X. Outwardly, you may give them to hold in their Mouth gr. iv. of our Laudanum
tied up in a Rag; or a little bit of Sal Prunellae, which gives immediate ease.

XI. The Flux being stayed, you may discuss the Swelling, by bathing with
Powers of Amber outwardly, on the Cheek and Jaw, and holding in the Mouth this
mixture: Powers of Aniseeds or Caraways ss. Carduus Water, or Aqua Elementaria
i. mix them.

XII. Sometimes the Pain has been cured by Sternutatories, and Errhines,
prudently applied.

XIII. If there be a Flux of Corrosive Humors falling upon the Teeth and Jaws,
viz. a sharp Catarrh; after Universals have been given; Laudanum, a gr. ij. ad
vi. must be given every Night to stop the Flux, and in the Mouth, the following
may be chewed.

XIV. of the best Tobacco, round Birthwort-roots, Gentian, a. i. Roots of
Pyrethrum, Sal Prunellae, a. ss. mix, and tie them up in a Rag, to be chewed in
the Mouth. Let it be first steeped a little while in Vinegar, and then chewed,
it commonly Cures at first or second using.

XV. If it be caused from a cold Distemper; first, you must Purge with
Phlegmagogues; avoid the cold Air, and bathe the external Parts of the Jaws and
Cheeks, with Powers of Amber.

XVI. In the Mouth let them hold this Mixture: Powers of Aniseeds i. Guttae
Vitae ij. Aqua Bezoartica i. black Cherry-water ij. mix them.

XVII. And at Bedtime cause them gently to Sweat, with Our Volatile Laudanum,
given a gr. ij. ad vj. After which, the next Morning, give this Mixture; of Our
Tinctura Mirabilis ss. Aqua Bezoartica i. black Cherry or Poppy-water iss. mix
them for a Dose.

XVIII. If they be hollow, or have Worms, you may stop them with this: Tobacco
in fine Powder j. Turpentine q.s. mix, and make small Pills, which put into the
hollow place: If this does no good; you must either burn them in the Ears; or
stop them with Lint dipped in Chemical Oil of Cloves, Camphir, Hasle, or Box; or
you may make up the Lint into a Pill with our Volatile Laudanum; which being
put into the hollowness, is to be kept there for some days.

XIX. If all these do nothing, you must then come to drawing of the painful
Tooth. The Gums must first be opened with the Fleam, and the Flesh loosned
round about the Tooth.

XX. This done, you must with Piercers, half Piercers, Punches, or a Pelican,
lay hold of the Tooth, and with a wary and gentle kind of forcing, bring it
forth: After which, if it Bleeds much, you must stop it with this Powder: burnt
Alum, Catechu a. j. Sanguis draconis, fine Bole, dried Blood a. ss. mix them.

CHAP. XXIX. DRAWING out Extraneous THINGS.
I. THIS has relation to Extraneous Things, which may be Force, or other
Accident, be gotten into Wounds, or any Cavernous Parts of the Body; as
Bullets, Arrows, Splinters, Thorns, etc. into Parts Wounded or Lacerated;
Fish-bones, and other things sticking in the Throat, etc.

II. Bullets. If it be of Lead, and difficult to find, or not easy to come
forth, it will be best to Cure the Wound without Extracting it.

III. But if it be near to the part where it did enter, (putting the Sick, as
near as may be, into the Posture he was in when wounded) seek out the Bullet
with your Finger or Probe, then with blunt Hooks (to lift aside the Vessels)
and hollow Forceps, draw forth the Bullet, etc.

IV. But if it be near to the opposite Part, you must cut it out there, lest it
be injurious to draw it out the way it went in.

V. Arrows. These, if barbed, are very hard to be got out, unless they be in
sight, and are for the most part taken forth on the opposite side; but then it
ought to be done with great care, with respect to Veins, Arteries, and
Lymphaeducts.

VI. Splinters. If deep in the Flesh, are either to be taken forth with
attractive Emplasters, or Cataplasms, or otherwise the Flesh must be opened
with a Lancet or Incision-Knife; and so they are to be taken forth with a Pair
of Pliers, or Forceps.

VII. Thorns. These being seldom deeper than Skin-deep, are either drawn forth
with a Cataplasm of Common Soap mixed with Chalk, and applied; or otherwise the
Skin opened with a Needle, and so picked forth.

VIII. Pieces of Iron, and pieces of Garments. These are easily taken forth
with proper Instruments, if they be in sight: otherwise more difficulty; yet
when once the Wound comes to digest, they are many times cast out by Nature.

IX. Fish-bones, or other things sticking in the Throat. If they are to he
seen, they may be taken out with a pair of Forceps; if not, let them be thrust
down with a small Whale-bone made fit, of about 14 or 16 Inches long; so as the
end to be put down may be thick, and growing smaller by degrees to the other
end.

X. Pins, Needles, etc. If they may be seen, may also be taken forth with a
pair of Forceps; but if not, the best way will be to drink warm Water and Oil,
and to provoke Vomiting with a Feather put down the Throat.

XI. Extraneous Things got into the Nose. Inject Oil of sweet Almonds, and
afterward provoke Sneezing with proper Sternutatories: Breathe also strongly.

XII. If into the Ears. Stop both Nose and Mouth, and then strain by Breathing:
If they cannot be so removed, use Forceps, Earpickers, blunt Hooks, etc. If yet
these cannot be used, the Passage is to be cut a little with an Incision-Knife,
to make way for the Instrument: If Creeping things be got in, kill them, by
dropping in Oil of Wormwood, and Vihegar.

XIII. If into the Eyes. If they be small, by blowing the Nose strongly the Eye
will be cleared; otherwise they may be wiped out with a fine Sponge: If they
stick fast, they must be pulled out with a pair of Pliers, or picked forth with
a Needle; washing the Eye afterward with some proper Ophthalmick Water; and if
much wounded, dressing it with Our Balsamum Ophthalmicum, etc.

CHAP. XXX. URINE STOPPED.
I. URine is stopped either by the Stone, or by some Tartarous Matter sticking
in the Passages of the Urine, which hinders its coming forth; which latter is
commonly called the Ischuria, and of which we have discoursed in the Third
Edition of Our Synopsis Medicinae, L. 5. C. 49.

II. If the Obstruction be made in the Reins or Vreters, where no Instrument
can come, nor any Manual Operation be done, you must then have recourse only to
Medicaments.

III. This Cause, whether of the Stone or Strangury, is from a Tartarous Matter
heaped up in the Reins, and falling into the Passages of the Urine; the way of
making of which we have discoursed of in Chap. 27. Sect. 2. aforegoing.

IV. The Signs. If it be in the Reins, there is a heavy Pain, and Soreness in
the Reins; if in the Vreters, (which are the Passages from the Reins to the
Bladder) there is pain in the Flanks below the Navel, to the Groin, and bottom
of the Belly.

V. There is also Stoppage of Urine, Sickness of Stomach, and many times
Vomiting withal, a Heat and Pain in making of Water, and in Men a Pain at the
End of the Yard.

VI. If the Obstructing Matter be in the Bladder, it is known by the last
enumerated Signs; but the Pain is more particularly and eminently at the end of
the Yard: And if the Sick stands upon his Head, he has present Ease and Relief,
by reason the Stone falls from the place stopped.

VII. If it be in the Urethra, or Passage from the Bladder, it may be known by
feeling, or searching, and sometimes a Swelling of the Part.

VIII. To distinguish whether it be a Stone, or Tartarous Matter that stops the
Urine: If Specificks remove the Obstruction, or bring away Slime and Pus, there
possibly may be no Stone; but if no Relief comes, a Stone is to be feared.

IX. In the Bladder, or Urethra, it is known by searching, either with a
Wax-Candle, or a Catheter, or the Gripe, which is the surer way.

X. The Prognostics, If it be a Stone in the Reins, it is uncurable, unless
small; so also in the Vreters: If in the Bladder, and large, only by Cutting:
So also if it be lodged in the Vrethra, without which, nothing but Death can be
expected.

XI. If it is Tartarous Matter, Sand or Gravel, it is more easily cured; and
more easily in the Bladder, than in the Reins.

XII. If it be inveterate, the Cure is more difficult than if it be recent; so
also in such as are weak, old, or decrepit: If the Stoppage is removed, and it
often returns, it is so much the worse.

XIII. The Cure. 1. Medicinal. Among Vegetables, these things are most
prevalent. Water distilled from Arsmart, drunk ad vi, at a time. Parsley-water,
also Water distilled from Onions in like proportion: Bean-shell-water with
Syrup of Violets, which is of good use: So also Grass-water.

XIV. Of Juices. The Juice of Pellitory of the Wall, or Syrup of the same Juice
given ab ij. ad iv. Juice of Camomil given ad iv. is famous, I know it by
Experience: So also Juice of Onions given j. ad ij. in White Wine, and
repeated. And inferior to none, is the Juice of Winter-Cherries, given ad j. or
more, in White Wine, as aforesaid.

XV. Seeds. Those of Violets are said to be of excellent use, because, together
with expelling the Stone, they are said to Purge, if used by way of Emulsion.
Daucus Seeds given either in Powder ad ss. or more; or in Decoction, are much
commended: So also the Seeds of Gromwell, Fennel, Parsley, Bishopsweed, etc.

XVI. Berries. Juniper Berries provoke Urine powerfully; so also Bay Berries,
whether in their Substance, as Powder, Extract; or in their distilled Waters,
Spirits, Oil, Potestates, etc.

XVII. Foecula's, Ashes. Tartar made into a Salt, or Oil per Deliquium, and
given ad j. or ss. in Arsmart or Parsley-water, is an approved thing.
Potashes, Broom Ashes and Bean-stalk Ashes, drunk in White Wine, are of
excellent use.

XVIII. Woods. The chief among Woods, is Lignum Nephriticum; which being
rasped, may be either given in Substance, in Powder, or else in Infusion in
Water or Wine, which being used for some time, has done Wonders.

XIX. Gums. The chief among Gums are, Turpentines of all Kinds, Balsams de
Chili, Copayba, of Gilead, Peru, and Tolu, Opium; the various ways of using
them you may search out in Our Seplasium, lately emitted into the World.

XX. Among Minerals, these are f^ most use. 1. Nitre given in Powder a ss. ad
ss. 2. Sal Prunellae, given in White Wine, sweetened with double refined Sugar.
3. Spar, given in fine Powder ad j. 4. Lapis Nephriticus, given a ss. ad j. in
some proper Vehicle.

XXI. Mineral Spirits. The chief of these are Spirits of Salt, of Sulphur, of
Vitriol, of Nitre, Bezoardick Spirit of Nitre, Spirit of Alum. Tincture of
Lapis Nephriticus, made with rectified Spirit of Salt, the Stone being first
poudered, and then both digested, till it makes a green Tincture.

XXII. Among Animals, these are esteemed. Egg-shells calcined, and given a ss.
ad j. which Medicine is said to be valuable before all other things: Hog-lice
are in great estimation, being given in Powder a j. ad ss. or their Salt, a ss.
ad j. So also the Powder or Salt of Bees. Cochinele in Powder, ad j. or ss. or
its Tincture ad j. given in Rhenish Wine, is said to be a gentle and pleasant
Medicine, and of great Virtue. To these things add, the Powder, Salt and Oil of
Scorpions.

XXIII. Spirits from Animals. Spirit of Urine, of Sal Armoniack, and of
Hartshorn, mixed with some proper Diuretick-Water or Tincture, and so taken.
Spirit of Sal Armoniack given in Rhenish Wine, is said to be a Specific: To
which things add, Our Spiritus Vniversalis.

XXIV. But Crabs Eyes are thought to be inseriour to nothing that has yet been
enumerated; they may be poudred, levigated, and given a ss. ad j. in Arsmart
Parsley, Pellitory, or Onion Water, or in Rhenish Wine.

XXV. Among singular Compounds, you may use these following: Juice of Liquorice
jss. which dissolve in Juice of Winter Cherries, q.s. Camphir j. dissolved in
S.V. q.s. Saffron ij. Laudanum nost. ij. White Wind lbviij. mix, let it settle,
and decant the clear. Dose iv. at Bed time.

XXVI. Liquor Nephriticus: of the Lynx-stone, Jews-stone, Hog-lice dried, Crabs
eyes, Eggshells, a. q.v. dissolve in Spirit of Salt, filter the Solution, and
distill to dryness; the Caput Mort. put into a Cellar, to dissolve per
deliquium. Dose a gut. xij. ad xx. or xxx. in any proper Vehicle.

XXVII. Sal Lithontripticus: Sal Prunellae, of Tartar, of Wormwood, a. j.
Volatile Salt of Amber jss. mix them. Dose a gr. viij. ad j. or ss. in
White Wind or Saxifrage-water.

XXVIII. Pulvis Nephriticus: Crabs eyes, Goats blood prepared, Calx of
Egg-shells, a. ij. Lapis Judaicus, Nephriticus, Bone of a Pikes Head, Powder of
Winter Cherries, a. jss. Gromwell seed, Daucus seeds, Crystals of Tartar, Sal
Prunellae, a. j. mix, and make a Powder. Dose ad j.

XXIX. Julepum Nephriticum: Julep of Roses lbj. Cinnamon Water vj. Tartar
Vitriolate iv. mix them. Dose ad ij. Or this: Tincture of Lignum Nephriticum
lbj. Horseradish Water lbss. Syrup of Corn Poppies iij. Tartar Vitriolate ij.
Powder of Crabs eyes iij. mix them.

XXX. Spiritus Antinephriticus: Roots of Rest Harrow, white Saxifrage, a. j.
Liquorice ss. Goats blood dried, Crabs eyes bruised, Hog-lice, Nutmegs,
Cinnamon, a j. Saffron ss. Cloves ij. Strasburgh Turpentine xvj. Spirit of Wine
lbv. cut and bruise what are to be cut and bruised, mix, and digest together
for 14 or 20 days; then distill in B.M. Dose, from one Spoonful to two, in a
Morning fasting in Parsley or Arsmart Water, sweetened with a little refined
Sugar; as much in the same manner at Noon; and in like manner at Night going to
Bed.

XXXI. While these things are taking, you ought also to exhibit Emollient and
Nephritick Clysters, Examples enough of which you have in Our Pharmacopoeia's
London, and Batean, and in some other of our Books. Or you may give this:
Strasburgh Turpentine j. Tolks of two Eggs, grind them together till they are
well mixed; to which add Chicken Broth, White Wind, a. lbss. hot enough to be
given for a Clyster; mix, and exhibit.

XXXII. But if after all, you find that none of these, or other proper things
will do; if it be in the Reins, you must commend the Patient to Heaven, to
place his Hope there, since so little is left him to trust to upon Earth. But
if by the Symptoms you find the Matter stopping be in the Bladder, or its
Mouth, or in the Vrethra, you must then apply your self to the following Manual
Operations.

XXXIII. If it be a Stone which is lodged in the Urethra, and will neither go
backwards nor forwards, but sticks fast there, whereby the Passage of the Urine
is totally stopped; you must first try all fit means to educe it without
Incision, as Emollient Oils, Ointments, Fomentations and Baths, Injections of
Oil, etc.

XXXIV. If those things will not do, you must come to Extention: The Vrethra is
to be extended by Wind blown in, tying that part of the Yard beyond the Stone
next the Pubes; whereby the Vrethra being dilated, the Stone may possibly with
the Fingers be forced out.

XXXV. If this will not do, the next way is, by strongly Sucking the Part; so
that by drawing the Breath very strongly, the Stone is drawn forth with it.

XXXVI. If this yet does not, you must endeavor to break the Stone by the help
of a pair of Forceps and Probe, which many times succeeds well enough, if the
Stone is of a brittle substance; otherwise not.

XXXVII. But if none of these ways do, you must come lastly to Incision; though
the place where it should be made, Authors contend much about: Some are for the
Lateral Parts, lest if the lower Part should be cut, there be a new Passage for
the Urine: Others are for the Lower Part, lest the Nervous Part should be hurt.

XXXVIII. But both ways have been tried with Success, and found easy enough;
yet sometimes the Lateral Apertion hurts Erection, as I observed once in one
Patient; for which Cause I should rather choose the Lower Part of the Vrethra.

XXXIX. Incision being made, the Stone is either to be pulled forth with a
little smooth Hook, or pressed forth with your Fingers; after which, the Wound
(whether of the Vrethra or Bladder) must be cured after the usual Method of
Curing Wounds in those Parts.

XL. But if the Matter sticks not so fast in the Neck of the Bladder, but may
be removed, or put back by Instrument, whereby the Urine may be drawn forth, we
commend to you the use of the Catheter.

XLI. Now, because the Silver Catheter, by being put in by unskilful Hands, may
sometimes hurt the Prostatae, or break the Seminal Bladders, whereby an
incurable Gonorrhea is produced; we have for that cause, in this Cure, rejected
it, and make choice of that of Helmont; which as it is infinitely more safe, so
it fully answers all the ends which we require from it.

XLII. The Description of Helmont's Catheter, as you find it in his Treatise of
the Stone, Chap. 7. Because (says he) the little Silver Catheter, to bring
forth Urine, is Cruel and Bloody, and much torments the Patient, it very much
displeases me: And among many which I have tried, this which I have made of
Leather, being as fit as harmless, I have chosen.

XLIII. I cause (says he) the Leather to be painted within, of a white Color,
made of Ceruse and Linseed Oil; which, when it is as it were dry, let it be
made into a Pipe, by sowing it very smoothly upon a fit Brass Wire, so as the
seam may not stick out: The one end of the Pipe is to be lesser than the other;
the bigger end is so large, that the Pipe of a Syringe may be put into it, as
often as one pleases, that by this means, any fit Liquor might be injected into
the Bladder.

XLIV. This done, the whole Leather Pipe is besmeared with dissolved Glue, to
strengthen it; which being dried, is over that painted with Ceruse, mixed with
Linseed Oil; and this also, as well for the firmness of the Pipe, as to prevent
it from being wet through, whereby it would grow weak and flaggy.

XLV. Now draw forth the Brass Wire, and fit another for the Pipe, made of
Whale-bone; so will you have a Leather Catheter, easy, thin, and flexible,
which will not any ways hurt or pain the Patient in putting it in, although it
may be Forty times put up into the Bladder in one day.

XLVI. This Catheter being put up into the Bladder, removes and thrusts in what
lay in the Neck of the Bladder, or in the Mouth thereof; which done, the
Whale-bone is drawn out of the Pipe, and then the Urine freely passes forth
through it, without any stop or pain; and you may every time draw it out as you
please. I know one, who by the means of this Instrument, caused a
Lithontriptick Patient to make Water with ease, for Eight or Nine Months
together.

LXVII. The Urine being emptied, you may (if you so please) cast into the
Bladder, by a Syringe, any proper Liquor, which you may think fit, to dissolve
the Tartarous Coagulum, which makes the Obstruction; but it ought not to be of
too sharp a Nature, nor what may any ways cause pain.

XLVIII. Lastly, you must note, that the Syringe must be fitted (beforehand)
to the outmost end of the Catheter, that the whole Operation may be done
neatly, and easily.

IV. APHAERESIS.
CHAP. XXXI. COUCHING of CATARACTS.
I. (...), (ab (...), aufero) Aphaeresis is that which teaches how to take off,
or remove any thing, which is superfluous; and its Operations are chiefly, 1.
The Couching of Cataracts. 2. Amputation. 3. Cutting off Cancers. 4. Cutting
off Wens. 5. Cutting a Sarcocele. 6. Cutting off Warts and Corns. 7. Removing
of Caruncles or Carnosities. 8. Removing of Humors by Friction, by Bathing, by
Sweating, and by Fasting.

II. A Cataract (whose Couching we here teach) is called in Greek, (...); and
in Latin, Suffusio; and it is a Congelation of Superfluous Humors, generating
by little and little, a preternatural Membrane between the Cornea and the
Crystalline Humor, covering either wholly, or in part, the Pupil of the Eye,
and so destroying, at least, hindering the Sight.

III. The Cause. It mostly arises from a pituitous Humor, either gathered
there from the weakness of the Eye, or transmitted thither from the Brain, by
reason of the abundant quantity.

IV. The Signs. Whilst it is recent, or beginning, the Patient sees every thing
double, and of various Colors, and as if many Flies were passing to and again
before his Eyes, Nets, Clouds, and other things in the Air, nor can they easily
endure the Light.

V. His Sight by degrees lessens, and things appear like dark Spots; after
which, blindness follows.

VI. And if all that the Patient sees, seems to be perforated, or with holes,
then the Cataract covers the Center of the Pupil; yet not the whole Pupil, but
leaves round about the Sight a circular part free.

VII. If the Pupilla spreads it self, when you rub the Eye with your Fingers,
it is yet imperfect; but if it remains unmoved, it is certain, that it is ripe
for Couching.

VIII. The Differences. It is either Imperfect, when the Humor is thin and
fluid, or the Apple of the Eye not totally covered.

IX. Or it is Perfect, when the Humor is become a Membrane, or the Pupilla
quite covered, so as all things seem dark.

X. Some Cataracts are white, some gray, some yellow, others leaden colored,
green or black, according as yellow, green, or black Choler is mixed with the
Humors.

XI. The Prognostics. If it be imperfect, and in the beginning, it may easily
be cured, by Medicines internally given, and externally applied; and so much
the more easy, if it be in a sound Body, and a middle-aged Person.

XII. The less the Pupilla is dilated, the less hopes of Cure; and the nearer
the Cataract is to the Crystalline Humor, the more dangerous it is.

XIII. Where you are certain that it is a Cataract, it will remain soft, till
the end of the third Year; so that it will not be Couched, or follow the
Needle; but after the Third or Fourth Year, it will be so firm, as to admit of
Couching.

XIV. If when the Eye is turned to the Sun, the Patient shall see no glimmering
or appearance of Light, he will then see no benefit from the Chirurgick
Operation.

XV. If, in Couching, the Humors of the Eye be commixt by the Needle, though
the Membrane be removed, the Blindness will remain: Yet I knew a young Girl, to
whom this happened, that after some time, perfectly recovered her Sight again,
and that without the use of any means.

XVI. If, in the Operation, you touch the Membrane called Retina, the Patient
will ever after that, see in the Air, Hairs, Flies, etc.

XVII. If some Blood is spilt in Couching, it is not dangerous, but will stop
of it self.

XVIII. If the Cataract be not altogether Couched, but broken or divided into
several pieces, whereby the sight does not perfectly return upon the Spot, yet
many times, in six or eight Weeks after, it becomes perfect again.

XIX. The Cure. If the Cataract is Imperfect, it is performed by Medicine: If
Perfect, by Manual Operation only, all other means being Vain.

XX. In the Cure of the Imperfect, first Purge with Pilulae Cochiae, or
Aggregativae, or rather with our Family Pills, which are inferior to no other
Head Purge.

XXI. Strengthen the Stomach, by eating daily green Ginger, that especially
which is brought to us, preserved in the East or West Indies, Caraway Comfits,
Candied Orange and Citron-Peels, Candied Angelica.

XXII. Strengthen the Head with Conserve of Rosemary-flowers, and a constant
taking the Hungarian-water inwardly, Morning, Noon and Night, in any proper
Vehicle, which ought to be continued for some considerable time.

XXIII. Outwardly Bath the whole Head with the Powers of Amber, Morning and
Night, or rather with this Mixture: Powers of Amber, of Limons, of Rosemary,
ana j. mix them to Bathe with.

XXIV. To the Eyes apply this: Gum Tragacanth ij. Celandine-water q.s. mix and
dissolve; with which mix burnt Alum ss. and make a Collyrium.

XXV. Or this; Tincture of Aloes, made in half Wine half Water iv. S.V. j.
Regulus of Antimony in Powder, White Vitriol a. j. Honey vi. mix and digest a
Month, then use it.

XXVI. Or this, Hens Gall, Tincture of Scammony a. iv. White Wine viij. Juices
of Fennel and Celandine a. x. Tinctures of Myrrh and Aloes a. iijss. in which
Camphir j. has been dissolved: Sarcocol j. mix, digest in a gentle heat for two
Months, shaking the Glass once a day, then letting it settle, decant the clear,
and keep it for use. See more hereof in the Third Edition of Our Synopsis
Medicinae, Lib. 3. Cap. 27. throughout.

XXVII. The Manual Operation, for Cure of a confirmed Cataract; before which
Vniversals ought to be used, for Evacuating the whole Body, and afterward
particulars for Purging the Head; but you must take heed that the Patient be
not troubled with Headache, Pain in the Eyes, Fever, Vomiting, Coughing, or
Sneezing.

XXVIII. Seat the Sick in a Chair, somewhat lower than your own, if you sit;
bind up the well Eye, and cause him to hold his Hands about your Wast, not
stirring them till the Operation is ended.

XXIX. Let somebody hold his Head fast behind, and hold then asunder his Eye
Lids, causing him to turn his Eye toward his Nose: Then thrust your Needle
quickly in by the Cornea, half a straws breadth from the Iris, some say a
straws breadth, and bring it unto the hollow of the Eye.

XXX. When the Needle has Couched the Cataract, endeavor therewith to press
it gently, and so long from above downwards, until it remains there.

XXXI. If it be stubborn in raising up; you must again and again divide it into
several Particles, and bring them down, keeping them in both a little while
under, that they may not return again, before the Pupil of the Eye.

XXXII. Then draw out the Needle, and bind up as well the Sound, as the Unsound
Eye; applying double Linen Cloths, moistened in Rose Water, in which a little
Alum is dissolved, and then beaten together with Whites of Eggs.

XXXIII. In the Operation, take heed of hurting the Crystalline Humor, and the
Sound Tunicles.

XXXIV. Apply an Astrictive to the Forehead, let the Head lie high, and dress
the Affect for about Fourteen Days, ordering the Sick to stir his Head and
Teeth as little as may be.

XXXV. Let the time in which this is done be the Morning, in the decrease of
the Moon, and in a clear and serene Air. How to know when it is fit to do this
Operation, we shall hereafter teach.

CHAP. XXXII. Of AMPUTATION.
I. (...), Amputatio, Dismembring, or the Cutting off any Part or Limb, is a
dreadful Operation, seldom used, but in a Sphacelus, or perfect Mortification,
or where there is such a Laceration of any Part, as it is impossible to be
restored, or to save Life without it.

II. (...), Mortificatio seu Sphacelus, a Mortification, is that which invades
both Flesh and Bones with a Rottenness or Putrefaction.

III. The Signs. If Cut (the Patient not seeing it) the Part is senseless, and
the Patient feels it not; the Flesh is cold, flaggy, black, smells like a dead
Carcass, and the Skin by reason of rottenness may be separated from the Flesh,
there flowing from it a viscid, greenish and blackish Matter.

IV. And although there may be yet some Motion, it is because the heads of the
Muscles are not already affected; however the Work is not to be delayed, but
the Part is to be taken off either in the sound and sensible Part, or in the
corrupt and dead; the first of which, as it is most used, is also most secure.

I. The Common Way, in the Sound Part.
V. The Body ought first to be purged with Vniversals; after which, before the
Operation, the Spirits ought to be raised with Cordials; of which, this is
excellent: Canary iv. of our Aqua Bezoartica vi. Juice of Alkermes j. mix them
for a Dose.

VI. Some Authors say, That this Operation is most conveniently done in the
Joint, but then the Cure is rendered the more difficult, and the use of the
other part altogether lost: Therefore the Extirpation is much better to be
done, two or three Fingers breadth, or more, below the Joint; except the
Mortification has seized the uppermost part of the Arms or Thighs, then you
must necessarily take the Joint it self.

VII. The Amputation is also more safe in the Sound Part than in the Dead,
though the former is accompanied with the greater pain. But Woodall, and some
others, perform it in the Dead Part.

VIII. The Common Way is this, 1. Prepare the Body with good Diet, as Yolks of
Eggs, Toast dipped in Muscadine, Tent, Alicant, or Canary: And let the Patient be
purged for some days beforehand with Cassia new drawn, and such gentle
Lenitives; let him take three or four times a day Confectio Alkermes of Our
Prescription, (see Pharm. Land. Lib. 4. Cap. 22. Sect. 2.)

IX. 2. Have in a readiness, 1. Two Saws, lest one should break. 2. A
Dismembring Knife and Catlin. 3. Several Rowlers, five or six Yards long. 4.
Three great Needles (not much now in use.) 5. Boulsters, greater and lesser. 6.
Pledgets of Tow, greater and lesser. 7. Dorsels and Buttons, of several sizes.
8. A large Bowl, with Ashes, Water, and Vinegar.

X. 3. Then the Patient being conveniently seated, draw up all the soft Parts
with a strong Hand, after make a Ligature hard, girting it strongly, and
pressing powerfully upon the great Vessels, with your Fingers, which may in
part also keep the Patient steady.

XI. 4. This done, with the Dismembring Knife, cut the Skin and Flesh round,
very speedily, to the Bone. If it be in the Leg, or below the Elbow, divide the
Flesh between the Fossiles with the Incision Knife; after separate the
Periostion from the Bone, by scraping of it either with the edge or back of the
Incision Knife.

XII. 5. With a sharp Saw, cut the Bone as near to the living Flesh as may be.

XIII. 6. The Operation thus over, there will be a Flux of Blood, which if it
be not too great, you may stay it only by such Medicines as stop Blood, as
Pulvis Dysentericus Crollii, Pulvis Sperniola Crollii; or rather with Pouders
causing an Escar; thus you may mix equal parts of Vmber and unslakt Lime
together, with a little Hair in Powder or Ashes of an old Hat, which reduce
into an Ointment with the White of an Egg.

XIV. Or this: white Starch vi. Sanguis Draconis, Frankincense, a. j. fine
Bole, Terra Sigillata, a. ss. Gypsum jss. Frogs prepared ij. Moss of Men's
Skulls j. Hares hair cut small ij. Tragacanth in Powder, Sponge Torrefied in
Powder, a. j. mix, and make a subtle Powder.

XV. But if the Flux is great, you must use an Actual Cautery to the Mouths of
the Vessels, otherwise in the use of the aforesaid Pouders, take four of your
greatest Buttons, made of Tow moistened well in Posca, which arm with either of
the said Pouders, and apply them to the great Vessels, speedily applying over
them a thick Bed, made of Tow, dipped also in Posca, and spread thick over with
the Powder.

XVI. 7. Have another Bed made so much larger, as to reach an Inch or two over
every side round, and armed with the Pouders as aforesaid, to be laid over the
former; on which draw a Bladder, and on it make a Ligature an Inch broad near
the top, over all these lay a fourfold Linen Cloth.

XVII. 8. But if the Flux be great, and the Patient refuses the Actual Cautery;
then, as soon as the Member is taken off, let the Skin together with the Flesh,
in four distinct places opposite one to the other, be taken up with a Needle
and waxed Thread, and the Ligature loosned above, or drawn down, that if
possible they may meet.

XVIII. This way is painful and troublesome, and therefore seldom to be used,
yet it stays the Haemorrhage, preserves the Bone from all danger, and makes the
Wound to be the sooner Cured.

XIX. 9. If you use not the Bladder, be sure your Buttons be ready to apply to
the place where the Blood appears, as you roll up the part: And having loosed
the Ligature, roll up the Member with Swaths dipped in Oxycrate, applying to the
next Joint above, a Defensative.

XX. 10. Observe, that unless there be great pain, that you dress it not till
the third day; then have in readiness Stuphes and good Roulers, the first may
be dipped in White Wind, or S.V. to be laid on the former Applications, that they
may be the more easily removed, which do very gently.

XXI. If the Bed next the Wound stick, remove it not till the third dressing:
The Applications being removed, strew the Vessels, with some of the former
Pouders of Crollius, on which apply three or four Pledgets, with Whites of Eggs
dipped in the Powder.

XXII. On these, and the rest of the Wound, apply Basilicon, Balsamum
Terebinthinae, or Balsamum Arcaei, till there is digestion. Or this: Strasburgh
Turpentine iij. Oil of Roses ij. Gum Elemi dissolved in the Oil, and strained
ss. Saffron ss. mix, and make an Ointment.

XXIII. 11. After Digestion, mundifie with Apostolorum, or Hartman 's Vulnerary
Balsam, or Ung. e succis aperitivis. Or with this: Turpentine iij. Meals of
Orrice Root, and of Barley, Powder of round Birthwort Root, a. ss. Honey of
Roses j. S.V. ss. Mithridate ij. mix, and make a Mundificative. Or this: Juices
of Parsley, Smallage, Scordium, Plantane, Rue, a. iv. Juices of Self-heal,
Allheal, a. ij. Honey of Roses lbj. boil to the thickness of a Syrup, to which
add Pouders of the Roots of round Birthwort, Angelica, Swallow-wort, Meal of
Lupins, Mithridate, a. j. S.V. ij. mix them, then Incarnate, and dry with
Pulvis Dysentericus Crollij: It dries without any biting property.

XXIV. Over this you may apply some Glutinative Emplaster, as Ceratum ex pelle
Arietina Arnoldi de Villa Nova, Emplastrum Gratia Dei, or the like.

XXV. 12. If proud Flesh arises, use Ung. Aegyptiacum laid on hot, upon which
lay another Pledget, and so dress it up for about two days: The next dressing
use only dry Lint or Flax, by this means the great sensibility of the Ulcer
will be abated; or to eat the Flesh away, you may lay on burnt Alum mixed with
Vitriol, burnt Ceruse, and burnt Lead.

XXVI. At every dressing, endeavor to draw the Skin and Muscles together by
degrees, that the Bone may be covered; it is best done with the dry Stitch
applied a Fingers breadth from the Lips of the Wound, round about the Member,
etc.

XXVII. Lastly, Fingers and Toes, yea Hands and Feet, as also superfluous
Joints, may be removed by Chizels, etc. of which see Scultetus Tab. 27. Fig.
12. and 15. but the Saw is best.

XXVIII. If Humidities abound, Pouders of Roots of Hog-fennel, round Birthwort,
Florentine Orrice, Pine bark, and Lignum Guajaci, a. ss. mix, and strew it on
the Ulcer once or twice a day. It dries without biting, and will cause the
scaling of the Bone, which will be within thirty or forty days.

II. Aquapendens his Way, in the Dead Part.
XXIX. This is done in the Dead Part, but near the Sound, yet not too near it:
Let two strong Men hold both Parts of the Member very steady, then begin the
Operation: The Part being taken off, remove as much dead Flesh as may be; then
with red hot Cauteries, sear the dead Part, and therewith heat the end of the
Bone, till such time as the Patient perceives the heat of the Fire.

XXX. After that, make a fomentation with a good Lixivium, as in a Gangrene,
which apply (not too hot) for about half an hour: This done apply Stuphes very
warm to the Part, binding it up; within the space of two or three days, there
will be a separation of the mortified Part from the sound.

XXXI. At second dressing do the like again, and cutting off the dead Flesh
with Sciffers, forget not to heat the Bone; but beware of an Haemorrhage
stealing upon you, for which you ought to be provided, as aforesaid.

XXXII. Some Authors say, That the dead Flesh touched with Oil of Vitriol or
Sulphur, as in a Gangrene, may be better, and less dangerous.

XXXIII. Now here is to be noted, 1. That the Body must be beforehand
prepared, as aforesaid. 2. That in a Sphacelus caused from a defect of Innate
heat, the former way is the better, viz. Amputating in the Sound Part. 3. But
in a very slow Sphacelus, sprung from an Internal Cause, in a Body otherwise
Sound, this latter way is the best. 4. That this way causes very little pain,
and puts a sudden stop to the Putrefaction. 5. That by this Method, a Flux of
Blood is not to be feared, etc.

CHAP. XXXIII. CUTTING off CANCERS.
I. (...), Cancer, is a preternatural Tumor said to arise from Melancholy,
round, hard, livid, painful, with Turgid Veins resembling the Feet of a Crab.

II. It is twofold, denominated from its two times; 1. (...), Carcinoma, a
Cancer not ulcerated. 2. (...), Phagedaena, a Cancer ulcerated.

III. Signs. It is not easily known in the beginning, being very small, about
the bigness of a Tare or Vetch, yet sometimes it grows to be six, eight, ten,
or twelve pounds in weight; it is accompanied with painful Symptoms, the Tumor
being hard, full of Pain, hot, livid, or black, roundish, with some inequality,
and many tumified Veins.

IV. As to the various Causes, Prognostics, and Intentions of Cure, we shall
refer you to the Chapter of the Cancer in Lib. 3. following, where we shall
discourse every thing at large: Here we shall only give you a short Idea of
what we think most necessary to be done.

V. The Cure. If the Cancer be not exulcerated, first purge with this: Sena iv.
Rhubarb j. Hermodacts, Gummy Turbith, Jalap, Cambogia, white Flowers of
Antimony, Mastich, Ginger, Cinnamon, Galangal, a. j. Scammony, Cremor Tartari,
a. jss. Oils of Vitriol, Cloves, Juniper and Anise, a. ss mix, and make a
subtle Powder. Dose a j. ad j. which frequently reiterate.

VI. Provoke the Terms in Women, if stopped, and the Haemorrhoids in Men, if
usual, for this is beneficial.

VII. Apply over the Cancer this: Oil of Ben iv. Strasburgh Turpentine ss. of
Our Hercules q.s. mix, and make an Ointment. Or this: Oil-Olive vj. Turpentine
j. burnt Lead ij. Saccharum Saturni jss. Juice of Nightshade j. of Our Hercules
q.s. mix, and make an Ointment.

VIII. But if it be ulcerated, some, to form a Palliative Cure, apply the
Quintessence of Arsenick, (see its Preparation in Our Pharm. Land. Lib. 4. Cap.
5. Sect. 7.) mixing it with Basilicon, or a Digestive, renewing it once in two
days.

IX. Barbett applies this: Galls, Pomgranate Pells, a. j. burnt Talck j. fine
Bole ss. burnt Lead ij. Ashes of Crabs j. Honey, Turpentine, a. q.s. mix, and
make an Ointment. By these and the like Medicines, ulcerated Cancers have been
kept easy, and in the same condition.

X. Some commend this: Take Aqua Fortis j. Corrosive Sublimate iv. Sal
Armoniack ij. Arsenick j. put them into a Glass Alembick, and distill to
dryness: add to the Faeces, Vinegar q.s. and distill again, till the Matter
comes to the consistence of a Paste.

XI. First wash the Cancer with Linen Cloths dipped in hot Wine, rubbing it
pretty hard, then spread the Paste on a double Cloth (not full out so broad as
the Cancer^) and apply it for 24 Hours, so will an Escar be made bigger than
the Plaster, which kills and removes the Cancer: After which it is to be Cured
as another Ulcer, according to Art.

XII. This Application is apt (from its vehemence) to produce a Fever,
Vomiting, and Flux of the Belly and Urine, for two or three days, or more, but
yet with a benefit to the Sick.

XIII. But if these things do not, so that you must be forced to come to Manual
Operation, you ought first to purge the Body well with Vniversals, or with the
former Purge at Sect. 5. aforegoing.

XIV. This Operation is often performed on Cancers, whether Vlcerated or not:
And it is done either with Cauteries after Incision, or else with both at once;
or by Incision, with Adstrictives; but the first with Cauteries is best,
because that bridles the malignity of the Tumor, and also, if any small Portion
of the Cancer should be left behind, may cause it to fall with the Escar.

XV. If the Cancer be small, not ulcerated, loose, and free from the Flesh on
all sides, Incision with Astrictives may serve, letting it first bleed, if the
Sick be strong.

XVI. In this Operation, 1. Prepare the Body, as we have taught Sect. 13. 2.
Have in a readiness Pledgets, Boulsters, Rowlers, Needles, Astringent Pouders
or Cauteries, as you intend to proceed.

XVII. Take hold of the Cancer, either with your Left Hand, or a pair of round
Forceps, then immediately cut it off, and apply either the Astringent Powder,
or the Cauteries, as you intend.

XVIII. Some cut it off with Cauterizing Knives red hot, then dress it up with
Anodynes, and such things as may cause the Escar to fall; but doubtless it is
none of the best way.

XIX. Others (which is the most common way) pass two Needles through the
Cancer; across at right Angles, and holding those ends up by threads or
strings, cut it off with a sharp Knife.

XX. In all these ways, let the Part afterward be anointed with Oils of Roses
and Myrtles, then cure the Wound according to Art. If after the Escar is
fallen, the Pus is thick, white, and laudable, Pain and Symptoms be abated, and
the Flesh grow like Pomgranate-seed, it will do well, and the Cancer is
eradicated.

XXI. But if the Cancer grows to the Bone, or passes through any Internal Part,
it is incurable: A Cancer in the Lip is to be first cut out, then cured as a
Hare-Lip.

XXII. After the Cancer is cut off, some dress it with Anodyns, others with
Anodyns mixed with Stypticks, which being all ready prepared, and spread upon
Tow, or other convenient Matter, and laid on a proper Emplaster, are clapped upon
the Wound at once; after which Application, and the Flux being stopped, it is to
be cured after the manner of a Green Wound.

XXIII. This Work is horrid in Appearance, but soon done, if a skilful and
nimble Artist has it in hand; I remember that I once saw Dr. Th. Gardner, the
King's Chirurgian, cut off a very large Cancer (weighing near eight Pounds when
off) from a Woman's Breast between Forty and Fifty Years of Age: I pulled out a
Minute Watch which I had about me, when he first took the Needles in Hand, and
from that time, the piercing of the Needles, cutting off, and binding up, to
the laying the Woman into her Bed, amounted not full out to two Minutes: The
Flux of Blood was very small, and the Woman did well, being perfectly cured in
about Six Weeks time afterward.

CHAP. XXXIV. CUTTING off WENS.
I. A Wen is called in Greek, (...); in latin, Lupia; being for the most part a
round Tumor, bunching out, mostly without any proper Cistis, but sometimes with
one.

II. The Cause. Some will have them to proceed from a Pituitous Humor, but
doubtless they come rather from Blood; the Mouths of the Arteries appointed to
carry Nourishment to the Muscles, being sometimes more open than they ought to
be.

III. The remote Cause, is sometimes from Falls, Blows, or other External
Violence: Where the Parts are disorderly moved, the Native Heat and Flesh
forming Faculty, turning the Extravased Blood into Flesh; which increasing,
makes a preternatural Tumor, which sometimes becomes Malign, if the Blood be
impure.

IV. If it proceeds from Blood only, it is florid, warm and easy, but grows
prodigiously: If from Phlegm, it is flaggy, tough and viscous: If from Choler,
it is many times painful: If from Melancholy, it sometimes grows to a gristly
hardness.

V. And commonly answerable to these Humors, is the Color, Red, White,
Yellow, or Livid.

VI. As the Wen increases, so its Arteries grow big, which nourish it; as also
the Veins increase, that they appear under the Skin, sometimes as thick as ones
Finger.

VII. The Prognostics. It is not of it self malign, but may easily be made so,
by untoward and evil Applications; and is apt to degenerate into a Cancer, if
it be long ill used.

VIII. The Cure. If in the beginning, use Astringents and Repellents; as a
Plate of Lead besmeared with Quicksilver, or Empl. de Ranis cum Mercurio; but
for Applications, we refer you to the Chapter of the Wen in Lib. 3. following,
where it is handled at large.

IX. But as the best Remedies seldom answer Expectation, the Tumor still
increasing; so the best Cure is either binding with a Thread, or the Knife, or
both.

X. Some apply Suppuratives to the Tumor, to ripen it, then open it by a
Caustic, or with an Incision-Knife; but that way is dangerous, for fear, that
if any malign Humor should attend it, it should degenerate into a Cancer.

XI. The Cutting off of a Wen. Cast a Thread, small, (but strong) twice round
the neck of the Tumor, and tie it with a double Knot, which must be daily
straightened, till the Tumor be deprived of its Color, Feeling and Life, which
will be in about seven or eight days: Then you may take it off with a Crooked
Knife, which is easily performed, for that neither any great Pain, nor Flux of
Blood is to be feared.

XII. This Operation is best done in Gross or Phlegmatic Bodies; in others,
Pain and Inflammation are so violent, that it will scarcely be endured: in such
it is commonly removed at once, by Cutting, and then applying Astringent
Pouders, or the Actual Cautery; after, Curing it as other Wounds.

CHAP. XXXV. CUTTING off a SARCOCELE.
I. WHAT a Sarcocele, or Hernia Carnosa is, we have in part told you in Chap.
8. Sect. 3. But it is more a Fleshy Tumor than a Rupture; unless it be called a
Rupture, from the eroding of the Membranes which close the ends of the
Capillary Blood Vessels.

II. A Fleshy Rupturethen, is a hard Tumor, slowly increasing, unequal, rough,
heavy, and without any thin or floating Humors; and not very painful, unless
joined with any sharp Matter.

III. The Cause is chiefly Blood, whether pure or impure, for the most part
abounding in Quantity, being cast out of the Capillary Blood Vessels, the
Membranes which close them, being either eroded, broken, or dilated; whereby
the Nutritious Blood flowing more into the Part than Nature requires, and not
Putrefying, it is changed into the Substance of Flesh.

IV. This Flesh sometimes grows to the Testicle, in which case, it cannot be
taken away, but by taking away the Testicle it self; but many times it only
Circumvolves the Testicle, but grows not to it; in which Case it may be
removed, without either hurting, or Cutting the Stone out.

V. This was lately done in a Patient, that came to me, by the Hands of a
French man, who slit open the Scrotum very carefully long-ways, took forth the
tumified Testicle; and pulling it down a little, tied it fast, as high as he
could above the Stone; then he cautiously cut the Fleshy Substance long-ways
also, so as not to hurt or scratch the Membranes of the Testicle: Which done,
he turned the Testicle out with his Fingers, and with one cut, cut off the
Fleshy Substance, just below the Bandage (the Patient not crying out for it.)
Then he returned the Testicle into the Cod, and in a short time healed it after
the manner of a green Wound: The piece of Flesh in this Operation weighed above
two Pounds.

VI. The Prognostics. It is scarcely ever cured by Medicines, and seldom
without Manual Operation: And if the Fleshy Substance grows to the Stone, not
without removing, or cutting it off also.

VII. If the Fleshy Substance extends its self to the Groins, it is for the
most part incurable.

VIII. The Cure. In its beginning, it is many times cured by astringent and
repelling Medicines: Some have been Cured with the Powder of Doves-foot Roots;
others with the Powder of Restharrow Roots, taken j. Morning and Evening in
Wormwood Wine, or some other fit Vehicle, for four Months together.

IX. And over the whole Scrotum, you may apply Emplastrum de Galbano Crocatum
Mynsichti, or de Ranis cum Mercurio, and so tie it up in a kind of Bag-Truss.

X. But if notwithstanding all that can be done, its increase cannot be
hindered, you must come to the Manual Operation, thus; Make a little Orifice to
the Scrotum, and rather in the Superior than the Inferior Part; through which, by
help of Pledgets, let suppurating Remedies be applied, that, if possible, the
Flesh may be wasted.

XI. And every dressing, diligently wipe away the Matter, but not all of it,
that what Flesh yet remains, may the better be consumed.

XII. If this succeeds not, draw forth the Testicle, and by Incision cut off as
much Flesh as you can, without doing Injury to it. Then restore it to its
place, and the remainder of the Flesh contrive to consume by Suppuration.

XIII. If the former ways prevail not, take out the Hernious Testicle, as far
as you can; then pass once or twice a Silken Thread above the Tumor, by the
process of the Peritonaeum, and pass both ends of the Silk through the Orifice
it self; so that that which was on the right side, may be on left, and that on
the left, may be on the right: So tying the Process of the Peritonaeum with a
Knot, Cut off the Testicle, letting both ends of the Silk hang out of the
Scrotum, then Cure it as another Wound.

XIV. But here you ought well to consider the Cause, before you Operate; for
sometimes you may be deceived by a Scirrhous, swelling of the Parastates: And
sometimes the Spermatick Vessels are detained in the S^, where oftentimes they
may exceed in Magnitude the Testicles themselves, cauting no other
inconveniency, but Fear.

XV. Lastly, when you come to Operate, make the Ligature as near to the Tumor
as possible; for the higher the Process of the Peritonaeum is perforated, so
much the thicker it its, by which the suppuration, and falling of the Thread
will be hindered; in which time, if Convulsions follow, they foreshew Death.

An Appendix, concerning Cutting an Oscheocele.
XVI. Although this Discourse does not properly belong this place, but rather
to Chap. 8. aforegoing; yet, because the Operation of Cuttin; was not there
taught, we were necessitated to refer it to another place: And here, having an
opportunity, under a Branch of the same Head, we thought good to resume that
part which was there wanting, and to deliver it here.

XVII (...), Oscheocele, Hernia Scroti: Hernia intestinalis vel Omentalis, in
quae, ob Rupturam, aut Lesi^m aliquam Intestinum aut Omentum, in Scrotum
delabitur, Lind. Ex. 4. 45. It is a Rupture in which the Guts or Caul, through
a Breach of the Peritonaeum, fall down into the Cods.

XVIII. By reason Cutting of an Oscheocele is not only dreadful, but also
hazardous, it is seldom in use, except when the Substance fallen into the
Scrotum, cannot be reduced; yet some have made use of it, to prevent a falling
down any more, and so for a perfect Cure.

XIX. To perform this, (when the Guts cannot be reduced, either from the
hardened Excrements there, or Narrowness of the Passage) the Patient must be
tied fast to a Form or Table, and Incision must be made in the upper Part of
the Scrotum, not touching the Guts; then putting in the Directory at the
Incision, and under the Production of the Peritonaeum, with your Knife, cut
such a space as is necessary, toward the Belly; after which, reduce the
Intestine, and stitch up so much of the Peritonaeum as may be sufficient to
hinder the fall of any thing again into the Cod, after it is healed.

XX. But unless the Patient be very strong, this is not to be done; much less
the following Operation, which is performed either with, or without taking away
the Testicle.

XXI. That, with taking away the Testicle, is so horrid and bloody, as
Scultetus has related it, ( by which way the famous Gelders of Italy did Cure a
Hernia Intestinalis) that we shall forbear to teach it, and come to show you
that Operation, which saves the Testicle entire.

XXII. The Incision is to be made about the Share-bone, into which the
Directory is to be put, thrusting it long-ways under the Process of the
Peritonaeum, which lift up, and separate it from the adjoining Fibers and
Nervous Bodies, to which it adheres: Then forthwith draw aside the Seminal
Vessels, with the Cremaster, or hanging Muscles of the Stones, and then draw
the Process aside above, and take so much from it as is too loose, with a small
Mullet perforated in the midst: and, with a Needle, having Five or Six Threads,
thrust it through, as near as you can to the Seminal Vessels and Cremaster;
after which, put the Needle again through the midst of the Remnant of the
Process, taking up therewith the Lips of the Wound; then tie the Thread with a
strait Knot, and cut off the Needle, leaving so much of the Thread, as may hang
forth of the Wound; which is not to be drawn out, till there is a sufficient
Conglutination, which then heal up according to Art.

CHAP. XXXVI. CUTTING off WARTS and CORNS.
I. WARTS are known by Sight, being of various Kinds: Some hard, some soft,
some jagged on the Top, as if they were Flowering or Seeding; some having broad
Roots, some small; proceeding from an Earthy, Pituitous or Melancholy Matter.

II. If they have small Roots, they may easily be taken away, wherever they
be, either by tying them with a Thread hard, whereby they are deprived of their
Nourishment; or by Pinching them, after which they fall, or may otherwise be
cut off; but some nip them off with their Nails, at once; after which they
never come again.

III. Those with broad Roots, are first to be cut down, or pricked, after which
they are removed with various Medicines: Some rub them with the Juice of
Marigold Leaves; others take them away with Purslain bruised, and applied.

IV. Some commend the Liver of Colocynthis to be bound to them; it is singular,
if it be mixed with Red Praecipitate. Others use Dissolvents, or Potential
Cauteries.

V. Or you may strew them with Filings of Brass, over which you may lay an
Emplaster, to keep them on. Or this, Basiticon j. Verdigrise gr, xiv. mix and
apply it, over which lay a sticking Emplaster.

VI. Some commend the Water which runs from Ash-sticks burnt, or that which
stands in the Roots of Oak-trees when cut down; others affirm, the stroaking
them with a dead Man's Hand to be efficacious; and I have known several have
found it true by Experience.

VII. Others lay a Defensative round about them, and then carefully prick them;
after which they apply one drop of the Oil of Vitriol or Sulphur upon them, and
over that a sticking Emplaster; by which means they become effectually removed.

VIII. CORNS, are a Disease proceeding from the same Cause which Warts come
from, and they are also of various kinds; some are hard, some soft, some with a
single root, and some with a manifold.

IX. You must first cut them as near as you can, in the Wane of the Moon, with
a very sharp Knife, and then apply over them Emplastrum de Ranis cum Mercurio.

X. Or this: Basilicon j. Red Praecipitate ss. mix, and apply it, over which
lay a sticking Emplaster; it will certainly do, if kept long enough to them. Or
this: Red Wax, and spread it on Leather, upon which strew Red Praecipitate, and
apply it.

XI. Or this: Red Wax j. Verdigrise ss. Oil of Ben q.s. mix, and make an
Emplaster, which apply upon the Corns: Some apply the Leaves of Ivy bruised,
Morning and Night, which generally Cures in fifteen Days.

XII. Others apply a Desensative round about the Corns, and being cut close,
drop upon them one drop of Oils of Vitriol or Sulphur; or a few drops of the
Juice of Spurge, which some say is a Specific.

XIII. Others have had them cured by Application of Bean-leaves or Celandine,
bruised and applied for certain days, after which Basilicon and Red
Praecipitate have consummated the Cure.

XIV. But if all these things fail, you must come to cutting them out; thus,
Cut them round with the point of your Incision-knife, then tie them with a
Twine Thread, turning them with it every way as you cut them, by degrees
winding the Thread about them; and continue your cutting round, till you come
to the very root of the Corn, and they are perfectly removed.

XV. After which, if the place bleeds, apply some Natural Balsam, as de Peru,
de Tolu, or de Chili, or Balsamum Lucatelli, and a Plaster of Diachylon simplex.

XVI. If the Part about be hard, lay over it Mynsicht's Emplastrum de Galbano
Crocatum, mixed with a little Sal Armoniack; or this: Galbanum extracted with
Vinegar j. Shippitch ss. Diachylon simplex ij. Sal Armoniack j. mix them: This
is said to remove both Corns and Warts, if renewed every third or fourth Day.

CHAP. XXXVII. REMOVING CARUNCLES.
I. CAruneles or Carnosities growing in the Urethra, or passage of Urine and
Seed, are a kind of fleshy substance, not much differing from the nature of a
Wart, and may be properly called Warts of the Vrethra, which when they are
grown to a considerable bigness, stop up the passage.

II. These are to be removed either with Medicines, or Instrument: The first is
done by conveying a Caustic, or other proper Matter to them, through an hollow
Pipe: The latter is done by putting in an Instrument, and rubbing them hard.

III. If then there be Caruncles or Carnosities in the passage, you may put up
a little Suppository made of equal parts of Vng. Fuscum Wurtzii, and Honey of
Roses, boiled up to a fit thickness.

IV. Or this: Litharge ij. Minium j. Flowers of Sulphur iij. Ung. Aegyptiacum
j. Honey of Roses q.s. mix them, and herewith anoint a Wax-candle, which put up
the Vrethra, repeating it twice or thrice a Day, till there is a perfect
cleansing.

V. Washing in Limewater (not too strong) is excellent, so also with our Aqua
Ophthalmica, they being injected with a Syringe: Lastly, you may heal with
Vnguentum Mirabile: Inwardly take a Traumatick, Sudorifick, and Antivenerial
Diet.

VI. But if it cannot be cured by any of the former means, or if it grows so
great as to stop the Water, you must come to Manual Operation.

VII. But that no other Parts but only the Caruncle may be eaten away, and that
the Urine might not wash away the Medicines that are applied, you must (by the
Advice of Fabritius ab Aquapendente) make a Pipe of Linen, and smear it over
with white Wax: Let it be in length about an Inch, or an Inch and half, and so
broad as to be equal to the Silver Catheter, and at the end thereof let a long
Thread hang.

VIII. This Linen Pipe let be smeared over with this Liniment, Honey calcined
to Ashes, Tutty prepared, fresh Butter, Turpentine washed, Wax, a. ss. burnt
Alum ss. melt and mix; this consumes the Caruncle without pain, or excoriation
of the sound Part.

IX. But some highly commend the following of Rochus Cervierus. Take Sulphur
Vive, Mercury Praecipitate, Verdigrise, Crude Antimony, all in Powder, a. iij.
white Wax j. which mix well in a Leaden Mortar with Oil of Roses q.s. to an
Ointment.

X. The Linen Pipe being anointed with one of these, must upon the Catheter be
thrust into the Urethra, till it meet with the Caruncle, then the Catheter is
to be drawn back, and the Linen Pipe left in the passage, to be afterward
drawn forth by its fastened Thread.

CHAP. XXXVIII. REMOVING of HUMORS.
I. HVmours are removed several ways, the chief of which are these four, 1. By
Friction. 2. By Bathing. 3. By Sweating. 4. By Fasting. There are other ways of
removing of Humors, as by Purging, Vomiting, Urine, and Salivation; but these
belong rather to Internal Administration, than Manual Operation.

I. Of FRICTION.
II. Friction is a rubbing of the whole Body, or of some of its Parts, as Head,
Back, Shoulders, Arms, Thighs, Legs, etc. with course Cloths, or other proper
things.

III. The Intention is, to disperse Humors, Excrements, Spirits, loosen
Obstructions, open the Pores, divert Fluxes and Rheums, cause free Circulation
of the Blood, prevent Scabs, Itch, Pustules, Breakings out, Tumors, Cramps,
and take away cold pains, (caused through Congelation) in most parts of the
Body.

IV. It is to be done with awarm Hand, Sponge, or course Linen Clothwarmed;
beginning at first softly, and increasing by degrees, till the place becomes
red, first from lower Parts, and so ascending upwards.

V. If it be done soft and long, it opens the Pores, and wastes the Humors: if
hard and short, it makes the Skin red for a time: if hard and long, it fastens
and makes the Flesh hard, and stirs up natural heat.

II. BATHING.
VI. Baths are either Natural, or Artificial.

VII. Natural Baths are chiefly those at Bath ( supposed to spring from
Sulphur, and some Golden Mineral, Iron, etc.)

VIII. They are used in Palsies, Sciatica's, Numbness, Hardness, and
Contractions of the Nerves, Morphew, Scabs, Scurf, old Sores, Tumors, old
Pains, Diseases of the Joints, Liver, Spleen, Itch, Leprosy, etc.

IX. Artificial Baths are made in Imitation of the Natural, and to the same
intentions and purposes: of which you may see several forms in Our Pharmac.
Land. which may easily be made much stronger, by the Solution of proper
Minerals therein.

X. They are used either to the whole Body, or to a Part only; not too hot, for
fear of hurting, and always after due purging.

XI. The time is chiefly at Eight in the Morning, and about Five in the
Afternoon: At first, stay in not much above half an hour; the following times
you may stay in an hour or two, as your strength and convenience will serve.

XII. Being too much used, they dry and weaken the Body: Their use is to ease
Pain, open the Pores, evacuate superfluous Humors, resolve, make thin, heat,
cool, dry, moisten, cure Gouts, Sciatica's, Poxes, Leprosies, etc.

XIII. An Artificial Bath of Sulphur may be thus made. Take Flowers of Sulphur
xx. Salt of Tartar or Potashes x. Water lbx. mix, and boil for two hours, or
something more, almost continually stirring it; then put it all together into a
Bathing-tub almost full of warm Water, fit for Bathing in. It is excellent
against Scabs, Itch, Scurf, Morphew, Leprosy, French Pox, and other Breakings
out.

II. SWEATING.
XIV. Sweating, it is used for all the same Intentions and Purposes that Baths
are designed for, and no ways inferior to them; and being used three or four
times a Year, is found to be a good expedient against the Scurvy, and to
preserve the Body in Health.

XV. Go into it in the Morning, with an empty Stomach (as to Food,) but it will
be good to be repleat with two or three Glasses of Sack.

XVI. In the time of the Sweat, give some pleasant Sudorifick Cordial, a little
sharpened with Oil of Vitriol or Sulphur. Take Black-Cherry-water ij. Our Aqua
Bezoartica j. Syrup of Citrons ss. mix them. Or thus: Take Carduus Water ij.
Our Aqua Bezoartica j. Syrup of Red Poppies ss. Spirit of Sulphur, enough to
give it a grateful acidity.

XVII. Stay in as long as may be conveniently, but come forth before Fainting,
wiping off (in the mean season) the Sweat with warmed Napkins.

XVIII. Then let the Patient be immediately laid in a warm Bed, and covered
with Cloths, where let them Sweat well again for two or three Hours, and if
they can, repose themselves to sleep.

XIX. If they enter into the Sweat about seven or eight in the Morning, they
may rise before Dinner, and use gentle Exercise, keeping themselves warm,
because the Pores are open.

XX. The way of doing it, is in Hartman 's Chair, with Spirit of Wine set on
Fire: Which certainly was one of the most happy Inventions in the World: I
shall omit the description of it at this time, because it is now common in
London.

IV. FASTING.
XXI. Fasting is of use (whilst the Body is emptying) to lessen the quantity of
Humors, by hindering their Generation, and this chiefly in universal ill
habits, and elderly people: For Children are scarcely able to bear it, nor
Choleric People; for Bile causes a vast Consumption of Humidity.

XXII. This possibly is one of the most useful courses in the whole Art of
Physic or Surgery; for as much as many Diseases may be cured by Fasting
alone, which no other course could do any good in.

XXIII. Besides, the Stomach being empty, draw Humors from all other Parts of
the Body; by which means they come to be removed, and so cast forth in the
common Draught, with the other Recrements of the Body.

XXIV. More especially, it is to be used in all Diseases proceeding from
fullness, for in them it makes an Alteration almost to a Miracle; and therefore
it is of great use in Surfeits of every kind, and Diseases proceeding from
Gluttony, Gormandizing, and Drunkenness.

V. DIARTHROSIS.
CHAP. XXXIX. Of CROOKEDNESS in General.
I. THis Fifth part of the Art is called by some in Greek, (...), Diarthrosis,
Articulatio, commissura Artuum; and is intended to rectify ill Conformation,
in reducing it to its natural Figure by right Articulating of it, whence
Diarthrosis, Articulating.

II. But in my Opinion, from the nature of the Intention, it ought rather to be
called (...), Diorthosis, emendatio, seu directio, because it is rather a
mending, directing, or putting into a right state or situation, what is
distorted, crooked, or out of order.

III. It is directed chiefly, 1. To rectify, or set straight a Crookedness of
the Back. 2. A Crookedness of the Arms and Legs. 3. A Crookedness of the
Fingers. 4. Of Feet and Toes.

IV. The Parts affected, and which particularly cause these Distortions, are,
the Muscles, and in them the Nerves and Tendons especially, and sometimes the
Bone it self.

V. The Signs. These are so evident, that they need not be declared, being
manifest both to Sight and Feeling.

VI. The Causes. Though they arise sometimes from Wounds, Fractures or
Dislocations (whose Cure depends upon the Cure and right Healing of those
Diseases) yet they many times are connate from Infancy, and arise from a
Rickety Disposition, or from some Cause, inward or outward, which might have
been cured, had it not been neglected.

VII. The Prognostics. If the Cure be attempted, whilst the Patient is young
and tender, the Distortion may be rectified with ease; for then, the Parts
being more flexible, are more apt for a Reduction.

VIII. But if they be grown stiff or callous, and into a kind of a Bony
hardness; the Restoration is much to be doubted, if not impossible; more
especially if there be Age withal.

IX. The Cure. First, the Parts affected ought to be Fomented, Bathed, or
Anointed with Emollients and Softners; as a Bath of Milk, Emollient Oils and
Liniments; and after them the Application of softning Emplasters.

X. A softning Oil. Oil of sweet Fennel-seeds iss. Oil of Ben. or of sweet
Almonds ivss. mix them; with which anoint Morning and Evening.

XI. A softning Ointment. Oil of Aniseeds jss. pure golden colored and sweet
scented Palm Oil iij. mix them, and anoint well therewith, Morning and Evening.

XII. A softning Liniment. rectified Oil of Vitriol j. Oil Olive iij. mix them:
With this anoint once a day; it is much better than any of the former, and
resolves more.

XIII. A softning Bath. Spirit of Nitre j. Spirit of Vitriol j. mix them, and
therewith gently bathe the Contorted or Contracted Parts.

XIV. In the intervals of Anointing, you ought also to anoint with Neuroticks,
of which this is an excellent thing. Oil of Nutmegs, or Mace by Expression iij.
Oil of Lavender and Limons a. ss. mix them.

XV. Or thus. Earthworms lbss. which cleanse, by washing first in Water, then
in Wine, cut them small, and affuse upon them (in a large Receiver) Oil Olive
lbss. or rather as much Oil of sweet Almonds, Oil of Limon; ij. and upon warm
Embers resolve into Liquor, which strain out strongly by pressing.

XVI. This is an excellent Oil, for the Liquor of the Worms, by its peculiar
Virtue, penetrates immediately; and passes to the Nerves and Nervous Parts,
Veins, Arteries, etc. moderately warming, humecting, and strengthening them;
whilst, mean season, the Viscous Substance thereof occludes the Pores, and
keeps in the Heat, in order for resolution of the hardened and constricted Parts.

XVII. Afterward you may apply also Emplasterwise, Mynsicht's Galbanum
Crocatum, or Ammoniacum cum Cicuta, or de Ranis, with triple quantity of
Mercury: For by these various Applications, the Parts will be beforehand
prepared for the use of the Instruments.

XVIII. For the whole stress of the Cure seems to lie upon the right
Contrivance, Making, and Affixing of the Instruments; without which, nothing
can indeed be done; but, in a manner, all your Labor will be in vain.

XIX. Wherefore, fit Instruments being made; and the former softning Medicines
used for some time beforehand; you must come to the Application of the
Instrument, (using also your softning Medicines as before) together with
Splenia, or Bolsters, and proper Bandage; as the Nature, Position, and Form of
the Part requires.

CHAP. XL. CROOKEDNESS of the BACK.
I. THIS is thought to proceed mostly from the Rickets; which, while the
Patient is young, if not neglected, may be cured, but by the help of
Instruments.

II. There is generally a fullness of one Shoulder, more than in the other,
which tends that way, if not prevented, and while it is in beginning, may be
helped by constant Swinging.

III. Sometimes it is in the Spine, the Vertebrae being contorted, mostly
outward, seldom (if ever) inwards; and also to either side, which is most
usual with young Girls, who have generally a debility of the Leg of the same
side.

IV. Though these kinds of Crookedness are many times caused from the Rickets, or
a Defluxion of a Morbifick Matter; yet they are many times caused from an ill
Conformation in the Womb, or some Pituitous Humor, collected about the
Vertebrae.

V. Sometimes also it is caused, as aforementioned, by external Violence, from
Falls, Bruises, or a constant ill Posture of the Body, whilst Young and Tender,
in sitting, standing, carrying, bowing down forwards, writing, sowing, or
making to use their Feet too soon.

VI. Many times also it is the Mothers fault, who striving to have them small
in the Waste, by strait lacing, draws their Bodies aside; more especially, if
there be any thing in the Cloths on either side, which hurts them: Which ill
custom, if the Child escapes Crookedness, it commonly brings other ill
Diseases, as Obstructions of the Viscera, Greensickness, Consumptions, etc.

VII. The Cure. Here Emollient and Discussive Oils, Ointments, Liniments,
Balsams, and Emplasters are to be used, (Examples of which you have in the
aforegoing Chapter) before the Application of the Instrument.

VIII. The Instrument is a Steel Compress, or Bodice, fitted to the Body to be
reduced: It is to be full of Holes, that it may be the lighter and cooler; and
lined with Cotton, that it may not hurt; bunching inwards, answerable to the
bunching out of the Back.

IX. This Compress is to be gently and gradually used, being straightened by
degrees; for without the use thereof, all other Medicines will be applied in
vain; whilst, by the use thereof, some have been restored in about eight or ten
Months time, or a Year at farthest.

X. As you perceive the Reduction to come on you must accordingly alter the
Compress, viz. for such as are not yet come to their Growth, where they are to
be altered every third Month.

XI. Where the Person was very youthful, I have known this affect Cured by
swinging by the Arms and Arm-holes, and sometimes gently by the Chin in a
Sling, and the success was wonderful; but this is much better for a Gibbosity
in the Shoulder, or where one Shoulder grows higher than another.

XII. If the Patient is come to their full Growth, the means of Cure, and all
Trials of this Operation is in vain.

XIII. If the Patient be very Young, the Compress, or Bodice, may be made of
stiff Whale-bone; so fitted to keep the Backbone upright, repress the bunching
out, and defend the Parts.

XIV. And about the Seventh Vertebra of the Back, some advise to open an Issue,
which is said to intercept the Humor flowing down, if it should seem to affect
the Hip, Reins, or Feet.

XV. Hildanus has an Observation, which I care not if I insert, it is Cent. 5.
Observe. 67. pagina mea 458. of a young Girl about Eighteen Months old, who had
the Vertebrae of her Loins beginning to grow bunched outward.

XVI. After that some Barbers had for diverse Months attempted the Cure, with
Unguents, Baths, and Plates of Lead, but all in vain, for that the Spine did
bunch out daily more and more; Hildanus was then called, who found the Third
and Fourth Vertebrae of the Loins to bunch out, as large as a Ducks Egg, which
were gradually followed by the Second and Fifth.

XVII. By which means the Spine being grown into a great Bunch, especially
toward the left side; it also made the left Leg much weaker than the right.

XVIII. First, he rubbed the Back, whole Thigh and Leg, with the following
Water, to strengthen the Nerves. Water distilled from Juniper Berries without
Wine, Waters of Sage, Betony, and Lavender a. ij. Powder of Tormentil-Roots,
and Rose-Leaves a. ij. make an Infusion, by digesting eight or ten days in a
large Vessel, decant the clear, and keep it for use.

XIX. After Chasing, he applied the following Emplaster. Emplast. Slotani (or,
in place thereof, Ammoniacum cum Cicuta) v. new Wax ij. Osteocolla j. Pouders
of Comfrey-Roots, Terrae sigillata a. ij. Pouders of Balaustians, Cypress-Nuts,
Damask-Roses a. j. mix them over a gentle Fire, and make an Emplaster, by
adding Oil of Roses, or of Mastich q.s.

XX. To repress the Extuberance of the Vertebrae, he made an Iron Plate, a
little bent, long and broad enough to cover the whole Gibbosity, and quilted it
into a Compress, or Bodice, between Cloths, that it might hurt the Child the
less.

XXI. This Compress was worn upon the Naked Body, and so fitted, as to
comprehend all her Belly, to the Muliebria: It was tied on with a long Strap
over the middle of the Belly; and about the Breast, it was gently tied, that it
might not straiten the Ribs, or Midriff.

XXII. But below the Bastard Ribs, to the bottom of the Abdomen, it was
straightly tied, that the Iron Plate might repress the bunching-out Vertebrae.

XXIII. And lest the Compress should have slipped upwards, two Straps, an Inch
broad, were fastened on each side the Groin, to go under the Perinaeum, and to
turn up again upon the Buttocks, and so were fastened by Straps to the Compress
on either side.

XXIV. He ordered all from the Hip to the Foot, to be Chafed with the aforesaid
Water every day; and the Plaster and Chasing upon the Extuberance every Fourth,
or Sixth day; by which means, through God's Blessing, the Child was Cured in
Six Months: But she wore the Bodice and Plate, by reason of the weakness of the
Parts, Two Years; in which time she grew very well.

CHAP. XLI. CROOKEDNESS of the ARMS and LEGS.
I. IT is known by Sight: The Cause is many times Defluxions of Humors,
Rickets, King's Evil, Dislocations, and Tumors, hard to be cured, called by
Hippocrates, Galangones.

II. The Prognostics. If it be from a Contraction of the Tendons and Muscles,
it is more easily Cured, than if it proceeds from Repletion of the Cavities, by
a thick, pituitous and viscous Humor, which may fall, not only in this, but in
other Joints, after Defluxions, great Pain and Weakness.

III. If also there be a Callus, in or near the Joint, (from an Erosion of the
two ends of the Bones by some sharp Humor, whereby an intervening Callus makes
them grow into one, as in Fractures) then it is in vain to attempt the Cure:
For, let the Artist do what he can, it will ever after be stiff and useless.

IV. The Cure. If it be without a Callus, after Vniversals have been premised,
let the Nerves, Muscles and Tendons be softened by Emollients, either by
Fomenting or Anointing.

V. You may Foment with the Powers of Amber or Aniseeds: If you anoint, you may
do it with this. Oil of bitter Almonds iv. Oleum Succini, Anisi. a. j. mix
them: It softens beyond all imagination.

VI. Also, the Disaffected Part ought to be held an hour or two in a hot Bath
of warm Water, in every Gallon of which, iij. of Sal Armoniack is dissolved.

VII. And you may after Bathing, apply this following Cataplasm: Baked Turnips
lbij. Oil of Turpentine and Aniseeds, a. iij. mix, and apply it as hot as can
well be endured, letting it lie on all Night.

VIII. Which done, Bathe it again, as before directed; then anoint with the
aforementioned Oil, and after apply the aforedirected Cataplasm again; which
course repeat twice a day, so long till you find the contracted Part made
somewhat supple and pliant.

IX. Then come to the Application of the Instruments, which ought to be so
ordered, as, 1. To crush the Prominent and Unequal Parts. 2. That it may
scarcely touch the hollow, but rather defend it from Compression. 3. That it be
so fitted to the Parts, as to hinder motion as little as may be.

X. The Instrument is various, according to the Parts affected; but that which
serves for the Elbow, may serve for the Wrist and Knee, which is thus:

XI. Make a Casket of Wood or Iron, in fashion of a Ring, and of such a breadth
as may compass the whole Joint: In that for the Knees, there must be a hollow
for the Rotula, in the midst of the Casket must be a Screw, which is to pass
into the Ring, the Ring also having Hinges, by which it may open and shut; to
the Gasket put straps of Leather to fasten it, both above and below the Joint.
The Screw is made, to bring gradually the Joint into form. See the Figure
thereof in Scultetus, Table 18. Fig. I. and Table 43. at C.

XII. Immediately, upon the Part affected you must put an Emollient or softning
Emplaster, with which it must be dressed twice a day; I have found mighty
success in a Cerecloth made of Empl. de Minio, made with Oil, without Wax, and
not boiled too much; it alone restored a Contracture in the Elbow, of many
Years standing.

XIII. Then six the Instrument to it, which let be well guarded with Tow,
Cotton, or Lint, to be kept on Night and Day, as you see occasion, or as the
Patient can bear it.

XIV. Every time the Insirument is taken off, the Part must be bathed, or
fomented, anointed, and a new Emplaster applied, straitening the Instrument
every Day, as you see the disaffection requires it.

XV. By this means the Crooked Limb comes to be extended, which is yet to be
done with all gentleness, lest Pain be excited, and evil Symptoms arise.

XVI. If the Contracture is in the Knee, whilst the Instrument is sixth to it,
the Patient ought to walk gently upon it, if he be able. But if it be in the
Arm, he must then often stirit, sometimes forwards, and sometimes backwards.

XVII. Hildanus his description of the Instrument for the Thigh. It is a wooden
Case or Cradle, made hollow, and fit to receive the Thigh about the middle; and
the Small of the Leg a little above the Ancle.

XVIII. Then there must be an Iron Hoop, fit to receive the Knee, with an Hinge
to open and shut, and with a Button, and several holes to straiten or widen it,
as there shall be occasion: A Male Screw must be put through a hole in the Hoop,
just in the Ham, and a hole in the wooden Cradle, which is placed behind, and
made fast with strings to the middle of the Thigh, and Small of the Leg. This
Male Screw, must rest by a Shoulder in the Hoop; then the Female Screw must
screw on behind the wooden Cradle, and thereby the Leg extended, as much as you
see needful.

XIX. Hildanus has C^ed Crooked Elbows without this Instrument, only by the use
of Emollients, and causing the Patient every Hour to lift some heavy Matter
with his Hand, as a Pail full of Stones, and to walk about with it; this is an
easy Method, but he says he has found great success in it.

XX. Crookedness of the Legs is also many times remedied by Boots, Splints,
Boulsters, and such like, fitted to the Part, using withal, Emollient Baths,
Oils, Ointments, and Emplasters.

CHAP. XLII. CROOKEDNESS of the FINGERS.
I. THE same Method that we have prescribed in softning the Contracted Nerves,
Tendons, and Muscles of other Parts, must be taken here; after which an
Extender ought to be fitted to the Finger or Fingers contracted, to stretch
them forth gradually, (if the thing is to be done;) and the use thereof to be
continued so long, till the Parts are restored to their natural Situation,
conformation and Use.

II. Hildanus, Cent. 1. Observe. 83. has a famous Example. I had a Patient,
(says he) a Child, about fourteen Months old, who, falling into the Fire, burnt
his right hand.

III. His four Fingers, and the external Part of the Metacarpus were so burnt,
that the ends of his Fingers were drawn back, to their first Articulation or
Roots.

IV. The Father of the Child committed the Cure to Ignorant Persons; so that
the Skin of the back of the Hand and Fingers was shrunk up, and grown together
into a kind of Globular Form.

V. About Seven Months after it was healed, the Child was brought to me: I
first Purged it with Broth in which Manna was dissolved; then I used the
following Emollient Decoction and Ointment, for several days.

VI. The Decoction. Althaea, the whole Plant, Root and all, Roots of Bryony, of
white Lilies a. j. Flowers of Camomil, Melilot, Hypericon, Ground Pine,
Germander a. M.j. Linseed, Foenugreek-seed a. j. Broth made of a Wethers or
Calves Feet and Head q.s. mix, and boil them together for a Fomentation.

VII. I anointed the whole Arm and Hand with this Ointment: Ointment of
Marshmallows j. Mans-grease, Hens, Goose and Bears-grease a. ij. Mucilage of
Earthworms ss. mix, and make an Ointment.

VIII. After Anointing, I wrapped the Hand (says he) in Emplastrum de
Mucilaginibus; by which means the Contracted Sinews, and Callosity of the back
of the Hand and Fingers, grown together on the said back of the Hand, were
sufficiently mollified.

IX. I then with a Rasour cut away the Callus, between the Fingers and
Metacarpus, then I separated the Fingers; after which I strewed on my Powder to
stop Bleeding, and applied Whites of Eggs mixed with Rose and Plantane-water,
together with Oil of Roses.

X. Which done, I applied a Defensative to the Wrist, and Anointed the whole
Arm with Oils of Roses, of Myrtles and Earthworms.

XI. The next Day was laid upon the Incisions this Digestive, with soft Lint.
Turpentine washed in Rose and Plantane-waters j. Oils of Roses and of Eggs, a.
ij. Saffron ss. Yolk of one Egg, mix them. And withal, the Arm was Anointed
with the aforementioned Oils.

XII. The Fifth Day I applied an Instrument, with which, by degrees, the
Fingers were drawn and extended to their natural site.

XIII. It was made of a Splint three Inches broad, and long enough to reach
nearly from the Elbow to the Wrist: And at the end next the Wrist, it had a
stick fastened across it, with four round Pegs standing up.

XIV. The Splint was tied in two places round the Arm, with a Band; which being
thus tied on, and well Lined with Lint or Cotton, Finger-stalls of Leather were
put upon the Ends of the Fingers, with Strings to fasten them to the Four Pegs
beforementioned.

XV. Every Day they were bent more and more, which that it might be the better
done, the Arm and Hand were Anointed with the Ointment at Sect. 7. above, as
often as the Wounds were dressed.

XVI. And that the Fingers might not grow together again, Plates of Lead were
put between them: Thus were the Fingers, by little and little, restored to
their natural Posture.

XVII. Mean season, the Wounds were healed and Cicatrized; not with vehement
Driers, but with things which were withal a little Emollient; whereby, with the
Blessing of God, the Hand was perfectly Cured.

CHAP. XLIII. CROOKED FEET and TOES.
I. CRookedness between the Joints, if the Patient be Young, is cured by the
like Means and Instruments; but they are commonly fitted to the Part, that they
may be serviceable, and not troublesome. See Paraeus, Lib. 23. Cap. 10.

II. If the Feet be Distorted, or turned Inwards, it is called Varis; but if
Outward, Valgus.

III. In Varis, bind the Ancles together, and put Bolsters between the Great
Toes: In Valgus, bind them close at the Toes, and put thick Bolsters between
the Ancles and Heels.

IV. If they have been of long standing, you must have half Cases, from above
the Knees to the Toes, made of Steel, Brass, Wood or Leather, to which fit
Straps and Buckles to fasten them, one at the Gartering place, one a little
above the Ancle, and another where the Shoes are tied.

V. We will give you an Example of a Cure of this kind, out of the Famous
Hildanus, Cent. 6. Obser. 90. A Woman with Child going in Pattens, stumbled,
and was out of order after it: When brought to Bed, (which was of a Boy) its
right Foot was distorted, so much that his Toes, and all his Foot turned
inwards, toward the inside of his Ancle.

VI. So that the Child when grown big enough to walk, trod more upon the
out-part of his Ancle, than the Sole of his Foot: For this, much means was
tried, but all in vain.

VII. When he was something above Three Years old, and all the hopes of
Restoration were past, they desired my help: I viewed, and considered well; but
(to speak Truth) despaired of restoring the Foot, for that the distortion was
old and confirmed.

VIII. Yet at the Parents request, I attempted the Cure; first purging the
Child with Manna, and Syrup of Roses Solutive, alternatim; lest by Baths and
Fomentations I should attract Humors to the Part affected.

IX. The Body twice or thrice purged, the following Emollient Decoction was
used two or three times a Day, for Ten or Twelve Days together.

X. Roots of Althaea, Mallows, a. ss. Herbs and Flowers of Betony, Ground Pine,
Camomil and Melilot Flowers, a. M. j. Linseed and Foenugreek-seed, a. j. Broth
of Sheeps Feet and Heads q.s. mix, and make a Decoction, for use.

XI. After the Foot and Leg had been somented with the former Decoction, they
were anointed with this Ointment: Oil of white Lilies, of sweet Almonds, a. ss.
Oil of Earthworms j. Oil of Juniper Berries ij. mix them.

XII. Then the following Emplaster was applied; Empl. de Mucilaginibus ijss.
Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in Spirit of Juniper and strained, and boiled again to
a thickness j. new Wax ss. Oil of Eggs j. dissolve over a gentle Fire; and mix
therewith Powder of Betony Flowers, of Ground Pine, and Red Roses, a. ij.
Saffron, Powder of Earthworms, Mastich, Olibanum, a. j. mix, and make an
Emplaster, S.A. adding a little Oil of Roses, if need be. It wonderfully
mollifies, and strengthens the Nervous Parts.

XIII. The Foot and other Parts being sufficiently softened, the Emollients were
left off, and Corroboratives applied: But in the mean time, whilst the
Emollients were used, a kind of Boot, or high Shoe was also put on, which shall
hereafter be described.

XIV. And although the Foot was wonderfully distorted, yet after the Emollients
were for some time used, it were easily reduced into its natural form, and that
without pains. But as soon as ever the Hand was off it, it would presently
return to its former irregular Figure.

XV. And whenever the Foot was extended, and reduced to its Natural posture, a
great hollowness was selt between the inner Ancle, and the Sole of the Foot.

XVI. For the Process of the lower Appendix of the Os Tibiae, which constitutes
the inner Ancle, (for that it had rested a long time upon the Os Calcis) was
depressed, and stood at a distance from the Os Calcis; and the Process of the
Fibula, which makes the outward Ancle, was preternaturally prominent, and
twisted the Foot inwards.

XVII. To reduce therefore the Foot to its natural Posture and Form, it was
needful to sink the prominence of the Fibula, and a little to prolong the
Defect of the Process of the Appendix of the os Tibiae: The former was
performed by Art and Pains; the latter, through Natures Assistance.

XVIII. That Nature is thus wonderfully solicitous for the preservation of her
Individuum, I can demonstrate by an Instance in my Study.

XIX. I have the Skeleton of a Capon, which had broke its left Thigh Bone short
off, and the one end of the broken Bone grew over the other by a firm Callus;
and therefore that Leg must have been shorter than the other: But provident
Nature made the Os Tibiae of that Leg of much longer than the Os Tibiae of the
right, so that no Inequality or Deformity was left.

XX. Now if it may be thus in Brutes, why not so in Children, while they are
growing, more especially if they be of a healthful Habit of Body, as this
Patient was?

XXI. But to our Cure again: The Foot being thus sufficiently softened, it was
(with the whole Leg) Anointed with this Mixture: Juice of Earthworms, Aqua
Betonicae, waters of Groundpine, Sage and Juniper a. q.s. mix them. After which
the following Plaster was applied.

XXII. Emplastrum Slotani (or, in place thereof, Emplast. of Ammoniacum cum
Cicuta) iij. fine Gum Elemi, new Wax a. j. Mastich, Olibanum, Earthworms, all
in Powder a. ij. Powder of Red Roses, Balaustians, Cypress-Nuts a. j. Oil of
Earthworms q.s. mix, and make a Cerate, which spread upon Leather, and apply
it, renewing it every sixth day.

XXIII. Then having replaced the Foot in its natural Posture, which will be
done without pain, the following Instrument was so cleverly applied to the
Foot, that it could not get back into its former preternatural Posture, unless
the Swaths and Bandage should chance to be loosned.

XXIV. The Instrument. It was made of Iron, shaped like a half Boot, but parted
about the mid-leg, and held together by two Iron Pins, running into two Loops,
and a Screw between them; to let the lower Part down, or draw it up tight, as
occasion should require.

XXV. This lower part was so made, as to take hold of the Foot, and keep it
from starting any way, out of its proper place, and was for the outside of the
Leg, being fastened to a piece above the Knee, by a Pin to run on, for the
Motion of the Knee.

XXVI. The inside of the Leg was covered with Splints lined with Tow or Cotton,
and so the Instrument on the outside, was fastened round the Leg by Strings.

XXVII. The Foot being thus tied strait and fast in this manner, the Prominence
of the Fibula was depressed, or at least hindered from starting out.

XXVIII. And the Process of the lower Appendix of the Os Tibiae (since there
was a hollowness) might grow out, and so gradually fill up the Emptiness about
the inner Ancle. Thus the Deformity, and ill Position of the Foot was
rectified; so that when the Child walked, no fault was perceived.

XXIX. From what has been said, and may be observed in the History of this
Cure, it is evident, that disaffections of this kind require long time, much
Industry, and great Skill, with gentle Management; for Violence does no good,
it is Natures Business to correct and mend such Deformities, joined with a
Skilful Artist's help.

XXX. The Child wore the aforesaid Instrument a whole Year; and then another
was contrived for the Child to wear afterward; because Children, when they are
growing, must have new ones fitted to them, as the old ones are out-grown.

XXXI. And in such like Cases as these are, a Physician must set himself to
work, to invent proper Instruments; without which, the very best of Medicines
may be used to no purpose.

VI. PROSTHESIS.
CHAP. XLIV. Of BALDNESS.
I. (...), Prosthesis, additio, a (...), appono, is that part of the Art, which
teaches how to add to, or supply Parts which are wanting; which are chiefly, 1.
Hair, in Baldness. 2. A Lip, in a Hare-Lip. 3. Eyes, Nose, Teeth. 4. Arms and
Legs; of which in order.

II. Baldness falls under the Title of Defedation; and therefore what relates
to the Medicinal Cure, shall here be omitted, referring you to the Chapter of
Baldness in Lib. 2. following.

III. There are several kinds of falling of the Hair, as, 1. Tinea, when the
Hair falls off one by one, being eaten and consumed by certain Worms, known by
the Hairs being one shorter than another, and uneven, small Worms sticking in
their Ends.

IV. 2. Area, the falling off the Hair, from certain parts of the Head, and is
threefold; 1. Alopecia, a Fox-like shedding of the Hair, in Patches, without
any kind of Figure. 2. Ophiasis, a Serpent-like shedding of the Hair, beginning
in the hinder part of the Head, and creeping to the fore part of the Head. 3.
Leprous, accompanied with Scales, Scurff, Dandriff, Morphew.

V. 3. Defluvium, wherein all or most of the Hair falls off, in most places of
the Head; which is caused, 1. From Defect of Nourishment, as in Persons
Consumptive, and such as are sick of Hectic or Malign Fevers. 2. From evil
Humors, which eat and corrode the Roots of the Hair. 3. From the Rarity and
ill Disposition of the Pores of the Skin.

VI. 4. Calvities, Baldness, when the Hair falls off wholly from the forepart
of the Head; caused from a defect of Nourishment, dryness of the Brain, either
through Age, or some violent Causes, as too much use of Coition.

VII. Many of these are very difficult to Cure; the last is said to be
uncurable: The remedy in this Case, is an Artificial covering, being Hair made
up into a Perriwig, according to the Barbers Art; of which we shall say no more
in this place.

CHAP. XLV. Of a HARE-LIP.
I. IT is known by sight, being sometimes single, sometimes double; sometimes
in one Lip only, and sometimes in both Lips.

II. Sometimes the Lip is much cleft, showing two or three Teeth of the upper
Jaw; sometimes it is less, and sometimes double cleft, there remaining only a
piece between both, which, unless it be callous, need not be taken away, though
its usual so to do.

III. Sometimes with these, not only the upper Jaw, but also the Roof of the
Mouth is divided in two, one side of the upper Jaw Bone standing out, with a
Tooth or two more than the other, without the Lip.

IV. The Cause. It is usually from Frights, and strong Fancies in the Mother,
whilst she goes with Child; which are also many times the cause of Monstrous
Births.

V. The Prognostics. It Is more dangerous to be done upon a grown, than a young
Person, though happily, it has sometimes been done in Persons of Thirty Years of
Age.

VI. The younger Children are when they are Cut, the better and the safer it
is; yea, if it may be, whilst they are Infants, unless they be sick or weak.

VII. The Cure. You ought to consult whether the loss of the part of the
Hare-lip can be helped by reunion, otherwise it is not to be meddled withal. It
is a work of Art to excoriate the Parts, and keep them close together, that by
the Blood they may unite.

VIII. Choose a very clear place, and put the Patient into his proper Seat, (if
a Child, into the Lap of a strong and discreet Person;) and let one stand
behind to hold the Head, the Child's Hands being tied down; and, if possible,
let it be kept from Sleep for ten or twelve Hours before the Operation, that it
may be disposed for Sleep presently after it.

IX. Have also in readiness, a Glass of generous Wine, or some good Cordial, in
case of Fainting; together with a Basin of Bloodwarm Water, Sponges, Pledgets,
Bolsters, Bandage, Incision-Knife, cutting Pincers, Scissars, and five or six
three-square Needles, threaded with Red Silk.

X. If the Deformity be great, be very cautious, lest you make it worse; if it
sticks, or grows unto the Gums, which sometimes it does, you must divide them,
putting Lint between, etc.

XI. Then taking up that part of the Lip which must be excoriated, with the
left hand, take off the Skin equally, either with a very sharp Knife, or else
with a pair of good Scissars; so as it may become perfectly raw; or as a green
Wound, cutting to the very Angle of the Hiatus; doing the same in like manner
on the other side, cutting away so much as is needful.

XII. Then with your Hand, draw the Parts together, and stitch them, observing
this, not to take the Stitches superficially, but through all; passing the
Needle straight through the Lip, from the outside inwards, on the one side; and
from the inside outward, on the other side.

XIII. Then tie the Threads, and fasten the ends, and cut them off; but
observe, not to take your Stitches too near the edges of the Wound, but at a
good distance, lest the hold should break: The number of which is to be
determined by the amplitude of the Wound.

XIV. After the Stitching is done, let Compresses, or Bolsters be dipped in
Whites of Eggs and Rose Water beaten together, and applied, both to the inside
and outside of the Wound.

XV. Then a fine, soft, and smooth piece of Linen, of about half an Inch
broad, dipped in Posca, must be applied to the inside of the Lip, to keep it from
Fluxion: And a fine, soft, and smooth Rowler, of about three Inches broad, dipped
also in Posca, must be brought along obliquely above the Ears, and must be tied
tightly behind the Head.

XVI. When a Day, or something better is past, remove the Compresses, and apply
Conglutinants, with Lint and Unguentum ex Cerussa, and a Plaster of Ceratum ex
Cerussa applied over it.

XVII. But to the Inside, you must apply Syrupus ex Rosis siccis, Syrup of
Myrtles; and if there is much foulness, Julep of Violets with Mel Rosarum,
which used either alone, or mixed, hasten the Coalition, or Uniting.

XVIII. Or you may use this. Honey of Roses v. Syrup of dried Roses i. Myrrh in
fine Powder iss. mix them; spread it on a Rag, and apply it often to the inside
of the Lip.

XIX. When the Parts seem well united, which may be at the end of the third
day, you may loosen some of the Stitches; but then you ought to hold the Parts
easily together, with a sticking Emplaster, till there is a perfect Coalition:
And then, as soon as the Glue sticks, the Stitches may wholly be loosed.

XX. This is a good Glue. Glair of Eggs q.v. Chalk in impalpable Powder q.s.
mix them.

XXI. Or this. Glair of Eggs No ij. Gum Tragacanth, Gum Arabic, Mastich,
Frankincense a. v. the other Ingredients being in fine Powder, mix them with
the Glair to a Consistency.

XXII. Then get two doublepasted Cloths, about three Inches long, and as broad
as the Lip; with Threads fastened at small, but equal distances in both, in each
a like number.

XXIII. Spread these Cloths with the sticking Emplaster; applying the ends
where there are no Threads, wet to the Lip, but so as the outmost Edges of the
double Cloth, meet not by about four Inches, from the edg of the Wound.

XXIV. About six Hours after the Plasters are applied, they will be fast and
dry; at what time you may tie the Threads gently, so close, that the Lips of
the Wound may seem close, and there be no pain.

XXV. Which done, dress the Wound with drying and healing Balsams, which while
it is doing, loosen the Threads, wipe the Wound, apply the Balsam, and then tie
the Threads again; over which put a thin Cloth, and a Rowler; which work do
twice a day, till it is perfectly healed.

XXVI. But some advise to apply at Bedtime, Ceratum ex Cerussa, binding it on
with a Rowler: Which, since there is a difference in Flesh, as to healing, I
should rather advise you to make use of that which will best agree.

XXVII. Scultetus does the Work after another manner, and I think as well, or
better. Tab. 35. Fig. 8. The Cloven Lip must be taken hold of, on both sides;
and if growing to the Gums, must be separated with a fit Knife, and a Linen
Cloth must be put in between the Lip and the Gums, that they may not grow
together again.

XXVIII. Then sticking Emplasters must be applied on both sides the Cleft, with
Strings; which being done, and dried fast on, the Lips of the Fissure must be
renewed, or made raw with a pair of Scissars, and being renewed, they must be
brought to touch one another with stitching, which will not so soon break forth
again; but being by the Strings drawn together, will be kept so, till the
Coalition is perfect, by the help of Spanish Balsam.

XXIX. Or thus. Having cut both sides of the Hare-lip, so much as is needful,
pass through them a Needle or two, as there may be occasion, leaving them in,
and wind the Thread about the ends of the Needle, as Tailors do, when they
stick them on their Sleeves.

XXX. Then anoint the Lips first, and Wound with Spanish Balsam, Lucatellus
Balsam, or Balsam de Peru, de Chili, or any other proper Unguent, which you may
strengthen with the dry Stitch, as before directed.

CHAP. XLVI. PARTS of the HEAD Supplied.
I. THAT Supply which is made of Flesh taken from a living Body, learnedly
treated of by Gasper Taliacotius, the Bononian Professor of Anatomy, is so
difficult and painful, besides the necessary preparation for the Work, the
Symptoms that fall out in the doing of it, and the danger that follows the
least neglect; that it is seldom or never attempted in our Days: And therefore,
by reason of the Difficulty and Unsuccessfulness thereof, we shall wholly
pretermit it; referring those which are curious in that kind, to the Author
himself.

II. However, Artificial Eyes, Nose, Palate, Teeth, etc. may be made to supply
those Defects, of several other Materials; of which, Ambrose Parrey, lib. 23.
cap. 1. ad 7. has spoken at large.

I. Of the Eyes.
III. If therefore, the Eye happen to be broken, or put out by any Violence or
Inflammation, or if it waste or consume, by reason of a Consumption of its
proper Substance, there can be no hope to restore the Sight or Function of the
Eye; but you may cover the Deformity of the Eye so lost, by another Eye
Artificially made of Gold, Silver or Glass, counterfeited and Enameled, so as
it may seem to have the Brightness, Decency, and Life of the Natural Eye; which
may be put into the place of the Eye so lost.

IV. If it cannot be worn, being put into the place, you must make a stiff Iron
or Brass Wire, like unto Women's Ear Wires; which may be so formed, as to bind
the Head harder or looser (as the Patient shall see reason) from the lower Part
of the Head behind, above the Ear, unto the greater Corner of the Eye.

V. This Wire ought to be covered with Silk, and made somewhat broad at both
ends, lest that the sharpness thereof should hurt any part it comes to; but the
end in which the Artificial Eye must be put, ought to be broader than the
other, and covered with a thin piece of Leather, that upon it the Colors and
liveliness of the Eye may be shadowed and Counterfeited.

II. Of the Nose.
VI. If the Nose be lost, it is requisite to make a Nose-Artificial of Gold,
Silver, Tin, Paper, or Linen Cloth glewed together; and it ought to be
Colored, Counterfeited and made, both for Fashion, Figure and Bigness, that it
may as much as possible, resemble a natural Nose.

VII. This Artificial Nose must be stayed with little Threads or Strings, unto
the hinder part of the Head, or a Cap upon the Head: And if any part of the
upper Lip is lost with the Nose, you may shadow it with an Appendix to the
Nose, and Counterfeit it according to Art, like the former.

III. Of the Ears.
VIII. The Ear is gone, either wholly or in part: If it be wholly wanting,
another must be made of Paper Artificially glewed together; or else of Leather,
which is much better, and so fastened with Laces from the top or hinder part of
the Head, that it may stand in the appointed place.

IX. Or you may have an Artificial Ear made of Leather, and Counterfeited or
Painted, so that it may resemble the Shape and Color of a Natural Ear; which
may be retained in the place where it ought to stand, with a Steel or Brass
Wire coming from the top, or hinder Part of the Head, as we have before spoken
of the Eye.

X. If the Ear be only lost in part, it ought not to be neglected; but you must
make many holes in the remaining part, with a Bodkin; and after that the holes
are cicatrized, or healed, let some convenient thing be artificially formed,
like unto the part of the Ear lost, which being shadowed and Painted, let it be
tied, or fastened, unto the remaining part by those holes.

IV. Of the Palate.
XI. If a part or portion of the Bone of the Palate being broken by any
accident, is lost; or corroded, through the Virulency of the Pox, falls away
(as is usual,) whereby the Patients cannot easily pronounce their words, but
obscurely, and with snuffling; this is to be remedied by an Artificial Palate,
or a Plate filling the Vacancy in the Roof of the Mouth.

XII. It ought to be made of Gold or Silver, a little bigger than the Cavity it
self is, as thick in the middle nearly as a Crown-piece, and in form like unto
a Dish: On the upper side, which shall be toward the Head or Brain, a little
Sponge must be fastened, which when it is moistened with the moisture distilling
from the Head and Brain, will be swollen and puffed up, so that it will fill
the Cavity of the Palate, that the Artificial one shall not fall down, but
stand fast and firm, as if it stood of it self.

V. Of the Teeth.
XIII. If the fore Teeth are broken, or come forth of their places, causing a
Deformity to the Mouth, or causing a Lisping, and hindering a right
Pronounciation; other Teeth are Artificially made of Bone or Ivory, which may
be put in the place of those which are wanting.

XIV. They must be joined fast one to another, and also so fastened unto the
Natural Teeth adjoining, which are whole; And this must be done with fine Gold
or Silver Wire; or, for want of them, with a common well twisted Thread of
Silk, thoroughly waxed for strength sake.

CHAP. XLVII. ARTIFICIAL ARMS and LEGS.
I. IT is Necessity which investigates the Means whereby we may help and
imitate Nature, and supply the Defects of Members, which are perished and lost;
which in the Case of Arms or Legs, may well be done with Silver, Latten, Steel,
Copper, Wood, or other fit Matter.

II. And some have been made by Ingenious Smiths, or other Artificers, with
which the Party which wore them, have performed the proper Functions of going,
standing, and handling; and with their Artificial Legs, Feet, Arms and Hands,
have done other necessary Flexions and Extensions, beyond what can possibly be
imagined, by any but such as have seen them.

III. These, says Ambrose Parrey, are not only profitable for the Necessities
of the Body, but also for the Decency and Comeliness thereof; whose Forms or
Figures you may see in the said Author, lib. 23. cap. 12. Page 532, 533, and
534.

IV. Arms, Hands, and Fingers must be made of Iron, or Latten, with many Wheels
and Screws, to make the required Motion, that they may be the more useful, when
applied to the Intention; and they are to be conveniently fixed to the
Shoulder, Elbow or Wrist, and be tied on with Strings.

V. Legs, Feet and Toes are more frequently made use of, especially the first;
some being made in the form of natural Legs, others all small downwards, with a
Seat, wherein are put small Pillows or Bolsters for the Knee to rest on; which
also are to be fastened with Strings to the Thigh.

VI. Sometimes also it happens, that the Patient who had the Nerves or Tendons
of his Leg wounded, long after the Wound is whole and consolidated, cannot go
but with very great Pain and Misery, by reason that the Foot cannot follow the
Muscle which should draw it up.

VII. To remedy this, you must fasten a Linen Band (moderately strong) unto
the Shoe which the Patient wears on his pained Foot; and at the Knee it must
have a slit, where the Knee may come forth in bowing of the Leg.

VIII. This Linen Band, or Strap, coming thus up above the Knee, must be
trussed up fast unto the Patients Middle, that it may in some measure move,
lift up, and erect the Foot in going.

VII. REPORTS.
CHAP. XLVIII. Of REPORTS in General.
I. WHAT Care ought to be taken in making Reports. The Chirurgian ought to be
very considerate, ingenious and wise, because the Events of Diseases and
Accidents are often doubtful and uncertain: Nor is it easy to presage rightly
of Life or Death, by reason of the uncertain Condition of the Body, and of the
Humors with which it abounds. He ought to be a Man of Honesty, Integrity and
Piety, that he may not be carried away with Favor, nor corrupted with Rewards;
but give a just Report to the Magistrate, as the Nature of the thing requires.

II. Now the Report is made concerning a wounded Body, either alive, or after
Death. The reason of which is, that a Magistrate may do Justice upon the
Offender, according to the Quality of the Demerit: For if the Man be alive, he
ought to have the Prognostics from the Chirurgian, to know the Probabilities
or Hopes of Life, or the Danger of Death; that accordingly he may deal with the
Malefactor, sending him to close Prison, or suffering him to give Bail, and go
at large. If it be of a Body dead, to know how the Deceased came by his End,
that Courts of Judicature may proceed the more justly.

I. Of Wounds, Mortal, Dangerous and Safe.
III. Of Wounds, some are Mortal; some Dangerous; some Safe. Those Wounds may
be called Mortal, which are made in a Principal Part; and therefore they are
denominated from the Nature and Quality of the Parts, alone: For from the
Essence of the Wound, it cannot be, because a Wound, as to its Essence is the
same in all Parts, it being a fresh Solution of Unity in a soft Part; so that,
were any Wound in its Essence Mortal, all Wounds would for that reason be
Mortal, and none Safe.

IV. Whether Wounds may be said to be Mortal, from any supervening Symptom:
It Is true, if grievous Symptoms come between, such a Man must be mortally
affected; but in truth, no Wound has from the Symptoms any thing, why it should
be Mortal; for if a Man was wounded in his Foot, and an Inflammation, Gangrene,
or Convulsion should follow upon it, whereby the Patient should die, must the
Wound therefore be said to be Mortal? If so, all Wounds may be so denominated.
Therefore, though supervening Symptoms may bring Death, yet they can never
alter the Nature of a Wound.

V. What Wounds then may be said to be Mortal? Truly all such as are made in
the Principal Parts and Fountains of the Body; as the Brain, Heart, Liver,
Stomach, (from the great Necessity of its Action) and Spinal Marrow, (from its
great Affinity with the Brain:) Also such as are made in those Parts, which
once divided, scarcely ever grow together again; and yet they exercise some
necessary Action of Life; as the Diaphragma, Small Guts, and Bladder: Lastly,
such Parts, as by their large Effusion of Blood, or Spirits, destroy Life, as
the great Arteries and Veins. And Hippocrates, Praedict. 2. Aph. 6. and in some
other places, discoursing of Mortal Wounds, takes them from the Nature of the
wounded Part, and never from any thing else. Yet, if a Man be bit in the Finger
by a Viper, or a Rattle-Snake, that may be said to be a Mortal Wound, though
neither the Quality of the Part, nor Greatness of the Wound makes it so; but
that is so, only from the Quality of the Poison infused.

VI. Invisible Wounds in the Great Arteries and Veins, never bring Death,
without the intervening of heavy Symptoms. From whence it appears, that those
Symptoms, through whose intervention wounded Persons seem to die, do always
follow the Nature, Quality, and Excellency of the wounded Part: So if the Mouth
of the Stomach should be wounded, Swooning necessarily supervening, kills the
Patient: If the Brain be wounded, a Convulsion, or Apoplexy supervening, the
Party dies: So that Mortal Wounds wholly depend upon the Nature of the Parts
wounded; and whatever Symptoms supervene, they always succeed according to the
Nature and Property of the Part.

VII. Such Wounds are dangerous, as are inflicted on the less Noble or
Principal Parts; as a Wound of the Lungs, Spleen, Testicles, Womb, etc. For
Wounds of the Lungs have been healed, so also Wounds of the Womb; and the
Spleen and Testicles have been totally taken away, and the Animal has done well
again: These are such Wounds, as Galen says, have an equal tendency to Life or
Death. And to these, such Wounds as are called Cacoethe, or Malignant, and such
as are Contumacious to Cure, may be referred; also such as touch the extreme
Parts of the Liver, or the Meninges of the Brain.

VIII. Such Wounds are safe, which are in Places remote from the Principal
Parts, and are void of dangerous Symptoms: That is to say, such as tend
according to the Course of Nature, to Recovery; but these Parts are manifold,
and of various kinds, according to their Place and Situation, Majority or
Minority, and other proper Circumstances.

II. Of Wounds, Great.
IX. Wounds, says Paraeus, are called Great in a threefold respect; the First
is from the Greatness of the Dissolved Unity, or Resolution of Continuity. And
such are those Wounds, which made by a violent stroke of a Back Sword, have cut
off an Arm or a Leg, or have wounded the Breast over-thwart.

X. The Second is, from the Dignity or Worthiness of the Part: Now this Dignity
depends on the Excellency of the Action; thus any little Wound made with a
Bodkin or Tuck, in any Part whose Substance is Noble, as the Brain, Heart,
Liver, or any other Part, whose Action and Function is necessary to preserve
Life, as the Windpipe, Lungs, Bladder, is judged Great.

XI. The Third is, from the ill Habit, or Abundance of ill Humors, or Debility
of the wounded Person: So Wounds made in the Nervous Parts, and old decayed
People, are said to be Great; but in searching of Wounds, the Chirurgian ought
to take Care, that he be not deceived by his Probe; for sometimes it cannot go
into the bottom of the Wound, but stops and sticks by the way; either because
the Patient is not placed in the same Posture he was in, when he received the
Wound; or else, for that the stroke being made downright, slipped aside to the
right or left Hand; or upwards, or downwards; whereby, expecting that the Wound
is but small, may judge that it may be cured in a short time, whenas it may
either be long in Curing, Dangerous, or Mortal.

XII. For this Cause sake, in some Cases the Artist ought for some time to
suspend his Judgment. For from the First day it behooves him to suspend his
Prognostics of the Wound, until the Ninth, because in such a space of time,
the Accidents may truly show themselves, whether they be Small or Great,
according to the Condition of the Wound, and Habit of the wounded Person; State
of the Air, Season of the Year, or other Qualities attendant.

III. Diseases, Great or Small, Long or Short, Mortal, or not.
XIII. But mostly the Signs whereby we may judge, whether Diseases are Great or
Small, Long or Short, Mortal, or not, are four. They are drawn either from the
Nature and Essence of the Disease; or from the Cause, or the Effects thereof;
or from the Similitude, Proportion and Comparison of those Diseases, with the
Season, or Constitution of the Time; as whether it be Healthful or Sickly,
Malign, Pestilential, or otherwise.

XIV. Being called therefore to a Green Wound, whose Essence, and Nature, and
Danger, is no other but a simple Solution of Continuity in the Musculous Flesh;
we may presently pronounce, that the Wound is of no danger, but will soon be
Cured: But if it have an Ulcer with it, or is Sanious, then we may say, it will
be more difficult, and long in Curing; and so of all other Diseases, taking the
Signs from their Essence and Nature.

XV. What are the Signs taken from the Causes. Those which are taken from the
Magnitude, Weight, and Form of the Weapon, or other Matter causing. So a Wound
made with a heavy and sharp Edged, or Pointed, Weapon, as a Halbert, if the
Blow be with great Violence, must be accounted great; and also Mortal, if the
Accidents be corresponding.

XVI. What are the Signs, from the Effects. Truly if a Patient fall to the
Ground, through the Violence of the stroke; if a Choleric Vomiting follow
thereon; if his Sight fail him, and there be a Vertigo; if Blood comes forth at
his Eyes and Nose, and if Distraction or a Delirium follow, with loss of
Memory, and Sense of Feeling; we may say, that the hope of Life is small; and
that it only remains to be presaged from the Similitude and Comparison of the
Wound, with respect to the Season, and Constitution of the Time.

XVII. What are the Signs from the Similitude, etc. These are taken from the
likeness of the affect, to another of the same kind; also the Likeness and
Comparison of the Season, considered in respect to its Constitution: For at
some time, through fault of the Air, and evil Humors in Men's Bodies, and the
Disturbance of them, most Gunshot Wounds are Mortal: So in some Seasons, the
Measles, Smallpox, Vomiting, Fluxes and Fevers, carry with them a kind of
Pestilent Contagion; whereby, in such Constitutions of the Air, the Judgments
of Diseases are the less difficult.

IV. Wounds considered, in respect to the Parts hurt.
XVIII. All Wounds received in the Outside; and Forepart of the Body, do for
the most part hurt Extension; and what are received on the Inside, Flexion, or
Bending. For Galen demonstrates, that Inside Muscles serve for bending of a
Part, and External for stretching it out. A Muscle so long operates, as it is
contracted toward its beginning, and draws the part moved, toward that;
whether it be done by drawing the whole Muscle to that they call the Head; or
when it is drawn in the whole, or altogether.

XIX. Whether the External or Internal Muscles are cut asunder, in both, the
Figure of the Part remains immovable. For neither Extension is lost alone, nor
Flexion alone, but both continue, and both are lost together; not that the
Operation really perishes, whose Muscles are entire; but because those Muscles
succeed one another in their Operations by turns: For the internal bending
Muscle being whole, the external Extensor being cut, at first indeed you may
bend the Part, but you cannot bend it again, unless you extend it with
something else: and contra, if the internal Muscle or Bender is cut, the
External, or Extensor, being whole, this will extend at first, but no more
afterward, unless the Part be bended with your Hand again; for then the whole
Muscle will perform its Operation again.

XX. Since some Parts are composed of many Joints, it sometime happens, that
the Function of the Part where the Wound is made, is not always hurt, but of an
adjoining Part, which is tied to the wounded Part by Articulation: Because
Muscles are derived from superjacent Bones, wherein there are Acetabula, and
are inserted after the beginnings of the subjacent, which are to be moved; and
by these intense Muscles, when their Heads are drawn upwards, the whole Member
is drawn up with them.

XXI. So that if a Wound is made in the Brachium, it will hurt the Functions of
the Cubit; if it be made in the Scapula, it will hurt the Functions of the
Brachium, etc. But the use of a Part is not always lost, by the cutting of one
Muscle, where several Muscles conspire to that one Action; and therefore the
cutting of that singular Muscle, is not sufficient for the whole Action of the
Part.

V. What the Event of the Wound may be.
XXII. If it should be demanded of us in a Court of Judicature, what the Issue
of a Wound may be, before the Event is seen; as, whether the Man will be Lame,
or made Imperfect in any of his Functions: To that we answer, that great care
is to be taken in this Matter, that no room may be left for reprehension, so as
to lay the blame upon the Physicians Cure, and not upon the Wound received: But
this you are to understand, that we intend not here all kinds of Hurts, but of
some which have respect to the Animal Function; to wit, such as are External,
whereby some manifest and voluntary Motion is hurt: But the Evil which is done
to the Natural and Vital Instruments, are not intended here, because upon
Recovery, no such Imment may be left, as may obstruct the doing his ordinary
Affairs.

XXIII. For, if the Heart, Lungs, Liver, Stomach, Arteries, or Veins, should be
hurt or wounded, it either kills the Patient, or he escapes: If he escapes, he
may perform voluntary Motions, and go about his ordinary Occasions.

XXIV. From what has been said, it may be deduced, that a Muscle is the
Instrument of Spontaneous or voluntary Motion; to wit, of that Motion, which is
at the command of our Will: For there is no Part in the whole Body, which if it
has a Spontaneous Motion, but it has Muscles inserted into it; which Muscle is
said to consist of three Parts, 1. The Beginning, which is called the Head and
Rise of the Muscle, coming from the Bone. 2. The Middle, or Belly, which is of
a carnous or fleshy Substance, with many Fibers dispersed in it, from Ligaments
and Nerves. 3. The two Ends, which are Nervous: Now the end of a Muscle is
called a Tendon, because its Action is to extend, and the Muscle ends in it,
being made up of many mixed Fibers, and is inserted either into a Bone, or into
another Muscle, to wit, into that Part which is to be moved. And though Galen
may say, that a Tendon, not a Muscle, is the Instrument of voluntary Motion,
the Difference is not great; for a Tendon is indeed a part of a Muscle, and
that to which the Action is principally owing; but the Muscle is the entire
Instrument of Moving, so that it makes not much, whether the Property of the
Function be attributed to the one or the other.

XXV. A Muscle then being the Instrument of voluntary Motion, if the Muscle be
hurt, the Motion of the Part familiar to the Muscle, ^st needs be hurt. If a
Muscle (...) Incised, its Motion is only ^urt; but if it be cut transverse at
right Angles, or asunder, its Motion will be lost in the subject Parts: Now the
measure of the Hurt is proportional to the measure of the Section; more Motion
being lost in greater Sections, and less in lesser.

XXVI. What has been said of a Muscle, the same is to be understood of a
Tendon. For if you cut them quite asunder, you destroy the Motion of that Part;
if you make Incision, you will so far hurt it as you make Incision; and the
same thing is to be understood of the Heads of the Muscles; for when the Head
of a Muscle is cut, it performs (as Galen says) its Motion no more.

XXVII. If therefore a Muscle has but one Head, if that be cut, it is deprived
of its whole Action; but if it have more Heads, the whole Action will not be
lost, unless they be all cut. For it is not every cutting of a Muscle which
takes away the use of a Part, but only that which is transverse, or made at
right Angles: and this a Physician ought to know, who would presage or foretell
the Hurt of a Part; though, I confess, in some Cases, and in some Parts, it is
very difficult.

VI. In a dead Person, whether the Wound was made before, or after Death?
XXVIII. If a wounded Body be found Dead, and it be enquired whether the Wounds
were given whilst the Person was alive, or after they were dead. Look then upon
the Wound, and if the Lips thereof are red and bloody, and the Place about it
black and blew, the Wound was made whilst alive; but if no Signs of Blood
appear, the Wound was made after Death; because, the Blood being cold and
coagulated, it could not flow to the Part hurt or wounded.

CHAP. XLXI. REPORTS, where no Wound appears.
I. MANY are the Ways by which People come by their Deaths, besides Wounding,
as, 1. Blows. 2. External Suffocation. 3. Internal Suffocation. 4. Thunder and
Lightning. 5. Poison.

I. By Blows, or Beating.
II. Since many die suddenly by Blows, or Beating, whence comes Contusions,
Tumors, etc. It is necessary to enquire into the manner, how Death is induced
thereby, and of what Consequence or Danger, such Blows, Beating, or Contusion
may be.

III. Where Blackness, Blewness, or Lividness appears, a Blow, or some private
Nipping may be judged. But this ought to be in a Part fleshy, and where the
Capillary Arteries or Veins are; for they being broken by the force of the
Blow, Beating, Nipping, etc. pour forth their Blood, where, being extravasated,
it contracts that discolor.

IV. But every bruised Part does not always appear black and blew; and the
Reason is, because it is void of those Vessels, as Nervous Parts are, or else
they lie deep in the Part, so that the Blood cannot flow to the external Parts:
And therefore, if a Nervous Part be hurt, you will find neither Discolor, nor
Ecchymosis.

V. And sometimes a blackness and blewness may be, where no external Violence
has gone before. This is evident in many who die of Poison; and in some
Pleuriticks, whose Side looks livid like a Bruise, as Hippocrates de Acutor.
Lib. 1. says. And in Epidem. 4. he says, One that died of a Dropsy, had his
Hypochonder look red, as if the Body had been beaten with Stripes. Also, some
dying of a Fever, or some other spontanous and internal Disease; the Reason of
which seems to be the mighty struggling of Nature, which she violently exerts
in Extremity, thrusting forth the Blood thither; which being void of Spirit and
Life, turns livid, as is manifest after a particular manner, in the Plague and
Spotted Fever.

VI. Blows, Beating, Nipping, or Falls, which occasion Bruising, cause Death
two ways, either because they break or tear the Bowels, Membranes, Nerves and
great Vessels; or because they excite violent Pain, whence comes a Fever. In
these cases therefore, a violent Blow being upon a Part, under which some great
Vessel lies; as the Epigastrum, which contains great Veins and Arteries, Blood
may be voided by Excretion out of the Breast, or by the Urinary Passages.

VII. But if the Mouth of the Stomach receives a Blow, a vehement Pain is
generally excited, which kills the Patient. And here it is not necessary that
Blood should come away; nor indeed is Excretion of Blood to be expected from
every Blow on the Head.

VIII. Death may also be caused by a blow on the Head, more especially on the
Temporal Muscles. Because these produce dreadful Symptoms, as an Apoplexy,
Catochus, Convulsions, and the like, from the Concussion and Compression of the
Brain, and Interception of the Animal Spirits: And the Head may be so weak, as
a very slight blow may endanger all this; and if the blow be very violent,
Blood may come out at the Ears and Nose, and sometimes at the Mouth also.

IX. But neither Discolor, nor Bleeding are the certain Signs of a Man's dying
by Blows or Beating; because these may sometimes be present, where the other
never went before; so that it is not safe, positively to determine upon this
ground; though when these two Signs do appear, and there was no other manifest
cause of Death, Blows, or Beating, are much to be suspected.

II. By External Suffocation.
X. Several who have been secretly Suffocated by a Murderer, do not presently
afford any Sign of it: Wherefore, he that is required to make a Report in such
a Case, ought not rashly to judge, but be very considerate, lest he lay the
fault where truly it ought not to lie.

XI. Now this may be caused by Drowning, or forcibly stopping of the Mouth and
Nose, or a String, or the Inspiration of a Sulphurous Air. Now by Suffocation,
I mean such a Violence done to the Instruments of Breathing, which hindering the
Office of Respiration, introduces Death.

XII. If a Person be Drowned, there is an unusual Swelling and Flabbiness of
the whole Body; the Belly is chiefly swelled, some mucous Excrements come out
of the Nose, and frothy stuff out of the Mouth, and the Fingers ends seem as if
they were worn: For such as are Drowned, though at bottom of the Water, strive
to get out, where scratching and scrabbling in the Sand, or Gravel, they wear
their Fingers.

XIII. Now the swelling of a Body in a drowned Person, is not so much from
receiving in the Water, as from Wind, into which the Humors thereof are turned
by a putrid Heat, and secret Fermentation; for which reason, this Swelling
shows not it self till after some considerable time; upon which, the Body is
then said to swim.

XIV. If one be Suffocated, by a forcible stopping of the Mouth and Nose; as
with a Pillow, or any thing put into them, or a Cord, you will find this, which
is common to all such as are thus Suffocated, that they will froth at Mouth,
and sometimes at the Nose too: For the Expiration of fuliginous Steams being
stopped, they are all violently impelled; for which reason, some of the proper
Humidities are expelled together with them.

XV. But if one be Strangled with a Cord, or Rope, the Print of it will appear,
chiefly where the Rope crosses. The Head of the Aspera Arteria will be many
times bruised, and there will be a Luxation of the second Vertebra of the
Cervix, or Neck; the Arms, Legs, and Face will be livid, the Breast swollen, and
Urine voided.

XVI. The Reasons of which Accidents are these: The Swelling of the Breast, is
from many Fumes arising from the contained Breath within. The Urine flows,
because of an unequal straining of the Muscles, which conspiring for the common
safety, are contracted toward their Original; and the Sphincter growing dead,
whereby it loses its Use and Office, lets the Water go. Also the Face, and
other Parts of the Body are red, or livid, because the Violence of Strangling
is such, that the Expulsive Faculty of the whole Body is so irritated, as to
force all the Blood, and other Juices to the Skin, especially to those Places,
which have the larger Vessels, as the Face, Back, Arms, Thighs, etc.

XVII. And opening the Body, you will find the Lungs full of purulent Froth,
though the rest of the Viscera may be in good order: And the Head and Breast
will be found full of Blood: And if the Breath is stopped by any other way, you
may observe the same Signs, except the Print of the Rope.

III. By Internal Suffocation.
XVIII. If a Man, naturally abounding with good Humors, and who keeps a
wholesome Diet, should die suddenly, or be accidentally found dead, and no
Symptoms of external Violence be found on him, you are to enquire whether he
lay last in a new Room, lately done with Lime and Mortar, or Plaster; or
whether he had been shut up in a close Place, where Damps come; or in a close
Room, where was no Chimney, and in which Charcoal was burnt; or whether it was
an Apoplexy, which many times after Death is attended with a Flux of Blood, or
Humors; or faint away and die, by the heat of a Bath, or the like.

XIX. It Is possible, that Air containing an inimical Sulphur, may kill, if long
and liberally taken in; as is the Air of subterraneous Vaults, Damps in Mines,
new Plaistered Rooms, and the Fumes of Charcoal, not having a Vent to get out
at.

XX. So also, where there being no great quantity of Air, the Place is so
close, that what is within cannot get forth, nor any fresh come in: For the
Principle of Life is maintained by a due Ventilation, and a moderate
Refrigeration, without which, the vital Flame will necessarily go out: So that,
People which die through the Heat of a Bath, it is not because the Spirits are
evacuated, but for want of Refrigeration, to keep the Flame alive.

XXI. And such who die in new Plaistered Houses, or in the Steams of Charcoal,
or in Mines with Damps, or in stinking Caves, Vaults, or Charnel Houses; Die,
not so much for want of Air, as because the cold Air is not attracted, which is
absolutely necessary for Respiration; to which add, the stinking and inimical
Sulphur, contained in the Air of such impure Places; which, as it were, with a
kind of violence, smites the Vital Powers. These Die, not through any fault of
the Brain, but for want of Ventilation, and by the Malignity of the impure
Sulphur.

XXII. But, such who die of an Apoplexy, have a Suffocation of the Animal
Spirits, from Matter filling the Ventricles of the Brain; which pressing hard
upon the Meninges, compress the Brain, with the little Vessels which carry the
Blood, and convey the Spirits to their respective Parts; which failing, the
Person presently dies.

XXIII. Now, in Respiration we attract two Things, 1. The Air it self. 2. Its
Quality: So that, should we have never so much of the Air, yet, if it be of a
hot Sulphurous Quality, the Creature will be as well Suffocated, as if it
inspired nothing at all; whereas, had it been of a cool Nitrous Quality, it
would have refreshed the Spirits, both Vital and Animal, and maintained Life;
which is overcome by the Blood and Spirits being too much heated.

XXIV. Lastly, Galen says, the only Symptom which is common to all such as have
the use of Inspiration intercepted, is that of Frothing. But dying by the means
of Sulphurous Fumes, is a less violent Death, than that of being stopped at
Mouth and Nose, or being Strangled with a Cord or Rope.

IV. By Thunder and Lightning.
XXV. If a Body be found, and it be demanded, whether it was by Thunder, or any
other Mischance? If by Thunder, or Lightning, the Body smells strong of
Sulphur; also under the Part, whether it be whole or Wounded, the Bones are
broken; and if wounded, the Wound is black, and the Body falls on the wounded
side, (but Beasts on the contrary side;) and if one be Thunderstruck waking,
the Eyes are found shut; but if sleeping, they are found open, and the Body is
also free from Corruption.

XXVI. There are three or four kinds of Thunder, or Thunder and Lightning,
which hurt three or four several ways. The first, is, that which terebrates,
and makes as it were a kind of hole in the Body. The second, is, that which
divides or breaks a Body, or tears it into several Parts. The third, is, that
which neither bores nor tears, but only burns, and leaves evident Signs of
Burning: And this is twofold, 1. That which burns either slightly, like
blasting; or so as to consume; or set all on Fire. 2. That which burns, so as
only to make the Body black. The fourth, is, that which kills without any
Symptoms, or, at most, only changes the natural Color a little, or sometimes
makes it blew, pale, purple, or livid.

XXVII. Suppose a Man should be walking with his Friend in the Field, and one
of them should be Thunderstruck; and the surviving Man should be Indicted for
Murder; it is necessary here, that a Physician should be able to determine,
that the Innocent might be rescued from the force of Ignorance and Malice; and
to make a Report according to Truth, for Direction sake, in the Case of doing
Justice.

XXVIII. Men's Bodies are many ways affected by Thunder, yet two notable Signs
are common to all that are Thunderstruck, viz. to have a brown or blackish
Color, where the Thunder strikes, and to be somewhat burnt; also to smell like
Sulphur: For the Flashes of Lightning, and Strokes of Thunder are Sulphurous,
as Pliny observes.

XXIX. From what has been said then, it will not be hard to find out when any
one has been killed by Thunder. The Nature of Thunder is Spirituous, and
Aristotle affirms every kind of Thunder to be Spirit, which is only thin and
clear, and therefore not burning; or else thick and fumous, which consumes by
burning. Some have fancied a Thunderbolt to be a Stone, or some hard and solid
thing, because it sometimes breaks the Bones in the Body, without much hurting
the Flesh, tears great Trees all into bits, and breaks the most hard and solid
things: Now this comes not from its Materiality or Solidity, but from its
Nature and Violence, which chiefly hurts things which resist it, slightly
touching things which give way to it. I have twice seen a Thunderbolt fall,
which was like a great Pyramid, or Cone of Fire inverted, or the point turned
downwards, and the base upwards: I went and viewed the places in which they
fell, and found nothing, only the Grass round about its central Point was burnt
up, being in Diameter about eighteen or twenty Feet: By which it appears, that
Thunder is rather Spirit than Body, or any thing solid, whatever others may
imagine.

XXX. And therefore, because the Body of Man is almost all over covered with a
soft and fleshy Substance, we shall rarely find it bruised, but rather burnt or
discolored, and sometimes the Bones under the Thunder-stroke broken: As a Sword
shall be melted in a Scabbard by it, the Scabbard being whole; the Wood about
Piles inviolate, all the Iron being run down; and Money melted in a Man's
Purse, or Pocket, the Purse, or Pocket remaining whole and unhurt.

V. By Poison.
XXXI. If a Man being in Health and Strength, be found dead, if his Body appear
black and blew, or be vehemently swelled, or be flabby and stinking, it may be
concluded his Death came by Poison.

XXXII. But in judging of Poison, you are in the first place to consider the
Nature of the principal Poisons, and after what manner they will operate in
Man's Body. For some Poisons kill by exciting a violent Fermentation, as the
Juice of the Berries of deadly Nightshade, swelling the whole Body, as if it
would burst; and making the Face, and other Parts, red, black, and blew:
Others, as Juice of the Hellebors, Vomit and Purge even to Death; and if the
Patient escape with Life, the Nails, Hair, and Skin all come off.

XXXIII. Other Poisons, as Arsenick, corrosive Sublimate, etc. smite the vital
Powers with Malignity, causing an exceeding Drought, a Frothing at Mouth, and
Sickness at Heart; making the Sick Mad, or look as if Distracted. These, if
they be opened after Death, will have their Stomach, and other Bowels,
corroded, made black like Soot, and mortified in many Places.

XXXIV. But if the Sick has drank Aqua fortis, Spirit of Nitre, Oils of Vitriol
or Sulphur, Death is introduced by violent Heat and Corrosion; and when Dead, a
violent Fermentation is excited; whence comes a vehement Swelling and Puffing
up of the Thorax and Abdomen, with a Swelling and Lividness in the Face.

XXXV. But by the late ways of Poisoning used in France, no Symptoms appear at
all upon the Body of the Dead. And therefore in such Cases no Report can be
made, but what may be doubtful, or shall be received from the Relatives or
Neighbors of the Deceased, relating to Circumstances, and other Accidents
inducing a strong suspicion of Poison.

CHAP. L. REPORTS, from the Viscera being Wounded.
I. Wounds of the Brain.
I. WOunds of the Brain are said to be Mortal, upon a twofold Cause; 1. Because
it is a Principal Part, and the Original of the Nerves and Animal Faculty. 2.
Because it usually induces many grievous, and for the most part, Mortal
Symptoms. As it is a Principal Part, the Spirits are soon wasted or spent, and
the prejudice is immediately imparted to the whole Body. And, as to the
Symptoms, they are Inflammation, hurt of the Animal Faculty, and Convulsions.
Now by Wounds of the Brain, we mean, Wounds of the Meninges, which reach to the
Substance of the Brain; also Wounds of the Substance it self. Yet sometimes the
Meninges have been hurt, the Life being safe, and therefore some Authors will
have them to be enumerated among dangerous Wounds.

II. Now when the Brain, or its Membranes are hurt or wounded, Blood comes out
at the Nose, and in some, at the Ears; Generally Vomiting of Choler follows,
and some have their Senses stupefied, the Eyes turn strangely in the Head; and
on the third (and sometimes sooner) or fifth Day, a Delirium is induced; and
some have a Convulsion of the Nerves.

III. But if a Membrane only be hurt, the Patient has a notable violent
Headache, which is enraged by shutting the Jaws, and holding their Breath, the
Eyes are hot, the Tongue falters, and there is Dotage.

IV. If the Substance of the Brain is Wounded, the Patient falls down, and the
Voice is lost. The Face is sometimes drawn awry, there is Vomiting of Choler,
and a white Humor like Pap runs out at the Ears.

II. Wounds of the Stomach.
V. If the Stomach ( says Hippocrates) be Wounded, it is Mortal. Yet Galen
seems doubtful in this Case, because some have been wounded in that Part, and
have been cured. In my Opinion therefore, it may come among the dangerous
Wounds; for if the Stomach be but slightly wounded, it will agglutinate. And
though Celsus (agreeing with Hippocrates) says, Wounds of the Stomach are
Mortal, yet Marcellus Donatus relates, how several wounded in their Stomachs
have recovered; and of late, a Patient of mine in London, recovered of a Wound
in the Stomach.

VI. A Wound in the Outer Tunicle easily heals; but if it pierces into the
Cavity, it will prove more difficult to Cure. A Wound in the bottom of the
Stomach has less of Danger; but a Wound in the Mouth thereof, which is of a
very nervous Substance, is desperate, not only for the Excellency of the Part,
but for its Communication with the Heart and Brain, and being void of Blood.

VII. If the Stomach then be wounded, the Hiccough follows, with Vomiting of
Choler. Meat and Drink are cast up immediately, the Pulse fails, and there are
frequent Swoonings: Cold Sweats follow, and the Extreme Parts chill and grow
cold; and there is a most vehement pain, more especially if the Wound tends
upwards.

III. Wounds of the Liver.
VIII. Wounds of the Liver, by reason of a vehement Flux of Blood, are mortal.
For the Patient dies by Fluxion of Blood, before agglutination can be made: But
this is to be understood of large and deep Wounds, for such as are shallow, and
in the edges of it, may be healed. Therefore,

IX. It was the Opinion of Celsus, that Wounds of the Liver, in the Vena Porta,
were only Mortal; and that when the thick part of the Liver was wounded, Death
generally ensued: That is, when the Concave or Unequal Parts thereof are hurt;
but other Wounds thereof are only dangerous; and unless happening in a
Cacochymick Body, or in one committing some Error, are not hard to heal.

X. Now, when the Liver is wounded, much Blood flows out of the Right Side, and
the Bowels are drawn to the Backbone. There is also sometimes Vomiting of
Choler, the Sick looks pale, Coughs, and delights rather to lie on his Belly;
he makes bloody Urine and Stools, languishes in a Fever, and at length the Body
consumes away.

IV. Wounds of the Lungs.
XI. These, if they be large, and make a deep solution of Unity, if they waste
the Parenchyma of the Part, and hurt the great Vessels, and some principal
Branches of the Arteria or Vena Pulmonalis, are said to be Mortal. Because
thereby is made a great Effusion of Blood, and Dissipation of Vital Spirits;
besides, the Coagulating of the Blood in the adjacent Vessels, will in some
measure impede its Circulation: And though the Wounds of the Lungs may be small
or superficial, if the Cure be not skilfully managed, they may kill.

XII. And though the great Vessels are not wounded, but only the Bronchia, or
Aspera Arteria, the Case is Mortal, but at a greater distance of Time; several
Symptoms conspiring to that End; as, the Communication with the Heart,
Putrefaction of the Lungs, Dissipation of Spirits, a Continent Fever, and
Difficulty of Cure, by reason of continual Motion and Cough, still enlarging
the Wound.

XIII. And Galen, Meth. Lib. 5. cap. 2. says, Wounds of the Lungs admit not of
Cure, not for that the Part is in continual Motion (as some before him
imagined) but because the Pus or Sanies are difficultly gotten out from thence:
And much of this mind was Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 26. who affirms, it is only
incurable, when the middle of the Lungs are wounded.

XIV. But if the lesser Blood Vessels be broken, or the Flesh of the Lungs
divided, though the Wound may kill, yet it does not do it suddenly, and
possibly a Skilful and Careful Artist may Cure it, unless it be inflamed. And
it is thought that more danger lies in a Wound of the Substance, than of the
Vessels, because they are more difficultly healed.

XV. When the Lungs are wounded, there is Difficulty of Breathing, and frothy
Blood comes up at the Mouth, making a noise when he Breaths. He lies easiest on
the wounded Side, and then he speaks; but on any other Side he is dumb: If the
Wound be wide, frothy Blood comes out at it; but if not wide, it comes up at
the Mouth: The Vessels of the Neck swell, the Tongue is discolored, they draw
in much Breath, and crave cold things; and if it continue long, a Fever is
induced, and with it, a Phthisis, and Death.

V. Wounds of the Diaphragma, or Midriff.
XVI. The Events of these are various, according to the variety of its
Substance. If a Wound be in its Nervous Parts, which is its Center, it is
Mortal; for its constant Motion hinders Agglutination. If it be in its fleshy
Part, which goes round the inside of the Thorax, it is possible to be healed,
as Galen has observed: But if an Inflammation comes thereon, the Cure will be
very Dangerous and Difficult.

XVII. When the Midriff therefore is wounded, the Praecordia are attracted
upwards, they breath slowly, and the Back aches. And Paulus affirms, That if
breathing be enlarged, it is with Sighing, and Pain all over the Shoulders.

VI. Wounds of the Guts.
XVIII. Wounds, says Galen, into the Cavity of the Guts, are very seldom
healed: And Hippocrates, Sect. 6. Aph. 18. says, If the small Guts are wounded,
it is Mortal. And this is, not only because of their Substance, but because we
cannot well apply Medicines to them.

XIX. But the Jejunum being wounded, is said to be most incurable; because of
the Magnitude of its Vessels; thinness of its Tunicles, its Nervous Substance,
its Proximity to the Liver, and Susception of Choler: But it is said, That a
Wound has sometimes been cured, when it has only touched its Outside.

XX. Wounds of the other Guts, if slight, or not cut in two, are apt to heal,
because their Substance is very Carnous; and they seldom kill, unless seized
with an Iliack, or an Inflammation, or Gangrene supervene. A Proof of this I
had in a Negro of my own, who being wounded in the Guts, had his Excrements
come through them and the Belly, for near six Weeks together; I only applied
outwardly an Emplaster to the wounded Parts, and kept him warm, with a Laxative
Diet made of Maiz and Milk, and in two Months time he was as well as ever, and
went to his Work again.

XXI. But great Wounds, and transverse, or being cut in two, are Mortal. And
the reason is, by the great separation of Parts, being kept asunder by a large
afflux of vicious Humors: Besides, being cut totally asunder, they can never
come together again to unite; nor can the Excrements ever after go through the
Body.

XXII. The Sign that the Guts are wounded, is, that the Excrecrements come
forth at the Wound. There is a Swelling in the Praecordia, and Choler sometimes
comes out at the Mouth: So also, if the lower Guts be wounded, for then the
smell, as well as Excrements, show it.

VII. Wounds of the Bladder.
XXIII. Wounds of the Bladder, are Mortal, says Hippocrates, Sect. 6. Aph. 18.
If it be wounded through and divided, with a large Wound, it is Mortal; but a
small Wound has been known by Experience to heal up, and that firmly; and if it
be incurable, it must be in the Nervous Part.

XXIV. Wounds in its Carnous Parts are curable; for we daily see, that Wounds
made there, by Cutting for the Stone in the Bladder, are made with Safety, and
soon cured, if the Body be not Cacochymick: But Wounds are with difficulty
cured, if made in that Part, where the Bladder is tied to the Os Sacrum.

XXV. When the Bladder is wounded, there is Pain in the Groins, and they swell
above the Os Pubis: Blood comes away with the Urine, and the Urine runs out at
the Wound: There is Sickness of Stomach, and inclination to Vomit, and they are
cold and dry, vomiting Choler, or having the Hiccough.

VIII. Wounds of the Spinal Marrow.
XXVI. These are said to be as Mortal as those of the Brain; and Galen tells
us, It is a kind of Brain to all the Parts which are below the Head. For, from
it many Conjugations of Nerves spring, which give Sense and Motion to most of
the other Parts of the Body; and therefore, from it many grievous Symptoms
arise: It also Communicates with the Brain and other adjacent Parts, and is of
Difficult Cure; and the higher the Wound is in the Spine, the more Mortal it is.

XXVII. If the Spinal Marrow be totally hurt in any of the Vertebrae, all the
lower Parts are resolved, or suffer a Paralysis, as Galen affirms. But if only
one side is hurt, and the other remains whole; the Paralysis affects only the
lower Parts on the same Side hurt.

XXVIII. But in respect to the Nature of the Part, a Wound in the lower Part of
the Spinal Marrow, is far worse than that in the upper. Because, as Columbus
observes, the Marrow above is soft, and perfectly of the Substance of the
Brain, whereas that below is almost Nervous: Yet such Wounds must be very
great, to make them Mortal.

XXIX. If the Spinal Marrow be cut transversly asunder, it is certainly Mortal.
But, if the Weapon has not run deep into it, there is a possibility of Recovery.

XXX. If therefore the Spinal Marrow be wounded, there is a Paralysis of some
particular Part or Parts, and a Convulsion of the Nerves: Sense is also lost;
and at some times there is an involuntary voiding of Seed, Ordure, or Urine.

IX. Wounds of Arteries and Veins.
XXXI. If they be in the Arteria Magna, or Vena Cava, or other great Vessels in
the inside of the Body, as the great Arteries and Veins about the Neck and
Throat, Armpits, Thighs, Legs, they are Mortal. And they must needs be Mortal,
because of the large Effusion of Blood, and the impossibility of stopping it.

XXXII. And by how much they run less out of the Body, by so much they die
sooner, because the Patient is Suffocated. Their Nervous Substance, and deep
Situation, show the great difficulty of Cure, because nothing can be exhibited,
which can carry its full Virtue to them; besides, the great exhausting of the
Vital Spirits.

XXXIII. When these great Arteries or Veins are wounded, a great quantity of
black Blood is cast forth, the Patient immediately looks pale, and Death is at
hand. The Pulses presently alter and fail, and the Arteries cast forth a thin,
yellow, frothy Blood.

X. Wounds of the Aspera Arteria.
XXXIV. If they be great, they are always Mortal; and the Patient dies of them,
not because the Breath has a Passage out at the Wound, but because their
Substance, or Matter, is Cartilaginous, and in perpetual Motion, so that it can
never be healed. And it is observed, that Wounds in the upper Part of the
Throat, where diverse Nerves, Arteries and Veins meet, are most dangerous.

XXXV. But if it be Cut any where else, it may be Cured; for in a dangerous
Quinsey, we often order Laryngotomia, and that successfully: And therefore
slight Wounds of the Aspera Arteria are many times cured.

XXXVI. In these Wounds but little Blood comes forth, because of the nature of
the Part, and many times the Breath comes forth at the hole. But by degrees the
Throat is filled with Blood; there is great Pain backward, the Voice is hoarse,
and the Tongue dry.

XI. Wounds of the Reins.
XXXVII. Wounds of these Parts are generally Mortal: For many Vessels are
spread through the Kidneys, and they receive a perpetual Afflux of Recrements;
besides, they are of necessity for the Conservation of Life.

XXXVIII. But if the Wounds reach only to the thick and fleshy Part, and are
slight, they are sometimes curable: But the Cure is very difficult, if they be
deep.

XXXIX. When the Reins therefore are wounded, the Pain reaches to the Groins
and Testicles: There is also difficulty of making Water, and it is bloody, or
all Blood.

XII. Wounds of the Spleen.
XL. Simple Wounds of the Spleen are not Mortal, if a Skilful Artist has the
Cure in hand. For we have often known the whole Spleen to have been cut out of
living Animals, and yet they still survived. I had some Years since, a Bitch
whose whole Spleen was cut out, and I kept her several Years after, and she had
several Litters of Whelps; only she became dull, and as if dis-spirited: But if
any great Vessels be wounded withal, there is danger, according to the
Magnitude and Excellency of the Vessels hurt.

XLI. When the Spleen therefore is only Wounded, there will come forth from the
left Side, black Blood; and on the same Side, the Stomach and Praecordia will
grow hard, with vehement Thirst, and Pain in the Throat, like as when the Liver
is wounded. These are the chief Signs showing the Viscera to be wounded; if
none of them are manifest, then none of these Parts are hurt, but you must
inquire elsewhere for the Cause of the Disaffection.

XIII. Wounds of the Heart.
XLII. Wounds of the Heart are generally Mortal: If the Ventricles be wounded,
the Patient infallibly dies. But if the Wound penetrate not so far as to the
Ventricles, but stays in the Substance of the Heart, whereby Inflammation
ensues, the Sick may possibly live a day or two. If the Wound reaches to the
Ventricles, Death must necessarily follow, because of the great Effusion of
Blood, and vast Dissipation and Exhausting of Spirits. And though it may be
objected, that Tumors and Ulcers have been found in the Heart, yet seeing these
arise and grow gradatim, Life may sometimes for a while, subsist together with
them, but in the end they bring a Syncope, Convulsions, and Death. But Wounds,
in regard that they suddenly disturb the very Frame and Economy of the Heart,
the Life cannot long subsist with them.

XLIII. If the right Ventricle be wounded, the wounded person may in this Case
lengthen out his Life for some short time: But if the left Ventricle be
wounded, the Person immediately Perishes; because the left Ventricle is the
Storehouse and Treasury of the Blood and Vital Spirits. But as to Wounds of
the right Ventricle, Sennertus in his Praxis, lib. 5. par. 4. cap. 3. has given
us an Historical Relation of a Soldier, who was wounded into the right
Ventricle of the Heart, and yet lived to the Sixteenth Day; this Soldier was
opened by Nicholaus Mulerius, two other Chirurgians, Luke and Gasper Hullen,
being also present with many more Spectators. The Man was a Soldier at
Groningen, under the Most Illustrious Count William of Nassaw; he received his
Wound the 22 of August 1607, and died the 8 of September following; which
strange, but true History, is found written on a Table, hanging up against a
Wall, in the Library of the University of Groningen aforenamed.

XLIV. When the Heart therefore is Wounded, much Blood is found to come away:
If it be the right Ventricle, the Blood runs black: If the left, the Blood
comes forth more florid and light colored: The Arteries or Pulses also flag,
the Color is pale, with cold, ill scented Sweats; then Coldness increases upon
the extreme Parts, and immediate Death.

XLV. From all that has been said, it appears, that the Signs of the
Disaffections of internal Parts, are to be deduced from, 1. The Hurt of the
Action. 2. The Site of the Parts. 3. The Excreta. 4. The Kind of the Grief. 5.
And from proper Symptoms. So that, if in a wounded Person Respiration is hurt,
conclude the Lungs, Thorax, or Vertebrae are hurt. If Excrements come forth,
the large Guts are wounded; if Chyle, the small Guts: If Urine come out at the
Wound, the Reins, Ureters, or Bladder are hurt. As to the Site; if the Wound be
in the right Hypochonder, the Liver may be suspected to be hurt; if in the
left, the Spleen; if in the Pecten, or Share, the Bladder, etc. As to the Kind
of the Pain; if it be dull, the Lungs, Liver, or Spleen are hurt; if sharp and
pricking, their Tunicles and Vessels; it violent, the Stomach, Guts, and
Nervous Parts. As to the Symptoms, consider what are proper to each Part. If a
Frenzy, Epilepsie, etc. be present, the Brain is hurt. If Nauseousness,
Vomiting, Hiccough, the Stomach. If Respiration, the Thorax. If Swooning, the
Heart. If Convulsions, the Nerves, etc.

CHAP. LI. REPORTS, from Wounds External.
I. Of the Malignity of Wounds.
I. WOunds, both Mortal and Dangerous, Internal and External, are accompanied
sometimes with Malignity. Now the times wherein this Malignity manifests it
self, remains to be enquired into. Guido, and Tagaultius from him, limit three
times, wherein Malign Signs show themselves, viz. the seventh, ninth, and
fourteenth Days. And indeed, many among the Moderns suspend their Judgment till
the ninth day is over, because in that time they think, that hopeful or malign
Signs will show themselves, with respect to the Constitution of the Patient,
Quality of the Air, and Condition of the Wound.

II. But indeed, it is the Critical Day which ought to be taken notice of, viz.
the Times when the Moon comes to her Sinister or Dexter Quartils, or
Oppositions, etc. And these are the Times which Hippocrates intends, when
speaking of a Wound in the Head, he says, a Fever in Summer time, seizes him
about the seventh Day, but in Winter, about the fourteenth Day: If any Error
has been committed, and if evil Symptoms seem to come on apace, the Patient
will die in Summer, before the seventh Day; and in Winter, before the
fourteenth. This seems to be rational, as being deduced from the Crises; and
why they happen later in Winter than in Summer, is evident, because in Winter
our internal Heat is more vigorous and strong, and therefore resists malign
Causes the more powerfully.

III. Therefore, if the Patient be strong of Constitution, has Youth of its
side, and the Wound was given in perfect Health, and in Winter time, you ought
to wait till the second Crisis, for the appearance of the Symptoms, and before
you may adventure to deliver your Prognostics. At what time, if Evil and
Malign Symptoms come on, Death may be predicted, on, or before the next
Critical Day, according as they approach, slowly or hastily: But if a Wound
happens to a weakly Person, Aged, and of a cold and dry Complexion,
Cacochymick, and in Summer time, I should expect the Symptoms to be manifest,
about the time of the first Crisis.

II. Whether a Wound will kill, or not kill.
IV. Now, to know whether a Man dies of his Wound, or of something else, you
are to consider, whether the Wound present, be Mortal in its own Nature, or is
for the most part so; if it be, the Wound may be truly said to be the Cause of
Death: But, if the Wound be safe, and without danger, the Death of the Person
must be imputed to something else.

V. But, if Wounds be in their own Nature, dangerous and doubtful; so also
ought your Presages to be. For, if they be great, they may then be the occasion
of Death; but if small, Death must be imputed to some other Matter or Cause. If
then, a great Wound be made in a Joint, whereby the Nerves, Tendons, and
Vessels are torn; though this in it self is not Mortal, yet because it is very
dangerous (it yielding to no Errors without prejudice and requiring an exact
Cure, with all Care and Diligence;) if the Person dies, you may report the
Wound to be the Cause of Death; unless some egregious Fault has been committed
in the Cure, either by the Chirurgian, or the Patient, or some other
unavoidable ill accident should intervene. And though without the fault, the
wounded Man might have died, yet since the Case is dubious, where any fault has
been committed, the Report should always be in Favor of the Living.

VI. In dangerous Wounds of the Skull, where there is occasion to open it, if
the Patient dies, (unless some egregious and plain fault has been committed)
the Wound may be said to be the Cause of Death: But when the Salubrity of the
Clime shall be admitted, then all Wounds of the Head, even if the Bone be
broken or perforated, (if the Membranes be but safe) are to be accounted safe,
unless much of the Skull be taken away; for then, because it is impossible for
the Meninges not to be wounded; you ought to esteem such Wounds dangerous: As
for other Wounds, though they rank themselves with the Dangerous, yet they
approach nearer to the Nature of such as are safe.

III. How Men are said to Die of small Wounds.
VII. A Person having received a Wound not Mortal, may Die; but then it cannot
be of the Wound, but of some other Cause; as from the evil Habit of Body,
weakness of the Part wounded, irregular Living, malign Constitution of the Air,
Ignorance, or Negligence of the Chirurgian, or some other unhappy Accident, as
some new hurt, straining of the Part, bruiting it, etc.

VIII. If it happens on a Person Cacochymick, or Cachestick, tainted with the
Dropsy, Rheumatism, King's Evil, Consumption, Leprsie, Pox, etc. Though the
Wound may be in a Carnous Part, and not subject to danger, there may from such
a Habit of Body, be great Defluxions, vehement Pains, strong Inflammations,
Fevers, Convulsions, Gangrenes, Sphacelus, or other ill Symptoms, the malign
and tainted Humors flowing many ways into the Part.

IX. If there be a weakness in the Part wounded, as Strumous Nodes, Gout,
Rheumatism, Paralysis, Numbness, Flux of Humors for a long time before, or
other Weaknesses: Into what a great danger may a small Wound (though in it self
not Mortal) put him? especially if it be in a Joint, or a Nerve, or Tendon be
wounded; and be joined also with a Cacochymick Habit of Body.

X. If the Patient lives irregularly, eating Gluttonously, drinking to be
Drunk, keeps unseasonable Hours, lies in the Cold, is unsatiable in Venery,
perplexed with Cares, and uses violent Exercises; he may bring upon himself
Surfeits, Dropsies, Rheums, Agues, Inflammation of the wounded Part, Gangrenes,
Consumptions, Hecticks, etc. and other Diseases so great, as to send him into
another World; in these Cases, the irregular Living, joined with the Wound, is
the Cause of Death, not the Wound simply it self.

XI. If there be a malign Constitution of the Air, as in the Plague time, or
when some other Epidemick Disease Reigns; at such a time, a small Wound is apt
to receive its malign Influences, and pestilential Miasms; from whence arise
Convulsions, Faintings, Cacoethick Ulcers, Inflammations, Gangrenes, malign
Fevers, the Distemper of the Time, and other dangerous Symptoms, the least of
which are able to destroy the Patient.

XII. If there be Ignorance, or Negligence, in the Chirurgian, it is easy to
be apprehended, how an Error of that kind, may create an irreparable Evil, and
bring the Wound into such a Condition, as either to put the Patient into
apparent danger of his Life, or, at least, to bring upon him some incurable
Ulcer, or leave him Lame and Helpless all the days of his Life after.

XIII. Lastly, if any other unhappy Accident should happen, as lying upon the
wounded Part, or bruising it, or otherwise hurting or straining of it, a
Defluxion, Inflammation, Gangrene, and Sphacelus may be introduced; by which
(though the Wound it self was small, in an ignoble Part, in no bad Place, nor
in the least Mortal in its own nature, yet) the Patient may unhappily die.

IV. Wounds dangerous.
XIV. And these are all such as are large, or bruised, and much battered, with
Fracture of the Bone, or where much of the Flesh is cut quite away, or cut out
and hanging on, or where the Wound is of a Circular Figure: The safest are,
such as are small, in a fleshy Part, and in a right Line; and in a Child,
Youth, or young Person; for such heal sooner than in elder People, or in such
as are weak and infirm, of an evil Habit, Voluptuous, Idle, or Intemperate, etc.

XV. Also Wounds in the Heads of the Muscles, in the Cranium, or Skull, Breast
or Belly; and Wounds of the Nerves, or Nervous Wounds, as Galen says, with all
such as have an equal tendency to Life and Death, may be accounted dangerous.

XVI. Wounds under the Clavicula, and the inner Process of the Scapula, are
very dangerous; because the Axillar Artery and Vein, and fifth Pair of Nerves
running from the Vertebrae of the Neck to the Arms, may be hurt. And of this
kind, as Celsus says, are many of those Wounds in the Armpits and Hams, about
the Anus and Testicles, in the Thighs, and among the Fingers, all which are
very difficult to Cure.

XVII. Among the dangerous Wounds also, are those of the end of a Muscle, of a
Nerve, Artery, Membrane, Cartilage, or Bone. In which respect, Wounds of the
Neck are many times of evil Consequence; because sometimes some considerable
Nerve or Tendon may be hurt, especially if the Wound reaches to the Spinal
Marrow. Wounds near the Navel, about which lie the perforated Tendons of the
Oblique and Transverse Muscles, are not without danger, though they be not
deep. Wounds also in the back part of the Thorax, which, though they reach not
the Cavity, yet by reason of the proximate dispersion of large Arteries, Veins,
and many Nerves, are accounted very dangerous.

XVIII. Wounds in the Joints are of dangerous Consequence, because of their
Tendons and Ligaments, which being hurt, many times produce malign Symptoms;
especially in a Wound of the inside of the Arm. And of this kind, may be
esteemed Wounds of the Armpits, bending of the Elbow, inside of the Wrist, and
outside of the Leg; because in these there are great Veins, Arteries, Nerves,
and Tendons, which hazard violent Fluxes of Blood, Pain, Inflammations,
Gangrenes, Convulsions, etc.

XIX. When Nerves, Tendons, and Membranes, investing the Skull or other Bones,
are cut or wounded, there is sometimes hurt of the Sense, numbness of the Part,
violent Pain, Inflammation, Convulsion, and sometimes a Delirium, by consent of
the Brain; and these many times happen, when the Ligaments of the Joints are
cut: But the Pain is more violent, and Inflammations, Tumors, or Convulsions
oftener succeed, when the Nerve, or Tendon is pricked, or partly cut, than when
they are quite cut asunder.

XX. Wounds of the Nerves are rarely Mortal, unless by Accident; but they are
indeed oftentimes very dangerous. Now under the name of Nerves, Galen
comprehends both the Nerves themselves, springing from the Brain and Spinal
Marrow, and also Ligaments and Tendons, which being wounded, he esteems
Malignant and Dangerous, but never Mortal. For, says he, if that no principal
Part be drawn into Consent, nor the Wounded or Contused Nerve is affected with
an Inflammation, Wounds of the Nerves may be cured without any Danger; and if
these Accidents should attend, yet neither shall Putrefaction, or Convulsion,
or Death ensue; for Mortal Wounds can only be inflicted on those Parts that are
either Principal, or destroy Strength by large Effusion of Blood and Spirits;
or serve to some necessary use of Life; all which being seriously considred,
the Nerves can never be found of those kinds: For, an Hand, an Arm, or Leg, and
their Nerves, may be cut off without loss of Life; and therefore doubtless,
Wounds of the Nerves can never be accounted among such as are Mortal, but only
among such as are Dangerous.

XXI. But Nerves which have their Original immediately from the Brain, or
mediately from the interposition of the Spinal Marrow, are more apt to cause
Convulsions, than Tendons, which are composed of a Nerve and a Ligament. But if
the Tendon insert it self into a Muscle, the more of Nerve there is in it, the
more of Danger there is in it; but a wounded Ligament, if it proceeds from one
Bone to another, is not of so dangerous a Consequence.

XXII. Lastly, many of those Wounds, which we have said, are for the most part
Mortal, may (when they are small) be accounted among the Dangerous: As, Wounds
of the Dura Matter, of the edges of the Liver, Lungs, Spleen, Womb, etc. when
they are slightly wounded.

V. Wounds of the Nerves, and Backbone.
XXIII. Not only the hurt of the Muscles, but the hurt of the Nerves also,
hinder Motion; because distributed through the Muscles, and being the chief
Cause of Motion. For, Galen says, that in all Muscles, whether you wound their
Nerves, or cut their Fibers athwart, you immediately deprive them of all
Motion: Now the Faculty of Motion is derived from the Brain, and distributed to
the other Parts by the Nerves; which, because they are not sufficient of
themselves for Motion, the Muscles were ordained, to be as it were, Leavers,
that one might the more easily raise up any Weight: For which reason, every
Muscle has a Nerve inserted into it, from whence it derives its Motion: And
since the original Cause of Motion, is from the Animal Spirit, if that be stopped
or intercepted by Cutting, Compressing, or Bruising the Chanel in which it
runs, to wit, the Nerves, all Motion and Sense in that Part will cease: But
those Parts will yet retain both Motion and Sense, through which the remaining
part of the Nerve runs, which it continues with the Brain.

XXIV. Now, the Nerves seldom run along the outside of the Body, into the
Muscles, but, for safety sake, as it were, run along the inside. The Nerves
that come along to the Hand, run along the inside of the Arm; but contrariwise
in the Leg; for they run along the backside of the Thigh, because of its
Fleshiness. For which cause sake, not any Nerves pass by, or upon, the Elbow,
Knee-pan, or Shin-bone, because they have little or no Flesh upon them; but
always deep among the Fleshy Parts of the Limbs, Cartilages, and Ligaments.

XXV. If the Nerves springing from the fifth, sixth, and seventh Vertebrae of
the Cervix, along the Armpits; and from the first and second Vertebrae of the
Thorax (which accounted from the beginning, may be called the eighth and ninth
pair) being very strangely intermixed, and crossing one another, descending to
the Arm and Hand; if these, I say, be wounded in the Vertebrae, the Motion of
the Arms and Hands will be hurt, according to the Magnitude of the Wound.

XXVI. If the Nerves proceeding from the Vertebrae of the Loins and Os Sacrum,
which intermix and cross one another also, in a various complication, be
wounded, there will be a hurt in like manner to the Motions of the Thigh, Leg,
and Foot: For whatsoever Pair of Nerves proceeding from the aforesaid
Vertebrae, are hurt, the Muscles underneath will also be hurt.

XXVII. If the Spinal Marrow be cut quite through ( says Galen) in the Region
of the third or fourth Vertebrae, the Person will presently be deprived of
Breathing; not the Thorax only, but the whole Body below the Wound, becoming
immovable.

XXVIII. If it be cut through, below the second or first Vertebrae, or in the
very beginning of the Spinal Marrow, the Person immediately falls down dead.
But if the Spinal Marrow be cut quite through, lower than the Fourth Vertebra,
all the Muscles of the Breast lose their Motion, and Respiration is performed by
the benefit of the Diaphragma, or Midriff only; but a Cut about the seventh
Vertebra, much less, cuts under the eighth or ninth, hinders not the Function
of the Thoracick Muscles: And the lower the Wound is yet made, the more Muscles
of the Thorax will do their Office.

XXIX. If the Wound of the Spinal Marrow be in a right Line, up and downwards,
none of the Intercostal, Lumbar, nor Crural Nerves will lose their use; but if
it be cut half way cross, all the Nerves springing thence on the same side,
perish. But generally hurts of the Parts, from Wounds of the Medulla Spinalis,
are Mortal, there being not much difference between Wounds of that, and Wounds
of the Brain.

VI. Wounds of the Head.
XXX. If a deep Wound be made in the Neck behind, so as to reach the Parts
under, you will hurt the Motions of the Head. For there being six Pair of
Muscles which draw the Head backward, they all of them lie under some other
external Muscles, the Exterior under the Musculous Dilatation, which moves the
Cheeks, the Posterior under the Scapular Muscle; wherefore a superficial Wound
cannot hinder the Motion of the Head: All these six Pair of Muscles, come from
the Spines of the first five Vertebrae, and reach almost half way up the hinder
part of the Head.

XXXI. And there is one Pair of Muscles which bend the Head forward, these
arise from the top of the Thorax, and end of the Clavicula, being long, round
and strong, and are apparent before the Skin is taken off, and are inserted
into the Mamillary Processes: If these be both moved, the Head is bent
forwards; but if it be drawn on one side only, one of them only acts; these, if
they be cut, hinder the Motion of the Head forwards or side-ways.

XXXII. A Wound in the Head in the Cutaneous Part, which only makes bare, or
breaks the Bone, but hurts not the Meninges, is safe, because it is in the
Skin, or a Carnous Part, no Nervous, or Principal Part being hurt. But such a
Wound may be in some respects dangerous, because near the Brain, and may put a
Person into more hazard, than Wounds of other Parts; and therefore Judgment
ought to be delivered concerning them very cautiously, because they produce
many and vehement Symptoms, not happening in Wounds of other Parts, arising
from the Nature of the Part, faults in Management, and difficulty of Cure: For
such is the formation of the Head; that whatsoever Wound happens in its Skinny
or Carnous Substance, it may easily, by a Fracture of the Skull, be
communicated to the Meninges, and the Brain it self; because there may be a
Fissure of the Cranium, in another Part than where the Wound is, as Hippocrates
affirms, which is called Resonitus Cranii, or, a Contrafissure: And Avicen
says, the Skull may be oftentimes broken, whilst the Skin remains whole. And
Celsus, That though the Bone be perfectly whole, yet some Vein in the Membrane
of the Brain, may be broken and bleed; in all which Cases, a wise Artist may be
in a doubt what to do, and make more than small faults, by his Mistakes in
Curing.

XXXIII. Such a Fracture of the Cranium, as lays the Meninx, or Dura Matter
bare, is full of Danger; for they have place among Nervous Wounds, which are
dangerous. Yet in giving Judgment, consider the Temper of the Clime, Nature of
the Place, Quality of the Season, and Habit of the Body, and accordingly
deliver your Opinion.

VII. Wounds of the Forehead, and upper Eyelids.
XXXIV. A Wound in the Forehead, near the Eyebrows, if longways, according to
the Course of the Fibers, when healed, will not hurt the Function of the Part,
or Eyelid; but if it be transverse and deep, the Eye-brow and Skin under it
will be drawn downwards, causing a great trouble to the Eyes, because the upper
Eyelid cannot open freely, nor perfectly do its Duty. This Substance lying
upon the Forehead, and sticking fast to it, Galen calls a Musculous Skin;
Vesalius, not a Musculous, but a Carnous Membrane, but Fallopius says, it is
perfect Muscle, from its Fibers and Motion; and Realdus, that it is duplicate,
because he has seen one side of the Forehead convulst, whilst the sound side
was entire in its Function. These Muscles have no Tendon, because it is not a
Bone, but a Skin that is to be moved, and is terminated in that common Suture,
which divides the Bones of the Head from those of the upper Jaw: And their
Fibers (as Vesalius says) run in a direct Line from the top of the Nose to the
beginning of the Forehead; but Columous says, they run obliquely, from the top
of the Nose, to the said middle of the Forehead.

XXXV. If the upper Eyelid is wounded transverse, in the space between the
Corners of the Eye, the total loss of the Function of the Eyelid follows, if
the Wound be deep; but if not deep, it will only not shut close. For in this
Case, the two oblique Muscles moving and lifting up the Eyelid, must be cut
asunder, or much hurt, according to the Effect following.

VIII. Wounds of the Cheeks.
XXXVI. If the Musculus latus be wounded, whose use is, to draw the Cheeks from
one side to theother, and perform some other Motions, without moving the lower
Jaw, or opening the Mouth, the Functions of the Cheeks must necessarily be
hurt: This Action is very manifest, in that Convulsion, or Contraction, called
Spasmus Cynicus; for therein, this Muscle is extremely stretched, and
contracted-towards its Original: Its Fibers are carried, partly up to the Lips,
as in that part of the Muscle which ascends to the Os Pectoris, and middle of
the Clavicula; and partly run obliquely from the same, as in that part of it
which rises from the rest of the Clavicula, top of the Shoulder, the Scapula,
and Region of the Neck.

XXXVII. If the two Muscles descending Obliquely from the Cheeks, moving the
upper Lip; and the two Muscles ascending from the end of the Jaw, where the
Chin is, be wounded, the Functions, or Actions of the Lips will cease, or be
hurt. Now let the Wound in these Parts be made which way it will, it is always
transverse, and cuts the Fibers across; because the Fibers of those Muscles are
strangely interwoven, and complicate one with another.

XXXVIII. If the Region which lies between the Ear, the Forehead, and Os
Jugale, making an imperfect Circle, called the Temples, be wounded, the lifting
up of the upper Jaw, and the shutting of the Mouth will be hurt. For the
Crotaphites, or Temporal Muscle lies there, which arising from the Os Verticis,
Frontis, and Temporis, is fastened to the crooked Point of the lower Jaw,
drawing it up to shut the Mouth. And the Fibers of this Muscle, run from the
Circumference to the Center, which they do in no other Muscle besides. A Wound
in this Muscles causes also (as Hippocrates and Galen say) Convulsions, Fevers,
Sleepiness and Doting, because near to the principal Nerves.

XXXIX. If the Space between the Os Jugale, and Root of the Ear, at the
beginning of the neat her Jaw, be wounded, Mastication, or Chewing will be
hindered. For there the Masseter, or Chewing Muscle lies, which you may easily
feel with your Fingers, when the Mouth is open; arising from that part of the
Head where the Processus Styloeides are, comprehending all the nether Jaw, and
drawing it round.

IX. Wounds of the Arms.
XL. If the Muscles dedicated to any Function of the Arm, are wounded, those
Functions will be hurt. That which lies upon the Epomis being wounded, the
Motion drawing the Arm upright is hurt. If those two which come by the sides of
the former, from the Scapula, be wounded, the Motion which draws the Arm
backward or forward, according as they are on this or that side, is hurt. If
the three Muscles which draw the Arm to the Breast are wounded, that Motion also
is frustrate. If the four Muscles, proceeding from the Scapula, and that from
the lower end of the lowest Rib, under the Scapula, be wounded, the Motion
which turns the Arm backward is prejudiced.

XLI. If the Muscles dedicated to the Cubit, or Elbow, are wounded, the
Functions of the Cubit will also be hurt. If the Muscle which appears near the
Humeral Vein, having two Heads, one upon the edge of the Head of the Scapula,
and another upon the Process, and cleaving first to the Os Brachii, and then to
the Radius, having a second under it, assistent to the same Action, be wounded,
the Motion extending the Cubit will be hurt: But if a Wound be made in the
hinder Part, opposite to the aforesaid Muscles, touching their ends, the Office
of bending the Elbow will be lost. If the long Muscle arising from the Os
Humeri, and implanted into the lower Appendix of the Radius, being the second
of them which draw the Radius forwards, be wounded, the Motion raising the
Radius supinely will be hindered. But if the lower Part of the Vlna, going along
to the lower Part of the Wrist, be wounded, all the Motions of the Wrist will
be hurt; for there all the four Muscles of the Cubit, which are the cause of
all the Motion of the Arm, are extended.

XLII. If a Wound be made in the inside of the Cubit, inclining a little back,
then the second Joints of the four Fingers cannot bend; for there runs one
Muscle, the first among the Internal, which moves the upper part of the Hand,
which arising from the lower Swelling of the Humerus, is hid under others, till
it comes to the Elbow, where coming forth, it is seen under the Skin, except
what the former Muscle does pass over: This then having passed the Wrist, is
divided into four Tendons, each of which being fixed to the second Bones of the
Fingers, are their Benders. And therefore, whatever of the internal Muscles,
which run down with the first to the Wrist, are cut, certainly hurt the
Function of Contraction, or bending.

XLIII. The Hand is manifestly extended by the external Muscles, placed in the
back part of the Arm. If therefore the first of these be wounded, which having
past the Elbow, appears, and is seen under the Skin, and runs under another,
which extends the Wrist, which being divided into four Tendons, runs to all the
Joints of all the Fingers, and extends them; the Motion causing these
Extensions will be frustrate. The second Muscle, by which the Palm is formed,
having the same Original with the former, is to be seen under the Skin with the
first, proceeding underneath to the Hand; this is that, by which the little
Finger is drawn aside from the rest; therefore, if this Muscle is wounded, and
the Wound be made in the lower Region, the Function of the little Finger will
be hurt; but if it be made a little above, the Function of the three next
Fingers then suffer.

X. Wounds of the Hands.
XLIV. If the back of the Hand be wounded, where (not Muscles, but) Tendons
creep along to their Joints, then the Function of that Finger will be hurt,
which is next to the Muscle, or Tendon, Cut or Wounded. But many times, when
these exterior Tendons have been cut, the Fingers have yet been extended, but
the Function has been the more weakly performed; the cause of this remaining
ability of Extension, is from other Muscles arising in the Palm, which
exercising the same Function of extending, with those which were cut, makes the
prejudice, or hurt of the Function the less: And this is evident, because, if
the Palm of the Hand be wounded, the Motion of the Fingers is many times hurt
thereby.

XLV. If therefore the broad Tendon in the Palm, which lies next the Skin, and
four Muscles which lie under it, from the middle of the Palm, to the setting on
of the Fingers; which (though they be internal) extend the four Fingers and the
Thumb: If, I say, these be Wounded, the Function, or Action of extending the
Thumb and Fingers must be hurt. And these four arise from the Tendons of that
Muscle, which bends the third Joints of the four Fingers, and then running to
the external Part, are implanted in the said third Joints, and so extend them.

XLVI. If a Wound be about the little Finger, that Muscle will be hurt, which
arises from the fourth Bone of the Matacarpus, and draws it aside from the
other Fingers. If the Ball of the Thumb is wounded, the three Muscles which
bend the Thumb will be hurt; and whatever Wound it is which hinders its
Function, it must be either in it, or very near it, because the Thumb has this
peculiar property in it self, to take nothing to it, from any upper part.

XI. Wounds of the Thighs.
XLVII. A Wound any where in that Region of the Buttock, which reaches from the
Os Sacrum and Coccyx, half over the Os Ilium, unless it be shallow, will hinder
the Extension of the Thigh. For, the Muscle giving this Motion, arises from the
aforesaid Parts, and ends at length in the great Trochanter, making the
Buttock. But since this Function requires much strength, other Muscles are
helpful to it, lest by the hurt of one Muscle, the whole Action of the Part
should be lost.

XLVIII. A Wound in the Thigh, in the forepart, between the tops of the
Knee-pan, will prejudice the Extension of the Leg. For under that place, there
runs the seventh Muscle of them that move the Leg, and under that the eighth
Muscle, to be seen above the Knee: But, because it has other Muscles assistant
in this Action, the total loss of this Extension need not be feared, from the
wounding of one Muscle.

XLIX. And if that Muscle be wounded, which descends obliquely, almost from the
Groin, like a Border along the inside of the Thigh, and ending in the Shin,
that Motion or Action of the Leg, which draws it toward the Groin on the other
side, or to the Thigh, will be very much hurt. And if the hinder part of the
Thigh, between the end of the Buttock and the Ham, be wounded, it hinders
Contraction; especially if the Tendons be cut, which appear so evidently in the
sides of the Ham; that when the Knee is bent, they may be plainly felt by the
Fingers.

XII. Wounds of the Legs.
L. If those Muscles, which coming up above the Knee, do by their Bellies, on
each side of the Leg, make up the Calf, and at length make the strongest Tendon
of the whole Body, coming to the Heel: If these, I say, be wounded, or that
Tendon be cut, then the Action of the Foot, which stretches it forth, will be
hurt: But the hurt, or wounding of one Muscle, is not sufficient to destroy the
Action of the whole; for four other Auxiliary Muscles, lend their Assistance to
this Function.

LI. If the two Muscles running between the Calf and the Os Tibiae, or Shin
bone; one of which next the Calf, extends four of the Toes; the other running
by the Os Tibiae, extends the end of the Foot: If, I say, these be wounded, the
Action of extending will certainly be hurt.

LII. If the Metapedium, or Instep he wounded athwart deep, and the Wound be
not healed at one Intention, by reason of the Concourse of Arteries, Veins,
Nerves, Muscles, and Tendons, and the easy afflux of Humors, as being a
depending Part. If the use of the Foot be not wholly lost, yet the Ulcer will
be of difficult Cure, and long in Healing.

CHAP. LII. EXAMPLES of making REPORTS.
I. Of Death, presumed to ensue.
WE A. B. and C. D. Chirurgians of the City of L. have by Command, or Order of
Counsel, viewed the Body of E. F. which we find in Bed, wounded in his Head, on
his left Temple, plercing the Bone with a Fracture, and Depression of the
broken Bone, Splinters thereof, and Meninges into the Substance of the Brain,
with a weak Pulse, dejected Appetite, cold Sweats, Convulsions, and Raving;
whereby we judge that certain and sudden Death is at Hand: In witness whereof,
we have hereunto put our Hands, the 16. May, 1695.

II. A Report in a doubtful Case.
I A. B. by Order of the Coroner, have visited G. H. whom I found Sick in Bed,
being wounded with a Scimitar, or Cutlass, on his left Thigh. The Wound was
three Inches broad, and pierces quite through the Substance of the Thigh,
cutting also the great Artery and Vein, whence came a great effusion of Blood,
by which he is exceedingly weakened, and is often taken with Swooning Fits: Now,
his Thigh is very much Swollen, and livid, whereby a Gangrene, or Sphacelus is
feared; for which Reasons, the Health and Safety of the Sick is much doubted
of. In witness whereof, I have hereunto put my Hand, the 24. August, 1695.

III. A Report, in Case of the loss, or Debility of a Member.
We A. B. C. D. Chirurgians of the City of L. by Command of the Counsel, have
visited I. K. whom we found Wounded in his left Arm, with a Wound of four
Inches bigness. The Tendons bending the Leg were out, as also the Nerves, and
Crural Veins and Arteries: There are also present Malign Symptoms, as, great
Pain, Inflammation, Abscess, Fever, Convulsions, and Gangrene; for which
Reasons, we think his Life to be in great danger; but if, through the
Skilfulness of the ARtist, and great Care, he escapes Death, he will doubtless
continue Lame, all the Days of his Life following, through the Impotency of the
wounded Part. In witness whereof, we have hereunto put our Hands, the 12. of
April, 1695.

IV. A Report, when Wounds are found in diverse Parts.
We A. B. C. D. E. F. Chirurgians of L. by Order of the Counsel, have visited
M. N. whom we found hurt with five Wounds. The first was on his Head, in the
middle of the Os Frontis, three Inches broad, penetrating to the second Table;
so that we were forced to take away several Splinters of the same Bone. The
second was across his right Cheek, reaching from his Ear to the middle of the
Nose. The third is on the midst of his Abdomen, or Belly, two Inches broad, and
so deep, as to pierce into the Capacity, or Hollowness of the Abdomen; so that
we were forced to cut away a part of the Caul, coming out thereat, to the
bigness of a Wallnut, being also grown of a black Color, and Putrified. The
fourth was upon the back of the right Hand, with the Cutting of the Arteries,
Veins, Nerves, Tendons, and Bones of that Part; for which Cause, though cured,
it will always remain Lame. Tho fifth upon the Spina Dorsi, two Inches big,
with a Paralysis, or Numbness, or Deadness on all the Parts on the right Side
below it; for which Reason it is much to be feared, that the Medulla Spinalis is
hurt. The Patient has oftentimes Fainting and Swooning Fits, and sometimes
Convulsions, Fever, and other ill Symptoms attending; for which Reason, we
think his Life to be in very great Danger, (or Death is much to be feared.) In
witness whereof, we have hereunto put our Hands, the 14. Day of October, Anno
1695.

V. A Report of a Woman delivered of a Dead Child.
We A. B. C. D. by the Judges Command, have visited G. P. whom we found Sick in
Bed, having a strong Fever upon her, with a Convulsion and Efflux of Blood at
her Womb, by reason of a Wound in the Abdomen, or Belly, below her Navel on the
right Side, penetrating into the Capacity of her Belly; whence it came to pass,
that she was delivered before her Time, of a Male Child, perfect in all its
Parts, but Dead, being killed by the same Wound, which pierced through its
Skull, into the Substance of the Brain: For which Reason we judge, that the
Death of the Mother also is near at hand. In witness whereof, we have hereunto
put our Hands, the 27. Day of June 1695.

VI. A Report of a Wounded Person, found Dead.
It was demanded of us, E. F. G. H. Chirurgians of the City of L. whether the
wounded Body received the Wounds alive, or dead? Now, because when a Person is
wounded whilst living, the Lips of the Wound will be red and bloody, and the
Flesh about it black and blew, with Signs of Blood in the Place where the Body
was found: And, because none of these Signs are found in this present Body, nor
any appearance of Blood, or bleeding, neither about the Wound, nor about the
Place, though the Weapon be found in the Wound, and run through the Body;
because that the Blood being cold and coagulated, before the Wound was made, it
could not flow to the Part hurt or wounded: For these Reasons we judge, the
Wound was made after Death; and that the Deceased was not Felo de se, but
killed first, and afterward run through by another. In witness whereof, we
have hereunto put our Hands, the 10. May, 1695.

The first Five of these Reports, are in a manner taken out of Paraeus, or made
in imitation of his; I do not say how exquisitely they are worded; nor with
what Artist-like Terms they might, or ought to have been expressed; yet they
may serve as Exemplars for others, to take Pattern by, and do better when
Occasion shall require.

VIII. EMBALMING.
CHAP. LIII. EMBALMING the EGYPTIAN WAY.
I. (...), Pollinctura, (a pollincere, vel pollingere) Conditura, (a condiendo)
Balsamatio, (a Balsamo;) The Art of Embalming, is that which teaches to
cleanse, sweeten, perfume and dry, or preserve a dead Carcass or Body.

II. The Artist is called, (...), Pollictor, seu Pollinctor, an Embalmer, or
Preserver of Dead Bodies.

III. The Egyptians called him (...), Salinator, a Salter; and the Art, (...),
Salitura, the Art of Salting; because the ancient way of Embalming in that
Nation, was by Salting or Poudering with Salt, as we shall now immediately
teach.

IV. Embalming is exercised either according to the ancient Egyptian ways; the
European ways; or, our Modern Institutions.

V. The ancient Egyptian way of Preserving the Dead, was either by Salting;
or, by Aromatic Gums and Spices.

VI. The Scythians eat their Dead; the Graecians burn; the Indians anoint with
Oils and Fats; the Persians bury, but first Encerate; the Babylonians bury in
Honey and Wax; and this was the Custom also sometime among the Graecians; for
Agesilaus of Lacedaemon was Embalmed in Honey, as Xenophon relates; so also was
the Body of Alexander the Great, as you may perceive from Statius, in Sylvis.

VII. The Egyptians Embalm, and that either with Salts, or with Aromaticks, to
keep the Body from stinking, putrefying or breeding of Worms, and (if it were
possible) to make it Immortal: These Embalmed Bodies they call Gabbares.

VIII. Their Opinion was, that so long as the Body endured, so long the Soul
continued with it; therefore they studied to preserve their Dead by Embalming,
lest the Soul should quickly transmigrate to another Body.

IX. The Romans, from a contrary Opinion, burnt their Dead, that their Souls
might quickly be discharged, and return into their own Nature. Herodotus and
Diodorus Siculus tell us, That these Embalmed Bodies become, as it were,
petrified, and hard like Marble. August. de diversis, Sermon. 120. concludes from
this their Practice, that they held, or believed, the Resurrection of the Dead.

X. The Egyptian Art of Salination is threefold, viz. either by Salt alone;
or, by Salt and Juice of Cedar; or, by Salt and Aromatic Gums and Spices.

XI. Herodotus and Diodorus have very copiously Recorded the manner of
Embalming; and how he that professes that Art, keeps Patterns of dead Bodies;
as also, that according as they are paid, they can Embalm the Body, exact or
not; and that those who would go the Price of it, might have their Dead done
extreme curiously. See Herodotus, lib. 2.

I. Salination with Salt alone.
XII. This was only of Use with the Poor People. The dead Body was carried to
the Salinators, (for so they were called) where the Body being opened with a
sharp Ethiopick Stone, with Lotions it was cleansed, and the Belly purely
washed, then with Nitre it was Salted seventy Days, and after dried; in which
Condition it would keep firm many Hundreds of Years.

XIII. And if an Egyptian, or a Stranger was found killed by a Crocodile, or
drowned in the River, the City where he was cast up, or found, must Embalm him,
(with Salt only, it is supposed) and bury him in the Sacred Monuments; whom no
one, no not a Relation or Friend may touch, but the Priests of Nile only.

II. Salination with Salt, and Juice, or Balsam of Cedar.
XIV. This was of Use among the middle or better Sort of People. The Salinator
forces up a Clyster by the Anus, of the Juice, or Balsam of Cedar, with which
they fill (as it were) the Cavity of the Belly, neither cutting nor
unbowelling; then they Salt it with Nitre for Seventy Days complete.

XV. At the end of that Term they take out the Clyster, and out with it comes
the Guts, Ventricle, and other internal Viscera; so powerful is the Clyster
made of Juice, or Balm of Cedar.

XVI. In the mean Season, the Nitre has consumed all the other superfluous
Humidities, having penetrated to the Bone: thus the Body being made thoroughly
clean, it is after dried, and put into its proper place, where it will remain
without Corruption multitudes of Years.

III. Salination with Salt, and Aromaticks.
XVII. The Salinator extracted the Brain by the Nostrils with a Hook, then he
filled it with dissolved Gums, after that, with a sharp Ethiopick Stone, he
ripped up the Belly, and unbowelled it, which was immediately washed and cleansed
with Phoenician, or Palm-wine.

XVIII. And filling the whole Cavity of the Belly with Aromatic Spices, Myrrh
and Cassia, (but no Frankincense) it was sewed up, and then Salted with Nitre
for Seventy Days; at the end of which time it was cleansed, washed and dried.

XIX. This done, it was bound with Fillets, or Ribands, beginning at the Head,
and ending at the Feet, and then going again from the Feet to the Head; to the
wrapping up (as the Historian says) of a Thousand Else; after which it is
wrapped up in a Cere-Cloth, dipped in melted Gums and Rosins.

XX. The Body then is restored to the Relations, who make a wooden Coffin, in
shape of a Man, into which they put the Dead, and entomb him.

IV. The Egyptian Embalming, with Aromaticks alone.
XXI. The Artist that is to Dissect the Belly, is called the Scribe; he lays
the Body upon the Ground, and marks out how much of the Belly must be cut open
about the left side; this Section is performed with the sharp Ethiopick Stone.

XXII. The Entrails are presently flung away, by their Law, being pulled out by
the Hand of the Embalmer; but the Heart and Kidneys are cleansed with
Phoenician Wine, or Wine of Palms, and Aromaticks, and kept.

XXIII. This done, the whole Body is anointed with Juice, or Balsam of Cedar,
or Turpentine, for about Forty Days, (the number of the Days of their Mourning
for the Dead:) Afterward they perfume the Body with Myrrh, Cinnamon, Aloes,
and other Aromatic Gums, Spices, and Odors.

XXIV. And this is done in such sort, that (as their Historians report) the
Hair shall be preserved and renewed Hundreds of Years; and every Member kept so
entire, that the Eyebrows, Beard, and Countenance, and shape of the whole
Body, may easily be known by any that knew them in their lifetime. Diodorus
Siculus, lib. 1.

XXV. Now from what Historians have said, and the evident Demonstration of the
Mumies brought from Egypt, it is certain, that they had two ways of Embalming;
the one cheap, for the poorer sort, the other costly, for the Rich.

XXVI. For the poorer People they used Asphaltus, i. e. Bitumen Judaicum, or
Pissasphaltum, which is a mixture of Pitch and Bitumen.

XXVII. For the Rich, they used Aromatic Spices, Balsamic Juices, Oils, and
Rosins, such as Opobalsamum, liquid Rosin of Cedar, Aloes, Myrrh, Turpentine of
Chi^, Cassia lignea, Cinnamon, etc. which by their Bitterness, innate Balsamic
Sulphur, Oiliness, and Volatile Salt, were able to resist Putrefaction and
Corruption, for a very great number of Years.

CHAP. LIVE. EMBALMING the EUROPEAN WAYS.
I. THESE are such as are universally practiced through most of the European
Nations, and are either without Dissection, or with it.

II. Those which are Embalmed without Dissection, cannot be of that endurance
which they are of, who are Dissected; nor are those Bodies useful for Mummies.

III. The name of Mummy is only given to Dissected Bodies, Embalmed with
Aromatic Drugs; or, to those Bodies which are covered over, and dried in the
Sands of Lybia, by the heat of the Sun.

IV. It is improperly given either to the Liquor which flows from the Coffins
of Princes Embalmed, which being dried in the Sepulcher, becomes hard as the
Embalmed Flesh.

V. Or, to those Bodies which are Embalmed with Asphalthum or Bitumen, (which
is a Sulphurous Humidity of the Earth) which, through length of time, being
once dry, becomes like Mortar, or a crusted Paste over the Body.

VI. The Coffins of the Egyptians were shaped out to the Similitude of a Man;
and if they were made of Wood, it was Sycamore or Cedar, which are reported,
will remain sound for ever,

I. Embalming without Dissection, called Encearing.
VII. You ought to cleanse the Bowels well by Clysters cast in, made either of
Wine Vinegar, Sea Water, Salt Brine, or Solution of Niter, or a strong
Decoction of Coloquintida; and these to be often repeated; then hanging the
Body up by the Arms, that the Ordure, or Faeces may drop out.

VIII. If the Body be laid in warm Water almost scalding hot, for a season,
after the Exhibition of the Clyster, it will work so much the better.

IX. The Bowels being cleansed, let all the Passages of the Body be stopped up
with hurds dipped in the Composition prepared for the Cerecloth, and over them
lay Cloth fitted, and dipped in the same.

X. Lastly, wrap up the Body in a Cerate, made of new Cloth; so large as it may
go four, or five, or more times round the Body, as you think fit; and then Cord
it up, putting it into a strong well made Coffin, well and firmly Pitched all
over the inside.

XI. But here note, 1. That in thin and lean Bodies, it is not always necessary
to use the Clysters, being chiefly for fat and gross Bodies.

XII. 2. That some Cord not the Body, being wrapped in the Cere-cloth; but it is
most safe to use Cordage, if the Body be very Fat and Gross.

XIII. 3. That the Cerat for this purpose you may see in our Doron, or
Supplement to our London Dispensatory, lib. 3. cap. 5. sect. 1, 2. Or you may
use this following:

XIV. Burgundy Pitch lbxij. Bees Wax lbiv. Pitch lbi. Frankincense, Gum Elemi,
Verdigrise a. lbss. Oil q.s. melt, mix, and make a Cerat. Or this, Bees Wax
lbxx. Rosin, Sheeps Suet, Stone Pitch, a. lbx. Turpentine lbvi. Oil enough to
give it the body of a Cerat.

II. Embalming with Aromaticks.
XV. Have in a readiness for Dissection, all the proper Instruments, Incision
Knives, Saws, etc. as also Spunges, Stuphes, Linen, Needles, waxed Thread,
Bandages.

XVI. 2. Embowel the Corpse, removing all the Viscera, or contained parts in the
three Venters, except the Heart and Kidneys, which may be Embalmed with the
Body. All these Bowels you may put in an Urn, or Pot, and bury them by
themselves.

XVII. 3. The Venters being all freed, dry them very well with Spunges and
Cloths, and then wash them with Water and Salt, or Vinegar, or Salt and
Vinegar, or Aqua Vitae, or Spirit of Wine, or Lixivium of Quicklime.

XVIII. And if would have the Body to keep for a longer time, make Incision
into the inside of the Thighs, Arms, and other Fleshy Parts, where the greater
Vessels lie, that the Blood may be extracted, and so you may do, if you please,
to the whole Body; after which dry and wash it, as we have just now directed.

XIX. Lastly, wash it with Vinegar, in which Colocynthis, Wormwood, Rue, Aloes,
Salt and Alum have been Infused and Decocted.

XX. 4. This done, fill the said Venture and Incisions with this Powder; Pulvis
ad Implendas Cavitates Cadaverum. Acorus, Orrice, Birthwort, Rhodium,
Xyloaloes, Gentian, Zedoary, Bay Berries, Ginger, Cardamoms a. lbiij. Myrrh,
Aloes a. lbxv. Leaves of Wormwood, Centory, Master-wort, Rosemary, Pepper,
Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmegs, Labdanum a. lbij. make all into a Powder, and
moisten with Spirit of Wine to embody it; all which will be little enough, if
the Body be large, and you Embalm the Bowels also.

XXI. For you ought not to leave the least Cavity unsought, but fill every
Corner, as full as the Skin will hold.

XXII. 5. The Venters being filled, sew up all the places, and anoint the Body
all over with, first, Oils of Turpentine, Spike, Juniper Berries, and Cloves,
mixed together in equal quantities: Secondly, with Balsam of Peru; which done,
strew over the whole Body, some of this following Powder, till it be about half
an Inch, thick.

XXIII. Pulvis ad Cadavera Loricanda: Myrrh Elect, fine Aloes, Benjamin, Gum
Guajaci, Orrice-root, Acorus, Cloves, Cinnamon, Tacamahacca, Lignum Rhodium,
Bay Berries, a. lbij. make all into a Powder, and mix them.

XXIV. 6. The next thing you are to do, is to wrap up the Body in Cere-cloths,
so large as may go, three, four, or five times round it; the form of the
Cerecloth you have above at Sect. 14. or others (in my Opinion better) in our
Doron, lib. 3. cap. 5. sect. 1, 2.

XXV. 7. Lastly, Put up the Body into the Coffin, which, if it be of Wood, let
it be exceedingly well Pitched all over within: If of Lead, let it be Soddered
up; after having first filled up all the empty Spaces, with either of the
Pouders at Set. 20. or 23. aforementioned.

III. Another way to do the same.
XXVI. 1. Open the Skull behind, about the breadth of the Palm of an Hand,
something more or less; take out the Brain, and fill the Cavity with this
Powder.

XXVII. Myrrh, Aloes a. lbxv. Benjamin, Tacamahacca, Gum Guajaci, Labdanum a.
lbv. Roots of Orrice, Gentian, Ginger, Zedoary, Aristolochy round, Bay Berries,
Acorus, Asphaltum, Cloves, Cinnamon a. lbiij. mix, and make a Powder. Then put
on the piece of Skull again, and few it fast on.

XXVIII. 2. Make an Incision from that part of the Breast where the Ribs meet
above the Navel, and another Incision crossing it, about eighteen Inches long,
so as to lay open the Region of the Liver, Spleen, and Stomach: Separate the
whole from the Sternon on both sides in the Mucilaginous Parts, raise the
Sternon against the face of the Body; take out the Tongue, Eyes, Lungs, Heart,
Liver, Spleen, Stomach, Intestines, and all the contained Parts.

XXIX. Make also two or three Incisions all along each Arm and Leg, and deep
Incisions in the Buttocks and Thighs; as also from the Neck to the Buttocks on
the Back, separating the Skin and fat Parts with an Incision-Knife.

XXX. Lastly, make five or six Incisions in the Neck, two in tho Soles of each
Foot, and as many in the Palms of each Hand.

XXXI. 3. Suck up the Blood, and watery Humors with Spunges, bathe and wash the
Parts with good Spirit of Wine; after rub with good Spirit of Salt, or S.V. to
every lbss. of which, i. of Spirit of Salt is put.

XXXII. And then fill every Hole and Corner, and all the Incisions and Spaces
between the Skin and Flesh; as also the Mouth, Eye-holes, Nostrils, and whole
Cavity of the Body, as full as the Skin will hold, with the Powder at Sect. 27.
aforegoing, and few up the Skin firmly with Thread well Waxed.

XXXIII. 4. This being done, anoint the Body all over with Balsam of Peru,
strewing it over with the Powder at Sect. 23. above.

XXXIV. 5. Then wrap the Body in a Cere-cloth, and soder it up in a Leaden
Coffin, where it may be preserved for many Ages.

XXXV. 6. If you would preserve the Body for some time to lie in State, where
it may be apparelled with Linen, Cloths, Hose, Shoes, Gloves, etc. with the
Head and Face uncovered; you must prepare a white Linen Odoriferous
Cere-cloth, which cut into long Bandages of about two or three Inches broad,
with which swath the Arms, Legs, Thighs by themselves, and afterward the whole
Body, applying the Swaths aslant upon the Powder.

XXXVI. Upon which you may Clothe the Body, as if it were Living, and Comb out
the Hair; often wash the Face with S.V. rectified, and lay over it, when it is
not publicly exposed, double Linen Cloths dipped in the same; or a Portion of
the said Odoriferous Cere-cloth, which for this purpose may be thus made.

XXXVII. White Beeswax lbvij. Venice Turpentine lbss. Oil of Nutmegs by
Expression iv. distilled Oils of Orange-Peels, of Limon-Peels, of Rhodium, a.
ij. melt, mix, and make a Cerate.

CHAP. LV. EMBALMING the MODERN WAYS.
I. A special and particular Way of Embalming, very excellent.
I. EMbowel, or remove all the contained Parts, in all the three Venters as
aforesaid, making also fit Incision in all the fleshy Parts, and wherever any
of the great Vessels lie.

II. This done, and the whole Body wiped very dry, and thoroughly cleansed; lay
it for three or four Hours in very warm Water, ( in which Nitre, an ounce to
every quart, is dissolved) till the Water is well colored; pour that Water
away, and put in fresh, letting the Body be in it as long; cast that Water
away, and this Work repeat, till the Water will be no more colored.

III. Afterward you shall dry the Body very well with Cloths and Spunges, and
lay it so, as that all that can may drain out of it, then put it into good
Spirit of Wine, so much as to overtop it for 3, or 4 Fingers breadth; wherein
let it lie for forty-eight Hours: Pour off that Spirit, and affuse new, letting
it lie forty-eight Hours as aforesaid: This Work repeat so long, till the
Spirit will be no more colored.

IV. Then take fresh Spirit of Wine, to every Pint of which put half an Ounce
of the best Oil of Vitriol, Oil of Sulphur, or Oil of Salt, mix them well
together, and pour them upon the whole Body, as you poured the former Spirit;
in which let it lie twenty-four Hours, after which decant the Liquor, and, with
what care you can, very curiously dry the Body in all its Parts.

V. Being well dried, besmear it all over, both within and without, with a
Hogs-bristle Brush, with this following Liquor: fine Myrrh, Benjamin, Rosin a.
iv. rectified Spirit of Wine, enough to dissolve the biggest part of the
aforesaid Rosins, in a gentle Sand heat: This dissolution mix with half its
quantity of the solution of fine Aloes, in other rectified Spirit of Wine; for
the aforesaid Use: You may do it twice a day all over with the said Brush for
eight or ten days together.

VI. These ten days being over, fill the Capacities of all the Ventricles with
the Powder at Sect. 27. Chap. 54. beforegoing; and Anoint the outside of the
Body all over with Balsam of Peru; which done, wrap it in the Cere-cloth at
Sect. 37. Chap. 54. The Body being thus Embalmed, will keep some Thousands of
Years without any decay.

VII. Lastly, put it into the Coffin or Tomb, prepared for it, observing the
Directions in Chap. 54. Sect. 25.

II. Balthazar Timaeus a Guldenklee, his Way of Embalming; Epist. Medicinal.
Lib. 6. Ep. 10.
VIII. This is done according to the Pleasure of the Relations, sometimes the
whole Body, with all its Cavities and Limbs, are Embalmed; sometimes the middle
and lowest Venters, and sometimes only the lowest is taken out, and preserved.

IX. Some (says he) use Aloes and Myrrh; some, Spirit of Wine; some, Vinegar
and Salt; and some, a Lixivium and Quicklime: Others, compounded Pouders,
Ointments, distilled Oils and Balsams.

X. I have Embalmed several after the following Method: First, I provide all my
requisite Instruments; as, Knives, Rasors, Scissars, Tweezers, Bodkins, Saws,
Hooks, Needles, Thread, Cords, Swathing Bands, Spunges, Tow, Linen, Vinegar,
Aqua Vitae, Salt Water, Magistral Pouders, Oils, Balsams, Cere-cloths, etc.

XI. The Corpse is well washed and cleansed with warm Wine, from all its
external Filth, and laid on a convenient place: I cut open the Abdomen
cross-ways, taking out the Guts, Mesentery, Stomach, Kidneys, Spleen, Bladder,
(and Womb, if a Womankind) ordering a Servant to empty and cleanse them.

XII. Then I open the Thorax, taking out the Lungs, Heart, Arteries, Veins,
Diaphragma, and the Oesophagus to the Epiglottis, carefully emptying and
cleansing all the Vessels.

XIII. The Cavities of the Thorax and Abdomen, are first washed well with cold
Water, and wiped dry with Spunges; then with strong Vinegar, and lastly with
A.V. or S.V. Spiritus Solomonis, which is a very effectual thing, to prevent
Putrefaction and Corruption.

XIV. After which, I strew the following described Powder upon all the Parts,
and rub it well in; applying also every where, Pledgets of Tow, or Cotton dipped
in A.V. and then strewing on more Powder, till I fill the whole Cavity of the
Thorax, and Abdomen therewith; and then I sew up the Skin.

XV. Coming now to the Head, I divide the Skull circularly, with a sharp Saw,
or else open it only from the Crown to the Occiput, take out the Brain, and
wash the Cavity in like manner, as I did the Thorax, etc. before, first with
cold Water, then with Vinegar, and last of all very well with A.V. or Spiritus
Solomonis; and fill it as I did the former Cavities, with the said Powder and
Tow.

XVI. I cleanse the Jaws also very well with a Syringe, and fill them with
Powder of Cinnamon and Cloves: I anoint the Face well (and reiterate the
Anointing) with Balsam of Peru, or Spiritus Solomonis.

XVII. Then I make deep Incisions in the Musculous and Fleshy Parts, chiefly
about the Buttock, carefully squeezing out the Blood, and strewing them with
the aforementioned Powder.

XVIII. Which done, I wrap the Body up in hot Cerecloth, and anoint it all over
with Ship Pitch, Pine Rosin, and Liquid Storax, melted together at the Fire.

XIX. If the Body is to be kept long, the fleshy Parts must be taken away, and
buried with the Bowels: but you may put the Heart in its place again, or keep
it by it self in a Box, being washed first of all with our Balsamic Water of
Aloes and Myrrh; afterward with Spiritus Solomonis, and then Anointed with
Balsam of Peru.

XX. Now here is to be observed, 1. That the Embalming is to be hastened after
the Parties Death, and not put off above twenty-four Hours, especially if the
Weather be hot.

XXI. 2. That the Body be kept in a cold place, and not exposed to the heat of
the Sun: Nor yet put in a wooden Coffin, but in one of Lead, with Tin or Silver
over it; because Wood rots, and in humid Vaults swells, and so bursts the Tin,
or Silver Coffins.

XXII. 3. In Embalming, do it carefully, lest any putrid Exhalation should
offend those about the Funeral, which is a great disgrace to the Artist.

XXIII. 4. The Artist and his Servants, must take care not to receive any harm
from the Effluvia, and Smells or Steams coming from the putrified Viscera; more
especially, if they died of a Phthisis, or Empyema, or some other Contagious
Disease.

XXIV. 5. That in Summertime this Operation be done in a Room, with Windows
open to the North: In Winter, in a Room aired with a Fire made of Ash, or Oak,
and some Juniper with it, but in no wise in a Stove.

XXV. 6. Let the Artist and Servants (when going about this work) take some
Alexipharmick, to defend them against the pernicious Scents; anoint their
Nostrils with some Balsam, or hold to them a Sponge dipped in Bezoardick Vinegar;
and hold in their Mouths Trochisci de Zedoaria, de Corticibus Citri, or the
like Alexitericks: If he has none of these things, let him eat some Food, or
Bread tosted and dipped in Wine.

XXVI. 7. That it is better to begin with opening the Abdomen, and not to use
Quicklime, or other Corrosive things; for that they rather Consume, than
Preserve, the Bodies they are applied to.

XXVII. The Powder mentioned at Sect. 14. aforegoing: Aloes lbv. choice Myrrh
lbiv. Hermodacts, Styrax Calamita, Cloves, dried Rosemary a. lbij. biting
Cinnamon, Frankincense a. lbj. dried Bay Leaves, Red Roses a. lbss. cut what
are to be cut, and make a gross Powder.

XXVIII. The Cere-cloth to wrap the Body up in, and to line the Coffin withal:
yellow Beeswax lbxxv. Venice Turpentine, Colophonia, Rosin a. lbiij. Ship
Pitch lbijss. Frankincense, Liquid Storax a. lbij. Verdigrise lbj. Oil of Spike
lbss. being melted and mixed well together, add of Sheeps, or Beef Suet lbij. In
this mixture, dip a whole piece of Linen Cloth, or so much as may serve the
Occasion.

XXIX. The Powder to be strewed on the Cere-Cloth: Wormwood, Southern-wood,
Lavender, Rosemary, Bay Leaves, a. M. vj. Sage, Marjoram, Basil, Origanum,
Time, Savory, Hyssop, Camomil-flowers a. M. iij. Orriceroot in Powder, Salt a.
lbiv. Lignum Rhodium lbiij. Red Roses, Aloes, Myrrh, Frankincense, Storax,
Benjamin a. lbij. Wood of Juniper, Sassafras a. lbiss. Roots of Calamus
Aromaticus, of Angelica, of Cyperus Orange and Citron Peels, Cinnamon, Cloves
a. lbj. yellow Sanders, Lignum Aloes a. lbss. mix, and make a Powder, which
moisten with Oil of Spike lbss.

XXX. An Oil to Anoint withal: Chemical Oils of Rosemary, and of Lignum Rhodium
a. iij. Oil of Cloves jss. distilled Oils of Wormwood and Origanum a. lbj. mix
them.

XXXI. The Balsam: Liquid Storax vj. Balsam of Peru ij. Oil of Rhodium iss. Oil
of Mace ss. mix them.

III. Gabriel Clauder, his Way of Embalming.
XXXII. The most famous Embalmer that ever yet came upon the Stage of the
World, was the Excellent Bilsius, who did it with that Curiosity, that not any
of the Embalming Matter stuck to the outward Parts of the Body; his Fame
reached to the King of Spain's Ears, who had him in such admiration, that he
ordered him to be paid (by his Governor in the low Coutries) Twenty Thousand
Crowns, upon condition he should declare faithfully upon Oath, his so excellent
an Art; and to be an honorary Professor in the University of Lovain, where he
should teach Anatomy according to his Manual Operation; for which he was to
have a Pension of Two Thousand Crowns per Annum.

XXXIII. But the University refused him, after much struggling; whereupon at
length, Bilsius laden with his Money, bid Lovain farewell; and going home to his
United Provinces, he died, and (for all that we yet know) his famous Secret was
buried with him.

XXXIV. This admirable excellency of Bilsius put others upon search, and though
Bilsius was so unkind as not to make the World happy with his Invention, it put
another Man upon making Trials; to wit, the Excellent Clauder, Physician to the
Duke of Saxony, who after many and various Experiments, found out the following
most excellent Method or Way.

XXXV. The Body having been dead at most but twenty-four hours, he lays its in
a long and large Oaken Tray, or Tray of some other hard Wood; upon which he
pours his Preserving, or Embalming Spirit, so much as will overtop the Body
about ten Inches.

XXXVI. This Spirit is made extemporanco modo, thus: fair Water lbxij.
Potashes lbij. mix and dissolve, letting them stand for an hour or two: To
which Solution add of the best Sal Armoniack poudered lbj. or something more;
shake them together (in a Glass) oftentimes, for the more easy and better
dissolution of the Ingredients, stopping the Glass, lest the volatile Particles
should fly out; which done, filter it through a brown Paper, and keep it for
use.

XXXVII. Now as this Spirit is filled with both a fixed and a Volatile Alcali;
so it immediately raises the Body, and will not let it sink for some Days, or
Weeks, by reason of a Crude and Impure Matter, which puffs up the Body like a
Tympany; for which reason, and lest the upper Parts which would lie uncovered,
might Corrupt, either the Vessel must be every Day moderately shaken, that the
Balsamic Liquor may come at all the Parts; or the Corpse must be pressed down in
the Liquor, (which is the better way) with a piece, or two, of a wooden Lath.

XXXVIII. This done, the Vessel must be exactly covered, and the Chinks must be
stopped close with Paper and Paste; not only to prevent the Volatile Spirits from
flying away, but also to keep the External Air from getting in, and Corrupting
it.

XXXIX. If it be a large Body, it must lie twelve or thirteen Weeks; but for
little Bodies, six or eight Weeks will be sufficient to to lie in this Pickle;
and a Months time may be long enough for others: And it ought to be kept in a
cool Place, not a hot and moist, which is chiefly to be observed in Summer
time: See also whether the Flesh be hard, or soft.

XL. After a Month, two, or three, the Vessel must be opened, and the Liquor
gertly poured off, or taken out; and the Body is to be gently taken out of the
Vessel, which done, it is to rest for eighteen or twenty-four Hours.

XLI. Then lay it in a Stove of a moderare heat, to dry up the superfluous
moisture, or you may lay hot Bricks upon the Belly, or strew upon it hot Sand,
especially upon the Abdomen; or in Summer time, you may expose it to the
vehement Heat of the Sun.

XLII. But note, that you turn the Body every day on a new side, that the
Humidities of every part, may be the better dried up by the external Heat;
after which it may be washed with a Sponge, to clear it of Filth, if any be; and
then well dried, by wiping with hot Linen Cloths.

XLIII. What has been hitherto said, may be sufficient, if it be a Child, or
the Body is only kept some few Weeks, for the performing of the Funeral
Obsequies: But if it be a Man or Woman, or a very large fat Body, and it is
intended to be kept for a longer Continuance, you must within 18, or 24 Hours
after Death, set the Body upright, and pour into the Stomach, by the Mouth, 16,
20, 24, or 30 Ounces, more or less of the afore-described Spiritus Balsamans,
doing it leisurely, that it may well repleat the Stomach, and take Possession
thereof; stopping the Mouth, Chops, and Throat with Cotton dipped in dissolved
Myrrh, Balsam Capivi, or Cypress Turpentine; binding it also in, if you see
need require it, lest the Spirit should come forth again.

XLIV. In the Arm-holes, and in the Groins, you may make holes with a sharp
Knife, or a threesquare-pointed Bodkin, so deep that they may pierce into the
Capacity of the Thorax and Abdomen; into which put Pipes, made either of large
Goose or Swans Quills, or turned, and made out of some hard Wood, as Box, or
rather of Ivory, (not much unlike to Clyster-pipes, but their Heads need not be
full out so large) that thereby the Embalming Liquor may the more easily enter
into, and repleat the said Cavisities of the Breast and Belly, and so correct
the Crudities of the Blood and Humors, lodging in the Mesentery, and inward
Parts of the other Bowels, which otherwise would Putrify and Rot, but by this
means will be easily and happily dried and preserved.

XLV. The Stomach being thus filled by the Mouth, and the Pipes put into their
several holes under the Arms, and in the Groins, let the Body be laid in a fit
Posture, as directed at Sect. 35 aforegoing, pouring upon it, the Spiritus
Balsamans, till it is the height above the Body, before directed, letting it
lie in the Spirit for six or eight Weeks, at least, before the Preserving
Liquor is decanted, or poured off.

XLVI. If also to the former Embalming Liquor, you add the Juices of Wormwood,
Carduus, or Centory, or any other bitter thing, as Colocynthis, Aloes, Myrrh,
etc. which have also a mighty Preserving Power in them, you will very much
augment the Balsamic Energy, and Force.

XLVII. A very fat Body is much more difficult and tedious to be Embalmed after
this manner, because the thick Substance of the Fat, does resist the Force of
the penetrating Balsamic Spirit: And therefore, for that Reason, the Body must
be retained a longer time in the Preserving Liquor.

XLVIII. Now, if there be any Ulcer, or Ulcers in the Body, whether inward or
outward; or any Vessel broken, by which there is an Efflux of Blood, which has
lain and putrified in the Body; (though the Embalming Spirit being but once
affused upon the Body may do, yet, because it will be depauperated, and made
Spiritless) it will be best in these Cases, or where speed is required in doing
the Work, to decant off, or change the first affused Liquor, after it has lain
on about fourteen Days: and this second Affusion, after it has lain the same
space of time, may be decanted in like manner, and once more repeated with
fresh Spirit: But oftener is not necessary, because of its mighty Penetrability,
whereby an Erosion of the Abdomen may be feared, which Experience has
sufficiently taught.

XLIX. This doubtless, is an excellent way of Preserving dead Bodies: But if
the Relatives of the Deceased will be persuaded to an Exenteration, which is a
removing of the Viscera of both Ventricles, viz. of the Thorax and Abdomen,
according to the former Methods of Embalming; as it will exceed all the other
ways yet taught, so will it be performed in a much shorter time, than what we
have here limited: And if the Viscera be cleansed, and Embalmed by themselves,
with the same Liquor, they may (if you so please) be reposited.

L. The Body having now laid its due time in the Embalming Spirit, let it be
gently removed and laid by its self, as before-directed at Sect. 40. for
eighteen or twenty-four Hours, that the Liquor may drain away, and the
superfluous Moisture be dried up: Then put it into the Tray or Trough again,
and pour upon it this following Liquor; Water q.v. in every Gallon of which,
dissolve of Nitre or Alum q.s. or vi. or viij. letting it overtop the Body six
or eight Inches, and lie therein for two or three Days.

LI. This being done, pour off the Liquor, and take forth the Body; which being
drained well, and freed by wiping with dry Linen Cloths, from the superfluous
Humidities, put it into a Stove of a moderate heat, to be thoroughly dried; or
you may wrap it up and dry it in a Sand heat; or otherwise expose it to the
heat of the Sun, till it is dried as much as is needful.

LII. And though the Body is dried, yet will not the Volatile saline Particles
easily fly away, but adhere to the Parts through which they have pierced, and
even dwell there, not considerably evaporating, they being in some measure
fixed by the Acids of the Body, and held in by the Skin, Membranes, and other
Parts, their Pores being as it were constringed, or closed; and they will yet
more firmly adhere, or stick to the Parts within the Body, for the same Reasons.

LIII. But how long a Body thus Embalmed, or Preserved, may keep, is scarcely
possibly to be determined, we can only speak to this Matter by Conjecture;
though it may be hoped, that it may be Conserved many Years; and some Bodies
naturally dry, even to a kind of Petrification: But, the ground of such a
Conservation and Durability, consists very much in defending the Body from the
Mutations of the Air; and, in particular, from the Humidities thereof, which
will be apt to resolve and melt the saline Matter, with which the Body is
Preserved.

LIVE. Lastly, It prevails much for the long keeping, and durability of the
Body, to cleanse it often, from the Putriscible Atoms or Particles, adhering to
the Skin, for some Weeks together, with a Sponge dipped in the Embalming Liquor;
or the afore-described Aqua Nitrata, keeping it either in a hot and dry, or
else in a very cold and dry Place: After which it may be wrapped in a
Cere-cloth, made of Linen, dipped into a Composition of Wax mixed with
Turpentine, and so laid in a Coffin of Wood, Lead, or Tin, as its ultimate
Defense against the Injuries of the Air.

IX. MEDICAL STORE: OR, Pharmacopoeia Chirurgica.
CHAP. LVI. De Simplicibus.
I. MEdicamenta sunt vel Simplicia, vel Composita.

II. Simplicia ea vocamus, quae talia sunt qualia natura produxit, quaeque
nullam ab Art Compositionem sumunt, Compositionem tamen Ar^e factorum
ingrediuntur.

III. Sunt autem vel Vegetabilia, vel Mineralia, vel Animalia.

I. De Vegetabilibus.
IV. Vegetabilia sunt, quae ex Herbis, Fruticibus, Arboribusque sumuntur; eaque
vel a totis, vel ex partibus suis, ut Radicibus, Corticibus, Lignis, Foliis,
Floribus, Fructibus, Succis, Humoribus, and Cineribus.

V. Si Radices spectemus, Praecipuae quae in Pharmacopoeia nostra utuntur,
sunt, Allii, Aristolochiae rotundae, Ceparum, Elecampanae, Glycyrrhizae,
Iridis, Jalapae, Mechoacannae, Scillae, Serpentariae, Rhabarbari,
Sarsaparillae, Zedoariae, Zinziberis.

VI. Si Cortices, praecipuae sunt, Cinnamomum, Guajaci, Peruanus, Winteranus,
Macies.

VII. Si Ligna, eminentissima sunt, Guajaci, Nephriticum.

VIII. Si Folia, Asarum, Elleboraster, Nicotiana, Sena Alexandrina.

IX. Si Flores, Crocus Anglicanus.

X. Si Fructus and Semina, Alkakengi baccae, Cardamoma, Caryophilli,
Granadillae, Hyosciami, Nuces Moschatae, Piper album and longum, Sinapi.

XI. Si Succi, Acetum, Kermes, Vinum.

XII. Si Humores, isti sunt, vel Olea, vel Succi inspissati, vel Gummata, vel
Resinae.

XIII. Olea sunt praecipua, Olivarum, Amygdalarum, de Ben.

XIV. Succi inspissata sunt, Acacia, Aloe, Ammoniacum, Cambogia, Euphorbium,
Elaterium, Galbanum, Glycyrryhizae, Mannae, Opoponax, Opium, Saccharum,
Sagapenum, Scammonium, Cremor Tartari.

XV. Gummata sunt, Arabicum, Asa foetida, Cancamum, Sanguis Draconis,
Sarcocolla, Tragacanthum.

XVI. Resinae vel sunt humidae vel siccae; humidae sunt, Ambra liquidum,
Balsamum Chilianum, Copaybae, Peruanum, Tolutanum, Pisselaeon, Styrax,
Terebinthina Laricea seu Venetia, Argentoratensis seu Abietum, Cypria, vel e
Chio, ex Terebintho.

XVII. Resinae siccae sunt, Benzoinum, Camphora, Elemi, Mastiche, Myrrha,
Olibanum, Pix Navalis, Resina seu Colophonia, Tacamahacca, Thus.

XVIII. Si Cineres spectemus, praecipuae sunt Clavellati, Tartari.

II. De Mineralibus.
XIX. Mineralia seu Fossilia, sunt Medicamenta ex terrae Visceribus deprompta;
sub iisque continentur, 1. Terrae. 2. Succi concreti, seu Salia. 3. Bitumina,
seu Sulphura. 4. Lapides. 5. Mineralia, seu Semimetalla. 6. Metallg.

XX. Terrae, quae aqua infusa solvuntur, ut sunt, 1. Bolus Armenus, seu
Orientalis. 2. Creta, quae in Anorexia and Cardialgia utilis. 3. Terra Lemnia,
ruffi coloris and pinguissima, ut in ore contenta ex sevo constare videatur. 4.
Terra sigillata, seu illa candida, seu purpurascens, pinguis, and cum tangitur
frigida: lis addatur, 5. Catechu, seu Terra Japanica.

XXI. Succi concreta seu Salia, sunt, 1. Alumen rupeum. 2. Nitrum. 3. Sal Gem.
4. Vitriolum album. 5. Vitriolum viride. 6. Vitriolum Hungaricum. 7. Vitriolum
Romanum. Vitriolum autem nihil aliud est quam Salsuginis Sulphureae Cuperatae,
Ferrataeve coagulum: Iis addatur. 8. Borax, seu Chryso colla.

XXII. Bitumina seu Sulphura, sunt, 1. Ambra, seu Ambarum griseum vulgo dictum,
optimum est cinerei coloris, odoratissimum, quod ncu perfossum multum succi
pinguis refudat. 2. Naphtha, bituminis Babylonii colamen. 3. Petroleum. 4.
Succinum, Ambra citrina, electrum, carabe, quod in maris littore invenitur. 5.
Sulphur, quod si nativum, debet esse color extus subcinericio, intus luteo: si
factitium, debet esse praepingue and virescens. 6. Terroleum, quasi oleum e
terra: Iis addatur, 7. Gagates, niger, crustosus, and Bituminis ferax, qui igni
admotus flagrat, odoremque Bituminis exhibet, sic a Carbone fossili
distinguitur. 8. Flores Sulphuris.

XXIII. Lapides sunt, 1. Aetites, qui ab Aquila in nidum defertur. 2.
Haematites, virescens, variegatus, guttis cruentis conspersus. 3. Hibernicus.
4. Judaicus, subrotundus, striis secundum longitudinem aequidistantibus, and
discurrentibus, ac si torno factae essent. 5. Magnes, seu Heraclius, eo melior,
quo magis caeruleus and ponderosus. 6. Nephriticus, opacus, variegatus, ex
color viridi aliisque permistus, superficies ipsius semper pinguis apparet. 7.
Osteocolla, dicitur Holosteus, qui Ossis figuram aemulatur.

XXIV. Mineralia, seu semimetalla, sunt vel nativa, vel factitia.

XXV. Nativa sunt, 1. Antimonium. 2. Argentum vivum, Hydrargyrum, seu
Mercurius. 3. Cinnabaris.

XXVI. Factitia sunt, 1. Aerugo, flos aeris. 2. Aes ustum. 3. Cerussa, quae ex
plumbo beneficio aceti educitur. 4. Cinnabaris, quod ex Mercurio vivo and
sulphur sublimetur. 5. Lithargyrum. 6. Pompholyx, Spodium, Tutia; optima est
candida, and laevis, Cypriaque laudatissima. 7. Stibium, seu vitrum Antimonii.
8. Sublimatus corrosivus, qui ex Argento vivo and Sale cum Calcantho sublimatur.

XXVII. Metalla quae praecipua utuntur, funt, 1. Argentum. 2. Ferrum, seu Mars,
vel Chalybs. 3. Plumbum, seu Saturnus. 4. Stannum, seu Jupiter; ex quibus, 1.
Calx, seu Vitriolum Lunae. 2. Plumbum ustum. 3. Minium. 4. Amalgama Stanni, cum
Mercurio, oriuntur.

III. De Animalibus.
XXVII. Medicamenta Animalia sunt, quae vel ab Animalibus totis, vel ipsarum
partibus desumuntur, in quintuplici differentia considerata; ex, 1. Avibus. 2.
Quadrupedibus. 3. Piscibus. 4. Serpentibus. 5. Insectis.

XXIX. Ex Avibus, ut, Fell Corvi, Gallinae, Milvi, Picae.

XXX. Ex Quadrupedibus; Bufo tota, Bezoar, Castoreum, Cornua, Fell Bovis,
Moschus, Sal Ammoniacum, Sanguis, Sperma Ceti.

XXXI. Ex Piscibus; Fell Anguillarum, Ichthyocolla, Margarita, seu Perlae, Oculi
Cancrorum, testae Ostreae.

XXXII. Ex Serpentibus; Caro Viperarum.

XXXIII. Ex Insectis; Cantharides, Cera, Cochinella, Kermes succus, Mel
Anglicanum, Millepedes.

IV. Quae sunt ex his excerpenda, ad Cistam.
XXXIV. Ex Vegetabilibus haec desumuntur, 1. Aloe Succotrina. 2. Ammoniacum
Gummi. 3. Balsamum Copaybae. 4. Balsamum de Chili. 5. Balsamum de Tolu. 6.
Cambogia. 7. Camphora. 8. Caryophylli. 9. Cineres Clavellati. 10. Cortex
Guajaci. 11. Cortex Peruanus. 12. Cremor Tartari. 13. Crocus. 14. Elemi Gummi.
15. Guajaci Gummi. 16. Glycyrrhizaeradix. 17. Glycyrrhizae pulvis. 18.
Granadillae. 19. Jallapae pulvis. 20. Lignum Guajaci. 21. Lignum Nephriticum.
22. Mastiche. 23. Mechoacanna. 24. Myrrha. 25. Nuces Moschatae. 26. Oleum de
Ben. 27. Olibanum. 28. Opium. 29. Piper. 30. Resina. 31. Radix Serpentariae.
32. Rhabarbarum. 33. Scammonium. 34. Sena. 35. Terebinthina. 36. Thus.

XXXV. Ex Mineralibus, haec eliguntur, 1. Aerugo. 2. Alumen rupeum. 3.
Antimonium. 4. Argentum vivum. 5. Bolus Armenus. 6. Catechu. 7. Cerussa. 8.
Chalybs. 9. Cinnabar. 10. Creta. 11. Flores Sulphuris. 12. Nitrum. 13.
Petroleum. 14. Tutia. 15. Stibium. 16. Sublimatus corrosivus. 17. Succinum. 18.
Terra sigillata. 19. Vitriolum album. 20. Vitriolum Romanum.

XXXVI. Ex Animalibus, haec excerpuntur, 1. Bufo. 2. Cantharides. 3. Cera. 4.
Cochinella. 5. Cornua. 6. Fell Bovis. 7. Mel. 8. Moschus. 9. Oculi Cancrorum 10.
Sal Ammoniacum. 11. Sanguis desiccatus. 12. Zibethum.

Horum Praeparationes varias Medicamentorum, virtutes and usus, vide in
Seplasio nostro, quo plene elucidantur.

CHAP. LVI. Of Simples.
I. MEdicines are either Simple, or Compound.

III. We call those Simple, that are in the Condition in which Nature has
produced them, and which receive no Composition by Art, but go into the
Composition of such as are Artificial, or made by Art.

III. And these are either Vegetables, Minerals, or Animals.

I. Of Vegetables.
IV. Vegetable Medicaments, are such as are taken from Herbs, Shrubs, and
Trees; and that either from whole Plants, or from their Parts, as Roots, Woods,
Leaves, Flowers, Fruits, Juices, and Gums.

V. If we consider their Roots, these are the chief, which are used in our
Dispensatory; Garlic, round Birthwort, Onions, Elecampane, Liquorice, Orice,
Jallap, Mechoacan, Squills, Snakeroot, Rhubarb, Sarsaparilla, Zedoary, Ginger.

VI. If their Barks, the chief are Cinnamon, Guajacum, Jesuits-bark, Winters
Cinnamon, Mace.

VII. If Woods, the most noted are Guajacum, and the Nephritick Wood.

VIII. If Leaves or Herbs, Asarabacca, Bears-foot, Tobacco, Alexandrian Sena.

IX. If Flowers, English Saffron.

X. If Fruits and Seeds, Winter-Cherries, Cardamoms, Cloves, Granadillas,
Henbane-seed, Nutmegs, Pepper white and long, Mustard Seed.

XI. If Juices, Vinegar, Kermes, Wine.

XII. If their Humors, or other Humidities, these are either Oils, or thickened
Juices, or Gums, or Rosins.

XIII. The chief Oils are, of Olives, of Almonds, and Oil of the Nut Ben.

XIV. Inspissate Juices are, Acacia, Aloes, Ammoniacum, Cambogia, Euphorbium,
Elaterium, Galbanum, Liquorice, Manna, Opoponax, Opium, Saccharum, Sagapenum,
Scammony, Cream of Tartar.

XV. The Gums are, Arabic, Asa foetida, Cancamum, Sugar, Dragons Blood,
Sarcocol, Tragacanth.

XVI. The Rosins are either soft or hard: the soft are liquid Amber, Balsams of
Chili, Capivi, of Peru and Tolu, Tar, liquid Storax, Turpentines, Venice, from
the Larch Tree, Strasburgh from the Fir Tree, and Cyprus, or Chio, from the
Turpentine-tree.

XVII. The dry or hard Rosins are, Benjamin, Camphir, Elemi, Mastich, Myrrh,
Olibanum, Pitch, Rosin or Colophony, Tacamahacca, and Frankincense.

XVIII. If we consider their Ashes, the chief are, Potashes, and calcined
Tartar.

II. Of Minerals.
XIX. Mineral Medicaments are such as are taken from the Bowels of the Earth;
and under them are contained, 1. Earths. 2. Thickened Juices, or Salts. 3.
Bitumens, or Sulphurs. 4. Stones. 5. Minerals, or half-Metals. 6. Metals.

XX. Earths, which being infused in Water, are dissolved, as are, 1. Fine Bole.
2. Chalk, which is profitable against want of Appetite, and pain at Stomach. 3.
Earth of Lemnos, of a sad red color, and fat, so that if it be held in the
Mouth, it seems to be made of Suet. 4. Sealed Earth, either the white, or that
inclining to purple, being fat and cold to feel to. To these may be added, 5.
Catechu, or Japanian Earth.

XXI. Concreted Juices or Salts, are, 1. Roch Alum. 2. Nitre. 3. Sal Gem. 4.
White Vitriol. 5. Green Vitriol. 6. Hungarian Vitriol. 7. Roman Vitriol. Now
Vitriol is nothing else but a sulphurous Saltness of Iron, or Copper
coagulated. To these may be added, 8. Borax, or Chrysocol.

XXII. Bitumens, or Sulphurs, are, 1. Ambergrise, the best of which is of an
Ash Color, and most fragrant, which being pricked with a Needle, sweats out
much fat moisture. 2. Naphtha, the straining of the Babylonian Bitumen. 3. Oil
of Peter, or Rock-Oil. 4. Amber, which is yellow, and found upon the Sea Shore.
5. Sulphur, which if it be native, it ought to be outwardly of a light
ash-cour; inwardly, of a yellow color; if it be factitious, it ought to be fat
and greenish. 6. Terroleum, or Oil of the Earth. To these may be added, 7.
Jeat, which is black, hard on the outside, and full of Bitumen, and if set on
Fire, it flames, and smells like Bitumen, by which it is distinguished from Pit
Coals. 8. Flowers of Sulphur.

XXIII. Stones are, 1. The Eagle Stone, which is said to be taken from an
Eagles Nest. 2. The Blood Stone, which is greenish, party colored, and
sprinkled over with bloody Spots. 3. Irish Slate. 4. Jews Stone, which is
roundish, with equidistant streaks all along, as if turned so by Art. 5. The
Lodestone, which is so much the better, by how much it is more blew, or
Sky-colored and heavy. 6. Nephritick-Stone, which is dark, party colored, of
a mixture of green and other Colors, its Surface seeming always fat. 7. The
Boneglewer, called also Holosteus, which much resembles the shape of a Bone.

XXIV. Minerals, or Semimetals, are either Native, or Factitious.

XXV. The Native are, 1. Antimony. 2. Quicksilver, or Mercury. 3. Cinnabar.

XXVI. The Factitious are, 1. Verdigrise. 2. Burnt Brass, or Copper. 3. Ceruse,
which is made of Lead, by the help or means of Vinegar. 4. Cinnabar, made of
Mercury and Sulphur sublimed together. 5. Litharge. 6. Pompholyx, which is
Spodium, or Tutia, the best of which is white and light, and the choicest is
that which comes from Cyprus. 7. Stibium, or Glass of Antimony. 8. Corrosive
Sublimate, which is made by Sublimation, from Salt and Vitriol.

XXVII. Metals which are chiefly used, are, 1. Silver. 2. Iron, or Mars (the
Filings.) 3. Lead. 4. Tin. From whence comes, 1. The Calx, or Vitriol of Luna.
2. Burnt Lead. 3. Red Lead. 4. An Amalgaina, made of Tin and Mercury.

III. Of Animals.
XXVIII. Animal Medicaments are, such as are taken either from the whole living
Creature, or from some of its Parts; considered in a five-fold Difference; as
from, 1. Birds. 2. Beasts. 3. Fishes. 4. Serpents. 5. Insects.

XXIX. From Birds, as the Gall of a Raven, Hen, Kite, Mag-Pye.

XXX. From Beasts; the whole Toad, Bezoar-stone, Castoreum, Horns, Ox Gall,
Musk, Sal Armoniack, Blood, Sperma Ceti.

XXXI. From Fishes; the Galls of Eels, Ising-glass, Pearls, Crabs Eyes,
Oyster-shells.

XXXII. From Serpents; the Flesh of Vipers.

XXXIII. From Insects; Cantharides, Wax, Cochinele, Juice of Kermes, English
Honey, Hoglice.

IV. What those Simples are, which are to be chosen from all the former, for
the use of the Chest.
XXXIV. From the Vegetable Kingdom we have these, 1. Fine Aloes. 2. Gum
Ammoniacum. 3. Balsam Capivi. 4. Balsam de Chili. 5. Balsam de Tolu. 6.
Cambogia. 7. Camphir. 8. Cloves. 9. Potashes. 10. Guajacum-bark. 11.
Jesuits-bark. 12. Cream of Tartar. 13. Saffron. 14. Gum Elemi. 15. Gum Guajaci.
16. Liquorice. 17. Liquorice Root in Powder. 18. Granadillas. 19. Jallap in
Powder. 20. Guajacum in Chips, or Raspings. 21. Nephritick Wood. 22. Mastick.
23. Mechoacan. 24. Myrrh. 25. Nutmegs. 26. Oil of Ben. 27. Olibanum. 28. Opium.
29. Pepper. 30. Rosin. 31. Snake Root. 32. Rhubarb. 33. Scammony. 34. Sena. 35.
Turpentine. 36. Frankincense.

XXXV. From the Mineral Kingdom, these are chosen, 1. Verdigrise. 2. Roch Alum.
3. Antimony. 4. Quicksilver. 5. Fine Bole. 6. Japan Earth. 7. Ceruse, or white
Lead. 8. Filings of Steel. 9. Cinnabar. 10. Chalk. 11. Flowers of Sulphur. 12.
Salt Petre. 13. Oil of Petre. 14. Spodium, or Tutia. 15. Stibium. 16. Corrosive
Sublimate. 17. Amber. 18. Sealed Earth. 19. White Vitriol. 20. Roman Vitriol.

XXXVI. From the Animal Kingdom, these are taken, 1. The Toad. 2. Spanish
Flies. 3. Wax. 4. Cochinele. 5. Horns. 6. Ox Gall. 7. Honey. 8. Musk. 9. Crabs
Eyes. 10. Sal Armoniack. 11. Blood dried. 12. Civet.

The Various Preparations, Virtues, and Uses of all these Medicaments, you may
see in our Seplasium, or Drugists Shop opened, wherein every thing is explained
at Large.

CHAP. LVII. De AQVIS.
I. Aqua Elementaria.
REcipe Aquae fontanae libras octo, Salis Nitri drachmas quatuor, misce,
dissolvatur, filtratur, reponaturque ad usum.

In febribus ardentibus Medicamentosa est, sitim extinguit, and valde
praevalebit ad omnes morbos calidos. Praecipue usitata pro Vehiculo in
affectibus praedictis and similibus. Dosis per se (saccharo albo dulcificata)
unciae quatuor, vel sex plus minus. Calculum in renibus and vesica comminuit,
Vrinam potenter movet, and aliis gravissunis affectibus succurit.

II. Aqua Antifebritica.
Aquae fontanae libras duas, Olei Sulphuris drachmas duas, vel guttas
quadraginta, and ut Oleum optime cum Aqua permiseeatur, saepiuscule
transvasentur: Ubi vero non fuerit sufficienter facta acida, plus Oleum
Sulphuris addendum, similiterque ut supra procedendum.

Haec aqua dicto modo correcta, utilis est in febribus, non tamen, ut aqua
simplex, noxia ventriculo and hepati, spiritus enim Sulphuris haec membra
corroborat ac confortat. Aqua vere Febrifuga est, animales Spiritus recreat,
and summopere refrigerat. Exhibetur ad praecavendam and curandam Pestem, ad
Tertianam, and febrem continuam; ad Renum calculos, and dolores Colicos potens
est remedium. Sanguinem attenuat, Podagrae dolores mitigat, doloresque Capitis.
Stomachum mirum in modum confortat; atque Psoram and scabiem persanat. Dosis ab
Vnciis duabus, ad quatuor per se, vel cum aliquo Medicamento appropriato.

III. Aqua Vitrioli.
Vitrioli Hungarici, vel ex ferro facti, quantum vis: Eo ampullam vitream ad
medietatem imple. Deinde cum suo capello and recipiente per Balneum Mariae
distilla ad quartum balnei gradum, id est, in aqua tamdiu bulliente, dum omnis
Humiditas, distillationi apta, profluxerit. Exemptum in vase vitreo optime
obturato ad usum serva.

Vehiculum praecipue est, sed valet adversus ardentes Capitis dolores sumptum,
pro re nata, duabus drachmis continuatum aliquot dies Stomacho jejuno;
adustionem sanguinis mitigat, omnia item Viscera corroborat, Cerebrum calore
and siccitate debilitatum confirmat; humidum etiam radicale restaurat.

IV. Aqua Calcis vivi.
Aquae fontanae libras octo, Calcis vivi libram unam, misce, digerantur ad
Aquae defaecationem usque, fiitretur, serveturque ad usum.

Calefacit and siccat manifestissime: Dosis ab unciis duabus ad quntuor in
omnibus frigidis and humidis Affectibus. Externe Vlcera vetera sanat, si
Linteum i^hbutum superimponatur; and valde convenit Vlceribus Pudendorum, and
aliis aliarum partium Phagedenicis cadaverosis, and curatu difficillimis;
pluries enim lota, mordacitatem omnem exuit, and acris esse desinit: proinde
Vlceribus confert exsiccandis, and ad cicatricem perducendis.

V. Aqua Stomachica.
Aquae Menthae in Balneo Mariae distillatae libras quatuor, Salis Menthae, vel
in loco ejusdem, Salis Absinthii, drachmas duas; misce: dissolvatur, filtratur,
and reponatur ad usum.

Medicamentum Stomachicum est, unciarum tres vel quatuor pondere, vel per se,
vel pari cujusvis Aquae Cordialis quantitate potum. Valet contra omnia Venena,
Parts Vitales exhilerat, and Cor recreat.

VI. Aqua Tartarisata.
Aquae Rosarum Damascenarum, vel in loco ejusdem, Aquae fontanae libras sex,
Salis Tartari drachmas tres; misce: dissolvatur, and filtratur, ut supra.

Nephritica est, and deobstructiva, purgatque per Vrinam. Vtilissima est ad
dissecandos, and incidendos Humores crassos and tartareos in Visceribus
Nutritioni dicatis: Sanguinem purificat, praetereaque Diureticum est
efficacissimum, adeoque specificum Hydropicum; omnes quippe aquosas humiditates
and flatus, omnemque tartaream and viscosam materiam, unde Calculus Vesicae ac
Renum procreatur, per Vrinam potenter expellens. Dosis per se, ab unciis duabus
ad quatuor; cum aliis utitur pro Vehiculo, idque multis in Morbis.

CHAP. LVII. Of WATERS.
I. Elementary Water.
TAke Spring, or Fountain Water lb viij. Salt Petre iv. mix, dissolve, filter,
and keep it for use.

It is good against Burning Fevers, quenches Thirst, and mightily prevails
against all hot Diseases. It is chiefly used for a Vehicle, in the aforenamed
affects, and others of like kind. The Dose alone (being sweetened with white
Sugar) is iv. or vj. more or less. It is good against the Stone in the Reins
and Bladder, powerfully provokes Urine, and Cures other grievous Diseases.

2. Water against Fevers.
Fountain Water lb ij. Oil of Sulphur forty drops, or ij. which shake well
together, that the Oil may be well mixed with the Water: If this quantity of
the Oil makes it not acid enough, you may add more, shaking them together, as
before-directed.

This Water thus corrected, is prositable against Fevers, and is not hurtful to
the Stomach and Liver, as is simple Water, because the Spirit of Sulphur
strengthens and comforts those Parts. It is a true Febrifuge, chears the animal
Spirits, and cools admirably. It is given both to prevent and cure the Plague,
as also against Tertian and Continual Fevers. It is a powerful Remedy against
the Stone in the Reins, and Colic Pains. It attenuates the Blood, eases the
Pain of the Gout and Headache. It wonderfully comforts the Stomach, and cures
Scabs and other breakings-out. Dose ab ij. ad iv. either by it self, or with
some other appropriate Medicaments.

3. Water of Vitriol.
Hungarian Vitriol, or Vitriol of Iron, as much as you please; put it into a
glass Body, so big, as it may be half full; cover it with its Head, and fit to
it a Receiver, and then distill in Balneo Mariae, with the fourth degree of
heat, that is, in a Water continually boiling; which continue till all the
humidity is distilled forth. This Water take and put into a Glass Vessel, which
stop close, and keep it for use.

It is chiefly used as a Vehiculum, but being taken as the Disease requires, it
prevails against vehement Pains of the Head; ij. being given at a time in a
Morning fasting, and continued for some days. It takes away the adustion, or
heat of the Blood, strengthens all the Bowels, and comforts a Brain weakened
with heat and dryness. It also restores the radical Moisture.

4. Water of Quicklime.
Fountain Water lbviij. Quicklime one pound, mix them, and digest till the
Water is clear; then filter, and keep it for use.

It evidently heats and drys: the Dose is from ij. to iv. in all cold and moist
Diseases. Outwardly, it heals old Ulcers, if a a Linen cloth be dipped therein,
and put upon them; it is of great use in curing Ulcers in the Privy Parts, and
in Eating-Ulcers of other parts, or such as are tending to a mortification, or
are of difficult cure; for being often washed therewith, it puts a stop to the
eating, and destroys the acrid humor: and lastly, it drys them, and heals them.

5. Stomach Water.
Mint-water, made by distillation in Balneo Mariae lbiv. Salt of Mint, or in
place thereof, Salt of Wormwood ij. mix; dissolve, filter, and keep it for use.

It is a Stomach Water, and may be drunk from ij. to iv. either by it self, or
mixed with a like quantity of any Cordial Water. It is good against all sorts of
Poison, revives the Vital Spirits, and chears the Heart.

6. A Tartarized Water.
Damask-rose-water, or in place thereof, Fountain Water lbvj. Salt of Tartar
iij. mix: dissolve, and filter, as aforesaid.

It opens Obstructions, and is Nephritick, purging by Urine. It is good to cut
and dissolve thick and tartarous Humors in those Bowels which conserve the
Nutritive Faculty: it cleanses the Blood, and is withal a most efficacious
Diuretic, being indeed a Specific against the Dropsy; for it potently expels
Wind, and all watery humors; as also all sorts of tartareous and viscous
matter, of which the Stone is bred, whether in the Reins or Bladder, and that
by Urine. Dose by it self, is from ij. to iv. but it is used with other things
as a Vehicle, and that in many Diseases.

CHAP. LVIII. De TINCTVRIS.
I. Tinctura Cordialis.
REcipe Piperis longi, Zinziberis, Corticis Winterani, a. dram. unam,
Caryophyllorum, Nucis Moschatae, Corticis Limonum Cinamomi, ana drachmas duas;
Croci Anglicani, Cochinellae, ana drachmas tres, Spiritus Vini rectificati
libras tres, Olei Sulphuris drachmis duabus impraegnati, optime contusa; misce:
digerantur per mensem, and postea filtrentur, and Tinctura cum Essentia
extracta ad usum reservetur.

Vtilis est in Syncope, Cordis palpitatione; consumit Pituita in Ventriculo and
Intestinis: Cerebrum and omnes ejus functiones mire corroborat, Catarrhos
discutit, praeservat ab Apoplexia, Epilepsia, and Lethargo: Stomachi nauseam
and debilitates submovet; insuper in Colica and Suffocatione Matricis, non est
remedium ei simile. Dosis, a dram una ad duas, in debito Vehiculo.

II. Tinctura Mirabilis.
Catechu uncias sex, Corticis Peruani uncias quatuor, Seminum Hyosciami uncias
duas, Spiritus vini communis uncas viginti: misce; digerantur per septimaniam,
filtr^tur, and reservetur ad usum.

Ad Renum and Vesicae Vlcera valet; Sanguinem undicunque manantem and Sputa
cruenta cobibet, generisque varii Haemorrhagias sistit: Faeminarum Menstruam
Purgationem immoderatius fluentem moratur; Diabetae, Vrinae incontinentiae,
Cruento item Lotio medetur, ac Dysenterias, Diarrhoe as, and Alvi profluvia
compescit; Viscerum languores, Ventriculi, Hepatis, and Cordis imbecillitates
removet. Dosis cochlearia duo, plus-minus, mane ac vesperi, continuando ad sex
septemve dies.

III. Tinctura Opii.
Opii Thebaici uncias octo, Croci, Cochinollae, ana j. Caryophyllorum, Macis,
Nucis moschatae, Cinamomi, Radicis Serpentariae, ana unciam semis: Succi
Limonum, Spiritus Vini rectificati, ana libras duas and semis: misce, and
digerentur ad Medicaminum subsidentiam usque: filtra, and exhala ad dimidiam.
Vel sic, ab Angelo Sala; Opii Thebaici exiccati unciam unam; Croci Orientalis,
Macis, ana unciam semis; Ambrae griseae drachmam unam, Spiritus Vitrioli uncias
quatuor, Aquae Rosarum Damafcenarum uncias sex: infundantur omnia in vase
vitreo, and digerantur per mensem: deinde facta colatura, abstractaque Aqua
Rosarum, servetur ad usum.

Remedium est probatissimum, tutissimumque in omnibus Doboribus, seu Veneriis
seu aliis; sistitque omnem Haemorrhagiam, and Vteri and Ventris fluxum. Egregie
Sudorem movet; Sanguinem enim in universo corpore mundisicat, pristinum
Sanitatis vigorem restituit: Prodest and in Hydrope, Convulsionibus, Calculo,
and Suffocatione Matricis: in sistendis omnibus Humorum and Catarrhorum
profluviis, and Menstruorum excretionibus; in Vigiliis, and in omnibus Febrium
generibus, Viriumque resolutionibus; in Phrenesi, Mania, Melancholia, Vomitu,
Epilepsia, Cardiaca, Colica, Ventriculo debilitato, Pleuresi, Arthritide,
Gonagra, Podagra, Ischiasi, Lithiasi, and Nephritide, Medicamentum est
stupendum: quia in sedandis omnibus vehementissimis and acutissimis doloribus,
divinum est auxilium, and quasi ultimum Asylum. Dosis, a guttis sedecim ad
viginti vel triginta, plusminus; quae Vesperi circa introitum lecti sumuntur.

IV. Tinctura Purgans.
Senae uncias octo, Jalapii uncias duas, Seminum Anisi, Carui, Coriandri,
Radicis Glycyrrhizae, ana unciam unam, Aqua Vitae libras sex: misce; and
digerantur in loco frigido per septimanas duas, colaturque Tinctura.

Purgat Bilem utramque, and Pituitam salsam, sine molestia; propterea Morbis ab
iisdem natis confert: Cancro, Elephantiasi, Maniae, Melancholiae, Rheumatismo,
Arthritidi, Strumae, Impetigini, Psorae, Scabiei, and similibus Affectibus
Cutis. Melancholiae educendae mirifice prodest, and ad omnes Affectus e mixta
cum Bile Pituita provenientes efficax est. Mirum in modum convenit Lienosis,
Melancholicis, Hypochondriacis, Maniacis, Epilepticis, Febre delirantibus,
Passionibus Hystericis, and Lue inveterata laborantibus. Alvum potenter
subducit, Obstructiones tollit, crassos Humores, lentos and viscidos incidendo
and attenuando removet. Dosis, a cochleariis duabus ad sex septemve,
plus-minus; Stomacho jejuno.

V. Tinctura Exfolians, seu Euphorbii.
Euphorbii unciam unam, Myrrhae drachmas duas, Spiritus Vini uncias sex; misce,
digerantur per septimanam, and ad usum filtretur Tinctura.

Nunquam datur per Os, neque per se, nec cum aliis, nisi raro, and parva
quantitate. Externe utitur, maxim autem in Ossibus cariosis, quae exfoliari
sunt. Quod si Mandibula aliquo in loco (dixit Hildanus) extra Os denudata
fuerit, applicurem Pulverem Euphorbii, quod mirandas habet proprietates; sua
enim caliditate humores in Osse non solum exsiccat, sed and occulta quadam
facultate hic convenire videtur; quapropter non immerito a Dioscoride and
Recentioribus Medicis, Ossibus cariosis adhibetur: nec est quod ipsius
acrimoniam timeas, etiamsi enim Linguam and Nares mordicet, Vlceribus tamen,
quantumsis copiose inspersum, nuilum dolorem aut inflammationem excitat: -- ego
expertus loquor. Si haecce Gummi indissoluti sunt vires, quot sunt Tincturae
potestates?

VI. Tinctura Absinthii.
Foliorum Absinthii vulgaris siccati uncias quatuor, Salis Tartari unciam unam,
conjunctim moluntur in Mortario calido; add Spiritus Vini rectificati uncias
sedecim, digere ad dies septem, exprime fortiter; in liquore infunde iterum
Absinthii and Salis Tartari quantitates easdem: exprime, and repetetur opus ad
tertiam vicem; exprime iterum, and filtra colaturam.

Magna Stomachica est, Coctionem juvat, and Alvi Lumbricos intern^ sumpta
enecat, Obstructiones tollit, Menses ducit, Foetum and Secundas excludit, a
Putredine conservat, Venenis resistit, Pesti curandae convenit, and Morbis
contagiosis pluribus. Dosis, a guttis sex ad sexdecim, plus-minus, in haustu
Vini, vel Cerevisiae.

VII. Tinctura Antimo^ii, Purgans.
Vitri Antimonii pulverizati unciam unam, Spiritus Vitrioli non rectificati
uncias octo; digereque in Balneo Mariae.

Obstructiones aperit, Sanguinem clarificat, and omnes Assectus quos generant
Obstructiones certissime curat; Vermes Infantium enecat; Chlorosi, Cachexiae,
Scrophulae, and Scorbuto convenit; omnibusque in Morbis Panchymagogum censetur.
Dosis, a guttis sex ad duodecim.

VIII. Tinctura Cathartica.
Senae optimae uncias tres, Jalapii pulverizati unciam unam, Caryophyllorum,
Croci, ana drachmam unam, Vini Chalybeati libras duas; infunde ad septem dies,
exprime, ac filtra.

Omnes Affectus Cerebri and Vteri tutissime and certissime sanat: Illusiones
Melancholicas, and Phantasmata omnia, and Somnia Melancholica dissipat and
avertit; Hemitritaeum, and reliquas Febres obstinates and intermittentes curat;
quia Humores putrentes in Corpore, and praecipue Bilem and Melancholiam,
educit; Fluxus omnes Ventris, Dysenterias, Lienterias, and Diarrhoeas, cum
Hepatico fluxu, prohibet; propter Salem, and Sulphur Ferri. Egregie praestat in
omnibus Obstructionibus Hepatis and Lienis, Mensibus retentis, etc. Dosis,
cochlearia duo, tria, vel quatuor, quotidie, ad longum tempus.

IX. Tinctura Martis.
Frustulorum seu Clavulorum Ferri libras quinque, Vini Albi libras octo,
Spiritus Vini libras duas, Olei Sulphuris unciam unam; misce: digerantur loco
frigido per menses sex, plusminus: and ut Sal and Sulphur Martis optime in
Vinum exhalatur, saepiuscule Vas agitetur; deinde decanta, and filtra ad usum.

Haec Tinctura Martialis varios Humores Alvum subducendo corruptos educit,
specialiter Flavam and Atram Bilem, Humores terrestres, ponderosos, and
tenaces, aliis Medicamentis haud facile ejectos aut extirpatos. In Obstructione
Hepatis, Splenis, and Matricis singular est Remedium; Morbum Regium,
Cardialgiam, Cordis tremorem, Colicam, Iliacam passionom, and Rachitidem
adjuvat: in Melancholia Hypochondriaca, Quartana, Cachexia, Hydrope, Scorbuto,
Mensibus superfluis and retentis, Morbo Virgineo, etc. utile experimentum est.
Dosis, cochlearia duo vel tria, plus-minus, in debito Vehiculo, hora somni; ut
vires ejusdem eo melius penetrare possunt etiam ad remotas Corporis parts.

X. Tinctura Sacra, seu Amara.
Aloes Succotrinae uncias duas, Caryophyllorum, Nucis moschatae, Radicis
Serpentariae, Croci Anglicani, Seminum Aniss, ana drachmam unam, Vini
Cheriensis libras duas and semis; misce, and digere saepe agitando ad septe^n
dies; deinde filtra ad usum.

Omnes Obstructiones Jecinoris and Lienis aperit, Hydropicis prodest, Pi^uitam,
utramque Bilem, and Aquam evacuat, caeterosque Humores peccantes educit,
Sanguinem puriorem reddi^; nibil ctiam mali in Corpore Humano relinquit, sed
omnem noxam per Alvum and Vrinam expeilit; Ventriculum roborat; multisque aliis
bisce similibus Morbis adversatur: in Ventriculi dolor, Cachexia, Ructu,
Vermibus necand^s, etc. datur: ante Paroxysmum Tertianae, nec non Quartanae
exhibita, saepe curat, post terria vice. Dosis, ab uncia una ad uncias duis,
jejuno Stomacho. Ad Sanitatis praeservationem sumitur ejus cochlear dimidium,
aut integrum, quoquo mane, in Vino albo, tempore Verno, ad octo vel december dies.

XI. Tinctura seu Elixir Proprietatis.
Aloes Succotrinae, Myrrhae pulverizatae, Croci Anglicani, ana unciam unam;
Spiritus Universalis uncias duodecim; misce, digereque ad dies septem, deinde
filtratur ad usum.

Stomachum ac Intestina maxim confortat, and Appetitum excitat, Cerebrum and
omnes ejus functiones foeliciter corroborat: usus est proficui in Morbis
malignis, Hypochondriacis, and Vterinis; ab Epilepsia and Apoplexia praeservat;
in variis Febrium generibus summae utilitatis est; and nobilissimum
Medicamentum ad plurimos Morbos, ad omnes Obstructiones Viscerum reservandos;
Pleuritidem, Vertiginem, and Cephalalgiam egregia est Aperiens; unde in
Menstruis retinentis, Paralysi, Ictere, and Hydrope mira praestat. Dosis a
dram una ad quatuor, plusminus, pro re nara.

XII. Tinctura Antimonii crudi.
Antimonii crudi pulveri zati libram unam, Spiritus Universalis libras quatuor;
misce, ac digere ad quatuor vel quinque septimanas; deinde filtretur, and
reservetur ad usum.

In Epilepsia, Melancholia, Mania, Venenis haustis, Peste mire operatur. Vis
hujus est, Sanguinem in universo Corpore sic mundificare, and renovare, ut
omnes Morbos ex corruptione Sanguinis ortos radicitus tollat. Dosis, a dram
una ad duas, plusminus, in Vehiculo appropriato.

XIII. Tinctura Salis Tartari.
Salis Tartari calcinati ad colorem cyaneum, vel magis liquefacti seu fusi,
libras duas; Cinerum Ossium libras quatuor, Spiritus Vini optimi rectificati
libras octo; misce: agitatur, and reponatur ad usum. Super magmam si affunderis
novum Spiritum, Tinctura erit bona, ut prior.

Nobilius and efficacius Stomachicum in tota Republica Medica nondum inventum
esse, Experientiam ipsam attestor. Datur autem cum Vehiculo Stomachico, vel
Aqua Stomachali: super modum Viscera confortat, Secretumque hoc est roborans
and restaurans: totam massam Sanguinis a mucosis omnibus and serosis Humoribus
purificat; propter Salem suum, and dulcem. Dosis, a guttis triginta ad
sexaginta, plus minusve.

CHAP. LVIII. Of TINCTURES.
1. The Cordial Tincture.
TAke Long-pepper, Ginger, Winter 's Cinnamon, a. j. Cloves, Nutmegs, Limon
Peels, Cinnamon, a. ij. English Saffron, Cochinele, a. iij. rectified Spirit of
Wine lbiij. impregnated with Oil of Sulphur iij bruise them well, and mix them;
digest for a month, then filter, and keep the Tincture for use.

It is good against Fainting and Swooning Fits, and palpitation of the Heart;
and is profitable against Phlegm in the Stomach and Bowels: it wonderfully
strengthens the Brain and all its functions, removes Catarrhs, and preserves
from the Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, and Lethargy: it masters the nauseousness
of the Stomach, or loathing of food, and helps the weakness thereof; in the
Colic it is a singular thing, and in Fits of the Mother, for which purpose few
Medicines are equal to it. Dose, a j, ad ij. in a fit Vehicle.

2. The Wonderful Tincture.
Catechu vj. Jesuits Bark iv. Henbane-seeds ij. Spirit of Wine, i.e. common
Brandy xx. mix; digest for a week, filter, and keep it for use.

It is profitable against Ulcers of the Reins and Bladder; it stops Spitting of
Blood, and Bleeding, or Fluxes of Blood; in what part of the Body, or of what
kind soever: it represses the overflowing of the Terms in Women, cures the
Diabetes, Incontinency of Urine, and Pissing of Blood, as also the Bloody Flux
and Diarrhoea, and stops other Fluxes of the Bowels; it prevails against the
soreness of the Bowels, weakness of the Stomach and Liver, and lowness of the
Heart. Dose, two spoonfuls, more or less, morning and evening, continuing its
use for six or seven days.

3. Tincture of Opium.
Thebian Opium viij. Saffron, Cochinele, a. j. Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Cinnamon,
Snakeroot, a. ss. Juice of Limons, rectified Spirit of Wine, a. lbijss. mix
them; digest, 'till the Ingredients fall to the bottom; filter, and exhale the
one half. Or thus, from Angelus Sala; Thebian Opium dried j. English Saffron,
Mace, a. ss. Ambergrise j. Spirit of Vitriol iiij. Damask-rose-water vj. infuse
all in a glass vessel, and digest for a month: then strain, abstract the
Rose Water, and keep the Tincture for use.

It is a most approved and safe Remedy in all Pains, whether Venereal or
others; it stops all Haemorrhagies, or Bleedings and Fluxes, both of the Womb
and Bowels. It is a famous Sudorifick, purifies the Blood through the whole Body,
and restores the pristin vigor of Health: It is good as well in the Dropsy and
Convulsions, as in the Stone, and Fits of the Mother: it is a stupendous
Medicament in stopping all Fluxes of Humors and Catarrhs, Overflowing of the
Courses, in Watching, and in all kinds of Fevers, and Weaknesses; in Phrensies,
Madness, Melancholy, Vomiting, Falling Sickness, Suffocation of the Heart,
Colic, weakness of the Stomach, Pleurisy, Gout, as well in the Hips, as Knees
and Feet, as also the Stone, and pain of the Reins: for in easing all vehement
and sharp kinds of pain, it is as it were a divine help, and the very last
Refuge. Dose, a gut. 16, ad 20, vel 30. more or less; which may be taken in the
Evening, about bedtime.

4. Purging Tincture.
Sena viij. Jalap in powder ij. Seeds of Anise, Caraways, Coriander, Roots of
Liquorice, a j. Aqua Vitae lbvj. mix; and digest in a cold place for fourteen
days, strain out, and keep the Tincture for use.

It Purges Choler and Melancholy, as also salt Phlegm, and that without
trouble; and is indeed profitable against all Diseases proceeding from those
Humors; as Cancers, Elephantiasis, Madness, Melancholy, Rheumatisms, Gouts,
King's Evil, Ringworms, Scabs, Breakings-out, and other like Affects of the
Skin. It is very powerful for bringing forth the Melancholy Humor, and prevails
against all Diseases which proceed from a mixture of Phlegm and Choler. It is
an admirable thing for such as are troubled with the Spleen, Melancholic and
Hypochondriack Diseases, Madness, Falling Sickness, or Delirium proceeding from
a Fever, Diseases of the Womb, or an old Pox. It powerfully provokes Stools,
takes away Obstructions, and removes thick Humors, viscous and tough, by
cutting and attenuating them. Dose, from 2 spoonfuls to 6 or 7, more or less,
in the Morning fasting.

5. Tincture Exfoliating Bones, or Tincture of Euphorbium.
Euphorbium j. Myrrh ij. Spirit of Wine vj. mix, and digest for a week, filter,
and keep the Tincture for use.

It is never given by the Mouth, neither alone, nor mixed with other things,
except very rarely, and in small quantity. Outwardly it is used, but chiefly in
rottenness of the Bones, where they require scaling. But if the Mandible or
Jaw Bone in any place (says Hildanus) be made bare, I apply the Powder of
Euphorbium, which has wonderful properties; for by its heat, it not only drys
up the humors in the Bone, but here it is found to have some agreeable occult
quality; for which reason it is deservedly, both by Dioscorides and Modern
Physicians, applied to rotten Bones: nor need you fear its acrimony, for though
it bites the Tongue and Nostrils, yet notwithstanding you may strew Ulcers
plentifully with its Powder, or as much as you please, for that it causes no
pain or inflammation: -- I speak what I know by experience. If these are the
virtues of the Gum in its gross body, what are its excellencies when its Body
is opened?

6. Tincture of Wormwood.
Dried Leaves of common Wormwood iv. Salt of Tartar j. grind them together in a
hot Mortar; and add thereto rectified Spirit of Wine xvj. digest seven days,
then strain out by pressing: in that liquor infuse again the same quantity of
Wormwood and Salt of Tartar, digesting and expressing as before; which work
repeat the third time: press out again, and filter the Tincture.

It is a great Stomatick, helps Concoction, and inwardly taken kills Worms of
the Belly, it removes Obstructions, provokes the Terms, brings forth the Birth
and Afterbirth, preserves from Putrefaction, resists Poison, and is good in
the cure of the Plague and many other contagious Diseases. Dose, a gut. vj, ad
xvj. more or less, in a draught of Wine or, Asc.

7. Tincture of Antimony, Purging.
Glass of Antimony in powder j. Spirit of Vitriol not rectified viij. mix, and
digest in Balneo Mariae.

It opens Obstructions, purifies the Blood, and certainly cures all those
Diseases which proceed from Stoppages; it kills Worms in Children, and is
profitable in the cure of the Green Sickness, Cachexia, King's Evil, and Scurvy;
and in every Disease it is said to be a Panchymagogue, or Universal Purger.
Dose, agut. vj, ad xij.

8. A Cathartick Tincture.
Choice Sena iij. Jalap in powder j. Cloves, Sasston, ana j. Chalybeat-Wine
lbij. infuse for seven days, express, and filter.

It safely and certainly cures all Diseases of the Brain and Womb, removing and
dissipating all Melancholy Phansies and Thoughts; it is good against
Semitertians, and other obstinate and intermitting Fevers; for it brings forth
Humors putrefying in the Body, and those chiefly Choler and Melancholy; it
stops all Fluxes of the Belly, Bloody-fluxes, Lienteria's, Diarrhoea's, and the
Hepatick-flux; by reason of the Salt and Sulphur of the Iron which it contains.
It is very powerful to remove all Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, provoke
the Terms, etc. Dose, 2, 3, or 4 spoonfuls daily, for some cosiderable time.

9. Tincture of Mars or Iron.
Bits of Iron, or old Nails lbv. White Wind lbviij. Spirit of Wine lbij. Oil of
Sulphur j. digest in a cold place for six months, more or less: and that the
Salt and Sulphur of the Mars may be well drawn into the Wine, let the Vessel be
often shaked; then decant, filter, and keep it for use.

This Martial Tincture brings forth many corrupt Humors by loosning the Belly,
chiefly Choler and Melancholy, Humors earthy, heavy, and sticking, not easily
by other Medicaments to be ejected or removed. It is a special remedy against
Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Womb; it is profitable against the
Jaundies, Pain at Stomach, Palpitation of the Heart, Colic, Iliack-passion,
and the Rickets in Children: it has been found by experience to be a noble
Remedy against Hypochondriack Melancholy, Quartans, Cachexia's, Dropsies,
Scurvy, overflowing and retention of the Terms, and the Green Sickness in
Virgins. Dose, 2 or 3 spoonfuls, more or less, in some proper Vehicle, at
bedtime; that the virtues thereof may the more easily penetrate, even to the
remote parts of the Body.

10. The Excellent, or Bitter Tincture.
Fine Aloes ij. Cloves, Nutmegs, Snake-root, English-Saffron, Aniseeds, a. j.
Sherry-Sack lbij ss. mix, and digest; often shaking the Vesseb, for a week,
then filter, and keep it for use.

It opens all Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, is profitable against the
Dropsy; bringing forth Phlegm, Choler, Melancholy, and Water, with other
superabounding Humors; it purifies the Blood; nor will it suffer any evil
matter to remain in the Body, but whatever is pernicious, it expels by Stool
and Urine; it helps the weakness of the Stomach, and prevails against many
other Discases of like kind with these; and therefore is given against Pain of
the Stomach, Cachexia, Belching of Wind, and to kill Worms: it is exhibited
before the Fits in a Tertian and Quartan, which it often cures at the third
time taking. Dose, from j, ad ij. in a Morning fasting. If it be given for the
preservation of Health, it may be taken from half a spoonful to one spoonful,
every Morning, in White Wind, for eight or ten days, in the Springtime.

11. Tincture, or Elixir of Property.
Fine Aloes, Myrrh, both in powder, English Saffron, a. j. of the Universal
Spirit xij. mix: digest seven days, decant, and filter it for use.

It wonderfully comforts the Stomach and Bowels, causes an Appetite, and
happily strengthens the Brain and all its functions: it is profitably used in
malign and Hypochondriack Diseases, and in Diseases of the Womb; it preserves
from the Apoplexy and Falling Sickness; it is of mighty use in various kinds of
Fevers; and a most noble Medicament for many Diseases, to open Obstructions of
the Bowels, help the Pleurisy, Vertigo, and Headache: it is a wonderful Aperient
or Opener; for which reason, in stoppage of the Terms, Palsy, Jaundies, and
Dropsy, it does wonderful things. Dose, a ij, ad iv. more or less; as the
nature of the Disease, and constitution of the Sick requires.

12. Tincture of crude Antimony.
Powder of crude Antimony lbj. Spiritus Universalis lbiv. mix: digest for four
or five weeks, then filter, and keep it for use.

It admirably prevails against the Falling Sickness, Melancholy, Madness,
Poison, Plague. It is of so great power in purifying and renovating the Blood
through the whole Body, that it radically takes away all Diseases proceeding from
the corruption of the same. Dose, a j, ad ij. more or less, in some fit Vehicle.

13. Tinctureof Salt of Tartar.
Salt of Tartar calcined to blewness, or rather melted, lbij. Bone-ashes in
powder lbiv. of the best rectified Spirit of Wine lbviij. mix; shake often, and
keep it for use. Upon the Faeces you may affuse new or fresh Spirit, and you
shall have a Tincture as good as the former.

There is not found out a more noble and efficacious Stomatick in the whole
Republic of Medicine, I speak by Experience. But it ought to be given in some
Stomatick Vehicle or Water: it is also a Secret having a strengthening and
restoring virtue. It purifies the whole mass of Blood from all mucous and
serous Humors, by virtue of its Salt and sweetness. Dose, a gut. 30, ad 60.
more or less.

CHAP. LIX. De SPIRITIBUS.
I. Spiritus Cordialis.
COrticis Winterani uncias duodecim, Fructus Pimenti uncias octo, Foliarum
Rosmarini uncias sex, Radicis Serpentariae, Angelicae, ana uncias quatuor;
Granorum Paradisi, Croci Anglicani, ana uncias duas; Seminum Anisi, Carui,
Foeniculi, Coriandri, Piperis longi and albi, ana unciam unam; Aquae Fontanae
libras viginti quatuor; Spiritus Vini duplicati libras viginti: crassiuscule
incisa and contusa misce, and infundantur in Liquoribus per quatuor dies;
postea distillentur in Alembico refrigeratorio suo librae triginta duae;
distillatum addatur Sacchari-candi pulverizati albissimi libri tres:
dissolvatur, coletur, and reservetur ad usum.

Cerebrum, Stomachum, and Cor, omnesque functiones eorum mire corroborat:
Catarrhos discusit, atque ab Apoplexia, Epilepsia; and Lethargo praeservat;
magni est usus ad omnes frigidos Capitis Affectus, intra and extra adhibitus;
contra Vertigiuem, Paralysin, Convulsionem, and Tremorem, singulariter, tanquam
insignem Medicinam commendare volui: utilis est in Syncope, Cordis
Palpitatione, Cardialgia, and Aegritudine Stomachi: consumit Pituitam in
Ventriculo and Intestinis; omnibus denique a Frigiditate ducentibus Morbis
magnopere conducit: Vires amissos restituit, and Membra Principalia confortat.
Dosis, a drachmis duabus ad unciam unam, plus minusve, pro ratione Morbi and
necessitatis.

II. Spiritus Vini Camphoratus.
Spiritus Vini libras octo, Croci, Cochinellae, ana drachmas quatuor; misce,
fiatque Tinctura, in qua dissolvantur Camphorae unciae sedecim; and reponatur
ad usum.

Diaphoreticus est and Anodynus, in plerisque Morbis, tam frigidis quam calidis
usurpatur: externe, in Arthriticis and ommbus Affectibus frigidis Artuum
summopere convenit; Odontalgiae, Aurium doloribus, Vertigini, Paralysi,
Tremori, aliisque Morbis ad Miraculum usue medetur. Interne, ad Colicum dolorem
sumitur a drachmis duabus ad sex, in Vehiculo appropriato, cito, mireque curat.

III. Spiritus Sulphuratus, vel Vitriolatus.
Spiritus Vini rectificati libras octo, Olei Sulphuris vel Vitrioli uncias
sedecim; misce, ac digere: tunc distilles per Retortam in Arena ad siccitatem,
and servetur ad usum.

Praestans admodum, and delicatus est hic Spiritus ad Cordis and Ventriculi
imbecillitatem juvandam, Venenis adversetur, Vino permixto: Cor summopere
roborat, and Stomachum confortat: concretum Sanguinem dirimit, ex Spiritu suo
and Sale soluto, qui omnia concreta dissolvit: unde and Calculosis and
Sabulosis peroptimam est Remedium, in Aqua Hydropiperis: Vulneribus venenatis,
and aliis simplicibus, and Vlceribus omnibus, summum Medicamentum est. Valet
contra Pestem, Febres Pestilentiales and Malignes: Sitim extinguit, and Vrinam
provocat. Dosis, a dram semis ad drachmam unam, in Vino vel Jusculis.

IV. Spiritus Vini Basilii.
Spiritus Vini rectificati, Olei Salis optimi, ana; misce, been Vas agitando.
Per hunc, ex Auro fit Tinctura.

Arcanum est summum contra Venena, and verum and unicum Bezoarticum Remedium;
adversus Pestiferae Aurae Contagionem nibil efficacius, and est summum Pestis
Praeservativum and Curativum: potentissime curat quaecunque Vulnera simplicia,
cito; ita ut stupendnm sit Naturae Miraculum, propter ingentem vim Balsamicam,
quae in ejus Oleo, Sale, and Spiritu continetur. Dosis, a guttis duodecim ad
viginti quatuor; vel ad aciditatem congruentem.

V. Spiritus Nitri.
Nitri quantum vis, in Aqua vulgari dissolvatur, ita ut Muriam fortissimam
referat; hujus Muriae libras quatuor, Olei Vitrioli libram unam; fiat
distillatio ex Cucurbita vitrea ex Arena; prodibit primitus Phlegma, postmodum
subsequetur Spiritus Nitri acidus, quem seorsim collige, distillando ad
siccitatem Nitri in fundo remanentis. Vel sic, Nitri libras duas, Olei Vitrioli
rectificati libram unam; misce: committantur Retortae, and successivis Ignis
gradibus distilletur ad ficcitatem usque; and habebis Spiritum Nitri
fortissimum: in fundo autem residet Nitrum Vitriolatum, quod suum Essentiale
Principale vocat Kreuchnerus.

Hic Spiritus, licet suspicione adulterationis Olei Vitrioli non careat, satis
tamen gratus est, and usui Medico inserviens; subrilissimus, and
penetratissimus est inter omnes Spiritus acidos Minerales: hinc potenter
attenuat, resolvit, and aperit; Sudorem and Vrinam movet, and Lithontripticus
est. Conservat a Putredine; hincque frequens ejus usus in Peste, Febribus
Malignis, and Exanthemate. Dosis est, a scrupla semis ad scruplam unam, in
Liquore aliquo appropriato.

VI. Spiritus Nitratus.
Spiritus Nitri rectificati uncias sex, Alcohol Vini uncias octodecim;
digerantur simul per tres dies, tunc distilles per Retortam vitream in Arena,
ad siccitatem, terque repetatur; and reservetur ad usum.

In Colico dolor nihil est praestantius, quia saepe hic Affectus ex Pituita,
and glutinosis, and flatulentis Humoribus ortum habet. Hoc autem Arcanum suo
illitu, discutit, disperdit quicquid frigidum est, glutinosum, and flatulentem.
Dissolvit and emollit quoscunque Tumores frigidos, duros, and scirrhosos. Hoc
Menstruum temperatissimum est, and ad Tincturas multorum Vegetabilium
extrahendas. Ardores Sanguinis sistit, compescendo furorem Sulphureum, and
Salino-volatilem in Sanguine contentum. Pituitam tenacem potenter incidit; ac
proinde in Obstructionibus solvendis prodest. Saburram calculosam corrodit and
comminuit, and per Diuresin expellit. Ac quia Acidum sum volatile est,
potenter attenuat; and Diureticus, Febrifugus, Antipleuriticus, and Anticolicus
est. Valet contra Pestem, arcet Putredinem, extinguit Sitim, and convenit
nimiis Humorum Ardoribus, Febribus ardentibus and malignis, penetrante totum
Corpus. Hincque infinitis Morbis utilis est. Edulcorari Saccharo potest, ut
fiat instar Syrupi; and tum ad cochleare semis exhiberi potest. Dosis alias
est, a guttis december ad sexaginta, in Cerevisia, Vino, aut aliqua Aqua
appropriata. Inservitque etiam pro Menstruo in paranda Tinctura Coralliorum:
fitque ex hoc, Aurum Potabile, Elixir Proprietatis, Tinctura Opii, vel Guttae
Vitae, and Liquor Catharticus.

VII. Spiritus Salis Philosophicus.
Salis uncias sedecim, Olei Vitrioli rectificati uncias octo, Aquae quantum
sufficit ad dissolvendam Salis communis; infundatur Vase distillatorio, dein
distillatur; sic primo prodit Phlegma, secundo Spiritus Acidus, quem feorsim
serva; infunda in Retorta vitrea, and distilla in Arena ad siccitatem usque:
Spiritus acidus penetratissimus est, qui est Spiritus Salis communis. Oleum
vero Vitrioli coagulabitur in Retorta, cum Alcali Salis communis. Recipe hujus
Spiritus acidi uncias quatuor, Salis (in Aqua soluti) uncias duas; misce,
distillaque in Arena, ut antea; sic prodibunt unciae sex; and hoc in infinitum
potest repeti; ita ut fine ullis sumptibus Spiritus hic in promptu esse possit.
In fundo remanebit Sal coagulatum, ex quo fit Sal Mirabile, ut postea
declarabitur.

In Chymia, and Tincturarum extractionibus, plurimi est usus: praecipitat omnia
soluta in Aquaforti vel in Spiritu Nitri, Aceto, etc. quae praecipitata,
laevissima and albissima fiunt. Insuper omnia Olea foetida corrigit, and
foetorem tollit. Aperit, refrigerat, maximeque adversatur Pesti. Sitim
extinguit, Febribus convenit, and effervescentiam Sanguinis sedat. Gratioris
saporis est, and minus violentus, quam est Spiritus Salis vulgariter
distillatus. Vrinam movet, Calculum pellit, Sudorem ciet, and praeservat a
Putridine: hinc Febribus malignis and contagiosis conducit, imprimis Saccharo
edulcoratus. Solvit Solemn, tanquam ejus Menstruum. Dosis, a scrupla semis ad
scruplam unam; vel ad gratam aciditatem, in poculo Vini, ulteriusve liquoris.

VIII. Spiritus Cornu Cervi, compositus.
Rasurae Cornu Cervi libram unam, Succini, Tartari albi, ana libram semis;
Retortae terreae vel vitreae indantur, and in Igne aperto vel in Arena,
distilla, primo lento Igne, augendo ad quartam usque gradum; and prodibit primo
gradu Phlegma, cum secundo Oleum, cum tertio Sal volatile: continuetur
Distillatio per horas quinque aut sex, donec nil amplius prodeat; and habebitur
in Recipiente Massa, ex Phlegmate, Oleo, and Sale volatili conrlata; magna
quoque pars Salis volatilis sub forma Nivis adhaerebit lateribus Recipientis,
quod debet esse amplum, and maxim quadrans ad collum Retortae: Oleum separatur
a Spiritibus, and Sale,

Vim admirabilem habet Spiritus Sudorificam, unde usus in Febribus malignis,
contagiosis, and Peste; in Morbis Vteri, Obstructionibus Viscerum, and
Affectibus Melancholicis. Egregium est Medicamentum, praesertim in omnibus
Morbis per Sudorem curabilibus. Exhibetur in Mensium Obstructionibus, and
reliquis Affectibus Vterinis; in Epilepsia, Apoplexia, Paralysi, Lethargo,
aliisque Nervorum obstructionibus, atque in Morbis malignis; and in Morsu
Animalium Venenatorum, insuper est Antidoton. Concretum Sanguinis dirimit ac
dissolvit. Dosis, a guttis december ad scruplas duas, plusve, in Vebiculo
convenienti.

IX. Spiritus Salis Armoniaci.
Salis Armoniaci libram unam, Salis Alcali vel Cinerum Clavellatorum libras
duas; exact inter se conterantur, and in Cucurbitam vitream conjiciantur;
eisque affundantur Aquae communis librae tres: leni Igne distillentur, cum
Recipiente vitreo satis amplo, cujus junctura been quadrat ad collum
Distillatorio: distillaque donec unciae duodecim circiter, plusve prodierint,
tum cessa: Si Calcem vivam loco Salis Alcali adhibueris, multo fugacior
elicitur Spiritus: distillentur simul per Retortam vitream in Arena positam,
Igne satis l^ni. Sic primo prodit Sal volatile in forma sicca, secundo Spiritus
liquidus simulcum phlegmate, in quo Sal volatile dissolvitur: Spiritus
prolectus in Vitro arctissime clauso reservetur.

Sensus omnes acuit, Spiritus Animales refovendo and multiplicando. Pathemata
omnia Cerebri, Cordis, Ventriculi, Hepatis, Lienis, Matricis, and Nervorum
sanat. Vteri omnes Affectus tutissime tollit, and fertilitatem inducit:
Circulationem Sanguinis promovet, Obstructiones reserat, Febribus Tertianis,
Quartanis, and Quotidianis medetur; Peste, Paralysi, Apoplexiae, Epilepsiae,
and Passionibus Hystericis succurrit; Diaphoresin, Diuresin, and Menstrua
promovet: penetrantissimus est instar Panacaeae in Medicina, quibuscunque
Morbis inserviens. Dosis, a guttis december ad scruplas duas.

X. Spiritus Mirabilis.
Aquae-fortis simplicis, seu Spiritus Nitri non rectificati, Spiritus Vitrioli,
ana libram unam; misce, been Vas agitando.

Arcanum est summum in Colica curanda, Febre Quotidiana, Tertiana, and
Quartana, Arthritide, Ischiadico dolor, Nervorum and Musculorum
contractionibus, and Paralysi particulari membri alicujus, and totius Corporis,
admotum membris externe, and assumptum ex Art interne. In omnibus Doloribus
acutissimis frigidis and calidis, ubi prae vehementia Homines fere exanimantur;
praecipue in dolor Colico, Nephritico, Pleurilicis, and Podagrico, nihil est
in rerum praestantius; qued intemperiem partium omnium, and Humores acres and
pungentes attemperat and alleviat. Tumores omnes frigidos and scirrhosos
discutit and emollit, exterius illinendo, propter suum Spiritum aethereum qguem
continet, qui penetrando frididos illos Humores, and tartareos tissolvit.
Sumitur ad quantitaem drachmae semis, plus-minusve; um Jusculis, Aquis, and
Syrupis Morbo appropriatis and convenientibus.

XI. Spiritus Opii compositus.
Succi Pomorum libras december, Opii Thebaici libram unam, misce, and dissolvatur;
addantur Sacchari librae duae and semis, Caryophyllorum, Croci Anglicani, ana
unciae quatuor; radicis Serpentariae, Corticis Winterani, ana unciae tres;
Nucis Moschatae, Zinziberis, ana unciae duae; Fermenti Cerevisiae libra semis:
crassiuscule contusa and mixta, fermententur simul in digestione per tres vel
quatuor dies; postea add Spiritus Vini libras duodecim; tune in Alembico, Igne
nudo, vel in Balneo Mariae distillentur: Spiritus evocatus, Saccharo purissimo
edulcoretur.

In vitiis Pectoris, Tussi, Asthmate, imbecillitate Ventriculi, Colica,
Torminibus Ventris, etc. bonum est Medicamentum. Mirabilis est operationis, and
ad curandum Phthisin, sanandum Vlcera Pulmonum, expertissimus. Praeterea
Pleurilicis, Suspirosis, Arteriacis, Empyacis, seu Purulenta excreantibus
peculiariter and efficacirer opitulatur. Sopo iferum est and Anodynum
Medicamentum, Sudores prolicit, aliis Medicamentis mixtum. Astringit, unde
convenit in Diarrhxa, Dysenteria, caeterisque Fluxibus, omnibusque Humorum
profluviis; in sedandis omnibus etiam acutissimis a quacunque causa subortis
doloribus, and inquietudinibus immodicis; uti Phrenitis, Mania, stupendum est
Medicamentum, gratam inducens tranquillitatem. Varias and egregias habet
facultates, Spiritus insuper in Syncopticis recreat, and mirabiliter restaurat.
Dosis, a dram una ad quatuor, plus-minusve, in Vino, vel alio Vehiculo
adapto.

XII. Spiritus Sulphuris per Distillationem; vulgo, Ens primum.
Retortam tubulatam terream, aut saltem perforatam; injiciatur per vices, five
cochlearia, pulvis ex Sulphuris and Nitri partibus aequalibus factus. Sic
Vapores incensi cum impetu feruntur in Recipiens vitreum; quod amplissimum esse
debet, continens aliquid Aquae purissimae, and cujus junctura cum collo
Retortae sit tantum leviter obturata. Consumpto cochleariuno, ingeratur
alterum, idque continuetur quamdiu libitum fuerit. Sic accipietur, una cum
quibusdam Floribus, Spiritus acidus penetrantissimus, Spiritui Campanario hand
absimilis, sineque dubio tamen aliquid acidi Nitri in se continens, quod
Vapores rubicundi demonstrant. Si solum Sulphur, absque Nitro, ingeratur,
faeliciter non succedit Operatio; quia Sulphur non facile accenditur, atque
ideo paulum vel nullum Spiritum acidum, sed Flores multi suppeditat; etiamsi
leviter tantum juncturae sint clausae.

Sudorem valde movet, Menses ciet, Alvum lenissime solvit, Nephriticum est
insigne, omnibus Pectoris Vitiis succurrit, ut and Tussi, Phthisique, praecipue
si ulterius elaboretur cum Melle: utilis est Asthmaticis, Catarrhosis,
Obstructionibus inveteratis, caeterisque Morbis Viscerum. Attenuat, incidit,
aperit, and siccat. Morbis Vteri, Colicae, Pesti, Febribus ardentibus and
contagiosis convenit. Effervescemiam Sanguinis mitigat, Putrefactionem arcer,
Vermes necat; viresque easdem cum Ole^ Sulphuris habet. Dosis, a dram una ad
duas, vel ad gratam aciditatem, in Vehiculo appropriato.

XIII. Spiritus Vniversalis Clauderi.
Cinerum Clavellatorum libram unam, Aquae communis libras sex; stet per horam
unam, and aliquoties agitetur pro meliore dissolutione: huic Solutioni injice
Salis Armoniaci pulverizati libram semis, vel paulo plus; agitetur itidem
aliquando pro plenaria Salium in Aqua defluxu, and quidem in Vase obturato, ne
parts volatiles evaporent: postea filtretur per Chartam emporeticam, and
servetur ad usum.

Deobstruit, omneque Acidum oberrans in Corporemitigat and infringit,
recreatque Spiritus in univer so Corpore, Circulationem Sanguinis promovet,
Cachexiam Mulierum tollit, Sudores adjuvat, Putredini resistit, and Passionibus
Hystericis medetur; Pituitam tenacem porenter incidit, ac proinde in
obstructionibus Mensium, Capitis gravedine, palpitatione Cordis, Pleuritide,
and Ventriculo Fermento suffocato, maximarum est virium, and instar Panacaea in
quibuscunque Morbis, and Febribus, per Sudorem curabilibus, esse potest. Dosis,
a dram una ad duas, in Aquis vel Syrupis appropriatis. In Operationibus
Chymicis, summi est usus in Extrahenda Anima (quae est Essentia subtilissima)
Vegetabilium, Mineralium, Metallorum, and Animalium, praecipue Sulphureorum,
etc.

CHAP. LIX. Of SPIRITS.
1. The Cordial Spirit.
WInter 's Cinnamon xij. Jamaica Pimento viij. Rosemary-leaves vj. Snakeroot,
Angelica-root, a. iv. Grains of Paradise, English Saffron, a. ij. Seeds of
Anise, Carawaies, Fennel, Coriander, Pepper long and white, a. j. Spring Water
lbxxiv. recti^ed Spirit of Wine lbxx. the ingredients being grossly cut and
bruised, mix, and infuse them in the Liquor for four days; then distill all in
an Alembick with its Worm, drawing off sixteen quarts; to which add of the
purest white Sugar Candy in fine powder lbiij. dissolve, strain, and keep it
for use.

It wonderfully comforts the Brain, Stomach, and Heart, and all their
functions: stops Catarrhs, and preserves from the Apoplexy, Epilepsy, and
Lethargy; it is of great use in all cold Distempers of the Head, both inwardly
and outwardly used; it is singular good against the Vertigo, Palsy,
Convulsions, and Tremblings; and I commend it in these cases, as a most
admirable Medicine: it is good against Swooning and Fainting, Palpitation of
the Heart, Pain at Stomach, and Sickness thereof: it prevails against Phlegm in
the Ventricle and Bowels; and is of great force in all great Diseases
proceeding from Cold: it restores lost Strength, and comforts the Principal
Members. Dose, a ij. ad j.

2. Spirit of Wine Camphorated.
Spirit of Wine lbviij. Saffron, Cochinele, a. iv. mix, and make a Tincture, in
which dissolve Camphir xvj. and keep it for use.

It is Diaphoretick and Anodyn, and is used in many Diseases both hot and cold:
outwardly, it is of very great use in the Gout, and all cold Diseases of the
Joints; it gives ease, and cures the pains of the Teeth and Ears; and is good
against the Vertigo, Palsy, Trembling, and other Discases of like kind, which
it cures to a Miracle. Inwardly, it it given against the Colic, a ij. ad vj.
in some proper Vehicle, which it quickly and wonderfully cures.

3. The Sulphurated, or Vitriolated Spirit.
Spirit of Wine rectified lbviij. Oil of Sulphur or Vitriol xvj. mix, and
digest; then distill by Retort in Sand, and keep the Spirit for use.

It is indeed a powerful and pleasant Remedy against fainting of the Heart, and
weakness of the Stomach, and prevails against Poison, being taken in Wine: it
also strengthens the Heart, and comforts the Stomach: it loosens the too strict
jointing of the Blood, by virtue of its Spirit and dissolved Salt; which
dissolves all coagulated substances: for which reason it is a most excellent
thing against the Stone and Gravel, being given in Hydropiper-Water: it is also
a singular, and most excellent Medicine for simple Wounds, and such as are
poisoned; as also in all sorts of Ulcers. It prevails against the Plague, and
Pestilential, as also Malign Fevers: it quenches Thirst, and provokes Urine.
Dose, a ss ad j. in Wine or Broth.

4. Basil's Spirit of Wine.
Rectified Spirit of Wine, of the best Oil of Salt, ana; mix them by shaking
the Vessel well. By this Spirit, a Tincture may be drawn out of Gold.

It is one of the chiefest Secrets against Poison, and the true and only
Bezoartick Remedy against the Infection of a Pestiferous Air, for which
purpose, nothing is more efficacious; and it is also the chief, both
Preservative and Curative, of the very Plague it self: it presently and
powerfully cures simple Wounds, of what kind soever; becoming as it were a
stupendous Miracle of Nature, because of its mighty Balsamic power, contained
in its Oil, Sale, and Spirit. Dose, a gut. xij, ad xxiv. or to an agreeable and
pleasant acidity.

5. Spirit of Nitre.
What quantity you please of Nitre, dissolve it in common Water, so much as to
make it a very strong Brine or Pickle: take of this Pickle lbiv. Oil of Vitriol
lbj. put them into a Cucurbit, and distill in Sand; so will you have first a
Phlegm, then an acid Spirit of Nitre, which gather by it self: distill to
dryness, the Nitre remaining in the bottom. Or thus, Nitre lbij. Oil of Vitriol
rectified lbj. mix them: put them into a Retort, and with a gradual increase of
the Pire, distill to dryness; so you will have a very strong Spirit of Nitre,
and in the bottom you will have a Nitre Vitriolate, which Kreuchner calls its
Essential Principle.

This Spirit, though it may be suspected to be adulterated with the Oil of
Vitriol, yet it is sufficiently grateful, and of good use in Physic; it is
most subtle and penetrating, of all the acid Mineral Spirits; and therefore
powerfully attenuates, resolves, and opens; it causes Sweat and Urine, and
breaks the Stone. It preserves from Putrefaction; for which reason, it is of
frequent use in the Plague, Malign-fevers, and Smallpox. Dose, a ss. ad j. in
some appropriate Liquor.

6. A Nitrated Spirit.
Rectified Spirit of Nitre vj. rectified Spirit of Wine xviij. digest them
together for three days; then distill in a glass Retort in Sand, repeating the
Distillation three times; and then keep it for use.

There is nothing more powerful in the World against the Colic, because this
Disease oftentimes arises from Phlegm, or glutinous and flatulent Humors: and
this Arcanum, by even Bathing with it, discusses and disperses all kinds of
cold, glutinous, and flatulent Matter. It is a kind of temperate Menstruum, and
of good use for extracting the Tinctures of several kinds of Vegetables. It
quiets the Fermentation of the Blood, and allays the rage of its Sulphurous
and volatile Saline parts: it powerfully cuts tough Phlegm, and therefore is
profitable in opening Obstructions: it dissolves Gravelly Matter, breaks the
Stone, and expells it; and as it is one of the highest or greatest volatile
Acids, so it is powerfully attenuating and diuretic; a great Antifebritick,
Antipleuritick, and Anticolick. It is good against the Plague, resists
Putrefaction, quenches Thirst, and prevails against the violent Fermentation of
the Humors, burning and malign Fevers; by reason of its penetration through the
whole Body: for which cause sake, it is said to be profitable against many
Diseases. It may be sweetened with Sugar, and made like a Syrup, and so given
about half a spoonful at a time. Otherwise, the Dose is, a gut. 10, ad 60. in
Beer, Ale, or Wine, or some other appropriate Liquor. This Preparation may be
of use as a Menstruum in preparing Tincture of Coral: and therewith may be made
also Aurum Potabile, Elixir Proprietatis, Tincture of Opium, or our Guttae
Vitae, and a Cathartick Potion.

7. Philosophic Spirit of Salt.
Salt xvj. rectified Oil of Vitriol viij. Water a sufficient quantity to
dissolve the Salt; put them into the S^i^latory and distill: in the first place
the Phlegm comes forth, after that the Acid Spirit, which keep by its self; put
them into a glass Retort, and distill in Sand to dryness: this Acid Spirit is
very penetrating, and the true Spirit of the Salt. The Oil of Vitriol will be
coagulated in the Retort, with the Alcali of the common Salt. Take of this acid
Spirit iv. new Salt ij. which dissolve in a sufficient quantity of Water; mix
them, and distill in Sand, as before; so will you have six ounces of Spirit; and
this you may repeat infinitely, producing the Spirit with all imaginable ease,
and without any charge. In the bottom, a coagulated Salt will remain, of which
is made Sal Mirabile, as shall afterward be declared.

In Chemistry, and the extraction of Tinctures, it is of much use; it
precipitates all Solutions in Aqua fortis or Spirit of Nitre, Vinegar, etc.
which Precipitates it makes very fine and white. It very much corrects all
foetid Oils, and takes away their stinking. It opens and cools, and is a mighty
thing against the Plague. It quenches Thirst, prevails against Fevers, and
quiets the violent ardors of the Blood. It is more grateful in taste, and less
violent than the Spirit of Salt distilled after the vulgar manner. It provokes
Urine, breaks the Stone, moves Sweat, and preserves from Putrefaction; for
which reason it is good against malign and contagious Fevers, being first
sweetened with Sugar. It dissolves Gold, as its proper Menstruum. Dose, a ss. ad
j. or to a pleasant acidity, in a glass of Wine, or of some other liquor.

8. Spirit of Hartshorn, compound.
Raspings of Hartshorn lbj. Amber, white Tartar a. lbss. put them into an
earthen or glass Retort; distill, and with a naked Eire, or in Sand; first, in a
gentle heat, then augmenting it to the fourth degree; so will you have first
the Phlegm, then the Oil, and lastly the volatile Salt: continue the
distillation five or six hours, 'till no more will come forth; in the Receiver
you will have a mass, consisting of Phlegm, Oil, and volatile Salt, looking
almost like Snow, and adhering to the sides of the Receiver; which ought to be
very large, and exactly fitted to the neck of the Retort: separate the Oil from
the Spirit and Salt.

This Spirit is a most excellent Sudorifick, for which cause it is of use in
malign and contagious Fevers, and in the Plague; in Diseases of the Womb,
Obstructions of the Bowels, and Diseases proceeding from Melancholy. It Is a
famous Medicine, chiefly in all Diseases curable by Sweating. It is given
against Obstruction of the Terms, and other Affects of the Womb; against the
Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, Palsy, Lethargy, and other Obstructions of the
Nerves, as also in malign Diseases. It is a powersul Antidote against the
Bitings of Venomous Creatures. It breaks and dissolves the Coagulation of the
Blood; and is given a gut. 10, ad 40. and more, in some convenient Vehicle.

9. Spirit of Sal Armoniack.
Sal Armoniack lbj. Sal Alcali, or of Potashes lbij. mix them well together by
beating them in a Mortar, put them into a Cucurbit, and affuse thereon fair
Water lbiij. distill with a gentle Fire, into a very large Receiver, which may
fit very well to the neck of the Stillatory: distill till about xij. or more may
be come forth, then give over. If in the place of the Potashes, you use
Quicklime, you will have a Spirit much more subtle and volatile. Let them be
distilled by a Retort in Sand, with a very gentle Fire. So will you have,
first, a volatile Salt in a dry form, then a liquid Spirit mixed with the
Phlegm, in which some volatile Salt is dissolved: the distilled Spirit keep in a
Glass close stopped.

It quickens all the Senses, by increasing and comforting the Animal Spirits.
It is good in all the Dissaffections of the Brain, Heart, Stomach, Liver,
Spleen, Womb, and Nerves. All Diseases of the Womb it safely removes, and is
good against Barrenness: it facilitates the Circulation of the Blood, opens
Obstructions, and cures Quotidian, Tertian, and Quartan Agues. It is prevalent
against the Plague, Palsy, Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, and Passions of the
Womb; it provokes Sweat, Urine, and the Courses: it is indeed a powerful
Medicine, and like a Panacaeae or All-heal, serving for all kinds of Diseases.
Dose, a gut. x, ad xl.

10. The Wonderful Spirit.
Simple or common Aquafortis, or Spirit of Nitre not rectified, Spirit of
Vitriol, a. lbss. mix them well together, by shaking the Vessel.

It is a great Secret in curing the Colic, Quotidian, Tertian, and Quartan
Fevers, the Gout, Sciatica, Contractions of the Sinews and Muscles, and the
Palsy, not only of any particular member, but of the whole Body, being
outwardly applied, and inwardly taken according to Art. There is nothing more
powerful to ease all sorts of sharp and vehement Pains, whether hot or cold,
which for their vehemence cause the Sick to faint, or die away; chiefly such as
arise from the Colic, Stone, Pleurisy, and Gout; for that it qualifies and
alleviates the intemperature of all the Parts, and abates the acrimony and
pungency of the Humors. It discusses all cold and scirrhous Tumors, and softens
them, by outwardly bathing therewith; by virtue of its thin aetherial Spirit
which it contains, and by which it penetrates those cold and tartarous Humors,
and dissolves them. It is taken to the quantity of ss. more or less, in Broth,
Waters, or some convenient and proper Spirit.

11. Spirit of Opium compound.
Juice of Apples lbx. Thebean Opium lbj. mix, and dissolve; then add Sugar lbij
ss. Cloves, English Saffron, a. iv. Snake-root, Winter 's Cinnamon, a. iij.
Nutmegs, Ginger, a. ij. Ale-yest lbss. being grossly bruised, let them be mixed
together and fermented, by digesting them three or four days: after which add
Spirit of Wine lbxij. and distill in an Alembick, either with a naked Fire, or
in B.M. the distilled Spirit dulcifie with treble-refined Sugar.

It is a good thing in Diseases of the Breast, Coughs, Asthma's, Weakness of the
Stomach, Colic, Gripings of the Guts, etc. It is of an admirable operation for
the cure of the Phthisick, and heals Ulcers of the Lungs, for which it is
approved by experience. Besides, it is a singular help for such as are troubled
with the Pleurisy, difficulty of Breathing, straitness of the Aspera Arteria,
Empyema, or spit Purulent matter. It is a Medicament which induces Sleep, and
gives ease in Pains; and being given mixed with other Medicines, it causes
Sweat. It is of a Binding quality, for which reason it is profitable in a Flux
or Looseness of the Bowels, a Bloody Flux, and all other Fluxes of the Belly; as
also all other overflowings of the Humors, and in easing of all pains, even the
most acute, arising from what cause soever, giving rest and quietness; so that
in a Phrensy, Madness, and continual Watchings, it is found to be a most
transcendent Medicine. It has many and wonderful faculties; for it revives the
Spirits in Swooning-fits, and admirably restores. Dose, a ij, ad ss. more or
less, in Wine, or some other proper Vehicle.

12. Spirit of Sulphur, by Distillation; vulgarly called, Ens primum.
A tubulated Retort, or one at least perforated, put into it by degrees, or
spoonfuls, a powder made of equal parts of Sulphur and Nitre, which being
inflamed, the Vapors will be driven with violence into a glass Receiver, which
ought to be very large, containing some fair Water, and stopped in the juncture
to the neck of the Retort: one spoonful being consumed, another is to be put
in, and this to be continued so long as you please. So have you (together with
some Flowers) an acid penetrating Spirit, not much unlike to that made per
Campanam; but without doubt containing in its self somewhat of the acid of the
Nitre, which the reddish Vapors demonstrate. If Sulphur only were used or put
in, the Operation would not succeed so happily; because the Sulphur is not
easily kindled, or made to flame; and therefore little or no acid Spirit, but
many Flowers will come forth: the juncture also is only gently to be stopped.

It powerfully provokes Sweat and the Terms, moves the Belly, and is a famous
Nephritick; it is good in all Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, as the Cough and
Phthisick, more especially if it be dulcified with Honey: it is profitable in
Asthma's, Catarrhs, inveterate Obstructions, and other Diseases of the Bowels.
It makes thin, cuts, opens, and drys, and is of good use in Diseases of the
Womb, in Colicks, the Plague, as also in vehement burning and contagious
Fevers. It quiets the effervescency of the Blood, resists Putrefaction, kills
Worms, and has the same virtues with Oil of Sulphur. Dose, a j, ad ij. or to
make the Vehicle have a pleasant acidity.

13. The Universal Spirit of Clauder.
Potashes lbj. fair Water lbvj. let them stand for an hour, often shaking the
Glass, for the better dissolution of the Ashes: to this Solution put Sal
Armoniack in powder lbss. or a little more; shaking it also sometimes, for the
better dissolving of the Salts in the Water; which let be in a Vessel close
stopped, that its volatile parts may not evaporate: afterward let it be filtred
through brown Paper, and kept for use.

It opens Obstructions, and corrects and destroys every irregular Acid in the
Body, chears the Spirits through the universal Man, and promotes or facilitates
the Circulation of the Blood, takes away a Cachexia in Womenkind, provokes
Sweat, resists Putrefaction, and cures Diseases of the Womb: it powerfully cuts
tough Phlegm, and for that cause provokes the Terms, eases the Headache, helps
the palpitation of the Heart, and is profitable against the Pleurisy, and a
suffocative Ferment of the Stomach, Fumes, Vapors, etc. in all which cases it
is wonderfully prevalent; and a kind of Panacaea, in almost all Diseases and
Fevers, which are possible to be cured by Sweating. Dose, a j, ad ij. in some
proper Water or Syrup. It is of singular use in Chemistry, in Extracting of
Tinctures, or the Soul, (which is the most subtle Essence) of Vegetables,
Minerals, Metals, and Animals, chiefly the Essence of their Sulphurs, etc.

CHAP. LX. De OLEIS Distillatis.
I. Oleum Seminum Anisi.
SEminum Anisi contusorum libras december, Aquae fontanae libras octoginta, Salis
communis libram unam, Salis Clavellatorum libram semis; macera in loco calido
per novem dies, distillaque per Vesicam aeneam cum Refrigeratorio serpentino;
tunc separetur Oleum ab Aqua.

In dolor Colico corroborat, and Flatus discutit, Calculo sive Nephritico
maxim conducit. Dosis, in Vehiculis appropriatis, ad guttas sex. Externe
egregium Anodynum est; in Podagra, and Chiragra, ex causa frigida, and omnibus
doloribus ex eadem, Spasmo, Convulsionibus, and Paralysi praevalebit, si Parts
affectae inungantur cum eo, simpliciter, vel hac in mixtura: Olei Anisi guttas
triginta, Olei de Ben, vel Olivarum guttas quadragintaquinque; misce.

II. Oleum Caryophyllorum.
Caryophyllorum grosso modo tusorum libras duas, Aquae fontanae libras viginti,
Cinerum clavellatorum uncias duas; indantur in Vase figulino, and digerantur in
Infusione per dies septem: dein imponantur in Vesicam, and distillentur cum
Refrigeratorio serpentino, and habebis Olei uncias quatuor. Vel, distillentur
in Retortam vitream in Arena positam, leni Igne, sed tamen ad ebullitionem
Materiae ad mediam partem. Oleum ab Aqua separetur. Aquam faecibus reaffunde,
distilla ut ante; sic denuo Olei copia prodit, quod ut ante separetur. Tertio
denuo reaffunde, and proceed ut ante, semper ad medietatem distillando; sic
omne prodit Oleum, Capite restante mortuo inutili.

Confert frigidis Ventriculi Morbis, and Imbecillitati Hepatis, Cordis,
Cerebri, and Intestinorum, a causa frigida; Melancholiam dissipat, and crassos
Humores clarificat. Memoriam acuit, Lypothymias solvit; imprimis vero,
Apoplexiae, Paralysi, and Lethargo medetur. Stomachicum est egregium, Cor
roborat, and Flatus discutit. Dosis, a guttis duabus ad sex, plusve, in
Vehiculis appropriatis.

III. Oleum Cerae.
Cerae flavae libram unam, fluat in Patella terrea, tunc admisce Arenae
cribratae libras duas, ab Igne remove, and perpetua agitatione sinito
refrigerari: antequam autem induretur, formentur Globuli, dein injiciantur
Retortae vitreae, reponeque ad distillandum in Arena, Igni secundi and tertii
gradus, idque per horas duodecim. Sic primo prodibit Phlegma aquosa; secundo,
Oleum subtilius fluidum; tertio, Oleum butyrosum. Singula Olea seorsim excipi
queunt, si libitum fuerit. Recipe Oleum hoc butyrosum, quantitatemque Arenae,
ut satis est; misce; idque per Cucurbitam vitream ex Balneo Mariae rectifica,
Igne lento, and exit Oleum liquidum, clarum, aurei coloris Phlegmati suo
innatans, Art ab eo separandum. Ex Cerae libra una, uncias duodecim Olei
extrahes.

Liquidum intra Corpus sumitur ad guttas sex, plusve; ad Consolidationem
partium Ruptarum, Dysenteriam, etc. Resolvit, attenuat, penetrat, emollit,
discutit; ac propterea utile est Apostematibus duris, and Tumoribus frigidis.
Sanat Fissuras Papillarum in Mammis Mulierum, and Doloresearum mitigat. Vulnera
eliam recentia consolidat, si ea bis de die inungas. Confert and in Ambustis,
Cicatrizans est summum, citissime Vlcera Carne replet. Interne, Colicos dolores
sedat, Flatus discutit, attenuat, incidit. Pro insigno habetur Diuretico, est
enim partium subtilium, and valde penetrans. Butyraceum externe tantum
usurpatur, ad Defluxiones Brachiorum, Crurium, Nodos, Paralysin, Arthritidem,
etc. calide eo partem inungendo. Vim habet anodynam, and emollientiam; unde
Tumoribus inservit leniendis.

IV. Oleum Baccarum Juniperi.
Baccarum Juniperi grosso modo quassatarum libras december, Salis communis uncias
december, Spiritus Salis cum Oleo Vitrioli praeparati uncias quinque, Aquae
pluvialis libras bis-centum; indantur in Vesicam, and digerantur simul per
december, plusve dies: dein distillentur in Alembico serpentino Stanneis, aut cum
Igne aperto, vel Arena; sed leni primo, and tamen ad ebullitionem materiae ad
mediam partem. Oleum distillatum ab Aqua separa per Tritorium; Aquam faecibus
denuo reaffunde, distilla iterum; sic denuo Olei copia prodit, quod ut ante
separa: cohobatur Aqua tertio, semper ad medietatem distillando, ut supra.

Calefacit, emollit, discutit, aperit, mundificat, and consolidat; Cardiacum,
Neuroticum, and Nephriticum est, depurans massam Sanguineam, eamque a
corruptione praeservans. A^que exterius loco very Balsami usurpari potest, in
omnibus Vlceribus cacoetheis, insanabilibus, foetidis, Fracturis, Contracturis,
membris Refrigeratis, Paralyticis, and Convulsivis. Nephriticis doloribus
summopere convenit: Vrinam and Menses movet: Obstructiones per universam
Sanguinem tollit: Colico dolori medetur: Arenas and Calculos pellit. Dosis, a
guttis tribus ad december.

V. Oleum Limonum and Aurantiarum.
Fiunt per distillationem ex Aurantiis and Limonibus putrescentibus, cum magna
Aquae quantitate, in Vesica aenea, cum Alembico and Refrigeratorio serpentino,
secundum Artem.

Vires easdem habent cum Oleo Rosmarini and Lavendulae, atque Stomaohicum sunt,
and Flatus discutiunt, Sudores movent and Menses, attenuant and incidunt;
diureticum sunt, acre, and valde penetrantes; sunt enim partium subtilium and
penetrantium. Valent ad Convulsiones Nervorum, and alios ejusdem Affectus.
Dosis, a guttis tribus ad december.

VI. Oleum Macis per Expressionem.
Macis, vel Nucum Moschatarum quantum vis, contunde crasse, easque ita contusas
illiga arcte Panno lineo, eumque in Vase vitreato appende; quod demittatur, seu
demergatur in Ahenum ferventis Aquae, unde percalesiat Aroma; deinde Praelo
subjectum fortiter exprime: nam hoc pacto copiosius emanat Oleum. Quidam Macem,
vel Nucem Moschatam crassum in Pulverem redigunt, and Aqua Vitae aspergunt, diu
Balneo in longo Vase coquunt; setaceo excepta, Laminis calidis exprimunt.

Valet in Stranguria, and quicunque a Frigiditate ortum habuerint, Morbis.
Calidae est facultatis, ideoque commodus ejus usus est in Colica a causa
frigida, and Catarrho in Capite descendente: confortat Cor, Ventriculum, and
Matricem; in Tremoribus Cordis, ex timore, aut ex Vesicae obstructione, aut
Matricae, maximum auxilium praestat. Extrinsecus, Lentis aut Pisae instar Ori
Ventriculi inunctum, mirifice ipsum corroborat; deglutitum mediocriter
calefacit, and Anhelitum commendat, illitum Veneris tentiginem excitat;
Stomachicis quoque frigida and humida intemperie laborantibus conducit. Dosis,
a scrupla semis ad scruplam unam, vel semidrachmam. Haec Olea dico, in genere,
esse, and substantiis suis, ad persanandas Dysenterias, Lienterias, and
Diarrhoeas, spectando qualitates roborantes, confortantes, and astringentes,
plus praestare, quam elicita per Aquam: His Oleis si debit am quantitatem Aquae
affuderis, and distillaveris, vix quartam, ne dicam sextam partem Olei
distillati colliges, residuo in fundo remanente: quod residuum, puta Oleum,
virtute sua adstringente and consistentia priori magis solidum, multo
efficacius experimur in Dysenteria, quam illud quod cum Aqua exstillarat. Haee
Olea insuper ob soliditatem, Basis sunt pro conficiendis omnis generis
Balsamis, lege Artis distillatis, Oleis essentialibus pro specie Balsami
dispensandi: cumque his Balsama debitam recipient Consistentiam, nec rancida
aut unctuosa evadunt; sed intra Corpus commode, and citra nauseam assumi
possunt.

VII. Oleum Philosophicum.
Nitri purissimi uncias duas, inde in Crucibulo, quod repone in Ignem
circularem, donec fluxerit instar Aquae; tum successive injice frustulum
Carbonis igniti, expectando, donec hoc sit consumptum, fietque magna
effervescentia and strepitus; quo cessante, iterum injice frustulum simile, and
sic continua, donec, non amplius fluat Nitrum, sed incrassatum, nec amplius
accendatur; sed exiccatum color viridi remaneat, quod fit spatio semihorae.
Haec massa durissima, sicca, and virescente, recte erit Nitrum fixatum and
alcalisatum. Recipe Nitrum hoc fixatum, solvatur in quantitate Aquae ferventis,
solutum filtretur, colatura evaporetur in Vitro evaporatorio ad siccitatem
usque; and relinquetur in fundo Sal acerrimum, scilicet Nitrum fixatum
depuratum: Hoc Sal in Orb vitreo, aut terreo vitreato, reponatur in locum
frigidum and humidum, ut in Cellam, and relinquatur tamdiu, donce per deliquium
solutum fuerit in liquorem limpidum: hic decantetur, and servetur ad usum; est
enim Liquor Nitri sixi, sive Alcahest Glauberi.

Hic Liquor est Menstruum universale, commune solvens, and celeberrimum
Alcalinum, in omnibus tribus solvendis Regnis, Vegetabili, Animali, and
Minerali: immediate regno Vegetabili and Animali, mediate vero regno Minerali;
ubi nempe Mineralia prius a Menstruo acido in calcem sunt redacta. Imprimis
tamen Vegetabilia resolvit, atque ita aperit, ut postea commode, beneficio
Alcohol Vini, genuina Tinctura elici queat. Nempe, cum omnia Sulphura
concreverint beneficio Acidi, Alcahest hoc, quod naturae alcalinae est,
destruendo Acidum parts sulphureas recludit, atque ita vinculum eorum
infringit, ut parts integrae separari possint, aliis instrumentis.
Superfunditur rebus contusis vel conquassatis, Gummique pulverizatis, ut Pulvis
been madefiat, digeriturque per diem and noctem, Vase aperto, ad siccitatem
usque: tum super affunditur Alcohol Vini, ad aliquot digitorum transversorum
supereminentiam. Fiat iterum digestio lenis per horas duas; sic Alcohol
particulas resoluti corporis in se recipit, and nobis novas rerum Tincturas and
Essentias offert. Tum sensim effunditur Tinctura: fitque iterum digestio super
Magmatem per diem and noctem unam: atque iterum Alcohol Vini novum affunditur,
and proceditur sicut antea, donec tota Tinctura sit exhausta, and Alcohol Vini
non amplius tingitur. Aclahest recuperare. Magmati affundatur Aqua pura,
digeratur per noctem, postea filtretur per Chartam, tumque evaporetur ad
siccitatem usque: relictumque Alcahest reverberetur, reverberatum solvatur Aqua
pura, filtreturque per Chartam, and evaporetur ad siccitatem: hocque iterum
solvatur per deliquium, sic recuperabitur Alcahest, eritque incorruptibile.

VIII. Oleum Rosmarini compositum.
Fit per distillationem ex Rosmarini partibus tribus; Lavendulae, Salviae,
Pulegii, ana, part una, cum magna Aquae quantitate, in Vesica aenea, cum
Refrigeratorio suo serpentino, secundum Artem; sic habebis Aqua and Oleum, quod
separa: cohobatur Aqua super Rosmarinum novum, distilletur, and separetur
Oleum: iterum super Rosmarinum novum, etc. cohobatur Aqua, distillaque ut
supra, semper ad medietatem; sic omne Oleum prodit, quod ab Aqua separetur, and
reservetur ad usum.

Hoc Oleum penetrantissimum est and volatile; potenter resolvit, penetrat,
aperit, and dissipat; unde infinitis Morbis, ut Pesti, Apoplexiae, Epilepsiae,
Lethargo, Scorbuto frigida ex causa, Colicae, Hemicranio, Cephalaeae,
Vertigini, Paralysi, Convulsionibus, Arthritidi, and aliis Morbis Neuroticis
medetur. Lenit dolores Podagricos ab Humoribus frigidis exortos. Bezoardicum
and Sudorificum est, Putredini resistit, habeturque pro magnorum Morborum
remedio. Dosis, a guttis duabus ad sex vel septem.

IX. Oleum Succini.
Fragmentorum Succini quantum vis, imponantur Retortae terreae, and
distillentur per Arenam, sensim augendo Ignem, ad quartum usque gradum: sic
prodit primo Phlegma, seu Spiritus Succini; secundo, Oleum flavum; tertio, Sal
volatile; quarto, Palsamum crassum. Spiritus and Oleum Infundibulo separentur.
Spiritus acidus per se rectificatur; at Oleum cum Cineribus clavellatis, vel
Sale communi. Rectificari potest etiam, super propriam Caput mortuum optime
calcinatum: sic triplex prodit Oleum; primo, aloum; secundo, flavum; tertio,
rubrum: singula seorsim excipiantur, Recipiente mutato.

Oleum Flavum (dixit Beguinus) Sacrum olim appellatum fuit, ob^aires ejus
eximias, quas cum per se, tum aliis mixtum praestat; ut in Epilepsia,
Apoplexia, Melancholia, Spasmo, Vertigine, Paralysi, Peste, Calculo,
Defluxionibus Capitis frigidis, Cordis palpitationibus, Animi deliquiis,
Ietero, difficultati Respirandi, Dysuriis, Partu difficili, Vteri
strangulationibus, Mensium retentionibus, fluore Matricis albo, Vermibus, etc.
Sudores movet and Menstrua, calefacit and siccat, Vrinas pellit, Gonorrhoeam
curat, and Specificum est in Lethargo, Naribus and Temporibus inunctum. Hoc tam
internis quam externis usihus dicatum est. Externe Arthritidae vagae,
Paralytici, Apoplectici, and omnibus affectibus fri^idis succurrit, si membra
eo inungantur, addita sequenti mixtura. Olei Succini drachmas quatuor,
Tincturae Castorei drachmas tres, Camphorae drachmam unam and semis: misce.
Olei Dosis, a guttis duabus ad sedecim, and viginti. Salis volatilis, a granis
quatuor ad quindecim; at potentiores vires habet.

X. Oleum Sulphuris.
Campanam vitream idoneam, in superiori part perforatam (priusque madefactam
Aqua pura;) accipe etiam Sulphuris vivi quantum vis, liquefiat in Olla terrea
vitreata; liquefactum incendatur Pruna candente, vel Ferro ignito, and Campanae
ipsi supponatur. Sulphur deflagrans aliquoties Bacillo moveatur, ne in
superficie crustam acquirat, quae flammam suffocaret. Sulphuri deficienti
Sulphur recens infundatur liquefactum; and quo magis lata Ollae superficies
est, eo melius operatio procedet. Haec operatio tamdiu continuetur, donec
quantitate Spiritum, five Oleum nactus fueris. In summitate vero Campanae
haeret Pulvisculus levissimus, qui dicitur Flos Sulphuris. Facta est operatio
cum Spiritu Nitri, vel Sale Nitri: qui processus videatur apud Schroderum.

Vires easdcm cum Oleo Vitrioli possidet, nisi quod hoc non tam adstringens
sit, and gratius etiam gustui. Ego etiam puto ommes Spiritus acidos in Mundo
esse Spiritum Vitrioli, sed aliter modificatum; atque magis, Spiritus
Sulphuris, propterea in se Sulphuris magnam continet quantitatem Vitriolum.
Prodest in Febribus ardentibus, Sitim extinguit, Humorum putredini resistit,
crassos and viscidos incidit, effervescentiam Sanguinis mitigat. Insuper
Pulmonis and Thoracis affectibus convenit, Putrefactionem arcet, Vermes necat,
Sudorem and Vrinam movet; Angini, Pleuritidi, Colicae, Tussi, Pesti, Morbisque
contagiosis medetur. Statum Naturalem optime conservat. Dicitur Helmontio
facere ad longam Vitam, conservari Fermentum Ventriculi, Sanguinem depurare,
and reddere incorruptibilem. Dosis, ad guttas viginti, plus-minus, in Vehiculo
appropriato.

XI. Oleum Tartari per deliquium.
Oleum hoc fit per Deliquium, ponendo Tartarum ad albedinem calcinatum in Cella
vel alio loco humido, donec resolvatur in Oleum, quod postea filtrandum. Parari
etiam potest, si Sal Tartari in Aqua dissolvatur and filtretur.

Potenter resolvit, attenuat, aperit; Vrinam and Calculum optime pellit, Menses
ciet, Acidum in Corpore Humano mortificat and destruit, Alvum laxat. Optimum
est remedium in omnibus Serpiginibus, Vlceribus, Tinea, Scabie, Verrucis, etc.
praecipue si mixtum cum Floribus Sulphuris and quantitate Cinnabaris
proportionali. Vim habet diaphoreticam, sive sudorificam; unde usus in Febribus
malignis, Peste, morbis Vteri and Renum, Melancholicis, etc. Massam depurat
Sanguineam, eamque a corruptione praeservat, reseratque Obstructiones internas;
conducitque Scorbuto, Epilepsiae, Apoplexiae, Scrophulae, aliisque sexcentis
Morbis ab Acido oriundis. Dosis, a dram una ad duas, plus minusve.

XII. Oleum Terebinthinae.
Terebinthinae communis quantum vis, vel libras duas; distilla illam ex
Cucurbita vitrea humiliori, in Arena, donec incipiat strepere, tum desiste, and
Liquorem duplicem in Recipiente contentum serva ad usum: qui in fundo haeret,
est Spiritus acidus vel Phlegma; qui vero huic innatat, Oleum Terebinthinae
album dicitur. Vel sic: Terebinthinae quantum vis, deinde in Vesicam aeneam,
cum Refrigeratorio, Aqua propemodum repletam: distilla; sic elicitur Spiritus,
qui Aqua innatabit, and per Balneam Mariae rectificari poterit, aut repetitis
distillationibus, instar Spiritus Vini exaltari: ex libris tribus Terebinthinae
accipies uncias octo. Vel. sic: Terebinthinae quantum vis, distilla eam per se,
lenissimo Balnei vapore, obstructis probe omnibus foraminibus: exsudabit Oleum,
seu Spiritus long subtilissimus, utpote qui in manu exhaltare possit. Ex una
libra Terebinthinae vix unciam unam accipies. Reliquum auctiori Igne
distillatur ad usus vulgares.

Eximium Remedium in Gonorrhaea, insigneque Diureticum est. Tussim and Phthisin
curat, Venenis pestilentialibus resistit, Vrinam provocat, Calculum and Arenas
pellit, Stranguriam, and Vlcera Vesicae sanat; Nerv^sas parts aperit and
confortat. Sanguinem coagulatum dissolvit, Vterum purificat, ac propterea
suffocationi Matricis valde utilis est. Extrinsecus in Paralysi, Doloribus a
causa frigida, Convulsionibus Nervorum, and Contusionibus maximus ejus usus,
and Balsami very vires aemulatur. Dosis, a guttis octo ad viginti.

XIII. Oleum and Spiritus Vitrioli.
Vitrioli Hungarici vel Anglici libras quinque, imponatur Ollae in medio Igne
ad calcinandum; viz. donec omnis humiditas abscedat, and Olla inferius pene
candefacta est, Vitriolumque vapores fere nullos amplius emittit, sed flavi
apparebit coloris, vel ad albedinem. Vase vel Olla refrigerato, fractaque,
eximatur Vitriolum, (quod erit tres circiter librae) and pulverizetur:
pulverizatum deinde Retortae imponatur, huic operationi convenienti, apposito
magno Recipiente, quo majus, co melius, lutatis optime juncturis; and Igne
nudo, primo leni, donec vapores albi appareant; ita enim exudat portio
Phlegmatica cum Spiritu volatiii Vitrioli. Ignem successive auge, quousque
Retorta probe candere incipiat: sic enim transit Spiritus Vitrioli acidus.
Tandem Ignem urge ad summam violentiam, and incandescentiam usque; sic enim
transibit in Vas recipiens Oleum Vitrioli rubicundum, corrosivumque valde.
Ignem vero per horas viginti quataor isto tenore fove ad ultimam Liquoris
egressionem, (dicitur autem singula Vitrioli libra, horam tantum unam
requiret:) and obtinebis, si been operatum fuerit, libra Olei una, vel plus,
valdeque fortis, secundum Vitrioli bonitatem; quod in usum repone. Omnibus
refrigeratis, quodeunque distillatum est, in Cucurbitam altam, vel Phialam
longioris colli conjice, and Igne lenissimo, Spiritum volatilem Vitrioli
collige; reliquum Retortae vitreae committatur, and Phlegma mediocri Igne
auferatur; quod subsequitur, Spiritus Vitrioli acidus: remanente in fundo Oleo
Vitrioli acerrimo, valdeque ponderoso.

Spiritus volatilis and sulphureus Vitrioli, Epilepsiae, Apoplexiae, Paralysi,
and omnibus subitaneis Affectibus medetur, qui ex Spirituum suffocatione
proveniunt. Refrigerat, adstringit, Phlegma tenacium incidit, Appetitum
prostratum instaurat, obstructiones Mensium and Mesenterii faeliciter resolvit,
praecipue si hoc Menstruo, Elixir Proprietatis elaboratum fuerit. Stomachum
roborat, valet ad extinguendos Ardores febriles, and summum est Aperiens, si
cum Julapiis, Claretis, similibusque Vehiculis frequenter exhibetur. Dosis, ad
gutras quindecim, plusminusve.

Oleum virtutes easdem habet, Sitim extinguit, Humorum putredini resistit, and
per Vrinas and Poros cutaneos operatur; Phlegma consumit, crassos and viscosos
Humores incidit, languentem Appetitum excitat. Inservit etiam parando Sulphuri
narcotico Vitrioli, and etiam distillando Spiritui Salis Glauberiano, and
elaborandis Chymicorum multis Arcanis; fixat omnia Volatilia, Sulphura
Mineralium and Metallorum extrahit, omnia Salia volatilia retinet, and a faga
cohibet; Metallaque corrodit. Aperit, and Putredini resistit, Febres extinguit,
Vomitum extergit, omnibusque Morbis calidis, Febribus malignis and contagiosis,
Pesti, and Affectibus pestilentialibus medetur. Causticum est, and
Catheraeticum insigne in Vlceribus; quia momento Putrefactionem destruit.
Dosis, a guttis duabus ad sex, vel december, plus-minus, in Vehiculo adapto.

CHAP. LX. Of OILS Distilled.
I. Oil of Aniseeds.
ANiseeds, which bruise, lbx. fair Water lblxxx. common Salt lbj. Potashes
lbss. digest in a warm place for nine days; and then distill in a copper Vesica
with its Worm; after which separate the Oil from the Water.

It strengthens the Bowels in the Colic, discusses Wind, and is prevalent
against the Stone, or pain in the Reins. Dose, in some proper Vehicle, ad gut.
vj. Outwardly, it is an excellent Anodyn; anoint with it in the Gout of the
Hands and Feet, proceeding from a cold cause, and in all other Pains arising
from the same reason; in Cramps, Convulsions, and Palsies, it is of great use.
You may use it either by it self, or in this Mixture. Oil of Aniseeds, gut.
xxx. Oil of Ben, gut. xlv. mix them.

2. Oil of Cloves.
Cloves grossly bruised lbij. fair Water lbxx. Potashes ij. put them into an
earthen Vessel, and digest by Infusion for seven days; then put them into a
Vesica, and distill with a Worm; so will you have iv. of Oil. Or, you may distill
in a glass Retort in Sand, with a gentle Fire; but so that the Matters may
boil, drawing off one half part. Separate the Oil from the Water. Cohobate the
Water upon the Faeces, and distill as before; so will much Oil come forth: again
cohobate the third time, and distill as before; always drawing off the one half
by which means you will obtain all the Oil, an unprofitable Caput mortuum only
remaining behind.

It is good against cold Diseases of the Stomach, and Weakness of the Liver,
Heart, Brain, and Bowels, arising from a cold cause; it dissipates Melancholy,
and purifies gross Humors. It sharpens the Memory, and is good against
Swooning-sits, but principally against the Apoplexy, Palsy, and Lethargy. It
is a most famous Stomatick, comforts the Heart, and discusses Wind. Dose, a
gut. ij, ad vj. or more, in some fit Vehicle.

3. Oil of Wax.
Yellow Wax lbj. melt it in an earthen Pan, then mix with it sifted Sand lbij.
remove it from the Fire, and stir it continually till it is cold: but before it
is grown hard, make it up into little Balls, which put into a glass Retort, and
distill in Sand with a Fire of the second and third degree, and that for the
space of twelve hours: So will you have, first, a watery Phlegm; secondly, a
fluid subtle Oil; thirdly, a butter-like Oil. The Oils may be taken each by
themselves, if you so please. Take the butter-like Oil, and a sufficient
quantity of Sand; mix them; and then rectify by a glass Cucurbit in B.M. with
a gentle Fire; so will the Oil come forth liquid, clear, and of a golden
color. Separate it from its Phlegm according to Art. Thus will you have from
lbj. of Wax, about xij. of Oil.

The liquid Oil is taken inwardly, to vj. drops, or more; for the healing of
Carnosities, Ruptures of the Vessels, Bloody-fluxes, etc. It resolves,
attenuates, penetrates, softens, and discusses; and therefore is of good use in
hard Apostems and cold Tumors. It heals Fissures or Chaps in the Nipples of
Women's Breasts, and eases their Pain. It heals also green Wounds, if they be
anointed with it twice a day. It is good against Burnings, and is the principal
of all Cicatrizers; and quickly fills Ulcers with Flesh. Inwardly, it eases the
pain of the Colic, discusses Wind, attenuates, and incides. It is a famous
Diuretic; for it consists of subtle parts, and is very penetrating. The
butter-like Oil is only for external use, and is good against Defluxions of
Humors upon the Arms and Legs, Nodes, Palsies, Gouts, etc. being anointed warm
upon the Part. It has an anodyn and emollient virtue and power, for which
reason, it is of good use to soften hard Tumors.

4. Oil of Juniper Berries.
Juniper Berries grossly bruised lbx. common Salt x. Spirit of Salt made with
Oil of Vitriol v. Rainwater xxv gallons: put all into a copper Vesica or Body,
and digest for ten days or more; then distill in an Alembick with its pewter
Worm, either with a naked Fire, or Sandheat; which at first let be very gentle,
but afterward augment the Fire to a boiling heat, distilling off the one half;
separate the Oil from the Water by a Separatingvessel: the Water cohobate again
upon the faeces, and distill again; so will you have more Oil, which separate as
before; and again repeat this work the third time as before; always distilling
till the one half of the Liquor is drawn off.

It warms, softens, discusses, opens, cleanses, and heals; is Cordial,
Neurotick, and Nephritick, purifying the mass of Blood, and preserving it from
corruption. And outwardly it may be used in place of the true Balsam, in all
foetid and malign Ulcers, and such as are difficult to cure, in Fractures,
Contractures, Benumbed members, Palsies, and Convulsions. It is profitable in
Nephritick pains after an admirable manner: it provokes Urine and the Terms:
removes Obstructions through the whole mass of Blood: cures the Colic: and
expels Gravel and Stone. Dose, a gutt. iij, ad x.

5. Oil of Limons and Oranges.
They are made by distillation, from Oranges and Limons putrified, adding a
great quantity of Water, in a copper Vesica, with its Alembick and Worm,
according to Art.

They have the same virtues with Oil of Rosemary and Lavender, are Stomatick,
and discuss Wind, provoke Sweat and the Terms, attenuate and incide: they are
diuretic, pungent, and very penetrating; because they are of subtle and
penetrating parts. They are good against Convulsions of the Nerves, and other
Affects of the same. Dose is, a gut. iij, ad x.

6. Oil of Mace by Expression.
Mace or Nutmegs, as much as you please, bruise them grossly, and tie them up
firmly in a linen Cloth; hanging it in a glazed Vessel, which let down, or sink
into a copper Vessel of boiling Water, whereby the Spice may be made thoroughly
hot; then putting the matter into a Press, and pressing strongly out, you will
have a good quantity of Oil. Some reduce the Mace or Nutmegs into a gross
Powder, which they sprinkle with Aqua Vitae, then boil them in a long Vessel in
Balneo, for a good while; after which they take them forth, and whilst hot,
press forth the Oil in a Press, between hot Plates full of holes.

It is good against the Strangury, and all Diseases which arise from Cold. It
is of a hot nature, and therefore is of good use in the Colic from a cold
cause, as also in a Catarrh falling from the Head: it comforts the Heart,
Stomach, and Womb; and gives great relief in a Palpitation or Trembling of the
Heart, coming from fear, or from obstructions of the Bladder or Womb.
Outwardly, the quantity of a Lentil or Pease, being anointed upon the Mouth of
the Stomach, wonderfully strengthens it; and inwardly taken, it warms, and is
good against shortness of Breath; anointed on the Yard, it stimulates Venus, or
excites Lust; it is good for a Stomach afflicted with cold and moist Humors.
Dose, a ss. ad j. or ss. These Oils, considering their strengthening,
confortative, and astringent qualities according to their kind, are in their
own substances more powerful, than those which are drawn with Water by
Distillation, for the cure of the Dysentery, Lientery, and Diarrhoea. If to
these Oils, a fit quantity of Water is put, and then they be distilled, you
will scarcely get a quarter part (I say not a sixth part) of the distilled Oil,
the rest remaining in the bottom: which residence, to wit, of Oil, being of a
more astringent virtue, and more solid consistence than the former, we have
found experimentally to be more efficacious in the Bloody Flux, than that which
is distilled with Water. Moreover, these Oils made by Expression, by reason of
their solid consistency, are the Basis, for making all sorts of Balsams; by
dispensing Essential distilled Oils, (by the Rule of Art) according to the
species or kind of the Balsam. And by the mixture of these Oils, Balsams obtain
their just Consistency, and neither grow rank or greasy; but may be given
inwardly into the Body, with pleasure, and without the least nauseousness.

7. The Philosophic Oil.
Fine Nitre ij. put it into a Crucible, which place in a circulary Fire, 'till
it runs thin like Water; then successively cast in live pieces of Charcoal,
which will make a great effervescency and noise, which ceasing, put in more
pieces of Charcoal in like manner, and so continue 'till it will flow no more,
but grow thick and fixed, and ceases to be kindled, and being hardened becomes
of a greenish color; which will be done in about half an hours time. This hard
mass, dry, and of a greenish color, is truly a fixed and alcalizate Nitre.
Take this fixed Nitre, dissolve it in a sufficient quantity of boiling Water,
filter the solution, which evaporate away in a proper glass Vessel to dryness;
and in the bottom you will have a very sharp Salt, to wit, a depurated fixed
Nitre: Put this Salt into a glass Vessel, or an earthen one glazed; set it in a
cold and moist place, as a Cellar, leaving it so long there, 'till it melts and
runs into a thin clear liquor: this decant, and keep for use, as the Liquor of
fixed Nitre, or Glauber 's Alcahest.

This Liquor is an universal Menstruum, a common dissolvent, and most
celebrated Alcali, in dissolving all things in the Vegetable, Animal, and
Mineral Kingdoms: immediately, in the Vegetable and Animal kingdom, but
mediately in the Mineral; where namely in the Mineral the matter is first through
the help of an acid Menstruum reduced to a calx. First then, it resolves, and
so opens Vegetables, as afterward with ease, the genuine Tinctures may be
drawn forth by the help of the Alcohol of Wine, which is of an alcaline nature,
and destroys the Acid which shuts up the sulphurous parts; and so breaks its
chains, as to make a perfect separation of the parts, without any other help.
It is put upon things bruised, and Gums poudred, so as to make them through
moist, and digested for 24 hours in an open Vessel, even to dryness; upon which
is affused the Alcohol of S.V. so much as to overtop it some inches: make again
a gentle digestion for 2 hours: so will the S.V. extract into it self the
particles of the dissolved body, and give us a new Tincture and Essence of the
matter. Then gently pour off the Tincture, and make another digestion upon the
faeces for 24 hours: decant, and affuse new S.V. and digest again as before,
'till all the Tincture is drawn forth, and the Alcohol of the Wine will be no
longer tinged. To restore, or recover the Alcahest. To the magma or faeces put
fair Water, digest for a night, filter through brown Paper, and evaporate to
dryness: the Salt remaining, reverberate, and dissolve again in fair Water;
filter again through Paper, and evaporate to dryness, as before; and then let it
dissolve per deliquium, so will the Alcahest be recovered or restored, and be
incorruptible.

8. Oil of Rosemary compound.
It is made by distillation, from fresh Rosemary three parts; Lavender, Sage,
Peniroyal, ana one part; with a sufficient quantity of fair Water, in a copper
Still or Alembick, with its Refrigeratory and Worm, according to Art; so have
you Water and Oil, which separate: cohobate the Water upon new Rosemary, etc.
distill, and separate the Oil; and again cohobate the same Water upon other
fresh Rosemary, distilling as before; (always to the one half) so will all the
Oil come forth; which separate, and keep for use.

This is a very penetrating and volatile Oil; it powerfully resolves,
penetrates, opens, and dissipates; by which means, almost infinite Diseases are
cured; as the Plague, Apoplexy, Epilepsy, Lethargy, Scurvy from a cold cause,
Colic, Megrim, old Headache, Vertigo, Palsy, Convulsions, Gouts, and other
Diseases of the Nerves: it eases Gout-pains, arising from cold Humors. It
resists Putrefaction and Poison, and is Sudorifick, and is truly a remedy, even
for great Diseases. Dose, a gut. ij, ad vj. vel vij.

9. Oil of Amber.
Pieces of Amber, as much as you please, put them into an earthen Retort, and
distill in Sand, leisurely leisurely augmenting the Fire, even to the fourth
degree: so will you have first a Phlegm, or Spirit of Amber; then, a yellow
Oil; after that, a volatile Salt; and lastly, a thick Balsam. Let the Spirit and
Oil be separated with a Funnel. Rectify, the acid Spirit by it self, but the
Oil with Potashes or common Salt. It may also be rectified upon its own proper
Caput mortuum, being first well calcined: so will you have, first, a white Oil;
then, a yellow; lastly, a red: which take apart, by changing the Receiver, and
keep by themselves.

This Yellow Oil, says Beguinus, was accounted of old as a thing Sacred,
because of its extraordinary virtues (whether given by it self, or mixed with
other things) in the cure of the Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, Melancholy,
Convulsions, Vertigo, Palsy, Plague, Stone, cold Catarrhs, palpitation of the
Heart, Swooning, Jaundies, difficulty of Breathing, Dysury, hard Labor,
Hysterick-fits, stoppage of the Courses, Whites, killing Worms, etc. It
provokes Sweat and the Terms, heats and drys, expels Urine, cures a Gonorrhoea,
and is a Specific in the Lethargy, being anointed upon the Nostrils and
Temples. And is used both internally and externally. Outwardly it is good
against the running Gout, the Palsy, Apoplexy, and all affects from a cold
cause, if the parts affected be anointed therewith thus commixed: Oil of Amber
iv. Tincture of Castor iij. Camphir j ss. mix them. The Oil is given a gut. ij,
ad xvj. and xx. The volatile Salt a gr. iv, ad xv. having the same virtues, but
more powerful than the Oil.

10. Oil of Sulphur.
A Glass-Bell, of a fit shape and bigness, having a hole or passage quite
through the upper parts moisten it beforehand with fair Water; then take
Sulphur vive q.v. melt it in a glazed earthen Pot or Pan; then set it on fire
with a live Charcoal, or a redhot Iron, putting it directly under the Bell: the
deflagrating Sulphur often stir about with an iron Rod, lest it gets a crusty
substance on its top, which may put out the flame. The matter being consumed,
put on more melted Sulphur; the broader the mouth of the Pan, the better will
the operation be done; which is so long to be continued, till you have gorten a
sufficient quantity of Spirit or Oil. In the top of the Bell you will have a
very light Powder, which is called Flos Sulphuris, The operation is sometimes
done with Spirit of Nitre, or Sal-Nitre; the process whereof you may see in
Schroder.

It has the same virtues with Oil of Vitriol, saving that this is not full out
so adstringent, and of a more grateful taste. But truly I think all acid
Spirits in the World to be Spirit of Vitriol, but after a different manner; or
rather a Spirit of Sulphur, because Vitriol contains in it self a great
quantity of Sulphur. It is good in burning Fevers, quenches Thirst, resists
Putrefaction, cuts thick and viscous Humors, and allays the boiling or
effervescency of the Blood. It is of excellent use in affects of the Breast and
Lungs, taking away the putrid matter; it kills Worms, and provokes Sweat and
Urine. It cures the Quinsy, Pleurisy, Colic, Cough, Plague, and other
contagious Diseases. It conserves the Natural state of the Body; and is
accounted by Helmont to be good for the prolongation of Life, to uphold the
Ferment of the Stomach, to purify the Blood, and make it incorruptible. Dose,
ad gut. xx. more or less, in a proper Vehicle.

11. Oil of Tartar, made by melting or dripping.
This Oil is made by melting or dripping, putting the Tartar (calcined to
whiteness) into a Cellar, or other moist place, till it resolves it self into
an Oil, which is afterward to be filtrated. It is also made by dissolving Salt
of Tartar in Water, and then filtring that Water.

It powerfully resolves, attenuates and opens, and admirably brings forth both
Urine and Stone, provokes the Terms, absorbs and overturns the Acid in Man's
Body, and loosens the Bowels. It is a most excellent Remedy against Ring-worms,
Ulcers, Scald-heads, Scabs, Warts, etc. especially if it be mixed with Flowers
of Sulphur, and a proportional quantity of Cinnabar. It causes Sweat, for which
reason it is of use in malign Fevers, the Plague, Diseases of the Womb and
Reins, Melancholy, etc. It purifies the Mass of Blood, and preserves it from
corruption, opens internal Obstructions, and prevails against the Scurvy,
Fallingsickness, Apoplexy, King's Evil, and multitudes of other Diseases arising
from acid Humors. Dose, a j, ad ij. more or less, as reason requires.

12. Oil of Turpentine.
Common Turpentine, q.v. or lbij. distill it from a low glass Cucurbit in Sand,
till it begins to make a noise, then cease; so will you have a twofold Liquor
in the Recipient, which keep for use: what falls to the bottom, is the acid
Spirit, or Phlegm; but that which swims, is said to be the white Oil of
Turpentine. Or thus: Turpentine q.v. put it into a copper Vesica, with its
Refrigeratory, nearly filled with Water: distill; so will you have a Spirit,
which will swim on the Water, and may be rectified in B.M. or by repeating the
distillation, will be subtiliz'd like S.V. from lbiij. of Turpentine, you will
have viij. Or thus: Turpentine q.v. distill it per se, with the gentle heat of a
vaporous Bath, luting well the joints: so will you have a Spirit or Oil, so
wonderfully subtle, that put in the palm of ones hand, it may fly away. From
lbj. of Turpentine, you will scarcely have j. of this Oil or Spirit. Distill the
remainder, by augmenting the Fire; so will you have the common Oil, for vulgar
uses.

It is a famous Remedy against a Gonorrhoea, and a singular Diuretic. It cures
the Cough and Phthisick, and resists pestisential Poison, provokes Urine, and
expels Stone and Gravel, helps the Strangury, and heals Ulcers the Bladder. It
opens Obstructions of the Nerves, and comforts them; dissolves coagulated
Blood, purifies the Womb, and for that reason is of great force in the cure of
Hysterick-fits. Outwardly, it is very powerful against the Palsy, Pains from a
cold cause, Bruises and Convulsions of the Nerves; and is not inferior in
virtues to true natural Balsam. Dose, a gut. viij, ad xx.

13. Oil and Spirit of Vitriol.
Hungarian or English Vitriol lbv. put it into a Pot in the middle of the Fire,
to be calcined; viz. so long till all its humidity is wasted, and the Pot below
is almost red-hot; the Vitriol in a manner sending forth no more vapers, but
appearing of a yellow color, or inclining to whiteness. The Vessel or Pot
being cooled, break it, and take forth the Vitriol, ( which will be about
lbiij.) and powder it; which then put into a Retort proper for this operation,
and fit thereto a large Receiver, which the larger it is, the better it is;
lute well the juncture, and distill with a naked Fire, first gently, till the
vapors appear white; for so a part of the Phlegm, with the volatile Spirit of
the Vitriol comes forth. Increase the Fire gradually, till the Retort begins to
be red-hot; and so will you have the acid Spirit of Vitriol. At length, augment
the Fire to the greatest degree, even to the highest red-hot heat; so will you
have in the Receiver a red Oil of Vitriol, and most vehemently corrosive. Keep
the Fire in this state or height for 24 hours, till all the liquor or moisture
is come forth, (but some say, that every pound of Vitriol requires but one
hour:) so will you have at length, if you have operated well, lbj. of Oil, or
something more, but exceeding strong, according to the goodness of the Vitriol;
which keep for use. The Fire being gone out, and every thing cooled, take that
which is distilled, and put it into a high Cucurbit, or a Bolt-head with a long
neck, and with a very gentle Fire draw forth the volatile Spirit of Vitriol;
what remains put into a Glass, or glazed Retort, and with a gentle Fire bring
forth the Phlegm; what follows after, is the acid Spirit of Vitriol: and there
will remain in the bottom, the most sharp and corrosive Oil of Vitriol, and
exceeding weighty.

The volatile Spirit of Vitriol, which is of a sulphurcous nature, is good for
the curing of the Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, Palsy, and all sudden or
unlookt-for Affects, which come from a suffocation of the Spirits. It cools and
astringes, and cuts tough Phlegm, restores a decayed Appetite, happily resolves
obstructions of the Womb and Mesentery; more especially, if an Elixir
Proprietatis be prepared with this Spirit as a Menstruum. It strengthens the
Stomach, quenches febrile Heats, and is one of the greatest Aperitives; if it
be frequently given with some proper Juleb, Claret, or other like Vehicle.
Dose, ad gut. xv. more or less.

The Oil has the same virtues; it quenches Thirst, resists the putrefaction of
Humors, and works by Urine and the Pores of the skin; it consumes Phlegm, cuts
tough and viscous Humors, and stirs up a weak Appetite. It is also of use in
preparing the narcotick Sulphur of Vitriol, and in distilling of Glauber's
Spirit of Salt, as also for the elaborating of many Chemical Arcanums; it fixes
all sorts of Volatils, extracts the Sulphurs of Minerals and Metals, fixes all
volatile Salts, keeping them from flying away; and corrodes Metals. It opens,
and resists Putrefaction, extinguishes Fevers, stops Vomiting, and cures all
hot Diseases, malign and contagious Fevers, the Plague, and pestilential
Distempers. It is caustic, and a notable Catheretick in Ulcers; because in a
moment it destroys the Putrefaction. Dose, a gut. ij, ad vj, aut x. more or
less, in some proper Vehicle.

CHAP. LXI. De BALSAMIS.
I. Balsamum Antimonii, Viri peritissimi D. Tho. Gardneri, Chirurgi Regii
Primarii.
ANtimonii mineralis, Tartari Rhenensis, Nitri crystallizati, ana parts
aequales, pulverizentur and miscentur; mixtura cochleatim indatur in Crucibulo
magno, vel in Olla ferrea; postea Igne fortissimo probe liquatur massa: dein in
Mortario calido immediate pulverizatur: Pulverem pone in vitri Cucurbito collo
longo, cui addatur Oleum Terebinthinae ad eminentiam trium vel quatuor
digitorum, and in Arena lento Igne digere, quousque Oleum summam contraxerit
rubedinem; Tinctura decanta, novum Oleum affunde ut prius; illudque continua
quousque Tincturae totum obtinuisti. Illas vero confundito, and ad medietatem,
vel Syrupi consistentiam evaporato, vel in Retorta per distillationem
abstrahatur.

Medicamentum est quod potenter per diuraesin educit Tartarum Sanguinis, and
efficaciter a Renibus Arenas and Calculos expellit. In Hydrope, Podagra,
Scrofula, obstructionibus Mensium, specifice exhibetur. Dosis, a scrupla semis
ad drachmam semis, plusminus, in Vehiculo appropriato. Externe in omnibus
Affectibus frigidis summopere convenit; Podagricis doloribus succurrit, si ad
drachmas duas Camphorae scruplus unus permisceatur, and loco affecto sub linteo
applicetur. Putredini and corruptioni potenter resistit; valetque in Vlceribus
malignis and inveteratis, in Paralysi and Gangrena, si linteamina in hoc
Balsamo madefacta, and madida imponuntur partibus affectis.

II. Balsamum Salis Tartari.
Salis Tartari siccissimi and purissimi unciam unam, Spiritus Aceti uncias
quatuor; misce, and distilla ex Arena per Retortam vitream ad siccitatem usque:
Liquor omnis quod prodibit, erit insipidus, Aquae instar, quia relinquetur in
fundo cum Sale Tartari omne Aceti acidum. Retorta and Furnace refrigeratis,
affunde iterum Spiritus Aceti uncias quatuor, iterumque distilla ad siecitatem
usque, and iterum prodibit Spiritus Aceti sub Aquae forma. Continua hanc
distillationem tamdiu, (semper affundendo novum Spiritum) donec tandem Spiritus
Aceti prodeat acidus, talis, qualis fuit affusus: tum e^im significatur Sal
Tartari sufficienti quantitate Aceti acidi impr^gnatum, atque saturacum.
Materiam hanc solve denuo cum Alcohol Vini, filtra per Chartam emporeticam, and
Alcohol Vini abstrahe ad siccitatem: sic relinquetur in fundo, massa pinguis
vel unctuosa, Butyri vel Balsami instar, and saepe repraesentans multa quasi
folia, unde forte nomen, Terra Tartari Foliata.

Est insigne Digestivum in Humoribus crassis attenuandis and incidendis.
Vtiliter Potiunculis purgantibus additur pro stimulo, and corrigente. Multis
inservit pro Menstruo universali, and Arcanorum Clave Chymicorum. Sumitur intra
Corpus a scruplam semis ad ad scruplam unam, in aliquo liquore, ad
obstructiones Viscerum.

III. Balsamum Camphorae.
Olei Seminum Anisi uncias quatuor, Camphorae uncias tres, Spermatis Ceti albi
unciam unam; misce, and stent in digestione septem dies; tunc coquantur simul
in Vase vitrea, leni Igne, donec ingredientiae perfectae dissolvantur; deinde
reponatur Balsamum ad usum.

Interne sumptum, Calculum pellit, Flatus discutit, Colicos dolores sedat;
partium enim est subtilium, and vim habet Anodynam, Obstructiones internas
reserat, and Sudorem ciet. Externe in omnibus Affectibus frigidis adhibetur, ut
in Haemicrania, dolores Capitis and Aurium, and in Ischiade, Arthritide vaga,
si pars affecta eo illinatur mane and vesperi. Vulnera recentia citissime
curat, si parva Cerae quantitate in formam Vnguenti reducatur.

IV. Balsamum Sulphuris Rulandi.
Florum Sulphuris uncias tres, Oleum Nucum Juglandi libram unam and semis, Vini
generosi uncias sex; digerantur simul in Aqua calida, saepius agitando
ingredientias, and postmodum coquantur simul ad solutionem Sulphuris: sic habes
Balsamum Diasulphuris Rulandi.

Vermes necat, and valet in Peste, and morbis Pulmonum, ut Tussi, Asthmate,
Phthisi, and Morbis malignis. Dosis, a gurtis december ad triginta. Externe
Anodynum est; convenit Vlceribus and Inflammationibus repellendis, Fi^ulis in
Ano, Haemorrhoidibus, Arthritidi, etc.

V. Balsamum Sulphuris commune.
Florum vel Lactis Sulphuris uncias duas, Olei Terebinthinae uncias octo;
coquantur simul in Vase vitrea in Arena, per horas circiter duas, (spatio octo
horarum dixit Beguinus) ut sanguineo rubicundo color tingatur Oleum, and
solvatur Flores Sulphuris. Vel sic: Flores Sulphuris uncias duas, Salis Tartari
unciam unam; pulverizentur optime seorsim, dein misce, and liquefiat in Olla
terrea vitreata, donec obscure rubri evadant coloris, Hepati similis, unde
Sulphuris Hepar dicitur; add Aquae communis unciam unam; coque Igne sat
vehementi ad consumptionem humiditatis, (quo nigrior appareat massa, eo melior)
tunc effunde, ut frigefieri queat; frigefacta pulveriza, huic superfunde Oleum
Terebinthinae uncias december, coquantur simul, etc. ut supra.

Pulmonicum and Thoracicum est; in Phthisi, Tussi, Asthmate, Ictero,
caeterisque Pulmonum Vitiis, summi usus: Vermes necat and pellit, and leniter
Alvum solvit. Dosis, a guttis tribus ad viginti. Hoc ad Vlcera maligna sananda
utilissimum est; siccat enim eximie sine morsu, and roborat. Anodynum est
insigne, maturativum ac digestivum in Vulneribus partium nervosarum. Tartar in
Vesica caeterisque partibus atterit; Penisque doloribus, excoriationi, and
Vrinae suppressae medetur. Auribus inditum, dolores earundem tollit. Tussim and
Catarrham inveteratam, Syrupo Meconii vel Glycyrrhizae assumptum, eliminat.

Eodemque modo Balsamum Sulphuris cum Oleis Anisi, Juniperi, Limonum,
Rosmarini, Succini, etc. factum est.

VI. Balsamum Saturni.
Saccharum Saturni unciam unam, Oleum Anisi, vel baccarum Jumperi, uncias tres;
misce, and stent in digestione per septem dies, donec Oleum rubicundissimo
color tingatur, and Saccharum totaliter solutum sit: ubi solutum, aliud
Saccharum add, quousque solvere nolit ulterius; deinde addantur Camphorae
drachmae quatuor, ut in eo solvatur.

Mira praestat in Podagra calida and Inflammationibus, and statim sedat omnem
dolorem in quacunque Corporis part, si linteolum eo madefactum superponatur.
Insuper medetur suffusionibus, and rubedini oculorum ab acri Catarrho exortis.
Convenit Vlceribus inveteratis, nec-non Tumoribus; unde egregii usus in
Chirurgia. Praestans est Remedium in inflammationibus Renum, and Contusionibus;
curat Vulnera, eademque ab accidenti praeservat, praecipue si addatur Camphora.
Succurrit etiam in Morphaeis, Cancro, and Fistulis, si in Fistulis guttula una
vel altera in cavitatem instillatur. Si Fistula oriatur in cantho Oculi, (post
exhibita mundificantia) statim gutta una vel altera infundatur; ita brevi
tempore carne replebis, and cicatricem obduces. In Cancro, and omnibus
Vlceribus phagedenicis, insuper mixtum cum Oleo Oli varum, and tritum,
(quousque desinant in Linimentum album) optimum est Medicamentum. Interius
exhiberi potest in omni vehementiori Haemorrhagia Vteri and Vulvae, in fluxu
Mensium nimio: itidem in Febribus ardentibus, Affectibus Renum and Vesicae; in
Gonorrhoea, ubi, ab acri Fermento Venereo eroditur ductus Vrinarius. Dosis, a
guttis quatuor ad octo, december, vel duodecim, plus-minus, in Aquis vel Jusculis
appropriatis.

VII. Balsamum Mirabile.
Olei Vitrioli vel Sulphuris rectificati, vel potius Spiritus Nitri perfect
dephlgmati unciam unam, Olei Olivarum vel Nucum de Ben uncias tres; misce, ac
digere pro usu.

Interne convenit hoc Vermibus, and omnibus in genere doloribus Viscerum,
praecipue Colicae, quo in Morbo specificum est. Dosis, a granis octo ad
sedecim, vel viginti, in Vehiculo adapto. Externe Anodynum est, doloresque
quoscunque mitigat and tolli^. Arthritidi, omnibus Articulorum affectibus,
Tumoribus duris, Nervorum vel Musculorum contractionibus specifice succurrit,
si parts affectae madidis linteis illinantur: meliusque erit si cum uncia
Balsalmi una, Camphorae dram una dissolvatur.

VIII. Butyrum Antimonii.
Antimonii crudi, Mercurii sublimati corrosivi, ana parts aequales; terantur
in Mortario vitreo, exacteque inter se misceantur, conjiciantur in Retortam
vitream, colli amplioris and brevioris; and ex Arena successivis gradibus fiat
distillatio, Igne primo leni, donec Butyrum (liquor glacialis) ascendere
incipiat: dein, aucto Igne, procedit Oleum in frigido coagulans, quod Carbone,
seu Pruna adhibita candente circa collum Retortae, in Recipiens propelli debet:
in fine distillationis excitetur Ignis suppressionis, illumque continua,
quousque omnes fumi praeterierint, Vasque recipiens clarum evadat. Hac in
operatione Sales vitriolosi, nitrosi, and Sal commune rodunt puriorem Antimonii
substantiam, illamque in formam coagulati secum vegunt, concrescuntque in
Butyri forma. Omnibus refrigeratis, Vas recipiens aufer, Liquoremque glacialem,
seu Butyrum Antimonii, per novam Cucurbitam vitream ex Arena rectisica,
quousque ab omni fuligine and sordibus liberatum sit; quo in casu, instar Nivis
candidum erit.

Causticum est insigne, and ad miraculum sistit Gangraenam and Sphacelum, si
seilicet Plagapenna, hoc Liquore madefacta, circumscribatur, quem terminum
malum transgredi non solet, sed ad miraculum subsistit. Excrescentias Carnis
absumit, Vlcerum erodentium and Gangraenae malignitatem corrigit; estque tantum
externi usus apud Chirurgos in tollendis partibus corruptis, sedulam vero
requirit manum; cum Pluma pars affecta leviter inungitur, vel Vlcus serpens
circumducitur, ne ulterius serpere possit: rarioris est usus per se, nunquam
interni; sed exinde fiunt Bezoardicum Minerale, and Mercurius Vitae. Hoc
Butyrum, non tantum cum acido Nitri effervescat, sed etiam cum Salis alcalicis
Tartari, Nitri, and similium.

CHAP. LXI. Of BALSAMS.
1. Balsam of Antimony, communicated by that most skilful Artist Dr. Tho.
Gardner, the King's Chief Chirurgian.
MIneral Antimony, Rhenish Tartar, and Crystals of Nitre, a. equal parts,
powder them and mix them; put the mixture by spoonfuls into a large Crucible,
or Iron Pot; afterward melt the mass thoroughly with a very strong Fire: which
done, put it out into a hot Mortar, and immediately powder it: put this Powder
into a glass Cucurbit with a long neck, to which add Oil of Turpentine, so much
as may overtop it three or four Inches, and digest in Sand with a very gentle
Fire, till the Oil has extracted a very red Tincture; this Tincture decant, and
affuse on the magma new Oil as before; and this work continue so long till you
have gotten all the Tincture. Mix these Tinctures together, and evaporate away
to the one half, or till the matter is of the consistency of a Syrup; or
otherwise abstract it by distillation in a Retort.

It is a Medicine which powerfully by Urine expels the Tartar of the Blood, and
effectually sends forth Stone and Gravel from the Reins. It is given as a
specific against the Dropsy, Gout, King's Evil, and obstructions of the Courses
in Women. Dose, a ss. ad ss. more or less, in some proper Vehicle. Outwardly,
it is of mighty use in all cold Affections, and prevails against the pains of
the Gout, if with ij. thereof, j. of Camphir be mixed, and applied with lint to
the place diseased. It powerfully resists Putrefaction and Corruption, and
therefore is of good use in malign and inveterate Ulcers, as also in Palsies
and Gangrene, if linen cloths or rags be dipped or moistened with this Balsam, and
so prepared, be applied to the parts affected.

2. Balsam of Salt of Tartar.
Very pure and dry Salt of Tartar j. Spirit of Vinegar iv. mix, and distill by
Retort in Sand to dryness; all the humidity which comes forth will be insipid
like Water: for the whole acidity of the Vinegar will remain in the bottom,
with the Salt of Tartar. Let the Fire go out, and the Retort being cold, affuse
iv. more of Spirit of Vinegar, and distill again, even to dryness; so will the
humidity even now also come forth insipid like Water: Continue this
distillation so long, (always affusing new Spirit) till at length the Spirit of
the Vinegar shall come forth as acid as it went in: for then it is manifest
that the Salt of Tartar is sufficiently impregnated and saturated with the acid
of the Vinegar. Dissolve this matter now again with rectified S.V. filter, and
abstract to dryness: so will you have in the bottom a substance fat and
unctuous, like Butter or Balsam, and representing as it were many leaves; from
whence possibly the name might come of Terra Tartari Foliata, Foliated Earth of
Tartar.

It is a noted Digestive, cutting and attenuating thick Humors; and is
profitably used in purging Potions, both as a stimulative and corrective. It is
used by many as an universal Menstruum, and the Key of Chemical Arcanums. And
is given inwardly, a ss. ad j. in some Vehicle proper for the obstructions of
the Bowels.

3. Balsam of Camphir.
Oil of Anisceds iv. Camphir iij. pure white Sperma Ceti j. mix, and let them
stand in digestion seven days; then boil them together in a glass Vessel with a
gentle Fire, till the ingredients are perfectly dissolved, and keep the Balsam
for use.

Internally it is given to expel the Stone, discuss Wind, and ease the pains of
the Colic; for it is of subtle parts, and has an anodyn quality, by which it
opens internal Obstructions, and provokes Sweat. It is used outwardly in all
cold Affects, as the Megrim, Headache, pain of the Ears, Sciatica, running
Gout, from cold causes, the parts affected being anointed therewith morning and
evening. It speedily cures green Wounds, being made into an Ointment, by adding
a little Beeswax.

4. Rulandus his Balsam of Sulphur.
Flowers of Sulphur iij. generous Wine vj. Oil of Walnuts xviij. digest them
together in warm Water, often stirring the ingredients, and afterward boil
them together to the solution of the Sulphur: so have you the Balsamum
Diasulphuris of Rulandus.

It kills Worms, and is good against the Plague, and Dileases of the Lungs; as
the Cough, Asthma, Phthisick, and malign Distempers. Dose, a gut. x, ad xx.
Outwardly used, it eases Pains, and prevails against Ulcers, abates
Inflammations; it is also good against Fistula's in the Fundament,
Haemorrhoids, Gout, etc.

5. The common alsam of Sulphur.
Flowers or Lac of Sulphur ij. Oil of Turpentine viij. boil them together in a
glass Vessel in Sand for two hours, ( Beguinus says, eight hours) till the Oil
is tinged of a reddish color, and the Flowers of Sulphur are dissolved. Or
thus: Flowers of Sulphur ij. Salt of Tartar j. powder them well by themselves;
then mix them, and melt them in a glazed earthen Pot, till they become of a
dark red color, like Liver; from whence it is called Hepar Sulphuris, or Liver
of Sulphur; add to it fair Water, about an ounce, and boil it with a pretty
strong Fire, to the consumption of the humidity, (the mass of which, by how
much the more black it is, by so much the better it is:) then pour it forth,
that it may cool; being cold, powder it, and affuse thereon Oil of Turpentine
x. and boil them together, etc. as above is declared.

It is Stomatick and Pulmonick; and of mighty use in the Phthisick, Cough,
Asthma, Jaundies, and other Vices of the Lungs: it kills Worms, and expels
them, and gently loosens the Belly. Dose, a gut. iij, ad xx. It is a singular
thing for healing malign Ulcers of the Lungs, because it drys much, without any
biting or sharpness, and strengthens withal. It is a great Anodyn, maturative
and digestive in Wounds of nervous parts. It dissolves Tartar in the Bladder
and other parts, eases the pain of the Yard, (in making Water) heals its
excoriation, and removes the suppression of Urine. Dropped into the Ears, it
eases their pain. It takes away and cures Coughs and Catarrhs, though inveterate;
especially if it be taken with Syrup of Poppies, or Syrup of Liquorice.

And after the same manner the Balsam of Sulphur is made, with Oils of Aniseed,
of Juniper, of Rosemary, of Limons, of Amber, etc.

6. Balsam of Saturn, or Lead.
Saccharum Saturni j. Oil of Aniseeds or Juniper Berries iij. mix, and let them
stand in digestion for seven days, till the Oil is tinged of a very red color,
and the Saccharum is wholly dissolved: which done, add more of the Saccharum,
so long, till the Oil will dissolve no more; then dissolve therein iv. of
Camphir.

It prevails admirably against a hot Gout in the Feet, and is good against
Inflammations; it immediately eases all Pain, in what part of the Body soever,
if a little lint or linen rags be moistened or dipped in the same, and laid on. It
is very good in curing suffusions, and redness of the Eyes, arising from a
sharp Catarrh. It is good against inveterate Ulcers and Tumors; for which cause
it is of vast use in the practice of Surgery. It is a present help in the
inflammation of the Reins, as also in the cure of Contusions; it cures Wounds,
and preserves them from accidents; more especially if a little Camphir be added
thereto. It takes away Morphew, and is good against Cancers and Fistula's; in
which last, a drop or two may be instilled into their hollownesses. If the
Fistula shall be in the canthus, or corner of the Eye, (after the exhibition of
mundificatives or cleansers) immediately gut. 1 or 2 may be put into the same,
and it will forthwith be filled up with flesh, and healed. In Cancers, and all
sorts of phagedenick or eating Ulcers also, it is a most excellent Medicin;
more especially if mixed with Oil-olive, and ground together, till it comes to a
white Liniment or Ointment. Inwardly, it is given in all vehement Hemorrhagies
of the Womb and parts dedicuted to Generation, as also in a too great flux of
the Terms; in burning Fevers also, and Affects of the Reins and Bladder, and in
a Gonorrhoea, where the Urinary ductus is eroded, from a Venereal acrid
Ferment. Dose, a gut. iv. ad viij, x, aut xij. more or less, in appropriate
Waters or Broths.

7. The Wonderful Balsam.
Oil of Vitriol or Sulphur rectified, or rather Spirit of Nitre well
dephlegmated j. Oil-Olive or Oil of Ben iij. mix, digest, and keep it for use.

Inwardly given, it kills Worms, and gives case in all sorts of pains of the
Bowels, but chiefly in the Colic, for which it is a Specific. Dose, a gr.
viij, ad xvj, aut xx. in some proper Vehicle. Outwardly used it is Anodyn,
easing and taking away all pains of what kind soever. It is a specific in the
cure of the Gout, and all other Affects of the Joints, hard Tumors, and
contractures of the Nerves and Muscles, the parts affected being anointed with
linen rags dipped therein, which may also be applied: and the Medicine will yet
be better, if to every ounce of the Balsam a dram of Camphir be added to the
same, and dissolved therein.

8. Butter of Antimony.
Crude Antimony, corrosive Sublimate, of each equal parts; beat them in a glass
Mortar, and mix them well into a mass, which put into a glass Retort, having a
large, but short neck; distill in Sand with degrees of Fire, first gently, till
the Butter or icy Liquor begins to ascend, then increase the Fire; so will you
have an Oil, which will coagulate in the cold; this you must force into the
Receiver, by holding to the neck of the Retort some burning Coals: toward the
end of the distillation, make a Fire of suppression, and continue it so long
till all the fumes cease, and the Receiver becomes clear. In this operation,
the vitriolick and nitrous Salts, and the common Salt, corrode the more pure
substance of the Antimony, and bring it with them into a coagulated form. All
being cooled, take away the Receiver, and put the icy Liquor into a new glass
Cucurbit; which rectify in Sand, till it is freed from all its foulness, and
becomes white like Snow.

It is a famous Caustic, and stops the progress of a Gangrene and Sphacelus,
even to a miracle; viz. if the circuit round about it be touched with it, by a
Feather dipped in the same, it not only puts a stop to it, but even miraculously
as it were overcomes it. It consumes fleshy Excrescencies, and corrects the
malignity of eating Ulcers and Inflammations. It is only outwardly used by
Chirurgians, in taking away corrupt parts or portions of Flesh, but it requires
a very steady and careful hand; let the part affected be gently anointed with a
Feather, or the creeping Ulcer surrounded with the same, that it may not creep
farther. It is seldom used by it self, never internally; but from thence are
made, 1. Bezoarticum Minerale, 2. Mercurius Vitae. This Antimonial will
effervess, not only with the acid of Nitre, but also with alcalious Salts, as
Salt of Tartar, fixed Nitre, and such like.

CHAP. LXII. De ELIXIRIBUS.
I. Elixir Antepile pticum.
CArnis Ciconiarum, Cornicum, Corvorum, Hirundinum, Lumbricorum, Picarum,
desiccatae; Cranii Humani grosso modo pulverizati, Sangninis Humani siccati,
ana uncias duas; Spiritus Nitri uncias triginta, misce ac dissolve: dissoluto
addatur Alcohol Vini unciae sexaginta, filtratur, reponaturque ad usum. Vel
sic: Carnis Ciconiarum siccatae, etc. pone in Retortam, and extrahatur Oleum
foetidum and Sal volatile: Oleo and Sali add Spiritus Nitri quantitatem
duplicem, digere per horas viginti quatuor; dein addatur Alcohol Vini quantitas
toti duplex, digereque ad usum.

Summo cum successu exhibetur contra omnes Epilepsiae species, tam ad
digerendam in Epilepticis fluidam illam Pituitam (in istis enim hic Humor
peccat) naturalem, calorem illorum confortando, and corroborando Cerebrum; quam
ad separandos and consumendos in Centro acres aut malignos Vapores, qui
ascendentes in Cerebrum, hunc causantur Morbum in aliis. Valet etiam in
Puerorum Epilepsia, quae vitio Stomachi a quadam, vel flatulentia, vel Cibi
corruptione, vel Vermibus exagitatis obtingit. Sumitur in aqua Peoniae, florum
Papaveris sylvestris, aliove appropriato liquore, ante vel post paroxysmum; ita
etiam mane jejuno stomacho, and hora somni. Dosis, a dram semis ad drachmam
unam. Contra Paralysin est efficacissimum; singular refugium est in Apoplexia,
(datum in principio, and reiteratum per intervalla temporis, prout necessitas
requirat,) in Convulsionibus and morbis Hystericis. Non minoris efficaciae est
in Hypochondriacis, aut Melancholia flatulenta; quae variis modis affligere
solet, idque pro diversitate Partium, quas Vapores isti maligni impetuose
exagitant. Vtlissimum est contra Tremorem membrorum, exortum ex imbecillitate
and relaxatione nervorum, ob senilem aetatem, aut Humores frigidos: in Tabe
etiam, and Corporis Consumptione, a simplici Obstructione tam Mesenterii, quam
aliorum Organorum principalium. Colicam passionem, Ventrisque Tormina,
praestantissime sedat.

II. Elixir Proprietatis.
Aloes Succotrinae, Myrrhae optimae, Croci Anglici, ana uncias sex; rebus
contusis, vel grosso modo pulverizatis, superfunditur Oleum Philosophicum
unciae octo vel december: digerit mixturam per horas viginti quatuor, vase aperto,
ad siccitatem usque: tum superaffunditur Spiritus Vini rectificati librae tres,
fiat iterum digestio per noctem; dein sensim effunditur Tinctura, fitque iterum
digestio cum Spiritus Vini rectificati libris tribus, and magmate per diem and
noctem unam: decanta Tincturam, atque iterum Alcohol Vini novum affunditur, and
proceed ut antea, donec tota Tinctura sit exhausta: misce Tincturas, digere
mixturam, reponaturque ad usum.

Virtutes and Vsus, vide in Sectione undecima Capitis quinquagesimi primi,
paulo supra.

III. Elixir Metallorum.
Reguli Antimonii martialis uncias duas, Stanni optimi Anglici, Veneris rubrae,
ana unciam unam; fundatur in Crucibulo, igne strenuo, ita ut Cuprum totaliter
dispareat, quo peracto, effundantur in Cono fusorio. Hujus massae unciam unam,
Nitri purissimi uncias duas; terantur in pulverem exact inter se, and
successivis vicibus conjiciantur in Crucibulum candens, coquanturque simul,
donec massa tua conversa sit in scorias ex caeruleo viridescentes, massaque tua
igneam acquisivit acrimoniam; tunc massam tuam effunde, and antequam humidum
Aeris attrahere queat, in pulverem terito, iique affundito Alcohol Vini
purissimi uncias viginti: stent in digestione per viginti quatuor horas, and
Spiritus tuus Vini rubello color tingetur, and in gremio suo occultabit
praedictorum Metallicorum Sales, resolutos primitus per Sales corrosivas
Antimonii, and postmodum per fulmen Nitri; habebisque potentem Tincturam
Metallorum.

Haec Tinctura Cephalica, Cardiaca and Stomachica est, rationeque Salium
Pituitam potenter tenacem incidit, and Obstructiones pertinaciores resolvit;
Fermenta acidoaustera peregrina Viscerum and Sanguinis extinguit;
fermentationem Sanguinis suppressam, per acida coagulantia, elevat and
restituit: hinc in Scorbuto, Cachexia, Chlorosi, Obstructionibus Mensium,
passione Hysterica, in Epilepsia, Paralysi, Apoplexia; Morbis Soporosis, ut
Lethargo, Coma, etc. vim habet insignem; malumque per Diuresin exterit,
Ventriculum, Hepar, Lienem, aliaque Viscera confortat. Sumitur etiam in dolor
Nephritico, in Gonorrhoea, and Lue Venerea. Dosis est a guttis december, sensim
ascendendo, ad guttas quadraginta, in Vino, aliove Vehiculo.

IV. Elixir Cranil Humani.
Cranii Humani pulveritati uncias duas, Spiritus Nitri rectificati uncias
quatuor; misce ac dissolva: quo peracto, addatur Spiritus Vini rectificati
unciae octo; misce, digere, filtraturque ad usum.

Epilepsiae, Apoplexiae, Lethargo, Vertigini, Cephalalgiae, Hemicraniae,
Suffocationi Matricis, omnibusque Morbis Cephalicis and Hystericis ad miraculum
usque medetur. Dosis, a guttis viginti ad sexaginta, mane ac vesperi, in
Vehiculo appropriato.

V. Elixir Pulmonum.
Pulmonum Vulpium, Ovium, Bovium, vel Porcorum desecatorum and desiccatorum,
quantum vis, Spiritus Nitri quantitatem duplicem; misce, ^atque Elixir, ut
supra.

Flatus discutit, Sudores movet, and Menses, Cruciatus etiam circa Ventriculum
ciet, in genere deobstruit, Circulationem Sanguinis adjuvat, Cachexiam Mulierum
tollit, Pituitam tenacem potenter incidit; ac in Obstructionibus Mensium,
Passione Hysterica, Febribus putridis, and Ventriculi Pulmonumque Fermento
suffocato, maximarum est virium. Exhibetur in Vehiculis adaptis, a guttis
viginti ad scruplas duas.

VI. Elixir Sanguinis Humani.
Fit ex Sanguine desiccato, ut supra.

In Lithiasi, Nephritide, Hydrope, Ischuria, Dysuria, Obstru^ Mensium,
Epilepsia, Ca^ hoque suffocativo, valde ju^ Insigniter conducit Asthma^ and
Hyochondriacis, omni^ (...) Pulmonum obstructionibus: (...) infarctos reserat,
materi^ (...) impactam attenuat, Naturamque adjuvat, ut per vias convenientes
se ab hoc exoneret. Dosis, a scrupla una ad duas, mane ac vesperi. Eodem modo
Elixir ex Sanguine Bovium, Ovium, Porcorum, etc. extrahes.

VII. Elixir Viperarum.
Fit ex Carne desiccata, ut Elixir Cranii Humani.

Massam Sanguinis mundificat, omnes Humores corruptos and putridos, Vermium
semina, e Corpore aufert: omnibus Morbis Melancholicis, Vertiginibus,
Epilepsiis, Paralysibus prodest. Confert etiam Scorbutis, Cachexiis, Febribus
quartanis, similibusque Affectibus, qui ob contumaciam suam Eccoproticis vix
cedunt. Tabidos item mirifie ad bonam Corporis habitudinem reducit. In
Affectionibus Cutis curandis commendatur; cujus generis sunt Leuce, Lepra,
Impetigo, Elephantiasis, Alphos, and Scabies. Impotertiam curat, exolutosque a
languore perfect reviviscere facit. Dosis, a scrupla una ad duas, bis in diem.

VIII. Elixir, seu Sanguis Symphyti, Quercetani.
Radicum Symphyti majoris and minoris, simul optime mundatam, hanc in Mortario
probe contunde cum Pistillo lignco, donec formam pulpae sortiatur. Ad quatuor
libras hujus puplae adjice medullae Panis Secalini and Triticaei, ana libram
unam: omnia invicem probe mixta, and tantillo Vini albi irrigata, injiciantur
in Matracium vitreum cum collo longo, Subere vel Cera Hispanica optime
obturatum, ut nihil transpiret. Hoc Matracium collocetur in Fimo calido, sive
in Balneo vaporoso, donec materia in Chyli sanguinei ac rubicundi colorem
convertatur: tunc illam fortiter Praelo exprime, and expressionem hanc chylosam
and sanguineam pone in Balneo vaporoso, illud in secunda digestione majorem
acquiret rubedinem; and faeces aliquot in fundo relinquet, quas separabis;
continuando hanc digestionem and depurationem, donec materia clarissima and
rubicundissima apparuerit: separa ab illa tunc Liquorem clariorem per Alembicum
ad ignem Balnei vaporosi, and remanebit in fundo Elixir rubicundissimum, quod
nominant Sanguineum Symphyti.

Medicamentum est ad Hernias, and omnia Vlcera interna Viscerum
praestantissimum. Dosis est, a scrupla una ad drachmam unam, mane ac vesperi.
Dissolvendum est in sua propria Aqua distillata, vel in Vino albo, aliove
liquore congruo; continuando ad plusculos dies, and egregios mirosque effectus
inde produci comperies.

IX. Elixir, seu Sanguis Satyrionis and Pastinacae albae.
Eodem modo Elixir sive Sanguinem ex Satyrione, and Pastinaca alba, Battatisque
parabis.

Singular Matricis corroborans, and specificum est Remedium ad Conceptionem,
Prolisque generationem juvandam, sterilissimisque quantumlibet Mulieribus
foecunditatis donum impertit; Virique impotentiam ad pristinum vigorem reducit.
Nota, verus Philosophus ulterius adhuc progredietur, and per eandem viam, tum
ex Frumento, tum ex Vino, educet substantiam quandam Sanguineam, alendi ac
vivificandi facultate potentem; qua causam generationis Carnis in Corpore
nostro indagabit. Dosis, a drachmis quatuor ad unciam unam. Post haec Elixira
facta sunt, addatur Vini Cheriensis unciae sex, vel Spiritus Vini unciae tres,
ad libram unam Elixiris, ut long conserventur.

CHAP. LXII. Of ELIXIRS.
1. An Elixir against the Falling Sickness.
OF the flesh of Storks, Crows, Ravens, Magpies, Swallows, Earthworms, dried;
Man's Skull grossly poudred, Man's Blood dried, ana ij. Spirit of Nitre xxx.
mix and dissolve: which being done, add thereto the Alcohol of Wine lx. filter,
and keep it for use. Or thus: Of Storks flesh dried, etc. put all into a
Retort, and extract a foetid Oil, and volatile Salt; to this Oil and Salt add a
double quantity of Spirit of Nitre: digest twenty four hours; and then add
again a double quantity of the whole Alcohol of Wine, and digest for use.

It is given with the greatest success against all kinds of the
Falling Sickness, both to digest that natural fluid Phlegm (because in this
Disease that Humor most abounds) by exciting their innate heat, and
strengthening the Brain; and also to separate and consume in the Center, or
Stomach and Bowels, those acrid and malign Vapors which ascend thence to the
Brain, which causes this Disease in many. It is good also against the
Falling Sickness in Children; which in some arises from a fault of the Stomach,
or from Wind, or corrupted Food, or from Worms. You may give it in Peony-water,
or water of Corn-poppy-flowers, or other appropriate liquor, either before or
after the Fit, in the morning fasting, and at bedtime. Dose, a ss ad j. It is
an effectual thing against the Palsy, and a certain refuge in the Apoplexy,
(being given in the beginning of the Disease, and reiterated in the intervals
of time, as necessity requires) in Convulsions also, and Hysteric diseases. It
is of as great power in Hypochondriack Diseases, or a flatulent Melancholy;
which are wont to afflict in diverse manners, and that also according to the
diversity of Parts which those malign Vapors impetuously move. It is also of
great use against the Trembling of the members or limbs, arising from a
weakness and relaxation of the Nerves; caused either by old age, or a coldness
of Humors: so also in a Tabes and Consumption of the Body, coming from a simple
Obstruction both of the Mesentery and of other principal Organs. It powerfully
eases the pain of the Colic, and Gripings of the Guts.

2. Elixir of Property.
Fine Aloes, best Myrrh, English Saffron, a. vj. the things being bruised or
grossly poudred, affuse thereon Oleum Philosophicum viij, or x. digest the
mixture for 24 hours, in an open vessel, or till it becomes dry; then affuse
thereon rectified S.V. lbiij. digest again for a night: after which, gently
pour off the Tincture; add S.V. lb.iij. more, and digest again for a day and
night, and then decant the Tincture: the third time add to the magma Alcohol of
Wine lbiij. more, and proceed as before, till you have extracted the whole
Tincture: mix all these Tinctures together, digest, and keep it for use.

The Virtues and Uses, see in Chap. 5^ Sect. 11. aforegoing.

3. The Elixir of Metals.
Martial Regulus of Antimony ij. of the best English Tin, red Copper, a. j.
melt them in a Crucible with a strong fire, so that the Copper totally
disappear, which done, pour it forth into an iron Cone. Of this mass j. of fine
Nitre ij. beat them into powder, and mix them well together, and cast it into a
Crucible red-hot, by spoonfuls or turns; which boil together so long, till your
whole mass it turned into a scoria of a greenish blew color; so will it obtain
a fiery acrimony: pour it then forth, and before it can attract the humidity of
the Air; beat it into powder, and affuse thereon Alcohol of Wine xxiv. digest
24 hours; so will the Spirit be tinged of a red color; in the body or
substance of which Tincture will be hid the Salts of the aforesaid Metals,
beforehand resolved, by the corrosrve Salt of the Antimony, and afterward by
the fulmination of the Nitre; thus have you the potent Elixir, or mighty
Tincture of Metals.

This Tincture is Cephalic, Cardiack, and Stomatick, and by reason of the
Salts, powerfully cuts tough Phlegm, and resolves rebellious Obstructions; it
extinguishes foreign, austere, acid Ferments of the Bowels and Blood, restoring
and enlivening the natural Ferment of the Blood, suppressed through coagulating
Acids; for which reason it has a mighty power in curing of the Scurvy, Cachexy,
Green Sickness, Obstructruction of the Courses, Fits of the Mother,
Falling Sickness, Palsy, Apoplexy; Sleepy Diseases, as the Lethargy, Coma, etc.
it carries off the Disease by Urine, and comforts the Stomach, Liver, Spleen,
and other Bowels. It is given also in Nephritick pai^ as of the Stone, in a
(...) and the French Pox. Dose (...) gut. x, gradually ascending (...) gut. xl.
in Wine, or some (...) Vehicle.

4. Elixir of Man's Skull.
Man's Skull in powder (...) Spirit of Nitre rectified iv. mix and dissolve;
which done, add rectified S.V. viij. mix, digest, and keep it for use.

It cures, even to a miracle, the Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, Lethargy,
Vertigo, Headache, Megrim, Fits of the Mother, and all other Diseases of the
Head and Womb. Dose, a gut. xx, ad lx. morning and evening, in some appropriate
Vehicle.

V. Elixir of Lungs.
Of the Lungs of Foxes, or of Sheep, Oxen, or Hogs, cut into bits and dried,
q.v. Spirit of Nitre, a double quantity, (in weight) mix, and make an Elixir,
as before.

It discusses Wind, provokes Sweat and the Terms, eases Pains in the Stomach;
in general, opens Obstructions, helps the Circulation of the Blood, removes the
Cachexy in Women, potently cuts tough Phlegm, and is of wonderful force in
stoppage of the Courses, Fits of the Mother, putrid Fevers, and a suffocative
Ferment of Stomach and Lungs. You may give it (in a fit Vehicle) a j, ad ij.

6. Elixir of Man's Blood.
It is made of dried Blood, as before.

It wonderfully helps in the Stone, pain of the Reins, Dropsy, stoppage of
Urine, scalding of Urine, stoppage of the Terms, Falling Sickness, and
suffocative Catarrhs. It is famous for the curing of Asthma's, and such as are
Hypochondriack, as also in all Obstructions of the Lungs. It opens the Passages
being stopped, attenuates the impacted Matter, and helps Nature, so as it may
discharge it self therefrom, by convenient ways. Dose, a j, ad ij. morning and
evening. After the same manner you may make the Elixir of Ox, Sheep, or Hogs
Blood, which has all the same virtues and uses.

7. Elixir of Vipers.
It is made of the dried Flesh, as the Elixir of Man's Skull.

It purifies the mass of Blood, and takes away all corrupt and putrid Humors
from the Body, which are the Seed of Worms. It is profitable in all Melancholy
Diseases, Vertigo's, Epilepsies, and Palsies. It is good also against the
Scurvy, Cachexy, quartan Agues, and other like Affects, which by their stubborn
disposition, will scarcely yield to Gentle-purgers. It wonderfully restores
such as are Consumptive, to a good habit of Body. It is commended for the cure
of Affects of the Skin; of which kind are the white Scall, Leprosy, Ringworm,
Elephantiasis, Morphew, and Scab. It cures Impotency, and perfectly recruits
such as have a feebleness and inability, from a languor or decay of natural
strength and humidity. Dose, a j, ad ij. twice a day.

8. Quercetan's Elixir, or Blood of Comfrey.
Of the greater and lesser Comfrey-roots, cleanse them well, and beat them
stoutly in a Mortar with a wooden Pestel, till they come into a pulp; to lbiv.
of this pulp add crumbs of Rye-bread, and of Wheaten-bread, a. lbj. mix them all
well together, and sprinkle or moisten them well with Whitewine, put them into
a glass Mattrass with a long neck, which stop well with Cork or Wax, that
nothing may transpire. This Mattress place in warm Horse-dung, or in Balneo
vaporoso, till the matter is turned or changed into a blood-like and
rubicund-coloured Chyle: then press it strongly out in a Press; which
blood-like expressed Liquor put into a second digestion in Balneo vaporoso,
that thereby it may acquire the greater redness, separating and casting away
the faeces which fall to the bottom: continue this digestion and depuration,
till the matter shall become very clear and red, separate then the clear Liquor
by an Alembick in Balneo vaporoso: so will you have in the bottom a very red
matter, which is the Blood-like Essence of Comfrey.

It is designed against Ruptures, and all sorts of internal Ulcers of the
Bowels, for which it is a most excellent thing. Dose, a j, ad j. morning and
evening. You may dissolve it in Comfrey-water, or in Whitewine, or other fit
liquor; continuing the use of it for some few days, you will have from it
mighty and wonderful effects.

9. Elixir, or Blood of Satyrion and Parsnips.
The Elixir or Blood of Satyrion, Parsnips, and Potatoes, are prepared in the
same manner with the former.

An Elixir thus prepared from any of those things, is said to be a singular and
specific Remedy for corroborating of the Womb, and to help Conception,
removing barrenness, and causing fruitfulness in Women; it helps impotency in
Men, and restores them to their pristin vigor. Where note, that the true
Philosopher does go yet farther, and after the same manner, from Bread-corn and
Wine, produces a certain Blood-like substance, which has strength and potency
with it, and a property to nourish and vivifie, or restore; from which the
cause of the generation of Flesh in our Bodies is manifest. Dose, a iv, ad j.
These Elixirs being made, (if you design them for any long keeping) you may add
to them, for every xij. of Elixir, vj. of choice Sherry, or iij. of the best
Brandy.

CHAP. LXIII. De POTESTATIBVS.
I. Potestates Fuliginis Clauderi.
FUliginis splendentis quantum vis; si simul obtineri poterit e Fumariis, ubi
potissimum comburuntur ligna Quercus, Betulae, aut Pini, eo melius erit;
pulverisato superfunde in Vitro Spiritus Universalis quantum surficit, vel ad
eminentiam aliquot digitorum. Vitrum been claudatur, ne evaporet pars
volatilior; agitetur aliquoties, and spatio dimidii horae quadrantis, and
citius Spiritus Menstrui salinus extrahit and absorbet Sal and Virtutem
Fuliginis, ut obtineas subito Essentiam pulcherrimam rubiniformem, ab omni
empyreumate, sapore ac odore molesto liberam: filtretur, and in Vase optime
munito servetur usui.

Praestantissimum excitativum est in Epilepsia, Apoplexia, Lethargo, and Morbis
Hystericis; atque Cancerati Corpore habitus insigne est Medicamentum.
Diaphoreticum est and anodynum; in plerisque Morbis tam frigidis, quam calidis,
optimo cum successu usurpatur. Cephalalgiae, Odontalgiae, Vertigini,
Hemicraniae, Paralysi, ad miraculum medetur, Obstructiones pertinaces potenter
resolvit, and Pituitam tenacem incidit and attenuat. Exterius applicatur in
Paralysi, in Contracturis, in Podagra ex causis frigidis, in Tophis
incipientibus Venereis and Podagricis, genereque in omnibus Nervorum
Obstructionibus a Pituita oriundis coagulata. Dosis, a dram semis ad
drachmas duas vel tres, in Aquis vel Vehiculis Cephalicis.

II. Potestatibus Seminum Anisi.
Olei Seminum Anisi, Spiritus Salis Armoniaci, ana unciam unam, Spiritus
Seminum Anisi rectificati libras duas, misce; disti lenturque Potestates
secundum Artem.

Pituitam tenacem potenter incidunt and dispellunt, Obstructiones' Pulmonum
solvunt; itaque Afthmaticis, Phthisicis, Catarrhosis, Tussi inveteratae,
caeterisque Pectoris vitiis, utilis est. Dosis, a dram una ad duas.

III. Potestatibus Baccarum Juniperi.
Olei Baccarum Juniperi, Spiritus Salis Armoniaci, ana unciam unam; Spiritus
Juniperi libras duas, misce; distilla Potestates. Vel sic, Olei Baccarum
Juniperi unciam unam, Tinctura Salis Juniperi vel Tartari libras duas; misce,
reponaturque ad usum.

Flatus potenter Viscerum dissipant, Calculum and Mucum ex Renibus abigunt.
Facultate incidendi, dissipandi, aperiendi, abstergendi, and frigidam ac
serosam colluviem consumendi potentes sunt: quamobrem frigidae intemperei
Obstructioni Jecoris, Lienis, Mesenterii, Renum, Vesicae, Vteri; nec-non
Capitis, Pectoris, and Stomachi, a causa flatulenta and frigida, aut a
defluxione vitiis, egregie opitulantur. Dosis, a drachmam unam ad duas, bis in
diem.

IV. Potestates Lavendulae.
Olei Lavendulae, Spiritus Salis Armoniaci, ana unciam unam, Spiritus
Lavendulae libras duas; misce, distillaturque secundum Artem. Vel sic, Olei
Lavendulae unciam unam, Salis Lavendulae fusi drachmas duas, Alcohol Vini
libras duas; misce ac digere. Vel sic, Olei Lavendulae unciam unam, Tincturae
Salis Lavendulae vel Tartari libras duas, misce ac digere; sic habebis
Potestates Lavendulae.

Prostratas vires reficiunt, ac calfaciendo, Cerebrum, Ventriculum, Matricemque
roborant. In Febribus malignis, pestilentialibus, imo in Peste ipsa, sum
salutares sunt, Cordisque Palpitationi resistunt. Omnes Sensus internos
summopere acuunt, omnesque Affectus ex causa frigida ortos curant; quia
excalfaciunt vehementer, and Spiritus omnes recreant. Apoplecticis,
Epilepticis, Ischiadicis, Paralyticis, and Arthritide quacunque laborantibus,
in genere succurrunt. Dosis, a dram una ad drachmas duas.

V. Potestates Caryophyllorum.
Olei Caryophyllorum unciam unam, Tincturae Salis Caryophyllorum cum Spiritu
ejusdem factae, libras duas; misce, ac digere. Vel sic: Olei Caryophyllorum,
Spiritus Salis Armoniaci, ana unciam unam, Spiritus Caryophyllorum libras duas;
misce, and per distillationem Potestates extrahuntur. Vel sic: Olei unciam
unam, Tincturae Salis Tartari libras duas; misce, digereque ad usum.

Omnia membra confortant, imprimisque Ventriculum, Cor, Cerebrum, and Viscera,
eorum calorem conservando and multiplicando. Jecori and Lieni maxim
auxiliantur, functionesque perditae restaurant. Dentium Doloribus quibuscunque
summum sunt and ultimum refugium; quia cum causticae sint virtutis, nervum
ferunt Dentis, and humorem acrem: Vlcera quaecunque curant, propter eandem
rationem; Sal enim urens and causticum Vlcus constituens, dissolvitur and
annihilatur per Salem hujus Arcani, similitur urentem, and ambo in aliam
convertuntur substantiam; deinde, Natura suo Balsamo-naturali cicatricem
inducit. Sunt in deliquiis Animi singular Medicamentum, quia Cor exhilerat and
roborat, and omnia quae illi nocere possunt, ab eo abigat. Ad pestilentis Aurae
fugam, and praeservationem, nihil est praestantius; quia omnia principalia
Membra ita roborat, ut resistere possint Miasmati venenato and pestilenti.
Dosis, a drachmam unam ad duas, in Vino aut Jusculis, aliove Vehiculo.

VI. Potestates Limonum and Aurantiarum.
Olei Limonum vel Aurantiarum, Spiritus Salis Armoniaci, ana unciam unam,
Spiritus Limonum vel Aurantiarum libras duas; misce, ac distilla. Vel sic:
Olei, etc. unciam unam, Tincturae Salis Tartari cum Spiritu Limonum factae,
libras duas: misce, ac digere.

Illae Cephalicae, Stomachicae, Cardiacae, Spleniticae, and Hystericae
Potestates sunt. Haemicraniam and dolorem Capitis ex flatibus frigidis, and
copia Pituitae ortum sanant, quia Flatus discutiunt. Visum acuunt, Ventriculum
and Jecur roborant, Lienem absumunt, Vrinam cient, fluentem Alvum sistunt,
frigidisque Vteri Affectibus mirifice prosunt; Nervorum and Articulorum
diuturnis doloribus, a frigore excitatis, utilissimum sunt; and ad Veneris
excitandos stimulos, maxim expetuntur; quia excalfaciunt, and augent Spiritus
vitales and animales, qui sunt omnium actionum radices. Catarrhis, Paralysi,
Convulsionibus, membrorum Tremori, Arthritidi, aliisque Morbis frigidis;
Apoplexiae, Epilepsiae, Vertigini, Lethargo, and Suffocationi Vteri valde
conducunt. Dosis, a dram una ad duas.

VII. Potestates Pulegii.
Olei Pulegii, Spiritus Salis Armoniaci, ana unciam unam; Tincturae Salis
Pulegii cum Spiritu ejusdem factae libras duas; misce. Vel sic: Olei Spiritus
Salis Armoniaci, ana unciam unam; Spiritus Pulegii vel Vini rectificati libras
duas; misce, and distilla. Vel. sic: Olei and Spiritus, ut supra, unciam unam;
Tincturae Salis Tartari libras duas; misce, ac digere.

In fugandis pallidis ac foedis Virginum coloribus, nihil est praestantius,
quod Coctionem Viscerum omnium mirifice juvant; Menses tutissime provocant,
propter eandem rationem; unde and Vteri Affectibus fere omnibus succurrunt; and
Sterilitati medentur, foecundasque reddunt Mulieres. Sensus omnes tum internos,
tum externos acuunt, curantque omnes Affectus ex causa frigida ortos, Spiritus
omnes, tum Vitales and Animales recreant. Orthopnoicis, and anhelatoribus,
maxim prosunt, quod Pulmones roborent and Pectus, and Catarrhos sistunt, and
infarctos Pulmones Pituita, and glutinosis humoribus liberant, penetranti and
exsiccanti facultate. Dosis, a dram una ad duas.

VIII. Potestates Rosmarini.
Fiunt ut Potestates Pulegii.

Sensus omnes acuunt, Memoriam praecipue, and Cerebrum adeo roborant, ut a
Vertigine, Comate, Apoplexia, Lethargo, frigidisque omnibus Affectibus Capitis
and Nervorum praeservent. Spiritus omnes Naturales, Vitales, and Animales
mirisi^e recreant and fovent. Adversus Pestiferae Aurae contagionem nihil
efficacius; valent etiam ad Senectutem retardandum, quia calorem radicalem and
nativum conservant. Ophthalmicae sunt mirandae, Nebulas enim omnes, Caligines,
Albugines percurant viscosos, illos dissolvendo Humores: Fistulas, and Vlcera
omnia concava and depascentia, abstergendo, ad cicatricem conducunt. Capitis
dolores, qui per sympathiam Ventriculi male affecti oriuntur, mulcent and
tollent: Apoplexiae, Epilepsiae, Lethargo, Paralysi, Convulsionibus, Morbisque
Hystericis medentur. Dosis, a dram una ad duas, plusminus, in Vehiculo
Cephalico vel Neurotico, mane ac vesperi, ad sexaginta circiter dies.

IX. Potestates Succini.
Olei Succini primi primae distillationis unciam unam, Spiritus Succini cum
Spiritu Vini rectificato distillati libras duas, Salis volatilis Succini
drachmas duas; misce. Vel sic: Olei Succini subtilis unciam unam, Alcohol Vini
libras duas, Spiritus Salis Armoniaci uncias duas: misce, and distillentur
secundum Artem.

Paralysin, and omnes Nervorum Affectiones, Podagram, quamcunque Arthritidem,
Haemicraniam, and quemcunque Capitis dolorem, Contractiones Musculorum,
omnesque Morbos Capitis and Vteri, extrinsece admotum, and intrinsece sumptum
certissime curant. Ad Suffocationem Hystericam, Vapores ab Vtero, and Spiritus
Animalis Morbos valde praevalent. Intellectum and omnes Sensus acuunt,
membrorum Tremori succurrunt, and Convulsionum omnium speciebus. Vertiginem and
Lethargum ex quacunque causa ortum, praecipue ex causis frigidis, tollunt.
Dosis, a dram ^na ad duas vel tres, in Aquis, Syrupis, aliove Vehiculo
appropriato.

X. Potestates Terebinthinae.
Olei Terebinthinae unciam unam, Alcohol Vini libram unam; misce, ac distilla.
Si tibi placet, addatur Spiritus Salis Armoniaci unciam semis.

Gonorrhoeam virulentam sanant, Vulnera Nervorum and Vlcera ad cicatricem
perducunt, difficultatem Meiendi citissime tollunt, Calculum Renum Vesicaeque
rumpunt and atterunt, earumque partium Vlcera brevissimo tempore conglutinant.
Lethargo, Paralysi, Tremorique membrorum medentur. Dosis, a dram una ad
duas, in Vino albo, aliisque Vehiculis.

XI. Potestates Virtutum.
Oleorum Angelicae, Amaraci, Camomillae, Carui, Foeniculi, Melissae, Menthae,
Rutae, Salviae, Sabinae, Sassafras, Thymi, ana unciam semis; Spiritus Salis
Armoniaci uncias sex, Spirituum earundem Plantarum libras duodecim; misce, ac
distilla. Aliter. Oleorum, etc. ana unciam semis, Tincturae Salium Plantarum
earundem cum Spiritibus iisdem extractae, vel Tincturae Salis Tartari, libras
duodecim: misce, ac digere.

Omne Acidum oberrans in Corpore Humano mitigant, Circulationem Sanguinis
adjuvant, Cachexiam Mulierum tollunt, Sudores procreant, and omne in genere
noxium Corpori nostro corrigunt. Sunt illae Cephalicae, Neuroticae,
Stomachicae, Cardiacae, Hepaticae, Spleneticae, Arthriticae, and Hystericae;
Specificaeque eorum vires ab Oleis and Salibus desumendae sunt. Verbo, universi
Corporis Humani Viscera corroborant, and a Putredine and Veneno conservant and
liberant. Dosis, a dram una ad duabus.

XII. Potestates Viperarum.
Olei foetidi Viperarum unciam unam, Salis volatilis earundem drachmam unam,
misce; cui adduntur Spiritus Nitri rectificati unciae quatuor; postea add
Tincturae Salis Tartari, vel Spiritus Vini Tartarisati uncias december: misce, ac
digere.

Adversus Syncopen and Vapores Melancholicos a Spleen ad Cor exhalantes
praevalent. Adhibentur ad omnia genera Venenorum, and Symptomata venenata; in
Peste, and Febri maligna, and Hungarica, mirifice administrantur. Palpitationi
Cordis, deliquiis Animi, caeterisque Cardiacis passionibus adversantur.
Suffocationi, vel caduco Matricis, Epilepsiae, Vertigini, Haemicraniae,
Lethargo, Paralysique opitulantur. Scorbuto, and Impotentiae Virili, Atrophiae,
Tabi, Febrique Hecticae mirifice medentur. Et quod notatu dignum, absque
dolor, vomitione, tormine, perturbatione; and quod maximum est, cum Corporis
corroborante. Dosis, a scrupla una ad duas, plusminus, in Vino Hispanico.

XIII. Potestates Vngulae and Cornu Cervi.
Olei Ungulae and Cornu Cervi unciam unam, Spiritus Salis Armoniaci uncias
duas, Tinctura Salis Tartari uncias octo; misce, ac digere.

Hystericam and Cephalicam vim habent; propterea omnes Suffocationes Vteri,
etiam periculocissimas, nec-non Praecordiorum compressiones and dolores
tollunt. Nam in Strangulatione Matricis, ubi omnia irrita and quasi desperata
sunt, illae saluberrimae fuere: hujus enim ferocissimi Affectus causam
abscindunt, and omnes vel deploratissimus Mulierum praecipitationes Vteri, ob
Spermatis retentionem, aliasque causas, quam plurimas sistunt, and Matricis
motum perfect sedant. Dosis, a guttis december ad viginti, vel semidrachmam, in
Vino albo, vel liquore Hysterico.

CHAP. LXIII. Of POWERS.
1. Clauder's Powers of Soot.
PItch-like Soot, q.v. which if it be gathered from such Chimnies where the
best matter, as the wood of the Oak, Beech, or Pine is burnt, it will be so
much the better; powder it, and affuse thereon (in a glass Vessel) of the
Universal Spirit a sufficient quantity, or so much as may overtop it some
inches. Stop the Glass close, that the volatile parts may not fly away, shake
the Glass often, and in the space of half a quarter of an hour, or sooner, the
saline Spirit of the Menstruum will extract and suck out the Salt and Virtue of
the Soot; so as you will have presently a most excellent and rubycoloured
Essence, wholly freed from its empyreuma, and all its evil taste and smell:
then filter it, and keep it in a Glass close stopped, for use.

These Powers have most admirable effects in the Fallingsickness, Apoplexy,
Lethargy, and Hysteric Diseases; as also in a Cancerous habit of the whole
Body, in which they are of wonderful use. They are diaphoretick and anodyn, and
in most Diseases, whether from a hot or a cold cause, they are used with
success. They cure the Headache, Megrim, Vertigo, Toothache, and Palsy, to a
miracle; powerfully open even confirmed Obstructions, and cut and attenuate
tough Phlegm. Outwardly, they are applied in the Palsy, Contractures of the
Nerves and Muscles, in Gouts from a cold cause, in the beginnings of Venereal
and Podagrical Tophs, and in all kinds of Obstructions of the Nerves, arising
from coagulated Phlegm. Dose, a ss, ad ij, or iij. in some Cephalic Water or
Vehicle.

2. Powers of Aniseeds.
Oil of Aniseeds, Spirit of Sal Armoniack, a. j. Spirit of Aniseeds rectified
lbij. mix, and distill off the Powers according to Art.

They powerfully cut and dissipate tough Phlegm, resolve Obstructions of the
Lungs; and so are profitable to all such as are afflicted with Asthma's,
Phthisicks, Catarrhs, inveterate Coughs, and other vices of the Breast. Dose, a
j, ad ij.

3. Powers of Juniper Berries.
Oil of Juniper Berries, Spirit of Sal Armoniack, a. j. Spirit of Juniper
Berries lbij. mix, and draw off the Powers by distillation. Or thus, Oil of
Juniper Berries j. Tincture of the Salt of Juniper, or Salt of Tartar, lbij.
mix, and keep them for use.

They powerfully discuss Wind in the Bowels, and take away Stones and Mucous
matter from the Reins; and have a mighty faculty of cutting, dissipating,
opening, cleansing, and consuming or wasting heaps of cold and serous Humors:
for which reason they admirably open Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen,
Mesentery, Reins, Bladder, and Womb, in a cold habit of Body; and help Diseases
of the Head, Breast, and Stomach, coming from a flatulent and cold cause, or
from a defluxion of Humors. Dose, a j, ad ij. twice a day.

4. Powers of Lavender.
Oil of Lavender, Spirit of Sal Armoniack, a. j. Spirit of Lavender lbij. mix,
and distill, according to Art. Or thus, Oil of Lavender j. Salt of Lavender
melted ij. Alcohol of Wine ij. mix, and digest. Or thus, Oil of Lavender j.
Tincture of the Salt of Lavender, or of the Salt of Tartar lbij. mix, and
digest. So have you Powers of Lavender.

They restore strength lost or decayed, and by their heating faculty comfort
the Brain, Stomach, and Womb. They are wonderfully good against malign and
pestilential Fevers, also in the Plague it self, and prevail against a
Palpitation of the Heart. They highly quicken all the internal Senses, and cure
all Affects arising from a cold cause; because they vehemently heat, and cheer
all the Spirits. They restore such as are afflicted with the Apoplexy,
Falling Sickness, Sciatica, Palsy, and Gout of what kind soever. Dose, a j, ad
ij.

5. Powers of Cloves.
Oil of Cloves j. Tincture of Salt of Cloves made with Spirit of Cloves lbij.
mix, and digest. Or thus: Oil of Cloves, Spirit of Sal Armoniack, a. j. Spirit
of Cloves lbij. mix, and draw off the Powers by distillation. Or thus: Of the
Oil j. Tincture of Salt of Tartar lbij. mix, and digest, for use.

They comfort all the members, chiefly the Stomach, Heart, Brain, and Bowels;
by conserving and augmenting their heat. They mightily help the Liver and
Spleen, and restore their lost functions. They are of wonderful efficacy in
easing the Pains of the Teeth of what kind soever; for that being of a caustic
virtue, they immediately smite as it were the Nerve at the bottom of the Tooth,
and master the sharp humor: and for the same reason they cure all sorts of
Ulcers; for they, by their own proper Salt in like manner burning, dissolve and
annihilate the burning and caustic Salt of the Ulcer, and both are changed
into another substance; and then Nature, by her own Balsamic property induces
the cicatrice. They are a choice Medicine in Swooning fits, for they cheer the
Heart, and strengthen it, and remove all such things therefrom, which may any
ways hurt it. There is nothing more powerful to preserve from the malignity of
a pestilent Air; because they strengthen all the principal members, so as to
make them able to resist any poisonous or pestilential impurity. Dose, a j, ad
ij. in Wine, Broth, or other Vehicle.

6. Powers of Limons and Oranges.
Oil of Limons, or Oranges, Spirit of Sal Armoniack, a. j. Spirit of Limons or
Oranges lbij. mix, and distill. Or thus: Oil of, etc. j. Tincture of Salt of
Tartar, made with Spirit of Limons or Oranges lbij. mix, and digest.

They are Cephalic, Stomatick, Cardiack, Splenetick, and Hysteric; they cure
the Megrim and pain of the Head, arising from cold wind, and plenty of
Pituitous humors, for they discuss Wind. They clear the Sight, strengthen the
Stomach and Liver, and abate vapors of the Spleen, provoke Urine, stop the
flux of the Whites, and wonderfully help the Womb; they are profitable against
stubborn and rebellious Diseases of the Nerves and Joints, arising from cold,
and greatly provoke Venery; because they heat the parts, and stir up the vital
and animal Spirits, the proper sources of all actions. They also are of mighty
use in the curing of the Catarrh, Palsy, Convulsion, Trembling, the Gout,
Apoplexy, Epilepsy, Vertigo, Lethargy, and Suffocation of the Womb, and other
Diseases coming from cold. Dose, a j, ad ij.

7. Powers of Peniroyal.
Oil of Peniroyal, Spirit of Sal Armoniack, a. j. Tincture of Salt of
Peniroyal, made with Spirit of the same, lbij. mix them. Or thus: Of the Oil
and Spirit aforesaid, a. j. Spirit of Peniroyal, or rectified S.V. lbij. mix,
and distill. Or thus: Oil and Spirit as before, j. Tincture of Salt of Tartar
lbij. mix, and digest.

There is nothing more powerful against the pale and illfavored color of
Virgins, because it helps the Concoctive faculty of the Bowels; they safely
provoke the Terms, for the same reason; for which cause also they are good
against most Diseases of the Womb. They are said to cure Barrenness, and make
Women fruitful. They quicken all the Senses, both internal and external, and
cure all Affects arising from a cold cause, reviving the Spirits, Vital and
Animal. They are good against Difficulty of Breathing, strengthen the Breast and
Lungs, and stop Catarrhs, freeing the Lungs from the Phlegm and glutinous
Humors, with which they are stuffed, by penetrating, and exciting their
faculty. Dose, a j, ad ij.

8. Powers of Rosemary.
They are made as the Powers of Peniroyal.

They quicken all the Senses, and so strengthen the Brain, and Memory in
particular, that they preserve from the Vertigo, Sleepiness, Apoplexy,
Lethargy, and all cold Affects of the Head and Nerves. They wonderfully cheer
all the Spirits, Natural, Vital, and Animal; nor is any thing more efficacious
against the infection of a Pestilential Air. They retard Old Age, because they
conserve the radical and native heat. They are an admirable Ophthalmick, for
they cure all sorts of Cloudiness, Darkness, or Films, offending the Sight, by
dissolving the viscous Humors which cause them. They are good to heal
Fistula's and Ulcers, whether concave or eating, by cleansing them. They ease
and take away the Headache, which arises sympathetically from the evil
disposition of the Stomach. They cure the Apoplexy, Epilepsy, Lethargy, Palsy,
Convulsions, and Diseases of the Womb. Dose, a j, ad ij. more or less, in some
Cephalic or Neurotick Vehicle, morning and evening, for about 60 days.

9. Powers of Amber.
Oil of Amber that comes forth first, of the first distillation j. Spirit of
Amber, distilled with rectified S.V. lbij. Volatile Salt of Amber ij. mix them.
Or thus: Of pure Oil of Amber j. rectisied S.V. lbij. Spirit of Sal Armoniack
ij. mix, and distill, according to Art.

They are an excellent cure for the Palsy, and all kinds of Affections of the
Nerves, the Gout in the Feet, and all other kinds of Gouts, the Megrim, and all
kinds of Headache, Contractions of the Muscles, and most Diseases of the Head
and Womb, being outwardly applied; and inwardly taken, they wonderfully prevail
against Fits of the Mother, Vapors from the Womb, and Distempers of the Animal
Spirits. They sharpen the Understanding, and quicken all the Senses, and are
profitable against Tremblings of the limbs, and Convulsions of all kinds
whatsoever. They are good against the Vertigo, and Lethargy, arising from what
cause soever, but chiefly from a cold cause. Dose, a j, ad iij. in appropriate
Waters, Syrups, or other appropriate Vehicles.

10. Powers of Turpentine.
Oil of Turpentine j. Alcohol of Wine lbj. mix, and distill: to which you may
add (if you so please) Spirit of Sal Armoniack ss.

They cure a virulent Gonorrhoea, heal Wounds of the Nerves and Ulcers, and
help a stoppage of Urine, or difficulty of Pissing: they are said to break the
Stone in the Reins and Bladder, and heal in a very short time Ulcers of those
parts. They cure the Lethargy, Palsy, and Trembling of the members. Dose, a j,
ad ij. in white Wine, or some other Vehicle.

11. Powers of Virtues.
Of the Oils of Angelica, Sweet-Marjoram, Camomil, Caraways, Fenel-seed, Bawm,
Mint, Rue, Sage, Savin, Sassafras, Time, a. ss. Spirit of Sal Armoniack vj.
Spirit of the same Plants lbxij. mix, and distill. Or thus: Of the Oils, etc. a.
ss. Tincture of the Salts of the same Plants, made with the Spirit of the same
Plants; or instead thereof, Tincture of the Salt of Tartar lbxij. mix, and
digest.

They correct all the abounding Acids in the Humane Body, promote the
Circulation of the Blood, are good against an evil habit in Women, provoke
Sweat, and contend with evil Humors in the Body of every kind. They are
Cephalic, Neurotick, Stomatick, Cardiack, Hepatick, Splenetick, Arthritick,
and Hysteric; and their Specific virtue or power is derived from their
several particular Oils and Salts. In a word, they strengthen all the Bowels of
the Humane Body, preserving and freeing it from Putrefaction and Poison. Dose,
a j, ad ij.

12. Powers of Vipers.
Stinking Oil of Vipers (made by distillation) j. volatile Salt of Vipers j. mix
them; to which add rectified Spirit of Nitre iv. after which add Tincture of
Salt of Tartar, or Tartarized S.V. x. mix, and digest.

They prevail against Swooningfits, and Melancholy Vapors arising from the
Spleen, and assailing the Heart. They are given against all sorts of Poison,
and Poisonous Symptoms; as also in the Plague, and malign Fevers, and in the
Hungartan Disease, in which they wonderfully prevail. They are good against the
Palpitation of the Heart, Faintings, and other like passions: they help Fits of
the Mother, Falling Sickness, Vertigo, Megrim, Lethargy, and Palsy. They cure
the Scurvy, Impotency in Men, Atrophy, Consumption, and Hectic Fever, for
which things they are famous. And that which is worthy to be known, they do
these things without any painful operation, vomiting, griping, perturbation, or
trouble of the Stomach or Bowels; and which is chiefly to be taken notice of,
they perform all their effects by an act of strengthening the Body. Dose, a gut
xx, ad xl. more or less, in a glass of Canary.

13. Powers of Hearts Horns and Hoofs.
Oil of the Hoofs and Horns j. Spirit of Sal Armoniack ij. Tincture of Salt of
Tartar viij. mix, and digest.

They are Hysteric and Cephalic, for which cause they take away all kinds of
Hysterick-fits, even the most vehement; as also the pain and compression of the
Praecordia. And in Fits of the Mother, where all the parts are irritated, and
the Disease become as it were desperate, they have a most sanative power; for
they destroy even the Cause of this most violent Disease, and of all other the
most vehement precipitations or disorders in the Wombs of Women; whether they
arise from the retention of the Seed, or any other cause; which as they
powerfully repress, so they perfectly quiet. Dose, a gut. x, ad xx. or ss. in
white Wine, or some Hysterick-liquor.

CHAP. LXIV. De SALIBVS.
I. Sal Absinthii fixum.
ABsinthii communis quantum sufficit, accendatur ut penitus in cineres abeat
albos; ex quibus cum Aqua calida Elixiviatur Sal: hanc Aquam filtra, recentem
supra faeces fundendo, donec nullum falinum amplius referat saporem: solutiones
omnes confunde, and in Patella terrea munda ad siccitatem evapora; sique opus
sit, secunda and tertia solutione, filtratione, and coagulatione purificatur.
Sal Essentiale paratur ex foliis Absinthii virentis, antequam semina protrudere
incipiat, contusis, in Aqua copiosa coctis ad medietatem: fortiter decoctum
coletur per expressionem, colatura cum albumine Ovorum clarificetur, and
evaporetur ad Mellis liquidi spissitudinem; deinde reponendo in frigido ad
crystallizandum, siceantur Crystalli ad usum.

Sal Fixum incidit, aperit, abstergit, attenuat, and Stomachicum est, Calculum
pellit, Vrinam and Sudores ciet, prodest atque in Febribus quibuscunque. Dosis,
a granis december ad scruplam unam. Sal Essentiale abstergit, Stomachicum est
egregium, and Sudorisicum; Vermes necat, Obstructiones Lienis and Mesenterii
tollit, and Bilis effervescentiam sedat. Dosis, a granis december ad scruplam
unam.

II. Sal Aluminis.
Ex Capite mortuo, open Aquae communis elicitur. Alumen dulce, seu Saccharum
Aluminis, fit ex Alumine in Aqua communi soluta; dein digeritur and
crystallisatur, terque opus repetetur, ut Alumen dulcescat.

Sal Febrifugum est and Sudorificum, sumiturque ante Paroxysmum, a granis sex
ad sexdecim; postea mane ac vesperi datur in Vehiculs Antifebriticis. Saccharum
utilissimum est in Pectoris Morbis, praesertim ex Minerarum halitu contractis;
Vulnera curat, convenitque Vlceribus inveteratis and Odontalgiae, partibus
impositum affectibus. Dosis, a granis octo ad sexdecim, in Vehiculo aliquo
adapto.

III. Sal Armoniacum volatile.
Salis Armoniaci and Salis Tartari, ana parts aequales; misce, and sublima
secundum Artem: sublimetur etiam cum tertia Castoris vel Succini part.

Medicamentum est potentissimum in Scorbuto inveterato, in Hydrope, insuper in
Epilepsia, Apoplexia, Lethargo, omnibusque Capitis Morbis, quia Obstructiones
potenter Corporis Humani tollit: attenuat, aperit, and diaphoreticum est;
exhibetur in Affectibus Pulmonum ex acri and corrosivo Sale oriundis,
praesertim in Pleuritide, Colico dolor, passione Hysterica, Obstructionibus
Mensium, and similibus Affectibus; Pituitam tenacem incidit, Spiritus in
universo Corpore recreat, Sanguinisque Circulationem promovet. Dosis, a granis
quatuor ad duodecim.

IV. Sal Cinerum clavellatorum.
Fit, ut Sal Absinthii, Sectione prima.

Attenuat, aperit, resolvit, Humores fundit, cum Acidis effervescit, eaque
temperat and destruit, unde infinitis Morbis conducit, praecipue omnibus iis,
qui ab Humorum infarctu, and a Fermento acido generantur; ut Morbi Pituitosi,
Scorbutus, Obstructiones Renum and Vesicae, Calculus, Stranguria, Ischuria,
Dysuria, Febres, Hydrops, Podagra, aliique Morbi similes: nempe Meatus
reserando, Sudorem ciendo, Humores solvendo, Acidum and Acre absorbendo,
Vrinamque movendo. Dosis, a granis sex ad quindecim, vel scruplam unam, in Aqua
Elementaria, aliove Vehiculo diuretico.

V. Sal Cornu Cervi Succinatum.
Frustulorum Cornu Cervi crudi quantum sufficit, repleatur eo Retorta terrea,
instituaturque distillatio in Igne aperto, observando Ignis gradus; and
prodibit cum primo gradu Phlegma, cum secundo Oleum, cum tertio Sal volatile:
continuetur distillatio per horas sex, donec nil amplius prodeat; and habebitur
in Recipiente massa, ex Phlegmate, Oleo, and Sale volatili conflata. Magna
quoque pars Salis volatilis sub forma Nivis, adhaerebit lateribus Recipientis,
quod debet esse amplum, and maxim quadrans ad collum Retortae. Oleum crassum
separetur a Phlegmate and Sale volatili, solvendo totam massam Aqua pura,
filtrandoque per Chartam: sic Sal volatili and Phlegma transibunt per Chartam,
Oleum vero crassum in Charta manebit. Aqua seu Phlegma, cum Sale solent
cohobare super Caput mortuum, ad albedinem calcinatum in Cucurbitam vitream cum
Alembico, leatissimo gradu Ignis, and Sal ascendabit nivei coloris in Alembici
capite. Recipe etiam Salis Cornu Cervi purificati libram unam, Succini
pulverisati libram semis; misce, and sublimatur: sic habebis Sal Cornu Cervi
Succinatum.

Alexipharmicum, Diaphoreticum, Cephalicum, Cardiacum, and Hystericum est;
sumitur in Febribus malignis, Peste, Syncope, passione Hysterica, Arthritide
vaga, Paralysi, Apoplexia, Epilepsia, Lethargo, Ictero, Obstructionibus Vrinae,
Morbis Melancholicis; praesertim in omnibus Morbis per Sudorem curabilibus:
penetrantissimum est Medicamentum in Obstructionibus Mensium, and Affectibus
reliquis Vterinis, and Nervorum Obstructionibus, in Morsu Animalium
Venenatorum; quorum Fermenta potenter enecat, and per Sudores expellit; si cum
Cardiacis and aliis Alexipharmacis misceatur, ut Artis est. Dosis est, a granis
december ad scruplam unam.

VI. Sal Fabarum volatile.
Fabarum libras quinque, indatur Retortae terreae, vel vitreae loricatae, and
distilletur Igne aperto, sensim augendo Ignem, donec Oleum and Sal volatile
ascendere incipiat; and continuetur distillatio per horas tres vel quatuor,
donec Recipiens clarifactum erit. Liquor rectificetur simul cum Sale volatili
in Arena, per Cucurbitam vitream collo longo, cum Alembico suo; sic Sal
volatile gradatim ascendabit in Alembici capitis summitate, albi coloris; quod
immediate indatur in Vitro optime clauso, and in loco frigido reponatur ad usum.

Mirifice attenuat, resolvit, incidit, aperit, dissipat, and penetrat;
Obstructiones omnes incidendo Humores Pituitosos, and in fluorem redigendo
reserat; hinc Vrinas and Sudores pellit, chronicisque Morbis convenit omnibus;
aciditatem omnem temperat and extinguit; infinitisque Morbis utilis est, ut
Podagrae, ardori Ventriculi, Scorbuto, Hystericis, and passionibus
Hypochondriacis, Epilepsiae, Apoplexiae, Lethargo, Soporosis omnibus, Syncope,
and caeteris, quoniam Aegros mire excitat. Dosis, a granis quinque ad
quindecim.

VII. Sal, seu, Lapis Infernalis.
Calcis vivae libras duas, Cinerum clavellatorum libram unam, misce; and Aqu^
pura extrahatur Lixivium per ebullitionem: dein liquorem supernatantem per
Manicam Hippocratis cola, and evapora in Vase sictili ad siccitatem; sic
remanebit Sal, quod in Crucibulo, Igni admoto, liquabitur, and ad humiditatis
residuae evaporationem ebulliet. Hinc materia, sub forma Olei in fundo
Crucibuli existens, effundatur, and in Vitro optime clauso servetur. Fit etiam
ex Lunae cupellatae uncia una, and Spiritus Nitri rectificati unciis tribus, in
quo Luna soluta, and ad tertias evaporata; infunditur Crucibulo Germanico and
amplo, and Ignem apertum, ad consistentiam debitam evaporatur, tandemque
effunditur, and in Vitro reponetur ad usum.

Causticam vim spatio semihorae perficit, and absumendis Excrescentiis carnosis
inservit.

VIII. Sal Martis.
Limaturae Martis unciam unam, Olei Vitrioli unciam unam and semis, Aquae
pluvialis calefactae uncias tres vel quatuor, ad octo; in Cucurbita vitrea
misce, reponeque in Arena donec Limatura plane dissoluta sit, videlicet ad
horas duodecim; Solutionem calidam filtra, and evapora ad pelliculae
apparentiam; reponeque in Cellam per horas viginti-quatuor, ut Crystalli
concrescant virides, quae ex liquore auferendae sunt, and super Charta sine
Igne exsiccandae: Liquorem remanentem evaporetur ad dimidias, iterumque repone
in Cellam; sic denuo Crystalli concrescent, quas pariter sicca, servaque ad
usum. Si been operatus fucris, ex Martis uncia, Vitrioli uncias duas habebis.
Sal Martis, quod Anima Hepatis dicitur. Olei Vitrioli libram semis, Spiritus
Vini rectisicati libram unam; misce in Sartagine ferrea, digere ad siccitatem:
sic habebis Sal Martis album, quod collige, Arenaque sicca, and servetur ad
usum.

Optim^ convenit Scorbuto and Melancholiae Hypochondriacae, Obstructionibus
Mensium, Chlorosi, and Cachexiae Virginum, Ictero, Hydropi, Morbis Spleneticis,
and Vermibus Puerorum, quibus specificum est; and in omnibus Obstructionibus
Hepatis, Lienis, Stomachi, Vteri, and Mesenterii, and aliis Affectibus inde
oriundis. Dosis, a granis december ad scruplam unam, prioris; and a granis tribus
ad sex vel octo, posterioris.

IX. Sal Mirabile.
Caput mortuum, in distillatione Spiritus Salis, vel Spiritus Nitri, Oleo
Vitrioli factum, dissolve in Aqua ferventi, vel ad minimum tepida, ut non
Vitrum rumpatur; solutum filtra per Chartam, and evapora ad tertiae tantum
partis remanentiam, vel cuticulae apparentiam; residuum in loco frigido
relinque per duos vel tres dies, and liquor magna ex part in Crystallos
concrescet, quae non debent esse corrosivae; quod si sint, tum significat,
nimis multum esse evaporatum ex Aqua; necesseque est, adhuc simul Aqua pura
dissolvere, iterumque filtrare, tum evaporare, sed caute, ne nimium Aquae
evaporetur; sed tantum, ut possit hoc Sal apt crystallizari.

Hoc Sal leniter coagulatum, exiccatumque super Charta alba in Arena lent
calida, in pulverem albissimum reducatur; vim habet diversos coagulandi
liquores, ut Cerevisiam, Vinum, Acetum, si una pars Salis hujus calcinati
misceatur cum tribus partibus liquoris, reponanturque per noctem, sic liquor
cum Sale hoc abibit in Glaciem. Sal Crystallizatum catharticum est, Visceraque
leniter movet per inferiora, omnesque Humores depravatos and malignos educit.
Cephalalgiae, Hemicraniae, Epilepsiae, Defluxionibus, Odontalgiae, Hydropi,
I^tero, Arthri^idi, Vermibus, Febribus interne da^um convenit; ex^ern^,
Vlceribus inveteratis, Vulneribus, Doloribus, Obstructionibus Ossis
cribriformis medetur. Dosis, a drac^is duabus ad quatuor vel sex, in Vino,
aliove Vehiculo adaptato.

X. Sal Nitratum.
Salis communis, vel Tartari, libram unam, Spiritus Nitri rectificati libram
unam and semis; misce, and super Arena calida evaporetur ad siccitatem usque.

Hoc Sal potenter attenuat, penetrat, incidit, aperit, and resolvit;
refrigerat, and Vrinam movet; Li^hontripticus est, conservatque a Putr^dini,
and sic malignitati medetur; unde ejus usus in Peste, Febribus malignis,
Inflammationibus, and Febribus ardentibus. Dosis, a granis quatuor ad scruplam,
Vino, vel Vehiculo appropriato.

XI. Sal Nitrum Catharticum.
Nitri fixati quantum vis, Spiritu Aceti dissolvatur; filtra, coagula, idque
ter cum novo Spiritu Aceti repete: deinde solve in Spiritu V^i, evaporaque ad
siccitatem usque.

Suaviter purgat, idque per inferiora, Obstructionibusque Mesenterii and Lienis
conducit: sumitur a scrupla semis ad drachmam semis. Hoc dicitur Terra foliata
Nitri, and utile est in Febribus ardentibus, putridis, and malignis; Vrinam and
Calculum expellit, and praestantissimum est ad incidendos and detergendos
Humores crassos and tartareos, and Meatus obstructos aperiendos.

XII. Sal-Nitrum Nitratum.
Nitri purissimi libram unam, Spiritus Nitri rectificati libram unam and semis;
misce, and macerentur simul per horas aliquot: dein Igni superponatur, and
evaporetur liquor ad siccitatem; sic in fundo remanebit Sal candidissimum,
fracto Vitro, eximendum.

Locum Salis Prunellae supplere potest, sed mult^ fortius, and gratius: omnibus
Febribus putridis and malignis, Peste, Morbis Contagiosis, Scorbuto, and
Obstructionibus Viscerum convenit; Sitim extinguit, and Stomachi Fermentum
enervatum estaurat, Appetitumque excitat. Dosis, a granis quatuor ad scruplam.
Permiscetur plerumque tribus partibus Sacchari albissimi. Externe Gingivarum
putridini illitum convenit.

XIII. Sal-Nitrum Vitriolatum.
Fit ex Nitro, and Oleo Vitrioli, iisdemque proportionibus ut Nitrum-Nitratum.

Praeservativum est in Scorbuto, Putridine, Peste, and Morbis Contagiosis,
habetque virtutes easdem cum priore: valde acutum est, and penetrans; Ictero,
Cachexiae, Anorexiae, Morbis Chronicis and Hypochondriacis conducit. Dosis, a
granis quinque ad viginti.

XIV. Sal Polychrestum.
Nitri purissimi, Sulphuris, ana uncias octo; terantur subtilissim^,
cribrentur, misceanturque, and massa per vices ingeratur in Crucibulum (super
carbonibus) ignitum, comburaturque, donec pulvisculus griseus vel rubeus
remaneat: Pulverem solve in Aqua ferventi, filtra per Chartam, and evapora ad
siccitatem; sic relinquatur Sal albissimum, quod usui servetur.

In Febribus intermittentibus insigne est deobstruens, si inseratur ordinario
Potui Aegrorum; Humores purgat serosos per Sedem, and nonnunquam per Vrinas.
Dosis est, dram una pro una vice, in Cerevisia vel Aqua; vel drachmae duae
vel tres in Aquae libris duabus dissolvatur, ut fiat instar Acidularum;
refrigerat, and Obstructiones optime reserat.

XV. Sal Prunellae.
Nitri purissimi pulverisati uncias octo, inde Crucibulo mundo, superque
Carbonibus accensis repone, ut fluat instar Aquae; fluenti add Florum
Sulphuris pulverisatorum drachmam unam vel drachmas duas, qui per vices
inspergantar; quibus incendio absumptis, Nitrum effunde fusum super lamellam
cupream mundam, ut fiat in Tabellas, quae sunt ipsum Sal Prunellae, sive
Crystallum Minerale dictum.

Refrigerat, repellit, Putridem arcet, Acrimoniam acidam temperat; conducit in
Dysenteria, in Febribus malignis, in Inflammatione Faucium, aliarumque partium.
Dosis, a semiscruplam ad semidrachmam. Sitim extinguit, Vrinam potenter movet,
Effervescentiam Sanguinis sedat; Bilem compescit, unde Crapulae, Febribus
ardentibus, doloribus Nephriticis, Obstructionibus Pulmonum, omnibusque
Inflammationibus convenit. Prunellae dictum, quia mediante Prunellae factum est.

XVI. Sal, seu Saccharum Saturni.
Cerussae optimae pulverisatae subtilissime libram unam, inde Cucurbitae
vitreae, affunde Spiritus Aceti libras tres, vel quantum sufficit; digerantur
in Arena calida per horas vigintiquatuor, (ahi per septimanam) donec Acetum
evadat dulcissimum, aliquoties Cerussam optime agitando, ne fundo adhaereat:
Solutionem instar Sacchari dulcem, effunde, and recens Spiritum Aceti
superfunde, eodem modo procedendo, ut ante; haec operatio repetatur tamdiu,
donec Acetum non amplius dulce fiat. Liquores omnes confusos filtra per Chartam
lento Igne, ad quartae partis remanentiam, vel ad Pelliculae apparentiam
evapora; evaporatum infunde Vasi stanneo, vel idem repone Vitrum in locum
frigidum; and post horas viginti-quatuor in fundo Vasis stannei, vel Vitri,
Crystallos albos, vel substantiam Saccharinam cum adstrictione dulcissimam,
siccandam, and usui reservandam. Ex Cerussae libra una, Salis vel Sacchari
colliguntur unciae octo vel novem.

Resrigerat, siccat, adstringit, and repellit, conducit in Inflammationum
principiis, Pectoris and Pulmonis vitiis succurrit; praecipue si Tinctura cum
Spiritu Vini inde abstrahatur: Vermes necat, Venerem extinguit, Gonorrhoeam,
Diarrhoeam, Dysenteriam, and Mensium profluvium sistit. Dosis, a granis duabus
ad sex. In Affectibus Pulmonum: Sacchari Saturni, Nitri purissimi, ana;
dissolve seorsim in Aceti Spiritu, solutiones confunde, filtra, and evaporando
Crystallos fiunt. Hoc Medicamentum in Asthmate, Orthopnoea, and similibus
Affectibus prodest. Dosis, interne, a granis duobus ad december: externe, vel in
Aquis, vel Vnguentis, vel Emplastris permiscetur. Saccharum syncerum omnes
Inflammationes allevat, valetque in Affectibus Oculorum, Erysipelate,
Tumoribus, and Vlceribus; and propter duas causas medetur; Sal enim volatile
Aceti Obstructiones solvit, and particulae Saturni, propter mollitiem suam,
acres obtundunt Humores, and erodentes, qui Vlcerum sanationem impediunt, and
cicatrizat. Cosmeticum est, and in Podagra calida, Suffusionibus, mira
praestat; itidem in Contusionibus, aliisve dolorincis Fluxionibus sedandis. In
Gonorrhoea, nbi ab acri Fermento Venereo eroditur Ductus Vrinarius, hoc
Saccharum cum Aqua vel Lacte tepido, injectum per Syringam, praesens est
remedium.

XVII. Sal Succini volatile.
Fit in distillatione and rectificatione Olei Succini, colligiturque collo
Retortae adhaerens, quod sic purificatur: Salis volatilis Succini Oleo suo
foetido inquinati, quantum vis, huic misce Salis decrepitati tantum, quousque
fit arida, and sublima ex Vasculo terreo, Pyramide chartacea munita; Ignem
autem caute rege, ne Capitellum papyraceum comburatur: sic enim obtinebis Salem
Succini volatilem instar lintei, omnique foetore and empyreumate liberatum.

Vires habet Olei, at potentiores; insuper passionbus Hystericis succurrit,
Calculum and Vrinam pellit, and Sudorificum est; Paralyticis, Apoplecticis,
Hystericis, Arthritidi vagae, similibusque Affectibus, and omnibus Morbis
frigidis prodest. Dosis, a granis quatuor ad scruplam unam, Vehiculo
convenienti. Spasmos curat, and specificum est in Lethargo, Epilepsia,
Convulsionibus, etc.

XVIII. Sal Tartari.
Fix ex Tartaro calcinato, ut Sal Cinerum clavellatorum, Sectione quarta hujus
Capitis.

Attenuat, incidit, resolvit, and potenter aperit; acida omnia Fermenta,
praecipue Ventriculi, in momento destruit, Vrinam movet, and Calculos pellit,
Exaestuationem Sanguinis sedat, Febribus ardentibus, Delirio, Vigilis
continuis, Ictero, and Hydropi subvenit. Sulphura aperit, and sic praeparat, ut
cum Spiritu Vini Tinctura genuina elici possit. Dosis, a semiscrupla ad
semidrachmam, bis in diem, Si Sal cum part Nitri dimidia factum est, optimum
erit Diureticum and Lithontripticum, and Tincturarum extrahente, admisceri
solet.

XIX. Sal Vitriolatum.
Salis communis, vel Salis Tartari in Aqua pura soluti, quantum vis, ita ut
Lixivium sit limpidissimum and fortissimum; huic successive guttatim affunde
Oleum Vitrioli rectificatum, quousque effervescentiam sedatam notaveris: dein
leni Igne ad siccitatem evapora.

Digestivum est nobile ad Obstructiones pertinaces resolvendas, praecipue
Stomachi, Mensium, Mesenterii, Lienis, and similium; Aperiens est egregium, and
magnum Stomachicum; potenter attenuat, incidit, crassosque Humores and viscosos
resolvit: Cachexiae, Ictero, Hydropi, Calculo, Chlorosi succurrit, and stimuli
loco Purgantibus permiscetur; cumque Jalappa feliciter purgat Hydropicos.
Dosis, a semiscrupla ad scruplas duas. Diureticus, Febrifugus and Anticolicus
est, valet contra Pestem, arcet Putredinem, extinguit Sitim; inde convenit
nimiis Sanguinis ardoribus, Febribus ardentibus and malignis; ratione
penetrandi totum Corpus, infinitis Morbis est utilis.

XX. Ens Veneris.
Vitrioli Martis optimi reverberati and loti uncias quatuor, Salis Armoniaci
uncias octo, misce, and sublima, bis vel ter cohobando.

Anodynum est, in summis doloribus; lassitudini Corporis maxim convenit, unde
usus est eximii in Rachitide; Vermes necat, Obstructiones aperit and resolvit,
valdeque proficuum est in Pleuritide ac Vteri suffocatione. Dosis, a granis
quatuor ad duodecim, vel sexdecim, mane ac vesperi, Vehiculo aquoso appropriato.

XXI. Vitriolum Lunae.
Lunae cupellatae uncias duas, eique affundito Spiritus Nitri uncias sex;
collocato in digestione tepida, quousque Spiritus Nitri Lunam dissolverit;
solutionem ad medietatem, vel cuticuli apparentiam, evaporato, and loco quieto
locato: ita concrescunt Crystalli Lunares, quas a superflua humiditate separa,
and leni calore exicca, superfluum autem humorem de novo ad medietatem evapora,
and proceed ut prius. Hos Crystallos resolvito iterum in Aqua pura vel pluviali
distillata; digere per horas viginti quatuor, ut faeces, si quae sint,
subsidant; solutionem filtrato, and ad medietatem evaporato: ita de novo
Crystalli concrescunt Lunares, quas exicca, ut dictum prius, and reserventur ad
usum. Nota primo, Quod Luna absolute ab omni Venere debeat esse depurata; secus
enim Vomitus violentos excitare solet. Secundo, Quod huic Aqua solutioni quidam
addunt Salis Prunellae tantum, quantum ponderavit Argentum, eum in finem, ut
maxima ex part corrosioum Crystallorum infringatur.

Specificum and indubitatum Medicamentum Antihydropicum est; Cephalaeae,
Cephalalgiae, and Hemicraniae medetur. Dosis, a granis duabus ad quatuor vel
sex, in baustu Vini calidi, Aqua Cinamomi, vel similibus Vehiculis
convenientibus. Nota: Vt in forti eductione Aquarum humoris hydropici, Viscera
sunt corroboranda, Essentia Baccarum Juniperi, cum proprio Spiritu extracta,
and cum guttulis aliquot Spiritus Salis acidula facta; vel Elixire Proprietatis
Paracelsi cum Spiritu Salis dulcificato, facto. Hoc specificum quinetiam in
Epilepsia, Apoplexia, Lethargo, Vertigine, Convulsionibus, Arthritide,
Paralysi, similibusque Morbis convenit.

CHAP. LXIV. Of SALTS.
1. Fixed Salt of Wormwood.
COmmon Wormwood, q.s. burn it, so as it may be presently brought into white
ashes; of which with hot or boiling Water make a Lixivium: filter it, and put
fresh Water upon the faeces, so long till the Water will come off unaltered in
the taste: put all these solutions into a clean earthen Pan, and evaporate to
dryness; and if need be, you may purify it by a second and third solution,
filtration, and coagulation. The Essential Salt. It is prepared of green
Wormwood, before it runs up to seed, bruising it, and boiling it in a good
quantity of Water to one half: then straining out the decoction by strongly
expressing it, which being clarified with whites of Eggs, is to be boiled to
the thickness of new Honey, and put in a cold place to crystallize, and drying
the Crystals for use.

The Fixed Salt incides, opens, cleanses, attenuates, and is Stomatick, expels
the Stone, provokes. Urine and Sweat, and is good against all sorzs of Fevers.
Dose, a gr. x, ad j. The Essential Salt cleanses, and is a famous Stomatick and
Sudorifick; it kills Worms, and removes Obstructions of the Spleen and
Mesentery, and allays the effervescence of Choler. Dose, a gr. x, ad j.

2. Salt of Alum.
It is drawn forth of the Caput mortuum, by the help of common Water. Sweet
Alum is made of the crude Alum, being dissolved in fair Water, digested, and
crystallized, and repeated three times, till the Alum grows sweet.

This Salt is a Febrifuge and Sudorifick, and is given before the Paroxysm, a
gr. vj, ad xvj. afterward it is given morning and evening in some
Antifebritick Vehicle. The Saccharum is profitable in Diseases of the Breast,
but chiefly in such as are contracted from Mineral fumes: it is profitable also
in the cure of Wounds and old Ulcers, as also the Toothache, being applied to
the part affected. Dose, a gr. viij, ad xvj. in some proper Vehicle.

3. Volatile Sal Armoniack.
Sal Armoniack and Salt of Tartar, a. mix, and sublime, according to Art. You
may also sublime it, with a third part of Castoreum, or Amber.

It is a most powerful Medicine against an inveterate Scurvy, Dropsy, but more
especially against the Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, Lethargy, and all Diseases
of the Head; because it powerfully takes away Obstructions of the Humane Body:
it attenuates, opens, and is diaphoretick; it is given in Affects of the Lungs,
arising from a sharp and corrosive Salt; chiefly in the Pleurisy, Colic, Fits
of the Mother, Obstructions of the Courses, and other like Diseases; it cuts
tough Phlegm, chears the Spirits through the universal Body, and promotes the
Circulation of the Blood. Dose, a gr. iv, ad xij.

4. Salt of Potashes.
It is made as Salt of Wormwood, at Sect. 1. above.

It attenuates, opens, resolves, melts Humors, and effervesces with Acids,
which it both qualifies and overcomes, whereby it conduces to the cure of
infinite Diseases, but chiefly of all such which are caused from the stuffing
of Humors, and are generated of an acid Ferment; as Diseases from Phlegm, the
Scurvy, Obstructions of the Reins and Bladder, the Stone, Strangury, Ischury,
Disury, Fevers, Dropsy, Gout, and other the like Distempers: and this it does
do by opening the Passages, provoking Sweat, resolving Humors, absorbing
Sharpness and Acidity, and provoking Urine. Dose, a gr. vj, ad gr. xv. or j. in
Aquae Elementaria, or other Diuretic Vehicle.

5. Salt of Hartshorn with Amber.
Little bits of raw Hartshorn q.s. fill therewith an earthen Retort, and
distill in an open Fire, observing degrees of heat: so will you have with the
first degree Phlegm, with the second Oil, with the third volatile Salt: continue
the distillation for six hours, till no more will come forth: so will you have
in the Receiver a mass, consisting of Phlegm, Oil, and volatile Salt; but a
great part of the volatile Salt will stick to the sides of the Receiver, (which
ought to be large, and exactly close with the neck of the Retort) in the form
of Snow. Separate the thick Oil from the Phlegm and Salt, by dissolving the
whole Mass in fair Water, and filtring it through Paper: so will the volatile Salt
and Phlegm pass through, leaving the thick Oil behind. The Water or Phlegm,
together with the Salt, are usually cohobated upon the Caput mortuum, calcined
to whiteness, in a glass Cucurbit, with its Head or Alembick, and distilled
with a very gentle Fire: so will the Salt ascend as white as Snow to the top of
the Head. Take again of this purified Salt of Hartshorn lbj. Amber in powder
lbss. mix, and sublime: so will you have the Salt of Hartshorn with Amber.

It is Alexipharmick, Diaphoretick, Cephalic, Cardiack, and Hysteric; and is
given in malign Fevers, the Plague, Swooning-fits, fits of the Mother, running
Gout, Palsy, Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, Lethargy, yellow Jaundies,
Obstructions of Urine, Melancholy Diseases; but chiefly in all Distempers
curable by Sweating: it is a most powerful Medicine in Obstructions of the
Terms, and other Affects of the Womb, and Stoppages of the Nerves, as also in
the Bitings of Venomous Creatures; which Ferment it powerfully overcomes, and
expels the same by Sweating; more especially if mixed with Cardiacks and other
Alexipharmicks, as Art shall direct. Dose, a gr. x, ad j.

6. Volatile Salt of Beans.
Beans lbv. put them into an earthen Retort, or a glass one coated, and distill
them in an open Fire, increasing the heat by degrees, till the Oil and volatile
Salt begins to ascend; and continue the distillation for three or four hours,
till the Receiver becomes clear. The Liquor, together with the volatile Salt,
may be rectified in a glass Cucurbit with a long neck and its proper head, in
Sand; so will the volatile Salt gradually ascend to the highest part of the
head, of a white color; which immediately put into a Glass and stop it close,
keeping it in a cold place for use.

It wonderfully attenuates, incides, opens, dissipates, and penetrates; it
opens all Obstructions, by cutting the Pituitous Humors, and making them thin;
for which reason it brings forth Urine and Sweat, and is good in all chronick
Diseases; it allays the acidity and destroys it; being profitable for the cure
of many Diseases, as the Gout, Pain of the Stomach, Scurvy, Fits of the Mother,
Hypochondriack Melancholy, Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, Lethargy, all Sleepy
Diseases, Swooning-fits, etc. for that it wonderfully excites or stirs up the
Animal Spirits in such Patients. Dose, a gr. v, ad xv.

7. Burning Salt, or, Hell-stone.
Quicklime lbij. Potashes lbj. mix, and with fair Water make a Ley by
boiling; decant the liquor, and strain it through Hippocrates his Sleeve, and in
an earthen Vessel evaporate away to dryness; so will the Salt remain, which put
into a Crucible over a Fire, making it to melt, and boil away the remaining
humidity. This matter under the consistency of Oil in the Crucible, pour forth,
and keep it in a Glass close stopped, for use. It is also made of cupellated
Silver j. dissolved in rectified Spirit of Nitre iij. this is to be evaporated
away to a third part; then put into a large German-Crucible, over an open Fire,
and evaporated away to a due consistency; then it is to be poured forth, and
kept in a Glass close stopped, for use.

It performs its Caustic operation in about half an hours time, and serves to
take away fleshy Excrescencies.

8. Salt of Mars, or Iron.
Filings of Iron j. Oil of Vitriol j ss. Rainwater warmed iij, or iv, to viij.
put them into a glass Cucurbit placed in a Sand-heat, till the Filings are
thoroughly dissolved viz. for about twelve hours; the Solution being warm,
filter, and evaporate, till a skin comes on the top; then put it into a Cellar
for twenty-four hours, that it may shoot into green Crystals, which take out of
the liquor, and dry them upon Paper without Fire: the remaining Liquor
evaporate to one half, and put it again into a Cellar to crystallize, as
before; which dry, and keep for use. If you have wrought well, you will have
from j. of Filings, ij. of Vitriol. Salt of Iron, which is called The Soul of
the Liver. Oil of Vitriol lbss. S.V. rectified lbj. mix them in a Fryingpan or
iron Kettle, and digest to dryness: so have you the white Salt of Mars, which
gather, and dry in a Sand-heat, and keep it for use.

It is admirably good against the Scurvy and Hpochondriack Melancholy,
Obstruction of the Terms, Green Sickness, and evil habit of Body in Virgins,
the yellow Jaundies, Dropsy, Diseases of the Spleen, and Worms in Children, for
which it is a specific; as also in all Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen,
Stomach, Womb, and Mesentery, and other Distempers thence arising. Dose, a gr.
x, ad j. of the former; and, a gr. iij, ad vj, vel viij. of the latter.

9. The Wonderful Salt.
The Caput mortuum made in distillation of Spirit of Salt, or Spirit of Nitre,
with Oil of Vitriol; dissolve it in boiling Water, at least so hot, as it may
not break the Glass; filter the solution through brown Paper, and evaporate till
a third part only remains, or a thin skin appears; then set it in a cold place
for two or three days; so will a great part of the liquor shoot into Crystals,
which ought not to be corrosive; if they be so, it shows that too much of the
liquor was evaporated; and it will be necessary again once more to dissolve in
Water, to filter and evaporate, but with caution, that too much of the Water be
not exhaled, but only so much as may put it into a condition of crystallizing.

This Salt being leisurely coagulated, and dried upon white Paper in a gentle
Sand-heat, becomes a very white powder; which has a virtue of congealing or
turning into a kind of Ice several liquors, as Beer, Vinegar, Wine; if to three
parts of the liquor you put one part of this poudred Salt, and it be kept quiet
for one night, so will the liquor be turned into Ice. The Crystals are
cathartick, gently purging the Bowels by Stool, and bringing forth all sorts of
depraved and malign Humors. Inwardly given it is good against the Headache,
Megrim, Epilepsy, Defluxions of Rheum, Toothache, Dropsy, Jaundies, Gout,
Worms, and Fevers. Outwardly used it helps Wounds, inveterate Ulcers, Pains,
and Obstructions in the Nostrils, or Stoppages in the Head. Dose, a ij, ad iv,
vel vj. in Wine, or other fit Vehicle.

10. Nitrated Salt.
Common Salt, or Salt of Tartar lbj. rectified Spirit of Nitre lbj ss. mix, and
upon warm Sand evaporate to dryness.

This Salt powerfully attenuates, pierces, cuts, opens, and resolves; it cools,
and provokes Urine, is good against the Stone, preserves from Putrefaction, and
for the same reason is good against malignity; for which cause it is used in
the Plague, malign Fevers, Inflammations, and burning Fevers. Dose, a gr. iv,
ad xx. in Wine, or some appropriate Vehicle.

11. Purging Sal Nitre.
Of fixea Nitre, as much as you please, which aissolve in Spirit of Vinegar;
alter and coagulate, which repeat three times with fresh Spirit of Vinegar:
lastly, dissolve it in S.V. and evaporate to dryness.

It purges gently, and that by Stool, opens Obstructions of the Mesentery and
Spleen. It is given, a ss, ad ss. This Salt is that which is called Terra
foliata Nitri, the Foliated Earth of Nitre, and is profitable against putrid,
burning, and malign Fevers; it brings forth Urine and the Stone, and is very
powerful in cutting and deterging of gross and tartarous Humors, and in opening
of obstructed Passages.

12. Salt-Nitre Nitrated.
The most pure Nitre lbj. Spirit of Nitre rectified lbj ss. mix, and digest
them together for some hours; then put it upon the Fire, and evaporate to
dryness; so will you have at bottom, a very white Salt, break the Glass, and
take it forth.

This may supply the place of Sal Prunellae, but it is much more powerful, and
more grateful; and is good against all forts of putrid and malign Fevers,
Contagious Diseases, and the Plague, as also the Scurvy, and Obstructions of
the Bowels; it quenches Thirst, and restores the weakened Ferment of the
Stomach, and stirs up the Appetite. Dose, a gr. iv. ad xx. It is oftentimes
mixed with three parts of white Sugar. Outwardly, being rubbed upon the Gums
and Teeth, it cleanses them, and preserves them from rotting.

13. Salt-Nitre Vitriolated.
It is made of Nitre and Oil of Vitriol, in the same proportions as the
asoregoing Nitre-Nitrated.

It is a Preservative against the Scurvy, Putrefaction, Plague, and contagious
Diseases, and has the virtues of the former: it is very acute, and penetrating;
and good against the Jaundies, evil habit of Body, depraved Appetite, Chronick
and Hypochondriack Diseases. Dose, a gr. v, ad xx.

14. Salt of many Virtues.
Pure Nitre, Sulphur, a. viij. beat them into very fine powder, sift them and
mix them together; which done, put of the mass by spoonfuls into a Crucible
red-fire-hot, upon a good fire, and let the matter burn till it becomes gray or
reddish; this dissolve in boiling Water, filter through Paper, and evaporate to
dryness; so will you have a white Salt, which keep for use.

It is a famous thing in Agues, powerfully opening, if it be put into the
ordinary Drink of the Sick; it purges serous Humors by Stool, and sometimes by
Urine. Dose, j. at a time, in Beer or Water; or two or three drams, in a quart
of Water, that it may be made like to the Medicinal Waters at Tunbridge, etc.
it cools, and notably opens Obstructions.

15. The Cooling Salt.
Fine Nitre in powder viij. put it into a clean Crucible upon a good fire, that
it may melt, and flow like Water; to which put fine Flowers of Sulphur j, or
ij. which by degrees let be strewed in; when all is consumed by burning, pour
forth the melted Nitre upon a clean copper plate, that it may be made into
little Tables, like Lozenges; which are the Sal Prunellae, called also Crystal
Mineral.

It cools, repels, resists Putrefaction, qualifies the acrimony of Acids,
prevails against a Bloody Flux, malign Fevers, Inflammations of the Jaws and
other parts. Dose, a ss, ad ss. It quenches Thirst, powerfully provokes Urine,
and allays the boiling of the Blood; it represses Choler, for which reasonit is
good against Surfeits, Burning-Fevers, Nephritickpains, Obstructions of the
Lungs, and all sorts of Inflammations. It is called Sal Prunellae, because made
by the help of Prunella, a Burning-coal.

16. Salt or Sugar, of Saturn or Lead.
Of the best Ceruss in fine powder lbj. put it into a glass Cucurbit, and
affuse thereon Spirit of Vinegar lbiij. or a sufficient quantity; digest in
warm Sand for twenty-four hours, (others say, for a week) till the Vinegar
becomes very sweet, by sometimes stirring it very well, that it may not stick
to the bottom: this sweet Solution pour off, and affuse more Spirit of Vinegar,
proceeding in the same manner as before; which operation so often repeat, till
the Vinegar will grow no more sweet. Mix all these Liquors together, filter
through brown Paper, and over a gentle Fire evaporate, till a quarter part only
remains, or a little Skin appears on the top; being evaporated, put the matter:
into a tin Vessel, or put the same Galss into a cold place for twentyfour
hours; so will you have in the bottom of the tin Vessel, or of the Glass, white
Crystals, or a very sweet Sugar-like substance, with some adstriction, which
dry, and keep for use. From lbj. of Ceruss, you will have viij, or ix. of the
Salt or Saccharum.

It cools, drys, binds, and repels, and is good against Inflammations in their
beginning, prevails against Diseases of the Breast and Lungs; more especially if
a Tincture be extracted therefrom with Spirit of Wine: it kills Worms,
quenches Lust, and stops a Gonorrhoea, Diarrhoea, Bloody Flux, and overflowing
of the Terms. Dose, a gr. ij, ad vj. In Affects of the Lungs, commix it thus:
Saccharum Saturni, pure Nitre, a. dissolve them apart in Spirit of Vinegar, mix
the solutions, filter, evaporate, and crystallize. These Crystals are good
against an Asthma, Dirficulty of Breathing, and other like Affects, Dose, in
wardly, a gr. ij, ad x. outwardly, they may be mixed with Waters, Ointments, or
Emplasters. The Pure Saccharum (without this mixture of Nitre) allays all
Inflammations, and is good in Affects of the Eyes, in an Erysipelas, in Tumors
and Ulcers; and that for two causes, it cures them; for the volatile Salt of the
Vinegar dissolves the obstructing matter, and the particles of the Saturn, by
reason of their softness, obtund the acrid and eroding Humor, which hinders the
healing of the Ulcer, and so produces the cicatrice. It is Cosmetick, and does
wonders in a hot Gout, and in Suffusions or Cataracts; it eases, and gives
relief in Contusions, and other painful Defluxions. It is also a present remedy
in a Gonorrhoea, where the Urinary Passage by reason of an acrid Venereal
Ferment is eroded, being mixed with warm Water or Milk, and then injected with
a Syringe.

17. Volatile Salt of Amber.
It is made in the distillation and rectification of the Oil of Amber, and is
gathered sticking to the neck of the Retort, and thus purified: Volatile Salt of
Amber, not perfectly freed from its foetid Oil, q.v. with this mix so much
decrepitated Salt, as may make it into a dry substance, and sublime from an
earthen Vessel, covered with a paper Pyramidal-head; let the Fire be cautiously
managed, left the Paper-head be burnt: so will you have the volatile Salt of
Amber, like lint or down, and free from all manner of ill smell, or scent of
burning.

It has the virtues of the Oil, but is much more powerful; good chiefly against
Hysterickfits, it expels Urine and the Stone, and provokes Sweat. It is good
against Paralytick, Apoplectick, Hysteric Diseases, the Running-Gout, and
other like Affects; as also, against all cold Diseases. Dose, a gr. iv, ad j.
in some fit Vehicle. It cures Cramps, and is a specific against the Lethargy,
Falling Sickness, and Convulsions, etc.

18. Salt of Tartar.
It is made of calcined Tartar, as Salt of Potashes, by Sect. 4. of this
Chapter.

It attenuates, incides, resolves, and powerfully opens; all Acids it destroys,
more especially the acid Ferment of the Stomach, provokes Urine, expels the
Stone, allays the over-boiling of the Blood, and prevails against burning
Fevers, Delirium's, continual Watching, the Jaundies, and Dropsy. It opens the
Essence of Sulphurs, and so prepares them, that their genuine or true Tinctures
may be drawn forth, even with Spirit of Wine. Dose, a ss, ad ss. twice a day.
If the Salt be made with a half-part of Nitre, it will be a very excellent
Diuretic and Lithontriptick, and is usually mixed with other ingredients, for
extracting their Tinctures.

19. Salt Vitriolated.
Common Salt, or Salt of Tartar, q.v. dissolved in fair Water, so that the
Lixivium may be very pure and strong; to this liquor put in due order rectified
Oil of Vitriol, drop by drop, so much and so long, till you find the
effervescence cease; then with a gentle Fire evaporate to dryness.

It is a noble Digestive, for resolving rebellious Obstructions, chiefly of the
Stomach, of the Courses, of the Mesentery, Spleen, and other Bowels. It is a
famous Opener, and a great Stomatic; it powerfully attenuates, incides, and
resolves thick and viscous Humors: it is good against the Cachexy, Jaundies,
Dropsy, Stone, Green Sickness, and is mixed with Purgers to quicken them: mixed
with Jallap, it purges Water pleasantly. Dose, a ss, ad ij. It is a Diuretic,
a Febrifuge, and Anticolick; prevails against the Plague, resists Putrefaction,
quenches Thirst, for which reason it allays the mighty ardores of the Blood,
and is good against burning and malign Fevers: and by reason of its penetrating
through the whole Body, it is profitable against a great many Diseases.

20. The Ens, or Being of Venus.
Vitriol of Mars well reverberated and washed iv. Salt Armoniack viij. mix, and
sublime, cohobating twice or thrice.

It is an Anodyn in the greatest pains, and is wonderfully good against
lassitude or weakness of the Body; for which reason it is of mighty use in the
cure of the Rickets: it kills Worms, opens Obstructions, and resolves; and so
is very profitable in a Pleurisy, and Fits of the Mother. Dose, a gr. iv, ad
xij, aut xvj. morning and evening, in some proper watery Vehicle.

21. Salt, or Vitriol, of Luna or Silver.
Of the purest and best refined Silver ij. upon which affuse Spirit of Nitre
vj. put it in a warm digestion, till the Spirit of Nitre has dissolved the
Luna; evaporate the solution to the one half, or till a little skin comes on
top; then set it into a still place, so will it shoot into Crystals, which take
out of the liquor, and dry with a very gentle heat: that remaining liquor
evaporate again to the one half, and proceed as before. Take all these Crystals
and dissolve them again in very fair Water, or distilled Rainwater; digest for
24 hours, that the faeces, if any be, may subside; filter the solution,
evaporate to the one half, and set it to crystallize again, which dry as
aforesaid, and keep them for use. Where note, first, That the Silver ought to
be perfectly freed from every particle of the Venus or Copper, otherwise it
will be apt to be vehemently Emetick. Secondly, That some add to the last
solution before crystallization, an equal weight of the Silver, of Sal
Prunellae, that it may bridle, (as it will for the most part) the corrosive yet
remaining in the Crystals of Luna.

It is a tried specific Mediment against the Dropsy, and certainly cures the
Headache new or old, as also the Megrim. Dose, a gr. ij, ad iv, aut vj. in a
draught of warm Wine, or in Cinamon-water, or other like proper Vehicle. But
note, That because it strongly draws forth Water in hydropick persons, the
Bowels ought to be corroborated with the Essence of Juniper Berries, extracted
with their own proper Water, and made a little acid, with some few drops of
Spirit of Salt; or with Paracelsus his Elixir Proprietatis, made with dulcified
Spirit of Salt. This Speeifick besides is good against the Falling Sickness,
Apoplexy, Lethargy, Vertigo, Convulsions, Gout, Palsy, and other like Diseases.

CHAP. LXV. De FLORIBVS.
I. Flores Sulphuris.
SUlphuris vulgaris pulverisati libram unam, hic per se sine ulla additione
sublimetur ex Cucurbita terrea in Ignem apertum artificiosa reposita, applicato
Capitello vitreo, latissimo rostro; and leni Igne primo prodit Phlegma;
secundo, aucto Ignis gradu, Flores sub forma Fumi in Capitellum ascendent; unde
manu inter sublimandum saepius removeri debent, ne nimis indurentur:
sublimentur Igne primo lento, sub finem fortiori procedendo, tamdiu donec totum
Sulphur (relictis faecibus) sublimabitur in Capitellum: Flores Havissimos and
levissimos, remoto Alembleo, cum Plumaceolo collige, and serventur ad usum.

Pulmonici and Thoracici sunt; attenuant, incidunt, calefaciunt and siccant,
Sudores movent; Alexipharmici, Bechici, and Vulnerarii sunt; Vulneribus,
Vlcerisque internis Pulmonum, Renum, aliisque partibus medentur. Pesti,
Asthmati, Febribus ardentibus, Catarrhis, Morbisque Vteri convenient. Dosis, a
scrupla una ad semidrachmam, plus-minus, cum Syrupo adapto, semel vel bis in
diem.

II. Flores Bismuthi and Zinci.
Bismuthi vel Zinci calcinati, Salis Armoniaci, ana parts aequales; misce, and
sublima, secundum Artem, in Cucurbita forti.

Cosmetici sunt celebrati ad dealbandam Cutem; conferuntque ad Cutis vitia,
Lichenes, Impetigenes, Lepram, etc. mixti sunt Olei de Ben, ad partem aequalem,
pro usu.

III. Mercurius Sublimatus corrosivus.
Salis communis libras duas, Vitrioli ad rubedinem calcinati libram unam and
semis, Nitri purissimi uncias quatuor, Argenti vivi libram unam, Mercurii
Sublimati corrosivi unciam unam, Spiritus Aceti unciam semis; conterantur simul
in Mortario lapideo per horam unam, doncc Mercurius plane dispareat; massam
hanc Cucurbitae planae infunde, and in Arena impone: sublimetur tribus primis
diebus Igne lenissimo, ita ut vix quicquam ascendat, nisi Aquafortis solum,
quae per Alembicum in Recipiens collecta, ad usum servari poterit: quarto die
augeatur Ignis, sic materia albissima in superficie faecum elevabitur, quae
fracta Cucurbita, a faecibus facillime separatur; Mercurium album sublimatum
and corrosivum ad usum reserva; quo firmior and durior est, eo etiam melior
est. Nota. Si lgnis nimis cito intendatur, Mercurius sub forma pulveris
sublimabitur, and altum petet, non tam corosivus, neque tam ponderosus. Vel
sic, tempore brevissimo. Solutionis Mercurii in Aqua-forti factae partem unam,
Salis communis parts quatuor: misce, and per Retortam vel Cucurbitam vitream,
omnis Spiritus propellatur; postea augeatur Ignis, and sic ascendet Mercurius
corrosivus albissimus, in usum reservandus. Haec Operatio quinque, vel sex
horarum spatio perfici poterit, and aeque Corrosivum praebet Mercurium.
Temporibus antea, non nota fuit ista methodus, and jam Amstelodami conficiunt,
and venditur pro duobus praetii prioris, tertiis.

Corrosivus and venenatus est, and si ad granum unam exhibeatur, Vomitum and
Salivationes inducit: Operationibus autem Chymicis, and Praeparationibus
Medicinalibus inservit.

IV. Mercurius dulcis sublimatus.
Mercurii sublimati corrosivi optime pulverisati uncias december, Argenti vivi
uncias septem and semis; misceantur in Mortario vitreo exactissime, donec
Mercurius vivus nullibi, sed plumbei coloris, appareat: mixturam Cucurbitae
parvae sublimatoriae colli oblongi infunde, reponatur in Arena in Patella
terrea, and lento Igne primo procedatur per semihoram; postmodum successive
augeatur ad incandescentiam usque, non vitreae Sublimatoriae, sed Patellae
terreae, id est, ad tertium Ignis gradum: sic ascendet Mercurius interdum ad
summum Vitri, aliquando ad medium, Sacchari instar adhaerebit, faecibus in
fundo relictis. Vitrum resrigeratum per medium secetur Ferro ignito,
separaturque Mercurius albus and purus a faecibus. Teratur iterum in Mortario
vitreo subtilissime, and per se sine ulla additione, denuo reponatur in recenti
Phiala, and sublimetur sicut antea; quo facto, Mercurium sublimatum, omnis
acrimoniae expertem, ideoque dulcem dictum, collige and serva ad usum. Aliter
sic factum Opus. Recipe Argenti vivi uncias octo, Salis communis uncias
sexdecim, Colcotharis Vitrioli quantum sufficit; misce, ac inde Phialae
Sublimatoriae, and statim Ignis ei fatis fortis applicetur; assurgit Mercurius
dulcis, qui per se iterato sublimare possit. Nota, 1. Quo diutius laevigetur,
eo magis albus fit pulvis, and eo citius etiam edulcoratur Mercurius. 2. Quo
saepius sublimatur Mercurius, eo magis deponit vim suam purgatricem.

Exhibetur cum aliis Purgantibas, ut Extracto Catholico, Seammonio, Trochisco
Alhandal in sorma Pilularum, a granis octo ad scruplam unam, vel semidrachmam.
Blande est purgans, Pituitam tenacem incidens and expellens; ac proinde in
Gonorrhoea est Medicamentum praestantissimum. Si per se sumitur, and ad
scruplas duas Dosis extendatur, Ptyalismum seu Salivationem excitare solet, ac
in Morbo Venereo curando srequenter adhibent. Omnes in universo Corpore
latitantes Humores attrahit, and fermentationem and praecipitationem satis
magnaminducit; ideoque Attractivi and Stimuli loco, in caeteris Purgantibus
inservit; atque in Morbis malignis and fixioribus, ut Lepra, Scrophula,
Podagra, Lue Venerea, Chiragra, Scorbuto, etc. plurimi est usus; pro Vermibus
Puerorum in bolo propinatur, a granis tribus ad sex; purgatque leniter per
Alvum Humores serosos; unde cum alio Purgante adapto egregium est Hydragogum,
Lymphae vitia corrigens. Externe Vlceribus, Herpeti, Impetigini, Strumae, and
partium Excoriationibus, imprimis Venereis, medetur.

V. Cinnabaris artificialis.
Sulphuris communis pulverisati unciam unam, fluat in Patella terrea super
carbouibus, sine flamma, ne accendatu^; tum statim add Argenti vivi uncias
quatuor, agitentur perpetuo Spatula ferrea, donec abeant in pulverem subnigrum,
nec Mercurius amplius conspici possit; sic Mercurius erit rite mixtus cum
Sulphur: hanc massam redige in pulverem subtilissimum, quod ex Retorta vitrea
loricata in Igue aperto distilla; sic sesquihorae spatio, materia sublimabitur
in collum Retortae, illudque totula sub forma grisea opplebit, aut
subrubicunda, quae tamen mox trita, rubicundissima evaderc possit, diciturque
Cinnabaris artificialis: haec Cinnabaris in pulverem redigi, and adhuc semel
eodem modo in Retorta nova sublimari, sic evadat rubicundissima.

Curandae Epilepsiae, Morbis Venereis, Gonorrhaeae, Nodis, Tophis, doloribus
nocturnis, aliisque Affectibus ex Fermento acido oriundis, inservit. Intern!
sumitur a scrupla una ad scruplas duas, vel drachmam unam, pro multis diebus;
externe, in Vnguentis and Emplastris, pro Vlceribus and Tumoribus inveteratis
and malignis.

CHAP. LXV. Of FLOWERS.
1. Flowers of Sulphur.
COmmon Sulphur in powder lbj. sublime it by it self, without any addition,
from an earthen Cucurbit in an open Fire, and conveniently placed, cover it
with a Glass-head having a large beak; making first a gentle Fire, so will you
have a Phlegm; then increasing the Fire, the Flowers will rise like Smoke into
the Head, from whence with your hand in the time of sublimation they are often
to be taken away, lest they crust or harden: begin at first with a gentle Fire,
but toward the end increase it so long, till all the Sulphur (a few faeces
only remaining) is sublimed into the Head; which being taken off, with a Wing
gather the pure yellow and soft Flowers, which keep for use.

They are Pulmonick and Pectoral; they attenuate, incide, heat and dry, provoke
Sweat; are Alexipharmick, Bechick, and Vulnerary; they cure inward Wounds and
Ulcers of the Lungs, Reins, and other parts. They are good against the Plague,
Asthma, burning Fevers, Catarrhs, and Diseases of the Womb. Dose, a j. ad ss.
more or less, with some proper Syrup, once or twiee a day.

2. Flowers of Tin-glass, and Zink or Spelter.
Tin-glass, or Spelter, calcined, Salt Armoniack, of each equal parts; mix, and
sublime, according to Art, in a strong Cucurbit.

They are a famous Cosmetick for whitening the Skin, and are good against the
vices thereof, as Spots, Ringworms, Leprosy, etc. and are prepared for use, by
mixing them with an equal quantity of Oil of Ben.

3. Mercury Sublimate corrosive.
Common Salt lbij. Vitriol calcined to redness lbj ss. fine Nitre iv. Spirit of
Vinegar ss. Quicksilver lbj. Corrosive Sublimate j. beat them together in a
stone Mortar for one hour, or till the Mercury wholly disappears; put this mass
into a flat Cucurbit, which place in Sand: sublime the three first days with a
very gentle Fire, so as scarcely any thing may rise, except an Aquafortis
only, which coming by the Alembick is saved in the Receiver, and may be kept
for use: the sourth day increase the Fire, so a white substance will arise upon
the top of the faeces, which, the Cucurbit being broken, may easily be
separated, and the white corrosive Mercury sublimate keep for use; which, by
how much the firmer and harder it is, by so much also the better it is. If the
Fire is increased too soon, the Mercury will sublime in the form of powder, and
will rise up high, yet will neither be so corrosive nor so weighty. Or thus,
done in a shorter time. Mercury dissolved in Aquafortis one part, common Salt
four parts; mix, and through a glass Retort or Cucurbit force away the Spirit;
afterward increase the Fire, so will the Mercury ascend very corrosive, and
purely white, which keep for use. This Operation may be done in five or six
hours time, and the Mercury be full as corrosive. In former times this method
was not known, but now it is thus made at Amsterdam, and is sold for two thirds
of the former price.

It is corrosive and poisonous, and if it be given to gr. j. it induces
Vomiting and Spitting; but is of use for Chemists, and making other Medicinal
Preparations.

4. Mercury sublimed sweet.
Mercury sublimate corrosive in fine powder x. Quicksilver vij ss. mix them
well in a glass Mortar, till the Quicksilver wholly disappears, and looks of
the color of Lead: put this mixture into a small Cucurbit-sublimatory, having
a long neck; place it in Sand in an earthen Pan, and make a gentle Fire for
half an hour; afterward gradually increase the Fire to a red-hot heat, (not of
the Subliming-vessel, but) of the earthen Pan, to wit, to the third degree of
heat: so the Mercury will rise sometimes to the top of the Glass, sometimes to
the middle, having the resemblance of pure white Sugar, and sticking to the
Vessel, the faeces remaining at bottom. The Glass being cooled, cut it in the
middle with a redhot Iron, and let the white and pure Mercury be separated from
the faeces. Beat the matter again very well in a glass Mortar, which put again
by it self without any addition, into a new Phial, and sublime as before; which
done, the Mercury sublimate, (free from all manner of acrimony, and therefore
called dulcis, or sweet) gather and keep for use. The Operation otherwise done,
thus. Take Quicksilver viij. common Salt xvj. Colcothar of Vitriol q.s. mix,
and put it into a Subliming-vial, making a very good Fire of a sufficient heat;
the Mercury will rise sweet, which may be sublimed alone by it self again.
Where note, 1. By how much longer it is levigated, by so much will the powder
be more white, and by so much the sooner will the Mercury be sweetened. 2. By
how much the oftener the Mercury is sublimed, by so much the more will it lose
its purgative faculty.

It is given with other Purgers, as with Extractum Catholicum, Scammony,
Troches Alhandal, in the form of Pills, a gr. viij, ad j, vel ss. it is a
gentle Purge, cutting and expelling tough Phlegm; also, in a Gonorrhoea it is a
very excellent Medicine: if it be given alone, or by it self, to a Dose of ij.
it usually excites a Salivation or Spitting, and is frequently given in the
French Pox. It attracts forth all the latent Humors in the whole Body, and
causes a very great fermentation and precipitation of the same; and therefore
serves as an Attractive and Quickner in other Purges; it is also of great use
in malign and fixed Diseases, such as the Leprosy, King's Evil, Gout, French
Disease, Scurvy, etc. it is given in a Bolus, a gr. iij, ad vj. for the Worms
in Children; and it purges serous Humors gently by Stool; for which reason,
with other proper Purgers, it is a most excellent Hydragogue, correcting the
vices of the Lympha. Outwardly it cures Ulcers, Herpes, Ringworms, Struma, and
parts Excoriated, chiefly from a Venereal cause.

5. Artificial Cinnabar.
Common Sulphur in powder j. melt it in an earthen Pan upon coals which flame
not, lest it be kindled; then presently add Quicksilver iv. stir it
continually with an iron Spatula, 'till it becomes a black powder, and the
Quicksilver can be no more seen; by which means the Mercury will be well mixed
with the Sulphur: this mass make into a fine powder, which put into a glass
Retort coated, and distill with an open Fire; so in an hour and halfs time the
matter will be sublimed up to the neck of the Retort, and all the Sulphur will
become a gray or reddish substance; which notwithstanding being afterward
beaten will become a deep red, and is called Cinnabar artificial: this Cinnabar
being made into fine powder, and once again in the same manner put into a new
Retort to be sublimed, is made at length a most glorious red.

It is of good use in curing the Falling Sickness, Venereal Discases, the
Gonorrhoea, Noder, Tophs, nocturnal pains, and other Disaffections arising from
an acid Ferment; inwardly, it is given a j, ad ij, aut j. for many days
together; outwardly, it is used in Ointments and Emplasters, for inveterate and
malign Tumors and Ulcers.

CHAP. LXVI. De MAGISTERIIS.
I. Arcanum Coralinum.
FIT ex Argenti vivi libra una, Spiritus Nitri libris tribus, distillatis cum
tribus cohibiis; Arcanum in fundo remanens edulcando per calcinationem vel
ablutionem, secundum Artem. Aliter. Argenti vivi purificati, Spiritus Salis
Nitri, ana libram unam, digere, ut solvatur penitus Mercurius; hinc abstrahe
Spiritum Salis Nitri (in Arena, per Phialam colli longi:) Mercurio relicto
trito; affunde denuo tantundem novi Spiritus Salis Nitri, ac abstrahe, id que
ad tertiam vicem; habebis in fundo Mercurium corallatum elegantem, quem lento
Igne paululum igniendo calcina. Dulcis est, and sine facultate corrosiva.
Aliter. Praecipitati rubri, Spiritus Nitri, ana libram unam, digerantur simul,
and evaporentur; tum eandem quantitatem Spiritus Nitri pulveri superfunde,
digere and evapora ut antea: pulveri huic restanti, superfunde Spiritum Ac^ti
(...) supereminentiam quatuor digi orum, digeratur per dies duos, dein
evaporetur Acetum ad siccitatem usque: ultimo, superfunde Spiritum Vini
rectificatissimum, ad supereminentiam quatuor digitorum, digerantur, and
distillentur in Arena ad siccitatem: Spiritum abstractum faecibus superfunde,
and denuo abstrahe, donec Spiritus Vini acidum acquirat saporem; deinde
recentem Spiritum Vini faecibus affunde, abstraheque denuo, and pulvis usui
servetur, sub nomine Auri Horizontalis, qui omnes noxias qualitates per omnes
vias educit.

Specificum est purgans in Lue Venerea inveterata, and Affectibus Vlcerosis;
solvit Morbos Chronicos pertinaciores, utpote Quartanas, Hydropem, Scorbutum,
Rheumatismum, Lepram, Obstructiones Nervorum, Paralysin, and Scabiem
inveteratam and profundam, tam Veneream quam alias. Dosis, a grana una ad
quatuor. Expellit enim Pituitam ex Venereo Fermento, and Ptyalismum, sive
Salivationem excitare solet. Miscetur etiam cum Vnguentis, and exterius
applicatur ad Vlcera maligna, Cancrum scilicet, Lupum, Fistulam, Nodos, Tophos,
aliosque Morbos externos and Defaedationes cuticulares.

II. Arcanum Jovis.
Argenti vivi purissimi, Stanni Anglici optimi, ana parts aequales; misce,
fiatque amalgama: pulverisa, and in Spiritu Nitri rectificato digere, ac per
Retortam ad siccitatem usque distilla: massam in fundo relictam tritam ablue
cum Aqua, and accensione saepe Spiritus Vini edulcator; and securitatis gratia
quinquies vel septies novum Alcohol Vini affundendo, and supra accendendo,
figito; sic enim praeparatum erit Praecipitatum Mercuriale Diaphoreticum.

In Lue Venerea, Scabie inveterata, and Febribus pertinacioribus exhibetur;
potenter enim reserat Obstructiones, Malumque partium, interdum per catharsm,
quandoque diuresm for as educit; aliquando blande per Sudores opus suum
destinatum perficit: si autem in magna Dosi sumitur, Ptyalismum sive
Salivationem excitare solet. Dosis, a granis quatuor ad december, vel duodecim,
cum Theriaca, vel similibus Sudoriferis. Hac in operatione Mercurius primitus
involvitur Metallo innocuo, ac proinde a Fermentis nostri Ventriculi, aliorumve
Viscerum, non ita facile in actum educi potest. Secundo, per spicula acuta
Aquae fortis, intimius and firmius unitur and figitur cum metallo. Tertio, per
flammam Spiritus Vini, Sales Spiritus Nitri qui post edulcorationem adhaerent,
corriguntur.

III. Antibecticum Poterii.
Reguli Antimonii, Stanni optimi, ana parts aquales; fundantur simul in
Crucibulo, donec omnia been unita sint: effundatur materia in Cono susorio. Sic
obtinebis Regulum valde friabilem, quem in pulverem terito tenuem, and cum
portione aequali Nitri calcinato, ut in Antimonio Diaphoretico: post
calcinationem habebis massam, quam in pulverem tenuem terito, eique Pluviam
calentem affundito, and cum Pistillo agitato; sic enim lactescet Pluvia, quam
leniter decanta; novam vero Pluviam calentem massae affunde, and proceed ut
prius: hoc continua quousque nihil nisi grumi Regalini, and sordes, remaneant:
Liquorem lacteum in quieto loco repone, and defend, ita enim pulvis
candidissimus praecipitabitur ad fundum, supernatante Pluvia, quae in sese
combibit Sales nitrosos; pulverem saepius lava, quousque totalis Nitri
acrimonia ablata sit; tunc leni calore exicca, and servetur ad usum.

Exhibetur hoc Medicamentum in Lue Venerea; principaliter in Vlceribus
inveteratis, Scorbuticis, ex acri Sale originem trahentibus; itidem in Hectica
incipienti, (quae neque per Decocta, neque per Medicamenta ulla Galenica curari
possunt.) Ad Hydropem, Icterum, Obstructiones Vteri valet; diversimode autem,
pro ratione subj ctorum, operari solet: in quibusdam enim per Diuraesin
operatur, in quibusdam autem per Sudores, in aliis vero per Seeds, and
quandoque ubi Ventriculus saburra oneratur, per Vomitum unum vel alterum, vires
suas ostendit. In M^rbo Gallico, Herpete, Scabie, Impetigine; and Vlceribus
malignis, venereis, strumaticis, and scorbuticis, commode exhibetur in decocto
Guajaci, Sassafras, and Sarsaparillae. Sumitur successive ascendendo, a granis
quinque ad december, vel usque donec Aeger nauseam observit; quod signum est,
Dosin esse sufficienter, and ad summam extensam; tum paululum de Dosi remitte,
and eo tenore singulis diebus proceed, simulac observaveris Medicamentum hoc
operari per Vrinas; observabis etiam Vlcera maligna and inveterata de violentia
sua remittere, quae tunc per inspersum Pulverem, vel per Vnguenta, vel
Emplastra incarnativa, facile consolidantur.

IV. Bezoar Minerale.
Butyri Antimonii glacialis libram unam, ei Vitro, collo oblongo, affunde
guttatim Spiritus Nitri rectificati quantum sufficit, quod est, quamdiu
effervescat: digere per noctem, tum distilla (unde Spiritus Nitri Bezoardicus)
ex Retorta vitrea ad siccitatem usque; bis cohoba, tum pulverem relictum
albissimum leviga minutissime in Mortario vitreo, and in Crucibulo mundo, super
carbonibus accensis paululum reverbera per semlhoram, ut foetor and Spiritus
corrosivi avolent, and pulvis relinquatur insipidus: ne tamen comburatur in
cineres, sed evadat ex flavo albus, qui est Bezoardicum Minerale. Vel sic:
Reguli Antimonii a scoriis separati uncias duas, Aquae Regis uncias sex:
macerentur simul, donec effervescentia cesset; digere per dies duos; sic
Regulus in pulverem albissimum corrosus in fundo remanebit, supernatante Aqua
Regia flavedine tincta: huic postea superfunde Aquae magnum quantitatem
communis, sic praecipitabitur pulvis albissimus, saepius recenti Aqua affusa
edulcorandus. Nota. In his Operationibus, non opus est affusionem Spiritus
Nitri repetere, ut plerique volunt; quoniam omnia saturata Corpora, suo acido,
nunquam amplius immutantur, vel alterantur, and hoc est Cerussa Antimonii, seu.
Bezoardicum Minerale, sine Sublimato.

Vsus est singularis in omnibus Affectionibus Pestilentibus, and Febribus
malignis populariter grassantibus; eas enim e Centro educit and evellit,
Sudores potentissime movendo. Dosis, a granis sex ad scruplam unam; cum aliquot
granis Cochinellae and Salis Absinthii, bis, ter, vel quater in diem. Est
insigne Diaphoreticum, magnorum Morborum Remedium; summo cum successu exhibetur
in omnibus Morbis per Sudores curandis; praesertim in illis, in quibus a
spirituosis, oleosis, and salinis Volatilibus metuitur Inflammatio Sanguinis.
Variolis, Morbillis, Pesti, Febribus pestilentialibus, Ictero, Venenis,
caeterisque Morbis contagiosis adversatur. Bezoartici mineralis granas
quatuordecim; Salis Absinthii granas octo, Cochinellae granas sex, Croci
Anglici granas quatuor: Laudani opiati sesquigranam, Mithridati scruplas duas;
misce pro Dosi.

V. Gryphus Mercurii.
Mercurii sublimati quantum vis, resolve illum in Aqua coelesti calida,
solutionem aliquoties filtra, filtratam Vitro immitte, and guttatim infunde
tantum Olei Sisis Tartari quantum putabis re ^uiri, quoad in fundo appareat and
subsistat pulvis subrubeus: Aquam profunde, and pulverem retine, Aqua communi
edulcora, usquedum destituatur omni acredine and salsedine: cohoba deinde
Alcohol Vini, and abstrahe Spiritum; cohoba iterum, tum incendatur, and ferrea
Spatula continuo motu circumferatur, donec Spiritus Vini absumatur.

Valet praecipue in Lue Venerea Gonorrhoea virulenta, Scabie profunda, Tophis,
Nodis, Doloribus Nocturnis, omnibusque Obstructionibus Viscerum. Dosis, a
granis duabus ad quatuor vel sex. Exterius applicatur, Scrophulae ulceratae,
Leprae, Vlceribus malignis, Gummati Venerei, Cancro, Lupo, Fistulis
inveteratis, aliisque Morbis externis hujus generis, si cum Vnguentis,
Linimentis, vel Emplastris debito modo and proportione miscetur. Liquor
decantatus dicitur Aqua Gryphi, quae Vlceribus inveteratis maximo successu
medetur.

VI. Mercurius Vitae.
Butyri Antimonii quantum vis, ei superfunde Aquae communis quantitatem
sufficientem, and praecipitabitur pulvis albissimus, multis affusionibus Aquae
recentis edulcorandus, Igneque lento, inter Chartas super Cretam vel Arenam
exiccandus. Mercurius Vitae correctus. Recipe Salis communis decripitati unciam
unam, Nitri purissimi sesquiunciam; fundantur simul in Igne, dein sensim
injiciatur Mercurii Vitae sesquiuncia; fluant simul per horae quadrantem, dein
edulcoretur Aqua communi, multis affusionibus.

Incorrectus, Vomitus movet egregios; unde convenit in Pituita viscida, Bile,
Humoribus tartareis, and Ventriculi saburra, evacuandis: Hydropi, Ictero,
Arthriti, Febribus ex Obstructione ortis, Chlorosi, Cachexiae, Rheumatismo,
aliisque Morbis hujus generis medetur. Dosis, a granis duabus ad quatuor.
Correctus, vires easdem habet, and sumitur a granis duabus ad semiscruplam.
Infusus Mercurii Vitae. Recipe Mercurius Vitae unciam unam, Vini Cheriensis
libras sex, stent in digestione tepida per horas duodecim, saepius commovendo;
deinde Vinum clarum a faecibus separa per inclinationem. Hoc Vinum magis quam
Pulvis in substantia exhibetur, securitatis gratia; sumiturque ab uncia semis
ad sesquiunciam.

VII. Mercurius praecipitatus albus.
Argenti vivi puri uncias duas, Aquae-fortis (ex Vitriolo calcinato and Nitro
factae) uncias quatuor; misceantur in Cucurbita vitrea, reponaturque per noctem
in digestione, vel donec totus Mercurius sit solutus, nec quicquam in fundo
conspiciatur superesse: Solutionem hanc instilla Muriae, ex Aqua pura and Sale
communi factae, (quantum scilicet Salis Aqua capere potest) dum liquor instar
Lactis appareat; sic praecipitabitur in Muriam Mercurius in pulverem album:
liquor limpidus decanta, ac affusa Aqua pura, coagulum album aliquoties
edulcora, donec tandem Aqua manserit insipida, and omni salsedine and acrimonia
privatur pulvis; denique in Charta super Arena exiccabitur: hic est ipsa calx
Mercurii, vulgo dicta Mercurius cosmeticus. Mercurius praecipitatus incarnatus;
fit, si in loco Muriae, cum Urina recenti, eodem modo praecipitabitur.

Si interne utitur, pulveri superfundendo Spiritum Vini rectificatum, eumque
iterum per distillationem aut incendium abstrahendo, pulverem edulcoratum
reddunt; in parva quantitate, ad Luem Veneream inveteratam purgandam; in quo
casu plurimis instar Panacaeae est, adhibetur. Externe, vim habet
Cathaereticam, quod est, auferendi Excrescentias carnosas, quas blande, and
sine dolor corrodit: unde Fistulis, Pustulis, and aliis defoedationibus
conducit, si pulvis Emplastro alicui inspergatur, and applicetur; vel cum Aqua
fontana, Mellis Rosarum parva quantitate mixta, per Syringam injiciatur. Dosis,
a granis sex ad duodecim; viro autem peritissimo, D. Wiseman, ad granas viginti
quinque, diuturne. Sumitur in Febre quartana, Hydrope, Tophis Venereis, and in
genere in omnibus pertinacissimis Corporis Humani Obstructionibus; cum
Theriaca, Extracto purgante, and similibus. Hoc Praecipitatum Mercuriale album
in emolliendis Tumoribus induratis, praesertim in Nodis Venereis, in Herpete
miliari, and in Scabie profunda curanda, applicatur. Sacchari Saturni unciam
unam, Praecipitati albi uncias duas, Spiritus Aceti uncias tres; misce,
lentoque igne evapora ad siccitatem: ad hunc Pulverem addatur Olei de Ben
sesquiuncia; misce, fiatque Unguentum, leniter parti affectae inungendum. Ad
Tophos Venereos, magnarum virium est hoc Emplastrum. Argenti-vivi in Aquaforti
soluti uncias quatuor, Olei de Ben, vel Amygdalarum, uncias octo; contunde
simul, deinque in Olla terrea concoquito, continuo cum Spatula lignea movendo,
donec massam mollem habebis; addantur Cerae unciae duae, pulverum Mastichae,
Olibani, ana drachmas sex, misce, fiatque Emplastrum. Praecipitatum incarnatum,
habet vires easdem ut Album; sed datur a granis december ad scruplam unam.

VIII. Mercurius praecipitatus rubrus.
Argenti vivi in Aqua forti soluti, ut supra, quantum vis: si committatur
Retortae, distilla; si Vitro evaporatorio, evapora Aquam fortem ad siccitatem,
and relinquetur calx vel materia alba, valde corrosiva, quae pulverisata in
Crucibulo super carbonibus accensis leviter reverberata, ut acquirat colorem
rubicundum and splendens, saepius vertendo Stylo, (ne tamen nimis diu, and in
nimis forti Igne teneatur, ne in totum avolet Pulvis; si enim sublimetur
pereunt Crystalli, and figuram rutilantem amittit, quoniam hoc modo Spiritibus
acidis spoliatur:) sic habebis Mercurius praecipitatus ruber, vocaturque
absolute Praecipitatum in Pharmacopoliis: huic Praecipitato Pluviam affunde,
and per crebras ablutiones, quantum fieri potest edulcorato. Postmodum
quinquies vel sexies, Alcohol Vini superincende; ita enim corrosivum
Praecipitati mitigatur, and non tanto cum periculo interlus exhiberi potest:
Ignem enim si ulterius continuaveris, ex Mercurio omne ejus corrosivum
expelles; portio autem Mercurii revivificabitur, ac proinde nec color
rubicundus, nec scintillae apparebunt lucidae.

Externe, inservit Excrescentiis carnosis eximendis, eamque strenue absumit,
nullo aut exiguo dolor; sordes crassiores Vlcerum, and callos detrahit; ideo
sordidis, putridis, saniosis, callosis, serpentibus, atque aliis omnibus
Vlceribus, quae vulgaria Remedia contemnunt, and Cicatrici obsistunt atque
reluctantur, modo solus, modo aliis, quae citra morsum siccare aut tergere
possunt, mistus, utiliter adhibetur. Interne, aliquando exhibetur in Lue
Venerea, Hydrope, Lepra, Scabie, Gonorhhoea virulenta, Doloribus nocturnis, (in
quibus specisicum est) Scorbuto, Podagra, Gonagra, Chiragra, Rheumatismo, Febri
quartana, aliisque Morbis inveteratis and deploratis. Sumitur in parva
quantitate, (tanquam interni usiis rarioris est) ad Luem Veneream purgandam; in
quo casu Salivationem movet, vel per Vomitum and Sccessum purgat, plurimisque
instar Panacaeae est. Dosis, a grana una ad quatuor vel quinque, in Theriaca,
vel Extracti convenienti, hora somni, vel mane, si Catharticis adaptis
miscetur, jejuno Stomacho.

IX. Mercurius praecipitatus Principis.
Praecipitati rubri supradicti uncias duas, per trituram fiat pulvis
subtilissimus, ei addatur Olei Tartari per Deliquium, unciam unam; digere per
viginti quatuor horas, saepius vertendo Spatula eburna: postea Alcohol Vini
superincende, ac vigesies repetatur.

Vires easdem cum priori habet, sumitur autem a granis tribus ad december, plus
minusve, pro re nata: Catharticum est, attamen in nimia Dosi Salivationem
movet: tuto and utiliter intra Corpus exhiberi potest, in Extractis
purgantibus. Si in Theriaca datur per quatuor vel quinque dies, sursum and per
Salivationem operatur; sic Morbo Gallico; Gonorrhaeae virulentae, Elephantiasi,
Rheumatismo; Arthriti, Leprae, Scorbuto, Scabiei, Vlceribus malignis and
Venereis, aliisque Morbis hujus generis medetur. Nota. Hoc Praecipitatum a
Principe datur a dram semis ad drachmam unam, Dosis pervalde magna.

X. Mercurius praecipitatus iuteus, vel Turpethum minerale.
Argenti vivi purificati uncias quatuor, Olei Vitrioli rectificati, vel Olei
Sulphuris per Campanum facti, rectificati, uncias octo; misce, ac digere per
duos dies in Arena; deinde per Retortam vitream distilla, (cum tribus cohobiis,
ut dicunt Chyrmci;) ultimo, Igne vehementi, ut Retorta candeat: quo peracto,
frange Retortam, massamque albam exime, and tere in pulverem, quem Aqua pura
vel distillata calenti saepius ablue, vel aliquoties edulcora; and in momento,
ex pulvere albissimo, fiet flavissimus; super quem Alcohol Vini (post
digestionem horarum vigintl quatuor) ter accendas, ut tanto magis edulcoretur,
fixetur, and a malignitate, si qua adest, spolietur.

Purgat sursum and deorsum, magnumque Secretum est in Lue Venerea, Gonorrhoea,
Elephantiasi, Lepra, Scabie, Arthritide, Hydrope, Scorbuto, Cancro, Fistulis,
and Vlceribus Venereis and malignis: ex omnibus Corporis partibus per Vomitum,
per Secessum, atque per Salivationem evacuat; secundum autem exhibitionis
modum. Sic quod haec Mercurii praeparatio ad infinitos fere Morbos deploratos
curandos utilissima est, maxim vero ad Morbum Gallicum and ejus symptomata.
Dosis, a granis tribus ad sex vel octo.

XI. Mercurius praecipitatus, per se.
Argenti vivi purissimi quantum vis, injice in Phialam, (peculiariter hoc in
usu factam, inferne scilicet latam, superne compressam, intus rostro
angustissisimi orificii, in ventrem usque producto,) ut tantummodo fundus
operiatur: Phialae exact ad aequilibrium in Arenam collocatae, (ut Mercurius
aequali crassitie ubique fundum tegat) subdatur Ignis primo lentus, post
fortior, ad dierum quadraginta sinem usque; vel donec Mercurius in pulverem
rubicundissimum, instar Cinnaharis conversus sit: hunc ablue Aqua pluvia
distillata, postea digere cum Alcohol Vini, and per distillationem abstrahe,
vel superincende, securitatis gratia. Nota. Praestantior erit Praecipitatus, si
fiat cum Solis vel Lunae part octava.

Sudores vald^ movet, Luem Veneream sexies vel septies exhibitus eradicat,
Lumbricos eliminat, Febres omnes tollit; omnes Humores vitiosos purgat, contra
Infirmitates ex Humorum putredine, Remedium est; and utile in Hydrope, Podagra,
Peste, Vlceribus malignis, Scabie, aliisque Morbis similibus. Dosis, a granis
tribus ad sex.

XII. Mercurius praecipitatus aureus, vel Solaris; seu Aurum Vitae.
Auri purissimi foliati unciam unam, Aquae Regis uncias quatuor; misce, and in
tepido calore Arenae dissolva. Argenti vivi purificati uncias octo, Spiritus
Nitri uncias sedecim; misce, ac dissolva: has solutiones confunde, and in
Retortam distilla ad siccitatem usque; calcinetur in Crucibulo calx residua,
augendo Ignem, ut Spiritus corrosivi secessum faciant a calce in fundo
remanente: hanc calcem edulcorato, and cum Alcohol Vini figito; sic obtinebis
Aurum Vitae. Aliter sic: Auri purissimi unciam unam, Argenti vivi purificati
uncias octo, misce, fiatque amalgama; hoc pone in Vitro infernali, posito ut
supra apud Sectionem undecimam, cum Igne primo Ieni, post fortiori, donec
materia in pulverem rubicundissimum, instar Cinnabaris conversa sit; quod
perfacile sit opus, saepe eximendo, conterendo, and revertendo in Vitro
infernali materiam; continuando autem ad opus perfectum digestionem: sic
habebis Mercurium praecipitatum Aureum, vel Solarem.

Mire praestat in Hydrope, Icteritia, Peste, Pleuritide, Podagra, Rheumatismo,
Scorbuto, Lepra, Elephantiasi, and Lue Venerea; Sanguinem enim purificando, and
Medullam in Ossibus rectificando, omniaque noxia e Corpore Humano radicaliter
pellit. Medicamentum est insigne, quod jure optimo meretur nuncupari Panacaea:
in Morbis deploratis ex Humorum putridine causatis, singular est Remedium,
quia omnes venenosos and vitiosos Humores educit: Vermes necat, and omnia
Vlcera Venerea curat; purgat per Vomitum and Secessum, and in nimia Dosi
assumptum, Salivationem movet, si sepe reiterata. Dosis, a granis tribus ad sex
vel octo, in Vehiculo Morbe adapto.

XIII. Mercurius praecipitatus Lunaris, seu Argentum Vitae.
Fit per Dirsolutionem in Spiritibus acutis, vel per Amalgamationem Mercurii
and Argenti; ut supra.

Vires and Dosin eandem cum priori obtinet. Summum insuper est remedium
mundisicativum Sanguinis, ac totius Corporis in Lue Venerea; and specificum est
in Cephalalgia, aliisque Morbis Cephalicis and Neuroticis: magnum quoque fert
solamen in Hydrope, pellit Aquam per Secessum and Vrinam, exiccatque fontem. In
Caduco quoque, Colica, Quartana, Scorbuto, Scabie, Vlceribus malignis,
venereis, and cancrosis, omnibusque Cutaneis Affectibus prodest. Acres Humores
mitigat, Pituitosos expurgat, Viscerum constitutionem emendat; atque Phrenesi
and Maniae medetur.

XIV. Tartarum Emeticum.
Croci Metallorum, vel Vitri Antimonii subtilissime pulverizati, Cremoris
Tartari, ana libram unam, Aquae pluvialis libras sedecim; misce, and per
fesquihoram coquatur: deinde filtretur, and evaporetur ad siccitatem usque; vel
bulliatur ad cuticulam, and crystallizatur secundum Artem. Vel sic, a
Margravis. Croci Metallorum, vel Vitri Antimonii libram unam, Nitri crudi
pariter pulverizati uncias tres; misce, and in Crucibulo super carbonibus
ignito, detonetur: materiae relictae pulverizatae add Salis Tartari purissimi
libram unam, Aquae fontanae libras novem: misce, and in Vase ferreo coque ad
siccitatem; massam relictam pulveriza, and cum Aqua fervente extrahe, filtra
per Chartam; (quod in Charta relinquitur, Vitrum est Antimonii, quod sicca, and
reservetur:) liquorem vero filtratum evapora in Vitro ad siccitatem usque:
deinde massam relictam fortiter sicca, and in Vitro clauso Pulvis servetur ad
usum.

Purgat per superiora, and inferiora, praecipue Humores Pituitosos and
Biliosos; multoque lenius operatur, ac tutius quam Crocus Metallorum vel Vitrum
Antimonii: Emeticum est praestantissimum in omnibus diuturnis and Morbis
obsirmatis: prodest autem contra Melancholiam, Maniam, Insaniam, Delirium,
diutinos Capitis Dolores, Vertiginem, Epilepsiam, Apoplexiam, Difficultem
Auditus, Tinnitum Aurium, and Memoriam difficilem; contra etiam Nauseam,
Inflammationem Stomachi and Laterum, Icteritiam flavam, Hydropem, Tertianas,
Quartanas, alias diuturnas, continuas, putridas, and acutas Febres, Venena
hausta, Pleuritidem, and Morbos in universum omnes quos utraque Bilis excitat.
Prodest porro contra Dysenteriam illam venosam tempore Pestis vulgo grassantem,
Morbum etiam Ungaricam. Dosis, a granis duabus ad sex, praesertim in
robustioribus, cum Veoiculis appropriatis. Notandum etiam, cum quis vomere
incipit, dari solitum ipsi, vel Possericum vel carnis Jusculum; idque
reiterandum, ut eo facilius Vomitus provocetur, and actio Medicamenti
acceleretur.

CHAP. LXVI. Of MAGISTERIES.
1. The Coraline Secret.
IT is made of Quicksilver lbj. Spirit of Nitre lbiij. distilled with three
cohobations; the Arcanum remains in the bottom, which is to be sweetened by
ablution or calcination, S.A. Or thus. Quicksilver purified, Spirit of Nitre,
a. lbj. digest, that the Mercury may be presently dissolved; abstract from it
the Spirit, through a Phial with a long neck, in Sand: the Mercury remaining beat
or grind into powder, and affuse thereon again the same quantity of fresh
Spirit of Nitre, which also abstract, and repeat this work the third time; so
will you have in the bottom a bright corallated Mercury, which calcine, by
burning it a little with a gentle Fire. So will it be sweet, and without any
corrosive faculty. Otherwise thus. Red Precipitate, Spirit of Nitre, a. lbj.
digest them together, and evaporate; powder, and affuse thereon the same
quantity of Spirit of Nitre, digest and evaporate, as before; to the remaining
powder affuse Spirit of Vinegar, so much as to overtop it four inches, digest
for two days, then evaporate the Vinegar to perfect dryness: lastly, affuse
thereon Alcohol of Wine, so much as may overtop it four inches, digest, and
distill in Sand to dryness: the abstracted Spirit affuse upon the faeces again,
and again abstract, which continue till the S.V. acquires an acid taste:
lastly, affuse thereon fresh S.V. and abstract again, keeping the Powder for
use, under the title of Aurum Horizontale, which purges out of the Body, by
every way, all ill Humors.

It is a specific Purge in an inveterate French Pox, and Ulcerous Affects; it
cures stubborn Chronick Diseases, as Quartans, the Dropsy, Scurvy, Rheumatism,
Leprosy, Obstructions of the Nerves, Palsy, and the Scab, inveterate and
eating, whether it be Veneral or otherwise. Dose, a gr. j, ad iv. For it purges
Phlegm in a Venereal Ferment, and is used to cause Spitting or Salivation. It
is mixed also with Ointments, and outwardly applied to the cure of malign
Ulcers, as the Cancer, Wolf, Fistula, Nodes, Tophs, and other external Diseases
and defilements of the Skin.

2. The secret Precipitate of Jupiter.
Pure Quicksilver, best English Tin, of each equal parts, mix, and make an
amalgama: powder, and digest it in Spirit of Nitre, and distill by a Retort to
dryness: the mass remaining powder, and edulcorate by washing with Water, and
often burning from it S.V. and to make the Medicine the more safe and gentle,
affuse thereon, and burn off therefrom Alcohol of Wine, five or seven times; so
will you have a Mercurial Diaphoretick Praecipitate.

It is given in the French Pox, and an inveterate Scabbiness, as also in
stubborn Fevers; for it powerfully opens Obstructions, and removes the Disease
of the parts affected, sometimes by Purging, and sometimes by Urine; and
sometimes it performs the desired operation by gently Sweating: but if it is
given in a large Dose, it is apt to cause Salivation or Spitting. Dose, a gr.
iv, ad x, vel xij. with Treacle, or other like Sudorificks. Where note, 1. That
in this Operation, the Mercury is intimately joined or mixed with an innocent
Metal, and therefore is not so easily to be brought into action by the Ferment
of the Stomach, or of any other Bowel. 2. That by the sharp points of the
Spirit of Nitre, it is the more absolutely, inwardly, and firmly united with
the Tin. 3. That by the accension of the Spirit of Wine, the Salts of the
Spirit of Nitre which yet stick to the particles of the Praecipitate after
edulcoration, are corrected.

3. Poterius his Antihectick.
Regulus of Antimony, of the best Tin, a. melt them together in a Crucible,
'till they are well united: then pour forth the matter into a Fusory-cone. So
will you have a Regulus exceeding brittle, which beat into fine powder, and
calcine with an equal part of Nitre, as in Antimonium Diaphoreticum: after the
calcination, you will have a mass, which beat again into fine powder, and
affuse thereon boiling Rainwater, which stir about with a Pestel; so will the
Water look white like Milk, which presently gently decant: affuse again more
Rainwater warm, and proceed as before: continue this work so long, till
nothing but the Reguline grossness and dross remains: this milky Liquor put
into a still quiet place, and cover it from dust; so will a very white powder
praecipitate to the bottom, the Water swimming at top, which imbibes in it self
the nitrous Salt; wash often the powder, 'till all the acrimony of the Nitre is
gone; then dry it with a gentle heat, and keep it for use.

This Medicament is given in the French Pox; chiefly in old Ulcers, Scurvy,
arising from a sharp Salt; as also in the beginnings of Hectick-fevers, (which
neither by Decoctions, nor by any Galenick Medicaments are possible to be
cured.) It is good against the Dropsy, Jaundies, Obstructions of the Womb; but
operates after a diverse manner, according as the nature of the Disease and
Body does require: for in some it works by Urine, in others by Sweat, in some
again by Stool, and sometimes when the Stomach is foul and loaded, it exerts
its power in a Vomit or two. It is profitably given in the Venereal Disease, in
a Herpes, Scabbiness, Ringworms; as also Ulcers, malign, pocky, strumatick, and
scorbutic, in a decoction of Guajacum, Sassafras, and Sarsaparilla. It is
exhibited by a gradual ascending, a gr. v, ad x. or till the Patient shall find
it begins to nauseat him, which is the Dose is large enough, and come up to the
highest extent; then it may be a little diminished, till you find it to work by
Urine, and shall observe that malign and inveterate Ulcers abate of their
contumacy, which then by sprinkling on the Powder, or by application of
incarnative Ointments or Emplasters, are easily healed.

4. The Mineral Bezoar.
Icy Butter of Antimony lbj. put it into a glass with a long neck, and affuse
thereon by drops rectified Spirit of Nitre, q.s. or so much, 'till it ceases
effervescing: digest for a night, then distill (which is the Bezoardick Spirit
of Nitre) by a glass Retort to dryness: cohobate twice, and the remaining white
powder levigate finely in a glass Mortar, and a little reverberate it in a
clean Crucible, upon a charcoal-Fire, to make the ill smell and corrosive
Spirits vanish, and that it may become insipid or tastless: but take heed it be
not burnt into coals, but that it may change its color from yellow to white,
which is the Mineral Bezoar. Or thus: Regulus of Antimony, separated from its
scoria ij. Aqua Regis vj. macerate them together till the effervescence ceases,
digest for two days; so the Regulus will be corroded into a very white powder
in the bottom, the Aqua Regis swimming over it, of a yellow color: then affuse
thereon a great quantity of Water; so a white powder will praecipitate, which
edulcorate, by many affusions of fair Water. In this Operation there is no need
to repeat the affusion of the Spirit of Nitre, as several advise, because the
whole Body is satiated; nor will it admit of any more change or alteration; and
this last Preparation is the Ceruse of Antimony, or the Mineral Bezoar, made
without Sublimate.

It is of singular use in all Pestilential Distempers, and malign Fevers, which
are generally mortal; for it protrudes and brings forth from the Center, by
provoking Sweat powerfully. Dose, a gr. vj, ad j. with some grains of Cochinele
and Salt of Wormwood, twice, thrice, or four times a day. It is a famous
Diaphoretick, and a Remedy against great Diseases, given with the greatest
success in all Diseases curable by Sweat; but chiefly in those, wherein an
Inflammation of the Blood is feared to arise from spirituous, oily, and saline
Volatils. It is good against the Measles, Smallpox, Plague, Spotted-Fever,
Jaundies, Poison, and other contagious Diseases. Bezoarmineral gr. xiv. Salt of
Wormwood gr.viij. Cochinel gr.vj. Saffron gr. iv. Laudanum gr. j ss. Michridate
ij. mix, for a Dose.

5. The Mercurial Gryphin.
Mercury sublimate corrosive q.v. dissolve it in boiling Rainwater, filter the
solution several times, and then drop into it Oil of Tartar a sufficient
quantity; at the bottom will be praecipitated a powder of an orange-tawney
color: decant the Water, and take the Powder and edulcorate with warm Water,
till it is freed from all its acrimony and saltness: then cohobate with S.V.
rectified and abstract the Spirit; which cohobate again, and burn it off;
stirring the Praecipitate round about continually, till the Spirit is wholly
consumed.

It is good against the French Pox, virtulent Gonorrhoea, malign Scabs, Tophs,
Nodes, Nocturnal Pains, and all Obstructions of the Bowels. Dose, a gr. ij, ad
iv, vel vj. Externally it is applied to Kings-evil-sores, Leprosy, malign
Ulcers, Venereal Gumms, Cancers, the Wolf, old running Fistula's, and other
like Diseases of this kind, if it be mixed rightly in a fit proportion with
Ointments, Liniments, or Emplasters. The Liquor poured off, is called the Water
of the Gryphin, which cures old Ulcers with admirable success.

6. Praecipitate of Butter of Antimony.
Butter of Antimony q.v. put to it fair Water a sufficient quantity, and a very
white powder will praecipitate, which sweeten with many affusions of fresh fair
Water, dry it between Papers upon Chakl or Sand, with a gentle Fire. Mercurius
Vitae corrected. Take common Salt decripitated j. pure Nitre j ss. melt them
together in a Fire, then by little and little cast in of your Mercurius Vitae j
ss. melt them together for a quarter of an hour, then edulcorate by many
affusions of fair Water.

Being uncorrected, it causes violent Vomitings; for which reason it is good
against viscous Phlegm, Choler, and tartarous Humors, to evacuate the same, as
also to empty a loaded or oppressed Stomach: it cures the Dropsy, Jaundies,
Gout, Fevers arising from Obstructions, the Green Sickness, Cachexy,
Rheumatism, and other Diseases of like kind. Dose, a gr. ij, ad iv. Being
corrected, it has the same virtues still, but is given in a larger Dose; as a
gr. ij, ad x. Infusion of Mercurius Vitae. Take Mercurius Vitae j. Sherry-Wine
lbvj. let them stand in a warm digestion 12 hours, often shaking the Glass;
then decant the clear Wine from the faeces. This Wine is rather (for its safety
sake) to be given, than the Powder in substance. Dose, ab j, ad j ss.

7. White Praecipitate.
Purified Quicksilver ij. Aqua fortis (made from calcined Vitriol and Nitre)
iv. mix them in a glass Cucurbit, and put them for a night in digestion, or
till all the Mercury is dissolved, nor any particle of it remains to be seen in
the bottom: drop this Solution into a strong Pickle made of Salt, (to wit, so
much Salt as the Water will dissolve) the mixture will presently look like
Milk, and the Mercury will praecipitate into a white powder: decant the clear
liquor, and affuse on the powder pure fair Water, which oftentimes edulcorate,
so long, till the Water comes off insipid, and the powder remains free from all
manner of saltness and acrimony; then dry it between Papers upon Sand: so have
you a Calx of Mercury, which is commonly called Cosmetick Mercury.
Flesh-colour'd Praecipitate; it is made after the same manner, if instead of
the Salt-pickle, you praecipitate the Mercury with new made Urine.

If you use this Powder inwardly, affuse thereon rectified S.V. and abstract
the same either by distillation or accending, thereby to edulcorate it; then it
is given in a small Dose, to purge, in an inveterate Lues, or French Pox; in
which Disease it is exhibited by many as a Panacaea. Outwardly, it has a
Catheretick force, by which it takes away fleshy Excrescencies, which it
corrodes gently, and without pain: for which reason it is good against
Fistula's, Pustules, and other Defoedations; if it be sprinkled upon any
Emplaster, and applied; or otherwise commixed with fair Water, and a little
Honey of Roses, and injected thereinto with a Syringe. Dose, a gr. vj, ad xij.
but by Mr. Wiseman, that skilful Chirurgian, it was given daily ad gr. xxv. It
is exhibited in Quartan-agues, the Dropsy, Veneral Tophs, and generally
stubborn Obstructions of the Humane Body, with Treacle, a purging Extract, or
some such like. This white Mercurial Praecipitate is also applied for the
softning hard Tumors, chiefly of Venereal Nodes, in a Herpes Miliaris, and a
malign Scabbiness. Saccharum Saturni j. white Praecipitate ij. Spirit of
Vinegar iij. mix, and with a gentle fire evaporate to dryness: to the remaining
matter add Oil of Ben j ss. mix, and make an Ointment, with which gently anoint
the part affected. This Emplaster is of great power against Venereal Tophs.
Quicksilver dissolved in Aquafortis iv. Oil of Ben, or of Almonds viij. beat
them well together, and then boil them in an earthen Pot, contitinually
stirring it with a wooden Spatula, till it is made a soft mass; to which add
Wax ij. pouders of Mastich, of Olibanum, a. vj. mix, and make an Emplaster. The
Flesh-coloured Praecipitate has the same virtues as the White, but is given a
ss, ad j.

8. Red Praecipitate.
Quicksilver dissolved in Aqua fortis, as above, q.v. which, if you put it
into a Retort, distill; but if into an Evaporating-glass, evaporate away the
Aqua fortis to dryness, so will you have a calx, or white matter, very
corrosive; which powder, and put into a Crucible upon live coals, and gently
reverberate, that it may have a shining red color, oftentimes stirring it with
an iron Rod: (but let it not be too long in the Fire, nor in too strong a Fire,
lest the whole flies upwards; for if it should sublime, it would lose its
crystalline and shining form, because thereby it would be robbed of all acid
Spirits:) so will you have a red praecipitate Mercury, which in the Shops is
simply called Praecipitate. On this Praecipitate affuse Rainwater, and by
manifold ablutions, edulcorate or sweeten it. Afterward burn off from it
rectified S.V. five or six times; for by that means the corrosive quality of
the Praecipitate will be diminished, and may be given inwardly with so much the
less danger: now if the Burning should be continued any longer, the corrosive
would be wholly destroyed, and a part of the Mercury revived; whereby the red
color, and shining brightness would be lost.

Outwardly, it is of use for taking away of Caruncles or fleshy Excrescencies,
which it admirably consumes, with little or no pain; it removes the thick filth
and callus of Ulcers; and it is of exceeding good use for filthy, putrid,
running, callous, and creeping Ulcers, and indeed for all other kinds of old
Sores, which vulgar Remedies have no force upon, and which are rebellious, and
not easy to heal; whether used alone, or mixed with other things which have a
power to cleanse and dry, without biting. Inwardly, it is sometimes given in
the French Pox, Dropsy, Leprosy, Scabbiness, virulent Gonorrhoea, nocturnal
Pains, (for which it is a specific) the Scurvy, Gout in the Feet, Knees, and
Hands; in a Rheumatism, quartan-Ague, and other inveterate and deplorable
Diseases. It is given in small quantity (though it is seldom used internally)
against the French Pox; in which case it carries of the Venereal venom, either
by Salivation, or by Vomit, or by Stool, and by several it is used as a
Panacaea. Dose, a gr. j, ad iv, vel v. in Treacle, or some proper Extract, at
bedtime; but if with any congruous Cathartick, in the morning fasting.

9. The Princes Powder.
Of the aforesaid red Praecipitate ij. make it into a subtle powder by
grinding; to which add Oil of Tartar per deliquium j. digest for twenty-four
hours, often stirring it with an ivory Spatula; afterward burn off from it
rectified S.V. which repeat twenty times.

It has the same virtues with the former, but is given a gr. iij, ad x. more or
less; as the nature of the subject requires: it is Cathartick, but given in too
great a Dose, it causes Spitting or Salivation: it is safe, and profitably
given inwardly, in some purging Extract. If it be given in Treacle, for four or
five days, it works upwards, and by Salivation; and so it is said to cure the
French Disease, virulent Gonorrhoea, Elephantiasis, Rheumatism, Gout, Leprosy,
Scurvy, Scabbiness, malign and Venereal Ulcers, with other Difeases of this
kind. Where note. That the Prince gave it a ss, ad j. which is indeed a Dose
too great.

10. Yellow Praecipitate, or Mineral Turbeth.
Quicksilver purified iv. rectified Oil of Vitriol, or rectified Oil of
Sulphur made per Campanum viij. mix, and digest in Sand for two days; then
distill by a glass Retort, (with three Cohobations, as some Chemists say) and
toward the end, with a very strong Fire, so that the Retort may be red-hot:
which done, break the Retort, and take forth the mass, which will be white, and
beat it into a powder, which wash oftentimes with fair, or distilled Water,
boiling-hot; so will the powder be changed immediately from an exceeding
whiteness, to an exceeding yellowness; upon which put Alcohol of Wine, digest
twenty-four hours; then thrice deflagrate it, or burn it off from it, that it
may be (by so much) the more sweetened, fixed, and freed from its malignity, if
any yet remain.

It purges upwards and downwards, and is a great Secret in curing the
French Pox, Gonorrhoea, Elephantiasis, Leprosy, Scabbiness, Gout, Dropsy,
Scurvy, Cancers, Fistula's, as also malign and Venereal Ulcers: it evacuates
Humors from all parts of the Body, by Vomit and Stool, as also by Salivation,
but according to the manner of the exhibition. So that this preparation of
Mercury is a most excellent thing for the cure of almost aninfinite of
deplorable Diseases, but more especially for the cure of the French Pox, and
the symptoms arising therefrom. Dose, a gr. iij, ad vj, vel viij.

11. Mercury praecipitated, by it self.
Quicksilver purified, q.v. put it into a Phial, (such a one as is made
peculiarly for this use, viz. broad downwards at the bottom, and narrow
upwards, having a neck or beak turned inwards into its belly, with a very
narrow mouth) that the bottom only may be covered; place the Phial in Sand,
exactly in an aequilibrium, (that the Mercury may cover the bottom all over of
an equal thickness;) give it fire, first gentle, afterward stronger, for the
space of full forty days, or till the Mercury becomes a very red powder, much
like to Cinnabar; this wash with distilled Rainwater; after which digest it
with rectified S.V. and abstract it again by distillation, or burn it off for
advantage of the Medicine. Where note, That the Praecipitate will yet be more
powerful, if it be made with an eighth part of Gold or Siver.

It powerfully provokes Sweat, and cures the French Disease at six or seven
times taking; it kills Worms, and takes away all sorts of Fevers; it purges all
sorts of vicious Humors, and is a Remedy against Diseases which arise from
Putrefaction of Humors; it is also a good thing against the Dropsy, Gout,
Plague, malign Ulcers, Scabbiness, and other like Diseases. Dose, a gr. iij. ad
vj.

12. Solar, or golden Praecipitate; or Aurum Vitae.
Of pure fine Gold in leaves j. Aqua Regis iv. mix, and dissolve in a warm
Sand-heat. Purified Quicksilver viij. Spirit of Nitre xvj. mix, and dissolve:
join these solutions together, and distill in a Retort to perfect dryness; the
remaining matter calcine in a Crucible, increasing the Fire, that the corrosive
Spirits may be forced away from the calx remaining in the bottom, which calx
edulcorate, and fix with rectified S.V. so will you have Aurum Vitae. Otherwise
thus: Of the most fine Gold j. purified Quicksilver viij. mix, and make an
amalgama; put this into a Glass- infernum, placed as directed at Sect. 11.
above, making at first a very gentle Fire, afterward a stronger, till the
matter becomes a very red powder, much like to Cinnabar; which work will be
easily done, by often taking it forth, and beating or grinding it, and putting
it again into the Infernum, and so continuing the digestion to the perfecting
of the work: thus have you Solar, or Golden Praecipitate.

It prevails wonderfully against the Dropsy, Jaundies, Gont, Plague, Pleurisy,
Rheumatism, Scurvy, Leprosy, Elephantiasis, and French Pox; for it purifies the
Blood, and strengthens the Marrow in the Bones, and radically drives forth all
noxious Matters or Humors out of the Humane Body. It is a famous Medicine, and
deserves by the greatest right to be called a Panacaea, or All-heal: it is a
singular Remedy in all deplorable Diseases arising from the putrefaction of
Humors, for that it expels or drives out all venene and vicious Humors: it
kills Worms, and heals all Venereal Ulcers; purges both by Vomit and Stool, and
taken in somewhat too large a Dose, causes Salivation, if often repeated. Dose,
a gr. iij, ad vj, vel viij. in some Vehicle proper to the Disease.

13. Lunar, or Silver Praecipitate, or Argentum Vitae.
It is made by a Dissolution in strong Waters, of Mercury and Silver, or by an
Amalgamation; as in the former.

It has also the same Virtues and Dose with the former, but is the greatest
Remedy for purifying the Blood, and of the whole Body in the French Pox, that
can be; it is a specific in an Headache, and other Diseases of the Head and
Nerves: it gives also great relief in a Dropsy, expelling the Water both by
Stool and Urine, and drying up the very fountain or spring. It is good also
against the Falling Sickness, Colic, quartan Ague, Scurvy, Scabbiness, malign,
venereal, and cancerous Ulcers, and all sorts of Cutaneous Affects. It
qualifies sharp Humors, purges Phlegmatic matter, rectifies the constitution
of the Bowels, and cures Phrensies and Madness,

14. Vomiting Tartar.
Crocus Metallorum, or Glass of Antimony in very subtle powder, Cream of
Tartar, ana lbj. Rainwater lbxvj. mix, and boil for an hour and half, then
filter, and evaporate to dryness; or boil till a skin appears on top, and set
it to crystallize, according to Art. Or thus, according to Margrave. Crocus
Metallorum, or Glass of Antimony lbj. crude Nitre a little poudred iij. mix,
and in a red-hot Crucible upon live coals make the detonation: the remaining
matter powder, and put thereto of pure fine Salt of Tartar lbj. fair Water
lbix. mix them, and boil in an iron Kettle to dryness; the mass remaining,
powder, and extract with boiling Water, filter through Paper: (that which remains
in the Paper, is the Glass of Antimony, which dry, and keep for other uses:)
the filtred liquor evaporate in a Glass to perfect dryness; and dry it with a
strong heat, then put it up into a Glass, which stop close, and keep it for use.

It purges both upwards and downwards, chiefly Phlegmatic and Choleric
Humors, and it works much more gently and safely than Crocus of Metals, or
Glass of Antimony; it is a most powerful Emetick in all long continued and
stubborn Diseases: it is good against Melancholy, Madness, Phrenzy, Dotage,
long continued Pains of the Head, Vertigo, Epilepsy, Apoplexy, Difficulty of
Hearing, Noise and Ringing in the Ears, Shortness of Memory, Loathing of Meat,
Inflammation of the Stomach and Sides, the yellow Jaundies, Dropsy, Tertian
Agues, Quartan Agues, and other chronick, continual, putrid, and acute Fevers;
poisonous Draughts, Pleurisies, and all other Diseases of the Body proceeding
from Choler or Melancholy. It prevails also against a malign Bloody Flux, which
is generally mortal in a Plague-time; as also against the Calenture, or
Hungarian Fever. Dose, a gr. ij, ad vj. but to strong constitutions, and in
some proper Vehicle. Here is to be noted, when the Sick begins to vomit, they
are to drink either Possetdrink, or Broth made of flesh, (as Mutton or Veal)
which is to be often repeated, that the Vomiting may be performed thereby more
easily, and the operation of the Medicine, with all the speed imaginable.

CHAP. LXVII. De SYRVPIS.
I. Syrupus Simplex.
AQuae fontanae vel Succi Angelioae libras tres, Spiritus Vini libram unam,
Sacchari albissimi libras sex: misce, and Balnei caliditate fiat Syrupus.

Pro Vehiculo praecipue usurpatur, and Pectoris Morbis, ut Tussi, Asthmati,
Pulmonum Obstructionibus opitulatur. Dosis, a semiuncia ad unciam unam, vel pro
re nata.

II. Syrupus Volatilis.
Spiritus Vini rectificati, vel Tincturae Angelici optimae, Sacchari albissimi,
ana libras duas: misce, dissolvaturque Balneo leni Saccharum.

Pro Vehiculo, ut prior, possit usurpari; sed Cardiacus and Pectoralis est:
magnopere Tabidis, Consumptis, ac ulceratos Pulmones habentibus, diuturnae
Tussi, and Asthmati prodest. Dosis, (cum Aqua appropriata) a drachmis tribus ad
unciam unam: Senibus autem maxim familiaris.

III. Syrupus Limonum, etc.
Succi Limonum siltrati, vel succi Citriorum; seu in loco ejusdem, Aceti Vini
optimi libras tres, Alcohol Vini libram unam, Sacchari albissimi libras sex:
misce, and dissolva.

Humores in Thorace crassos incidit and attenuat, Stomachum a crassa Pituita
and tenaci absterget; Nauseam, and Fermenti debilitatem Ventriculi removet:
resrigerando and humectando biliosarum and aestuantium Febrium incendia
potentissime restinguit, and Sitis intolerantiam sedat; Putredinem arcet, ac
Lumbricos enecat; Cor resicit, ejusdemque vires tuetur; saluberrimus est in
Affectibus Calidis ac Biliosis, in Pestilentia, and Morbis ex Putredine, vel
materia Mixta, natis. Dosis, ab uncia semis ad unciam unam, plus-minusve.

IV. Syrupus Antifebriticus.
Aquae fontanae libras octo, Salis Nitri uncias octodecim, dissolvatur Sal;
add Sacchari albissimi libras octo, Spiritus Vini libras duas, lenique calore
fiat Syrupus.

Viscerum Obstructiones aperit, Vitales Spiritus reficit, totius Corporis
Exaestuationi confert, Calculos atterit, Vrinas movet, Renumque Arenulas, and
Humores Tartarosos expurgat; Hydropi succurrit, and Aquas per Vreteres and
Meatus Vrinarios maxim educit: potens est in aperiendis Obstructionibus ex
crassis, viscidis, and glutinosis Humoribus ortum ducentibus: Febribus
ardentibus, biliosis, malignis, and pestilentibus mire prodest: sumitur autem
in Paroxysmo, vel tempore aestuanti, in Vehiculo appropriato, ab uncia una ad
duas.

V. Syrupus Catharticus.
Vini albi libras quatuor, succi Rosarum Damascenarum depurati libras duas,
Alcohol Vini sesquilibram, Senae Alexandrinae libram unam, Rhabarbari uncias
quatuor, Glycyrrhizae contusae uncias duas; digere in Balneo Mariae per viginti
quatuor horas, dein coletur, cumque Sacchari albissimi libris sex fiat Syrupus.

Bilem utramque and Pituitam satis potenter educit: Polychrestum Medicamentum
est, quod ad multos Affectus Corporis praeter Naturam sit utile, ac omnes
Humores purgat; ad varias enim Capitis, Ventriculi, Jecoris, Viscerumque aliis
Affectus, est efficax. Dosis, ab uncia una ad duas vel tres, mane, jejuno
Stomacho.

VI. Syrupus de Meconio, seu Diacodium.
Capitum recentium Papaveris albi and nigri cum seminibus, mediocris
magnitudinis, nec nimium viridium, nec nimium maturorum, ana uncias octo, Aquae
pluvialis vel fontanae libras octo; macerentur per horas viginti quatuor, and
coquantur ad remanentiam trium librarum: expressioni add Sacchari albi uncias
viginti quatuor, Spiritus Vini uncias december: misce, lentoque Igne fiat Syrupus.

Vehiculum est, and usu creber, arcendis Desluxionibus tenuibus and acribus in
Thoracem and Asperam Arteriam ruentibus, Tussim sedat, Sitim explet, somnum
conciliat, Diarrhoeam and Dysenteriam sistit, Dolorem acutum, Inquietudinem,
and Morbos Hystericos alleviat, Caloris febrilis incendium mitigat, bumectat
and resrigerat. Dosis, a semiuncia ad unciam unam.

VII. Mel Rosarum, vel Rosatum.
Infusionis multiplicis Rosarum rubrarum libras tres, Mellis despumati libras
duas and semis; misce, and coquuntur, addaturque in finem Spiritus Vini optimi
unciae december. Vel sic: Recipe succi Rosarum rubrarum libras tres, Mellis optimi
despumati libras sex: misce been, addatur Alcohol Vini libra una, reponaturque
ad usum.

Ventriculum roborat and detergit, Coctionem juvat, Putredini adversatur,
Humores crudos concoquit, Raucedines mitigat, Oris Phlegmonas, prout and
Gingivarum, Tonsillarumque Inflammationes placat; Asperae quoque Arteriae,
Columellae, Faucium and Gutturis noxas depellit. Dosis, interne, ab semiuncia
ad unciam unam.

VIII. Oxymel Scilliticum.
Scillam recentem, hanc rejectis aridioribus Tunicis extimis, Pasta Panis
involve, eamque in Clibano ad Panis sufficientiam coque; exemptam, Cultro ex
osse parato in laminas disseca, quas Filo trajice, ita ut una alteram non
attingat, and loco sicco appensas per dies quadraginta sicca: postea concisam
Cultello eburneo, libram unam dies alios quadraginta in Spiritu Aceti Vini albi
libris sex, insolabis, in Vase vitriato stricti orificii been obturato, dein
colabis: Recipe Aceti hujus Scillitici libras sex, Mellis despumati libras
octo; misce, paucisque ebullitiouibus consiciatur Oxymel debitae consistentiae.
Aliter. Recipe Scillae Pane involutae and in Clibano assatae libram unam semis,
Accti acerrimi libras septem; misce, and per quadraginta dies insolatur; vel
digere in Cinere vol Sabulo calido per tres dies, postmodum colabis, cumque
Melle ut supra fiat Oxymel Scilliticum. Vel sic: Recipe succi Scillae (ex
crudis, plenis, ac nitidis, Cultello eburneo in parts vel laminas incifis, and
in Mortario lapideo contusis,) expressae, libras duas, Aceti Vini albi acerrimi
libram unam, Mellis optimi libras tres; misce, and coque ad Syrupi formam.

Hydropicos, nec non Anasarca laborantes juvat, unum vel duo cochlearia pro
Dosi sumenda: ad Cerebri, Pulmonis, Ventriculi affectus Pituitosos vel
Melancholicos etiam contumaces pollet; eo ^imur in Epilepticorum insultibus,
ipsoque Paroxysmo; in Affectibus Pectoris and Ventriculi, and Asthmaticis a
crassa Pituita, and viscosa humiditate provenientibus maxim conducibile est.
Incidit, attenuat, and expulsioni praeparat materiam crassam, quae Thoracis
cavo continetur; veterem Tussim cum suspirio sanat: Asthmaticis, difficulter
Spirantibus in magna Pituitae copia, Spiritus vias opprimente succurrit,
prompteque hujusmodi Obstructa liberat; Senibus perpetuo ejusmodi Morbis
molestis valde necessarium: Venarum Obstructiones etiam inveteratas reserat.
Cum Samius hoc Medicamento uti incepit, quinquagesimum annum natus erat, and
usque ad centesimum decimumseptimum vitam produxit integer, and nulla unquam
adversa valetudine tentatus. Phthisicos ab omnibus deploratos, hoc Medicamento
sanitati restitutos novimus, dixit Galenus. Morbo Comitiali diuturno
efficaciter profuit, ut nisi post longa temporis intervalla non reairet;
incipientem vero ac novum perfect discutit, neque reverti amplius hunc
Affectum permittit. Ad Podagras praeterea, and Articulorum Morbos; Jecoris,
Lienisque duritiem, vehementer facit. Alvus lubrica omnino est, totiusque
Corporis purgatorium Medicamentum, etiamsi in Ossibus sordes inbaereant. Nibil
supervacui in Corpore residebit; non Flatus, non Bilis, nec Stercus, nec Vrina,
sed omnia facile excernit, atque educit.

CHAP. LXVII. OF SYRUPS.
1. The Simple, or Uncompounded Syrup.
FAir Water or Juice of Angelica lbiij. Spirit of Wine lbj. treble-refined
Sugar lbvj. mix, and with the heat of a Bath make a Syrup.

It is chiefly used as a Vehicle, and in Diseases of the Breast, as Coughs,
Asthma's, Obstructions of the Lungs, it is exceeding helpful. Dose, ab ss, ad
j. or according as the nature of the thing requires.

2. The Volatile Syrup.
Alcohol of Wine, or the best Tincture of Angelica, treble-refined Sugar, ana
lbij. mix, and dissolve the Sugar in a gentle Bath.

It is used for a Vehicle, as the former; but is Cordial and Pectoral, and is
very profitable in Pinings, Hecticks, Consumptions, and Ulcers of the Lungs, as
also for such as have tedious Coughs and Asthma's. Dose, (being mixed with some
proper Water) is, a iij, ad j. It is a good thing, chiefly for ancient People.

3. Syrup of Limons, etc.
Filtred juice of Limons, or of Citrons; or in place thereof, the best
Wine-vinegar lbiij. S.V. rectified lbj. treble-refined Sugar lbvj. mix, and
dissolve.

It cuts and attenuates thick Humors in the Breast, cleanses the Stomach from
thick and tough Phlegm; takes away Loathing of Food, and the weakness of the
Ferment of the Ventricle: it powerfully allays the great heat of burning
Fevers, by cooling and moistning of Choler and Melancholy; it quenches vehement
Thirst, resists Putrefaction, kills Worms, comforts the Heart, and restores its
strength. It is most effectual in Diseases proceeding from Heat and Choler, in
the Plague, and in Diseases arising from Putrefaction, or Mixed humors. Dose, ab
ss, ad j. more or less.

4. The Syrup against Fevers.
Fair Water lbviij. Nitre xviij. treble-refined Sugar lbviij. S.V. lbij. mix,
and with a gentle heat make a Syrup.

It opens Obstructions of the Bowels, recruits the Vital Spirits, and is good
against the vehement Heat of the whole Body; it wastes the Stone, provokes
Urine, and expels Sand and Tartarous Humors from the Reins, it is profitable in
the Dropsy, and wonderfully brings forth the watery Humor by the Ureters and
Urinary Passages: it is powerful in opening Obstructions proceeding from thick,
viscous, and glutinous Humors: it is a singular thing, and of great force in
burning, choleric, malign, and pestilential Fevers: but it is then given in
the Fit, or time of the burning heat, in some fit Vehicle. Dose, ab j, ad ij.

5. The Purging Syrup.
White Port-wine lbiv. depurated juice of Damask- Roses lbij. Alcohel of Wine
lbj ss. best Sena lbj. Rhubarb iv. Liquorice bruised ij. digest in Balneo
Mariae, for twenty four hours; then strain out, and with the best white
Sugar Candy lbvj. make a Syrup.

It sufficiently and powerfully purges Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy: it is a
Medicine of general use, which is proper to many praeternatural Affects of the
Body, and expels all Humors; it is powerful against various Diseases of the
Head, Stomach, Liver, and Disaffections of the other Bowels, and is given in
the Morning fasting; ab j, ad ij, vel iij.

6. Syrup of Poppies, or Diacodium.
Fresh heads of Poppies with their seed, white and black, of a middle size,
neither too green, nor too ripe, ana viij. rain or fountain Water lbviij.
digest for twenty four hours, and then boil till lbiij. only remain: express
out, and add thereto white Sugar xxiv. Spirit of Wine x. mix, and with a gentle
heat make a Syrup.

It is a Vehicle for other things, and of frequent use to restrain thin and
sharp Defluxions flowing down upon the Breast and Lungs, it stops the Cough,
quenches Thirst, induces Sleep, and stays Fluxes of the Belly, and a
Bloody Flux; it eases acute Pains, causes Rest, and alleviates Hysteric
Diseases: it mitigates the vehemence of febrile Heats, moistens and cools,
Dose, ab ss, ad j.

7. Honcy of Roses, or Honey Rosed.
Of the manifold Infusion of red Roses lbiij. clarified Honey lbij ss. mix, and
boil, adding in the end rectified S.V. x. Or thus: Take juice of red Roses
lbiij. best clarified Honey lbvj. mix them well, add Alcohol of Wine xij. and
keep it for use.

It strengthens and cleanses the Stomach, helps Concoction, resists
Putrefaction, digests crude Humors, removes hoarsness, and gives relief in
Swellings proceeding from Blood, happening in the Mouth, as Inflammations of
the Gums and Tonsils; it takes away the Distempers of the Aspera Arteria,
Columella, Jaws, and Throat. Dose, being internally taken, a ss, ad j.

8. Oxymel of Squills.
A fresh Squill, its outsidecoat being taken off, wrap it up in Bread-dough,
and bake it with Bread in an Oven; being taken forth, cut it into slices with a
bone or ivory Knife, which put upon a Thread, but so as one piece may not touch
another, and hang it in a dry place for forty days, till they are dry;
afterward cut them with an ivory Knife, of which take lbj. Spirit of
White-wine-vinegar lbvj. put them into a glass Vessel with a narrow mouth,
which stop close, and insolate for forty days, after which strain it out. Take
of this Vinegar of Squills lbvj. clarified Honey lbviij. mix them, and with a
little soft boiling, make Oxymel of a due consistency. Otherwise thus: Take of
a Squill baked in Bread-dough lbj. of the sharpest Vinegar lbvij. mix them, and
insolate for forty days; or otherwise digest in hot Ashes or Sand for three
days; afterward strain, and with Honey, as above, make Oxymel of Squills. Or
thus: Take juice of a Squill (taken from a raw one, which is plump and clean;
cut into slices with an ivory Knife, and bruised in a stone Mortar) lbij. of
the best White-wine-vinegar lbj. of the best Honey lbiij. mix, and boil to the
form of a Syrup.

It is good for Hydropick persons, and such as have an Anasarca, one or two
spoonfals being taken for a Dose: it powerfully removes contumacious affects of
the Brain, Lungs, and Stomach, proceeding from Phlegm or Melancholy; it is used
also in a prevailing or stubborn Epilepsy, and in the Paroxysm it self; as also
in Diseases of the Breast and Stomach, and is singularly good in an Asthma
coming from thick Phlegm and a viscous humidity. It cuts, attenuates, and
prepares the thick matter sonexpulsion, which is contained in the cavity of the
Breast; it cures such as have an old Cough, accompanied with difficulty of
Breathing: it helps the Asthma, and shortness of Breath, arising from the
passages of the Breath being stuffed with a great quantity of Phlegm; and readily
frees such as are obstructed after this manner; and it is extremely necessary
for Ancient people, who are almost always troubled with Diseases of this kind;
it opens also inveterate Obstructions of the Veins. Samius when he began to use
this Medicine was fifty years old, and he lived well and in good health,
without the appearance of any sickness, till he was an hundred and seventeen
years of age. Galen says, that by the use of this Medicine he knew many to be
restored to their healths, who labored under deplorable Phthisicks, or
Consumptions of the Lungs. It is effectually good against a long-continued
Epilepsy, so as it returns not, except after a long space of time; but if the
Disease is recent, and in its beginning, it perfectly removes it, so as it
shall never return any more. It is also admirable against the Gout, and
Diseases of the Joints; also the Scirrhus, or hardness of the Liver and Spleen.
It makes the Belly perfectly soluble, purges the whole Body, and draws from all
the parts of the same, not suffering any filth to remain in the Bones. It
suffers no unprofitable thing to rest in the Body; neither Wind, nor Phlegm, nor
Choler, nor Melancholy, Dung nor Urine; but moves, or purges them with much
ease, and casts them forth.

CHAP. LXVIII. De SPECIEBVS.
I. Pulvis Antimonii.
ANtimonii optimi pulverizati libras duas, Lixivii Saponis for tissimi quantum
sufficit, vel ad quatuor digitorum eminentiam; been agitetur Spatula lignea:
spatio stet horarum viginti quatuor; dein affunde guttatim Olei Vitrioli uncias
duas, digere per septimanam integram; postea affunde Aquae quantitatem magnam,
ut edulcoretur; denique siccetur, and reservetur ad usum.

Hic operari solet interdum per Vomitum, aliquando per Secessum; Humores
crassos viscidosque in Ventriculo, vicinisque locis, ejicit sursum ac deorsum:
penetrat, digerit, aperit, incidit, dissolvit, abstergit, purgat, Putredini
Venenisque resistit; Cruditatibus Ventriculi, Appetitu prostrato;
Obstructionibus Alvi, Hepatis, Lienis, Vteri, and Renum; Colicis doloribus
maxim convevenit; Pesti, and Febribus malignis and pestilentialibus resistit;
utile quoque est in Febribus putridis, Hydropi, Scorbuto, Scrophulae, Ictero,
Arthritidi, Rheumatismo, etc. long minus per Vomitum, magis vero per Alvum
operatur. Dosis, a granis tribus ad quinque, plus-minus.

II. Pulvis Antifebriticus.
Salis Prunellae subtilissime pulverisati libram unam, Antimonii crudi
laevigati libram semis; misce.

Vsus insigne est in Febribus ardentibus, putridis, malignis, and
pestilentialibus, in Hydrope, Ictero, and Obstructionibus Renum and Vesicae:
operatur per Vrinam, Impuritatesque quascunque educit. Vim habet Putredini
resistendi, Sitim ac Aeftum compescendi, Tartaream saburram incidendi,
Sanguinem coagulatum resolvendi, Doloresque mitigandi; in Pleuresi Angina,
Peripneumonia, in Obstructionibus Epatis and Mesaraei, Calculoque Renum and
Vesiea exhibetur. Dosis, a semidrachma ad drachmam unam, in Vehiculo maxim
Saccharo albo edulcorato.

III. Pulvis Bezoarticus.
Bezoartici Mineralis uncias octo, Oculorum Canerorum, Terrae sigillatae albae,
ana uncias quatuor, Cinnabaris nativae, Cochinellae, ana uncias duas; Camphorae
unciam unam: misce, fiatque Pulvis.

Cardialgiam, and Dolorem Ventriculi curat: exhibetur commode in Febribus
ardentibus, putridis, and malignis; Sudorificus est; and Epilepsiae, Pesti, and
Venenis adversatur: convenit etiam in Variolis, Morbillis, Ictero, Morbisque
omnibus per Sudorem curabilibus. Dosis, a granis sex ad scruplam unam.

IV. Pulvis Cachecticus.
Chalybis, cum Aqua vel Sulphur in pulverem redacti uncias sex, Sem. Anisi,
Ari radicis faeculae, ana unciam unam, Nucis Moschatae uncias duas, Sacchari
albissimi uncias december: misce, fiatque Pulvis.

Insigniter attenuat, incidit, aperit; Anticachecticus est, and deobstruens
egregius; Menstrua promovet, Ictero succurrit, Vermes necat; Chlorosi,
Scorbuto, and Melancholiae Hypochondriacae medetur: Specificum est in Cachexia
Mulierum, Hydrope, and in omnibus Obstructionibus Ventriculi, Hepatis, Lienis,
and Mesenterii, and Affectis inde oriundis. Dosis, a granis duodecim ad granas
viginti-quatuor, mane quotidiane ac vesperi.

V. Pulvis Cartharticus.
Vitri Antimonii levigati unciam unam, Spiritus Nitri unciam semis; misce, ac
digere per horas viginti quatuor; cui affundatur Spiritus Vitrioli uncia una,
digere ad siccitatem: affundatur iterum Spiritus Vitrioli uncia una, digereque
ad siccitatem: repetatur hoc opus quinquies vel sexies; atque Aqua calida
edulcoretur, reponaturque ad usum.

Stomacho praesenti est auxilio, non retentos Cibos ob Vomitionum impetus
sistit; Ictero, Scorbuto, Scrophulae, Cachexiae, Melancholiae Hypochondriacae,
Arthritidi, Rheumatismo, Epilepsiae, Lethargo, Hemicraniae, Cardialgiae, and
Ventriculi dolori prodest; Lienis gravitatem removet, Faciei coloris reddit,
Obstructiones omnes tollit, Vrinam, Arenulas, and Humores Tartareos pellit;
Vteri Affectibus, Colico dolori ab Humoribus crudis, and a Flatibus orto,
Hydropi, and Febribus putridis and malignis medetur. Dosis, a grana semis ad
sesquigranam, and in robustioribus ad granas duas: operatur praecipue per
Secessum, rarius per Vomitum.

VI. Pulvis Cornachini.
Scammonii resinosi pulverisati uncias duas, Autimonii Diaphoretici,
Crystallorum Tartari, ana unciam unam; misce, fiatque Pulvis.

Humores crassos, simulque serosos, potenter ab extremis partibus, praesertim
ab Articulis, educit; ac ad multos Affectus, and Morbos frigidos, non modo
Capitis, Nervorum, and Juncturarum, sed etiam Ventriculi, Hepatis, Lienis,
Mesenterii, Renum and Vteri, utilis est: ex his enim partibus Pituitam, Serum,
Bilem, and Succum Melancholicum detrahat and purgat; propterea Febribus
putridis, malignis, complexis, and inveteratis, and Morbis complicatis
conducit. Scorbuto, Ictero, Arthritidi, Rheumatismo, Strumae, Cachexiae,
Hydropi, Viscerum Obstructionibus, atque Vteri Morbis medetur: Vermes necat and
expellit, Febri quartanae confert, Stomachum corroborat, and totius Corporis
Humores excrementitios, blande, sineque dolor purgat. Dosis, a scrupla una ad
semidrachmam; diluculo, cum custodia.

VII. Pulvis ad Diabeten.
Catechu, Seminum Hyosciami, aua parts aequales; fiat Pulvis.

Diabeti non solum, sed etiam omnibus Haemorrhagiis and Fluaeibus, ut
Lienteriae, Dysenteriae, Diarrhaeae, atque Fluxui Hepatico, and Mensium
Prosluvio medetur. Dosis, a dram semis ad scruplas duas, mane ac vesperi.
Hujus itaque usus est in omnibus Distillationibus e Capite in Asperam Arteriam;
Tussi quinetiam a tenui Distillatione, seu Catarrho excitatae auxiliatur;
defluentes enim illos Humores inspissat.

VIII. Pulvis Emeticus.
Antimonii optimi pulverisati quantum vis, cui affundatur Aqua Regia: stent
aliquamdiu in digestione, donec Calx in fundo alba appareat; postea abstrahatur
Aqua Regia per distillationem, vel decantationem; vel etiam affundendo Aquam
praecipita, Calcemque elue Aqua tepida, donec Aqua Regia non amplius
sentiantur: Pulverem siccatum in Crucibulo clauso reverbera per sex horas,
fietque rubeus.

Emeticus est, and Quartanum curat; Podagricas defluxiones, and Paroxysmos
efficaciter compescit; Vulnera, Fistulas, and Vlcera inveterata a Putridine
conservat, and sanat: conducit adversus omnes Obstructiones licet inveteratas,
Hepatis, Lienis, Mesenterii, and aliarum Viscerum; Sanguinem mundisicat;
Obstructionibus Mensium, Cachexiae Virginum, Hydropi, Melancholiae
Hypochondriacae, Luae Venereae, Febribusque malignis prodest: felicissime autem
purgat aeque deorsum quam sursum; idque non tam natura sua, quam Humoris
Biliosi, circa Ventriculum stabulantis; quinimo in ^onnullis per Diaphoresin
operatur. Dosis, a granis duabus ad quinque.

IX. Pulvis Herculeus.
Argenti vivi optimi, Flores Sulphuris, ana unciam unam; misce, fiatque per
triturationem Pulvis nigerrimus.

Non movet Ptyalifmum, sed per Sudorem operatur. Vermes necat; exhibeturque in
Lue Venerea, Scabie inveterata, Vlceribus malignis, Gonorrhoea virulenta,
Hydrope, etc. In Vlceribus malignis, tam Venereis quam aliis, miscetur cum
Vnguentis adaptis, and exterius applicatur. Dosis, a scrupla semis ad seruplas
duas: in Vermibus Puerorum expellendis, datur a granis octo ad viginti, cum
granis Scammonii duas vel tribus.

X. Pulvis Rheumaticus.
Arcani Corallini triturati uncias quatuor, Cinnabaris artificialis uncias
viginti, Scammonii optimi pulvcrisati uncias octo: misce, fiatque Pulvis.

Diversimode operari consuevit; in quibusdam Vomitum producere solet, aliis,
Alvum purgat; maxima cum utilitate assumi potest in Rheumatismi curatione:
Vlceribus inveteratis, Scabieis, Arthritidi, Scorbuto, Doloribus Nocturnis, Lui
Venereae, Gonorrhoeae, Scrophulae, aliisque Morbis hujus generis canvenit.
Dosis, a scrupla una ad semidrachmam, vel scruplas duas, in robustioribus.

XI. Pulvis ad Vermes.
Corallini laevigati, Mercurii dulcis laevigati, ana drachmas sex; Scammonii
resinosi, Mechoacae, Seminum Cynae and Anisi, Entis Veneris, Croci Martis
aperitivi, ana drachmas quatuor: misce, fiatque Pulvis.

In expellendis Vermibus and Lumbricis, tum Puerorum, tum Adultorum, efficax
est. Dosis, a scrupla una ad scruplas duas, vel dcachmam unam; mane vel
vesperi, in Vehiculo convenienti.

CHAP. LXVIII. Of POUDERS.
1. Powder of Antimony.
OF the best Antimony in powder lbij. strong Ley of Soap-ashes, a sufficient
quentity, or so much as may overtop it four inches; stir it well with a wooden
Spatula; let it stand for the space of twenty-four hours; then affuse thereon
by drops Oil of Vitriol ij. digest for a whole week; afterward affuse thereon
a great quantity of fair Water, that it may be sweetened; then dry it, and keep
it for use.

This is wont to work sometimes by Vomit, sometimes by Stool; it expels thick
and viscous Humors in the Stomach and parts adjacent to it, both upwards and
downwards: it penetrates, digests, opens, incides, dissolves, absterges,
purges, resists Putrefaction and Poison, and is wonderful good against
Crudities of the Stomach, weakness of Appetite, Obstructions of the Bowels,
Liver, Spleen, Womb, and Reins, Colic pains: it prevails against the Plague,
and malign and pestilential Fevers: it is also profitable in putrid Fevers, the
Dropsy, Scurvy, King's Evil, Jaundies, Gout, Rheumatism, etc. it works much less
by Vomit than by Stool, and is given a gr. iij, ad v. more or less.

2. The Fever-Pouder.
Sal Prunellae finely poudred lbj. crude Antimony levigated lbss. mix them.

It is a singular thing in burning Fevers, putrid, malign, and pestilential; in
the Dropsy, Jaundies, and Obstructions of the Reins and Bladder; it works by
Urine, and brings forth all sorts of Impurities; it resists Putrefaction,
quenches Thirst, and allays burning Heat; cuts Tartarous silth, resolves the
Coagulation of the Blood, and mitigates pains: it is given also in the
Pleurisy, Quinsey, Inflammation of the Lungs, Obstructions of the Liver and
Mesentery, and in the Stone, both in Reins and Bladder. Dose, a ss, ad j. in a
Vehicle very well sweetened with white Sugar.

3. The Bezoartick Powder.
Bezoar Mineral viij. Crab's-eyes, Terra sigillata, ana iv. native Cinnabar,
Cochinel, ana ij. mix, and make a Powder.

It is good against Sickness at Heart, and Pain at Stomach; and is properly
exhibited in Fevers, burning, putrid, and malign; it is sudorifick, and good
against the Falling sickness, Plague and Poison; and prevails against the
Smallpox, Measles; Jaundies, and all sorts of Diseases curable by Sweating.
Dose, a gr. vj, ad j.

4. The Virgins Powder, or Green-sickness-Pouder.
Steel or Iron, reduced into a powder either with Water or Sulphur vj. Aniseed,
Facula of Aron-roots, a. j. Nutmegs ij, treble-refined Sugar x. mix, and make a
Powder.

It admirably attenuates, incides, opens, and is Anticachectick, and a
wonderful opener of Obstructions; it provokes the Terms, helps the Jaundies,
kills Worms, and cures the Green Sickness, Scurvy, and Hypochondriack
Melancholy. It is a specific in the Cachexia, or evil habit of Women's Bodies;
in the Dropsy, and in all Obstructions of the Stomach, Liver, Spleen,
Mesentery, and Diseases thence arising. Dose, a gr. xij, ad xxiv. every day
morning and evening.

5. The Purging Powder.
Glass of Antimony levigated j. Spirit of Nitre ss. mix, and digest for twenty
four hours; then add to it Spirit of Vitriol j. digest to dryness: add again
Spirit of Vitriol j. and digest to dryness: this work repeat five or six times,
then edulcorate with warm Water, and keep it for use.

It is a present help for the Stomach; it keeps the Food in the Stomach, which
otherwise would not be retained, because of a violent Vomiting; it is good
against the Jaundies, Scurvy, King's Evil, Cachexy, Hypochondriack Melancholy,
Gout, Rheumatism, Falling Sickness, Lethargy, Megrim, Sickness and Pain at
Stomach; it removes the pain and heaviness of the Spleen, makes the Face of a
good color, removes all Obstructions, and drives forth Urine, Sand, and
Tartarous Humors; it helps Diseases of the Womb, the Colic, arising from crude
Humors and Wind, the Dropsy, and putrid and malign Fevers. Dose, a gr. ss, ad
gr. j ss. and to gr. ij. in strong Bodies: it works mostly by Stool, more
rarely by Vomit.

6. Cornachinus his Powder.
Resinous Scammony in powder ij. Antimony Diaphoretick, Crystals of Tartar, a.
j. mix, and make a Powder.

It brings forth powerfully both thick and serous Humors from the extreme
parts, but chiefly from the Joints; and it is profitable to many Affects, and
cold Diseases, not only of the Head, Nerves, and Joints; but also of the
Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, Reins, and Womb; and from all those parts it
draws and purges forth Phlegm, Serum, Choler, and Melancholy; it is also good
in Fevers, putrid, malign, complex, and inveterate, and in complicate Diseases.
It helps the Scurvy, Jaundies, Gout, Rheumatism, King's Evil, Cachexy, Dropsy,
Obstructions of the Bowels, and Diseases of the Womb: it kills Worms, and
expels them, prevails against a quartan Ague, comforts the Stomach, and purges
the whole Body of excrementitious Humors, and that gently, and without pain.
Dose, a j, ad ss. early in the morning, the Patient being careful not to take
cold.

7. A Powder for the Diabetes.
Japan- Earth, Henbaneseeds, of each equal parts; make them into a fine powder,
and mix them.

It cures not only the Diabetes, but also all Bleedings and Fluxes, as a
Looseness of the Belly, Bloody Flux, Flux of Chylous matter, as also the
Hepatick-flux, and Overflowing of the Terms. Dose, a ss, ad ij. morning and
evening. This Powder is also of use in all Distillations from the Head upon the
Lungs; it likewise helps a Cough caused by a distillation of thin Humors, or a
Catarrh; by reason of its thickning that flowing Humor.

8. A Vomiting-Pouder.
Of the best Antimony in powder q.v. to which affuse Aqua Regia: let them stand
for some time in digestion, till a Calx shall appear white in the bottom;
afterward abstract the Aqua Regia by distillation, or else decant it; or
otherwise praecipitate, by the affusion of Water: wash the Calx with warm
Water, till the Aqua Regia can be no more perceived, either by taste or smell:
dry the Powder, and reverberate it in a Crucible for six hours, and make a red
Powder.

It is Emetick, and cures Quartan-agues; it powerfully alleviates Gouty
defluxions, and the Paroxysms thereof; it heals Wounds, Fistula's, and
inveterate Ulcers: it is good against all Obstructions, though inveterate, of
Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, and other Bowels; it purifies the Blood, provokes the
Terms, and prevails against the Green Sickness in Virgins, the Dropsy,
Hypochondriack Melancholy, French Disease, and malign Fevers: it purges with
much pleasantness, both upwards and downwards; and that not so much by its own
nature and virtue, as from the latency and stagnation of the Choleric Humor
about the Stomach; but in some it works by Sweating. Dose, a gr. ij, ad v.

9. The Herculean Powder.
The best Quicksilver, Flowers of Sulphur, a. j. mix them, and by grinding
them in a Mortar, make a very black Powder.

It causes not Salivation or Spitting, but provokes Sweat. It kills Worms; and
is given against the French Pox, inveterate Scabbiness, malign Ulcers, virulent
Gonorrhoea, Dropsy, etc. In malign Ulcers, whether Venereal or others, it is
mixed with proper Ointments, and outwardly applied. Dose, a ss, ad ij. it is
given to kill and expel Worms in Children, a gr. viij, ad xx. with gr. ij, or
iij. of Scammony.

10. A Powder against a Rheumatism.
Arcanum Corallinum ground fine iv. artificial Cinnabar xx. resinous Scammony
in powder viij. mix, and make a Powder.

It uses to work variously; in some it is wont to cause Vomiting, in others it
purges downwards by Stool; it is given with wonderful profit in the cure of a
Rheumatism: it admirably helps inveterate Ulcers, Scabbiness, the Gout, Scurvy,
Nocturnal Pains, French Pox, Gonorrhoea, King's Evil, and other Diseases of this
kind. Dose, a j, ad ss, or ij. in strong Bodies.

11. A Powder for Worms.
Coralline levigated, Mercurius dulcis levigated, a. vj. resinous Scammony,
Mech^acan, Wormseed, Aniseed, Ens Veneris, opening Crocus of Mars, a. iv, mix,
and make a Powder.

It is effectual in expelling of Worms of all kinds, both in old and young.
Dose, a j, ad ij, or j. morning or evening, in some fit Vehicle.

CHAP. LXIX. De ELECTVARIIS.
I. Theriaca Chymica.
ZInziberis conditi ex India advecti, concisi, and in massam contusi, libras
duas; Extracti Melliginosi Juniperi, Succi Alkermes, ana libram unam; Olei
Macis per Expressionem optimi, Olei de Ben, ana uncia; novem; Balsami
Sulphuris, Opii cum succo Limonum extracti, ana uncias sex; Balsami Camphorae,
Balsami Salis Tartari, ana uncias quatuor; Olei Chymici Angelicae,
Caryophyllorum, Foeniculi, Lavendulae, Limonum, Rosmarini, de Sassafras, ana
unciam unam; misce integre: cui adduntur, Antihectici Poterii, Arcani Jovis,
Auri Vitae, Bezoartici Mineralis, Salis Perlarum, Salis volatilis Succini,
Vitrioli Martis, ana unciae quatuor; Pulveris Bezoar Orientalis,
Caryophyllorum, Castorei, Cochinelae, Corticis Winterani, Croci Anglici,
radicis Enulae-campanae, Myrrhae, Nucis moschatae, Oculorum Cancrorum, Piperis
longi, radicis Serpentariae, Succini albi, Viperarum, Zedoariae, ana unciae
tres: misce, fiatque Theriaca Chymica Nostra.

Ad Cerebrum, Cor, Ventriculum, and aiia Viscera corroboranda celebratur; mirum
in modum confert Morbis venenatis, contagiosis, and pestilentibus expugnandis:
est anodynum, narcoticum, somniferum, and sudorificum; hinc magni usus, ac
infinitis fere Morbis conducit; ut in Hypercatharsi, in nimiis Vigiliis, dolor
Colico, Nephritico, Podagrico, and in Vomitu compescendo: operatur per Sudorem,
interdum per Vrinam, omnesque dolores cujuscunque generis mitigat, levemque
Somnum inducit: in Diarrhoea, Lienteria, and Dysenteria maxim valet, and
Fluxus omnes alios Alvi and Vteri sistit. Dosis, a scrupla una ad drachmam
unam.

II. Electuarium Antipestilentiale.
Zinziberis apud Indos conditi, concisi and contusi, Syrupi ejusdem, ana uncias
sex, Olei Macis per Expressionem optimi, Succi Alkermes, ana uncias quinque;
Bezoartici Mineralis uncias quatuor; Cochinelae, Radicis Serpentariae, ana
uncias tres; pulveris Viperarum uncias duas, Croci Anglici, Camphorae, Nitri
vitriolati, Salis volatilis Succini, Opii Extracti, ana unciam unam, Olei
Angelicae sesquiunciam; misce, fiatque Electuarium.

Pesti, Morbis pestilentibus and contagiosis, omnibusque Febres putridis and
malignis medetur; parts principales roborat, Vermes enecat, Vomiturientibus
confert, Cordis Palpitationi multum opitulatur, Hydrophobiam, and Canis rabidi
morsum opportune data sanat: per Sudores, and parts Principales and Vitales
corroborando operatur. Dosis, a scrupla una ad drachmas duas, in Vino
Hispanico, vel Aqua aliqua Cordiale.

III. Electuarium Antihecticum.
Pulveris Viperarum uncias sex, Salis Conchae Ostreae uncias quatuor,
Cochinelae, Balsami Salis Tartari, Antihectici Poterii, ana uncias tres; Bezoar
Mineralis, Salis Vitriolati, ana uncias duas, Croci unciam unam, Olei Macis per
Expressionem optimi uncias sex, Succi Alkermes uncias octodecim; misce, fiatque
Electuarium.

Vires exolutas restaurat, Corporis habitum longo Sanguinis fluxu, aut alia
quavis immoderata vacuatione extenuatum resarcit, macilentis and consumptis
succurrit, nutriendo nempe ac coroborando: Febribus hecticis, Tabidis, and
immoderato Viscerum calori, mirifice medetur. Dosis, a dram una ad duas,
mane ac vesperi.

IV. Electuarium Catharticum.
Seammonii optimi uncias octo, Mechoacae, Resinae Jalapae, ana uncias sex,
Senae uncias quinque, Rhabarbari optimi, Hermodactylorum, ana uncias quatuor,
Piperis longi uncias tres, Salis Mirabilis, Crystallorum Tartari, ana uncias
duodecim; Mannae in Syrupo redactae, vel Syrupi Florum Perficorum, libras sex;
misce, fiatque Electuarium.

Fiscidam Pituitam, Succus glutinosos, omnesque Humores malignos in quacunque
part Corporis Humani, potenter attrahat and purgat. Apoplexiae, Epilepsiae,
Vertigini, Hemicraniae, Cephalalgiae, Asthmati, Morbis frigidis and
arthriticis, Colico dolori, a Pituita vitrea nato, multum confert. Podagrae,
Cheiragrae, Gonagra, Scorbuto, Rheumatismo, Hydropi quoque vel praesenti, vel
imminenti, mirifice prodest. Non modo autem dictos Humores a prima regione
Corporis, sed a Renibus, and partibus remotioribus expurgat, Dosis, a dram
una ad drachmas duas, vel duas and semis; mane, jejuno Stomacho. Morbis a Bile
utraque and Pituita salsa, natis, ut Cancro, Elephantiasi, Maniae,
Melancholiae, Impetigini, Psorae, Scabiei, similibusque Affectibus Cutis,
convenit.

V. Electuarium Catarrhale.
Zinziberis apud Indos conditi, concisi and contusi, libram unam; Catechu,
Florum Sulphuris, ana uncias quatuor; Olei Macis optimi uncias tres, Succi
Alkermes quantum sufficit; misce, fiatque Electuarium.

In Catarrhis vel Dejluxionibus a Capite ad Pectus tenuioribus incrassandis and
maturandis; in Tussi etiam praestans est Remedium, mane ac vesperi, vel saepe
in die, a dram semis ad drachmas duas propinandum: in Dysenteriis and
Diarrhaeis, Exulcerationibus Intestinorum and Mesenterii utiliter exhibetur.

VI. Electuarium Stomachicum.
Zinziberis apud Indos conditi libram unam, Corticum Citri, Auranciarum
conditorum, ana uncias tres; Conservae Barberorum uncios octo; Olei
Caryophyllorum drachmas duas; misce, fiatque Electuarium.

Ventriculo refrigerato exhibetur: ad varia etiam Stomachi and Cerebri Vitia
emendanda; Vomitum, Nauseam, Cardialgiam, Dolorem Ventriculi, Flatus
Hypochondriacum, and Coctionem laesam, praestans est Medicamentum. Dosis, a
dram una ad duas, saepe in die.

VII. Electuarium ad Tussim.
Electuarii Catarrhalis libram unam, Opii Thebaici cum suceo Limonum extracti,
unciam unam: misce, fiatque Electuarium

Valet in omnibus Pectoris Affectibus morbosis, Tussi diuturna and recenti,
Asthmate, and Phthisi ipsa; in Sputo Sanguinis, a quacunque causa ortum
duxerit, praestans est Remedium; conglutinat, and oscula Venarum claudit;
omnibusque Viscerum Fluxibus, ac Haemorrbagia, cum sucessu exbibetur. Dosis, a
scrupla una ad drachmam unam, bora somni quotidie.

CHAP. LXIX. Of ELECTUARIES.
1. Chemical Treacle.
INdian Green-ginger, cut into thin stices and beat into a mass lbij.
Melliginous Extract of Juniper, Juice of Alkermes, a. lbj. best Oil of Mace by
Expression, Oil of Ben, a. ix. Balsam of Sulphur, Opium extracted with Juice of
Limons, a. vj. Balsam of Camphir, Balsam of Salt of Tartar, a. iv. Chemical
Oils of Angelica, Cloves, Fennel, Lavender, Limons, Rosemary, Sassafras, a. j.
mix them well together; and then add thereto the Antihectick of Poterius, the
Arcanum of Jupiter, Aurum Vitae, Bezoar Mineral, Salt of Pearl, volatile Salt of
Amber, Vitriol of Mars, a. iv. Pouders of Oriental Bezoar, Cloves, Castoreum,
Cochinele, Winter's Cinnamon, English Saffron, Elecampane, Myrrh, Nutmegs,
Crab's-eyes, Long-pepper, Virginia Snake-root, white Amber, Vipers, Zedoary, a,
iij, mix, and make Our Chemical Treacle.

It is a famed Medicin for strengthening the Brain, Heart, Stomach, and the
other Bowels; and prevails after a wonderful manner against poisonous,
pestilential, and contagious Diseases: it is anodyn, narcotick, somniferous,
and sudoriferous; for which reason it is of great use, and conduces to the cure
of almost infinite Distempers; as of Fluxes, or too great Purgings of the
Bowels, continued Watchings, pains of the Colic, and Reins, Gout, and
Vomitings: it operates by Sweat, sometimes by Urine, eases all Pains of what
kind soever, and induces pleasant or gentle Sleep: it is admirably good against
a Looseness, Lientery, and Bloody Flux, and stops all other Fluxes, whether of
the Belly or Womb. Dose, a j, ad j.

2. The Electuary against the Plague.
Indian Green-ginger, cut and beaten into a mass, Syrup of the same, of each
vj. best Oil of Mace by Expression, Juice of Alkermes, a. v. Bezoar Mineral iv.
Cochinele, Virginian Snake-root, a. iij. powder of Vipers ij. English Saffron,
Camphir, Nitre vitriolated, volatile Salt of Amber, Extract of Opium, a. j. Oil
of Angelica j ss. mix, and make an Electuary.

It cures the Plague, pestilential and contagious Diseases, and all sorts of
putrid and malign Fevers: it comforts and strengthens the principal parts,
kills Worms, stops Vomiting, and helps the Palpitation of the Heart; and if
timely given, cures the Hydrophobia, and bitings of mad Dogs; it operates by
Sweating, and comforting the Principal and Vital parts. Dose, a j, ad ij. in
Canary, or some Cordial Water.

3. Electuary against Hecticks, or, Consumptions.
Powder of Vipers vj. Salt of Oister-shells iv. Cochinele, Balsam of Salt of
Tartar, Antihecticum of Poterius, a. iij. Bezoar Mineral, Salt Vitriolated, a.
ij. Saffron j. best Oil of Mace by Expression vj. Juice of Alkermes xviij. mix,
and make an Electuary.

It recuperates the decayed strength, and repairs the extenuated habit of Body,
proceeding either from losing much Blood, or any other immoderate evacuation:
it comforts and replenishes such as are lean and consumptive, by nourishing and
strengthening them: also it admirably cures Hectick-fevers, melting
Consumptions, and the vehement heat of the Bowels. Dose, a j, ad ij. morning
and evening.

4. The Purging Electuary.
Resinous Scammony viij. Mechoaean, Rosin of Jalap, a. vj. Sena v. best
Rhubarb, Hermodacts, a. iv. Long-pepper iij. Sal Mirabile, Crystals of Tartar,
a. xij. Syrup of Manna, or Syrup of Peach-flowers lbvj. mix, and make an
Electuary.

It powerfully attracts and purges out viscous Phlegm, thick glutinous Matter,
and ail malign Humors in what part of Man's Body soever. It is good against the
Apoplexy, Epilepsy, Vertigo, Megrim, Headache, Asthma, cold and gouty Diseases,
colic Pains arising from glassy Phlegm. It is very profitable for such as are
afflicted with the Gout in the Feet, Hands, or Knees, Scurvy, Rheumatism,
Jaundies, and Dropsy, whether it be present, or approaching. Now it purges the
aforementioned Humors, not only from the first region of the Body, but from the
Reins, and the more remote parts. Dose, a j, ad ij, vel ii ss. in the morning,
fasting. It is of good use for such as are afflicted with Diseases arising from
Choler, Melancholy, and salt Phlegm, as the Cancer, Elephantiasis, Madness,
Melancholy, Ringworms, Herpes, Scabbiness, and other like Affects of the Skin.

5. Electuary against Catarrhs.
Indian Green-ginger, cut and beaten lbj. Catechu, Flowers of Sulphur, a. iv.
best Oil of Mace iij. Juice of Alkermes a sufficient quantity; mix, and make an
Electuary.

It is a most excellent thing in thickning and ripening thin Catarrhs, or
Defluxions of Rheum falling down from the Head upon the Breast; as also for a
Cough, being given morning and evening, or oftentimes a day, to be taken a ss,
ad ij. it is also of good use being given in Fluxes of the Bowels,
Bloody-fluxes, or Exulcerations of the Guts and Mesentery.

6. A Stomach-Electuary.
Indian Green-ginger lbi. candied Citron-peels and Orange-peels, A. iii.
Conserve of Barberries viii. Oil of Cloves ii. mix, and make an Electuary.

It is given in a cold Stomach, as also to help several Distempers of the
Stomach and Brain; as Vomiting, Loathing, Sickness at Heart, Pain of the
Stomach, Hypochondriack Vapors, and weakness of the Concoctive-Faculty, for
which it is a powerful Medicine. Dose, a i, ad ii. oftentimes a day.

7. Electuary against Coughs.
Of the Electuary against Catarrhs lbi. Extract of Thebian Opium, made with
juice of Limons i. mix, and make an Electuary.

It is good in all Distempers of the Breast, as the Cough, whether of long
standing, or new, Asthma, and the Phthisis or Consumption of the Lungs it self,
it is a powerful Remedy for Spitting of Blood; arising from what cause soever;
it conglutinates and heals the mouths of the Veins; it is given with great
success in all Fluxes of the Bowels, as also in Hemorrhagies. Dose, a i, ad i.
every day, at bedtime.

CHAP. LXX. De PILVLIS.
I. Pilulae Catharticae.
ALOES purissimae libras quindecim, Colocynthidis pulverisatae libras quatuor,
Turpethi Mineralis, Cambogiae, ana libras tres: in decocto forti pulpae
Colocynthidis dissolvatur Aloes and Cambogia, and evapora ad Mellis
consistentiam; cui addantur pulveres Colocynthidis and Turpethi; fiatque Oleo
C^rui massa Pilularum.

Omnes Humores, praecipue serosos, atque Bilem and Pituitam maxim purgant;
specificae sunt ad Gonorrhaeam and Fluxus Vteri album; in Hydrope, Arthritide,
Scorbuto, Scrophula, Rheumatisma, Cachexia, Ictero, Obstructionibus Hepatis,
Lienis, Mesenterii, Vteri, and Renum, felicissime exhibentur, and praesertim
iis, qui levioribus Medicamentis purgari nequeunt: omnibusque impuritatibus
Cerebri, Ventriculi, Intestinorum, and Sanguinis convenient. Dosis, a scrupla
una ad semidrachmam, mane, Stomacho Jejuno.

II. Pilulae ad Luem.
Aloes uncias sexdecim, Colocynthidis pulverisatae uncias octo; Turpethi
Minerali, vel Arcani Corallini, uncias sex; misce, and cum decocti fortis
pulpae Colocynthidis quantitate sufficienti and Oleo Anin fiat massa Pilularum.

Specificae sunt in Lue Venerea, Gonorrhoea virulenta, Lepra, Scabie,
Arthritide, Vlceribus and Fistulis malignis and venereis: interius assumptae
Pituitam tenacem incidunt and expellunt, omnesque Humores purgant. Dosis, a
granis quindecim ad semidrachmam.

III. Pilulae Mirabiles.
Argenti vivi panno conclusi, ut granis minimis efflaat, uncias quinque; Succi
vel Syrupi Limonum quantitatem sufficientem; misce, and extinguatur Mercurius
eodem Succo per triturationem; cumque satis extinctum and mixtum fuerit,
addatur Aloes unciae octo, pulpae Colocynthidis pulverisatae unciae quatuor;
Cambogiae unciae duae; misce, and cum syrupo Limonum, vel decocto forti
Colocynthidis fiat massa Pilularum, addendo pro re nata, Bezoartici Mineralis,
vel Glycyrrhizae pulveris, quantitatem parvam.

Virtutes omnes proximi habent praecedentis; praecipue autem in Arthritide,
Rheumatismo, and doloribus Scorbuticis and Venereis; in quibus nihil est in
Rerum natura praestantius. Dosis, quotidie, a semiscrupla ad scruplam unam, vel
pro re nata.

IV. Pilulae Hystericae.
Aloes uncias quinque, Colocynthidis, Rhabarbari, Opii Extracti, Asae foetidae,
Fuliginis ligneae, Salis volatilis Succini, Croci Martis aperitivi, Calcis
Jovis, Vitrioli Lunae, ana unciam unam; Castorei, Camphorae, Myrrhae, Olei
Succini, ana unciam semis; Olei de Gornu Cervi drachmam unam; misce, and cum
decocto Senae fiat massa Pilularum. Vel sic. Recipe Aloes uncias septem, Asae
foetidae uncias quatuor; Opii, Fuliginis ligneae, Salis volatilis Succini,
Crocus Martis aperitivi, ana uncias duas; Camphorae, Myrrhae, Olei Succini, ana
unciam unam; cum Syrupo Atriplicis olidae fiat massa Pilularum.

Vteri strangulatus, dolores, and subversiones maxim sedant: faeliciter vero
Epilepticis, Apoplecticis, Lethargicis, Paralyticis, Maniacis, Lienosis, and
Melancholicis Hypochondiacis, ab Humoribus impactis, dantur; Vertiginem etiam,
Cephalalgiam, and Hemicraniam sanant. Dosis prioris, a granis quindecim ad
semidraehmam; posterioris a scrupla una ad duas.

V. Laudanum Samech, seu Tartarisatum; Viri Excellentissimi, D. Tho. Gardneri
Regii Chirurgi.
Salis Tartari (ex Tartari and Nitri partibus aequalibus facti) uncias sex;
Olei Terebinthinae and Juniperi, ana uncias sex; misce simul Vase amplo, in
loco frigido and humido; stent ad menses aliquot, tamdiu scilicet (saep^
interim quotidie agitando, and plus Olei, quoties opus fuerit, adjiciendo)
usque-dum Sal plane triplum Olei absorbuerit; atque in unam massam (Saponis
instar) spissam conspiraverint homogeneam, nullatenus separandum. Recipe hujus
Saponis uncias octodecim, Opii Thebaici Extracti uncias octo, Salis Armoniaci
volatils uncias sex; Sulphuris Martis anodyni, Gummi Guajaci, ana uncias
quatuor; Extractorum Theriacae Andromachi, Croci, Cochinelae,
Radicis-serpentariae, Olei Macis and Nucis moschatae per expressionem, ana
uncias duas; misce, and in Mortario contunde; cumque mixtura partibus Oleorum
aequalibus Anisi, Juniperi, and Succini, ac pulvere Glycyrrhizae vel
Zinziberis, fiat massa Pilularum.

Nota. Sulphur Martis sic perficitur. Recipe limaturae Martis libram unam;
Spiritus Aceti uncias octo, Spiritus Nitri semiunciam; bulliantur ad
siccitatem; add Spiritus Aceti quantum sufficit, digeritur ad rubedinem,
filtretur; cum Oleo Tartari per deliquium praecipitatur, and Aqua pura
edulcoratur Sulphur ad usum.

In operatione and virtute hoc Medicamentum, Mithridatium and Theriacam ipsam
long vincit; hinc vires ejus facile colligere poterit; in Hydrope, Arthritide,
Lue Venerea, and Rheumatismo praevalet. Contra Pestem, Febres malignas and
contagiosas, Marsum Canis rabidi, Morbillos, Variolas, and quaevis alia Venena
celeberrimum est Alexiterium. Omnes Dolores sedat, omnesque Fluxus cujuscunque
generis sistat; Tussi and Tabi convenit, Somnum lent inducit, and per Sudorem
and Transpirationem insensibilem efficacissime operatur. Dosis, a granis tribus
ad octo, sub nocte, vel hora somni.

VI. Laudanum specificum Nostrum.
Opii Thebaici sesquilibram, dissolvatur in succi Limonum libris duabus, Olei
Sulphuris unciis duabus mixti; coletur, inspissetur, and evaporetur ad Extracti
consistentiam; cui addatur Olei Nucum moschatarum per expressionem libra una;
Bezoartici mineralis, pulverum Caryophyllorum, Camphorae, Catechu, Cochinelae,
Corticis Winterani and Peruani, Croci, Radicum Serpentariae, ana unciae tres,
Sulphuris Vitrioli Martis anodyni unciae sex: Olei Chymice praeparati
Absinthii, Anisi, Caryophyllorum, Foeniculi, Juniperi, Lavendulae, Limonum,
Rosmarini, Sassafras, and Succini, ana drachmae duae and semis: misce, fiatque
massa Pilularum.

Stomachum confortat, ac in omnibus Alvi Profluviis, ut Diarrh^ea, Lienteria,
Dysenteria, Fluxu Hepatico, Vomitu, Haemorrhagia Narium, Mensibus superfluis,
Sputo Sanguinis, Catarrhis, aliisque Defluxionibus Experimentum est mirabile.
Confortat Intestina and Membra interiora: in Hydrope, Arthritide, Scorbuto,
Icteritia, Suffocatione Matricis, similisque Vterinis Affectibus; omnisque
generis Febribus, sive sint intermittentes, sive continuae, aut malignae, suam
adeo promeretur laudem, ut a nullo satis ejus virtutes depredicari possint. In
Peste, and Morbis Epidemicis, Morbillis, Variolis, Doloribus extremis in
quacunque Corporis part, and cujuscunque generis, Colico, Tussi, Phthisi,
Calculo Renum and Vesicae exhiberi solet. Spiritus Vitales, Animales, and
Naturales in omnibus membris recreat and fortificat. Somnum generose indu it,
necnon in Gonorrhoea and F^uxu albi Matricis, Arcanum est. Dosis, a granis
duabus vel tribus ad sex vel octo, hora somni.

VII. Laudanum Catharticum Nostrum.
Opii Thebaici (succo Limonum) extracti, libram unam; Aloes Succotrinae (Aqua
fontana) extractae, libras octo; Scammonii resinosi, Zinziberis, Glycyrrhizae,
pulverum, ana libram unam: misce, ac Oleo Anisi, Caryophyllorum, Limonum, and
Sassafras, ana drachmas sex; misce, fiatque massa.

Omnes Dolores universaliter sedat: minus quidem purgat, magis tamen roborat,
and adstrictam Alvum solvit. Virtus hujus Remedii admiranda, and nunquam satis
laudanda, existit; quoniam ad omnium Visce^m nobiliorum corroborationem
commendatur; pravorum insuper Humorum correctionem; and blandissimam
evacuationem promovet, tuta and jucunda operatione. Catarrhos tenues sistit, ac
Tussim inde natam sedat; Somnum conciliat, and in Febribus tertianis and
quartanis, aliquot horis ante Paroxysmum propinanda praestat. Dosis, hora
somni, a semiscrupla ad scruplam unam, vel semidrachmam.

CHAP. LXX. Of PILLS.
1. The Purging Pills.
FINE Aloes lbxv. Coloquintida in powder lbiv. Turpeth-Mineral, Cambogia, A.
lbiii. dissolve the Aloes and Cambogia in a strong decoction of Coloquintida,
and evaporate to the consistency of Honey; to which add the pouders of
Coloquintida, and Tuxpeth; and make with Oil of Caraways a mass of Pills.

They purge all Humors, chiefly serous and watery; as also Choler and Phlegm
very much; they are a specific in a Gonorrhaea, and the Whites in Women: they
are given with great effect in the Dropsy, Gout. Scurvy, King's Evil,
Rheumatism, Cachexy, Jaundies, Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Mesentery,
Womb, and Reins; and chiefly to such which cannot be purged with gentler
Medicines: they are good against all impurities of the Brain, Stomach, Bowels,
and Blood, Dose, a i, ad ss. in the morning fasting.

2. Pills for the French Pox.
Aloes xvi. Coloquintida in fine powder viii. Turpeth Mineral, or Arcanum
Corallinum vi. mix, and with a sufficient quantity of a strong decoction of
Coloquintida and a little Oil of Aniseeds make a mass of Pills.

They are a Specific against the French Pox, virulent Gonorrhea, Leprosy,
Scabbiness, Gout, malign and venereal Ulcers and Fistula's: internally given,
they cut and expel tough Phlegm, and purge all kinds of Humors. Dose, a gr. xv,
ad ss.

3. The Wonderful Pills.
Quicksilver, which tie up in a Rag, that it may squeeze forth in very small
grains v. Juice or Syrup of Limons, q.s. mix, and kill the Quicksilver with
the Juice, by grinding them together; when it shall be sufficiently killed and
mixed, add thereto of Aloes viii. pulp of Coloquintida in powder iv. Cambogia
ii. mix them, and with Syrup of Limons, or a strong Decoction of Coioquintida,
make a mass of Pills; adding, as occasion requires, a small quantity of Bezoar
Mineral, or powder of Liquorice.

They have all the Virtues of the last aforegoing; but chiefly in the Gout,
Rheumatism, Scorbutic and Venereal pains; for which Diseases, nothing is
better or more powerful in Nature. Dose, every day, a ss, ad i, or as the
occasion may require.

4. Hysteric Pills, or Pills against Fits.
Aloes v. Coloquintida, Rheubarb, Extract of Opium, Asa foetida, Wood-soot,
volaril Salt of Amber, Crocus Martis aperitive, Calx of Tin, Vitriol of Silver,
A.i. Casror, Camphir, Myrrh, Oil of Amber, A. ss. Oil of Hartshorn i. mix, and
with decoction of Sena, make a mass of Pills. Or thus. Take Aloes vii. Asa
foetida iv. Wood-soot, volatile Salt of Amber, Crocus Martis aperitive, A. ii.
Camphir, Myrrh, Oil of Amber, A.j. with Syrupof stinking Arach make a mass of
Pills.

They wonderfully quiet, and ease the suffocation, pains, and disturbances of
the Womb; and are happily given in the Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, Lethargy,
Palsy, Madness, Distemper of the Spleen, and Hypochondriack Melancholy, from
Humors heaped up together; they are also helpful in the Vertigo, Headache, and
Megrim. Dose, of the former, a gr. xv, ad ss. of the latter, a i, ad ii.

5. Tartariz'd Laudanum, of that most excellent Man, Dr. Tho. Gardner, the
King's Chirurgian.
Salt of Tartar, (made of equal parts of Tartar and Nitre) vi. Oils of
Turpentine and Juniper, A. iv. mix them together in a large Vessel, and let
them stand for some months in a cold and moist place; to wit, so long (stirring
them in the mean season every day, and adding more of the Oils, as often as need
requires) 'till the Salt has completely drunk up a triple quantity of the Oil,
and shall become one thick homogene mass (much like to Soap) not to be
separated again. Take of this Soap xviii. Extract of Thebean Opium viii.
volatile Salt Armoniack vi. anodyn Sulphur of Mars, Gumm of Guajacum, a. iv.
Extracts of Venice-Treacle, of Saffron, Cochinele, Virginia Snake-root, Oil of
Mace and Nutmegs by expression, a. ij. mix, and beat them in a Mortar, and with
a mixture made of equal parts of the Oils of Anise, Juniper, and Amber, with
powder of Liquorice or Ginger, make a mass of Pills.

Note. The Sulphur of Mars is thus made. Take filings of Iron lbj. Spirit of
Vinegar viij. Spirit of Nitre ss. mix, and boil to dryness; then add Spirit of
Vinegar q.s. digest till the Tincture is red, which decant and filter;
praecipitate with Oil-of Tartar per deliquium, and edulcorate the Sulphur with
fair Water, for use.

This Medicine much exceeds both Mithridate and Venice- Treacle in its virtue
and operation; from whence it is easy to find out what things it is good for;
it is good against the Dropsy, Gout, Pox, and Rheumatism; it is a famous
Alexiterick against the Plague, malign and contagious Fevers, Bitings of
Mad-dogs, Measles, Smallpox, and all other sorts of Venom. It eases all Pains,
and stops all Fluxes of what kind soever; it is good against Coughs and
Consumptions, induces pleasant Sleep, and operates most effectually by Sweat
and insensible Transpiration. Dose, a gr. 3, ad viij. at night, or time of
going to sleep.

6. Specitick Laudanum of the Author.
Thebian Opium lbj ss. dissolve in juice of Limons lbij. mixed with Oil of
Sulphur ij. strain, inspissate, and evaporate to the thickness of an Extract;
to which add Oil of Nutmegs by expression lbj. Bezoar-mineral, pouders of
Cloves, Camphir, Catechu, Cochinel, Winter 's Cinnamon, Jesuits-Bark, Saffron,
Virginian Snake-root, a. iij. anodyn Sulphur of the Vitriol of Mars vj.
Chemical Oils of Wormwood, Aniseed, Cloves, Fennel, Juniper, Lavender, Limons,
Rosemary, Sassafras, and Amber, a. ij ss. mix, and make a mass of Pills.

It comforts the Stomach, and is by Experience found to be admirable against
all Fluxes of the Belly, as a Looseness, Diarrhoea, Bloody Flux, Hepatick-flux,
Vomitings, Bleeding at Nose, Overflowing of the Terms, Spitting of Blood,
Catarrhs, and other Defluxions of Humors. It comforts the Bowels and internal
Members: it is so much praised for its effects against the Dropsy, Gout,
Scurvy, Jaundies, Fits of the Mother, and other like Diseases of the Womb; as
also all kinds of Fevers, whether intermitting, or continual, or malign, that
no man can sufficiently set forth its virtues. It is usually given in the
Plague and Epidemick Diseases, Measles, Smallpox, vehement Pains in whatsoever
part of the Body, and of what kind soever, Coughs, Phthisicks, Stone in the
Reins and Bladder. It cheers the Spirits, Natural, Vital, and Animal, and
fortifies them in all parts. It causes kind and pleasant Sleep; and is a
Secret, in curing a Gonorrhoea in Men, and the Whites in Women. Dose, a gr. ij,
or iij, ad gr. vj, or viij. going to sleep.

7. The Author's Cathartick Laudanum.
Thebian Opium (extracted with the juice of Limons) lbj. fine Aloes (extracted
with fair Water) lbviij. resinous Scammony, Ginger, Liquorice, (all in powder)
a. lbj. mix, and with Oils of Aniseeds, Cloves, Limons, and Sassafras, a. vj.
mix, and make a mass.

It universally eases all Pains: purges indeed less, but strengthens the more,
and loosens the Belly being bound. The Virtues of this Medicine, to be admired,
and never enough to be praised, are manifest; and it is commended for
corroborating the more noble Bowels; but above all, for correcting of corrupt
and evil Humors; and its very sweetly purging of the Body, which it does by a
very safe and pleasant operation. It stops thin Catarrhs, and eases the Cough
thence proceeding; it induces Sleep, and prevails against tertian and quartan
Agues, being given some hours before the Fit. Dose, a ss, ad j, aut ss. at
bedtime.

CHAP. LXXI. De LOTIONIBVS.
I. Aqua Ophthalmica.
AQuae fontanae libras tres, Salis Vitrioli unciam unam: digere per viginti
dies, and filtra: addatur Sacchari Saturni drachmae quatuor, Aloes optimae
semiuncia, Opii Thebaici drachmae duae; dissolve, ac iterum filtra: huic
addantur Spiritus Vini (in quo Camphorae drachmae duae dissolvuntur) libra una,
Vitri Antimonii, vel Reguli seu Croci Metallorum, pulveris subtilissimi unciae
tres: misce, ac digere pro usu.

Instilletur ter vel quater in die Aqua haec Oculo, laboranti Perla, Verruca,
Cataracta, vel Nebula, and spatio dierum triginta vel quadraginta, etsi
desperatissimus esset Affectus, medetur: atque in omnibus Inflammationibus, and
Oculorum Affectibus, hoc Collyrium dicatum est.

II. Aqua Styptica.
Salis ex Capite mortuo reverberato Vitrioli cum Aqua fontana eliciti, unciam
unam; Aquae purae uncias duodecim, vel quantitatem sufficientem; misce, ac
dissolve; cui addantur Spiritus Vini unciae tres: digeritur, and reponatur ad
usum. Aliter. Pulveris Sympathetici unciam unam, Aquae communis uncias
duodecim; misce, ac dissolve: digere per septimanam, vel potius mensem; deinde
filtra, and add Spiritus Vini uncias quatuor. Vel sic. Vitriolo soluto,
filtrato, cum Spiritu Aceti praecipitato, edulcorato, and siccato, affunde
Oleum Vitrioli, and distilla ad siccitatem: Caput mortuum digere cum Spiritu
Yini; filtra calide, ac abstrahe: solve Salem in sundo remanentem cum Aquae
quadruplo per digestionem, fietque Aqua Styptica.

Hae Aquae onmibus Haemorrhagiis prosunt, and usus ultimae est internus and
externus. Dosis, a guttis december ad viginti, etc. Vulneribus etiam recentibus,
atque inveteratis, mirifice medentur.

III. Aqua Calcis cum Mercurio.
Calcis vivae libras duas, Aquae communis libras octo; misce, dissolve, ac
digere per horas viginti quatuor: dein decanta and filtra; cui addantur
Mercurii dulcis laevigati, vel Praecipitati albi unciae quatuor; misce iterum
Vasi agitando, and reservetur ad usum.

Vlceribus venereis and Gonorrhaeae virulentae prodest, per Syringem injecta.

IV. Aqua Divina Fernelii.
Aquae Plantaginis (vel communis) uncias duodecim, Sublimati corrosivi granas
viginti quatuor: misce, ac dissolva.

Vlceribus malignis, inveteratis, and venereis, lavando medetur.

V. Aqua ad Gnorrhaeam.
Aquae communis libras duas; Vitrioli albi, Aluminis, a. drachmas tres; Catechu
drachmas duas, Opii drachmam unam: misce, dissolve, ac filtra; cui addantur
Spiritus Vini unciae quatuor; misce, and reservetur ad usum.

Gonorrhaeae, and Fluxui albo, per Syringem injecta quater vel sexies in die,
medetur.

VI. Aqua Mercurialis.
Aquae communis libras duas, Amygdalarum excorticatarum uncias duas and semis;
misce, fiatque Emulsio: cui addantur Camphorae pulverisatae, Cerussae, ana
uncia una; Sublimati corrosivi (in succi Limonum unciis quatuor soluti) dram
una, misce. Vel sic. Rccipe Aquae communis, Succi Limonum, ana libram unam;
Sublimati corrosivi drachmas duas, Albuminum Ovorum numero quatuor; misce omnia
diligenter, deinde pone ad Solemn per octo dies, and serva ad usum. Aliter sic.
Recipe Emulsionis praescriptae libras duas, Sublimati corrosivi pulverisati
drachmas quatuor; misce, ac in Mortario vitreo, triturando dissolva, fiatque
Aqua albissima. Aliter, ab Willisio. Recipe Aquae communis libras duas,
Sublimati corrosivi pulverisati drachmas quinque and scruplam unam: misce, and
stent simul in Vase stanneo per septimanam, vel ad liquoris nigritudinem,
agitando saepe Spatula lignea; filtra ad claritudinem, and repone in Vitro
clauso ad usum.

Ad Faciei Ruborem, Vermiculos, and Pustulas curandum Aqua certissima est.

VII. Lac Mercurii.
Aquae communis libras duas, Sublimati corrosivi pulrerisati sesquiunciam;
misce, agitando in Disco stanneo, ut fiat instar Lactis.

Vlceribus malignis and venereis, tangendo medetur.

CHAP. LXXI. Of LOTIONS.
1. Eye-Water.
COmmon Water lbiij. Salt of Vitriol j. digest twenty days, and filter: then
add Saccharum Saturni, fine Aloes, a. iv. Theban Opium ij. dissolve, and
filter: to this add Spirit of Wine (in which Camphir ij. is dissolved) lbj.
Glass of Antimony, or its Regulus, or Crocus Metallorum in fine powder iij. mix
and digest, for use.

Being dropped into the Eyes of such as are troubled with Pearls, Warts, or
Cataracts, Clouds, three or four times a day for thirty or forty days, it cures
them, though exceeding bad. It is also of use in Inflammations, and all other
Affects of the Eyes.

2. The Styptick Water.
The Salt drawn with Water from the reverberated Caput mortuum of Vitriol j.
fair Water xij. or a sufficient quantity; mix, and dissolve: to which add S.V.
iij. digest, and keep it for use. Otherwise. of the Sympathetick-pouder, j.
common Water xij. mix, and dissolve: digest for a week, or rather a month, then
filter, and add S.V. iiij. Or thus. Dissolve Vitriol in Water, filter, and with
Spirit of Vinegar praecipitate, then edulcorate and dry: affuse thereon Oil of
Vitriol, and then distill to dryness: this Caput mortuum digest with Spirit of
Wine, filter warm, and then abstract it: the Salt remaining in the bottom,
dissolve in a fourfold quantity of Water by digestion, and the Styptick Water
will be made.

These Waters are good to stop all Haemorrhagies or Fluxes of Blood, of what
kind soever; and the use of the last of them is both internal and external.
Dose, a gut. x, ad xx, etc. They also cure Wounds both new and old, after an
admirable manner.

3. Limewater with Mercury.
Quicklime lbij. common Water lbviij. mix, dissolve, and digest for twenty four
hours; then decant and filter: to which add Mercurius dulcis levigated, or
white Praecipitate iv. mix again by shaking the Vessel, and keep it for use.

Being injected with a Syringe, it cures venereal Ulcers, and a virulent
Gonorrhoea.

4. Fernelius his Divine Water.
Plantan-water, or fair Water xij. corrosive Sublimate in powder gr. xxiv. mix,
and dissolve.

It cures malign, inveterate, and venereal Ulcers, by washing them therewith.

5. A Water for a Gonorrhoea.
Fair Water lbij. white Vitriol, Alum, 2. iij. Catechu ij. Opium j. mix,
dissolve, and filter; to which add Spirit of Wine iv. mix, and keep it for use.

It cures a Gonorrhoea, and the Whites in Women, being injected with a Syringe
four or six times a day.

6. Mercury-Water.
Common Water lbij. blanched Almonds ij ss. mix, and make an Emulsion: to which
add Camphir in powder, Ceruss, a. j. corrosive Sublimate (dissolved in iv. of
juice of Limons) j. mix them. Or thus, Take common Water, Juice of Limons a.
lbj. corrosive Sublimate ij. Whites of four Eggs; mix them very well together;
insolate for eight days, and keep it for use. Or thus. Take of the former
Emulsion lbij. corrosive Sublimate in powder iv. mix, dissolve by grinding in a
glass Mortar, and make a very white Water. Otherwise thus, from Willis. Take
common Water lbij. corrosive Sublimate in powder v, j. mix, and let them stand
together in a tin Vessel or Basin for a week, or till the liquor grows black,
often stirring it with a wooden Spatula; filter it till it is clear, and keep
it in a Glass close stopped, for use.

It is a most excellent Water for the curing of Redness, Worms, and Pustles
breaking out in the Face.

7. Mercurial Milk.
Common Water lbij. corrosive Sublimate in powder j ss. mix them in a tin
Basin, and by stirring them, make the mixture white like Milk.

It cures malign and venereal Ulcers, by touching them.

CHAP. LXXII. De OLEIS.
I. Oleum calefaciens.
OLEI de Ben, vel Olivarum, libras duas; Oleorum seminum Anisi, baccarum
Juniperi, Limonum, Rosmarini, Sassafras, and Succini, ana uncias quinque;
Camphorae uncias duas; misce, ac dissolve.

Corporis Doloribus and Vitiis frigidis, Convulsiones, Tetano, Nervorum
distentione, and Paralysi conducit; Spinae and Renum dolores reprimit, atque
Hemicraniam, Cephalalgiam, Podagram, and Gonagram levat.

II. Oleum Refrigerans.
Olei de Ben, vel Olivarum, libras duas; Sacchari Saturni (in Spiritu Aceti
dissoluti) uncias quatuor; misce, pro usu.

Ad Ambusta, Erysipelata, Scabiem, and Cutis vitia a salsa Pituita and Bile
usta enata, ad Prurigines, ac Pustularum eruptiones commendatur.

III. Oleum Anodynum.
Olei de Ben, vel Olivarum, libras duas; Opii Thebaici (in Aqua dissoluti ad
consistentiam Mellis extracti) uncias duas, Camphorae sesquiunciam: misce.

Dolores mirifice levat, Inflammationes, ac calidos quosvis Tumores reprimit;
Arthritidi, Cephalalgiae, Hemicraniae, nec-non doloribus, Splenis, Renum,
Vteri, Haemorrhoidarum, opem fert.

IV. Oleum Paralyticum.
Oleorum Chymice praeparatorum, Anisi, Foeniculi, Lavendulae, Sabinae, Pulegii,
ana uncias quatuor; Olei Terebinthinae, Sassafras, ana uncias sex; Olei Succini
rectificati uncias duodecim; misce.

Ad Spasmum and Paralysin confirmatam commendatur; valenter namque digerit ac
emollit, ut Nervorum and Articulorum Tophos dissipet; eorundem etiam frigidos
Affectus, and imbeciilitates, seu resolutionum membrorum, sanat.

V. Oleum Cosmeticum.
Olei de Ben libram unam, Praecipitati albi, vel Mercurii dulcis laevigati
uncias duas, Olei Tartari per deliquium unciam unam; misce.

Aspera laevigat, Faciei maculas and lentigenes exterit, Ephelides, ac Vstiones
ex insolatu factas emendat, Lepram, Morphaeam, nec-non Pustulas in Cute a salsa
Pituita sanat.

VI. Oleum Diacolocynthidos.
Olei Olivarum libras duas, Vini rubri libram unam, pulpae Colocynthidis uncias
duas; coquantur ad Vini consumptionem, vel per duas vel tres horas, lento igne,
donec Oleum vim totam Colocynthidis attraxerit, tandemque exprimantur and
colentur; and addantur Olei Chymici seminum Anisi, Carui, and Foeniculi, ana
drachmae tres; misce, and reponatur ad Enemata.

Dosis, ab uncia una ad duas, prout majori vel minori operandi efficacia opus
fuerit, cum Jure pingui permixtum, summum Medicamentum erit ad omnes
soporiferos Affectus, Apoplexiam, Lethargum, and similes; and effectus
praestantes foelici cum successu ostentabit in sedandis potissimum
intolerabilibus doloribus and passionibus Colicis, ut-plurimum a Pituita vitrea
in Intestinis subortis; in quibus Purgantia lenitiva sola exhibita, inefficacia
prorsus and invalida comperientur. Oleum enim hoc Medicamento mirifice
contemperat acrem and venenatam Colocynthidos qualitatem; adeo ut sic
praeparata, neutiquam noxia aut damnosa sit Intestinis.

VII. Oleum ad Vermes.
Olei Olivarum libras duas, succorum Absinthii, Cardui benedicti, ana libram
unam; pulpae Colocynthidos uncias duas; Aloes (in Aqua dissolutae) unciam unam:
misce, and coquantur ad Succi consumptionem, donec Oleum vim ingredientium
totam extraxerit, deinde exprimantur and colentur: postea addantur Fellis Bovis
defaecati unciae octodecim, Oleorum Chymicorum Anisi, Cumini, and Foeniculi,
ana semiuncia: misce, and servetur ad usum.

Hoc Oleum mixtum cum Lacte, aut Jusculo Capitis vervicini, in quantitate
sufficienti ad fingendum Enema, summa erit medela adversus Lumbricos quosvis.
Infantibus trium, quatuor, aut quinque annorum, sufficient exhibere pro Dosi
semiunciam, vel drachmas sex, cum Lactis unciis quatuor aut quinque, ut fiat
Clyster: mediocriter robustis uncia una satis erit, robustioribus sesquiuncia,
imo and robustissimis unciae duae. Hoc Oleum excellentissimum est ad
expellendos Vermes, ad demulcendos and leniendos Dolores a causis frigidis,
Cruditatibus, Flatibus, ac Humoribus mucilaginosis, tartareis, and arenosis
sive calculosis suscitatos; atque ad educendam foetidam Humorum illuviem and
putridinem: ad Aegros etiam excitandos in Comatosis and Soporiferis Symptomatis
and Affectibus; and ad validius expurgandos omnes Humores, citra tamen
calefactionem nimiam; qualem inducere solent Hierae Logadii, vel Pachii
Diacolocynthidos, and hujus alia generis.

CHAP. LXXII. Of OILS.
1. The Heating Oil.
OIL of Ben, or Oil of Olives, lbij. Oils of Aniseed, Juniper, Limons,
Rosemary, Sassafras, and Amber, a. v. Camphir ij. mix, and dissolve.

It is good against cold Aches and Diseases of the Body, Convulsions, the
Tetanos, or cross Convulsion of the Neck, Distention of the Nerves, and the
Palsy; it eases the pain of the Back and Reins, and gives relief in the pain of
the Head, Megrim, Gout in the Feet and Knees.

II. The Cooling Oil.
Oil of Ben, or of Olives; lbij. Saccharum Saturni (dissolved in Spirit of
Vinegar) iv. mix them for use.

It is said to be of good use for Burnings, an Erysipelas, Scabbiness, or
Breakings out, and other vices of the Skin, arising from salt Phlegm and
Melancholy, as also Itchings, and Pustles or Pimples breaking out.

3. The Oil easing Pain.
Oil of Ben, or of Olives, lbij. Theban Opium (dissolved in Water, and
extracted to the consistence of Honey) ij. Camphir j ss. mix them.

It gives great ease in Pains, represses Inflammations, and all sorts of hot
Swellings: it gives help in the Gout, Headache, Megrim; as also in Pains of the
Spleen, Reins, Womb, and Haemorrhoids.

4. The Palsy-Oil.
Chemical Oils of Anise, Fennel, Lavender, Savin, Penyroyal, a. iv. Oil of
Turpentine, Sassafras, a. vj. rectified Oil of Amber xij. mix them.

It is said to be good for Cramps and Convulsions, as also a confirmed Palsy;
for that it powerfully digests and softens, so as to discuss and softens, so as
to discuss Knots in the Nerves and Joints: it cures also the cold Affects of
those parts, and the weakness or resolution of the members.

5. The Beautifying Oil.
Oil of Ben lbj. white Praecipitate, or Mercurius dulcis levigated ij. Oil of
Tartar per deliquium j. mix them.

It makes smooth a rough Skin, and takes away Spots, Freckles or Lentils of the
Face, and Sun-burnings; and prevails against the Leprosy, Morphew, Scurf; as
also Pustules breaking out in the Skin from salt Phlegm.

6. Oil of Coloquintida.
Oil Olive lbij. Red Wine lbj. pulp of Coloquintida ij. boil to the consumption
of the Wine; or for two or three hours, with a gentle fire, till the Oil has
drawn forth all the virtue of the Coloquintida; then strain out by pressing,
and add Chemical Oils of Aniseeds, Caraways, and Fennel-seeds, a. iij. mix, and
keep it for Clysters.

The Dose is from j, ad ij. more or less, according as the occasion may
require; being mixed with fat Broth, (and given Clyster-wise) it is an excellent
thing against all Sleepy-Diseases, as the Apoplexy, Lethargy, and the like; it
operates upon the spot, and with good success, in easing the most vehement
pains and disorders of the Colic, chiefly those which proceed from a kind of
glassy Phlegm in the Bowels; in which cases, lenitive Purges being only given,
are ineffectual, and do no kind of good. For the Oil-olive in this Composition
does admirably allay and qualify the acrid and (as it were) venene quality of
the Coloquintida; and so being thus prepared, it is not in the least hurtful or
prejudicial to the Intestines.

7. The Oil against Worms.
Oil-olive lbij. juices of Wormwood, Carduus benedictus, a. lbj. pulp of
Coloquintida ij. Aloes (dissolved in Water) j. mix, and boil to the consumption
of the Juices, and till the Oil has extracted all the virtue of the
ingredients, then strain out by pressing: afterward add Ox or Bulls Gall
defecated xviij. Chemical Oils of Anise, Cumin, and Fennel, a. ss. mix, and
keep it for use.

This Oil, mixed with a sufficient quantity of Milk, or the Broth of a
Wethers-head, and given as a Clyster, is an excellent thing to kill all sorts
of Worms, To Children of three, four, or five years old, you may give ab ss, ad
vj. mixed with iv, or v. of Milk, for a Clyster: to those who are moderately
strong, it may be given to j. such as are stronger, may receive it to j ss. and
the strongest Bodies or Constitutions, may have it exhibited to ij. This Oil is
a most excellent Medicine for expelling Worms, and to abate and ease Pains
proceeding from a cold cause, from Crudities, Wind, and mucilaginous,
tartartarous, or viscous and lapidescent Humors; and to expel the fetid
nastiness and putridness of the Humors: it is given also to rouse up such as
are sick of a Coma, or afflicted with Sleepy Symptoms or Diseases; and for the
more effectual purging forth all sorts of Humors, without exciting too much
heat; which is usual where the Hierae Diacolocynthidos of Logadius and Pachius,
with other things of like kind, are given.

CHAP. LXXIII. De BALSAMIS.
I. Balsamum Vulnerarium Nostrum.
OLEI de Ben, vel Olivarum libras tres, Terebinthinae Argentoratensis libras
duas, Cerae libram unam, Balsami Tolutani, vel Peruani, vel Chiliani; Thuris,
ana uncias octo: Olei Chymici Lavandulae uncias tres; misce, fiatque Balsamum
secundum Artem.

Inter Sarcotica Chirurgis usurpatum, multa habet; emollit and concoquat,
Carnem creat, putridamque depascit; Vulnera cujuscunque generis, and quacunque
Corporis part, tuto, cito, jucunde, and perfect sanat.

II. Balsamum Anodynum Nostrum.
Balsami Peruani, vel Tolutani, vel Chiliani; Thuris, ana libram unam:
Camphorae, Opii, (cum Aqua ad Mellis consistentiam extracti) ana uncias novem;
Sacchari Saturni uncias quatuor, Spiritus Vini quantitatem sufficientem; misce,
ac digere in Arena per december dies.

Dolores Arthriticos, Convulsivos, and Colicos mirifice sopit; linteola in isto
intincta dolentibus locis adhibeantur, renovando quarta, vel quinta quaque
hora, donec omnes cruciatus cessent. Interne detur ad granas octo vel december;
and per Enema, in Colica, ad scruplam unam vel semidrachmam: itaque in
Dysenteriis, Lienteriis, aliisque Fluxibus Alvi.

III. Balsamum Gummi Elemi Nostrum.
Gummi Elemi, Terebinthinae Venetiae, ana libras duas; Cerae Animalis vel
Myrtillorum sesquilibram; Olei de Ben, vel Hyperici libram unam; Balsami
Peruani, Styracis liquidae, ana semilibram; misce, fiatque Balsamum.

Putridini efficaciter resistit, and Vulnera Capitis faeliciter sanat;
Vlceraque contumacia ac Fistulas, detergendo expurgat; lent desiccat, Carnem
in Vlceribus generat, eaque ad cicatricem perducit. Balsamum hoc, nulli
Medicamento, ad Vulnera implenda Carne, and agglutinanda, cedit: Nervos quoque
roborat, calorem partis fovet, maximeque Capitis aegritudinibus externis,
prodest.

IV. Mel Saponis.
Saponis Castallensis, Mellis optimi, ana libram unam; Olei Tartari per
deliquium, uncias quatuor; misce.

Arthritidi, omnibusque Doloribus Juncturarum, and partium adjacentium medetur.

V. Balsamum de Sapone.
Saponis Castallensis, Olei de Ben, seu Olivarum, ana libram unam; Olei
baccarum Juniperi, Terebinthinae Argentoratensis, ana uncias quatuor; florum
Sulphuris uncias tres; misce.

Nervorum debilitati, Tremori, Paralysi, Arthritidi, omnibusque Doloribus, and
Morbis praesertim externis frigidis confert: Calorem nativum reficit, atque
parts imbecilles roborat, and imbecillitatis causam aufert.

VI. Balsamum Amicum Nostrum.
Terebinthinae Argentoratensis, Balsami de Copayba, Gummi Elemi, ana uncias
duodecim; Thuris, Resinae, Cerae, ana uncias december; Styracis liquidae,
liquid-Ambari, Petrolaei clari, ana uncias octo, Balsami Peruani, Tolutani,
Olei Nucis moschatae, ana uncias sex; Mastiches, Myrrhae, Olibani, Scammonii
resinosi, ana, pulvere subtilissimo, uncias quatuor; Olei Hyperici uncias
quadraginta octo: in Oleo dissolvantur Resinae, Cera, Gummi, Balsama, and Olea
aromatica; postea, and dum adhuc calent, inspergantur Pulveres; diu, and sine
intermissione agitando, misce, fiatque Balsamum.

Frigidos Nervorum Morbos tollit, ac Doloribus eorundem opitulatur; Vulnera
maxim sanat; Vlceribus and Fistulis prodest, quia mundificat, siccat,
abstergit, coquit, and consolidat; nec-non absque ullius acrimoniae sensu
Cicatricem ducit. Potenter digerit, ac resolvit, Nervos roborat, and a frigidis
injuriis tuetur.

VII. Balsamum Arthriticum Nostrum.
Olei Olivarum libras quatuor, Opii (cum Aqua ad Mellis consistentiam
extracti,) Terebinthinae Argentoratensis, Thuris, Saponis Castallensis, ana
libras duas; Camphorae, Petrolaei clari, Cerae, Saccharum Saturni, (in Aceto
dissoluti) ana libram unam; misce, fiatque Balsamum.

Arthriticis and Ischiadicis utiliter adhibetur; Inflammationem omnem
extinguit, Dolores sedat, Sensus stupefacit, Cephalalgiae and Phrenetidi
confert, Renum ardores illitum temperat, Artus laxatos firmat, Ecchymosin
delet, and ad omnes dolores Juncturis contractus foeliciter usurpatur.

VIII. Balsamum Polychrestum Nostrum.
Olei de Ben, Terebinthinae Argentoratensis, ana libras duas; Styracis
liquidae, liquid-Ambari, Petrolaei, Cerae, ana libram unam; Camphorae, Oleorum
Chymicorum Anisi, Juniperi, Lavendulae, Limonum, Rosmarini, Sassafras, Succini,
ana uncias tres; misce, fiatque Balsamum.

Animam and Naturam confortat, ejus tamen usus ad Nervorum genus roborandum,
intemperiem frigidam tollendam, nativum Partis calorem excitandum and fovendum,
and robur Membris conciliandum. Eo dum illinitur Dorsi Spina, mira celeritate
Paralysi and Stupori succurrit. Dolores a causis frigidis aufert, and Partium
debilitati efficacissime prodest. Calefacit, siccat, essentia and tenuitate
aperit, penetrat, digerit, Materiam omnem excrementitiam resolvit; Morbis
Cerebri and Nervorum, ut Lethargo, Vertigini, Tremori, multisque aliis prodest.

IX. Balsamum Ophthalmicum Nostrum.
Mellis optimi uncias viginti quatuor, Fellis Bovis uncias duodecim,
Terebinthinae Argentoratensis, Sacchari Saturni, ana uncias sex; Mastiches,
Myrrhae, Olibani, Sanguis Draconis, Sarcocollae, Scammonii, ana uncias tres;
Auri Vitae uncias duas; misce.

Praestans est Balsamum, non modo ad Pterygium Oculorum, sed etiam ad omnes
Affectus and Maculas eorum delendas. Ambliopiae, Caligini, Visus debilitati and
hebetudini, Oculorum rubori and lachrymae prodest. Efficacissimum est ad
Tunicas roborandas, and Vlcera sananda.

CHAP. LXXIII. Of BALSAMS.
1. Our Wound-Balsam.
OIL of Ben, or of Olives, lbiij. Strasburg- Turpentine lbij. Wax lbj. Balsam
of Peru, Tolu, or Chili, Frankincense, a. viij. Chemical Oil of Lavender iij.
mix, and make a Balsam according to Art.

It is a great thing among those which Chirurgians use as Sarcoticks or
Flesh-breeders; it is emollient and digestive, breeds Flesh, takes away the
Putrefaction; and safely, speedily, easily, and perfectly cures Wounds, be they
of what kind soever, and in what part of the Body soever.

2. Our Anodyn-Balsam.
Balsam of Peru, Tolu, or Chili; Frankincense, a. lbj. Camphir, Opium,
(extracted with Water, to the consistence of Honey) a. ix. Saccharum Saturni
iv. Spirit of Wine, a sufficient quantity; ^ix, and digest in Sand for ten days.

It wonderfully eases Arthritick, Convulsive and Colic pains, rags being dipped
therein, and applied to the parts affected, renewing the application every
fourth or fifth hour, till the pain wholly ceases. Inwardly, it is given a gr.
viij, ad x. and by Clysters, in a Colic, a j, ad ss. as also in Bloody-fluxes,
Lienteries, and other Fluxes of the Belly.

3. Our Balsam of Gum-Elemi.
Gum Elemi, Venice- Turpentine, a. lbij. Beeswax, or Wax of Myrtle-berries lbj
ss. Oil of Ben, or of Hypericon lbj. Balsam of Peru, liquid Storax, a. lbss.
mix, and make a Balsam.

It powerfully resists Putrefaction, and easily cures Wounds of the Head; it
makes contumacious Ulcers and Fistula's easy to heal, by cleansing them; it
gently drys, breeds Flesh in Ulcers, and heals them. This Balsam is inferior to
no other, for filling Wounds with Flesh, and agglutinating their lips for
healing: it also strengthens the Nerves, comforts the heat of the Part, and
is extremely good for external affects of the Head.

4. Honey with Soap.
Castil- Soap, best Honey, a. lbj. Oil of Tartar per deliquium iv. mix them.

It helps the Gout, and all sorts of Pains of the Joints, and parts adjacent.

5. Balsam of Soap.
Castil- Soap, Oil of Ben, or of Olives, a. lbj. Strasburg- Turpentine, Oil of
Juniper Berries, a. iv. flowers of Sulphur iij. mix them.

It is good for weakened Nerves, Tremblings, Palsies, Gouts, and chiefly for all
sorts of external Pains and Diseases: it restores the native Heat, strengthens
weak parts, and removes the cause of that weakness.

6. Our Friendly Balsam.
Strasburgh- Turpentine, Bal^sam of Capivi, Gum Elemi, a. xij. Frankincense,
Rosin, Wax, a. x. liquid Styrax, liquid Amber, pure Oil of Peter, a. viij.
Balsams of Peru, of Tolu, Oil of Nutmegs by expression, a. vj. Mastich, Myrrh,
Olibanum, resinous Scammony, all in subtle powder, a. iv. Oil of Hypericon xl.
in the Oil dissolve the Rosin, Wax, Gums, Balsams, and aromatic Oils;
afterward, but whilst yet hot, sprinkle in the Pouders, stirring the whole
for a good while, and without intermission, and conclude the Balsam.

It removes cold Diseases of the Nerves, and Pains afflicting them; it
admirably heals Wounds; and is good for Ulcers and Fistula's, because it
digests, purifies, cleanses, drys, and consolidates, and produces the
Cicatrice, without the least sense of acrimony or sharpness. It powerfully
digests and resolves, strengthens the Nerves, and preserves them from Diseases
coming of cold.

7. Our Gout-Balsam.
Oil-olive lbiv. Opium, (extracted with Water, to the thickness of Honey)
Strasburgh- Turpentine, Frankincense, Castil- Soap, a. lbij. Camphir, clear Oil
of Peter, Wax, Saccharum Saturni, a. lbj. mix, and make a Balsam.

It is very good against the Gout and Sciatica; it allays all sorts of
Inflammations, eases Pains, stupifies the Senses, is good against the Headache
and Phrensy; and by anointing thereon, allays the heat of the Reins,
strengthens loose and weak Joints, discusses Contusions, and is successfully
used in all Pains of the Joints.

VIII. Our Balsam of many Virtues.
Oil of Ben, Strasburgh- Turpentine, a. lbij. liquid Storax, liquid Amber, Oil
of Peter, Wax, a. lbj. Camphir, Chemical Oils of Aniseeds, Juniper, Lavender,
Limons, Rosemary, Sassafras, Amber, a. iij. mix, and make a Balsam.

It comforts Nature, and as it were, the Soul it self; but its chief uses are,
to strengthen the Nervous System, to remove their cold intemperature, to stir
up and revive the native heat of the Parts, and fortify the strength of the
Members. It is of admirable use against Numbness and the Palsy, being anointed
all along the Backbone. It takes away Pains proceeding from cold causes, and
is powerfully good against the debility of the Parts. It warms and drys, and by
its essence and subtilty, it opens, penetrates, digests, and resolves all
excrementitious Matter; and is good against Diseases of the Head and Nerves, as
the Lethargy, Vertigo, Trembling, and many others of like kind.

9. Our Eye-Balsam.
Of the best Honey xxiv. Ox-gall xij. Strasburgh- Turpentine, Saccharum
Saturni, a. vj. Mastich, Myrrh, Olibanum, Sanguis Draconis, Sarcocolla,
Scammony, a. iij. Aurum Vitae ij. mix them.

It is a powerful Balsam, not only to take off Films from the Eyes, but to
remove Spots, Pearls, and all other Affects of the same. It is good against
dimness of Sight, darkness, weakness of the Sight, and defects of the same,
redness and watering of the Eyes. It is a most powerful Medicament to
strengthen their Tunicles, and cure Ulcers therein.

CHAP. LXXIV. De VNGVENTIS.
I. Vnguentum Aegyptiacum.
AERuginis uncias quinque, Aceti Vini fortis uncias septem, Mellis uncias
quatuordecim; coquantur omnia simul, donec fiat Unguentum spissum, and color
purpureum.

Valentissimam ad Saniem siccandam, Sordes detergendas, and Carnem absumendam,
Vlceribus malignis, putrilaginosis, and cuniculosis convenit.

II. Vnguentum Album.
Sacchari Saturni (in Aceto soluti) uncias quatuordecim, Olei de Ben, vel
Olivarum, libram unam; Cerae albae uncias quatuor, Camphorae (Spiritu Vini)
dissolutae semiunciam, Albuminum Ovorum numero sex: misce Saccharum solutum,
and Camphoram; illico Albumina Ovorum conquassata, ac in Aquam veluti per se
resoluta, commisceri queunt; atque his demum aliquandiu invicem agitatis,
ultimo Cera in Olco liquata addi potest.

Ad Ambusta, Erysipelata, Scabiem, and Cutis vitia, a salsis Pituita and Bile
usta enata commendatur: ad Prurigines, ac Pustularum eruptiones, acrem
Serpiginem, attrita; and intemperiem Vlcerum calidam, valet, ubi calor est,
ustio, and excoriatio.

III. Vnguentum Basilicon.
Cerae, Resinae, Picis navalis, ana libram unam; Olei Olivarum sesquilibram;
misce.

Omnia enim Vulnera tuto and salubriter sanat, praecipue partibus nervosis and
carnosis; Vlceribus foedis ac malignis opitulatur; mundificat, abstergit,
coquit, and consolidat.

IV. Vuguentum Fuscum Wurtzii.
Scrofulariae, Chamaecissi, Veronicae, ana manipulos duos; incidantur,
contundanturque, imponantur Vesicae vitreae: his affunde Aceti Vini ad
eminentiam duorum digitorum; digere in Arena calida per septimanam: Acetum
exprime, cujus ad uncias duodecim addantur Sulphuris Vitrioli abstersivi,
Vitrioli Phlegmae, ana unciae octo; florum Aeris unciae quinque, Mellis
despumati unciae viginti quatuor; misce, and coquantur simul Igne lento ad
Unguentum.

Putridini maxim resistit, and Carnem mortuam a sana potenter separat; unde
plurimum commendabilis est in Gangraena and Sphacelo, omnibusque aliis
Vlceribus valde putridis and sinuosis exsiccat and detergit; Humoresque putrido
and venenatos, Juncturis and partibus adjacentibus infestos, fortiter emendat
and corrigit.

V. Vnguentum Mercuriale.
Mercurii (cum Terebinthinae unciis quatuor, Olei de Ben unciis duas) extincti,
uncias quatuor; Olei de Ben, Sevi bovilli vel ovilis, ana uncias december: misce
primo Oleum and Sevum, deinde addantur Mercurius extinctus, and Olei Rhodii
semiuncia; fiatque Unguentum.

Scabiei, and Vceribus malignis and venereis prodest; Pruritum, and Lepram
juvat; siccat sine morsu, Vlceraque difficilia persanat. Si post repurgatum
Corpus, Spinae Dorsi, Juncturae, Palmae, Soleae, aliasque parts, bis, ter,
atque iterum illiniantur, sic ut ad excitantem Salivatonem, seu Humoris
virulenti per Os exputationem, Morbo venereo, omnibusque ejusdem Symptomatis
medetur.

VI. Vnguentum Nicotianae.
Foliorum recentium Nicotianae libras duas and semis, Succi Nicotianae, Olei
Olivarum, ana sesquilibram; lento igne bulliantur ad humiditatis consumptionem,
postea coletur and exprimatur. Huic expresso add Terebinthinae
Argentoratensis, Sevi ovilis, ana uncias december; Cerae uncias sex; radicis
Aristolochiae rotundae subtilissime pulverisatae uncias quinque; misce, fiatque
Unguentum. Aliter. Recipe Extracti Nicotianae siccae libras tres, Olei
Olivarum, Sevi bovilli, ana libras duas; Terebinthinae Argentoratensis
sesquilibram; Cerae, radicis Aristolochiae rotundae pulverisatae, ana uncias
novem; foliorum Nicotianae pulverisatae uncias septem; misce, fiatque Unguentum.

Excrementa serosa ab Vlceribus, vim absumendi habet, crassiora separandi, and
extergendi: Dolores mitigat, Humorem malignum parti impactum coquit, illius
acrimoniam lenit, and Carne Vlcera implet. Insigni autem virtute, eaque
peculiari, prodest Vulneribus a Cane rabido inflictis, corumque virus specifica
proprietate extinguit, and Humores infectos Veneno exterget and absumit. Hoc
Vnguentum a Jouberto in sua Pharmacopoeia describitur, cui miram in Scrophulis
dissipandis vim inesse ait. Celebratur autem potissimum in Vlceribus and
Vulneribus, tam recentibus quam antiquis, persanandis. Adustis and Ambustis
quoque medetur; Morphaeam delet, Tineam Capitis exterit, and Cutem a Scabie
mundificat. Arthritidi, Oedemati, aliisque similibus Tumoribus prodest.

VII. Vnguentum Populeon.
Oculorum Populi arboris libras duas, foliorum recentium Cicutae, Hyoscyami,
Papaveris, Lactucae, Sempervivi, Solani, ana uncias quinque; Olei Olivarum
libras quinque: Herbae and Oculi contundantur, and misceantur Oleo Olivarum:
macerentur in Arena calida per tres circiter septimanas; coquantur postea,
supra lentum ignem, ad Humiditatis fere totalem consumptionem; tunc fiat
colatura cum forti expressione, deinde addantur Sevi ovilis libras tres: misce,
fiatque Unguentum.

Inflammationes extinguit, Phlegmonas omnes remittit, Dolores ae causis calidis
mitigat, Apostemata calida contemperat, Pleuriticos juvat; Cephalalgiam and
Hemicraniam a causa calida sedat, Fluxiones fiftit, Humorum impetum cohibet,
and Erysipelata extinguit.

VIII. Vnguentum Cosmeticum.
Olei de Ben, Sevi ovilis, ana libras sex; misce ad ignem lentum, and addantur
Olei Tartari per deliquium unciae sex, Spermatis Ceti, Sacchari Saturni, ana
unciae octo; Camphorae, Olei Aurantiorum and Limonum, ana uncia una: misce,
fiatque Unguentum. Si tibi placet, ad unciam unam, Praecipitati albi vel
Mercurii dulcis levigati dram una addatur.

Prurito, Morphaeae, Ephelidi, Lentiginibus, Pustulis ab ichoribus Sanguinis
calidis aut Bile natis, aliisque Cutis vitiis prodest: Inflammationes,
Erysipelata, Sacros Ignes, ac calidos quosvis Tumores potenter reprimit.

IX. Vnguentum ad Scabiem.
Olei Olivarum (in quo radicum Scrophulariae libra una coquatur) uncias
quatuordecim, Sevi ovilis uncias octo, Florum Sulphuris, vel Pulveris Sulphuris
vivi subtilissimi uncias quatuor, Praecipitati albi, vel Mercurii dulcis
laevigati, uncias duas: misce.

Ad Cutis vitia ex Scabie usus est; Pruritum curat; atque ad Lepram, Morphaeam,
aliosque Morbos hujus generis confert; fervorem temperat Humoris, and Succum
vitiosum Cuti impactum extergit: valet ad Ambusta, and Vlcera maligna and
putrida; qualia sunt Cacoethe, Herpes Narium, Faciei, Pudendi, and Digitorum
gangraenosa Vlcera: malignitatem and putridinem Vlcerum corrigit: Ozaenae,
Gummatibus Gallicis, Vlcerationibus Strumarum and Mentulae, Ficubusque, seu
Carnis Excrescentiae medetur.

X. Vnguentum Tutiae.
Olei Olivarum libras tres, Cerae libram unam, Thuris uncias sex, Tutiae
praeparatae uncias novem, Sacchari Saturni uncias quinque; misce, fiatque
Unguentum.

Omnibus Inflammationibus, Vlceribus sordidis ac pertinacibus, and
Ambustionibus, and Erysipelate medetur. Calidas Oculorum fluxiones demulcet and
sistit, eorundem rubedinem and inflammationem aufert, nec-non dolores inde
natos tranquillat: acerbissimos etiam Haemorrhoidarum dolores placat,
earundemque inflammationes retundit.

CHAP. LXXIV. Of OINTMENTS.
I. The Egyptian Ointment.
VErdigrise v. strong Wine-Vinegar vij. Honey xiv. boil all together, till they
come to the thickness of an Ointment, and to a purple color.

It is very powerful for drying up thin Humors, cleansing Ulcers of their
Filth, eating away of Flesh, and healing of old putrid Ulcers and Fistula's.

II. The White Ointment.
Saccharum Saturni (dissolved in Vinegar) xiv. Oil of Ben, or Olives, lbj.
white Wax iv. Camphir (dissolved in Spirit of Wine) ss. Whites of six Eggs: mix
the dissolved Saccharum and Camphir, then the Whites of Eggs, (first beaten
together, till they resolve as it were into Water) which being added, let them
be again beaten together for a good while; lastly, you must add the Wax being
melted with the Oil, to complete the Ointment.

It is very good for Burnings or Scaldings, Erysipela's, Scabbiness, and vices
of the Skin, arising from salt Phlegm and burnt Choler: it is good against
Itching, breakings out of Pimples, fretting Ringworms, Gallings; and the
vehement pain of Ulcers, where there is heat, burning, and excoriation.

3. The Royal Ointment.
Wax, Rosin, Ship-pitch, a. lbj. Oil-olive lbj ss. mix them.

It heals all wounds safely and securely, chiefly in nervous and fleshy parts;
it is good against putrid and malign Ulcers, cleanses, purifies, digests, and
heals them.

4. The Brown Ointment of Wurtz.
Pilewort, Alehoof, Speedwel, a. M. ij. cut and bruise them, and put them into
a glass Vesica: to which put Wine-Vinegar, so much as may overtop them the
height of two inches; digest in warm Sand for a week: then press out the
Vinegar, to xij. of which add abstersive Sulphur of Vitriol, Phlegm of Vitriol,
a. viij. pure Vedigrise v. clarified Honey xxiv. mix, and boil with a gentle
Fire to an Ointment.

It admirably resists Putrefaction, and perfectly makes a separation of dead
Flesh from the sound; for which reason it is mightily commended against a
Gangren and Sphacelus, and all sorts of other Ulcers, though vehemently putrid,
and very hollow: it consumes the moisture, and cleanses; and powerfully alters,
amends, and corrects putrid, venene, or malign Humors, insesting the Joints,
and parts adjacent.

5. The Mercurial Ointment.
Mercury or Quicksilver ( killed with Turpentine iv. mixed with ij. of Oil of
Ben) iv. Oil of Ben, beef or mutton Suet, a. x. mix first the Oil and Suet
together by melting, then add the Quicksilver as before killed, and Oil of
Rhodium ss. mix, and make an Ointment.

It is good against Scabbiness, malign, and venereal Ulcers; it helps the Itch
and Leprosy; it drys without any sharpness or biting, and perfectly cures
Ulcers difficult to heal. If (after purgeing of the Body) it is anointed along
the Backbone, the Joints, Palms of the Hands, Soles of the Feet, and other
parts, two, three, or four times, so as to excite a Salivation, or spitting
forth of the virulent Humor by the Mouth, it cures the French Disease, with all
its Symptoms.

6. Ointment of Tobacco.
Green leaves of Tobacco lbij ss. juice of Tobacco, Oil-olive, a. lbj ss. boil
them with a gentle fire to the consumption of the humidity, afterward strain
out by pressing. To this expressed substance add Strasburgh- Turpentine,
Sheeps-suet, a. x. Wax vj. round Birthwort-roots in fine powder v. mix, and
make an Ointment. Otherwise. Take Extract of dry Tobacco lbiij. Oil-olive,
Beef Suet, a. lbij. Strasburgh- Turpentine lbj ss. Wax, powder of round
Birthwort-roots, a. ix. powder of Tobacco-leaves vij. mix, and make an Ointment.

It takes away serous or thin excrements in Ulcers, and separates and cleanses
them from the more thick: it eases Pain, digests malign Humors impacted in any
part, abates their acrimony, and fills Ulcers with Flesh. It is a Medicament of
great fame, and is peculiarly good for Wounds made by the bitings of mad Dogs,
for it extinguisheth their Poison by a specific virtue, cleansing and taking
away the poisonous Humor. This Ointment is described by Joubertus in his
Pharmacopoeia, where he says it is of admirable use in dissipating Scrophulous
Tumors. It is also celebrated for a most excellent thing in curing all sorts of
Wounds and Ulcers, whether new or old. It cures also Burnings and Scaldings;
takes away Morphew; heals Scald-Heads, and cures Scabbiness. It is profitable
also for the Gout and Oedema, and such other like Tumors.

7. Ointment of Poplar-buds.
Buds of the Poplar-tree lbij. fresh leaves of Hemlock, Henbane, Poppy,
Lettice, Houseleek, Nightshade, a. v. Oil-Olive lbv. beat the Herbs and Buds
together, and mix them with the Oil: macerate them in warm Sand for about three
weeks; afterward boil them over a gentle fire, to the consumption of almost
all the humidity, then strain out by strongly expressing; lastly, add
Sheep-suet lbiij. mix, and make an Ointment.

It takes away Inflammations, discusses all sorts of Phlegmons, eases Pains
from a hot cause, and allays hot Apostems; helps in Pleurisies, gives ease in
the Megrim and Headache, stops Fluxes of Humors, hinders their impetus or
violence, and cures an Erysipelas.

8. The Cosmetick, or Beautifying-Ointment.
Oil of Ben, Sheeps-suet, a. lbvj. mix them on a gentle fire, and add thereto
Oil of Tartar per deliquium vj. Sperma Ceti, Saccharum Saturni, a. viij.
Camphir, Oil of Oranges and Limons, a. j. mix, and make an Ointment. If you
please, you may to one ounce hereof, add one dram of white Praecipitate, or
Mercurius dulcis levigated.

It is good against the Itch, Morphew, Pimples, Freckles, Lentils, Pustles,
from sharp humors of the Blood, or Choler, with other vices and defilements of
the Skin: it powerfully represses Inflammations, Erysipela's, Wildfire,
Shingles, with other kinds of hot Tumors or Eruptions.

9. Ointment against Scabbiness.
Oil-olive (in which roots of Pilewort lbj. have been boiled) xiv. Sheeps-suet
viij. Flowers of Sulphur, or fine Powder of Sulphur vive iv. white
Praecipitate, or Mercurius dulcis laevigated ij. mix them.

It of good use in curing Scabbiness, and other vices of the Skin; it cures the
Itch, and prevails against the Leprosy, Morphew, and other Diseases of like
kind; it allays the heat of Humors, and cleanses the Skin of vicious Juices
impacted therein: it is good against Burnings, putrid and malign Ulcers, and
such as are evil to heal; as also against a Herpes of the Nose and Face, and
gangrenous Ulcers of the Privities, Fingers or Toes. It corrects the putridness
and malignity of Ulcers, and cures an Ozaena, Venereal Gumms, Strumous Ulcers,
Caruncles in the Yard, Ficus in Ano, or other Fleshy Excrescencies.

10. Ointment of Tutty.
Oil-olive lbiij. Wax lbj. Frankincense vj. Tutty prepared ix. Saccharum
Saturni v. mix, and make an Ointment.

It cures all Inflammations, foul, sordid, and rebellious Ulcers, Burnings with
Fire, and an Erysipelas. It cools and stops a hot flux of Humors upon the Eyes,
takes away their redness and inflammation, and eases the pains thence arising:
it gives ease in the most vehement torture of the Haemorrhoids; abating their
violent heat and burning.

CHAP. LXXV. De PVLVERIBVS.
I. Pulvis Mercurii coagulati.
MErcurii crudi, Plumbi vel Stanni crudi, ana unciam unam; fluat Saturnus vel
Stannus in Crucibulo, tum effundatur in aliud Crucibulum frigidum, and mox
superfundatur ei Argentum vivum; statimque haec duo abeunt in unam massam: hanc
massam projice in Crucibulum calidum, non tamen ignitum plane, and statim
fluida, effunde in Crucibulum frigidum; illudque iterum repete, ut duo haec
Metalla been uniantur: sic omnia melius miscebuntur, and constituent massam
duriorem; quae imposita per aliquot dies and noctes in Aquam Fabrorum
ferrariorum, evadit durissima. Nonnulli Mercurium crudum includunt linteolo
denso, and Saturnum effusum, and jam ex part coagulatum, mollem tamen adhuc,
Baculo, aut Stylo, perforant, and in foramen Mercurium cum linteo inserunt;
sicque Mercurium vapore Saturni coagulant.

Vsus multiplex est. Primo, ut fiat malleabilis, and habeatur basis Lunae
fixae: secundo, potest gestari pro Amuleto contra Pestem, and Venena: tertio,
potest redigi in pulverem, and addi Emplastris: quarto, potest inspergi
Vlceribus antiquis, quorum Panacaea Mercurius est; nam est Alcali, and absorbet
Acida: quinto, ut inserviat Mercurio diaphoretico, aliisque concinnandis
Medicamentis.

II. Sulphur Vitrioli abstersivus.
Vitrioli calcinati libras duas in Olla per horam candefacimus, frangimus
deinde Ollam, and Vitriolum in Aceto aliquandiu coquimus, affundendo in fine
Aquam fontanam, quam ad medium evaporatam, postquam aliquantulum ab igne remota
steterit, decantamus; quod in Olla remanet, alia Aqua affusa rursus coquimus,
dum rubro color tinctus sit; tunc decantamus, novamque rursus affundimus,
procedendo ut prius, dum Aqua non amplius tingatur. Confusos deinde hos
decantatos Liquores ad siccitatem Terrae rubrae evaporamus. Terram hanc rursus
candefactum in Aquam conjicimus, coquimus, liquorem tinctum decantamus, aliam
affundimus; hunc laborem repetemus, dum liquor non amplius tingatur Tandem
liquores omnes ad siccitatem evaporamus, Terramque relictam, rursus candefactam
in Aquam conjicimus, uti jam dictum, coquendo, decantando, and evaporando
procedimus, tandem Terram relictam and siccatam, ad usum servamus.

Maxim Abstersivum and Stypticum est, and Haemorrhagias omnes mirifice sistit:
Vulneribus, Vlceribusque quibuscunque Corporis partibus medetur. Praeparatum
autem praecipue ad Vnguentum Fuscum Wurtzii.

III. Pulvis pro Vlceribus.
Scammonii pulverisati uncias quatuor, Aloes pulverisatae uncias duas,
Colocynthidis pulverisatae unciam unam; misce.

Praestantissimum est ad Vlcerum sanacionem; eorum enim calorem mitigat,
humiditatem siccat, malignitatem cancerosam domat, dolorem lenit. Vulnera and
Vlcera contumacia detergit, fungosam and Carnem mortuam removet, and a sordibus
efficaciter exterget, humiditates absumit, and ad cicatricem perducit.

IV. Pulvis pro Vlceribus Venereis.
Pulveris pro Ulceribus uncias quatuor, Pulveris Principis, vel Praecipitati
albi, semiunciam; misce.

Vlceribus Venereis, malignis, vel inveteratis praecipue usurpatur: excrementa
serosa ab Vlceribus absumit, crassiora separat, and detergit. Vtilissime ad
Vlcera mala, inveterata, and quae vix integram curationem admittunt, usurpatur.

V. Pulvis Stypticus.
Salis ex Capite mortuo Vitrioli extracti, Boli Armoniaci, Catechu, Aloes
Succotrinae, Lanae caprinae torrefactae, Aluminis calcinati, ana uncias
quatuor: misce, fiatque Pulvis.

Vires habet adstringendi and siccandi; sistitque egregie Sanguinis profluvium
in Vulneribus.

VI. Pulveres ad Hypersarcosin.
Fit ex Alumine calcinato, vel Praecipitato rubro, sen Arcano Corallino
laevigato, pro re nata. Recipe Aluminis, quantum volueris, ponatur in Fictile
novum, and tamdiu uratur, donec totum Alumen efferbuerit, nec ulterius spumam
emittat; refrigeratum, servetur ad usum.

Adhibentur exterius in Carne luxuriante absumenda, and in Vlceribus malignis,
tam Venereis, quam aliis.

VII. Pulvis Sternutatorius.
Foliorum Nicotianae siccorum libram unam, Nucum moschatarum uncias tres,
Corticis Winterani, florum vel foliorum Rosmarini, ana uncias duas;
Caryophyllorum unciam unam; subtilissime pulverisentur seorsum, deinde misce,
fiatque Sternutatorium.

Valet in Capitis doloribus, and Ossis cribrosi obstructionibus; atque in
omnibus Capitis and Cerebri affectibus, ut in Apoplexia, Epilepsia, Vertigo,
Lethargo, aliisque Morbis soporiferis.

VIII. Errhinae.
Multiplicia sunt; inter quae, haec tria praecipue usurpantur: 1. Radices Asari
pulverisatae: 2. Pulveris radicum Asari, Scammoni resinosi pulverisati, ana
uncias duas; Nucis moschatae unciam unam: misce. 3. Turpethi mineralis unciam
unam, foliorum Rosmarini sesquiunciam, pulveris Glycyrrhizae uncias tres;
misceantur exact, and in pollinem subtilissimum redigantur. Deckers,
Exercitat. page mea 15.

Duorum ultimorum Pulverum minima fere quantitas sufficit, multumque Pituitae
viscidae educit; cum successu praescribuntur hi Pulveres in Apoplexia,
Epilepsia, Lethargo, Capitisque affectibus soporosis omnibus; nec-non in
quibusdam Capitis affectibus recentibus, and inveteratis, Vertigine, Gravedine,
etc. Viro Lethargico, qui conquerebatur de Capitis dolor gravativo, and vix
excitari poterat, Deckerus ille Doctissimus, Errhinum tertium prescribat; cujus
tantillo Naribus indito and inflato, excitabatur cum levi sternutatione;
septimo de summo Capitis dolor gravativo, levique calore conquerebatur; iterum
tantillum Naribus est inflatum; tantaque Puris pauco Sanguine mixti copia
secuta, non tantum ex Naribus, verum etiam Faucibus; ut nisi Oculis meis (ut
ille dixit) vidissem, credere me fuit impossible, dolorque Capitis gravativus
imminutus, imo brevi evanuit; mixturaque sequente ad finem usurpata, Divino
annuente Numine, brevi convaluit. Mixtura. Aquae Pulegii and Betonicae, ana
sesquiunciam, vel uncias duas; Aquae Prophylacticae unciam unam; Tincturae
Castorei drachmam unam; Spiritus Salis Armoniaci semidrachmam; Syrupi
Stoechadis drachmas sex: misce. Dosis, cochlearium unum.

CHAP. LXXV. Of POUDERS.
I. Powder of Mercury coagulated.
CRude Quicksilver, crude Lead or Tin, a. j. melt the Lead or Tin in a
Crucible, then pour it out into another Crucible, and presently put upon it
Quicksilver, and presently these two will become one mass: this mass put into
another Crucible which is hot, but not red-fire-hot, and it will straitway
flow, then pour it forth into another cold Crucible; and this work again
repeat, that the two Metals may be the better united: so will their whole
substance be the better mixed, and make a harder mass; which being laid or put
for some days and nights in Smiths Forge-water, will become very hard. Some tie
up the Quicksilver in a thick piece of cloth, and pouring forth the melted
Lead, being almost grown stiff, but yet soft, with the end of a Stick, or a Rod
of iron, they make a hole in it, into which hole they put the Quicksilver with
the cloth or rag; so will the Mercury be coagulated, by the fumes of the Lead.

The use of this is manifold. First, that it may be made malleable, and so
become the basis of fixed Luna: secondly, that it may be conveniently worn, as
an Amulet against Plague and Poison: thirdly, that it may be reduced into a
powder, and so added to, or mixed with Emplasters: fourthly, that it may be
strewed upon old Ulcers, whose true Panacaea is Mercury; for that it is an
Alcali, and an absorber of Acids: fifthly, that it may serve for Mercurius
diaphoreticus, and other like proper Medicines.

2. Abstersive Sulphur of Vitriol.
Vitriol calcined lbij. make it red-hot for an hour in a Crucible; break the
Crucible, and take the Vitriol, and boil it for some time in Vinegar, putting
into it toward the end of the boiling, some fair Water, which which evaporate
to the one half: then being removed a little from the fire, let it stand, and
decant the clear liquor; to the remaining matter put more Water, boil again,
till it is tinged of a red color, which decant; affuse fresh Water again, and
boil as before; which work continue so long, till no more Water will be tinged.
Put all these decanted Liquors together, and evaporate to dryness. The
remaining matter make red-hot again, which boil in Water till it is tinged red,
decant it, and affuse more Water; which work so often repeat, till the liquor
will be no longed tinged. Then mix all these liquors together, and evaporate to
dryness; the matter or Earth remaining, heat red-hot again, and boil in Water,
as before, decanting and evaporating to dryness in like manner; then take it,
and keep it for use.

It is a very great Abstersive and Styptick, and wonderfully stops all sorts of
Haemorrhagies or Bleedings: it cures Wounds and Ulcers, in what part of the
Body soever. But it is chiefly prepared, for making Wurtz his Vnguentum Fuscum.

3. A Powder for Ulcers.
Scammony in powder iv. Aloes in powder ij. Coloquintida in powder j. mix them.

It is a powerful thing for the curing of Ulcers; for it diminishes their heat
and burning, drys up their superfluous humidities, quells their cancerous
malignity, eases their pain. It cleanses even contumacious Ulcers, as also
Wounds, removes a Fungus, as also dead Flesh from them, effectually cleanses
them from their sordes or filth, stops, or drys up the flux of Humors, and
disposes them to a speedy healing.

4. A Powder for Venereal Ulcers.
Of the former Powder for Ulcers iv. the Princes Powder, or white Praecipitate
ss. mix them.

It is chiefly used for Venereal Ulcers, as also such as are malign and
inveterate: it drys up their serous or thin recrements, and separates, and
cleanses them from their thicker filth. It is of mighty use for evilly disposed
Ulcers, which are old, and which scarcely admit of a perfect cure.

5. A Styptick Powder.
Salt of Vitriol extracted from its Caput mortuum, fine Bole, Catechu, fine
Aloes, Goatswool torrified, Alum burnt, of each iv. mix, and make a Powder.

It is powerful in astringing and drying; and admirably stops a flux of Blood
in Wounds.

6. A Powder to eat away proud Flesh.
It is made of burnt Alum, or of red Precipitate, or Arcanum Corallinum
levigated, according as the occasion may require. Take Alum, as much as you
please, put it into a new earthen Pot, and burn it so long, till the whole
quantity ceases bubbling or swelling, or will become no longer frothy; then
being cold, keep is for use.

They are of use externally, for eating away of proud Flesh; and are good in
malign Ulcers, whether Venereal, or others.

7. Snush, or Sneezing-pouder.
Leaves of Tobacco dried lbj. Nutmegs iij. Winter 's Cinnamon, flowers or leaves
of Rosemary, a. ij. Cloves j. make each into a fine powder by themselves; then
mix them, and make a Sternutatory, or Sneezing-pouder.

It is good in pains of the Head, and obstructions of the Os Ethmoides, or
stoppages of the Nostrils, and in all affects of the Head and Brain, as the
Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, Vertigo, Lethargy, and other sleepy Diseases.

8. Nose, or rather, Head-Purgers.
They are manifold; amongst which these three are chiefly used: 1. Powder of
Asarum or Asarabacca-root. 2. Powder of Asarum-roots, resinous Scammony in fine
powder, a. ij. Nutmegs in powder j. mix them. 3. Turpeth mineral j.
Rosemary-leaves j ss. powder of Liquorice iij. reduce each into a fine powder,
and mix them well. See Deckers his Exercitations, last Edit. page 15.

Of the two last Pouders, a very little quantity will suffice, which will bring
forth much Phlegm, and viscous. These Errhines, or Pouders, are prescribed with
success in the Apoplexy, Epilepsy, Lethargy, and all sleepy diseases of the
Head; as also in some other distempers of the Head, whether new or old; as the
Vertigo, Defluxions of Humors, etc. The most Learned Deckers prescribed the
third Errhine, to a Lethargick, who complained of a grievous Pain of his Head,
and could scarce be made to awake; a little of which being blown up into his
Nostrils, he was provoked a little to sneezing; on the seventh day he
complained of a great heavy pain of his Head, and a little burning; again a
little of the Powder was blown up into his Nostrils; upon which there came
forth so large a quantity of Matter mixed with Blood, not only out of his
Nostrils, but from his Jaws also, that unless (as he says) I had seen it with
mine eyes, I could not have believed it; and the heavy and grievous pain of his
Head grew less, yea in a short time vanished; and using the following mixture
all the while, he was in short time, by the blessing of God, restored. The
Mixture. Waters of Penyroyal and of Betony, a. j ss. or ij. Prophylactick-water
j. Tincture of Castor j. Spirit of Salt Armoniack ss. Syrup of Stoechas vj. mix
them. Dose, one spoonful.

CHAP. LXXVI. De CERATIS.
I. Ceratum Album.
CERAE albae uncias octo, Olei de Ben, vel de Amygdalis amaris uncias december,
Spermatis Ceti purissimi uncias duas, Cerussae lotae uncias tres, Camphorae
unciam unam; misce.

Cicatrices Exanthematum illitum, eas replet; lenit, resolvit, and Anodynum
est; Cosmeticum etiam est elegans.

II. Ceratum Viride.
Succi Nicotianae libras sex, Cerae novae libras quatuor, Resinae libras tres,
Terebinthinae Argentoratensis libras duas, Olei Olivarum quantum sufficit;
misce, fiatque Ceratum molle. Vel sic: Recipe Resinae libras sex, Cerae novae
libras tres, Sevi ovilli libras duas, Terebinthinae Argentoratensis libram
unam, Olei Olivarum quantum sufficit; misce, fiatque Ceratum.

Vulneribus recentibus medetur, ac ea cicatrice claudit. Quod si id Vlceribus
repurgandis magis idoneum reddere volueris, in singulis libris Cerati adjicito
Aeruginis mundatae drachmas duas; sic autem valde Ceratum viride efficeris.

III. Ceratum de Galbano.
Gummi Ammoniaci, and Galbani in Aceto dissoluti, Cerae, ana libras tres;
Terebinthinae Argentoratensis libras duas, Succi Nicotianae libram unam; misce,
fiatque Ceratum.

Magnarum in emolliendo and resolvendo est virium; quia Articulorum and
Membrorum principalium Tophos, Nodos, Scrophulas, Tumores duros and scirrhosos
digerit, emollit, and resolvit, eorumque dolores vehementes; atque Pectoris,
Scapularum, Mammarum, Hypochondriorum, Laterum, Ventriculi, Hepatis, Lienis,
Renum, Vteri, and Articulorum; ex influxu frigido, sive a crudis Humoribus, vel
a Flatu crasso, aut alia intemperie Membrorum frigida excitatos, sedat.
Verrucas etiam and Clavos in Pedibus, pedetentim tollit. Insuper omnes Strumas,
tam recentes quam inveteratas, emollit, lenit, concoquit, digerit, incidit,
atque dissolvit. Hemicraniam, loco affecto applicatum, emendat; Nervos and
Vterum roborat; Convulsionibus, morsibus, ac ictibus Rabidorum, Scorpionum, and
Animalculorum venenatis, impositum, medetur.

IV. Ceratum e Gummi Elemi.
Gummi Elemi libras quatuor, Thuris, Cerae, Gummi Ammoniaci, Galbani, Sagapeni,
Extracti Nicotianae, ana libras duas; Terebinthinae Argentoratensis libras tres
and semis; misce, fiatque Ceratum.

Ad Vulnera penetrantia Capitis, and Pectoris; and ad Vlcera quamplurima
antiqua, and difficilis consolidationis, commendatur. Vulnera recentia ab
Inflammatione vindicat, divisa glutinat; and quae inflammantur, curat; Vlcera
superficialia instanter sanat. Ad partium quarumcunque durities resolvendas and
digerendas efficax, Scirrhos Hepatis and Lienis dissipat, Strumas quoque and
inveteratos Abscessus dissolvit: Podagricis quovis tempore opitulatur.

V. Ceratum Nigrum.
Minii, Aceti Vini, ana libram unam, Olei Olivarum libras tres; misce, ac
coque, agitando sine ulla intermissione, ad nigritudinem: si tibi placet,
addantur sub finem Thuris libra una.

Anodynum est; propterea, praemissis prius universalibus, Arthriticis,
Podagricis, nec-non aliis doloribus, quovis tempore utilissimum; quia
refrigerat, omnesque dolores and cruciatus mirabiliter placat; immo
incandescentias and fervores Inflammationum potentissime extinguit.

VI. Ceratum Oxylaeum.
Olei Olivarum libras quatuor, Accti Vini, Lithargyri, ana libras duas; misce,
and cum lento igne coque, agitando indesinenter, ad Cerati mollis consistentiam.

Emollit, Dolores sistit, Abscessus dissolvit, Tumores duros and calidos, and
Inflammationes, digerit and maturat. Insuper Podagricis auxiliatur.

VII. Ceratum Refrigerans.
Cerae albae libram unam, Olei Olivarum libras tres, Sacchari Saturm uncias
octo, in Accto dissoluti; misce, ac cum lento igne coque ad consistentiam. Vel
sic: Liquentur Cera and Oleum in Vase duplici; refrigeratis, affundantur
paulatim in Mortario Sacchari Saturnt Solutio, and Aquae frigidissimae, quantum
absorbere poterunt, percutiendo, and agitando: Aqua affunditur frigidissima,
and agitatione continua subigitur; and rursus nova frigidae affusio and
agitatio iteratur, donec ipsam mixtura respuat.

Valet ad Phlegmonas, Erysipelata, Herpetes, Carbunculos, Phygethla, omnemque
intemperiem calidam; Febrientibus quoque multum conducit, si Hypochondriis
superponatur.

VIII. Ceratum Spermatis Ceti.
Cerae albae libras quatuor, Spermatis Ceti libras duas, Galbani in Aceto
dissoluti libram unam, Olei de Ben quantum sufficit; misce, fiatque Ceratum.

Scrophulis, Strumis, Tumoribus scirrhosis and duris medetur. Mammis
Puerperarum, post partum non lactantium, impositum, and continue per
multos-dies gestatum, omnibus ex Lacte doloribus and tumoribus prodest: Lac
enim coagulatum sive concretum solvit, ejusque abundantiam absumit.

IX. Ceratum ad Tophos.
Argenti vivi Sputo extincti, vel Succi Limonum, Pulveris Nicotianae, ana
libram unam; Cerati de Galbano libras quatuor, Olei de Ben uncias novem; Olei
Baccarum Juniperi uncias quinque; misce, fiatque Ceratum.

Commendatur ad Tumores duros, Tophos, and Nodos; dolores etiam Necturnos,
praesertim in Morbo Gallico subortos. Valet atque ad Strumam, aliasque Tumores
hujus generis similes.

CHAP. LXXVI. OF CERE-CLOTHS.
I. The White Cere-cloth.
WHITE Wax viij. Oil of Ben, or of bitter Almonds x. fine Sperma-Ceti ij.
Ceruss washed iij. Camphir j. mix them.

Anointed on the marks of the Smallpox, it causes them to fill up; it softens,
resolves, and is Anodyn; it is also a delicate Cosmetick.

2. The Green Cere-cloth.
Juice of Tobacco lbvj. new Wax lbiv. Rosin lbiij. Strasburgh- Turpentine lbij.
Oil-olive a sufficient quantity; mix, and make a Cerate. Or thus: Take Rosin
lbvj. new Wax lbiij. Sheeps-suet lbij. Strasburgh- Turpentine lbj. Oil-olive a
sufficient quantity; mix, and make a Cerate.

It cures green Wounds, and produces a cicatrice. But if you would rather have
it for the cleansing of Ulcers, to every pound of the Cerate, you may add ij.
of purified Verdigrise; but then it will be made very green.

3. The Galbanum-Cerate.
Gum Ammoniack and Galbanum, (dissolved in Vinegar) Wax, a. lbiij. Strasburgh-
Turpentine lbij. Juice of Tobacco lbj. mix, and make a Cerate.

It is of great virtue in softning and resolving; for it digests, softens, and
resolves even hard and scirrhous Tumors, Tophs, Nodes, and Scrophula's of the
Joints and principal Members, and eases their vehement pains; as also the pains
of the Breast, Shoulders, Duggs, Hypochonders, Sides, Stomach, Liver, Spleen,
Reins, Womb, and Joints; proceeding from cold Defluxions, crude Humors,
Flatulency, or other cold indispositions of the Parts. It is said to take away
Warts and Corns, in a short time. But above all, it is powerful against the
King's Evil, whether new, or of long continuance; for that it softens the
Tumors, gives ease, concocts, digests, incides, and dissolves them. Applied to
the place pained, in the Megrim, it eases it; it strengthens the Nerves and
Womb. It is good against Convulsions, and cures the bitings of mad Dogs; as
also the stingings or woundings of Scorpions, and other poisonous Creatures.

4. The Cerate of Gum Elemi.
Gum Elemi lbiv. Frankincense, Gum Ammoniack, Galbanum, Sagapenum, Wax, Extract
of Tobacco, a. lbij. Strasburgh- Turpentine lbij ss. mix, and make a Cerate.

It is commended for the cure of all such Wounds as pierce either Head, or
Breast; as also for very old Ulcers, and such as are difficult to heal. It
preserves green Wounds from Inflammations, conjoins their gaping lips; and if
inflamed, removes the Inflammation, and cures them; Ulcers that are not deep,
it presently heals. It is powerful in resolving and digesting the hardness of
any part whatsoever. It dissipates a Scirrhus of the Liver and Spleen,
dissolves also Struma's and inveterate Abscesses: and is a constant remedy at
all times, for such as are afflicted with the Gout.

5. The Black Cerecloth.
Red-lead, Wine-vinegar, a. lbj. Oil-olive lbiij. mix, and boil (continually
stirring it, without intermission) till it grows black. If you please, you may
add at the end of the boiling, a pound of Frankincense.

It is Anodyn; and therefore (universals being premised) is found to be of
exceeding good use against the Gout, in what place soever, and happening in
what time soever; for it gently cools, and after an admirable manner eases all
manner of pains and torments; and withal, it powerfully allays, and
extinguishes the great heat and vehemence of Inflammations.

6. The Soft Cerecloth.
Oil-olive lbiv. Wine-vinegar, Litharge, a. lbij. mix, and boil over a gentle
fire, (continually stirring it, even without ceasing) till it comes to the
consistency of a soft Cerecloth.

It softens, eases Pain, dissolves Abscesses, as also hot and hard Tumors,
digests and ripens Phlegmons or Inflammations; and is specifically good against
the Gout.

7. The Cooling Cerecloth.
White Wax lbj. Oil-olive lbiij. Saccharum Saturni (dissolved in Vinegar) viij.
mix, and with a gentle fire boil to a consistency. Or thus: Melt the Wax and
Oil in a double Vessel; which being cooled, add thereto by little and little,
in a Mortar, the Solution of the Saccharum Saturni, and cold Water, so much as
it will drink up, continually stirring and beating them together. The Water
must be put upon it cold, and it will be mixed by a continual stirring or
beating together; then more cold Water is again to be put in, and in like
manner beaten together, even so long, till it will receive no more.

It is good against Phlegmons, or Inflammations, Erysipela's, Herpes,
Carbuncles, Inflammations or Tumors of the Glandules, and every intemperature
proceeding from heat. And if it is applied to the Hypochonders, it is very good
for such as are Feverish, or apt to be troubled with Fevers.

8. A Cerecloth of Sperma Ceti.
White Wax lbiv. Sperma Ceti lbij. Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar lbj. Oil of
Ben, a sufficient quantity; mix, and make a Cerecloth.

It cures Scrophula's, Struma's, and hard and scirrhous Tumors. It is also good
to apply to Women's Breasts after delivery, who give not Milk; it eases the pain
occasioned by the Milk, and abates the tumor or swelling: for it dissolves the
coagulated or concreted Milk, and hinders its increase.

9. A Cerecloth against hard Bunchings-out.
Quicksilver killed with Spittle or Juice of Limons, Powder of Tobacco, a.
lbj. Cerat of Galbanum lbiv. Oil of Ben ix. Oil of Juniper Berries v. mix, and
make a Cerat.

It is commended for the cure of hard Tumors, Tophs, and Nodes; and easing
Nocturnal pains, chiefly such as proceeded from, or are caused by the French
Disease. It is also good against the King's Evil, and other like Swellings of
that kind.

CHAP. LXXVII. De EMPLASTRIS.
I. Emplastrum Album.
OLEI Olivarum libras quatuor; Sevi ovilli, Cerussae lotae, and Lithargyri Auri
laevigati, ana libras duas; Vitrioli albi usti uncias quinque; toque igne
lento, assidue Spatula lignea movendo: mixturae Sevi, Olei, Cerussae, and
Lithargyri, sic coctione and agitatione incrassatae, and igni substractae,
Vitriolum pulveratum injiciunt and subigunt: sicque massam habent consistentia
laudabilem, ex qua Magdaleones formant.

Valet ad Vulnera cruenta, Vlcera quoque dysepulota and inveterata, atque ad
parts divulsas, and ecchymomata. Materiam flatulentam discutit, partimque
Sarcoticum est, partim Epuloticum; id est, vim habet novam Carnem generandi,
Vulnera glutinandi, and Vlcera exsiccandi, and ad cicatricem ducendi: Fluxiones
quoque sisiit, and Parts, quibus adhibetur, roborat. Tumoribus Pestilentibus,
and exituris Bubonibus, Ambustis, Articulorum Morhis, Oedematibus, Ossium
fracburis, and Contusionibus prodest.

II. Diachylon Simplex.
Mucilaginum radicum Althaeae, Caricarum; seminum Lini and Foenugraeci, ana
uncias novem; Lithargyri Auri laevigati, vel Cerussae lotae, sesquilibram; Olei
Olivarum libras tres: misce, and lento igne fiat Emplastrum, consistentia
legitimum. Signum Emplastri perfect cocti habetur, cum ipsius portio Marmori
adhibita non adhaeret, aut Digitos, dum contrectatur, non inquinat. Mucilago.
Recipe radicum Althaeae mundatarum, and minutim incisarum; Caricarum, seminum
Lini and Foenugraeci, ana uncias quindecim; Aquae fontanae libras quindecim:
misce, digere per horas viginti quatuor, and lento igne coque ad Mucilaginis
consistentiam crassae, tum fortiter exprime ad usum.

Emplastrum hoc Malacticum optimum est; Hepatis enim, Lienis, Ventriculi, and
tumores aliarum partium duros emollit, Humoresque coquit, incidit, and
resolvit. Enumeratur inter Emollientia and Suppurantia, ejusque usus est
frequens.

III. Diachylon cum Gummis.
Gummi Ammoniaci, Bdellii, Galbani, Opopanacis, Sagapeni, Tacamahaccae, ana
uncias tres; Vini albi quantum sufficit: Vino dissolvantur, colentur, and
coquantur ad Mellis crassitudinem; quibus addantur Diachyli simplicis librae
tres: misce, fiatque Emplastrum.

Eadem praestat hoc Emplastrum, quod superius, sed efficacius: magis enim
duritiem quamlibet mollit, coquit, digerit, ac potenter resolvit: partim
emollit, partim coquit, ac maturat: ob id Tumoribus praeter naturam duris,
utroque dicto modo sanandis confert.

IV. Emplastrum Epispasticum.
Emplastri Meliloti libras duas, Terebinthinae Venetiae libram unam;
Cantharidum fine alis and capitibus pulveratarum uncias octodecim: misce,
fiatque Emplastrum.

Humores qui a Capite ad Oculos, Dentes, and Genus descendunt, potenter
revellit: in Bubonibus and Carbonibus pestilentialibus, Venenum a Cord ad
exteriora revocat. In Morbis diuturnis, nullis Remediis aliis cedentibus,
potissimum sibi locum vendicat.

V. Emplastrum Febrifugum.
Thuris pinguis libras duas, Terebinthinae uncias quatuor, Olei Olivarum,
Camphorae, Cinnabaris, ana uncias duas: misce, fiatque Emplastrum.

Virium magnarum, and multae experientiae fuit hoc Emplastrum, ad Febres
intermittentes curandos, si ad Stomachi regionem applicatur. Confert ad
Vomitum; ac iis, qui Cibum retinere nequeant, prodest.

VI. Emplastrum de Meliloto.
Resinae libras octo, Cerae libras quatuor, Sevi ovilli libras duas, Meliloti
viridis libras quinque: misce, coque blando igne, and cola.

Ad Vulterae and Vlcera repurganda and coalescenda, and ad paries, quibus
adhibetur roborandos, prides. Ad Vulners quoque contusa, and partis carnosae
Ecchymomata valet.

VII. Emplastrum de Minio cum Sapone.
Cerati nigri libras tres, Saponis Castallensis incisi uncias octo: misce,
fiatque Emplastrum.

Arthritidi, and Morbis Juncturarum medetur: ad Strumas etiam recentes,
frigidos ac diuturnos Abscessus, Viscerumque Tumores, perutile. Surculos and
Spicula Corpori altum infixa, and omnia Venenata extrahit. Splenis duritiem
emendat, Articulorum ac Genuum, ex Humorum influxu dolores sedat. Ad Mammarum
Collectiones, and Tumores duros and scirrhosos valet. Morsibus etiam venenatis,
aut rabidorum Canum, impositum, medetur. Vlceribus calidis prodest, ac iis quos
acres and salsi Humores infestant.

VIII. Emplastrum Mercuriale.
Diachyli simplicis, vel cum Gummis libras sex; Argenti vivi (cum Sputo, vel
Succo Limonum, vel Terebinthinae Argentoratensis extincti) libram unam; misce.
Vel sic: Recipe Diachyli simplicis, vel cum Gummis, libras sex; Praecipitati
rubri uncias quindecim; misce. Aliter. Recipe Cerati de Galbano libras quinque
and semis, Olei Olivarum uncias sex; misce: tum addantur pulvetis Mercurii
coagulati uncrae sedecim; misce. Aliter iterum. Recipe Cerati viridis libras
sex, Argenti vivi (Sputo, vel S^cco Limonum extincti) libram unam, pulveris
Nicotianae uncias sex, Olei Baccarum Juniperi quantum sufficit, misce. Vel sic:
Recipe Cerae libras quatuor, Olei Olivarum libras duas; misce, deinde addantur
Cinnabaris factivae librae duae; seu Cinnabaris factivae, Praecipitati rubri,
ana libra una; fiatque Emplastrum. Sic iterum. Recipe Cerati viridis libras
sex, Argenti vivi (cum floribus Sulphuris extincti) libram unam, Olei Petrolaei
quantum sufficit; misce, fiatque Emplastrum. Vel sic: Recipe Argenti vivi
uncias quatuor, solvatur in Aquae fortis, seu Spirtus Nitri quantum sufficit:
Solutioni add Mixturam (ex Oleo Olivarum and Sevi Ovilli, ana unciis quatuor
factam) and in Vase terreo, Patella nimirum, lenissimo igne coquantur, ad
Emplastri consistentiam; ne nigrescat, indesinenter Spatula lignea agitando:
cui add Cerae flavae uncias tres; Thuris pinguis, Olibani vel Mastichis
pulveris, ana unciam unam. Sic habes Emplastrum nobile and praestans, quod
omnia Vlcera Gallica persanat, and crustas, sine doloris sensu, quocunque etiam
loco secreto haereant, veluti miraculose absumit.

In Tumoribus, Tophis, and Nodis Gallicis faelici successu usurpatur. Itemque
Doloribus Nocturnis, a Morbo Gallico procedentibus, medetur. Valet egregie in
dissipandis doloribus Artuum, Homoplatarum, Coxendicumque, a Lue inve^erata
obortis, partibus robur ^ciliat, virulen^ia^ Luis sub Madoris specie extrahit,
and dolores i^nplacabiles consopis.

IX. Emplastrum Nicotianae, vel Polychrestum.
Nicotianae recentis and contusae libras quinque, Sevi ovilli libras duas;
coque per duas horas vel tres, lento igne, and exprime: cui addantur Cerae,
Resinae, Picis navalis, Thuris, Terebinthinae Venetae, ana unciae quindecim;
misce, fiatque Emplastrum.

Vlcera quaecunque and Vulnera, recentia and inveterata, mundificat, Carne
replet, and curat. Dolores Arthritidis nimios sedat, atque Apostemata ad
maturitatis statum perducit.

X. Emplastrum ad Strumam.
Gummi Ammoniaci, Aceti Scillitici, ana libram unam; succi Cicutae libram
semis; misce, dissolve, and cola: coquatur ad debitam consistentiam; deinde
addantur Gummi Elemi unciae tres, Praecipitati rubri unciae quatuor: misce,
fiatque Emplastrum.

Ad Strumas vel Scrophulas, Abscessus, vel Apostemata, Vlceraque vetera, quae
cicatricem non facile admittunt, prodest. Fluxiones quacunque Corporis part
irruentes intercipit, and ad locum affectum devolvi vetat.

XI. Emplastrum Vulnerarium.
Balsami Sulphuris (Oleo Olivarum facti) libras quatuor, in quo dissolvantur
Sevi ovilli librae duae; Resinae, Cerae, Thuris, Gummi Elemi, Terebinthinae
Venetae, ana libra una; Balsami Copaybae, Peru, and Tolu, ana unciae sex;
Pulverum Mastiches, Myrrhae, Olibani, Camphorae; ana unciae quatuor; misce,
fiatque Emplastrum.

Vulnera recentia, and Ictus celeriter consolidat, Symptomata and Fluxiones
supervenire solitas praecavet; Ferrum, Lignum, Plumbum, aliaque profundius
membris infixa, sine dolor extrahit. Vires hujus Emplastri perinsignes sunt;
antiqua Vlcera siccat, and mundificat, Carnem bonam producit, and cicatrice
claudit; atque Fistulas, quae nondum callum contraxerint, jungit, and
conglutinat.

XII. Emplastrum Arthriticum.
Diachyli cum Gummis, seu Cerati Viridis, vel de Galbano libras duas; Saponis
Castallensis, Opii cum Aqua vel Aceto extracti, ana uncias sex; Argenti vivi
sputo vel succo Limonum extincti libram unam; misce, fiatque Emplastrum.

Doloribus Arthriticis and Venereis medetur; Tophos, Nodos, Scrophulas,
Tumoresque duros digerit, emollit, resolvit, eorumque dolores sedat. Vlcera
callosa and maligna, imo pessima, curat; omnibusque Mammarum Tumoribus, Lacte
concreto, Oedemate, and Cancro, nihil est aequale.

CHAP. LXXVII. Of EMPLASTERS.
I. The White Emplaster.
OIL-Olive lbiv. Sheeps-suet, Ceruss washed, Litharge of Gold levigated, a.
lbij. white Vitriol burnt v. boil it with a gentle fire, continually stirring
it with a wooden Spatula: to the mixture of the Oil, Suet, Ceruss, and
Litharge, made thick by boiling and stirring, being removed from the fire, the
Vitriol in powder is to be added, and well mixed: so will you have a mass of a
due consistency, which make into Rouls.

It is good for green Wounds, as also for great, evil-disposed, and inveterate
Ulcers, and Parts broken and bruised. It discusses flatulent matter, and is
partly a Sarcotick or Flesh-breeder, and partly an Epulotick, or Cicatrizer;
that is, it has the power or virtue of generating new Flesh, of closing up
Wounds, of drying up Ulcers, and skinning them. It stops Fluxes of Humors, and
strengthens the Parts it is applied to. It is also good for Pestilential Tumors
and Apostems, Bubo's, Burnings, Diseases of the Joints, Oedema's, broken Bones,
and Contusions.

2. Simple Diachylon.
Of the Mucilages of Althearoots, of dried Figs, Lin-seed, Fenugreek-seed, a.
ix. Litharge of Gold levigated, or Ceruss washed, lbj ss. Oil-olive lbiij. mix,
and with a gentle fire, make an Emplaster of a due consistency. The sign of the
Emplaster being perfectly boiled, is, that a little of it being dropped upon a
Marble, it does not stick to it, or when wrought with the Fingers, it does not
bedaub them. The Mucilage. Take cleansed roots of Althea cut small, dry Figs,
Lin-seed and Fenugreek-seed, a. xv. fair Water lbxv. mix, digest for
twenty-four hours, and boil with a gentle fire to the consistency of a thick
Mucilage, which strain out by pressing, for use.

This Emplaster is the best Mollifier that is; for it softens the hardnesses
and tumors of Liver, Spleen, Stomach, and other parts, concocts Humors,
incides, and resolves. It is of very frequent use, and is accounted among the
number of Emollients and Suppuratives.

3. Diachylon with Gums.
Gum Ammoniack, Bdellium, Galbanum, Opoponax, Sagapenum, and Tacamahacca, a.
iij. white Wine a sufficient quantity; dissolve the Gums in the Wine, strain,
and boil to the thickness of Honey: to which add of simple Diachylon lbiij.
mix, and make an Emplaster.

This has the same virtues with the former Emplaster, but much more effectual:
for it more powerfully softens, concocts, digests, and resolves: it partly
mollifies, partly concocts and maturates: for which reason, after both ways it
is said to cure hard preternatural Tumors.

4. The Blistering-Plaster.
Melilot-Plaster lbij. Venice- Turpentine lbj. powder of Cantharides (their
wings and heads being cast away) xviij. mix, and make an Emplaster.

It powerfully revells, or derives Humors, which fall from the Head to the
Eyes, Teeth, and Knees. It recalls the Poison and malignity of Pestilential
Bubo's and Carbuncles, from the Heart to the external parts. And it has a
principal place in the helping of those Diseases which have been of long
continuance, and yield to no other Remedies.

5. The Fever-frighter.
Fat Frankincense lbij. Turpentine iv. Oil-olive, Camphir, Cinnabar, a. ij.
mix, and make an Emplaster.

This Emplaster is of great virtue, and has been much experimented, for the
curing of Agues, being applied to the Pit of the Stomach. It is good against
Vomitings, and helps such as are not able to retain their Food in their
Stomachs.

6. Emplaster of Melilot.
Rosin lbviij. Wax lbiv. Sheeps-suet lbij. green Melilot lbv. mix, boil with a
gentle fire, and strain out.

It is good for the cleansing and healing of Wounds and Ulcers, and is good to
strengthen the parts it is applied to. It heals contused Wounds, and Bruisings
of the fleshy parts.

7. Emplaster of Red-lead with Soap.
Of the Black Cerate lbiij. Castil- Soap sliced thin viij. mix, and make an
Emplaster.

It cures the Gout, and Diseases of the Joints: it is profitable also for a
recent King's Evil, cold, and long-continued Apostems, and Tumors of the Bowels.
It draws forth Splinters and Thorns, though fixed deep in the Flesh, and extracts
all sorts of Venom. It helps the hardness of the Spleen, and eases the pains of
the Knees and Joints, from an influx of Humors. It is good against Gatherings,
and hard and scirrhous Tumors of the Breasts. Being often applied, it cures the
bitings of mad Dogs, or of other Venomous Beasts. It is good for hot and
burning Ulcers, and such as are infested with salt and sharp Humors.

8. The Mercurial Emplaster.
Diachylon simple, or with Gums, lbvj. Quicksilver (killed either with spittle
or juice of Limons, or Strasburgh-Turpentine) lbj. mix them. Or thus: Take
Diachylon simple, or with Gums lbvj. red Precipitate xv. mix them. Otherwise.
Take Cerate of Galbanum lbv ss. Oil-olive vj. mix them; then add powder of
Mercury coagulate xvj. mix again. Otherwise. Take of the Green Cerate lbvj.
Quicksilver (killed with Spirtle, or Juice of Limons) lbj. powder of Tobacco
vj. Oil of Juniper Berries, a sufficient quantity; mix them. Or thus: Take Wax
lbiv. Oil-olive lbij. mix, and add factitious Cinnabar lbij. or factitious
Cinnabar, red Precipitate, a. lbj. and make an Emplaster. Or thus again. Take
of the Green Cerate lbvj. Quicksilver (killed with flowers of Sulphur) lbj.
Oil of Petre, a sufficient quantity; mix, and make an Emplaster. Otherwise
thus: Take Quicksilver iv. dissolve it in Aqua fortis or Spirit of Nitre, a
sufficient quantity: to the Solution add a Mixture made of Oil-olive and
Sheeps-suet, a. iv. put them into an earthen glazed Vessel or Pan, boiling them
together with a very gentle fire, to the consistence of an Emplaster; but that
it may not grow black, let it be stirred continually with a wooden Spatula:
then add yellow Wax iij. Mastich and Olibanum in powder, a. j. which mix well.
So have you a noble and efficacious Emplaster, which perfectly cures all Ulcers
proceeding from the French Pox; and removes Scabs and Breakings-out, in
whatsoever secret place they may be, even to a wonder.

It is used with great success in Venereal Tumors, Tophs, and Nodes; and cures
also Nocturnal Pains from the same cause. It is powerful in dissipating pains
of the Joints, Shoulderblades, and Hips, arising from an inveterate Lues,
confirms the strength of the parts, and draws forth the malignity of the Pox in
the form of Sweat, and lays as it were asleep the most vehement pains.

9. Emplaster of Tobacco, or Plaster of many Virtues.
Tobacco, green, and bruised lbv. Sheeps-suet lbij. boil for two or three hours
with a very gentle fire, and press out: to which add, Wax, Rosin, Ship-pitch,
Frankincense, Venice- Turpentine, a. xv. mix, and make an Emplaster.

It cleanses all sorts of Ulcers and Wounds, whether new or old, fills them
with Flesh, and heals them; it eases vehement pains of the Gout, and ripens
Apostems.

10. Emplaster against the King's Evil.
Gum Ammoniack, Vinegar of Squills, a. lbj. juice of Hemlock lbss. dissolve,
and strain, and boil to a due consistency; then add Gum Elemi iij. red
Precipitate iv. mix, and make an Emplaster.

It is good against the Kingsevil, Apostems, and old Ulcers, which are
difficult to heal; stops Fluxes of Rheum, falling upon what part of the Body
soever; and hinders their afflux to the part affected.

11. The Wound-Plaster.
Balsam of Sulphur (made with Oil-olive) lbiv. in which dissolve Sheeps-suet
lbij. Rosin, Wax, Frankincense, Gum Elemi, Venice- Turpentine, a. lbj. Balsams
of Capivi, Peru, and Tolu, a. vj. Pouders of Mastich, of Myrrh, of Olibanum and
Camphir, a. iv. mix, and make an Emplaster.

It speedily heals green Wounds, and the Bitings or Stinging of Beasts, or
Venomous Creatures; hinders the Symptoms, and prevents the usual Fluxes of
Humors; draws forth pieces of Iron, splinters of Wood, and other things which
are lodged deep in the Flesh, and that without pain. The virtues of this
Emplaster are very admirable; for it drys up old Ulcers, and cleanses them,
fills them with good Flesh, and heals them; and Fistula's which have not yet
contracted a callus, it joins their sides together, and conglutinates them.

12. The Gout-Emplaster.
Diachylon cum Gummis, or the Green Cerate, or that of Galbanum lbij. Castile-
Soap, Opium (extracted with Water or Vinegar) a. vj. Quicksilver (killed with
spittle or juice of Limons) lbj. mix, and make an Emplaster.

It cures the Gout, also Venereal pains; digests, softens, and resolves Tophs,
Nodes, Scrophula's, and hard Tumors, taking away their pain. It cures callous
and malign Ulcers, even the most rebellious; and for all sorts of Tumors in
Women's Breasts, Curdled Milk, Oedema, and the Cancer it self, this Plaster has
yet no equal.

Explicit Liber Primus.
ARS CHIRVRGICA. Liber Secundus. OF DEFOEDATION.
The ARGUMENT.
Removing of Defilements or Vices, are considered in an Eightfold respect: I.
Defilements or Pices of the Hair. 1. Pilorum Fissura, Cleaving of the Hair. 2.
Defluvium Pilorum, Falling of the Hair. 3. Alopecia, a Fox-like shedding of the
Hair. 4. Ophiasis, a Serpent-like falling of the Hair. 5. Tinea Capillorum,
Worms of the Hair. 6. Calvities, Baldness. 7. Canities, Hoariness. 8. Plica
Polonica, Elfs-locks. 9. Phthiriasis, Lousiness. 10. Furfuratio, Scurf and
Dandrif. 11. Achor, Favus; a Scald Head. II. Defilements, or Pices of the Skin.
12. Nigredo, vel Adustio a Sole; Sun-burning. 13. Ephelides, Childbearing
Spots, or Freckles. 14. Lentigenes, Lentils. 15. Naevi Materni, Mother-Spots.
16. Maculae Volaticae Infantium, Red Comb. 17. Maculae Hepaticae, Liver-Spots.
III. Defilements, or Eruptions of the Skin. 18. Guttae Rosaceae, Red Pimples on
the Face. 19. Morphaea, Alphus; Morphew. 20. Leuce, the deep Creeping Morphew.
21. Malum Mortuum, the Dead Evil. 22. Vari, Pimples. 23. Intertrigo, Galling.
24. Herpes simplex, the Shingles. 25. Phlyctaenae, Ignis Sylvestris; Wildfire,
Blisters. 26. Vermes Cutis, Worms of the Skin. IV. Defilements, or Pices of the
Skin and Flesh. 27. Scabies, Scabbiness. 28. Mentagra, the Chin-Scab. 29.
Impetigo, Lichen; the Ringworm. 30. Leonina, the Tettar. 31. Sirones, the
Barbadoes-Worms, or Chego's. 32. Verrucae, Thimi, Myrmeciae, Acrochordones;
Warts. 33. Cornua, Clavi, Corns. V. Defilements Universal. 34. Pruritus, the
Itch. 35. Lepra, the Leprosy. 36. Sudamina, Measles. 37. Lues Venerea, the
French Pox. 38. Gonorrhoea, the Running of the Reins. 39. Malus Odor, Evil
Smell of the Body. VI. Defilements, or Pices of the Eyes. 40. Phlyctaenae
Oculorum, Blisters of the Eyes. 41. Anchylops, a Tumor in the Corner of the
Eye. 42. Aegylops, a Running-Sore, or Fistula of the Eye. VII. Defilements, or
Pices of the Teeth and Gums. 43. Color vitiosus, discolor; sordes, and foetor
Dentium: Ill color, filthiness, and stinking of the Teeth. 44. Corrosio and
Caries Dentium, Corrosion and Rottenness of the Teeth. 45. Vacillatio Dentium,
Looseness of the Teeth. VIII. Pices of the Hands, Fingers, and Nails. 46.
Fissurae Manuum, Clefts of the Hands. 47. Unguium Scabrities, vel Lepra; Nails
Rough, Thick, and Deformed. 48. Unguium Discolor, Nails Evil-coloured. 49.
Unguium Fissura and Casus, Cleaving and Falling of the Nails. 50. Reduvia, the
Whitloe.

I. Defilements, or Vices of the HAIR.
CHAP. I. CLEAVING of the HAIR.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Pilorum Fissura; and in English,
the Cleaving of the Hair.

II. This Cleaving is on the ends of the Hair of the Head; (and sometimes of
the Beard) which are oftentimes divided into two, three, or four Threads.

III. It is known by sight; and tho it may many times be caused from some sharp
Humor, sticking to the Hair, and cleaving to its ends; yet it is mostly caused
from the Hairs being too long, and not timely cutting it.

IV. If it proceeds from the Hairs being too long, it is remedied by often
cutting it; especially upon the Change, or early Increase of the Moon.

V. If it proceeds from sharp, drying Humors, they may be purged off, with
either Our Family-Pills, or Pilulae Catharticae, or Tinctura Purgans; the
Patient mean season using an Alcalious Diet, having a fatness and glutinosity
in it; as new Milk from the Cow, Whey, etc.

VI. Outwardly, it may be washed with the Decoction of Capillary Herbs; as
Southernwood, Lavender-cotton, Maidenhair, or with Spirit of Wine: and then
afterward anointed with Bulls Gall.

CHAP. II. FALLING of the HAIR.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Defluvium Pilorum; in English, the
Falling of the Hair.

II. The kinds. It is either Preternatural, or Natural.

III. The Preternatural is threefold. 1. Defluvium: 2. Alopecia: 3. Ophiasis.
There is indeed in all these, a falling off of the Hair, and so in general they
might be comprehended under the title of Defluvium; but custom and use has so
far prevailed, that the name Defluvium is specially taken for the Shedding of
the Hair, which we shall here speak of.

IV. The Natural Falling of the Hair, is that which is occasioned through Age; and
this is called Calvities, Baldness.

V. The Causes. They are several: either the want of Nourishment, or the
malignity of Humors corroding the roots of the Hair: both which Causes have
place in such as are Phthisical, or afflicted with malign Fevers; or from the
thinness of the Skin, not able to contain the nourishment.

VI. Or it may come from the taking of Poison; and then sometimes both Skin and
Nails fall off also: Or lastly, from corrupted Humors in the French Pox; which
very often produce this effect.

VII. The Signs. It is known at sight, by the continual shedding of the Hair;
but is distinguished from Alopecia, Ophiasis, and Calvities, from the different
manner of falling: for in this the Hair falls off not only in the Head, but in
all parts of the Body equally; sometimes more, and sometimes less.

VIII. The Signs of the Causes, may be known from what has been said before: If
Sickness went before, for want of nourishment; if sharp Humors abounded, it may
be from them; but if Cause rarifying the Skin preceded, as Heat of the ambient
Air, it then indeed proceeds from the thinness of the Skin.

IX. The Prognostics. A Defluvium of the Hair is not difficult to cure, unless
the Cause is that which cannot be removed. If it happens after acute and malign
Fevers, (in which the Skin has not contracted any preternatural disposition) it
is easily cured: for the Disease being cured, nourishment is again supplied,
and the Hair is restored, for the most part, without the help of any Medicine.

X. But happening in a Phthisis, it is of difficult cure: for the falling of
the Hair in Consumptions, is a sign of Death.

X. If the falling away is by reason of the thinness of the Skin, then it is
restored without any great trouble, by the use of such Medicines which thicken.

XII. The Cure. The Cure depends upon taking away the Cause. If therefore the
Defluvium is from want of Nourishment, you must use Frictions to the part, and
give things which breed Nourishment, and endeavor that it may be attracted to
the Skin of the Head.

XIII. Inwardly, give every night going to bed, ss. of Our Theriaca Chymica;
and every morning fasting, a j. ad ss. of powder of Vipers flesh: for these
breed Hair again by a specific property, rubbing the Head daily with Onions.

XIV. If it be from malign or depraved Humors, supplied from several parts of
the Body; you may evacuate, according to the strength of the Patient: either
with Pilulae Catholicae, or Tinctura Cathartica; but chiefly with Sal Mirabile.

XV. But if the Humor lies only at the roots of the Hair, then it ought to be
discussed, 1. By Friction; because it not only helps to discuss, by opening the
Pores, but attracts too Nutriment to the Head; and also strengthens and
thickens the Skin.

XVI. 2. By application of Discussive Medicaments to the Head; for which
purpose, a Decoction of Elm-tree-bark and Bur-dock-roots, in Lie of
Broom-ashes, is of singular use.

XVII. In the first case, where it is caused for want of Nutriment, besides the
Medicines mentioned at Sect. 12. above, you ought to take care for a good
nourishing course of Diet, that thereby a sufficient quantity of good Blood may
be generated: and before any of the Topics, Frictions or Rubbings are often to
be used; for the attracting of the same Nutriment.

XVIII. In the second case, if it be from the depravity of evil Humors, the
Evacuations being made, Discussives, as was said, are to be applied; yet they
ought to be moderate, lest they dissipate the Aliment, and render the Skin
thin: and therefore if Ointments are used, Labdanum may well be mixed therewith.

XIX. If it be caused from the thinness of the Skin, you must use things which
condense and thicken: Oil of Myrtles, Bears or Vipers Grease, either alone, or
mixed with Labdanum, is commended; so also Labdanum dissolved in Wine, to wash
with.

XX. And indeed, Labdanum is good in all sorts of Fallings-off of the Hair: but
because it is too thick to be used of it self, it ought to be mixed with some
thinner Body, as Oil or Wine, etc.

XXI. But if greasy and oily things are refused, Lotions may be used; made of
Southernwood, Lavender-cotton, Maidenhair, golden Maidenhair, herb Mastich,
Sage, Rosemary, Labdanum, etc. roots of Reed, sharppointed Dock, Bur-dock,
Asarabacca: also Honey, Ashes of Bees, Wasps, Hornets, Flies, Moles, Mice, etc.

XXII. An Oil against Falling of the Hair. Southernwood, Lavender-cotton, Sage,
Wormwood, Myrtle, a. M j. Oil, Wine, a. lbj ss. Bears-oil, juice of Mullein, a.
lbj. Honey lbss. mix, and boil to the consumption of the Wine; then press out
the Oil, and adding to it a sixth part of Labdanum: keep it for use, to anoint
with.

XXIII. A Wash against Falling of the Hair. Take Southernwood, Lavender-cotton,
Mullein, Maidenhair, Bur-dock-roots, a. viij. Water lbx. boil to one half, then
strain out, and add to it, Aqua Mellis lbij. Spirit of Wine lbss. mix them:
with which wash two or three times a day.

CHAP. III. FOX-LIKE SHEDDING of the HAIR.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Alopecia, Pilorum decidentia quod
Vulpibus familiaris est; in English, a Fox-like Shedding of the Hair.

II. This Disease causes the Hair to fall from certain parts of the Head, so as
to leave bare and bald patches, here and there; caused from evil Humors,
fretting and gnawing the roots of the Hair.

III. The Hair is said to fall off areatim, that is, by patches or spots; and
hence it is, that this deformity is called also Area, as Celsus seems to
acknowledge.

IV. The Cause. It is a depraved and sharp Humor, eating asunder the roots of
the Hair; and for the most part is caused either from salt, adust, and
putrified Phlegm, through the fault of the Brain.

V. Or from eating of corrupt Meats, and such things as are venomous and
poisonous, among which Galen accounts Mushrooms: we also know by experience,
that too large a Dose of the decoction of Bearsfoot, also the berries of the
deadly Nightshade (not given in so large a quantity as to kill) will do the
same thing: it may also happen from the malignity of the French Disease.

VI. The Signs. It it is known by sight: but in the Alopecia, the Hair falls
off without any excoriation, or hurt at all, of the Skin.

VII. The Differences. That Area, says Celsus, lib. 6. cap. 4. which is called
Alopecia, is dilated under all kinds of figures, happening both in the Hair of
the Head, and of the Beard; but the Ophiasis happens only in the Head, the
hinder part of it, creeping in the form of a Serpent.

VIII. The Prognostics. This Disease brings little danger with it, and while
it is recent, it is easily cured: so also if the place being rubbed, grows
easily red; or if the extremities of the bald patches begin to shoot forth Hair
afresh.

IX. If the Disease is inveterate, or the Skin is very smooth, thick, greasy,
and wholly void of Hair, the Cure will be difficult; and if the place being
rubbed grows not red, the Affect is judged for the most part uncurable.

X. If it it proceeds from the French Disease, it is not to be cured, till that
Disease it self is cured.

XI. Where it is curable, so that new Hair comes on again, it is either white,
or yellow: like as it is in Horses, where the Hair has been lost by reason of
some Ulcer, caused by gauling; when it grows upon that part again, it usually
grows white; which is caused from a vicious nutriment of the Part, and weakness
of the Skin.

XII. The Cure. As for this, since it differs nothing at all from the Cure of
Ophiasis, in any of its Intentions; we shall refer you thither, treating of it
in the very next Chapter.

CHAP. IV. SERPENT-LIKE FALLING of the HAIR.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Area, and Ophiasis, a figura; quod
parts glabrae and Pilis destitutae, tortuosae instar Serpentum videntur: in
English, a Serpent-like Shedding of the Hair.

II. It is so called from its figure, because that the bald and smooth parts
destitute of Hair, are writhed like a Serpent. It begins on the hind-part of
the Head, and not exceeding the breadth of two fingers; it creeps toward the
Ears, and in some as far as the Forehead, till the two heads meet before:
chiefly haunting Infants, and such as are young.

III. In Ophiasis, not only the roots of the Hair, but even the Skin it self is
eaten and gnawn through; viz. as deep as the roots of the Hair.

IV. The Causes. The are, in part, the same with the former; and according to
Galen, these Diseases follow a depraved Nutrition of the Skin of the Head;
which if it be in abundance, it eats equally alike through the Hair, in many, and
greater places; but if less, and mixed with a corrosive Humor, it makes an
Ophiasis.

V. The more remote Causes are said to be the heat of the Liver and Head,
especially the faults of the first and second Concoction, whence salt and sharp
Humors are generated; which though they may happen in every Age, yet they
generally after Childhood and Youth; sometimes following Tinea, Achor, and
Favus.

VI. The Signs. It is known by its form, and its creeping along, as before
described, with an Excoriation of the Skin; the very color of it being also
changed; and in some it appears more whitish, in some more pale, and in others
more black; and if it be pricked, there flows forth a serous, whitish Blood.

VII. The Differences. Alopecia and Ophiasis differ from Tinea in this: the
first is without Excoriation; Ophiasis is with a simple Excoriation of the
Skin, and when cured, the Hair grows again; but in Tinea, the Excoriation and
Ulceration is deeper, and the Skin is many times so corrupted and spoiled, that
the Hair never returns any more.

VIII. As to the Signs of the Causes, the Skin it self shows what Humor it is
that offends; which is seen by cutting, or shaving away some of the remaining
Hair, and rubbing it gently: the Hair also that grows anew, by its color will
show what Humor abounds, and is cause of the Disease.

IX. The Prognostics. They are almost the same with Alopecia, to which you are
referred; but Ophiasis is thought by some, to be the greater Disease, and so
the more difficult to cure.

X. It is commonly curable, if it follows Porrigo, or Tinea: but if it proceeds
from the Leprosy, which sometimes accompanies it, it is altogether uncurable;
and if it be from the Pox, not till the Disease it self be removed.

XI. The Cure. First, institute such a Diet as may breed good Blood, and
prevent the increase of bad Humors; abstaining from plentiful drinking of
Wines, but especially from all French Wines.

XII. Then let the Body be prepared and purged with fit Medicines, according to
the nature of the Humor pecant: and a particular Evacuation of the Head by
Apophlegmatisms, and solid Errhines at the Nostrils, are exceeding good.

XIII. While the Disease is recent, and not confirmed, both Galen and Avicen
advise to use Repellers: but otherwise, absolutely to abstain from them, and to
use Digestives, which are of hot and thin parts, yet not greatly drying; with
which you ought to mix things cold and moist.

XIV. If there remains any Hairs that are corrupted, they are to be pulled out
with an Instrument called the Volsella, or with a Dropacism; or such as we
mention, (ad Porriginem) in Our Doron, lib. 3. cap. 7. sect. 1. and at sect. 32.

XV. Then wash the Head with a Lie, wherein Maidenhair, Southernwood, and the
like have been boiled: after use Frictions with course cloths, till the place
is red: and lastly, apply proper Topics.

XVI. Such like Medicaments are Mustard Seed, Cresses, white Lilly-roots; which
(as it is affirmed) will restore Hair to places that have lost them by burning
or scalding.

XVII. To these add, Rocket-seed, Nitre, Oil of Bays, liquid Pitch, Sulphur,
powder and ashes of Southernwood, roots of Sowbread, Hellebor, seeds of
Stavesacre, Doves dung: add these also, (which are the strongest of all)
Thapsia, (by some called Turbith) and Euphorbium.

XVIII. Now you must note, That these Medicines now mentioned, are not to be
used in all kinds of Area, or at all times, or in any manner, or to all ages;
but unto each, such as are fit and proper: for each Medicament has its due
time and manner of use.

XIX. While the Disease is recent, use the weaker sort; so also to Children,
Women, and soft and delicate Bodies: but if it be inveterate, or in such as are
of full age, or in Men, or such as are of hard and strong Bodies, you may use
the stronger.

XX. Galen commends this: Ashes of the Greek-reed ss. ashes of a Hedg-hog j.
Mouse-dung ij. bruise, and mix with Vinegar; and anoint therewith. Or,
Reed-ashes, Goats-hair burnt, Maidenhair, Bears-fat, liquid Pitch, Rosin of the
Cedar, ana: mix them. This he calls the Admirable Remedy.

XXI. Or, Mice burnt, Linen-cloth burnt, Horse-teeth burnt, Bears-fat, Marrow
of a Heart, Reed-ashes, ana: Honey, q.s. mix them. Or this, which is the
strongest of all. Euphorbium, Thapsia, Oil of Bays, a. ij. Sulphur vive,
Hellebor, white and black, a. j. Wax vj. softened with Oil of Bays, old Oil, or
Tar: mix them; to be used, the Disease being inveterate.

XXII. For Children and Women use this: Reed-roots burnt, Southernwood, ana;
Bearsfat, or old Oil of Bays, or liquid Pitch, enough to make an Ointment, Or,
Southernwood, ashes of Reed-roots, Frankincense, and; Bears-fat q.s. make an
Ointment.

XXIII. If you would have it stronger, add Sulphur vive, Bullsgall,
Rocket-seed, Nitre, or even Thapsia it self. Bears-grease helps by a secret
property; of which, with the Hairs of a Bear burnt, Oil of the Mastichtree, and
the things before named, you may make an Ointment.

XXIV. But in the use of the stronger sorts of Medicaments, you must observe,
That in the Beginning, the more liquid, and softer Medicines may be used:
looking always after each application, what alteration it has made in the part
affected; and so, as need requires, to make it stronger, or weaker.

XXV. This alteration is seen, by observing whether the Skin is made red, or
not: for you must be cautious, that the Skin be not burnt through, by the too
often repeated use of the stronger Remedies.

XXVI. Also observe, that if the Hair be not shaved off, that Medicines of
soft, and of a more liquid form, as Washes, Liniments, Unguents, etc. will be
best to be used: but if it be wholly shaved off, then Medicines of a more solid
form, as Emplasters, Cerats, are to be applied.

XXVII. The weaker Medicines may be kept on the part, night and day, the better
to exert their strength and Virtue: but the stronger sort, are only to be kept
on so long, till they cause some alteration in the Skin, or cause some kind of
pain; and therefore the place affected is to be viewed once or twice a day.

XXVIII. And if they have strongly affected the place, you must then return to
the milder sort of them; and the part is to be anointed with Goose-fat, alone,
or mixed with Tar, or Bears-Oil, which is a Specific.

XXIX. It Is certain, that the stronger Medicaments being kept too long on, they
will burn the Skin; and Christopher a Vega says, he had seen many, who by the
use of over-strong Medicines in this case, were made incurable, or made
perpetually bald.

CHAP. V. Of the HAIR-WORM.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...), and by Aristotle, (...). in Latin, Tinea, and
Tinea Capillorum; in English, the Hair-Worm, or Hair-Moth; affecting sometimes
the Head only, sometimes the Beard.

II. It is a Disease wherein the Hairs fall off one by one, being eaten through
at their roots, and consumed by certain little Worms; which some say are so
small, that they can hardly be seen; (only they are discerned to move) being
not much unlike to the Mites which breed in Cheese, old Wax, Prunes, etc.

III. The Cause. They have their original, doubtless, from an Excrementitious
Humor; which, together with the nourishment of the Hair, penetrates into the
said Hair, and there being cherished by the heat of the Head, is converted into
little Worms.

IV. These afterward sticking unto the Hair (of which they are generated, and
whence they have their nourishment) corrode it; so that they fall off by little
and little.

V. The Disease is called Tinea, because that like as woollen Clothes are eaten
with Moths, so also is the Hair eaten by these Worms.

VI. The Signs. It is manifest of it self; for the Hairs are made shorter, and
unequal: some of them being more shortened, and some less.

VII. And though the worms are generally at the roots of the Hairs, yet in many
Hairs they also stick or breed in their extremities or ends; whereby the Hair
becomes ash-colored, and uneven, being from day to day corroded and curtailed.

VIII. It is many times accompanied with a dry Ulcer, corrupting the Hair: and
the Head is sometimes covered with a kind of crusty substance, ash-colored, or
yellow: for which reason, when it affects the Head only, some will have it be
Achor or Favus, a Scald-Head.

IX. But doubtless it is not the Disease properly called a Scald-Head, though it
may well enough (from the resemblance it has therewith) be a species of the
same, and may be called a Bastard-Scald.

X. The Prognostics. There is no danger at all in it, yet it is difficult to
be cured; and causes a very great deformity and unsightliness, especially when
it happens in the Beard, making the Hairs unequal, some shorter, some longer;
the Beard it self seeming foul and nasty.

XI. If it continues long, it often degenerates into Alopecia, or rather
Ophiasis, or causes Baldness.

XII. The Cure. Medicaments penetrating and cleansing are to be chosen; as also
that may digest and discuss the matter of which the Worms are bred.

XIII. The Body may be purged with Vniversals; as, Our Family Pills, Pilulae
Catharticae, Tinctura purgans, Pulvis Cornachini, etc. because the Worms are
generated of a vicious Humor mixed with the nourishment of the Hair.

XIV. For Topics, a Decoction of Broom and Myrrh boiled together in Vinegar,
is commended, A Decoction of the great-Nettle in Lie, so also of Nettles and
Scabious in Lie, are said to be of good use to wash the Head often with.

XV. The Head may also be anointed with Oil, in which Squills, Myrtle-leaves,
and Wormwood have been boiled: or with Bulls-gall, mixed with equal parts of a
Decoction of Garlic and Centory in Vinegar.

XVI. To these add, a Decoction of Wormwood, Centory the less, Southernwood,
and Gentian, in Vinegar, or Lie of Potashes: all bitter Herbs are very good;
as Rue, Aloes, etc.

XVII. But what I have several times proved by Experience, is, a strong
Decoction of Coloquintida in Water; with which the Head is to be washed and
somented, three or four times a day: or a Decoction of Bearsfoot, which never
fails.

XVIII. After washing, the Head may be anointed with this Ointment: Take
Oil-olive vij. Oil of Tartar per deliquium iij. Flowers of Sulphur iij. white
Precipitate j. mix them; with which anoint once or twice a day, and in a short
time the Affect will be cured.

CHAP. VI. Of BALDNESS.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Calvities, also Calvitium; and in
English, Baldness.

II. It is a Disease, wherein the Hairs fall wholly off; chiefly from the
forepart of the Head, leaving the Skin smooth and dry.

III. The Cause. Hippocrates and Galen will have it to be from the want of
Humidity; whereas Actuarius, Meth. lib. 1. cap. 5. says, it is caused from too
much Humidity: which may be thus reconciled; that it may proceed from too
little alimental or nutrimental Humidity, and also be caused from having too
much excrementitious Moisture, which destroys their roots.

IV. It arises therefore from defect of Nourishment, dryness of the Brain;
either through Age, or some other accidental cause, as Poison, Burning, Scalding,
Cutting of the Skin, some deep Ulcer, too much Coition.

V. The Signs. It is known by sight; the forepart of the Head being void of
Hair.

VI. The Differences. It differs from Defluvium, or Shedding of the Hair;
because in that the Hairs generally (a great part of them) fall off, here and
there, up and down through the whole Head: from Alopecia, which falls off in
spots or patches: and from Ophiasis, because of its serpentlike creeping:
whereas Baldness happens always in the forepart of the Head.

VII. The Prognostics. It has no danger in it, except it be the exposing the
Head more to the Cold, and external injuries of the Air; but is indeed a great
deformity.

VIII. It is mostly without Remedy, but we have known it sometimes cured; and
possibly it may, by Art, be very much prevented.

IX. But that which is immaturely, in time of Youth, from Burnings, Scalding,
or Ulcers; or is caused simply by Old Age, is incurable.

X. The Cure. This may be fetched, in part, out of what we have said in the four
former Chapters: yet we think good to add in this place the few following
things.

XI. First, let Universal Remedies be premised, then order a good Diet; in
which biting, salt, and astringent things ought to be avoided.

XII. Supply the Nutriment, by such things as correct the dryness of the Brain,
and attract Moisture to the roots of the Hair: in which case, moderate
Frictions are good for this purpose; and apply some of the Attractives in Chap.
5. aforegoing. You may rub the place till it is red with an Onion, and apply
after, a Cataplasm of Onions and Mustard Seed.

XIII. Labdanum, mixed with proper Ointments, is excellent: so also is the Gum
alone, or dissolved in Oil of Mastich, or Bears-grease.

XIV. You may foment the Head with a Decoction of Foenugreek, or Burdock-roots,
made with a Lie of Tartar, and often wash the part with Aqua Mellis.

XV. Labdanum is a Specific in this case, and very fitly to be administered in
every Falling-off of the Hair; being dissolved in Wine, or some proper Oil.
Lotions also of Labdanum, in a Decoction of Maidenhair, Golden-maidenhair,
Southernwood, Mastich, Roses, Rosemary, and Sage, are of great use.

XVI. The things following, not only take away the cause of Shedding Hair, but
help to generate and breed it, by a peculiar faculty: viz. all the Capillary
Herbs; Southernwood, Reed-root, Dock-root, great Burdock-root, Asarabacca,
Labdanum, Honey, the powder or ashes of Bees, Wasps, Flies, Moles, Mice,
Mouse-dung, Hedg-Hogs, Bears-fat, Vipers and Serpents fat, down of Quinces,
ashes of Cotton and Hair, Aqua Mellis, juice of Onions.

XVII. Of all which you may form Oils, Balsams, Liniments, Ointments, and
Emplasters, at pleasure. As, Oil of Southern-wood ij. Ashes of Bees or Wasps j.
Mouse-dung j. Honey, Labdanum, a. v. Bears-fat, enough to make a Liniment.

XVIII. Or thus: Choice Labdanum cut into small pieces lbj. Damask-rose-water
vj. Oil of Ben iv. boil together, and strain often, till it is clear. Or,
dissolve Labdanum in Oil of Mastich, or Oil of Ben, till it is clear; with
which anoint.

XIX. Oil of Ben v. Chemical Oils of Lavender, of Oranges, of Limons, a. ij.
Oil of Southern-wood ss. juice of Squills j. Wine iij. mix; and boil to the
consumption of the Wine; with which anoint.

XX. Or this: Chemical Oils of Lavender, Spike, and Limons, a. j. Oil of Ben
iij. Labdanum j. Wine ij. mix, dissolve, and boil to the consumption of the
Wine: then add powder of Cloves j. ashes of Bees and Moles, a. ij ss. mix them.

CHAP. VII. Of HOARINESS.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Canities; and in English,
Hoariness; Whiteness, or Grayness of the Hair.

II. By Hoariness here, we mean not, nor intend that which comes by Old Age;
for that is natural, and the ornament of their years: but an immature and
preternatural one, which happens in Youth, or to those which are young, and in
the flower of their age; and that sometimes suddenly, and as it were all in an
instant.

III. That such a Hoariness, or Whiteness, does often happen, is most certain,
and we have plenty of Testimonies in Authors for the same. Scaliger, in
Exercit. 312. says, that Gonzaga having imprisoned a near Kinsman in a strong
Castle, on suspicion of Treason, that he might receive the reward of his
demerits; news was brought him the next morning, that his Kinsman was become
all over white and hoary. Skenkius, in his Observat. lib. 1. relates the like.
Lemnius, in his Treatise of Complexions, lib. 2. cap. 2. has such another
Relation. Cuspinian gives us many Histories, of such as suddenly out of Fear
became Hoary, or Gray. Hadrianus Junius, in his Comment upon the Hair, has such
a like Example. Ludovicus Vives also gives us such a History, in his Scipio's
Dream. And Coelius Rhodoginus, in his Lectiones Antiquae, lib. 3. cap. 24. and
lib. 13. cap. 17. supplies us with more Examples.

IV. But why heap I thus up Authorities, since in my own time, and to my own
knowledge, the like happened to a Person of Honor, in the space of three or
four days; his Hair becoming as hoary and white, as if he had been fourscore
years of age, although then he was not much above thirty: so that upon the
Scaffold, where he lost his Head, he was by his Hair impossible to be known.

V. The Causes. Galen, de Temper. lib. 2. cap. 5. says, the cause is from the
putrified recrement of Phlegm. Aristotle, de Gener. Animal. lib. 5. cap. 5.
says, it is from the defect of native Heat; which not concocting the Humors,
they rot and putrify; with which the Hair being nourished, becomes white.

VI. But indeed, it seems more agreeable with reason, to understand any simple
crude Humor; rather than Phlegm properly so called; and crudity, rather than
putridness.

VII. But since the Hair is not nourished of Vapors, or Recrements elevated
into Vapors; but rather of Blood and Lympha, as all other parts are: it is
without all doubt, that the Blood and Lympha being universally chilled, or
otherwise depraved through mighty Fear, or extreme Joy; that they may yield such
a nutriment to the Hair, as may upon the spot give this change of color.

VIII. And this is so much the easier to be conceived, when we consider, and
reflect upon their substance and conformation: that they are hollow, and may be
filled with any sort of Juice, and their substance diaphanous and perlucid;
through which any color may easily manifest it self.

IX. The Signs. It is manifest of it self to sight: that by Age, is gradual and
natural; but in Youth it is preternatural: and much more preternateral, if a
person becomes hoary on a sudden.

X. The Prognostics. That which is natural, is not to be cured, nor ought it
to be attempted: but of that which is preternatural there is hopes, in regard
it proceeds from a vicious disposition (of the Brain more especially) which may
be cured: for that being amended, the color of the Hair will also be changed.

XI. That Hoariness which proceeds from Leuce, or Vitiligo, (a kind of Leprosy)
is of difficult cure: but upon curing of the said Disease, the Hair also mends
in its color.

XII. The Cure. First, good Blood must be endeavored to be produced in the
whole Body, and especially in the Head; the heat of which part ought also to be
comforted and restored, that there may be a supply of good nourishment unto the
Hair.

XIII. Universal Purgations ought also to be premised, that the vicious Humors
may be evacuated: and the Head in particular, ought to be purged with proper
Sternutatories and Errhins; as Our Pulvis Sternutatorius, and Errhina-simple,
of roots of Asarabacca; or compounded, etc.

XIV. This is commended by the Arabians. Black Mirobalans, without their
kernels, vij ss. Ginger, Bishopsweed, a. ij. Butter, q.s. mix them; and then
add of double-refined Sugar ix. Dose, a j, ad j ssoften.

XV. As to Topics, Galen advises to things hot, and of thin parts, to discuss
and scatter the superfluous Humidities: but unless there flows such a
nourishment, that may again generate Hair of the natural color, those
Applications will be in vain.

XVI. Others strive only to use Medicaments which make the Hair black: but in
doing this, we must beware of doing any thing to hurt the Brain, because such
things as make black, have a vehement astringency, and so produce other evils.

XVII. Among suchlike things, Galen commends Cadmmia before all others; which
not only blackens the Hair, but discusses the recrements of the Humors, and
amends the ill disposition of the Head.

XVIII. Oil is commended to anoint with, in which Costus, or pulp of
Coloquintida, or bitter Gourd has been boiled.

XIX. Oil of wild Olives is good: also all the sorts of Myrobalans, which are
said to retard and hinder Hoariness; being inwardly taken, and outwardly
applied: to which you may add, Galls, Acacia, Foenugreek, Henbane-seed,
Labdanum, juice of the green shales of Walnuts; leaves and roots of Capers,
boiled in Milk, and applied as a Cataplasm; rind of Holmroot, boiled to
softness; Vitriol of Iron, etc.

XX. The use of these things is to be continued for some time: and though they
seem not to do good, at once or twice using, yet they are not to be desisted
from, but still to be continued.

XXI. And if you would have the Colors these things give to be lasting, a
Lotion is first to be used; which may be as a ground to the Tincture or Color,
and make it to continue firm, as the custom of Dyers is: and therefore let the
Hair which is to be dyed, be first washed with a Lotion in which Roch-alum has
been dissolved, or Galls have been boiled.

XXII. Lixivium of Potashes lbj. Litharge of Gold iv. boil them together; and
with a Sponge dipped therein, let the hoary Hairs be well moistened warm, for a
quarter of an hour together; and after that, a Cloth wet in the same, be laid
over all for a quarter of an hour: which may be repeated three or four times a
week.

XXIII. Black Myrobalans ij. Raisons iv. red Wine lbvj. boil by a gentle fire,
to the consumption of two thirds: then add juice of green Walnutshales lbj.
Sumach, Acatia, a. j. Cloves iij. boil again, and strain out by expression: at
night going to bed, let the Hair be anointed therewith, and next morning washed
with a Decoction of black Myrobalans in Wine. Avicen says, that in these kinds
of Medicines, Cloves strengthen and defend the Brain very much.

XXIV. A Decoction of Litharge and Sage, in a Lie of Potashes, is a good
Lotion to wash the Hair and Head with.

XXV. Bark of Vine-roots, leaves of the Vine, and of Pellitory of the Wall, a.
vj. Alum, Vitriol, a. iij. Galls j ss. Water lbxij. mix, boil all gently, and
strain out; with which daily wash the Hair and Head.

XXVI. Shales of green Walnuts bruised lbj. Alum lbss. Oil-olive lbiij. boil
them for an hour, then strain out, and anoint therewith.

XXVII. But that which exceeds most other things, is a Decoction and an Oil of
Coloquintida: which you may make thus: Pulp of Coloquintida lbss. Water lbvj.
boil to three pounds; strain, and add thereto Tincture of Cloves, made with
rectified S.V. iv. with this wash the Head morning and evening.

XXVIII. Which being dried, presently anoint with the following Oil: Pulp of
Coloquintida ij. Oil-olive lbij. boil to the consumption of one half: strain
out by pressing, and add thereto Chemical Oil of Cloves j. which mix well.

CHAP. VIII. Of ELF-LOCKS, or MATTED HAIR.
I. IT is a Disease that was unknown to the Greeks; the Latins call it Plica,
and Plica Polonica; we in English call it Elf-locks, Witch-locks, or Matted
Hair.

II. It is an entangling and enfolding of the Hair, into Elflocks; wherein the
Hair is as it were folded and matted together into a kind of Chord, or one
Long-lock.

III. And though it is known, even by sight, by the bunching, entanglings, and
complications of the Hair, pains vexing the Joints and Bones, Convulsions,
plenty of Lice, roughness and scaliness of the Nails of the Greattoes, growing
black, and almost like a Goats-horn; yet we shall rather choose to give you the
description of it, in the words of some of those Authors who have written
thereof, as follows.

IV. The Description. They who are troubled with this Disease, have sometimes
one, and sometimes two Locks growing on their Heads, intwisted and infolded
within themselves inwardly, and entangled together with the Hairs nigh to them;
the Lock thereby becoming very great, and exceeding thick.

V. It is a great trouble and torment to almost all (...) ^ts of People, through
the wh^ ^ingdom of Poland; and now seems to creep farther: it nips the Bones,
loosens the Limbs, infests the Vertebrae of the Back, makes the members
deformed, writhing them back.

VI. It causes them who are affected therewith to Bunch-out, and fills them
full of Lice; and gives the Head such fresh and constant supplies of them, that
it can by no means be freed from them.

VII. If these entangled Locks be shaved off, that Humor, and the Poison
thereof disperses it self into the Body, and then extremely tortures and vexes
the person thus affected: it disquiets and troubles the Head, Feet, Hands, all
the Joints and Limbs; and in a word, all the parts of the Body.

VIII. And it is experimentally found, that those who have cut off these Locks,
thus matted together, have soon after been afflicted in their Eyes, and
vehemently troubled with Defluxions of Rheum unto other parts of the Body.

IX. If the Cure has been attempted by usual Catharticks, the Patient is the
worse for them; and the raging pain vexes the person so much the more: for not
being able to master the noxious Humor, it only stirs it up, and disperses it
through the whole Body: and after Purging, they are tormented with a burning Pain
through all their members; so that nothing can possibly be added to the acuteness
of it.

X. Women are oftentimes afflicted herewith; also such Men who are given to
Venereal pleasures, or inclined to the French Disease, and the Children who are
begotten by such that are troubled with the same: and such likewise, who having
a Porrigo, have endeavored the cure thereof with Repercussives: or having had
some certain Flux of Blood for a long time, have had it suddenly stopped.

XI. This Affect communicates with that fuliginous Exhalation, out of which the
Hair is bred; and seems to have some affinity with the Tinea, Achor, or Favus:
and by its excruciating and pinching the Bones, to have something of the
malignity of the Lues Venerea; by the great abundance of Lice, to be something
of the nature of the Pthiriasis; by the Pain of the Joints, to sympathize with
the Arthritis or Gout; and by the terrible Contraction of the Limbs which it
causes, to have some alliance with the Spasm or Convulsions.

XII. Schenekius, lib. 1. Observat. 13. gives us another very large description
thereof, not much unlike the former; but he adds, that these Locks grow
sometimes very long, oftentimes a finger-thick, and reaching down the Shoulders
and Breast, even to the Navil; exceeding dreadful to look upon, and resembling
the Gorgons Head.

XIII. These Locks they never suffer to be cut, nor at any time to be parted,
or severed with a Comb: for that they believe, (and for ought I know, truly
enough) this matted Hair prevents the most grievous Diseases of the Head; as
Headaches, Madness, Palsies, Apoplexies, etc. and that the combing or cutting
them, is altogether ominous and fatal.

XIV. So that some, d^ring their whole lives, do nourish and cherish them: that
possibly they may be preserved from all other dangerous and formidable
Diseases, which otherwise might threaten them.

XV. And a history he relates, of an old Woman, who having these Locks cut off,
died within the space of three days: yet, says he, a certain Countess who had
such a monstrous Head of Hair, would often cause it to be cut, even to the Neck.

XVI. Sennertus is of opinion, that this Disease is only somewhat that is
Critical as it were, arising from the expulsion of the vicious matter out of
the Body; and that the said Plica brings nothing of danger with it to the
diseased person, who has it all the days of his whole life, without any thing
of damage.

XVII. But that which most of all threatens danger, is, the vicious Humor,
which yet sticking fast in the Body, excites the before enumerated most grievous
Symptoms; all which cease, so soon as the matter is thrust forth unto the Hair.

XVIII. And that in such as are affected with this Disease to the height, the
Nails also, but chiefly of the Feet, and most of all in the Great-toes, become
rough, long, and black, like to a Goats-horn: which Sennertus observed himself
in a noble Lord, and that the very same had also happened to others.

XIX. The Causes. They cannot sufficiently be explained; yet they are thought
to arise from plenty of matter nourishing the Hair: now the said matter is
carried to the Hair, not in the form of Vapors, but mixed with the Blood it
self; which, as it is of all other parts; so it is likewise the nutriment of
the Hairs.

XX. And this in some measure appears from hence; because that if at any time
the Hair be shaved or cut, it yields Blood, but such a kind of Blood as is
hurtful to the Body: and by the bleeding of the Hairs, when cut or shaved, it
may well be conceived, that the malignity is conveyed to them by the Blood.

XXI. But Authors also say, that it is caused from a peculiar corruption of the
Place; nature of the Soil, Air, and Water: and therefore is properly an
Endemick Disease, as being mostly peculiar to some Regions, as Poland, etc.

XXII. The Prognostics. This Disease, if the matter be not fully and
continually thrust forth into the Hair, is dangerous enough: so that most
grievous Pains and Symptoms are excited, almost in all parts into which the
malign matter is dispersed.

XXIII. But if Nature, as it were critically, protrudes the matter only to the
Hair; then is the Patient altogether preserved from the other Symptoms and
Maladies: and many suchlike persons live very healthful all their lives long.

XXIV. If at any time these Locks are rashly cut off, it induces Blindness, and
sometimes many other cruel Diseases. A Soldier in Hungary having a Plica, being
taken Prisoner by the Turks, had all his Hair shaved off, and withal this
Plica, whereupon he became blind; but obtaining that his Hair might grow again,
he again recovered his sight.

XXV. If this malign Humor shall at length be all spent, (which not often
happens) then after some time these Plicae fall off of their own accords, and
the Party becomes well: if therefore it can be known or discerned, (which is a
thing difficult enough) when the said Humor is all spent, it may then be safe
enough, (and without the least ill Symptom succeeding) to cut off these Locks,
with the rest of the Hair.

XXVI. If it it be without Pain, there is hopes of a Cure; for so
excrementitious Humors are thrust forth into the Hairs, and the Faculties
become stronger. Otherwise, seeing the Causes are not perfectly known, no
perfect Cure can be expected: for the Disease seems to be a complication of the
Gout, Rheumatism, Cachexy, Hypochondriack Melancholy, and the Scurvy; joined
with a kind of Malignity.

XXVII. The Cure cannot be attempted by cutting off the Lock, or by keeping it
from Tangling: for then the party is pained, sick, or becomes blind, and as it
were at deaths-door; nor can have any ease, till it is either grown, or tangled
again.

XXVIII. Nor can it be attempted by Bleeding or Purging; for thereby it is made
so much the worse, and to rage so much the more: for that Purgation is not able
to overcome and master the noxious Humor, but to add torment to the Sick,
beyond imagination.

XXIX. In this case therefore, it will be good to follow Experience, as our
Guide: and rather to help forward the matter to the place where it is intended,
viz. to the Hair; which is well done by a Lotion made of Bears-breech, which is
very available and successful.

XXX. Some have been cured by often bathing, and manifold Fomentation, wherein
Bears-breech aforesaid has been decocted; viz. the dried leaves, in such a
quantity of Water, that the Decoction may be of a yellow, not of a purple
color; which decoction has also been drank inwardly, after it has been
fermented with sour Leaven, and the dried Herb infused also in the same.

XXXI. If this prevails not, you must keep the Body soluble, by cooling and
moistning Clysters, and frequently give Alexipharmaca, such as are exhibited in
the Scurvy and Gout: Sudorificks also, now and then to be used, are good;
because they help Nature, in expelling the matter to the place appointed.

XXXII. But whereas the Purges used by the Ancients, prevailed nothing in this
case; yet those that are more spirituous, I have known to do good: and by the
taking of this Tincture following, every other day for a hundred days together,
I once knew a stubborn Plica cured.

XXXIII. Choice Sena x. powder of Jallap iv. infuse all in S.V. lbviij. for
thirty days: of all which give every other, or third day, three or four
spoonfuls. If you make the Tincture in Aniseed-water, it will be yet better.

XXXIV. And I knew a certain Emperick, one Moret, to cure another by Fluxing
with the Pilulae Mercuriales Herculis Saxoniae; he having first for some time
used the Fomentation of the aforesaid Decoction of Bears-breech, and caused it
also to be drank as ordinary Drink; at last he cut off the Lock, and the
Patient remained well.

XXXV. But after all that these great men have said, other Methods may be
attempted; and that with probable success: for since the Blood and Lympha are
corrupted with a malign impurity, (as they are also in the Lues Venerea) it is
possible, that they being purified, the Patient may return to his pristin
health.

XXXVI. Now that this may be accomplished, it is necessary that the whole mass
of Blood and Lympha should be changed, or made new, and the mass or substance
of the Flesh sweetened: that this may be done in a right Method, nothing seems
to me so fit, as a just and regular Salivation, extended to a due length of
time: which may be done with Arcanum Corallinum, Aurum Vitae, Turpethum
Minerale, the Princes Powder, White Precipitate; and other things of like
nature.

XXXVII. And the same course ought to be taken in the Salivation exactly, as is
taken in Curing the Lues: if it be recent, it may be ended in about fourteen
days; but if it be inveterate or old, it will require at least a Salivation of
thirty days: but let it be gentle, and regular, and increased to a height as
you see convenient.

XXXVIII. I have seen several sick of this Distemper, but never had more than
one Patient under Cure; which I happily performed by a gentle Flux of thirty
days, raised with Arcanum Corallinum; at the end of which, I purged him with my
Family-Pills three times, and gave him for six weeks together the usual
Diet-Drink of Guajacum and Sarsa; to which Burdock-roots were added.

XXXIX. And outwardly, I caused the Head to be alternately washed; first, with
the Water of the Griffin, and then with the Decoction of Coloquintida: and this
washing was continued twice a day, for the space of twenty days: but the
Washing began not till toward the end of the Salivation; and it was always
done with the Liquor very warm, and the Head dried after it.

XL. During his Salivation, and taking the Diet-drink, with the external
Washings, his Hair began mightily to fall off; and I believe the Lock would in
a few weeks more have fallen off also; for several of the Hairs of the Lock being
fallen out from their rooting, hung with their rooted ends loose: but the Man
being impatient, caused it to be cut off, which bled not in the least, nor was
any ways moist: and it was done without the least injury or prejudice to the
person, and he constantly remained well after it.

CHAP. IX. Of LOVSINESS.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...), (a (...), Pediculis scateo, Pediculari Morbo
laboro; a (...), Pediculus;) in Latin, Pthiriasis, Pedicularis Morbus; in
English, Lousiness, or the Lousie-Evil.

II. This is a very strange Disease, yet happening both to old and young, as
the generating matter may be predominant: but the nastiness, and the trouble of
it exceeds all: for let one of the persons thus afflicted, be cleansed from all
the Lice which are visible, be washed clean in a Bath of Water, the Head combed
as clean as may be, and then dressed with fresh clean Linen, and fresh Clothes;
yet in an hour after they will be as lousie as if nothing had been done to
them; and you may find a thousand Lice presently about them, the fresh Linen
and Clothing being as much defiled with the Lice, as the last they lately put
off.

III. The Cause. Authors seem not agreed about the Cause: some will have it
from Pus, or simple Patrifaction alone; but then as Sennertus says, Ulcers
should rather breed Lice than any thing else; which yet we see they do not:
wherefore something more than Patrifaction, must be ascribed to the Cause.

IV. Aristotle, Histor. Animal. lib. 5. cap. 31. says, Quod fiant ex Carne,
cum multa Humiditas in ea abundat; and cum emersuri sunt, fiant Pustulae
quaedam sine Pure, exiguae; quae si pungantur, Pediculi exeant. Quo loco per
Carnem, Cutem intelligit Aristoteles; ut ex Galeno patet, de Simp. Med. Fac.
lib. 5. cap 4. And this seems to be true; for in one of these kinds of
Patients, I was very curious for to find and see whence the Lice so immediately
came: and finding up and down in the Body several little Protuberances, I
opened several of them with a sharppointed Lancet, and with my Fingers I
squeezed out several Lice; out of some eight or ten Lice, out of others more;
and out of one of these Pustulae, I took forth twelve or thirteen Lice, some of
them well grown: so that from thence-forth, my wonder about their so immediate
increase, ceased.

V. From what has been said, the place of the Generation of Lice in this
Disease appears; viz. that it is the Skin: and partly the Matter, to wit, an
abounding Humidity; to which we must add, the Vis generans, vel Potestas
formativa; a Spirit, which reduces the Matter into Act or Form, and is peculiar
only in this case.

VI. I know, that for the ordinary Generation of Lice in the Head, or other
clean Bodies, it is ascribed to nastiness and filth, with a putrid moist Humor;
which by the heat of the Body, comes to be vivified: but this reaches not our
case, where the breeding of Lice is not accidental, or symptomatical, but
purely a Disease.

VII. Avicenna will have them to be bred from Humidity, with a moderate Heat,
and a gentle Putrefaction. Modern Physicians will have them to be bred of
Excrementitious or Preternatural Humors; so disposed, that being moderately
hot, they may be in act or power moist, and in a medium between thick and thin,
and a little putrified. Theophrastus, de Cause. Plantar. lib. 2. cap. 12.
Sanguinem materiam Pediculorum esse scribit: verum cum corruptum Sanguinem
intelligat, non aliud proculdubio accipit, quam Excrementitiam quandam
Sanguinis, and inprimis Pituitosi; aut Alimenti in tertia Coctione partem.

VIII. The Place. The chief habitation of Lice is in the Head; and sometimes
they breed in other parts of the Body, from nasty Clothing, and long wearing
them without change; where they generate from Nits, or Eggs, and mightily
multiply; but this is in the ordinary way of Production: but when they become
Morbifick, the Body is the chief seat of their habitation: unless they be
generated from the filthiness of a Plica, and then the Head is their native
home.

IX. The Prognostics. Where Lice are bred only from filthiness, nastiness,
want of combing the Hair, or change of Clothes or Linen, the trouble is more
than the danger: but if they are bred in the whole Body, from a Morbid
disposition, it is difficult to be cured; and if it be not timely enough
mastred, kills the Patient, by eating through into the Body.

X. The Cure. Internally, the putrid Humor which breeds Lice, is to be carried
off by Purging; reiterating it several times, at least twice a week: either
with our Family Pills, Pilulae Catharticae, Tinctura Purgans, or other proper
Medicaments.

XI. This done, convenient Sweating is to be promoted; either in Hartman' s
Chair, with Spirit of Wine, and proper Sudorificks; or in the Public Bagnio's:
and this to be repeated twice a week, or at least once in five days.

XII. Or the Patient may bathe in a Bathing-tub, in a Lie of due strength; made
either of Potashes; or Quicklime, in which Flowers of Sulphur have been a
pretty while boiled.

XII. Or they may bathe in a Lie made of Nettle-ashes, in which Wormwood, Rue,
Centory the less, Scordium, and Southernwood; the roots of Gentian, Elecampane,
Birthwort, and black Hellebor; the seeds of Stavesacre, and Lupins; the pulp of
Coloquintida, wild Cucumbers, and wild Gourds; flowers of Sulphur, and
Bulls-gall, have been boiled: and the Patient is to sit in it, as long as he
can conveniently without fainting.

XIV. And if possibly, and the convenience will serve, the Patient ought to go
into the Bath once a day, though it be but for one quarter of an hour: and if
they cannot endure the Bath, they ought to bathe the principal Parts affected,
which may easily be discerned by sight, with the aforementioned Decoction.

XV. After Bathing, they may be anointed all over with this Ointment. Oil olive
lbj ss. Sheeps-suet lbj. mix them by melting; then add flowers of Sulpur iv.
Bulls-gall, Stavesacre in powder, a. iij. meal of Lupins, white Agarick in
powder, a. ij ss. Wormwood in powder, Aloes in powder, Coloquintida in powder,
a. ij. mix, and make an Ointment; with which anoint morning and evening.

XVI. If you would have it stronger, you may add poude^r of white Hellebor iij.
to the former Composition: but then you must use it only to people of strong
constitutions.

XVII. If after these things have been used for some considerable time, and
there be no amendment, (for it is a very stubborn Disease) we must then come to
stronger Medicaments, and such as are made of Mercury: and truly, without the
use of Mercury, this Disease is not often overcome.

XVIII. First, (after due Purging) anoint the palms of the Hands and soles of
the Feet, as also the Joints, and Backbone, (but very gently, to avoid
Salivating) with Vnguentum Mercuriale: and this may be done every night going
to bed, for some few days.

XIX. Or the Sick may wear a Quick-silver-Girdle, as is usual in this case; by
which I have known several cured. You may kill the Quicksilver with Spittle, or
Turpentine mixed with a little Oil, and then mix it with a little Emplastrum
Album, and so spread it upon a Girdle; which is to be worn round the Waste, for
some considerable time.

XX. But if none of these things will do, (as in some I have known they will
not) you must apply your self to the last Remedy, which is Fluxing: and in this
case, because the Disease is external, and in the surface of the Body, it is
better to be performed by Unction, or rather by Fumigation; of which we have
spoken in other places.

CHAP. X. Of SCVRF and DANDRIF.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Furfures, Furfuratio, Porrigo; in
English, Scurf and Dandrif: but some make Porrigo to be a Scald-Head.

II. The Description. It is an Affect, in which, when there is any scratching,
or combing, a white, thin, scurfy substance, falls down off the Skin, not much
unlike to Bran; and that not only from the Head, but also sometimes from the
Skin of the Eyebrows and Beard too.

III. The Causes. The Causes of this Affect are, serous, thin Humors, or
Recrements of the Cutis; which exsuding through the Cuticula, dry thereupon, and
so cause this white sort of branny matter.

IV. These recrements of Humors may possibly proceed, not only from Phlegm, but
also from Choler, and Lympha, elevated unto the Head; and so give a continual
supply of matter to the continuation of the Disease, where it is once begun.

V. And these Recrements or Exhalations, seeking a passage through the Pores of
the Skin, the thinner parts of them are discussed or exhaled, whilst the more
thick and clammy parts stick upon the Skin, and about the Hair; drying into
that white, scaly-like substance.

VI. The antecedent or remote Causes are, all those things which may any ways
generate abundance of gross Humors; which are taken from the Diet, way and
manner of Living.

VII. The Prognostics. It is without danger, being much more troublesome than
hurtful: and is thought by some to be of healthful signification; for that the
Head and Brain are cleared of many of their superfluous recrements that way.

VII. Yet it is some kind of deformity, or rather defilement of the part; and
not very easy to be totally removed: for though it is taken away with the Comb,
yet it will return again, unless the Cause be first removed.

IX. The Cure. The vicious Humors, which abound in the Body, are to be
evacuated with Vniversals: or you may give once every fifth day a Dose of our
Pulvis Catharticus, or the Pulvis Cornachini: if the Patient cannot take
Medicines in that form, you may purge with Syrupus Catharticus, or with
Tinctura Purgans.

X. Then internal Alteratives are to be given; of which the Tinctura Antimonii,
or Potestates Viperarum, may be acaccounted chief: and the Spiritus Nitratus is
of great use, because it radically dissolves the viscous Phlegm and Humors,
which are in a great measure the cause hereof.

XI. As to Topics, discussive Medicines are to be applied; and sometimes
Discussives mixed with Astringents; that the Part affected may be thereby
strengthened, so as not so easily to admit of the Humor that flows thereto.

XII. Galen advises to wash with the decoction of Fenugreek, or the juice of
Beets, and Nitre: or it may be cleansed with decoction of Marshmallows mixed
with the meal of Lupins, Cicers, and Beans. Some use a Laver of Castil-Soap,
others wash with bitter Almonds, beaten.

XIII. If the Disease is confirmed, and will not easily yield to Remedies;
after Cleansing, as aforesaid, Friction is to be used with course Cloths, and
then the Head is to be anointed with the following Ointment.

XIV. Oil-olive lbj ss. pulp of Coloquintida iv. boil an hour, and press out
the Oil; to which add powder of Tobacco, Labdanum, (dissolved in Vinegar) a. ij
ss. mix, and make an Ointment.

XV. If the Patient loves not greasy things, you may make a Wash; by boiling
pulp of Coloquintida and Tobacco, in Water, or Lie; and washing therewith twice
a day.

XVI. If these things will not do, you must come to the last Remedy. Decoction
of Coloquintida lbj. in which dissolve white Vitriol iij. then add thereto
Bulls-gall lbj. Oil of bitter Almonds iij. powder of Tobacco x. flowers of
Sulphur vj. Ceruss iv. Nitre in fine powder ij. white Precipitate j. mix, and
make a Cataplasm.

CHAP. XI. Of a SCALD-HEAD.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Achores, Crusta Lactea, and Favus;
in English, a Scald-head.

II. The Cause. Galen, de Comp. Med. secund. loc. lib. 1. cap. 8. says, that
this Disease arises from sharp, serous, and excrementitious Humors: or rather,
it is generated of a mixed Humor, partly thin, partly thick, partly serous,
partly grumous, and biting; of a salt, acid quality.

III. And from hence it is, that the colors of the Ulcers are sometimes white,
sometimes yellow, sometimes red, sometimes blackish; but always salt and
biting, and causing a kind of itching: all which proceeds from the different
mixture of the Humors causing them.

IV. This Disease, in Infants, proceeds also many times from the putrid Humors
collected in the Mothers Womb, and the impurity of the Maternal Blood, with
which the Child in the Womb is nourished: and sometimes from the vicious Milk,
which the Child sucks from its Mother or Nurse.

V. The Differences. It is either dry and crusty, like a Scab; and then it is
called Crusta lactea, from its color: and this is either small, little, and of
no thick substance; and then it is called Tinea; or of a very thick and yellow
substance, and then it is properly Crusta, or the Dry-Scald.

VI. Or it is moist, running, and full of Matter; called Tubercula ulcerosa,
or, the moist and running Scald: and this is either Achores, Ulcerous Pustles,
out of which a glutinous, viscous matter continually issues, which creates a
very great Scabbiness: or Favi, wherein the substance of the Flesh and Skin is
hollow, like to a Honeycomb or Sponge; out of whose spungy holes a purulent
juice is seen continually to flow, which drying, becomes also a Scab; but by
reason of its continual weeping, is apt often to fall off, and become raw again.

VII. It is also either recent, or inveterate; and both these may either be
gentle, or malign: and they are accompanied either with a morphew-like Scab, or
a crusty Scab; and that afflicting either a part of the Head only, or the whole
Head together, sometimes with some of the adjacent parts.

VIII. The Prognostics. A Scald-Head in the beginning is not dangerous; but is
generally of very difficult cure.

IX. If it be inveterate, and stubborn, it is not cured without very much
trouble: and many times it degenerates into Tinea, or there follows it a
Defluvium, or Alopecia.

X. And if the matter which flows is very malign, it sometimes through its long
continuance pierces to the very Skull, and penetrates that also: and sometimes
it so corrupts the Cranium, that it is necessary to take it forth; whereby the
Meninges of the Brain are laid open, and made bare.

XI. All sorts of Scald-Heads are for the most part long in curing, and
rebellious Diseases; and often, when seemingly well, return again.

XII. The Cure. The Morbifick matter is first to be evacuated, with such things
as purge salt and serous Humors; and the matter of the Purgation is often to be
repeated^ for which purpose, after using Pills, Pouders, etc. it will be good
to prescribe a purging Diet-drink, which may keep the Body in a course of
Purging for some time.

XIII. But this Evacuation is best to be begun with an Emetick, as Infusion of
Crocus Metallorum, Tartar Emeticum, or Oxymel Scilliticum; proportioning the
Dose to the age and strength of the Patient, and to be twice or thrice repeated.

XIV. After which, Catharticks may be used: as, Our Family Pills, Pulvis
Cornachini, etc. and then this Diet: Sena vj. Mechoacan thin sliced iv. roots
of sharp-pointed Dock bruised lbj. Aniseeds, Juniper Berries bruised, a. iij.
Garden-scurvigrass lbj. Horseradish scraped iij. blew Currants lbj. crude
Antimony in powder, and tied up in a rag, lbj. mix, and make a Bag for four
Gallons of Ale. Dose, three quarters of a Pint, twice a day: but to Children
less, according to age and strength.

XV. Next we must come to the application of Topics: and first, the Part
affected must be well bathed, with a Decoction made of
Sharp-pointed-dock-roots, Pilewort-roots, (if to be had at that season)
Celandine, Wormwood, Fenugreek, Southernwood, and the like.

XVI. This done, anoint with Oil in which pulp of Coloquintida has been boiled;
or with this: Of the former Oil viij. Oil of Tartar per deliquium j. flowers of
Sulphur, Ceruss, a. ij. Verdigrise iij. mix, and make an Ointment; which apply
twice a day.

XVII. If the Disease is recent, and not stubborn, you may take up with weaker
Medicines, which may be strong enough; as this: Oil-olive iv. Ceruss, Tutty
levigated, a. j. Aloes, Myrrh, a. (in fine powder) ss. Saccharum Saturni j. Oil
of Tartar per deliquium ij. mix, and make an Ointment.

XVIII. Or thus: Juices of Celandine and Wormwood, a. iij. in which dissolve
Aloes ss. then add thereto Oil of Coloquintida ij. Ceruss, Litharge, a. j.
powder of Tobacco vj. Turpentine j ss. mix them.

XIX. But if the Disease is inveterate and stubborn, and will yield to none of
the former Remedies, you must then apply this following: Oil of Coloquintida,
juice of Tobacco, a. iv. Turpentine iij. mix them: and then add flowers of
Sulphur, powder of Tobacco, a. ij. powder of Round-birthwort-root, white
Precipitate, a. j. Verdigrise iij. mix them, and make an Ointment.

XX. Or this. Oil of Coloquintida iij ss. Turpentine j ss. powder of Tobacco,
Stavesacre, a. vj. powder of Round-birthwort-roots iij. white Hellebor ij.
burnt Alum, Vitriol, a. j. mix them: and carefully apply it.

XXI. Barbett commends this: Potashes, and make a Lixivium with Wine of an
indifferent sharpness; in a quart of which boil leaves of Marjoram,
Southernwod, a. M. ij. Maidenhair M. j ss. Rose-leaves M. j. with which make a
Fomentation. With this he professes to have cured this Disease alone. Where
note, that if you cannot get Potashes, you may use Salt of Tartar instead.

XXII. Now I suppose this Medicine is chiefly of use whilst the Disease is
recent, and after due purging, and taking the Infusion of Sena, or Juice of
Fumitory in Goats-whey.

XXIII. After the use of which things, the Cataplasm ad Porriginem, mentioned
in Our Doron Med. lib. 3. cap. 7. sect. 1. may be applied; which when it has
done its duty, Valentia Scabiosa, or some other Styptick Vulnerary, will be of
good use to consummate the Cure.

II. Defilements, or Vices of the SKIN.
CHAP. XII. Of SVN-BVRNING.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Adustio, vel Nigredo a Sole; in
English, Sun-burning, and Tanning.

II. It is known by sight, from the change of the color of the Skin, to a kind
of yellowness, blackish yellow, or tawniness.

III. The Cause, is from the heat, and direct shining of the Sun upon the Skin:
but if the Skin receives the Sunbeams by reflection, as from the Water,
Glasses, or the Sunshine upon the Earth, it is not then called Sun-burning,
but (...), Nigredo, Tanning.

IV. And thus from the different ways of receiving the Sunbeams, viz. either
directly, or by reflection, comes the species, to wit, Sun-burning and Tanning.

V. The Prognostics. A continual habit of being in the Sun and Wind, makes it
more durable; but if it be by accident now and then, it will go away of its own
accord.

VI. If it is old, and of long continuance, so that the Skin seems to be
weather-beaten, it will not be removed without Medicines.

VII. The Prevention. It is done by keeping the Hands and Face covered from the
Sun, or its reflection, by Gloves and Masks: or by anointing them with the
White of an Egg, beaten up with Damask-rose-water: or you may use the Mucilage
of Fleawort or Quince-seeds, made with Rose Water: or a Solution of
Gum-Tragacanth in the same.

VIII. Or anoint with an Emulsion of the Four greater Cold Seeds: or with Oil
of bitter Almonds, or Oil of Ben: or with this, Oil of Ben, Sheeps-suet, a. j.
Saccharum Saturni dissolved in Rose Water ss. Mucilage of Fleawort-seeds ij.
mix them.

IX. The Cure. Celsus, lib. 6. cap. 5. says, that the regarding these things,
so as to cure them, is a mere folly and foppery: yet, says he, it is a thing
almost impossible, to debar Women from the care of their Beauty, and the color
of their Skin and Faces.

X. And though Nature will, in process of time, change the Scarfskin, by causing
it to peel off of its own accord, and so restore the native color again; yet
Women will scarcely be persuaded to stay Natures time of doing the Business;
but in all haste have recourse to the help of Medicaments.

XI. For this purpose, many things are commended to us by Authors; we shall
here only excery some few and choice things, out of the farraginous heap which
Authors have brought together: and these are either Washes, Ointments, or
Cerates.

XII. For Washes: 1. A weak Lixivium of Salt of Tartar, or Potashes, is
commended. 2. Damask-rose-water lbj. juice of Limons ij, or iij. mix them. 3.
Lac Virginale: Roch-alum iv. Water lbij. boil to a third: then take Litharge in
powder lbss. best Wine-Vinegar lbj ss. boil again to lbj. and strain: mix both
the Liquors together, shaking them well. 4. Queen of Hungaries Watre, in which
a little Camphir is dissolved.

XIII. Ointments. 1. Vnguentum Album. 2. Populeon. 3. Cosmeticum: with which
anoint at night going to bed, and then wash the Face with the Virgins Milk the
next morning.

XIV. Cerates. 1. Ceratum Album. 2. Ceratum Oxylaeum. 3. Refrigerans: any of
which may be taken and laid on at night going to bed: instead of the Ointments,
for such as love not greasy Applications.

CHAP. XIII. Of FRECKLES.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Ephelides; and in English,
Freckles.

II. These come sometimes from the Heat of the Weather, sometimes from
Sun-burning, and sometimes are occasioned by Women's Breeding of Children; and
come upon the Face and Hands, especially in Spring and Summer, and chiefly in
such as have very thin Skins; which about Wintertime disappear again.

III. The Signs. They are known by their form, being of a dusky liver-colour,
and as big as fleabites; often disfiguring the whole face, and sometimes the
Hands alfo.

IV. The Differences. They differ from Lentigines in these things: 1. They are
much less than they. 2. They come at the season of the year, and go away again
of their own accords in Winter; or if they be in a Woman with Child, when she
is delivered.

V. The Cause. It is either external, from the Air: or internal, from
fuliginous Vapors, sent from the Lympha and Blood, and there stopped in their
passage by the gluten of the Cuticula.

VI. But Celsus, lib. 6. cap. 5. has another kind of Ephelides; quae nihil
sunt, nisi asperitates quaedam, and durities mali coloris: they are (says he)
rough and hard Eruptions, of an evil color; i.e. rough, brown Tubercles or
Eruptions in the Skin, (which agrees not with the above-described Ephelides:)
and these come upon Women with Child, viz. on their Foreheads, Temples, or
Cheeks, many times as large as an handbredth.

VII. The Cause. These commonly arise from the suppression of the Terms; and in
Virgins, sometimes from eating of Beets.

VIII. The Prognostics. They are seldom cured, till the Woman is delivered:
and if perchance they by Medicines are taken away, yet they commonly return
again: after Delivery, they for the most part vanish of their own accord.

IX. These Childbearing Ephelides of Celsus, are cured by a Pap made of the
powder of Bay Berries and Mushroom-water, being often smeared on in a Bath, or
the juice of Bugloss-roots.

X. There are commended also, Oils of Elder, of bitter Almonds, and Oil of Ben;
Oil of Tartar per deliquium being mixed with them: Baths of Bean and Orobus
meal, with Camphir: to which add, Almond-milk mixed with juice of Limons,
Butter-milk, Asses-milk, and suchlike.

XI. But the depraved Humars, which are the antecedent and internal Cause of
this Affect, ought to be evacuated, in whatsoever Women it happens, who are not
with Child: it sometimes affecting Women who have a preternatural stoppage of
their Terms:) but where impregnation is, there we ought to content our selves
only with Topical Remedies.

XII. The Cure of the other sorts of Ephelides, which are properly Freckles, is
hardly worth the attempting: fince at the season of the year they go away of
their own accord: yet, if you please, the following things may be applied.

XIII. Wash the Face with juice of Beets, mixed with good Vinegar; or with
Juice expressed out of Bugloss-roots: also with an Emulsion of bitter Almonds,
mixed with meals of bitter Orobus, Barley, Beans, etc.

XIV. If these things do not, besmear the Face every night going to bed, with
Bulls-gall: or with a Tincture of Bulls-gall, drawn with Spirit of Wine.

XV. Lastly, you may wash with a Decoction of Coloquintida; or with the juice
of Limons, in which flowers of Sulphur and Saccharum Saturni have been for some
time digested.

CHAP. XIV. Of LENTILS, or Fixed FRECKLES.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Lentigines, and Lenticulae; in
English, Large fixed Freckles.

II. The Place. They generally affect the Face, Hands, and Arms: but some
people are all over freckled from Head to Foot; and in such they are generally
as big as Lentils, or Tares, from whence the Name is derived.

III. The Causes. Authors will have their original to be, from adust Blood
fixing in the Scarfskin: or from Choler abounding in ruddy Bodies.

IV. I am of opinion, that they arise from a depraved Lympha, or nutritious
Juice, ordained for the nourishment of the Skin and small Hairs; which being
brought to the Pores of the Skin, drys, and fixes there, causing these Spots.

V. The Signs. These Freckles are known by sight; being duskie, brown Spots:
some as big as flea-bitings, some bigger, and some as big as Lentils or Tares
and almost of the color of Tares too.

VI. They appear mostly in those places exposed to the ambient Air; as the
Face, Neck, Hands, and superior part of the Thorax; where the Air drys, and
fixes those adust Vapors in the Skin; being dispersed up and down in many drops
as it were, standing sometimes close and thick together, and sometimes
scattered far asunder, here and there.

VII. The Prognostics. They are only a deformity: and though these Lentigines
are said to be fixed, and remain the year thro'-out; yet notwithstanding in
some Bodies many of them will vanish in the Winter, and return again in Spring
and Summer: but where they have been of long standing, no season of the year
will in the least alter them.

VIII. The Cure. It is performed, by rectifying the Lympha by due Sweating; for
which purpose, proper Sudorificks are to be administered: and then we are to
come to the use of Topics, which are either Washes, Oils, Ointments, Cerates,
or Cataplasms.

IX. For Washes, those may be used mentioned in the two former Chapters; to
which you may add, Elder-flower, and Bean-flower-water distilled with Milk; to
which a little Camphir may be added, dissolved in Spirit of Wine.

X. Wheat or Rye Bread, moisten it well with Goats-milk, and distill a Water
therefrom, in B.M. to which add a third part of juice of Limons, or
Lime-juice, and rectified Spirit of Wine, in which a little Camphir is
dissolved. Queen of Hungaries Water viij. Limejuice, or juice of Limons iij.
Camphir iij. mix them for a Wash.

XI. But where the Skin is very thick, and ill-coloured, and in such condition,
as that none of the former things will do any good; you must then come to the
use of the following Wash: Litharge iv. Wine-vinegar lbiij. boil till a quart
only remains: then take Salt-gem ss. Water lbiv. mix, and dissolve by boiling:
filter the former Vinegar, and mix it with this Water: with which wash the Face
morning and evening.

XII. Afterward you may wash with the Aqua Mercurialis, and complete the work;
which is the most absolute Wash in the World.

XIII. Oils. Where the Skin is very much deformed, you may use this. Oil of
Coloquintida, Bulls-gall, a. ij. mix them: with which anoint the Face at night
going to bed. Oleum Refrigerans is also of good use.

XIV. Honey iv. Oil of Ben ij. Oil of Tartar per deliquium ss. Borax, Nitre,
each in fine powder, a. iij. mix them.

XV. If these things do nothing, you must use the Oleum Cosmeticum; which may
be accounted in the number of the best things among the Olls. Where note, that
the application of Oils is always at night going to bed, the use of Washes in
the morning chiefly, and in the day time.

XVI. Ointments. Where they have been of short standing, Unguentum Album
Nostrum will do the feat alone, if used for some time: Ointment also of green
Tobacco is excellent in this case; and Vnguentum Populeon has been proved very
effectual.

XVII. Or this: Oil of Myrrh per deliquium, Oil of Eggs, a. ij. Oil of Tartar
per deliquium ij. Sheeps-suet j. Gersa, or Fecula of Aron-roots, Borax in fine
powder, a. vj. mix them.

XVIII. Another. Oil of Myrrh, Oil of Ben, Oil of Coloquintida, a. j.
Sheeps-suet vj. Oil of Tartar per deliquium ij. melt, and mix: to which add
Gersa, or Fecula of Solomons-seal and Pilewort-roots, a. vj. Saccharum Saturni
iij. mix them.

XIX. If these things will not do, you must come to the use of the Unguentum
Mercuriale, which must be applied with due care and caution: or rather, to the
Vnguentum Cosmeticum; which being used for some time, very rarely go without
their defired effects.

XX. Cerates. The Cerates also mentioned in Chapt. XII. Sect. 14. may be of
good use here: Ceratum Viride has been approved: but if these things do not,
you may both with safety and success apply the Ceratum ad Tophos.

XXI. Cataplasms. A Cataplasm made of the greater Housleek-leaves, by taking
off, and casting away the outward skin of the inner, or hollow side of the
leaf; and then laying them on leaf by leaf on the surface of the Skin; and so
binding them on with Bandage, or a sticking Emplaster: renewing the Application
every seven or eight hours, and continuing the use thereof for five or six days
and nights; is said to take away Freckles, how fixed soever they may be.

XXII. This is certain, and I speak it by Experience, this application of green
Housleek, as it is very safe, so it is truly more efficacious than any, or all
the aforementioned Medicines, put them all together: and it will besides, make
an ill-coloured Skin purely white; and render that which was before thick and
hard, thin, and very soft; like to the Skin of a Child five years old.

XXIII. But however, if after all this, these Lentigines should be so eminent
and fixed, that none of the afore-enumerated Medicines should do any thing in
the matter; you must then come to taking off the Scarf-skin: which though it may
be done, and that safely too, with the common Vesicatory of the Shops, yet is
not so convenient in this case.

XXIV. That which most effectually does, and with as much ease as may be, is a
Plaster of soft Soap, (commonly called Crown-Soap) spread thinly upon a piece
of linen Cloth, and laid over the whole Face or Skin for twenty-four hours: it
separates the Cuticula, and in a short time takes it completely off: so that it
being spread abroad on a Cloth or piece of Paper, you may see all the Freckles
upon it, and taken off with it.

XXV. This, if the Freckles be not deep, does the work at one application; but
if they lie under the Cuticula, you must repeat the Operation once more; which
never fails to answer the desired end: the Plaster being removed, the Part is
to be healed (though it is not positively raw) with Oil, made by boiling Cream,
bruised Housleek, a. lbij. together over a gentle Fire, till the Oil separates:
this Oil heals, takes away the inflammation and redness, making the Skin soft
and white.

CHAP. XV. Of MOTHER-SPOTS.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Naevus Maternus, Macula
Maternalis; in English, the Mother-Spot.

II. They are contracted in the Mothers Womb; and thereupon they are called
Maternal: but of different colors and shapes, and in different parts of the
Body.

III. The Causes. They arise from the Fancy and Imagination of the Mother: and
it is manifest enough, that Infants have now and then, certain spots, marks, or
extuberances, resembling Rasberries, Strawberries, Mulberries, Cherries, Plums,
Grapes, Hogs-ears, red Wine, etc. from the Mothers seeing those things, and
longing for the same; or being surprised with any suchlike thing falling upon
her, or striking her on the sudden: whereupon the Child is generally marked in
the same part of the Body, with the resemblance of the matter so surprising.

IV. The Signs. They are known by sight, being from the birth: and if they be
occasioned by Fruits or Flowers of any kind, at the time of the year when those
things are ripe, or in season, they will more eminently appear and show
themselves; seeming as it were to revive, spring, and flourish again.

V. The Prognostics. They are very hard to cure, and very seldom cured: and
though they seem sometimes to be a little obscured, or as it were to vanish; yet
they soon break forth again, as if the place were raw.

VI. However, Authors are of opinion, that if Medicaments be applied
immediately, upon the Birth of the Child, they may be sometimes taken away.

VII. The Cure. Some anoint them with the Blood of the Secundine, rubbing them
well therewith while it is hot; others anoint them with Menstrual Blood: some
daily bathe them with Spittle often in the daytime, but chiefly with
Fasting-spittle: others foment them with the Mothers Breast-milk warm.

VIII. But the only thing that can do any good by topical applications, is the
greater Housleek, applied exactly as directed in the former Chapter; continuing
the use thereof for at least five or six weeks, or till you see the deformity
to vanish, and manifestly go away. A Cataplasm of Purslain long applied, is
profitable.

IX. If none of these things do, you must come to Excoriation, by Manual
Operation; cutting off the Scarf-skin, or otherwise apply Caustic Medicaments;
after which, the Eschar being fallen or removed, it must be cured after the
manner of some other simple Wound or Ulcer.

CHAP. XVI. Of RED COMB.
I. IT appears not that it was known to the Greeks; but in Latin it is called
Macula volatica Infantium; and in English, Red Scurf, Red Comb, or Red Gum.

II. This Affect consists of certain flitting Spots of a red or purple color,
with some little kind of roughness; creeping up and down here and there in the
Skin.

III. And, for the most part, it infests all the Skin in one night; putting a
strange kind of disguise (as it were) upon the Infant.

IV. The Prognostics. If they creep so, as to touch upon any Orifice, (as
suppose the Mouth, Nostrils, Eyes, Ears, etc.) and penetrates so far, as that
they reach unto them, the Affect is then said to be mortal.

V. The Cure. Sudorificks ought to be given inwardly to the Child, made of
Bezoar-mineral: Our Theriaca Chymica, given in a due proportion, according to
the age and strength of the Child, and such other like Medicaments as are used
in an Erysipelas; that by expulsion the matter may be driven from the Heart.

VI. For Topics, the Orifices are often to be washed with this:
Damask-rose-water ij. Tincture of Saffron ij. mix them: and the Spots all over
may be washed with the same, save toward the Feet; that so the Spots may go off
that way.

VII. After they have been some time washed with the former, you may anoint
them all over with Oil of Myrrh per deliquium: or with this; Oil of Ben iij.
Camphir j. mix, and dissolve.

VIII. Others anoint them with the Blood of the Afterbirth, or with the Blood
of a Cat; and some with Bulls-blood after baiting: but Ox-gall, mixed with
Spirit of Wine, is inferior to none of them.

IX. The Disease being over, and the Spots gone, you may cleanse the Skin, by
washing it often with Lac Virgineum.

X. And lastly, the remaining Recrements may be purged off with Manna, or a
gentle Infusion of Sena, or Sal mirabile; or what may best agree with the
Child's body, according to the judgment of the Physician.

CHAP. XVII. Of LIVER-SPOTS.
I. THIS is an Affect unknown to the Greeks; and called in Latin, Maculae
Hepaticae in English, Liver-spots: not so much for their proceeding from any
cause of the Liver, as for their color sake; being mostly of a dusky
liver-colour.

II. The Description. They begin first of all somewhat yellowish, and
afterward become brownish; or somewhat blackish, and as broad as the palm of
the Hand; seizing upon the Breast, Back, Neck, Brawny parts of the Arms, Thighs,
Legs, and Groins; covering sometimes even the whole Breast, with a slight
roughness of the Skin, which comes off in a kind of branny Scurf; not confined
to one place alone, but dispersed up and down, and sometimes in several parts
together; one while vanishing away, and then breaking out, and appearing again.

III. And Platerus seems to make mention of them, when he writes, that there
are certain dark-brownish, and dun Spots, as broad as the palm of the Hand;
arising sometimes in some certain parts of the Body, and at some certain times
only, and again vanishing away at some certain seasons.

IV. The Causes. It is thought, that a dry and Melancholy Humor, protruded unto
the Skin with its nutriment, is one of the Causes thereof: as also Blood and
Lympha, which are feculent, full of dregs, and very thick; which when it cannot
be all assimulated, the Excrementitious parts are thrust forth into the Skin.

V. Some will have the Cause to be derived from the Liver, (whence they will
have the Name:) others from the Spleen, which they will not allow to be free
from fault: but in my opinion, these are too remote things to be the Causes of
this Affect.

VI. The true Cause seems to be, an evil Habit of Body, meeting with some
external Accident; which has disposed the Matter to make its appearance in the
affected place.

VII. The Prognostics. There is little or no danger in these Affects: nor are
they any kind of trouble, or visible deformity; happening mostly in those
places which are covered with Clothes.

VIII. Yet, in regard to the Cause upon which they are said to depend, they
commonly forerun the approach of Tertian and Quartan Fevers.

IX. And although they may easily be taken away, yet unless the fault of the
Blood and Lympha be removed, and the evil Habit of the Body be altered, they
will again return in a little time after.

X. The Cure. It consists, 1. In evacuating of the vicious Humors, or
Recrements, causing this Affect. 2. In altering the Constitution or Habit of
the Body breeding the same. 3. In the application of proper Topics.

XI. The evacuating of the Humors offending, is performed by Vniversals, given
according to Art: or the Patient may purge with Sena, Rhubarb, Jallap,
Mechoacan, Polypody, Succory, Fumitory, Borrage, Spleenwort, Dodder, Agrimony,
Maidenhair, etc. which is several times to be repeated, as need requires.

XII. The altering of the Habit, is done by ordering and pursuing a good Diet:
abstaining from Baked meats, and all such meats as are of a thick, or ill
Juice, salt and sharp, breeding melancholy and fuliginous Vapors.

XIII. But Meats of good Juice are moderately to be eaten: as Kids-flesh,
Wether-goats, Mutton, Veal, Lamb, Pullets, Chickens, Larks, young Geese; Eggs,
Wheat, Barley, Rice, Maiz; ripe Fruits, as Apples, Pears, Cherries,
Strawberries, Plums, Prunes, Raisons, Almonds, Pistaches, etc. and whatever is
prepared by Boiling or Roasting, is not be overdone; but so, as a red Gravy or
Juice may plentifully flow, after cutting with the Knife.

XIV. For Meats over-roasted or boiled, want much of the good nourishment they
ought to have; dry the Body, deprave the Stomach, hurt the Digestion, breed
melancholy and adust Humors, cause an evil color of the Skin; making it look
brown, yellow, wan, blackish, or tawney; and introduces Old Age (at least in
appearance) even in Youthful years. And this is the reason that Frenchmen,
Portugueze, Jews, and some others, who eat their Meat so over-done, look older
at thirty, or thirty five; than such who have been accustomed from their
Infancy up, to eat it full, and springing out with its red Gravy, do at
seventy, seventy five, or eighty, etc.

XV. The application of proper Topics. First, Friction is to be used, with
course Cloths; after which, the Patient may enter into a Bath of warm Water, in
which Fenugreek, Mallows, Lilly-roots, and Potashes have been boiled; sitting
in it as long as it can conveniently be endured: taking at entrance into the
Bath, a Dose of Our Theriaca Chymica.

XVI. Coming out of the Bath, and the Body being dried, wash or bathe the
places stained, with White Wind, or Spirit of Wine, in which bruised
Mustard Seed has been forty eight hours infused. Or Mustard Seed,
White-lilly-roots, a. lbj. may be beaten up into a Pultise, and so applied upon
the place affected, and to be renewed twice a day.

XVII. Or a Cataplasm of bruised Mustard Seed, made up with Mithridate, may be
applied; and left to continue so long, till a kind of heat and pricking is felt
in the Part: then it is to be removed, and the place washed with warm Water;
and afterward anointed with the Oil made of Cream and Housleek.

XVIII. Or, Castil-soap thin sliced viij. meal of Beans and Lupins, a. ij.
crumbs of White-bread, Mustard Seed bruised, a. j. mix them; and with juice of
Sharp-pointed-dock make a Cataplasm, which apply.

XIX. After which, lay over the spotted places Housleek, the skin of the inner
side being first taken off: which either bind on, or lay over a sticking
Emplaster, and renew the Application, as long as need shall require.

XX. Or, you may apply a Cataplasm of Housleek and meal of Lupins: or, of
Housleek and Purslain, with Bean-meal: renewing it twice a day.

XXI. Lastly, they may be removed, by gently washing with Spiritus Vniversalis;
using it three or four times a day, and continuing its use for some days which
some say removes Sun-burnings, Tannings, Freekles, Lentils, other like
deformities.

III. Defilements, or Eruptions of the SKIN.
CHAP. XVIII. Of RED PIMPLES on the FACE.
I. IT is called by the Arabians, Albedsamen, Alguasen, and Albuttizaga; in
Greek, (...). in Latin, Gutta Rosacea, and Gutta Rosea; in English, Redness,
and Pimples on the Face.

II. The Description. It is a kind of rose-coloured Redness of the Face;
occasioned by a hot and fiery matter infesting the same. Or, it is a
Spotted-redness, or rather a Redness with Tubercles; with which the Cheeks,
Nose, and Face, are defiled and polluted, as it were with Rosy-drops.

III. And sometimes these Tubercles get a growth and increase, making the Face
unequal, and frightful to look upon: and sometimes the Nose, by the aggregation
of the morbifick matter, increases to an extraordinary magnitude and deformity.

IV. The Kinds. Nicholaus Florentinus makes three differences or degrees of
this Deformity. 1. There is sometimes present (says he) a preternatural
Redness, without any Pimples, Pustles, or Ulcers; which is absolutely called a
Red Face.

V. 2. And sometimes this Redness is accompanied with Pimples, Pustles, or
small Bunchings-out: and then it is called a Pimply, or Pustulous Redness.

VI. 3. And sometimes it has attending it, a small Ulcer or Ulcers, and Ulcers
with Pustles: and then it is called an Ulcerous Redness: and this last kind
seems very little to differ from Noli me tangere; of which we shall speak, Lib.
3. Cap. 32. following.

VII. This third kind, Authors thus describe, viz. That it begins in the Face,
especially above the Chin, near about the Mouth and Nose: and they think that
it resembles Noli me tangere, because it is rather irritated, than any ways
mitigated, though the most fit and proper Remedies be applied to it: and
whatsoever means almost are used, it more and more increases, by spreading
into, affecting, and eating (as it were) the sound parts.

VIII. The Causes. It is said to proceed of thick, salt, and inflamed Blood; so
made by bad Diet, excessive Drinking, Stoppage of the Terms, Hemorrhoids, etc.

IX. Sennertus will have this Blood to be generated through some default in the
Liver; which is easily carried to the Face, (as may be seen in Blushing:)
where, by reason of its grossness or thickness, it fixes; not being able (for
the same reason) to retire back again, nor yet easily to be discussed or
scattered: causing first a red Color in the Skin, and if it continues long,
generating red Pustles.

X. And though this Disease mostly affects such as are vehemently intemperate,
addicted to the Pot, and given over to Drunkenness and Debauching, whether with
Ale, Beer, Wine, or Brandy: yet it sometimes happens to others, the most
temperate in the World.

XI. And this must certainly be through a default, or something amiss in their
natural constitution and habit of Body.

XII. The Prognostics. It is very hardly cured; but much more difficultly, if
the Face be full of Pustles; and hardest of all, if it be accompanied with
Pustles and Exulcerations too.

XIII. If it be from the Birth, it is unremovable; and with great difficulty
cured, if it proceeds from the French-disease, or the Scurvy: and for the most
part, it accompanies the Patient that has it, all the days of his life.

XIV. The Cure. It is not absolutely to be cured, but by removing the internal
Cause, altering the quality of the Blood and Lympha, and helping what is amiss
in the Liver.

XV. For though the proximate or conjoined Cause may be dissipated in the Face,
yet by reason it will be reinforced with a new supply of the old matter, it
will in the like manner appear again.

XVI. And therefore there must be an alteration in the whole Habit of the Body:
the Blood and Lympha must be purified, and that with such things, as easily
entering into the mass of those Humors, may cool and sweeten them; and cause a
precipitation of the Morbifick Matter.

XVII. First, things must be given, which may open the Obstructions of the
Liver, which see in the third Edition of Our Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 5. cap.
23. sect. 17. to the end.

XVIII. Then let the Body be often purged, either with Our Family Pills,
Pilulae Catharticae, or Tinctura purgans: but that which exceeds all Purgers in
this case, is Sal Mirable; for that it not only actually enters into the mass
of Blood, and causes a precipitation of its Recrements, but also thoroughly
cools the same, and makes a perfect change in the Lymphatick-juice withal.

XIX. Then the Blood may be cooled, by often drinking Aqua Elementaria sweetened
with white Sugar; or taking Sal Nitrum Nitratum, or Sal Vitriolatum, or Spirit
of Sulphur, in due Dose; in some proper Vehicle.

XX. Spirit of Sulphur, or Nitrated or Vitriolated Salt may be given in
Poppy-water, or Infusion of the greater Housleek in fair Water, or rather in
Aqua Elementaria; and the use of it to be continued for some considerable time.

XXI. These things being done, we must now come to the use of Topics. The
Affect may be daily washed with juice of Limons, and afterward the pulp of the
Limon may be laid on, after the manner of a Cataplasm, every night.

XXII. It Is true, if the Face is exulcerated, this application will make it
smart vehemently: but it will be but for a little while; and the good it will
do, will make amends for all the pain the Sick may endure.

XXIII. Others commend this: Mastich, Camphir, Frankincense; a. Spirit of Wine
q.s. mix, and dissolve: with which let the Patient wash morning and evening,
for a quarter of a year.

XXIV. Or wash with a Lixivium of Colewort-ashes, and anoint with Vng. Nostr.
Alb. Populeon, or Cosmeticum: or with Oil of Wax mixed with Oil of Tartar per
deliquium, ana: or, with the Menstrual Blood of a Virgin.

XXV. But Oil of Toads is above all others most powerful, and only to be used,
when other things fail: with which, if the Face be anointed for certain days,
(once a day) the Wheals and Morphew will fall off, and the redness will vanish.

XXVI. Some commend the Blood of a Hare, to anoint with at night; and to wash
it off in the morning with Water of Mullein-flowers.

XXVII. Others wash with this. Alum vj. juice of Plantan, Sow-thistle, Sorrel,
a. xij. whites of ten Eggs: being all well beaten together, let them be
distilled in an Alembick; and keep the Water for use.

XXVIII. Some use Ointments: as the Ointment of Pilewort, made with May-butter;
or this, Ginger, Grains, a. ij. Sulphur vivum iij. Oil-olive, Sheeps-suet, a.
ss. mix, and make an Ointment: use it morning and night for fourteen days,
washing before you use it in the morning, with a Decoction of Wheat-bran.

XXIX. Or this: Mercurius dulcis, Saccharum Saturni, a. j. Camphir, Sulphur
vive, a. ss. Oil-olive, Sheeps-suet, a. j. mix, and anoint therewith: this is
without comparison.

XXX. Sennertus advises to these things following: Wheat-bread, macerate it in
Goats-milk, beat it with the whites of twenty Eggs; to which add Camphir j.
burnt Alum ij. mix, and distill.

XXXI. Or this: Litharge ss. Vinegar iv. boil to the third: in another Pot boil
Salt and Alum, a. ss. Frankincense j. Rose Water half a pint: mingle these
Liquors, strain, and keep the Mixture for use.

XXXII. Or this: Sulphur ij. Camphir, Salt, a. ss. Ceruss, Litharge of Silver,
a. ij. all being in powder, mix them with waters of Bean-flowers, Roses, white
Lillies, Solomons-seal, a. ij.

XXXIII. Or this: Camphir j. grind it in a Mortar with Oil of sweet Almonds
iij. then put to it Oleum Tartari per deliquium ij. yolks of two Eggs,
Saccharum Saturni ss. mix them well; and put thereto waters of Bean-flowers,
white Lillies, and Strawberries, a. ij.

XXXIV. Or this: Camphir, Litharge, burnt Alum, a. ss. white Vitriol,
Frankincense, a. j. Sulphur vive, j ss. being all in fine powder, mix them with
Rose Water and Bean-flower-water.

XXXV. Or you may every morning and evening, even three or four times a day, or
oftener, wash the places affected, with Lac Virgineum, and lay some of the
Faecula thereof upon each Pimple, letting it dry on; continuing this work for
fourteen, twenty, or more days.

XXXVI. And at night going to bed, lay all over the Face leaves of Housleek,
freed from their outward skin on that side which lies next to the Face;
repeating it often, for twenty or more days together. Or, in place hereof, lay a
Cataplasm of bruised Purslain; repeating it in like manner as the former.

XXXVII. These things will make the Skin pale, smooth, and soft; giving it a
youngness, with a pure and natural Whiteness, being used according to these
Directions.

CHAP. XIX. Of MORPHEW.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin Alphus, Morphaea; and in English,
Morphew or Scurf.

II. It is a Disease changing the color of the Skin, as it were with botches,
or patches of Morphew or Scurf, here and there scattered up and down, with a
kind of roughness, branniness, and deformity; and sometimes it creeps broader,
with some intermissions. Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 26.

III. It is twofold: either White, or Black.

IV. In the white Alphus, the Hairs retain their natural color. But Paulus
Aegineta, lib. 4. cap. 6. says, that in the white Alphus the Hairs are white,
and in the black Alphus, black.

V. In the black, ( which Celsus calls Melas) there are broad blackish Spots
(Scales as it were) here and there dispersed up and down throughout the Skin;
and when it becomes inveterate, the Hairs grow black.

VI. The Signs. These Alphi are easily known by sight; and the color, whether
white, black, or brown, is accompanied with a certain roughness, as it were
scurfy or scaly, dispersed in spots or patches.

VII. Both Alphi, in all things, (except the color) agree: and if the Skin be
pricked with a Needle, there issues forth Blood.

VIII. The Cause. The white springs from Phlegm, by default of the Liver: the
black, or the brown from Melancholy, by default of the Spleen.

IX. The Differences. Alphus differs from Leuca in this: that here the Skin
(and not the Flesh) is only affected: in Leuca, both Flesh and Skin are
vitiated.

X. The Prognostics. The white is easier cured than the black; and both are
easier cured than Leuce, although Leuce be but in beginning.

XI. And in general, see by how much the color recedes from the natural color
of the Body; by so much the more is the Distemper the harder to be cured.

XII. The Cure observes almost the same Method as the former; but you must use
milder Medicaments. First, foment the Part with Decoctum Cancri, (see Our
Pharm. Land. lib. 4. cap. 14. sect. 11.) or with this: Roots of Sorrel and wild
Cucumber, a. j. leaves of Celandine and Fumitory, a. M. j. boil them in Water
and Vinegar, ana: the Part being fomented, anoint with this following Unguent.

XIII. Juices of Celandine, Sorrel, Fumitory, Scabious, a. j ss. flowers of
Sulphur ij ss. Mustard Seed ground j. Oil of Ben q.s. make an Ointment.

XIV. In the black Alphus, first, let the Sick bathe with Baths made of Water,
in which flowers of Sulphur and Potashes have been boiled: then apply a
Cataplasm made of Mustard Seed, and Water or Vinegar; which let lie so long,
till there is perceived a mordication or biting.

XV. Or you may make a Cataplasm, of Mustard-seeds, Venice-Soap, and Water, and
apply it as the former: thus, Castil- Soap lbj. slice it, and dry it so, as to
make it into a kind of powder; and add thereto Bean-flower, and meal of Lupins,
a. iij. Mustard Seed j. crumbs of White-bread j ss. juice of Sorrel, q.s. mix,
and make a Cataplasm.

XVI. But be sure that the Diet be good; that the Blood be corrected and
amended; that the Sick abstains from all salt, acid, smoaky, dried, thick,
viscous, and clammy Meats; and that Frictions be used every morning, with
course Cloths; the Part being first anointed with Oil of bitter Almonds.

XVII. But if none of these things will do, and you find the Humor still to
flow out, and dry upon the Part; you must be forced to have recourse to
Vesicatories; which being once, twice, or thrice repeated, upon the very place
affected, will very much diminish the Humor, without the least hurt to the
Skin: and sometimes by this means alone the Affect is cured.

XVIII. But to complete the Cure, and put it past the danger of a relapse; let
the Parts affected be twice a day, or oftener, bathed with the Water of the
Griffin; or with the Aqua Divina Fernelii; or with Our Aqua Styptica, which
does wonders.

XIX. And at night going to bed, anoint with Oleum, vel Vng. Cosmeticum; and
where need requires, lay all over the Ceratum Spermatis Ceti, or the Emplastrum
Mercuriale, which perfects the work, without exception.

CHAP. XX. Of PROFOVND MORPHEW.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Leuca, and Vitiligo; and in
English, the Deep, Creeping, or Profound Morphew: and this is the Albaras alba
of the Arabians; being a continued Blot, piercing the Skin and Flesh.

II. It is a Disease changing both the color and substance, not only of the
Skin, but of the Flesh also.

III. The Signs. It is known by the Hairs falling off, and others growing in
their places like down: the Skin is flatter than in other places, and if pricked
with a Pin, a watery and white Liquor comes forth.

IV. And Galen, de Sympt. Cause. lib. 3. cap. 2. says, that the Flesh indeed as
yet remains; but notwithstanding its form is changed, and it becomes in a
certain mean, between Flesh that has Blood in it, and Flesh that is altogether
Bloodless: and then the Nutriment that is brought unto it, never so much as
attempts the converting it into red bloody Flesh; but rather into a Flesh like
that of Lobsters. But yet notwithstanding (says he) that the whole Flesh under
is not vitiated, but only in the superficies of the Body; where there are as it
were, certain Scales sticking close, and fixed.

V. It is caused of a Phlegmatic Blood, making the Flesh of a middle nature,
between those Animals which have Blood, and them that are Bloodless; making it
almost like to the Flesh of Oisters, and Lobsters.

VI. The Prognostics. It is without danger, but a very filthy and loathsome
Affect: if it be but small, and has some redness in it, it is curable: if it be
in the Hand or Foot, it is of difficult cure.

VII. If it wax not red when it is rubbed, and being pricked does not bleed; or
seizes upon, and possesses a large and spacious place; or is of long
continuance; or perpetually increases; i^ it is incurable.

VIII. The Cure consists, first in wasting and consuming the Humors; thereby to
hinder their afflux to the Skin, and to prevent the generating of new matter.

IX. Open the Pores, with the juices of Hysop, Peniroyal, Savory, Scabious,
Sharp-pointed-dock, Pellitory, Brook-lime, Watercresses or Scurvy Grass, mixed
with juice of Limons.

X. Then purge with Agarick, Mechoacan, Turbith, Colocynthis, and the like:
sometimes use Vomits, and sometimes Diuretics.

XI. Then administer Antidotes; as Tincture of Antimony, Our Theriaca Chymica,
or Our London-Treacle, or Powers of Sassafras, or Savin, to waste and consume
the cold and crude Humors.

XII. After this, come to Topics: where first let the place be well rubbed
with course, rough Cloths, to open the Pores; then apply such things as may
discuss, cleanse, and draw Blood to the part affected: seen is Dropax
confortans, (in Our Pharm. Land. lib. 5. cap. 5. sect. 15.) and things that
blister, and are as it were Causticks.

XIII. Such things are Mustard Seed, Rocket-seed, Treacle-mustard-seed, Nitre,
Euphorbium, Cantharides, Water-dragon-root, and the like.

XIV. These cleanse: as meal of Orobus and Lupins, Gentian, Beans, Figs, bitter
Almonds, Nightshade, Sulphur, Parietary, Wild-cucumber-root, Briony-root.

XV. You may apply Vesicatories; so long, till the Blisters are excited:
afterward, the Part being healed, you may for some considerable time apply a
Cataplasm made of Celandine-leaves alone, bruised, and so constantly applied
morning and night: or it may be made into a Cataplasm, with Castil-Soap and
Mustard Seed.

XVI. In doing all this, you must be constant in the exhibition of Sudorificks,
that the Blood may be stirred up, and sent to the external parts; and withal,
that those things be mixed with such other Medicaments as have a specific
virtue against the Disease, as Powder and Salt of Vipers; to which add the
Powers of Vipers, and Spiritus Nitratus, which resist the first Cause; and by
mixing with the Blood, dissolve the cold and coagulated Phlegm, in what part of
the Body soever they find it.

XVII. But, this Disease being one of the kinds, or rather the lowest species
of Lepra, we shall say no more of it in this place; but rather refer you to the
Cure of the Leprosy: for as much, as if it proves rebellious; the Cure must be
pursued wholly in that method.

CHAP. XXI. Of the BLACK SCAB.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Malum mortuum; in English, the
Black Scab, or, Dead Evil.

II. It is a certain kind of Scab; so called, because the Part appears black,
and as it were mortified.

III. Or, It is a kind of Scabies, which therewith gives a livid or black
color, with crusty Pustles; which are black, foul, dry, without any matter,
sense, or any great pain; and that chiefly in the Hips, Legs, and other fleshy
parts.

IV. The Cause. It is generally caused from a total stoppage of the Pores of
the Part affected, so that the least part of the Humor cannot perspire; which
then putrifies, corrupts, and becomes black, and as it were dead.

V. And this comes many times from a continual lying upon the Part for many
days; whereby the Natural Spirits being suffocated, the Skin and Flesh seems to
be deprived of life, and so indeed they are: for the Skin first dies, becomes
black, and as hard as the sole of a shoe; and after that, the Flesh also dies:
and all this without any extraordinary sense of Pain.

VI. I once saw a young Man, affected with this Disease upon both his Buttocks:
he was first taken with a Fever, which in some reasonable time went off; but
left him so weak, that he could not turn himself in his bed, but lay constantly
upon his back, for twenty days or more; having only a poor little weak Girl to
look after him.

VII. At length, a pious and industrious Matron hearing of his condition, went
to see him, and causing him to be turned upon his Belly, found all his Buttocks
black, full of little hard Pustles, and the Skin so hard, that she could not
easily cut it with a Knife: she first cut it round by the edge of the
blackness, and so took off the Skin, with some of the mortified Flesh sticking
to it: this work she did, without the Patient so much as feeling of it.

VIII. This done, and finding she was not yet come to the quick, or sensible
parts, she yet cut off more of the Flesh from both the Buttocks with a sharp
Knife, taking it off to the quick near the edges, but not in the middle.

IX. This done, she washed the Wound with fresh Urine, mixed with good Brandy,
and immediately after applied a large Cataplasm, made of green Tobacco-leaves,
shred and beaten up with Oil and Turpentine; with this she dressed it twice a
day, till such time as Nature casts off all the remaining dead Flesh, (which
was some pounds weight) and the part seemed very fresh and clear.

X. After this she dressed it daily with Ointment made of green Tobacco, being
boiled in Oil, strongly pressed out, and mixed with a third part of Turpentine:
and with this only Remedy she incarnated the Ulcer, and healed it in about five
weeks time; to the wonder of several Learned Men, who were spectators of the
Cure.

XI. And during the whole time of the Cure, she supported his Spirits with a
strong Bezoartick Cordial, and a good strengthening Diet: so that in a few weeks
after, the Patient became perfectly well, and grew to be as strong as ever.

XII. It has its original, from a Melancholy and Scorbutic juice; being a
Disease of long continuance, and very difficult to be cured.

XIII. It is cured as other Scabbiness, at Chap. 27. following, of this Book;
adding also Scorbutic Medicaments.

XIV. Let the Sick often use those Baths, or such like, specified in the place
afore-cited: and while he is in the Bath, give him a little of the Powers of
Angelica, mixed with Venice-Treacle: afterward let the place be anointed with
some proper Balsam or Ointment; as Aegyptiacum, Nicotianae, or the like.

XV. Every fourth or fifth day, be sure to purge with the Infusion of the best
Sena: and if the Disease be yet rebellious, you must have recourse to Our
Hercules, (designed for the rooting out of the French Disease) as the ultimate
Remedy.

CHAP. XXII. Of PIMPLES.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Vari; in English, Pimples.

II. The Description. They are little hard Extuberances on the skin of the
Face, made of a coagulated thick Juice; being about the bigness of Hemp Seed,
and sometimes longer, of a reddish color, and hard in the Flesh; and infesting
young People who are inclined to Venery, but yet chaste withal.

III. The Causes. These Tubercles are caused from a thick Juice; made partly of
Blood, partly of Lympha, and partly of Choler; gathered together in the Cutis,
and sent forth into the Cuticula.

IV. And by reason it is wanting in salt Serum, it is altogether without
itching, so that there is no need of any scratching: and the Humor causing
them, is said by some Authors to be for the most part Alimentary, insinuating
it self into the Pores of the Skin: but for my part, I cannot but believe it to
be mostly Excrementitious, mixed with Choleric Blood.

V. The Prognostics. They are without danger, only troublesome, causing a
little deformity: and therefore Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 6. says, it is a mere
folly to attempt the curing of them.

VI. If they have been of long standing, with great redness, and deep in the
Flesh, they will be difficult to cure, if not impossible; and if by strong
Medicines they should be removed, yet will the redness remain, and increase.

VII. If the Humor causing them be thick and gross, they will be firm and
stable; if the Humor be thin or excrementitious, they will yield a kind of
ichor or thin matter; and if they be suppurated, they degenerate into Ulcers.

VIII. They are cured with difficulty, if there be a deep redness in the Face,
with Pustles; especially if there be withal a bloat Face, and hoarsness of
Voice.

IX. The Cure. In order to the Cure, use the general Evacuations; or an
Infusion of Sena in Water, sharpened with Sal Tartari.

X. Then outwardly, Oils of Vitriol, Sulphur, or Tartar touched upon the places
in the evening, and washed off the next morning with Decoction of Bean-meal, or
Wheat-bran, are much commended.

XI. Emollients and Discussives are of good use here: as, Meal of Lupins and
Orobus, a. j ss. roots of Mallows peeled, and Flowerdeluce, a. ij. Salt
Armoniack j. with Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth make Troches, which at the time of
using may be dissolved in Milk.

XII. Or, Litharge iij. Turpentine iv. Oil, q.s. mix them.

XIII. If they be harder than ordinary, Black Soap ss. Ammoniacum,
Frankincense, a. j ss. dissolve in Water, to the thickness of a Cerate.

XIV. Or, Juice of Sharp-pointed-dock ij. Vinegar of Squills ss. Ammoniacum
dissolved in Vinegar ij. Borax j ss. Alum ss. mix them.

XV. Some have been cured by fomenting the Face with warm Water, to open the
Pores; and then anointing with Oil of Coloquintida, or Vnguentum Cosmeticum.

XVI. Others have been cured by often washing the Face with Lac Virgineum, and
repeating the Wash five or six times a day; letting it dry in every time, and
continuing the use thereof for six, eight, or ten weeks, more or less;
according to the stubbornness, or easiness of the Distemper.

XVII. Others have been cured by application of a Cataplasm of Purslain-leaves,
laid on every night: washing the Face the next day with the Lac Virgineum,
four, five, or six times in the daytime; letting it dry in.

XVIII. Others have cured by application of a Cataplasm of the greater
Housleek; or of the green leaves leaf by leaf laid on, taking off the skin of
that side which you lay next the Face: and so binding them to at night going to
bed, anointing the Face the next day with Oleum Refrigerans; and after five or
six hours washing it with this: Running-water lbj. juice of Limons viij. mix
them.

XIX. Lastly, some have been cured by application of a Vesicatory, all over the
place where the Affect is; and when healed up, repeating it again if need
requires; then anointing with this: Oil of Ben, Mutton-suet, a. vj. melt them
together; and add thereto Oil of Tartar per deliquium j. flowers of Sulphur v.
artificial Cinnabar ss. mix them.

CHAP. XXIII. Of GALLING.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Intertrigo; and in English, Galling.

II. The Cause. It is caused in Infants many times from the acrimony of the
Urine; or the Linen lying rough, or in heaps, and rubbing hard upon the
Scarf-skin, etc.

III. In Women it is many times caused from overflowing of the Whites; or a
preternatural Humor, hot and sharp, continually distilling from the Womb: and
if it be in their Arm-holes or Groins, it is from a superfluous and sharp
Moisture, with which the Glandules of those Parts are repleat.

IV. And in Men of ripe years, and also in Women, it many times happens in the
Seat, or between the Thighs, though the Patient sits still, and stirs not: and
this is not caused from any external Matter or Urine, or violent Exercise, as
much going, riding, etc. or rubbing any hard thing against the Part affected;
but purely from the repletion of the Parts with many salt and acrid Humors; so
sharp, as even to dissolve the Scarf-skin in some few hours time: though the
Patient is as quiet, still, and reposed, as may be.

V. The Signs. It is known by sight and feeling; the Cuticula or Scarf-skin
being worn, rubbed, or fretted off by some accident; or scalded by hot and
dripping Urine, or Whites, or dissolved by acrid Humors as aforesaid; the Part
is raw, and the Patient has sharp pains.

VI. The Prognostics. It is without danger, and for the most part easily
cured: if it has been (in elder persons) of many years standing; that is,
constantly to return at periodical times, for a long while, it will be much
more difficult to be cured; and if cured, (unless done with caution) it may
hazard the causing some worse Disease.

VII. The Cure. If it proceeds from a Diabetes, or a constant distilling down
of sharp Urine; you must first stop the preternatural flux of Urine by Our
Pulvis ad Diabeten; and cool the heat thereof, by giving some few Doses of Sal
Prunellae; applying in the mean season Topics.

VIII. If it proceeds from a long and constant course of the Whites, or other
sharp Humors distilling from the Womb; you can no ways cure it, but by curing
those Whites, or that preternatural running; the method of doing which, see in
its place.

IX. If it be from the repletion of any Part with superfluous and acrid Humors,
and it has been periodical for any considerable time; you must first evacuate
the Body with Pilulae Catharticae, Tinctura Purgans, or an Infusion of Sena and
Rhubarb, or with the Pulvis Cornachini, which is an excellent thing.

X. If the Stomach be foul, it ought to be cleansed once or twice by Vomiting:
and once a week, for two months together, the Patient ought to take a Purge;
and in the intervals of purging, to take such things as shall cool and sweeten
the Blood, Lympha, and other Humors.

XI. These things being said, we must now consider what Topical-Applications
are necessary. Children ought to be kept dry and sweet, and their Linen often
changed.

XII. The Parts galled ought to be first well washed and cleansed with Water,
and indeed fair Water will do; or Water in which a little Saccharum Saturni, or
Alum has been dissolved. Fair Water lbij. Saccha (...) Saturni, or Alum, ij.
mix, and dissolve.

XIII. The Affect being thus well washed, strew over the Part Pompholyx in fine
powder, or Ceruss washed and levigated, or fine Bole, in very fine powder.

XIV. But that which is inferior to no other, is Amylum, or white Starch in
soft powder, which answers all the external intentions of Cure, and heals in
twelve hours time. See the third Edition of Our Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 2.
cap. 26.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the SHINGLES.
I. THIS Disease is called in Greek, (...), a (...), Serpo; in Latin, Herpes
simplex, Formica; in English, the Shingles.

II. The Description. Shingles, are little Cholerick-pustles, pure, and unmixt
with other Humors; creeping upon the surface or skin of some part of the Body,
from place to place, broad, and after a circular manner; the middle parts
healing, while it breaks out farther afresh.

III. The Differences. A Herpes is threefold: 1. Simple, of which we treat in
this Chapter. 2. Miliaris, Ulcerous Pustles, breaking out like Millet-seed. 3.
Exedens, the Eating-herpes; which eats through, and devours the Skin, and
sometimes the Flesh too: but of these two latter, we shall treat in the third
Book following.

IV. The simple Herpes differs from Phlyctaenae, or blister-like Eruptions;
because they are generally Critical, and happen mostly in the Face, about the
Cheeks, Lips, or Chin; and foreshew the mending of the Patient; and may very
properly be called Critical-Shingles, or Shingles of the Lips: whereas what we
speak of in this Chapter, are rather Symptomatical than Critical, and always
happen in other parts of the Body.

V. It differs also from Psydracia; which though they be bladder-like Pustles,
yet they always happen in the Head: and by some are taken for one of the kinds
of Scalds.

VI. The Signs. It seems to creep like unto a Snake; and no sooner does one
part seem to be healed and well, but presently the Disease creeps unto the next
adjacent parts.

VII. The Causes. Authors will have it to arise from sincere and pure Choler,
severed and separated from the rest of the Humors; which by its thinness
pierces even to the Scarf-skin, and is diffused through it; making this
appearance in a small tumor, but less than in an Erysipelas.

VIII. Now this simple Herpes is manifest to the Senses; for it is a broad
tumor, which has little or no height in it: so that the Part is scarcely lifted
up at all, but may rather seem to be exasperated, than to swell up to any
height.

IX. There is also accompanying it a certain kind of hardness and pain; and as
it were a certain sense or feeling of Heat or Burning; purely occasioned from
the Choleric Humor.

X. The Prognostics. The Disease is accounted more or less troublesome,
difficult to be cured, and dangerous, accordingly as the Choler from which it
arises, is more or less predominant and offensive: and some say, that if they
encircle the whole Body, they are mortal.

XI. The Cure. The antecedent or remote Cause being yellow Choler and a salt
Humor, that is first to be purged out of the Body, by Cholagogues, as Rhubarb,
Aloes, Sena, Manna, Coloquintida, and the like; Our Pilulae Catharticae are
good in this case, as also an Infusion of Sena and Rheubarb, sweetened with
Manna. Now unless the Body be well purged, Authors are of opinion that the
Patient will never be cured, or made sound.

XII. If the Matter is extraordinary thin, ( as it is generally in a simple
Herpes) then Sudorificks ought to have their due administration: for which
purpose, Our Specific Anodyn is of good use, and Bezoar-mineral, given to j.
in some proper Vehicle.

XIII. If Phlegm, or serous Humors be mixed with the Choler, then such things
as purge Phlegm and Water must be mixed with the other Purgers; as Resin of
Jalap, mixed with a third part of Mercurius dulcis: and the Pills also of
Bontius are excellent in this case.

XIV. Next, we are to come to the use of Topics; where we are to use things
which gently cool the Part affected: and these have respect to the conjoined
Cause; for that they extinguish the extreme and intense heat of Choler, and
likewise repel and drive back moderately; such as are wont to be applied in an
Erysipelas.

XV. The Part affected may be cooled, by anointing it with the Oil of Cream and
Housleek; or with Vnguentum Populeon, or Oleum Refrigerans.

XVI. You may bathe them with a Lixivium of Beech-ashes; using after, either
Our Vnguentum Album, or applying upon them a Cataplasm of Housleek, Purslain,
or Garden-lettuce.

XVII. When they are broken, wash them often with Limewater, and dry them with
Saccharum Saturni dissolved in fair Water, or with Our Vnguentum Album.

XVIII. If the Heat will permit, you must use Digestion and Discussion, by
Bodies of a middle consistence: often to moisten them with ones Spittle is
admirable; and to anoint with Cats-blood, is said to be the certain Cure: nor
much inferior thereto is, Bulls, or Bullocks Blood, Sheeps-blood, with the
Blood of most other Animals.

XIX. The powder of Lapis Scissilis, mixed with Vinegar, is used with good
success: so also Vnguentum Populeon, mixed with Gunpowder.

XX. Lie made of Broom or Wood-ashes, mixed with Urine, is commended: or Powder
of Chalk mixed with Cream, and applied; the Part being first fomented with hot
red Wine, or Lees of the same: and if it is yet rebellious, the Part must then
be anointed with Vnguentum Fuscum Wurtzii.

CHAP. XXV. Of WILDFIRE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Phlyctaenae, Phluctides, Phlazacia,
Ignis sylvestris; and in English, Blisters, or Wildfire, or Shingles of the
Lips.

II. They are little Blisters raised in the skin of the Lips, Cheeks, or Chin,
by the sharpness of Humors; and are commonly called Wildfire.

III. The Cause. They are generally produced Critically, after an Ague, or
Fever, or taking some extraordinary Cold, upon the mending of the Patient: the
Disease seeming to break up, and go away by that means.

IV. And they arise from a serous and bilious Humor, which Nature sends forth
to the Skin by way of Crisis, or some external Cause.

V. Signs. They are known, because they are Blisters like those that proceed
from Scalding; and when they are broken, a yellowish Humor breaks forth.

VI. The Prognostics. They endure not long, seldom above two or three days.
They seldom happen to old people, more commonly to such as are young: if evilly
cured, they sometimes degenerate into Herpes.

VII. The Cure. First evacuate the peccant Humor; then foment with a Decoction
of Ducks-meat, Nightshade, or Purslain. Or apply an Epithem of strong Lie, made
of Beech-ashes, beat up with Linseed-oil, and Oil of Walnuts, ana, which use
often.

VIII. If they break not suddenly of their own accord, thereby causing grievous
pain, prick them with a Needle, squeeze them hard, and anoint them with Oil of
Cream and Housleek, or Our Oleum Refrigerans, or Our Vnguentum Album, till they
are completely dried up.

An Appendix, concerning the Pustules of the Head.
IX. This Disease is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Psydracia; and in
English, Pustules of the Head. We have placed this Disease here, because it
seems to be a kind of Critical Eruption like Phlyctaenae, the Part only
differing.

X. Some will have this Disease to be a species of a Scald-Head, (because this
kind of Pustule, always when it appears, afflicts only the Head) and describe
them to be hard, whitish Pustules, which by pressing yield matter.

XI. Others, that they are little Swellings in the Head, like Pushes; or small
Efflorescencies or Pustules, like unto Bladders; made and spread up and down
upon the surface of the skin of the Head.

XII. The Cause. They proceed from a salt and nitrous Humor, mixed with Blood
and Choler; and are one of the kinds of Scalds happening to the Head.

XIII. The Signs are evident, by the Definition; nor does this Disease threaten
any danger at all.

XIV. The Cure. It is cured by these Applications, or such like: Litharge,
Ceruss, a. ss. Alum, green leaves of Rue, a. ij. beat them well, and mix them
with Vinegar and Oil; with which anoint.

XV. Or, Rue, Alum, ana; beat them well with Honey, and apply them to the
Affect. Or you may foment the Part first with red Wine, and then anoint with
Our Vnguentum Album; which is a thing of good use, and will in short time
perfect the Cure.

CHAP. XXVI. Of WORMS in the SKIN.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Vermiculi Cutis, Vermiculi
Pellicei; in English, Worms of the Skin, or, Skin-Worms.

II. The Signs. They are known by sight, being small extuberances in the Skin;
some as big as Millet-seed, some as great Pins-heads, and some as small
Pins-heads; with sometimes a small black speck in the very middle or top of
them, being otherwise of the color of the Skin.

III. But if they exceed the former bigness, then they have a kind of
discolored redness, lie deep in the Flesh; making a little kind of hard
painful Tumor, if hard touched upon.

IV. The Place. They are found in many parts of the Body; but that which they
chiefly offend is the Face, and in the Face they chiefly seat themselves in the
Nose and Forehead, next on the Chin, and sometimes on the Cheeks also; and some
you may see whose whole Face is defiled with them, and as full as they can well
be, one by another.

V. The Causes. In some Women they are caused from a preternatural obstruction
of the Terms, or of the Hemorrhoids, in such where they used to flow; or a
stoppage of the Whites, or other Fluxes of the Womb, before due cleansing.

VI. The procatartick or remote Cause, is many times from surfeiting, or eating
vast quantities of Sugar, or of salt Pickles. I knew a young Lady of good
features and proportion, who for a long time had eaten great quantities of fine
Sugar; and thereby became so full of these Worms, especially in her Face, that
thousands of them might have been seen thereon at once, some small, and some
great, being deep in the Flesh, with hard tumors.

VII. I knew another young Woman, who being unsatiable in eating pickled
Cucumbers, pickled Barberries, and the like, (some bushels of them in a years
time, as her relations told me, for her own part) had a Face so full of them,
that no more could well come between; so that some thousands might be seen upon
her Forehead at once.

VIII. And another I saw, who had her Face in like manner defiled with this
sort of Vermin; which came upon her gradually, after a Surfeit, which she took
by eating Fish.

IX. The antecedent or internal Cause, is the corruption of the Humors or
Juices, principally the Blood and Lympha; which being made salt and acid, send
forth putrid recrements of that kind to the Skin, where being vivified, they
are turned into Worms.

X. The Prognostics. There is nothing of danger in this Disease, but only
deformity; which the curious, especially those of the female sex, are very
desirous to remove.

XI. They are difficult to be removed, though recent, or not of long standing:
and though they may be squeezed out between ones finger and nails, yet they will
return again, even as it were double.

XII. If they continue long, they cause great deformities; and sometimes the
Face seems to be spotted up and down with them, as with clusters of Pimples.

XIII. As often as they come out, they will go away again of their own accords,
(without nipping out;) but sometimes it is a longer time, and sometimes it is
shorter, according to the magnitude of the Worm; and then others come forth
again in the places of the former, and rather multiplied in number: thus
continually dying and increasing again, as long as the Patient lives, unless
removed by Art.

XIV. In some people naturally of good habits of Body, the antecedent Cause is
(in length of time) lost, or goes away of its own accord; Nature having expelled
the recrements of the Juices to the superficies of the Flesh and Skin, where it
seats it self, and fixes; and so becomes the proximate or conjoined Cause,
where it does as it were seminate, and there becomes the perpetual cause of the
Disease, and the very root of the Defilement.

XV. The Cure. Vniversals ought first to be premised, that the proegumenine or
antecedent Cause; to wit, the evil Humors which breed the Worms may be carried
off: and in Women, the Terms, if stopped, may be provoked, and the Hemorrhoids
opened.

XVI. First, cleanse the Stomach with an Emetick, if need be; as with Oxymel
Scilliticum, or Tartar-emetick: then cleanse all the first Passages with
Tinctura purgans, Tinctura Antimonii purgans, Tinctura Cathartica, or Tinctura
Sacra; or rather, if the Body is hot, with Sal Mirabile.

XVII. Or if the Patient cannot take liquids, you may purge them with Pulvis
Cornachini, Elect. Catharticum, Our Family Pills, or Our Pilulae Catharticae;
which will sufficiently carry off the Morbifick Cause.

XVIII. Secondly, after this Preparation you must come to the use of Topics,
which are considered in a five-fold respect: as they are, 1. Washes. 2. Oils,
3. Ointments. 4. Cataplasms. 5. Cerates, or Emplasters.

XIX. 1. Washes. The Lac Virgineum, constantly used for some considerable while
in the daytime, has done the work in several persons, whose Faces have looked
like Leopards-hides, they have been so spotted with these Worms; and some have
anointed at night with Oil of Colocynthis.

XX. If this do no good, you must often wash with a Lixivium made of Potashes,
not too strong: or the Spiritus Vniversalis, with flowers of Sulphur, so long
till the Skin peels off; or with juice of Limons, in which flowers of Sulphur
have been infused.

XXI. If these things prevail not, you must come to the use of stronger; as a
Solution of white Vitriol in fair Water, often to be washed with: or this,
Spirit of Wine viij. Spirit of Nitre j. mix and digest: with which gently wash
the Skin with a Feather.

XXII. If these things prevail not, you must wash with the Water of the
Griffin, which is an excellent thing; or with the Aquae Divina Fernelii; or the
weakest Aqua Mercurialis, which will do as much as can be done by any thing of
a Wash. But before any of these Externals are applied, the Pores of the Skin
ought to be first opened with a hot Fomentation of Water and Wheat-bran.

XXIII. 2. Oils. Oils, and so also Ointments, ought to be only used at night
going to bed, because of their greasiness; unless the Disease be very great,
and extremely stubborn: the Oils most for this purpose are, 1. Oleum
Diacolocynthidos, which is a thing of singular use: but if this will not do,
you must use 2. Oleum Cosmeticum, which is the most powerful Oil yet known, for
this purpose.

XXIV. 3. Ointments. Among Ointments there are, 1. Vnguentum Nicotianae: if
that does nothing, 2. Vnguentum Wurtzii may be applied: 3. Vnguentum
Cosmeticum, a very powerful Medicament: 4. Vnguentum ad Scabiem: 5. Vnguentum
Mercuriale, which is the most power-of all, and must be used with much caution.

XXV. 4. Cataplasms. Oil of Ben and Sheeps-suet, a. vj. melt and mix them
together; to which add Honey iv. flowers of Sulphur iij. sour Leaven, crumbs of
Bread, a. ij. white Precipitate j. Cream q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm; to be
applied night and day, if need require.

XXVI. 5. Cerates and Emplasters. If after long trials, it is found, that none
of the former things will do, we must be necessitated at length to come to the
last Remedy, which is the application of Vesicatories: for by this means, the
Cuticula in which these Worms are seated, is taken off; which when it is taken
off, being held edgwise against the light, so as to look over the plain of that
side the Skin which was next the Flesh; you will see hundreds of them at their
whole length, sticking endways upon the Skin, viz. according to the number
which was in the Cuticula.

XXVII. But if they be not all come forth so far as the Cuticula, but that some
of them yet lodge in the Cutis; you must again (when the last Application is
over, and the Skin well) apply another Vesicatory in like manner; which at due
intervals of time is to be twice, thrice, or oftener repeated, as you see
occasion, till they are all drawn forth, and the conjunct Cause or Matter
totally wasted.

XXVIII. I have done this to several Faces in this City, repeating the
Vesicatory to the third and fourth time; and that without the least prejudice
to the Skin: and so by this means have perfectly cured my Patient, which
otherwise by no artifice, could have been accomplished: and I believe there are
no fairer Faces, or purer Skins to be seen in the whole City of London, than
some that I have cured.

XXIX. If it be objected, that it draws a Humor into the Part; the Objection
smells of pure Ignorance, for manifold Experiences have evinced the contrary:
besides, it is against the Reason of the Operation; for a Vesicatory by its
speedy and strong operation disjoints the Humor, or cuts it off, and draws it
forth; and not after the manner of Attractives, which draw Humors into a Part.

XXX. The Vesicatory I applied was Emplastrum Epispasticum; which I let lie on
about twelve or fourteen hours, then taking it off, I only cut the Blister, and
let the Water out, not taking off the Skin; and then apply over the Blister
either Emplastrum de Meliloto, or the smooth side of Colewort-leaves; in one or
two Applications the whole Skin comes off, with the Worms sticking endways upon
it.

XXXI. And being healed, I keep it washing with some of the former Washes,
especially with the Water of the Gryffin: or I anoint it with some of the
former Oils or Ointments: or I apply this; Oil of Ben viij. Oil of Tartar per
deliquium j. flowers of Sulphur iij. artificial Cinnabar purely levigated j.
white Precipitate ss. mix them, to anoint withal.

XXXII. But if, as I said before, it appears that the Worms are not all out,
but that some which lay deep in the Cutis, are now come into the Cuticula; you
must have recourse again to the Epispastick, and that sometimes to the third or
fourth time, before you can master them, which is the true course I have
pursued in several I have cured.

XXXIII. Lastly, having done with the Vesicatories, and for some time having
pursued the course at Sect. 31. aforegoing, that the whole conjunct Cause may
be perfectly destroyed, (which in part brings the Skin to its color again,) I
then to perfect the Complexion, apply every night, 1. Emplastrum Mercuriale,
for twenty or thirty days; which perfectly restores the Skin to its complexion
and softness: and after that, either, 2. Ceratum Album' or Emplastrum Album;
which make the Skin absolutely white and pure, and perform the ultimate part of
the Cure.

XXXIV. Thus have we given you the Names, Signs, Causes, Procatartick and
Proegumenine; with the various Methods of Cure, of Worms breeding in the Skin
of the Face; never to my knowledge written of before by any other Author, in
any Language whatsoever: being the very Method I my self have practiced and
pursued, in all the Patients I have undertaken (which are not a few) who were
afflicted with this stubborn, rebellious, and almost unconquerable Disease.

IV. Defilements, or Vices Of SKIN and FLESH.
CHAP. XXVII. Of SCABBINESS.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Psoora, Scabies; and in English,
the Scab, or Scabbiness.

II. The Description. It may be known by sight, there being not only present
some defilement and deformity of the Cuticula, but also a distemper even of the
very Skin, together with a swelling and exulceration; from whence it is that
the Actions of the Skin are also hurt.

III. It generally succeeds the Itch, or a vehement Surfeit; especially if it
be in an exceeding Scorbutic habit of Body; those Diseases being as it were
the Praeludia or Forerunners of Psoora or Scabbiness.

IV. But in a Scabies, the top, or utmost part of the Cutis is affected; and
Galen upon the Aphorisms, sect. 4. aphor. 17. says, that there is a falling
off of the Skin, (to wit, in patches, or pieces, where the Scabbiness is;) so
that he will have it to have some resemblance with the casting off the Skins of
Serpents.

V. The Differences. It differs from the Itch, because in that there is only a
roughness of the Skin, with watery Pustules breaking forth; in which there is
nothing which falls off, notwithstanding the scratching: whereas in Psoora or
Scabies, there is not only a roughness of the Skin, but a Distemper, with
swelling, breaking-out, and a dry Scab, and sometimes running; from which by
scratching, the Scabs or Scabby-matter is easily separated, and with the same,
an ichorous matter, and filthy purulent excrements.

VI. The Kinds. It is either a dry Scabbiness, or moist, running with pus, or
matter: it is also again, either recent or inveterate; and it is also either in
some parts only, or over the whole Body.

VII. The Causes. Galen, in his book of Tumors, cap. 1, and 3. says it proceeds
from Melancholy, or adust matter; and upon the Aphorisms, sect. 7. aph. 40.
that Cancers, Elephantiases, Lepra's, and Psoora's, are all of them Melancholy
Affects.

VIII. But Avicen, in his fourth Tome, lib. 7. tract. 3. cap. 6. says, that
the Cause of a Scabies is the Blood, with which Choler is mixed, and that, with
salt Phlegm, converted into Melancholy.

IX. Other Physicians say, that in Psoora or Scabies, the Humor is not always
one; but that in every Scabies there is some mixture of adust Choler and
Melancholy, or of Humors hot and dry: but it is in the dry Scabies, that Galen
makes the Melancholy Humor to abound.

X. However, since the Scabies is generally an universal Affect of the whole
Body, it must mostly proceed from Blood and Lympha; or the Blood and Lympha
defiled with excrementitious Humors, not sufficiently separated and expelled
the right ways; to wit, by Urine, Stool, Sweat, Menses, Hemorrhoids, etc.

XI. So that the Sanguineous and Lymphatick juices, must of necessity be
corrupted with sharp and biting Humors, mixed with salt Phlegm and adust Choler,
which are Humors most apt and fit to produce Psoora, or Scabies.

XII. For these Humors being thick and hot, they excite a hot and dry
Distemper, causing an itching, swelling, and exulceration.

XIII. The procatartick, or remote Cause, is partly from Diet, viz. eating
Meats of evil juice, yielding an unwholesom and corrupt nourishment; such as
are salt, sharp, and easily corrupted: and hence it is, that the poorer sort of
people, who live upon such unwholesom and corrupt Food, are most frequently
infected with a Scabies, or Scabbiness; as also young people and children, who
are careless and heedless of their Diet.

XIV. For from these bad and evil Meats, salt and sharp Humors are easily bred,
especially in a hot habit of Body; whereupon the Blood and Lympha contract
great store of Excrements, which being retained, and let fall into the outward
parts of the Body, are are there corrupted, and so get an acrimonious quality.

XV. Another procatartick cause is, want of cleanliness, or nastiness of the
Body, not keeping it sweet and clean, and with clean Linen and Clothing, as it
ought to be: for the filthiness of the Skin being not duly washed off, or the
Garments not changed often enough, the filth and impurities stick in the
superficies of the Skin, and obstruct the Pores; so that there is not a free
passage for the recrements of the Blood and Lympha; which being retained,
corrupt the Juices of the Body, and give them a kind of acrimony.

XVI. Poison (where it is not so great as to kill) is accounted another cause
of a Scabies; and Contagion ( which Galen acknowledges) is reckoned up among
the principal Causes: for in the superficies of the Skin, in those that are
scabby, there is a certain viscous and clammy moisture, which is contagious;
which being either by touching, or by the Linen, Sheets, or Apparel, or some
other means, communicated to other Bodies uninfected, corrupts their Humors in
the like manner, and produces the like Affect; more especially in such habits,
as are predisposed to a Scabies.

XVII. But of the two kinds of Scabies, dry and moist, the moist Scabies is the
most contagious; in regard that it yields more of that viscid and clammy matter.

XVIII. The Signs. The dry Scabies, which is said to proceed from a black and
Melancholy Humor chiefly, with a mixture of other Humors; either sends forth
nothing at all which is moist out of the parts affected; or if any thing does
issue out, it is thick and dry; and the Ulcers themselves, or places upon which
the Scabs lay, are wan and pale, and sometimes black.

XIX. In the moist Scabies, there abounds a salt Phlegm, out of which there
plentifully flows forth much moist filth and corruption; which is either
ichorous, thin, subtle, and sharp; or rotten, filthy, and purulent: being of a
thicker and more digested substance.

XX. The Prognostics. Tho this Scabies is many times without danger, but only
causes deformity, yet always it is not secure and safe, and of the several
species or kinds; the dry is more difficult to be cured than the moist.

XXI. And therefore of what sort soever it be, the cure ought not to be
neglected (even for the very deformity sake, were there no other cause) but
withal possible have and care to be pursued, and the Disease removed.

XXII. If it has its Original from the Birth, being a contamination from the
impurities of the Mothers Womb, as being begot in the time of the flowing of
the terms, or the Seeds being defiled with impure Whites, or other sharp humors
of the Womb, it is rarely or never cured, but mostly accompanies the Patient to
their Lives end.

XXIII. But a Quaery may here arise; that though none of the ordinary methods
hitherto attempted in a Scabies from such a maternal Pollution, has prevailed
or done any good; whether a Salivation in this case might not be so powerful as
to remove the Evil, and cure the Disease, since it draws off the whole mass of
the old and defiled Lympha, and introduces that which is new and pure.

XXIV. If a Scabies comes not by contagion or contract, but from internal
causes of the Humors; then it is for the most part critical, and proceeds from
the vicious property of some of the Bowels, in which corrupt Humors being
generated, they are by nature protruded to the outward parts, or surface of the
Skin. Now if Nature be not always able to do this, or if by Repercussives or
other improper Medicaments, the morbifick Matter is kept in, it will have
recourse to other places, and breed other more dangerous Diseases.

XXV. Sometimes it begets Quartans, and other Agues: sometimes continual
Fevers; Sometimes Asthmas, and vehement Coughs, with spitting of Blood;
sometimes inordinate Fevers, and many times a Phthisis, or Consumption of the
Lungs.

XXVI. Authors give Examples of all these Diseases breaking forth, after the
removing of an inveterate or habitual Scabies; and that upon forcing out the
Humor again, the Patient has been freed from those other new Diseases.

XXVII. Sennertus tells us of a certain Student who had been affected with a
Scabies, who upon the drying up, or keeping the Humor in, became presently
blind, and continued so for some few days, together with an extraordinary
streightness of Breast, difficulty of Breathing, and black Urine: And these
continued with him, till the adust Humor was evacuted with proper Purges, and
he had took Fumitory and the like, after which, in about four days time more,
he recovered his sight again.

XXVIII. The same party (some time after) being again afflicted with the same
Disease (and keeping the Humor in like manner in, by improper Medicines I
suppose) did not loose his sight as formerly, but the Falling Sickness fell
upon him; out of which, he was also recovered again by fit and proper
Medicaments.

XXIX. The same Sennertus says also, That he knew a Youth of 14 years old, who
having a Scabies, which not being removed according to Art, but with improper
Ointments, lost his sight, and made black Urine, and at length was seized with
the Falling Sickness, of which (the Fits being vehement and very frequent) in
the end thereof he died.

XXX. And some from this unskilful taking away of a Scabies, (without first
removing the Cacochymy, and purging away the recrements of the Humors, by
proper Purgers, and other internal Medicaments) by application of
repercussives, and other improper externals, have been seized with vehement
Stitches in the sides, shootings in the Breast, Cachexies, Pleurifies, and other
like dangerous Diseases.

XXXI. These same Observations are also to be noted in the Achores, or
Scald-head (which is indeed a species of Psoora, or Scabies,) of which Disease
Hippocrates in his Book of the Epilepsies, says, Those Infants (says he) who
have Scabs breaking forth upon their Heads and Ears, and upon the rest of their
Body, and such as spit often, or abound with shot or snivel at Nose, these in
the progress of their Age live most in Health: for to these places flow, and
from those parts is purged forth that Phlegm, which ought to have been purged
away in the Mothers Womb; and these Infants who are thus purged, are never
seized with the Falling Sickness.

XXXII. Whereas, if upon the unskilful application of repelling Medicines,
these Achores, or scald-heads, are healed, those Infants or Children, many
times fall into Fevers, Obstructions of the Lungs, Coughs, Asthmas, Epilepsies,
Convulsions, etc. the vicious Humor retiring, and falling upon the internal,
and many times the more noble parts, causing in a short time (for the most
part) their deaths.

XXXIII. The Cure. The true method of curing this Disease is, 1. By
administration of proper internal Medicaments, 2. By the application of proper
Topics.

XXXIV. The Internal Medicines fit for this purpose, are, 1. Purging
Medicaments, as Emeticks and Catharticks. 2. Proper Diets, which may alter the
habit of the Body, cool the preternatural heat and sweeten the Juyces thereof,
by absorbing the acrimony, saltness and acidity of the Humors.

XXXV. Purging. If the Stomach is foul, it ought first to be cleansed with some
proper Emetick, as infusion of Crocus Metallorum, Vinum Antimoniale, Tartar
Emeticum, and in weaker Constitutions with Oxymel Scilliticum, any or either of
them, two or three times repeated.

XXXVI. The Stomach being cleansed, the Bowels ought then to be emptied with
proper Catharticks. As with Electuarium Catharticum, or the Pulvis Cornachini;
the Pulvis Catharticus is an extraordinary thing; and in strong Constitutions
you may give the Pulvis Rheumaticus.

XXXVII. If the Terms are stopped, they ought to be provoked with powerful
Emmenogogicks; and if the Hemmorrhoids are stopped, where they have been used to
flow, they ought to be opened; for Nature will by these ways expel much of the
vicious Blood and Humors.

XXXVIII. Decoction of Sena ix. Syrups of Fumitory of Epithymum and of Cichory,
a. ij. mix them for two Doses. Or,

XXXIX. Clarified juice of Fumitory viij. Sena ij. Rhubarb sliced j. infuse for
some hours warm, or boil a walm or two and strain, which sweeten with Syrup of
Fumitory or Syrup of Cichory, for two Doses.

XL. Sena j. Agarick, Rhubarb thin sliced, a. ss. Spicknard ij. Aniseeds,
Liquorice a. j. Ginger ss. Juices of Fumitory and Scabious a. lbjss. mix and
infuse scalding hot for two hours close covered, then boil two or three walms,
and strain out, which sweeten with Syrup of Damask Roses, for six doses, to be
taken every day, in an inveterate Scabies.

XLI. To such as cannot take Liquid Purges, you may give Pills, as our Family
Pills, ad ss. or Pilulae Catharticae, which are to be five or six time repeated
at due intervals of time: Or,

XLII. Purge with Panchymagogon Vegetable, mingled with Mercurius dulcis, or
Arcanum Corallinum; and let them drink Whey clarified with Fumitory. Or, with
Confectio Hamech iij. mixed with Elect. of Roses of Mesue jss.

XLIII. Or, After other Preparations and Purgations, give this: Clarified
Juices of Fumitory and Cichory, a. iij. infuse therein for one night, Roots of
black Hellebor jss. Aniseeds and Carraways, Winters Cinnamon, a. j. Cloves ss.
strain out by pressing, and sweeten with Syrupus Catharticus vj.

XLIV. But that which is more especially to be administered as a Specific, is
the Whey of Goats Milk, to which must be added, Syrupus Catharticus ab j. ad
iij.

XLV. When the Body has been thus sufficiently Purged, then provoke Sweat, with
our Theriaca Chymica, mixed with ss. of the inspissate juice of Fumitory: Or,
the said juice may be given with Spirit of Elder-Berries: And if it be
rebellious, you must exhibit decoction of Guajacum and Sassafras, in a
sudorifick manner.

XLVI. This done, cleanse the Body, by often taking Spirit or Tincture of
Tartar; cool and sweeten the Blood with magistrey or Tincture of Corals or
Pearl.

XLVII. Or, Provoke Sweat with Spirit of Danewort, Guajacum, Antimonium
Diaphoreticum, etc.

XLVIII. And then outwardly anointing either with Mercurial Ointments, or the
ablution of dulcis in Limewater, etc. with Pomatum, the Cure will be perfected.

XLIX. If it be the moist Scab, it is more easily cured than the dry Scab:
first, by Evacuation with Epithymum, Polypody, Sena, whey of Goats-milk, and
juices of Roses and Fumitory: secondly, by provoking Sweat, by Sect. 45, 46,
47. or thus: Spirit of Danewort ss. Fumitory-Water ij ss. mix them.

L. Thirdly, by Baths of sweet Water, Sulphur-baths, and Baths with Vinegar,
with the middle-Bark of Frangula. With these Baths and Whey alone, (says
Sennertus) even the most contumacious Scabies is often cured.

LI. Examples of these Mineral-Baths, Sennertus has many, of which take these:
Alum j ss. Sulphur ij. Nitre j. Salt an handful: all being in powder, cast it
into a Kettle full of Water warmed.

LII. Or, Salt lbss. Alum iij. Vitriol iv. Tartar, Nitre, a. ij. being in a
powder, cast them into a Bath of Water. In these Baths you may beforehand boil
Camomil, Fennel, Featherfew, Savory, Time, Mallows, Fumitory, Scabious,
Mugwort, Beet, roots of Sharp-pointed-dock, Elecampane, Briony: after these are
boiled, and the Minerals put in, add meal of Lupins, Orobus, and Beans,
Wheat-bran, etc.

LIII. Outwardly, we commend anointing with these Unguents; viz. Enulatum, ex
Oxylapatho, Valentia Scabiosae: but if the Humor be confirmed and settled, you
must use stronger; as, Vnguentum Enulatum cum Mercurio, (in Our Pharmac.
Londinenslib. 5. cap. 4. sect. 14.) or Our Oleum Cosmeticum, Vnguentum
Mercuriale, Vng. Nicotianae, Vng. Cosmeticum, or Vng. ad Scabiem.

LIVE. Or this, Flowers of Sulphur ss. Nitre ij. juice of Limons iij. Oil of
Roses and Nuts, of each j. mix them. Or this, Rooots of Elecampane, Dock, a. j.
boil them in Vinegar, and pulp them; to which add, Sulphur vive j. Salt ss.
juice of Limons vj. White Unguent of Rhasis, Citrine Unguent, a. ss. Oil of
Roses and Oil of Tartar, A. enough to make an Unguent, adding a little Wax.

LV. But by the leave of Sennertus, the Oil of Tartar will be inimical to the
juice of Limons; Alcalies ought to be used by themselves, and Acids by
themselves.

LVI. He proposes this, as an experienced Remedy: Roots of Sharp-pointed-dock
and of Elecampane, (both green) lbss. Hog's Grease iij. bruise them well in a
Mortar, and boil them a little over a gentle fire; then press them hard out,
and make an Ointment.

LVII. If it be the dry Scab, wherein little or nothing is voided, it is cured
with much greater difficulty, but after the manner of the former; wherein also
you must use stronger Purges, as Sena, Confectio Hamech, Extract of black
Hellebor, etc.

LVIII. Lastly, after all the former things have been attempted, in order to
the perfecting of the Cure, but without any success, and despair seems to
attend the Patient, the Physician ought not to give over his endeavors with
those ordinary Methods; but in the last place to pursue the last Remedy, which
is Salivation; which being carefully and well performed, will scarcel fail of
accomplishing the desired end: if this does not, the Patient ought to rest
contented, and may then reasonably be accounted uncurable.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the CHIN-SCAB.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Mentagra, Lichene agria, vel fera;
in English, the Chin-Ringworm, or Chin-Scab.

II. The Place. It is a Disaffect of the Chin, sometimes as it were
overspreading the whole Countenance, the Eyes alone being free; and thence
descending into the Neck, Breast, and Hands, with a filthy kind of roughness
and branniness upon the Skin.

III. It was of old a most inveterate Disease; and so contagious, as to be
caught by kissing.

IV. And Pliny, lib. 26. cap. 1. says, it is a Disease altogether void of Pain,
and having in it no danger at all of Death: yet (says he) it is so foul and
filthy, and it so defiles the Face, that any kind of Death is to be preferred
before the enduring this loathsome Disease: and it is called Mentagra, because
of the place of its rise, as being principally from the Chin.

V. The Skin is made hard, dry, and rough, and as it were full of Scales; with
a kind of redness, which sometimes a little ulcerates: there is present an
itching, and the Disease extends it self every day, till it becomes of a great
breadth.

VI. The Disease was of old contagious, as Pliny seems to speak in the place
before cited; and Galen held it to be contagious and epidemical; when in his
Book de Comp. Med. lib. 5. cap. 7. he says, that one Pamphilus by the curing
of the Lichenes at Rome, got much wealth, at the same time when the Mentagra
raged and prevailed in the City.

VII. The Kinds. Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 28. makes it the second kind of Papulae,
i. e. Lichen, Impetigo, or Ringworm: in the Impetigo or Ringworm, he says, the
Skin is lift up with small Pustules, becomes red, and is lightly corroded;
having the middle part of it a little smoother, and creeping along very slowly;
beginning in a round mannar, and in the same form it proceeds, and creeps
along, keeping its round fashion.

VIII. But in this other (says he) which the Greeks call Agria, or Fera, the
Skin likewise breaks out; but is far more exasperated and exulcerated, and is
more vehemently corroded, becoming thereupon red; and sometimes also (says he)
it sends forth Hairs.

IX. The Cause. It arises from a thin, serous, or wheyish Humor; generated from
a salt, sharp, and corrupt kind of Diet.

X. Some say it may be caused from the Heat of the ambient Air, which thrusts
the matter forth into the superficies of the Body, exasperates the same, and
superficially exulcerates it: also, in the Winter time by Cold; which shutting
up the Pores close, keeps that salt and sharp Humor in, which afterward breaks
out in this manner.

XI. And besides all the other Causes, this Disease may have its rise, and be
contracted from Contagion, or Infection; as is the Itch, and some other
Diseases.

XII. It is not dangerous; if newly begun, it is easily cured: if it grows old
and inveterate, it may degenerate into Lepra.

XIII. The Cure. As to the Cure, what we said as to the Evacuation of the
Humors, in Chap. 27. aforegoing, is to be observed here.

XIV. As for Topics, anoint the Part twelve, or sixteen, or twenty times a day
with Spittle: for that, if the Disease be recent and mild, will do the Cure; if
this will not do.

XV. You must use the Method of curing Impetigo or the Ringworm, in the
following Chapter; or that for the cure of a Scabies in the preceding Chapter;
where you will find many things of good use in this case: or the Unguent
commended by Valescus and Guido.

XVI. Juniper Berries well beaten j. Hog's Grease vj. boil them, strain, and put
in Turpentine j. being cooled, add Sulphur vive j. mix them well in a Mortar,
for an Unguent.

XVII. Or this: Sulphur vive, Nitre, A. ss. powder of black Hellebor ij.
Vinegar iij. Oil of Coloquintida, q.s. mix them, and anoint therewith.

XVIII. Or this: Powder of white Hellebor, and of black Hellebor A. ss. Sulphur
vive in fine powder iij. white Precipitate ij. fine Verdegrise ss. mix, and
with Oil-olive and Sheeps-suet, of each equal parts, q.s. make an Ointment.

XIX. Or this: Powder of white Hellebor j. Tar j. Oil of Colocynthis, q.s. mix,
and make a soft Ointment.

XX. If it is exulcerated, and spreads much, this is commended; Sulphur vive,
powder of white Hellebor-root, A. j. Scammony in fine powder, Aloes, burnt
Brass, Nitre, A. ij. Verdigrise, Litharge, A. j. all being in fine powder, mix
them with Oil of Colocynthis, and Balsam of Gum Elemi, of each equal parts,
q.s. and therewith anoint Morning and Evening.

XXI. But before the Ointment is applied, it would be good to wash the part
affected either with Spiritus Universalis, or with the Juice of Limons; for by
the use of these things, much of the Excrementitious Matter will be first taken
away, whereby the other things being applied, will take the better effect.

CHAP. XXIX. Of a RINGWORM.
I. IT is called in Greek (...), in Latin Impetigo, and in English, The
Ring-worm.

II. The description. It is a hard red Pustle upon the Skin, spreading it self
round, with dryness, roughness, and great itching: it comes from a thing, sharp
and choleric Humor. See chap. 28. sect. 7. aforegoing.

III. The Procathartick or remote cause, is evil Diet, sharp and salt Meats,
and eating and drinking things of corrupt Juice, which breed salt and acid
Humors; as also Surfeiting, from whence this Disease oftentimes takes its
Original.

IV. The antecedent cause is a serous, wheyish, thin, and sharp Lympha, mixed
with salt or acid Phlegm, and sometimes with yellow Choler; and if there is a
mixture of Melancholy therewith, it many times degenerates, either into
Elephantiasis, Leprosy, or Cancer.

V. The Prognostics. It is not dangerous, and (if new) easily cured: but if it
happen in a melancholic Constitution, it is more hard, and turns into a
Leprosy. In one I saw it ulcerate, and afterward became Cancerous, wherein was
much danger, for the Patient lost his Life.

VI. The Cure. The Patient is to observe such a Diet, as may not generate salt,
sharp, acrid and vicious Humors, but promote an exceeding sweetness of the
Blood and Lympha; and the evil Humors which are already present, must be
carried off by Universal Purgations.

VII. The Stomach, if foul and disordered, or not able to make a good
digestion, is first to be cleansed with Oxymel Scilliticum, or Tartar Emetick,
and then you are to corroborate it with Our Tinctura Stomachica, Tinctura
Cordialis, Tinct. Sacra, or Tinct. Antimonii, Theriaca Chymica, etc.

VIII. After this, you may purge the Bowels with an infusion of Sena and
Rhubarb, made in Water or Wine, or with our Tinctura Purgans, or Cathartica,
according as you see the habit of the Body requires.

IX. But if the Disease is stubborn, you must purge with stronger Medicines, as
our Pilulae Catharticae, Pulvis Cornachini, or Pulvis Rheumaticus, which need
rarely be above twice given; after the use of which, you may corroborate the
Bowels with Tinctura Antimonij, or Tinctura Salis Tartari.

X. Then cool the Blood and Lympha, by giving now and then Our Syrupus
Antifebriticus mixed with Aqua Elementaria, which may be for some days repeated.

XI. This done, we must come to the use of Topics: If the Disease is recent
and gentle, it is often cured by rubbing, or besmearing them with Spittle 10 or
12 times in a day, or oftener; but especially, that it be done with Fasting
Spittle.

XII. If this will not do, you must anoint with Oil of Tartar per deliquium,
mixed with Oil of Wax, ana; or wash with the water distilled by a Retort out of
Oleum Tartari per deliquium iv. Quick silver i. which Water cures all Itch,
Tettars, and Ringworms, though very contumacious.

XIII. This following is a most excellent thing: Oil of Ben viij. Oil of Tartar
per deliquium i. Flowers of Sulphur ij. White Praecipitate vj. Artificial
Cinnabar in subtle Powder ss. mix and make an Ointment. But before the
Application of this Ointment, the place ought to be well fomented with warm
Water, or a Lixivium of Pot Ashes, or rather with Spiritus Vniversalis Clauderi.

XIV. Other Topics (besides what we have already advised) are the Liquor
coming out of Green Wood while it is burning: Or, Juice of Parietary, or of
Sorrel roots mixed with Vinegar, adding to them Flowers of Sulphur, and a little
Verdigrise, so much as may give it a tincture of Greenness: Or, Balsam of
Tartar mixed with Oil of Eggs and Vnguentum Album Camphorat.

XV. Or this. Oil of Wax j. Oil of Eggs ss. Oil of Tartar per deliquium ij. mix
them. Or this: Vng. Nicotianae j. Oil of Eggs ss. Sulphur vive iij. Camphir. j.
mix them.

XVI. But if it be stubborn, you must bathe with this Water. Damask Rose Water
viij. Powers of Mercury j. mix them to wash with; or you may use instead of the
former, Aqua Mercurialis, the weaker or stronger (as you see the Disease
requires it;) or the Aqua Divina Fernelii.

XVII. If you use Ointments, the Vnguentum Enulatum cum Mercurio, to anoint
with, more especially if you mix with it flos Sulphuris, or Sulphur Vive is
excellent; so also our Oleum Diacolocynthidos, Vnguentum Nicotianae, Vng.
Cosmeticum, and ad Scabiem.

XVIII. And, not much inferior is Joel, his experiment of the rust of Iron; Or,
a weak Solution of white Vitriol in Rose Water; as also Aqua Ophthalmica
Nostra, in Our Pharmacopoea Land. 5. cap. 1. sect. 14.

XIX. Or this. Aquae Elementariae viij. white Vitriol, Roch Alum, A. iss. mix
and dissolve, with which daily wash the part affected as hot as can be well
endured, for the space of near half an hour.

XX. Lastly, strew upon the part, if Vlcerated, our Pulvis Herculeus, or the
Pulvis Mercurii Coagulatus, which will in a short time consummate the cure.

CHAP. XXX. Of the TETTAR.
I. IT is called in Greek (...). in Latin, Leonina, and morbus Leoninus: in
English The Tettar.

II. It is so called from the ruggedness of the Lions Forehead, and is known by
sight.

III. The Causes: It proceeds from a salt, sharp and pituitous matter
misplaced, or thrust forth by some particular Accident, to the surface of the
Skin; and sometimes from Choler, or Choler mixed with salt Phlegm, whereby the
Blood and Lympha are defiled.

IV. The Prognostics. It quickly comes to the height; if it once become
inveterate, it is of difficult Cure, especially, if in the extreme parts, as
the hands, or legs, or feet: the Alopecia, Ophiasis and Leonina, are commonly
found all joined together in Elephantiack persons.

V. The Cure. Vniversals must be first exhibited, that the antecedent Cause may
be removed, according to the method delivered in the cure of the Impetigo or
Ringworm, in Chap. 29. Sect. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. aforegoing.

VI. This done, you may come to the application of Topics, rubbing the place
affected often with Spittle, as 10, 15, or 20 times a day, but more especially
with fasting Spittle, which is a thing of great force, being suffered every
time to dry on.

VII. So also a Lixivium of Quicklime; Or juice of Plantane mixed with Beef
Brine; Or, a Solution of Sublimate in water: Or, Aqua ad Verrucas, and ad
delenda Variolarum vestigia, Aqua Ophthalmica, and Ophthalmica nostra.

VIII. To these may be added, Bulls-Gall, Lac Virginis, Liquor Mercurij vivi
Mynsichti, and his sugared Liquor (in Our Pharm. Land. Lib. 4. Cap. 11. Sect.
19, 20, 21, 24.) which are all very excellent things, provided that a good
Diet, and do Evacuation has been made beforehand.

IX. I once cured a Tettar upon a Maidens hand, with this following Ointment:
Oil of Colocynthis ij. Sheeps-suet j ss. mix, and add thereto Turpethum
minerale ij. with this she anointed morning and evening for a month, and was
made perfectly well.

X. Another person, after due Purging, I cured with this Mixture: Oil of Ben
iij. Oil of Tartar per deliquium ss. white Precipitate vij. mix them, and
anoint therewith morning and evening.

XI. Another I cured with this: Oil of Colocynthis iij. Tar ij. Sheeps-suet j.
white Precipitate j ss. mix them: but before I anointed therewith, I caused the
place affected to be fomented for half an hour, with warm Water and a Sponge.

XII. A recent Tettar I cured, by often bathing with the Spiritus Universalis:
in about 12 days the Patient was perfectly well.

XIII. I have also cured many with this following Water. Fair Water lbij.
Roch-alum, white Vitriol, A. j. mix, and dissolve, then filter: with this let
the diseased Party wash morning and evening, as hot as they can endure it, for
a full half hour at a time.

XIV. If it be in their Hands, let them keep their hands in the hot Liquor,
often rubbing them together: if any other Part, that cannot be kept in the
Water, let it be washed and fomented with a large Sponge, as hot as it can be
endured; and let the liquor be kept hot all the while over a chafing dish of
charcoal.

XV. With this very Liquor I have cured a Tettar of ten or twelve years
standing, and some of near twenty years standing; nor have I ever yet found it
to fail.

CHAP. XXXI. Of WORMS in the FEET.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...), i. e. very small Worms; in Latin, Sirones,
and Chirones; in English, Worms in the Feet; and by some, Barbados- Worms, or
Chego's.

II. They are Pustules in the soles of the Feet, and palms of the Hands, full
of little Animals or Worms, exceeding small, and hid under the Scarf-skin.

III. Signs. They are known by a kind of Itch, which is felt in the Pustule at
first; but afterward causes a kind of smarting pain: and if they be in the
Feet, they will cause the party to go lame.

IV. They are usual in hot Countries, near the Tropicks, and under the Line, as
in Barbados, Caribee-Islands, and possibly in Egypt, and other hot places in
Africa; and I am very apt to believe, are the very same kind of kind of Worms
which the Barbadians call Chego's; which that you may the better understand, we
will here give you the description of them from the Ingenious Ligon; as you may
find it in his History of Barbados, page 65.

V. These harmful Animals (says he) we call Chego's, and these are so little,
that you would hardly think them able to do any harm at all, and yet they will
do more mischief than Ants; and if they were as numerous as they are harmful,
there would be no enduring them: they are of shape not much unlike a Louse, but
no bigger than a Mite which breeds in Cheese, and its color bluish.

VI. An Indian laid one of them upon a sheet of white Paper, and with my
Spectacles on (says he) I could hardly discern it; yet this very little Enemy,
can and will do much mischief to Mankind.

VII. The Cause. They arise from much Choleric Sweat, restrained within the
Skin; and this Affect comes in these places chiefly: because that the more
thick and gross ichorous or ulcerous Excrements are in every Scabbiness,
detained and held under the Skin; which in the aforesaid places are more thick
than elsewhere.

VIII. This is the cause, according to the Opinion of such Authors as have
wrote thereof: but Ligon gives us another Cause, which is external, and is from
the Worm it self, in these words: This Vermin will (says he) get through your
Stockin or Hose, and (lodge it self) in a Pore of the Skin, in some part of
your Feet, commonly under the nail of one of your Toes, and there make a
habitation to lay its (eggs, or) offspring; making a Pustule as big as a small
Tare, or the Bag of a Be; which will cause you to go very lame, and give you
much smarting pain.

IX. It is of a bluish color, as aforesaid, and is seen through the Skin; but
the Negro's, whose Skins are of that color, (or near it, or black) are in an
ill case, for they cannot find where they are: by which means they are many of
them very lame.

X. The Cure. These Worms lying hid in the Pustules, the places affected are
discerned by the exceeding Itch, which is felt more than at other times.

XI. In order to the Cure, these Worms are to be picked out with a Needle, or
other fit Instrument: then, (that they may not breed anew) the places are to be
washed with Wine or Vinegar, in which Salt, Alum, or Nitre has been dissolved.

XII. Or, in a Decoction of Oak-leaves with Alum: or, in a Lixivium of Broom
and Oakashes: or, in Tincture of Sulphur, made by boiling in Oil of Tartar; and
then after to anoint with Vnguentum Mercuriale, or Cosmeticum.

XIII. The Indian Women (says Ligon) have the best skill to take them out;
which they d^ by putting in a Pin or sharppointed Needle, at the hole where
they first came in, and winding the point about the Bag, to loosen it from the
Flesh, and so to take it out.

XIV. Some of these Chego's (says he) are poisonous, and after they are taken
out, the orifice in which they lay, will fester and rankle for a fortnight
after they are gone: I have had ten taken out of my Feet in a morning, by an
Indian Woman.

XV. In Barbados these Worms breed in the dust of the Earth, in great numbers;
and so easily get into the Skin, in such as go barefoot, or are careless of
themselves; where making their nests, they many times breed in vast numbers, to
the very great detriment of the Patient.

XVI. And in their taking out, there ought to be great care taken, that the
Cistis be not broken: for should they in the taking of it forth break it, so as
that any of the Worms should be left behind, it would not only be troublesome to
extirpate and clear the Part of them; but they would increase to such
prodigious quantities, as to hazard sometimes the losing of a Toe, or cause
some other great mischief, not easy to be retrieved.

XVII. In Davies Translation of the History of the Caribee Islands, lib. 1.
cap. 24. it is said, that these Worms breed in the dust and sweepings, cast out
into the dunghill and such unclean places; and that getting into the Feet and
Toes, if they are not taken away in time, they will get farther, and so go into
all other parts of the Body.

XVIII. At first they only cause a litte itching, as aforesaid, but having once
got through the Skin, they cause an Inflammation in the place affected; and
mightily increase by the abundance of their nits or eggs which they lay: by
which means, Ulcers are bred in the places they seize on.

XIX. The best time to attempt the Cure, is as soon as the least itching is
felt, picking them out with a Needle: but if there are Ulcers bred, either
through unskilfully taking them out, by breaking the bag, or through not taking
them forth in time, though they seem to be little or nothing at first, yet
afterward they grow to be as big as the palm of a man's hand, because the Ulcer
will have its course: and some of these Ulcers, though little, are very hard to
be cured.

XX. Of these Ulcers there are two sorts, the one round, the other uneven; of
which the former is the harder to cure, because it is encompassed with dead
flesh: for till that dead and loose flesh is taken away, the Ulcer can never be
healed: for which cause as often as it is dressed, the dead flesh must be cut
away till it is quite removed, which is very painful to be done.

XXI. For the curing of these Ulcers, they ought first to be washed with the
Spiritus Universalis, then burnt Alum, or Our Pulvis ad Hypersarcosin must be
applied; that therewith the dead flesh may be taken away: and they must be
often washed with Lime-juice, the juice of Limons, or juice of the lesser
Citron, though indeed these things are extremely sharp: they certainly kill all
the little Worms contained in the Ulcers, of which there are store, making them
clean, and to look well.

XXII. Then you may anoint with Unguentum ad Scabiem, Ung. Nicotianae,
Cosmeticum, or Mercuriale: or with this; Honey ij. Aloes ss. dissolved in a
little Vinegar, purified Verdigrise j. mix them: which being used for some
time, at length perfect the Cure with Balsamum Gummi Elemi, or some other thing
of like nature.

CHAP. XXXII. Of WARTS.
I. THIS Tubercle is called in Greek, (...), Pl. (...) vel (...), Pl. (...). in
Latin, Thymus, Thymi; Verruca, Verrueae: and in English, a Wart, or Warts.

II. A Wart is a little tubercle on the Skin, resembling the flower of Time;
proceeding from a thick, phlegmatic, and melancholy Juice. Some have slender
Roots, and some broad.

III. The Prognostics. It often vanishes alone; if cut off, and the root be
remaining, it grows again. If the Roots be small and slender, they are easily
removed; but if broad, with much more difficulty.

IV. The Kinds. They are of three kinds: 1. Myrmecia, seu Verruca sessilis, vel
Formica; a small, callous, round and thick tubercle, having a broad foundation;
and when handled, yielding a sense like to the biting of an Ant or Pismire.

V. 2. Thymon, which has a narrower root than the former, but a much broader
head; which when it is spread, or in flower, or seed as they call it, something
resembles the flower of Time: being higher, harder, with a seedy top, and more
apt to bleed.

VI. 3. Acrochordon, Verruca pensilis vel botoralis; which is a kind of Wart
having a thin or slender root, with a callous bunch, like unto the knot of a
Rope, hanging by a small string, round, and without pain.

VII. The Cause. They are all caused of gross matter, or a thick juice,
pituitous and melancholic: being the recrements of the Blood and Lympha, which
Nature not being able to digest, sends out in this slow manner for her relief.

VIII. The Cure. Purge the Body with Pil. Rudii, mixed with Mercurius dulcis:
or with Pil. Catharticae, or an Iufusion of Sena and Rhubarb, in Water or Whey,
especially in Whey of Goats-milk.

IX. Then touch the Warts three or four times with either Oil of Vitriol or
Sulphur, or Butter of Antimony: or wash them with Water which comes out of the
ends of Oak-sticks when burning: or wash them with Spurgemilk, or apply to them
an Onion beaten with Salt.

X. Fallopius commends the juice of the leaves of the Willow or Sallow tree;
or, if the juice cannot be had, their Powder, mixed with Vinegar of Squills.

XI. So also Figwort; or the roots of Water-dragon; or Aron and Sowbread; or
the fresh roots of Celandine with the yellow juice thereof, to anoint with and
apply: applying after a Cataplasm of Watercresses and Mustard.

XII. Or, rub them with Nightshade and Urine, washing them afterward with
juice of Mullein: or a Decoction of Mustard, Salt, and Sulphur with Vinegar.

XIII. The rubbing of them often also with a dead man's Hand, is said to be of
great force. The leaves of Savin macerated twenty four hours in Wine, and
applied, are good: so is a Cataplasm of Herb-robert, Rue and Yarrow, beaten
together and applied.

XIV. And Cichorium Verrucarium or Wartwort, is of singular use and benefit; as
also the milky juice of Dandelion, and of all other Endive and Succory-like
Plants: or the Water sweating out of Vine-branches while burning: or the
standing-water on the stumps of felled Oaks: or the meal of Chick-pease.

XV. But above all is commended juice of Purslane: or rather a Cataplasm of
Purslane, applied night and day upon the part for some time; it softens them,
repercusses the Humor which feeds them, and causes them to wither insensibly
away: nor inferior to this, are the leaves of the greater Housleek, applied
whole, (their outward skin on that side which lies next the Wart being taken
off) and their use continued for some consisiderable time.

XVI. For Compound-medicines, the Emplast. de Ranis cum Mercurio, is very good:
or this, commended by Sennertus: Ship-pitch j. Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar
ss. Sal Armon. j. Diachylum magnum j ss. mix, and make an Emplaster.

XVII. If this will not do, you must apply your self to Causticks, such as
those at Sect. 9. aforegoing: which yet notwithstanding are not to be used
without a great deal of caution, especially in nervous places, and only by
touching the Wart with them; the part about being first well guarded with Wax,
or some kind of Emplaster.

XVIII. For this purpose, the milk of the Fig Tree or Spurge, or Tithymale
alone, are very efficacious, and so found by Experience.

XIX. You may also use unslaked Lime mixed with Soap, which will be yet more
effectual, if a little calcined Vitriol or Verdigrise or a cautery of Soap
Ashes be added.

XX. Or, The white of an Egg hardened, Verdigrise, Alum A. j. mix them: Or, make
a Cataplasm of green Garlic, and apply it.

XXI. Or, Orpiment, mix it with Oxymel, or juice of Spurge, and put it upon the
Wart, with a defensative. Andreas a Cruce much commends the Oil of Vitriol, nor
is that of Sulphur behind it.

XXII. But if you like not these Potential Cauteries, you must apply your
selves to the Actual, or else to cutting. You may Actually burn them, either by
a little stick of the Beech Tree, lighted at one end; Or, by an Iron Bodkin
heated red hot, and applied through a silver or brass Pipe, that the adjacent
parts may not be hurt.

XXIII. Or, apply a thin Plate of Iron, having a hole bored through it, so far
as the Wart only may appear through the hole, and then burn it either with a
red hot Iron, or the flame of a Candle.

XXIV. Lastly, The burning being ended, the Scar is then to be taken away; and
the affect to be healed after the manner of other Ulcers.

XXV. Some have been cured by washing them with this water. Lime Water vj.
Roman Vitriol j. Verdigrise ij. Roch Alum iij. Nitre iiij. mix and dissolve.
This Water is only to be often dropped upon them.

XXVI. Others have been cured by anointing the Warts four or five times a day
with the Milk of the Fig Tree; and others by dropping upon them daily one drop
at a time of Oil of Cloves, which will penetrate even to their Roots.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of CORNS.
I. THis Tubercle is called in Greek, (...), Pl. (...), (...) Pl. (...). in
Latin, Clavus, Clavi: and in English, A Corn, Corns.

II. It is a round callous Wart, of a whitish Color, infesting the Feet and
Toes, thereby causing pain in going; they come from Bruises, or straightness of
Shoes.

III. The Cause. It is from a melancholy or pituitous Matter, or the
superfluities of an excrementitious Juice, separated from that which nourishes
the Skin. And many times they are caused by bruising the Toes with straight
Shoes.

IV. The Prognostics. They never go away without cutting or pulling up by the
Roots; There is no danger in the cutting though it bleed, provided you expose it
not to the cold Air. I knew two, which by cutting their Corns, met their
deaths: for, not taking care of them they gangrened, by which they lost not
only their feet but their lives too.

V. If the Corn Bleeds in cutting, it many times dies and goes away; but then
as Avicen says, you must take care of it, lest an Inflammation or a Cancer
happens thereupon, which sometimes befalls the Patient.

VI. The Cure. What we have spoken in the former Chapter may be understood
here; besides which you may anoint the corns with Oil of Mercury, or the blood
of an Eel often.

VII. Or, cut them, and wash them with Dogs-urine, applying a plaster of soft
Red-wax, mixed with white Praecipitate, or Mercurius Dulcis, or a Plaster made
of Galbanum, Ammoniacum, and Turpentine dissolved in Vinegar.

VIII. Or this commended by Rulandus, Oil of Sulphur per Camp. ss. corrosive
Salt of Crystal-stone ij. seeds of Henbane, Opium, A. j. grind and mix them;
this plucks them up by the Roots.

IX. Or you may apply in particular, the Emplaster afore-described in Chap. 32.
Sect. 16. aforegoing; which is commended in particular by Sennertus. Or this,
Emplastri Meliloti ss. red Praecipitate ij. mix them, and apply it, changing it
every third day.

X. If none of these things will do, but you must be forced to come to cutting;
You must first soak the Feet or part where the Corn is, in warm water; then cut
it so as you may see it, after with the point of a sharp Pen Knife, dig it
round the edges, so as you may tie a twine thread gently about it; this done,
you may hold up the Corn by the Thread, till you so dig round about it, as
absolutely to cut it out.

XI. This done, fill the place, or apply over it Empl. de Ranis cum Mercurio,
or Forest. his cerat of Ammoniacum. Or rather, Our Emplastrum Mercuriale, which
is inferior to no other thing of that kind.

XII. But the best way of curing Corns is to cut them close, first soaking the
Feet a pretty while in warm Water, and then to apply Ivy leaves bruised,
renewing the same every Morning and Evening for 20 or 30 days, in which time
the Corns will be drawn out; by which it appears, that there is a very great
attractive Virtue in that Plant.

XIII. Or, after well soaking in warm Water, and cutting close, you may morning
and evening apply and bind to the Corns, leaves of the greater Housleek; taking
off the outward Skin of that side of the leaf which you apply next the Corn;
this wonderfully softens the Corns, resolves the Humor and discusses it,
performing the Cure in a months time, after most other things had been used in
vain, for more than twenty years together.

Of a CALLVS.
XIV. It is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Callus: in English, Hardness of
the Skin.

XV. It is bred in the surface of the Skin, in the Palms of the Hands and Soles
of the Feet, as also the sides of the Feet and bottom of the great Toe; and
sometimes upon the Knees, by much and often kneeling.

XVI. The Cause. It arises in the Hands by continual and hard Labor, and in
the Feet by much Walking.

XVII. The Prognostics. As it has no Root, and is void of all manner of Pain,
so it is without danger, yet not very easily cured.

XVIII. The Cure. The Patient is to forbear all those things which are the
cause thereof, otherwise all attempts for the Cure will be in vain.

XIX. Then he must often bathe and soak the Parts affected in a mild Lixivium
of Pot Ashes blood warm, which is to be continued and repeated, so long till
the Skin is very thin and soft.

XX. After bathing in the Lixivium, the parts are to be wiped very dry, and
then anointed with Oil of Ben; and if you so please, you may lay over them
Emplastrum Album, which will bring the Skin not only to a whiteness but
softness also.

Of HORNS.
XXI. They are called in Greek, (...), Pl. (...): in Latin Cornu, Cornua: and
in English, A Horn, Horns.

XXII. They are thicker, harder and higher than Corns, and in some they grow to
a very great length.

XXIII. They grow in many parts of the Body, as upon the Head, Forehead, Back,
Joints, and other parts.

XXIV. Avicen Lib. 4. Tract. 3. Cap. 14. says, They are thick, and crooked,
arising above upon the Junctures, in the Extremities, and that they are cured
by cutting off that which is insensible, etc.

XXV. Avenzoar, Lib. 2. Cap. 5. gives a relation of a Man, who had one of these
Excrescencies bred in his Back, not much unlike to a Unicorns-horn, but less
hard than a natural bone: This man by purging and drying Medicines was cured,
and the bone fell forth, as Hearts shed their Horns.

XXVI. And that he himself also had once a Bone growing upon his back, which
gave him much Grief and Pain; but by purging himself from gross Humors, and
applying Resolutives thereto, it was for the most part resolved, and the little
of it which remained was no prejudice to him.

XXVII. Lanfrancus, Tract. 3. Doct. 2. Cap. 3. says, That he had seen manifest
Eminencies of the Skull, like unto Horns; and that a man came to him for
Advice, who had seven of those Eminencies, of which one was as long as a man's
Thumb, and as big as the horn of a little Goat.

XXVIII. Philippus Ingrassias, de Tumorib. Tract. 1. Cap. 1. says, He saw a
Noble Virgin afflicted with many of these Excrescencies, sharpened in their
Tops, like unto Horns, and of an extraordinary hardness: these had continued
many years with her, augmenting both in bigness and number, so that she became
so deformed and misshapen, that (says he) she was become more like an ugly
Monster or frightful Devil, than a Woman kind; he cured her, and restored her
to her pristin Beauty.

XXIX. Alexander Benedictus Anat. Lib. 1. Cap. 14. says, That on a Knee
wounded by an Arrow, he saw a black Horn grow, which was the Matter that ought
to have been converted into a Bone, etc.

XXX. Zacutus Lusitanus Prax. Med. Admir. Lib. 2. Obs. 188. tells us of a Man,
who had one of these Horns grew out of his Heel, as long as the Palm of a man's
hand, and of the very likeness of a Horn, which by the advice of Physicians
(his Body being often purged) was afterward cut off, and he lived after it two
years in good Health; but not long after he felt in the same place vehement
pain, and in six months time the Horn grew again, somewhat longer than it was
before, hard and full of several sharp Points, which being again cut off by the
root, there remained a wide and deep hole, from whence a great quantity of a
black and putrid Humor came forth, so acid and sharp, that it eat the Flesh
round about.

XXXI. Julius Caesar Scaliger, Exercit. 199. Sect. 5. says, That
notwithstanding the Authority of Prince Aboalis and Abumeron, a person of note,
he could not believe so strange a thing, till he himself had seen one of them
on the back of a certain Rower.

XXXII. And Fallopius in his Book of similar Parts, Cap. 7. says, That
sometimes likewise in whole Bones as well as in Fractures, there may be
something bred like unto a Horn, which may grow forth without the Flesh and
Skin, and that he himself saw this at Padua, in the Thigh of a certain Noble
Man.

XXXIII. The Cause. They proceed generally from thick and glutinous Humors, and
a melancholy Juice, which Nature protrudes into some particular part,
according to her convenience.

XXXIV. The Prognostics. They are of difficult cure, and remain through the
whole course of life, unless cut off by Instrument.

XXXV. The Cure. If they be near the Joints, and cause much Pain, or hinder
their Motion, they ought to be cut off; which may be done the more safely, in
regard that they are like naked Bones, and are only covered with Skin.

XXXVI. Let the Body first be purged with Vniversals, and in particular with
Lapis Lazuli, which let be several times repeated; which done, The Skin is then
first to be opened, the Cornu is to be made naked or bare, and then it is to be
cut away from the Bone with a sharp Knife (but if too hard for a Knife, with a
fine sharp Saw) and the part is to be cured, as any other common Wound.

V. Of DEFILEMEMTS Universal.
CHAP. XXXIV. Of the ITCH.
I. IT is called in Greek (...): in Latin, Pruritus: and in English, The Itch.

II. It is a Disease which causes scratching, with some small exulceration of
the Skin, generally affecting the whole Body.

III. It will have its beginning in many parts of the Body; in Children it
often begins on the Fingers or between the Fingers: but if it begins upon other
parts first, it forthwith sends its Filthiness thither.

IV. The Cause. It arises from Choler subtilized, and sent into the habit of
the Body, being mixed with thin salt Phlegm; which spreading into the superficies
of the Body, breaks out in the Cuticula, with small watery Pustules, causing
great Itching.

V. The Procatartick cause is from feeding upon salt, acrid and hot meats,
through the fault of a hot habit of Body. It is also caused by contagion, as
putting on the Glove or Linen of one that had or has the Itch, lying with them
in the same Bed, or lying in those Sheets, wherein one that had the Itch had
formerly lain.

VI. The Prognostics. If the Itch happens to one in a Consumption, and the
Body is bound, it is mortal, as Hippocrates says in Coacis. For by reason of
the trouble and disquiet, they can neither sleep nor take any rest, which
hindering concoction, hastens their Death.

VII. If through continuance it gets into the whole Habit, it is never cured,
but generally proves mortal: I knew three Brothers, all young men, die purely
of the Itch, which by length of time becoming habitual, at last corrupted the
whole Body, which with putrid and eating Ulcers destroyed them.

VIII. If the Itch continues long, it is for the most part a forerunner of a
Scabies, or Scabbiness, not long after to follow: because its long continuance
is the occasion of collecting a great abundance of Matter, which becoming
putrid and acrid, corrodes the Cuticula, and excites Pustules and Scabs.

IX. In old people and such as are decripid, it is seldom cured; because old
Age is fit for treasuring up these salt Humors, and then that habit of Body is
difficultly changed, so as to be brought into a better state: yet sometimes,
through much care and diligence, it is healed. Mercurialis gives us an Example of
a man fourscore Years old, having an extraordinary great Itch, who by the help
of Medicines was restored: and I my self cured one perfectly of something a
greater Age.

X. And by how much the worse the Humor is which excites the Itch, by so much
the worse is the Disease: If it proceeds from adult Blood, or Choler, it lasts
not long: If it proceeds from salt Phlegm, it continues longer; but if from
Melancholy, longest of all.

XI. The Cure. First, purge the Body well with Panchymagogon vegetabile j. at a
time, mixed with Arcanum Coralinum, gr. iv. or else with Mercurius dulcis j.
Or, you may evacuate with our Family Pills, Pilulae Catharticae, Tinctura
Purgans, or Tinctura Cathartica; and in very hot Bodies with Sal Mirabile; then
you must cool the sharp Humor by drinking Whey.

XII. Or, You may purge with our Diajallapa, or Species Catharticae, or
Diaturbith, all mingled with Mercurius dulcis, as before, and then cool, by
taking often Crystals of Tartar, or Tincture of Coral in Whey.

XIII. Then anoint all over with Unguentum Populeum, or the Joints only with
our Mercurial Ointment, which is better: and let the sick wash in a Bath made
of Parietary, Mallows, Docks, Alum and Vitriol, sitting in it with the whole
Body.

XIV. Whey of Goats Milk with juice of Fumitory, given to three Pints at a
time, is excellent in this case, after the antecedent cause is taken away, as
aforesaid: by Rosin of Jallap and Syrup of Peach Flowers: Or, by provoking the
Courses or Haemorrhoids, if stopped.

XV. You may Bathe often with fresh Water Baths, in which Quicklime has been
cast: Or, you may make a Discussive Bath with Parietary, Mallows, sharp pointed
Dock, wherein Alum, Sulphur, Vitriol, etc. is put.

XVI. Sennertus tells us, first, that the Humors are to be prepared and
attenuated by coolers and moistners, as Endive, Succory, Borrage, Bugloss,
Fumitory, Hopps, Maidenhair, Asparagusroots, Polypody, Mother of Time, and
Syrups made of these.

XVII. Secondly, That the Humors be evacuated by the Leaves of Sena, Polypody,
black Hellebor, Jallap, Compound Syrup of Polypody, Diacatholicon, Confectio
Hamech, Extractum Melanagogum, Extract of black Hellebor.

XVIII. Thirdly, That the Courses or Haemorrhoids suppressed, be provoked, if
Age and strength will permit.

XIX. Fourthly, That the diet be cooling and moistning, and easy of digestion;
the Air cold and moist, and the Habit of the body altered by eating Borrage,
Endive, and especially Lettice, which last procures also Sleep, in this affect
very requisite and useful: but all sharp, salt, bitter, sower, sweet, fat, and
most of all, fried Meats are to be avoided.

XX. Fifthly, That for Bathing, it be done, one while with sweet blood-warm
Water; another while with that which is salt and sulphury: for by this means,
the Itch will be eased, the Pores loosned, and the Excrements evacuated and
cleans'd

XXI. Sixthly, That you anoint with Oil of Sweet Almonds, or Oil of bitter
Costus, in either of which is put a mixture of Salt and Sulphur. Or, Oil of
Coloquintida iiij. Tar iij. Lupine Meal iij. Sulphur ij. make a Liniment with
Vinegar, and anoint therewith.

XXII. Or, Litharge, Sulphur, Turpentine, A. iss. juices of Mallows, Parietary,
A. j. Oil of Colocynthis j. mix them; after the use of which, bathe in a
blood-warm bath of sweet Water.

XXIII. But since the Disease is contagious, and generally comes through
contagion, an external Cause; it is for the most part cured by Topics or
Externals, a great variety of which you have in Cap. 27. in the cure of a
Scabies, aforegoing, which may very well serve in curing this Disease.

XXIV. To which may be added this following Ointment, which scarcely ever fails
of doing the Cure alone, Oil of Ben, viij. Sheeps Suet ij. mix and melt; and
add thereto Flowers of Sulphur iiij. mix them, and anoint therewith morning and
evening.

XXV. If the former should prove too weak, you must add to it, White
praecipitate j. and then anoint with it as before, the Stomach and Belly being
excepted.

XXVI. Or, in place of the former, you may anoint with Unguentum Cosmeticum,
with White praecipitate; or the Vnguentum Mercuriale, which you may anoint upon
the Joints, Palms of the Hands, and Soles of the Feet: Or, the Vuguentum ad
Scabiem, which I have approved, and is a singular thing.

XXVII. Or, this following, which is neat and cleanly, not spoiling Linen, or
having any ill Scent. Corrosive sublimate in fine Powder iss. dissolve it in
rectified S.V. iiij. being dissolved, add thereto Rose Water two Quarts, or
better, with which the Patient (with a bit of Sponge) may wash the parts
affected, morning and evening, the Stomach and Belly only excepted. This will
not fail of doing the Cure.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the LEPROSY.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Lepra; and in English, the Leprosy.
It is a certain high, and indeed the highest degree of Psoora, or Scabies; and
is derived from (...). Cortex, Squama; Scales, etc. this is the Leprosy of the
Greeks.

II. This Disease generally affects the whole Body, or a part thereof, with
Scurf-like Scales, making it red, rough, and unequal: a tumor possesses the
place where it is; it augments by little and little, without pain; the Eyes are
red, Breath stinks, the Skin scurfy, knotty and hard, the Hands and Fingers
swell, the Feet grow deformed, and the whole Body turns into a Consumption.

III. The Kinds. There are two sorts of Leprosy, the one called Lepra
Graecorum, which is general all over the whole Body: the other Elephantiasis,
Lepra Arabum, the Leprosy of the Arabians; being an universal kind of cancerous
tumor of the whole Body: it arises from melancholy, pituitous Blood, tumid,
livid, black; with Ulcers and Varices in the Legs.

IV. If it possesses the Skin only, and not the Flesh, it is called (...),
Morphea, Morphew.

V. The Causes. Authors will have the Cause of this Disease to be black Choler;
but it seems rather to me that it arises from a putrid, salt Phlegm: and
possibly the pituitous matter may be putrified with a mixture of other Humors;
as a depraved Lympha, and adust Choler.

VI. The procatartick Cause is surfeiting, and feeding upon bad Food, and Meats
of evil juice, Obstructions of any usual Purgation; with all the other external
Causes assigned to the production of a Scabies, the chief of which is
Contagion, by which means it is mostly propagated.

VII. For if Scabies is contagious, without doubt Lepra is so likewise, it
being the worst Scabies, or the highest degree thereof: and therefore it is
reasonable to judge, that Lepra, which is the highest of Scabies, should be
more contagious than the Scabies it self.

VIII. The Differences. In Lepra there is a much greater corruption of Humors,
and so a greater Distemper than in Scabies, in which there falls off only a
bran-like substance: whereas in Lepra, that which falls off resembles the
scales of Fishes: so that from the itching in the Scabies, there is a ready way
made unto the Leprosy.

IX. In a Pruritus, there is with an itching, a certain light roughness of the
Skin, in which unless it be vehemently scratched, nothing at all falls off. In
a Scabies, afterward the Humor becomes more turgid, vehement, and external;
where upon scratching, a scurfy, branlike, or scabby substance falls off
constantly: but in a Lepra the swelling is greater, and there falls off no
longer a branny or scabby substance; but a scaly matter, whether there be
scratching or not.

X. And in an Elephantiasis, not only the temperament of the Parts, but also
their form and figure, and at length the very continuity it self is corrupted;
it being as it were a kind of Cancer, common to the whole Body.

XI. In a Scabies, the matter is more thin, and seizes chiefly upon the
Cuticula; but in Lepra it seizes not upon the Cuticula only, but upon the whole
substance of the Cutis also: and in an Elephantiasis, with the others, it
seizes upon the Flesh too.

XII. Celsus, though he has no where treated of the Leprosy under that name, yet
in lib. 5. cap. 28. he has plainly handled it under the name of Impetigo; of
which he makes four kinds: viz. an Exulcerated, a Red, a Black, and a White,
but all yielding Scales.

XIII. This Impetigo of Celsus is without doubt the Lepra of the Greeks; for as
much as all his kinds of Impetigo do yield Scales; which are indeed only proper
to the Lepra of the Greeks, which is thought to have received its name from
Lepis a Scale.

XIV. The Signs. It is not difficult to know, since it has mostly the same
Signs with Scabies: but this one thing alone is proper unto a Leprosy, that it
sends forth Scales.

XV. The Skin is rough, dry, and withered; there is also many times an itching,
and the Scales will fall off, whether there be scratching or not; and the Sweat
also is very unpleasant and stinking.

XVI. The Prognostics. Lepra scarcely admits of Cure, by any ordinary means:
if old, and in old people, it is uncurable. The Elephantiasis is much more
difficult to cure, than the other Leprosy.

XVII. The sooner is it taken in hand, the easier is it to be dealt withal: if
it is evilly dealt with, it is apt to degenerate into Elephantiasis, or the
Leprae Arabum.

XVIII. The Cure. A good Diet being institututed, the Body is to be evacuated,
and the Liver to be corrected and corroborated; and the matter invading the
Skin, to be by Digestives and Abstersives taken away.

XIX. You may provoke Sweat, by Decoction of Sarza, or Guajacum, or Powers or
Spirit thereof: and Sulphur is here also very commodious, by reason of its
abstersive virtue.

XX. But seeing Lepra is the highest degree of Scabies, the same Medicaments
which are used in Scabies, may be used here; save that they ought to be made
something stronger.

XXI. Sulphur is indeed commended as a most excellent thing, because it
mortifies the evil in its root; and cleanses well, by reason of its abstersive
virtue. Mercury is the next greater Medicament, and indeed without that it will
be very difficult to perform a Cure.

XXII. And next to these things, some have found good in anointing with Tar,
commixed with flowers of Sulphur; as Celsus advises in a Scabies: or this of
Serapion, described by the same Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 28. prope calcem: Sulphur
( vive, I suppose) iv. Nitre in fine Powder ij. mix them with a sufficient
quantity of Rosin: I suppose he means liquid Rosin, as Tar, or Turpentine; if
he does not, you must necessarily add Oil to it, to bring it to a Body.

XXIII. Or you may anoint with Ung. Cosmeticum, with Precipitate, or Ung. ad
Scabiem, or Ung. Mercuriale, applying them with discretion; and giving inwardly
every day, or every other day, gr. viij, x, or xij. (pro re nata) of Arcanum
Jovis, observing a strict course of life.

XXIV. That which has real virtue to extirpate this Disease, is the true Aurum
Potabile: and not much inferior are the the Tinctures of Antimony or Coral: but
if the Aurum Potabile be wanting, then the vitriolate Tartar, Tincture of
Tartar, and Mercurius dulcis take place.

XXV. A specific in this case, is Vitriol ij. dissolved in Wine lbx. and
strained; of which give three or four sponfuls often in a day, with ordinary
Drink, or with Wine, which is better: lbj. of Vitriol will be enough to effect
the Cure, being continually taken for three or four weeks. Hartman.

XXVI. You may also provoke Sweating, (bathing first the whole Body in Spirit
of Wine, and then) with the Diaphoretick, or rather Tincture of Antimony: so
will the Scabs and Scurf fall away, and the remaining roughness and hardness
mollify with Baths made of emollient Herbs: but it is absolutely smoothed and
softened by anointing with Oil of Vipers, or Land-snakes.

XXVII. Let their Drink be Viper or Snake Wine, and let them often eat their
Flesh; purging also the Body with the Panchymagogon-vegetable, mixed with
Mercurius dulcis; and Extract of black Hellebor, mixed with Coloquintida and
Salt of Tartar ^ or, which is better, our Pilulae Panchymagogae, or Catharticae.

XXVIII. But if none of all these things will do, you must come to the most
powerful, and indeed ultimate Remedy, which is Salivation; which you may do
with Mercurius dulcis, Arcanum Corallinum, Aurum Vitae, white Precipitate,
Turpethum Minerale, or other things of like kind; at the end of which you must
prescribe the usual Diet-drink made of Guajacum, Sarsa, Burdock-roots, and
Antimony: bathing in the mean while with the Wash in Chapter 27. Sect. 50, 51, 52.
or anointing with the Ointments mentioned in the preceding Section of this
Chapter: if these things do not, the Patient may be accounted uncurable.

XXIX. The Leprosy of the Arabians has four degrees of Putrefaction: first, the
Elephantiasis it self, which is the highest degree: secondly, Alopecia:
thirdly, Ophiasis: fourthly, Leonina, or the Tettar.

XXX. The Elephantiasis of the Arabians is another kind of Leprosy, differing
from the former; a single Affect, without degrees, and commonly happening to
the Feet: concerning all which, we shall (God willing) largely treat in
particular, in Lib. 3. Cap. 37, and 38. following.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the MEASLES.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Sudamina, Rubiolae, Morbilli;
and in English, the Measles.

II. They are small red Pustles, which break forth in the Skin, something less
than Milletseed; making the Skin rough, and for the most part accompanied with
a Fever, and mostly afflicting the whole Body from head to foot.

III. They mostly happen to Children and young people, of a hot constitution,
in a hot season of the year; and are generally excited through too much motion
and exercise.

IV. The Cause. They are caused by the thinner recrements of the Blood,
restrained within the Skin; by closing the Pores through cold, or some other
accident; where receiving a new Ferment by a febritick heat, they break forth.

V. The Signs. They are known by the manner of their breaking out; which is
with a very deep redness, roughness of the Skin, and Fever.

VI. The Prognostics. They are not geuerally dangerous, unless the Patient
take cold, or there is a choleric Flux of the Belly; and are many times cured
by the help of Nature only, without any thing of Medicine.

VII. The Cure. We have at large handled this Disease, in the third Edition of
Our Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 7. chap. 21. and the Cure thereof at sect. 17. to
30. of the same chapter, so that we shall say the less thereof here; and
chiefly direct those things which are topical, or belongs to the Chirurgian to
perform.

VIII. First, gentle Sudorificks are to be exhibited inwardly; as Our Theriaca
Chymica, drinking after it this Julep: Milk-water vj. Syrupus volatilis j.
Tincture of Saffron ij. mix them: for by this means the Morbifick-matter is
driven forth, out of the Flesh, and the Heart secured.

IX. If there is a great Thirst, give the Patient some few drops of the
Spiritus nitratus, in all the Drink they take; putting in so much, as to make
it pleasingly sharp. This Medicine not only quenches Thirst, but moderately
abates the heat of the Fever, and restores the Tone of the inward parts.

X. Outwardly, you may anoint with this: Oil of Ben vj. Camphir ij. Saccharum
Saturni (dissolved in Vinegar) iij. mix them to anoint with: but this must be
used after they are sufficiently and perfectly come forth; lest you hinder the
intention of Nature, and so do mischief.

XI. This is good: Oil of Ben, or Oil-olive vj. Sheeps-suet iij. Oil of Tartar
per deliquium j. Camphir ij. mix them: and if you please, you may add ij. of
Saccharum Saturni.

XII. Or you may wash with this: Water lbj. Saccharum Saturni iij. Nitre j.
mix, and dissolve: with which let the places affected be washed very warm.

XIII. And this is to be noted that whatever the internal qualities of the
Topics you apply may be, as being potentially cold; yet that nothing be
applied outwardly actually cold, but rather of a blood-warm heat: because
things actually cold are apt to close the Pores, and hinder the perspiration of
the remaining matter.

XIV. Being thoroughly expelled as aforesaid, you may wash with this Liquor
blood-warm, or hotter, fomenting the Parts with a Sponge. Spring Water lbij.
Spirit of Wine iij. Salt of Tartar ij. mix, and dissolve.

XV. After the washing is over, you may anoint with the Oil at Sect. 10.
aforegoing, or the Ointment at Sect. 11. next following; or with Our Oleum
Refrigerans, or Oleum Cosmeticum; than which, there are not yet any better
things found out.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the FRENCH POX.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Siphylis, Lues Venerea, Morbus
Gallicus; and in English, the Venereal Disease, or, French Pox.

II. The Definition. It is gotten by Contagion, through using unclean Bodies: and
therefore is defined to be a virulent and contagious Cachexia of the whole Body.

III. The Causes. They are principally three. 1. The Procatartick or Remote;
which consists in the Contact of impure persons, and a communication of
corrupted Seed.

IV. 2. The Antecedent; which is the mixture and corruption of the Seeds of
several persons; being conveyed into, and retained in the same Womb.

V. As for Contact, it may be by more ways than that common one of lying with a
Woman: as, one Man lying with another Man in the same Bed, so as to touch him,
being full of pocky-sores from head to feet; or lying in the same Sheets where
a pocky person has lain and sweated for some time; or drinking in a Glass,
where some little Poison of the Ulcers of a pocky man's Mouth, or of his
Spittle, filled with Venereal malign Salt, shall have stuck; or a wholesome
Nurse suckling a Child born with the Pox.

VI. Whereby it often happens, that the seed or poison of the Disease, by
superficially adhering to the parts of the sick Person, are conveyed to the
sound; causing either Pustules, Pains, Ulcers, or other Symptoms; which in time
insinuate themselves farther and farther into the Skin and Flesh of the sound
Person; till such time as it infects him with the universal Pox. From hence
appears,

VII. 3. The proximate, near, or conjoined Cause, which is a Venereal Salt,
very subtle, and full of malignity and poison; arising from the various
Ferments of differing Seeds; which being volatile and penetrating, easily enters
into any of the adjacent parts, (especially in the Privities, which are very
porous) through the Skin, even into the Flesh; and from thence into the Veins and
Arteries, without leaving any vestigia of its passage.

VIII. And if ever so little of it be once mixed with the Blood and Lympha, it
works like a little Yest put into much Wort, or like Leaven in a great quantity
of Meal, which easily leavens the whole lump; first fermenting, and then
corrupting as other Poisons do; which offend more by their quality, than their
quantity.

IX. The Antecedent Cause is evident from matter of fact, which is the
confusion and mixtion of many and different Seeds in one and the same Womb;
which makes a more vehement and irregular Fermentation, (as coming from many
and differing Persons, and each Seed containing many contrary and differing
Particles.)

X. From which unnatural Fermentation there proceeds a very evil change, to
Putrefaction, and a poisonous Acrimony; through the heat and moisture of the Part
(which is the Womb) that contains them, and the purity and spirituality of the
Matter (to wit, the Seed) which is corrupted.

XI. For the more pure Matter once corrupted, degenerates into the worst
Putrefaction, even to a degree of Poison: and the more Spirituous the matter
is, the the more vehement, subtle, and penetrating is that Venom; as is
apparently evident from the Pox.

XII. This Disease is common among the Indians, from whence the Spaniards had
it, and brought it home; who at the Siege of Naples, Anno 1493 communicated it
to the French, and they dispersing it all over Europe, it came to be generally
called the French Pox, or, French Disease.

XIII. The Signs are, Impure Coition preceding the Disease, heat and scalding
of Urine, restlessness, loss of appetite, universal itchings, suppression of
the Terms, or the Hemorrhoids, (where usual in Men) fixed pains of the Head,
Shoulders, Shin-bones, and other parts.

XIV. There is also many times present a Gonorrhoea, Bubo's, Ulcers, Pustules,
Cankers of the Yard and Vulva; and a hardness that remains after their healing;
Warts in the Privities, falling of the Hair from the Head, Tettars, Ringworms,
Gums, Nodes, Tophs, rottenness and corruption of the Bones.

XV. Now most of these Signs are but Accidents of the Pox; for it seldom
produces all of them at once, nor all of them at all times, nor in all persons:
but they manifest themselves at certain times and seasons, according to the
differing degrees of the Pox, and the variety of its malignity and infection.

XVI. And therefore it will be necessary to inquire into, and find out, how it
passes out of one degree into another; and why and how, in each particular
degree, it produces very different kinds of Symptoms.

XVII. The Prognostics. Ulcers caused by impure Coition or Contacts, are the
first and lowest degree of the Pox: being the effect of some of the Venereal or
Pocky matter, superficially adhering: and these may be cured at first with
ordinary, or common Desiccatives.

XVIII. But if the Salts constituting them cannot be destroyed by such means,
but that they penetrate into the Vessels, and mix themselves with the Blood and
Lympha; or with the natural moisture which remains in the ulcerated Part, so as
to degenerate into Cankers, known by the rising up of their white lips, dull
color, and hardness, the Disease will then be much more hard to cure.

XIX. If it is a Clap, which is a virulent Gonorrhoea that is contracted, and
it be recent, it may be cured with much ease and safety: but if it is
inveterate or old, the Cure will be much more difficult: as we shall more at
large discourse in the next following Chapter.

XX. If the Pocky-poison has entered into the substance of the Blood, and Nature
by struggling with the Poison has made some critical separation, whereby a Bubo
in the Groin, or some other Glandule does appear, if this is brought to perfect
suppuration, and made to run long, the Disease is drawn forth that way, and so
is easily cured.

XXI. But if these poisonous Salts entering into the mass of Blood, are not
thus precipitated by Nature into Bubo's, (the expulsive faculty being weak) but
fermenting with the Blood and other Juices, and by their own deleterious
quality, they insinuate and disperse themselves every where through the whole
substance of the Flesh, and there precipitate themselves, or are driven out by
Nature; whereby the whole habit of the Body becomes pustulous and ulcerous,
with a kind of Scabies; this is another degree of the Pox, and it is now become
universal; and therefore, though it is yet curable, it must be cured with more
general and universal Remedies.

XXII. If yet the malignity is increased, and the Ferment continues, whereby
the poisonous Salts insinuate themselves into the Nerves and Membranes; causing
Rheumatisms, wandering and nocturnal Pains, felt now in one part, now in
another; oftentimes in the Shins: it is manifest that the Disease is increased
to a greater height, and become much more difficult to cure; and to which more
vehement meant must be used.

XXIII. But if yet these Pocky and Poisonous Salts, after wandering about the
Body, shall at length fix and adhere to any particular Part; causing Gums,
Nodes, Tophs; as they oftentimes do on the Arms, Thighs, Shin-bones, Head,
Jaws, and other parts; and that this adhesion happens in the Muscles, or
Periostion, thereby causing vehement nocturnal pains and other accidents; as
drying the nervous Fibers of those parts, inducing a general Pining or
Consumption: or corrupting the Cartilages and Bones, causing a Rottenness of
the Bones, and other great changes, making boney Nodes, (which is a swelling of
the substance of the Bone, rotted and corrupted by the substance and action of
these impurities,) I say in this case, the Disease is very hard to cure: and
though sometimes it may be cured in very strong Constitutions, yet in some again
that are more weak, who cannot happily undergo the fatigue of the Cure; or in
whom the Poison has seized upon the noble parts, and such other parts as
administer to them, it becomes utterly without help, and past all manner of
hope.

XXIV. The Cure. Because we have at large given you the Description of this
Disease, with the Causes, Signs, Symptoms, Prognostics, and various Ways of
Cure, in the third Edition of Our Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 6. cap. 6. we shall
say the less of it here, rather referring you thither; nor shall we repeat
those things over again in this place.

XXV. But because there are some other particular Methods of Cure, which are
excellent, of which we have said nothing there: and because we would not leave
our young Artist in the dark, as to the safest, shortest, and best ways of
curing, we are willing to gratify the Industrious with the following things.

XXVI. If the Pox is only in beginning, as that there are only little Pustules
or Ulcers, caused by a light and superficial adhesion of some Venereal matter,
and that it has not penetrated more inwardly; lodging at present only in the
part, as in the Yard in Men, or the Privities in Women, or the Teats in Nurses,
or Mouths in Infants, etc. in these cases, it is vanity to pursue the general
Cure, since a particular, shorter, and easier Method will do.

XXVII. It Is only necessary to destroy the malign Ferment in the part affected,
blunting and breaking the points of the Veneral acid Salts, to prevent their
farther penetration.

XXVIII. And this is first done with Topics, not too strong, but of such a
Temperament as may best agree with the Body and Part it is applied to. This is
good: Well-water lbij. Salt of Tartar ij. Saccharum Saturni, Rochalum, white
Vitriol, A. iij. mix them, to wash with.

XXIX. Or this: A weak Limewater lbij. Verdigrise, Saccharum Saturni, Spirit
of Vitriol, A. j, or iv. mix them. And Water mixed with Spirit of Vitriol alone,
( iij. to a quart of Water,) is very excellent in this case.

XXX. Or thus: Well-water lbij. Spirit of Wine iv. Orpiment j ss. Verdigrise,
Aloes, A.ij. mix them. Or: White Port-wine lbij. Well-water lbj. Orpiment ss.
Verdigrise ij. Aloes, Myrrh, A. j. mix; and make a Liquor to wash with.

XXXI. And to prevent the farther increase, exhibit Sudorisicks to drive from
the Center to the Circumference: as Spirit of Hartshorn, a gut. x, ad xxx. or
volatile Salt of Hartshorn, a gr. viij, ad xxiv. or Tinctura Antimonii, ad ij.
which you may give in a Glass of Carduus-water.

XXXII. To these may be added, the Powder or volatile Salt of Vipers, of this
latter, a gr. vj, ad j, or, because this is very dear, the volatile Salt
extracted out of the Flesh of Oxen, Sheep, or other Animals; which may be given
in equal parts of Spirit of Angelica and Carduus Water.

XXXIII. You may also give Purgatives, but they should be only of such a
strength as to move Nature gently, and expel by Stool any putrid Matter in the
Bowels: but not so strong, as to attract the Humors from the remoter parts,
lest you should also attract inwardly the Venereal Malignity, and cause it to
make a farther penetration than otherwise it would have done of it self;
thereby causing the Pocky Venom to be disseminated into the more inward parts.

XXXIV. For this purpose, an Infusion of Sena with Salt of Tartar, and sweetened
with Our Syrupus Catharticus, is Purge enough, and all that you need do in this
case.

XXXV. You may also use Diuretics, to carry off any venene matter by Urine,
which may lodge in the Passages of the Serum; of which Sal Prunellae is chief,
being given a ss, ad ij. in fair Water sweetened with Sugar, or else in white
Wine.

XXXVI. Or, you may give Spirits of Sulphur or Vitriol, a gut. x, ad xxx. more
or less; in Arsmart, Parsley, or Pellitory Water, which cool and provoke Urine
admirably; and in colder Constitutions, Radish-seeds bruised and taken in white
Wine, which is a powerful Aperitive.

XXXVII. But if through neglect of the Patient, or want of Skill in, him that
undertakes the Cure, these Pustules, or Ulcers in beginning, shall degenerate
into Cankers, by the Poisons insinuating it self deeper into the substance of
the Flesh, you must then apply to them Escharoticks and Suppuratives, to eat
off the hardness which accompanies them.

XXXVIII. The ordinary thing used in this case, is red Precipitate, which makes
a Scar when it is good, but yet a very superficial one, which is not able to
hinder the hardness from increasing: others use corrosive Sublimate; but this
causes intolerable pain during its operation, draws a flux of Humors upon the
Part, and many times induces a Gangrene.

XXXIX. But indeed the Lapis Infernalis has a much more excellent and certain
effect, because it makes a deeper Eschar than ret Precipitate, and operates
with less pain than corrosive Sublimate: but it is to be used with prudence and
discretion, for that a Part already ulcerated is more easily to be penetrated,
than that which is covered with skin: and therefore it must be used in smaller
quantity, to fit places only, upon a Plaster with a hole in the middle of it,
of the just bigness you design the Eschar; it will perform the operation as it
were in an Instant.

XL. The Eschar being made, you may cause it to be removed by the help of the
common Suppurative, as Ung. Basilicon; with which you may afterward mix a
little red Precipitate and burnt Alum, to increase the suppuration, and consume
the remaining hardness: and some advise, in dry and melancholic Bodies, to add
to the said Ointment a small quantity of corrosive Sublimate, and to wash the
Ulcer every time you dress it, with the Wash made of white Port-wine, at Sect.
30. aforegoing; adding to it, if need requires, a little Vng. Aegyptiacum, to
make it a little more cleansing.

XLI. And you may lay over the Tents, etc. either Ceratum ad Tophos, or
Emplastrum Mercuriale; rubbing the places about also with Vnguentum Mercuriale,
reiterating proper Purges in their due order.

XLII. If these things happen on the Yard, and a Phimosis, or circular
contraction of the Prepuce is induced, either by negligence or, ignorance of
the Artist; so that the lower part of the Glans cannot be uncovered, whereby
you may come to dress the Ulcers or Cankers that are underneath, you ought to
use emollient Fomentations and Cataplasms, made of Mallow and Marsh-mallow
leaves and roots, Linseed, Turnips roasted, etc. with the Ointments and
Plasters before named.

XLIII. And while these things are doing, you must cleanse the Ulcers and
Cankers with some of the Washes before named; making injections under the
Prepuce with a Syringe, and stretching it gradatim with your Fingers, by
drawing it toward the root of the Yard, every time you dress your Patient,
till you can perfectly uncover the Glans.

XLIV. But all this is to be done with all the easiness that can be, lest a
Paraphimosis, or universal contraction of the Foreskin, wherein it cannot be
reduced, should happen; which is a Symptom much worse than the former, by
reason of the Pain, flux of Humors, and Inflammation, which may hazard a
Gangrene, if not timely prevented.

XLV. Against this evil, the former things mentioned for a Phymosis must be
used, if there be time for them; but if not, you must not only in the
Paraphimosis, but in the Phimosis also, prefer Incision (making one or two in
the Prepuce, as you see need requires) before all other Applications. These
things being done, the Ulcers and Cankers are to be well cleansed, all
impediments removed, and the Cicatrice to be produced according to Art.

XLVI. But if the whole Body is universally defiled, and the Pox is become
universal, we must come to a more universal Cure; and since Nature oftentimes
helps in this case, by the protrusion of Bubo's in the Groin, which if
carefully brought forward, opened, and kept long running, the whole malignity
of the Disease is carried off that way, we must endeavor by Art to promote
this natural Crisis, by application of proper Remedies.

XLVII. That this may be effectually done, you must endeavor to promote the
increase, magnitude, and protrusion of the Tumor, by giving internally
Sudorificks, which help on the Protrusion; of which kind are Our Tincturae
Cordialis, Tinct. Antimonii, Tinct. Opii, Tinct. Salis Tartari, Spiritus Opiati
compositus, Potestates Virtutum, Sal Cornu Cervi Succinatum, Bezoar mineral,
native Cinnabar, Theriaca Chymica, Laudanum specificum Nostrum, Laudanum Samech
Gardneri, and other things of like nature.

XLVIII. And externally you must apply Topics, which may hasten and procure
the Suppuration, you may apply this following Cataplasm: Ung. Basilicon, or
Nicotianae iij. Lilly-roots iv. sour Rye-leaven iv ss. powder of Bay Berries
ij. Oil of Amber q.s. mix, and make Cataplasms; which apply hot, renewing them
every six or eight hours.

XLIX. If in strong Bodies, you would attract more strongly, you must increase
the quantity of Leaven; but if it be in tender and delicate Bodies, you may
sometimes diminish it: now this Cataplasm not only attracts the Humor to the
Part, but also fixes it in the same, by contributing to the Suppuration.

L. If the augment is slow, you may apply a great Cupping-glass, once every
twelve hours; which must be left on so long, till it has made a considerable
attraction; then being taken off, upon the point of the Tumor apply this:
Basilicon, Leven fermented with a little Spirit of Vitriol, A. j. mix them, and
over this apply the former Cataplasm, or Empl. Diachylon cum Gummis.

LI. The Bubo being brought to suppuration, it is to be opened in the most
eminent part of it, or a little beneath, according to the ductus of the Fibers
of the Groin; by applying a potential Cautery, as Lapis infernalis, mixed with a
little Basilicon, or other proper Ointment, and then opening it with the Lancet
or Incision-knife.

LII. After which, the common Suppuratives and Detersives are to be applied;
putting at first upon it Emplastr. Diachylum, and afterward Our Emplastrum
Mercuriale; then you must order it as other corrupted Tumors, and toward the
end of its Cure, purge frequently with some proper Cathartick.

LIII. If Nature indicates not the raising of a Bubo, we must then come to
another way of Cure; which is by of Expulsion of the Morbifick-matter, through
those Passages which Nature has ordained: and this is either by the Pores in
Sweating, or the Salivatick-glands, in Salivation.

LIVE. I know that many have pretended to do the Cure by Sudorificks and Diets,
without Mercury; but this is impossible, in an universal and confirmed Pox:
though it is confessed, after a choice Salivation they are of mighty use. The things
most used for this purpose are, 1. The Wood Guajacum: 2. Cortex Guajaci: 3.
Sarsaparilla: 4. Sassafras: 5. Radix China: 6. Burdockroots; which, next to
Guajacum, are found to be most effectual.

LV. And late Experiences have a vast number of times confirmed to us, that
neither by Vomiting, nor Purging, nor yet by Sweating, or any other ordinary
Methods, can this Disease be cured; whatever ancient Authors have affirmed to
the contrary: it is true, those Methods may abate the Symptoms, and in a recent
Pox, do the work well enough; but in an old, universal, and confirmed Pox,
nothing but Salivation can have any good effect.

LVI. How Salivation then is to be performed, now remains to be inquired into;
and since it is to be done several ways, we will examine them all, and then
point out to that which is best: and the matter by which it must be performed
is Mercury, into the nature and properties of which we shall a little enquire.

LVII. Its nature, is easily to join with Sulphurs, and therefore it is apt to
join it self with Sulphurous Bodies, by amalgamation, whereby its quantity is
many times augmented with Lead and Tin, to a great abuse; for which reason it
is best to draw it forth from Cinnabar, mixing it with Filings of Iron, and so
draw forth the pure Mercury by distillation; and by this means other Mercury
may be had in its Purity; for the other Metals are not volatile enough to rise
with it, but remain in the retort with the Sulphur and the Iron.

LVIII. It is of a spherical or round Figure, and that makes it so moveable and
fugitive; and this form it conserves in its smallest Particles, so that though it
is (as it were) dissolved with acid Spirits, and reduced into most subtle
Powder, yet by the help of a Microscope, the spherical Form may be perceived
still to continue, so that it scarcely seems possible, to find a medium totally
to destroy it: And therefore it is, that by the heat of fire, being separated
from the acid, which divides it into parts, it may be revived again.

LIX. It abounds vastly with Sulphur, and that is the reason it so easily joins
to sulphurous Bodies: And Metals which abound with Sulphur, are more weighty
and more malleable than others, and their Particles more perfectly united
together, yet by their division into infinitely small Particles, they are
rendered more penetrative and volatile than before; and thus it befalls Mercury
in its preparation, for making of Medicines.

LX. Being thus prepared, it is fit for inward exhibition, or topical
Application in Ointments, Emplasters, and Fumigations; where being mixed with
sulphurous bodies, it is kept divided by those oily and resinous Substances, in
imperceptible Particles, that it may thereby the more easily penetrate the
Pores of the part to which it is applied, and that its motion is indifferently,
upwards, downwards, and on every side.

LXI. This is evident in the use of Mercurial Ointments, by the Oily Bodies of
which it is held divided into those so minute Particles, whereby it is the more
able to penetrate the Pores of the Skin: so also in Troches for Fumigation, the
sulphurous Fume of the resinous Bodies keep it also divided into most subtle
Particles, that it may make an easier entrance into the Skin, and pass through
the substance of the Flesh with the less violence.

LXII. This being premised, we will now consider the several ways by which it
is (by various Artists) differently performed: and this, 1. By the Mouth. 2. By
Unction. 3. By Fumigation. Of all which methods, we shall (God willing) treat
in order, as follows.

LXIII. In order to a Salivation (by what way soever attempted) there are some
previous considerations necessary, as 1. The time and Season of the Year, which
ought if possible, to be in March, April or May, if in the beginning of the
Year; or in the latter end of August, September or October, if in the latter
part of the Year; and not in the heat of the Summer (unless the Summer should
prove cool) because Heat causes a dissipation of the Spirits, and a diminution
of the native Heat and Strength, without which the operation cannot be
effected; nor yet in the cold of Winter, because the cold thickens the Humors,
and makes them less apt to flow, as they ought to do; besides, there is fear of
taking cold, which may bring the Patient into danger of his Life.

LXIV. 2. The Preparation of a body of a temperate constitution; And this is
done by purging with the Tinctura Purgans, or Syrupus Catharticus; Or with this
following, Sena ij. White Port Wine half a Pint, make an Infusion over a
simmering heat, for two hours close covered; strain out and add Cassia newly
extracted j. mix for a Dose, which repeat four times, viz. every other day: In
the intermediate days he may (if convenience affords) bathe morning and
evening, to dissolve the coagulated Humors; and during all the time you may
give him this: White Port Wine lbj. Raspings of Guajacam ss. Burdock-roots j.
thin sliced; infuse 24 hours, strain out: Water lbviij. Pearl barley ij.
Liquorice well bruised jss. boil well, and strain out, which mix with the
former infusion in Wine. Let this be his ordinary Drink.

LXV. 3. The Preparation of a thin Body, hot and dry. Here Coolers and
Moistners are to be used, and but very gentle Purging, because it carries off
the Humidities, which are already in too small a quantity. Clarified Whey lbj.
Sena j. make an Infusion, strain out, and dissolve therein Sal Prunellae ss.
for a Dose; which repeat not above twice at 4 or 5 days distance; bathe also
morning and evening for several days, but so as not to provoke the least Sweat,
and the while let this be his constant Drink. Water lbx. Pearled barley iij.
Purslain, Lettice, A. M. iij. Sorrel, M. ij. Liquorice bruised jss. boil and
strain out, into which squeeze the juice of a Limon to make it pleasant; and
let his Food be broth of Meats made savory, to nourish him, and boiled Meat,
and by degrees use him to the constant course of Liquid nourishment.

LXVI. 4. The Preparation of a Body repleat with moisture, and of a cold
phlegmatic Constitution. You may purge with Tinctura Cathartica, Sal Mirabile,
or Tinctura Antimonij Purgans; Or with the Tinctura Cathartica mixed with
Syrupus Catharticus, which you may repeat five times, viz. once every third
day. Let his Drink be this: Water lbx. Pearled barley jv. Liquorice bruised,
Burdock-roots, A. ij. boil, and toward the end of the boiling, add
Corriander-seed, Fennel-seed, A. ss. Cubebs ij. strain out: White Port-wine lbj
ss. Guajacum rasped ij ss. Cortex of the same bruised ss. mix, and make an
Infusion: strain out, and mix it with the former, adding the juice of Limons to
make it pleasant. Let him sweat every night, by giving him a Glass of the
former Liquor, with thirty drops of Spirit of Hartshorn in it, and then go to
a warm bed, if he sweat in a Bath, (otherwise putting a Warming-stone to his
Feet, or Bottles of hot Water to induce the Diaphoresis:) diminish also their
Food gradually, and let them eat what is roasted, as being more drying, and fit
for this occasion.

I. Salivation by Internals.
LXVII. The gentlest of all internal Salivatories is Mercurius dulcis, which
may be given a j, ad ss, or ij. every night going to bed, till such time as the
Flux begins to rise; then you must cease, till you see how it comes forward: if
it rises well, give no more, if not, advance another Dose; and be sure you wait
so long, till you see there can be no danger upon the exhibition thereof.

LXVIII. The next to this is Turpethum Minerale, then Aurum Vitae, and after,
Arcanum Corallinum, white Precipitate, red Precipitate, the Princes Powder, and
Precipitate per se, to which you may add Arcanum Jovis; but this last, because
it operates slowly, must be given longer, and sometimes to gr. x, xij, or more:
all, or any of these which you shall make choice of, must be used with the same
Caution which we gave in the preceding Section, concerning Mercurius dulcis.
See more of this way, in the Third Edition of Our Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 6.
cap. 6. sect. 156, ad Sect. 120.

II. Salivation by Unction.
LXiX. This is performed with Our Vnguentum Mercuriale, or this following:
Quicksilver iv. Turpentine ij. Oil of Ben j. Oil of Rhodium ij. mix, and
dissolve the Quicksilver by grinding; then add Oil-olive lbj. Sheeps-suet
lbss. mix them again well, and keep it for use.

LXX. Of either of these Ointments you may take ij. for the first anointing;
which may be from the Ancles till you come above the Knees, and from the Wrists
to the end of the Shoulder-blades: in some tender and delicate Bodies, this
first Unction has done the work desired; so that a second would have proved
dangerous.

LXXI. After this first Unction, therefore you must observe the motion of its
operation, or if any signs of the Salivation appear, for then you must
presently leave off anointing, for fear Suffocation should ensue; which does
always come to pass, when the Humors are carried up to the Throat in too large
a measure.

LXXII. If no signs appear, you must then come to a second Unction, which must
be made about a natural day, or twenty four hours after the first; in which you
may use ij. more of your Ointment, anointing and rubbing the Legs and Thighs
therewith, from the middle of the Foot to the upper part of the Hips; as also
the Backbone, from the end of the Os sacrum to the middle of the Neck; and the
Arms, from the Wrists again to the Shoulder-blades: not forgetting the places
where the Glandules are placed.

LXXIII. If yet no signs of a Salivation appear, you must with ij. more of your
Ointment anoint again a third time, and upon the same places last afornamed:
and this rarely fails to produce the desired effect, if the Body of the Patient
be fitly prepared, as it ought to be.

LXXIV. If yet no signs appear, you must be very cautious how you proceed, lest
you should be surprised before you are aware; and forbear anointing anew, for
at least two days: and when you begin to anoint again, not using above half the
quantity, and yet less, if the Gums begin to swell or grow sore: beware of too
many repeated anointings, because of the danger which many times succeeds.

LXXV. In this case you had better give a Dose of Mercurius dulcis, a gr. xx,
ad xxx. it will with much ease and safety induce the Salivation; when more
anointing may prove dangerous, and if need requires, it may be again repeated.

LXXVI. As to the manner of Anointing, it must always be made before a clear
and good fire, especially if the weather be cold; a Skreen being placed behind
the Patient, to make the heat reverberate, and save the Sick from cold, and the
Ointment ought to be rubbed on, and repeated several times upon each part, to
help forward the penetration.

III. Salivation by Fumigation.
LXXVII. This is the third and last way of raising a Salivation, which is done
by the Fumes of artificial Cinnabar, made into Troches, after this manner:
Artificial Cinnabar j ss. Benjamin, Mastich, Myrrh, Olibanum, all in fine
powder, A. ss. Cortex Winteranus, Zedoary, in fine powder, A. iij. Frankincense
ss. Turpentine, enough to make them up into a mass for Troches; of which make
forty, for ten Fumigations.

LXXVIII. Wiseman in his Surgery, has these Troches: Cinnabar ij. crude
Mercury j. Mastich, Frankincense, Gum of Juniper, A. ss. Storax Calamita,
Benjamin, A. iij. make all into a subtle powder, and with Turpentine q.s. make
a mass for Troches, each weighing about iij. this quantity may serve for twenty
Fumigations.

LXXIX. The way of using these Troches is thus: have an artificial Chair, or
Cane-couch, made for the purpose, upon which put the Sick in some warm close
place; or a Tub for the purpose, made beneath of boards, and arched like a
Tent; and covered all over with thick Blankets. Or, which is much better, let
him go into Hartman's Sweating-Chair, in which let him sit, and receive the
Fume from the Troches within, being thrown upon live coals.

LXXX. His Face must be out, as the nature of the place imports, that he may
endure it the longer; and his Head so covered, that the Air come not at it; but
toward the conclusion, the Head ought to receive some of the Fumes: and he is
to endure it as long as he can without fainting.

LXXXI. Then wrapping warm Sheets about him, carry him to a fresh warm place,
and place him in a warm bed, to sweat, for three or four hours, or more, as he
can endure it.

LXXXII. These Fumes are to be used once every day, if the Sick be strong, but
if weak, once every other day: and if he be faint, let him rest a day or two,
till his Spirits are recruited, and then repeat the Fumigation again; till by
the foreness of his mouth, and fluxing or spitting, you see reason to give
over: he may also in this method of Fuming, eat oftener than otherwise, and that
good and nourishing food; for too much abstinence in this case does hurt.

LXXXIII. If a particular part be chiefly affected, as an Arm or Leg, with
vehement, Rheumatick pains, a malign Herpes, or cacoethick Ulcer; you need only
fume that Part alone (which is less troublesome and dangerous to the Patient) by
laying it in a proper posture, covering it over and close with Blankets, and
then putting the Fumigation cast upon live coals, under it, etc.

LXXXIV. Hitherto of the usual Methods of Fuming; but length of time has
brought the Art to a greater perfection: for now the Patient being dressed in his
Clothes, (as if going abroad) is put in the morning into a close Room like a
Closet, or some such thing; and the Fumigation being put upon live coals, in
that little place, he receives it up his Mouth and Nostrils, for the space of
about an hour, more or less, as he is able to bear it: which when over, he goes
about his Chamber or House, without any other Observation than this Caution, to
beware of taking Cold.

LXXXV. This makes the Patient spit upon the spot, for an hour or better, and a
little all the day after till the next morning; (but so as not to be perceived
by strangers) and then it is repeated again in like manner for another hour;
and thus continued for about thirty days, less or more, or till the Patient
becomes perfectly well.

LXXXVI. This Method is without any danger, and if the weather is warm, the
Patient is permitted to go abroad: (for within an hour after the Fumigation is
over, the Salivation will be pretty well over also only a small kind of
spitting continues all the day, and is again revived the next day:) nor is any
precise Diet to be observed by him in respect to his eating or drinking; salt
and sour things, and Pickles, being only forbidden him.

LXXXVII. By this Method, a Patient is as certainly cured as by any other; and
I am sure, much easier, and with a great deal more of safety; and in my
opinion, in a much shorter time. If any shall object the danger of the Fumes
going up the Head, it is a vain Objection: for though it may be rationally enough
answered, yet daily Experience for thousands of times, has proved it safe and
innocent: and doubtless there can be no Argument against Experience.

LXXXVIII. Since we have here shown three several ways of Salivating, as, 1. By
Internals: 2. By Unction: 3. By Fumigation; and it be demanded which of them is
the best; we in few words answer, that by Fumigation; next that by Internals,
given by the Mouth; and in the last place we put that by Unction, as being the
very worst way of all, and always attended with the more dangerous Symptoms.

LXXXIX. For if we consider the way the Mercury has to make, when used by
Unction, that it must pass through the Skin, then through the Fat, if any be, and
Musculous Flesh, through which it has a long passage; (where by the way it is
sometimes lodged, and sometimes meets with the Bones, corrupting and rotting
them; causing many times nocturnal Pains, with many other Aches and disorders,)
and at length ascends up into the Stomach, Head, and Brain; whence the
Serosities of the Parts, and Acidities of the Humors precipitate it down again
into the Salivatick Glands and Ducts: I say, when a man considers, that this is
the way it must make, to perform the work of Salivation, with the accidents and
dangers attending it, it would make even a bold Man tremble to attempt it.

XC. As to the Internal way of raising the Salivation, (though it is much better
than that by Unction, yet) some Objections lie against it: for unless it be
made with Mercurius dulcis, (which is too weak a Preparation for a confirmed
Pox) it generally makes the Patient extremely sick, even almost to death;
frequently excites violent Vomitings, Faintings, and cold Sweats: and sometimes
the Salivation either rises not at all, or if it does, it is many times so
faintly as to do no good: and unless the Artist be very skilful in his
business, by endeavoring to raise it to its due height, he many times
suffocates his Patient; or otherwise by a too much opening the mouths of the
Vessels, causes a violent flux of Blood; to the great hazard, at least
detriment of the Patient.

XCI. From what has been said it is manifest, that the Way by Fumigation is
truly the best; and in that way, the method of Fuming by the Mouth, with the
Clothes on, because this is free from all the Symptoms, Dangers, and
Miscarriages of the other Methods; though we do not by this forbid them others,
but do allow that sometimes, upon some occasions and accidents, they may well
enough be made use of, if done by a skilful Hand.

XCII. But which way soever you pursue, whether by Internals, Unction, or
Fumigation, you may know when the Salivation is in beginning, by the working of
the Pulse, vexation of Mind and Body, diminution or entire loss of Appetite,
heat of the Mouth, swelling and soreness of the Gums and Lips, thickness of the
Tongue, blisters in the Cheeks, stinking of the Breath, whiteness of the
Palate, pain of the Teeth, and indisposedness to sleep.

XCIII. When by these signs, you find the Salivation to approach, you must
forbear giving any more Doses by the mouth, if you use that way; or Unction, if
you have used that, or Fumigations, if that; and all sort of Mercurials, lest
some evil accident, as vehement corrosion of the Vessels, by which much Blood
runs out of them for some days, or Suffocation should ensue, which many times
happens when Mercury is used in too great a quantity.

XCIV. But if the Salivation comes regularly on, it will be manifest by a
continual kind of stream, or running down of a clear Phlegm or Saliva, as it
were in a long thread, which at first runs but gently, but gradually increases
for 8 or 9 days, till it comes to the height, which in persons of a moist and
gross habit of Body, may come to four, five, or six Pints in a day and night,
and to others in a less proportion.

XCV. But it ought to be brought on with care and caution, and by a gradual
ascension in the use of the Medicaments, first seeing the ultimate of what the
last Dose or Quantity will do, before you venture upon the next, lest by too
frequent administrations, you raise the Salivation to a degree not to be
commanded, and so suffocate the Patient.

XCVI. In the beginning of the Operation, there is sometimes vehement pains of
the Belly, causing a Flux downwards. These if they be very violent and
difficult to endure, you may ease by exhibiting an Anodyn Clyster. White Posset
drink or broth of Pearled Barley lbj. Powers of Aniseeds iij. Tincturae Opij
gut. 30. mix, and give it warm.

XCVII. If the Mouth be much Vlcerated, you ought to wash it daily with warm
Water or Damask Rose Water, mixed with a little Wine; I know some advise to a
mixture of Milk and Water; but Water and Wine are much better, by reason of the
abstersive Quality of the Wine: It Is true, it will make the Patients mouth
smart a little, but its good effects will make it to be born withal,
notwithstanding that little inconveniency.

XCVIII. While the Spitting lasts, cold is carefully to be avoided; and before
taking of any thing inwardly down the Throat, the Mouth ought to be well washed
two or three several times with fair warm Water, that the adhering sharp,
corrosive and poisonous Humor may be washed off, the Mouth kept clean, and the
increase of the Ulcers hindered.

XCIX. For otherwise every time any thing is drunk or taken down, part of the
poisonous Recrements hanging about the Mouth, Tongue and Throat, will also be
swallowed, whereby the Patient will be reinfected with his own Poison, which
often times causes tortions and gripings of the Bowels: and truly, the want of
this course of daily washing the Mouth, is the cause of the repeating of
Salivation after Salivation; and that after several Salivations, though never so
well performed; they have proved ineffectual as to a perfect Cure; and that the
Patient has been forced to go through two or three several Salivations, and some
more; when one performed with this care, would have served the turn, and
possibly done better too.

C. As to the time the Flux ought to continue, it is not exactly to be
determined; in some it will finish of its own accord in 12 or 14 days,
(counting the beginning of the Flux when the Sick spits between a Pint and a
Quart in 24 hours) in some in 20 days, and in others in 30 days, beyond which
it ought not to be continued, unless it be very small and inconsiderable.

CI. For if you drain some Bodies too much, consuming and exhausting the
Radical Moisture it self, which is the Root of Nourishment, and Foundation of
Life, you will dry up the Brain by little and little, and so infallibly induce
an incurable Atrophy upon the whole Body, making Death to close up the Act. You
ought therefore as well to preserve what is natural to the Body, as to destroy
what is inimical: and therefore you must observe how much the Body is dried,
how much of the Strength is spent, and all other circumstances and accidents,
which may give you timely notice to stop the Salivation (after a sufficient
continuance) to prevent any future danger.

CII. If therefore you would stop the Salivation when it rises too high, or
continues too long, some Authors advise to repress it with Catharticks; others
with salt of Tartar mixed with Broth, or ordinary Liquid Purges, as a Tincture
or Infusion of Sena, etc.

CIII. But if you would do it certainly and effectually, give this mixture:
Flowers of Sulphur, or Sulphur Vive in fine Powder ij ss. Honey, or extract of
Juniper Berries, q.s. mix, and make a mass for five Doses, to be given morning
and evening: and if the Salivation is vehement, you may give a Dose or two of
Laudanum, for that immediately thickens the Humor through the whole Body, so that
it cannot flow to the Salivatick Glands, nor supply them, after which you may
give a gentle Purge.

CIV. To heal the Ulcers which happen in the Mouth and Throat, often gargle
with fair warm Water in which a few Drops of Spirit of Sulphur or Vitriol are
put; Or with this Gargarism, Fair water lbij. S.V. iij. Mel Rosarum jss. mix
for a Gargle: Or this, Fair Water lbij. Red Port Wine lbss. Honey of Mulberries
j ss. mix them.

CV. If there is a Flux of Blood at Mouth, Fair Water jv. Red Port Wine ij.
Tinctura Mirabilis j. mix them. Or give this: Catechu ss. Flowers of Sulphur j.
Honey of Roses, q.s. mix and make a Bolus, which often repeat. Or, An infusion
of Red Roses in Water jv. and make it pleasantly acid with Spirit of Sulphur;
it will be astringent enough to repel the Blood.

CVI. If there is a Diarrhaea or Bloody Flux, give one small Pill of Our
Specific Laudanum, at night going to bed; or instead thereof, this mixture,
Red Port Wine vj. Tincturae Mirabilis jv. Guttae Vitae, or Liquid Laudanum gut.
xxx. mix for a Dose to be given at night going to bed, to be repeated every
night so long as the Flux lasts.

CVII. If after the Salivation is over, there is in Women, yet an overflowing
of the Womb, with a kind of purulent Humor, it will be necessary for her to
receive up her Womb, the Fume of some of the Iroches mentioned Sect. 77.
aforegoing; or else to inject into the Womb with a Womb-Syringe this Water.
Fair Water lbij. White Vitriol, Roch Alum, Saccharum Saturni A. iij. mix and
dissolve, and inject therewith three or four times a day, blood-warm.

CVIII. If the Sick is accompanied with much Weakness and Fainting Fits, either
in the time of the Salivation, or after it is finished, you may give them two or
three spoonfuls or more, of Our Aqua Bezoartica, or Spiritus Cordialis, or
strong Cinnamon Water, (if in the Salivation,) mixed with as much choice Canary,
or else (if out of the Salivation) alone by it self; Or a glass of generous
Wine, which will relieve the suffocated Spirits, fortify the Heart, and do much
good in all fainting and swooning Fits.

CIX. As to the Diet which the Sick is to submit to, during the course of the
Salivation, We now come to speak. If the Body is hot, dry, thin, and lean, you
must forbear all Nutriments of a heating Quality, and withal nourish somewhat
more than ordinarily: Give him plentifully of broth made of Beef, a Leg of
Veal, or a Pullet, making it a little savory, adding to it Sorrel, Lettice,
Purslain, or Succory, and let him drink of it often: Or you may give him Gelly
made of Veal, also Gelly made of Hartshorn, and Barley Broth, made with Milk
like to Cream, and a little sweetened with double refined Sugar; Or Posset Drink
made White, and a little sweetened with fine Sugar: let him take hourly in the
daytime, and every third or fourth hour in the night, of some of these things,
which he likes best; and if he be faint for want of Food, you may give him a
couple of New-laid Eggs poached, every day at Noon, or only when need requires.

CX. But if the Body is fat, fleshy, strong, cold and moist, or phlegmatic, you
may give him the former things, but without Sorrel, Lettice, Purslain or
Succory, and not so often, nor in so large Quantities, but only just enough to
keep the Salivation up, and the Patient alive; and once in two or three days
you may give him a New-laid Egg or two, poached, for the Support of his
Spirits: Also Water Gruel is of good use in this case, boiled with Sage, Time,
Fennel and Savory.

CXI. Sometimes instead of Salivating, the Mercury Praecipitates downwards, and
the Malignity is carried off by Stool; but this hinders not the Mercury from
penetrating into all the parts, and is much better than when it terminates in
Sweating. This is caused from the abounding of Alcalious Salt, which meeting
with the Mercury, stops its motion, and forces it downwards. In this case the
Physician ought to assist Nature, by repeating proper Purges and Diuretics.

CXII. Sometimes also, it operates chiefly by Urine, and this is better than
that by Stool, and next to that of Salivation, especially if it continues long,
and is large enough. This happens in such Bodies where acid Salts and alcalious
Salts are nearly equal: for Acids taken inwardly become Diuretic, carrying off
Phlegm and Serosities by Urine, but joining with the Mercury, they may be
sublimed, or carried upwards with Heat; whereby they loose that Property,
unless encountered with an equality or sufficient Power of an Alcalious Salt,
for then being dissolved in the Serum, by the power of the Alcali the Mercury
is precipitated downwards, and by the Virtue of the Acid, it is conducted to
the Reins, and so the Impurities are carried off and expelled by Urine.

CXIII. But if the Mercury performs a complete Salivation, which is its most
ordinary operation; it is, because that the Venereal Salts fermenting like
Leven, dissolve in the Blood and Lympha, and so spread themselves into all
parts of the Body, rendering by this means all the Humors sharp and acid; and
the Mercury meeting with these acid Humidities, charges it self with them, from
whence it comes to pass, That the Mercury by its Volatile Property, through the
native heat of the Body, ascending upwards, carries all the malignity of the
Humors with it, to the Salivatick Glands, and so causes the Salivation.

CXIV. And it seems that Nature acts her part in this work of her own accord,
because this motion is not only from below upwards, but it is generally equal,
moderate and continual. Now all the acid, malign and impure Humors ascending
with the Mercury, they make it corrosive (like corrosive Praecipitate dissolved
in A.F. or Spirit of Nitre) and ascending up with Heat, they increase their
corrosive property, (making a kind of Sublimate) which seizing upon the parts
about the Mouth and Throat exulcerates them, and sometimes penetrates them so
exceedingly, that many times the Vessels are corroded and opened, whence comes
a flux of Blood, lasting sometimes for several days, till the fluid matter
becomes less corrosive, through the diminution of the Acids.

CXV. Tho the Directions we have here given, are almost infallible for curing
this Disease, and do scarcely fail one of a hundred, if exactly observed, yet
many times dreadful Accidents happen, which no man could foresee, and many
times are impossible to be remedied; as in dry, thin and lean Bodies, of a
sudden there is a flux of the Bowels, with almost insufferable Gripings, which
soon leaves a constipation behind, which causes an inflammation of the Bowels,
Breast, Throat and Mouth, with a difficulty of swallowing and breathing, which
produces a Fever, with intolerable heat and burning, whence comes oftentimes
Deafness, Blindness and Palsies, and many times Frensies, Swoonings,
Appoplexies, and Death it self.

CXVI. So also in a fat, cold, moist, and phlegmatic Constitution, as sudden
Alterations happen, the Mercury through its violent ascension, carries with it so
great a confluence of Humors, that not only most of the afore-enumerated
Accidents may happen, but many times a very great swelling of the Throat,
Tongue, and Cheeks, and oftentimes of the whole Face, with hardness, cancrous
eating Ulcers, looseness of the Teeth, and an immoderate flux of Blood, which
causes either present Suffocation, or otherwise the Ulcers spreading, and
growing black and stinking, they at length gangrene, and so cause Death.

CXVII. The Causes of these things are often unknown, and therefore difficult
to be avoided; in some there are inward Dispositions and Qualities, not
possible to be understood, and so without the possibility of being taken away;
in others the Cacochymia of Body is so great, that it cannot any ways be
corrected, or overcome; besides the true causes of many men's Death is wholly
unknown, nor can the set time be avoided; for which reasons it is, that the
success of this Operation is not always so happy as one would desire, and such
accidents happen, which as they could not be foreseen, so might not reasonably
be expected, and therefore not in the power of the most Skilful to prevent.

CXVIII. It remains now, that we prescribe the conclusive Diet, or that which
is to be taken after the Salivation is over, which is to be continued for at
least thirty days; of which we shall give you one only Praescript, which is
this that follows, and is chiefly for a cold, moist, and phlegmatic
constitution.

CXIX. The conclusive Diet Drink. Antimony in fine Powder, and tied up in a Rag
xxiv. Burdock Roots thin sliced xxxij. Mealy Sarsaparilla slit, Liquorice
bruised, Lignum Guajacum, rasped Potashes, A. xvj. Cortex Guajaci, Winters
Cinnamon bruised, A. viij. Water six Gallons; mix and infuse all night in a
scalding heat; the next day boil till six Quarts are consumed in a proper
Diet-Pot: then add Currants, Raisons of the Sun stoned, Figs slit, A. xvj.
Zedoary x. Anise-seed, Carraway-seed, Coriander-seed, Fennel-seed, A. iv. boil
well again for half an hour, or better, and then strain out, without pressing;
bottle it up, putting into each Bottle a Clove slit in two: Of this drink three
Pints a day, viz. morning, noon, and night, gently sweating upon it every night.

CXX. The remaining ingredients, except the Figs, Raisons, and Currants, which
are to be cast away, you may take again, and add to them fresh Figs, Raisons
and Currants, A. xvj. Aniseeds, Coriander, Carraways, and Fennel-seeds, A. ij.
Water lbxx. and boil again half an hour or better, then strain out and bottle
it up as before; this is the second decoction, and for ordinary Drinking: The
Antimony keep and preserve, for it will serve 40 times if there be occasion.

CXXI. But if it is in a thin, hot, dry, choleric and consumptive habit of
Body, you must take but one half of the Lignum Guajacum, and wholly leave out
the Cortex, Winters Cinnamon, and Zedoary, and then make it up with the
remaining Ingredients, in all respects as the former, both as to the first and
second Decoctions.

CXXII. Lastly, That all parts may be sufficiently cleansed, and that no Seeds
of the Disease, nor Recrements of Humors may be left in the Bowels, or other
Passages, purge first before you take the Decoction, at least twice, and
afterward whilst you take the Decoction, once every fifth day, with this
infusion of Sena. Choice Sena ij. green Liquorice bruised jss. Salt of Tartar
ss. Fair Water jx. mix and infuse two hours close covered, then give it a Walm
or two, and Strain out for one Dose. See more of this Cure at large in the
Third Edition of Our Synopsis Medicinae, in the Elements of Physic, Lib. 1.
Cap. 71. Sect. 44. ad Sect. 63. and Lib. 6. Cap. 6. where you will receive
abundant Satisfaction.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of a CLAP, or RVNNING of the REINS.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Gonorrhoea Virulenta, and Venerea;
in English, a Clap, Virulent, or Pocky Running of the Reins.

II. The placing this Distemper here among Universal Defilements, may be
objected against us; it being the hurt only of a particular Part: but to this
we answer, 1. That we did it chiefly, as having an affinity to the Lues,
treated of in the preceding Chapter, and as being a Species of it; for which
cause we thought it fit to be treated of in the next place to that. 2. That
though it is not an Universal Defilement in its beginning, yet many times by
continuance and ill handling, it becomes Universal; inducing a Venereal Cachexy
over the whole Body; tainting the Blood, Lympha, Seed, and all the other Humors.

III. The Signs. It is known by the running of a virulent, stinking, and
ill-coloured matter from the Yard or Womb; with much pain, heat, and sharpness
of Urine withal.

IV. It is indeed a particular kind of Pox, or the Pox in beginning: a Clap, or
virulent Gonorrhoea, is a higher degree thereof than simple Ulcers or Cankers,
of which we have spoken in the former Chapter; because the malign or poisonous
Salts or Matter is insinuated farther into the Body, even to Parts inward and
concealed.

V. There is a solution of Continuity in the Urethra, which descends down even
to the Bladder it self, and parts adjacent, which seem to be the first of the
inward parts affected; then comes Inflammation, known by the heat and pain
which is felt in pissing, with sometimes a total stoppage of Urine; or so great
an obstruction, as only suffers it to be made by drops, or in little quantities.

VI. And by degrees the malignity seizes upon the Seminal parts, and the Seed
it self; altering it in its substance, color, smell, and other properties;
making it thin, yellow, green, blew, and stinking; and in all its substance,
spoiled and corrupted.

VII. The Causes. They are the same with those mentioned in the former Chapter;
and are chiefly, 1. Contagion, which by Contact or Act affixes the seeds of the
Disease. 2. A malign and poisonous Salt, which insinuating it self into the
Pores of the Skin, where the contact is, disseminates its self, fixes in the
Part, and lays the foundation of the Disease.

VIII. The Differences. It differs from a simple Gonorrhoea, or Flux of Seed;
which arises either from too great a fullness of Seed, or overflowing of the
Seed-vessels, or a weakness of the Retentive Faculty: whereas this virulent
Gonorrhoea is a Solution of Continuity, or Ulcer in the Vrethra, descending
down, affecting the Seed-vessels, and by its malignity contaminating the Seed
it self.

IX. The Prognostics. When it is recent, or but newly contracted, it may be
cured in short time, and with much ease and safety; by removing the Symptoms
appearing, through the application of fit and proper Medicines.

X. But if it has been of any long continuance, so that the malign and venereal
Salts have penetrated into the Orifices of the Veins and Arteries; or by any
other ways howsoever, have affected the Blood and Lympha, and corrupted the
whole substance of the Seed, the Cure will be much more difficult and tedious;
because all the accidents become greater.

XI. And if it has been of very long continuance, without cure, the malignity
penetrates farther, even to the infecting the Muscles, and whole
Fleshy-substance, and at length degenerates into the Universal Pox, of which we
have treated in the preceding Chapter.

XII. The Cure. Bleeding, with which this Cure is almost always begun, by the
Quack-Doctors and Vulgar Practisers, must be absolutely forborne, for the
mischief it may possibly do. Let us hear what the famous Blegny, Chirurgian in
ordinary to the French Queen, says in this case, in his Observations on the
French Disease, Sect. 2. Cap. 2.

XIII. Some Practisers (says he) whose course we must by no means follow, ever
begin this Cure with Bleeding in the Arm; by which means the Venereal matter
will be attracted, or driven more inwardly into the Body: and therefore we must
by consequence suspect it as pernicious or dangerous.

XIV. Others (says he) Bleed boldly in the Foot, which also has the same
effect; or else it precipitates the matter, by defluxion into the Testicles:
for which reason you ought to abstain from Bleeding in either part; and rather
use this following Decoction, which cools the Inflammation, abates the
Acrimony, and drives the Matter outward.

XV. The Decoction. Roots of white Lillys, of Althaea, A. lbj. Sorrel M ss.
Liquorice bruised viij. Water lbxxiv. boil and make a Decoction, and strain out
by pressing, the better to draw forth the Mucilage: and to every quart of this
put Oil of Vitriol, or Sulphur gut. xij. of this let the Patient drink as much
as his Stomach will bear, and this, at any hour of the day or night. Thus
Blegny.

XVI. This may be of use in the beginning of the Disease, and also of service,
if it has been of any continuance: but to make it more effectual for abating
the inflammation and heat of Urine, you must dissolve in every quart thereof
Sal Prunellae, or Crystals of Nitre, a ij, ad j. and sometimes you may add to
it juice of Limons, to make it more cooling, refreshing, and agreeable.

XVII. And with a Yard-Syringe you must daily inject into the Yard thin
Barley-milk only warm, or new Milk lukewarm; casting in two or three
Syringes-full at a time, and doing it six or seven times a day; but always
after pissing, if you have occasion: and where these things cannot be had, you
may use warm Water, in which a little Spirit of Wine is put, a quarter of a
pint or better, to a quart of Water.

XVIII. And if the Pain be vehement, you may give a Turpentine-Clyster, which
is an excellent thing, to give ease, and facilitate the passage of the Urine.

XIX. In the next place, you must endeavor the carrying off the Malignity by
Urine; which you may do by giving a few Doses of Chio, Cyprus, or Strasburgh
Turpentine, either in Bolus's or Pills. One of those Turpentines ij. with
powder of Liquorice make Pills for eight Doses; to be given morning and evening
for four days.

XX. After the use of this, you must then purge gently with an Infusion of Sena
and Cassia, thus made: Choice Sena ss. Sal-nitre j ss. White Wind viij. mix,
and make an Infusion; in which dissolve Cassia new drawn j ss. for two Doses.

XXI. In the mean season, cleanse the part affected, by this detersive
Injection: White Wind a quart, juice of Pellitory of the Wall a pint, Mel
Rosarum vj. Verdigrise purified j. mix them: with which syringe (with a proper
Yard-syringe) four or five times a day.

XXII. If you would have it more desiccative, you may make it thus: White Wind,
Limewater, A. lbj. Honey of Roses v. purified Verdigrise ss. mix them: it
cleanses and drys well.

XXIII. These things being used for some time, whereby the impurities are
evacuated, and the Parts affected cleansed of their malignity; by which the
matter comes to run more white and thick, and less in quantity, you may with
safety give the White Potion, thus made:

XXIV. Strasburgh- Turpentine ij. yolks of three new-laid Eggs; mix them well
together by grinding, then add thereto either Milk, or Whey, or white
Posset Drink, three quarts; mix them well, and dulcifie with double-refined
Sugar. Dose, half a pint, morning, noon, and night.

XXV. If by the use of this it should seem to run more, it is but by way of
farther cleansing; which you may facilitate by the use of this Injection:
Decoction of Agrimony and Pearled-Barley lbij. clarified juice of Wormwood vj.
Tincture of Wormwood ij. Honey of Roses v. Oil of Sulphur gut. xx. mix them.

XXVI. These things being done, the malignity carried off, and the Ulcer
sufficiently cleansed; we must now come to consummate the Cure by Stypticks and
Astringents, which you may with all safety administer.

XXVII. For these things prudently given, close the Spermatick Vessels by
little and little: yet give them leave to discharge themselves of their
remaining impurities.

XXVIII. But if the Disease has been inveterate, they ought not to be used, but
in the very last part of the Cure: for in such the running Matter is nothing
else but the Poison of some of the Ulcers in the passages: and therefore the
Flux must not be hindered by any other means, than that which is detersive and
desiccative, which being sufficiently made use of, you may come then to the use
of Astringents and Stypticks.

XXIX. Every night going to bed, you may give of Our Specific Laudanum; or Dr.
Gardner's Laudanum Samech, two or three grains, or more, as you see occasion:
and every morning, of Our Tinctura Mirabilis one spoonful, in a glass of Ale,
or some proper Decoction.

XXX. Let his Drink, whether Beer, Ale, or Wine, be made pleasantly sharp with
Our Aqua Antifebritica; which will certainly destroy all malignity which may
harbor in any of the inward parts, and perfectly complete the Cleansing.

XXXI. Then with a proper Yard or Womb Syringe, inject the following mixture.
Of a moderate Limewater lbij. Saccharum Saturni iij. mix them; to be injected
five or six times a day; always after making water, if there be occasion.

XXXII. Or this: Fair Water lbiij. white Vitriol, Rochalum, A. iij. Saccharum
Saturni j ss. S.V. vj. mix them; to be used as the former, four, five, or six
times a day; and two Syringes-full every time.

XXXIII. If the Patient has fallen into ill hands, who for want of skill has
stopped the Running too soon; by which means the virulent Serosities are fallen
into the Testicles, where it causes a great and painful Tumor, giving a great
deal of trouble in the Cure: in this case, the Patient ought to repose for a
time, and if possibly, in his bed.

XXXIV. Then to take away the Inflammation, and alleviate the Pain, you must
foment the Part with Decoction of Camomii, mixed with an equal part of red
Port-wine.

XXXV. After which, you may apply to the Part a Cataplasm of roasted or baked
Turnips; which upon manifold Experience, I declare to be an excellent thing. Or
this: White-bread lbj. six yolks of newlaid Eggs, Oil-olive iv. Milk q.s. mix,
boil, and make a Cataplasm; which apply as hot as can be endured, and let it be
renewed every six hours.

XXXVI. This done, apply this following Cataplasm: Cuminseed, Fennel-seed, Ana,
well bruised, and boil them in Oxymel to the consistence of a Cataplasm; after
which you may apply Balsam of Sulphur, mixed with Myrrh, to the consistence of
a Cerecloth.

XXXVII. And while all this is a doing, you must also carry off the Humor by
due Purging with Our Pilulae Catharticae, several times repeated. And what
remains must be consumed by the use of a Decoction of Guajacum Saraparilla,
Burdock-roots, and other Sudorificks.

XXXVIII. If a Carnosity should happen in the Urethra in a Man, or the Neck of
the Womb in Women, wherein, in Men the passage of the Urine is stopped or much
hindered; which is usually perceived in the beginning, by the smallness of the
Stream, or dividing thereof, with pain in Pissing.

XXXIX. If I say, the Urine is wholly stopped, it is mostly cured by opening
the Perinaeum, by Incision; or at least otherwise to put down into the Bladder
a Catheter, which yet will cause much pain.

XL. If it is but in beginning, it may be consumed by excoriating it with the
Catheter, and applying thereupon, by the help of a small wax Candle mixed with
Turpentine, Red Praecipitate, burnt Alum, Verdigrise, yellow Orpiment, and
Savin, all in fine Powder, mixed, and made up into a Balsam, with Balsam of Gum
Elemi.

XLI. This if dexterously applied in a small quantity, and directly upon the
Excrescence, will not go without the desired effect: But of this matter we
shall speak more in other places, to which you are referred.

XLII. But if the Caruncula Mammillaris, at the beginning of the Urethra, which
shuts the holes through which the Seed passes, into the common Passage from the
Glandulae Prostatae, has been unfortunately consumed by some Ulcer or Hurt, by
putting a Catheter into the Bladder, or by corrosive Medicines, the Disease in
Men will be incurable, in which case, palliative only can be used. Veslingus.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of EVIL SMELL of the BODY.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Foetor, vel Putor, vel Olor malus
Corporis; in English, Evil Smell, or stinking of the Body.

II. It is a stinking and very offensive Smell, which in some persons, breaths
forth out of the external parts of the Body through the Skin, offending not only
the Bystanders, but also the person himself: for the Body of Man smells not at
all, or at least sends not forth any ill Savor or Smell to be perceived by any,
whilst it is in its right state of Health: Tho it is true, that all sorts of
Animals breathe forth some sort of Smell proper to their kind.

III. The Places. Now the places whence this evil Smell comes, are manifold, as
1. From the Mouth by the Breath. 2. From stinking Teeth. 3. From the Nose and
Ears. 4. From the Arm-holes. 5. From the Privy Parts. 6. From the Feet. 7. From
the whole Body.

IV. The Causes. A stinking Breath is caused either from eating strong and ill
scented Food, as Leeks, Onions, Shelots, Garlic, etc. Or from a foulness of
the Stomach, which corrupts all the Food which is taken into it; Or from
Obstruction, Corruption, or Ulcer in the Lungs, which in respiration sends
forth those evil Vapors; Or lastly, from Worms, breeding in the Stomach.

V. The stinking smell of the Armpits, called in Greek (...), and in Latin,
Hircus; is caused as some suppose, from the rankness and overflowing of the
Seed: It Is true, it is most familiar to Virgins which are Marriageable, if they
be excited with amorous Toying, or heat with much motion, and sometimes it
happens to Young Men.

VI. And this is said to come from the Testicles, and the Seed, which has the
power of imprinting such an offensive and stinking smell upon the Blood, as we
manifestly see in Goats, Negro's, and other over Lecherous Creatures, more
especially if they have over moist Bodies, because the Moisture joined with
Heat, is obnoxious to putrefaction.

VII. It Is true, the whole substance of the Blood is not putrisied, but the
Serum is at least tainted with foetid Recrements, which being expelled about
the Emunctories in Vapors, produce that Rank or Goat-like Smell.

VIII. The stinking of the Teeth is caused from foulness, hollowness, or
rottenness of the Teeth, foetid Ulcers of the Gums, and the like.

IX. The stinking of the Nose, is either from the Breath sent through the
Nostrils, from the Stomach and Lungs, and then the Causes are the same which we
assigned at Sect. 4. aforegoing: Or it is (whether in Nose or Ears) from foul
and foetid Ulcers in them, which admit not of easy Cure.

X. The stinking of the Privy Parts, arises from the same cause with that of
the Arm-holes, by reason of an Afflux of Excrementitious Humors to them, more
especially in Women; which are also sent from the Arteries, Veins and Liver, to
the Emunctories of the Groins, exhaling those foetid and rank Vapors.

XI. The stinking of the Feet is caused from an abundance of moist and
excrementitious Humors, which Nature for her relief, is apt in some persons to
protrude to those parts for her Relief; Now the Feet being so covered and shod,
that the Vapors perspiring, through the pores of the Skin, cannot easily fly away,
they grow moist, and get a putridness, from whence that stink, and very
offensive smell is contracted.

XII. If the whole Body yields a stinking Smell, the whole Habit thereof must
be foetid, from a general and universal Taint of the Serum of the Blood, which
every where perspiring, continually gives that foetid and unpleasing Odor.

XIII. These, when they sweat, are extreme stinking; and I have been informed
of a Woman, who stunk so exceedingly, that by the malignity thereof, she killed
three Husbands; and a Doctor who attended her one morning while she was in bed,
told me, That the Smell which came from her, so offended him, that he believes
he had fallen down dead, at least fainted or swooned away, had he not made
great haste to be gone.

XIV. However, the smell of the Armpits when it is very strong, so universally
scents the whole Body, that many times it is taken for the stink of the whole
Body: and I am apt to believe, that when that filthy smell of the Armpits is
so vastly abounding and rampant, that the same filthy Recrements and Taint in
some measure, affects the entire Body.

XV. The Prognostics. A stinking Breath, if it be hereditary, or from the
Birth, is uncurable; if it is accidentally caused, it is cured by removing
those causes.

XVI. The stinking of the Teeth, if hollow or rotten, can only be cured by
pulling them out: The stinking of the Ears and Nose will be Cured, by curing
the Ulcers which are in them.

XVII. The stinking of the Feet is difficultly cured; yet if the Patient will
follow strict Advice, it is sometimes happily removed.

XVIII. The stinking of the Armpits and Privy Parts, is extremely difficult to
be helped, and it is very rare that any are cured of it: If they meet with
help, it is by a long and tedious course of Physic.

XIX. The stink of the whole Body, if it be very rank, or strong, and of long
continuance, is harder to cure than any of the former, and very rarely meets
with help.

XX. A stinking Breath happening to one in a Consumption, is a sign of Death.

XXI. The Cure. 1. A stinking Breath. If it is from the Stomach, (which is
known by this, that the Stink is more before eating than immediately after,) it
is necessary to cleanse the Stomach by some proper Emetick, and that two or
three times one after another, at due intervals.

XXII. Give Tartar Emetick a gr. ij. ad vj. which let be repeated; then let the
Patient take every morning for a month together, a spoonful, two or three, of
Oxymel Scilliticum, (according as they can bear it) in a glass of White Wine
and Sugar; these things if done, will not fail to do the Cure perfectly.

XXIII. If it is from a Phthisis, or an Ulcer of the Lungs, you must have
respect to the cure of that, which see in its proper place.

XXIV. If it is Hereditary or from the Birth, a Palliative Cure is only to be
instituted, which is by wearing Perfumes, as Musk and Ambergrise in the Bosom,
and holding them, or other Odoriferous things in the mouth.

XXV. For this purpose these Troches are of good use. Take fine Catechu j.
Lignum Aloes, Rhodium, Nutmegs, A. ss. Cloves, Winters Cinnamon, A. ij. Musk
ij. Ambergrise j. treble refined Sugar jv. which moisten with the best
rectified Spirit of Wine: The Species being all in fine Powder, mix them with
the Sugar (finely poudred and moistened,) and with Glair of Whites of Eggs, or
Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, make little Troches, 20 in a dram, which carefully
dry and keep for use: These the Patient may often hold in his Mouth.

XXVI. If it proceeds from Worms, they must be killed and expelled, as we teach
in its proper place. See the Third Edition of Our Synopsis Medicinae, Lib. 2.
Cap. 25. Sect. 9. ad 18. and Lib. 5. Cap. 11. Sect. 20. ad 54.

XXVII. And if the Patient is of Age, and will take things, he may take every
night going to bed Aloes lotae ad j. more or less, Powder of Wormwood made up
into an Electuary with Honey, or Tincture of Wormwood, made with Salt of Tartar
and rectified Spirit of Wine, which may be taken in all his Drink.

XXVIII. 2. Stinking Teeth. This evil Scent is taken away. 1. By cleansing the
Teeth if they be foul, with Dentifrices, Washes, and a Tooth-brush. 2. By
healing the Ulcers of the Gums if there be any, with proper Topics, as Spirit
of Wine, and Gargles of Red-wine, in which Roch Alum and Mel Rosarum are
dissolved. 3. By pulling the Teeth out, if they be very rotten, loose, or
hollow, etc. See Our Polygraphicae, Lib. 5. Cap. 4. Sect. 3.

XXIX. 3. Stinking Smell from the Nose and Ears. This is generally from an
Ulcer or Worms in the Ears, or an Ozaena in the Nostrils: How the Ozaena is to
be cured, we show in its proper place; but Ulcers in both parts may be kept
clean, if not cured, by injecting with a Syringe this following mixture. Strong
Wormwood Wine vj. Mel Rosarum j. juice of Celandine ss. mix them. Or this:
White Port Wine viij. Red Tincture of Wormwood j. Mel Rosarum jss. mix and
dissolve, with which Syringe thrice a day.

XXX. 4. If it proceeds from the Armpits: This happens to gross Bodies only,
and therefore the morbifick Humor is first to be carried off by Purging, and
then it is in some measure to be dried up with Sudorificks and proper Bathings.

XXXI. You may purge with Aloes Rosatae, or the Pilulae Angelicae, as also
Oxymel Scilliticum, which dry the Body, and powerfully preserve it from
putrefaction: Then sweat in a Bath, or in Bed, by giving 30 drops of Spirit of
Hartshorn, in ij. of Our Aqua Bezoartica, or Spiritus Cordialis.

XXXII. Let their Diet be also such as is drying, and may tend to the resisting
Putrefaction: let them eat their meat with proper Sawces made with Vinegar,
juices of Limons, Citrons, and Oranges, Rose Water, Rose Vinegar, etc.

XXXIII. They must abstain from Meats easily to be corrupted, such as
Cucumbers, Melons, Musk Melons, Water Melons, Figs, and the like; as also the
overmuch use of Fish, especially of Eels, and others of a soft Flesh, which
are carefully to be avoided; but pickled Sturgion may be permitted.

XXXIV. Bodily Exercise is to be much used; Sleep ought not to be overmuch,
and the Armpits are to be often washed with a Laver of Soap, or Lixivium (not
too strong) of Quicklime, doing it at first for some few days, four, five, or
six times a day, afterward twice a day only.

XXXV. Or, they may be washed with a Decoction made of Barley, Camomil,
Scabious, Florentine Orrice-root bruised, Lignum Guajacum, Cortex Ejusdem,
Orange, Limon, and Citron Peels, Cortex Winteranus, Pimento, Yellow Sanders
rasped, Lignum Aloes rasped, Lignum Rhodium, Aspalathus, Clove-bark, Cloves
bruised, Myrrh, Aloes, etc.

XXXVI. Wash-balls also may be made of Genoa or Venice Soap, incorporated with
Camphir and Chemical Oils of Limon and Orange Peels, Lavender, Sweetmarjoram,
Rhodium, etc. with which, Washes may be made to be often used.

XXXVII. But because it will be some time, before Medicaments can so operate as
to take away this evil Smell, and make it tolerable to be endured by other
persons, it ought to be palliated by the use of Perfumes: You may anoint the
Arm-holes with this, Oil of Ben ij ss. Sheep-suet j. White Bees Wax ss. Oil of
Rhodium j. Musk in subtle Powder, gr. viij. Ambergrise, gr. iv. (These two last
first mixed with juice of Limons, gut. 40.) mix all together and make an
Ointment, to anoint with morning and evening after Washing.

XXXVIII. Under the Armpits Perfumes ought to be born, as also in the Breast or
Bosom of the Party thus afflicted, as sweet Pomanders, etc. variety of which
you may see in our Polygraphicae, Lib. 5. Cap. 16. where you may see much
variety, about Ten several kinds.

XXXIX. This following is inferior to none. Liquid Storax vj. Balsam of To^ jv.
Balsam of Peru j. Oil of Nutmegs by expression j. Liquid Amber j. Chemical Oils
of Rhodium, Sassafras, Lavender, Savin, Limon Time, Limons, Oranges, Citrons,
A. j. Oil of Cloves ss. Lignum Aloes, Clove-bark, Yellow Sanders, Winters
Cinnamon, ana j ss. The Woods being all in a fine Powder or Flower, mix them
with all the other things exactly, and with Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, q.s.
make Pomanders.

XL. They ought also to chew in their Mouths the Troches described in Sect. 25.
aforegoing, which give a fragrant Odor to the Breath, and in a great measure
drown this most abominable smell of the Armpits.

XLI. 5. If it proceeds from the nastiness of the Privy Parts, you must pursue
the same course which is taught you in that of the Armpits, immediately
preceding, save that instead of the Armpits (which may also be washed and
anointed) you must wash and anoint the Privity, as also the Groins; and in
Women, the Vagina and Womb ought also to be anointed three or four times a day,
and sometimes oftener; and withal, the Patient ought to sit in a Bath, morning
and evening for half an hour.

XLII. If there is a virulent Gonorrhaea, you must cure it, as in the proper
place we teach; but if only stinking Whites, you must cleanse the Womb by
detersive Injections, and then strengthening and stypick Injections, (Universals
having been premised) after which you may use the before described Baths and
Ointments: for this is certain, that if those foetid Whites be not cured, the
stinking Smell can never be taken away.

XLIII. Also often washing the Womb (by injecting with a proper Womb Syringe)
if it be with nothing else but fair warm Water, five or six times a day,
whereby it is kept clean, is a great matter in order to this Cure.

XLIV. 6. If it proceeds from Sweaty and stinking Feet; which happens chiefly
to such as are Gross and very Fat, and full of moist Humors, apt to descend: In
this Case there ought to be a due purging of the Body with our Pilulae
Gatharticae, Tinctura Purgans, Tinctura Cathartica, infusion of Sena; Or else
with Oxymel Scilliticum: The use of which last thing ought to be continued for
at least a month together, more or less of it, according as the Body is able to
bear it.

XLV. This done, he must every day, morning and night, wash his Feet in a soft
Lie of Potashes or a gentle Lime Water, something more than Blood warm, either
simple of themselves, or with the following things being infused or decocted in
them; as leaves of Angelica, Bay, Camomil, Featherfew, Hyssop, Lavender,
Marjoram, Origanum, Pennyroyal, Rosemary, Sage, Savory, Time, Vervain, etc.

XLVI. He must also every morning put on clean dry Socks, and clean Stockings,
with fresh and dry Shoes, and in the bottoms of the Socks he may strew the
Powder following: Winters Cinnamon, Clove-bark, of each jv. Florentine Orrice
Root, vj. make all these things into very fine Powder, and then put to them
White Starch in fine Powder, Filings of Steel, of each iij. Caput mortuum of
Vitriol well washed ij. artificial Cinnabar finely ground j. mix them.

XLVII. Also every day after Washing, morning and evening, (which let be for
near half an hour at a time) his Feet being well dried with clothes, let him
bath them very well with the Powers of Amber; for this Medicine not only
powerfully drys up the Humor, but so mightily strengthens the parts, as to make
them able to resist the very torrent or violence of the Defluxion: By this very
method I have cured several of stinking Feet, who had lived many years in
despair of any help.

XLVIII. 7. Lastly, Evil Smell or Scent proceeding from the whole Body. That
some times such persons as have been afflicted with this distemper, have been
found in the World, is evident from the Suffrage of several great Physicians,
men very Learned, and of great Integrity. Sennertus was of that Opinion.
Snitzerus, in an Epistle to Libavius, gives us an Example of a Virgin of about
17 years of Age thus afflicted, whose whole Body smelt like to a dead
Putrefying Carcass, very offensive to those she kept company withal, she all
this while having nothing amiss in her Mouth, Stomach, Womb, or any other
particular part of her Body.

XLIX. Libavius in answer to the said Epistle, thinks, that this Distemper was
contracted in the Womb of the Mother, from the pollution of the Blood, and Seed
corrupted; Or, that the Embryo in the Womb was affected with this Taint, from
something the Mother suffered, either by nauseousness, or Vomiting, or
Affrightment, or being terrified with some Coffin, Sepulcher, or dead Body, or
from the offensive Smell of some stinking and putrid Excrements flowing from
such as lie in Childbed, etc.

L. And the same Libavius gives us another Example of his own knowledge, of a
Young Woman which had such a stink of the whole Body coming from her, as no
Jakes could be worse, who being married, lived very discontentedly with her
Husband for the same reason: but this chiefly whilst she had her Courses upon
her. See Gregor. Horstius in Epist. Med. Lib. 2. Sect. 10. and Sennertus Med.
Pract. Lib. 5. Part. 3. Sect. 1. Cap. 9.

LI. This Distemper though it is of difficult cure, yet must be attempted; and
the very same Medicines and Method are to be used here which we prescribed in
the cure of the stinking Smell from the Arm-holes: but in this case bathing
with sweet Baths ought oftener to be used; for they open the Pores, and draw
forth much of the putid Vapors.

LII. But if none of those Courses will do, the last Remedy is Salivation,
which being carefully and skilfully performed, has sometimes cured in this
case, especially when the cause has been accidental, from eating putrid Meats,
etc. (and not from the Mothers Womb:) If this does nothing, the affect is
uncurable.

LIII. There remains then nothing more to be done, but to observe an exact
cleanness in Linen and Apparel, and a Palliative cure by Perfumes, to hide or
obscure it: And therefore the Patient must make use of Perfumed Garments and
Gloves, sweet Balls, Pomanders, sweet Balsams, sweet Waters, Essences, Oils,
and sweet Pouders; a great variety of which you may see in Our Polygraphica,
Lib. 5. Chap. 4. and Chap. 6. to Chap. 22. where you may have abundant
Satisfaction.

VI. Defilements, or Vices of the EYES.
CHAP. XL. Of BLISTERS of the EYES.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Phlyctaenae Oculorum; and in
English, Blisters of the Eyes.

II. They are litte Tumors, like Gromwel-seed, happening in the white of the
Eye, viz. in the Cornea and Adnata; being full of Water, proceeding from a
sharp Humor: which being broken, there follows an Exulceration.

III. Those in the Adnata are red; those in the Cornea, blackish if outward,
but whitish if inwards.

IV. The Prognostics. Those which grow in the Adnata, are less dangerous than
they in the Cornea.

V. The more superficial, the less danger; the more inward, the more danger:
for it is to be feared, that they should erode the whole thickness of the
Cornea; whereby the watery Humor will be let forth, or the Wea start out.

VI. If there be an Exulceration, and it be not stayed, it will corrupt the
whole Eye: but if the Ulcer seizes only the Caruncle, and that the Punctum
Lachrymale grows callous, it becomes Fistula Lachrymalis.

VII. The Cure. In the Cure hereof, you must resolve the Matter conjoined, and
revert the antecedent Cause; taking great heed that you bring not the Pustules
to suppuration, lest they should turn into Ulcers.

VIII. Therefore those Evacuations, Revulsions, and Derivations, which we shall
hereafter use in the Cure of an Ophthalmy, must be used here.

IX. If they be with inflammation, they must be cured as other Inflammations:
for which purpose, Saccharum Saturni dissolved in Eyebright or Fennel Water, is
here of all Remedies the chifeest.

X. If they be from a waterish Humor, you must exsiccate and dry; which you may
do with Lapis Tutia, Calaminaris, and such like: here Brandy dropped into the Eye
several times, is of good use.

XI. Afterward you must apply such Topics, which may gently repercuss and
discuss, such as we shall hereafter lay down in an Ophthalmy: then such things
as are more dissolving and drying, and especially Ophthalmick-Ointments, which
discuss, and dry up Pustles.

XII. Those which are superficial, and appear of a darker color, are called in
Greek Epicaumata.

XIII. Those which are more deep, under the second or third Film, which seem
white, by reason of the whiteness of the Cornea, are called Encaumata; these
are more dangerous, and do often eat through the whole Cornea Tunicle.

XVI. Barbett says, that these Phlyctaenae are easily cured by this Powder.
White Sugarcandy, prepared Tutty, A. ss. red Coral prepared, Camphir, white
Vitriol, Saccharum Saturni, A. ij. mix, and make a fine Powder.

CHAP. XLI. Of a SWELLING in the CORNER of the EYE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Anchilops; and in English, A
Swelling in the Corner of the Eye.

II. It is a Tumor in the great Corner of the Eye, near the Nose: it is either
with, or without Inflammation; if not broken, it is called Anchilops; but if
inflamed and broken, it is called Aegilops.

III. The Signs. When it is inflamed, it is like a small Phlegmone; red about,
with a shooting pain.

IV. The Causes. It proceeds of a thick viscous Humor like Honey; painless, and
included in a Cistis.

V. The Prognostics. It is difficultly cured: if the Apostem opens, it becomes
an Ulcer, which quickly turns hollow; and then is called Fistula Lachrymalis:
which continuing a year, causes foulness of the Bone.

VI. The Cure. In the beginning of the Tumor, you must repel the Defluxion from
the Part, use Repercussives to the Forehead, and Purge with proper Catharticks:
to which purpose you may apply Ceratum Santalinum, or that pro Herniosis, (in
Our Pharmac. Land. Lib. 5. Cap. 5. Sect. 3, 10.)

VII. Or this of Riverius: Pomgranate-peels, Acacia, Balaustins, Galls,
Cypress-nuts, Roch-alum, fine Bole, A. j. white Wax iv. Turpentine iij. make a
Cerate.

VIII. After the use of Repercussives, apply Resolvers to the part affected;
such as Liquor Ophthalmicus, (in our Pharmac. Land. lib. 4. cap. 11. sect. 22.)
or this Decoction: Honey, fine fine Aloes, A. j. Myrrh ss. Saffron j. Water
lbij. boil gently to the consumption of a third part; with a Sponge squeeze it
into the Eye, and apply the Sponge warm to the part, binding it on: after which
you may apply the Ceratum Capitale Horstii, or Our Ceratum Album.

IX. If the Tumor will not resolve, but come to suppuration, whereby it becomes
Aegilops, you must forward the maturation with simple Diachylon: or if there be
Pain or Inflammation, you may apply a Cataplasm of Crumbs of Bread.

X. If it will not break, you must open it with a Lancet, without delay; lest
the contained matter should corrode the Parts, and make an incurable Fistula.
Some open it with the hot Iron, but the cold is best.

XI. After the Apostem is opened, you must pursue the method of Cure, according
to the Precepts of the next Chapter.

CHAP. XLII. A RVNNING SORE in the EYE.
I. IT it is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Aegilops; and in English, a
Running Sore in the Eye.

II. It is a Running Sore or Ulcer in the great corner of the Eye next the
Nose; from Anchilops being broken.

III. The Cause of its breaking, is from Choleric Blood afflicting the Eye;
with much pain, and a flux of sharp Humors which corrode the skin.

IV. The Prognostics. Aegilops is of difficult cure, in regard Medicines are
troublesome, and ill to be applied to it; by reason the Sight is so nigh.

V. But it is of more difficult cure, when the Apostem or Ulcer breaks out at
the Nose, whereby the matter flows out at the Nostrils.

VI. And it is most difficult of cure, when it degenerates into a Cancer; which
is accompanied with pricking pain, extension of the Veins, hardness and
blewness of the Skin.

VII. The Cure. Let the Body be first well purged with Our Pilulae Catharticae,
once or twice, and afterward 3 or 4 several times with Sal Mirabile, given
from ss, to j. and let the use thereof be continued once every fifth or sixth
day, till the Cure is completed; that the Humors which are apt to fall into
the Eye, may be constantly carried off.

VIII. Also if the Ulcer, or parts near it be very hot, full of pain, and
inflamed; you will do well to divert the Humor in some measure, by applying a
Seton to the nape of the Neck, at least a Blistering-plaster; which ought to be
kept running as long as it can conveniently.

IX. As for Topics to be applied to the Part, Authors advise to Resolutives
and Maturatives, or Digestives, that it may be made fit for cleansing as soon
as may be; of which kind this is good: Mithridate ss. Melliginous Extract of
Juniperberries iij. Honey of Roses ij. Gum Elemi j. Saffron in powder ss. mix,
and apply it daily.

X. After it is brought to good digestion, you must cleanse it with good
Detersives: wash it every day with Decoction of Celandine, Fennel, and Rue; or
with the juice of Fennel and Hyssop.

XI. Then dress it with this: Honey of Roses j. fine Aloes in powder,
Sarcocolla in powder, Frankincense and Mastich in powder, A. j ss. fine
Verdigrise gr. xxiv. mix them well together; lay it upon fine Lint, and dress
the Eye therewith morning and evening.

XII. After it is well cleansed you must dry it, and heal it, by washing it
constantly four or five times a day, or oftener, with Our Aqua Ophthalmica: if
there seems to be a flux of Humors into the Eye, you must add to the Eye-water,
an equal part of choice Brandy; for thereby the Eye and Part will be
strengthened; the Humor will be more effectually dried up, and the Ulcer healed.

XIII. If it breaks inwards, into the Nose, you must then prepare your
detersive Washes to be snuffed up the Nostril; or otherwise to be cast up with
a Syringe, and to be often repeated, at least six or eight times a day, for
some time.

XIV. After which, you must cast up Washes only drying and healing, mixed with a
good quantity of choice Brandy: Thus; Fair-water vj. white Vitriol, Roch-alum,
Saccharum Saturni, A. ss. Spirit of Wine iv. Mel Rosarum ij ss. mix them, to
inject with a Syringe, several times a day.

XV. If it degenerates into Fistula Lachrymalis, cure it as we shall direct in
its proper place: you may use this to cleanse; Myrrh j. Aloes j. Sugarcandy
iij. yolks of Eggs No iij. Goats-milk ix. mix them.

XVI. And this to Heal: Red Coral prepared, Hartshorn burnt, Sarcocol, burnt
Lead, A. j. Sanguis Draconis, Crocus Metallorum, A. ss. white Starch ss.
Gumtragacanth j. dissolved in Rose Water: mix all with Horsetail-water q.s. and
make a Collyrium.

VII. Defilements, or Vices of TEETH and GVMS.
CHAP. XLIII. Of DISCOLOVRED, FILTHY, and STINKING TEETH.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Color vitiosus, discolor,
sordes, and foeditas Dentium; in English, ill color, filth, and stinking of
the Teeth.

II. The Signs. The Teeth are changed from a white color, which is natural to
them, to a yellow, greenish, livid, or blackish color: and there is
filthiness, and a stinking smell.

III. The Causes. They arise either from internal vicious Humors, or some
matter outwardly adhering to them, or from acid Vapors of Sugar exhaling, or
some other acid thing; from the frequent eating of Sugar, Raisons, Figs,
Sweetmeats, or other sweet things; from chewing things black, as
Myrtleberries, Mulberries; or from unctions with Mercury, or use of Mercurial
Medicines, etc.

IV. The Prognostics. It is without danger, and whilst recent, easily cured,
if proper things be applied.

V. The Cure. To take away the filthiness of the Teeth, and to amend their evil
color and smell, Dentifrices are generally used; which are mostly made of
those things which have a power of cleansing in them.

VI. Of this kind are Pumicestone levigated or calcined, Os Sepiae, Cornu Cervi
calcined, Crystal, Coral, Osteocolla, Pearl, Crab's-eyes, Sponge-stone,
Alabaster levigated, Oister-shells and Cockle-shells calcined Egg-shells,
Flints calcined, jaw bone of the Pike, white Sand, Salt, Junipergum,
Birthwort-root, Tartar, Alum, Brick-dust: all, or any of which being prepared
according to Art, either by Calcination or Levigation, or both, as the nature
of the thing requires, are formed into Dentifrices, to rub the Teeth daily
withal.

VII. Powder of Crystal ij. red Coral prepared, Cornu Cervi usti prepared, A.j.
mix, and make a Powder. Or: Flints calcined and levigated, white Sand
levigated, A. iij. Crystal calcined and levigated, Lapis Calaminaris, A. ij.
Brick-dust, Myrrh, A. j. mix, and make a Powder.

VIII. These may be used dry in Powder, or made into an Electuary with Mel
Rosatum; and therewith the Teeth are to be rubbed after eating, either with
your Finger or a Tooth-brush, and then washed with Water, in which Vinegar or
juice of Limons is put, or Aqua Aluminosa made with Rose Water.

IX. Some commend the ashes of Vine-branches, or Rosemarystalks; others, as a
great Experiment, the ashes of Tobacco; others this: Tops of Wormwood, Sage,
Rosemary, A. M. j. Tobacco M. iij. red Coral, Ivory rasped, Horse-teeth, A. iv.
Sal Gem j. put all into a Crucible, and calcine to whiteness, and by levigation
reduce all to an impalpable powder; to which add powder of Cloves, Cinnamon,
Winter 's Bark, Catechu, A. ij. Musk j. if you so please.

X. After rubbing the Teeth with the former Pouders, you may wash them with the
following Water: White Sugar lbvj. Salt lbss. Roch-alum iij. mix, and distill in
a Glassbody. Or thus: Sal Armoniack, Salt Gem, Alum, A. j. Rose Water q.s. mix,
and distill. Or thus: Sugar lbij. Rochalum, generous Wine, A. lbj ss. mix, and
distill: and with some of these distilled Liquors often wash, and cleanse the
Teeth.

XI. Anselmus Boethius commends Osteocolla, being reduced into fine powder, and
mixed with Sugar, or Honey, or Oxymel, to the thickness of an Electuary. Or the
Teeth may be rubbed with this: Honey of Roses strained j. Spirit of Vitriol, or
Spirit of Sulphur, (i. e. the Oil) j. mix them.

XII. And truly the Oil or Spirit of Sulphur is much commended, because it
makes the Teeth white in a moment; after the use of which, they are be washed
with good Brandy; either alone, or mixed with an equal quantity of Rose Water;
and then let them be anointed with Oil of Ben, to take away their roughness:
for if that be not taken away, impurities will stick to them much more, and
they will foul the faster for the use of these acid Spirits.

XIII. Lastly, Cardanus commends the juices of Limons and Citrons; and they are
indeed of good use, either alone, or mixed with Honey, or Honey of Roses:
observing the caution of washing and anointing with Oil of Ben, as in the last
Section is directed.

CHAP. XLIV. Of CORROSION and ROTTENNESS of the TEETH.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...), Erosio Dentium, and (...). in Latin,
Corrosio and caries Dentium; and in English, Corrosion, eating away, and
rottenness of the Teeth.

II. The Cause. They are often corroded and corrupted by the afflux of sharp
and acrid Humors to them: from whence comes a pain of the Teeth, and then a
corrosion and caries follows; so that they break away, and are lost bit by bit.

III. The eating of several sorts of Food is a cause, as Hippocrates in his
Book de Affectionibus says: all sweet things, as Sugar, Honey, (which have in
them a radical Acid) Raisons, Figs, Sweetmeats and Confections, corrode, rot,
and totally spoil the Teeth: and that is the reason that you scarcely ever see
a Confectioner, but with a mouthful of rotten Teeth; for the very fumes of the
Sugar destroy them.

IV. They are also corrupted by eating things too hot, according to the vulgar
Verse: Pultes ferventes, faciunt corrumpere Dentes.
If you would have Teeth sound and fair,
Things scalding-hot you must forbear,


V. Cold on the contrary, is as great an enemy to them: more especially, if
things vehemently cold be taken immediately after things vehemently hot.

VI. The Teeth are also hurt by several Medicaments, as Vitriol and Mercury,
and by Fucuses made of Mercury: and that is the reason that many using those
kinds of things, have for the most part very bad Teeth.

VII. They are also corrupted by a Fistula, and sometimes by Worms, Tumors in
the Gums, etc.

VIII. The Prognostics. This evil is more matter of deformity than danger; if
of long continuance, never cured, but by the extraction of the Teeth: if the
Disease is recent, it submits to the following Remedies.

IX. The Cure. If it proceeds from the afflux of Humors, they are to be
diverted and carried off; first with Emeticks, because they meet first with the
Humor, and make an immediate diversion: secondly, by Catharticks; the chief of
which is Sal Mirabile, which may be given six or seven times.

X. If the cause is from a Fistula, the only remedy is extraction: which yet
Sennertus will not allow, unless the Tooth is loose: but this is certain, if
they be not taken out, they will corrupt the next adjacent Teeth that are sound.

XI. If the cause is from Worms, often wash the Mouth with juice of Onions, or
Rue, mixed with Nitre; and hold it a quarter of an hour or more at a time upon
the Gums, and this five or six times a day.

XII. Crato commends the Decoction of Ashtree-roots and Nettles, also the juice
of the leaves of the lesser Centory, of Peach-leaves, Aloes, Myrrh, etc. and
others commend the washing with Spirit of Wine, i. e. common Brandy.

XIII. Where the cause is by defluxion, having used inwardly Vniversals, as at
Sect. 9. above, you must then come to the application of Topics. A Decoction
in Wine or Vinegar, or a Tincture in common Brandy of the following things, are
good Repercussives, and strengthners of the Teeth and Gums; as roots of Capers,
Cinkfoil, Cyperus, Pyrethrum, Catechu, Cortex Peruanus and Winteranus, leaves
of Sage, Mint, Rosemary, Myrrh, Nigella-seeds, etc.

XIV. The following Mixture hinders the corrosion, and farther rotting of the
Teeth. Myrrh in powder j. Alum ss. with Honey, q.s. make an Electuary; with
which daily rub the putrified and corroded Teeth. You may rub them also with
this Mixture: Fine powder of Coral j. juice of Limons ss. Honey q.s. mix them.

XV. Dissolve Nitre in Vinegar or juice of Limons, and therewith wash the
Teeth; it cleanses them, and stops the corrosion and rotting: Powder of Bricks
j. Spirit of Sulphur iij. Honey q.s. mix, to rub the Teeth with: and after
eating always wash the Teeth with fair Water and a Brush, to keep them clean.

XVI. If the Teeth be hollow, stop them with a few grains of Frankincense, or
Myrrh, which is better; for this last preserves them from farther rotting: or
Myrrh mixed with Coral, in powder.

CHAP. XLV. Of LOOSENESS of the TEETH.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Mobilitas, vel vacillatio Dentium;
and in English, Looseness of the Teeth.

II. The Causes. The external Cause is either blows or falls, biting hard
things, pulling with the Teeth beyond their strength; the internal is, the want
of nourishment, (as in old people) whence comes the wearing away of the Gums,
(which causes looseness) or the afflux of evil Humors to them; which by an
eroding quality consume the Gums, or the roots of the Teeth: also from the
Scurvy, and Mercurial Unctions in the Venereal Disease.

III. The Prognostics. If they are very loose, and have been long so, they
will scarcely ever be made fast again.

IV. The Cure. If they are loosened by any external violence, their fastening is
endeavored by Astringents: as, Roots of Cinkfoil, Bistort, A. j. Cyperus ss.
Sumach iij. boil in Smiths-forge-water, filter, and add Aluin ij. with which
often wash the Mouth: and it may be so much the better, if a little red Wine be
added to it.

V. If it is from a defect of nourishment, there is scarcely any Remedy to be
applied; the greatest help that can be, is to apply astringent and strengthening
things to the Gums.

VI. If it is from too great humidity, use things drying, and something
astringing: but you ought to beware of such Astringents as may make the Teeth
black, as Pomgranate-peels, Balaustians, Galls, Vitriol, Chalcitis, etc.

VII. These things are profitable; as roots of Male-fern, of Cinkfoil, of
Bistort, of Dock, of Tormentil, of Capers; leaves of Myrtles, Lentisk, unripe
Medlars; flowers of red Roses, cups of Acorns, Hazle-nuts: a Decoction of all
or any of which may be made in red, or sharp, or sour Wine, with which the
Teeth and Gums may be often washed.

VIII. And to draw forth the Humidities, the roots of Pyrethrum, and
Sage-leaves may be added.

IX. The Teeth also may be often rubbed with this styptick Powder: Roch-alum,
Mastich, Sanguis Draconis, Terra Sigillata, fine Bole, A. ij. roots of Orrice
and Bistort, Hartshorn burnt white, red Coral levigated, Ivory burnt white, A.
j. Piperis, Pyrethri, A. ij. Mastich, Olibanum, A. ss. mix, and make a Powder.

X. Often wash the Teeth and Gums with Tincture of Myrrh, made with common
Brandy: or, for want of it, with good red Port-wine: this wonderfully
strengthens them, and destroys Putrefaction.

XI. Or they may be washed with a Decoction, of Moufear, roots of Bistort and
Tormentil, in Smiths-forge-water, boiled to a consumption of a third part, and
then filtred.

XII. Or, Leaves of Myrtles, Berries of Services, A. iij. unripe Medlars ij.
unripe wild Pears j. Sarcocol ss. Rochalum iij. Vinegar of Squills iij. red
Wine a quart; mix, boil to the consumption of a third part, and then strain and
filter; and add thereto Syrup of Myrtles, or Syrup of Limons.

XIII. This is much commended: Acorns j. burnt Alum j. Acacia ss. red Roses
dried M ss. red Port-wine a quart: boil to the consumption of a third part,
strain, and wash often therewith.

XIV. Powder of Junipergum ss. Myrrh, crude Alum, A.j. Oxymel Scilliticum, q.s.
mix, and make a stiff Electuary; to be laid all night upon the Teeth and Gums.

XV. Sennertus commends this: Roots of Tormentil and Bistort, Lignum Guajacum
rasped, A.jij. roots of Plantan j. of Self-heal, green bark of Walnuts,
Corianderseed, yellow Sanders, Cassia lignea, Citron-peels, A. ss. seeds of
Purslane vj. Cypress-nuts, Nutmegs, Myrtle-berries, A. iij. Pine-nuts No iv.
leaves of Plantane, Horehound, Nettles, Selfheal, red Roses, A. M. j ss.
Rosemary, red Sage, A. M. ij. Frankincense, Mastich, A. ij. Cinnamon, Myrrh, A.
j ss. raspings of Hartshorn j ss. let all be prepared according to Art, and
mixed with six quarts of old red Wine: digest a week, and distill all in a Glass
Cucurbit to dryness: in the Liquor you may dissolve Roch-alum ij. and therewith
the Teeth and Gums may be washed six, eight, or ten times a day.

XVI. If it is from a wasting or erosion of the Gums, you may use this: Alum
scissile burnt, red Roses, Sumach, A. j ss. Lignum Aloes, Cyperus roots, A. j.
mix, and make a powder, which lay all night upon the Gums.

XVII. Or, Take Red Coral prepared, Myrrh, A. j ss. Mastich, Frankincense,
Cyperusroots, A. ss. round Birthwort, Cassia lignea, Virginean Snake-root, A.
j. mix, and make a Powder, to be used as the former.

XVIII. If the looseness proceeds from the Scurvy, you must first cure that
Disease, before this Symptom can be remedied.

XIX. If it is from Unctions, or Salivation in the French Pox; you must, after
the Saliavtion is over, first cleanse them very well with Oxymel Scilliticum;
then wash them with the following Mouth-water: Take White Wind, Brandy, A. lbj.
raspings of Guajacum j. Cortex ejusdem ss. both ground to a powder in a hot
Mortar with Salt of Tartar j ss. mix, and extract a Tincture; with which often
wash the Teeth.

XX. Or you may use this: Take rectified Spirit of Wine lbj ss. Oil of Sulphur
iij. lignum Guajacum, and cortex, A. vi. mix, and extract a Tincture; and to
the clear Tincture add Damask-rose-water lbij. Honey of Roses q.s. mix them,
and keep it for use.

VIII. Vices of HANDS, FINGERS and NAILS.
CHAP. XLVI. Of CLEFTS of the HANDS.
I. THey are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Fissurae Manuum; and in English,
Clefts of the Hands.

II. It is a cleaving and cracking of the Skin of the Hands in cold weather, or
winter time, more especially in such are forced to expose them to the cold of
the Ambient Air.

III. They are caused from a sharp and dry Matter, which over drying the Skin
beyond what Nature intends, makes it when it meets with an external Dryness, as
cold and dry weather, and sharp Winds, to crack and chap up and down in several
places, and sometimes so vehemently as to cause Blood to appear.

IV. The Prognostics. They are without danger, and easily cured, but whilst
present are very troublesome, and withal show a scorbutic or cachectick habit
of Body.

V. The Places. They happen mostly to the Hands and Arms, and places exposed to
the sharp Air; much upon the backs of the Hands, and Knuckles next to the
backs; and sometimes these Clefts are found about other Joints; some also are
troubled with them in their Feet in like manner.

VI. The Cure. It is performed chiefly by Topics: This is of good use. Oil of
Ben iv. Sheeps Suet iij. melt and mix, to which add pure white Spermae Ceti
jss. mix them well together, and anoint therewith every night going to bed; and
if business will permit, every morning also.

VII. Sennertus, Med. Pract. Lib. 5. Part 3. Sect. 2. Cap. 10. has this:
Litharge of Silver, Myrrh, Ginger, Ana; bruise and powder them very small; and
adding to them Oil Olive, Virgin Wax, and Honey, a sufficient quantity, make an
Ointment; which if you please, you may perfume with Musk and Ambergrise. With
this (says he) they will be very speedily cured.

VIII. This is inferior to none. Oil Olive iv. Sheeps Suet ii. Virgin Wax,
White Sperma Ceti, A. j. Saccharum Saturni vj. Strasburgh Turpentine iij. mix,
melt, and make an Ointment, with which anoint as before directed.

IX. Or this. Oil of Ben vj. Sperma Ceti iij. Beef Suet, Virgin Wax, A. ij.
Flowers of Benjamin ij. mix and make an Ointment, with which anoint every
night, an hour and half before Bedtime; and at going to Bed, lay on the
following Emplaster spread upon new Cloth.

X. Virgin Wax jv. Oil of Ben, Sheeps Suet, A. j. Chio Turpentine ss. mix them
over a gentle Heat to a due consistency. Those who like not this, may apply the
Emplastrum Album, or an equal part of both may be mixed together.

CHAP. XLVII. Of ROVGH and DEFORMED NAILS.
I. THey are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Scabrities, vel Lepra Vnguium:
and in English, Roughness, Thickness and deformity of the Nails.

II. In this not only the magnitude, but also the Figure and Conformation of
them are vitiated.

III. The Cause. It arises from vicious and excrementitious Humors, mixing
with the nourishment of the Nails; chiefly from a Melancholic Property, joined
with a Tartarous Juice, from whence the Roughness and Hardness comes.

IV. The Prognostics. This Vice is evident to the Sight, and is more of a
Deformity, than any thing of Danger; yet it is sometimes prejudicial to the
person, because it may make them less apt to lay hold of any small or flat
thing.

V. It shows also, that there is some vicious Humor lying hid in the Body,
which Nature striving to exclude, does protrude the same unto the Roots of the
Nails: And those who are affected with Plica Polonica, are generally affected
with this Evil: But it also many times befalls such as have not, nor ever had a
Plica.

VI. The Cure. If it be joined with a Plica, you must endeavor the curing
thereof, and by that means you will meet with a cure of this, but without the
one the other will not be remedied.

VII. If it is without any other Disease, you must attempt the Cure alone;
First, by purging out the excrementitious Humors, with preparations of Sena and
Rhubarb.

VIII. Secondly, Altering the Tone of the Bowels, sweetning the Lympha and
other Juices, and strengthening the Blood in its Crasis, which is done with a
Nitrated Tincture of Steel.

IX. Thirdly, By application of Topics. If it is recent, or but newly begun;
soak them often in a very hot Decoction of Orobus and Lentills, and afterward
apply a Cataplasm of their Meal.

X. Or you may make a Cataplasm with Powder of Colocynthis ss. Sulphur jss.
making it up with Oil and Vinegar. Pliny, lib. 20. cap. 20. commends Arach as
an excellent thing; others Pilewort Roots beaten up with Tar to a Pultise.

XI. This is stronger. Pitch xij. Wax viij. Burgundy Pitch v. Rosin iij.
Mastich ij. Oil of Colocynthis, q.s. mix and make a soft Emplaster.

XII. Others lay on Raisons stoned, and made into a Cataplasm with Opoponax,
Linseed and Cresses; and yet more powerful are the Roots and Leaves of
Crowfoot. Sheeps Suet, Wax, A. vj. Rosm jv. Tar iij. Turpentine, Frankincense,
A. ij. Mastich jss. Red Praecipitate iij. mix, and with Oil of Colocynthis,
q.s. make a soft Emplaster.

XIII. If they be thick, rough, rugged, and unequal, which is from the too
great abundance of the nutritive Juice flowing to their Roots, occasioned through
much, strong and hard Labor, which causes an attraction of the said Juice to
their Roots; in this case, the cure is endeavored, by making the external
cause to cease, and then cutting and pairing the Nails, till by degrees, the
whole thick and rough Matter is pared off.

XIV. In some there is a Crooking of the Nails, wherein they are hooked, not
much unlike the Claws of Birds, which proceeds from too great a Dryness, which
overmuch contracts the Substance of the Nails, or rather from a vicious Matter
protruded to their Roots.

XV. It is an affect rarely seen, and happening chiefly to such as are affected
with a Plica, and therefore is to be cured by curing that Disease; and
outwardly you may apply the Medicines prescribed at Sect. 10. 11, and 12.
aforegoing.

XVI. If the Nails in the great Toes grow into their Sides, cansing much pain;
you must with an Incision Knife, split the Nail near the Corner where it grows
in, after which pulling it gently down backwards (as it were by degrees) you
may then cut it forth.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of DISCOLORED NAILS.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Vnguium Discolor: and in English,
Evil Color of the Nails, or Nails Evil Colored.

II. This Discolor, or Evil Color of the Nails is known by Sight, for that they
are vitiated with a Leaden Color, sometimes they are yellow, and sometimes they
are black.

III. The Cause. In Curriers and Dyers it happens, by reason of their handling
of Lime and Lie, and other Dying Stuff; which is no detriment to them, but as
it is matter of Deformity.

IV. In other persons, it happens (not from the change of the Color of the
Flesh underneath, as some think, but) from a vicious Aliment of the Nails,
impregnated with such a Color.

V. The Prognostics. It is without danger, being only matter of Deformity, and
not easily cured, without removing the original or internal Cause.

VI. The Cure. The vicious Humors are first to be evacuated with Our Family
Pills, or with Our Pilulae Catharticae, afterward with the Tinctura Purgans,
twice or thrice repeated.

VII. And upon the Nails themselves may be applied the Emplaster at Sect. 12.
of the former Chapter, renewing it once every second or third day.

VIII. And the Nails themselves are often to be pared and cut, until all that
part which is vitiated (by a gradual growing forth) is cut off.

IX. If the Discolor happens by reason of a Contusion from Blood being broke
forth, and spread under the Nail, which shining through the Nail, gives a darkish
Red; or Blackish Color, as sometime happens in Suffusions: In this case Avicen
advises to open the Nail by making a hole through it, to let out the Blood that
lies underneath.

X. But this is not the best Advice, nor yet good, for that in time, and by
degrees, this will wholly grow off of it self without any other trouble,
whereas the other must be Trouble and Pain too, especially if the nervous Skin
lying underneath is hurt.

XI. Authors advise to lay upon it Dittany of Crete, with Fish Gelly, or
Emplastrum Basilicon, or root of Solomon's Seal well bruised; Or Sagapenum made
into an Emplaster with oil of Nuts.

XII. But nothing is better than this. Emplastrum Album, Arcanum Corallinum, A.
j. mix them with a drop or two of Oil of Ben, and apply it. It softens the
Nail, takes away the Discolor, and makes it grow white, neat and handsome.

CHAP. XLIX. Of CLEAVING and FALLING of the NAILS.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Fissura and Casus Vnguium; and
in English, the Cleaving, and Falling-off of the Nails.

II. The Cleaving of the Nails, (which is a solution of their unity) is either
from external causes, as Wounds; or from internal, as Vitiousness of Humors,
which sometimes happens in the French Disease and Leprosy.

III. If it arises from Vicious Humors, they are to be evacuated with proper
Purges: if from some other Diseases, then that Disease is to be cured, and such
Topics are to be applied as we have directed in Chap. 47. Sect. 10, 11, 12.
aforegoing.

IV. If the Cleft is from a Wound, and the Wound is yet to be healed, yet will
not the cloven Nail be any ways united, but by its growing off, a whole and
found Nail succeeding.

V. And herein, care is to be taken, that the Nail, in that part where it is
cloven, may not grow together with the skin which lies under it: for then the
Nail will never be whole as it ought to be, but always grow forth cloven, and
as it were in two parts.

VI. Sometimes also the Nails fall quite off, leaving the ends of the Fingers
or Toes quite naked and bare; which is truly a Disease in number.

VII. The Cause. It is caused principally from fault of the Nourishment, being
not only vitiated, (as in the aforegoing Diseases of the Nails) but also made
sharp and corrosive withal; so that it corrodes the roots of the Nails, almost
in the same manner, as in an Alopecia, Ophiasis, or Tinea; wherein the roots of
the Hair are gnawn asunder, and so made to fall off.

VIII. And so very often, after Wounds and Ulcers about the roots of the Nails,
a corrosive Pus, or acrid filthy Matter being generated, it gnaws asunder their
roots, and so the Nails fall off.

IX. Yet this is to be understood, that it is not an immediate falling off, as
is that of Hair; but a falling off by degrees, to wit, as by growing forth,
they are thrust off.

X. And this has come to pass many times from the French Disease, as also after
the Plague, pestilential and malign Fevers; and from the taking of Poison.

XI. Sometimes it is caused from want of their accustomed nutriment; either
from a constipation of the pores of the Hands that carry their nutriment; or
from extinguishing their native heat.

XII. The Prognostics. If the roots of the Nails are eaten asunder by a
vicious and corrosive Humor, and that it has continued long; or if they be lost
by reason of the want of nutriment, they are not to be restored again.

XIII. But if the Malady be but in beginning, and the roots not wholly eaten
asunder, there is then some hopes of a Cure.

XIV. The Cure. The evil Humors are to be purged off with Tinctura Cathartica,
six, eight, or ten times to be repeated; and the Juices to be sweetened, by a
continual taking of Tinctura Antimonii, a j, ad ij. in some proper Vehicle,
morning and evening every day.

XV. And for Topics, you may apply this Emplaster: Labdanum ix. Ammoniacum vj.
Wax iv. Bdellium ij. mix, and with a little Oil of Ben, make a soft Emplaster.
Spread this upon leather, of which make caps to put upon the fingers ends,
renewing it every fourth or fifth day.

CHAP. L. Of a WHITLOE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). (and this is the Paronychia of the Greeks;)
in Latin, Reduvia; and in English, a Whitloe.

II. The Description. This is a Vice not so much of the Nails, as of the Skin
which is next to the Nails: it first begins with the cleaving, or rising up of
the Skin at the roots of the Nails, (by some called a Hang-nail;) which being
unhappily pulled up, or off, many times grows very sore, and painful; at length
there is heat, inflammation, redness, and intolerable pain about the root of
the Nail, night and day, with a small tumor.

III. The Cause. It is generally external, from the rising up of the Skin at
the root of the Nail, as aforesaid; which by the protrusion of ill Humors to
the Part, and an ill habit of Body, becomes a very painful and troublesome Tumor.

IV. The Differences. It differs from Paronychia Arabum, or Panaritium, a
Felon; because that never begins at the root of the Nail, but generally at the
Fingers-ends; and commonly begins from within, (as from the Bone) and comes
outwardly afterward: whereas the Reduvia begins outwardly, and then goes more
inwardly: affecting not so much the Bone, as the root of the Nail.

V. The Prognostics. It is generally without danger, but in Cacochymical
Bodies it is oftentimes with much pain and trouble: if it tumifies not, it is
accounted one of the lightest Affects; and Galen (de Nature. Human. sub finem,
Comment. 2.) says, it scarcely deserves the care and pains of a Physician: but
if it tumifies, and comes to suppuration, it is cured with trouble, and
requires some time: and many times it is so malign, as either to destroy the
root of the Nail; or so to hurt it, as to cause the Nail to grow thick, rough,
and very deformed.

VI. The Cure. At the beginning, before it Apostemates, it is many times cured
by anointing with Oil of Roses, or applying Housleek-leaves to the same; taking
away the skin of that side of the leaf which you lay next the Affect: for by
this means, heat, and inflammation is prevented, and consequently, the
Apostemation.

VII. Others apply Purslane, and some the roots and seeds of Mallows: but to
hinder the Part from taking cold, by application of Emplastrum Album, or
Hogs-lard mixed with poudred Rosin, prevents any farther danger, and heals the
Affect.

VIII. If it Apostemates, it is very painful, till it comes to ripeness; which
to perform, you may apply this: Take Sheeps-suet, Oil-olive, A. j. Rosin in
powder j ss. Turpentine ss. Oil of Aniseeds iij. mix, and apply it: it will
give ease upon application, and quickly bring is to ripeness.

IX. When it is ripe, you must open it with a Needle, and let out the matter:
the sooner it is brought to ripeness, the safer it is, and the less it
endangers the root of the Nail, which if that be hurt by the Affect, it is
impossible but the Nail must grow deformed.

X. The Tumor being quickly made ripe, and the Pus or Matter let out, (which
you must do when it grows white) you may heal it with Our Balsamum Amicum, or
Balsamum Gummi Elemi; applying over all Ceratum Gummi Elemi, or Emplastrum
Album.

Libri Secundi FINIS.
ARS CHIRVRGICA. Liber Tertius. OF TUMORS.
The ARGUMENT.
I. Of Tumors arising from Blood. 1. Of Tumors in General. 2. Polysarkia,
Corpulency; and Atrophia, Wasting and Consuming. 3. Apostema, an Apostem. 4.
Sinus in Apostematibus, Hollowness in Apostems. 5. Phlegmon, an Inflammation.
6. Bubo, a Tumor in the Groin-Emunctories. 7. Ecchymosis, a Contusion, or
Bruise. 8. Carbunculus, a Carbuncle or Plague Sore. 9. Parotis, a Tumor in the
Glandules of the Ears. 10. Phyma, or Phygethlon; a Tumor of the Almonds or
Glandules of the Jaws and Throat. 11. Gangraena and Sphacelus, a Gangrene and
Mortification. 12. Paronychia Arabum, Panaritium; a Felon. 13. Epinyctis,
Furunculus; a Push. 14. Perniones, Chilblains and Kibes. 15. Aneurisma, Rupture
or Swelling of an Artery. 16. Varix, Rupture or Swelling of a Vein. II. Tumors
arising from Choler. 17. Erysipelas, Ignis Sacer, Rosa; Anthonies-fire. 18.
Herpes Miliaris, Vlcerous Pustles. 19. Herpes Exedens, the Eating-Pustle. 20.
Exanthemata, the Smallpox. III. Tumors arising from Phlegm. 21. Oedema, the
White Swelling. 22. Tumor Cysticus, Atheorema, Meliceris, Steatoma; the
Cystick-Tumor. 23. Ganglion, Lupia; a Wen. 24. Gummi, Nodi, Tophi; Gums, Nodes,
Tophs. 25. Fungus; Spungy, Soft, or Proud Flesh. 26. Bronchocele, Tumor in the
Throat. 27. Strumae, Scrophulae; the King's Evil. IV. Tumors arising from Wind.
28. Emphysema, Tumor Ventosus; the Windy-Tumor. 29. Hernia Ventosa, the
Windy-Rupture. V. Tumors arising from Water. 30. Hernia Aquosa, a
Watery-Rupture. 31. Tumor Aquosus, the Watery-Tumor. 32. Hydrops, the Dropsy.
33. Hydrocephalus, Dropsy of the Head. VI. Tumors arising from Melancholy. 34.
Polypus, Noli me tangere; Cancer-like Tumor in the Nose. 35. Scirrhus, the Hard
and Painless Tumor. 36. Cancer, the Hard and Painful Crab-like Tumor. 37. Spina
Ventosa, Cancer of a Bone. 38. Elephantiasis Graecorum, the Arabian Leprosy.
39. Elephantiasis Arabum; Elephantiasis of a Part, or Cancer-like Swelling of a
Part. VII. Tumors, from the Solid Parts falling out of their places. 40. Hernia
Intestinalis, Rupture of the Peritonaeum, by which the Bowels fall into the
Cods; where also, of the Rupture of the Navel.

I. TVMORS arising from BLOOD.
CHAP. I. Of TVMORS in General.
I. A Tumor is called in Greek, (...), pl. (...). also, (...), pl. (...). in
Latin, Tumor, plu. Tumores; also, Inflatio, pl. Inflationes; in English, a
Swelling, and Swellings.

II. It Is true, the ancient Greeks, as Hippocrates, call a Tumor (...), Oidema,
or Oedema; and this word with the more ancient Physicians signified in general,
all, and every particular preternatural Tumor; as is observed by Galen, in
Prognost. 1. Text. 29. and in Comment. Aphoris. Lib. 4. Aphor. 34. and Lib. 5.
Aphor. 65, 66.

III. But now with us, Oedema is taken for a particular Tumor, white, and
painless; happening in the Joints, and more especially in the Knees; of which
we shall speak in its proper place.

IV. A Tumor then is a receding of any Part from its natural state, by its
augmentation in magnitude or quantity; through a diserasy, intemperies, or
distemper of the Blood, Lympha, and other Humors.

V. This Disease is called by the Arabians, Bothor: but if a Tumor Apostemates,
they call it Dubellet, and Dubellatum.

VI. We speak of Tumors preternatural only; for every swelling or augmentation
of a Part beyond its natural habit, is not to be reputed a preternatural Tumor:
for as much as there is not the least hurt or detriment of any one Action, or
any thing preternatural, or besides the intent of Nature; but only something
that is not natural, but is above that which is according to Nature, as Galen
testifies.

VII. And therefore where the magnitude of some one Part may be extended beyond
its natural habit, but so, that its natural Operations are not impeded, and
that there is no sense of Pain accompanying it; in this case, the Tumor or
Swelling is not preternatural, and so to be called a Disease, but rather a
Symptom; as in Nurses Breasts distended with Milk, and in a Woman with Child,
near her time, etc. these things happening according to the laws and course of
Nature.

VIII. From what has been said it appears, that a Tumor is a Disease of
magnitude, augmented beyond Natures intention; and has its production from
something which is preternatural adjoined to the Part affected; to which some
Authors will have added, a Solution of Unity.

IX. The Differences. They arise, 1. From the containing cause, as Humors,
Wind, or a solid Substance. Those which arise from Humors, have obtained no
particular appellation, but are called by the general name of Tumors.

X. If they proceed from Wind shut up in any Part, and distending the same,
they are called by the Greeks Emphysemata, and by the Latins Inflationes.

XI. If the cause is a solid substance, as Flesh, Skin, or something
cartilaginous or bony; all these proceed from Humors, and are therefore
referred to the first kind.

XII. 2. From changing of place: as when the solid Parts change their place and
situation, slipping down upon some other Part, distending and elevating the
same; of which kind are Hernia's or Ruptures, etc.

XIII. 3. From the quality of the conjoined Matter; as being hot or cold, moist
or dry, soft or hard.

XIV. 4. From their Magnitude; some are great, and these are called by a simple
and general name Tumors: some are small, and these are called Tubercula.

XV. 5. From their situation some are internal, some external, and these again
are either more deep and profound, or more superficial.

XVI. 6. From their figure; some are round, others long; some broad, and
flatter; others higher, and sharp-pointed.

XVII. But the main differences of Tumors are only two: the first arises from
the variety of Causes, the other from the Part affected.

XVIII. The Kinds. 1. Some proceed from Blood: as, 1. Poly-sarkia. 2. An
Abscess. 3. A Phlegmon. 4. A Bubo. 5. Ecchymosis. 6. A Carbuncle. 7. Parotis.
8. Phyma, or Phygethlon. 9. Gangraena. 10. Paronychia, Panaritia. 11.
Epinyctis, or Furunculus. 12. Perniones. 13. Aneurisma. 14. Varix.

XIX. 2. Some proceed from Choler: as, 1. Erysipelas, or Rosa. 2. Herpes
Miliaris. 3. Herpes Exedens. 4. Exanthemata, or the Smallpox.

XX. 3. Some proceed from Phlegm: as 1. Oedema. 2. Atheorema, Meliceris,
Steatoma, 3. Ganglion, or Lupia. 4. Gumma, Nodi, and Tophi. 5. Fungus. 6.
Bronchocele. 7. Strumae, or Scrophulae.

XXI. 4. Some proceed from Wind: as 1. Emphysema, Tumor Ventosus. 2. Hernia
Ventosa.

XXII. 5. Some proceed from Water: as 1. Hernia Aquosa. 2. Tumor Aquosus. 3.
Hydrops. 4. Hydrocephalus.

XXIII. 6. Some proceed from Melancholy: as, 1. Polypus, or Noli me tangere. 2.
Scirrhus. 3. Cancer. 4. Spina Ventosa. 5. Elephantiasis Graecorum. 6.
Elephantiasis Arabum.

XXIV. 7. Some proceed from the Solid Parts removing out of their proper
places: as, 1. Hernia in the Cods and Navel, Epiplocele: and from the Bones
also proceeds that which we call Exostosis; which is handled in the Chapter of
Gums, Nodes, and Tophs.

XXV. But many of these Tumors procceed not simply from one single Humor, but
complexly, from a combination of several Humors meeting together; as, Phlegm,
Choler, Melancholy, and Watery Humors: so that the conjunct Cause cannot
properly be said to be any one single Humor, but Matter generated out of Humors
conjoined; which is denominated from the principal Humor abounding: and in this
sense the Kinds of Tumors but now enumerated, are to be understood.

XXVI. Galen, ad Glauc. lib. 2. cap. 7. says, that in Apostems has been found
substances, like Stones, Sand, Shells, Wood, Mud, Slime, Filth of Baths, Dregs
and Lees of Oil, with many other like substances.

XXVII. And in his Meth. Med. lib. 14. cap. 12. he farther tells us, that in
some Tumors there was found substances resembling Nails, Hair, Bones, Shells,
and Stones.

XXVIII. Fallopius, and with him Sennertus, testify, that Worms are frequently
found in Tumors; and that the latter of them had seen them himself.

XXIX. The Causes. The External Causes may be Blows, Falls, Straining beyond
Strength, etc. The Containing Cause is something beyond, or besides Natures
intent, added unto a Part; which heightens, distends, and swells it up to a
greater magnitude than ordinary.

XXX. Tumors are caused either by Congestion, or Fluxion.

XXXI. Congestion is the heaping up of Matter contrary to Nature, being the
Recrements of the third Concoction, of that Nutriment which is distributed for
the nourishment of the Parts of the Body; or the Nutriment it self, not so
perfectly digested as it ought to be.

XXXII. This Matter is gathered together by little and little into the Part
affected. Primarily, by something amiss in the Part, as weakness of the
Concoctive power of the Part, whereby it cannot digest the Nutriment sent to
it, as it ought to do. Secondarily, from the weakness of the Expulsive faculty;
the Recrements not being thrust forth as they should be, the Pores being closed
through Cold, etc.

XXXIII. Congestion is caused many times also from evil and unwholesom Food,
causing such an abundance of Recrements, that the Expulsive faculty cannot cast
them all forth; or being so thick, that Nature cannot easily expel them: and
this is daily manifest in such as are much troubled with Furunculi, or Pushes.

XXXIV. Tumors therefore which proceed from Congestion, are more slow, long,
and tedious in breeding, than those caused by fluxion; for that these latter
are with great pain, redness, and beating, and come suddenly to a height.

XXXV. Fluxion is the falling down of some Humor or Humors, to some certain
part, either by Attraction, Protrusion or Transmission, offending it either in
quantity or quality, or both.

XXXVI. Attraction, or as some will have it, Protrusion, primarily proceeds
from Heat, either by overmuch motion, or the heat of the Sun, or Fire, or sharp
Medicines taken inwardly, whereby when the parts are heated, they draw to
themselves Humors; or the Humors being heated are rarefied, and so for want of
room are protruded to the Parts.

XXXVII. Secondarily, from Pain, because Pain is said to excite Tumors by
attracting Humors to the part grieved. Or rather, Nature attempting to relieve
the part pained, protrudes an extraordinary supply of Blood and Spirits more
than usual, so that thereby she over-loads and hurts the parts she endeavors to
Succor.

XXXVIII. Then the grieved part growing hot from that abundance of Blood and
Spirits protruded; the part is then said to attract more, by reason of this
adventitious Heat; and the Pain weakening the Member, if it attracts not, yet it
readily receives the Matter protruded without any resistance in the least.

XXIX. Transmission is a kind of Protrusion, but with the least force
imaginable, whereby the Humors as it were slide down into the part affected;
which if they be not digested or evacuated by Transpiration, but remaining and
still increasing, they cause a Tumor.

XL. There is then a part from which the Humor is sent, and a part which
receives it, and a part through which the Humor is transmitted: The parts then
transmitting are excited by Heat, whether it be external or internal, and
thereby the Faculty is provoked to expulsion, and sometimes the Humor by its
own weight descends into a part, as Water in a Dropsy, falling into the Feet
and Cods.

XLI. The Parts receiving, are such as by their weakness are disposed to the
Reception, which weakness is contracted either in their first Formation, or
afterward by some accidental Hurt; or so constituted by Nature, for the more
easy receiving the Recrements of other parts, as the Glandules in the Ears,
Throat, Arm-holes, Groin, Skin, etc.

XLII. For Nature (to preserve the Human Frame from Diseases) has purposely
ordained some weak and feeble Parts, that so the principal Parts oppressed or
burdened with Humors, might empty into them whatever is superfluous and
burthensom, and these are the Skin and Glandulous Parts aforementioned.

XLIII. Thus the Brain transmits the recrementitious Humors to the Glandules of
the Ears; the Heart to the Armpits, the Liver to the Groins, etc.

XLIV. The Barts through which the Humors are transmitted are either hidden, as
those in an Ascites, by which the Water falls into the Cavities of the Abdomen:
Or Manifest, to wit, the Arteries and Veins, the recrements of the Blood and
Lympha, being as it were, spued forth from their Capillary ends or mouths, and
by this way it is, that Tumors are mostly produced.

XLV. Out of what has been said, it appears, that the causes of Tumors are
threefold, viz. Primitive, Antecedent and Conjunct.

XLVI. The Primitive Causes are external, as Falls, Blows, etc. which move the
Humors, also external Heat, Food taken too raw, or cold, or in excessive
quantity.

XLVII. The Causes antecedent are internal, as Humors offending either in
Quantity or Quality, Intemperature, Weakness, and Pain.

XLVIII. The conjunct cause, is the Matter gathered together in the place or
part, by reason of the aforesaid Causes.

XLIX. The Signs. If the Tumor proceeds from the falling down of any part, it
is known by sight; if it does not, we may safely conclude, that it proceeds
either from Congestion or the afflux of Humors.

L. If from Congestion, it is known by the Signs delivered at Sect. 34.
aforegoing: And this is peculiar to them, that they take not up so much room in
the part, as Pushes, Pimples, and the like.

LI. If the Tumor was generated by Fluxions, it will be known by the presence
of the contrary Signs: And if there was not any foregoing Pain or Heat in the
affected part, it shows the Afflux was by Transmission.

LII. And contrariwise, if Pain and Heat did precede, the Fluxion is caused by
attraction.

LIII. The beginning of the Tumor is when the Part is first perceived to be
distended: The Increase or Growth is, when the part seems to be raised into an
indifferent large Swelling, with Symptoms corresponding. The height or state of
it is, when it ceases to be any farther augmented, and all the Symptoms are at
their highest pitch: and the Declination is, when the Tumor and Symptoms are
sensibly diminished.

LIVE. The Prognostics. Inward Tumors are always more dangerous than outward or
external; and they have more or less danger of Death, according to the
excellency and use of the part.

LV. The greater the Tumor, the greater the Intemperies or Distemper
accompanying it: The more malign and vicious the Humor, the more danger and
difficulty in the Cure. And contrariwise,

LVI. Tumors arising from Wind, are more easily helped; for they are discussed
or dissipated in a manner of their own accord.

LVII. Tumors arising from Humors, if they vanish not of their own accord, are
terminated either by, 1. Discussion. 2. Or by Suppuration. 3. Or by Corruption.
4. Or by Induration.

LVIII. If by Discussion or Resolution, the Member or Part grows lighter, i. e.
loses of its weight and heaviness; and there is a ceasing of the painful
beating, with which it was before troubled.

LIX. If it is by Suppuration, which is, when the Humor causing the Swelling,
is converted into Pus, or a purulent Matter, there is then a pain and
palpitation in the part, with Heat increasing: But when the Matter is concocted
and ripened, then the Heat abates, the Pain asswages, and the Tumor becomes
pointed, and eminently elevated, the Color is white, and the place (if felt
on) is soft, and the Matter seems to fluctuate, and yield to the Touch.

LX. But if the Matter lies deep, the maturation will not then be so easily
discerned, by reason of the thickness of the part, as says Hippocr. lib. 6.
Aph. 41.

LXI. If it be by Corruption or Putrefaction, wherein the Constitution, or
Habit and radical Heat of the part affected, is corrupted and destroyed by the
malignity of the Matter now nigh at hand, there is a blackness or livid Color
upon the part affected, and the violence of the Symptoms cease.

LXII. If it is by Induration, when the Tumor acquires an accidental and
adventitious hardness, it is known by a diminution of the Tumor, but an
increase of its hardness, the Swelling lessening unexpectedly, which
diminution, if it comes from an internal Cause, is always evil, unless the
matter retreating, goes off by some critical Evacuation.

LXIII. The Cure by Resolution is easiest and safest; and next to that is
Suppuration: Induration is a very Evil Symptom, but Corruption worst of all.
See the Third Edition of Our Synopsis Medicinae. Lib. 1. Cap. 49.

LXIV. The Cure. The Indication of Cure is taken from the conjoined Cause; for
upon the removal thereof, the Tumor goes away.

LXV. If there is any intemperature accompanying it, you must alter it, as if
it is of Heat, you must cool, if of cold, you must heat; if of dryness, you
must moisten: but if of moisture, you must dry; and this alteration is made by
the application of such things as have the opposite Properties in them.

LXVI. In removal of the conjoined cause, see whether the Tumor is perfect, or
may yet receive any farther increase; if it is not as yet at height, but only
approaching thereto, then we must have respect unto the antecedent Cause, as
also Causes procatartick, which are with all possible care to be removed, and
this is most considerable when the Tumor proceeds from Fluxion, or an afflux of
Humors.

LXVII. In those Tumors the Fluxion is to be opposed, and as much as may be,
totally removed; by evacuating the flowing Humor, either by Vomiting, or
Purging, or Urine; as by the habit and constitution of the Body it is requisite.

LXVIII. If you Vomit, the Oxymel Scilliticum exceeds in its use; which ought
to be used six or seven times: if Purging, the Sal Mirabile exceeds all other
Remedies: if you provoke Urine, Sal Nitre dissolved in Parsley or Hydropiper
Water, and well sweetened with Sugar, is an incomparable Medicine.

LXiX. This being done, you ought to give things corroborative, to strengthen
both the Part which breeds the Humor, and the Part which receives it: for which
purpose, nothing exceeds our Theriaca Chymica, or our Laudanum Specificum, or,
Dr. Gardner's Laudanum Samech, which may be given in a a fit Dose, at night
going to bed, and repeated as you see need requires.

LXX. The Fluxion also is opposed, 1. By Derivation, which is when the Humor is
derived unto the opposite Parts: 2. By Interception, wherein the motion of the
Humors in their passage is hindered; either by thickning them, or by repulsion.

LXXI. And since the Humor is said to flow partly by Attraction, which is
caused by Pain and Heat; it is requisite that this Pain be eased by Anodyns,
and the Heat by Medicaments which refrigerate.

LXXII. The Humor is taken away out of the Part affected, either by translating
it to some other Part; or by evacuating it out of the Body.

LXXIII. It is translated into some other Part either by Astringent Medicines,
which drive back; or by Constringing Medicines, which by Compression bring the
Parts close together; or lastly, by Attractive Medicines, which draw the Humor
unto other Parts, and is effected by Pain, Heat, and Emptiness.

LXXIV. But as for Repulsives, they only take place, where the matter is not as
yet impacted or stuffed into the substance of the Part, but only flows to, in
the greater and lesser Vessels of the same; or else without the Vessels, in the
vacant spaces of the same; whose substance is neither so thick, nor yet so thin
as to resist the force of Repulsives.

LXXV. But if the Matter be already so impacted into the Part, that it is
scarce possible, nor yet safe to repel it; you must then strive by Suppuratives
to bring it to maturation.

LXXVI. The Evacuation of the Peccant-matter is either insensible, or sensible.

LXXVII. Insensible is by Discussion: and this is to be endeavored when there
is no great store of matter in the Tumor, and that it is not very thick; and
the parts also about it not compact and hard, but rare, and porous.

LXXVIII. If the Matter to be discussed be any thing hard, it is first of all
to be mollified by Emollients; that it may the more easily be discussed through
the Pores of the Skin.

LXXIX. Sensible Evacuation, is by opening the Tumor with the Knife; and this
if the Matter contained in the Tumor is in great abundance, and withal thick,
and if the Part lying above it is close and compact.

LXXX. If the Tumor is perfect, that is, come to its height or perfection, you
must then treat it as an Apostem; and after the same manner it is to be opened,
cleansed, and healed; as in Chap. 3. following, we shall teach.

CHAP. II. Of CORPVLENCY.
I. IT it is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Corpulentia, Crassities; also
Corpulentia nimia; in English, Corpulency; and too great Corpulency: because
Authors say, that if it is not exceeding, over and above, or too great, it is
no Disease.

II. It is no Disease whilst the Functions of the whole Body are perfect and
entire, but when it begins to hurt them, then it is accounted for a Disease:
and it is a Disease of Magnitude, as Galen, lib. de different. Morb. cap. 9.
affirms, because it is not natural, but is above that which is according to
Nature.

III. Histories of exceeding corpulent people are extant; and the same Galen,
in the place cited relates, that one Nicomachus of Smyrna had his Body grew to
so exceeding a bulk, that he could not move from one place to another.

IV. And Sennertus tells us of a Rope-makers Wife of Strasburgh, a City of
Alsatia, who Anno 1613. and in the thirty-sixth year of her age weighed 480
pounds weight.

V. And he tells us of another, upon his own knowledge, who weighed more than
400 pounds weight, who notwithstanding appeared in public: but, says he, in
such persons as these, there is not an equal augmentation of all the parts of
the Body, as it is in such as grow, and naturally increase; but their Fat and
Flesh only exceed in that vast proportion.

VI. These things seem not incredible; for I my self knew a young Lady not
exceeding 18 years of age, so fat and fleshy, as scarcely to be able to go
cross her own Chamber; and being weighed, exceeded 300 pounds weight.

VII. I know also a Man now living, so bulky, that he cannot go alone, but is
carried in a Running-chair out of one Chamber into another: and by some of his
Family about him he is reported to weigh more than 460 pounds weight; and truly
his bulk bespeaks it.

VIII. The Causes. The Procatartick Cause is, plentifully eating good and
nourishing Food; and the person so eating being of a pure, untainted, and sound
Body; having the Native-virtue generating Flesh very vigorous, strong, and
active; and withal leading an idle life.

IX. The Antecedent Cause is, an overgreat abundance of good Blood, made of
nourishing Meats, abounding with a good Juice: for this cause it is, that
Corpulency is referred to Tumors proceeding from Blood: but there is this
difference between them, that the conjoined cause of this Tumor is Fat and
Flesh; whereas the conjoined cause of other Tumors arising from Blood, is Blood.

X. The conjoined cause therefore of this Tumor of the whole Body, is Flesh and
Fat: sometimes the Flesh is most augmented, sometimes the Fat; and sometimes
they are both alike increased together.

XI. Fat we conclude to be generated of the fat and oily parts of the Blood,
falling out of the Arteries into the membranous parts, and then digested by the
innate faculty and virtue of the Membranes.

XII. And this happens most to such as are of a cold and moist habit of Body:
and Galen also maintains, that all Bodies tending toward a cold and moist
temperament, become fat.

XIII. The Signs. It is evident to the sight: but if it only produces a kind of
deformity, it is then no more than a Symptom: but if it offends or hurts any
Action, it is then to be accounted a Disease.

XIV. The Prognostics. Avicen was of opinion, that such a great quantity of
Fat with which such corpulent people are troubled, hinders the Body in its
motion, in walking and operating, and straitens the Veins with an irregular and
dangerous constriction; from whence proceeds obstructions of the passages of
the Spirits, by which they are suffocated or extinguished.

XV. But this danger of Suffocation more belongs to such as grow thus
vehemently Corpulent in their younger years: for that they have their Veins and
Arteries always small; and by reason of this excessive increase of Flesh and
Fat compressing them, they are not permitted to grow larger.

XVI. Persons thus affected with such an extreme bulk of Body, are also apt to
fall into Apoplexies, Palsys, Palpitations, and Diarrhoea's, by reason of their
very great Humidities; as also into Lethargies, Coma's, Fainting and Swooning
Fits, etc.

XVII. And whether Men or Women, they are apt to be Barren; the Male not being
able to generate, nor the Female to produce an Embryo in the Womb, they having
little or no Seed at all: the Seed being produced of Blood, of which they they
have a very small stock: and if some of them have an indifferent quantity of
Seed, yet it is such as is thin and watery, and unfit for Generation.

XVIII. And if the Women conceive, (for it is they that have the most Seed) yet
it is very rarely; and when they do, they soon miscarry: nor are they able to
nourish the Child in the Womb, because they have an exceeding weak Appetite,
which affords not Nutriment enough.

XIX. This Disease is rarely cured, and when it is, the Cure comes but very
slowly on, nor can it be done in a short time: for the Patient ought to be
endued with much patience, self-denial, mortification, and prudence; without
which things, the attempt of the Cure will be wholly vain.

XX. The Cure. The great store of Flesh and Fat is to be removed; which is done
by wasting and consuming what is already generated, and preventing it for the
future to be increased: and this is effected, by taking care, that too great an
abundance of Blood be not bred, by using things which heat, and exsiccate or
dry, much.

XXI. In order to the performing of all this, there is a twofold Consideration:
1. That which has respect to the Diet and Government of the Patient. 2. That
which has respect to the Medicaments exhibited.

XXII. 1. As to Diet. Much Fasting, and an extraordinary Abstinence from Food,
is much commended in a word, a continual spare Diet is absolutely necessary,
for it very much tends to the diminution of the Corpulency.

XXIII. The Diet also ought to be hard, as well as sparing: because hard fare,
and Meats not of so easy digestion, breed not Blood in such an extraordinary
quantity, as to conserve or continue, much less increase such a prodigious bulk
of Flesh and Fat.

XXIV. Dry Bread is a good kind of Food for them; so also would Water, if the
fear of a Dropsy did not attend it: however, the Patient may now and then drink
a little Water, and sometimes Mild-beer, (because that is opening) and
sometimes Wine very much diluted with Water.

XXV. All their Food and Drink ought to be such as may render the Belly
slippery and soluble: for by that means, much of the Nutriment which would be
converted into Blood and Flesh, will be beforehand carried off.

XXVI. Let them accustom themselves to much and often Exercise every day;
beginning with small Exercises first, and then increasing them by little and
little, till they become great: avoiding by all means an idle and sedentary
course of life.

XXVII. No exercise exceeds that of fast Walking, and Running; which may at
first be but little, but ought every day to be increased gradatim, both as to
the speed in running, and as to the time of exercising it: and the course ought
to be continued every day for some months, yea years, till the gross of the
Body is brought down.

XXVIII. Next, Friction of the whole Body with hard or course Cloths, is of
good use; because it opens the Pores, and causes a transpiration of much of the
fatty Sweat or Humidities, which conspire to the increase of the magnitude of
the Body: rubbing the Body presently after all over with some sweet Oil, which
if you please may be perfumed.

XXIX. And withal, if they have convenience, they ought to Sweat once a day, by
a dry method of Sweating: the best for this purpose, is Sweating in Hartman's
Chair, with rectified Spirits of Wine. By this course I cured a Man of a
prodigious bulk in about three months time, or a little more; beyond mine, and
all others expectation.

XXX. Galen, Method. Med. lib. 14. cap. 15. says, he perfectly cured a Man of
about forty years old, who was exceeding fat and gross, even to the admiration
of all who beheld him. And this he did, by giving him an Antidote made of Sal
Theriacale, and the right Theriaca Andromachi made of Vipers; causing him to
use an extenuating Diet after it, and to exercise himself with swift running.

XXXI. And he fitted and prepared him for this exercise of Running, by gentle
Frictions with rough and hard Cloths made of new linen, till the skin became
red, and then anointed him with a digestive Oil, with which he also anointed
him after his running.

XXXII. 2. As to Medicines, Bleeding is wholly forbidden; for it is manifest,
that much and constant bleeding has made many grow to an extraordinary bulk of
Body, who otherwise would have been lean and slender enough: and Hippocrates
seems to be against Bleeding in fat persons, because (as they are of a cold
habit of Body, so) they are more propense unto cold Distempers.

XXXIII. Authors advise to frequent Purgations with Aloes, and Aloetick
Medicines: I commend my Cathartick Laudanum, which may be taken every night to
gr. x, or xij. and in some persons to xv, or xx. it is a noble Medicine, and
works admirably the next day, and that without any griping, pain, illness, or
making faint; and possibly may more waste the Body (almost after an insensible
manner) than a thousand other Medicines, which purge more vehemently: and yet
this is not to be despised, as to its purging neither.

XXXIV. Some advise to Aloes made up with Myrrh and Nitre, as a proper Remedy;
because Sal Nitre in a great measure wastes the Body by Urine, at least hinders
its farther increase.

XXXV. Oxymel of Squills constantly taken for some few months, is a famous
thing; and will certainly bring the Body down in some few months, if the
Patient can be but persuaded to the constant use of it.

XXXVI. Authors commend all hot and bitter things: as Wormwood, Southernwood,
Rue, Pellitory of Pain, Sage, Time, Savory, Myrrh, Frankincense; and generally
whatsoever things work by Urine, as Fennel, Smallage, Parsley, Hydropiper,
Asparagus, Onions, Winter-cherries, etc.

XXXVII. Sennertus commends this Powder: Sal Nitre j. Alum ij. Cortex Guajaci,
Sarsaparilla, Myrrh, Frankincense, A. ij. make all into a fine powder; of which
the Patient may take a dram morning and evening every day, for two months
together.

XXXVIII. The Salt of Vipers is commended, but is a thing dear, and hard to be
got: the Salt of Sheeps or Bullocks flesh will do as well.

XXXIX. For them that cannot take Pills, I commend a constant Purging with Our
Tinctura Purgans, or Tinctura Cathartica; and sometimes for change, with Elixir
Proprietatis: but more especially with Sal Mirabile, because that answers the
Indication, both by Stool and Urine; and if constantly used, will do wonders of
this kind.

XL. In the intermediate days of Purging, this following Powder may be given:
Sal Nitre, Winter-cherries, Cortex Guajaci, A. j. Myrrh, Cloves, Nutmegs, A.
ss. Camphir, Ginger, A. ij. white Pepper j. make each into a fine powder, and
mix them together. Dose, j. morning and evening, in Barley-water, or Decoction
of Parsley-roots.

XLI. Lastly, for a constant Drink, (instead of Beer, Ale, Wine, Water, or
other liquors) this following is most excellent; because it wastes not only the
Nutritious-juices, but even the Flesh and Fat, to a Miracle.

XLII. Raspings of Guajacum lbj. Cortex ejusdem, Sassafras rasped, A. lbss.
Fennel-seed, Coriander-seed, A. iv. fair Water lbxxx. Salt of Tartar iv. mix,
digest scalding-hot for twenty-four hours; then boil in a Diet-pot till a
Gallon is consumed: strain out, and sweeten it a little with double-refined
Sugar: of this let the Patient drink constantly every day, as his ordinary
Drink, and continue the use of it for 3, 4, 6, or 8 months; as the condition of
the Sick, and continuance of the Distemper shall require.

APPENDIX. Of an ATROPHIA.
XLIII. It is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Atrophia, vel Consumptio
Partis, vel Partium; and in English, a Consumption, or Wasting of a Part or
Parts.

XLIV. There are several kinds of Consumptions, as a Phthisis; a Marasmos or
Tabes; a Hectic; and lastly, an Atrophia, Pining or Wasting; which is called
in general, and Extenuation of the Body; viz. when the Body is not nourished so
much as it ought to be, but is diminished and lessened, by reason of the
withholding of Nourishment from it; and this is called in general an Atrophy.

XLV. Now an Atrophy is twofold: 1. General, of which we have already treated
in Our Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 2. cap. 31. and lib. 6. cap. 18. 2. Particular;
which is the Wasting or Pining away of some particular Part or Parts; as a
Foot, Leg, Thigh, Arm, etc. of which we shall treat here, and the rather,
because falling under none of the general Topics or Titles of this Art, though a
part of the Chirurgians duty: and not being willing to give it a place by it
self, we chose to treat of it in this Chapter, by way of Appendix; as being the
almost opposite of too great Corpulency.

XLVI. The Causes. The Causes of the particular Atrophy, (like that of the
whole Body, which consists in some one particular Bowel, whose action is
necessary for the Nutrition of the whole Body) is contained in some particular
Vessel or Vessels, beloning unto that particular Part.

XLVII. Yet however the general Causes are the same as in an Universal Atrophy;
viz. the weakness of the Nutritive-faculty of the Part, and defect of
Nourishment.

XLVIII. The Faculty is hurt when the Part is over-cooled, and left destitute
of its proper heat and warmth: for then the Part can neither attract any
nutriment, nor retain it, nor yet alter, or assimulate it.

XLIX. And a Part is said to be refrigerated, and its hea^ decayed, and to be
made dull, or stupid, and unfit for action, from many Causes; as, coldness of
the external Air, lying long in cold Water or Snow, or being laid upon a cold
place; as also by long lying upon the Parts, (by which the Spirits contained in
it are as it were suffocated) from overmuch rest, in the Palsy; or from the
straitness of the passages through which the Spirits flow.

L. The Nutriment fails chiefly by reason of the narrowness of the Passages,
(or their being obstructed or stopped up through the congelation of some Humor in
the same,) through which it ought to flow to the Part wanting it.

LI. And this arises mostly from External Causes, as, when the Arteries which
carry the Blood unto the Part for its nourishment are compressed by the Bones,
when they are loosened or out of joint: or from hard and strait bandage; as
many times happens in such as have long had an Issue; or from some Tumor nigh
unto the Part; or from the brawniness or hardness of the Flesh; or lastly, from
the Vessels being cut asunder, which are to convey the Nutriment.

LII. The Signs. The Disease is known by Sight; and the very Causes may be
fully known by the relation of the Patient: but because it may have dependence
upon many of them, they are therefore all of them to be enquired into, that so
the method of Cure may be the more rightly prosecuted.

LIII. The Prognostics. From the Causes, we are to make our Judgments of the
Cure: for if the Causes may be removed, there may be hope of Health and
Restoration; if they cannot be taken away, but will remain, the Disease will
also remain.

LIVE. The more recent it is, the more easily it is cured; and contrariwise, the
more inveterate and old, the more hard and difficult.

LV. If the Nutriment only is consumed, there is more hopes; but if much of the
substance of Flesh is already wasted, it will be the more difficult; and most
of all when the Membranous parts are already exsiccated, and very much dried:
for such an Atrophy is as impossible to be cured, as that which befalls the
Body through old age.

LVI. If the Native-heat be not so far weakened, but that it may be restored,
the hopes of recovery is manifest: for that the Cause being removed, and the
Heat restored, Nourishment will again be brought to the Part affected.

LVII. The Cure. A Part being extenuated or withered away, for want of the
Nutriment being conveyed to it, and the languishing of the Heat of the Part; we
must do our endeavor to restore the decayed Heat again, and to make an
attraction of the Blood to the same.

LVIII. Heat is restored to the Part many ways: as by a gentle Friction, or
moderate rubbing of the Member, moving of it up and down, and soaking it in
warm Water.

LIX. Now this friction, moving, and soaking it in Water, ought to be so long
(and no longer) continued, than to cause the Part to look somewhat red, and as
it were a little swollen; but not so long till it is again assuaged and fallen.

LX. The Parts affected may also be soaked and bathed in Baths made of the
following particulars, or some of them, which may be easiest gotten; as
Aniseeds, Angelica, Avens, Asarabacca, Bay Leaves, Basil, Bawm, Bears-breech,
Bishopsweed, Brooklime, Briony, Calamint, Camels-hair, Camomil, Caraway-seeds,
Catmint, Cedar-tops, Celandine, Centory, Chervil, Citronpeels, Cicely,
Coriander-seeds, Costmary, Costus, Cresses, Cumin, Dittander, Dittany,
Elecampane-roots sliced, Fennel the herb and seed, Fenugreek, Fetherfew,
Fir-tops, Galingal, Gaultree-leaves, Goats-rue, Gentian, Grains of Paradise,
Ground Pine, Hartwort, Hops, Horehound, Hysop, Jack-by-the-hedge, Juniper-tops
and berries, Larchtree-tops, Lavender, Limon-peels, Mallows, Marjoram,
Masterwort, Mastich-herb, Maudlin, Melilot, Mint, Mustard, Myrtle-leaves,
Navew, Orange-peels and leaves, Parsley, Parsnip-tops, Pellitory of the Wall,
and of Spain, Peniroyal, Pepper bruised, Pimpernel, Pinetree-tops,
Plowmans-spicknard, Polymountain, Radish-tops, Rampions, Rocket, Rosemary, Rue,
Sage, Savin, Savory, Saxifrage, Scabious, Scruvigrass, Skirret-tops, Smallage,
Sneezwort, Solomons-seal, Soapwort, Southernwood, Spignel, Tobacco, Tansy,
Tarragon, Time, Tormentil, Turnips and their tops, Valerian, Vervain, Wormwood.

LXI. The bathing and fomenting being over, (which ought to be repeated every
day, for some considerable time) you may anoint with this Oil: Oil-olive, or
Neatsfoot-oil, xiv. Chemical Oils of Aniseed, Amber, Caraways, Juniper Berries,
Camomil, Rosemary, Sage, Savin, Sassafras, Lavender, sweet Marjoram,
Turpentine, A. j. Oils of Oranges and Limons, A. iv. mix them; with which
anoint the Part morning and evening.

LXII. Or you may make the former into an Ointment, by adding Sheeps-suet xij.
Chemical Oil of Cumm vj. powder of Castoreum viij. with which you may anoint,
as before.

LXIII. Sennertus advises to this Ointment: Bdellium, Opoponax, A. j. dissolve
in Wine, and strain: to which add Hog's Grease, Goose and Hens grease, A. j. old
Oil-olive iv. Turpentine, Wax, A. j. boil till the Wine is consumed, and then
add Mastich, Frankincense and Fenugreek, all in powder, A. j. mix, and make an
Ointment; with which daily, morning and evening, anoint the places affected.

LXIV. After well Anointing, for a week or more, you may apply the following
Emplaster: Turpentine, Balsam-capivi, Gum-Elemi, Wax, Rosin, A. lbj. mix them
upon the fire; then add thereto Galbanum, Opopopanax, Sagapenum, strained, A.
iv. Tacamahacca iij. Frankincense, Mastich, A. ij ss. Long-pepper, Ginger,
Cardamoms, Grains of paradise, all in fine powder; Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves,
Zedoary, Galangal, Winters- Cinnamon, Mustard Seed, all in fine powder also, A.
ij. mix, and make an Emplaster; which apply, after it has been fomented with
the following Fomentation.

LXV. The Fomentation. Spirit of Wine lbvj. Pepper, white, and long, Ginger,
Zedoary, root of Pellitory of Spain, Mustard Seed, Grains of paradise, all in
powder, A. j. Bay Berries, Rocket-seed, berries of Spurge-olive,
Juniper Berries, Winters- Cinnamon, A. ss. Cloves, Nutmegs, A. ij. Mint,
Marjoram, Rosemary, Sage, Time, all dried, A. vj. mix all these Pouders
together, and grind them in a hot iron Mortar, with Salt of Tartar iv. then put
all into the Spirit, which digest in a cold place for a week, and decant off
the clear Tincture for use; with which foment the Part, before laying on of the
Emplaster.

LXVI. After the application of the former things for four, five, or six day,
the Ancients used Dropacisms, or Pications. Now a Dropax or Pication, was a
soft Ointment made of Pitch mixed with Oil; which they applied to the
extenuated part blood-warm, keeping it on till it was cold, and then they
removed it, and applied a fresh one; and this was often repeated, till at
length the Part became red, and something swelled: which done, they removed the
Dropax, and anointed the Part with sweet Oil, or some fat body, and in the
evening repeated the same as before: which course they continued so long, till
the Member grew thicker, and more fleshy.

LXVII. If this Dropax or Pication would do nothing, they made then use of
Percussion or Beating, smiting the wasted Part with Ferula's or Rods, till such
time as it became swollen and red, and then immediately anointed it with some
Oil, or fat Medicament: but later Physicians make use instead thereof, of green
stinging Nettles.

LXVIII. Some have been cured by anointing with this Ointment: Oil-olive,
Sheeps-suet, A. viij. Chemical Oils of Camomil, Juniper, Rosemary, Savin,
Sassafras, and Spike, A. ij. Mustard Seed, roots of Pyrethrum in fine powder,
A. ij. white Pepper in powder j. Camphir, Ginger in powder, A. ss. Turpentine
q.s. mix them.

LXiX. Others have been cured by manifold Frictions, and then immediately
anointing with this Mixture: Oils of Amber iv. Oils of Spike, Rosemary, and
Sassafras, A. j. Oils of Aniseed, Juniper, Limons, and Turpentine, A. ss. mix
them; with this the Patient was anointed twice a day, rubbing it in for half an
hour at a time; and being continued for twenty days or more, they became
perfectly well.

CHAP. III. Of ABSCESSES, or APOSTEMS.
I. THIS kind of Tumor is called in Arabic, Dubellet, and Aldubellet; in
Greek, (...), pl. (...), and in Latin, Abscessus, pl. Abscessus; Tumor est qui
suppuratur: in English an Apostem, pl. Apostems; a Swelling full of ripe matter.

II. The Description. It is a Tumor arising from corruption and putrefaction,
chiefly in the end of a Disease; and in or near the Glandules, as behind the
Ears, in the Neck, under the Arm-holes, or in the Groins, being repleat with a
preternatural Humor, most commonly in its own Membrane, yet sometimes not; if
it proceeds from concussion, or other external hurt: whence follows
inflammation of the Part, a Fever, and then a generation of Corruption, whence
comes an Abscess.

III. But some Tumors are denominated from their times; for whilst unripe, they
are Tumors of that particular kind; but coming to suppuration, they many times
lose their first appellation, and are called Apostems, of which kind are
Phlegmon's suppurated; and indeed any Tumor when it is maturated, is called by
some an Apostem: whence it is ordinary to say, when a Tumor is ripe for
Apertion, it is Apostemated.

IV. If therefore the matter which causes the Phlegmon or Inflammation is not
dissipated insensibly: Nature, which can never be idle, converts it in process
of time, (especially if assisted with warm Medicaments, or any Blood be mixed
with the protruded Matter) into a certain rotten substance called Pus; which
when it is wholly separated from the Parts containing, and gotten together into
the Part affected, is properly called an Abscess, or Apostem.

V. The Differences. They are taken, 1. From their Times. Some are maturated
more speedily, as those which proceed from Blood, and are in a fleshy-part.

VI. Some are maturated more slowly, as those Tumors which are bred out of
other Humors; and are seated near the Joints, and in Nervous parts, or parts
which are weak, or have in them but little native Heat.

VII. 2. From the Matter. And this is various, according to the Humor it is
generated of: out of good Blood is generated a Pus, less offensive; but out of
other Humors is bred a sharp, putrid, green, yellow, or ill-coloured stinking
Matter.

VIII. Sometimes this matter resembles Gruel, Honey, Suet, Wine-lees, Oil-lees;
and sometimes it is like Honey and Snivel mixed together, or the substance of
rotten Eggs; and that of so ill a savor, and so stinking, as not to be endured,
etc.

IX. And sometimes living Worms, and other like Animals are found in them; for
the Humors of the Body may possibly be wholly converted into Worms, and such
like substances, in great variety.

X. 3. From the Tumor it self: for the matter in the hollowness of the Part, is
either without a Membrane; or else is contained in a peculiar Cystis or
Membrane of its own.

XI. Yet some Authors are of opinion, that those Tumors alone, which proceed
from Inflammation and Pain, and had within them a sharp corroding Humor, and
not contained in any peculiar Skin or Tunicle, could properly be called
Apostems.

XII. The Causes. Though they may proceed from other Tumors maturated, and so the
remote and antecedent Causes in those cases are thence to be derived; yet they
are also many times caused from external injuries; as falls, blows, bruises,
etc. wherein Blood being extravasated by the external force, it is through the
help of Nature, and the heat of the Part putrified, and so there arises an
Apostem.

XIII. An Example of this kind, we have in Guiliel. Fabricius, Cent. 1. Obs.
63. A young Man 27. years old had a great Fall, and by the hilt of his Sword
was hurt under the short Ribs and left Kidney, having also his Loins much
bruised: after some days, he felt a pain in the left part of his Loins, which
by degrees became exceedingly sharp and intolerable: upon which followed loss
of Sleep and Appetite, with some small kind of Fever; but the Part affected was
not black and blew, or any way discolored, or in the least swollen, but appeared
as in perfect health.

XIV. In this condition he was tampered with by a certain DOCTOR, as a
Nephritick, but all in vain, for the Doctor was mistaken; for it was a hidden
Apostem in the Muscle Psooa. At length he sent for Griffonius, a learned
Physician and Chirurgian, who presently discovered the whole grief, and the
danger impending, from the Matter being shut up in those inward or deep parts:
it now possessed his whole Loins; he therefore applied powerful Attractives, to
draw all the Matter into some one place, where the principal Vessels were but
few, and the Instruments of Motion might be least hurt: then he opened it on
the left side, nigh to the fourth Vertebra, with a red-hot Razor, making the
Wound as deep and as long as ones finger, from the end thereof to the hollow of
the hand; out of which there flowed a great quantity of putrid and stinking
Matter; which he afterward cured according to Art.

XV. Sometimes they are caused from Fevers; where, by the fermentation of the
Febritick-heat, the Morbifick-matter is critically protruded into some
particular Part, where Nature can best dispose thereof.

XVI. An Example of this kind we have from the same Fabricius, in the place
cited, which happened also in the Muscle Psooa; where he tells us, that a
certain Matron took her bed, with extreme and acute pains about her Loins;
having a Burning-fever, accompanied with Swooning-sits and difficulty of
Making-water.

XVII. By the Signs, Symptoms, and kinds of the Pain, it appeared to be a
hidden Apostem; for outwardly nothing appeared, nor could any thing be
discerned by the touch; and by the place, that it could be no where but under
the Psooa- Muscle. She was told the extreme danger, and that it would be with
hazard of her life, unless it was opened; she gave consent, and it was opened
with a Razor, on one side of the Spina Dorsi, through the Skin, and exterior
Muscles, even to the Psooa; and there came forth a quantity of stinking Pus, or
Matter: after which, by abstersive and cleansing Medicaments for some time
applied, she became perfectly well.

XVIII. Sometimes also it is caused by Witchcraft; as when Hairs, Bones, Wood,
Nails, Pins, Needles, Coals, Cockle-shells, or any thing of a like nature, is
found; into which it is not possible for Humors to be naturally changed: in
such cases, Artists ascribe the cause to Sorcery and Witcheraft.

XIX. The Signs. In a Phlegmon, it is easily seen when the Humor causing the
Tumor is changed into Pus, and in other Tumors also there are peculiar Signs:
for till the Matter is changed into Pus, the Heat, Pain, Tumor, and other
Symtoms are heightened, not diminished, as they are when it is ripe; as
Hippocrates, Sect. 2. Aph. 47. affirms.

XX. When the Maturation approaches, the Apostem begins to be sharp-pointed,
the Pus seeking its passage forth, and so the more lifting up the Skin: then
also there is an abatement of the Fever and Heat, the Swelling round about a
little diminishes, and the extension and hardness is something remitted, and
the Patient has some ease, and is a little lightsom.

XXI. Then also, coming to perfect ripeness, if the place is pressed down with
the fingers, there is a softness, and a kind of floating of the Matter
underneath, which is sensibly perceived in the Part.

XXII. Yet, that you mistake not, this is to be understood, where the matter is
thin, and lies high; but if the Matter is thick, or lies deep, as under the
Psooa- Muscle: (in which Muscle Apostems seldom appear outwardly, as by the two
aforegoing Examples is manifest) there is no fluctuation at all to be
perceived, and many times neither tumor nor discoloring, as Hippocrates
maintains, Lib. 6. Aph. 41.

XXIII. The Prognostics. An Apostem is generally Critical, or upon the end of
a Disease: if it increases, and the Sick grows better, health is a coming.

XXIV. If it strikes inward, or falls down; or otherwise, if it yet increases,
and the Sick grows worse, let him prepare for death, for it is near at hand.

XXV. Apostems lying hid, (as those in the great Muscle Psooa) are much more
dangerous, than those which are apparent and outward; and by how much the more
outwardly they lie, by so much the less danger.

XXVI. The sooner an Apostem comes to maturity, the sooner and easier it is to
be cured; the more hard the matter, the more tedious and difficult the Cure.
The rest of the Prognostics see in the Third Edition of Our Synopsis
Medicinae, lib. 1. cap. 49. sect. 9, ad 24.

XXVII. The Cure. Whilst the Abscess or Apostem is in the way of maturation,
you must cherish the heat of the Part, by Medicaments that concoct, and
increase Pus, and ease the present intense Pain.

XXVIII. Such things are called Chalastica, and Anodyna, for for that they take
from the part all sense of pain: and of this kind are Milk, Butter, Oil,
Hog's Grease, Capons-grease, Vng. Dialthaeae, Emplast. Diachyl. simplex.

XXIX. What things hasten Suppuration, we shall show at large in Chap. 5, and
6. following: such are these, for hoc Tumors; Oil mingled with Water, and
simple without mixture; Wheat-Hower, and Bread of the same; Fats of a Calf, of
a Hog, of a Hen, of a Goose; Pitch, Rosin, Wax mixed with Oil; Vng.
Tetrapharmacum, made up of Wax, Rosin, Pitch, and Fat, etc. the Mucilages of
Lin-seed, Fenugreek-seed, Mallows, Marshmallows. Or this Cataplasm:

XXX. Powder of Althaearoots, Mallow-leaves, A. j. Wheat Flour j ss. seeds of
Line and Fenugreek, A. ss. Saffron ss. boil them in Milk or Decoction of dried
Figs; to which add Hog's Grease, Unguent. Dialthaeae, A. j. mix, and make a
Cataplasm.

XXXI. But if the Tumor be cold, you must use hotter things; such are
Turpentine, Gums of the Fir Tree, Larch-tree, and Pine Tree; dried Figs,
Raisins, Lin-seed, Fenugreek-seed, roasted Onions, Leven, Oils of Camomil and
white Lillies, old Hens fat, old Butter, Bdellium, Galbanum, Ammoniacum,
Emplaster of Melilot, and Diachyson magnum.

XXXII. Or this Cataplasm: of the former Cataplasm vj. Leaven vj. Camomil ij.
old Hens fat, Oil of Camomil, A. j ss. mix for a Cataplasm. If you add white
Lilly roots, Onions, Turpentine, A. j. it will be yet stronger.

XXXIII. When the Apostem is come to full ripeness, it is then to be evacuated
and cast forth of the Body: which is done either by Discussion, (which is very
seldom and rare;) or, by opening of it; (which is much the better way) be it
done either of its own accord, or by Art.

XXXIV. Now to know when an Apostem is fit for opening, you must have respect
to the signs of its maturation; which are, an abatement of the intense Pain and
Inflammation: as we have shown more at large in Sect. 20, 21, and 22,
aforegoing.

XXXV. The Abscess being now found by the Signs to be fit for Apertion, you
must perform it as we have taught, Lib. 1. Cap. 18. of this Work, where the
Operation is expressed at large. If the opening is by Instrument, it is done
with the Knife either red-hot, or else cold: but we now very seldom make use of
the hot Iron, and then never but in cold Tumors; and that also, only when the
Apostem is in those Parts which have many, or else large Veins and Arteries;
that so the Flux of Blood, or Haemorrhage, may the better be prevented.

XXXVI. Now if upon opening of the Apostem, great pain should ensue, or a flux
of Blood, or a swooning; in this case, the Section must be performed with the
greatest speed and care that may be.

XXXVII. If an Haemorrhage be feared, you must have in a readiness, these
things which stop the flux of Blood; as Frankincense, Aloes, white of an Egg,
fine Bole, Sanguis Draconis, Pomgranate rinds and flowers, burnt Alum, Caput.
mort. of Vitriol, and several others, which both Our Doron, and our Pharm.
Land. are able to furnish you with.

XXXVIII. To prevent Fainting and Swooning, especially in Children, Women, and
fearful persons, you ought to have in a readiness Spiritus Angelicae magis
compositus, Aqua Bezoarica, or Spiritus Cordialis, or that of Matthiolus;
letting the Sick smell to Oil of Rosemary, or Spike, or Savin, which is better
than either; or in desperate cases, to Spirit of Sal Armoniack.

XXXIX. And likewise that the Section may be rightly performed, the Chirurgian
ought to know the condition of the Part; the situation of the Veins, Arteries,
and Nerves; as likewise the nature of the Muscles: without the exact knowledge
of which, many irregularities, enormities and errors may be committed, even to
the hazard of the Patients life.

XL. For the Veins and Arteries being cut, a violent Haemorrhage may follow;
the Nerves being cut, either intolerable Pain may arise, or the Member may
altogether be deprived of Sense, or both; and the Muscles being cut, the Part
may be wholly deprived of its motion.

XLI. Moreoever, regard ought to be had to the Fibers of the Muscles, that
Section may be done according to their conduct, and not overthwartly, or cross
to them; and that some consideration be had to the greatness of the Section.

XLII. If it be too little, the Pus cannot come forth without compression of
the Part; which may both excite pain, and beget a brawniness, thereby hazarding
a Fistula: if it be too great, there may be either an unsightly Scar, or the
ambient Air may get too much in, and alter the Part.

XLIII. To make the Incision, Sennertus admits of either the Razor or
Incision-knife; or a Knife myrtle-shaped, edged on both sides, with which the
Italians and French open Veins; or with the Lancet; or lastly, with the
Syringotomos, an Instrument crooked, and of only use in the Incision of an
internal or concavous body.

XLIV. The Incision being made, if there be but little Pus, you may gently
press the part, that it may the better flow forth: but if there be much, you
ought to evacuate leisurely, and by little at a time; lest if all should be let
out together, the Spirits should be too much wasted, and swooning follow.

XLV. After Incision, and emptyng, of the Pus; the first day you may strew on
the dust of Frankincense: on the second day, lay on some kind of Digestive;
that if any thing remain not perfectly suppurated, it may be completed.

XLVI. And if any kind of nastiness does occur, let it wiped away; and then
cleansed with this: Turpentine j. Honey of Roses ss. Barley-meal, q.s. mix
them, and apply it.

XLVII. If the Ulcer require yet more forcible cleansing, you must use stronger
Abstersives; as, Vnguentum Apostolorum, Aegyptiacum, etc. and at length
Sarcoticks, or Medicines breeding Flesh are prudently to be applied to the
consummation of the Cure, as in the Chapt. following we shall discourse more at
large.

XLVIII. If an Apostem leys deep, so as that it is concealed in many places; or
if it is not opened in due time, but that delays are made, whereby it is kept
too long; the Humor or Matter is then for the most part translated to some
other place, and sometimes to the more noble Parts which cannot be, but with
manifest danger to the Sick.

XLIX. Of this kind, Guiliel. Fabricius, Centur. 1. Observe. 81. gives us a
remarkable Example, of a Child three menths old, which had an Apostem near to
his right shoulder. The Parents (says he) would admit of no Incision, and by
degrees the Tumor much abated; at length it was opened, but a very small
quantity of matter issued forth, and in a short time it sunk wholly away: but
the Humor gradually gliding downwards into the Abdomen and Genitals, it
destroyed the native heat; upon which followed a Gangrene, and in a few days
more, a Sphacelus; so that in a short time after the Child died.

L. From what has been said it appears then, that delays of opening Apostems,
are not to be permitted, in any Part; much more if they be in Parts, where the
Matter is easily translated to those we call the more noble; and that sometimes
it is better to open them a little too soon, than a little too late; the former
being an error, at most, on the right hand.

CHAP. IV. Of a SINUS in Tumors.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Sinus; and in English, the Hole of
a Tumor or Apostem.

II. The Description. Is it the hole or hollowness of a Tumor or Apostem, which
being emptied of its Pus, is notwithstanding filled again; for which reason it
is, that the sides of the said hollowness do not close, and grow together with
the Flesh which is underneath it; but there is a certain cavity or hollowness
left remaining, very difficultly, if not-impossible, to be cemented.

III. Now the mouth and entrance into the Apostem and Ulcer, is generally
strait and narrow; but within it is more profound or deep, enlarging it self
into a proportional breadth.

IV. The Causes. They arise mostly from Apostems or suppurated Tumors, not soon
enough opened, or not well cleansed.

V. For the Pus being longer kept in the Apostem than it ought to be, acquires
a sharp or corroding quality; by which it makes many winding and turning
passages; to which there is an afflux of Humors from the adjacent parts, and
many times from the whole Body: for which reason it is, that this Sinus, or
Windings to and fro, is difficult to be filled up with Flesh, and healed.

VI. The Differences. They are manifold: 1. As to Magnitude; for some are
greater, some lesser; some shallower, some deeper, some less capacious, others
broader.

VII. 2. As to Figure; some are straight, others with many turnings and
windings; some long and deep, others roundish, or globular.

VIII. 3. As to the situation, or way of Running: some run upwards, and so give
better hopes of Cure; for that by its orifice the Pus may the more easily flow
forth: some tend, or run downwards, so that the Pus cannot flow forth; for
which reason, with the Syringotomos it may be opened on the lower part.

IX. The Prognostics. If the Sinus is not speedily cured, it contracts a
Callus, and degenerates into a Fistula; and will not then be cured, without
much difficulty and danger.

X. The hopes of Cure are taken partly from the Sinus it self, as not being
large, deep, winding, or depending: partly from the Part; as being in an upper
part, not in a part depending: and partly from the Matter flowing forth; as
being well digested, without much swelling, or any very sensible pain; being
white in color, and small in quantity.

XI. If the Pain is wholly vanished, and the whole place is equal; not feeling
with a hollow or yielding softness; it is a good Argument that the Sinus is
already filled with Flesh.

XII. But if there is much pain, or any swelling or tumor, the matter flowing
in great quantities, and as it were continually, of an evil color, as green,
blew, yellow, or blackish; and indigested, or otherwise very putrid, and
extremely stinking; the hopes of Cure are very small.

XIII. The Cure. The Indicacations are taken from the Symptoms, which are
chiefly two, Solution of Unity, and Hollowness: and therefore there must be a
Unition; which that it may be accomplished, the Hollowness must be filled with
Flesh.

XIV. Now the Cavity cannot be filled with Flesh, except the temper of the Part
is as it ought to be; and that the Sinus is free and clean from all its
impurities and filth: we must labor therefore to remove the Distemper of the
Member, if any be, and then that the Sinus be thoroughly cleansed.

XV. The former is done with Alteratives of a contrary temper; and Purging once
or twice a week, with Pilulae Catharticae, Tinctura Purgans, Tinct. Cathartica,
or Sal Mirabile, Pulvis Catharticus, or Pulvis Cornachini.

XVI. Then see to the Orifice of the Sinus, if it looks not downwards, cause it
to look so, by opening the lower part thereof; that the filth may have a free
passage forth; and such a like Sinus, by applying Abstersives, is easily cured.

XVII. Now in this case, sometimes the whole Cavity must be laid open;
sometimes an Orifice must be opened only on the inferior part: but the opening
the whole Sinus is most in use, because the Ulcer thereby may be the more
easily cleansed and healed.

XVIII. Yet this is only when the Sinus is great, and the whole Part may be
laid open without danger: otherwise we only open it in the bottom thereof;
which done, it is thoroughly to be cleansed and dried, that no Pus be left
remaining.

XIX. For if any of the filth be left behind, there are commonly Recidivations
or Relapses which follow it, or else it degenerates into into a Fistula: and
though the parts may seem to be conglutinated, yet they stick not firmly
together, but afterward separate again.

XX. Now to help on the removal of the Pus, Pillows, or Bolsters and Swathbands
are of great use, thereby straightly to compress the hollowness, from the higher
part of the Sinus, toward its Orifice.

XXI. This being said, we must come to consider of the Medicaments fit for this
purpose; as 1. Barley-water, especially if mixed with a little Red-wine. 2.
Melicrate, or Water and Honey boiled together. 3. Mulsum, or Wine and Honey
boiled together; which both cleanses and corroborates together.

XXII. To these things you may add, the White Potion, which is thus made:
Strasburgh- Turpentine j. three yolks of Eggs, grind them together till they
are well mixed, then add to them, Barley-water three quarts; with which wash
the Sinus for some days.

XXIII. To these things we may add, Honey of Roses, Barley-meal, Bean-flower,
Orobus-meal, meal of Lupins, Spirit of Wine, Alum-water, Oxymel, Unguentum
Aegyptiacum; which laft is the strongest of them, and to be used in the most
filthy Ulcers.

XXIV. Honey of Roses strained ij. Barley-flower enough to give it a thick
Body: or, Turpentine, Honey of Roses, A. j. juices of Wormwood and Smallage, A.
ss. boil them together; then add of Lupin, Bean, Barley flower, A. q.s. mix
them well together.

XXV. Or, having for some days cleansed with the Mixture at Sect. 22.
aforegoing, wash only with the following Mixture, with which sometimes the Cure
is only and completely performed. Well-water lbiv. Saccharum Saturni,
Roch-alum, A. vj. white Vitriol iv. Spirit of Wine vj. mix them.

XXVI. But if the Sinus are manifold, or with many turnings and windings, or of
an extraordinary depth, so that it is altogether impossible to open them
wholly; nor that Unguents can possibly penetrate through the whole Cavity: in
this case, liquid Abstersives must be used, which may (by the help of a
Syringe) insinuate themselves into all parts of the Sinus.

XXVII. And sometimes, as soon as the Medicine is cast in, the Orifice is to be
stopped, (for some little time) that the Medicament may remain there for a while;
which may be best done with a short Syringe, if the Orifice is narrow, holding
the Syringe in all the while, to prevent the immediate flowing back.

XXVIII. Fair-water lbv. Honey iv. juices of Centory and Wormwood, A. ij. Aloes
ss. dissolve by boiling, and strain.

XXIX. If it be very foul, Barley-water lbiv. Honey iij. Unguentum Aegyptiacum
vj. mix them.

XXX. The Sinus being sufficiently cleansed by the use of these things, or
others of like nature, you must then come to the use of Sarcoticks,
Incarnatives, or Flesh-breeders: for though Nature her self will generate Flesh,
yet Art and Medicines many times assist her so, as to remove the recrements
which hinder her in her operation; which since they are an impediment to her,
are wholly to be taken away by means proper; so that the filth and impurities
may be thoroughly taken away from the Ulcer, and the humidities dried up.

XXXI. Now Sarcoticks or Flesh-breeders, cannot be said properly or really to
generate Flesh, for that is the work of Nature alone: but are so called from
their being assistant to her, in removing (as was said before) the impediments,
by their cleansing and drying qualities.

XXXII. Yet they ought not to be over-drying, but such as may agree with the
natural temper of the Part: for as much as there is not the same degree or
measure of dryness in all Bodies, nor yet in all Members.

XXXIII. The more gentle Sarcoticks are, Barley-meal, Bean-meal, Rosin,
Frankincense: the stronger are, Orobus-meal, powder of Orrice-roots, of
Aristolochia, Myrrh, Scammony, Aloes, Tutia, Pompholyx, etc. out of which you
may make various Compositions.

XXXIV. A mild Sarcotick. Turpentine ij. Gum Elemi, Capivi, Frankincense,
Mastich, Olibanum, Colophony, A. ss. Wax, Oil, A. q.s. mix, and make an
Ointment.

XXXV. A strong Sarcotick. Round Birthwort-root, Orrice-root, Comfrey-root, all
in powder, A. ss. Mastich, Olibanum, Frankincense, Myrrh, Aloes, A. ij.
Scammony j. Turpentine, Honey, A. q.s. mix them well together.

XXXVI. If it is Flesh of a harder kind which is to be generated, and in a Body
more than ordinarily dry, and the Ulcer lies open, then you may apply Topics
in a dry form, as Sarcotick Pouders, to strew on: as,

XXXVII. Frankincense, Mastich, Olibanum, Rosin, A. j. make all into a fine
powder. Or thus: Aloes, Frankincense, Mastich, Olibanum, Rosin, Sanguis
Draconis, Sarcocol, A. j. make all into a powder.

XXXVIII. This is better: Fine Scammony, and make it into a subtle powder. Or
this: Scammony, Myrrh, Olibanum, A. j. make them into a fine powder. Or this:
Scammony in powder iij. fine Aloes, Myrrh, A. j. Coloquintida in powder, ss.
mix them.

XXXIX. This is a most excellent thing: Scammony in powder, Mercurius dulcis
levigated, A. j. Myrrh, Aloes, A. ss. Coloquintida in powder ij. mix them.

XL. But if the Sinus is not open, Sarcoticks of a liquid form are to be
injected, after the manner of Cleansers; and the Orifice being kept close, they
are to be kept in for a while.

XLI. For this purpose, red Port-wine, in which Myrrh, or Myrrh and Aloes has
been dissolved, may be injected; or Wine, in which Scammon has been dissolved:
or a Decoction of round Birthwort-roots in red Port-wine, in which you may
dissolve Myrrh: also, a Decoction of Comfrey-roots, Horsetail, red Roses,
Myrrh, Frankincense, Aloes, etc. in red Port-wine, are admirable in this case.

XLII. After all, it may be a question, whether the deeper and more extreme
parts of the Sinus are well cleansed and conglutinated? But this you may know
by the Pus that flows out, if it is but small in quantity, well digested, and
no pain is perceived: but if after the fifth or seventh day, a crude and raw
Humor shall come forth, it is a sign of no good healing, or conjoining the
Parts; and that Flesh is not as yet bred therein.

XLIII. In this case, you must use Medicaments which more forcibly dry, yet
without any biting; which may be continued till the Sinus is in a manner filled
up.

XLIV. Then some agglutinating Medicament is to be applied, which may gently,
and without any acrimony, close together, and heal the tender Flesh which is
generated and bred, conjoining the divided parts.

XLV. After the Agglutinative has been applied, you may put upon it a new soft
Sponge, dipped in generous Wine, or in Mulsum, or in a Decoction of
Pomgranate-peels, Red-roses, and Myrrh, made in red Port-wine, and you may bind
it round on; which binding let begin from the bottom of the Sinus, and so go
forwards to the Orifice.

XLVI. And about the bottom, let the swathing be as hard and strait as may be,
(but so, as not to cause pain,) and then slacken it by little and little, till
you come to the very mouth of the Sinus it self; over which let the Medicament
be laid after a loose manner.

XLVII. Nor must you too closely stop up the Orifice, but leave a place for the
Pus to come forth; for which purpose, the Emplaster laid on may have a hole cut
in the middle thereof.

XLVIII. This was the ancient way of curing a Sinus, and hollow Ulcers; but
Arcaeus in his Book of Wounds, l. 2. c. 7. gives us another more compendious
course, discovered by himself in curing Apostems newly opened; by which, on the
third or fourth day at farthest, all the aforesaid cavity of Apostems might be
perfectly cured.

XLIX. If the Apostem or Tumor (says he) is great, let it be opened as well as
may be; so wide, that ones Finger may go into the Orifice; that thereby all the
Pus contained may flow forth, by a gentle compression of the place.

L. The Pus being evacuated, stop the mouth of the Sinus with a Tent, and lay
over the Sinus a Bolster; which let lie without stirring it, till the next day
following.

LI. Then loosen the ligature, and let the hollow Ulcer be carefully purified
or cleansed from all the Pus: (I suppose he intends, with abstersive Lotions or
Injections) that nothing may be left remaining underneath.

LII. This done, let a small Pipe of lead be put into the Orifice, reaching
even to the cavity or hollowness; but by no means be forced any farther: upon
which lay Emplastr. Basilicon, spread upon linen Cloth; in the which the Pipe
also may be contained, that it falls not forth; but always leaving a hole at
the orifice of the leaden Pipe.

LIII. Then on either side of the Sinus let triangular Bolsters be laid, that
all the hollow space may be filled up with them; leaving the orifice of the
Sinus in which is the leaden Pipe or hollow Tent, free and open; not letting it
be stopped up with the Bolsters, nor any ways obstructed by the ligature or
binding; so that all the Pus contamed may wholly run out.

LIVE. Then let the place covered with the Bolsters be rolled about with a
Rowler; beginning from the bottom of the Sinus, and so going toward its
Orifice, thereby to force away the remaining pus or filth.

LV. Thus bound up, leave it till the day following, then loosen the Ligature,
and search how much of the Cavity remains, by which you will know, whether the
Bolsters did exactly press upon the hollowness.

LVI. For all these placs or hollownesses, which were compressed by the
Bolsters, will all of them be found conglutinated, and joined fast together;
the which being manifest, the Bolsters are again to be bound on after the same
manner as before, and so to continue till the next day.

LVII. But now if any Pus or Humor seems to be left in any place, this is to be
pressed forth (as before) with the Bolsters and Swathing; by which means the
gaping or hollow places will coalesce, and be joined close together.

LVIII. Which as soon as you perceive, the Bolsters are to be removed, and you
may lay upon the Ulcer a Plaster of Arcaeus his Leonine-composition, spread upon
linen Cloth; or some other Emplaster of like kind, as Diapalma, etc. every day
wiping and cleansing it six or eight times.

LIX. Now here is to be noted, 1. That Arcaeus his Method is only in use in
Apostems newly opened; but in an old Sinus, or where it may be callous, or
fistulous, the former Way is much the better and safer.

LX. 2. That the Bolsters be sufficiently compressed with the Rowlers; both to
press forth the Pus, and also to conjoin the disunited parts; otherwise no
healing can be expected.

LXI. 3. That there may not remain any relics of the indigested or putrid
Matter through the Part; which if any be, will be known by the continuance of the
Tumor, and redness of the color; and therefore the due and through Cleansing
must be endeavored with all the speed that may be.

CHAP. V. Of an INFLAMMATION.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Phlegmone, and Inflammatio; in
English, a Phlegmon, or Inflammation.

II. The Description. It is a Tumor, rising gradually with pain, vehement heat,
and redness, with a protrusion, and beating in the part; from a preternatural
flux of Blood.

III. The Place. It is manifest chiefly in Fleshy parts, to wit, the Musculous,
and sometimes in parts that are Membranous; as in a Pleurisy, in the Membrane
which girts about and encompasses the Ribs; in a Phrensy, the Membranes of the
Cerebrum; in an Ophthalmia, the Membranes and small Vessels of the Eye;
oftentimes in the Glandulous parts, as in Bubo's, Parotis, etc. and in the
Bowels also; as the Brain, Liver, Spleen, Womb, Reins, etc.

IV. The Causes. The Procatartick Causes are Wounds, Fractures, Blows,
Contusions, violent Exercise, Surfeiting, critical Evacuations; or any thing
which may cause a Solution of Unity in the Part, the Skin remaining whole.

V. The Antecedent-cause is Obstruction, and things breeding Obstruction, also
the breeding much Blood; whence it comes to pass, that the Blood or Matter
obstructed, not finding its way out, increases, and by a continual addition
without circulation, a Tumor is produced.

VI. The Conjoined-cause is Blood, if it is a pure Phlegmon; but as it may also
arise from the mixture of other Humors, as Lympha, Serum, Phlegm, Choler, or
Melancholy, so it receives other Names; as if from Blood mixed with Choler, it
is called Phelgmone Erysipelatoodes; if from a mixture of Phlegm, Oedematoodes;
if from a mixture of Melancholy, Scirrhoodes.

VII. From this Blood, or Blood mixed mixed with Humors, arises a Ferment in the
Part affected, with a hot Effervescency; causing many times a putrid Pus or
Matter.

VIII. Galen says, it is caused from a hot fluxion of Blood, which when it has
seized upon, and seated it self in some Musculous part, at first the greater
Veins and Arteries are filled up, and distended; and after them the lesser: and
so it is carried on, and continued, till it arives at the Capillaries, or least
Vessels.

IX. In these, when the matter of the Fluxion is forcibly impacted, and cannot
be any longer contained in the Vessels, it is then extravasated, or transmitted
unto the outward parts; partly by Anastomosis, through their own Mouths; and
partly by Diapedesis, or percolation or sweating of it out through the Tunicles;
and partly by Diaeresis, or breaking of the Vessels; whereby the void spaces
that are betwixt are filled full with the Fluxion.

X. For since the Arteries and Veins run along unto every particular Part; so
long as the Blood flows in a due measure, and is contained within those its
receptacles, by circulation, no Inflammation or Phlegmon can be at all: but
then it happens only when the Blood is in an over-abundant manner, and all on a
sudden is emptied and poured forth by the said Vessels into the substance of
the Flesh.

XI. This is evident in an Ophthalmia: for in the Tunicle Adnata, replenished
with innumerable of these Capillary-vessels, whilst the Eye is free from
distemper, they are so very small, that they are hardly to be discerned by the
most piercing Eye: but as soon as the Eye is inflamed, and those Vessels
preternaturally replenished with Blood, then they notoriously show themselves,
and become very conspicuous.

XII. And in like manner it is most agreeable to Reason, and even Truth it
self, that it should be the same in all other Inflammations whatsoever, and in
what part soever.

XIII. But yet there will be no Phlegmon or Inflammation, though the lesser and
Capillary-arteries are even filled up with Blood; until that at length by and
through them the Blood is impacted into the remaining parts, or substance of the
Flesh.

XIV. And this is done, when that the Blood being emptied through those
Capillary-arteries into the substance of the Flesh, it cannot flow again or
circulate through the ends or mouths of the Capillary-veins, by reason of some
thick or viscous Matter obstructing them.

XV. The Differences. The chief Differences of an Inflammation, are taken; 1.
From the Variety of the conjoined Gause. 2. From the various Qualities of the
Blood, which stirs up, and makes the Inflammation.

XVI. The Kinds And so a Phlegmon is said to be, 1. True, as that which springs
from Blood alone. 2. Spurious, which comes from Blood mixed with other Humors.

XVII. The Spurious is threefold, viz. Erysipelatoodes, Oedematoodes, and
Scirrhoodes; as we have already discoursed at Sect. 6. aforegoing.

XVIII. As for the Blood, as it is more acrimonious and sharp, so it makes the
Tumor more sharp and painful, and contrariwise: now this is no change of its
substance, but of its qualities; for if the Blood changes its substance, it
excites not any kind of Blood-tumor at all, but the Tumor is denommated from
some other Humor.

XIX. The Signs. They are manifold; as, 1. Tumor and distension: for the great
quantity of Blood does not only fill the Arteries, but even the whole substance
of the Part; all of it is distended or stretched out, but chiefly the Skin.

XX. 2. A very great and intense Heat, from whence the Tumor has its name and
denomination; which is caused from the overgreat afflux of hot Blood detained
in the Part; and an obstruction of the Pores of the Skin, that the hot
Exhalations or Vapors cannot sufficiently perspire, nor the heat be cooled as
it ought to be; together with putrefaction of the Blood and Humors.

XXI. 3. A vehement Pain: for where there is a vehement Heat, or hot Distemper,
and a solution of Unity, (as there must be in all Tumors) together with a
distention of Parts, there must also be a great Pain: now this Pain is various,
and much different; as distending or stretching, pulling or twingeing, pressing
and burthening; according to the quality of the Parts affected.

XXII. 4. Resisting the Touch: for though the inflamed Part is not hard of its
own nature, yet being so much filled with Blood, and distended thereby; it must
necessarily resist the Touch (in some measure) and appear as it were hard to
the feeling.

XXIII. 5. Redness of the Part: for the Blood imparts this color thereto;
there being nothing in Man's body which assumes a redness of color, but the
Blood primarily, then the Flesh.

XXIV. 6. A Pulse, or beating Pain in the Part: there is perceived a beating of
the Arteries of the inflamed Part, which when the Part was well, was not
perceived: but this happens not to all places, but only to such of them as have
some notable Arteries, and other parts which are endued with an exquisite
sense; and when the Inflammation is grown to a considerable bigness; as says
Galen, de Loc. affect. lib. 6. cap. 7. viz. when the Inflammation tends toward
Suppuration.

XXV. The Prognostics. A Phlegmon, if small, does often resolve; (which is
known by abating of the Symptoms, and growing less) but if great, and the
matter is thick, and deep in the Flesh, it does often suppurate.

XXVI. If the Inflammation vanishes, and the Tumor suddenly strikes inward,
with a Fever, or other evil accidents, it is dangerous.

XXVII. If it neither resolves, returns back, nor comes to Suppuration, it
grows into a scirrhous hardness.

XXVIII. If it falls in the Fleshy parts, it is said to end in fourteen days;
if on the Tendons and Ligaments, in about forty days.

XXIX. An Inflammation external, often frees the internal parts from many
Diseases, and is healthful; except it is very great and malign; for then you
may fear a Gangrene, or some other danger.

XXX. That is dangerous which seizes on the Eyes, Jaws, Uvula, great Vessels,
Penis, or Joints.

XXXI. In a Young person, and in Summertime, it is sooner cured than in Elder
persons, or in Wintertime, or cold weather; and sooner in a lean, than a fat
Body.

XXXII. The end is good, when Nature overcomes the matter which breeds the
Inflammation, which happens, when the Tumor is either resolved by insensible
perspiration by Discussives, and is the best kind of curing it: or when it is
suppurated, and turned into Pus, or purulent Matter.

XXXIII. The end or event may be said to be evil, when Nature does not overcome
the Morbifick-matter; which is, when (if the Tumor is external) it suddenly
vanishes, or strikes inward; or when the natural heat being overcome and
extinguished, it becomes a Gangrene: so that if it is not presently cut off,
death must ensue.

XXXIV. The end or event is not good, when upon Resolution, or Discussion, the
thinner parts are removed, leaving the thicker behind; by which the Tumor
becomes hard, and degenerates into a Scirrhus.

XXXV. Now if the matter is not very thick, nor deep, or shut up under a hard
and deep Skin, the Body not very corrupt, and nature strong; then a Resolution
by an insensible Perspiration may be expected.

XXXVI. But if the matter is much in quantity, and thick, lying deeper than
usual, and under a thick Skin; a Suppuration is to be expected.

XXXVII. If the Tumor diminishes without application of Repercussives or
Repulsives, it will retreat inwards.

XXXVIII. If the heat, pain, red color, and pulsation of the Tumor ceases
without manifest cause, the Tumor still remaining, the approach of a Gangrene
may be presaged.

XXXIX. If over-strong Discussives be applied in the beginning, where the
matter is very viscous, and hard withal, the natural heat being strong and
vigorous, the thicker parts will be scattered and dispersed, and leave the
thicker behind, which will degenerate into a Scirrhus.

XL. The Times of an Inflammation. It is necessary to know the Times of a
Tumor, in relation to the Cure; lest we run our selves into an error, whilst
we apply improper, or contrary Medicaments.

XLI. Now then Inflammations, as all other Diseases, have four Times, or
Crises; viz. the Beginning, the Increase, the State, and the Declination.

XLII. The Beginning is, when the Part begins to swell and be distended, when
as yet no Action is hurt or hindered. The Increase is, when the tumor, pain,
stretching, and heat are increased.

XLIII. The State or Height is, when the tumor, distention, heat, pain, and all
other Symptoms are most vehement, and in the height of their extremity. And the
Declination is, when the Morbifick matter is diminished, the pain and heat,
together with the other Symptoms, are become more remiss and gentle: or
otherwise, when the Tumor is come to ripeness, being converted into Pus, or
purulent Matter.

XLIV. But as to these Times or Crises, they are sometimes shorter, sometimes
longer; and sometimes a Phlegmon is sooner, and sometimes later terminated: for
Galen, in Aphoris. lib. 6. Aph. 49. says, that which is of a thinner
substance, is sooner digested than that which is thick or tough, which requires
a longer time; and that which is thick and viscous, will have yet a more larger
time.

XLV. The Cure. The Indications of the Cure of this Disease, depend chiefly
upon the Times of the Disease; for each Time or Crise has it own proper
Indication.

XLVI. The beginning. The chief Indication here is taken from the Antecedent
and Conjoined Causes, by removing the one, and repelling the other: now the
Antecedent Cause is Obstruction, and an increase of Blood: the Conjoined Cause
is Blood it self, as we have before declared: and they ought to be removed in
the very same order, in which they follow one another.

LXVI. The Obstruction is removed by Aperients or Openers, and such Catharticks
as have power to call back the Humors, or divert the Fluxion: of the first kind
are the Spiritus Salis Armoniaci, Spirits of Blood, and Urine, and the Spiritus
Nitratus, which is a famous thing.

XLVIII. Of the second kind are Our Family-Pills, our Pilulae Catharticae,
Tinctura Purgans, and Cathartica; an Infusion of Sena, and Rhubarb, and not
inferior to any of them is the true Sal Mirabile.

XLIX. If the Body is repleat, and the Stomach foul, first Vomit once or twice,
with Sal Vitrioli; or rather with the Tartarum Emeticum, or Oxymel Scilliticum;
and then Purge with some of the former things: because sharp Blood, or Blood
mixed with sharp Humors, cause the Fluxion.

L. Then again you may exhibit the aperient Alteratives before named; which may
be given in Syrupus Antifebriticus, and sometimes in Syrupus de Meconio; a
little to cool the Blood, and thicken the Humors.

LI. The Conjoined Cause, which is the blood in the Tumor, is resisted by
application of Repercussives or Repellers: and this is in a manner the only
Time in which repulsion ought to be used.

LII. But that it might the more safely be done, Sennertus advises to
Venesection, that the great store of the abounding Blood may be diminished, and
be drawn back from the aggrieved place; and (says he) it is not to be omitted,
if the strength of the Patient will permit it to be done: for that in this
case, hardly can any Remedies be applied with safety, without the diminution of
the Blood by this means, be first attempted.

LIII. For if Repellers be applied to drive back, the Body still continuing so
full of Blood, it is much to be feared, lest the matte should not be received
by the other Parts, and that thereupon it should endeavor to flow to some
other particular Part, and possibly the more noble.

LIVE. The Blood also is diminished by hindering its breeding, which is done, by
a very sparing Diet, and eating such Food as affords not much nourishment: for
which reason strong Ale and Wine is to be forborne, and Meats of a rich juice;
and if the Sick (by long custom of using it) cannot forbear Wine; let it be
very much diluted with Water: avoiding also all hot, sweet, fat, spicy, and
astringent things.

LV. His Drink, if possible, should be Barley-water, or a middling sort of
Drink, aculeated, with Spirit of Sulphur, or Sal Nitratum, or Vitriolatum; a^'d
his Food Watergruel, or Barley (...) broth, with juice of Limons.

LVI. After Revulsion or Bleeding, (which ought only to be done in the very
first rise of the Distemper, and only when there is a great plenty of Blood,
and a more than usual Fluxion, or rushing thereof to the Part affected)
Repulsion is next to be pursued, which is performed, by the application of
Repercussive Medicaments.

LVII. Repercussives or Repellers are of two sorts or kinds: one cold and
moist, or Waterish; the other cold and dry, or Earthy; having also a thickness
of parts, and an Astringent power: for which reason they act with a double
force, 1. By their Coldness: 2. By their Astringency.

LVIII. Cold and moist Repellers, are the more mild and gentle, and have power
only to drive back the thin Humors, which are small in quantity, and seated in
the superficies; and are prositably applied when heat and pain afflict the
Part, and the Vessels are small and strait.

LIX. For they do not only oppose and resist the influx of the Humors, but also
allay the heat; and by relaxation do something mitigate and assuage the pain.

LX. Of this kind are Housleek, Wall-peniwort, Lettice, Purslane, Endive,
Suecory, Henbane, Nightshade, juice of Gourds, Water-leatils, Fleawort,
Mandrake, Water-lilies, Arach, Violets; and all other things which are cold,
and endued with a Watery Humor.

LXI. However, among these there are several degrees, some having a less, some
a greater efficacy: for Wall-peniwort and Fleawort repercuss less forcibly than
Mandrake, Nightshade, Henbane, Housleek, Lettice, or Purslane.

LXII. Cold and dry Repellers, which are astringent, are proper in other cases;
and chiefly if the Fluxion proceeds from a debility of the Part, and that the
pain is not very vehement.

LXIII. For they strengthen the Part receiving, that so it may refuse the
Humors flowing into it, and drive back that which has already flown in: they
are good also to be applied where the Vessels, through which the Blood flows are
wide and large.

LXIV. Of this kind are, flowers and heads of Roses, leaves and unripe fruit of
the Bramble and Mulberry, Vine-leaves and unripe fruit, Raison or Grape stones,
red Sanders, unripe fruits of Medlars and Services, wild Pears, Quinces, leaves
and berries of the Myrtle, roots of Bistort and Tormentil, Pomgranate flowers
and peels, Frankincense, Acacia, pulp of Slows, unripe and ripe, fine Bole,
Terra Sigillata, Dragons blood, dried blood of Man or Beast, leaves and nuts of
the Cyprus-tree, Oak-leaves, unripe Galls, Acorn-cup, Ceruss, Litharge,
Saccharum Saturni, Alum, white Vitriol, salt of Vitriol, lapis Haematitis,
powder of dried Toads, etc.

LXV. Out of these, several Mixtures may be made, as the circumstances of the
Disease shall require: for of the Plants, the raw Leaves, etc. may be applied,
or Spunges may be dipped in the juice of the same; or a Cataplasm of the whole
substance; or Spunges dipped in a Decoction of them in Water, or red Port-wine.

LXVI. Some apply Cloths or Spunges dipped in Frog-spawn-water, in which Myrrh is
dissolved: or a Lixivium of Quicklime, boiled with Wax and Oil of Roses: or the
whites of Eggs beaten with Rose Water and Vinegar, and mixed with fine Bole, or
lapis Haematitis; or a Cataplasm made with Vnguentum Populeon mixed with
Bole-armoniack; or Milk, Bread, and Litharge, with a little Terra sigillata.

LXVII. Galen dipped a Sponge in Oxycrate, and applied it; and for the same
purpose, Oil-Omphacine and of Roses, Oil of Myrtles, Ointment of Roses, the
Ceratum Santalinum, Vinegar, Red-wine, juice of Plantane, the Cataplasma
Rabricii, Anacolema Schroderi, and Cataplasma contra Cruorem, are all of them
said to be of good use: the last three see in Our Pharm, Land. lib. 5. cap. 7.
sect. 7, 13, and 14.

LXVIII. A Cataplasm of Barley-meal, boiled with Vinegar and juice of Plantane,
i^ commended; so also a Cataplasm of Barley-meal, powder of Pomgranate-peels
and Sumach, with Housleek and Red-wine, boiled totogether. This Cataplasm,
says Galen, ad Glauc. lib. 2. cap. 2. is absolutely the best in such like
Disaffections: for that it drives back what flows in, drys up what is already
in, and fortifies the Parts adjacent.

LXiX. Housleek vj. Barley-meal v. Pomgranate-rinds, Sumach, both in powder, A.
ij. pulp of Sloes j. boil all in red Portwine, or Vinegar, for a Cataplasm.

LXX. Plantan, Lettice, Purslain, Nightshade, Red-roses, A. M. j. Water and
Vinegar, A. q.s. boil them, and by addition of Barley-meal make a Cataplasm.

LXXI. Juices of Housleek, Plantan and Poppy, A. iij. Vinegar j. Oil-omphacine
j ss. Barley-flower, enough to make it into a Pultess by boiling.

LXXII. Powder of Pomgranate-peels, Sumach, red Sanders, A. j. fine Bole iv.
Barley-flower vj. juice of Housleek viij. boil, and make a Cataplasm: to which
add Oil-omphacine, or Oil of Myrtles q.s. mix them.

LXXIII. This is stronger. fine Bole, Sanguis Draconis, Salt of Vitriol, A. j.
Saccharum Saturni, Comfrey-roots in powder, A. ss. mix them with the white of
an Egg beaten up with Rose Water, and make a Cataplasm.

LXXIV. To these things are added Interceptives, which some call Defensatives;
but they are the same with Repercussives or Repellers, and differ only in
respect to the place to which they are applied: the former being applied to the
place affected, but these unto the parts and ways by which the Humor flows unto
the affected Part; that they may intercept its passage, and stop up the way
against it.

LXXV. These are generally applied to Parts having little or no Flesh, and
where the Vessels most appear, as in the Joints, and just above the Joints: So
in a Phlegmon in the Hand, they are applied to the Wrist; if betwixt the Wrist
and Elbow, to the Elbow; if in the Shoulder, to the highest part thereof; if in
the Foot, above the Ancle-bone; if in the Leg, above the Knee.

LXXVI. The common Defensative is thus made: Fine Bole, Sanguis Draconis, Terra
sigillata, all the Sanders, A. j. Oil-omphacin and Oil of Myrtles, A. q.s.
Vinegar of Roses j. mix them, and boil till the Vinegar is consumed.

LXXVII. In this Prescript, the Oils are disapproved of, because they mollify,
and if they lie long on, are apt to heat: and therefore it is better to mix the
said Pouders only with Oxycrate; and where you would have them act more
forcibly, with the white of an Egg mixed with Oxycrate; for so they will stick
the faster, and make a greater constriction.

LXXVIII. As for Example: Fine Bole, Sanguis Draconis, Sumach, flowers and
peels of Pomgranates, Red-roses, Myrtleberries, red Sanders, all in fine
Powder, A. j. Catechu, Jesuitsbark, Opium, Salt of Vitriol, Saccharum Saturni,
all in powder, A. ss. with whites of Eggs beaten with Vinegar, A. q.s. mix, and
make a Cataplasm.

LXXIX. It remains now, that we enquire when these Medicines, even Repellers of
any kind, are to be used, or whether to be used at all, or no: if they are to
be used, they are only to be used in the beginning of the Inflammation, before
the Blood and Humors are impacted into the Part; but there are some cases, in
which they may not be used at all.

LXXX. As first, if the Humor is malign, venene, or pestilential, wherein if
Nature protrudes the Morbisick-matter outward, we ought not to drive it back
again to the internal parts; lest retreating to the more noble parts, it should
increase the Disease, cause suffocation, or smite the Vitals.

LXXXI. Secondly, nor are they to be applied at any time, when Nature acting of
her own accord, produces the Phlegmon critically, thereby ending some other
Disease: for Nature in this case is no ways to be hindered in her operation.

LXXXII. Thirdly, nor are they to be applied to such Parts, which Nature has
ordained to receive the recrements or superfluities of the more noble Parts; as
the Glandules behind the Ears, in the Throat, Armpits, and Groins: for if
Repercussives should be applied to these, it may be feared that the matter may
again recur to the more noble part, from whence Nature sent it for their
relief.

LXXXIII. Fourthly, nor may they to be applied to other places, which too
nearly neighbor upon the more noble parts; for fear, lest the matter being
driven back, should invade those noble parts, and so cause a greater mischief.

LXXXIV. Fifthly, nor are they to be applied when the Phlegmon is too profound,
or over-deep; for then their virtue will not reach to the matter, nor will they
prevent the farther afflux: for by the repelling Medicine the exterior parts
will be contracted, and the Humors driven out of them inwards, and it may be
obtruded even upon the place it self affected.

LXXXV. The increase of the Phlegmon: and this is the time in which the
Physician strives to perform the Cure by insensible perspiration, or
discussion: in this case Repellers may be applied, yet not alone, but mixed
with Digestives or Discussives, that by the heat, the Humors or Matter may be
somewhat attenuated, and converted into Vapors.

LXXXVI. Now how Repercussives are to be mixed with Digestives, we are
instructed by Galen, de Comp. Med. secund. Loc. lib. 6. cap. 1. As in the
beginning (says he) Repercussives are useful; so in the increase, even to the
end, those Medicines which consist of a repelling virtue, and a digestive
faculty, will be requisite to discuss and scatter.

LXXXVII. But (says he) Astringents ought to have the precedence in the
beginning of the Increase; that is, ought to exceed the Digestives; in the
middle of the increase they ought to be equal; and toward the latter end of
the increase, the Digestives ought to exceed the Repercussives; but at the end
of the Increase, then Digestives are alone to be used.

LXXXVIII. If therefore the Phlegmon admits not of cure by the first Intention,
viz. by repelling the afflux of the Blood and Humors, we must attempt it by the
second Intention; which is to be done when it is in its augmentation or
increase, by a mixed Remedy, as we even now hinted at Sect. 85, 86, and 87. just
aforegoing.

LXXXIX. This manner of Evacuation of the Morbifick-matter, per (...), id est,
insensibiliter, or by insensible transpiration, is performed by such
Medicaments as the Greeks call (...). which being considered as Externals, we
construe them to be digestive, discussive, and resolving Medicines.

XC. Now Discussion or Resolution, is only an evacuation of the Humor by
insensible Transpiration: and therefore the Matter to be discussed ought to be
thin and fluxil, and the Skin thin and poroas.

XCI. For if it is clammy, viscous and thick, and the Skin thick, and its pores
closed and condensed; or the matter is in a place very deep, whereby it cannot
find a ready way, or new passage forth, it will not easily be cured by
Resolution.

XCII. Now since all Discussives are hot in quality, they are not as we said
before, to be applied in the beginning of the increase of the Phlegmon; but
rather Repercussives, either alone, or mixed with Discussives.

XCIII. Nor can the Humor be resolved, attenuated, and converted into Vapors,
but only by heat: but as hot Medicaments are of various qualities: as some to
Rarifie, or open the mouths of Vessels; some to Incide, or cut tough Humors;
some to Attract, or draw them, and others to Cauterize, or burn: so also some
are Diaphoretick or Discussive, and differ from all the former, having in them
this singular and peculiar faculty, to thin them, and convert them into Vapors.

XCIV. The Internals are called Sudorificks, or Sweating Medicines; and they
are given to help forward the Operation of the external Diaphoreticks or
Discussives; as Spirit of Sal Armoniack, of Blood, or of Hartshorn, given in a
Glass of Rhenish-Wine or Sack, etc.

XCV. The Externals are twofold: some weaker, or milder; and same stronger.

XCVI. The milder are, Camomil, Melilot, roots of Althaea, of white Lilies, and
of Foenugreek; meals of Lupins, of Orobus, and of Cicers, leavened Bread,
Goose-grease, old Oil, Elder-tree flowers.

XCVII. The stronger are, Dill, Origanum, Time, Penyroyal, Fennel, Fetherfew,
Hyssop, Mint, Angelica, Calamint, Horehound, Rue, Sage, seeds of Anise,
Caraways, Cumin, and Fennel, Orrice-roots: Gums; Ammoniacum, Bdellium,
Galbanum, Opopanax, Sagapenum, and Tacamahacca; Bears, Hens, and Ducks grease;
Oils of Bays, Nard, and Rue; Vnguentum Arragon, Martiatum, Oxycroceum,
Cataplasma de Fermento, Resolutivum Foresti, and Rondeletii, Leven, and the
Dung of Beasts.

XCVIII. But the strongest of all are, Soap in small quantity mixed with
Hogs-lard, Nitre, Borax, Sulphur, Lime, etc.

XCIX. Out of the aforenamed materials, others more compound may be made: as
Barley-meal iv. Linseed ij. Camomil-flowers in powder j. Vinegar q.s. boil them
together, and then add Oil of Camomil j ss. Oil of Aniseeds ij. mix, and make a
Cataplasm, to be applied in the augmentation.

C. Or thus: Mallows, Pellitory of the Wall, Plantan, A. M. j. Oxycrate q.s.
boil them: then beat them in a Mortar to a mash, and add Barley-flower ij.
Fenugreek-seed j ss. Oil of Camomil j ss. Oil of Fennel-seed iij. mix, and make
a Cataplasm.

CI. Where note, 1. The milder sort are to be made use of, when the matter is
in a place not very deep; and when the Body it self, and part affected is more
soft and pliant.

CII. 2. That the stronger sort are used where the Inflammation is greater, and
the Matter deep; as also where the Body and Part are more hard and condensed.
Yet these are to be used with caution, lest they should discuss and resolve the
thinner parts, leaving the thicker behind; making the Tumor become hard and
incurable.

CIII. But this danger may be prevented, if with such things as forcibly
discuss, you likewise mix such things as moisten and mollify: and that the
Discussives be not very sharp or biting, lest they thereby augment the pain,
and increase the fluxion.

CIV. The height or state of the Phlegmon. When it is manifest that the
Phlegmon is not yet ended, neither by repercussion nor by discussion, but is
come to the height or perfection, you must then endeavor to complete the work
by Digestives and Anodyns.

CV. These following are approved Digestives: as, roots of white Lilies,
Marshmallows, Onions roasted, leaves of Marshmallows, Mallows, Sorrel,
Wood Sorrel, Camomil-flowers, Saffron, Figs, Raisons, Currants, Dates,
Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Galbanum, Opoponax, Sagapenum, Tacamahacca, Tar,
Turpentine, Gum Elemi, Copayba; Ducks, Geese, Hens, and Hogs grease, Oil of
Lilies, Vnguentum Dialthaeae, Basilicon greater and lesser, Emplastrum
Diachylon, simple, and cum Gummis, Mithridate, Venice-Treacle, Our Theriaca
Chymica, Hens and Pigeons dung.

CVI. Out of these things several Compositions may be made: as, Flowers of
Melilot and Camomil, Mallow-leaves, A. M. j. Red-roses, Elder-flowers, A. M
j.ss. boil them in sharp wine; then add meal of Fenugreek ss. Oilolive q.s. to
which add of Spike iij. mix, and make a Cataplasm.

CVII. White-lily-roots, Hens-dung, A. j. flowers of Camomil and Melilot, A. M.
j. Red-roses M. ij. boil all in Water q.s. then add Barley and Fenugreek meal,
A. j. ss. Saffron ss. Oil-olive q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm; adding at last
Oil of Spike ij. A stronger sort of Discussive is that of Paulus Aegineta, lib.
4. cap. 18. which perfectly discusses and scatters such Apostems as are not
concocted. Powder of the stone Pyrites, Gum Ammoniacum strained, A. j ss.
Bean-meal vj. mix them up with Turpentine, which spread upon Leather, letting
it lie on till it falls off of its own accord.

CVIII. Turnips roasted in the embers iij. roots of white Lilies and Althaea,
A. j. Saffron in powder j. beat all together; and then add Basilicon, Ducks and
Goose grease, A. ss. Honey, meals of Linseed and Beans, A. jss. yolks of Eggs,
q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm. This is not inferior to that of Paulus
Aegineta: Gum Ammoniacum strained ij. Galbanum ss. Litharge iij. Old-oil, q.s.
mix, and make a Liniment.

CIX. Now the height or state of a Phlegmon is known by the Symptoms; as the
tension, pain, heat, redness, and symptomatick Fever, being at height, and so
remaining, neither increasing nor decreasing; the Veins of the adjacent parts
also continuing in the same fullness and dilatation.

CX. In this case, the Digestives and Anodyns aforementioned may be made use
of, and applied; and whatever other things may contribute to that end.

CXI. The declination of the Phlegmon. This is performed by Digestives or
Discussives of the stronger kind, many of which we have enumerated at Sect. 97.
aforegoing: but if the matter is grosser and thicker than ordinary, that
Digestives alone cannot satisfy expectation; the matter is then to be made
more fit for discussion and perspiration; by inwardly giving gentle
Sudorificks, and outwardly applying Medicines more mollifying.

CXII. In this case, we must not only abstain from such things as over-heat and
dry, (since they wast only the thinner parts of the matter;) but we must also
apply the greater Emollients, which moderately heat, and moisten withal.

CXIII. As Bears, Brocks, Goose, Hens, and Hogs grease, Sheeps-suet mixed with
two thirds of Oil-olive, Neatsfoot-oil, roots of Althaea and white Lilies,
Mallows, Linseed, Fenugreek-seed, Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Galbanum, Sagapenum,
Tacamahacca, and such like.

CXIV. And these things are to be applied, when the matter is thicker than
ordinary; and as we elsewhere show, when we speak of Emollients or Mollifiers.

CXV. This Composition is approved. Roots of Althaea j. leaves of Mallows,
Origanum, flowers of Camomil, of Melilot, A. M. j. Elder-flowers M. ss.
Fenugreek and Linseed, Dill-seed, A. iij. Water q.s. boil, and make a
Fomentation, to be applied with a Sponge.

CXVI. Or, Powder of the flowers of Camomil and Melilot, of Bay Berries, A. ss.
powder of Dill-seed ij. meals of Beans, Fenugreek and Linseed, A. j. Oils of
Dill and Camomil, A. q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm.

CXVII. Thus have we shown you all the Ways and Methods used by the most
learned Artists, for the cure of a Phlegmon by Repercussion or Discussion; but
if thereby you cannot attain the end, you must then come to Scarification, or
to the opening of the Part.

CXVIII. Now Scarification is of use while there is yet hope of Discussion, or
that the Tumor will be brought to a cure without Suppuration: But the Opening
of the Part is of use when all hopes of Resolution is past, and that it is
manifest, that the Cure can only be performed by the means of Suppuration.

CXIX. Concerning Scarification, Galen, Art. Parvae, cap. 95. says, You shall
more especially evacuate, both by the useful help of Scarification, and by the
help of Medicines which have a faculty in them to dissolve; in case you find
any thing to be contained in the intervening middle spaces.

CXX. And, de Tumor. cap. 2. It is (says he) found expedient by Physicians in
the case aforesaid, not only to discuss by heating Medicines; but also sensibly
to evacuate some part of the Blood it self, by scarifying the Skin.

CXXI. But before this is done, we ought to be sure that the Matter is not yet
turned into Pus, or is suppurated; for if it is so, or there is any hopes of
Suppuration, Scarification would be wholly vain, nor can it have any place at
all.

CXXII. But if the Matter is not changed into Pus, nor yet any hopes thereof;
and withal, that there is no likelihood that it should be wholly discussed by
Topics, then Cupping-glasses with Scarification must be applied.

CXXIII. For this is an effectual means, for the evacuation of the Matter, of
what kind soever, which sticks and lies deep; and which seems to be in a ready
way to degenerate into a Scirrhus.

CXXIV. But it is not to be used in the beginning of a Phlegmon, but after the
Body is sufficiently evacuated, and the Tumor come to the height; that there
may be no farther cause to fear that a new fluxion should be excited.

CXXV. It is also to be used only to those Parts, which in other cases may be
thought fit to suffer this Operation, lest a greater evil should ensue. But
after all, the best way is to do the Cure by Discussion of the Matter only, (if
it may be) without Scarification, to prevent as much as possible, the very
fears of evil accidents to ensue.

CXXVI. The Cure of a Phlegmon, degenerating into an Apostem. Now when there is
no hopes that the Phlegmon will be perfectly cured by any of the preceding
Methods; but that by the Signs present, it will come to Suppuration; (as from
the vehement heat, and grievous pain, which increases every day more and more,
with manifest pulsation or beating, and an evident extension of the Part
increasing) then we must endeavor by all ways and means, the concoction or
suppuration of the matter, or its conversion into Pus.

CXXVII. And it is necessary, that the Tumor be suppurated before it is opened;
for otherwise you will draw forth nothing, and rather add to the Disease, than
cure it: for concoction and suppuration of the Matter, makes a kind of
separation of the corrupt Humors from those which are good, whereby they are
the more easily evacuated.

CXXVIII. And this gathering together of the Pus, (being changed into an equal,
smooth, and whitish Matter) into some one particular place, is calledby the
Greeks (...), and by the Latins, Abscessus; as in the proper places we have
showed.

CXXIX. This Concoction of the Humor is Natures work alone, and the Physician
only is an Assistant to her: for the native Heat it is which digests the
Humors, and brings them to the perfection of laudable matter; and this is only
when the Heat is vigorous or strong, and then it is equal, smooth, and white,
and not very stinking: the contrary it is, if the Heat is weak.

CXXX. The Physician therefore when he finds the Heat languid, or weak,
endeavors to cherish, preferve, and increase it (in the inflamed Parts) by
proper Applications, for the easy and effectually generating of the said Pus,
or laudable quittor.

CXXXI. This innate Heat is conserved and augmented, 1. By stopping it from
breathing forth, and that it may not be dissipated by the ambient Air. 2. By
application of Medicaments hot and moist; which having a refemblance to the
native Heat, may cherish and augment it.

CXXXII. And these are such as we call Emplasticks, having a certain clamminess
in them; which may so sill the Pores of the Skin, as to prevent the going
forth, and evaporation of the native Heat.

CXXXIII. For which reason it is, that things of an abstersive quality, and
things which forcibly heat, (as Cataplasms of Bean-meal, Lupins, Chiches,
Fenugreek, etc. seeing they let the Vapors exhale and vent themselves
outwardly, may indeed be said to dry; but little or nothing farther Maturation:
of which kind are these following.

CXXXIV. Roots of Althaea iij. leaves of Mallows and Bearsbreech, A. M. j. boil
them in Water till they are soft; then add Turpentine ij. Hogs-lard q.s. mix,
and apply them.

CXXXV. Or thus: Roots of Althaea and white Lilys, A. ij. leaves of Mallows and
herb Mercury, A. M. j. fat Figs cut in bits iij. boil all together to softness;
then add Balsam Capivi, Gum Elemi, Turpentine, A. j. Wheat-meal ij. Linseed j.
Butter, q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm.

CXXXVI. Or, Althaea-roots, Onions, White-lilys, A. ij. Wheat-meal, Lin-seed,
A. j. Turpentine ss. Saffron j. Hens-fat, Oil of Camomil, A. q.s. mix.

CXXXVII. Or, Onions roasted in the embers iij. roots of Althaea, White-lilys,
A. j. Leaven ss. Saffron j. beat all together; then add Hens-dung, Basilicon,
Ducks and Goose grease, A. ss. Honey, yolks of Eggs, meal of Lin-seed, A. j ss.
mix, and make a Cataplasm.

CXXXVIII. Now here is to be noted, that if the Tumor seem cold, the hotter
Simples are to be chosen, according to the temperature of the Part: if it is
hot, Maturatives only of the first degree, avoiding those of the second, which
are only to be used where the Heat is less.

CXXXIX. And to accomplish this Maturation, Accidents are first to be removed:
as 1. Pain; and this is removed by Anodyns only: Narcoticks or Stupefactives
have no room here, lest they extinguish the natural heat of the Part, which is
the principal efficient Cause of Coction, and thicken the Matter, making it the
more rebellious. A Cataplasm of White-bread and Milk, with a little Saffron in
it, is good here.

CXL. 2. Tension, or vehement stretching forth; and this is done by Relaxers
which are temperately hot, of subtle parts, and not much drying: as Archangel,
white Horehound, Mullein, Dill, Camomil, Mercury, Melilot, Marshmallows,
Fenugreek, Turnips, meals of Barley, Beans, and Vetches.

CXLI. Camomil-flowers in powder ss. flower of Barley, Beans, and Vetches, A.
ij. leaves and flowers of Althaea beaten M. j. Mutton-broth q.s. boil to the
consistency of a Pultise, and add Oil of Camomil and Rape-seed, A. j.

CXLII. 3. Hardness. And here Emollients, and all manner of Salts and Oils are
of use: as Mallows of all sorts, herb Mercury, Coltsfoot, Borrage, Bugloss,
Spinach, Quince-seed, Cream, White-lilys, Figgs, Raisons, Marrow of beasts,
Oil-olive, Oil of Almonds, Ammoniacum, Bdellium, etc.

CXLIII. Linseed-meal iv. roots of Althaea and White-lilys, boiled in Water and
bruised, A.ij. herb Mercury, Mallow-leaves, A. M. j. Milk q.s. boil to the
consistency of a Cataplasm; to which add Ammoniacum strained, pulp of Figs and
Raisons, A. j. mix them.

CXLIV. 4. Extreme Heat. Here things moderately cooling must be used, (but not
extreme coolers, lest you induce a Gangrene) as Barley meal or flower, Endive,
Succory, Navelwort, pulp of Melons, Lettice, Water-lilys, Plantan,
Garden-nightshade: of these, or some of them, a Cataplasm may be made with
Barley-flower and Fair-water; boiling them to a consistency, and adding to it a
little Vnguentum Populeon, or Rosatum, etc.

CXLV. Now come we to Suppuratives, which the Greeks call (...), and the
Latins, Suppurativa; which are of two kinds, 1. Mild and gentle, as Man's
grease, (which is Anodyn) Grease of Bears, Ducks, Geese, Hens; Oils of Olive,
Almonds, and Rape-seed, Sweet-butter, Mallows, Althaea, Violets, Lilly-roots,
Figs, Linseed, Fenugreekseed, Wheat Flour, Saffron.

CXLVI. Example, of a Suppurative Cataplasm. Milk a pint, in which boil
Mallow-leaves and herb Mercury, A. M. j. cut and bruised; Figs, Lily-roots, A.
ij. (both boiled in Water till they are soft) Wheat Flour iv. boil to the
consistency of a Pultise; to which add Saffron in powder j. Linseed-oil, Oil of
Sweet-almonds A. ij. with which mix Oil of Anise, or Fennel-seed ij. and make a
Cataplasm.

CXLVII. If the Tumor is very hot, the Oil of Anise or Fennel-seed is to be
left out; upon an exigence this has been found good, Milk viij. Wheat Flour
iij. yolks of three Eggs, Oil-olive j ss. mix, and boil to a consistency. Also
an Emplaster made of Oil, Wax, and a little Turpentine, is of good use; so also
Diachylon simplex, if the Tumor is hot.

CXLVIII. 2. The stronger Suppuratives, which are, Ammoniacum, Balsam Capivi,
Gum Elemi, Galbanum, Sagapenum, Tacamahacca, Turpentine, Tar, Shippitch,
Burgundy-pitch, Leven, Onions, Garlic, and Leeks roasted in the embers, Hens
and Pigeons dung, Badgers and Dogs grease; Oils of Camomil, Dill, Anise, and
Fennel seeds; Saffron, etc. Diachylon cum Gummis.

CXLIX. An Example, framed out of these things, (which are chiefly to be
applied to venene, or pestilential Fevers.) Roots of Althaea and white Lilies,
Onions boiled and bruised, A. iij. Leven ij. Linseed-meal j ss. Saffron j.
Ammoniacum and Galbanum strained, pulp of Figs, A. j. Oil of Aniseeds iij.
mixed with Oil-olive q.s. mix, and make a Pultiss of a good consistency. And to
this add those others, described in Sect. 134, 135, 136, 137. aforegoing, and
Sect. 190, 191, 192, 193. following.

CL. These things are to be applied till the Apostem is perfectly ripe; which
then, if the Skin is thin and tender, breaks of its self: but if thick and
tough, it is to be opened by Instrument; as we have taught at large, Lib. 1.
Cap. 18. aforegoing.

CLI. Now before we come to this Manual-operation, we must be sure that the
Apostem is perfectly suppurated; and this we shall know by its proper Signs,
which are as follows.

CLII. 1. The Swelling contracts it self a little, and seems less than it was
in the State: for whilst Nature with the help of Medicines concocts the Matter,
it is somewhat rarefied, and some part of it is discust through the Pores of the
Skin.

CLIII. 2. The Tumor does as it were draw it to a point, a prominence: for when
Nature overcomes the Matter, it draws it together, and also to the Skin.

CLIV. 3. The Cuticula becomes a little shriveled, which is a good Sign; for it
signifies that the preternatural Heat has left it.

CLV. 4. The vehement Heat also vanishes: for the Phlegmon being suppurated,
the unnatural Heat goes away, leaving behind in the Part, only the natural Heat.

CLVI. 5. The Hardness and Tension will be much abated: for the Suppuration
being produced by Discussion, many Vapors will be exhaled, which before
stretched out the Skin, and made it hard.

CLVII. 6. The Color also of the Part is changed, and from red, it is become
white; more especially in the more elevated or pointed place.

CLVIII. 7. By pressing of the Matter, or place of the Tumor, you will find a
fluctuation; which will be perceived by pressing it with two Fingers, a little
distance asunder, one Finger at a time; by which pressing with one Finger, it
will feel to fluctuate under the other, with a certain softness of the Part:
but in this case we must be wary, for in some places a fluctuation will be
felt, whilst they are sound, as in the Knee, or other great Joints: whereas
also on the contrary, if the Matter is thick, and lies deep, though it be ripe,
yet no fluctuation will be felt.

CLIX. 8. Lastly, the Patient feels much ease in the Part, compared to what it
was in its height; because many of the sharp Vapors are resolved, and the
concocted Matter is contracted into less room.

CLX. Having now found that the Apostem is fit to be opened, we are next to
consider, how it is to be opened, and with what Instruments: nor is it at all
to be delayed; for if the Pus is too long kept in, it destroys the temper of
the Part, corrupts those which are adjacent to it; and so either makes an
intricate and winding Sinus, or else degenerates into a Fistula; which
principally happens when the matter is sharp and malign, or when the
Inflammation is in the Joints or Arms, etc.

CLXI. As for the waiting for Natures breaking of it, we are allowed, so to do
only when the Tumor is not exceeding great, and is more especially in the
outward most part of the Flesh and Skin, and a Skin that is very thick;
otherwise it is not safe to expect a spontaneous or voluntary opening.

CLXII. The way and manner of opening the Apostem, or the Instruments by which
it is done: 1. With the Lancet or Incision-knife: and they are of use where the
work is desired to be speedily done; also in small Tumors, which will be
suddenly whole; and lastly, if the Apostem is in the Face, or any other visible
place, to avoid the deformity of a Scar.

CXLIII. 2. With a Caustic, which is commonly the vulgar Lapis Infernalis, or
the silver one. The former is made either with the strongest Soap-lees, alone,
boiled to a soft Stone; which is best in Tumors in the unequal Parts: or with
the same Lees and unslaked Lime, boiled to the form of a soft Ointment: and
this is most convenient in Parts concave or hollow.

CLXIV. The Caustic or Pyrotical Medicaments are of use in five cases: 1. When
the Tumor ought to be kept long open: as in all contagious Apostems of the
Plague, Pox, King's Evil, etc. for where the Caustic is applied, there is
always loss of substance, and many times the Orifice is roundish or Oval, which
of all other figures, are longest in curing.

CLXV. 2. They are many times applied where the Patient is fearful: though in
truth the Incision-knife it self is much less painful, and much sooner done.

CLXVI. 3. When Apostems are large; for with them we make as large an Orifice
as we please, and as large as the magnitude of the Apostem requires; by which
means we shall not need to Tent, or enlarge it.

CLXVII. 4. They are also of greatest Service, where a Flux of Blood may be
feared: for by their burning the Part, the Flux is prevented.

CLXVIII. 5. When the Apostem is deep, as in the Back, and other like places;
for thereby the Matter will have a readier way for Evacuation.

CLXIX. To the two former ways at Sect. 162 and 163 above, Authors add a third
way, which is the Actual Cautery, or Red-hot-iron: but this is not of any
ordinary use, except to stop a Flux of Blood, (which we do with easier
Remedies) dry a Carious Bone, or correct a Cancerous Part, being first cut off.

CLXX. As to the very act of opening the Tumor, these five things are to be
considered; 1. That it be done where the Skin is thinnest, for so less pain
will be caused; and in the most depending part, that the Matter may more easily
flow out.

CLXXI. 2. That the nature of the Part be considered; so as to avoid Arteries
and Veins, for fear of an Hemorrhage: as also Nerves, Tendons, and Membranes,
because of their exquisite sense.

CLXXII. 3. The largeness of the Incision, must be in proportion to the Part
and Tumor: for if it is too little, then the Matter (if it is thick and
grumous) will not easily flow out without pressing; which is apt to produce a
Callosity, and make the Sinus a Fistula.

CLXXIII. 4. That if the Skin is only to be divided, then the Apertion is to be
made straight a but if a Muscle also must be cut, then the Incision must be
made according to the ductus of the Fibers.

CLXXIV. 5. That you consider the quantity of the Matter, which is to be
evacuated at one time: for in great Apostems which are near the Joints, Back,
Abdomen, or any principal Part, the Matter is to be taken away gradually;
because therewith many Spirits are spent and lost, whence comes Fainting, and
sometimes Swooning, and Death it self.

CLXXV. As for the Accidents which may happen upon opening, they are three: 1.
Fainting; which is helped by giving a spoonful or two our Aqua Bezoartica, or
Spiritus Cordialis, inwardly, either alone, or mixed with a glass of Alicant, or
other styptick Wine; or a little sup of choice Cinnamon Water.

CLXXVI. 2. Pain; if it is much, let the Part be embrocated with this: Oleum
Refrigerans ij. Red-wine j. mix them together by shaking: but be careful that
it touches not the edges of the Apertion, if it was made by Incision, lest it
causes spungy or proud Flesh to grow.

CLXXVII. 3. An Hemorrhage, which is to be stopped by applying a Powder: as,
Aloes, Frankincense, Olibanum, fine Bole, A. j. Ashes of an old Hat ss.
Saccharum Saturni, Salt extracted out of the Caput Mort. of Vitriol, A.. iij.
mix, and make a Powder: which lay upon Dossels or Pledgets dipped in whites of
Eggs, etc. and apply.

CLXXVIII. The manner of Applying the Potential Cautery. You must be sure
beforehand, that the Tumor is perfectly maturated; which that you may not fail
of, let some one of the following Compositions be applied.

CLXXIX. Althaea-roots, White-lily-roots, both bruised soft; Garlic, Onions
roasted under the embers, Figs boiled soft, meal of Fenuereek, Leven, A. j.
beat all into a pulp; to which add, Oil of Aniseeds iij. ss. Hogsgrease, q.s.
mix them.

CLXXX. Roots of Althaea, Onions, Garlic, Leeks, all boiled soft, A. ij. meal
of Fenugreek viij. Oil of Spike vj. Hogslard q.s. mix them, and apply.

CLXXXI. Sharp-leven, Doves-dung, roasted Onions and Garlic, A. j. Black-soap,
Hogslard, A. q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm: this is much stronger than the
former.

CLXXXII. Emplastrum Diachylon mixed with Mustard Seed, pulp of Figs, and Salt,
performs the same thing with the former.

CLXXXIII. This done, so that you are sure it is come to its persect ripeness,
you must then come to the application of the Caustic Medicament, thus: Take a
Cloth spread over with Vnguentum Diacylon, or some other sticking Emplaster, in
the midst whereof cut a small hole; lay this upon the Apostem close to the
Skin, that it may stick: let the hole be somewhat narrower and less, than you
intend the Cautery, and upon every place where you would have it opened.

CLXXXIV. This done, take one of the Causticks mentioned in Sect. 163
aforegoing: or the Lapis Infernalis, in Lib. 1. cap. 64. sect. 7. aforegoing,
which being something moistened with Spittle, apply it upon the Skin, at the
hole of the Emplaster; and then lay on another Emplaster over that, upon the
former Plaster.

CLXXXV. After three or four hours, remove the Caustic with the Emplaster, and
you will find the Part appear black, soft, and without any sense of feeling:
this Eschar is made to fall off, by well anointing it either with Fresh-butter,
Hogs-lard, Palm-oil, or some proper Digestive, which is better: but the only,
and more excellent way is, to open it with the Incision-knife, for that the
Patient will feel nothing of the Operation; and this is the safer and better
way.

CLXXXVI. If the hole is not wide enough, it may be very easily enlarged, by
putting into it a piece of prepared Sponge, or Puff-ball, an Elder-pith, or dry
Gentian-root, or dry Rape-root; for that these things being filled full with
humidity, will be then dilated, and so thereby enlarge and make wider the hole.

CLXXXVII. The Sponge is thus prepared. Take Sponge, and soak it well in the
white of an Egg well beaten together, then squeeze it close together in a
Press, and dry it leisurely in the shade: a bit, or small Tent of this, when
dried, is to be taken and put into the hole of the Apostem.

CLXXXVIII. The Apostem being opened (by which of the ways it matters not) the
Pus or purulent Matter is to be evacuated; but yet not wholly, or all at once,
but by degrees; some of it at one time, and some of it at another; more
especially if the Patient is weak.

CLXXXIX. For if it is great, and has much Pus within it, the evacuating of it
altogether would not only be a great loss of Spirits, but might also be apt to
cause Faintiness and Swooning; as we have before declared, at Sect. 184.
aforegoing.

CXC. When the Pus is evacuated, if there is pain, or any relics of the
Matter not suppurated shall appear in the circumference, or that the Pus is not
well and perfectly suppurated; then the pain is to be eased with some Anodyn;
and some digestive Medicament is to be applied, for the more speedy concocting
of the remaining unripened Matter.

CXCI. As, Oil of Almonds mixed with yolks of Eggs; which both ease the pain,
and digests the remaining Humor. Or this: Strasburgh- Turpentine j. yolk of one
large Egg, grind them well together in a Mortar; then add Frankincense,
Olibanum, Mastich in powder, A.i. Oil of Olives ss. Oil of Aniseeds j. mix them
well together: Diachylon cum Gummis is also very profitable in this case.

CXCII. The manner of Dressing, after opening. 1. If it was done by Incision,
you must put into the Orifice, if it be small, a little Tent; or if it is
large, Dossels with Pledgets, fortified with some Astringent powder; as fine
Bole, Frankincense and Flower, mixed with glair of Eggs; and then over all a
Plaster of Diachylon, and so to bind it up, letting it to remain so for the
space of 24 hours.

CXCIII. 2. If it was opened by Cautery or Caustic, as we have showed from
Sect. 194, to 198. you may apply your Dossels fortified with Basilicon; over
which you are to lay an Emplaster, (which is thus to be dressed once or twice a
day, as you see need requires, till you see the Eschar falls) and bind it up as
aforesaid, but not with too hard a bandage.

CXCIV. If in the mean season spungy or proud flesh should grow up, it is to be
removed with Catheretick Medicaments; as red Precipitate, either alone, or
sometimes mixed with Basilicon, in gentle Bodies; or mixed with a third part of
burnt Alum, in more hardy Bodies.

CXCV. Ung. Basilicon j. red Precipitate washed j. mix them well together,
Again: Red Precipitate ij. burnt Alum j. mix, and grind them upon a Porphyry
together; to which add Ung. Basilicon ij. mix them well into a body.

CXCVI. The next thing is, thoroughly to cleanse the Apostem, (without which,
Flesh can neither breed, nor Agglutination be made) which you may do with this:
Strasburgh- Turpentine, Gum Elemi, Balsam Copayba, A. ss. Mel Rosarum j. yolk
of one Egg; mix, and give them a walm over the fire; then add Saffron in powder
j. and a little Barley-flower.

CXCVII. But if there is need of better Cleansing, Honey, Barley-flower, A. j.
juice of Smallage ss. Saffron in powder ss. mix them: and if the Cleansing
ought to be more forcible, Vnguentum Aegyptiacum q.s. may be added.

CXCVIII. This following is good: Juice of the lesser Centory, of Smallage, A.
j. Honey iij. boil them together; then add flower of Barley and Orobus, A. j.
take them off the fire, and mix with them Turpentine, Gum Elemi, A. ss. powder
of Florentine-Orrice iij. You may also use those other things which we have
prescribed in the Chapters of the Cure of an Apostem and Sinus, Cap. 3. and 4.
aforegoing.

CXCIX. The Apostem being thus thoroughly cleansed, the next things to be
applied are Sarcoticks or Incarnatives, viz. Flesh-breeders, that the Ulcer or
Sinus may be filled with flesh: a Catalogue of which you may see in Our Doron
Medicum, lib. 1. cap. 10. sect. 18. and in some of the following Chapters of
this Book.

CC. And out of those singular things, you may make these following Compounds:
Frankincense, Mastich, Olibanum, Rosin, A. j. Honey of Roses, Oil-olive, A.
q.s. mix them. Or thus: Bugle, Comfrey, Sanicle, A. M.j. bruise them, and boil
in Wine: squeeze forth the juice, and add to it Frankincense, Mastich, and
Olibanum, A. ij. Honey, Turpentine, A. q.s. boil to the consumption of the
Juice, and make an Ointment.

CCI. This is inferior to none: Fine Aloes, Bdellium, Myrrh, Sarcocol, Honey,
A. j. Wine q.s. mix, and boil them to a due thickness. For a Wash none exceeds
this: Fair Well-water lbij. Saccharum Saturni, Salt of Vitriol, or pure white
Vitriol, Roch-alum, A. ss. or vj. Spirit of Wine iv. mix, and dissolve: wash
with it twice or thrice a day; it performs all the intentions of Cure, and
heals to a miracle.

CCII. Lastly, the Ulcer being filled with flesh, we must then come to the use
of Epuloticks or Cicatrizers; a Catalogue of which you may see in our Doron
Medicum, lib. 1. cap. 10. sect. 20. to which you are referred: and of this kind
are Emplastrum Album, or Diapalma, now called Diachalciteos, Emplastrum de
Minio, without Soap; Ceratum Nigrum, Oxylaeum, and Refrigerans; with other
things of like kind.

CCIII. Hitherto of a true and pure Phlegmon; it remains that we speak
something of the bastard or mixed Phlegmon: which, as we told you at Sect. 6.
aforegoing, was principally threefold, viz. (...), Phlegmone Erysipelatoodes;
where Choler is mixed with the Blood: (...), Phlegmone Oidematoodes; where
Phlegm is mixed with the Blood: and (...), Phlegmone Scirrhoodes, where
Melancholy is mixed with the Blood.

CCIV. The Cure of these differs not much from that of the simple or pure
Phlegmon; save, that in an Erysipelatoodes, things more cooling and moistning,
are to be mixed; in an Oedematoodes, things more heating; and in a Schirroodes,
things more warming and emollient.

CCV. If the Phlegmon, through carelesnss, or unskilful application, should
become a Gangrene, you must pursue the Cure thereof, as we teach in the Chapter
of Gangrene following, Chap. 11. mean season, if you fear any such thing,
foment or bathe the Part affected with Our Powers of Amber, or with Spirit of
Wine, mixed with Spirit of Sal Armoniack, and apply things healing and drawing.

CCVI. An Example of a Phlegmon, out of Hildanus, Cent. 3. Obs. 100. A young
Man (says he) had a Phlegmon in his Foot, and being called to him, he found the
Foot swelled, and full of pain, which reached to his Hips; the Patient was in a
continual Burning-fever, restless, delirious, and fainting away sometimes.

CCVII. He prescribed him a spare Diet, and purged him with this Potion:
Electuary of the juice of Roses, Diaturbith with Rhubarb ss. Syrup of Roses
solutive j. Decoction of Agrimony, Speedwell, roots of the sharp-pointed Dock,
inner bark of the black Alder-root, and Aniseed, q.s. mix, and make a Draught;
which wrought gently: the evening of the same day, two hours after Supper, he
gave him Laudanum gr. vj. which caused him to rest well that night.

CCVIII. The next day he took away ten ounces of Blood from the Arm of the side
affected, being plethorick and strong: upon which his Fever, Pain, and
Inflammation much abated: then he anointed his Hip, Knee, and all thereabouts,
which were free from the Inflammation with this Liniment. Oil of Roses ij. Oil
of Earthworms, Mans-fat, A. ij. mix them. And because Galen says, fat things
are not to be applied to the Part affected, he applied this: Seeds of Quinces,
Fenugreek, Althaea, A. ij. powder of Roses ss. Water q.s. boil to the rhickness
of a Cataplasm: afterward add the yolk of an Egg with the white. This was
applied, and renewed as oft^as need required.

CCIX. Opon this, the pain was ^sed, and the place of maturation appeared; to
which he applied Emplastrum Basilicon and the prescribed Emplaster, all over
the Foot: the sole, because it was very callous, he fomented well with hot
Milk, boiled with Fenugreek-seeds, Mallows, and Violet-leaves, and then pared
away with a Razor the thick Skin: thus in a short time the Apostem broke in the
sole of his Foot, after which he soon recovered. We have been the larger upon
this Cure of a Phlegmon, because, being well understood, it seems to lay the
groundwork or foundation of the Cure of all other Tumors, of what kind soever.

CHAP. VI. Of a BVBO.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Bubo, Inflammatio vel Tumor
Glandularum; and in English, a Bubo, or Swelling in the Armpits or Groins.

II. It is a Tumor and Inflammation of the Glandules, chiefly the Kernels of
the Armpits, or Groins; painful, hard, and red.

III. But Galen ad Glauc. lib. 2. cap. 1. defines it to be, an Inflammation in
the Glandules of the Groins. For they being by Nature ordained as the Sinks of
the superfluous Humors from the principal parts, if those Humors, and with them
the Blood shall happen to be thrust forth together, and as it were by heaps,
into them, an Inflammation is forthwith excited: and this happens most-an-end
in the Groins, and sometimes in the Armpits: if it be behind the Ears, it is
called a Parotis.

IV. A Bubo is either Critical, or Symptomatical; the Critical is safe and
healthful, and they are such as follow the declining of any Sickness, as
Fevers, etc. The Symptomatical are either Venereal or Pestilential, and these
show from whence they proceed.

V. If a Bubo is little, and not painful, but easily brought to maturation, it
is called Phyma; where it is mixed with Choler, it is called Phygethlon; if it
be in the Armpits, it is named Panus; behind the Ears, Parotis; if contracted
from impure Coition, it is called Venereal.

VI. The Signs in general are, pain, redness, heat, pulsation, tension, and
sometimes a Fever.

VII. That is to say, that in the Groins or Armholes there is a tumor or
swelling, with redness of color, hardness, resisting the touch, intense pain,
accompanied for the most part with a gentle Fever.

VIII. And this is manifest, if the Bubo happens to be by Crisis; for then a
Fever, or some other disease went before; which upon the appearing of the Bubo
is abated, and the Signs of a good and hopeful Crisis preceded; the which if
they be absent, the Bubo then is to be accounted for Symptomatical.

IX. And then if no signs appear of the Plague or Pestilence, or of Morbus
Gallicus, it is a simple Bubo, and not malign and contagious: but if the signs
of the Plague are present, then it is malignant and contagious.

X. And if the Patient is infected with the French Disease, it is then to be
accounted Malign and Venereal, and to proceed from a Venereal Defilement.

XI. The Causes. All Bubo's whatsoever have their Original from a preternatural
protrusion of Blood (conjoined always with some vicious and corrupt Humor) into
the Glandules of the Groins and Armholes, excited from the Ferment of the said
evil Humor; whereby Nature is stirred up to such a kind of excretion, or rather
expulsion.

XII. But from hence the strength of the principal parts is to be observed; for
that they are able to expel and thrust forth whatsoever is offensive and
hurtful to them, unto these ignoble parts, and other the like Emunctories.

XIII. Fabricius ab Aquapendente will have some Bubo's to be from Blood only,
excited at the instant time of the Crisis: but this seems not to me to be true,
for certainly some evil Humor is always conjoined with the Blood. Yet this we
say, that a Bubo does sometimes follow upon another Disease, and is excited by
the Crisis, whether perfect or imperfect; and sometimes without any other
Disease preceding it.

XIV. Yet in this last case, where no other Disease precedes it, (whereby it
cannot properly be said to arise from a Crisis,) it is Natures work to make an
expulsion of the vicious Humors, and is a healthful protrusion.

XV. The Prognostics. A Bubo (if not malign) being in the extreme parts, soon
suppurates, and is not dangerous; if it ripens slowly, it may turn to a Fistula.

XVI. A Malign Bubo, is for the most part a sign of sudden Death, though all
outward signs may appear well.

XVII. A Venereal is only of difficult cure, especially if the folly of the
Physician has been to use bleeding and repelling Medicines; whereby Nature has
been diverted from her work, and the malignity turned inward, which should have
come outward.

XVIII. Bubo's arising under the Armholes come soonest to suppuration, because
they proceed from hotter Blood; as being nearer the greater Vessels, and the
Heart, the Fountain of life and heat; which in this case for Suppuration is
alogether necessary.

XIX. Those which come in the Groins, are excited by a Blood less hot; and
being likewise in a place more remote from the Heart, and but moderately hot,
they are longer before they come to maturation: but those coming behind the
Ears, proceed from a colder kind of matter; and as the place is also colder, so
their suppuration is the slowest of all.

XX. The Cure. In a Bubo, (not Venereal or Pestilent) the Cure is to concede
with Natures Operations; for the Matter is by no means to be driven back into
the internal parts, if there is any hope of its coming to ripeness, or may
possibly be discussed.

XXI. If the Bubo is by Crisis, and that perfect, the Sick will the presently
be freed from the danger of his Disease; and if there be signs of a good
Crisis, nothing is to be disturbed, but the matter must be left to Nature; and
means must be used either to discuss, if possible; or speedily to bring it to
suppuration.

XXII. In the case of Discussion, excellent is the Balsamum Sulphuris to anoint
with, applying over it Emplastrum Diasulphuris, or Emplastrum Hystericum, etc.
See Our Pharmacopoeia's, etc.

XXIII. But if it will not be dissolved, then apply this Ointment: Yolks of
Eggs No ii. Balsam Capivii i. Oil of Camomil ss. Saffron ii. White-bread q.s.
mix, and apply it, repeating it often: and being ripe, it may be opened by
touching it with Butter of Antimony, etc.

XXIV. In these cases, Sudorificks are good to be given inwardly, because they
drive outward: but Bleeding is extremely ill, so also Repercussives or
Repellers; because they drive back that into the inward parts, which Nature did
drive or thrust forth for her relief.

XXV. Scarification with Cupping, is not to be used in malignant Tumors; nor
are Leeches to be applied, unless they are very much inflamed.

XXVI. If the Pain is violent, it ought to be eased with Anodyns; as this
Liniment: Balsam Capivii, Balsam de Chili, A. ss. Oil of Ben, Sheeps-suet, A.
jss. Bean-meal, q.s. mix them.

XXVII. Or you may apply this Cataplasm: Mallow-leaves M. i. Meal of
Althea-roots and Fenugreek-seeds, A. ii. Barley-meal i. Ducks-grease, Oil of
Dill, A. ss. boil all in Milk, to the consisteney of a Cataplasm.

XXVIII. But if the Bubo is Critical, and the Crisis is imperfect, the Humor is
farther to be attracted into the part affected, by the application of
Cupping-glasses, or by Medicines made of Leven, Black-soap, old Hog's Grease,
Pine-tree-rosin, Diachylon cum Gummis, and the like.

XXIX. If the Bubo is not Critical, and that no other Disease preceded it, yet
is not Natures motion to be disturbed in the least: but if with the Blood, many
vicious Humors be heaped up also, gentle purging may then be necessary; but yet
so gentle, as not to molest Nature in her Operations.

XXX. In this case the Sal Mirabile is most to be commended, because it takes
away the great abundance of evil Humors, without disturbance, or lessning of
the Protuberance, by that act of Purging: and it may be given from v. to vi. or
i. at a time, dissolved in Broth or Posset Drink.

XXXI. The other part of the Cure is to be performed like as in other
Inflammations, of which we have treated at large in the aforegoing Chapter: yet
this is to be observed, that because the Glandules (especially of the Groin)
are colder than other places, the Discussives or Digestives applied, are to be
of the strongest sort.

XXXII. Some advise to a Cataplasm made of flower of Barley and Lupins, mixed
with Honey.

XXXIII. Or this: Roots of Althea, of white Lillies, of wild Cucumers, A. i.
leaves of Parsley, Smallage and Pellitory of the Wall, A. i. boil in Wine q.s.
to softness, and beat them to a pulp, which pass through a Sieve: to which add
meal of Lupins ii. Oatmeal i. powder of Orrice root ss. Oil of Camomil q.s.
mix, and make a Cataplasm.

XXXIV. But Ceratum de Ammoniaco Forresti, or Ceratum de Galbano crocatum, or
Emplast. Diasulphuris, are inferior to no other thing; which see in Our Pharm.
Londinensis.

XXXV. If it yields not to Discussives, you must suppurate with very strong
Attractives, such are roots of Aron, Birthwort, Briony, Cresses, Cantharides,
Castor, Dittany, Ranunculus, Pellitory of Spain, Nettles, Galbanum, Euphorbium,
Succinum, Sulphur, Leaven, Quicklime, black Soap, Garlic, Figs, Onions,
Mustard, Ox-gall, Pigeons dung, Goats dung, Niter, Diachylon, Oxycroceum,
Mithridate, Venice Treacle.

XXXVI. In this case, the Cataplasma Laxativa Schroderi is good, so also that
Pro Adultis, as also the Dropax Confortans.

XXXVII. Or this: Take roots of Pellitory of Spain, Mustard, A. ss. Salt vi.
Treacle of Andromachus i. Onions, Pigeons dung, A. ii. Figs No xii. Leaven
jss. dissolved in Vinegar, enough to make it into a Cataplasm.

XXXVIII. Some take a Chick, Pidgeon, or Frog, divide it in the midst, and
apply it warm to the part; others apply the Anus of a Hen or Pidgeon, the
feathers being pulled off: but it is best forthwith in the beginning to apply a
Vesicatory thereto, the next morning to open the Blister, and then to apply the
Attractives.

XXXIX. The Bubo being suppurated, let it be forthwith opened, and that rather
by Incision, than by Cautery: keep it open till the Tumor is wholly dissolved,
and the Ulcer cleansed; then heal it after the manner of other Ulcers.

XL. In a Pestilential Bubo, neither Bleeding nor Purging is to be used:
Sudorificks and Refrigeratives are good; outwardly, you must apply strong
Attractives in the beginning.

XLI. The same is to be observed in a Venereal Bubo, (so long as there is any
hope of curing it by external Remedies) lest the malign matter which Nature has
thrust forth, should regurgitate, and so cause the Pox.

XLII. The Suppuration is to be endeavored by all means; and then forthwith,
although not perfectly ripe, to be opened: if it be tough, Cupping-glasses
should be applied.

XLIII. If the whole mass of Blood is infected, you must manage the Cure then,
as in the Cure of the Pox. In this case, our Quintessence of Guajacum and
Sassafras, drunk in good Beer or fragrant Wine, is excellent.

CHAP. VII. Of a CONTVSION.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Effusio, Suffusio, Sugillatio,
Contusio; and in English, a Bruise, or Bruising.

II. It is the pouring forth of Blood or Humors, into the next adjacent spaces,
through the Veins or Arteries; either by (...), anastomosis; or (...),
diapedesis; or by (...), diairesis, the skin remaining whole; which for the
most part comes to pass, either by the vehement pressure of some heavy weight,
falls, blows, stoning, or the like. Gal. de Fract. lib. 2. com. 16.

III. The Kinds. Galen. lib. de Tumor. cap. 10. and de Simp. Med. Fac. lib. 10.
cap. 9. makes two kinds of Contusions; 1. (...), Ecchymoma; which is the
general name; and is when the Contusion is of a middle color between red and
black, to wit, of a livid or leaden color; and this the Greeks call (...),
Pelidna, Lividness.

IV. 2. (...), Melasma, which is Blackness; and this is most familiar unto old
persons, as often as their Veins are bruised; as the other, to wit, Pelidna is
familiar to Children, and such as are young.

V. But Paulus Aegineta, lib. 4. cap. 30. makes three kinds, according the
diversity of the parts affected; of which, the two first have relation to the
Eyes, the last to the Nails of Fingers or Toes: these indeed are particular
kinds as they have relation to those particular parts, but can by no means be
accounted of, as in a general relation to the whole Body.

VI. The first is that which we call (...), hypopia; but by Hippocrates (...),
hypophthalmia, i. e. subocularia, blewness under the Eyes. This second is
(...), hyposphagma, called by some suggillatio, an Effusion of Blood into the
Adnata, or Cornea-Tunicle of the Eye. The third (...), hyponychos, the Bruising
of the Nails.

VII. The Signs. A Bruise is easily known from the preceding external Cause,
the Color it self, and the Swelling, if there is any which are evidently seen:
the Physician may also understand it from the relation of the Patient.

VIII. Sometimes the hurt part is not elevated into a Tumor, the Blood only
insinuating it self into the spaces of the parts, making the Skin of a red,
yellow, livid, or leaden color.

IX. And sometimes the Contusion, by reason of its greatness, and the pouring
forth of abundance of Blood and Humors under the Skin, and into the substance
of the Flesh and Muscles, is lifted up into a Tumor; with which there is
sometimes (according to the nature of the part) Pain, and sometimes
Inflammation, and perhaps at length a Gangren may be excited.

X. The Prognostics. A Contusion is generally without danger, (if the
principal parts be not hurt) and the Blood, whilst it is thin and not
coagulated, may easily be dissipated or discussed.

XI. But if it is long detained in the part, and the Contusion is great and
considerable, and near some principal part, it may prove of dangerous
consequence; for the corruption of the part affected may be feared, with other
mischief to the whole Body.

XII. For the Blood being coagulated, and not insensibly discussed, or turned
into Pus, (which is absolutely necessary, where the Contusion is great:)
Putrefaction and a Gangren are at length induced, which many times costs the
Patient his Life.

XIII. If also the part affected loses its color of wanness, lividness, or
greenness; and becomes very much distended, hard, painful, and inflamed; great
danger is threatened, and a Gangren or Sphacelation is at hand.

XIV. The Cure. If the Contusion is great, care is to be taken in the
beginning, to prevent the afflux of Blood to the place, lest an Inflammation
should be excited.

XV. To perform this, some Authors prescribe Venesection; but this intravasates
none of the Blood that is already out. However, Defensatives and Repercussives
are to be applied near to, and about the part affected; to prevent, as much as
may be, the influx of Blood into the same.

XVI. And of this kind are Alum, Bole-Armoniack, Catechu, Terra sigillata,
Sanguis draconis, Poppies, roots of Hounds-tongue, Henbane, Hemlock, juice of
Hemlock, Roses, Myrtles, Cypressnuts, Opium, Camphir, Galls,
Pomgranate-flowers, roots of the lesser Consound, Saccharum Saturni, Housleeek,
Nightshade, Orpin, Nitre, etc. out of which Compounds may be made.

XVII. Bole iv. Vinegar q.s. mix, and boil them; then add Balaustians,
Red-roses in fine powder, root of Consound in powder, A. ss. Oil of Myrtles
q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm.

XVIII. Or: Terra sigillata, Chalk, A. ii. Vinegar q.s. mix and boil; then add
powder of Pomgranate-peels, Nut-galls in powder, A. vi. Sanguis draconis ii.
Nitre jss. Saccharum Saturni i. Oil-omphacine q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm.

XIX. Or: Whites of Eggs ii. Rose Water i. Saccharum Saturni i. shake or beat
them well together, and with Towe, apply them to the place affected.

XX. Or: Whites of Eggs ii. Rose Water i. beat them well together, then add Oil
of Myrtles jss. fine Bole i. Caput Mort. of Vitriol, Dragons-blood, A. ss.
Vinegar q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm.

XXI. But this is to be observed, that you are not to apply many moist and
clammy Medicaments; lest the extravasated Blood be putrified, from whence many
dangerous Symptoms may ensue.

XXII. If the Contusion is from some vehement cause, as a fall from some high
place, crushing of a Cart, etc. whereby the Blood is poured forth in some
extraordinary manner; and that not only the external part may be hurt and
bruised; the Blood will then be apt to coagulate or clot together; thereby
inducing many evil Symptoms, extremely dangerous, as Inflammations, violent
(even the worst of all) Fevers, and very often Death it self.

XXIII. When therefore there is the least fear that the Blood is extravasated,
and fallen into the more inward parts, and that it cannot be dissipated by
external Medicaments; you must then endeavor to hinder its coagulation; and if
it be begun, that it may be dissolved, and that with all possible speed it may
be carried off by Stool, Urine, or Sweating.

XXIV. For when once the Blood and Humors become putrid, the Disease will not
be so easily cured; and sometimes not at all without extraordinary and
specific Remedies, and great care, pains, and industry, and application.

XXV. For this purpose, Physicians commend these following Simples;
Winter-cherries, Pellitory of the Wall, Fumitory, Hypericon, Scabious, juice of
Citrons, or Limons, Carduus benedictus, Vinegar, Chervil, Parsley,
Hydropiper-water, Madder, Rhapontick, Rhubarb, Terra sigillata, fine Bole,
Sperma Ceti, Crabs Eyes, Mummy, Volatile Sal-Armoniack, Salt of Hartshorn,
Spirit of of Sal-Armoniack, and Spirit of Hartshorn.

XXVI. Sperma Ceti is given a i. ad ii. dissolved in Vinegar, or Parsley, or
Hydropiper-water.

XXVII. Hydropiper-water iijss. Parsley-water ii. Vinegar, or juice of Limons
ss. mix for a Dose.

XXVIII. Hydropiper-water iv. Spirit of Hartshorn j. mix for a Dose. Or:
Parsley-water (in which Onions have been infused) iv. Spirit of Sal-Armoniack
i. mix for a Dose.

XXIX. Or: Of Our Aqua Bezoartica, or Spiritus Cordialis i. Hydropiper-water
iv. Spirit of Hartshorn i. mix for a Dose. These things may be given upon the
spot.

XXX. Then at night you may give of Our specific Laudanum, a gr. ii. ad iii.
or iv. drinking after it a little mull'd Sack. The next night, that the Body
may be a little opened, you must give a Dose of Our Cathartick Laudanum; so
will the Patient have a gentle Stool (without pain, or griping) the next day in
the afternoon.

XXXI. Some give this. Rhubarb ii. Terra sigillata, Crab's-eyes, Ox-blood dried,
Sperma Ceti, A.i. Nutmegs i. mix, and make a Powder. Dose, i. or iv. at a time,
in Milk-water, or Hyodropiper-water.

XXXII. Or this. Rhubarb iii. fine Bole, Goats blood prepared, Crabs eyes,
Sperma Ceti, Mummy, Comfrey roots, round Birthwort root, Nutmegs, A. i. make a
Powder. Dose, iv. in Syrup of Limons: after these Examples you may make a
thousand other Mixtures.

XXXIII. Some give Balsams inwardly; the chief of which are Lucatella's Balsam,
as also Balsam de Chili, Capivii, Peru, Tolu, etc.

XXXIV. This following is commended by some Practisers. Angelica, Bawm, Bugle,
Betony, Cinquefoil, Fennel, Ground Ivy, Hyssop, Ladies-mantle, Parsley,
Peniroyal, Sanicle, Sage, Southernwood, Smallage, Tormentil, Yarrow, A. M. i.
fresh new made Butter lbiv. being gathered green, shred them, and boil them in
the Butter till they are crisp, adding Wine lbi. then press forth the Liquor,
and add again the same quantity of Ingredients, boiling as before, and pressing
out: to the pressed Liquor add Strasburgh-Turpentine, Balsam Capivii, Balsam of
Tolu, Sperma Ceti, A. lbss. mix, and make a Balsam. Dose, i. in Syrup of
Vinegar or Limons, and outwardly you may also anoint with the same.

XXXV. For Liquors, Mum that is choice, and Spruce-beer, are much commended;
drinking some one of them, half a pint at a time, blood-warm, morning, noon,
and night.

XXXVI. As for Topics, at the beginning Astringents are to be mixed with
Discussives, that the bruised Tunicles of the Vessels out of which the Blood is
poured, may be strengthened and bound up; lest new matter flows thither through
the pain.

XXXVII. For if Discussives be only used, they will by their heat be apt to
drive more Blood into the contused Part, before the contused Vessels can be
possibly restored to their natural state.

XXXVIII. For this purpose therefore the Skin of a Lamb or Sheep new taken off,
is many times applied, before it is cold, sprinkled with a Powder made of
Myrtle-berries, Bay Berries, fine Bole, Catechu, and Salt: and this is chiefly
for external Contusions, made by beating, whipping, and the like.

XXXIX. And where it cannot be got, a white dressed Sheepskin may be got to lay
over the place; it being first dressed with this: Balsam of Peru and Chili, A.
iii. powder of Myrtle-berries, Bay Berries, Catechu, A. vi. Salt finely ground
ss. mix them.

XL. And the next day you may dress the place with Balsam de Chili or Peru, or
Lucatella's Balsam, or with some of those mixed with Vnguentum Nicotianae;
because these things prevent the flux of new matter, hinder putrefaction, and
also sufficiently discuss.

XLI. If the Contusion is particular, and external, (the Skin not being broken)
foment it with the Spiritus Vniversalis blood-warm; or with that Spirit, in
which Camomil, Fennel, Fetherfew, Southernwood, Tansey and Wormwood have been
five or six hours beforehand infused.

XLII. Then bathe it with Powers of Amber, and after that apply Balsam de Chili
or Peru, and so bind it up. Some commend the root of Solomons-seal new
gathered, applied in form of a Cataplasm; or if in Winter, and dry, to be made
into a Cataplasm with Wine; which is said in one nights time to do the Cure,
and cause the native heat to return to the Part contused.

XLIII. Over the place also you may apply Clothes dipped in the following Liquor.
Spiritus Universalis xx. one Bulls Gall, Catechu iv. in powder, roots of Aron
jss. of Solomons-seal iv. cut all small, digest six or eight hours, then apply
it with the Clothes.

XLIV. But if by the use of all these things the Cure succeeds not, nor the
matter is discust, you must then apply Cupping-glasses, and for the most part,
with Scarification; because these extract whatever is contained in the Part,
though the matter lies deep, and by the means of Scarification some of the Blood
is also drawn forth.

XLV. If all these things avail nothing, but that signs of Suppuration appear,
as the swelling up a little of the place, a beating pain, a redness beginning
to appear round about, with a softness to the touch; then you must promote the
Suppuration by such things as we have declared in the Cure of a Phlegmon or
Inflammation.

XLVI. The Suppuration being accomplished, the Apostem must be opened and
cleansed, as we have before taught; and then the Ulcer is to be filled up with
Flesh, and at length cicatrized, as is usual.

XLVII. But in this case, Suppuration must be used with caution; viz. that they
be not of the stronger sort, but such only as are gentle and mild; lest a
cacoethick, sordid, or putrid Ulcer be induced.

XLVIII. And therefore when we perceive the Contusion degenerates into an
Apostem, we rarely wait for a present Suppuration; lest the pus or purulent
matter, being too long kept in the place affected, should excite vehement
Pains, malign Fevers, and a great Putrefaction; so as to corrupt the adjacent
Parts, Muscles, Nerves, Ligaments, and Bones, and cause cacoethick and putrid
Ulcers, Fistula's, etc.

L. You must then never apply emollient and suppurating Cataplasms and
Emplasters; because they, by reason of their moisture, are apt to induce
putridness, and other evil Symptoms.

LI. In this case, Authors advise us, that the Apostem excited by coagulated or
congealed Blood, be forthwith opened with an Incision-knife; and then a Tent
put into the Wound, dipped in Vnguentum Aegytiacum; defending the whole part
affected, and laying over it some proper Emplaster, which may preserve the
native Heat, and kept it from putrefaction: and this is more especially to be
observed if the Contusion is in the Belly, Hypochonders, Sides, or Back.

LII. For then the third, fourth, or fifth day, you must observe, whether there
are any signs of an Apostem (as swelling, with pain increasing, pulsation,
uneasiness, not enduring it to be touched, and a redness in the circumference:)
for wherever they appear, (though no lividness, blewness, yellowness or
blackness appear in the external parts) they demonstrate that purulent matter
is generated, and an Apostem produced.

LIII. Upon which, the place is speedily to be opened, that the Pus may be
brought forth, lest it retires unto the more inward parts; making (as it were)
Coney-boroughs, and eating asunder the Nerves, Ligaments, Muscles, and Vessels,
thereby causing either speedy death, or some lingering Disease.

LIVE. Then the Wound is to be ordered, as before directed; and during the whole
course of the Cure, Vulnerary or Traumatick Potions are daily to be given.

LV. But if the hurt is great, or some error has been committed in the managing
of the Cure, so that the place begins to look black or blew, and that by reason
of the suffocation of the native Heat, a Gangrene and Mortification is feared;
you must then immediately scarifie the part, and apply Cupping-glasses, that so
the putrid Blood may be evacuated.

LVI. This done, the part is to be fomented with Powers of Amber, or Spirit of
Wine, mixed with a little Spirit of Sal Armoniack, or with the Spiritus
Vniversalis; or with the Liquor at sect. 43. aforegoing.

LVII. Or you may use warm. Vinegar, or the Decoction made of roots of
Radishes, of Aron, of Solomons-seal, of Virginia Snakeroot, and Winters
Cinnamon, in Wine, or their Infusion in Spiritus Vnversalis: for that these
things dissolve and draw forth the clotted Blood from the very bottom of the
Affect.

LVIII. After which you may apply Diachylon Simplex, or cum Gummis; or for want
thereof, any other drawing Emplaster.

LIX. Or this Cataplasm: Camomil, Smallage, Southernwood, Tansy, A. M. ss.
juice of Aron or Musterwort q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm; adding a little
Spirit of Wine.

LX. If the Contusion is in the Muscles, chiefly those about the Ribs, the
Flesh generally swells a little, with a kind of purulent Matter; which being
pressed down, sends forth a kind of flatulent Air, with a little noise, leaving
for a time the print of the fingers after it; which if it be about the Costae
or Ribs, endangers a putrefaction or mortification, with a separation of the
Flesh from the Bones.

LXI. In this case the Remedy must be speedy, by applying things which cleanse
and restore the natural Heat; after which it must be strongly drawn together,
and firmly bound up, with Emplast. Diachylon, made up with a little powder of
Myrrh, or some other like Digestive.

CHAP. VIII. Of a CARBVNCLE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Carbo and Carbunculus; and in
English, a Carbuncle, or Burning-coal. Avicen calls it Pruna, and Ignis
Persicus, the Persian-fire.

II. This Tumor is called by this name, because it is covered as it were, with
a certain kind of Crustiness, black like a Coal; and it is called Pruna,
because the Flesh is black, and looks as if it were burnt with a Coal; and it
is said to be a Fire, because the Part is pained as if it was burnt with Fire.

III. It is a Tumor proceeding from adust, thick, and inflamed Blood,
degenerating into black Choler, and burning the Part. Or, it is a Pestilential
Tumor inflamed, black, burning the place, and sometimes blistered, as if burnt
with Fire, accompanied with great Inflammation and Pain, Vomiting, Trembling,
sleepiness, cold Sweats, and Fevers.

IV. Some Authors would make a difference between Anthrax and Carbunculus, but
there is none. The Cause, is from burnt Blood assuming the nature of
Melancholy, and so apt to corrupt.

V. There is sometimes but one great Pustle, sometimes many little ones, which
being opened appear black, and inflamed round: the crust being removed, instead
of Corruption or Matter, you will find spungy Flesh, the Part is very painful,
with a Fever and Watching.

VI. The Description. It is a Tumor which has its original from a boiling and
adust Blood, which corrupts the part, and arises in the outward parts of the
Body; having a vehement pain joined therewith, invading the Patien with a
Fever, and a manifestt swelling, black and hard.

VII. But Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 28. gives another kind of description of it,
which seems to me to be a different species from the common. There is (says he)
a certain redness, and thence comes forth, but not very far, certain Pushes or
Pustules, black, and sometimes livid, in which there seems to be a rottenness,
and beneath the color is black; and the Body it self is more dry and hard than
it ought to be. About the Tumor there is as it were a Crust, surrounded by an
Inflammation; the Skin cannot possibly be lift up, but is as it were fixed and
fastened close to the Flesh underneath it; the Sick is extreme sleepy, and
sometimes there arises a kind of Horror, or Fever, or both: and the Disease
proceeds, as out of certain roots, sometimes more hastily, sometimes more
slowly: but above, when it first comes forth it looks of a whitish color, and
then immediately it becomes livid, with little Pushes or Pustules coming forth
upon it: and if it chances to fall upon the Jaws, or parts near the Stomach, it
oftentimes causes Suffocation.

VIII. The Causes. Galen. de Tumoribus, lib. cap. 6. and ad Glauc. lib. 2. cap.
1. and Meth. Med. lib. 14. cap. 10. and lib. de Atra Bile, cap. 4. and 5. and
de Differ. Febr. lib 2. cap. 19. says the containing cause of a Carbuncle, is
a boiling thick Blood degenerating into the nature of black Choler, and having
black Choler mixed with it, together with a conjoined malignity.

IX. But it rather proceeds from a malign and corrosive Salt, joined with a
poisonous Sulphur, which causes vehement sickness, great pain, burning and
inflammation; by which Nature being grievously afflicted, she suddenly drives
it forth from the interior to the exterior parts; and from the more noble
members, to such as are less noble.

X. For this cause it is, that a Carbuncle is never produced by congestion or
heaping up of Blood or Humors; but is always generated of a Defluxion, which is
made all at once: nor is it produced of Melancholy, only as a Cancer, but of
adust and burnt Blood, which degenerates into Melancholy, or has Melancholy
mixed with it.

XI. The Procatartick Cause, is from an ill and unwholsom course of Diet,
eating of Meats of a depraved and vicious juice, defiling the whole mass of
Blood; and also from the external evil qualities of the Air; as being too hot
and burning, corrupting the Humors; or malign and pestilential, depraving,
infecting and poisoning the Blood and Juices at once, as is evidently seen in
Pestilential times.

XII. The Differences. Some appear without Pustules, as the common Carbuncle,
which is one uniform, round, hard, burning Tumor: and some with a Pustule or
Pustules, like such as are raised by burning with fire, which being broken,
there lies underneath within, a crusty Ulcer; and of this kind is that which is
described by Celsus, at Sect. 7. aforegoing.

XIII. They are also divided into Pestilential and Non-pestilential, according
as the Air is more or less malign and contagious; some invading the Sick in a
Pestilential constitution of the Air, others when no such Pestilential
malignity is present.

XIV. The Signs. It arises for the most part from a small Pustle or Swelling,
and sometimes from one of the greater Pustules breaking forth; or from many
small ones like Millet-seed, lying very thick together; which when broken, a
crusty Ulcer appears, like that made by a red-hot Iron.

XV. But before these Pustules break forth, there is a kind of itching felt in
the part, near which one or more of these Pustules come forth: yet sometimes
the Carbuncles comes forth without any such Pustule; a crusty Ulcer being
excited, sometimes blackish, and sometimes of an ash color: in a very little
time after which, it becomes like to a Bubo, and then it obtains a round sharp
form, with vehement heat, and burning pain.

XVI. This heat and burning is more particularly exasperated at night, and it
is so vehement, that the Sick can scarcely endure it without rubbing of the
place affected; from which rubbing, there arise many of the aforenamed Pustules.

XVII. The Flesh round about them grows hot, which when the Disease comes to
the height, has a vehement burning heat: and the color it obtains is sometimes
blacker than that of an Erysipelas, or a Phlegmon; as if black was mixed
together wtih red.

XVIII. The Sick has also a Fever, (from the burning Heat) which afflicts these
more than those which are affected with a Phlegmon or an Erysipelas: they have
also a nauseousness, a vomiting, dejection of Appetite, a trembling, panting
and beating of the Heart, dotage or delirium, with frequent faintings and
swoonings: all which Symptoms are so much the more vehement, by how much the
Matter or Cause is more malignant.

XIX. Now though all Carbuneles are malign, yet all are not pestilential, or have
an adventitious malignity more than what is native to them: those which are
Pestilential, are known, 1. From the Pestilential constitution of the Air; for
it is scarcely possible for a Carbuncle to arise at such a time, and not be
Pestilential.

XX. 2. From the Signs and Symptoms which appear, being more frequent, and more
vehement, than in a Carbuncle which is not pestilent.

XXI. 3. From the Fever, which always appears of the nature of the Plague or
Pestilence; which though outwardly it seems sometimes not so violent, as in a
Carbuncle which is not Pestilential, yet it burns more inwardly, and is much
more dangerous.

XXII. 4. The fresh color of the Face is changed, the Tongue becomes black and
dry, the Dejections liquid and choleric, the Appetite prostrated, with
nauseousness, and vomiting of most offensive and malign Humors; difficulty of
Breathing, stinking Breath, vehement Sweating, sometimes hot, and sometimes
cold Sweats, with Sleepiness, and sometimes Watchings, Delirium, Fainting and
Swooning, etc.

XXIII. The Prognostics. If black, it is often mortal; so also if it vanish,
or happen in the Emunctories, or near to principal members, or about the
Stomach or Jaws, (where it generally choaketh:) but if it be little, appear
first red, and afterward yellowish, with Pustles, it is the less dangerous:
for from a very little Pustle, it suddenly gets to an extraordinary greatness.

XXIV. By how much the blacker it is, by so much the worse it is; for it is
produced by the most corrupt Blood: and the next to this, is the wan and
yellowish.

XXV. And those are the most mortal, which beginning once to wax red, do
presently vanish again; for then the matter is translated to the more inward
and noble parts, which generally kills the Sick.

XXVI. Where there is but one Carbuncle, it is less dangerous, than where there
are many; for in this last case, it shows the vast quantity of the malign
matter.

XXVII. In a Pestilential Carbuncle, consider whether it comes forth before the
Fever appears, or after: if before, it shows that Nature is strong, and able to
expel the poison, before the Fever can suprize the Heart; but if after the
Fever, the contrary; for that the Heart is seized with the pestilential Venom,
which from thence diffuseth it self into all parts of the Body.

XXVIII. The Place is next to be considered. It is always evil and pernicious,
if it happens in the Emunctories, or near to any of the more noble and
principal parts: but herein the strength of the Sick is to be observed; for one
weak and languishing may soon be overcome, even by a small Disease; whereas one
vigorous and strong, may overcome a Disease which is very strong and powerful.

XXIX. The Cure. The Indications of Cure have respect to the Antecedent cause,
to the Conjoined cause, and to the Symptom.

XXX. In respect to the Antecedent cause, a fit Diet must be prescribed, and
such things as alter and correct the heat and evil quality of the Blood.
Sudorificks are first to be given; as Spirit of Sal Armoniack, Hartshorn,
Man's Scull, Our Theriaca Londinensis, specific and volatile Laudanum, etc.

XXXI. This door, the fervor of the Blood is to be allayed with Syrupus
Antefebriticus, Sal Nitre, Sal Mirabile, and other like things, which easily
enter into the mass of Blood, and cool, alter, and correct it.

XXXII. Some Authors advise Bleeding, but you ought to be cautious therein,
lest you draw the malignity inwards to the Heart, and so destroy the Patient:
since Bleeding is generally acknowledged to be a Revulsive Remedy: and
therefore in this Disease it is scarcely to be admitted, for that the Natural
and Vital Powers are dejected by the Disease; and having entered the Lists
therewith, are now in the conflict, and not to be interrupted, without eminent
peril to the Sick.

XXXIII. Authors also advise to Purging; but in this you ought to be careful,
lest thereby the Humor which Nature strives to thrust forth to the external
parts, be drawn to the internal: and therefore, if it may at all be done, it
may be more safe in a Carbuncle not pestilential, than in one that is
pestilential.

XXXIV. But if there is any considerable Fever joined therewith, the crudity of
the matter, and the malignity, forbid Purging: and indeed there is scarcely a
Carbuncle to be seen, in which there is not something of malignity: and
therefore the malign matter is rather to be protruded to the external parts by
Alexipharmicks, than drawn inwards by Bleeding, and Drenching or Purging, as
the usual way of some is.

XXXV. The Matter being sufficiently thrust forth by Sudorificks, which in some
measure allay the servency of the Blood, it is then to be altered, and cooled
by other things which resist Malignity, as Sal Nitre, Sal Prunellae, Sal
Vitriolatum, Sal Tartari Sulphuratum, juices of Wood Sorrel, Oranges, Limons,
Citrons, Pomgranates, either simple, or in Syrup; or Syrup of Vinegar, or
Vinegar medicated with proper Alexipharmicks, as Angelica, Bawm, Scabious,
Carduus, Rue, etc. which may be given in all that the Sick drinks. Thus far as
to the Antecedent cause, we now come to the Conjoined.

XXXVI. The Conjoined cause, which has respect to the Tumor it self, is not
removed, as it is in other Inflammations, nor are Repercussives to be used or
applied; but the malign and poisonous Humor is rather by Attractives, to be
drawn from the more inward, to the more outward parts.

XXXVII. And therefore Authors advise, that the Part affected be forthwith
scarified, and that with Lancings deep enough; that so the corrupt, malign, and
poisonous Blood may be fully drawn forth; for that otherwise, unless it be
immediately drawn forth from the Part affected, it corrupts the Parts next
adjoining.

XXXVIII. And being scarified, you may apply Cupping-glasses, that the Blood
may be the more effectually drawn out; after which the Part is presently to be
cleansed, and well washed with warm salt Water, or warm Water in which Nitre
has been dissolved, that the Blood may not clod or coagulate in the Part.

XXXIX. And if the corrupt Blood seems not fully enough drawn forth,
Scarification is again to be repeated. Where note, that the place being
scarified, you are not to apply digestive, or suppurative Medicines to promote
the Pus or purulent Matter, (because in this kind of Tumor, they increase the
putrefaction and rottenness; and a Carbuncle in putrefying always creeps, and
spreads farther and farther, to the endangering of a Mortification;) but rather
those things which are dying, and such as resist putrefaction.

XL. Of this kind is Morsus Diaboli, bruised green, and laid on, and boiled in
Wine and drunk. Also a Cataplasm made of Orobus meal, powder of Myrrh, and
Oxymel; to which some add Vnguentum Aegyptiacum. Or, make a Cataplasm of green
Scabious bruised, yolk of an Egg, Barley flower, and a little Salt: which
things are to be laid on the Carbuncle it self.

XLI. If the Humor flows into the Part with great Violence, then Attractives
are not safe to be administered; lest the matter flowing in too great abundance,
should make the pain the more vehement, thereby augmenting the Fever, causing
Watchings, and dejecting the natural Strength.

XLII. In this case such things as moderately repress and drive back, with a
digestive quality, are to be used: as, Plantane, meal of Lentils, brown Bread,
A. boil them in equal parts of Water and Wine, to a Cataplasm; and apply it,
not upon the very Carbuncle it self, but only near it round about, some three
fingers breadth distant from it.

XLIII. If Scarification do not, or the Carbuncle will not yield to these
Remedies, you must come to Burning, and that immediately with all possible
speed; for the least delay may bring the Sick into extreme danger, yea even of
death it self.

XLIV. Some use Potential Cauteries, as anointing the top of it with the Butter
of Antimony; but the Actual Cautery is accounted more safe, for that, by the
heat and dryness of the fire, does after a peculiar manner resist Putrefaction,
and preserves the sound parts, from being infected with the putridness: it also
draws from the very bottom and depth, all the malign, poisonoes, and corrupt
matter.

XLV. Now in this case, this terrible Remedy, is not so painful as may be
imagined, for the Patient is many times not very sensible of it, for that the
Flesh is mostly dead; and therefore the use of it must be so long continued,
'till in all the parts thereof there be a sense of pain.

XLVI. This done, you must with all possible speed that may be, even in the
space of twenty four hours, remove the Eschar or Crust, for that to delay it is
dangerous: for which purpose, Authors advise to use Hogs or Goose grease, and
such other like things: but these will not do, but rather increase the
putridness.

XLVII. For this purpose, Guilielmus Fabricius commends this Ointment: Meal of
Orobus, roots of Birthwort, of Florentine-Orrice, of the lesser Vernal Gentian,
all in fine powder, A. ss. Venice Treacle ii. Honey of Roses q.s. mix, and make
an Ointment, which apply.

XLVIII. Horatius Augenius commends this. Vitriol in fine powder, Hogs Lard, A.
ii. choice Honey ss. mix them, and apply for the same purpose. Some anoint with
Vnguentum Aegyptiacum.

XLIX. Paul Barbett commends this following, which is much better. Venicle
Treacle, white Vitriol in fine powder, A. i. Honey of Roses jss. Leaven,
Turpentine, fresh Butter, A. ii. Soot ijss. black Soap iii. Mustard Seed,
Saffron, A. ss. yolks of Eggs No iii. mix, and make a Cataplasm.

L. The Eschar being removed, the Ulcer must be cleansed with Unguentum Fuscum
Wurtzii, Aegyptiacum, and Honey of Roses, etc. often changing the External
application: but beware of Suppuratives, for the Humors are easily corrupted of
themselves.

LI. Aetius writes, that wild Rue made into a Cataplasm with Honey and Raisons
of the Sun, does quickly separate the Crust; and therefore such Medicines as
resist Malignity, as Mithridate, Theriaca Andromachi, Our Theriaca Chymica,
etc. are very proper to be mixed herewith.

LII. Others commend this. Rue M.i. Leaven, Figs, A. i. Myrrh ss. Pepper,
Cloves in powder, A. i. Salt ii. mix, and make a Cataplasm, which apply morning
and evening: it is said to separate the corrupt part or flesh, from the good
and sound, in about two days time.

LIII. If it is a Pestilential Carbuncle, you must use Antidotes both
internally and externally; among which are Our New London Treacle, and Our
Theriaca Chymica, which are chief.

LIVE. And for taking off the Eschar, you may use some of the former things;
chiefly the Cataplasm of Barbett, or the Oil of Mercury, or Joel's Cataplasm of
Radishes beaten with Rose-vinegar. Or this: Scabious, roots of Comfrey, and
Radishes, yolks of Eggs, common Salt, A. ii. Squills, Onions roasted, Leaven,
Soot, A. i. Honey, Turpentine, A. q.s, mix, and make a Cataplasm; which spread
upon Cloth or Leather, and lay it on hot, shifting it almost every hour.

LV. If you see the Crust becomes round, and a circular redness appears, it is
a good sign of health and recovery, and that Nature has now separated the
corrupt parts from the sound: and when the Crust is wholly taken away, the
Ulcer is to be cleansed with the things directed at Sect. 50. aforegoing; or
with Honey of Roses, and juice of Smallage.

LVI. After the Cleansing, it is to be filled up with Flesh, by applying
Sarcoticks; the lips of the Ulcer are to be joined together, and at length
Cicatrized with Epuloticks.

CHAP. IX. Of a TVMOR behind the EAR.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...) and (...), quod sit juxta Aures; in Latin,
Parotis; and in English, a Bubo, or Tumor behind the Ear; and by Hippocrates
these kinds of Tumors are called (...), Eparmata.

II. A Parotis is a Bubo or Inflammation of the Glandules near unto the Ears,
viz. sometimes behind, sometimes besides, and sometimes under the Ears; for
which reason it is said in the Definition, to be near to the Ears.

III. The Signs. It is known from the Place affected, from a violent beating,
pain, redness, and swelling, for the most part behind the Ears, and extending
to the Jaws and Temples.

IV. And it generally appears with Heat, and a Fever; sometimes with Frensy,
Convulsions, Swoonings, coldness of the Extreme parts, with dejectedness of
Spirit.

V. The Kinds. It is either Critical or Malign; and the Malign is either
Pestilential, or Venereal.

VI. Now whether it is Critical or Symptomatical, the time of the Disease, and
the signs of the Crisis, whether present or absent, will sufficiently manifest.

VII. If it is only transmitted from the Head, there went before a vehement
pain of the Head; the which, upon the breaking forth of the Parotis, either
wholly vanishes, or is very much diminished.

VIII. The Causes. Blood is said to be the principal and conjoined cause of
this Tumor, but it is seldom or never pure, but with a mixture of other Humors;
as Choler, Phlegm, Lympha, or Melancholy; and sometimes they are conjoined with
malign or pestilenlential Miasmata; from whence it is that they are also malign
and pestilential.

IX. For Nature being provoked and stirred up by the vicious and depraved
Humors, protrudes unto the External parts those defilements with the Blood: and
they are sent to the Part affected, either from the whole Body, or from the
Brain.

X. It is also caused sometimes by Poison, which at any time may happen to be
drunk, or taken into the Body; wherein if Nature be strong enough, (and the
Poison ascends up into the Head) she sometimes protrudes it to the Glandules of
the Ears.

XI. The Differences. The principal Differences arise, 1. From the Matter: viz.
according to the Humor with which the Blood is conjoined, whether simple,
malign, or pestilential. 2. From the manner of their Beginning or Generation;
in regard that some of them may have their original without a Fever, as Celsus,
l. 6. c. 16. says, the Patient being in good health, Nature protruding those
Humors to such a particular Part, for the general good of the whole Body; and
some may be with a Fever, acute or chronick; either benign, malign, or
pestilential.

XII. The Prognostics. It is longer before it come to ripeness than other
Bubo's: the Critical are healthful, the Pestilential dangerous, and for the
most part a sign of sudden death.

XIII. The Venereal are not mortal, yet difficult to be cured; more especially
if they be made worse by Bleeding, Purging, or Blistring.

XIV. The Cure. It is needful to consider in the Cure of the Parotides, whether
they be Critical or Symptomatical, and of what kind of Humor they are bred: if
they be Critical, thereby terminating a Disease, or at least diminishing of it,
then the whole work is to be committed to Nature, as Hippocrates advises, lib.
1. aph. 20. and nothing else is to be done, but only those things which ease
Pain are to be laid thereupon, and the which may at one and the same time help
forward the Suppuration.

XV. But let the Parotis be what it will, whether Critical or Symptomatical,
great or little, benign or malign, be it what it will, this is to be noted,
that no Repercussives, Repellers or Drivers-back, have place in any measure,
lest that the matter be driven from the exterior to the interior, and from the
more ignoble, to the more noble Parts.

XVI. If the Tumor hastens not fast-enough it self to come forth, but that
Nature is weak, you ought to apply the gentler sort of Attractives; such are
the Oils of Camomil, Flowerdeluce, Dill, Melilot, etc. not using the stronger,
but with caution, lest the pain should be increased.

XVII. If Nature inclines to Resolution, you must assist her with Discussives;
but if to Suppuraration, (which is much better) than with Medicines which
concoct, digest and maturate; all which we have proposed in the Cure of
Phlegmon and Bubo.

XVIII. The Apostem being suppurated, it must be opened, (as we in its proper
place do teach,) and to be cured after the manner of other Ulcers.

XIX. If it be Symptomatical, and Nature be weak; or there be an overgreat
abundance of the Antecedent Cause, it is to be lessened by Evacuation: for
where such plenty of vicious Humors are, it is not to be feared that Nature
hereby may be averted from; and hindered in her work of Expulsion; but rather to
expect, that being eased of some part of her burden, she will the more easily
afterward expel what remains, and ought to be emptied forth.

XX. But yet, if notwithstanding this Evacuation, whether Emetick, Cathartick,
Sudorisick, or Ptarmick, Nature cannot sufficiently expel, then the Expulsion
is to be forwarded by Cupping-glasses with Scarification, and other Attractives.

XXI. And hence it is, that either a Discussion, or (which is better, and most
practiced) a Suppuration is to be procured, by those Medicines which we have
proposed in the Cure of Phlegmon and Bubo, aforecited.

XXII. But here you must observe the condition of the Tumor; for if it be more
than ordinary cold and thick, you must use the hotter and stronger Discussives;
and if there be any cause to fear that the matter may be hardened, you must make
use also of Emollients.

XXIII. The Matter being softened and maturated, if it so tends, let the Apostem
be opened, and cured; as we advise in lib. 1. cap. 18. and cap. 3. sect. 3 5.
ad 47. of this Book, aforegoing.

XXIV. Now you must not expect that the Tumor should break of its own accord,
nor are you to wait till then; lest the Pus being long retained, produce many
sad and dangerous Symptoms; and (as Guilielmus Fabricius, Cent. 2. Observe. 39.
well notes) seeks another passage, whereby it may cost the Patients their lives.

XXV. A young Maiden (says he) was afflicted with a Parotis, which though she
was not so much amiss or ill, as to take her bed; being all the while also free
from any Fever, and came well out, so that on the 14 day the Apostem was as big
as ones fist: yet because it was not timely opened, she was suddenly surprised
with a Fever, Vomitings, Heart-qualms, and Swooning-fits, with Watchings, and
want of rest, as also a vehement pain in her Back and Reins: and though it broke
of its own accord, yet in regard it was too long before it broke, little or no
Pus at all came forth; it seeking a passage downwards, and at last it cost the
Patient her life.

CHAP. X. Of PHYMA and PHYGETHLON.
I. THESE two kinds of Tumors, are really but one and the same Tumor, but so
denominated, as they proceed from different Causes: and therefore what the
Greeks call (...), and (...). are called in Latin Phyma, and Phygethlon; also
Tumor Glandularum; in English, a Swelling of the Glandules.

II. But they are thus distinguished: Phyma is a Tumor proceeding from Blood
mixed with Phlegm, and is called (...). and Phygethlon is a Tumor proceeding
from Blood mixed with Choler, and is called (...).

III. Phyma (says Wiseman, lib. 1. cap. 9.) is an Inflammation affecting the
Glandules under the Jaws, which are the conglobate Glandules; viz. neither the
internal Salivary, which is Ranula; nor the external, which is Parotis.

IV. And this name Phyma is also given to the Tumor Phlegmonoodes, in and about
the Anus; of which we shall speak anon.

V. The Cause. The principal Cause or Humor exciting Phyma, is Blood, but yet
impure, being always mixed with Pituita, or Phlegm; for which cause Children
are most subject to them, more seldom Youths, and not often those of full Age;
and the Inflammation is not so great and Intense.

VI. The Signs. It is known by its roundness and hardness, being much elevated,
and little or nothing red, nor with much pain: but in time of Suppuration it is
inflamed, and accompanied with pulsation, tension, etc. as in a Phlegmon, but
sooner comes to Suppuration.

VII. About ten years since, my self had a famous Phyma under the right Jaw, as
big as ones fist doubled, which much hindered my swallowing, and had almost cost
me my life: it was a whole month before it came to maturation, and was
accompanied with a Fever: James Wasse, one of our City-Chirurgeons, living in
Clements-Lane, was the man who daily attended me, and did the Cure; he brought
it to suppuration, then opened it with an Incision-knife, and in six weeks time
saved me (through the goodness of God) out of the jaws of death.

VIII. Dr. Burwell, one of the Warwick-Iane College, came several times to
visit me in this Sickness, and prescribed Bloodletting, and to carry off the
morbifick Cause by Purging: this he oftentimes (even as often as he came)
vehemently pressed me to; but I refused it, not thinking that Practice according
to the Principles of our Art; he oftentimes also pressed my Wife to the same,
predicting otherwise my death.

IX. And told her, he should learn Experience by this Sickness of her Husbands;
but he feared it would be with the loss of his life.

X. But agreeable to my Opinion, was that of James Wasse the Surgeon; so
that we took the contrary course, and by Sudorificks we assisted Nature in
protruding the Morbifick-matter; and with alexipharmick Cordials and
Confortatives, we strengthened the Body, to sustain the shock, or encounter with
the Disease.

XI. And externally moderate Suppuratives were applied; so that contrary to the
Doctor's Prognostic, (whose counsel had I followed, I had certainly been a
dead man;) I was signally preserved, and am yet in the land of the living, to
give a report of the same to the World.

XII. Differences. Some, says Wiseman, have taken them for Strumae; but they
differ from a Struma, which being contained in a Cystis, does require to be
eradicated by Escaroticks after Suppuration, and a discharge of the Matter:
whereas these, after discharge of the Matter, are cured either of themselves,
or by the ordinary intentions of Digestion, etc.

XIII. The Prognostics. Sennertus, lib. 5. part. 1. cap. 10. says it is
altogether free from danger; and is likewise instantly augmented, and for the
most part suppurated and healed, without the help of Medicine.

XIV. This may be true, where the Tumor is small, and is without a Fever, and
the Symptoms very gentle; but in such a case as mine was, the danger was very
great; for the Tumor, even from its magnitude, had almost caused suffocation:
and the rest of the Symptoms were so vehement, that my Life could never have
been supported without the assistance of Medicines.

XV. It is more easily cured in Children; more difficultly in Youths, and
hardest of all in such as are of perfect Age.

XVI. The Cure. These admit not of Repercussives, but either of Resolution, or
Suppuration, even from their first beginning: Wiseman says, all that ever he
saw, terminated in Suppuration.

XVII. In the beginning he applies Diachylon cum Gummis, de Meliloto, etc. and
in case of Pain, maturative Cataplasms; as in a Phlegmon.

XVIII. Tending to Suppuration, he dressed it with Ung. Basilicon, and a Plaster;
and being suppurated, he opens it with a mild Caustic, or with an
Incision-knife; and discharging the Matter, then dresses it with Lenitives, and
after separation of the Eschar, incarnates by the common Sarcoticks, and the
use of the Vitriol-stone; and lastly, heals, it up with Vnguentum de Lithargyro.

XIX. Sennertus is of opinion, that they ought to be suppurated with all
possible speed; which Suppuratives ought (by reason of the coldness of the
Part) to be the more strong and forcible.

XX. For though possibly some may be resolved or scattered by Discussives; as
Southernwood, Parietary, Fetherfew, Tansy, Marsh-mallow roots, Ammoniacum, etc.
yet this happens but very seldom; and therefore it is the safest course
artificially to open it, unless it break of its own accord; lest the long
detaining of the matter matter should bring danger.

XXI. This Suppurative is commended. Althea roots, meals of Beans and Lupins,
Leaven, A. i. choice Figs, Onions roasted, A. ii. Balsam Capivii vi. Oil of
white Lillies, q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm.

XXII. Or this. Balsam de Chili, or Peru, Turpentine, Honey, A. i. Onions
roasted, Mithridate, A. vi. Ammoniacum ss. Oil of white Lillies, q.s. mix them.

XXIII. If it is Pestilential or Malign, as was that of mine, you ought to
provoke Sweat with Our volatile Laudanum, giving two or three grains every night.

XXIV. And every morning fasting, half a spoonful or a spoonful of my Tinctura
Pestilentialis, in a glass of Sack, or some other proper Vehicle.

XXV. Tinctura Pestilentialis Nostra. Tincture of Salt of Tartar, or
Philosophic Spirit of Wine lbii. Jamaica Pepper ii. Virginia Snake-root,
Contra-yerva, Cortex Winteranus, Cinnamon, Bay Berries, Camphir, A.i. Gentian,
Cubebs, Zedoary, A. vi. Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Opium, A. ii. Ginger Cochinele,
Saffron, A. i. mix, digest, and make a strong Tincture; which decant, filter,
and keep for use.

XXVI. This Tincture strengthens the Stomach and Heart, fortifies the Archeus
and Digestive Faculty, causes Appetite, expels Wind, comforts and warms the
Bowels, provokes Sweat, and is good against all malign Diseases, and such as
proceed from Cold: it is an Arcanum against the Plague or Pestilence, and all
pestilential and malign Fevers, Measles, Smallpox, etc. Dose, a ii. ad iv. or
vj. in some proper Vehicle.

XXVII. And sometimes-in the day time, I took forty or fifty drops of my
compound Tincture of Coral, in a little Wine also: by these things the
morbifick matter and malignity were expelled, partly in the Phyma, or Tumor, and
partly in a continual breathing Sweat: nor was I out of a sweating condition,
little or much, for near a whole month, both night and day.

XXVIII. By these things the Heart and Spirits were also kept up; and though an
extreme weakness had universally seized me, yet I plainly perceived that Nature
got ground against the Disease.

XXIX. To maturate the Apostem, this Cataplasm was applied. White Lilly roots,
pulp of Figs, A. iv. boil them in Milk to an absolute softness; then add crumbs
of White-bread, q.s. boil again, and add Oil of white Lillies ii. Mithridate
iv. Saffron in powder ss. mix them well for use.

XXX. This was applied twice a day, as hot as it could well be endured; and in
about three weeks time it came to ripeness: at what time the Surgeon opened
it with an Incision-knife, out of which, near half a pint of green-coloured
matter came away at several times.

XXXI. Then, the Abscess being cleansed, it was healed up in about three weeks
following: after which I took two or three very gentle Purges, and became
perfectly well: and this was the whole course I pursued in that Cure. See more
here of Our Parateremata, or Select Physical and Chirurgical Observations, lib.
3. cap. 2. sect. 29.

De PHYMATE juxta ANVM.
XXXII. It happens often in the lower part of the Intestinum rectum, where the
Musculi Any are inserted; and is many times the original of Fistula in Ano,
they for the most part arising from these Abscesses; whether they break within
and ulcerate there, or the matter descends lower, and raises a Tumor without
the verge of the Anus.

XXXIII. The Prognostics. Those Phymata, which in the Anus produce the most
dangerous Fistulae; the matter of which piercing through the Tunicles into the
neighboring Muscles, are seldom discovered, 'till they have made their way
more outward among the Muscles of the Buttocks; and though they be discovered
sooner, yet the Cure is most difficult.

XXXIV. If it appears outwardly, upon the verge of the Anus, though it is of much
easier cure, yet if it be ill managed, the defluxion of the Humor is continued;
and the Sinus grows callous, and requires the same method of Cure which Fistula
in Ano do; of which we shall hereafter speak in Lib. 5. following.

XXXV. The Cure. To prevent the danger that may ensue by these Phymata, you
must timely lay open the external Phyma by Causticks, that the Pus may have its
free discharge; for if you open it by Incision, it must then be kept open by a
Tent, which cannot easily be kept in.

XXXVI. And whether the Matter be stopped in by that, or the Tent slide out, and
so the Orifice close up, it is much alike inconvenient, and prolongs the Cure.

XXXVIII. If the Phymata are internal, they are soon, and easily cured; if,
being timely discovered, they are opened by Incision.

XXXVIII. A Child four years old was much pained in Ano, four or five days, the
Tumor appeared externally, and lay juxta Anum, as big as a Pheasants Egg,
perfectly suppurated: I applied the milder Caustic on the declining part with
Plaster and Bandage: the next morning I took off the dressings, and found the
matter discharged through the Eschar, which was as I had designed it, the breadth
of a twopence: I dressed it with a Pledget of Towe spread with Vng. Basilicon
cum Oleo Rosarum; by this method the matter discharged freely, without
disturbance in going to stool, and it was cured by the Maids dressing, I not
visiting there. Wisenian.

XXXIX. One thirty years old, of a sanguine Body, was taken with a pain in Ano;
I made a search with my finger dipped in Oil, but found nothing: after three or
four days, the pain increasing, I made another search, and felt a swelling on
that part lying next to the neck of the Bladder: I took a crooked
Incision-knife, and defending the edge of it, almost to the point, with a piece
of Plaster, conveyed it in by my finger to the swelling, and made incision into
the Tumor, which presently discharged a spoonful or two of matter: from that
time he complained no more of pain; I cast in a little Oil of Hypericon warm,
and dressing him no more, he was perfectly cured. Wiseman.

XL. I was sent for to one extremely pained in Ano; viewing the Podex, I saw no
external disturbance, I then anointed my finger with a little Butter; and in
passing it up in Ano, felt a Tumor, which I opened, as in the former
Observation: the Patient desired to ease himself, and he did so, and discharged
only a quantity of Matter well concocted; from which time he complained of no
more pain, and was cured in a day or two, by the benefit of Nature: nor did I
cast in any Injections, lest they should get into the Abscess, and make it
sinuous. Wiseman.

Of PHYGETHLON.
XLI. Phygethlon, is a Tumor affecting the glandulous parts under the Jaws, and
is called Panus; being an Inflammation, wherein Blood is mixed with Choler.

XLII. But Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 28. calls it Panis; from the similitude of its
figure, being broad and flat, like a Loaf.

XLIII. The Cause. It is from a hot and fervent Blood, mixed with sharp Choler,
as Galen, ad Glauc. lib. 2. cap. 1. affirms; and comes mostly after Fevers, a
Fever being in some measure the cause thereof: or after some vehement pain of
some other Part, chiefly the vehement pains of the Belly.

XLIV. The Signs. It is known by tumor, hardness, heat, distension, and greater
pain, than probably a Tumor of that magnitude might cause.

XLV. There is oftentimes also a Fever, accompanying or preceding it; or some
other vehement pain of the Belly, or some other part, as the Head, etc.

XLVI. And sometimes (it lying deeper than ordinary) none of the aforesaid
outward signs at Sect. 44. are perceived, but only some certain prickings
inwardly; and this, as it is long before it comes to maturation, so it is not
fit to be converted into Pus.

XLVII. The Prognostics. If it arises from any Ulcer, pain, stroke, blow, or
any other external cause, it is wholly void of danger.

XLVIII. That which follows upon Fevers (as in pestilential and contagious
times) or proceeds from Swellings, either under the Armholes, or in the Neck,
is the most dangerous, as Paulus Aegineta says, lib. 4. cap. 22.

XLIX. Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 28. says, if it becomes not more hard than
ordinary all of a sudden; and which, though it grows not red, yet
notwithstanding is of a changed color; it is of the safer kind, and has little
danger in it.

L. The Cure. If it comes from Ulcer, pain, contusion, blow, or any other
Procatartick cause, then its increase (as in other Inflammations) is to be
hindered by Coolers and Repellers.

LI. But if it is in Fevers, or is otherwise excited from some internal
abounding of Humors, then Repercussives have no place, but only Discussives and
Resolutives; and if the Tumor is very hard, Emollients may be mixed with them;
as Althea, Mallows, Arach, Chickweed, Parietary, Figs, Ammoniacum, Galbanum,
etc.

LII. If the Matter be discussed, then you must endeavor to suppurate it, by
application of Maturatives; after which, it it is to be opened by Incision,
unless it breaks forth of its own accord, and then to be cured as an ordinary
Apostem.

LIII. An Observation from Wiseman. A little Girl was brought to him, as
supposing she had the Evil, who had a flat, hard, round Tumor, lying under her
Chin and part of the right Jaw, down toward her Throat; it was of a yellowish
red color, not much unlike an Erysipelas, but without Vesication: he caused a
Cataplasm made of white Lilly roots, etc. to be applied, by which it was
suppurated in three or four days, and discharged a well-digested matter, during
which the hardness was resolved, and was cured in seven days, by the only use
of that Cataplasm.

CHAP. XI. Of GANGRENE and SPHACELVS.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Gangraena; and in English, a
Gangrene. II. (...). in Latin, Syderatio, and Sideratio, also Sphacelus; in
English, a Sphacelus, or Mortification.

II. Sennertus says, that Gangrene and Sphacelus are neither Tumors nor
Ulcers; neither will he have Sphacelus to be so much as a Disease, since it is
the very mortification, or destruction of the Part. Yet with the favor of that
Learned Man, though in respect to the Part only, he will have it no Disease; yet
in respect to the whole Body, it is a very great one.

III. A Gangrene is a great and terrible Distemper, tending to a Mortification,
which may be induced without any Tumor at all: but yet because it most
frequently follows Tumors, and chiefly Inflammations, we thought good to treat
of it among Tumors; whereas others, (because that when a Part is Gangrenated,
an Ulcer necessarily follows thereon, and that after a Sphacelus, an Ulcer is
left remaining) treat of them among Ulcers.

IV. Gangraena, is an imperfect Mortification of the Part by little and little,
through violence of much inflamed Matter and Blood, which so stop the passages,
as that the natural heat cannot have recourse thereto. If it come of
Inflammation, the red Color, Pain, Sense and Beating decays; waxing pale,
livid, black and soft, yielding to the Fingers, without rising again.

V. Or, It is an imperfect corruption of the Part, tending unto a (...),
necrosis; to wit, a mortification or deadness: to which if there are not speedy
Remedies applied, it becomes Sphacelus, or Syderatio, wholly dead; losing all
sense and life, and feeling nothing, though it is cut or burnt.

VI. The Differences. From what has been said it appears, that there is no
difference between these Diseases, but in respect of degrees, or greatness. In
a Gangrene there is not yet a perfect corruption of the part, or absolute
mortification of the whole part; but only an invasion of the softer and more
tender parts, as the Skin, Flesh, and Muscles.

VII. Whereas in a Sphacelus, the whole part is wholly deprived of all sense
and life, and is altogether dead; and there is a perfect, absolute, and entire
corruption or mortification, not only of the softer parts aforenamed, but the
very Bones themselves also are corrupted and spoiled.

VIII. But when a Sphacelus is inducing, the softer parts, as Skin, Flesh, and
Muscles are first mortified; while the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves may remain
safe and sound: but if the Sphacelus continues to go on, and the putrid part is
not speedily separated, the Arteries, Veins and Nerves will at length be
invaded, and at last the Bone it self.

IX. The Causes. It is caused, 1. From external Cold, or Repellers. 2. External
Heat, Burners or Corrosives. 3. Defect of Nutriment. 4. Stoppage of the Pores,
(as in splinting and rolling Fractures,) whence comes suffocation of the
natural Heat. 5. Malign Humors. 6. The Scurvy, which by a peculiar property,
sometimes causes a Mortification.

X. Whatsoever destroys the native heat of the part, that same may also be
accounted a cause of a Gangrene and Sphacelus. Now the native Heat is
destroyed, when by its contrary it is either corrupted, or suffocated, or
diffipated, or extinguished for want of Nourishment.

XI. It is destroyed by its contrary, either acting by a manifest quality, as
Cold; or else by a hidden quality, as by Poison: it is suffocated, when the
Transpiration is hindered: it is dissipated, by a greater Heat: it is
extinguished, if necessary Food and Sustenance is denied it.

XII. 1. From external Cold, as traveling in Frost and Snow, in the Northern
Regions; where the extreme parts, as Nose, Ears, Hands, Feet, etc. are dead
with Cold, by reason of the extremity thereof.

XIII. 2. From Poison; as in a Carbuncle from internal malignity; or external,
as from the bitings and stinging of poisonous creatures; as the Viper,
Rattle-Snake, Slow-worm, etc. or the application of Septick Medicaments, which
being not wisely and carefully applied, corrupt the Flesh; or from the afflux
of malign and poisonous Humors.

XIV. 3. From Transpiration hindered; as in great Inflammations, where the part
stands in need of perpetual ventilation and cooling; which if hindered, the
native Heat is suffocated by the abundance of Vapors: and this is done many
ways; as by application of Emplastick Medicaments in moist places, too strict
bandage and rolling of the Part, and in applying overcooling Medicaments in a
Phlegmon or Erisipelas.

XV. 4. From an external preternatural Heat, which wastes the radical Moisture
and native Heat.

XVI. 5. From defect of Nourishment; viz. of Blood and Spirits flowing into the
Part, which are wholly necessary and requisite for the cherishing the native
Heat implanted therein: and this is caused many times also from too hard
ligature, or by applying of Medicines over-astringent and cooling; by which the
descent of the Blood and Spirits is wholly hindered.

XVII. The Signs. In a Gangrene the part begins but to die, nor is the sense
totally abolished; but the Skin is in a manner red, and without any vehement
ill scent.

XVIII. In a Sphacelus ( called also Necrosis and Syderatio) the Part looks
first pallid, after livid, then black; the Flesh is spungy, with great stink;
the sense, heat, and pulsation is vanished, and the Parts are altogether dead.

XIX. A Gangrene proceeding from Cold, has great pricking; first it is red, then
pale, then black.

XX. If from external Heat, or Stoppage of the Pores, the redness turns to a
whiteness, pain and pulsation ceases, and Pustles appear, from whence issues a
gleety Humor.

XXI. If from defect of Nutriment, it for the most part seizes on the Joints;
the part waxes cold, without Pain, Inflammation, or Tumor.

XXII. If from Venomous Creatures or Humors, there is Fainting, great Pain,
always a Fever, and oft-times a Phrensy; with a little Pustle, under which
appears a black Spot, spreading it self over the whole Part.

XXIII. If from the Scurvy, it for the most part begins in the Toes, with
blackish Spots or Lines; degenerating into a dry Crust, with numbness, and at
length mortification.

XXIV. In a Gangrene which is yet but beginning, you may observe a variety of
Signs and Symptoms; according as it has its original from diverse and different
Causes: but if at length Pustles arise, and the Part becomes pale and wan, then
Pains also come on, and a Fever is excited.

XXV. If the Gangrene happens from too hard Ligature, then the Part swells, and
greater Pustles arise, full of a thin Humor, not much unlike the Washings of
raw Flesh.

XXVI. In a perfect Corruption, and absolute Sphacelus, the life and sense of
the Part are wholly abolished; the Pulse is wholly lost, the Part, if cut or
burnt, is insensible of pain; the Flesh feels cold, and becomes soft and
flaggy; which yet afterward being thoroughly dried, becomes black, hard, and
wholly dead, and yields a noisome stink, like that of a dead Carcass.

XXVII. The Prognostics. Gangraena, if it be not presently helped, the Part
straightways dies, that is, degenerates into Sphacelus, as also the parts
adjacent; and so suddenly causes the death of the whole Body.

XXVIII. But if the Sick be young, the Constitution good, and the Nerves and
Muscles be unhurt, it is less dangerous.

XXIX. It is more dangerous, if it proceeds from the bitings of Venomous
Creatures. It is also dangerous if in moist parts, or if the Humors continually
flow to the Part, or be in the Cavities of the Body, viz. in the Mouth, Privy
Parts, Bowels, or Fundament.

XXX. That which happens from the Scurvy, is seldom cured; in Hydropick persons
it is always mortal.

XXXI. A Sphacelus is yet much the more dangerous, for the Part can no more be
restored again, but is immediately to be cut off from that which has life in
it; and which being not done, the sound parts which lie next or near to it,
will be infected, and the putrefaction will creep at length into the rest of
the Body, from whence comes danger of present death: but before which there
usually goes, Doatings, Watchings, Faintings, Swoonings, Convulsions,
Belchings, Sobbings, and cold Sweats breaking forth over the whole Body.

XXXII. The Cure. The Indications of Cure have respect, 1. To the Antecedent
Cause. 2. To the Conjoined Cause. 3. To the Vital Powers.

XXXIII. In respect to the Antecedent Cause, which is first to be considered
(if it is present in the Body) before we come to Topics. The Diet claims the
precedence, which ought to be cooling and drying; especially when the Gangrene
is accompanied with an afflux of Humors, and follows great Inflammations: in
other Cases, the Diet is to be varied according to the varity of the Causes.

XXXIV. Then for taking away the Antecedent Cause, it is done either by
Bleeding or Purging: concerning which Barbett advises us to distinguish, that
we may know when they are to be used with advantage or disadvantage, and ought
to be according to the nature of the peccant Humor.

XXXV. But this is to be precautioned, That regard be had unto the Heart, that
it be well; or otherwise to be defended against the malign Vapors and Humors
proceeding from the putrefying part.

XXXVI. The chief things for this purpose among Simples, are roots of Angelica,
Virginian-Snake-root, Contra-yerva, Zedoary, Lovage, Elecampane. Of Herbs;
Angelica, Bawm, Borrage, Bugloss, Carduus, Rue, Scordium, Scabious, Swallowort,
Sage, Southernwood, Time, etc. Of Flowers; Saffron. Of Spices; Cloves, Nutmegs,
Mace, Pimento, Cinnamon, Cortex Winteranus, Ginger. Of Peels; Oranges, Limons,
Citrons. Salts, of Carduus, Self-heal, Wormwood, Tartar, Potashes. Of Animals;
Cochenele, Vipers.

XXXVII. Among Compounds, these are chief; Treacle-water, Aqua Bezoartica
Nostra, Our Tinctura Bezoartica, Diascordium, Mithridate, Venice-Treacle, Our
New London-Treacle, Guttae Vitae mixed with four times its quantity of Syrup of
Limons, Confectio Alkermes, Our Theriaca Chymica, which may serve instead of
all the rest.

XXXVIII. The next thing is the Conjoined Cause, wherein are three Intentions
of Cure. 1. Either to prevent the Gangrene, when it seems to be inducing. 2. Or
to hinder its spreading, and increasing. 3. To overcome it in the part, where
it is present.

XXXIX. As to the first Intention of these, where the Gangrene is but coming
on, Author's advise to Externals, as Leeches, Cupping with Scarification,
(which some yet approve not so well of) and the application of such things as
resist Putrefaction; as roots of Angelica, Birthwort. Herbs; as Wormwood,
Carduus, Tobacco, Rue, Angelica, Germander, etc. Flowers; as Camomil, Melilot,
Saffron, etc. Liquids; Lie, Brine, Urine, Camphorated Spirit of Wine, Powers of
Amber and Turpentine, Spiritus Vniversalis, which is instar omnium. Ointments,
as Aegyptiacum, Fuscum Wurtzii, Mithridate, Our Theriaca Chymica, etc.

XL. Now to know a Gangrene beginning, Wiseman, lib. 6. cap. 2. page 444. says,
If the Tumor and Inflammation have been very great, and it changes color
suddenly, sinks down, the pain continuing, you may conclude a Gangrene is
inducing.

XLI. So also if there is a Wound or Abscess, if that Wound, etc. grow more
painful, the Flesh loses its ruddiness, looks pale, and withered, and the
Matter changes to be thin and gleety, you may then suspect its corrupting: in
which case, it will be necessary that you scarify to the quick, and make it
bleed freely. Now by the Patient's sensible feeling, and by the fresh trickling
down of the Blood, you may judge of the Mortification.

XLII. But if the Gangrene has crept down, or seems to proceed from the bottom
of the Wound, the Scarification ought to be made accordingly unto the fleshy
parts: and if there be any Abscess or Apostem under the Muscles, or lips of the
Wound or Ulcer, it is to be opened, and the Matter let out.

XLIII. Now in making such Scarifications, if you should hap to cut some
Vessel, causing a flux of Blood, beware that you suffocate not the heat of the
Part by thrusting in Dossils, whereby the mortification will be increased; but
stop the flux of Blood with some proper styptick Water, or Styptick-pouder,
etc. Or you may use the Actual Cautery, whereby you will not only stop the
bleeding, but also hinder the progress of the Putrefaction: after which you may
dress up the Wound, as we teach in the Cure of Burnings, etc.

XLIV. If in scarifying you prick or hurt a Nerve or Tendon, you will increase
the Gangrene; so also if you burn them but in part with the actual Cautery, or
sharp Medicines be applied on them, when newly hurt by Scarification; for great
Fluxions often arise from small disturbances of the Nerves and Tendons: when
therefore they lie in your way, you had better cut them off, or burn them
through, than hurt or prick them; after which the Ulcer will grow easy.

XLV. The second Intention of Cure is, to hinder the Gangrene from spreading,
or creeping farther into the sound parts. Those parts are to be defended with
Flowers of Sal Armoniack, or Spirit of Sal Armoniack, or Spirit of Urine mixed
with Spirit of Wine, whereby the Humors are kept from flowing, and also by
applying the red Defensive Emplaster, or Vigo's Cerat, or this following.

XLVI. Take fine Bole ss. Galls, Cypress-nuts, Pomgranatepeels, all in fine
powder, A. iij. Barley-flower vi. Oxymel simplex, q.s. mix, and make a
Cataplasm. Or: Fine Bole, Terra sigillata, A. ss. burnt Hartshorn i. Camphir
i. Rosevinegar i. Oil of Myrtles iii. white of one Egg: mix, and make a
Liniment.

XLVII. Sennertus advises, always to endeavor to hinder the sound Parts from
receiving the Putrefaction; which is done by guarding and defending them with
the aforementioned Medicaments; or by these following, in which Scordium is put,
for that it powerfully resists Putrefaction.

XLVIII. Fine Bole i. Terra sigillata ss. Hartshorn burnt i. Camphir ss. Wax
vi. Oil of Roses iv. juice of Scordium i. white of one Egg; mix, and make a
Liniment. Or: Terra Lemnia i. Vinegar of Scordium q.s. mix them.

XLIX. The third Intention of Cure, is the overcoming of the Gangrene in the
part where it is present. And this is done by scarifying of the place affected,
and cleansing it of the clotted Blood, by washing it with Brine; or a strong
Lixivium of Wood-ashes, Tincture of Myrrh, or Spiritus Vniversalis, etc.

L. And that the Putrefaction may go no farther, some anoint or touch it round
with Butter of Antimony, or Oleum Narcoticum, in which an eighth part of
Mercurius sublimatus is dissolved; digesting them together 'till the Oil looks
red, which not only perfectly cleanses all fetid Ulcerations, but also
separates the gangrened parts from the living; removing the putrefaction, and
yet not touching the sound.

LI. Then fill up the Scarification with Trochisci Musae mixed with Precipitate,
or in Dossils dipped in Oil of Cloves or Turpentine actually hot; Ung.
Aegyptiacum is good here also, with the addition of Nitre, flowers of Sal
Armoniack, Camphir, Mithridate, Venice-Treacle, etc.

LII. But the usual Fomentation is a Lixivium made of Potashes, wherein the
tops of Wormwood, Southernwood, Centory the less, Carduus ben. Scordium,
Swallowort, roots of round Birthwort and Gentian have been boiled; to which a
quantity of Spirit of Wine is to be added.

LIII. Aqua Calcis, with a Solution of Sublimate in it, is of good use for this
purpose; so also Aqua Lapidis Medicamentosi, the Powers of Amber, Powers of
Turpentine, or Spiritus Universalis, to foment withal. Cataplasms also made of
the meals or flower of Barley, Beans, Lupins, Lentils, Pease, and Mithridate,
boiled in a Lixivium of Potashes, with a little Oxymel added, are approved.

LIVE. Then as to the Dressings, you are to consider well in the application of
the Medicament, that in the destroying of one Gangrene, you do not excite
another; which will easily be done, by the too long use of sharp Medicines: for
which reason, when you feel the Ulcer warm, and find it to cease gleeting,
desist their use, and dress it with warm Digestives, as Vnguentum Basilicum,
with Oil of Turpentine, hot.

LV. And after Digestion, cleanse it with Detersives or Mundificatives, as that
ex Apio, or such other like, that the slough may the more speedily and easily
be cast off.

LVI. Lastly, after Digestion, and sufficient cleansing, you must complete the
Cure by Sarcoticks and Epuloticks; as in Lib. 5. of the Cure of Ulcers
following, we shall particularly teach.

LVII. The Vital Indication. This is not always requisite to be considered
here, where there is a sufficient strength of Body, where there is no
malignity, where the discrasy of the Blood is little, and the Humors of the
Body not much depraved: But in a Patient weak, the disease or temper of the Air
malignant, the Blood vitiated, and the Juices corrupted, this last Indication
will necessarily have place.

LVIII. From what has been said it appears, that the Diet must be composed of,
1. Strengthners and Restoratives. 2. Antidotes against Poison and Malignity. 3.
Restorers of the Blood to its due Crasis. 4. Depurators of the Humors, or
Juices of the Body: to which add a due quantity of proper Traumaticks.

LIX. A Diet-Drink. Scorzonera roots, Parsley roots, A. lbj. Galangal, Angelica
roots, Scabious, Scordium, Bawm, Mint, A. viii. Snakeroot, Contrayerva,
Winter's Cinnamon, A. ii. Bloodwort, Sorrel, A. lbj. Selfheal, Winters Green,
Ladies Mantle, Saracens Consound, Bugle, Hypericon, Speedwell, A. iv. fair
Water 4 gall. boil to one half, then add Coriander and Dill seed bruised, A.
ii. Limon and Citron peels, A. jss. Cubebs, Cloves, Ginger, A. ss. boil again a
quarter of an hour, then strain out, and bottle it up for use. Dose, half a
pint in the morning fasting, half a pint at 11 before noon, and half a pint at
6 at night.

LX. A Medicated Ale, for the same purpose. Take Fennel and Parsley roots,
Angelica roots, A.xii. Contra-yerva, Snakeroot, Winters Cinnamon bruised, A.
iii. Rhubarb, Galangal, A.ii. Agrimony, Bawm, Mint, Parsley, Scabious,
Scordium, Bloodwort, A. M. iv. Bugle, Fluellin, Ladiesmantle, Saracens
Consound, Selfheal, Vervain, Yarrow, A. M. vi. Aniseeds, Coriander-seeds,
Dill-seeds, Fennel-seeds, Pimento, all bruised, A.jss. Orange, Limon, and
Citron peels, A. i. put all into a Bag with a Stone in it, which put into 4
gallons of new Ale, and let them work up together: after three days, let the
Sick drink of it, three quarters of a pint, plus-minus, morning and evening,
and oftener, if they so please.

LXI. In this latter case, if the Patient is of a gross Body, and full of
Humors, it may not be inconvenient to put in a fit quantity of purging
Ingredients, by which the morbifick Cause may in a great measure be carried
off. To the former quantity of Ingredients, you may add Sena viii. Mechoacan
thin sliced, or bruised iv. Carthamus-seeds ii. but in thin and weak Bodies,
these Ingredients must be forborne. Hitherto of the General Cure; the Particular
Cure, as it arises from Particular Causes, now follows.

LXII. A Gangrene from External Cold. If it arises from vehement Cold, as in
Denmark, Norway, and Swedeland; and it is only beginning, and not perfectly
induced; known by its not being black, but being yet red with pain: then bring
the Patient toward the Fire, but not too near, that by degrees the heat may be
again restored to the Part.

LXIII. And for this purpose, let the Part be plunged in cold frozen Water, or
strongly rub it with Snow, or Cold, for some considerable time; and inwardly
give the Patient Mithridate, Venice-Treacle, or Our Theriaca Chymica in
Sherry-wine, or in Canary: Or, Our Powers of Rosemary, Anise, or Angelica in a
glass of Sack: Or you may give our Aqua Bezoartica, or Spiritus Cordialis ii.
by themselves.

LXIV. When the cold and pain remit, embrocate the Part with Oil of Dill or
Camomil, mixed with of Oil of Juniperberries, or Oil of Aniseeds or Amber: Or
with a Decoction of Turnips, mixed with Powers of Turpentine.

LXV. Afterward you may foment with S.V. in which Spirit of Sal Armon. or
Flowers of Sal Armon. are dissolved; or with Powers of Amber and Juniper, Oils
of Turpentine and Spike, or the like; laying over the Part a Cataplasm of
Mithridate, mixed with a little Oil of Amber.

LXVI. And in those Northern Countries, they give them burnt or mull'd Wine,
with powder of Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmegs, and Ginger, and the like Spices. Or
this Decoction: Rue M. ss. Swallowwort, Angelica, A. M.j. Scordium M. jss.
Pepper bruised i. boil in White Wind, and strain: to a pint of which add of Our
Spiritus Cordialis iii. And the Patient being in bed, make him to sweat with
the Warming-stone, or application of glass Bottles filled with hot Water.

LXVII. But if the Part is already gangrened, known by its being blackish, and
stiff with cold; you must then immediately scarify the Part, and foment it with
the former hot Medicaments, and continue the use of the former things, as we
have before declared.

LXVIII. A Gangrene from too much Heat. Let the Diet be cooling, and the hot
Humors (being qualified) evacuated with proper Catharticks, if the Disease
takes its original from an internal Canse.

LXiX. Then let the Part affected be scarified, and wash with Diaclysma
frigidum; to a pint and half of which you may put Vinegar half a pint, Salt an
ounce and half: or you may wash with this: Fair Water xiii. Vinegar, juices of
Sorrel and Scordium, A.viii. juice of Germander iv. Salt jss. Lupins ss. mix,
and boil to the consumption of a third, and use it hot.

LXX. Or you may use the Spiritus Universalis, to iv. of which you may put
juices of Scordium and Germander, Spirit of Wine, A. iii. after which apply
Vng. Aegyptiacum, or Fuscum Wurtzii, etc. but proceed not to an actual Cautery,
unless necessity force it.

LXXI. A Gangrene from Transpiration hindered, as in too hard Ligature,
application of Emplastick Medicaments in a Phlegmon, etc. The Binding is then
forthwith to be removed, or the Emplastick-body taken away; and Scarification
being made, you must wash the Part with Spiritus Vniversalis, Spirit of Wine
camphorated, Powers of Amber or Turpentine; or some other of the former
directed Medicines.

LXXII. And then you must apply Medicaments discussive, and non-putrifactive:
and the Blood and Humors flowing overmuch into the Part, are to be emptied out
of the whole Body by Bleeding, Cupping, with Scarification, Derivation,
Purging, and other fit Remedies.

LXXIII. And round about the part affected, Defensatives are to be applied, as
directed at Sect. 45. etc. aforegoing. But as to the Gangrene it self, the
Scarifications ought to be many, and deep enough, that great plenty of Blood
may be evacuated: but yet their greatness and depth ought to have respect to
the greatness of the Affect it self; according as it is more or less nigh unto
putridness and a Sphacelus.

LXXIV. After Scarification, as directed, you may use the Medicaments at Sect.
71. aforegoing; or this following Wash, which is much commended: Strong Lie and
sharp Whitewine-vinegar, A. lbii. Scordium, Wormwood, Lupins bruised, A. M. j.
roots of Flowerdeluce, round Birthwort, Swallowort, A. ss. boil to the
consumption of one third part; then strain, and add fine Aloes, Myrrh in fine
powder, A. ss. boil again a little, and lastly add Honey of Roses i. S.V. iii.
mix them.

LXXV. The Part being washed with the former, then apply Ung. Aegyptiacum, for
that it is reputed to be the most excellent Remedy to remove Putridness, and to
separate the dead and putrid Parts from the living and sound. But this Ointment
is not to be applied alone; but thereupon a Cataplasm is to be imposed, which
resolves, drys, and hinders Putrefaction. Take Mithridate iv. Myrrh ii. round
Birthwort in fine powder iss. Camphir in powder ss. Honey of Squills q.s. mix,
and make a Cataplasm.

LXXVI. Or, after Scarification, you may wash with this Water: Vitriol i. Oak
buds or tops M. i. Frankincense ss. Camphir ii. Urine lbijss. mix, boil to the
consumption of a third, and strain out for use: and after washing, apply the
following of Guilielmus Fabricius, (which is to be applied when the corruption
is more than ordinary. Verdegrise, Honey, A. iii. Decoction of Wormwood and
Scordium lbi. Vinegar of Squills lbss. juices of Rue and Germander, A. ii.
Alum, Sal Armoniack, A. ss. mix, and boil to a good thickness; then add Venice
Treacle, Mithridate, A. ss. Camphir i. mix them, and apply.

LXXVII. A Gangrene from Poison, or the afflux of malign Humors. If the Poison
is from without, as the biting of a Rattlesnake, etc. then such things as do
strongly attract the Poison, dry it up, and destroy it, are to be made use of;
for which purpose, nothing seems better than the application of the actual
Cautery; giving inwardly cooling, cordial, and sudorifick Medicaments.

LXXVIII. The Part affected being either burnt or scarified, then such things
as resist Putridness, and prevent the Necrosis or Sphacelation, are to be used,
viz. the strongest Attractives, and such as resist malignity and putridness, as
Wormwood, Rue, Dittany, Angelica, Swallowort, Scordium, Radish-roots, seeds of
Cresses, Garlic, and Onions roasted in Embers, Leaven, etc.

LXXIX. The Gangrene being mastred, the Ulcer is to be cleansed with juice of
Smallage and Honey of Roses, to which Spirit of Wine may be added, and with
other things proper to the same intention; and Defensatives are also at first
to be applied round about, that the Poison may not spread it self any farther
into the interior and more noble parts, nor yet spread broader into any of the
adjacent places.

LXXX. But if the Poison proceeds from within, Defensatives are not to be used,
but the malignity is only to be sent forth into the external parts: 1. By
Alexipharmick and Sudorifick Medicaments. 2. To be drawn forth by Scarification
and Attractives, Cupping-glasses, Leeches, etc. and in this case, Barbett
says, that he had seen Bleeding and Purging oftener to do hurt, than good.

LXXXI. If the Gangrene is from the afflux of malign Humors, or a malignant
Quality, a cooling and drying Diet is to be ordered, with Sauces made of the
juices of Oranges, Limons, Citrons, and Pomgranates: the depraved and malign
Humors are to be evacuated by Purging Medicaments, and sometimes by Bleeding,
if need requires it, or the nature of the Sick will bear it: and the malign
Matter is by Topics, as Burning, Scarification, Attractives, etc. to be drawn
forth.

LXXXII. And inwardly the Malignity is to be expelled and protruded to the
External parts, with such like things as we usually give in malign Fevers, viz.
Medicaments made of Citrons, Limons, Angelica, Borrage, Bugloss, Bawm, Carduus
bened. Dittany, Scordium, Sorrel, Swallowort, Mithridate, Our Theriaca Chymica,
etc. endeavoring a powerful Sweating, the malignity may be driven outward,
etc.

LXXXIII. A Gangrene from an Atrophia, or want of Nourishment. In this case,
advise to Meats hot and moist, and easy of digestion, which generate much, and
good Blood: and outwardly the Body is by all means to be moistened, by rubbing
and anointing it with sweet Oil, Oil of sweet Almonds, Oil of Ben, and pure
Neats-foot Oil; avoiding all things which exsiccate and dry the Body.

LXXXIV. Here is no place for Defensatives, but the Part already affected with
the Gangrene is to be drawn with vehement Attractives, that it may be supplied
with Nutriment; and it is gently to be rubbed and chafed, with application of
Cupping-glasses without Scarification.

LXXXV. But if there is already a present Putridness, you must apply things
which do alike both attract and resist Putrefaction; such as are, Salt-brine
mixed with juice of Scordium, Tar mixed with meal of Lupins or Orobus, Myrrh
mixed with Mithridate and Cress seeds, Spiritus Vniversalis, camphorated S.V.

LXXXVI. And if the Gangrene has already proceeded on, you must proceed to
Scarification, and the Lotions aforementioned, dressing it afterward with
Vnguentum Aegyptiacum, with other things aforementioned.

LXXXVII. A Gangrene proceeding from the Scurvy. This is not common, yet
Authors have taken notice of it; as Sennertus, Barbett, etc. This most usually
begins in the Extreme parts, as of the Leg or Foot, with black and purple
Spots; after which there appears a crusty and gangrenous Ulcer, drys, so as it
yields neither the thinner Matter, which we call Sanies, nor the thicker, which
we call Pus.

LXXXVIII. Then one or other of the Toes begins to dye, after which red lines
and purple spots appear upon the juncture of the Foot, according to the length
of the Part.

LXXXIX. This Gangrene differs from the common, very much; for that arises from
Causes manifest; and there always runs forth from the mortified or sphacelated
Part, a thin stinking Humor, the Member is soft and putrid, and yields a filthy
stink, like that of a dead Carcass, creeping far in a short time, and quickly
kills the person that has it: whereas the Scorbutic Gangrene invades without
any manifest cause, creeps but very slowly, and kills not the Sick 'till after
a long time: the Part is dry, so that no moisture flows from it; and when the
corrupt Part is taken away by Instrument; the Flesh seems to be of a dark or
blackish red, and remains dead the next day also, without any perceivable stink
which may offend.

XC. And as soon as ever the Disease has seized upon one Foot all over, it then
presently after, (without any evident cause) begins to appear in the same
manner, with Spots of a red purple color on the other Leg and Foot, and not
long after, one or other of the Toes of that Foot becomes wan and livid, and in
a very little time it is found to be perfectly dead: at length the Sick is
taken with an Apoplexy or Epilepsy, upon the first fit whereof they dye.

XCI. Sometimes again this Disease is induced suddenly, viz. when the peccant
Humor is through terror, fear, anger, wrath, or other like causes, disturbed and
protruded (as it were in a moment) unto the Toes, after the same manner as an
Erysipelas is wont to arise, causing the Part so affected presently to dye;
from which cause this kind of Gangrene is called by some Syderatio, Blasting;
or as the Vulgar phrase it, Planet-struck.

XCII. This Disease seizes most usually on the Tendons, causing almost
intolerable pains, afflicting the Patient night and day: and because it seizes
the Tendons, which do not so soon and easily putrify as the Flesh; therefore it
is that it creeps on so slowly, being sometimes one whole months space in
creeping over one whole Joint, before it seizes upon another; notwithstanding
that within the Foot, almost all the Tendons are already infected.

XCIII. It is seldom or never cured, because this malign acid Humor has
insinuated it self very deep into the Tendons, that it cannot easily be taken
away: so that it many times continues three, four, and sometimes six months
before that it klils the Patient.

XCIV. As to the Cure, the Internals must be highly Antiscorbutick, mixed with
Antidotes which have power to absorb the acid Humor, and destroy the malignity;
which are to be given both medicinally and dietetically, as the Physician shall
direct.

XCV. Order cordial Medicaments, giving after Sudorificks; which let be
followed close with strong Tinctures, Elixirs, or Potestates of Scordium, Rue,
Dittany, Scurvigrass, Cresses, Swallowort, Our New London-Treacle and volatile
Laudanum are good things, as also Our Theriaca Chymica.

XCVI. Outwardly foment the affected Parts with this. Guajacum rasped,
Sassafras rasped, Fennel-seed, A. i. roots of Angelica, Celandine, Cress-seeds,
A. vi. Scurvigrass, Watercresses, A. M. j. S.V. lbj. infuse a night, then
distill in B.M. to dryness.

XCVII. Or you may anoint with this. Oil of Earthworms, of Bays, of Rue, A. ii.
Castor i. Spirit of Wine iii. mix, and make a Liniment; and apply over,
Emplastrum de Galbano crocatum Mynsichti, Empl. Polychrestum, ad Strumam, vel
Arthriticum.

XCVIII. If these things do not, you must apply Cupping-glasses, Scarify, etc.
then wash with Brine in which flowers of Sal Armoniack are dissolved; or with
Spiritus Vniversalis, mixed with camphorated S.V. and after apply Vng.
Aegyptiacum, and over it some resolving and drying Cataplasm.

XCIX. If yet there be no amendment, you must come to Cauteries; either
Potential, as Butter of Antimony, red Precipitate, etc. or Actual: after which
you must remove the Escar in due time, lest new Putrefaction grow under it.

Of a SPHACELUS.
C. When the whole Member is corrupted, or become perfectly dead, it is then
sphacelated, as is before declared, and then it is no way to be cured, but by
cutting off: the way of doing which, whether in the dead or living part, we
have fully and plainly declared and taught, in Lib. 1. Cap. 32. aforegoing.

CI. Yet if you please, with what is there said, you may take the following
Notes. Celsus, lib. 7. cap. 33. advises to make the Section between the sound
Flesh and the dead, and rather to take away some of the sound, than to leave
any of the dead Flesh remaining: but this our modern Physicians disapprove of,
because of the accidents and dangers which follow, viz. immoderate profusion of
Blood, vehement pain, fainting, swooning, etc.

CII. Fallopius advises to make the Section in the dead part alone, and cuts
with a Razor into the dead Flesh, (even to the Bone) and then takes it off with
a Saw; after with red-hot Irons he burns the Flesh and greater Vessels, even to
the causing of pain.

CIII. The Putridness is sometimes apt to creep farther; but you will see when
it ceases to increase, because it will divide it self from the sound part of
its own accord, and be separated by Nature, upon the applying fit and proper
Medicaments.

CIV. But if you see the Putridness creeps forward by great steps, and that
Nature of her own accord begins not to separate the sound from the corrupt; you
may not then make the Section in the corrupted part, without present danger:
and the reason is, that sometimes the Putridness creeps farther underneath near
the Bone, than it appears to do upon the Skin and outward parts.

CV. If in this case you make the Section in the mortified part, the interior
Putridness will always creep farther, deeper, and broader, and so hasten the
death of the Patient; or else you must reiterate the Section, and so put the
Patient to a second torture.

CVI. But then in amputating in the sound Part, the sense of pain may very much
be moderated by tying the Ligatures very strait, thereby intercepting the
passage of the Animal Spirits for a time; and so the Instrument being sharp,
the Cutting will be quite finished, before the Patient shall peceive what is
doing.

CVII. And though the Section is made in the dead part, yet all manner of pain is
not then prevented; for when the Saw comes to cut asunder the Bone with the
Periostium, there will be excited very acute and sharp pains; and if to avoid
them, the amputation is made in the Part where the said Membrane is dead, and
the Bone is corrupted, it is to be feared, so great a putridness will be left
remaining in the Vessels and Muscles, (which are very apt to receive the
putrefaction) that it is scarcely possible to be extinguished, though with the
actual Cautery it self.

CVIII. Nor do these Cauteries destroy the whole Putridness without much pain;
of which there ought many to be applied, in removing or destroying the whole
substance that is mortified; which if so effectually applied, they by their
vehement heat melt the Fat and Humors; thereby exciting extraordinary pain, and
so consume the Flesh, that a great part of the Bone sticks forth naked and
bare; so that oftentimes it requires a new Section.

CIX. If then you make the Amputation in the sound part, the Muscles and
Vessels being drawn strongly upwards toward the sound part, the Member below
is to be very straightly tied down with Ligatures; by which binding, 1. The very
great flux of Blood will be prevented: 2. The sense of the Part, by restraining
the Animal Spirits, will be somewhat dulled: 3. The Muscles thus drawn upwards,
(when the Section is ended, and the Ligature loosened) will again devolve
downwards, and the better cover the extreme and naked parts of the Bone.

CX. And if it should chance that there should be a greater flux of Blood than
ordinary, yet it may prove for the addvantage of the Patient; for thereby the
Blood in the Vessels, which possibly may have received some putridness, may be
evacuated, whereby the danger of the putridness returning, or creeping farther,
will be prevented; and then when you think fit, you may stop it, by the
application of Styptick Waters, Pouders, and the like.

CXI. A Styptick Powder. Roman Vitriol calcined to whiteness in the Sun iv.
Saccharum Saturni ii. Roch-alum in fine powder i. Blood dried and reduced to
powder vi. mix, and make a powder, for the present stanching of Blood.

CXII. This is yet much better. Caput mortuum of Vitriol, calcine it in an open
Fire to a purple blackness; then with fair Water elicit the Salt, filter the
Solution, and abstract to dryness, and keep the Salt for use. Where note, that
some after this, calcine the Salt again with a red-hot Iron. This is
wonderfully styptick, and stanches Blood without any caustic or burning
quality.

CXIII. As to the place of Section; if it is in the Feet, and the Sphacelus has
got above the Ancles, the Leg is best to be cut off a little below the Knee;
for it will be more commodious to the Patient, and he may the better wear a
wooden Leg. The Amputation is not best to be made always very near to the dead
part; because when the Sphacelus is just by the Ancle, the remaining part of
the Leg will be troublesome to the Sick, and much impede his motion: but in
these cases you must do as the Patient will have it.

CXIV. But in the Arm, as little as may be is to be taken away; and the
Amputation is to be made as near the sphacelated Part, as is convenient for the
health of the Patient.

CV. If the Sphacelus is in the Fingers or Toes, the Section will be best to be
made in the very Joint: for in the Joint (if the Disaffection will admit) the
Amputation will be made with the least danger, and with the least pain.

CXVI. For the Nerves and Tendons, as soon as they are cut asunder, immediately
contract themselves upwards, and are covered with Flesh; nor does any
Convulsion follow thereupon.

CXVII. From what has been said it appears, That the practice of the Ancients,
in stopping vehement fluxes of Blood in Amputation, was always by the actual
Cautery, or Burning: But this way Paraeus very much inveighs against, because
of the exceeding barbarity and cruelty thereof.

CXVIII. For that it causes, 1. Extraordinary Pain. 2. Dangerous Symptoms may
happen to the Nerves and nervous Parts. 3. Very much of the sound Flesh is
consumed, whereupon the Bones are left bare, and the Flesh, together with the
Cicatrice, is either not at all brought over the end of the naked Bone; or if
be, it is with much difficulty, and length of time.

CXIX. He therefore by the Crows-bill lays hold of the Vessels, draws them
together, and binds them up with a Ligature, tying them very straight, or
closes them with a Cautery, and so loosens the Bandage; after which he applies
some suchlike Powder, as that in Lib. 1. Cap. 32. Sect. 14. upon Towe dipped in
the whites of Eggs, for the stanching of Blood.

CXX. I must confess, without any such Ligature or Cautery, the Blood may be
stanched with the application of the said Powder, or with Crepitus Lupi, so
much used by the Surgeons, being applied and laid upon the mouths of the
Vessels which so vehemently bleed: but more effectually with the Styptick
Pouders above described at Sect. 111. and 112. aforegoing.

CXXI. The Wound being thus dressed and bound up, it is to be placed in a direct
middle posture or figure, upon Pillows stuffed with Down, or Hares-hair,
Wheatmeal, or the like.

CXXII. And this Method is so long to be used, till there is no cause of
farther fear of an Hemorrhage; and then Digestives are to be applied, 'till you
see the Wound become purulent: then these things being laid aside, you are to
make use of Cleansers, such as are described Lib. 1. cap. 32. sect. 23.
aforegoing.

CXXIII. In the mean season, you must endeavor to draw the lips of the Wound
together, that the Flesh may cover the Bones; which Paraeus does by sewing
together the lips of the Wound in the form of the Letter X, or crosswise: but
the Dry Suture seems to me to be much more convenient.

CXXIV. Thus: Mastich, Sanguis draconis, fine Bole, Sarcocol, white Starch, A.
ss. mix them (being in fine powder) with the white of an Egg: with this make
Plasters of linen Cloth, of a convenient bigness, by thoroughly moistning it
therein: which let be applied unto the extremities of the Wound on both sides,
crosswise; and so let them stick 'till they become dry, and cleave fast to the
Skin; which then with a Needle and Thread you may sew, and draw them together,
as you see necessary and convenient.

CXXV. Lastly, if you have used the actual Cautery, you must endeavor that the
ends of the Bones which have been hurt by the red-hot Iron, or Air, may fall
off. For which purpose, some burn them again with a red-hot Iron, taking great
heed to avoid the Flesh: others make use of Emplastr. de Betonica, or of a
Catagmatick, or Fracture-medicaments; others of other things: by which means
the corrupted part of the Bone will fall off in about thirty or forty days.

CHAP. XII. Of a FELON.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Panaritium, and Paronychia Arabum;
in English, a Felon.

II. It is a Disease that seizes upon the Fingers end, and upon the ball of the
Finger; being a small Tumor, hot, and by reason of the Nerves, exciting most
vehement, and almost intolerable pains.

III. The Causes. It has its original from adust Blood, joined with a malign
Humor, chiefly Melancholy; which Nature thrusts forth unto the Fingers ends,
and there causes an Inflammation.

IV. The Kinds. It is twofold. 1. One which is benign, and begins in the Flesh;
which though it is painful, yet is less painful than the other. 2. The other,
which is malign, and begins at the Bone, and seizes first upon the Periostion
it self, whereby the pain is almost intolerable, and so comes gradually
outward: and this truly, in my opinion, is little different from that Disease
which we call Spina Ventosa; of which in its place.

V. The Signs. They are known by swelling, redness, and pain; appearing in the
Fingers ends, chiefly on the ball of the Finger, and sometimes near the roots
of the Nails; the pain is vehement and intense, by reason the near adjoining
Nervous parts are affected.

VI. The Patient can take no rest night nor day, (more especially if it is the
latter kind) and the pain, by reason the Nerves are affected, is oftentimes
extended through the whole Finger, yea many times through the whole Hand, and
sometimes through the whole Arm.

VII. There is, for the most part, a continual Fever present; and if it be of
the second kind, many times a disturbance of the spirit, faintings, swoonings,
etc.

VIII. The Prognostics. If the matter is benign, and not very sharp, the
Symptoms are less vehement, and more tolerable; but if malign, more grievous
and vexatious.

IX. The first kind is without any great danger, because it is seldom
accompanied with malignity, soon comes to ripeness, with a kind of whiteness,
which being opened with the Lancet, the matter is let out; and it heals almost
of its own accord.

X. The latter kind is always malign, and causes vehement Symptoms; for which
reason it is not without its dangers: sometimes it corrupts the Bone,
Ligaments, and adjacent Nerves; so that the utmost Joint, together with the
Bone, apostemates.

XI. Sometimes the whole Finger is corrupted, yea sometimes the whole Hand: and
sometimes (as Barbett says) from the extremity of the pain, the death of the
Patient is caused.

XII. I remember when I was a Youth, I had one of this latter kind, upon the
ball of my Forefinger of my left Hand: the pain was so vehement, that for five
or six days, I had no ease night nor day; nor for the first three days did any
thing appear, or any discoloring, but only the end of the Finger was a little
swelled: however with proper Applications, it was soon cured, without any
detriment to me.

XIII. The Cure of the Benign Felon. Wiseman says, Repellents are commended in
the beginning, but not with much astringency: but Sennertus says, that
repelling and astringent Medicaments are by no means to be applied; lest the
Humor should be the more impacted into the Part, the Pain augmented, and the
Nerves and Bone corrupted.

XIV. Yet as Defensatives upon the Parts adjacent, they may be imposed; such as
these. Oil of Myrtles, juice of Nightshade, Ana, and with fine Bole make a
Cataplasm. Or, Barley and Bean flower, A. i. Camphir ss. mucilage of Fleabane
and Vinegar, A. q.s. mix, and over the Fire make a Cataplasm. Powder of the
green sort of Galls, and with Vinegar make a Cataplasm.

XV. Or: Mucilage of Fleabane-seeds, juice of Nightshade or Plantane, A. i.
Vinegar ss. fine Bole q.s. mix, for a Cataplasm. Or: Mucilage of Fleabaneseeds
ii. Vinegar ss. fine Bole, q.s. mix them.

XVI. To the Affect it self you may apply the Worms that are found in the
middle of the Teazleheads, being found alive; because they alleviate the pain,
and sometimes discuss the Tumor: but because they are not always to be had, we
must have recourse to other Remedies; as Green Tobacco, and bind the leaf on
the Part: if that cannot be had, moisten dried Tobacco-leaves in Wine, and
apply them. Or, Unguentum Nicotianae i. Rosin in powder ss. mix, and apply.

XVII. But if it tends to Suppuration, Mucilage of Fleabane-seeds, meals of
Linseed and Fenugreek, A. ss. yolk of one Egg, Hens or Goose grease ii. Saffron
ss. powder of Rosin or Tobacco-leaves q.s. mix them. Or: Vnguentum Nicotianae
i. yolk of one Egg, meal of Linseed, Tobacco in powder, A. ss. Rosin poudred,
q.s. mix them.

XVIII. When the Tumor is maturated, the Apostem is immediately to be opened,
and the Pus to be taken forth; then the Ulcer is to be cleansed with
Abstersives, incarnated, and healed.

XIX. For which purpose, Seanertus commends this: Aloes iii. Myrrh,
Frankincense, Sarcocol, A. i. Honey of Roses ii. Turpentine ss. mix them. This
I commend by Experience. Ointment of Tobacco i. Honey of Roses ss. Tobacco in
fine powder, Rosin in powder, Myrrh, A. mix them, and apply.

XX. A Child was pained with a small red Swelling about the inside and root of
the Nail of one of its Fingers, Ceratum Galeni was applied to it; the second
day it shined, or was like a Blister, it was opened with a Needle, a thin
yellow matter was discharged, and by dressing twice with Vng. Basilicon, it was
cured. Wiseman.

XXI. A Gentleman had a very large one upon the ball of his Thumb, like a great
Blister; it was let out with a Lancet, and cured with Vnguentum Tutiae. Wiseman.

XXII. Another under the forepart of the Nail and Finger was very painful, but
was suppurated by Lenients; the matter was let out, part of the Nail cut off,
and it was cured in few days. Wiseman.

XXIII. A Woman had one of these in the end of her Finger, with vehement Pain,
Fever, Fainting, Swooning, Nauseousness, Vomiting, and other Symptoms. The
Finger was fomented with Milk, in which flowers of Camomil and Melilot, and
seeds of Fenugreek and Quinces were boiled: then the superficies of the Skin
were shaved off, under which small red Spots appeared; these were opened with a
Knife, and a drop or two of red Water came forth; after which linen Cloths
dipped in Aqua Vitae, in which Venice-Treacle was dissolved, was applied; by
which means the Pain was taken away: and by this only Remedy, the very next day
the Finger was healed. Guilielm. Fabricius, Cent. 1. Observat. 97.

XXIV. Another Woman, by reason of a Paronychia, could neither sleep nor rest
for three days: the Skin was shaved off, under which, in the very tip of the
Finger, a small Spot about the bigness of a great Pins head was found, in which
was about one drop of an ichorous Humor: it was opened, and Cotton dipped in Aqua
Vitae, mixed with Venice-Treacle, was dissolved, was applied; and about the
whole Hand and Wrist a double linen Cloth, dipped in Vinegar mixed with a little
Water, was wrapped; the pain immediately ceased, and the next day the Finger
was cured. Guil. Fabric.

XXV. But that Author advises (by reason the Skin in that part is of a great
thickness) to make the Incision forthwith, in the very beginning; because
otherwise, by the afflux of Humors, a Tumor and Inflammation will be excited;
and so the Flesh lying underneath, yea even the Bones themselves, will be in
danger of being eaten through.

XXVI. The Cure of a malign Felon. These ought immediately to be laid open,
penetrating to the Bone: for if you wait the time of Suppuration, the Bone,
Flesh and Nerves will infallibly be corrupted: for many times, (before there is
any outward appearance in the Flesh) it rots the Bones, Ligaments and
Membranes; so that there is scarcely any remedy but Amputation, chiefly if
there is any danger of running farther, or infecting the parts adjacent.

XXVII. Guido, and Vigo, call it a cruel, vehement, and mortal Disease; and
they report to have seen some so vehemently tormented therewith, as to die
thereof: But this I presume is, according as the Cure is managed, by falling
into ignorant and unskilful Hands.

XXVIII. Vigo advises to apply the actual Cautery, because it has an admirable
virtue in correcting of Malignity and Poison, which offend the Bone and Nerves,
and eases the vehement pain; then to cleanse it with Vng. Aegyptiacum, mixed
with Aqua Vitae, or a little Apostolorum.

XXIX. Wiseman proposes an immediate Incision to the Bone; then letting it
bleed a while, he dresses it with a Pledget of Vnguentum Basilicon, over which
he lays Emplast. e Bolo; and in a day or two after, according as the Patient is
easy, takes off the Dressings; and continues with fresh application, till it is
cured.

XXX. If it is rebellious, and on the second day after taking off the
Dressings, he finds the Wound open and undigested, he dresses it with a Dossel
dipped in red Precipitate, with Emplaster and Bandage: the third day after he
dresses it again, at what time the Slough does mostly come off with the Dossel.

XXXI. Then he dresses it with a less Dossel spread with Basilicon and
Precipitate, with a Pledget of Vng. Diapompholigos, and an Emplaster over it,
whereby it digests, and in six or seven days after is commonly healed.

XXXII. Now the reason why it sometimes heals not by agglutination with the
first or second dressing, is from the acrimonious Ichor, which offends at the
bottom of the Wound, and many times pierces deeper: which shows indeed the
necessity of timely laying open Tumors of this kind; unless you find they go
away by discussion, which is very rarely to be seen.

XXXIII. If the Tumor has been ill handled, by application of Suppuratives,
till the Putrefaction within has rotted the Ligaments and Periostion, corrupted
the Bone, and extended the Apostem to the second or third Joint. In this case,
lay open the Apostem by Incision from the Fingersend downwards, even the whole
length of the Abscess; then dress it with red Precipitate, applying Dossels
over it, spread with a Digestive, to keep the lips of the Wound distended.

XXXIV. And with snips of Empl. Diapalma, roll it up, leaving way for the
Matter to discharge: over which put a moderate Bandage, to press out the Matter
in the Part, and restrain the influx; the better to reduce the Finger to its
former shape.

XXXV. The third day dress it again, and if you find the Ulcer sordid, and
overgrown with proud Flesh, rub it with the Vitriolstone, and fill the Ulcer
again with red Precipitate, dressing it up, as before: By which method,
deterging the Ulcer, let it be incarnated with Sarcoticks, and the Cure
finished with Epuloticks, and proper Bandage.

XXXVI. The Vitriol-stone is of great use in these Ulcers, which so abound with
luxurious or proud Flesh, among the Tendons; for by it, the corrupt Flesh is
dried up, without offending the Nerves, Tendons, or other sound parts: and the
Ulcer may be deterged, according as it is touched more or less; and the Bone it
self, where it is bare or carious, may be dried by it, and disposed to moulder
off.

XXXVII. And where the Hypersarcosis is great, by sprinkling it with
Precipitate, the Ulcer is the more speedily freed from its Putrefaction.

XXXVIII. Where the Ulcer seems to be rebellious, with a kind of malignant
Humor attending, whereby the Cure succeds not, but is like to be very tedious
and unsuccessful, by the increase of the putrefaction, and rotting of the Bone;
the best Remedy in this case, is the cutting off the Finger in the next joint
beyond the Putrefaction; or otherwise in the middle of the joint, with a
Chezil, as Mr. Wiseman practiced.

XXXIX. Then to dress up the Stump with Pulv. Galeni cum albumine Ovi, rolling
it on, and the second day after to dress it with Turpentine mixed with the yolk
of an Egg, whereby it becomes digested; after which it is to be incarnated with
common Sarcoticks, and cicatrized with Vng. Desiccativum rubrum, and Pledgets
dipped in Aqua Calcis.

CHAP. XIII. Of a PVSH, or BILE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...), ((...). quoniam noctu generatur, ut Galenus
and Celsus docent; vel magis, non quod noctu oboriatur, sed quoniam noctu
vehementius hominem excruciet, ut Paulus Aegineta and Aetius existimant;) in
Latin, Furunculus, and Epinyctis; in English, a Push, or Bile.

II. The Kinds. It is twofold: 1. Furunculus, the great Push or Bile. 2.
Epinyctis, the little Push. The first is a Tumor about the bigness of a large
Pigeons Egg, the latter about the bigness of a large Horse-Bean.

III. And of the Furunculi, some are mild and gentle, seizing only upon the
Skin; others are malign, which descend deeper, and are mischievous and
dangerous, not to be cured without great difficulty, its roots being deeply
fixed: they are also sometimes Sporadick, and sometimes Epidemick, which if
they happen in a Plague-time, are not without sufficient danger.

IV. The Differences are, 1. In magnitude; the Furunculus being greater, the
Epinyctis being lesser. 2. In the greatness of the affect; the first being more
painful, troublesome, tedious and difficult to cure than the latter. 3. In the
time of breaking out; which as Galen says, the Epinictys does in the night: but
in this, I think those Ancients are mistaken, for it breaks out as the
Furunculus does, at any time; but it seems to be most troublesome in the night,
whereas the other seems to be night and day alike.

V. The Signs. Celsus, lib. 5. Cap. 28. says that Furunculus is a Tumor a
little acuminated or sharp-pointed, with Inflammation and Pain; and then
especially, when it is perfectly converted into Pus.

VI. It is indeed a small Inflammation in the beginning, a Pustule growing
bigger and bigger by degrees, seldom exceeding the bigness of a large Pigeons
Egg, with a certain kind of pain, and redness of color; when it is come to its
full bigness, and withal tending to a point; which happens about the ninth or
tenth day, at farthest.

VII. If it is Epidemical and Pestilential, it is then black and green, and
there is present a malign Fever, with other evil Symptoms: but it differs from
a Carbuncle in this, that although it proceeds from thick and vicious Blood, yet
the matter of a Carbuncle is more adust or burnt: also a Furunculus will admit
of Suppuration, whereas a Carbuncle will not.

VIII. Though many times there is but a single Furunculus breaks forth at a time;
yet sometimes many of them break forth, in various parts, together.

IX. The Epinyctis, says Aegin. l. 4. c. 9. and Aet. tetr. 4. sermon. 2. c. 61.
is a small Pustule, breaking forth of its own accord, somewhat reddish; which
being broken, there comes forth a bloody filth and matter, not greatly
excrutiating the Patient in the daytime, but giving a pain more than ordinary
in the night, and sometimes many of them break forth (in different places)
together.

X. Pliny, l. 20. c. 6. says they are pale and wan Pustles, which disquiet much
in the nightime: but Celsus, l. 1. c. 28. has given the most absolute
description of them. Viz.

XI. Pessima Pustula est quae (...), Epinyctis, vocatur. Ea color vel
sublivida, vel subnigra, vel alba esse consuevit: circa hanc autem vehemens
Inflammatio est, and cum adaperta est, reperitur intus exulceratio mucosa:
Color est Humori suo similis: Dolor ex ea supra magnitudinem ejus est, neque ea
saba major est. Atque h^c quoque oritur in eminentibus partibus, and fer^
noctu. Vnde nomen quoque a Graecis ei Epinyctis impositum est. Viz. This
Pustule which is called Epinyctis, is the very worst of all the kinds: its
Color is usually pale and wan, or blackish, or else white: there is also
conjoined with it a great Inflammation, and within, it contains a purulent and
filthy matter: the Color is much like to the Humor of which it is generated:
the Pain which it gives, much exceeds its magnitude, not being bigger than a
(large) Horsebean. It also arises in the eminent or principal Parts, and most
commonly in the Night; for which cause this name, Epinyctis, is imposed upon it
by the Greeks.

XII. The Causes. Galen. de Comp. Med. lib. 5. says Furunculus has its original
from thick and vicious Blood, but not so burnt and corrupted as in a Carbuncle;
which Nature severing from the rest, expels and drives forth, as offensive and
useless, unto the superficies of the Body.

XIII. The cause of Epinyctis is Blood, corrupted with a salt and serous Humor
mixed with Phlegm, and sometimes with Choler or Melancholy; for which reason it
is that the color is not always one and the same: and by reason of the
pituitous Humor mixed in the Tumor, it is, when suppurated and opened, found
abounding with a purulent and filthy Matter.

XIV. Some are of Opinion, that the cause of these Tumors is the same with that
of the Carbuncle, save that here is no malignity present: but for my part, I
judge the contrary, unless it be in a Plague-time, and then I think the case is
much altered.

XV. The Procatartick Causes of all these Tumors, is an evil course of Diet and
Living, breeding an evil and scorbutic habit of the Body: the Antecedent
Causes, are the evil Humors produced by that ill way of Living; which being
impregnated with an acid and sharp Salt, causes them to ferment with the Blood,
and so break forth: and the Conjoined Cause, is the Blood thrust forth with the
Matter fermenting.

XVI. The Prognostics. Hippocrat. Epidem. lib. 6. sect. 1. says, these
Tubercles which bunch forth externally, and are sharp-pointed, equally
maturate, and are not hard, or divided as it were into two parts, but have
their tendency downwards, are the more hopeful.

XVII. And Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 28. says, that in a Furunculus, Bile, or great
Push there is little or no danger, though nothing is done for the cure thereof,
because it suppurates of its own accord, and so breaks forth. It is the Pain
that accompanies it, which induces the application of Medicines, for the more
speedy ease of the Patient.

XVIII. Epinyctis, or the small Push, is yet less dangerous, and rather denotes
the strength of the Expulsive Faculty; but it is troublesome, by reason of the
Pain it causes, and the restlesness which it brings with it in the nightime.

XIX. The Cure of Furunculus, or a Bile. You must first endeavor Suppuration
by external application, with the same things as in a Phlegmon; as Raisons of
the Sun, Figs bruised, and laid upon the Part, Diachylum, white Lilly roots,
roots and leaves of Althea, Mallows, herb Mercury, and all Emollient Gums.

XX. Or you may apply Emplastr. Diachylon cum Gummi, de Meliloto, de
Mucilaginibus, Tripharmacum, de Minio cum Sapone, or proper Cataplasms.

XXI. Or, Meal of Linseed, roots of Althea in powder, A. ss. fat Figs No iv.
Raisons of the Sun stoned i. Water q.s. boil them together to a Cataplasm,
adding at the end Goose or Capons grease, or fresh Butter, q.s.

XXII. If the Pain is vehement, apply this: Mucilage of the seeds of Fleawort,
Althea, Linseed, A. ii. Barley meal or flower ijss. Oil of Lillies, Capons
grease, A. jss. Saffron ss. yolk of one Egg: mix, and make a Cataplasm.

XXIII. When the Tumor is maturated, it is to be opened (unless it breaks of
its own accord:) and then it is to be cleansed with this: Juice of Smallage,
Turpentine, A. i. yolk of one Egg, Barley-meal, Fr^kincense, A.iii. Rosin in
powder iss. Honey of Roses q.s. mix, and make a Liniment.

XXIV. And over all apply this Cerat: Sheeps suet, Calves suet, A. iii.
Turpentine jss. Oil-olive i. Wax q.s. mix, and make a Cerecloth: after all,
evacuate the Humor with proper Catharticks and Antiscorbuticks.

XXV. The Cure of Epinyctis. The Tumor is to brought to suppuration, as in the
former; then breaking, or being opened, they are to be cleansed with
Abstersives, and washed with some proper Styptick Water to dry them up: or you
may apply a Mixture made of equal parts of Sulphur vive and Litharge, mixed with
Wine.

XXVI. If they be very painful, Anodyns are of good use; as a Cataplasm of
Mithridate and powder of Bay Berries, after which they may be healed up, with
Vnguentum Tutiae, or some such like thing.

XXVII. Lastly, let the Patient keep from all things, sharp, acid, and salt;
and purge out the vicious Humor, by proper Antiscorbutick Catharticks.

CHAP. XIV. Of CHILBLAINS or KIBES.
I. THIS Disease is called in Greek, (...), pl. (...), i. e. Hyeme; in Latin,
Pernio, plu. Perniones; Fen English, Chilblains, Bloody-falls, or Kibes.

II. It is a peculiar kind of Tumor or Inflammation, which arises chiefly in
Wintertime, upon the Heels, Toes and Fingers, with other parts of the Hands
and Feet: But Wiseman will have them only to be called Kibes, which happen upon
the Feet and Toes; Sennertus says that he once saw a Nobleman, which had such
a kind of Disease on the very tip of his Nose.

III. The Causes. This Inflammation arises from the Winters cold; weakening
those parts, by the entrance of cold Atoms, and the drawing Blood and Pain into
the Part.

IV. The Signs. There is a swelling in the Part, with redness, and an extreme
itching, so that the Patient cannot forbear scratching or rubbing of them;
sometimes to the breaking of the Skin, and then they exulcerate.

V. These Tumors many times go away of their own accord in Summertime, and
then again about the beginning of Winter return again, with the old swelling,
redness, itching, etc.

VI. The Prognostics. There is no danger in this Disease; yet notwithstanding
if they be not speedily cured, they commonly prove tedious, and of long
continuance, and often return again for many years.

VII. If the Tumor grows very great, and meets with many heats and colds, it
commonly breaks and exulcerates; and then the Tumors which were before called
Chilblains or Bloody-falls, lose that name, and get the appellation of Kibes.

VIII. The Cure. It is to be considered, 1. As Chilblains, before they are
broken. 2. As Kibes, after they are broken and exulcerated.

IX. The Cure before they are broken, is, as Sennertus advises, to rub the
Parts affected with Snow, or dip them into frozen Water, or Snow-water, or
Water full of Ice: others advise to put the Part into a warm Decoction of
frozen Turnips: or when the itching and heat is over, to dip them into a pail
of cold Water almost frozen. The Decoction of Lupins is an approved thing.

X. Some have been cured by fomenting the Part with Milk blood-warm, wherein
Bay Berries, Camomil, Fennel, Origanum, Peniroyal, Rosemary, Rue, Savory,
Southernwood, etc. have been boiled: others by holding them to the flame of a
Candle, (in the fit of the itching) and to burn them as it were therewith:
others bathe them with S.V. or rather with Beef-brine.

XI. Or you may make Compounds, after this manner. White Port-wine sbi. Alum i.
boil, and bathe the^with. Ointment of Roses with Oil of Turpentine, to anoint
withal, is an approved thing. Or after Bathing, you may anoint with Honey, with
which powder of Sulphur vive has been mixed.

XII. Oil of Bays ii. Honey i. Turpentine ss. mix them. Or, Oil of Mace, fresh
Butter, Turpentine, A. i. mix them. Or, Oil of Wax, Oil of Roses, Honey,
Olibanum, A. i. mix, them.

XIII. The Cure, after they are broken and exulcerated. Let the Ulcer be
cleansed with the Liniment in Chap. 13. Sect. 23. aforegoing: Or, Frankincense,
Roch-alum, both in fine powder, A. i. mix them, adding thereto a little Wine;
laying over Emplastr. Catholicon, or some other good Vulnerary.

XIV. An Ointment made of the ashes of River-crabs mixed with Honey and Oil of
Roses, is approved; powder of Aloes also to strew upon them, is an excellent
thing; and if very foul, Vng. Basilicon mixed with red Precipitate, is to be
applied. But in my opinion, nothing exceeds the powder of Scammony, strewed on
dry.

XV. For that cleanses, purifies, and incarnates. If the Bone is foul, I have
known it to scale it, and make it white, remove all the impediments and
accident which may befall the Cure, cleanse, repress proud Flesh, and yet
incarnate and heal: so that there is scarcely a better singular thing for this
purpose, or for the cleansing of any foul Ulcer in the World.

XVI. Then over the Powder lay this Emplaster of Barbett, which is admirable.
Frankincense ii. Litharge, Myrrh; A. jss. red Lead i. Galls, round
Birthworth-roots, both in powder, A. ss. Camphir i. Mercury sublimate gr.^ vi.
Sheeps or Rams suet, Rosin, A. q.s. mix, and make an Emplaster, adding a little
Oil-olive.

XVII. And afterward wash the Sore with Saccharum Saturni dissolved in Spirit
of Wine, or some other proper Liquor, to cause a speedy healing.

XVIII. Lastly, if the Ulcers prove rebellious, they are to be cured after the
common method, as we shall teach in Lib. 5. following.

CHAP. XV. Of an ANEVRYSM.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Aneurysma; and in English, an
Aneurysm, or Rupture of an Artery: it is so called, (...), i. e. supra
dilatare, to dilate, or widen above: but modern Physicians have found from
Practice and Observation, that it is more than a dilatation of an Artery, viz.
more than a rupture of the inner Coat, and dilatation of the outward Coat; and
that it is (as Wiseman has well observed) a downright rupture through both the
Arterial Coats.

II. Definition. This Disease is therefore an eruption of Blood out of the
Artery, by a rupture of both the Coats of the same, and filling the spaces of
the Muscles adjacent thereto, with Arterial Blood. For as the aforenamed Author
says, it is not probable that a force big enough to burst the inner Tunicle of
an Artery, which is so very tough and firm, should leave the exterior whole,
which is much softer and weaker, leisurely to be extended by the Blood.

III. Barbett also defines an Aneurysm to be a Tumor besides Nature from a
rupture of an Artery; continually beating, easily yielding to the Fingers, and
as suddenly returning.

IV. The Kinds. An Aneurysm is either great, or small. The great can never be
but with the rupture of both the Coats of the Artery, whereby the Blood
insinuates it self into the interstices of the Muscles: the small may be
(according to Barbett) from an erosion of the internal Tunicle, the external
being only extended: but if the Tumor is of the bigness of ones Fist, it is
impossible but that the external must be broken too.

V. The Place. Sennertus says, an Aneurysm may happen in every part of the
Body, but more frequently in the Throat, where it produces a Bronchocele: it
happens likewise in the Head, nigh unto the places of the Arteries, and in all
other parts of the Body also where the Arteries may be wounded; as also in
letting Blood in the Arm, etc. when an unexpert Artist in attempting to open a
Vein, does withal either prick, or cut asunder the Artery lying underneath it.
Aegineta, lib. 4. cap. 53.

VI. The Causes. All Arteries (except such as are dispersed through the Brain and
upper parts) consist of a double Tunicle: and therefore what things soever
contribute to the rupture of those Tunicles, are the cause of this Disease; and
these causes are either Internal or External.

VII. The Internal cause is either from some corrosive Humor or Salt corroding
the Tunicles; and that is either innate in the Blood, which eats through some
parts of the Vessels thinner than ordinary; or being highly fermented by other
Causes, causes an unexpected Rupture: or extern to the Vessels, which fixing
upon some particular Part, may at length meet with an Artery, and gnaw that
asunder also; as in a Cancer, is often seen.

VIII. The Internal Cause, if it is in the Blood it self, is from an Impetus
arising either from the violent motion of the Blood; which being greater than
the Artery can sustain, does force its way through the sides of the Vessel,
making a rupture in it; whereby the Blood filling the interstices of the
neighboring Muscles, it incrassates the Membranes, and forms its self a Cystis.

IX. Or it may be from the too great quantity of Blood in that Part, being more
than the Vessel can contain; which opens mostly in the Nose, Lungs, or in the
Brain, (there causing an Apoplexy:) or in the Stomach, Guts, Reins, Anus, etc.

X. Or from some violent motion of the Body, or vehement passion; by which the
Blood is forcibly driven from the Heart, toward some peculiar Artery: which
being intercepted by some violent contraction of the Muscles, through which it
must pass, it of necessity breaks the Vessel; as in violent Vomitings, and
other vehement Strainings. Aneurysms are often made in the Neck, Arms, Legs,
Belly, Thighs, etc.

XI. The External Causes are Wounds or Punctures, made by Incision-knife,
Lancet, or Weapon; cutting, bruising, or any other thing which may break and
divide the Coats of the Arteries.

XII. The Signs. It is known by a Tumor gradually increasing, and of the same
color of the Skin: if it is small, there will a continual pulsation be felt in
it, and it easily yields to the Fingers: But if great, and it rises suddenly,
and is white and soft from its first appearance, there will no pulsation be
felt, nor any return of the Blood, if compressed with the Hand: yet you may
conclude it to be an Aneurysm, there being no Humor, but the Blood only, which
can so suddenly make such a Tumor.

XIII. The often increase and decrease of the Tumor, is a sign of an Aneurysm,
the diminution being the return of the Blood into the Artery, whence it as
often comes out again; but this is in a small Aneurysm: the contrary is found
in a great, where, as Barbett observes, there is a noise heard, as of boiling
Water: and this hissing noise is not only to be perceived when it is pressed
down by the Fingers, but also at any other time, upon putting the Ear close
thereto; which is thought to proceed from the motion of the Vital Spirit, through
strait and narrow places.

XIV. If it is from the pricking of a Lancet, the manner of the springing out
of the Blood will show it; and if it does not bleed, yet a Tumor immediately
thrusts up under your Finger, with pulsation, the Blood forcing its way into
the interstices of the Muscles, though not quite to the Skin: but the Tumor will
be more compact or scattered, as there was care taken at first to restrain it
within compass.

XV. In some of these there is redness and inflammation, by reason of the
expansion of the Parts beyond their capacity, or from the putrefaction of the
Blood: in which latter case, a Fever and Fainting for the most part accompany
it.

XVI. The Differences. They are taken, 1. From the Magnitude, great or little;
possessing the whole Member, or a part only. 2. From its Situation; as being
superficial, near the Skin; or deep in the Muscles. 3. From its shape; it
either keeping the shape of the Part, which is when the orifice in the Artery
is small; or losing that form, when the eruption is so sudden and great, as it
cannot be kept within bounds: or when it is by an unskilful Artist, managed
with Lenitives and Discussives, being mistaken for some other Tumor, whereby
the Membranes are more relaxed, and made to give way.

XVII. The Prognostics. All-Aneurysms are very difficult of cure: Barbett
says, not at all, if great, without taking off the Member: Sennertus says,
those which are recent, and less, will admit of cure; the greater no ways, but
by Amputation or Section; because the Blood will not be driven back by
Astringents, nor the Artery admit of consolidation.

XVIII. If the Tumor is opened, it brings the Patient into extreme hazard of
death; and remarkable Instances there are of such as have died under the hand
of the Artist, at the time of opening; because of the extreme profusion of
Blood, and great wasting of the Vital Spirits.

XIX. However, not being opened, Sennertus says the Tumor has no great danger
in it, but life may be lengthened out for a long time; and he knew a Woman who
had an Aneurysm as big as a Walnut, in the inward bending of the Arm, (through
the unskilfulness of the Artist, who in opening of a Vein, cut the Artery also)
for the space of above thirty years, enjoying her health all that time: and
therefore concludes, that it is better to bear with some inconvenience, than to
run the hazard of a dangerous Cure.

XX. Barbett says, it is for the most part a long Disease, yet he has sometimes
seen it kill, without any other accidental cause, in the space of two years:
but this, I prefume, is intended of large Aneurysms.

XXI. Wiseman says, those which are large, and arise from Arteries deep in the
Muscles, to which application cannot be made, are incurable: but if it is in a
Part capable of Bandage, and application of Medicaments, the Cure is feasible;
or it may be palliated, to the ease of the Patient.

XXII. The Cure of a small Aneurysm. So soon as ever it is perceived, let
Astringents and Repellers be imposed upon the place affected, to repel and
qualify the Blood, and close up the hole of the Artery: for which purpose,
Emplastrum ad Herniam, either the common, or of Our Prescription, are of
exceeding good use.

XXIII. Sennertus commends a thin plate of Lead to be hard bound on, which does
repel, thicken, and close the loosened Artery, and keep the Blood within its
Channels: or you may master it (as Wiseman says) with Escaroticks, or the
Actual Cautery.

XXIV. The Medicaments proper in its first appearance, if it arises from an
Internal Cause, are such as are good to restrain its motion, and agglutinate
the Vessels; as fine Bole, Terra sigillata, Gypsum, Aloes, Catechu, Opium in
powder, Frankincense, Dragons-blood, Blood dried, Oxliver poudred, fine
Wheat Flour, Sal Vitrioli, Saccharum Saturni; juices of Plantane, Mouse-ear,
Shepherds-purse, dead Nettles, Periwinkle, Yarrow, and the like. Compounds may
be made of the Pouders of the former, with Juices of the latter; or mixed with
Vinegar and the whites of Eggs.

XXV. Other things also may be prepared of the roots of Comfrey, Mastich,
Pomgranate peels and flowers, Acacia, Hypocistis, unripe Sloes dried and
reduced to powder, unripe Brambleberries in powder, Myrtle-berries, Nutgalls,
Loadstone, Lapis Haematis, Crocus Martis astringens, etc.

XXVI. But if it is in a place incapable of Bandage, you must content your self
with the application of Emplastrum Caesaris, Catagmaticum, Album, or some such
like.

XXVII. If it is near the Trachea Arteria, the Patient may wear a Plate of Gold
or beaten Lead upon it, covered with Sarsnet, or some such like.

XXVIII. If it lies where you may take it up, the Cure is then best performed
by dividing it: the manner of the Section is thus: The Tumor or outward Skin
being opened, the Artery that is to be cut, must be intercepted by binding it
about with two Bands, and then it must be dissected between the two Bandages;
which Bandages are not to be loosed, till Nature has covered the Wound with
Flesh, and the danger of an Hemorrhage is over.

XXIX. But as this is an Operation so cruel, that few or none will submit to
it, so has it likewise much of danger in it, nor has the Sick always cure by
it: for upon loosning the Bandage, either an Hemorrhage may be feared, or else
a new Aneurysma may be caused.

XXX. If it is only a small Aneurysm, wherein the inner Coat is only broken,
the outward dilated or extended, the manner of the Operation out of Paulus
Aegineta, lib. 6. cap. 37. is thus: Let a straight Section be made long-ways,
then part the lips of the Skin far asunder by little Hooks, so that the Artery
may be made bare, severing it from the Membranes by Instruments fit for this
purpose: then after the transmission of a Needle under it, tie it with double
Threads; and with a Lancet or Incision-knife, prick the middle of the Artery,
that what is contained therein may be evacuated; after which apply
Suppuratives, till at length the ties of the Threads fall off.

XXXI. But if there is the rupture of both Coats of the Artery, let the Skin be
divided, and the Artery tied both above and below; and cut out the middle with
the Tumor, not loosing the Ligatures, till the Wound is perfectly cured, and
there is no fear of an Hemorrhage.

XXXII. Immediately after opening of it, the Hemorrhage of the Part ought to be
stopped with Astringent Pouders, and Stypticks, either Pouders or Waters; such as
we have prescribed in cap. 11. sect. 111, 112. aforegoing; or the Royal
Styptick, over which a Compress is to be put. This Method of curing by Section,
is so cruel that few will endure it, besides the hazard and danger that is in
it: Wiseman says, you ought well to be advised, before you attempt the Cure by
opening it.

XXXIII. If it is caused by Putrefaction of the Blood, and it burst forth
suddenly upon you, the Life of the Patient will be in danger: then you must be
quick in application of Restrictives, Astringents, or Stypticks, and good
Bandage: after which you have time to consider what to do against the next
Dressing or Eruption; for if it breaks not out again of it self, you are not to
open it; and for the future, you must endeavor the Cure by the Method that
hereafter will follow.

XXXIV. In great Aneurysms, Sennertus says, the more secure and safe course is
only to bind hard, and press together the Tumor with Medicaments (Compress) and
Bands, that it may no farther augment. But Barbett says, that by reason the
Operation at Sect. 30. and 32. above is dangerous, painful, and troublesome, and
many times of little benefit; it is better, to preserve Life, to amputate or
cut off the Member.

XXXV. If the Aneurysm is caused by a Puncture in Bloodletting, you may permit
it to bleed freely; but if it bleeds not well, immediately loosen the Bandage,
and apply a Compress with Styptick Pouders, or dipped in the Royal Styptick
Liquor: or for want of them, in Oxycrate.

XXXVI. Let it be held firmly upon the Apertion by a Servant, whilst the
Artist makes Revulsion by opening a Vein in the other Arm, by a long
evacuation, to fainting, if requisite.

XXXVII. Mean season apply Astrictive or Styptick Pouders to the Arterial
Wound, with good Restrictive Emplasters over it; defending the upper part of
the Arm, by application of Cloths wrung out of Oxycrate: then with a Rowler
with two heads, roll it two or three times upon the wounded Part; and (the Arm
being bowed the while) roll the Arm upwards, and turning the Rowler about the
Neck, return it again backward to the Part affected, fastening it on the outside
of the Arm; and make the Expulsive-bandage from the Hand upwards.

XXXVIII. This Rolling and Bandage ought so to be done, as to be for the ease
of the Patient; let him then be put into his Bed, and his Hand placed upon his
Breast; and give him cordial and cooling Juleps, Opiates, etc. to quiet and
allay in some measure the motion of the Blood.

XXXIX. The Bandage being thus well made, open it not hastily, because many
times the first dressing secures the Patient. The great mischief in this Cure
proceeds from Ignorance, in binding up the Arm carelessly; upon which the
Patient the next day complaining, he embrocates and foments the Tumor; thereby
making way for the Blood to empty it self into the interstices of the Muscles,
causing a Tumor of the whole Arm.

XL. In this case, Wiseman says a laced Sleeve and Glove may be of great use.
If this Method fails, the Cure is to be performed by the Directions before
delivered.

CHAP. XVI. Of VARIX.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...), by Aristotle, hist. Animal. lib. 3. cap. 11.
and Plutarch, in vita Caii, (...). but by Galen, meth. Med. lib. 10. cap. ult.
out of whom Paulus Aegineta, lib. 6. cap. 82. and Aetius, Tetr. 4. Sermon. 2.
cap. 48. have it, (...), Venae dilatatio; in Latin, Varix; in English also
Varix; and the Dilatation or Widening of a Vein.

II. The Signs. Varices are easily known, let them happen in what part of the
Body soever; by their turgency, their crooked figure, and azure or blew color;
which is more or less evident, as the Veins lie superficial, or more deep.

III. The Veins are much larger swollen, blacker than formerly, soft, easily
yielding to the Fingers, and as soon returning again.

IV. In a Hernia varicosa, there is an unequal knotted Tumor in the Vein
leading to the Testicle, with relaxation of the same Testicle; and if the
Testicles are filled with Wind, the Vein is also distended, and painful.

V. The Places. They may happen in diverse parts of the Body, but most
frequently in the Thighs, Legs, Testicles, (which Tumor is specially called
Kirsocele) and Fundament, in the Hemorrhoidial Veins.

VI. They often happen also in the lower parts of Women's Bellies, under the
Navel, (caused in them many times from hard labor:) and sometimes in the
Temples, as Paulus in the place mentioned, testifies.

VII. The Causes. Galen, de Atra bile lib. cap. 4. says, They are generated
from great store of melancholy Blood, which Nature oftentimes transmits unto
those Veins which are in the Thighs; by which being distended and dilated, they
are rendered varicose, or swollen up, and the Skin that touches them, becomes in
process of time of a black color.

VIII. But if the Blood is not adust, or mixed with Melancholy, then the color
of those Veins being dilated, will scarcely ever be of that black hue, as in
the former case is declared; nor indeed does good Blood, though never so
plentiful, scarcely ever produce Varices, without it be thick, which by its
weight tends downwards upon the Thighs.

IX. Hippocrates, in Coacis Praenot. versus finem, says, Varices happen not
till ripeness of age; for that a thick and melancholy Blood is not generated
sooner in the Body: and indeed they often happen to Men of a Melancholy temper,
Women with Child, and such like.

X. The more remote Causes, are all those things which produce and breed
melancholy Blood; especially a distempered Spleen, which helps toward the
generation of these Varices.

X. Wiseman says they proceed from the Restagnation of gross Blood; which being
transmitted into the Veins, either by reason of the depending of the Part, or
from some other pressure upon the Vessel; or else by its own grossness, proves
unapt for Circulation.

XII. So that instead of continuing its current proportionably to the other
Parts, it stops in the place, and as it were coagulates or thickens; and by
degrees increases it self by the accession of the like particles of the
succeeding Blood; and thereby dilates the Vessels into a capacity large enough
to receive it: but this thickning of the Blood in a Varix, is not so much as to
stop the passage wholly up; for the current always forces its thinner parts by
the sides of the Coagulum, and so increases the dilatation.

XIII. This Affect most commonly happens in Cutaneous Vessels, where the Veins
have little or no assistance from Muscular Flesh; which by a continual pressure
forces the Blood forward, and permits it not to stagnate.

XIV. Another Cause may be, from the weakness of the Vessels, either natural or
accidental; in which the valves of the Varicose Veins are so feeble, that they
cannot sufficiently support the Blood in its ascent; but falling down again
upon the sides of the Vessels, its weight proves too much, or rather an
overmatch, for its circular motion.

XV. The Veins prove varicose many times, in Women with Child, from that
exceeding thickness of the Blood; occasioned from its being robbed of its
nutritious Serum; and sent partly to nourish the Foetus in the Womb.

XVI. The Veins are also varlcose in Cancers, either from the coagulation of
the Serum, or grumousness of the Blood some where in its passage; by something
pressing upon the Part, or some compression made by the matter of the Tumor; by
which it happens, that the current of the Vein beyond it is stopped, and so is
forced to swell.

XVII. In a Woman with Child, if the burden lies vehemently, or presses much
upon the Ramus Illiacus, on either side of the Body, it makes the Thigh and Leg
on all that side varicous.

XVIII. The external Causes are, from too strait Gartering, which may cause
Varices in the Leg: so the weight of the Testicles, or pressure of a
Bolster-Truss in a Rupture may render them varicose.

XIX. Riding much on horseback does the like; because of the pressure made upon
the inside of the Thigh by the Saddle, more especially if riding with long
Stirrups.

XX. They may also proceed from Blows, overmuch strainings, as in the Bellies
of Women who have hard travel in Childbearing, long and tedious Foot-journeys,
extreme hard Labor, and the like; where the continual standing puts the
Muscles upon contraction; whereby they press upon the upper Branches of the
Thigh-Veins, and so straiten them, and hinder the free ascent of the Blood.

XXI. The Prognostics. Varices are not dangerous in themselves; for they
rather free the Patient from imminent and dangerous Diseases; especially such
as proceed from Melancholy.

XXII. Hippocrates, lib. 6. aph. 21. says, Insani si Varices vel Haemorrhoides
supervenerint, Insaniae fit solutio: i. e. If Varices or the Hemorrhoids happen
to such as are Mad, they are thereby freed from their Madness. Moreover, the
whole Body is by them thoroughly purged from all the flatulent Blood.

XXIII. Galen, de Venae sectione, adversus Erasistratum, cap. 6. and libri de
Atra Bile cap. 4. says, that Madness, Pleurisies, Pain of the Reins,
Hemorrhoids, Coughing, Spitting of Blood, Apoplexies, Cachexies, Dropsies, and
other Diseases may arise from their being unreasonably taken away.

XXIV. And if they break, and flow intemperately, they may also cause
Cachexies, Dropsies, Consumptions, and other the like Diseases: and Sennertus
says they are sometimes changed into the Elephantia Arabum, which is a
cancerous Tumor of the Feet.

XXV. The Cure. These Varices ought not to be cured, unless they be very great,
and that the Veins and Skin by reason of their extension are so extenuated, as
to endanger a Rupture; whereby a great profusion of Blood, and Death it self
may ensue.

XXVI. Nor are they to be cured, unless they be inflamed, or extremely painful,
or if there is present some great and malignant Ulcer; lest they being removed,
some more vehement mischief should ensue; since those things only may be said
to cure, that wholly frees the Patient, not causing or generating Diseases more
dangerous than the former.

XXVII. But if there is a necessity of curing them, the Cure must be begun with
Purging and Bleeding; not once or twice, but often to be repeated, letting
forth some of the Blood in the Varix: and whatsoever is amiss in the Liver and
Spleen, or other Viscera, is to be corrected and amended, by altering,
strengthening, astringent, and exsiccative Medicaments.

XXVIII. If the Varix is small and inconsiderale, Aquapendens orders it to be
cured by Astringents: as, Gum Tragacanth, dissolve it in Astringent Wine, or in
juice of unripe Grapes, or of unripe Bramble-berries; to which add fine Bole,
Mastich, Sanguis Draconis, Catechu, Ana, all in fine powder; so much till the
Tragacanth becomes as thick as Wax; so that in the palm of the Hand it may be
reduced into the shape and form of a Wax-Candle: and sometimes also he used
Hypocistis, for the same purpose.

XXIX. These Medicaments he applied, according to the length of the Varix,
binding it down with a part of a Reed tied fast thereupon, with a narrow
Bandage; and over all, a Hose, or Buskin, made of a Dogs skin, which he put
about, and fastened it about the Thighs, by lacing it on.

XXX. Hippocrates, in his Book of Ulcers, teaches us how to make an Evacuation
of the Blood, that is already flown in. The Vein (says he) is not to be cut
with any great and wide gash, lest thereby a great Ulcer should be caused; but
the Varix is again and again to be pricked, whenever it shall be fit; by
which means, the Blood already flown in will be evacuated. And this you must do
by little and little, not all at once, but as it were by degrees, till the Vein
does even fall down and sink; upon which then it will be good to apply such
Astringents, as we have mentioned before (at Sect. 28.) with good and strong
Bandage.

XXXI. Aquapendens approves not much of the Chirurgick way of Cure, whether it
be by Section or Burning; but thinks the Work is better to be done by
interception of the Blood, with Astringent Medicines and strong Bandage: and of
this opinion is Mr. Wiseman. However, because we are willing that young Artists
should know the Way of doing these things, we will give the Method of the
Operation, from Paulus Aegineta, Corneiius Celsus, and Avicenna.

XXXII. From Paulus Aegineta, lib. 2. cap. 82. Tie a String (says he) about the
upper part of the Thigh, and cause the Diseased to walk, that the Varix may
fill; then mark it with Ink, according to the situation, the length of three
Fingers, or more.

XXXIII. 2. After lay the Patient on his back, with his Thighs extended; and
with another String bind the part above the Knee; so will the Varix be filled,
or lifted up a considerable height.

XXXIV. 3. And with an Incision-knife, in the place marked, cut, but only no
deeper than through the Skin, by no means dividing the Vein: distend the lips of
the Section or Skin, with a little Hook; excoriating or flaying off the
Membranes with a crooked Incision-knife, so that the Vein may be laid naked and
bare.

XXXV. 4. Then loosen the Thigh-bands, and by a little Hook, elevate the Varix;
under which put a crooked or bowed Needle, drawing with it a double Thread,
cutting in two the bow.

XXXVI. 5. This done, divide the Vein in the midst with a
Venesectory-incision-knife, and evacuate or let forth the Blood, as much as is
needful; and by squeezing it out with your Fingers, if occasion requires it.

XXXVII. 6. After this, with one of the Threads tie close together the upper
part of the Vessel; and the Thigh being extended straight out, with your hands
press forth the Blood which is in the Thigh: then with the other Thread tie
close together the nether part of the Vessel or Vein.

XXXVIII. 7. This done, you may now either cut off and take quite away, that
part of the Vein which lies between the Ligatures; or otherwise let it remain,
till at length, with the Threads it falls out of its own accord.

XXXIX. 8. The Operation being over, put in drying Liniments, or styptick
Pouders, and over, a long spleen-like Emplaster, after it has been thoroughly
washed in Wine or Oxycrate, or with some styptick Liquor: then bind it down
close, and cure it according to Art.

XL. From Cornelius Celsus, lib. 1. cap. 31. where he shows the Operation by
Cutting, much as is before declared; and also by Burning with a red-hot Iron,
in this manner.

XLI. Si recta est, si quamvis transversa, tamen simplex, si modica est, melius
aduritur. Adurendi ratio haec est. Cutis superinciditur; tum patefacta Vena,
tenui, and retuso, Ferramento candente modice premitur; vitaturque, ne Plagae
ipsius orae adurantur, quas reducere hamulis facile est. Id, interpositis fere
quaternis digitis per totum Varicem fit, and tum superimponitur Medicamentum,
quo adusta sanantur. Viz. If the Vein is straight, or though it may be
transverse, provided it is single; or if not very great, it is better to be
cured by Burning. The manner of of which Burning is this. The Skin is first to
be opened by incision, then the Vein being laid bare, it is moderately to be
pressed down or burnt with a small and blunt Cauterzing-Iron made red-hot; and
great care is to be taken, so to shun the lips of the Wound it self, that they
be not burnt; which to reduce again with small Hooks, will be easily done. This
may be performed by interposing four or five fingers in a row, through the whole
Varix, and then applying such a Medicine, by which the parts burnt may be
healed.

XLII. But, says he, if the Veins or Varices are crooked, and are as it were
implicated into certain orbs or bunches: so that many of them are as it were
involved and folded one within another; it is then more convenient to take them
forth by Section, as is before declared.

XLIII. Avicen, lib. 3. Fen. 17. Tr. 1. cap. 18. advises to cut the Skin, till
the Varix appears; and this is indeed to be done long-ways, and not either
obliquely or transversly; then you must extract all the Blood that is in it,
and cleanse it, by cutting it in length. Again, sometimes it is to be drawn
forth with a Needle, and so to be cut: and sometimes the taking it forth with a
Cautery, is better than the cutting it forth.

XLIV. Wiseman, l. 1. c. 14. says, If you proceed by Section, that you must
divide the Skin, and separate the Teguments, and having raised the varicous
Vein; you are to pass a Ligature above, and another beneath it, making a
deligation of them; then slit the Vein, cast out the gross Blood, and
afterward digest and heal it, as you do in an Aneurysm.

XLV. Fabricius Hildanus, Cent. 4. Obs. 85. has this History. An extraordinary
strong Man had in his left Leg a malign and inveterate great Ulcer, together
with a Varix of a vast magnitude, equal in thickness to the brawny part of the
Arm above the Wrist, and nearly a span long.

XLVI. It began in the very Ham, and descending toward the Foot, it made a
ring, and two circumvolutions: whenever he lift up his Leg any thing high, the
Blood presently fell back; and putting it down again, it immediately descended.

XLVII. He instituted a fit course of Diet, several times purged him, bled him
in the Arm of the same side; and placing the Patient on a Bench, in the very
Ham, he gently separated the Skin from the Vein it self.

XLVIII. Then with a Thread twice doubled, and put into the eye of a crooked
Needle, he wound it about the upper part of the Varix, and in like manner in
the lower part of the same: then he caused his Leg to be taken off the bench,
and set upon the ground; that the Blood according to its custom might flow
downwards: after which he tied the Thread hard, and made fast the knots at both
ends of the Varix, both upper and lower.

XLIX. After, with an Incision-knife, he made an Incision almost in the upper
part of the Varix; that the Blood contained therein, as in a long and little
Bag, might flow forth.

L. But the flux of Blood proving to be greater, than what was proportionable
to the Tumor; he exactly viewed the place, and found a blind passage in the
lower part of the Ligature, which entered into the Varix, from which the Blood
flowed.

LI. This, because it could not be tied with a Thread, he first applied to the
entrance thereof, the Escarotick Unguent; and after that, he put on in great
abundance his own Astringent Powder, with the white of an Egg for stanching the
Blood.

LII. All these things he bound fast (...), with a Swathband thoroughly moistened
in Oxycrate, which he left till the following day: after which he healed the
Wound after the usual manner of a Vulnerary Cure, and in a short time the Man
became perfectly well and sound.

LIII. But after all, the Palliative Cure, with Aquapendens, Sennertus,
Wiseman, and others, is rather to be embraced, than this of Section.

II. Tumors arising from CHOLER.
CHAP. XVII. Of an ERYSIPELAS.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Erysipelas, Rosa, and Ignis Sacer;
in English, Anthony's Fire. Of this Ignis Sacer, Lucretius, lib. 6. makes
mention. Et simul Vlceribus quasi inustis omne rubere
Corpus, ut est, per membra Sacer cum dicitur Ignis.
Red burning Ulcers the whole Body vex,
As Ignis Sacer does a Part perplex.


II. Definition. It is a Tumor besides Nature, from Choler, or Choler mixed with
some other Humor, as Blood, Phlegm, Melancholy, or Serum, thrown forth the most
part into the Skin it self, sometimes on the subjacent Muscles, causing pain,
heat, and other Symptoms. Wiseman says, it is generated of a hot Serum in the
Blood.

III. The Differences. It is perfect, when it proceeds from simple Choler; it
is imperfect, when Blood, Phlegm, Melancholy, or Serum are mixed with it.

IV. And from this mixture of other Humors with Choler, the imperfect
Erysipelas takes its name: 1. (...). Erysipelas phlegmanoodes 2. (...).
Erysipelas oedematoodes. 3. (...). Erysipelas scirroodes.

V. But if Choler is joined with a malignant or caustic Salt, mixed in the
Serum of the Blood; it causes (...), Erysipelas ulcerosum; wherein, an Ulcer is
joined with it, which sometimes consumes the Skin only, and sometimes the Flesh
also with it.

VI. The Causes. In a pure Erysipelas, Barbett seems to say that Choler is the
cause thereof; but in a bastard, it is Choler mixed with other Humors; as Blood,
Phlegm, Melancholy, or Serum: whence those things which are good in a Phlegmon,
are oftentimes beneficial in an Erysipelas.

VII. Yet Galen, ad Glauc. lib. 1. cap. 2. seems to say, that the cause of an
exquisite Erysipelas is, a most thin and hot Blood, or a choleric Blood,
hotter than Nature requires: where he determins that pure Choler is not the
original and efficient cause of this Tumor, but rather of a Herpes.

VIII. Again, contrariwise, in his Book de Atra Bile, cap. 5. and Meth. Med.
lib. 14. cap. 1, 2, 4. and lib. 17. cap. 2. also in lib. de differ. Febr. cap.
5. and many other places, he asserts Choler to be the true cause of this Tumor:
which latter Opinion most of our Physicians follow.

IX. Wiseman says, lib. 1. cap. 6. page 34. that the Humon causing it, simply
considered in it self, is very thin and sharp, much affecting the Pores of the
Skin, in which it usually lodges; and in a great measure ows its confinement
thither to their being shut up; they being covered with a Cuticula, whose
density hinders transpiration, from whence pain and redness arise.

X. And, says he, oftentimes other Humors are invited thither, so that the
Tumor enlarges it self, and becomes compound; and as he will have it to be
generated of a hot Serum in the Blood, so he will have the same to be a thin
choleric Humor, which is the cause of a pure Erysipelas, whose fountain is
Blood; which by its capillary Arteries discharges it upon that part, as often, as
in choleric, malign, and pestilential Fevers it is prompted thereunto.

XI. There are also external Causes, as heat of Sun, sharp Medicines, vehement
Traveling, Contusions, Fractures, and the like: all which in choleric Bodies,
through the turgency of the Blood, cause a separation of the Humor, when Nature
for her relief casts it forth into the superficies of the Skin.

XII. The Places. Whilst it is simple, the Skin only is the seat of it, or the
Periosteum, or a Bone that lies bare: but if compound, it affects the Flesh
also, and the adjacent parts. Wiseman.

XIII. As to the particular Parts, it most commonly invades the Nose and Face,
Legs, Thighs, Arms and Shoulder-blades, and some parts of the Back: but it may
affect any Part, where Nature is disposed to cast the Humor out upon it.

XIV. The Signs. There is redness mixed with yellowness, great heat, sharp pain,
easily giving way to the touch, and as easily returning again: the swelling and
extension of the Part little, and the pulsation less.

XV. It is always accompanied with a Fever, except it be from an external
cause; and yet then as it begins with some little rigor, so it is continued
with a small kind of Fever.

XVI. A pure Erysipelas affects the Skin with a shining, or pale red, or
citron-colour, without pulsation, or circumscribed tumor, spreading from one
place to another. Or, its color may be said to be a shining yellowish mixed
with red; with vehement heat, pricking pain, and blistring the Skin, and
creeping about the Part affected.

XVII. It may be known from a Phlegmon by these tokens; that whereas a Phlegmon
is under the Flesh, deep among the Mucles, its heat is less, its symptomatick
Fever less; the pain of the Tumor more, its color of a dark red, by reason of
thick Blood, the pain dull, heavy, and stretching and swelling, not yielding to
the touch, and being pressed with the finger, not becoming white: also it
possesses but one place, and is manifested with a single elevation and
circumscription.

XVIII. Now in an Erysipelas, the Tumor is superficial in the Skin, Heat more
acute, Fever greater, Pain less, but more sharp and pricking, Color brighter;
Tumor yielding to the touch, and returning again; which being pressed upon,
becomes white, spreads it self round the adjacent places, and without
circumscription or elevation, unless in many little Blisters.

XIX. The Prognostics. A pure or simple Erysipelas is seldom dangerous, unless
the Matter is repelled from the external to the internal parts.

XX. But if it seizes on the Jaws, or on the noble parts, or is accompanied
with a Wound, Fracture, Dislocation, or Putrefaction; it is dangerous, and more
difficult of cure.

XXI. If it is with a Fever, that diminishes, as the Erysipelas increases;
according to Hippocrates, sect. 9. aph. 25. When the Matter is sent from within
outward, the Viscera are relieved, and the Patient recovers: But the sudden
return of the Humor inwards is a bad sign, ill Symptoms frequently following,
and sometimes death it self, if the Emunctories were affected.

XXII. Galen, in his Comment on the same Aphorism, says, That Suppuration in a
malign Erysipelas is not good, but does for the most part corrupt; as is seen
by the discolored Pustles which arise about them.

XXIII. An Erysipelas upon the adjacent parts to a bare Bone, is evil; and if a
delirium happens, there is imminent danger.

XXIV. An Erysipelas invading upon Wounds, Ulcers, Fractures, and Dislocations,
is mostly mortal; if it does not come from the application of too hot external
Medicines.

XXV. An Erysipelas appearing in the Head, is more dangerous than in other
parts; because upon the Morbifick-matter passing to the Meninges, a Phrensy or
Raving is induced; if it passes to the Muscles of the Neck, a Quinsey.

XXVI. The Cure. The Indications of Cure have respect to Causes, Procatartick,
Antecedent, and Conjoined; and so accordingly we shall institute a proper Diet,
proper Internals, and proper Externals.

XXVII. As to the Diet, as in hot Tumors, it ought to be (both Meat and Drink)
cooling, and sparing; the Food may be Grewel, Penado, Chicken or Mutton Broth
with cooling Herbs; and their Drink, Barley-Broth, Emulsions, Juleps made of
distilled Waters, the white Decoction made of burnt Hartshorn, made pleasant
with Syrup of the juice of Citrons, Limons, clarified Whey, etc.

XXVIII. Galen, Meth. Med. lib. 9. cap. 5. permits the Patient to drink as much
cold Water as he will; because it resrigerates the Body, quenches Thirst, cools
the Liver, and abates the heat of Choler: but with this permission, the Stomach
ought to be strong, and the Season hot, if also it is made pleasant with Syrup
of Limons, it will be so much the better.

XXIX. Small Beer boiled with a crust of Bread is good, especially in
Summertime, when the Air ought to be made artificially cool.

XXX. All hot, sharp, fat, and sweet things are forbidden; as also too great
Motion of the Body, Anger, Venery, Costiveness, and much Watching.

XXXI. The second Indication has respect to the Antecedent Cause; where
Bleeding and Purging are chiefly to be considered.

XXXII. If the Erysipelas comes upon Wounds, or such like accidents, and where
it affects the Head, Face, or Neck and Throat, endangering a Phrensy or
Quinsey, (which latter may hazard Suffocation,) or in a Phlegmonoodes, Authors
prescribe Bleeding.

XXXIII. But in an exquisite Erysipelas in other parts, Bleeding is forbidden;
because, not only the good and bad Blood are both taken away together, but the
Patient is also much weakened thereby; and the Blood is made more subtle and
vehement in its motion, and the Choleric Humor is excited.

XXXIV. If it is a simple Erysipelas, and be but in the Skin, you must evacuate
the redundancy of Humors, and repress the ebullition of Choler, with proper
Catharticks.

XXXV. If the Body is cacochymick, purge with proper Cholagogues; as,
Electuarium lenitivum, Diacatholicon, Diaprunum solutivum, an Infusion of Sena
and Rhubarb, in fair Water, etc.

XXXVI. If the Inflammation is not extreme, the Decoction of cooling Herbs,
with Cassia dissolved in them, will be of good use; which may be repeated, as
you see cause.

XXXVII. After due purging, sweat gently with Antimonium diaphoreticum,
Bezoardicum minerale, vel solare, in Tinctura Corticum, or a little
Treacle-Water.

XXXVIII. If the Body is plethorick or gross, purge with Cassia, Manna,
Tamarinds, Cremor Tartari, Sena, Rhubarb, made with Whey, or Decoction of
Barley, and the Opening Roots, Syrupus catharticus, and the like.

XXXIX. After which, give Spirit of Sal Armon. in Milk or Water; or some
Treacle-water, or Our Spiritus Cordialis, to open the Pores, and provoke Sweat.

XL. The third Indication has respect to the Proximate or Conjoined Cause; and
this relates only to Topicals.

XLI. In Applications to the part affected; consider whether the Disease is
from an Internal or External Cause; and whether it is great, or small.

XLII. If it is from an Internal Cause, Internals are first to be used, as we
have before directed, to wit, Evacuation by Purgatives; unless it is remote
from the principal Parts, and the heat is vehement; in which case, you may
pretermit Internals, and apply Externals, gently to refrigerate the Heat; and
then proceed to Purging.

XLIII. If it is from an External Cause, you may safely apply Refrigerants,
without any previous Evacuation; because the Affect took its rise merely from
the distemper of the Part; as heat of Sun or Fire, sharp Medicines, Contusion,
Fracture, etc.

XLIV. But as to Topics, you must avoid the application of Oils, or fat
things; because they increase the Putrefaction, by stopping the Pores; and are
apt more to inflame the Part, or induce a Gangrene.

XLV. Nor must you in any case apply astringent and repelling Medicines, which
are cooling and drying; especially if they have an Emplastick property with
them; lest the sharp and corrosive Vapors being kept in, should erode and
corrupt the Part. 2. Or extinguish the Natural Heat, and create a Gangrene. 3.
Or revert the Humor inward upon the Viscera, and so sometimes cause Death.

XLVI. Fabricius Hildanus, Cent. 1. Obs. 82. gives us a famous Example, to make
us beware of using of Oils or Unctuous bodies in an Erysipelas. A Countryman
having an Erysipelas in his left Hand, by a Barber's advice anointed his Hand
and Arm with Oil of Roses for several days; on which Pain and Inflammation
succeeded, and all the Symptoms grew worse and worse, till the whole Hand was
gangrened: when he came to me, (says he) I scarified the Part, and applied
other things for the cure of a Gangrene, and so he was made well.

XLVII. Let therefore the Topical Applications be cooling and moistning; let
them be actually cold, liquid, and thin, and often changed or renewed; not much
astringent, lest you dry the Skin, and prohibit Transpiration: so that
including the Humor, it should grow sharp, corrode the Parts, or cause
Apostemation, or some other worse evil, and so Death.

XLVIII. For this reason, Spirit of Wine is very evil, not only because it is
hot, but because it is of such an exsiccating quality. I knew one who had an
Erysipelas in the brawny part of his left Arm, One of the Quacks was sent for,
who immediately prescribed bathing it with camphorated S.V. and to lay over it
Cloths dipped in the same; the Bathing was repeated four or five times the first
day, and again at bedtime: the next morning the Part was livid, and a Gangrene
had seized the Arm; and the mighty Doctor not understanding the condition of
the Sick, boasted he had done the Cure, and so continued another day the same
Means; on the third day a Sphacelus was manifest: an honest Surgeon was sent
for, who told the Relations that there was no remedy but cutting off, and it
was doubtful whether that would do, by reason of the proximity of the Affect to
the more noble parts; for which reason he declined the Operation, in a few days
more, the Sick was seized with Vomiting, Fainting and Swooning Fits, and upon
the eighth day died.

XLIX. Simples proper on this occasion are, Fumitory, Plantane, Fleawort,
Maidenhair, Lettice, Purslane, Nightshade, Marsh-trefoil, Hemlock, Houseleek,
Horstail, Navelwort, Ducksmeat, Poppies, etc. the juice of them may be
expressed, and applied.

L. Or you may make a Decoction of them in Water and Vinegar, in which Myrrh
may be dissolved: or a mixture of Frogspawn-water two parts, with Vinegar of
Roses one part, in which Myrrh as aforesaid, may be dissolved.

LI. If it is a simple Erysipelas, after cooling Topics have been applied, and
other general Remedies, the total discussion ought to be left to Nature.

LII. You may foment with Saccharum Saturni dissolved in juice of Housleek,
upon which you may apply Ceratum frigidum Galeni, or a Cataplasm of the leaves
of Plantane, with Frogspawn-water.

LIII. If at any time you use Repellers, be sure to mix Discussives or
Resolvents with them.

LIVE. Wiseman commends this, Ceruse viii. Litharge of Gold iv. Mucilage of
Fleawort seeds, and of Quince seeds, extracted with Nightshade-water, juices of
Nightshade and Maidenhair, A. iii. Vinegar ii. Oil of Roses and Myrtles, A.
lbss. Calves suet iv. boil to the consumption of the Juices, then add
Frankincense in powder x. Wax q.s. mix. and make a Cerate.

LV. Ceratum infrigidans ^aleni. Oil of Roses lbi. white Wax iv. mix, and wash
them with Vinegar and juice of Nightshade, and make a soft Cerate.

LVI. These things strongly draw forth the Heat, viz. Diapalma, vel Empl.
album, dissolved in Vinegar: or leaves of Tobacco, Coleworts, or Henbane,
bruised and applied, and often removed: or Sheeps-dung boiled in Vinegar;
flowers of Elder, Melilot, and Camomil, boiled in new Milk: or Chalk scraped,
and strewed upon the Part, laying Cap-paper over it.

LVII. This Fomentation is good: Wine-vinegar, juice of Housleek, A. v. Myrrh
in powder iii. Saccharum Saturni i. Opium i. mix, dissolve in a a gentle heat,
and dip linen Cloths in it; applying them warm, and often renewing them.

LVIII. But as for Opiates and Narcoticks, you ought to be very cautious in
using them; unless there is exceeding great Pain, and the place affected be far
from any principal Part.

LIX. Heurnius commends Castlesoap dissolved in fair Water, to foment with
warm: or Bulls-dung boiled in a Drying Pan with Vinegar, Camomil, and
Elder-flowers, till it comes to a Liniment, these are good for the Face.

LX. If the Disease proceeds from Internal Causes, Decoction of Sage, with a
Solution of Castle-soap is to foment withal; over which Ceratum insrigidans
Galeni may be put: but if it is Critical, you may use Ceratum album, or
refrigerans; described in Our Pharmacopoeia aforegoing.

LXI. If the Heat is vehement, the application is daily to be renewed; if not,
once in two days will be enough.

LXII. Barbett commends this: White Troches of Rhasis i. Camphir i. S.V. i.
Elder-water vi. mix; and apply them as before.

LXIII. And if the Erysipelas is in the Face, the same Barbett commends the
fumes of Mastick and Frankincense; to be used five or six times a day.

LXIV. For an Erysipelas in the Head, Aetius commends a Swallows nest made into
powder, and mixed with Honey; which is to be anointed on the Part with a Feather.

LXV. Wiseman advises us, not to be too forward in our Applications to the
Face, or parts about it: but he says, he commonly used Aqua Calcis with
Linseed-oil, well shaked together, with good success.

LXVI. And he applied this following, where greater drying was required. Spirit
of Vinegar in which Litharge or Minium has been boiled: let it settle, pour off
the clearest, and filter it; which put into a Glass with Oil of Roses, and
shake them together.

LXVII. Or, Saccharum Saturni ss. Oil of Roses, or rather Oil of Ben i. beat
them up together: this, or the former, apply with a Feather twice or thrice a
day.

LXVIII. If the Erysipelas is ulcerated: White Troches of Rhasis ii. red Myrrh,
Litharge of Gold, A. i. flowers of Sulphur ss. Sarcocol ii. whites of Eggs q.s.
mix, and make a Liniment, which apply.

LXiX. Or this of Wiseman: Oil of Roses vi. Sheeps-suet iv. white Wax ii.
Ceruse jss. Trochisci albi Rhasis, Tutia in powder, A. jss. burnt Lead i.
Camphir ss. make an Ointment by grinding the Ingredients in a leaden Mortar for
two hours: this will cicatrize the Ulcers.

LXX. How long Externals, in the first Intention, are to be applied. Truly,
When the Heat is altogether, or nearly abated, and when the Skin has recovered
its own color, you are to desist from application, especially of cold Topics;
lest the Skin becomes livid or black, and a Gangrene be induced, or a
Mortification: and then apply Resolvers and Discussives to corroberate the
Part, and restore it to its natural Tone.

LXXI. For though an Erysipelas does not arise with any circumscribed Tumor, yet
after it is vanished, the Part is swelled; and in progress of time, for want of
discussion, may become oedematous, or otherwise grow into a hard Tumor.

LXXII. In these cases, you may first foment with this Decoction: White
Port-wine a quart, tops of Wormwood, Camomil flowers, red Roses, A. jss boil;
and to the Decoction add Brandy or S.V. iii.

LXXIII. And then apply over the Swelling either Ceratum de Galbano, or de
Gummi Elemi, or Spermatis Ceti, either of which will discuss, or soften and
dissolve the Tumor: See them in the Pharm. Chirurgica, in lib. 1. cap. 76.
sect. 3, 4, 8. of this present Work.

LXXIV. If a Gangrene is already induced, foment with a weak Lixivium of
Potashes, in which Calamine, Centory the less, Hyssop, Mint, Peniroyal,
Scordium, Southernwood are boiled: then apply Hippocrates his Cataplasm, made
of Barley-flower, Vinegar, and Oil of Roses, warm. Or this: Barley and Bean
flower, A.vi. weak Lixivium lbiv. boil to the thickness of a Plaster, adding
Oxymel simplex iv.

LXXV. But if the Skin looks black, and has passed into a Mortification, you
must scarify, and then pursue the Cure according to the Rules delilivered in
the former Chapter.

CHAP. XVIII. Of VLCEROVS PVSTVLES.
I. THIS Disease is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Herpes miliaris and
ulcerosus; in English, Ulcerous Pustules, or an Ulcerous Herpes. It is so
called, (...), a serpendo, from Creeping.

II. It is a preternatural Tumor, springing from yellow Choler, mixed with a
salt Serum, disfiguring the Skin with corroding and spreading Pustules.

III. The Causes. The Procatartick Cause is taking cold, lying in cold places,
eating and drinking sour and salt Meats, and even to surfeiting and
drunkenness, and persisting in even a continued surfeiting course of living,
whereby plenty of evil Humors are bred.

IV. The Antecedent Cause is Choler mixed with a putrid Lympha, or with a
preternatural salt Ferment in the Blood; which being by some violent action,
surfeiting, or the like, stirred up into act, causes this kind of Breaking-out.

V. The Conjoined Cause, is a salt, watery, and pus- like Matter protruded out
into the Cuticula.

VI. The Signs. It rises in a cluster of small Wheals, not much differing from
the color of the Skin, and are first discovered by their itching: and being
rubbed or scratched, there issues out a thin serous Humor: or not being
scratched, they swell many times to the bigness of small Tares, or great
Pins-heads, which drying, they become a Scab.

VII. They many times creep up and down; and as they heal in one place, they
often break out in another; being mostly of a cluster, like to Millet-seed.

VIII. The Prognostics. There is little of danger in this Disease, unless
rendered so by the unskilful use of Repellents: it is without a Fever, but is of
difficult cure, especially if it is in the Face, Nose, or Ears.

IX. If it is neglected, or ill handled, it eats deep into the Flesh; and then
in what part so ever it is, it is very hard to be cured, degenerating sometimes
into Herpes exedens.

X. The Differences. There are three kinds of Herpes: 1. Simple, to wit, the
Shingles; which though they proceed from Choler, or a choleric Blood, yet they
differ from the other two kinds; because these of the first sort are for the
most part Critical, as coming forth after a Fever or Ague, or some other
illness. See Lib. 2. Cap. 24 aforegoing.

XI. 2. The millet-like Herpes, being mostly like Millet-seed, as to bigness,
which differ from the former, in the Humor causing them; and from the latter,
in the form of the Tumor or Breaking-forth; and in the place first affected,
which is the Cuticula.

XII. The eating Herpes, which affects the Cutis or Skin, and many times the
Flesh also: this, says Sennertus, is of the nature of an ulcerated Erysipelas,
from which notwithstanding it differs in the thinness of the Humor.

XIII. There are two Indications of Cure: the first, which respects the
antecedent Cause; the second, which respects the conjoined.

XIV. In respect to the antecedent Cause; the Diet ought to be the same as in
an Erysipelas, cooling and moistning, and which may attemperate Choler, and
salt Phlegm.

XV. Bleeding here is not allowed, but Purging is very necessary; and since it
has its original from yellow Choler, mixed with a salt Lympha or Serum, they are
first especially to be purged out of the Body: and it is the opinion of
Sennertus, that unless the Body is purged, the Sick will never be perfectly
cured.

XVI. For this purpose, you may make use of Rhubarb, Mechoacan, Jallap,
Scammony, Cambogia, Sal mirabile, Juice or Syrup of Damask-roses, and Sena;
which last is said to purge all Humors: these may be given in Infusion,
Decoction, or some proper medicated Ale: Decoctions of Sarsa and China, are
also good.

XVII. In respect to the conjoined Cause, Barbett is not for repelling
Medicaments, lest being drove to the internal parts, it should excite a Fever,
and other ill Symptoms: and therefore he advises to the often use of
Fasting-spittle, which does good.

XVIII. He also applys the powder of Lapis scissilis, mixed with Vinegar, with
great success. Some use Mustard boiled in Butter, to which others add
Gunpowder: Lie also, and Urine, he says, has helped many.

XIX. Powder of Chalk mixed with Cream, is said to be good to anoint withal;
fomenting beforehand with hot Lees of Wine: also Unguent. Fuscum Wurtzii is
excellent here, being prudently applied. Or,

XX. Mastich, Frankincense, Lapis calaminaris, Goat-suet, A. ss. white Troches
of Rhasis, Litharge, Myrrh, A.iii. Sarcocol, flowers of Sulphur, A.ii. Wax,
Turpentine, q.s. mix, and make an Emplaster, and apply it.

XXI. Wiseman says that this Disease comes near to the nature of the Itch, and
is to be treated with Purgatives and Alteratives, much of the same kind with
those which are proposed for that.

XXII. And as for Topics, he advises such as powerfully dry: you may foment
with Lac Virginis, and then anoint with Oleum Anodynum, Oleum Colocynthidos,
Vnguentum ad Scabiem, vel Tutiae; over which you may apply Ceratum album, vel
Oxylaeum, vel Refrigerans, to consummate the Cure. If broken, cleanse and dry
with Lixivium of Calx vive, mixed with Saccharum Saturni.

XXIII. If these things do not, you must anoint daily with Unguentum
Nicotianae; which commonly masters the Disease, though it is very rebellious and
stubborn.

XXIV. Valescus de Taranta commends this following for a Secret. Greasy Wool of
a Sheep, and roast it by the Fire until it is black, which make into a powder,
and mix with Rose Water, till it becomes a Liniment: with which anoint the Part
affected with a Feather thrice every day, till it be well.

CHAP. XIX. Of EATING PVSTVLES.
I. THIS Disease is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Herpes exedens; but by
Celsus, Ignis sacer: in English, the Eating Herpes, or Eating Pustule.

II. The Differences. This is the third kind of Herpes, and differs from the
two former; chiefly in the Humor causing it, and the manner of its progress,
which is by eating.

III. It is almost like to an Erysipelas exulcerated, but does differ from that
in the thinness of the Humor; as Galen, Meth. Med. lib. 14. cap. 17. affirms in
these words:

IV. Est (inquit) admodum tenuis Humor, qui Herpetem excitat, adeo profecto, ut
non solum omnes interiores Parts, quae utique carnosae substantiae sunt,
transeat, sed etiam Cutem ipsam ad summam usque Cuticulam, quam solam, quod ab
ea retinetur, tum erodit, tum exedit; quando si hanc quoque sudoris vice
transiret, haudquaquam Vlcus excitaret. Viz. It is (says he) a very thin Humor
which excites the Herpes, even so thin, that it not only passes through all the
interior Parts, which are likewise of a fleshy substance, but also through the
very Skin it self, even unto the utmost part of the Cuticula or Skarf-skin, the
which alone, for that it is kept in and retained, it both erodes or gnaws, and
likewise then eats through; whereas should it pass through it by sweating, it would
not excite any manner of Ulcer.

V. The Causes. The Procatartick and Antecedent Causes are almost the very
same, as in an Erysipelas: yet in this more disposed to the generating of an
excrementitious yellow Choler, than of a choleric Blood.

VI. Wiseman says, that the Matter or Humor added to the Choler partakes much
of acrimony, and proves exceeding corrosive: and indeed it is caused from a
corrosive and malign Salt, mixed with an exceeding thin excrementitious Bile.

VII. The Signs. It is a broad Tumor, which has little or no height in it; so
that the Part is scarcely lifted up at all, but seems rather to be exasperated,
than to swell up to any considerable height, accompanied with a certain kind
of hardness and pain, with a sense of heat and burning.

VIII. Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 26. says, Est Malum cum summae Cutis excoriatione,
and exulceratione; sine altitudine, latum, sublividum, inaequaliter tamen;
mediumque sdnescit, extremis procedentibus; ac saepe id quod jam sanum
videbatur, iterum exulceratur, ac circa proxima Cutis, quam malum occupaturum
est, tumidior and durior est, coloremque habet ex rubro subnigrum: viz. It is
(says he) a Disease with excoriation and exulceration of the Epidermis or
Scarf-skin, without any height at all, broad, somewhat pale and wan, or almost
livid, yet unequally; the middle of which becomes whole, when at the same time,
the extreme parts thereof are in their progress and motion forwards: and many
times, that which seems to be altogether whole and sound, becomes exulcerated
again; and the Skin which is next about it, that the Herpes is even now ready
to seize upon, is somewhat more swelled, and harder; and it has a color
changing from red, to that which is dark and blackish.

IX. Wiseman, lib. 1. cap. 17. says it is rather an Ulcer than a Tumor, but is
indeed an Ulcer with a Tumor; it rising in the Skin in a small Tubercle, on the
top whereof appears an Ulcer like a pin-hole; and is for the most part without
inflammation or pain.

X. When it arises alone, it is scarcely taken notice of; it mattering but
little, unless it is pricked, and then it scabs soon after with a thin scurf.

XI. But in its progress, it shows its evil nature and condition, by eating
away the Skin; and indurates the Flesh underneath it, and the Parts thereabout.

XII. Sometimes I have seen (says he) these Ulcers arise in the Skin, somewhat
distant one from another, making an unequal farrow; as from the upper Lip by
the Nostril, creeping to that side of the Nose, so to the ridge of it, and down
again to that corner of the Eye; healing in some places, whilst it eats deep
into the Flesh in others.

XIII. This Herpes in Lues Venerea often arises from a simple Herpes, while the
matter is shut up by the Scab, and corroding underneath, makes an Ulcer, which
breaking out, appears like an Honeycomb, bigger, or lesser, long or round, as
the Disease has more or less malignity.

XIV. The Prognostics. It is not easily cured, and usually of long
continuance; unless in the Cure a due regard is had to the antecedent Cause,
and Habit of the whole Body.

XV. Wiseman says, if it be not (well and) timely treated, it degenerates or
terminates in a Phagedena, or cancerous Ulcer: but when it arises from Lues
Venerea, the very worst is cureable.

XVI. The Cure. Let the Diet be cooling and moistning, attemperating Choler,
and absorbing the acid and corrosive Salt; and purge the Humor off, either with
Our Family-Pills, Electuarium Catharticum, or Pilulae Catharticae: or with an
Infusion of Sena, Rhubarb, and Liquorice, in White Wind.

XVII. Bleeding is not permitted, but Baths are excellent, and their Waters
taken at fit times, are said safely to cure this Disease.

XVIII. This Purging-pouder is good. Cremor Tartari iii. Tartar vitriolate ss.
Scammony in fine powder ii. mix them. Dose, ii. either every morning, or every
other morning, with Broth.

XIX. Wormwood-tops, Scordium, Mechoacan thin sliced, A. iii. Aniseeds,
Caraways, A. ii. choice Sena i. Rhubarb thin sliced j ss. cut and bruise all,
put them into a Bag with a Stone in it; which put into white Port-Wine lbv.
after two days drink of it. Dose, half a pint every morning, fasting.

XX. Raspings of Guajacum iv. Sarsaparilla, roots of the sharp-pointed Dock,
A.ijss. Liquorice bruised i. Fumitory M.ii. Groundpine M j. choice Sena i.
Scammony in powder ii. dissolved in a little Wine, fair Water lbvi. White Wind
lbjss. mix, digest in B.M. for twenty-four hours; then boil a little, and
strain out. Dose, from iv. to vi. or viii. every morning fasting.

XXI. As to Topics, you may anoint with Unguent. Fuscum Wurtzii, Mercuriale,
Cosmeticum, vel ad Scabiem: but nothing is superior to an Ointment made of
green Tobacco, raised in England from Virginia Seed; or bathing the Affect with
the juice of the same, and laying a green leaf over it: this cures it in a
short time.

XXII. Barbett commends this: Vnguenti Fusci Wurtzii iii. Vng. Albi cum
Camphora jss. Ceruse, Sulphur, Myrrh, A. i. Verdigrise purified, Mercurius
dulcis levigated, A. ss. Oil of Roses q.s. mix, and make an Ointment.

XXIII. Or, Flowers of Sulphur, Ceruse, Camphir, A. ss. Lapis Prunellae,
Saccharum Saturni, Mercurius dulcis levigated, A. ii. old Rape-oil, or Oil of
Scorpions, A. q.s. mix, and make a Liniment; and over it, you may apply
Emplastr. Diasulphuris Rulandi.

XXIV. Lac Virginale constantly used, as five or six times a day, or oftener;
and Cloths dipped in the same laid over; is an excellent thing, and used for some
considerable time, certainly cures.

XXV. It Is certain that one of the conjoined Causes of this Evil, are certain
Animalcula, or little Worms, (which by some Microscopes I have perceived) which
perpetually gnaw and eat: and therefore whatever effectually kills them, cures
this Disease; for which purpose (besides Mercurials) nothing seems to be more
effectual than Saccharum Saturni, of which the Lac Virginale is made, and
Tobacco.

XXVI. As to the latter, where green Tobacco cannot be got, I have done great
Cures of this kind, by 1. Bathing often with a Lixivium of the ashes of dried
Virginia Tobacco. 2. By Anointing with the Ointment made of dried Virginia. 3.
By Washing sometimes with an Infusion or Decoction of the same Tobacco in
Water. 4. By Applying a Leaf of the same, moistened in the said Infusion or
Decoction, over the Ulceration, or Part affected.

XXVII. Sennertus commends this: Litharge, Ceruse, A. ii. Pomgranate-peels in
powder ss. Frankincense j ss. Verdigrise, Alum, Myrrh, A. i. Wax, Oil of
Myrtles, A. q.s. mix, and make an Ointment. But if this (says he) will not
serve the turn, but that the Ulcer and putrefaction creeps farther, you must
have recourse to the stronger sort of Remedies.

XXVIII. Sheep-suet, Oil-olive, A.iv. Auripigmentum ii. corrosive Sublimate ss.
Quicksilver killed with fasting-spittle, ss. Litharge of Gold and Silver, and
Ceruse A.iii. mix them in a glass Mortar, for use. Wiseman.

XXIX. Mercurius dulcis, red and white Precipitate, Arcanum Corallinum, or
Turpethum Minerale mixed with some proper Ointment: or Sheep-suet and
Oil-olive, ana, oftentimes serve to good purpose in curing this Disease.

XXX. But in the more rebellious, they are to be fomented with a good Lixivium;
or an Ablution of Turbith Minerale. And sometimes Spirit of Vitriol, and the
Caustick-stone it self may be used: but such Corrosives are not to be applied
to the Face; more especially not the Nose, because the Cartilages and Bones lie
so near the Skin.

XXXI. Municks advises to this Wash. Roots of White Hellebor, Elecampare,
Florentine-Orrice, Althaea, A. i. pulp of Coloquintida ss. leaves of Savin,
Tobacco, A. i. Roch-alum ii. Litharge viii. Rainwater q.s. mix, and boil to
xl. strain, and add Wine-vinegar xii. mix them for use.

XXXII. Or this. White Hellebor-roots i. roots of Elecampane, of
Florentine-Orrice, of Esula, and Althaea, A.vi. leaves of Savin M. i. pulp of
Coloquintida iii. Alum ss. seeds of Stavesacre vi. Litharge vi. Oak-ashes viii.
Water q.s. boil to lbiii. or xl. strain, and add Wine-vinegar vi. mix them.

CHAP. XX. Of the SMALLPOX.
I. THIS Disease is called in Greek, (...), Pustularum eruptio; ab (...),
effloresco: also by Hippocrates, Epidem. lib. 3. (...), quas Pustulas
Interpretes vocant, i. e. Papularum eruptiones: in Latin, Exanthemat^,
Ecthymata, from the Gre^; also Variolae, from Vari, Pimples; because they are a
sort of Pimples or Pustules, breaking forth of the Flesh, upon the Skin: and in
English, it is called the Small Pox.

II. The Definition. The Small Pox are a pustular Eruption besides Nature, of a
morbifick Matter, through the Flesh into the substance of the Skin; by reason of
a Fever, and preternatural Ferment of the Blood and Lympha with Choler, and the
help of the Expulsive-faculty.

III. The Causes. They are either remote, or present: the remote, are the
radical Impurities of the Mothers Blood, which the Child in the Womb receives
into it self with its Nourishment; and lies dormant or hidden for some Months
or Years, in the fleshy substance of the whole Body.

IV. The present Cause, is the boiling of Choler, or fermentation thereof with
the Blood and Lympha, stirred up by some accidental provocation, and induced by
a strong preternatural Heat, inducing a continual, violent, and malign Fever.

V. The Kinds. This disease is twofold; first, that in which the manifold
Pustules breaking out, are each of them entire, and distinct one from another:
secondly, that in which they run all into one, as it were, and much like a
Bladder, which the Vulgar call the Fluxing kind.

VI. This latter kind is very rarely caused or excited by any one Humor
whatsoever; but for the most part there are many Humors mixed together,
especially choleric, salt, and serous or wheyish Humors; which making the
ferment greater and more universal, cause the Pox to break out in such heaps,
so as to flux as it were, together.

VII. And it seems to me, that this Fluxing kind of Smallpox is that very
Disease which the Greeks called (...). ((...), vel (...), quod est, bullire,
and fervere:) and the Latins, in imitation of them, Phlyctaenae, Phluctides,
Phluzacia, and Phluseis; (though we under those names now understand another
Disease, as you may see, Lib. 2. Cap. 25. aforegoing.)

VIII. For this sort of Smallpox are at first little Pustules, which
afterward become little Bladders, which flux or run one into another; excited
and caused by the exceeeding fervency of the Humors; being as it were
boiling-hot, and most sharp; like to those Blisters which are raised by burning
fire, and scalding-hot Water.

IX. The Signs of the Pustular kind. This Disease, at its first beginning is
attended with chilness and shivering, vehement pain in the Head, with a strong
pulsation in the Forehead and Temples; great sleepiness, difficulty of
breathing, intense heat, redness, and sense of pricking over the whole Body,
with a pain of the Back; which sometimes alone, or appearing with other
Symptoms, foreshews the Smallpox.

X. For through the Back are carried the great Artery and Vein, in which the
malignant Blood fermenting or boiling, does send forth a sharp effervescency to
the adjacent Nerves and Membranes; for which cause it is, that pains are
especially felt in those parts.

XI. There is also a heaviness in the Eyes, swelling of the Face, with some
redness, hoarsness, panting of the Heart, with a continent, or at least
continual Fever; which exciting the ferment of the Blood and Humors, protrudes
the Morbifick-matter from within, to the outward parts.

XII. Generally on the fourth day from the first illness, or falling down of
the Sick, sometimes sooner, and sometimes later; the Smallpox come forth, in
Spots or small Pustules; (accompanied with a continual Fever, from the
ebullition of the Blood and Humors;) at which time, the Symptoms (at least
their vehemence) either abate, or disappear.

XIII. At their first coming out, the Pustules or Wheals are reddish; and they
are scattered over the Face, Neck, Breast, Arms, Hands, Thighs, Legs, Feet; and
in gross Bodies, and where the Ferment is high, they generally appear in great
numbers over the whole Body.

XIV. As the Pustules grow bigger, the Face swells, with pain and stiffness in
the Jaws; and next after the Face, the Hands and Arms swell, and the Fingers
begin to be distended, growing in all parts bigger and bigger, till they come
to their utmost height and magnitude.

XV. And as they grow bigger the intervals between the Pustules, which were
before white, begin to be red, and much swelled, with a continual pain: and
about eight or nine days after the first invasion, they will be come nearly to
the height; in which time, (if the Morbifick-humor is in great abundance) the
Eyelids will swell, and the whole Face and Head will be vehemently tumified,
(and proportionably other Parts) swelling sometimes nearly to double their true
magnitude.

XVI. The Pustules are at first smooth and red, but as they grow in ripeness,
they grow rougher and rougher, with a whitish yellow color: also in the Hands,
and other parts of the Body, they grow whiter and whiter, afterward yellowish,
casting forth a yellowish Humor, in color almost like candied Honey, and in
thickness almost like new Honey.

XVII. As the Pustules grow to their bigness, the inflammation of the Face,
Arms, Hands, Back, and all other parts, comes also to its height; so that the
interspaces between the Pustules appear of a florid red color; and the milder
or gentler the Pox are, the more lively the color.

XVIII. This Eruption of the Morbifick-matter is generally attended with
vehement Thirst; excited mostly from the intenseness of the Heat, and violence
of the Fever.

XIX. The Pustules being come to their height, about the eleventh or twelfth
day (and in some later, where the Humor is in great plenty) the inflammation
and swelling abate, and the Pustules either break or dry, and so scab, in order
to their withering and falling off: but this is to be understood of those which
are in the Face, and those parts of the Body which are constantly kept in Bed,
and very warm.

XX. But those which are in the Hands and Arms, continue longer; remaining
still white and fresh, for at least two or three days more; after which they
break, and scab also.

XXI. On the fifteenth, sixteenth, or seventeenth days they go away entirely
from the Face and Body; but from the Hands and Arms, on the nineteenth,
twentieth, and twenty-first day; and they fall off in Scales or Scabs,
according to the nature of the places affected.

XXII. Where the Humor is very sharp and corrosive, and where it is long a
drying away, lying all the while upon the Cutis, it generally leaves seams,
pits, or holes; but this is more especially in the Face and Hands; as being
Parts lying more cold, and most exposed to the ambient Air.

XXIII. In a hopeful Smallpox, the Body is generally costive or bound: there
is also (after the first few days are over) a natural kind of Sweat, which
helps to protrude the Morbifick-matter; which continues more or less, through the
whole course of the Disease.

XXIV. In some there is little or no Sweat, or it immediately vanishes; the
Sick is anxious, and vehemently sick at Stomach, pisses little and often, is
continually restless, tossing up and down, which Symptoms are generally
attended with another, viz. a Delirium, or Light-headedness.

The Signs of the Fluxing Kind.
XXV. To distinguish these in Name from the Phlyctaenae, or Ignis sylvestris,
mentioned Lib. 2. cap. 25. we will henceforth call them (...), i. e.
Phlyctaenae morbidae; because they show forth a very corrupting and vehement
Disease. And therefore in this Fluxing kind, though the Symptoms are nearly the
same, yet they are much more corrupting and vehement: for it is this kind
chiefly, which leaves pits, scars, or seams behind it, by reason it corrupts or
eats the place upon which the Humor lies.

XXVI. The Fever in these, as also the sickness at Stomach, nauseousness, or
inclination to vomit, anxiety of Mind, and restlesness of Body are much more
vehement; and they come forth on the third day, or sooner, seldom later; and
the sooner they are protruded, the more apt they are to Flux, or run together
into one.

XXVII. But sometimes through the violence of other Symptoms, as vehement
Sickness at Stomach, with Vomiting, or a Looseness or Flux, which accidentally
happens before the breaking forth of the Pox, and continues a day or two after,
(which scarcely ever happens in the former kind:) or a Catarrh, or any great
Hemorrhage; whether by the Nostrils, Urine, or Stool, the protrusion of the
Pustules are retarded till the fourth or fifth day.

XXVIII. So that it appears, that the separation of the Morbifick-matter, and
febrile Ebullition or Fermentation, are in the first three, four, or five days:
But the real protrusion or coming forth thereof, is perfected by Nature in some
succeeding time: in little Abscesses arising in the Skin, which, the Humor
being serous, and more fluid, with the dissolution of a very sharp Salt, causes
a fluxing of them one into another.

XXIX. Many times, through the ill managing of the Sick, several bad Symptoms
succeed; as Sleepiness, Watchings, Phrensy, Light-headedness, or Dotage,
falling down of the Pustules or Wheals; with sometimes little black Spots on
the heads of them; or a depression in the middle, purple Spots being scattered
almost every where between the Pustules; together with spitting or pissing of
Blood, or some other Hemorrhage; or a suppression of Urine, pain, restlesness,
trembling, etc. many of which Symptoms happen in the first six, or seven days
of the Distemper.

XXX. The Pustules come out sometimes after the manner of an Erysipelas, (but
none but Fools and Ignorants will call it an Erysipelas; for where the
Smallpox is, that is Disease enough of it self, without the addition of any
other:) and sometimes like the Measles, (yet it is no Measles) which may be
distinguished by the differing signs of the Disease, and the time of breaking
out.

XXXI. A kind of Catarrh, or Spitting, sometimes in persons of ripe age, begins
at the time of breaking forth; sometimes two or three days after, spitting at
first a thin matter; which on the tenth or eleventh day grows more viscous or
thick.

XXXII. And a Looseness or Flux in Children and the younger sort, is apt to
seize also, before the breaking forth of the Pox, and many times continues a
day or two after, which scarcely ever happens in the former Pustular kind: but
this Looseness seizes not so early, as the Catarrh or Spitting does Men.

XXXIII. Whilst the Disease is in the increase, the Pustules rise not to any
eminent height, but rather run together like red Blisters, in the Face; (so as
many times to cover the whole Countenance) and many other Parts; which by
reason of the fluidity of the Humor, swell sooner than the Pustular kind.

XXXIV. Afterward, they seem to be like a white Bladder or Skin, and in the
Face, are not much higher than the surface thereof; though the whole Face seems
to be extremely swelled: those which are in the Hands and Feet are larger, and
the farther or higher you go from the extremities of the Limbs, the lesser they
are.

XXXV. The eighth, ninth, or tenth day sometimes, being past, the white Skin
grows daily (but gradually) rougher and rougher, and of a brownish color; and
the pain in the Skin is more intense, till the Scabs fall off; which in this so
vehement a Disease, seldom happens till after three Weeks are past.

XXXVI. The Symptoms do not immediately abate, after the coming forth of the
Pustules, as they do in the Pustular sort; but the Fever, and the other
Symptoms do continue also to vex the Sick for many days afterward. And as in
both kinds, the Fever is present from the beginning to the time of protrusion
or eruption; so it continues to the time of full ripeness; after which it
sensibly abates, and vanishes away of its own accord.

XXXVII. During the extreme heat of the Fever, the Sick seems to be as it were
in a Furnace or Oven; and it is generally accompanied with great Thirstiness,
and sometimes a Hoarseness; and a Cough many times seizes them as they drink,
making the Drink to come forth through the Nose.

XXXVIII. You must note also, that the nearer the Pustules or Bladders are to
ripening, the more brown they grow, and indeed so much the more dangerous they
are: but the yellower they are, the less they flux or run together, and the
more quickly go away.

XXXIX. Presently after the Scabs or Skin are come off in the Face, it is
spread over with a kind of mealy or white Scales or Scurf, of a very eroding
nature, which many times causes pits, scars, or seams; and though then the
swelling of the Face should decline, yet it goes not wholly away, till some
days after.

XL. The Prognostics. If the Sick is so violently thirsty, that nothing can
quench it, grows hoarse, is extreme sleepy, or lethargick, and his Catarrh or
Spitting ceases; without any apparent swelling of the Face and Hands,
beginning, and continuing till the Pustules are fully come out, conclude Death
is at hand.

XLI. The greater, and more in number the Pustules, chiefly in the Face, the
greater the danger: the lesser and fewer, provided the Sick has no heart-sick,
fainting, or swooning Fits, the less danger: and if they be of a violet-colour,
green, or livid, or black, they are dangerous, and for the most part mortal: so
also if they strike in again.

XLII. The Fever increasing after their being full come out, difficulty of
Breathing, unquenchable Thirst, Looseness, Bloody Flux, bleeding at Nose, or
otherwise; and black or blew Spots, with black or livid Urine, are all signs of
Death.

XLIII. A suppression of all Evacuations in the state of the Sickness, a
Frenzy, or Lethargy after the eleventh or fourteenth day, great quantity of
Urine, the Fever not abating; plentiful Sweats, not diminishing the Disease; a
violent Flux in the beginning of the Disease, and continuing; the eruptions
small, and of an evil color, where the putrefaction is great, if they fall
back again, though not quite in, (whereby the malign Morbifick-matter retires to
the more noble parts,) all these are signs of Death.

XLIV. If they be slow in coming out, or they be hard, or vastly great in
number, or if they touch one another; or the Sick breathes not freely, or the
Fever abates not after their breaking forth; or if there is violent Vomitings,
Sickness at Heart, Fainting, or Swooning; or there be Frenzy, Delirium, Raving,
or Dotage, or Convulsions with raving, trembling of the Hands and Tongue, or
Heart-burning, or Hiccough, great loathing of Food, many and violent Excretions
in the beginning and increase of the Disease. These Symptoms, I say, though they
are not always mortal, yet they are very evil, and exceeding dangerous.

XLV. The Pulse like that in perfect health, is dangerous, for Nature out of
weakness concocts not the Humors: and then though the Sick seems freed from his
Fever, yet he grows worse and worse, and draws toward death.

XLVI. If they come easily out, and easily, or soon ripen; if there is Sneezing
(provided the Lungs are sound) or a suppression of all Evacuations, in the
beginning and augmentation of the Disease, or Deafness in the state of the
Disease; or the Urine is with signs of Concoction, or the Symptoms be not
great, or there are Critical Sweats, or other Critical Evacuations, in the
state and declination, wherein the Sick is better after them: these, I say, are
all Signs of good Health, and Recovery.

XLVII. However, whilst the Disease is in its beginning and increase, it will
be prudence to suspend judgment; for it will be dubious and uncertain, till
about the end of the state or declination. And if you would give a more exact
and perfect judgment, you ought diligently to study and learn Our Prognostics,
which we have largely and clearly delivered, in the Third Edition of Our
Synopsis Medicinae Lib. 1. from Chap. 46. to Chap. 66.

XLVIII. The Cure. The Indications of Cure are fourfold, and have respect, 1.
To the Nature or Essence of the Disease; which is to drive from the Center to
the Circumference. 2. To the Cause; which is the Morbifick-matter to be
protruded, or thrust forth through the Pores of the Skin. 3. To the Symptoms; so
as to secure the first Indication, and in the due time to abate them. 4. To the
Vital Indication; which has respect to the strength or weakness of the Sick:
all which we shall pursue (through God's assistance) in the following Discourse,
and in their due Order.

XLIX. But before we enter upon the true Method of Curing, we think it
necessary to reflect upon the present Mode of Practice, now managed by some
persons, who are thought to be Men of great Names, but lesser Skill; as it has
relation to Bleeding, Purging, and Blistering; wherein we hope to deliver our
Mind, with a kind of Demonstration: especially being considered with respect to
the unerring Principles of Our Art.

L. I know I cannot do this, without meriting the Malice and Envy of some
particular Men; but the truth of it is, it is of such as are my professed
Enemies, and such as have determined, and publicly declared my Ruin and
Destruction; who have already by all unjust methods at Law persecuted me, and
still continue to do the same. But on my part, I oppose them not for malice or
envy sake, nor with any respect to the Evil they have done me; for I freely
forgive them all: but only for the sake of Truth, which I desire to bring to
light, for the benefit of Mankind in general.

LI. I cannot think without terror, of the Death of Her late Majesty, when I
consider with what Methods She was managed. I must confess, I would not hazard
a Negro, ( whose Life I may value but at 20 l.) under those pernicious courses
of Bleeding; but infinitely less, that of so good, and so great Queen: a Life
so valuable, that nothing can be put in the balance against it: since other
courses may be pursued, with a thousand times less danger.

LII. But what shall I say in this case? it is the eternal fate of the Great, to
fall under such ill circumstances, and under such Fatal Men's hands: and for
this, we have the Authority of the Poet; as you have it in Mr. Gould's
admirable Poem up-Sn the Memory of Her late oacred Majesty, QUEEN MARY, in the
following Lines or Words. Ye Sons of Aesculapius, boast no more,
That you the Weak to Health and Strength restore:
Vain is your Learning, and your Art a Cheat;
At least, it is ever Fatal to the Great.
All you can do, is but [hap-hazard] Guess,
And a whole College has the worst Success.
For like a two-edged Sword, you both ways slay;
I add this Line. By want of Skill, and sometimes by foul Play.
Who under you escape, had yet no doubt,
Sooner recovered to their Health without.
You are your selves an Epidemick Ill:
For one you let escape, you thousands kill.
To Plagues and Pestilential Blasts akin;
Their Poisons reign without, but yours within.
From you, it is weakness to expect Relief;
Both Atheists in your Practice and Belief.
From GOD, can Favor on your Work be shown,
When you so boldly argue there is none?
Those that would live, must your Prescriptions shun:
I add: Who Sacrifices to your Net 's undone.
Under this just Reproof, you justly stand;
Y' are evil Omens to our mourning Land.
Night-birds, and Birds of Prey, foreboding ill;
Who never approach, but with design to Kill.
Where the Carcass is, like Vultures you resort;
And if you come, Death makes the Dire Report.
We call to Witness our Indulgent QUEEN,
Who, we believe, had lived, had you not been.
We cannot help Our Faith; Believe we must:
And We believe She 'd lived, had some been just.
Your Prescripts are but formal Acts of Fate;
Who scapes your Hands, you think does dye too late.
Death's Harbingers you are; you go before.
And to its splendid Entry open the Door.
Abandon them, my Soul! and fly, my Heart!
And let me dye by Nature, not Their Art.


LIII. Haec autem obiter. Now to the purpose in hand. First, as to Bleeding: it
is my Opinion, that it is against all the Indicationes Curativae; and this we
shall endeavor to prove or demonstrate to the Understanding, from the
following Arguments.

LIVE. Either there are Principles in Our Art, upon which we build, and by which
we ought to be guided, or there are none. If Our Art consists of Principles, we
ought either to Act by, and according to them, or not: if we ought, then all
the Indications or Methods of Cure in every Disease, are to be squared
according to those Principles; and he that Acts not according to those
Precepts, shows himself to be a Cheat, Ignorant, or something worse. But if we
ought not to walk by them, then it is manifest, that the Art it self is
precarious and vain; and they are all Fools, who make it their Business to
study and break their Brains about an Art, whose Principles have no Worth or
Usefulness in them.

LV. But if the Art is built upon no Principles, but that all that is done in
it, is only Opinion, Chance, and Hap-hazard; then the Art it self (as it is
called) is no Art, but a mere Cheat, and Delusion; the Profession thereof all
Trick, and Designing: and the Practice thereof though under the most specious
title of Doctor or Collegiate) nothing but Villainy, Impudence, and Quacking.

LVI. But we presume, the Professors thereof will readily grant us, that the
Art is built upon Principles, that those Principles are rational, and the
Indications of Cure raised from them, reasonable, and necessary to be followed.
And that he that acts not by those Principles, acts precariously and
dangerously, as to the Patient; and his Practice, as to himself, is mere
Confidence and Quackery.

LVII. If this is granted, we will then consider the Indicationes Curativae, in
this particular Disease, as built upon those Principles: and they are four, as
you may see in the third Edition of Our Synopsis Medicinae, Lib. 1. Cap. 75,
76, 77, 78, 79, and 80. and so are taken, 1. From the Nature or Essence of the
Disease. 2. From the Causes. 3. From the Symptoms. 4. From the strength or
weakness of the Sick, which is called the Vital Indication, all which we shall
consider distinctly, with reference to Bleeding, etc.

LVIII. The Essence and Nature of this Disease is, to protrude or thrust forth
the Morbifick-matter, from the Center to the Circumference. And therefore,
whatever Methods are taken contrary to this Indication, must be extremely
prejudicial to the Sick, if not destructive and fatal.

LIX. Now Bleeding (though many rash and ignorant persons use it in this Age, in
the Cure of this Distemper) is diametrically opposite to this Indication: For
all Physicians account Bleeding a Revulsive Remedy, which calls from the
Circumference to the Center: and if so, then the Morbifick-matter, which ought
to be thrust forth, is immediately drawn into the Blood by the Veins, (for they
will be filled again) and so by Circulation conveyed to the Heart.

LX. From whence we conclude, that unless the Disease is very gentle, the
Morbifick-matter but little in quantity, and the Patient very strong, and
naturally of a good habit of Body; if this Remedy be used, the Sick must
patiently submit to his Fate; for Death stands at the door: as we have in some
hundreds of Patients particularly observed.

LXI. The second Indication arises from the Cause, which is the
Morbifick-matter to be thrust forth; that we may hinder the augmentation
thereof for the future, which Nature now endeavors to diminish by casting
forth.

LXII. But Bleeding is opposite to this Indication: for the evil Matter now in
part protruded, through the Fermentation of the Blood and other Juices, being by
this means drawn into the Blood again; the whole Mass thereby becomes in a very
short time putrified, and all the Juices of the Body converted into the very
Matter or Cause of the Disease.

LXIII. This augmented or multiplied Putrefaction being thus joined again with
the Blood, which Nature had been for a long time before separating, by
Circulation with the Blood comes to the Heart and smites it, empoisons the
noble Parts, stagnates the bloody Juice, and suffocates the vital Flame.

LXIV. The third Indication of Cure, has respect to the Symptoms. Where the
Symptoms are more extreme, and show more danger than the Disease, the Intention
of Cure is to be directed to remove, or alleviate them. But where the Disease
is more vehement, that is first to be considered, because upon the remedying of
that, the Symptoms of their own accord cease or vanish.

LXV. So in this Disease, the Fever is one of the Symptoms, which though never so
strong and intense, is never so dangerous as the malign matter to be protruded:
and is therefore here to be neglected; and not only for that Reason, but for
another more powerful, viz. because it is assistant in expelling the
Morbifick-matter.

LXVI. The diminution then of the febritick Heat is to be avoided, yea it ought
to be kept up to the height; otherwise the protrusion will be weak and
imperfect, and in general proves fatal to the Sick. It Is a great error indeed,
to cause an abatement of the Fever; for it is the strength and height of the
Fever, which saves the Life of the Patient.

LXVII. It Is that violent Heat, which is the effectual Cause of a complete
protrusion of the Matter into the surface of the Skin: and not only so, but
it is also the cause of a more speedy expulsion, and bringing the Disease to a
much more speedy, healthful end.

LXVIII. For the more languid that Heat, the more danger; and if the Fever goes
either quite away, orconsiderably abates, it is a thousand to one but the Sick
dies suddenly, or in a little time becomes past all hopes of recovery.

LXiX. But if the Heat be conserved, and the Fever let alone, you will see in a
short time, by the plentiful eruption of the Pustules, (if there is a plenty of
the Morbid-matter) that the danger of Death will quickly be over, to the great
ease, comfort, and satisfaction of the Sick.

LXX. And that after Nature has made a sufficient protrusion, the Fever it self
(for want of fuel) will presently vanish of its own accord, without the help of
any Medicine: and this is that which in the space of thirty-three Years
Practice, I have, I believe, above a thousand times observed.

LXXI. It is objected, That by the violence and continuation of the Fever, the
Smallpox may come forth too plentifully; or much more than otherwise they
would do; to the great prejudice, and greater danger of the Sick. We readily
answer, 1. That they cannot come too plentifully out; for all the
Morbid-matter, which Nature has prepared, and separated from the Blood and
other Humors, ought to be expelled. 2. That there is no danger to the Sick,
simply by their coming forth plentifully: but directly on the contrary, the
danger is, if they do not come fully forth, as they ought to do.

LXXII. If there is not a plenty of Matter to be expelled, they cannot come
plentifully forth: but if there is a plenty of that Matter, it ought to be all
expelled, otherwise several inconveniences will unavoidably ensue.

LXXIII. If the Body is weak, and the Constitution very faulty, as Cachectical,
Scorbutical, etc. the not coming completely forth, for the most part, hazards
the Patient's Life. But if the Sick is of a strong habit and constition of
Body, whereby Nature is so able to contend with the Disease, as to vanquish the
dangers of Death; then some evil Symptoms, as running Sores and Ulcers, Scabs,
Itch, Biles, etc. are apt to seize upon the Patient; in some presently; and in
others, in some little time afterward.

LXXIV. Or else some other pernicious and ill-natured Disease is apt to seize
and afflict them; as the Scurvy, Leprosy, King's Evil, Consumption, etc. which
by reason of the remaining universal defilement of the Body, will not be easily
mastered or overcome; without much trouble, and long and tedious courses of
Physic.

LXXV. It is also to be observed, that the greatness of the Fever, is in
proportion to the prepared and separated Morbid-matter now ready for expulsion:
if it is little in quantity, the Fever is never great; and sometimes, where the
Pustules are very few, as here and there one) scarcely to be discerned; so that
the Patient goes up and down the House, as if nothing ailed them. But where it
is much in quantity, the Fever is great, and always in proportion to the Matter
to be expelled, as it were by Natures designation.

LXXVI. It Is also observable, that more Matter than Nature has prepared and
separated, will not be protruded, do what you will, neither by the height, nor
continuance of the Fever, use of Sudorificks, or any other means whatsoever.
And therefore, what Matter the has separated for expulsion, ought not to be
prevented, by abating the Symptoms through Bleeding, lest other greater evils do
ensue, as we have before declared.

LXXVII. The last Indication of Cure, is the Vital Indication, respecting the
strength or weakness of the Sick, against which Bleeding is diametrically
opposed. For take away the Blood, in which the Vital potency resides, and you
manifestly weaken the Sick more and more, and diminish the Spirits, which ought
to oppose, or encounter the Disease.

LXXVIII. For Nature through Bleeding, being weakened, (not only by being robbed
of her defense, but by introducing an Enemy, who universaily defiles her
Economy, and quenches the Vital Flame) there is immediately an universal
weakness spread over the whole Humane Frame, and the contest of Nature with the
Disease ceases, by Natures being overcome. This Truth is so evident, that we
cannot but speak it with grief, when we do but think of that late precious
Life, which by that means, we faithfully believe, was lost.

LXXIX. From what has been said, it is manifest, that Bleeding in this Disease,
is a very inimical course to the Patient, let the Practisers thereof say what
they can for themselves: and if they allege Experience against us, we will
bring Experience against Experience; and justify by the universal Management of
this Disease through the whole Kingdom, yea almost through the whole World, That
above a thousand does well without it, to one that does well with it.

LXXX. And generally speaking, every one that is born into the World, and now
alive, who in their order or course, have had this Disease, and have overcome
it without Bleeding, ought to be opposed to the novel Practices of these times:
for that through the whole Kingdom, yea through the whole Universe, there is not
one to a thousand, that are let Blood in it; yea I am of opinion, that there is
scarcely one of ten thousand in the whole, that is; and yet generally, they
live and do well.

LXXXI. Whereas, let us but examine amongst those that are let Blood, and we
shall find by sad experience, that scarcely ten live in an hundred. Take an
equal number on both sides, suppose a thousand which may have this Disease, and
are not let Blood; we find, that by the help of a good Nurse, and careful
looking after, that at least nine hundred and fifty, do well; which is complete
nineteen in twenty.

LXXXII. Whereas in a thousand that have this Disease, and are let Blood, at
least nine hundred and fifty of them dye; which is again full nineteen out of
twenty. And this my own Eyes are Witnesses of: I knew ten in one Family, all
which had the Smallpox at the same time almost, one after another; six
Children, a Wife, and two Brothers; they were all let Blood, in order to the
Cure, and were all lost: the Master of the House fell sick afterward of the
same, and refused that course, by reason of the ill success of the other nine;
and lived and did well. Now what can be said to such an Example as this?

LXXXIII. But to give Our Adversaries all the advantage that can be, suppose
among those that are let Blood, the one half of them should live, yet the odds
of living are on our side, who are against Bleeding. And to justify our selves
in this Opinion, we will consider the whole Body of our own Nation, which you
see at this day is full of People; and yet, that though the greatest part of them
have past past this Disease, (take the whole Kingdom throughout) not one in ten
thousand of them (I mean, of them that are living) have been let Blood in this
case. Which is a mighty and weighty Consideration, and worthy to be taken
notice of.

LXXXIV. As for my own part, in my time of Practicing, I am very confident I
have had at least a thousand Patients sick of this Disease, not one of which I
ever let Blood, or caused it be done, and yet they all lived and did well; nor
had I ever (I bless God for it) a Patient sick thereof under my hands, which
died.

LXXXV. And yet I freely confess, that the Disease is sometimes so malign and
deleterious, that no Methods whatsoever can save; and therefore where I see
mortal Symptoms, I always forbear meddling: and truly it is a great and good
piece of knowledge in our Art, to be so well skilled in the Prognostic part
thereof, as to foresee the danger of the Sick; which being well understood,
gives the true Physician a great reputation; by avoiding the Infamy, which
otherwise might attend him.

LXXXVI. If it be enquired, Whether Blood may not be taken away before their
coming forth; we answer, No. In any Patient of mine, were I sure the Smallpox
would succeed, I should always forbid it: and my Reason is, because it would
make the protrusion of the Pustules very languid and weak; whereby, if it did
not hazard the Patient's life, yet this evil might follow, that by reason through
weakness of the Expulsive Faculty, there might not be a full expulsion of the
Morbifick-matter, the remaining part thereof would lay the foundation of some
other more pernicious Disease; as the Measles, Leprosy, King's Evil, Apostems,
Consumptions, etc.

LXXXVII. When any of the Blood-suckers Patients dye, the Pustules seem to fall
in again, grow flat and dead, or to dent in in the middle; and sometimes to
turn purple, livid, or black; with many livid, or purple spots in the
interspaces. Then to excuse themselves, they say it was a dangerous and malign
Disease, and complicated with an Erysipelas, Purples, Spotted-fever, or the
like; by reason of which Complication, 'twas impossible for the Sick to escape
death, what course soever had been taken.

LXXXVIII. To which we answer, That this is only a blind for their Ignorance,
and an Excuse for their cursed Male-practice: for many (if not most) of those
miserable Patients might have lived, if they had not fallen into those
Blood-suckers hands: and it is for the most part Bleeding, (where the Sick dies
upon it) which is the cause of suchlike Spots appearing.

LXXXIX. But as for a Complication of the abovenamed Diseases in the
Smallpox, we never once knew it, in the thousand cases we have seen, nor do we
believe it possible to be: it is the nature of the Disease, not to admit them.
The Smallpox is Disease enough of it self, we need not add others to it, to
make it worse.

XC. As for an Erysipelas, the Smallpox it self is so like it, in its first
approaches and coming out, that it is not every one that can distinguish
between them. But however, the Small pox cannot in any wise admit of an
Erysipelas to be joined with them; their natures are as different, as are the
methods of their cure.

XCI. And when purple or livid Spots appear, upon the falling down of the
Pustules, or death of the Patient, they no more demonstrate a purple or spotted
Fever, than they do the Dropsy or Gout. It Is the property of the Disease, when
Nature is upon the yielding part, or is already overcome, to send forth those
Symptomata, as Tokens of her ensuing Fate.

XCII. These things being said, we shall now address our self to the Cure;
wherein we shall do our endeavor to explicate it, according to the best
Methods of Practice; and what I my self have found admirably successful in all
my undertakings, wherever I have been concerned in the Cure of this Disease.

XCIII. First, Purging we forbid, as dangerous; (almost for the same reasons as
we do Bleeding) lest it should induce a Flux of the Bowels, whereby their
plentiful eruption might possibly be hindered: it is better of the two, to keep
the Body Costive, than to admit of any thing which may hazard a Flux of the
Belly.

XCIV. But upon the Patient's first falling ill, if the Body is Cacochymick, or
has a fullness of Humors, or the Stomach is foul, or a Vomiting be present; you
may safely enough give some proper Antimonial Emetick, as Vinum Benedictum,
Tartar emetick, and the like; because it at once empties the Stomach of
abundance of filth, adhering to its Tunicles, and gives upon the spot, a
wonderful relief to Nature.

XCV. But in the progress of this Cure, I think a good, honest and careful
Nurse is most to be relied on; I am sure, much more than on the Blood-sucking
Doctors, and No-Doctors of these times; under whose hands, the greatest part of
those who fall into them, miscarry.

XCVI. If extreme Thirst afflicts the Patient, it may be allayed by small Beer,
in which Saffron has been infused, and made pleasantly sharp with Spiritus
Nitratus: or with this, Fair Water three quarts, burnt Hartshorn ii. boil till
a quart is consumed: toward the end of boiling put in a crust of Bread; then
strain, and sweeten with treble-resined Sugar ii. or better, adding also the
juice of one Limon: of which give the Sick, as need requires.

XCVII. Give this every night going to bed. Our Tinctura Opii, or Guttae Vitae,
or liquid Laudanum, a gut. vi. ad xvi. Spiritus nitratus gut. xx. Milk-water,
or the former Decoction of Hartshorn iii. mix for a Dose. But be sure to
regulate the Dose of the Opiate, according to the age and strength of the Sick.
If it is a young Child, gut. iii. or iv. may be Dose enough, and you may
sweeten it with a little white Sugar.

XCVIII. And every Morning give this. Bezoar-mineral gr.xii. Bezoar-stone,
Cochinel, A. gr. vi. Salt of Amber gr. iv. mix for a Dose, if it is a Man. But
if it is a Child, it will serve for two Doses.

XCIX. If the Tongue and Throat are clammy, rough, hot, and dry, inject the
following Gargarism with a Syringe. Of the former Decoction of Hartshorn viii.
Honey of Roses jss. Tincture of Saffron and Cochinele iii. dulcified Spirit of
Nitre gut. xxx. mix them.

C. If the Pustules seem to strike in, fall flat, or sink in the middle, let
the Composition at Sect. 98. above, be repeated every six hours. Or this
Mixture. Milk-water viii. choice Canary i. Spiritus cordialis ss. Tincture of
Saffron and Cochinel ii. Spirit of Sal Armoniack, or Spirit of Hartshorn ijss.
mix them, for four little Draughts.

CI. Or this. Our Theriaca Chymica, Electuarium Antepestilentiale, A. ss. mix
them. Dose, a gr. xvi. ad i. to be repeated every six hours, till the Pustules
begin to arise again: or either of the particulars may be given alone in the
same Dose.

CII. If upon the eleventh, twelfch, or other succeeding days the Fever goes
not off; but that the Sick is unquiet, uneasy, and restless, and that death
seems to be at the door, give the Pulvis Antifebriticus, a ss. ad ii. or i. in
the Harts-horn-Decoction. Or this: Aqua Elementaria vi. Spiritus Cordialis i.
Spirit of Hartshorn i. mix for a Draught.

CIII. If a vehement Flux is present, give a gr. ad ii. of a simple Extract of
Opium, mixed with, or dissolved in Tinctuce of Catechu; to be repeated every
Night, so long as need requires, and given in the Harts-horn-Decoction.

CIV. When the Pustules are fully come out, and begin to grow yellow, the
purulent matter may be let out, by pricking them with a Needle, or the point of
a Lancet, or cutting off their heads; after which, you may anoint them with a
Feather, with the following Mixture. Sheeps-suet ii. Oil of Ben jss. Sperma
Ceti i. mix, and make an Ointment; with which anoint, 'till the Pustules are
fully dried up.

CV. This is commended. Oil of Ben iijss. pure white Sperma Ceti i. juice of
Limons ss. in which let be dissolved Saccharum Saturni ii. mix, and make a
Liniment; with which anoint twice a day.

CVI. The Scabs being fallen off, there is wont to succeed a notable Scurf,
which in many eats even into the Skin: to prevent which, and to clear it of the
Scurf, you must daily, two or three times a day, or as often as you see occasion,
wash with Aqua Tartarisata blood-warm; or rather with Lac Virginale, than which
I think nothing is better.

CVII. If in the beginning of the Disease, there happens to be either spitting
or pissing of Blood, or a Bloody Flux, you must necessarily give Our Tinctura
Mirabilis, a ss. ad i. mixed with some convenient Vehicle. Or this Powder:
Catechu in powder i. Crocus Martis astringens ss. Opium in powder gr. i. mix
for a Dose; to be repeated as often as need requires.

CVIII. If the Disease is vehement, the Fever great and intense, and the
Pustules break forth generally over the whole Body, in very great numbers, or
run every where into a flux; the Sick ought to keep their Bed, be carefully
tended and looked after; and, as much as may be, avoid taking Cold, for that is
as much as the Life is worth; and their Food may be boiled Barley,
Barley-broth, or rather boiled Rice, and Rice-broth, Ponada, etc. drinking also
the Hartshorn Drink before described, Canary-whey, which comforts the Spirits;
white Posset Drink made with Ale, and sweetened with double-refined Sugar.

CIX. Lastly, at the End of the Disease purge the Body well; either with Sal
mirabile, Our Family Pills, Pilulae Catharticae, Tinctura purgans, Tinctura
Cathartica, Syrupus Catharticus, an Infusion of Sena and Rhubarb, or some other
proper Purge, agreeable with the habit and constitution of the Body; which let
be repeated at least three or four times. The want of doing this, (which
carries off all the remainders or relics of the Distemper) has been the cause
of Scurvy, Gout, Consumptions, Apoplexies, Apostems, foul Ulcers, Botches,
Biles, Scabs, Leprosy, and King's Evil, breaking out afterward, and seizing
upon the Patient

CX. Some, when the Pustules rise not as they ought to do, or when they find
them to fall down again, apply Vesicatories, or Blistering-Emplasters: but they
only put the Patient to a very great deal of pain and torture, without doing
any general good, or any good at all: for as much as they draw but only from
particular Parts, and Parts adjucent to the Application, and so leave the Sick
worse than they found him.

III. Tumors arising from PHLEGM.
CHAP. XXI. Of an OEDEMA.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Oedema; and in English, Oedema,
and, the White-swelling. It Is true, Hippocrates and other ancient Physicians,
under the name of Oedema understood all other Turnors whatsoever; because it
signifies an eminency, rising up, or swelling: but those of later times
understand only one certain kind of swelling, which is the White-swelling here
intended.

II. Definition. Tumor est praeter Naturam, ab Humore seroso aut pituitoso
ortum habens, albus, mollis, laxus, indolens, and caloris expers; prementi
Digito cedens, and per congestionem frequentius, quam per affluxum Humorum
productus. It is a Tumor besides Nature, arising from a serous or pituitous
matter, white, soft, loose, without pain, and void of heat; yielding to the
Fingers being pressed, and oftener caused by congestion, than fluxion, or a flux
of Humors.

III. The Kinds. It is perfect, when it proceeds from Phlegm only: imperfect,
when it proceeds from other Humors; as Blood, Choler, Melancholy; whence they
are called Oedema Phlegmonoodes, Erysipelatoodes, Scirrhoodes.

IV. The Cause. It is caused from Phlegm alone sometimes, and sometimes from a
mixtion of other Humors, as is mentioned in the Kinds. But Barbett thinks it to
be produced from the ill disposition of the Lymphaducts.

V. Galen, ad Glauc. lib. 2. cap. 3. says, that it is caused by a Pituitous
matter; or else by the Spirits, when they are full of Vapors. But by that great
Man's leave, though in the similar Parts there may be some kind of flatulent
Spirit collected, which may tumify the Part; yet this Tumor is not properly
Oedema, but rather (...), or (...), a Windy Tumor: of which hereafter.

VI. Sennertus says it proceeds from a serous Humor abounding in the Body, and
descending upon the Part, and there abiding and sticking fast, as in a
substance more cold than other parts of the Body.

VII. The Conjoined Cause is Phle^m contained in the Blood, when it is so
increased, that it irritates and stirs up the Expulsive Faculty: for Nature
being then excited, protrudes the Matter out of the greater Vessels into the
less, and expels it from the more noble Parts to the weaker; till at length it
is received and retained, by the most weak and infirm Part.

VIII. The Procatartick Cause is, an error and default in Sanguification;
producing such a like Humor, which must be found out from the Patient's Diet,
Exercise, and way of Living.

IX. The Places. Although it may be excited in all parts of the Body whatsoever,
yet it chiefly arises in the Hands, Knees, and Feet; as is manifest in such
persons as are afflicted therewith; as in such as are Hydropical, Cachectical,
Phthisical, or Strumatick.

X. The Signs. It is known by being a Tumor soft and loose, so that if it be
pressed down with the Finger, it easily gives way: for the moist Phlegm softens
and loosens the Part; yet being thicker than the Lympha or other Humors, it
sticks in the Part.

XI. It is altogether without pain, or any pulsation; for not dissolving
perfectly the unity, it cannot be dolorous.

XII. It is also of a white, or whitish color, because there is in it no
preternatural heat, but only so much as is conformable to Nature: or rather,
there is a coldness of the Part, from its weakness, and nature of the Matter
congested therein.

XIII. The Prognostics. It is not suddenly generated, but grows by degrees, or
by little and little: because the Humor is cold, thick, and sluggish; and
therefore not fit for any speedy motion.

XIV. It often happens to old people, gross and phlegmatic. Bodies, and in
Winter time; and to such who with gluttony and much drinking, continually
debilitate the natural heat.

XV. It is a Disease, which in it self (without other accidents) is of no
danger: nor is it great, or the cause thereof, of any dangerous consequence,
nor has it usually any ill Symptoms joined therewith.

XVI. It is said to be dangerous, if it happens to such as have a Cachexy,
Dropsy, Consumption, or King's Evil: but then this danger comes not simply from
the Oedema, but from those Diseases which the Oedema follows: for which reason,
you ought to distinguish whether it arises of it self, or follows upon some
other Disease.

XVII. If it happens in the Feet or Knees, after long Diseases, from Crudities
collected by the Disease, or from a refrigeration, or other dangerous faults of
the Liver, it is then dangerous, and may threaten death, from the Causes upon
which it depends: but otherwise if no such accidents be concurrent with it,
there is no danger at all.

XVIII. If it degenerates into a Scirrhus, or by any accident comes to
Apostemats, it will be of very difficult cure, if not totally uncurable.

XIX. But yet though Oedema is a Disease, which of it self is without any danger,
yet notwithstanding it is of a long continuance; because it arises from a cold
and clammy Matter, which cannot be overcome in a long time.

XX. Sometimes it terminates by a Resolution, unless it degenerates into a
scirrhous Nodosity, or the like: for the much using of Digestives, many times
makes the matter wax hard.

XXI. The Cure. Indications of Cure are threefold: 1. The removing the
Procatartick Cause. 2. Removal of the Antecedent Cause. 3. Removing of the
Conjoined Cause; which is done by Topics, or External Applications.

XXII. As to the removing of the Procatartick Cause; let the Diet be such as
does not generate or breed Phlegm, but rather such as destroys it.

XXIII. Let his Bread be Wheat, and chiefly Biscuit: his Meat, Flesh of good
nourishment, and easy digestion, as roasted Mutton, Veal, Pullets, Rabbets: his
Fish, such as swim in stoney and gravelly places: his Drink, Medicated Ale,
with Wine sometimes.

XXIV. Let the Air he lives in, be drying and heating, use Exercise before
Eating, to ^tir up the Native Heat; be merry and cheerful, avoiding Melanc^oly
as much as may be: diurnal Sleep is also to be avoided, also Blood letting, and
such things as bind the Body, or overmuch cool it, as Cheese, cold Fruits, as
Cucumbers, Melons, etc.

XXV. The Antecedent Cause is removed by due Purgation, either upwards or
downwards. If the Stomach is foul, give a Vomit of Tartar-emetick, a gr. ii. ad
v. or vi. according to age and strength; or with Vinum emeticum, or Vinum or
Acetum scilliticum; repeating the Dose two or three times.

XXVI. Then purge with Diajalapa, or Diagamba, or Our Family Pills, Pilulae
Catharticae, Syrupus Catharticus, or Pulvis Corna^hini, or Tinctura purgans: or
you may often purge with an Infusion of Sena and Mechoacan, which is admirable:
and then cut the tough Phlegm with Oxysaccharum, by often giving it in Infusio
Catholica, or alone.

XXVII. Sudorificks are sometimes given with good success, being exhibited in
the times between Purging.

XXVIII. A proper Diet ought also to be instituted, such as this of Barbett.
Florentine-Orrice i. Sena vi. roots of Parsley, Sea-holly, A.ss. Rhubarb,
Agarick trochiscated, A.iii. Cinnamon, seeds of Siler montanum, A. ii. Cloves
ss. infuse them in old White Wind a quart: and take every morning iv. or v. for
a Dose.

XXIX. Or this Electuary. Electuary of the juice of Roses i. Jalap i. Spirit of
Salt i. mix, and make an Electuary; of which let the quantity of a Bean or
Hazle-nut be taken every third or fourth day.

XXX. By the often use of one or other of these Medicines, he says he has many
times cured an Oedema; but withal rolling the Parts with Rowlers twelve or
fifteen yards long; beginning from below upwards, allowing thereby no liberty
for the Humor to descend. By this method the noble Parts are strengthened, the
evil Humors evacuated, and the Parts affected in a few days restored.

XXXI. But in order to the Essential Cure, you must observe whether the Oedema
follows any other Disease of the more noble parts: if so, the Intentions of
Cure must first be directed to them; that the Disease upon which it depends may
be taken away; otherwise the Oedema will never be cured.

XXXII. The Conjoined Cause is next to be considered. By Frictions and hot
Fomentations, warm the Part affected; or rub it well with Oil, mingled with
Salt: or foment it with a Decoction of Wormwood in Wine, in which a little Salt
of Wormwood, or of Tartar has been dissolved.

XXXIII. Or anoint with Unguentum Martiatum, or with Balsam de Chili, with
which once I cured an Oedema; bathing the Part also with the Powers of Amber,
and applying over a Resolutive Emplaster.

XXXIV. But in the beginning Repellers are to be mixed with Discussives, but so
that the Discussives may exceed; afterward use only Discussives or
Resolutives: as Vnguentum Adstringens mixed with equal parts of Vnguentum de
Althaea, or Vng. Comitissae, or Vng. Rutaceum, or Ceratum de Ammoniaco, or
Geratum Galeni, mixed with a few flowers of Sulphur; or the Cataplasma
Resolutivum Foresti, Diachylon simplex, etc.

XXXV. Or you may apply this, which is stronger. Labdanum jss. Olibanum, Oil of
Rue, A. i. flowers of Sulphur vi. Storax Calamita, Cow Dung, A. ss. Alum,
Nitre, Vine-ashes, A. ii. Turpentine, Pitch, A. q.s. mix, and make an
Emplaster. Or, Cow Dung iii. Pigeons-dung ii. mix, and fry them with Oil, and
apply it.

XXXVI. Rose-vinegar jss. Oils of Myrtles and Earthworms, A. i. fine Bole,
Terra sigillata, A. iv. Aloes iii. Acacia, Sanguis draconis, Cyperus roots
poudered, A. ii. Saffron ss. Wax q.s. mix, and make a Liniment.

XXXVII. Or this. Beanmeal ii. Vinegar i. flowers of Sulphur, Vine-ashes,
Sal-gem, A. ii. Oil of Nuts, Camphir, A. i. Turpentine, Wax, A. q.s. mix, and
make a Cerate.

XXXVIII. This Cataplasm is excellent. Roots of Althaea iii. briony,
Dwarf-elder, A. ii. leaves of Sage, Rue, A. M. i. Savin, M ss. boil them in
equal parts of Wine and Water: in the end add Wine-vinegar iii. beat all well
together; then add Beanmeal ijss. Leaven jss. Cow Dung i. Vine-ashes, common
Salt, A. ss. Hogs-lard ii. Oil of Camomil iv. mix them.

XXXIX. Bandage (says Wiseman) is of great help in this cure; so that we can do
nothing considerable without it. Those I especially commend to you, are, a
laced Stocking, Trowze, Sleeve, Glove; because they sit most firmly, and may be
worn with the greatest advantage, and least trouble or prejudice to the Health
of the Patient; yet it requires consideration, and care how they be laced: for
by unequal lacing, a Tumor may be raised; and by an equal over-hard lacing, the
most fleshy Part may be emaciated.

XL. And Sennertus says, that in applying of Medicaments of any kind, whether
Liniments, Ointments, or Emplasters, we must beforehand make the Part hot by
Frictions and Fomentations; otherwise the Applications will scarcely effect the
Cure, by reason of the coldness of the Part.

XLI. The Frictions may be made with course hot linen Cloths, the Fomentation
with Decoction of Camomil, Feather-few, Hyssop, Origanum, Tansey, Wormwood,
etc. in Wine: for by the Frictions and Fomentations together, the Heat and
Blood will be called into the Part, and the superfluous Humor will be scattered.

XLII. But if the Tamor will not resolve, but that it is necessary to bring it
to Suppuration, you may do it with the Cataplasm, at Sect. 38. aforegoing,
adding thereto, pulp of roasted Onions, Basilicon the less, A. iii.

XLIII. The Abscess being suppurated, let it be opened either with a Caustic,
or the Knife; and let it be thoroughly cleansed with juice of Wormwood and honey
of Roses, mixed with Turpentine and Frankincense; fill the hollowness with
Vnguentum Basilicon, or Nicotianae, and at length heal it up according to Art:
but it commonly proves a long time, before the Cure is perfected.

XLIV. If it should degenerate into a Scirrhus, you must use only Emollients:
and for this purpose, we use Vinegar, in which Lapis Pyrites or Fire-stone, or
a piece of a Millstone heated red-hot has been quenched: afterward anointing
the Part with old Oil, in which roots of wild Cucumbers and Althaea, have been
boiled.

XLV. Or this. Mucilage of Althaea roots, Linseed and Fenugreek, Goose grease,
Veal marrow, powder of Orrice root, powder of Hermodacts, Camomil flowers, A.
ii. liquid Storax, Myrrh, Frankincense, Oil of Camomil, A. x. Wax, q.s. mix,
and make an Emplaster.

XLVI. Scultetus has this Observation. With the noble Limewater, says he, made
use of for some days, I have discussed obstinate Oedematous Tumors. A piece of
Quicklime, the quantity of a Walnut, put it into boiling Water till it is
dissolved; which done, stir them together, and let them settle: decant off the
clear Water, and dip into it a new Sponge, which press out, and apply hot to
the Part; it being first anointed with Oil of sweet Almonds, or Hog's Grease.

XLVII. The same practice (says he) is to be given to a Sponge dipped into Posca
or Oxycrate, viz. Vinegar and Water mixed together; being applied in the
beginning or augmentation of the Disease. Scult. observe. 72.

XLVIII. In an Oedema Phlegmonoodes, which is somewhat like an Erysipelas, and
for the most part invades the Limbs, being very troublesome, nothing is found
better than this: Lie of Vine-ashes lbi. Sal-nitre jss. common Salt,
Wine-vinegar, A. i. mix them. After general Remedies, dip double linen Cloths
in this lukewarm, and apply, binding them on with Rowlers: it wonderfully
drinks in, discusses, and in three or four days at most, helps dangerous
Oedema's, threatening Mortification. Scultet. observe. 98.

XLIX. Munick, Chirurg. lib. 1. cap. 6. sect. 14. commends this, from great
Experience. Rectified S.V. Wine-vinegar, A. vii. common Salt ss. mix, and
dissolve: this Liquor apply with double Cloths dipped in it hot, with strict
ligature (rolling it from below upwards) but not too much compressing the Parts.

L. About three years since, I had a Maidservant in cure, who having an
obstruction of her Terms, had forthwith an Oedema in her Knee; it was very
large: I first well purged her with my Family Pills three or four times; and
gave her Tinctura Martis to provoke her Terms, which was effectually done:
after which, (making her keep her Bed, for about seven or eight Weeks) I gave
her every night my Guttae Vitae, beginning at fifty drops, and increasing the
Dose gradually, till it came to an hundred; which she continued the taking of,
the whole time of the Cure.

LI. And outwardly, after Frictions, I bathed it well with my Spiritus
Anodynus, (which is a Tincture of Opium, etc. in Spirit of Wine:) and after,
anointed it with Balsam de Chili, applying over it a Plaster of Mithridate.
This course was constantly repeated, morning and evening; and in about 8 weeks
time she was perfectly well.

LII. Where an Oedema is very obstinate, whether it breaks, or breaks not,
there is nothing equal to a gentle Salivation; which being skilfully and
carefully performed, does the Cure to a wonder; for that it causes an effectual
revulsion of the Humor to another Part.

CHAP. XXII. Of the CYSTICK TVMOR.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Tumor Cysticus; in English, the
Cystick Tumor, or, Tumor contained in a Bag.

II. The Kinds. It is threefold, according to the threefold Matter contained in
the Cystis, or Bag: viz. 1. When it is like unto Frumety, called in Greek,
(...), Pultis genere; in Latin, Atheroma. 2. When it is like unto Honey, called
in Greek, (...); a (...), Mel, and (...), Cera; in Latin, Meliceris. 3. When it
is like unto Suet, called in Greek, (...), a (...), Sebum seu Sevum; in Latin,
Steatoma, Tumor sevosus.

III. They are all of them also called (...), Choeratodes; because they have
some resemblance to that swine-like Disease the Scrophula; when contained in a
Cystis or Bag.

IV. The Definition. Atheroma is a preternatural Tumor, contained in a proper
Cystis; caused from a Humor or Matter like to Frumety or Paste, made of boiled
Barley or Wheat; of the color of the Skin, without pain, hot easily yielding
to the Fingers; nor when removed, suddenly swelling out again.

V. Sometimes in an Atheroma, there is mixed with the pultislike Matter, hard
substances, and stony bodies; sometimes a sulphur-like substance, sometimes
small Bones, matted Hair, and the like.

VI. Meliceris is a preternatural Tumor, contained in its own proper Cystis,
proceeding from a honey-like Matter, of a white color, painless, round, and
easily yielding to the Fingers; which being removed, presently returns again to
its first figure.

VII. The Tumor in this, is greater than the former, its figure is rounder and
higher, and the Humor thereof thinner.

VIII. Steatoma is a preternatural Tumor, contained in its proper Cystis,
caused from a matter like to Suet, and of the same color, and soft: it arises
from a small beginning, increases gradually and leisurely, difficultly yields
to the Fingers; which being removed, it returns again to its former magnitude.

IX. The Differences. How they differ one from another, the Signs aforegoing
show: but (says Barbett) if the Matter of any of these Tumors is gathered
together about the Joints, it is called (...), Ganglion: if about the Glandules
of the Neck, (...), Choeratodes, Glandula, Scrophula, or Struma: if in the Arms
or Legs, Tuberculum; if from the Pox, Tophus, or Gumma. So that in the main, it
seems, that he makes them but as a species of the King's Evil.

X. But if they happen in the Head, they are called, 1. Talpa, which is
referred to Atheroma. 2. Testudo, or Topinaria, which is referred to Meliceris.
3. Natta, which is referred to Steatoma, growing forth especially on the Back.

XI. The Causes. The Antecedent Cause is Phlegm; in the one more, in the other
less; receding from its natural constitution: and sometimes (though seldom) it is
mixed with Melancholy.

XII. Platerus is of pinion, that these Tumors are not generated from
excrementitious Humors, or Phlegm; (for that it would be obnoxious to
putridness) but from an alimentary Juice: viz. such as is by Nature provided
for the nourishment of the Part.

XIII. For (says he) if the Humor is thicker than is necessary for nourishment,
then a fleshy substance or Excrescence is bred: but if the Humor is
extraordinary thick, then it becomes a Scirrhus: but if the Humor is thinner,
then it suddenly ends in an Apostem, in which different matter is generated,
according to the difference and variety of the Juice mixed with other Humors)
which has bred this Tumor; which yet comes not to suppuration in like manner,
as other Apostems bred from Blood; nor yet is it turned into Pus, but into
another kind of Substance, contained in a proper Cystis.

XIV. All these sorts of Tumors have their cause from a very inconsiderable
beginning; and they are tedious, and increase but by little and little; being
included in their own peculiar Tunicle.

XV. The Signs. Atheroma yields when it is touched, as if it were a certain
loose body, and returns back slowly: but what it has within, (as also Meliceris
and Steatoma) is only to be guessed at by conjecture: so true it is, that it
cannot be certainly known, till it is cast forth; as Celsus says, lib. 7. cap.
6.

XVI. Meliceris is rounder in figure, more extended; and when pressed down, it
suddenly yields and gives place to the touch; and upon removal of the Fingers,
as soon returns back again.

XVII. Steatoma is harder than the other, and resists upon the touch, having
the bottom thereof more solid: but though it is hard, yet it differs from
Strumae, because it is nothing so hard as Strumae, nor has it an inequality
like it.

XVIII. The Tumors called Talpa, Testudo, and Natta, are easily known, 1. From
the Place, because they almost always happen in the Head. 2. From their Form
and Substance; being soft Tumors, at least not very hard, and shut up in their
own proper Cystis.

XIX. TALPA (from its creeping like a Mole) runs under the Skin and Flesh, and
seems to feed upon the Cranium or Skull; the matter whereof is more gross and
thick than in Testudo, and so may be referred to Atheroma.

XX. TESTUDO, is a great Tumor in the Head, soft, or not very hard, of a broad
form, much like the manner of a Tortoise; growing forth at first in form and
fashion of a Chestnut, afterward like an Egg, containing a soft kind of matter,
in a Cystis; for which reason it is referred to Meliceris, which sticks so fast
in the Scull, that it vitiates it, and causes rottenness.

XXI. NATTA, is a Tumor great and soft, without any pain or color, growing on
the head, back, shoulders, and sometimes other parts, hanging by a small,
slender root; yet sometimes it increases to the weight of some pounds, and in
bigness, to the quantity of a large Melon: the Matter contained, seems to be
fleshy, but indeed it is no Flesh, but like unto Fat, and therefore is referred
to Steatoma.

XXII. These three last Tumors have the same Cause, which the three former
Tumors have; but in this lies the difference, that in these there is a greater
quantity of Matter; for which reason, their magnitude or bulk is much greater.

XXIII. The Prognostics. Atheroma, Meliceris, and Steatoma carry no danger in
them; yet they are generally of long continuance, and without any great hurt,
continued and neglected.

XXIV. Sometimes they Apostemate of their own accord; but if so, they are not
of so difficult cure as Scrophulae, or a Scirrhus.

XXV. If they be elevated, and exposed to motion, they are easily cured; but if
they lie deep, and not exposed to the touch, with much more difficulty.

XXVI. In cutting them out, much care is required, because of the danger of
great fluxes of Blood; or the cutting or pricking of some Nerve. Many
Surgeons for want of skill, in cutting away these Tumors, many times cut
away the Nerves that lie under them.

XXVII. These Tumors (says Barbett) are scarcely ever cured, but by Manual
Operation. If the Vesicle is broken, or not all taken out, there remains a
Fistula, or foul Ulcer; whose cure will be both difficult and tedious.

XXVIII. Talpa, Testudo, or Natta, being in the Head are dangerous, by reason
of their nearness to the Scull; for that they corrode the Scull, and corrupt
it, chiefly about the Suture.

XXIX. If they are without any corruption of the Scull, they are the more
easily and safely cured: but if there is present a great corruption of the
Scull, it is much better to let the Tumor alone, than to cure it.

XXX. As in Atheroma, Meliceris, and Steatoma, so in Talpa, Testudo, and Natta,
there is no perfect recovery to be hoped for; unless the whole Cystis, together
with the Humor contained in it be taken forth; for if any thing is left behind,
a new Tumor of like kind will arise again.

XXXI. The Cure. Though Atheroma, Meliceris, and Steatoma, differ in their names,
yet they have almost but one way of curing. Universals are to be premised, and
the whole Body is to be purged from the vicious or or offending Humor, both by
Vomit and Stool.

XXXII. Afterward the conjoined Matter, which is the cause of the Tumor; and
the Cystis it self is to be taken away, if need requires.

XXXIII. Barbett says they are sometimes, but very rarely removed by
Resolvents: Sennertus says, that Atheroma is cured by Discussives and
Suppuratives; and for the most part, has no need at all of Section.

XXXIV. Barbett cured some with Balsam of Peru; some with Empl. Oxycroceum;
some with this following: Labdanum i. red Myrrh iii. Camphir i. mix, and make a
Plaster.

XXXV. Another. Gum Ammoniacum, Sagapenum, A.ss. flowers of Sulphur iii. Oil of
Amber i. Euphorbium, and roots of Pellitory, A. ss. mix, and make a Plaster.

XXXVI. This of Sennertus is good. Labdanum, Bdellium, Galbanum, Ammoniacum,
Propolis, Turpentine, A. q.s. mix, and make an Emplaster. Unslaked Lime also
(he says) mixed with Grease or Oil, is very useful, and of singular benefit.

XXXVII. Or this: Ship-Pitch i. Gum Ammoniacum, Sulphur, A. ss. mix them. Or
this: Roots of Sowbread, Hogs-lard, A. q.s. to which add a little Sulphur, and
make a Cataplasm.

XXXVIII. If these Tumors tend to suppuration, which is very rare, you must
assist Nature with Maturatives: and if they break, and the Matter discharge out
of the Tunicle, then you must use Corrosives, for other Medicines will be too
weak.

XXXIX. Cathereticks for this purpose, are roots of white and black Hellebor,
burnt Galls, burnt Date-stones, Verdigrise, burnt Alum, Quicklime,
Mercury-sublimate, Vitriol, Spirit of Salt, Oil or Butter of Antimony, Liquor
of Tartar, red Precipitate, Oak-ashes, Vine-ashes, Vng. Aegyptiacum, Vng.
Fuscum Wurtzii. Some use Arsenick and Orpiment, but with great danger in some
places, as near the Nerves and nervous Parts; but to the Skin and fleshy
Excrescencies, they may be better applied.

XL. This Ointment is also of good use. Dulcified Vitriol i. Verdigrise i. Ung.
Aegyptiacum ss. mix, and make an Ointment. Others commend red Precipitate mixed
with Honey, or Honey of Roses.

XLI. But if the Tumor open; not of its own accord, then you must come to
Section; that so the Cystis (whether it contains a butter-like, a honey-like,
or suet-like substance) may be taken forth, and cut away.

XLII. The Skin is not to be cut transversly, or overthwart; but straight
forward, or a little obliquely, like to the form of a Myrtle-leaf; then the
Cystis, or Membrane containing the Humor, is to be freed from the Skin, and the
Part lying under it: after which it is to be wholly cut off at its root, with
one singular cut.

XLIII. Now in this Operation great care is to be taken, that the Cystis be not
hurt; for so the Humor that is contained therein, flowing forth, will hinder
the Operation; and be a means that some of it, or some of the Humor may be left
behind; which if it should so chance, is to be consumed by Cathereticks: for if
any part of the Tunicle is left remaining, the Tumor will again return.

XLIV. If these Tumors are in the Head, ( the Cystis being taken forth) the
Pericranium must be cut, and the Scull shaved, lest there be any remainder
which may generate the Tumor afresh.

XLV. If the Patient will not admit of Section, the Skin is to be opened with a
Caustic, and the Cystis being taken forth, the Ulcer is to be consolidated,
cutting away the Skin, whatsoever of it is superfluous.

XLVI. An Observation. A Child three years old had an Atheroma, a large soft
Swelling without inflammation: the Bone being suspected to be carious, a
Caustic was applied, which gave vent to a matter not unlike Butter, and by
search with a Probe, the Cranium was felt bare. It was dressed with Lenients, and
after separation of the Escar, the Cranium was bare, as broad as a shilling: it
was dressed up with Linimentum Arcaei hot, and the lips of the Ulcer with Vng.
Basilicon mag. The second day, it was fomented with Decoction of the tops of
Hypericon, Origanum, Betony, red Roses and Balaustians in Wine and Water: the
Bone was dressed with Dossils of Lint, pressed out of S.V. and the lips were dressed
with Vng. Diapompholigos, touching them sometimes with a Vitriol or Alum Stone.
By this means the Bone incarned, united with the lips of the Ulcer, and
cicatrized from the edges round; during which some small pieces of Bones cast
off, and the Ulcer easily healed. Wiseman.

XLVII. Another. A Coachman had a troublesome Meliceris on his right Shoulder,
which after preparing and purging the Body, there was applied the Cerate
Diasinapios to it, thus made. Old Oil xi. Sal Gem, Litharge of Gold, Ceruse, A.
iv. Mustardseed poudred ii. Galbanum, Opopanax, A. ss. Wax, Turpentine, A. ii.
Vinegar q.s. mix, and make a soft Cerate. The effect of this Cerate against a
Meliceris, I lately experienced in another person; who by my advice applied it
to a Meliceris in the right Knee, as big as a Goose-egg, which it totally
discussed in a months time, with all those other Humors, which were gathered to
the Part in the beginning, through the neglect of general Remedies. Scultetus.

XLVIII. If any of these kinds of Tumors hang like Figs by a slender stalk,
they are not to be cut out by opening the Skin, but they are to be cut off by
the roots: or in timorous people, you may bind it about its roots with a
Thread, drawing it harder and harder every day, to stupify it; which is there
to be left, till the Tumor falls off: but where the Patient has courage enough,
it is best to be cut away with a sharp Knife.

XLIX. If it bleeds much, (after cutting off) you must either stop it with a
Styptick, or lightly burn it with a red-hot Iron; and when the Escar is fallen,
you must heal it as a common Ulcer: this way the Ulcer is but small, and equal,
and the Cure soon done.

L. Some of these Atheromata, which lie upon the Parts with a large Basis, are
of very different magnitudes: some are as big as a small Nut, some as big as a
Walnut, others as big as an Egg; but the great ones are as big as a large Melon
or Pompion: and I once saw one, upon the Back of a Gentlewoman, as big, nearly,
as an half-bushel.

LI. Now these great ones, by reason of many Veins and Arteries, cannot be
taken forth, but are wholly to be cut off at once, after the manner as a Cancer
is cut off: taking it away by the very roots; after which, to stop the flux of
Blood, it must be dressed up with Stypticks, Digestives, Sarcoticks, and
Epuloticks.

LII. Scultetus, instead of taking hold of it, as you do of a Cancer in cutting
it off, has a large pair of Pincers made on purpose, with which he takes hold
of the whole Apostem, as far as the roots of it, and so proceeds to the
amputation, or cutting off: those which are of the lesser sort, are cut forth
by opening the Skin, and separating it, and not otherwise.

LIII. In this latter case, you must be very careful that you hurt not the
Cystis, especially in an Atheroma, and a Meliceris: but in Steatoma, the
tallowy substance being more solid, it will hardly run forth, so that there is
less danger in hurting the Bag.

TALPA, TESTVDO, NATTA.
LIVE. These give little hope of cure where the Bone is much corrupted;
otherwise, when they reject all other Remedies, they may be taken away by the
Knife, thus; Divide the Skin in form of a Cross, then take forth the Cystis
whole; which done, separate the Pericranium from the Cranium, and scrape the
Bone with a Rasp, till you come to the sound Part.

LV. After which, sprinkle upon it some Astringent powder, and let the Skin be
forthwith consolidated again; which if it is too loose or large, (which is very
seldom) is in part to be cut off, or taken away.

LVI. Vniversals are here first to be premised, and the Body sufficiently
evacuated; then the Matter making the Tumor is to be taken away by Digestives
and Resolvers, or by Suppuratives, or Manual Operation; as is directed at Sect.
53. aforegoing.

LVII. It is rare that these Tumors are cured by Discussives; but when you have
occasion to make use of them, they may be such as we apply in Scrophula's, or
suchlike Tumors.

LVIII. If they cannot be cured by Discussives alone, then Suppuratives are to
be applied; such as that in Chap. 21. Sect. 38, and 42. aforegoing, of this
Book. Or this: Roasted Onions, yolks of Eggs hard boiled, A. No iii. Hogs-lard,
or fresh Butter lbss. pulp of Althaea-roots lbi. Mithridate v. mix, and make a
Cataplasm.

LIX. But you must not wait for a perfect maturation, because the Pus soon gets
a sharp and malign quality, and so corrodes the Scull; but as soon as any signs
of Suppuration appear, the Tumor is to be opened.

LX. The Incision is to be made either downright, or else in the form of a
Cross, according to the place, and largeness of the Tumor: then the Pus being
wholly emptied, the Ulcer is to be thoroughly cleansed with Vng. ex Apio, or
some other fit Medicine: as, Barley-flower ii. Sarcocol i. Myrrh, Scammony, A.
ss. Honey q.s. mix them.

LXI. Or, cleanse with this. Ung. Nicotianae ii. Tobacco in powder ii. mix
them. Or, Ung. Nicotianae ii. powder of Scammony vi Honey q.s. mix them.
Scammony it self also alone applied, is an excellent thing: so also Scammony
mixed with Myrrh.

LXII. The Ulcer being thoroughly cleansed, it is to be filled up with
Sarcoticks or Incarnatives; and then consolidated according to Art, with
Epuloticks or Cicatrizers.

LXIII. But if the Bone is corrupted, it is then to be scraped with a Rasp or
Scraping-iron; as is above directed at Sect. 53. after which it is to be cured
as other Ulcers, which are accompanied with rottenness of the Bones.

CHAP. XXIII. Of a WEN.
I. THIS Tumor is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Ganglium, Lupia; and in
English, a Wen.

II. What the Ancients meant by Ganglion, is hard to be determined, nor yet
have we any any Disease common with us, that agrees with those Signs and
Symptoms declared by Sennertus; but our more late or modern Authors, under the
names of Ganglion or Lupia, intend that Tumor called by the Vulgar a WEN.

III. A Wen is a preternatural Tumor, proceeding sometimes from Phlegm, and
sometimes from Phlegm mixed with Blood and other Humors; sometimes hard,
sometimes soft, but most commonly round, and of a fleshy substance.

IV. The Places. It generally happens in those places which have little Flesh,
being dry and nervous: as the Forehead, Eyebrows, Backbone, Joints of the
Toes, etc.

V. The Kinds. They are twofold: 1. Those which are contained in a Cystis, or
Bag as it were. 2. Such as are without a Cystis, and seem to be one continued
lump of Flesh with the adjoining Flesh of the Body.

VI. The Causes. The Procatartick Causes are, heavy and dull blows, falls from
high places, overstraining of any Part, or, any other violence; whereby the
mouths of the Capillary Arteries may be made too open, or the mouths of the
Capillary Veins may be obstructed, so as to hinder the due Circulation of the
Blood.

VII. For those Arteries (which are appointed to carry the Nourishment to the
Muscles) yielding or casting out their bloody Juice, and it not being received
in again by the mouths of the Capillary Veins; whereby the Blood joined with
Lympha, becomes extravasated, Nature forms it into a new body, and makes such a
preternatural Tumor as we call a Wen.

VIII. The Antecedent Cause is sometimes Lympha alone, sometimes Lympha joined
with Serum: and sometimes joined with Blood if it proceeds chiefly from a
lymphatick, serous, or pituitous matter, it is generally included in its proper
Cystis; otherwise, if from Blood, not so, but is one continued piece of Flesh
with that of the Body.

IX. The Conjoined Cause is for the most part a fleshy substance, contained in
its proper Cystis, or not contained; having its own particular Veins and
Arteries, by which it is nourished, and made daily to increase, and grows
sometimes to a very great magnitude.

X. The Signs. If it is not contained in a Cystis, it sticks more firmly to the
Part, and is as it were immovable; as those upon the joints of the Toes, etc.
but if it is contained in a Cystis, then it is more moveable with your Fingers,
up and down.

XI. It is a Tumor arising from a very small beginning, and grows in a round or
globular form by little and little, sometimes to a very great magnitude: some
grow as big as a Nutmeg, and never any bigger, some as big as Walnuts, some as
big as large Eggs; others again to a vast bigness, even to the greatness of a
large Melon or Pompion.

XII. In some they cease growing after a year or two, in others they grow for
the space of six or seven years together: some of them easily yield to the
touch, others with more difficulty; being mostly of a fleshy substance, and
generally without pain.

XIII. The color is many times white, or of the color of the Skin, especial
where Lympha or Phlegm is the principal cause: if much Blood is conjoined, it
is reddish; if Choler be joined therewith, the color is yellowish, and the
Tumor a little painful; but if Melancholy, it is livid, and very hard to feel
to.

XIV. As the Tumor increases, the Vessels, as Veins and Arteries, grow big
also; so that they appear sometimes under the Skin, as thick as ones Thumb.

XV. The Prognostics. This Tumor is not in it self malign; but by evil
Applications it may easily be made so: however, the best of Remedies seldom
answer expectation.

XVI. If it is great, and of long continuance, it will never come to
Resolution: if evil Medicines be applied, it oftentimes degenerates into
Cancer: but this is chiefly to be understood of such as are contained in no
proper Cystis.

XVII. If it is about a Joint, there is scarcely any cure for it: for in that
case, cutting will be very dangerous.

XVIII. The Cure. While it is in beginning, you may hinder its increase, as
Paraeus says, ( lib. 7. cap. 20.) by somewhat a strong and frequent rubbing
with your Fingers: for so (says he) their Cystis or Bag, together with the Skin
will wax thin, and the contained Matter grow hot, and be attenuated and
resolved.

XIX. But if this nothing prevails, ( we speak of that contained in a Cystis)
you must press upon it hard with your whole Hand, or a hard piece of Wood, as
heavy as you can, till the Cystis is broken; and then apply and bind strongly
unto it a plate of Lead besmeared with Quicksilver: Paraeus says, he has many
times found by experience, that it has a wonderful force, to resolve and waste
the subject Humor.

XX. But if the Wen is in such a place, where you can make no strong
impression; as in the Face, Breast, Stomach, Throat, or Belly; then this
resolving Emplaster may be applied. Gum Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Galbanum, A. iii.
dissolve them in Vinegar, and strain through a Sieve: then add Oils of Lillies
and Bays, A. i. pouders of Orrice-root, Sal Armoniack, Sulphur vive, and Roman
Vitriol, A. ss. Aqua Vitae ss. mix, and make an Emplaster.

XXI. But whilst this is doing, it will be good to prescribe universal Purgers;
and then to take the Tincture of Salt of Tartar for many days together.

XXII. And whilst the Tumor is small, strive to resolve it, by often anointing
it with Balsam of Sulphur; and applying Empl. Hystericum, or de Galbano
crocatum, which is accounted one of the greatest Resolvers; or Ceratum de
Ammoniaco Foresti, (which see in Our Pharmacop. Land. lib. 5. cap. 5. sect. 4.
and cap. 6. sect. 61. or the Empl. de Ranis, with double or treble Mercury,
which is inferior to none of them.

XXIII. Oribasius made use of this. Ammoniacum, Galbanum strained, old Oil,
Rosin, Ceruse, A. i. Wax iv. mix them, and apply it.

XXIV. But indeed in the beginning, such things as repel and astringe are to
be applied; rolling the Part upon them gently. Pomgranate-peels, Bistort-root,
A. i. rust of Iron, burnt Lead, Quicksilver killed. A. ii. fine Bole,
Boodstone, A. jss. Turpentine, Wax, A. q.s. mix, and make an Emplaster.

XXV. Some commend Sorrel-leaves roasted under the Embers and applied, being
mixed with Oak-ashes in form of a Pultise: others apply Suppuratives, then open
it, and cure it as another Ulcer.

XXVI. Some use an Actual Cautery; because by it, its increase may be staid for
a long time; and sometimes it wholly removes the Tumor.

XXVII. Where the neck or root of it is small (or so small as a Thread may be
applied) cast a strong Thread, or small Packthread about its neck twice, and
tie it with a double knot; drawing it straiter and straiter every day, 'till it
is deprived of its color, feeling, and life; which will be in eight or ten
days time.

XXVIII. Then with a crooked Knife you may easily take it off, without any
great pain, or flux of Blood: but this ought to be done in a cold and moist
habit of Body, or one of a Phlegmatic constitution; but in Sanguine or
Choleric habits, it will so afflict, that it will scarcely be endured:
however, you ought to anoint with some anodyn or cooling Ointment, and use
persuasions to the Patient to bear it.

XXIX. Some use Potential Cauteries, as this: Vnslak'd Lime, Goose-grease,
Turpentine, A. i. Ammoniacum strained ss. mix them, and apply it.

XXX. Others, (if they will not resolve) gently and carefully anoint it, or
rather touch it with Oil or Butter of Antimony, round about the roots thereof:
and then with a sharp Instrument (all things being fit) cut it off according to
Art; presently washing the place with Ablution of Saccharum Saturni warm, or
applying some other Styptick, and then healing it up, as another Ulcer.

XXXI. But if you design to take it away by Section, ( which is to be done,
when the Wen is grown to so great a mass, that it cannot be cured by other
means, but yet withal where there is no danger by reason of its too great
magnitude, too close adhesion to the adjacent Parts, or too near to the greater
Arteries and Veins, for in all these cases, it will be better to let section
alone:) the manner is thus:

XXXII. Make a small incision in the Skin, even unto the Cystis, in which the
Matter of the Tumor is included; through which a Probe of the thickness of a
Finger, round at the end, but hollow in the middle, is to be conveyed in,
between the Skin and the Cystis, and to be drawn about even to the root of the
Wen: and then after this, upon the Skin, an Incision is to be made large
enough, in form of the Letter X, or crosswise; after which, presently draw off
the Skin from the Cystis, cornerwise, toward its root, with your Fingers wrapped
about with a linen Cloth, or separate it with an Incision-knife; after which,
cut off the Wen by the root.

XXXIII. If there arises any Hemorrhage from the larger Vessels, (which are as
it were its roots) upon their being cut, it is to be stopped with the Royal, or
some other proper Styptick: after which it is to be well bound up, a portion of
the Skin with which it was covered being first cut off, and only so much left
as is enough to cover the Part; after which, let it be cured as some other
green Wound.

XXXIV. If any of the substance of the Tumor should be left behind, it must
either be cut again, or else consumed with caustic Medicaments.

XXXV. Paraeus says, he took away a Wen which hanged at a man's Neck, as big'as
a man's Head, which weighed eight pounds: and he says, that being called on a
time to open the Body of a great Lady, he found in one of her Breasts a Stone,
as big as a Hen-egg, hard and compact like a Pebble; taken by the Physicians
and Surgeons whilst she was living, for a Cancer; because it was very
painful to her, when pressed upon.

XXXVI. The Cure of a Wen not contained in a Cystis. Whilst it is young, and
in its beginning, you must apply Discussives or Resolutives, and such things as
make supple, as are Emollients: Natural Baths of Sulphur are good in this; also
Empl. Diasulphuris Rulandi, which dissolves much.

XXXVII. But you must beware how you apply Suppuratives, lest you create an
incurable Ulcer; at least such a one as will be very difficult to heal, or may
prove phagedenick, whereby the nervous parts near about the Joints may be
corrupted.

XXXVIII. In a Tumor therefore of this kind, your best way will be, to be
contented with a Palliative Cure, and such things as may keep it from growing
bigger, or degenerating into Cancer; of which kind are Vng. Diapompholigos, a
Plate of Lead besmeared with Quicksilver, Emplastrum de Ranis, with triple
quantity of Mercury, etc.

CHAP. XXIV. Of GVMMS, NODES, TOPHS.
I. THESE kinds of Diseases are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Tumor
gummosus, nodosus, tophaceus, and callosus; in English, a Gumm, Node, Toph, or
Callous Tumor.

II. The Differences. There is some difference as well in the natures of these
Tumors, as in their names: and though they may all happen to one and the same
person, and at the same time, yet always in different parts of the Body, and
from different causes.

III. A Gumm, called (...), Tumor gummosus; is a Tumor happening in the brawny
parts of the Body, or in the substance of the Flesh; and this is for the most
part softish, and of a much softer substance, than either a Node, or a Toph.

IV. A Node, called, (...). Tumor nodosus; is a knotty hard kind of Tumor; and
commonly affects the Nerves, or Nervous parts.

V. A Toph, called (...). Tumor callosus; also, (...). Tumor tophaceus, a hard,
stoney-like Tumor, is an Exostosis, or bone-like substance, growing out upon a
Bone, or a stoney Concretion growing in the joints.

VI. The Places. A Gumm happens many times upon the brawney part of the Arm, as
betwixt the Wrist and the Elbow, and between the Elbow and the Shoulder: also
upon the fleshy parts of the Buttocks, Thighs, and Legs, and many times upon
the hairy part of the Head, and Forehead, and several other parts, as Wrists,
Ancles, etc.

VII. A Node is always an Affection of the Nerves, or Nervous parts, following
many times upon Convulsions, or after severe Cramps; and sometimes in those
places where the Lymphatick Vessels run.

VIII. A Toph is always found upon the Bones, or in a Boney place; being a hard
Callus, or bone-like substance; and is seated generally under the Periostion,
upon the Shins, etc. and sometimes in other parts, as the Joints, in the Gout,
where it is stoney.

IX. The Causes. A Gumm, for the most part, arises from the Venereal Disease;
which causes a fugitive, malign, pituitous Humor to fly up and down the Body;
till it meets with a plentiful Viscosity, sufficiently able to stop it in its
career, and then hold it fixed in the Part where it so appears.

X. A Node, is caused for the most part by a contraction of the Nerves in
Spasmatick-paroxysms; or thro'a rupture of some of the Lymphatick-vessels, in
the Pox; and other Diseases: where that Juice being sharp, and making its way,
and not being able to get through the Skin, it hardens into a Matter, much like
to a Knot in a Nerve, or some Cartilaginous substance.

XI. A Toph arises from many causes, as sometimes from breaking of the Bones,
the Bone-making Faculty and Juice, being too powerful and luxuriant; but mostly
from a sharp and malign Humor, in the French Pox; which touching the Bone,
seizes upon it, where making its seat, it grows hard and great, extending the
Periostion; or from a Lithontriptick Juice; which being scattered up and down
the Body, Nature for her relief sends to the Joints, and there hardens it into
the substance of Chalk-stones.

XII. The Signs. These are all known by sight, and from what has been said in
their Differences, places they seize on, and the variety of causes which
produce them. Gumms are known by a broad large swelling in the Flesh, making
the very place somewhat harder, and somewhat higher than the adjacent Flesh;
sometimes of the color of the Skin, and sometimes of a kind of reddish hue,
especially if any sort of pain attends them; which being nipt with your
Fingers, as hard as you may do any other fleshy substance of the Part, puts the
Patient to ten times as much more pain.

XIII. A Node is hard in feeling, much like to a hard, nervous, or
cartilaginous substance, sometimes as large as a small Hazlenut, sometimes as
big as a large Nutmeg; sometimes bigger, sometimes less, generally painful, and
sometimes not easy to be felt by the Fingers in places nervous, or where the
Nerves and Lymphatick-vessels pass.

XIV. A Toph or Exostosis is known from the Place, which is generally upon some
naked Bone; as the Shins, Jaw-bones, etc. From its Form, it being broad in its
Basis, and lifted up higher than the rest of the Flesh: and from its Substance;
it being very hard, like to a bone, and not yielding to the Fingers: its Color
is the natural color of the Skin, and is very full of pain, chiefly in the
night time, and when warm in bed; whence come those which are called Nocturnal
Pains; this kind of Tumor generally following upon, and being one of the
Symptoms of the Pox: Stones in the Joints, are known by Sight.

XV. The Prognostics. These are all of difficult cure, and only to be removed,
by curing the Diseases which cause them. Gumms proceeding from the Pox, are
easier of cure, than either Nodes or Tophs, because they are removed by
resolution with Externals only; and sometimes by Internals only, by such things
as take away the Disease which causes them.

XVI. Nodes are of very difficult Cure; and though many times, at length they are
cured by Resolution, yet they also many times, remain during the whole course
of the Patient's life.

XVII. Tophs are the hardest of all to cure, where they are of a stoney
hardness; as those of the Joints in the Gout, which are said to be incurable.

XVIII. And Exostoses upon the Shins and other places, admit of no other cure,
but laying open the Part, and scaling the Bone, or Excision; which is a work of
time, labor, difficulty, and hazard; together with removing the original
Cause, viz. the Pox it self.

XIX. The Cure of Gumms. These, as they arise from the Pox, so the internal
Remedies must be such as cure that Disease; the chief of which are, the Princes
Powder, Precipitate per se, white Precipitate, Turpethum Minerale, Arcanum
Corallinum, Aurum Vitae, etc.

XX. Outwardly you may apply this: Juice of Nightshade, Oil of Lillies, Vipers
fat, A.iv. boil to the consumption of the Juice; then add, artificial Cinnabar
iv. Opium, Castile-soap, A. ii. Sublimate in fine powder iss. Labdanum, Wax, A.
q.s. mix, and make an Emplaster.

XXI. Or anoint with this Liniment. Distilled Oils of Turpentine, Euphorbium,
Amber, and Guajacum, A. ii. crude Opium iv. Quicksilver killed with spittle i.
mix, and make an Ointment or Liniment.

XXII. Or you may apply Emplastrum de Ranis, with double or treble quantity of
Mercury, or Emplastrum Mercuriale, described in lib. 1. cap. 77. aforegoing,
which is inferior to no other Medicament.

XXIII. I have also many times cured Gumms, by bathing the place affected two
three times a day with this Water. Sublimate corrosive in fine powder i.
boiling Water x. mix, and dissolve.

XXIV. A Child seven years old, had a Gummy-swelling encompassing the Muscle
Mastoides, on the right side of her Neck, also the Fingers of her right Hand
were affected with the like Swellings. The Gumms upon the Neck and Fingers were
embrocated with Vng. Magistrale ad Strumas and Empl. ad Tophos, applied over
all: during which Applications, the Child was frequently purged with
Calomelanos and Diagredium; and drank a Decoction of Sarsa, Burdock-roots,
Scrophularia the greater, flowers of Sage, Betony, and Rosemary, etc. But the
Cure not succeeding with these, there was given her a few grains of Theriaca
Metallorum, by which she Salivated; during which the Gummy-tumors resolved, and
several Ulcerations she had, dried up. But to confirm the Cure, she took
Sudorificks, and purged frequently. Wiseman.

XXV. A Woman thirty years of age, had a Gumma on the Muscle Mastoides,
(whether from the Pox, or King's Evil, is doubtful,) she took Calomelanos, ad i.
and repeated it as often as was thought cenvenient, with a Decoction of Sarsa; by
which course, some Ulcers in her Throat were also healed. The Gumma lessened,
her Chaps being now already sore by the Calomelanos, two Doses of Turbith were
given her; beginning with gr. 7. and so higher, by which a Salivation was
raised, which resolved the Gumma; after which she was purged, and with a drying
Diet she was cured. Wiseman.

XXVI. The Cure of Nodes. These are more difficult to be cured th^n the former,
and can only be ^ielped by curing the Disease which causes them.

XXVII. If they proceed from Convulsions of the Nerves, or Spasmodick
Paroxysms, give inwardly this: Powers of Rosemary, Lavender, Sage, Limons,
Anise, and Amber, A. i. mix them. Dose, one spoonful, in a glass of Ale or
Wine, morning and evening.

XXVIII. And outwardly, bathe with the same Mixture, or with Oil of Amber, or
with this. Pure, sweet, golden-coloured Palm-oil i. Spirit of Nitre, Oil of
Amber A. ii. mix them well, and anoint therewith daily, two or three times a
day.

XXIX. Sennertus commends natural Sulphurous Baths; as also Emplast.
Diasulphuris Rulandi, which he says is here very useful, and of singular
benefit. However, nothing in the World seems to outdo the force of the
Spiritus Mirabilis, bathing with it twice or thrice a day.

XXX. But if they proceed from a Venereal or Pocky Cause, nothing can absolve
the Cure, but inwardly to give Mercurials, to cause a complete Salivation; as
we have taught in lib. 2. cap. 38. of this present Work.

XXXI. And outwardly to anoint the Node with Ung. Mercuriale, Cosmeticum, vel
ad Scabiem; and to apply over it Ceratum ad Tophos, Emplastrum de Ranis; with
treble quantity of Mercury; or the Emplaster described at Sect. 20. aforegoing:

XXXII. Or, which is better, our Empl. Mercuriale, in our Pharmacopoeia
Chirurgica, described Lib. 1. cap. 77. sect. 8. aforegoing. If these things do
not, the Affect is incurable.

XXXIII. Some have attempted to remove them by Chirurgical Operation; but by
reason of the Parts in which they happen, which are mostly Nervous, it cannot
be done without great danger, and much pain; besides rendering the Part
deformed, and many times useless, as to its natural operations.

XXXIV. The Cure of Tophs. These, as they always proceed from a Venereal Cause,
so their cure must be attempted only by a radical cure of the Pox; which can be
done but by a through-salivation: wherein you are to consider the age, sex,
strength, and habit or constitution of the Body; and accordingly to excite it,
by such things as may be most agreeable.

XXXV. Then you must come to Topics, which give us but little hopes; without
laying open the Part to the Bone, and taking away the Exostosis, (or it may be
only a foulness of the Bone) by proper Medicaments, or Manual Operation.

XXXVI. Scultetus, Obser. 65. had a Man who complained of a Venereal Toph on
the left Leg, which would neither yield to a Sudorifick course, nor the-Cerate
in Sect. 39. following. He therefore laid open the Shin-bone (which was foul)
with a Caustic; and shaved it away to the sound part, with the Scraping-Irons:
which done, he applied a Drying-pouder to the Bone, and with dry Lint,
Incarnatives, and Epuloticks he healed it up as an ordinary Wound, and so
perfectly cured the Man.

XXXVII. Now here is to be noted, that no Fat, or Oily Medicines are to be used
to the Bone, except they are extreme drying: or such Oils and Balsams as are
made by Distillation, and so have lost all Unctiousness.

XXXVIII. It is also observable, that sometimes the virulency of this Disease
is such, that it penetrates and corrupts the Shin-bone to the Marrow; in which
case, the use of the Rasp or Scraping-iron is not sufficient; but besides them,
Trepans, and red-hot Irons or Cauteries, are necessary to the rooting up, and
consuming the remaining foulness, which will not be separated by the Tinctura
Exfolians, or sprinkling upon it the powder of Euphorbium.

XXXIX. If the Nocturnal Pains are recent, and the Toph but young, it is many
times cured by anointing with Ung. Mercuriale, or Cosmeticum, or ad Scabiem,
and applying over Empl. Mercuriale; or this of Scultetus: Diachylon with Gumms,
Cerate Oxylaeum, Citrinum, A. i. Quicksilver (killed with fasting-spittle) ss.
Oil of Guajacum i. powder of Indian Tobacco ss. mix, and make a Plaster.

XL. But if these things do not, so that the Pains remain, and the Tumor is not
discussed, it is a certain sign that the Bone under the Gumm or Toph is
corrupted: and therefore it is necessary to make incision upon the Toph
long-ways, upon the Shin-bone, with an Incision-knife; and then the Bone being
uncovered, to rasp or scrape it away with the Scraping-iron, where it is
corrupted.

XLI. The Bone being made bare, this Powder to cleanse it, is good. Euphorbium
i. Sarcocol, Mummy, A. ss. make each into a powder, and mix them. Barbett.

XLII. But if the corruption of the Bone is so great, that it cannot be removed
by Medicaments, then you must come to Manual peration, as before declared;
scraping the Bone only, if the corruption is small; but perforating it, if it
is great; or rather using the Actual Cautery: for without these you will not be
able to make a perfect Cure.

XLIII. The Padua Surgeons do it thus. The first day they cut the Toph with
an Incision-knife, upon the length of the Shin-bone, to the Bone it self: then
they dilate the Wound, with Tow wet in Glair of Eggs, and they bind up the Leg
with convenient Ligature, to repress any afflux of Humors

XLIV. The second day, they remove the Dressing, opening the Wound
artificially; and then having well defended the sound parts about it, that they
may not be hurt, they fill it with a Caustic, and after that cover it with a
Plaster, reaching all over it, but not going round the Leg, and bind it up
again, according to Art.

XLV. The third day, the Emplaster and Caustic are removed, and then they
apply things to make the Escar fall off; which being taken away, they scrape
away the rottenness, 'till the Bone appears sound: and lastly, with drying
Pouders they cover the bone with Flesh.

XLVI. Where note, that they first cut the Toph, that the Caustic may the
sooner come to act; yet incision is not always first necessary; for we now
generally apply the Caustic first upon the whole Skin, and then open it with
an Incision-knife to the quick; wherein, if the Caustic has not had its full
effect, we sometimes apply it again a second time, and that with good success;
as was done to a late Patient of mine, with all the advantage imaginable.

XLVII. A Man having a Toph upon the shin of his right Leg, from a Venereal
cause, (of which he had been lately cured (was first purged, and prescribed a
Decoction of Sarsa, etc. also Antimonium Diaphoreticum, and Embrocations and
Emplasters were applied to resolve the Toph: but after six weeks course, it
remained almost as painful as before.

XLVIII. Upon which consideration, it was concluded to lay it bare; it was done
with the white Caustic: after, the Escar was divided to the Bone, and at the
next dressing, raised the Escar off; then the Toph was scraped with a Rasp, and
dressed dry, as is usual in Ulcers with Caries.

XLIX. The Lips of the Ulcer were digested with Unguentum Basilicon applied
warm: afterward the Bone was incarned, and the Ulcer was cured in the space of
two months; but not without great trouble to the Surgeon, and much pain to
the Patient. Wiseman, lib. 7. cap. 4. observe. 53.

L. If in the Operation of this Cure, proud Flesh should arise upon the Lips,
or in the middle of the Ulcer, it may be taken away by strewing upon it red
Precipitate dry, and laying over it Pledgets spread with Basilicon mixed with
Precipitate, or on which Precipitate is strewed, etc. and at length, after due
cleansing, the Ulcer is speedily healed, by washing it with some styptick
Liquor, and applying de Minio, or some other drying Emplaster.

CHAP. XXV. Of a FUNGUS, or SPONGY FLESH.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Fungus; and in English, a Fungus,
or Spongy Flesh.

II. The Kinds. It is twofold, viz. either True, or Bastard: the True, is that
which is properly so called.

III. The Bastard is fivefold: viz. 1. (...). Pterygium, parva Ala; an
Excrescence of Flesh about the nails of Fingers or Toes, or Flesh growing in
the corner of the Eye. 2. (...). Condyloma, a flat Swelling in the Fundament.
3. (...). Ficus, the Fig in the the Fundament. 4. (...), Cristae, the Comb in
the Fundament. 5. (...), Thymi, the Tyme-flower-like Excrescence of the
Fundament.

IV. The Definition. A Fungus properly so called, is a fleshy Tumor arising
from a Membrane any ways wounded, hurt, or bruised; growing up suddenly, like a
Mushroom, (whence the name) and naked, without any skin to cover it.

V. The Place, From Galen, de loc. affect. lib. 1. cap. 1. Avicenna, in the
fifth of lib. 4. tract. 3. cap. 1. and Guil. Fabricius Hildanus, cent. 2.
observe. 25. it appears to be a Tumor, chiefly arising from the Membranes of the
Brain being hurt or wounded: When the Cranium is broken (says Galen) if the
Meninx or Membrane is broken also, a Fungus does arise: and, says Avicen, When
the Scull is broken, if the Meninx or Membrane goes forth, a Tumor called
Fatera, i. c. Fungus, is caused.

VI. But as Hildanus observes, they may happen in other places also; as the
Ear, Palate of the Mouth, Gumms; and also upon the hurting, or wounding of an
Artery, and in several other places.

VII. The Cause. It Is caused from a gross melancholy Blood from the broken
Vessels of the Scull and Dura Matter, or from a superfluous Humor; as it were
sweating forth through the hurt Membranes; and is changed into the substance of
the Flesh, by the Plastic or Formative Faculty of the Part.

VIII. For Nature (which cannot be idle) does form into this fleshy substance,
the superabundance of the flowing Humor; because the Part, by reason of its
debility, is not able to convert it into the nourishment and substance of the
same.

IX. The Signs. It is very easily known, for that, out of a Membrane (in any
part) hurt, bruised, or wounded, there springs or grows forth a spongy, soft,
pale, naked Flesh; or not covered with skin; which in a very short time grows
to a very great magnitude; being narrow beneath, and broad above.

X. The Prognostics. If it is in the Head, it is very dangerous, and hard to
be cured: nor is it of easy cure, let it happen in what Part soever, especially
where there is an afflux of vicious Humors.

XI. It ought to be cautiously handled; for if it is not managed aright, it is
very apt to degenerate into the nature of a Cancer.

XII. The Cure. Vniversals are to be premised, yet such as are gentle,
according to the strength of the Patient, and greatness of the Affect; and what
the nature of the Part will admit of.

XIII. Then Topical Medicines are to be applied; which are such things as
exsiccate, or corrode: or it must be removed by Manual Operation, as excision,
or cutting out.

XIV. Medicaments which exsiccate or dry are much more safe, than such as
corrode and eat: because Corrosives are apt to alter the quality of the Part,
exasperate the Tumor, and cause it to degenerate into the nature of a Cancer.

XV. For this purpose Authors commend Roots of round Birthwort, of Florentine
Orrice, of Angelica, of the true Acorus: Herbs; as Carduus ben. Horsetail,
Plantane, Rosemary, Rue, Savin, Storksbill: Flowers; as red Roses, Balaustians,
Lavender: Gumms or Rosins; as Mastich, Frankincense, Olibanum, Myrrh: Mineral
Preparations; as Tutty and Lapis Calaminaris prepared, burnt Lead, Saccharum
Saturni: Ashes of Frogs and Sea-crabs.

XVI. But in the beginning use Clysters, at least every other, or every third
day. Posset Drink or Mutton-broth lbi. brown Sugar iii. Tinctura purgans i.
Powers of Aniseeds ss. mix.

XVII. Foment twice a day with this. Red Port-Wine lbii. Spiritus Vini
Camphoratus ss. Powers of Lavender, Limons, Penyroyal, Rosemary, Amber, and
Turpentine, A. ss. mix: and with a Sponge, or double Flannel, foment therewith
hot.

XVIII. Then dry the Head and Part with hot Linen, and besprinkle the Fungus,
and whole Wound with this. Zedoary, Calamus Aromaticus, Winter' s-Cinamon, A.
iv. roots of round Birthwort, Florentine Orrice, Guajacum wood, Rhodium, A.v.
Marjoram, Rosemary, Rue, Sage, Savory, Southernwood, Time, A.vi. make each into
a fine powder, mix them. Or, Red Oker, Tutty prepared, ashes of Toads, A. i.
powder of Savin iii. mix, for a powder; which sprinkle on, and apply over all
Emplast. Basilicon, or other proper Salve.

XIX. But if it is grown so great, that none of these things will make an
impression upon it, but that you must come to excision, as when it is nearly so
big as an Egg; then either take it away with the Knife, or tie it at the root
hard, with a strong silken Thread, and in a while it will fall off.

XX. Thus being removed, then sprinkle over it some of the Pouders
beforementioned, or this following. Zedoary, Galangal, Winter 's Cinnamon,
round Birthwort-roots, Rhodium, Florentine Orrice, Spicknard, Schoenanth, A.ii.
make each into a powder apart, and mix them; over which apply the aforementioned
Emplaster.

Of PTERYGIUM.
XXI. Pterygium of the Eye, we have treated of already in the third Edition of
our Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 3. cap. 30. to which we refer you: that which
remains to be spoken of here, is the Pterygium of the Nails of Fingers or Toes.

XXII. It is an Excrescence of Flesh, growing out of the sides of the Nails,
chiefly in the Toes by reason of the Nails growing into the Flesh.

XXIII. The Signs. It is known by the Tumor, or Excrescence on the side or root
of the Nail, redness, inflammation, and troublesome pain; (yet, not but what the
Patient may endure) being chiefly painful in going.

XXIV. The Causes. In the Fingers it may be caused by a Whitloe going before,
or some Pustule preceding it.

XXV. But in the Toes it may be caused from some pressure of the Nail, or
bruise, especially where the Nail is thick and hard, as some thick and
overgrown Nails are; which causes pain and inflammation, and afterward an
eruption of Matter; which being exasperated by a continual pricking or pressing
of the Nail, causes an Ulcer and corruption, from whence Excrescencies and
loose Flesh are thrust forth round about; so that many times the Matter
corrupts the Tendons and Bones.

XXVI. The Differences. They arise from the Cause and the Part affected: some
rise superficially in the sides of the Nails, with erosion; others arise from
the Tendons, and corrupt the Bones.

XXVII. If the Tendons or Membrane under the Nail are affected, the pain is
more vehement: if the Bone is corrupted, it is known by the stinking smell.

XXVIII. The Prognostics. If it affects only the Skin, the cure will be easy;
and if the Nail is pared away, the Ulcer will soon heal.

XXIX. If it arises from the Tendons or Membranes at the root of the Nail, the
cure will be more difficult; and in cacochymick, and old people, it may
endanger a Gangrene.

XXX. The Cure. Vniversals being premised, cut away your Nail, so that you may
apply the Medicaments which may consume or dry the loose Flesh, and cicatrize
it: in which case you may use dry Lint, or Lint dipped in Aqua Calcis and dried,
or pouders of Zedoary, round Birthwort root, Orrice root, Balaustians,
Pomgranate-peels, fine Bole, Tutty, etc.

XXXI. But in stronger habits, you may dress it up with red Precipitate;
avoiding the application of moist or greasy Medicines, for they rot the Nails,
and increase the Ulceration.

XXXII. The Excrescencies arising from the Tendons, or Membranes at the roots
of the Nails, are to be dressed with more powerful dryers; as Aes ustum, Squamma
Aeris, Calx viva, Trochisci Polyidae, Andronis, Musae, red Precipitate, and the
Caustic Stone it self, being carefully used; and lastly, with the Vitriol or
Alum Stones, or some proper Styptick Liquor, you may produce the Cicatrice.

XXXIII. Scultetus, Observe. 82. says, fleshy Excrescencies of the Fingers and
Toes are soon consumed with this Powder. Caput mortuum of Vitriol, burnt
Sponge, A. i. mix them for a powder: and being taken away, they may be
cicatriz'd with Ceratum Divinum.

Of CONDYLOMA, FICUS, CRISTAE, THYMI.
XXXIV. Condyloma is a soft round Tubercle, distending the internal wrinkled
Tunicle of the Anus, of the same color with the Skin, and for the most part
without pain.

XXXV. Ficus is a Tumor almost representing a Fig, but not altogether so great;
yet with a large head, a long neck, and narrow root; being often very painful,
and the bigger, the more full of pain.

XXXVI. Cristae are a kind of hard Excrescences, arising a little distance from
the orifice of the Anus; and not unlike a Cocks Comb, but not full out so high.

XXXVII. Thymi are also hard Excrescences, somewhat resembling the tops of Time
when in flower: not much unlike to Warts, save, that they differ in their
manner of growing.

XXXVIII. The Causes. They are all of them caused from a gross pituitous Blood,
joined with a viscous Lympha; which through the force of the Expulsive-faculty,
are protruded through the Pores of the Skin, and through the Plastick-power of the
Part, are brought into this form.

XXXIX. The Cristae and Thymi generally rise from Lues Venerea, and have mostly
the Rhagades to accompany them: they are accounted as a Symptom of the Pox.

XL. The Prognostics. Condyloma and Ficus are of no difficult cure, if the
Disease, or the Matter causing them be removed: Cristae, generally arising from
the Pox, are only cured, by curing that Disease.

XLI. Thymi, are the worst sort of Excrescences, and are generally more malign
than painful; and if ill handled, are apt to degenerate into Cancer.

XLII. The Cure. Since most, or all of these Affects, proceed generally from a
Venereal Cause, it is absolutely necessary, to prosecute their removal, by
first eradicating that Disease, by Salivation, Diet-drinks, of Sarsa, etc.

XLIII. But if they proceed not from a Venereal cause, (as sometimes they do
not,) then you must first purge and cleanse the Body with Universals, continued
for some time; at least five or six times repeated.

XLIV. Then by Topics you must apply your self to the Excrescences themselves,
which if it be at their first budding forth, are to be helped by astringent and
drying Medicines, viz. round Birthwort root, Orrice root, Zedoary, Acorus,
Lignum Guajacum, Cortex Winteranus, Oak bark, Cortex Winteranus, Catechu,
Pomgranate peels, Balaustians, Myrtle berries, Sumach, Chalk, fine Bole, Terra
sigillata, Lime washed, Alum, Saccharum Saturni, burnt Lead, Rust of Iron,
Crocus Martis, Aes ustum, red Precipitate, etc.

XLV. Some of these things are to be made into Decoctions, to foment the Affect
withal: others of them are to made into Pouders to strew upon the Part, or to
be mixed with drying Ointments, and applied upon Towe.

XLVI. If these things stop not their growing, you must then come to Manual
Operation, cutting them off, either with Scissars, or a Knife; and then
consuming them by Escaroticks, as red Precipitate, etc. or the Actual Cautery.

XLVII. After which, you must prosecute the rest of the Cure, by Digestives,
and Epuloticks, according as the Intentions of the Cure require: and to prevent
their future growing again, we have commended to us by Authors, Ashes of
Vine-branches and Bean-stalks, to be mixed with Vinegar, and applied to the
Part.

CHAP. XXVI. Of BRONCHOCELE, RANULA, TONSILLAE.
I. THE first of these Tumors is called in Greek, (...). a (...), Aspera
Arteria; and (...), Hernia: in Latin, Bronchocele, Hernia gutturis: and in
English, a Tumor of the Neck, or Throat

II. The second of these Tumors is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Ranula;
and in English, a Tumor or Apostem under the Tongue.

III. The third is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Tonsillae, and Morbus
Glandularum; and in English, the Tumor or Swelling of the Almonds of the Ears.

IV. The Signs. A Bronchocele is known by a great Tumor on the Neck, either on
the sides, or on the Throat, or both; mostly contained in a Cystis, and of the
color of the Skin; large generally, but more flat than high; in which the
quantity of the Flesh seems to be increased; and it is mostly without pain; not
very hard or soft.

V. Ranula is known by a soft Tumor or Swelling under the Tongue, of the color
of the Skin, much about the bigness of a Pigeons Egg, hard and round; and when
painful, of a reddish color: the Tongue being turned up, it thrusts its self
forth. It is an impediment both to speaking and swallowing: it is mostly
included in a thick Cystis, and when suppurated, the matter looks of a whitish
color.

VI. Morbus Glandularum, or Swelling of the Almonds, is known by sight, being
increased in magnitude; and when very large, filling almost the whole passage
of the Throat: it is an impediment to speaking, and taking any thing down the
Throat; and without much pain, except in the time of swallowing; which proves
very troublesome to the Patient.

VII. It is a soft fleshy Tumor, of a round or oval figure, retaining the
natural color of the Skin, and of a dull sense; so that the body thereof may
be pierced with a Knife or Bodkin, without causing pain, or drawing Blood.

VIII. The Causes. A Bronchocele is said to arise from preternatural Phlegm,
and an acid Lympha joined with Wind; contained for the most part in a Cystis,
lying between the Skin and Aspera Arteria: but sometimes it is without a
Cystis, possessing the Muscular-flesh.

IX. Ranula is caused by a Pituitous-matter, arising from congestion of Humors
in the inferior Salival Gland; causing a soft Swelling, and possessing those
Salivals under the Tongue; which in its progress fills up the space between the
Jaws, and makes a Tumor externally under the Chin.

X. Tonsillae are caused by congestion of Humors gradually, without pain; and
therefore are seldom taken notice of, 'till by their growth they bring several
inconveniences with them; as, Catarrh, Cough, difficulty of Swallowing,
wherein, in drinking, the drink many times runs out at the Nose.

XI. They arise from a cold and pituitous Lympha, and differ from the common
Swellings of the Almonds, as Tumors made by congestion, do those made by
fluxion: the latter being of sudden growth, and terminating as soon: whereas
the Tumor we here intend, may have been many years a growing, increasing and
decreasing with the Moon, as all Tumors caused by congestion in the Glands do.

XII. The Kinds or Species. Authors account all these Tumors as a Species of
Struma, or the King's Evil; and therefore will have them to proceed mostly from
the same Causes.

XIII. The Prognostics. Bronchocele is of difficult cure, and dangerous;
whether contained in a Cystis, or not; if it waxes very great, and grows hard,
pressing upon the Aspera Arteria, it may endanger Suffocation: that without a
Cystis, which will not be discussed, many times becomes incurable.

XIV. That in a Cystis, is many times to be removed by Excision: that without a
Cystis, whilst recent, is in the possibility of being resolved, taking away
withal the internal Cause.

XV. Ranula, is a Tumor not dangerous as to Life; but more troublesome, as
impeding several of the Operations of Nature: yet it is of difficult cure, and
very troublesome to the best Artist, putting him many times to the trouble of
Excision.

XVI. Tumor Tonsillarum, if it is small, the trouble is but little; several
people having them from their Infancy without much inconvenience.

XVII. If the Tumor is great, there may be great danger of Suffocation; nor
will they easily discuss, sometimes never: when they will not discuss, they may
be cut off, without any danger or difficulty.

The Cure of BRONCHOCELE.
XVIII. Vniversals must be premised, as in the cure of Strumae; purging the
Body with our Family Pills, Pilulae Catharticae, Pulvis Cornachinii, Tinctura
purgans, or an Infusion of Sena and Rhubarb.

XIX. Give also Clysters every other day, to make a more effectual Revulsion of
the Humors from the Part affected. Broth, or Posset Drink lbi. Tincture of
Colocynthis jss. brown Sugar iv. mix, for a Clyster.

XX. And in the intervals of Purging, give this following Powder. Aethiops
mineralis, Bezoar mineralis, native Cinnabar, A.vi. Myrrh, Orrice root,
Zedoary, A. iv. Alum burnt, Bwax, Ens Veneris, Scammony, A. ii. Cloves,
Long-pepper, Spicknard, A.i. make all into a fine powder, and mix them; to
which add treble refined Sugar v. Dose, ii. every Morning, when Purging is
intermitted.

XXI. Outwardly apply over the Tumor a Plate of Lead, besmeared with
Quicksilver; or, Empl. de Ranis, with treble Mercury; or, our Emplast.
Mercuriale, Emplast. Diasulphuris Rulandi; or, Ceratum e Gummi Elemi, Ceratum
Spermatis Ceti, Ceratum ad Tophos, Emplast. Diachylon cum Gummis; or, Emplast.
ad Strumam, which is inferior to no other: see them in Our Pharm. aforegoing.

XXII. These things, whilst recent, may prevail: but if they do nothing, there
is no other Remedy (as to Internals) but Salivation; which yet let be carefully
performed, for fear of Suffocation. If none of these things do, you must remove
it by Section. See the following Example.

XXIII. A Maid thirty years old, strong of Body, had one of these Tumors on the
left side of her Neck, reaching from her Ear to the Aspera Arteria, and
stretching over it upwards to the other side of the Neck; it was soft, and
seemed to be full of Matter, but was without inflammation.

XXIV. A puncture was made into the body of it, which discharged a stinking
Serum, much like Horse-piss; the Tumor then sunk, and felt unequally hard, and
it was dressed up with a Pledget of Vng. Basilicon, and Empl. Diachalciteos.

XXV. The next day, taking off the dressings, the swelling was lank; a Caustic
therefore was applied the length of two inches, about three fingers-bredth from
the Ear: the Escar was opened, and a foul matter discharged; after which it was
dressed up with Dossels dipped in red Precipitate, with Lenients over the Escar;
and from that time, the falling off of the slough was hastened.

XXVI. After the separation of it, another sort of matter was protruded, not
much unlike that of an Atheroma and Meliceris mixed together: with the
Probe-Scissers it was laid open toward the Aspera Arteria, and with the
Fingers several Vesiculae were pulled out, some containing a foul Serum, others
a gritty substance: also gobbets of Flesh came away, with which the basis of
the Abscess seemed to be laid.

XXVII. Being thus cleansed, it was filled up with Dossels dipped in Precipitate,
and the lips were kept open: this method of dressing was repeated every other
day, and the strumous Excrescences were rubbed with the Vitriol-stone: the
sinus contracted narrower within, but the Tumor being strumous, it would not
heal whilst any hollowness remained, but filled up with that sort of Flesh,
and raised a Tumor.

XXVIII. Whereupon a Caustic was applied, upon its upper part toward the Ear,
and it was divided with a pair of Scissers, and the Sinus filled with red
Precipitate, dressing the lips with Digestives. After the Escar was separated,
the strumous flesh was eradicated with the Vitriol-stone and Precipitate, and
cicatriz'd from the Ear downwards; but with some difficulty, the Basis proving
false more than once, in one part or other.

XXIX. Some of this strumous Flesh rising among the Vessels, and uniting over
them, made Sinus's so deep, that it was difficult to divide those, without
danger of the Vessels: But no Cure being to be expected whilst this remained,
a Ligature was passed with a small Probe under the Fungus; and by deligation,
and application of Precipitate, the Fungus was consumed, so that that the
deepest Sinus was laid open.

XXX. This done, by application of Epuloticks, a Cicatrice was induced upon
them; and thus the Abscess was healed well near to the Aspera Arteria: after
which, the other side was laid open, and by the same method, the matter was
eradicated, and the Tumor cured, as the other before. Wiseman, lib. 4. cap. 4.
Observe. 10.

XXXI. If the Tumor is contained in a Cystis, whereby neither External
applications, as Resolvers, nor yet Salivation will prevail, you must attempt
the Cure by Section.

XXXII. Make an Apertion in a right line, observing the fibers of the Muscles,
which being on the Neck, must be long-ways; taking heed that you hurt no
Artery, Vein, or Nerve; (rather than to hurt any of those Vessels, you had
better cut the fibers cross:) If the Tumor is great, you must make a double
incision crosswise, taking heed as aforesaid, of the Vessels: then with your
Fingers remove the Bag, which seldom or never sticks very fast to the Skin; and
cutting off the little Artery by which it is fed, take heed, that not the least
particle of the Bag may remain, lest it grow again; after which, heal it up as
another Ulcer.

The Cure of RANULA.
XXXIII. First let Vniversals be premised; cleanse the Stomach and Vpper-region
by proper Emeticks; then give Universal Catharticks, which repeat five or six
times: afterward keep the Body soluble, and perfectly cleanse the Bowels with
the Clyster in Sect. 19. aforegoing, repeating it as often as you see occasion.

XXXIV. To the external part of the Tumor apply Discussives, or Resolutives;
such as are applied in a Struma, where there is hopes of doing the Cure by
Resolution; of which kind are Emplastrum Diasulphuris Rulandi, Our Diachylon
cum Gummis, Ceratum e Gummi Elemi, Ceratum de Spermate Ceti, Ceratum ad Tophos,
Emplast. ad Strumam, or Our Emplast. Mercuriale.

XXXV. And the Topics to apply to, or to wash the Tumor under the Tongue, are
also Discussives; the chief among which are all manner of Salts, and hot
Aromaticks; either in substance, or decocted in some proper Liquors, and so to
be held in the Mouth.

XXXVI. Barbett commends the following Powder, by which he says they are often
cured. Pepper, Ginger, A.i. roots of Florentine-Orrice, Hermodacts, Calamint,
Origanum, A. ss. Mastich i. make of all a Powder.

XXXVII. These may be boiled in Wine, to wash with and hold under the Tongue;
or mixed with Oxymel, to besmear the Part with; or it may be strewed dry, or
rubbed upon the Tumor, and often repeated in the daytime: for by the heat it
creates in the Part, the Tumor seems to be discussed.

XXXVIII. But if these things will not do, you must open the Tumor by help of
an Actual Cautery, in one or more places; that the Humor may come forth, and
afterward dress it with Honey of Roses. But Barbett rather approves of
Incision with a Lancet, or Incision-knife.

XXXIX. An Observation. A Woman thirty five years old had a large Ranula
between her Jaws, under her Tongue, reaching to her Fore-teeth, making a great
swelling under her Chin, which was troublesome to her, and caused a croaking in
her speech.

XL. She had before passed under a course of Physic unsuccessfully: the matter
was proposed to be let out by an Actual Cautery, but she refused; whereupon it
was opened by Incision on each side near the Tongue; and out of it came two
Blood-porrengers full of an albuginous matter, upon which the Tumor sunk.

XLI. Search was made with a Probe, and it was found that the matter had not
only made a deep cavity downward^, but all the inner part of the Tongue was
rendered hollow: it was then dressed with Syrupus de Rosis ficcis: and Empl. ad
Herniam, mixed with a third part of Empl. Caesaris was applied externally under
the Chin; deterging it afterward with Mel Aegyptiacum, dissolved in Decoction
of Sage, Betony, Smallage, etc. and then it was incarned and cicatrized.

XLII. Some time after the Tumor rose again as formerly; whereupon it was
opened with the Actual Cautery, on both sides of the Ranula; by which the
matter was again discharged, and the Tumor sunk. During the time of the Cure,
she was purged, and put into an Antistrumatical Course, and so at last was
cured. Wiseman, lib. 4. cap. 8. Obs. 1.

XLIII. A young Fellow had also a painful Ranula under his Tongue; incision was
made into it, according to its length, and there came forth a Stone bigger than
that of an Olive: it was afterward dressed with Syrupus de Rosis siccis, and
thereby in a few days cured. Wiseman.

The Cure of TONSILLAE.
XLIV. Preparation is to be made for the Cure, by Universal Purgation,
Clysters, etc. and Derivation by Vesicatories, Cupping, Issues, etc. especially
if there is Inflammation, and the Tumor is caused by Fluxion.

XLV. But if they are made by Congestion, the speedy and only way of cure is by
Extirpation; either by Excision, at once cutting them off; or else by
application of the Actual or Potential Cautery; among the latter of which,
Butter of Antimony is accounted the chief.

XLVI. Wiseman says, that the way by Potential Cautery is, by working with a
Caustick-stone, and other Escaroticks, fixed in such an Instrument as may serve
to eat into them, without offending the neighboring sound Parts; and so to
make way into the body of the Gland, consuming it within; and at length the
exterior parts of it will fall in pieces, and so the whole will be eradicated.

XLVII. Such a like Tumor in those places, I once saw Dr. Thomas Gardner, chief
Surgeon to the King's Household, ( and now attending his Majesty's Person in
his Camp in Flanders) open, with a great deal of dexterity, at Sir John Roberts
his House in Bromley by Bow, by touching it with Butyrum Antimonii twice; and
then cutting it with an Incision-knife, the Tumor yielded near a quarter of a
pint of matter, presently wasted away, and became healed in a very short time
after.

XLVIII. The way by Excision, is by making a ligature about the Basis of them;
and then cutting or snipping them off with a pair of crooked Probe-scissers.

XLIX. In doing this, consider how they are radicated: if they be rooted deep
in the Throat like a Crista, if in cutting them out, you only cut the part you
tied, and cut the ligature at the same time, the matter or substance may fall
down into the Throat, and so hazard choking.

L. Whilst therefore you hold the ligature with one hand, with the other hand
you must pass the Scissers down as close by the Basis of it, as you can, so as
by one snip, you may cut it clear off.

LI. But for fear of failing, 'twill be necessary to have another ligature
fitted in an Instrument for this purpose, and the Patient's Head to be held
steady; that in case you fail in the first attempt, and it fall into the
Throat, you may readily return it, and tie it at the same time, which is easy
enough to do.

LII. The Excision being made, the bleeding may soon be stopped with Oxycrate;
and you may cicatrize it in a few days time, by touching it with the Vitriol
and Alum Stones.

LIII. Observations. A Man, twenty five years old, long subject to defluxions
from overgrown Tonsils, had taken much Physic unsuccessfully; so that no other
way of Cure appeared, but by Excision. The right Tonsil was very large, and a
ligature was made upon it, with design to cut it off at that instant: but for
fear of a great flux of Blood, it was deferred to the next morning; at which
time it was shrunk, and much lessened.

LIVE. Then hold being taken of the Ligature with one hand, and with the other
passing the Probe-Scissers close by the root of it, at one snip, it was cut
off, and brought away with the Ligature, it scarcely bleeding a drop: the
remaining Basis was rubbed with the Vitriol-stone, and afterward he gargled
with Barley-water sweetened with Syrupus de Rosis siccis, and in four or five
days time it was cicatrized; and the Man recovered a better degree of health.
Wiseman.

LV. A Girl twelve years old was often troubled with Catarrhs, and difficulty
in swallowing, through a great Tumor in the right Tonsil; Excision was advised. A
ligature was made upon it, and at the same time it was cut off: afterward, by
rubbing it with the Vitriol-stone, it was cicatrized in a few days. Wiseman.

LVI. A Woman, twenty six years old, subject to Catarrhs, from the
preternatural growth of the Amygdalae, was also cured by Excision: a Ligature
was made upon the one, and it was cut off, washing her Mouth after with
Oxycrate: then a Ligature was passed upon the other, and it was also cut off;
after which she gargled and washed her Mouth: afterward the Basis of them was
rubbed with a Vitriol-stone. Wiseman, lib. 4. cap. 7. Observe. 2, 3, 4.

An Appendix, concerning cutting off the UVULA.
LVII. If there is an elongation of the Uvula, through a great afflux of the
Saliva, it oftentimes happens, that it touches upon the root of the Tongue, or
upon the Epiglottis; causing a frequent, and almost continual hauking, whereby
in process of time a vexatious Catarrh is produced.

LVIII. Such was the case of a Maidservant, her Uvula hung dangling upon the
root of her Tongue, not swelled, nor inflamed. Supposing that to be the cause
of her Distemper, the lower part of it was taken hold of with the Forceps, and
then immediately it was cut shorter with a pair of Scissers; it bled not a
spoonful, and afterward cicatrized of it self, without application of any
Medicine: and so she was freed from her Catarrh.

LIX. Such another was cut off in one of the King's Servants at Hampton Court;
as also some others, who were so affected, and thereby they were freed from
their Catarrhs, when all other Remedies failed. Wiseman.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the KING'S EVIL.
I. THIS Disease is called in Greek, (...), vel, Pl. (...). in Latin,
Scrophula, Struma; and by some in the Plural only, Scrophulae, Strumae; I
suppose, because oftentimes, many of these Tumors hang together: and in
English, Scrophula, Struma, and the King's Evil. The Greek and Latin Names are
taken from Swine, because that kind of Beast is more frequently troubled with
this Disease.

II. The Definition. Galen, Method. Med. lib. 14. cap. 11. defines, Strumae to
be scirrhous Swellings, shut up in a peculiar Membrane.

III. Aetius, Tetrab. 4. Sermon. 3. cap. 5. Strumae (dixit ille) sunt Carnes
subcandidae, facile augescentes, in Membrana contentae, and in summa Glandulae
induratae, quae in Collo, sub Alis, and Inguinibus oriuntur, ubi Glandulae
Vasis substratae sunt, ut in aliis quoque jam relatis Glandulis. Aliquando
etiam, sed raro tamen, ex Carne eorundem locorum fiunt; quae affinitate quadam
ad Strumarum naturam vertitur, and Materiae accessione augetur. Viz. These
Strumae (says he) are a kind of Flesh somewhat white, easily increasing and
growing, enveloped in a Tunicle or Cystis; and in a word, they are Glandules or
Kernels hardened, which arise in the Neck, under the Arms, and in the Groins;
where they are situated under the Vessels, even as in other parts related to
the Glandules already mentioned. And sometimes likewise (but it is very rare)
they are bred from the Flesh of the self-same places, which by a certain
relation thereunto, is converted into the nature of Strumae, and does increase
by an accession of matter.

IV. Barbett says that Strumae or Scrophulae, are preternatural Tumors of the
Glandules of the Neck, contained in their own proper Cystis or Tunicle.

V. The Differences. The Tumor or Tumors are sometimes in a Cystis, sometimes
not; sometimes moveable, sometimes fixed; sometimes small, sometimes great; and
sometimes but one, sometimes many; sometimes not ulcerated, sometimes ulcerated.

VI. The Places affected. They are generally the conglomerated Glandules of the
Neck, called the Salival Glands: But that Struma which is not contained in a
Cystis, (as that which is fixed for the most part is not) may happen to many
other parts of the Body; as the Back and Backbone, upper Lip, the Breast,
Arms, Wrists, Hands, Fingers, Thighs, Legs, Ancles, Feet, etc. where it first
appears, in an obscure, diffused Tumor; afterward it breaks, and becomes
ulcerated, and many times fistulous.

VII. To these you may add those Glands about the Ears called Parotides, or the
Stenonian Passages, from Steno, their first discoverer. And it is to be noted,
that the Salival-passages, proceed from the conglomerated Glandules of the Neck.

VIII. The Causes. Authors say, that they proceed from a Pituitous Humor, or
from Phlegm mixed with Melancholy, by reason of the hardness, which for the most
part goes along with the Tumor. Whereupon it is, that such as are
Phlegmatick-melancholy, who are gluttonous, and usually eat Meats cold and
moist, and to drink cold Waters, or Snow-water, are more especially afflicted
with Scrophula.

IX. And hence it is, that in several Regions, where the Inhabitants constantly
drink crude, cold, and snowy Waters, (as generally in the Alps, etc. where this
Disease is Endemical) they are all of them for the most part troubled and vexed
with these Strumae.

X. Barbett says, that since the use of the Glandules of the whole Body, is
certainly to percolate the Lympha; therefore of necessity the grosser Lympha
(or the Lympha vitiated) is the Cause of this Disease; from whence first of all
proceeds their hardness, and afterward an increasing and pertinacious Tumor.

XI. And so when any of this vitiated Lympha is shed abroad into other Parts,
as the fleshy substance of the Body, the strumatick Tumor is then fixed, here
and there, (though not in Glands) wherever Nature finds a weak Part to protrude
it to. And from hence it comes to pass, that in many Patients the whole habit
of the Body is Strumatick also, and the Disease breaks forth in several places
at once, making it rebellious, and very tedious to be cured; to the very great
vexation, both of the Patient and Physician.

XII. And because Struma sometimes degenerates into Cancer, which is caused
from a very sharp Humor or Lympha; Deckers does say, that the Humor or Lympha
must have also an offending sharpness in it.

XIII. Others say, they are caused from gross and raw Juices, contained, 1. In
the conglobate Glandules; which they receive from the Arterial Blood, convert
and perfect into Lympha, and from whence the Lymphatick Vessels do proceed;
which convey it either into the Chyliferous or Sanguiferous Vessels. 2. In the
Conglomerate, which they receive from the Venal Blood; either the Lympha again,
or some other peculiar Juices; where they ought yet be brought to a greater
perfection, and are conveyed by other proper Ducts to the Parotides and
Maxillary Glands, from which the Salival Ducts arise, which convey the Spittle
into the Mouth.

XIV. Platerus will not have Phlegm and Melancholy alone to be sufficient for
the generation of these Tumors; for that then they would not be of any long
continuance, but would rather corrupt and apostemate, or turn into Pus: but
that there is rather another Juice joined with them, nourishing these parts;
for Glandules are nourished with a thicker Juice than other fleshy parts: and
therefore if this Juice is vitiated, or exceeds in quantity, it then generates
this kind of Tumor.

XV. The Signs. The Tumor is sometimes roundish, sometimes longish, sometimes
irregular, as to its form; sometimes single, some times complicated, and
sometimes seated in a Glandule, and sometimes not; as when it happens on the
Spina Dorsi, Lips, the Wrist, Hand, Finger, Ancle, etc.

XVI. It is for the most part void of pain, unless when it grows extraordinary
big; and it is many times so hard, as not to yield to the impression of the
Fingers.

XVII. They are known also by their slow growth; for they are not suddenly
generated, or all at once, but by degrees; and where there are many Kernels,
one after another. First of all, the Humor flows unto one Glandule, in which is
excited a Tumor, first soft and loose; and then there grows another, in like
manner soft and loose.

XVIII. These Tumors are at length hardened; and many times they increase in
number, till there hangs down from the place affected many Glandules, as it
were so many branches: but this is chiefly to be understood, when it affects
the Neck, and parts adjacent.

XIX. When it happens in the Joints and other parts, it is not contained in a
Cystis, but is a broad diffused Tumor, without any considerable pain, 'till it
grows very great; and mostly of the color of the Skin, hard, and immovable;
which in process of time breaks, and becomes a foul Ulcer, or running Fistula;
and many times fouls and rots the very Bone it self, after an extraordinary
manner.

XX. The Prognostics. These Tumors are always hard to be cured, and long in
performing; especially if they be many, have been of long continuance, and are
very great, and hard, or fixed.

XXI. By how much the more moveable they are, by so much the more easily cured;
and when cured, they for the most part leave behind them great Scars.

XXII. If they grow very great, and painful withal, they are dangerous, and apt
to become Cancerous; and if they stick to a Bone, they generally corrupt it,
and hardly admit of cure: the like if they be fixed to any great Nerve or Vein,
lie deep, or are hereditary: in all these cases, a Palliative Cure is the best.

XXIII. If in curing them by Section, you should divide the Recurrent Nerve,
the Speech will certainly be lost, and many times Life withal.

XXIV. The Cure. The Indications of Cure are threefold: 1. To attenuate,
attemperate, and evacuate the thick, acid, or vicious Lympha. 2. The Tumor is,
if possible, to be discussed; otherwise, to be softened and ripened. 3. If it
comes to Suppuration, it is at length to be taken away, either by Incision, or
Escarotick Medicaments.

XXV. The first Indication is answered by Internals: First, such things as
attenuate, incide, and evacuate the Morbifick-matter contained in the first
Passages. I commend upon Experience Oxymel of Squills, which may be taken every
other Morning; from one spoonful to two spoonfuls or more; in a glass of Wine
and Water.

XXVI. Afterward it may be taken a spoonful at a time, every morning; for 14
or 16 mornings, in like manner.

XXVII. Afterward you may purge twice a Week, with Our Family Pills, Pilulae
Catharticae, Pilulae Mirabiles, Tinctura Purgans, or some such like thing.

XXVIII. In the intervals of Purging, give something that is specific against
the Disease, and may attemperate the acid Humor, by absorbing it; which is done
by Alcalies, chiefly such as are volatile.

XXIX. Of this kind, the Spirits of Sal Armoniack, of Hartshorn, of Cows-horn,
Ox-horn, Ox and Horse-hoofs, of Beef, etc. are said to be chief, whether
inwardly used, or outwardly applied, given in a convenient Vehicle.

XXX. A famous thing is Salt of Hog-lice: they that cannot get the Salt, may
take the Powder of them; being first washed clean, then drowned in Wine, and
dried in an Oven, 'till they will reduce to powder. Dose, a gr. x. ad xxv. in
any proper Liquor, for forty or sixty days.

XXXI. These following Internals, have also the property of consuming
Scrophula's, and inducing their healing, if ulcerated: viz. Roots of
Swallowort, round Birthwort, Briony, Jallap, Mechoacan, Sowbread, Dropwort,
Pilewort, Figwort, Devilsbit, Orrice-root, Squill, Vervain, flowers of Broom,
of Privet, Crabs burnt, Eggshels burnt, Sal Gem, Sponges burnt, ashes of a
Lizard, etc.

XXXII. Johannes Prevotius commends the Electuary of green Lizards, as a great
Secret, and certain Remedy for the cure of the King's Evil. Dose, to Children
ii. to Men or Women ss. vi. or i. at most, continuing it for thirty or forty
days: anointing also outwardly with the Oil of Lizards. See their Preparations
in Our Doron Medicum, lib. 3. cap. 2. sect. 9. Hercules de Saxonia commends
those things also, as most excellent.

XXXIII. In like manner the powder or ashes of Spunges and Sea-crabs may be
given; by mixing them with Honey, and making them into an Electuary, as you do
the powder of Lizards.

XXXIV. As for the Diet or Food, it ought to be such as is prescribed usually
in the Cure of an Oedema and Scirrhus, which may consume the cold phlegmatic
Humor, and alter the habit of the Body: Purging also with proper Phlegmagogues,
such as are the aforementioned things: or a Diet-drink made of Sena, Rhubarb,
Mechoacan, Horseradish roots, and Scurvigrass.

XXXV. Avoid Bleeding, as the most pernicious thing; ( it is the advice of
Barbett, and other great Men) but sometimes, in the intervals of Purging, the
Patient may sweat, by the exhibition of volatile Alcalies; which is a good
expedient in this Cure: so also the dulcified Spirit of Nitre.

XXXVI. Powder of Vipers, given ad i. is a famous thing; so also the Salt of
Vipers, given ad gr. x. or the Powers of Vipers given ad gut. xxx. in any
convenient Vehicle.

XXXVII. And for their constant drink, let it be Decoctum Ulmi; in a gallon of
which let five hundred Hog-lice be bruised and boiled; than which, there is no
greater Specific in the World, I have proved it several times: For by the
constant taking of this Liquor, the quality of the whole mass of Blood and
Lympha comes to be perfectly altered, and the scrophulous habit of Body to be
thoroughly changed, so that the Patient mends upon it to a wonder: it may be
drank as common Drink, mixed with a little White Wind. See the Preparation
thereof in Our Pharm. Bateana, lib. 1. cap. 16. sect. 29. And see more of this
Cure, in Our Synopsis Medicinae, (the Third Edition) lib. 6. cap. 15.

XXXVIII. If yet the Disease is so rebellious, that none of the
afore-prescribed Methods will do, you must then come to the last Remedy, which
is Salivation; which is to be done with a great deal of care and gentleness,
with proper inward Mercurials: And this I have done several times with happy
success; but this way succeeds best, when it is in any other part but the Neck
and Throat; if it be in these, it may be done, but it must be with much
caution; lest by the too great afflux of Humors, the Patient should be
suffocated.

XXXIX. The second Indication is answered by the application of Externals,
which are of three kinds: 1. Discussives and Resolutives, where there is hope
of Resolving. 2. Suppuratives or Maturatives, where there is no hopes of
Resolution. 3. Palliatives where it is indurated, so that its degeneration into
Scirrhus or Cancer is feared.

XL. If they be loose, small, and not very hard, there is hopes of Resolution;
in which case a simple Ointment made of Pilewort roots is an excellent thing:
much more if an half part of Our Hercules be mixed with it.

XLI. Or anoint with this Liniment of Barbett: Oils of Myrtles and Bays A. i.
Vng. of Martiaton i. Quicksilver extinct with flowers of Sulphur vi. mix, and
make an Ointment, with which anoint twice a day: if the Tumors are not consumed
with this, they will at least be diminished.

XLII. Balsam of Sulphur is a good thing to anoint withal; so also Ointment
made of Tobacco, green or dry: if it is made of green Tobacco, it ought to be
such as is raised with us from Virginia Seed: and it is so much the better, if
it is mixed with white Precipitate ii. native Cinnabar i. to one ounce of the
Ointment.

XLIII. This of Poterius is a singular good thing: Green Tobacco leaves M. vi.
fresh Butter lbii. Venice Turpentine iv. mix, and insolate eight days; strain
out by pressing; to the expressed matter add Wax, Gum Ammoniacum, Galbanum, A.
ii. which mix; and being almost cold, add crude Antimony, Cinnabar artificial,
both in fine powder, A.ss. Myrrh, Frankincense, A. ii. ( I add powder of
Tobacco leaves i.) mix again, and make an Ointment.

XLIV. Oil of Bricks, commonly called Oleum Philosophorum vi. Oils of Juniper
and Turpentine, A. i. Spirit of Nitre iii. mix them, and therewith anoint.
Balsamum mirabile is excellent to anoint with in this case: so also to bathe
the Part affected with Spiritus mirabilis.

XLV. Or you may anoint with Ung. Cosmetic. or ad Scabiem, or Mercuriale; and
apply over the Tumors Ceratum de Galbano, e Gummi Elemi, vel Ceratum ad Tophos;
or Our Diachylon cum Gummis; or Our Emplast. ad Strumam, vel Mercuriale; all
which see in Our Pharmacopoeia Chirurgica, in Lib. 1. cap. 74 sect. 5. 8. 9.
cap. 76. sect. 3. 4. 9. and cap. 77. sect. 3. 8. and 10. aforegoing.

XLVI. Barbett commends this Emplaster: Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Galbanum, A.ss.
Bay Berries, Cummin, Pellitory of Spain, Stavesacre, A. vi. Pigeons dung i.
Goats dung iii. Hog's Grease jss. Oil of Camomil i. Wax, Pitch, A. q.s. mix, and
make an Emplaster.

XLVII. Cinnabar i. is good to be added to it: and if the Tumor is painful, you
may also add to it Opium vi. or i. because it has not only the virtue of easing
pain, but also of Discussing and Resolving.

XLVIII. This following Emplaster is also good. Empl. e Cicuta cum Ammoniaco
ii. pure Gum Elemi ss. flowers of Antimony, Mummy, A. ss. red Precipitate v.
flowers of Sal Armoniack iii. Juniperine Balsam of Sulphur q.s. mix, and make a
soft Emplaster; which spread upon Leather, and apply to the Part affected,
renewing it once every two days.

XLIX. This also is of singular efficacy. Red Precipitate q.v. Quicksilver as
much as it will absorbe, or suck up by grinding in an iron or glass Mortar: put
this Mixture into a thin Cloth, and strain from it all the Quicksilver which
would not unite: to this Mixture put depurated juice of Nightshade, q.s.
insolate for some days; decant the juice, and repeat it three times: this done,
mix of this Powder i. with Oil-olive, Sheeps-suet, A. ss. first melted
together, and almost cold, and make an Ointment: it resolves much, and eases
pain.

L. But where a Resolution cannot be accomplished, and the Tumor is great, and
manifestly contained in a Cystis, and free from any great Vessels, the best way
is by Section; making an incision through the Skin, and separating it from the
Cystis, then cutting it off by the root, as we have taught in the former
Chapters.

LI. If this cannot be commodiously done, you must then endeavor a
Suppuration; and this is most commonly performed in a Phlegmonoodes, with this
Cataplasm: Onions, heads of Garlic, A. No ii. bake them in an Oven, 'till
soft, old Leven ii. Mucilage of Althea and Lilly roots, Mithridate, A.i.
pouders of Fenugreek and Linseed, Hens and Pigeons dung, A. ss. Figs roasted,
No vi. Oil-olive jss. Oil of Juniper i. Saffron ii. mix, and make a Cataplasm.

LII. Wiseman says, that to hasten the Suppuration, it is common to pinch them
hard; and some say, to thrust a Thorn into them, to inflame them, thereby to
hasten their ripening: you must endeavor a perfect concoction; for if you open
them, while any part of the Gland is hard it will increase, or put you upon a
necessity of eradicating it, or else to leave the Cure imperfect.

LIII. Being perfectly ripe, the way of opening the Tumor, is mostly by
Incision, because it makes the least Scar: but if the Struma is large; the way
by Caustic may be better, because it makes a large Orifice, and with less pain
assures a Cure.

LIVE. The Matter being discharged, you may cleanse with the Mundificative ex
succo Apii, Basilicon, red Precipitate, and the Vitriol-stone; and afterward
incarnate and cicatrize, as in other Abscesses or Apostems.

LV. In old and hard Struma 's which admit not of a complete Suppuration, but
break out into small holes, which growing bigger and bigger, become so many
painful Ulcers, spreading one into another, the body of the Gland remaining
hard, without hopes of maturation; these you may dress two or three days with a
Pledget of Unguent. Basilicon, which will qualify the heat, and moderate the
Ulceration, and then by interchangably applying Discutients or Lenients, you
may happily waste the whole Gland, the Patient taking the mean while specific
Internals.

LVI. In some Strumae ulcerated about the Chops, I have seen (says Wiseman) a
Fungus thrust forth, so that with my Spatula thrust under them, I have thrust
them quite out, and healed the Ulcer in few days: in others, where they are
incapable of being so soon thrown out, I cut off the protuberant part, and
consumed the remaining Basis with Escaroticks.

LVII. When therefore the Strumae are large, or lie deep, and near considerable
Vessels, Extirpation by Causticks and Escaroticks is the best way. It Is true,
it requires more time, but it is sure, and the only way Patients generally admit
of; for the very notion of cutting with a Knife, frights them.

LVIII. In order then to this work, the Patient ought frequently to purge, and
constantly to take some antistrumatick Diet, etc. otherwise new Tumors will
arise whilst the old ones are eradicating.

LIX. Then such Escaroticks are to be chosen, as may penetrate deep into the
Gland, and do the work with the least pain: But indeed all Medicaments fit for
this work are very painful, yet the strongest Causticks are most proper to
begin with, so they be kept within their bounds.

LX. Of these there are several kinds: as, 1. Soap-lees, boiled up to a Stone;
but this will spread, in spite of all Defensatives. 2. The Causticks made of
Arsenick, Sublimate, and Vitriol; which spread also. 3. Calx viva, boiled up
with Lixivium Saponis; which spreads least of all.

LXI. Simple Escaroticks are, 1. The Caustick-stone. 2. Corrosive Sublimate. 3.
Arsenick. 4. Auripigment. 5. Unslaked Lime. 6. Oils of Vitriol and Sulphur. 7.
Butter of Antimony, etc.

LXII. Simple Cathereticks are, 1. All sorts of Vitriol. 2. Verdigrise. 3.
Squamae Aeris. 4. Chalcitis. 5. Misy. 6. Sorry. 7. Burnt Alum. 8. Arcanum
Coralinum. 9. Red Precipitate.

LXIII. Of these Compounds are made: as, 1. Trochisci de Minio Vigonis, made of
Corrosive Sublimate, Minium, and Leven. 2. This of John Arden, more Escarotick.
Corrosive Sublimate iv. Ceruse, Starch, A. iijss. Arsenick in fine powder jss.
juice of Asphodel x. best Vinegar v. mix, and boil to the consumption of the
humidity; then powder it, and incorporate it with Auripigment calcined jvss.
Leven xvi. mix, and with a little Rose Water, make Troches. 3. Pulvis sine
pari. It is made of corrosive Sublimate, Auripigment, Quicklime, ana. 4.
Turbith-mineral alone. 5. Red Precipitate alone. 6. Red Precipitate mixed with
burnt Alum. 7. The Vitriol-stone.

LXIV. The gentlest of those Preparations with Corrosive Sublimate, are too
painful to be applied in tender Bodies, and scarcely to be endured in the
strongest, though taken off in four or six hours after: for that the Salts having
penetrated, the pain will continue vehement for a long time after; many times
affecting the neighboring parts with Tumors and great Inflammation, and
sometimes affecting the Head with terrible pains, as also Palpitations of the
Heart, Faintings, etc.

LXV. The Cathereticks most commonly used, are Turbith-mineral, red
Precipitate, and burnt Alum, which are indeed the mildest, and therefore of a
more slow operation, but may serve ordinarily, and in tender Bodies.

LXVI. The Method of applying them is this. 1. It is best to choose that
Caustic which will spread least; which you are to spread long, in proportion
to the Tumor, reaching from the lowest part thereof upwards; because in
consuming it, the Scrophula will sink downwards; and defend the sides with
Plasters, that it do not spread.

LXVII. 2. The lips being once divided, they give way, and as the Escarotick,
penetrates into the body of the Gland, the sides will fall in, and be
eradicated out of the aperture, though very small; which the less it is, the less
Scar will remain from the Cicatrice, and the sooner it will be cured.

LXVIII. 3. The Escar being made, divide it the whole length, and with a
Caustick-stone, rub into it, 'till it has penetrated into the body of the
Gland; the which it will the sooner do, if you press into the same place with a
Stick dipped into Oil of Vitriol, or Butter of Antimony.

LXiX. 4. This done, dress it up with Ung. Basilicon, mixed with a little
Linseed-oil; embrocating the Parts adjacent with Oil of Roses mixed with
Vinegar, and over all lay Empl. e Bolo: being thus dressed, it is painful; but it
lasts not above half an hour.

LXX. 5. The third day after dress it again; and if the Escar in the middle is
dried hard, dress it with Lenients: but if it feels soft, rub it again
interchangably with the Caustick-stone, and Oil of Vitriol, or Butter of
Antimony, thrusting them every way into the body of the Gland; but taking heed,
that the lips of the Ulcer may not be enlarged thereby.

LXXI. 6. Thus proceeding, most of the Struma will be wasted, before the first
Escar in the circumference will fall off: after which you may consume the
remainder with red Precipitate, and keep it open by Dossels of Lint, letting
the lips grow narrower in the mean time; and so heal it with a Cicatrice, as
another Sore. Wiseman.

LXXII. This is the Method for very large Strumae, the lesser will not admit of
this Way; to such you may apply the strongest Catheretick Pouders, as you see
cause. But if they affect the Muscles, Nerves, Tendons, Ligaments, Joints, etc.
they require more caution in their extirpation.

LXXIII. The Cure of the Evil which is without a Cystis, afflicting the
Muscles, Tendons, and Joints. The gumminess upon the Muscles and Tendons
require Emollients and Discussives, and differs not much in Cure from that of a
Scirrhus.

LXXIV. The Evil affecting the Joints increases gradually, and rises by
congestion: it is twofold; 1. That which rises Externally, upon the Tendons,
between them and the Skin, or them and the Bone. 2. That which rises
Internally, within the Bone it self, which we shall consider in the Chapter of
Spina Ventosa.

LXXV. The first of these arises for the most part from an Humor overmoistening
the Tendons and Ligaments; which very much relaxes them, and produces a
weakness and uneasiness in the Joint, raising a Tumor externally; which in
process of time corrodes and rots the Membranes and Bones, through its acidity.

LXXVI. First purge with Mercurials and Antimonials, and keep the Patient to an
Antistramatick Diet, to alter the habit of the Body; and apply to the Tumor
Emplasters of an astringent and dry quality, as Empl. de Minio, e Bolo, etc.
with moderate Bandage; and let the Member be placed in such a position, as may
prevent the falling down of the Humor.

LXXVII. Afterward strengthen the Joint by Fomentations, and Emplasters of a
discussive and astringent faculty: but if yet the Tumor grows greater, and will
not discuss by any application, it is to be feared, that the Bones are hurt.

LXXVIII. Now since these kinds of Swellings are for the most part caused by an
Hypersarcosis within, they are not to be opened, without some assurance of a
rottenness of the Bone: for otherwise upon opening, it will only yield a G^eet,
and the Hypersarcosis will be protruded in a Fungus.

LXXIX. If also in some particular place Suppuration does appear, and upon
opening, a matter much like whites of Eggs does come forth, you may conclude
the Bone is corrupted, (especially in the Hand or Foot) and the longer the
opening is delayed, the more rotten the Bones will be.

LXXX. In this case, discharge the matter, making the vent large, according as
the Vessels will permit; and proceed in the Cure, as in an Ulcer with
rottenness of the Bone, and keep the member in such a position, that the Joint
may not be contracted.

LXXXI. If much proud Flesh shall grow up in the Ulcer, it will hazard the
rotting of the Bone underneath; and if the Bone is once carious, it is not then
the work of Nature, but of Art: for 'till the Hypersarcosis is removed, the
Bone will never exfoliate, but the Evil will still increase, and the Bones rot
in pieces, one Apostemation coming upon another; so that the Patient will
consume, and dye miserably.

LXXXII. In this case, the proud Flesh must be removed by such things as the
Patient can bear; as Precipitate, either alone, or mixed with Basilicon, or
burnt Alum, as the occasion may require: then way being made to the Bones, they
are to be made bare, and such as are loose are to be taken out, the others you
must dispose to exfoliate.

LXXXIII. Then cleanse the Ulcer well by Detersives; for which purpose nothing
seems better than Ung. Nicotianae, and cherish the native Heat by discussive,
and drying Fomentations; and by Compresses (pressed out of Limewater, or the
Water of the Griffin) and convenient Bandage, endeavor to restore the Part to
its natural form and magnitude.

LXXXIV. If it becomes of a scirrhous hardness, or seems to degenerate into
Cancer by reason of pain, then nothing is to be attempted more than a
palliative Cure. Ceratum de Galbano lbi. Pulvis Mercurii coagulati vi.
Oil-olive q.s. mix, and make a soft Emplaster.

LXXXV. Or this. Emplastrum album iv. Sacchar. Saturni, Opium, (dissolved in
Water, and inspissated to the thickness of new Honey) A. i. shining Soot jss.
volatile Sal Armoniack vi. soften with Oil of Nightshade, q.s. and make an
Emplaster.

LXXXVI. Or, Emplast. de Galbano lbss. Empl. Mercuriale lbi. mix them, and
apply. Or, Sheep-suet ii. Oil-olive ivss. melt, and mix; to which add Oils of
Juniper Berries, Fennel-seed, Anniseed, and Amber, A.i. volatile Sal Armoniack
iii. Saccharum Saturni jss. Opium extracted i. white Precipitate, native
Cinnabar, A.vi. mix them, and anoint therewith.

OBSERVATIONS.
LXXXVII. A Girl ten years old, had hard King's Evil Swellings on three of her
Fingers: she was cured by the Smoke of Vinegar poured upon red-hot Flints,
morning and evening for a Month together. Riverius, Observat. communicate.

LXXXVIII. A Maiden, fourteen years old, was much troubled from her Infancy
with Ulcers in her Ears and Fingers, Lips much swelled, darting Pains, Scurvy,
with Glandules of Neck and Ears exulcerated, and the rest scirrhous, and so
swelled, that she could scarce move her Neck. She drank the Decoction of
Guajacum, with cutting and opening Medicines, four times a day, with eight
drops of Spirit of Sal Armoniack in it: and once a week she took this Powder.
Jalap ss. Tartar vitriolated gr.v. Oil of Fennel gut.ii. make a powder, for a
Dose; which gave her three or four Stools. And outwardly there was applied
Emplast. de Ranis cum Mercurio, softened with Oil of Rue and Soot; but the
Glandules being exulcerated, Vng. Basilicon was first applied, and after that,
Balsamum Sulphuris Rulandi; with which in about three months she was cured.
Deckers.

LXXXIX. A Gentlewoman was three years troubled with a hard painful Tumor in
her Neck, to which was applied this. Emplast. de Ranis cum Mercurio ss. fine
Galbanum ii. Saccharum Saturni, volatile Sal Arm. A.ss. soften with Oil of Rue,
q.s. and make the consistency of a Plaster. By the application of this the Pain
and Swelling vanished away. Deckers.

XC. A young Lady choleric and lean, had many scrophulous Tumors, and being
afflicted with a continual Hectick-fever died: her Body being opened, there was
found above a thousand Glandules upon her, little and great, from the Jaws to
the Os Pubis; which were within of the same color with those in her Neck, viz.
yellow; Medicines were warily applied, yet with no success. Barbett.

XCI. A Youth twelve years old had a Struma under his right Jaw, of an oval
figure. Incision was made into the Skin, according to its length; then
separating it, a Ligature was fastened under it, and so it was cut out, leaving
the Ligature to digest off. It was dressed with a Digestive made of Turpentine,
and Emplast. e Bolo: after Digestion, it was deterged, incarned, and
cicatrized. Wiseman.

XCII. A Woman twenty eight years old, had a large Struma on the left side of
her Neck, of an oval figure, and moveable under the Skin: an Incision was made
the full length of it, and the Skin being every where separated from it, it was
pulled out, and a Ligature was tied about the Vessels under it, and then cut
off: it was dressed with a Dossel spread with the Digestive of Turpentine, dipped
in Pulvis Galeni, with Pledgets of the same Digestive over it, and a
Restrictive Plaster over all, with good Bandage; and after Digestion, it was
incarned and healed. Wiseman.

IV. Tumors arising from WIND.
CHAP. XXVIII. Of the WINDY-TVMOR.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...), pl. (...). (...), pl. (...). (...), pl. (...)
in Latin, Emphysema, pl. emphysemata; Apostema ventosum, Inflatio, Inflationes:
in English, Windy Tumor, or Tumors, a Windy Apostem, etc.

II. Definition. A flatulent Tumor is a preternatural swelling, proceeding from
Wind, shut up within the Membranes of several Parts, as under a thick Skin, or
the interstices of the Muscles, and yielding to the impression of the Fingers,
but suddenly returning again.

III. Or, It is a Swelling proceeding from Wind, not pitting, but yielding to
the Fingers, contained within Membranes, and which if shaken, makes a rumbling
noise.

IV. Galen, lib. de rat. Vict. in Acut. Com. 4. Text. 21. Tumor est, collecto
Spiritu flatulento in quibusdam cavitatibus, vel sensui expositis, vel ratione
contemplabilibus. It is a Tumor made by a flatulent Spirit collected in certain
cavities; these cavities being either exposed to the sense, or such as are to
be apprehended by reason.

V. Now what these Cavities are, which are to be apprehended by reason, he
explains himself, ad Glauc. lib. 2. cap. 5. And that they are those very Pores
of the Similary Parts, and those little spaces which are interposed between the
said Similary Parts.

VI. Wiseman says, it is a light puffy Tumor, easily yielding to the pressure
of the Fingers, and rises again in the instant you take them off.

VII. The Differences. 1. In respect to the kinds; being either pure, or mixed.
A Pure Emphysema is seldom found, unless in cases of Wounds in the Breast; where
the Air getting in between the Muscles and Membranes, does puff them up, much
like to the inside of a Shoulder of Veal. A Mixed Emphysema is that which is
mixed with some Humor, which is chiefly, or always Phlegmatic.

VIII. 2. In respect to the place; some are inward, some are outward. The
Inward are in the membranes of the Bowels, and sometimes in their very
Cavities; as the Stomach, Abdomen, Womb, etc. of these we say nothing here. The
Outward may be on the Eyelids, the great Joints, the Scrotum, Navel, and other
membranous parts; the Scrotum being the usual seat of the Hernia ventosa, of
which in the next Chapter.

IX. 3. In respect to its quality: some are without pain, in which the Wind is
in motion; others with pain, in which it is quiet, from its too great
distention.

X. The Causes. The proximate or conjoined Cause is Wind, or a flatulent
Spirit; which is, as Galen testifies, de Sympt. Cause. lib. 3. cap. 4. from a
weak and languishing heat: for as absolute cold cannot excite any Vapor; so on
the other side, vehement heat discusses the Vapor.

XI. The antecedent cause is Phlegm, viscous Lympha, or some other thick Humor;
sometimes alone, and sometimes mixed with a little Choler, which as Ferment
turns it into froth, and so generates Wind: and it always happens upon a
debility of the Part; which endeavors a concoction of Humors, but is unable.

XII. The procatartick or remote causes are flatulent Meats and Drinks; cold,
moist, and cloudy Air; idle and sedentary Life; the suppression of accustomed
Evacuations, Stoppages of the Pores of the Part, and thickness of its
Membranes; to which add, external injuries, which contribute to the hurt and
weakness of the place affected.

XIII. The Signs. The Part is inflated like a Bladder, yields to the Fingers,
but immediately rising again, and makes a kind of rumbling noise, if shaken.

XIV. It is of an uncertain bigness, sometimes very large, sometimes small;
without any weight to the Part that it possesses.

XV. The Tumor being pressed with the Fingers, though it yields to them, yet it
leaves no pit: whereby it is distinguished from ^edema; for that also yields to
the Fingers; but then it leaves a Pit after it.

XVI. It is of the color of the Skin, without any alteration: unless it is
full of pain, by reason of its lying deep, among the sensible parts, or near
the Periostion.

XVII. A crackling is often felt, if it is in the Knee, or other outward part:
and it most commonly affects the Joints, but chiefly the Knee and Wrist; and
Parts membranous.

XVIII. The Prognostics. If they be small, and proceed not from any rebellious
cause; or affect only the lesser Joints, they are of easy cure; and if need be,
may be opened at any time.

XIX. If it is great, it argues a great debility of natural Heat, and great
plenty of morbifick Matter; and therefore the more difficult of cure, because
more stubborn and rebellious.

XX. An Emphysema affecting the greater Joints, is of most difficult cure, and
not to be opened without great consideration.

XXI. If the Matter is detained in the Muscles, it is then hardly cured, and
with much trouble; for that the Spirit is produced, bound up and included by
the containing Membranes, and disper'sd into all parts of the Muscle.

XXII. The Cure. The Wind that distends the Part, is to be taken away. Means
also must be used, that it may not breed again, and flow to the Part. And the
Pain, if any be, is to be mitigated, and removed.

XXIII. In order to the performance of these things, the Diet is first to be
considered; which is to be the same as in Oedema, Pease, Beans, Carrots, and
all crude Fruits, and windy things do extremely hurt. Wine, and other things
moderately heating; as the Potestates Anisi, Carui, Caryophyllorum, Juniperi,
Lavendulae, Limonum, Rosmarini, Rutae, Salviae, etc. do very much profit.

XXIV. The Matter out of which the Wind is bred, is to be evacuated; which is
effectually done by purging once or twice a week with Tinctura purgans, Syrupus
catharticus, or Oxymel scilliticum.

XXV. The Stomach and whole Body is to be corroborated by giving inwardly
Tinctura Cordialis, Tinct. Martis, Tinct. Sacra, Tinct. Salis Tartari, Elixir
Metallorum, etc. as also, Sudorificks, the chief whereof are, Our Specific
Laudanum, Guttae Vitae, Theriaca Chymica, Laudanum Samech, etc.

XXVI. Every night going to bed, after taking a Dose of Laudanum, etc. let the
Patient take a glass of Hippocras, or spiced Wine; and a like draught of the
same every morning fasting.

XXVII. But for correcting the Wind, expelling it, and to hinder its breeding,
nothing is better than the Spiritus nitratus, which effectually opens all
Obstructions, and causes a dissipation thereof; take it ad ii. in a glass of
Hippocras, or spiced Wine.

XXVIII. As to Topics, they are to be such as by their heating and attenuating
quality, may open the Pores, and discuss the Flatulencies; which of Simples
these are chief: Roots of Angelica, Galangal, Lovage; Herbs, as Avens, Bawm,
Camomil, Dill, Fennel, Fetherfew, Hyssop, Marjoram, Mint, Penniroyal, Rue,
Southernwood, Tansy; Flowers, of Camomil, Elder, Melilot, Saffron; Seeds,
Anise, Caraways, Cumin, Fennel; Oils of Mace, Nutmegs, Spike, and all hot
distilled Oils.

XXIX. Of Compounds, this is good. Tops of Angelica, Bawm, Camomil, Dill,
Hyssop, Origanum, Southernwood, A. M.j. Wine lbvi. boil, and make a
Fomentation, which apply for half an hour or better: or you may make it in a
small Lixivium of Potashes.

XXX. You may also embrocate with the following Mixture. Powers of Rosemary,
Juniper, Savin, Amber, A. i. Powers of Turpentine ii. mix, and bathe therewith:
or you may mix with them Oil-olive i. and so anoint with them.

XXXI. Or you may anoint with this Liniment commended by Barbett. Common Oils
of Wormwood and Rue, A. ii. Oil of Nutmegs by expressision i. distilled Oil of
Mace ss. Castor dissolved in Aqua vitae ii. mix, and make a Liniment.

XXXII. Oil made of wild Cucumbers, is approved of, as a most excellent thing
to anoint with: or this, Oils of wild Cucumbers, of Dill, of Rue, A. ss.
expressed Oil of Nutmegs ii. Oil of Amber ss. mix, to anoint withal.

XXXIII. It is good to bathe with Spiritus mirabilis, or anoint with Vnguentum
mirabile, or with this Balsam following. Common Oil of Rue ii. Turpentine half
an ounce: mix with the Turpentine Oil of Vitriol vi. till the Turpentine is
perfectly dissolved; then mix that with the Oil of Rue, and make a Balsam.

XXXIV. After, you may apply this Cataplasm of Barbett: Rue, Calamint, A. M.
ss. Goats dung vi. Bean meal ii. seeds of Anise and Cumin, A. ss. Bay Berries,
Salt, A. iii. Nitre, Sulphur, A. i. Wine q.s. mix, and boil to softness, and
beat all up into a Cataplasm.

XXXV. Or this Emplaster. Oil of Spike iv. Mastich, Venice-Soap, A. iii. seeds
of Cumin, Caraways, A. ii. Castor dissolved in Aqua vitae i. roots of Pellitory
of Spain, ashes of Earthworms, A. ss. Wax, Turpentine, A. q.s. mix, and make an
Emplaster.

XXXVI. Or this: Faeces of new Wax from the Press lbjss. crumbs of brown Bread
lbss. flowers of red Roses iv. boil all in White Wind, then beat them together,
and add Gloves, Nutmegs, Ginger, Pepper in fine powder, A. iii. seeds of Anise,
Bishops-weed, Cumin, Fennel, A.iv. Oils of Camomil, Dill, and Rue, A. ii. mix,
and make a Cataplasm.

XXXVII. If need require, Blistering, Scarifying, and Cupping are to be done:
but if neither by these things, nor the former applications, the Tumor will
discuss, but is inflamed, and grows painful, you must then use Anodyns.

XXXVIII. But if the Tumor is in a place where it may be safely opened, the
speediest way of Cure will be by cutting into it; and then it is to be cured,
as in the Cure of an Absceess we have showed.

XXXIX. A Tumor in the Knee of long standing, great, soft, and loose, was cured
by this Cataplasm. Roots of Briony, Orrice, Lillies, Daffodils fresh gathered,
beat them together, and boil them in Wine and Aqua vitae, and make a Cataplasm:
this was applied hot every day upon the Swelling, and bound on; and in three
Weeks time it did the Cure. Platerus, Observe. lib. 3.

XL. The like has been done by application of a Cataplasm, made with wild
Radish roots and Vinegar, and applied hot.

XLI. Great Inflations of the Knee, have been sometimes cured, by application
of a large blistring Plaster, made with Cantharides, sour Leven, and a little
Vinegar.

XLII. A Woman thirty years old, had a swelling on her right Knee, encompassing
the Rotula, and had been growing near two years. It was supposed flatulent, and
so was treated with Fomentations, Embrocations, and Emplasters: but it heating,
and increasing, Empl. de Bolo was applied, and a Knee-piece laced on: by the
continued use of which the Tumor was restrained, and the Knee recovered its
former strength. Wiseman.

XLIII. Another Person had in the Knee a round soft Tumor, lying on each side
the Rotula, of the same color with the Skin, which much disabled her from
walking: Empl. ad Herniam was applied, with an addition of Ceratum Hyssopi; and
a Compress of brown Paper, soaked in Aqua Fabrorum, over which a laced
Knee-piece was put on, and straightened proportionably: by renewing these
Dressings, in about ten days the Swelling discussed, and her Knee recovered its
former strength. Wiseman, lib. 1. cap. 27. Obs. 4 and 5.

XLIV. A young Woman had a puffy Swelling on her left Foot, near her Toes,
stretching over the Toe next the little one, of about two Fingers breadth,
without inflammation, or much pain. It was endeavored to be discussed, but it
resisted, and was inflamed: then Emplast. e Bolo was applied, and a Sock to be
laced, with a Bracer locked to it, for the Toe; and by Compress and careful
lacing, the Tumor was suppressed, and she had much ease, and in some Months she
was cured. Wiseman, ibid. Observe. 7.

CHAP. XXIX. Of a WINDY RVPTVRE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). ex (...), Ventus, and (...), Ramex, Ruptura;
in Latin, Pneumatocele, Hernia ventosa, Ramex ventosus, Ruptura ventosa; in
English, a Windy Rupture.

II. The Kinds. It is twofold: 1. (...), Hernia ventosa Scroti, a Windy Rupture
of the Cods. 2. (...), Hernia Umbilicalis ventosa, a Windy Rupture of the
Navel. See Synop. Ased. lib. 5. cap. 18.

III. Definition. It is a collection of Wind in the Scrotum, and parts adjacent
to it; or else in the Navel, making the parts to swell, or stick out.

IV. The Causes. The proximate or conjoined Cause is Wind, or a flatulent
Spirit, protruded into the Part through its weakness, or want of natural Heat;
the antecedent is a viscous Lympha, or a superabundance of Phlegmatic matter:
and the procatartick or prime Causes, are, evil temper of the Air, Food of evil
Juice, violent motions, and overstraining of the Body; and in Children many
times struggling and crying.

V. The Signs. They are known partly by the swelling out of the Part. That in
the Groin is many times large, sometimes hard, sometimes not; but that in the
Cod is for the most part hard; because it is apt to swell much, is suddenly
grown to its bigness, round, and yet light, possessing for the most part the
whole Scrotum, and Cremaster-muscle, and sometimes the very Yard, it self.

VI. When it is at its full bigness, it resists the touch, and is clear, like
unto a Bladder full of Wind; and the Yard is sometimes greater in one place,
than in another. If it is in the Groin, it is nothing near so large, and more
oblong, and seldom affects the Yard.

VII. That in the Navel is known by the protuberance, clearness of the Skin,
softness, and easily yielding to the touch; being also less painful than the
former.

VIII. The Prognostics. If it is recent, it is easy of Cure; but if it is
inveterate, or of great magnitude, the Cure will be performed with much
difficulty.

IX. If it has been of long standing, and in a Scorbutic or Cacochymick Habit
of Body, it is dangerous; so also if it proceeds from any malign Cause.

X. If it be not discussed, or reduced, it causes in length of time many other
Diseases; and sometimes it so spreads, as to possess the whole Body.

XI. The Cure. The Indications of Cure are, 1. To expel or carry off the Humor
causing the Wind. 2. To strengthen the Viscera, by Carminatives. 3. To remove
the conjoined Cause, by Topics and proper Compresses.

XII. Purge the Body ( if strong, with Oxymel scilliticum) with Syrupus
Catharticus, Electuarium Catharticum, Pulvis Cornachini, Pulvis Antimonii, or
Pulvis Catharticus; which last is a most admirable thing; and repeat the
Purgation two, three, or four times, or as often as you see occasion.

XIII. Strengthen the Bowels with Carminatives, as Potestates seminum Anisi,
baccarum Juniperi, Cariophyllorum, Limonum, Virtutum; Tinctura Cordialis,
Tinctura Martis, Salis Tartari, Sacra; Spiritus Nitratus, Elixir Metallorum; or
other things of like nature.

XIV. As to Topics, foment in the beginning with this: Angelica, Bawm,
Calamint, Camomil, Fenel, Fetherfew, Origanum, Southernwood, Tansy, A. M.i.
bruise, and boil all in Posca, or a mixture of equal parts of Wine and Water
lbiv. boil to the Consumption of a third part; and foment hot with Spunges.

XV. Or you may embrocate with this: Oil-olive, or Oil of Ben iii. Oils of
Caraways, Juniper, and Aniseed, A. i. mix them, and anoint therewith. Some
anoint with Oils of Euphorbium and Elder, mixed together.

XVI. If the Tumor is with pain and inflammation, use Anodyns; applying such
Cataplasms and Cerats or Emplasters, as have power to soften and resolve.

XVII. As these Diseases are most incident to Children, so they ought to be
used with great care and mildness: Fienus cured several, by often heating them
against the Fire, and making dry Fomentations, with hot Cloths oftentimes
applied.

XVIII. The Emplaster ( which ought to be either ad Herniam, or some such as we
have described in the former Chapter) being applied, the Part is to be bound
up, either with a Bag-truss, or a Bolster-bandage, according to the Place
affected; both to keep the Part warm, and keep the Applications on: and so to
be continued, 'till such time as the Cure is perfected.

XIX. The Hernia Umbilicalis ventosa, is to be cured exactly after the former
manner: but the Cure also consists in the well reducing of it, and retaining it
so by Agglutinatives, strong Binders, and good Bandage.

XX. If through neglecting it, the Skin should wear thin, and mortify, you must
dress it as a Mortification: and after the separation of the Escar, you must
endeavor to take up the Peritonaeum, stitch it close, and incarn it with the
rest of the Ulcer; and being cicatriz'd, apply good Bandage, to retain it in
its place.

OBSERVATIONS.
XXI. A Child seven years old had a Hernia ventosa in the Groin, as big as a
Pullets Egg, soft, but yet so strait, as it scarcely yielded to pressure.
Bandage did it no good, but made it more painful; Fomentations and Emplasters
we applied, as in a flatulent Tumor, and it was bound up with a Bolster-truss;
and with proper Internals, it was cured in some time after. Wiseman, lib. 1.
cap. 28. Obs. 7.

XXII. A Child had a Hernia ventosa in his left Testicle, the Wind being gotten
into the Tunica vaginalis which encompassed the Testicle round, so as the
Testicle could not be felt. The Tumor was so intense, that it would not yield
to pressure. For the Cure Discussives and a Bag-truss were advised. Wiseman.
ib. Obs. 8.

XXIII. A Child three years old, had one of these Tumors lying the whole length
of the production of the Testicle, like to the uppermost of those Bladders we
find in Carps: and the same Wind having raised up the Tunica vaginalis, made
the Testicle, not unlike the lower round Bladders which are united to the
aforementioned upper Bladders in the same Fish: the Cure was performed by
Discutients, and a Bag-truss. Wiseman, ibid. Observe. 9.

XXIV. A Child two months old had a Hernia ventosa in the right Inguen, down
into the Tunica vaginalis; the Tunicle of the other Testicle was also
distended: Empl. e Cymino was put over the Scrotum and Inguina, with a
Bag-truss, the Tumor not being capable of Reduction or other Bandage. The Child
had an ill Nurse, and was galled by its Piss; for which cause, Empl.
Diachalciteos was applied, and renewed daily: upon good Bandage, the Tumor
would be very inconsiderable, and sometimes quite discussed: but upon neglect
of bracing the Truss close, it would appear big again: it had a Rupture in both
Groins; upon which account, a double Bolster-truss was laid on. Wiseman, ibid.
Observe. 10.

XXV. The same Child had a Hernia Umbilicalis ventosa, which was cured by
external application of Astringents and Compression, exactly according to the
method of the following Observation. Wiseman, ibid.

XXVI. A Child four months old had a Hernia Umbilicalis ventosa, to which was
applied a mixture made of pouders of Frankincense, Mastich, Aloes, Sanguis
draconis, with the white of an Egg; Emplastr. e Bolo, with a small Button
sticking in the middle, made of some snips of the same Emplaster; by which the
Emplaster under it was kept the closer: these were bound on to make a
Compression. Above the Navel, it had also another Rupture: a Compress was made
of some pieces of Empl. ad Herniam, which was kept upon the place, by applying
over Empl. e Bolo: by this method, these Hernia's were in few weeks cured.
Wiseman, ibid. Obs. 1.

V. Tumors arising from WATER.
CHAP. XXX. Of a WATERY RVPTVRE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). ex (...), Aqua, and (...), Ramex; in Latin,
Hydrocele, Hernia aquosa; in English, a Watery Rupture.

II. The Kinds. It is twofold, 1. Hydrocele, properly so called: 2. (...),
Hydromphalus, Tumor Umbilici aquosus, a Watery Tumor of the Navel: this by some
is called, Vmbilici procidentia, the thrusting forth of the Navel.

I. Of HYDROCELE.
III. The Definition. It is a Watery Swelling of the Scrotum or Cods; and is
either Simple, or Complex: Simple, is when it is an original Disease; Complex,
is when it is joined to, or is the product of another Disease; as of an
Ascitis, or an Anasarca; of which we have nothing to say here, but shall (God
willing) treat of them in their proper places.

IV. The Kinds. When it is an original Tumor of the Part, the Water lies either
without the Tunica vaginalis, affecting the whole Scrotum: or else it is
contained within the said Tunicle: or otherwise, it is held in a Cystis of its
own: in which case, you will find one side swelled, the other yet remaining in
its natural magnitude or state: or if both Testicles are affected, you will
feel the Tumors distinct.

V. The Causes. An original or simple Hydrocele is generated or caused as all
other Watery Tumors are; to wit, by a separation of the Serum from the Blood
out of the Arteries; which not returning into the Veins again, lodges it self
in the Skin, or between the Membranes, or some other part the Body.

VI. The Procatartick Cause, is some vehement overstraining of the Body,
violent hard labor, fall from some high place, bruise, blow, or the like.

VII. The Signs. Where it is original or simple, and lies without the Tunica
vaginalis, it affects the whole Scrotum, fills it like a Bladder, and discovers
it self by shining.

VIII. But if it lies within the Tunica vaginalis, between it and the
Testicles, or in a particular Cystis, the Scrotum is proportionably stretched,
and somewhat wrinkled; and at first sight, it appears not much unlike an Hernia
Intestinalis, or Zirbalis.

IX. But they are easily to be distinguished, forbidding the Patient to Cough;
if you press with your Fingers upon the Production, and nothing fills your Hand
like Wind, it is truly an Hydrocele.

X. And if the Water is within the Tunica vaginalis of both Testicles, you will
find the Tumor to appear double.

XI. It is caused from an Ascites, the Tumor is vastly great; if Anasarcous,
the Scrotum is thick, soft, and shines, yields to the impression of the
Fingers, and works like soft Wax, and generally the Praeputium is swelled: but
of this in another place.

XII. The Prognostics. In a simple Hydrocele, if it is from an External Cause,
it is the more easily cured; and so much the easier, as the habit of the Body
is good: but if it is Cacochymick, the Water may be let out, and that without
danger, as often as it fills.

XIII. If it is complicated, it is the more dangerous; and if joined with a
Dropsy, cannot be cured, unless the Dropsy is first cured; yet may serve to
discharge the Water, both in an Ascites and Anasarca.

XIV. The Cure. The Indications of Cure, are, 1. To remove the Procatartick
Cause. 2. To remove the Conjoined Cause. 3. To strengthen the Part affected.

XV. The Prime Cause is removed, by observing a spare, drying and attenuating
Diet; and such as prevents the generating of moist and watery Humors.

XVI. To remove the Conjoined Cause, Discussives and Dryers are to be applied,
and kept close to the Part with a Bag-Truss; which will also help to sustain
the Part: lest otherwise, by the weight of the Humor, the Tumor should be
increased.

XVII. Then you are to consider the quantity of the Water, and the Place it is
lodged in; if it is less than a Pint, open it not till it is bigger, lest you
hurt the Testicle; except it is in a Child, and then you may open it, though it
be not full out half a Pint.

XVIII. The way of doing it, is thus: Let the Patient be in a good light; and
with one of your Hands press hard upon the Production, to make the Tumor more
hard or tight: and if it is a Man that is affected, let another Person press
with his Hand upon the other side, that the Scrotum may be the more firm or
steady.

XIX. Then you may make the Puncture in the depending Part; but have a care not
to cut the greater Veins of the Scrotum, lest making the Water bloody, you may
think you have hurt some Part within.

XX. Let the Apertion be big enough to receive a small Pipe; which presently
put in, and keep it there 'till you have drawn forth all the Water.

XXI. Which being performed, apply a Pledget of Ung. Basilicon, and an
Emplaster over it to keep it on, and a flanel Stuph wrung out of Tinctura
mirabilis; all which may be kept close to the Part with a Bag-Truss, 'till the
Wound is healed, and the Scrotum contracted; which will be in about two or
three days time.

XXII. If the Water is included in a Cystis, one or more, they must be opened
each apart, and you must be careful to pass in your Pipe, and keep it in, 'till
the last drop of Water is discharged; for if accidentally it should come out,
it will be difficult to get in again; for the inner Tunicle hanging loose, the
holes may not answer one another; nor will it be so well opened again, as it
was at first: thus the Water being discharged, you must perform the healing as
is before declared.

XXIII. But all this is but a Palliative Cure; if you would do it perfectly,
you must make the Apertion large on the one side of the Cods; reaching toward
the Production, according to the length of the Testicle, that you may open it,
after the Water is extracted, the better to apply your Medicines to it, in case
it should be affected.

XXIV. Now whether this Apertion is done by Incision or Caustic, it ought to
be in a Body not Cacochymick, nor Aged; lest Inflammation, Colic, or Fever
should seize them: in which case good Fomentations, Lenients, and Anodyns are
to be applied to preserve the Natural Heat; as also Turpentine, Clysters, etc.

XXV. Whilst the Tumor is small, possibly it may yield to Discussives; so also
a Bruise sometimes, accompanied with Inflammation: but if it should tend to
Suppuration, you must assist Nature with Maturatives: but if it has any
quantity of Water in it, the speedy cure of it is, by letting it out.

XXVI. And after all, you must apply over the whole Scrotum (to strengthen the
Part) some Astringent Emplaster, as that ad Herniam, Caesaris, Catagmaticum;
and with a Truss fitted to the bigness of the Cod, to keep it from depending or
swagging.

XXVII. If the Tumor is complex, viz. an Anasarca of the whole Scrotum, it is
done by making many Punctures with a Lancet; by which the Water will come forth
in a few hours; and the Wounds will afterward heal, without any other
application than a warm Stuph.

XXVIII. But if there is an Anasarca of the Belly, the Seton is then most
proper; which must be made transverse the Scrotum in the lower part of it, and
kept open till all the Water is evacuated: mean season, you must preserve the
Native Heat, by application of warm Stuphs wrung out of Spirit of Wine, or red
Wine, to a pint of which, Powers of Lavender i. are put: and beware of
sharpness of Humors, inflammation, and excoriation, lest a Gangrene ensue;
which if you fear, let the Seton be withdrawn.

II. Of HYDROMPHALUS.
XXIX. Definition. It is a Collection of Water, or Watery-matter within the
Navel, causing its protrusion or sticking forth.

XXX. The Causes. The Procatartick Cause may be external Violence, evil Diet,
etc. The Antecedent Cause is a Cacochymick, and Phlegmatic habit of Body,
Hydropick Humors. The Conjoined Cause is Water, contained within the Tumor.

XXXI. The Signs. It is known by the Tumor which sticks out, the Navel it self
being turgid and prominent; the Tumor also is lax, soft, yielding a little to
the impression of the Fingers; and many times large, so that a fluctuation of
Water may be perceived.

XXXII. The Prognostics. In Children it is easily cured, and without any kind
of Danger: in Elder persons, not difficult, but more troublesome, by reason of
motion.

XXXIII. If it proceeds from an Ascites, it is indeed dangerous, and not to be
cured, without the cure of that Disease; of which in its place.

XXXIV. The Cure. If it is recent, small, and simple; not proceeding from an
Ascites, it may be cured with Resolutives, Discussives, and Dryers, Emplastick
bodies, etc. applying over a proper Bandage.

XXXV. But if the Tumor is large, the only and speedy way of cure is by
Incision, thereby letting out the Water; then dressing it with Basilicon, and
laying over it Emplast. Album, with a good Bolster-bandage.

XXXVI. If it proceeds from an Ascites, it is to be opened in the place, and
the Water gradually discharged; but it will not be perfectly cured, but with
the cure of that Disease. See the third Edition of Our Synopsis Medicinae, lib.
5. cap. 18.

CHAP. XXXI. Of a WATERY TVMOR.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Tumor aquosus, vel serosus; in
English, a Watery Tumor, or Swelling.

II. The Definition. It is a preternatural Tumor, collecting watery or serous
Humors together in some particular Part of the Body.

III. The Kinds. 1. A watery Tumor in the interstices of the Muscles, which is
when the whole Body is swelled with Water, and this is called Anasarca. 2. A
Dropsy of the Belly only, or Belly and Legs, called Ascites. 3. A Dropsy of the
Belly, in which Water is mixed with Wind, called Tympanites 4. A Dropsy of the
Head, called Hydrocephalos. 5. A Dropsy of the Breast and Lungs, called Hydrops
Pectoris vel Pulmonis. 6. A watery Tumor of the Navel, called Hydromphalos. 7.
A watery Tumor of the Cods, called Hydrocele. 8. A watery Tumor of some other
singular Part of the Body, called in general Tumor aquosus, which is what we
only intend in this Chapter, the other seven kinds being particularly handled
in their proper places.

IV. The Differences. It differs from Oedema, because in this, being pressed
with the Fingers, the print remains not so long, as it does in Oedema: from a
flatulent Tumor, because it makes no sound, as that does: from other pituitous
Tumors, by reason of its shining, and manner of pitting: from a Phlegmon, and
Erysipelas; because they are with pain, this without: from a Scirrhus, because
it will yield to the Touch, whereas a Scirrhus will not, etc.

V. The Causes. Barbett says it is caused from Serum or Salt Water, produced
from the lost heat of the Parts; which serve to making of Chyle and Blood.

VI. Wiseman says it is caused from Serum extravasated, which according to the
place on which it lights, does denominate the Disease: which place, says
Sennertus, is some part that is loose, or that has in it a cavity or hollowness.

VII. And indeed the Causes of these Waterish Tumors are, whatever may increase
the Serum of the Blood beyond its due quantity; or keep it preternaturally in
any part of the Body, whereby it stagnates in some one or more places.

VIII. The Procatartick Causes are ill Digestion, defect of Sanguification,
caused many times through intemperance, and great Hemorrhages, or frequent
Blood-lettings; whereby the Blood being weakened, through the diminution of its
quantity, cannot convert the Aliments received into Blood, but lets them
degenerate into Serum; and withal is not able to carry the Serum along with it
to the Emulgent Arteries; but lets it fall by the way into the receiving Parts:
from which cause these waterish Tumors arise.

IX. The Antecedent Cause is a Watery habit of Body, and a defect in the
Ferments of the Viscera, the Kidneys not separating the Serum from the Blood;
or the conglobate Glandules not doing their duty as they should do: whereby
through a kind of stagnation of several Juices, as the Lympha, etc. the Blood
becomes too acrimonious and hot, and so runs in a great measure into Serum or
Water; which being extravasated in any part of the Body, produces a Tumor of
this kind.

X. The Signs. It is known by its softness, being softer than an Oedema, and
more yielding to the Fingers, and as suddenly returning again; without pain,
and withal shining.

XI. If the Water is near the Cuticula or Cutis, the Tumor has a kind of
perlucidness in it; the nearer the Skin, the more they shine; the deeper under
the Skin, the less: but those that lie very deep, or are contained in a Cystis,
do not discolor the Skin at all, nor cause any considerable pain.

XII. If the Swelling is very large, it is so much the more shining; and you
may by shaking it, perceive a kind of undulation.

XIII. Wiseman says, that some of these Tumors, if in a dark room, you shade
them, as Women do an Egg with their hands, holding a Candle to the other side
of it, you will find a kind of faint transparency.

XIV. The Prognostics. These Tumors are not dangerous, if the principal Parts
which feed them be not too much debilitated; yet they are difficultly cured,
more especially if they happen in the Joints.

XV. Nor is there any danger of Life, unless the Viscera be very much
obstructed or tainted: but the more inward they are, the more dangerous; so
also, if the more noble Parts are affected.

XVI. The Cure. The Indications of Cure are, 1. To remove the Procatartick
Cause. 2. The evacuation of the Antecedent Cause. 3. The removing the Conjoined
Cause.

XVII. The first Indication is answered in observing a proper Diet, much like
that prescribed in Oedema. All moist and humid things are to be avoided, and
such as generate watery Humbrs: things hot and dry, and attenuating are best,
Spices chiefly excepted; also strong Waters, and salt Food.

XVIII. The second Indication is answered in purging away the serous and watery
Humor by Stool and Urine: which may be done with Tinctura purgans, Syrupus
Catharticus, Pulvis A^monii, Pulvis Catharticus, Pilulae Catharticae, Tinctura
Phlegmagoga Grulingii, Hydragoga Grulingii, Resina Jalapae, Pilulae ex Duobus,
or any other proper Hydragogue.

XIX. This done, you must order, that the Diaphoresis and insensible
Transpiration may be free, and uninterrupted; as also that you provoke Urine,
with Nephriticks: to the end that not only the serous Humor may be evacuated
all ways, but that Nature might be a little corroborated.

XX. A present fault or weakness of any Bowel destinated for Concoction, is to
be corrected: but that cannot be, 'till it is freed from the Watery Humor;
which you may do by the Catharticks before enumerated.

XXI. Or else by some of these following, viz. Roots of Asarum, Dwarf-elder,
Jalap, Mechoacan, leaves and inner bark of Elder, Euphorbium, Turbith,
Cambogia, species Diacarthamum, Cream of Tartar; but above all, by the Vinum
Hydragogum of Barbett, in Our Doron Med. lib. 2. cap. 23. sect. 3.

XXII. The third Indication, is next to be considered, which is the removing
the Conjoined Cause, by Discussives and Dryers, which may absume the Watery
Humor; the chief of which among Simples are, Rue, Elder, Danewort, Camomil,
Dill, Celandine, Centory, Calamint, Marjoram, Fennel, Hyssop, Southernwood,
Savory, Fetherfew, Tansy, Tobacco, Wormwood; roots of Orrice, Briony, Sowbread,
Birthwort; Bay and Juniper berries; Bean and Orobus meal; Salt, Alum, Sulphur
vive; Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Opoponax, Sagapenum, Bdellium: of which things you
may form Fomentations, Cataplasms, and Emplasters.

XXIII. Tops of Southernwood, Wormwood, Origanum, Calaminth, Marjoram, A. M.
ii. flowers of Elder, Camomil, Rosemary, red Roses, A. M.i. Bay and Juniper
berries, A. ii. fair Water, or Lixivium of Quicklime, q.s. boil and dissolve
therein Sulphur, Salt, Alum, A.i. and make a Fomentation.

XXIV. Sal Nitre, Sal Armoniack, Potashes, white Pepper, A. v. Euphorbium in
powder ii. Camphir i. Oil of Rosemary iii. Oil-olive vi. mix them; and
embrocate therewith the Part affected.

XXV. Bay Berries, Zedoary, Ginger, all in very fine powder, A. i. juice of
Dwarf-elder iv. Camphir, Oil of Juniper Berries, A. iii. Oil-olive, Wax, A.
q.s. mix, and make a Cerate.

XXVI. First foment the Part, to open the Pores; then apply Cataplasms,
renewing them for some time, to discuss: and at last, apply a Cerate or
Emplaster, to dry, comfort, strengthen, and restore the weakened Part.

XXVII. If by the application of these or the like things, the Cure succeeds
not, you must then come to Section, or making an Apertion, to discharge the
Water.

XXVIII. It is done with an Incision-knife. Where note, that if gross matter or
dregs are mixed with the Water, the Apertion must be the more large. The Water
and matter being emptied, cut off as much of the superfluous Skin as is
necessary, and let the edges be brought together.

XXIX. Then dress it up with the common Digestive of Turpentine, etc. applying
also a restrictive Cerat, or Emplaster, with Compress, and good Bandage.

XXX. The second or third day after, let it be dressed again; which let be
continued daily, 'till the Wound is agglutinated, cicatrized, and perfectly
cured.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the DROPSY.
I. THE general name in Greek, is (...). Aqua intercus, (a facie aquea) ex
(...) Aqua, and (...) facies; in Latin, Hydrops; in English, the Dropsy.

II. The Kinds. It is threefold, 1. (...), ab (...) per, and (...) caro; (...),
ab (...) in, subter, etc. (...), ex (...) album, and (...), pituita; in Latin,
Anasarca, Leucophlegmatia: a Dropsy of the Flesh, or of the habit of the whole
Body. 2. (...). ab (...) uter: in Latin, Ascites, Hydrops Abdominis; in
English, a Dropsy of the Belly. 3. (...). Tumor ad Tympani similitudinem; in
Latin, Tympanites; in English, the Tympany, or, Windy Dropsy of the Belly;
called by some, the Dry Dropsy.

I. Of ANASARCA, or, SARCITES.
III. Definition. This Disease is a praeternatural Collection of serous Lympha
through all the fleshy parts, or habit of the whole Body. Or, it is a
preternatural Tumor of the whole Body, caused by a Collection of waterish and
serous Humors.

IV. The Causes. The Procatartick Causes, are great Hemorrhages of what kind
soever, irregular living, idleness, much drinking, as well of strong Liquors,
as of small; by which the Ferment left in the Stomach is washed away through that
continual excess, or it is made more flaccid, and less fit for Concoction;
whereby Crudities are increased, by which an evil Chymus is produced, of which
a vicious Blood is generated, and a crude, phlegmatic and serous habit of
Body, whence comes Obstructions; and a Dropsy.

V. The Proximate or near Cause is the serous Lympha, which is also sometimes
very sharp, which being much heaped up, does distend its tender Vessels; and by
too great distention does many times break them; whereby it is extravasated,
and falls every where upon the muscular Flesh, and interstices of the Muscles.

VI. The Antecedent Cause is an obstruction of the Glandules of the
Lymphatick-vessels; whereby the Lympha flows out too plentifully.

VII. The Signs. The whole Body, Face, Hands, Belly, Thighs, Legs, Feet, etc.
being chilled through the coldness of the serous or watery Humor is enervated,
languish, and swell; and wherever almost you press hard your Fingers, (more
especially on the Legs) their print or impression remains behind.

VIII. Respiration or breathing is always difficult, and with some trouble, but
more espcially after eating; and the Patient is always thirsty and craving
Drink; and though they drink never so much, yet they are never satisfied.

IX. Their Flesh is generally cold, or of a cold habit, soft, loose, pale and
white; and many times they look as if they were dead; the Urine is thin and
white, Stools many times very pale, with a weak and unequal Pulse.

X. The Prognostics. In the beginning, and in Infants and Young people it is
easily cured; and as easily returns again, if the Viscera be not strengthened,
or a good Diet be not observed.

XI. But if the Patient is Scorbutic, or of a Cachectical habit of Body, the
Sick is with much difficulty restored to perfect Health: so also if it comes
after a burning Fever, or an Ague of long standing.

XII. Celsus, lib. 2. cap. 8. says, that a Cough coming upon a Dropsy, takes
away all hope of Cure: and Hippocrates, sect. 7. aph. 47. says, that if a Cough
troubles an Hydropick person, he is in a desperate condition.

XIII. One troubled with an Anasarca, if there be a Fever withal, with little
Urine, and that thick, it foreshews Death. And if one be cured of a Dropsy, if
it returns again, there will be but small hopes of Recovery: so also if they
have Ulcers supervening. Hippocrates in Coacis. Celsus, lib. 3. cap. 21.

XIV. The Cure. The Remote Cause must be removed, by instituting a good Diet,
hot, drying, and strengthening; and forbearing things cold, moist, and watery.
The Humor or Water superabounding, must be taken away by proper Catharticks,
Diuretics, and Sudorificks. And the Tone of the weakened Bowels must be
restored and strengthened: but Bleeding must be avoided, as a thing most hurtful
to all Hydropick persons.

XV. The Humor or Water abounding is taken away, 1. With the following simple
Catharticks, Vinegar, Wine, and Oxymel of Squills, Cambogia, Elaterium, Jallap,
Rosin of Jallap, Mechoacan, Nitre, Syrup of Buckthorn-berries, and Sena in an
Infusion in Wine.

XVI. With these Compounds: 1. Pilulae Catharticae, Family Pills, Pilulae
Hydropicae Bontii, and Pilulae Lunares, (which are wonderful things) Pulvis
Cornachinii, Syrupus Catharticus, and Vinum Hydragogum Barbetti; which see,
Dor. Med. lib. 2. cap. 12. sect. 7.

XVII. These Pills are also commended: Aloes, Cambogia, Nitre, ana; dissolve
the Aloes and Cambogia in fair Water, or a strong Decoction of Colocynthis, and
bring them to the body of a Pill, then add the Nitre in fine powder. Dose, a
gr. xvi. ad xx, xxv, or xxx. in the morning fasting.

XVIII. This Powder is also good: Mercurius dulcis i. Rosin of Jallap gr. vii.
Elaterium gr. iii. mix, for a Dose, for a Man; a third part of it will serve
for a Child; and one half of it for a Youth of 14 or 16 years old.

XIX. The next Course to be pursued, is that of Diuretics; for which purpose
we commend Pellitory of the Wall, Salt of Tartar, Salt of Broom, or
Broom-ashes, Potashes, and all sorts of fixed Alcalious Salts; an Infusion of
Mustard Seed in White or Rhenish Wine, the Powder or Salt of Millepedes, etc.

XX. And in the intervals of Purging, whether by Stool or Urine, the Patient
ought often to Sweat, chiefly in a Bath of hot Water; in which hot and drying
Herbs, as Southernwood, Wormwood, Camomil, Fether-few, Origanum, etc.
Potashes, flowers of Sulphur, etc. have been boiled.

XXI. If the Disease is vehement, and come to a head, this following Cataplasm
is of extraordinary use. Green Tobacco leaves ( raised from Virginia seed) M.
vi. cut, and then bruise them well in a Mortar, and make it up into the
consistence of a Cataplasm, with powder of Bay Berries; and apply it warm over
the whole Belly of the Patient.

XXII. You may let it lie an hour, more or less, as you see occasion, or that
the Sick can bear it; and it may be renewed every other, or third day, if the
Disease shall require it: it works strongly, and purges watery Humors, both
upwards and downwards.

XXIII. If you cannot get green Tobacco, you may make use of dried Virginian;
which being cut small, may be thoroughly moistened with White Wind: to it may be
added some Mithridate or Honey, and a sufficient quantity of powder of
Bay Berries, to be beaten up into a Cataplasm, and to be applied warm, as
before directed.

XXIV. And to facilitate the Cure, if the Legs swell much, or the lower parts,
you may apply Vesicatories to the Calves, and let the Blisters run as long as
you see convenient: for by this alone means, the Water has been drawn wholly
out of the Body; but you must be very cautions, and look after them very
diligently, lest they should gangrene or mortify; which many times they are apt
to do, through the great afflux of watery Humors.

XXV. But while this Purging, Diuretic, and Sudorifick Courses are pursuing,
you must in the intervals of time strengthen the Bowels, and endeavor to
restore their Tone; which you may do with the following things.

XXVI. Crocus Martis aperitivus i. Nutmegs in powder ss. Cloves in powder ii.
foecula of Aron roots i. Camphir ss. mix them. Dose, i. every night in the
intervals of Purging, etc.

XXVII. We also commend Our Theriaca Londinensis, or rather Our Theriaca
Chymica, which is a most admirable thing: so also Tinctura Martis cum Tartaro;
which Preparation you may see in Our Doron Medicum, lib. 2. cap. 7. sect. 19.

XXVIII. And after the Disease seems to be cured, and perfectly gone, you must
still for some time continue the use of these strengthners, either some of
them, or all of them; using them interchangeably, 'till the Viscera are
absolutely restored, and confirmed in their healthful Tone; lest a relapse
should follow, and thereupon, the death of the Patient.

XXIX. We are very short here, (though if truly considered, we have said a great
deal:) but such as desire a more full and ample Discourse concerning the Cure
of this Disease, may be pleased to see the third Edition of Our Synopsis
Medicinae, lib. 6. cap. 4. sect. 1. ad 130. and sect. 163. ad 186. where they
may receive abundant satisfaction. However, we thought good to say these things
in this place; that we might not leave our young Artist, who may not have seen
that Book, totally destitute.

II. Of an ASCITES.
XXX. Definition. An Ascites is a preternatural Tumor of the Belly, caused by a
Collection of Watery Humors into the capacity of the Abdomen.

XXXI. The Causes. The Procatartick Causes are the same with the former. The
Antecedent Cause is the weakening of the Blood, or a discrasy, whereby it cannot
convey its Serum to the Reins: so that the sanguiferous Vessels swelling, they
are not able to receive their continual and daily proportions of Lympha; from
which cause, the Lymphaducts being overcharged, are extended, and swell; and at
length where they are most tumified, and weakest, break.

XXXII. This breach of the Lymphaducts, if it happens in the internal Parts, as
the Viscera, they let fall their Juices, (now depauperated, altered, and
changed, through their stagnation) into the cavity of the Abdomen; which at
beginning is but small, but being continual (though gradual) at length comes to
produce a mighty Tumor of the Belly; from whence, the Cods, Thighs, Legs, and
Feet, many times are caused to swell, through the dispersion of the same Humor.

XXXIII. The conjoined Cause is a serous Lympha, but in a recent Ascites it
seems to be wholly Lymphatick; in an inveterate Ascites, it is most like to
Serum, with a thicker part like Curds, or some such like thing; as Barbett in a
dissection after death observed.

XXXIV. A Woman fifty years old died of an Ascites, she was opened by Barbett,
the famous Franciscus Sylvius, and Verschagen being by, they found, 1. A thin
and fluid Lympha: 2. Then a Matter, which was congealed: 3. That which was
thicker, or like the Matter of an Apostem. From this and several other like
Examples, Barbett was of opinion, that this thicker part of the Matter
remaining in the Belly, after Tapping, is the cause of many a Patient's death.

XXXV. And that if the Patient would sooner yield to ^e tapp'd, they might,
with much greater probability, recover: whereas being grown inveterate, it is
for the most part mortal.

XXXVI. The Signs. There is a manifest Tumor or Swelling of the whole Belly,
and when it grows great, it is very heavy with the Water: and there is a sound
of Water rumbling, as it were falling or squashing, when the Sick turns from
one side to the other.

XXXVII. The Thighs, Legs, and Feet many times swell; and generally there is a
tumor of the Scrotum, which by degrees, grows many times as big as a Man's head.

XXXVIII. There is an internal Fever, very great Thirst, a dry Cough, and at
length a difficulty of Breathing; whereby the Patient cares not for stirring or
moving up and down, but rather delights in sloth and idleness.

XXXIX. There is also an Extenuation, or kind of Consumption of the upper parts
of the Body; and the Urine is very little, and thick, and sometimes of a
reddish color.

XL. The Prognostics. This is the most difficult of all Dropsies to cure; yet
while it is recent, and newly begun, may be attempted by Purging: but if it is
inveterate, then Purging rather adds to it, and increases it.

XLI. Hippocrates, Sect. 7. Aph. 55. Those who have their Liver filled with
Water, if (says he) it falls upon the Caul (that is, into the cavity of the
Abdomen) it fills the Belly with Water, and then the Patient dies.

XLII. If it has been of long continuance, there is great danger of the Bowels
being corrupted or putrified; and then, (though the Sick admits of being Tapt)
nothing but Death can put a period to the Disease.

XLIII. But if Tapping be attempted while the Disease is recent, and the
Patient has strength and courage, the Operation may be very successful; and
many times the Patient returns to perfect health again, and that in a short
time.

XLIV. The Cure. The Diet in this ought to be as in the former, with
observation of all other things relating to the seven Non-naturals: and while
the Disease is recent, Purging may be made use of for some time, with such
things as restore and strengthen the Tone of the Parts in the intervals of
Purging; as Opiates, and all sorts of hot and dry Antiscorbuticks, which abound
with a volatile Salt.

XLV. But if after some trials by Purging and Diuretics, you find no benefit;
but that the Disease does get ground of the Patient; it is then totally to be
forborne, and the sooner the better, to make way for a more effectual Remedy;
since delays in this case always breed danger.

XLVI. How the Paracentesis or Opening is to be made for letting out of the
Water, we have at large declared in Lib. 1. cap. 16. aforegoing of this Work:
so that what we have there said, need not be here again repeated. See more of
the Cure of this Disease, in the third Edition of Our Synopsis Medicinae, lib.
5. cap. 19. and lib. 6. cap. 4. sect. 131, ad 140. of the same Book.

XLVII. Though Barbett 's way of making the Paracentesis, is by many approved of,
yea by the most Excellent Sylvius; yet some great Artists have a few Exceptions
against it. Wiseman says, that while the Belly is distended with abundance of
Water, it may succeed well: but that it is not to be pretended to, farther than
the evacuation of half the Humor; for then (says he) you will be in danger of
wounding the Intestines: and therefore he concludes it an unfit Instrument to
discharge a Dropsy: nor will our Patients admit of so many openings, as will be
necessary to empty an Hydropical Belly.

XLVIII. He therefore concludes, that a Pipe, made taperwise, with holes in the
side, (whose Description is in Paraeus) according to the old method, to be
best: this is to be conveyed in through a hole made by puncture.

XLIX. The Cannula or Pipe is to be stopped with a Screw or Plug, which may be
put in or pulled out at pleasure; and the Pipe is to be kept in the Hole by
Bandage, till all the Water is evacuated, by degrees, and at fit times, as you
see convenient. You may consider all the ways which Authors have taught, and
choose that which in reason you find to be most convenient and safe.

III. Of a TYMPANITES.
L. The Definition. A Tympanites is a preternatural Tumor of the Belly, from a
Collection of Wind, or rather Wind mixed with Water, in the cavity of the Belly.

LI. Riverius says, that in an Ascites there is not only Water, but Wind also;
so that the Dropsy has its name from that which predominates: if there is more
Water than Wind, it is an Asci^es; but if there is more Wind than Water, it is
a Tympanites; if the Wind and Water is equal, it may be doubted whether it is
an Ascites, or a Tympanites.

LII. The Tympany is called by Hippocrates the Dry-dropsy, Sect. 4. Aph. 11.
They (says he) who have pains and torments about the Navel and Loins, which
cannot be eased by Medicines or otherwise, are fallen into a Dry-dropsy.

LIII. The Causes. The remote Causes are evil Diet, and such things as breed
Wind; among which is the immeasurable drinking of Strong Water, and Brandy;
which over-heating the Internals stir up a Flatus, by converting the pituitous
and watery Humors into Vapors, which fill the cavity of the Abdomen.

LIVE. But Platerus says, that this Wind thus distending the Belly like a Drum,
is not always contained in the cavity of the Belly, but sometimes in the Guts
only. In this case I am confident, it must be very painful, because of the
vehement stretching of the Intestines, whose Tunicles are so very nervous: but
then, it seems to me to be more a Colic, than a Dropsy.

LV. The Antecedent Cause Riverius will have to be a crude, pituitous, or
melancholy Humor stirred up, and made thin by Heat, and resolved into a Flatus,
or thick Vapors, hard to be dissolved: which Humor (says he) is partly in the
Stomach, partly in the Guts, but especially between the Midriff and Guts; from
whence it is more hard to be moved, than from the cavity of the Parts
aforesaid: besides, the greatness of the pain shows that the Cause is deep in
the substance of the Mesentery and other adjacent parts, and cannot easily be
removed; for were it in the Stomach and Guts, it would easily admit of remedy.

LVI. The conjoined Cause is Wind, mixed also with a watery Humor or serous
Lympha, fallen into the cavity of the Abdomen, and filling it; as also the
interstices of the Membranes, from a rupture or opening of the Mouths of the
Lymphaducts.

LVII. The Signs. The Belly is equally and vehemently swelled, as in an
Ascites; but by reason of Wind mixed with some Water, it is not so heavy as if
it were all Water.

LVIII. If the Sick lies on his Back, the Belly will appear distended, and feel
hard; so that being struck upon, it will sound almost like a Drum; and turning
from one side to another, the noise and fluctuating of the Water will not be
observed.

LIX. The Face is not so altered from its natural appearance, as in the two
other kinds of Dropsies: belchings, and breakings of Wind do often happen, as
also croaking and noise in the Bowels; and pains of the Navel and Loins do
precede, as is evident out of Hippocrates, Sect. 4. Aph. 11.

LX. The Prognostics. A Tympanites is much more dangerous than a Sarcites or
Anasarca, and nearly as dangerous as an Ascites, but kills not altogether so
soon.

LXI. If it comes upon an acute Disease, it is evil; nor will it abate the
Fever, but increase the pain, and cause death: but if in its beginning there is
a Flux of the Belly, without crudity or want of concoction, the Disease is
cured: but if it comes when the Disease is inveterate, it is evil, because it
is from some fault in the Bowels.

LXII. Hippocrates says, that little and thick Urine in a Dropsy, with a Fever,
is mortal; but if the quantity of the Urine increases, there is hopes: and
Celsus says, there is hopes of recovery, when the Sick voids more Urine, than
he takes Drink.

LXIII. If the Patient seems cured, and there be in a little time after, a
relapse, there is much danger: for it shows there is some incurable fault in
the Bowels, which renews the Water again.

LXIV. If it happens in old Age, or in much weakness, and the Patient pisses by
drops, it is very dangerous; and in a Melancholy habit of Body, it is for the
most part mortal, and Medicines are generally given in vain.

LXV. The Cure. For Internals, Rhubarb is commended, because it not only
carries off the noxious Humor, but also strengthens the Liver and Bowels: and
many have been cured with the use of Rhubarb, given a i. ad ii. in some opening
Decoction, every second or third day.

LXVI. Juice of blew Flower-deluce, is much commended. Juice of blew
Flower-de-luce drawn with White Wind iii. of the best Manna jss. mix for a Dose.

LXVII. And if the Wind is in the Guts, the Turpentine Clyster is of great
efficacy. Venice Turpentine i. two yolks of Eggs, grind and mix them well
together, and add thereto Posset Drink, or Mutton-broth lbi. for a Clyster;
which give a little more than blood-warm, repeating it once a day, as long as
need requires.

LXVIII. Outwardly, apply over all the Belly a Cataplasm of green Tobacco
leaves, (raised from Virginia seed) and brought to a consistence with powder of
Bay Berries. For want of such green Tobacco, you may make it of dried Virginia,
moistened with a small Lixivium of Potashes; which keep on, so long as the
Patient can well endure it. It works both upwards and downwards, and expels
Humors admirably.

LXiX. These things, if the Disease be recent may do, giving also inwardly,
Confortatives to strengthen the Bowels; as steeled Wines, Tinctura Martis,
Syrup of Mars, Decoction of Juniper Berries, Wine of Juniper, Spirit of
Juniper, Opiates, Antimonium diaphoreticum, Crocus Martis, Bezoar minerale,
Troches made of the powder of Rhubarb, and the like.

LXX. But if after all, no inward Medicines will prevail, nor yet any external
Application, of which that of Tobacco is chief, you must then come to the last
Remedy, which is the Paracentesis; which is yet to be done in due time,
according as we have before directed: for if the Bowels be corrupted, it will
then be too late, and all that you do, will be in vain. See the third Edition
of Our Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 5. cap. 20. and lib. 6. cap. 4. sect. 141, ad
162.

IV. Of a Derivative HYDROCELE.
LXXI. Of an Original Hydrocele we have already spoker, in Chap. 30.
aforegoing. A Derivative Hydrocele, is that which is caused by some other
Disease, as the Dropsy: and this is twofold; 1. That which proceeds from a
Sarcites. 2. That which proceeds from an Ascites.

LXXII. If the Hydrocele proceeds from a Sarcites or Anasarca, it cannot be
cured but by curing the Anasarca it self: which methods being taken, then, if
the whole Serotum is vehemently swelled, your best way to restore it, will be
by opening it, by passing a Needle transverse the lower part, and fitting
thereto a Seton, keeping it open till all the Water is discharged; preserving,
mean season, the heat of the Part with Fomentations and warm Stuphs, wrung out
of Claret Wine mixed with Powers of Oranges, or Lavender.

LXXIII. But if it proceeds from an Ascites, you must make an Apertion in the
depending Part, into which you must put a Cannula or Pipe, and through which you
must gradually discharge the Water, till it is all drawn forth; as you do in
Tapping the Belly, every time fomenting the Part with warm Stuphs, wrung out of
Claret Wine, etc. as aforesaid: after the Water is all drawn forth, you must
heal the Wound as directed in Chap. 33. Sect. 21, and 26. aforegoing, being
fitted with a Bag-truss.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of a DROPSY of the HEAD.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). ab (...) aqua, and (...) caput; in Latin,
Hydrocophalon; and in English, a Dropsy of the Head.

II. Definition. It is a preternatural Tumor of the Head, arising from Water
contained either within, or without the Scull.

III. The Causes. That which is without the Scull, between the Cranium and the
Scalp, is caused from an effusion of Serum; from the bruising hurting, or
rupture of some of the Capillary Vessels, wherein the serous part of the Blood
is extravasated; and this comes mostly from the ill handling of the Head by
Midwives and Nurses.

IV. That which is within the Scull, is caused from an effusion of the Serum or
Lympha within the Scull; either between it and the Dura Matter, or between the
Dura and Pia Matter.

V. This extravasated Serum or Lympha is often found coagulated into a stiff
glewy substance, all about the Vessels under the Basis of the Brain, involving
all the roots and caudex of the Spinal Marrow; covering the Nates, Testes, and
Glandula Pinealis, reaching even into the Ventricles of the Brain.

VI. The Signs. If it is External, and the Water lies immediately under the
Hairy-scalp, all the whole Head will be tumified; and if the matter is
Oedematous, it will pit, if you press your finger upon it; but if it is Serum,
it will not pit, but return presently again.

VII. The Face will be pale and swelled, as also the Eyelids, which will
sometimes be bloody and shining: in its increase it sometimes protrudes a
wenlike Tumor, but its fluctuation shows it to be full of Water.

VIII. This Disease most commonly befalls Children; in whom, after some stay of
the Humer in the Part, it is often found to turn to corruption, and stink.

IX. If it is between the Scull and Pericranium, you may feel the Scull as it
were bare, and a fluctuation between it and the Pericranium.

X. If it is within the Scull, between the Cranium and Durae Matter, the Sutures
are loose or disjoined; so that you may sometimes bury your finger between them.

XI. If it is between the Dura and Pia Matter, it makes the former to swell, and
often times to thrust it self forth between some of the Sutures.

XII Such Children as have an inward Hydrocephalus, are generally subject to
the Rickets: and where it involves the roots and cauda of the Spinal Marrow,
Nates, Testes, and Glandula Pinealis, reaching to the Ventricles of the Brain,
it is seldom discovered 'till after death.

XIII. The Prognostics. Such Children as are affected with this Disease, are
very unhealthful, and in their Infancy subject to Convulsions, Epilepsies, etc.
and if they escape, they generally fall into the Rickets, or the King's Evil.

XIV. If the Tumor is large, and possesses the whole Head, the Cure will be
very difficult: but if it only possesses some singular external part, it will
be effected the more easily.

XV. That which is next the Scull, is very dangerous: but that which thrusts
forth, from within the Scull, is mortal.

XVI. The Cure. First, purge away the watery Humor with Hydragogues and
Phlegmagogues; as Pilulae Catharticae, Pulvis Cornachinii, Syrupus Catharticus,
Resina Jalapii, or Scammony and Calomelanos, made up in form of a Bolus, etc.

XVII. Secondly, foment the Tumor with Discussives; such as tops of Angelica,
Bawm, Camomil, Dill Fennel, Fetherfew, flowers of Elder, Hyssop, Mint,
Marjoram, Nep, Origanum, Peniroyal, red Roses, Southernwood, Tansy, Wormwood,
etc. boiled in Wine, or a Lixivium of Potashes.

XVIII. If stronger things are required, you may add to the Decoction, flowers
of Sulphur, Alum, Nitre, Saccharum Saturni, Salt of the Caput mort. of Vitriol,
etc.

XIX. Thirdly, embrocate with this: Oil of Nutmegs by expression ii. Oil of
Spike, of Oranges, and Limons, A. ss. Oil of Vitriol iii. mix them, and
embrocate, the Hair being first shaved off.

XX. Fourthly, apply over all the Ceratum viride, or the Ceratum ad Tophos,
emplastrum Diasulphuris, or Diasinapi; or other things which are discussive and
drying.

XXI. Fifthly, make Fontatanels or Issues in the Neck, behind the Ears, or
other parts adjacent; and apply Vesicatories over the whole Head, or a part of
it; according as the whole, or a part of it is tumified: which being healed,
repeat their application, three or four several times.

XXII. But if by all these things, the Humor is not discussed, drawn forth, or
removed, you must then discharge the Water by small Apertions, letting it out
gradatim: in the mean while, continuing the use of the milder Discussives and
Desiccatives, to restore the Part affected to its natural Tone.

XXIII. Or, if the Humor has gathered it self into one singular Part, and you
are satisfied that it does not arise from within the Scull, you may cut into
it, and let the Water out: or if it has a slender Basis, make a Ligature round
it, and cut it off.

XXIV. If the Tumor seems to arise from within the Scull, you must forbear
Excision, to avoid the Ignominy that may come upon it; for that these Tumors
are generally mortal. See more hereof, in the third Edition of Our Synopsis
Medicinae, lib. 3. cap. 22. where you may receive farther satisfaction.

VI. Tumors arising from MELANCHOLY.
CHAP. XXXIV. Of a POLYPUS.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...), Multipes; ex (...) multus, and (...) pes; in
Latin, Polypus, Sarcoma, Noli me tangere; in English, a Polypus, or Cancerous
Tumor.

II. The Kinds. It is twofold: 1. That in the Nostrils, which is properly
called Polypus. 2. That which happens in other Parts, which they generally call
Sarcoma, and Noli me tangere.

I. Of POLYPUS.
III. Definition. Polypus is a preternatural Tumor, being a fleshy Excrescence,
long, and hanging in the Nostril, hindering respiration, and threatening
suffocation in time of sleep.

IV. Celsus, lib. 6. cap. 8. Est Caruncula, inquit, modo alba, modo subrubra,
quae Narium Ossi inhaeret; and modo ad Labra pendens Narem implet, mod^ retro
per id foramen, quo Spiritus a Naribus ad Fauces descendit, adeo increscit, ut
post Vvam conspici possit. -- Fereque mollis est, raro dura; eaque magis
Spiritum impedit, and Nares dilatat, quae fere (...) est, itaque attingi non
debet. It is a Caruncle (says he) sometimes white, sometimes reddish, which
sticks close to the Bone of the Nostrils, and sometimes hangs down to to the
Lips, filling the Nostril; sometimes it grows upwards, through the same passage
of the Nostril by which the Breath is drawn inwards, increasing so much, as
that it may be seen beyond the Uvula. -- It is mostly soft, seldom hard; and by
so much the more as it fills the Nostril, it hinders the Breathing; which is
almost of a Cancerous nature, and therefore not to be touched.

V. The Causes. It is caused of a thick and viscous Humor, or phlegmatic matter
mixed with the Blood, falling down from the Brain; which not being acrid,
seldom comes to exulceration.

VI. Sometimes it arises from a Melancholy Humor mixed with an acrid Salt; and
then it is painful, and is apt to degenerate into Cancer.

VII. The Signs. It is known by sight, and the Description aforegiven by
Celsus; being purely a piece of Flesh growing in the Nostril, and hanging down.

VIII. The Prognostics. If it soft, white, and void of pain, it is is easily
cured: but if it is reddish, with more difficulty.

IX. If it is of a brown, or livid color, it is scarcely curable; more
especially if it be livid and stinking, being of a Cancerous nature.

X. The more deeply it is rooted, the more dangerous it is; because nearer the
Brain, and the more difficult to have Medicines applied to it: but the more
external and visible, the less difficult of cure.

XI. If it proceeds from an acrid Salt, and melancholy Humor, it is apt to
degenerate into Cancer; and this is that which Celsus thinks not fit to be
touched, lest it becomes a Cancer, and overspreads the whole Face.

XII. But that which has nothing of a Cancerous humor in it, though inveterate,
yet it admits of Cure by Surgery, viz. with the Knife, and drying Medicines.

XIII. The Cure. The Body is to be universally purged, as is usual in all
Diseases of the Head, with such things as have a general tendency; of which we
need say no more in this place.

XIV. The Humor may be derived by application of Vesicatories, Seton,
Fontanels, etc. and the Head strengthened with proper Cataplasms, Cerates, and
Emplasters; which may be applied to the Forehead, or forepart of the Head, to
intercept the Fluxion.

XV. The piece of Flesh then hanging in the Nostrils, is to be eradicated and
taken away; which is to be done, either with the Knife, or other proper
Instrument, or with Medicines.

XVI. If the Polypus has a slender root, it is to be taken away either with a
Thread, or the Knife: if it can be easily come at, let it be cut off by the
roots, with an Incision-knife; some nip them off with a pair of Pincers.

XVII. After extirpation, the Wound is to be healed with things drying and
styptick: and the outward parts are to be defended with things strengthening and
astringent applied to the Forehead.

XVIII. Pomgranate-peels, Balaustians, A. i. Cadmia fossilis ii. Crocus Martis,
crude Antimony, A.ss. Litharge, Loadstone, Mastich, Myrrh, A.i. make a fine
powder; which apply to the Wound, mixed with Mel Rosarum, etc.

XIX. If this does nothing, for that some part of the roots of it remain, you
must then come to Exedents. Alum burnt, Balaustians, fine Bole, ana; make them
into a powder.

XX. Or this, which is stronger. Vitriol iv. Alum, Galls, Pomgranate-peels, A.
ii. red Myrrh, Birthwort-root burnt, A.i. make them into a powder.

XXI. This is yet stronger. Vitriol iv. Alum, Verdigrise, A.ss. Vinegar vi.
mix, and calcine in a luted Retort: mix this or the former with Mel Rosarum,
and apply them.

XXII. This is said to be most effectual. Arsenick red and yellow, Alum, Galls,
A. ss. Galls, A. ss. make them into a fine powder. And some have been perfectly
cured with the Pulvis Cathereticus Clossaei, as also the Pulvis Causticus
Barbetti; which last see in Our Doron Med. lib. 2. cap. 21. sect. 28.

XXIII. Others have had them eradicated with the Liquor Mercurii sublimati, (
in Our Pharm. Land. lib. 4. cap. 11. sect. 24.) but it may be fit to make it
with double or treble quantity of Mercury: this is only Corrosive-sublimate
dissolved in fair Water, about i. to a pint.

XXIV. Aquapendens and Sennertus commend a pair of Forceps, with which they are
to be laid hold of, pulled forth, and then cut off; after which, some of the
former astringent and drying Medicines are to be applied; or else the before
described Escaroticks, to eat in, and take it away by the roots.

XXV. Or these following. Butter of Antimony, Spirit and Oil of Vitriol, or
Sulphur, Lapis Medicamentosus Crollii, Oleum Mercurii, Menstruum duplicatum,
etc. which last see in Out Seplasium, lib. 2. cap. 6. sect. 22.

XXVI. But in the use of these things, you ought to defend the Nose with some
cooling Ointment; and they are to be conveyed to the Part in Pipes fitted for
this purpose.

XXVII. If you use the actual Cautery, you must beware of the adjacent Parts
and apply it to the Part through a Pipe.

XXVIII. If it is Cancerous, viz. livid, or black and blew, or painful, it is
not then to be touched; for if you meddle with it, it soon degenerates into
Cancer, and becomes incurable.

XXIX. In this case, Ung. e Plumbo, juice of Nightshade, Rose Water, A. i.
grind them a long time in a leaden Mortar, till the Mixture is sufficiently
blew, and anoint therewith.

XXX. Or, Two yolks of new laid Eggs, grind them in a leaden Mortar even to
blackness: to which add, Aethiops Mineralis. Oil of Ben, A. ii Camphir ss. mix,
and anoint therewith. Or, Ung. e Plumbo i. Aethiops Mineralis ii. Extract of
Opium i. mix them in a leaden Mortar as aforesaid, with which anoint.

II. SARCOMA, or Noli me tangere.
XXXI. (...), Carnositas, Carnis praeter naturam incrementum, is that other
sort of Polypus, of which Celsus in the place before cited) speaks in these
words; Illud aliud genus ferd quidem ferro curatur; interdum tamen inarescit,
si addita in Narem per Linamentum aut Penicillum ea compositio est, quae habet
Minii Sinopici, Chalcitidis, Calcis, Sandarachae, singulorum p. i. Atramenti
Sutorii p.ii. There is another kind, which may indeed be nearly cured with the
Knife: yet sometimes it is healed by drying Medicines, being applied to the
Nostril with Lint, or a Pencil; such as this, Fine Bole, Chalcitis, Lime, red
Arsenick, ana p. i. common Vitriol p. ii. make all into a fine powder.

XXXII. Sarcoma to me seems to be only a species of Polypus, but happening in a
different place: for whereas the Polypus specially so called, happens only
within the Nostril; this other species happens in other parts, as about the
Nose, Lips, Chin, Cheeks, near the Eyes, Breasts, Arms, Thighs, Legs, Shins,
Ancles, etc.

XXXIII. Sennertus, lib. 1. part. 3. sect. 4. cap. 3. Caeterum differt a
Polypo, Sarcoma, inquit, ut genus a specie, figura item, and magnitudine: nam
Sarcoma rudis quaedam Carnis massa est, certa figura carens, and saepe in
magnam molem excrescit: etiam carne a Polypo distat, quoniam durior est, and
dolorem infert, ac nigrescit aut livescit, ac Venas circumquaque crasso
Sanguine turgidas habet, ac plerumque intus prope viciniam Narium, and Palatum
nascitur. Viz. Moreover, (says he) Sarcoma differs from Polypus, as genus from
species; and that both in figure and magnitude: for Sarcoma is a certain rude
mass of flesh, of no regular form, and oftentimes grows forth into a great
lump: it differs also from Polypus in the substance of the Flesh, because it is
harder, and withal painful; and grows either blackish or livid, having turgid
Veins round about it, filled with a gross or thick Blood: it is also produced
inwardly, near to the Palate, or the adjacent parts of the Nostrils.

XXXIV. From what has been said, it appears, that a Sarcoma is of two kinds,
viz. benign and malign: the latter of which is denominated again, according to
the place it afflicts: for if it possesses any part of the Face, as Nose, Lips,
Cheeks, Eyes, Chin, it is called Noli me tangere: but if it possesses other
lower parts, as the Breast, Arm, Thigh, Leg, Shins, Ancles, etc. it is called
Lupus, the Wolf.

XXXV. The Causes. The Benign arises from a thick Blood mixed with a Pituitous
Humor, tough and viscous, extravasated; and filling some particular Glandule of
the Cutis, which by a daily aggravation of fresh matter increases into this
form and substance.

XXXVI. The Malign arises from a thick Blood mixed with Atra-bilis, or a
Melancholy Humor, acrid and corroding; which being also extravasated, and
separated from the nourishment of the Part, grows into a malign Sarcoma.

XXXVII. Signs. Noli me tangere, is a Tumor, or Ulcer arising about the Nose,
Lips, Cheeks, Mouth, or Chin; being for a long time, as a Year or more, no
bigger than a Pustule, and is as it were a very small and inconsiderable Push.

XXXVIII. Its growth and increase is very slow at the beginning, afterward is
it becomes a little larger Tumor; and (possibly by ill handling) a corrosive
Ulcer, having a resemblance with, and being very like to an exulcerated Cancer.

XXXIX. In other parts of the Body, where it is called Lupus, its beginning is
like the former; but when it becomes exulcerated, if it is in a very fleshy
Part, it corrodes or eats much more; and as I suppose, from that vehement
corrosion, it was called The Wolf.

XL. The Prognostics. The Benign is more easy of cure, the Malign more
difficult; and if it be truly Cancerous, not to be meddled withal, unless it is
totally taken away by the roots.

XLI. Noli me tangere, which is benign, (being a small, round, acuminated
Tubercle, without much pain, unless it be touched or rubbed,) is always
exasperated by sharp Medicines; and Corrosives are apt to make it degerate into
a Phagedenick Ulcer.

XLII. The Malign, if they be ulcerated, yet corrode but slowly; for says
Rogerius, in c. 5. Cancer plus corrodit uno die, quam Noli me tangere in uno
mense: Noli me tangere does not corrode or eat so much in a month, as a Cancer
does in day.

XLIII. And being once ulcerated, if it is vehemently exasperated, or enraged,
it immediately becomes a true Cancer.

XLIV. The Cure. The Benign (which is not deeply rooted) may as Celsus says, be
almost cured with the Knife alone; drying Medicaments being afterward applied
to it, to heal it.

XLV. But if it is Malign, it is scarcely at all to be touched, but only with
Palliatives; as Vng. e Plumbo, mixed with Aethiops Minerale and Opium; Ceruse,
Saccharum Saturni, Sal Jovis, (which is a Specific in this case) Mercurius
dulcis ground small with a few drops of Oil of Tartar, Emplastrum Mercuriale, a
plate of Lead besmeared with Quicksilver, Lixivium of Quicklime, etc.

XLVI. If you determine the Extirpation thereof by Surgery, the Body ought to
be beforehand sufficiently evacuated, by such things as purge Melancholy: and
sometimes a little gentle Salivation may be profitable, if it is in any of the
lower or depending parts of the Body.

XLVII. Then you may come to the Extirpation; which is best done with the
Actual Cautery: but here you must be sure to burn to the roots of it; or else
to apply after the Actual Cautery, Escaroticks, which may consume the very
roots thereof.

XLVIII. But by reason the Actual Cautery is so dreadful, that few will admit
thereof, we will show you the Method of doing it with the Potential Cautery;
which is thus. First, draw a Line with Ink round about the Tumor, as far as you
intend to burn it. This done,

XLIX. Secondly, begin with the Caustick-stone, made sharp-pointed, which press
upon the middle of the Tubercle, burning deep into it: and to quicken the Work,
touch it with Butter of Antimony, or Oil of Vitriol upon a Stick, and then
again with the Caustick-stone interchangebly, till you have consumed the
Tubercles, and the Parts marked within the Line.

L. Thirdly, whilst this is thus doing, dry up the Salts, which are dissolved
in the humidities of the Tumor, with armed Probes; after which wash out the
Salts of the Caustic with warm White Wind; and then divide the Escar, and wash
it again with Milk, or a soft Limewater, till the Tumor or Part is freed from
pain.

LI. Fourthly, then dress it with Ung. Basilicon cum Oleo Rosarum upon a
Pledget, and apply over all Emplastrum e Bolo: by which things the Escar will
be separated, and a deep round Ulcer left.

LII. Fifthly, then digest with Ung. Basilicon nigrum, mixed with red
Precipicate; after which you may incarnate and cicatrize with Vnguentum Tutiae,
or some other like Medicine.

LIII. Lastly, you must be sure to eat deep enough at first, to consume the
very root of the Tumor; otherwise after the coming off of the Escar it will
arise again, and put you to new trouble; whereas being once effectually done,
it returns no more.

LIVE. Wiseman says he saw one on the outside of a Man's Arm, a little above the
Elbow; which was a small Tubercle, as big as a Hazle-nut, of a bluish color,
and looked as if it had been a Varix; without inflammation, hardness, or change
of color in the Parts adjacent: he covered it with a Cup made of light wood,
with straps fastened to it to tie it on, to defend it from the pressure of his
Sleeve. And such another he saw on the Arm of a Woman, of 40 years old; it was
on the outside of the Arm, and of a blew color.

LV. And such a like one I once saw on the inside of the left Arm of a Man, a
little above the bending of the Elbow; and another like one, on the Leg of
another Man of about 50 years of age: they were both of them much about the
bigness of a small Nutmeg: they showed them to me, to have my Opinion; but
would not admit of any thing in order to have them cured, or removed.

LVI. An Observation from Wiseman, Lib. 4. Cap. 6. Obs. 10. A poor Woman had a
large Tubercle on the right Canthus, also a Polypus in that Nostril: after the
separation of the Tubercle, a Fungus thrust forth, which was very vexatious in
eradicating, and unsuccessful: then the Polypus was attempted:

LVII. It was taken hold of by a Ducks-bill Forceps, and pulled outward; then
a Needle with a twisted brown thread was passed through it, as Fabricius ab
Aquapenente advises; and pulling by that and the Forceps together, it was drawn
out about the length of two inches; but was attended with a flux of Blood from
the Nose, Mouth, and Eye; which was stopped by Syringing up Oxycrate.

LVIII. At the next dressing of the Ulcer in the Canthus, the Fungus was
missing, and a great hole found in the Bone of the Nose; upon which it was
concluded, that the Fungus which was there, was the root of the Polypus: the
Bone was much corrupted, but the External Cure of the Ulcer was hastened, the
Exfoliation of the Bone being left to Nature.

LIX. A certain Noble Woman had all the right side of her Face overspread with
a Lupus, or a phagedene Ulcer, which grievously tormented her for a long time;
she sought in vain to the Physicians for help, as well French, Italian, and
Spanish, as Germans, together with other Foreign Physicians; but was at length
perfectly cured by an ordinary and vulgar Barber-Chirurgeon, by application of
Chickens cut into very many thin and broad pieces, which were daily applied to
the Part affected, often changing and renewing them: and at length by this only
Remedy she was recovered to her pristin health and soundness. Mauritius
Cordaeus upon Hippocrates, lib. 1. comment. 7.

LX. I knew also a certain Woman who had a Lupus for a long time on her left
Side, below her Breast, which vehemently tormented her; which was by the advice
of an old Woman cured in a short time, by the only application of raw Beef to
the Part, cut in thin slices, and often renewed.

LXI. But if the Malignity is so great, that none of these things will prevail
against the Ulcer, or give the Patient any ease; and it is in a Part where
Cutting or Burning, or the use of Escaroticks may be safe, there are no other
Remedies to be attempted: otherwise the Patients must endure the torment and
vileness of the affliction all the days of their lives.

CHAP. XXXV. Of a SCIRRHUS.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...), Tumor duras; in Latin, Scirrhus; and in
English, a Scirrhus, or Hard Tumor.

II. The Definition. It is a preternatural Tumor, of a stoney kind of hardness,
without sense or pain, and not yielding to the touch.

III. The Causes. The Antecedent Cause is a thick, viscous, clammy, cold Humor,
such as is that of Melancholy; or it is caused of Melancholy mixed with Phlegm,
Choler, or Blood.

IV. By Melancholy here, Physicians understand not that thick black Humor,
which is called Choter adust, but that Melancholy which is natural; viz. the
thick, and more feculent part of the Blood, or a thick recrement of the Blood
protruded; or a Matter arising from an indurated Inflammation.

V. By Phlegm also, is not meant that humid and thin Humor, which is the Cause
of Oedema; but an Humor thick, viscous, glutinous, and extraordinary dry.

VI. Of the former, or of both these Humors mixed together, and retained in the
Part overlong, (the more thin and subtle parts being transpired and gone, and
the more gross and thick being left behind) is a Scirrhus generated.

VII. It Is true, thick Humors may flow to a Part, yet they immediately cause
not a Scirrhus; but it is by degrees, and after some time, that it becomes such
in the Place affected; viz. from the gradual perspiration of the thinner Humor,
leaving the thicker Matter behind, which by degrees is impacted in the Part,
and grows hard.

VIII. And from hence it is, that though a Scirrhus may be an original, and be of
its self, yet for the most part it follows upon other Tumors; as a Phlegmon,
Erysipelas, Oedema, etc. not sufficiently or rightly cured; where the thinner
parts, by heating Medicines are unseasonably or overmuch dissipated; or by
Repercussives, repressed and driven back, etc.

IX. But Paraeus assents not to all this, but will have it to be caused from an
Alimentary Juice, but more thick than is fit for the nourishment of the Flesh;
which becomes hardened either in a Phlegmon, or from some other Cause; where the
Blood being discussed by the vehement heat, the Matter that remains, is
thickened and hardened.

X. The Kinds. It is said to be twofold, according to the Matter that causes
it: viz. 1. Perfect or Legitimate, when it proceeds from Melancholy alone. 2.
Imperfect or Illegitimate, when it proceeds from Melancholy mixed with other
Humors, and has some pain.

XI. A Scirrhus is said also to be, 1. Original, when it is the first Disease;
beginning small, and rising slowly and gradually to its bigness. 2. Derivative,
when it arises from some other Tumor going before.

XII. And so accordingly they will have it to be Scirrhus Phlegmonodes,
Oedematodes, Erysipelatodes; to which some have added Scirrhus Cancrosus, when
it has an aptness to degenerate into Cancer.

XIII. The Signs. An Original Scirrhus usually begins small, like a Vetch or
Pea, and gradually increases to a considerable magnitude, without shifting or
changing of its place.

XIV. It is accompanied with great hardness, is void of pain, and white color,
but sometimes inclining to livid; and being pressed hard with the fingers, it
is said to want sense; at leastwise, it is much less sensible than any other
part.

XV. The Scirrhus being without sense, it is then said to be absolute and
confirmed: now the reason of its want of sense, is, because the influx of the
natural Spirits is hindered by the matter impacted, and Temper or Tone of the
Member it self is so changed, as to become benumbed or stupid.

XVI. A Derivative Scirrhus is known from it following some other Tumor; as a
Phlegmon, Erysipelas, Oedema, etc. wherein the accidents belonging to those
Tumors, suddenly change into that of Scirrhus.

XVII. It is hard and immovable, like the other, and many times of a dark red
color, accompanied with sense, if pressed upon; and is many times full of
pain, though not continually painful like a Cancer.

XVIII. The Prognostics. If it is without pain, and Hair grows upon it, it is
altogether incurable; and if livid, it is very dangerous, and often degenerates
into Cancer.

XIX. Wiseman says, an original, exquisite, or true Scirrhus, being altogether
without sense, admits of no Cure; because the induration of the Part is so
great, that it will not receive a free afflux of the Blood into it, but keeps
its hardness, in despite of all Applications.

XX. A derivative, illegitimate, or imperfect Scirrhus, which is small and
painful, sometimes (though very seldom) admits of Cure, but sometimes terminates
in a Cancer.

XXI. If it has a mixture of Phlegm with it, it seldom changes the color of
the Skin: and if it is big and hard, and has Hair grows upon it, it is
uncurable, but degenerates not into Cancer.

XXII. But though it is not altogether incurable, if at first, fit and proper
Remedies be applied; yet notwithstanding it is not easily cured; especially if
it is in any of the more noble parts, as Liver or Spleen.

XXIII. And where there is hopes of a Cure, yet it is not accomplished, but in
a long time; because the thick, hard, and cold matter is not easily mollified
and softened; nor can it be done, but by little and little.

XXIV. And when the Cure is to be done, it is either by Resolution or
Discussion, or else by Suppuration: but Suppuration is very rare, and mostly,
not without danger; for that it very easily degenerates into Cancer, especially
where the Melancholy Humor partakes of a corrosive, sharp Salt.

XXV. The Cure. It respects, 1. The Procatartick Cause. 2. The Antecedent
Cause. 3. The Conjoined Cause, where the application of Topics comes under
consideration.

XXVI. As to the first Indication, the Air ought to be clear, and hot and
moist; Food, such as represses the Melancholy, etc. Humor, and breeds good
Blood; as Chickens, Pullets, Eggs, Kid, Lamb, Veal, Mutton, young Rabbits, etc.
boiled with Borrage, Bugloss, Endive, Succory, Lettice, Purslane, Sorrel, etc.
Bread made of Wheat and well baked: things hot and dry are to be avoided.

XXVII. Let their Drink be a middle sort of Ale or Beer, (and not stale,) white
Portwine, Rhenish-wine and Water, Whey clarified with Fumitory, Mead, etc.

XXVIII. Let Sleep be moderate, and a constant exercise of Body, to waste the
superfluous Humors: let the Mind be kept pleasant and cheerful, and the Body
soluble; and if it be not so, let it be made so by Clysters: and Courses,
Hemorrhoids, if stopped, provoked.

XXIX. The second Indication, is the Evacuation of the Humor; as with Infusion
or Decoction of Sena, Tinctura Purgans, Syrupus Catharticus, Pilulae
Catharticae, Pulvis Cornachini, and other things of like nature; to which add
Aurum Vitae, as a specific.

XXX. This Purging ought to be frequent, and many times reiterated; because the
Humors abounding are thick, tough, hard to be removed: and sometimes gentle
Sweating.

XXXI. Some also make Revulsion to the contrary Part, by Frictions, Cuppings,
Scarification, etc. or make Derivation, by the Seton, Fontanels, or Issues, etc.

XXXII. The third Indication has respect to the Conjoined Cause; which is to be
treated with such Topics, as the nature of the Disease requires.

XXXIII. And here you are not to use Repercussives or Repellers, for they hurt,
by reason the tough, hard and cold Humor is incapable of being driven back, as
hot Humors are. For this Humor or Matter, as it will not give way to them, so
it will rather the more incrassate or thicken them, and as it were impact them,
and make them stick faster in the Part.

XXXIV. In this case therefore, you ought to use Emossients, to soften the
hardened Matter; and afterward, when it is softened, Discussives to scatter it.

XXXV. But you ought not to use the strongest Emollients, which do too much
mollify, lest you should cause it to degenerate into Cancer: nor the strongest
Discussives, which too much discuss or resolve, lest you cause it to pass into
a stoney hardness.

XXXVI. For which reason, it will be most safe to let the whole course of the
Cure be mixed; and that you use not alone any one Medicine, which has in it a
power either only to moisten, or only to discuss, but such as mollify and
discuss: but not together, but by turns, and one after another.

XXXVII. Yet some Artists mix Emollients with Digestives; for which purpose
Galen commends the Fomentation of Vinegar, wherein the Pyrites has been
extinguished: the Part being first fomented with the Decoction of the emollient
Herbs; which alternately are often to be repeated: and in this manner, the
Scirrhus, which is almost desperate, may be cured.

XXXVIII. Sennertus advises, in a Scirrhus which is but newly begun, to use
those Medicaments which are of the milder sort: but in an old or inveterate
Scirrhus, or if it is in a Tendon or Ligament, those that are more strong.

XXXIX. Among the milder sort of Emollients are, Oils of sweet Almonds, of
Camomil and white Lillies; Butter, Hens, Geese, Ducks, Hogs, Dogs, Foxes, Man's
Grease, (which last is a Specific;) Vipers fat, Marrow of Veal, and of a Heart;
Mucilages of roots and leaves of Marrows, Marshmallows, Line and
Foenugreek-seed, Arach, Wax, fat Figs, etc.

XL. Among the stronger Emollients these are numbered; old Oil-olive, Whale-oil,
Bears-grease, Bdellium, liquid Storax, Tar, fat Rosins, Turpentine, Balsam
Capivii, de Chili, Gilead, Peru and Tolu, Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Opoponax, and
Sagapenum.

XLI. Among Compounds, Ointment of Marshmallows, Empl. Diachylon simple,
Treatum, and cum Gummis, Diachylon compositum, and that of Melilot simple, etc.

XLII. Among Discussives, these are commended; Bean-meal, and meals of Lupins,
Cicers, and Orobus, flowers of Camomil, Melilot, and of the Elder-tree; leaves
of Angelica, Avens, Alexanders, Bawm, Calamint, Camomil, Dill, Elder,
Dwarfelder, Fetherfew, Fennel, Horehound, Marjoram, Mint, Origanum, Peniroyal,
Rue, Sage, Southernwood, Tansy, Wormwood: Seeds of Anise, Caraways, Cumin, and
Fennel; roots of Florentine-orrice, and Elecampane: Oils of Bays, Nard, and
Rue: Cataplasma de Fermento, Resolutivum Foresti, Leven, and Dung of Beasts;
roots of wild Cucumbers, Briony, Solomon's-Seal, Orrice, etc.

XLIII. Among Compound, these; Ceratum de Ammoniaco Foresti, Emplastrum de
Galbano, or de Mastiche, or Oxycroceum, or this of Barbett: Gum Ammoniacum,
Galbanum, Opoponax, A. i. flowers of Sulphur, red Myrrh, A. ss. Camphir i. Oils
of white Lillies, Ducks-grease, A. vi. Wax, q.s. mix, and make an Emplaster.

XLIV. Barbett commends this Cataplasm: Roots of Altheae iii. Orrice i. leaves
of Coleworts, Parietary, Mallows, flowers of Camomil, Melilot, A. M.i. Linseed
ii. boil them in Water, then beat them well together, and add Horse-dung ii.
Hog's Grease, Oil of Camomil, A. iii. roasted or boiled Onions ss. mix, and
apply them.

XLV. A Cataplasm also of Briony-roots, Goats-dung, and Urine, mixed together,
and applied; often renewing it for several days, is accounted an excellent
thing.

XLVI. But Sennertus says, that if it should prove tedious to use Emollients
and Discussives thus alternately, or by turns, that at length they may be all
mixed together: for that by this means, the Tumor will be both mollified and
discussed, or dissipated together.

XLVII. And for the same purpose, you may apply this: Fresh Butter, Scammony,
Wax, A. q.s. mix, and make a soft Cerate, which renew every other day.

XLVIII. Or this: Ceratum de Ammoniaco Foresti jss. Sulphur vive, iii. mix
them, and apply it; renewing it once every day: or a Cataplasm of green Tobacco
leaves.

XLIX. Or this: Meals of Beans, Fenugreek-seed and Linseed, A. vi. roots of
Althea i. Pitch v. Goose-grease q.s. mix, and make an Emplaster.

L. Or this: Meals of Fenugreek, Linseed, Althea-roots, powder of
Holyoke-roots, A. i. boil them in Milk; then add fresh Butter jss. liquid
Storax, Ammoniacum, Bdellium dissolved in Vinegar, A. ss. mix, and make a
Plaster.

LI. Or this: Althea-roots, white Lilly-roots, Briony-roots, boiled and well
bruised, A. iii. fat Figs boiled ii. Ammoniacum, Bdellium (dissolved in
Vinegar) A. i. liquid Storax ss. Goose and Hens fat, Veal-marrow, A. iii. Oils
of Lillies and Camomil, Wax, A. q.s. mix, and make an Emplaster.

LII. If the Scirrhus is more confirmed, and fixed among Ligaments and Tendons,
the Fumes of Wine-vinegar, and Spirit of Wine sprinkled upon the Pyrites, or a
red-hot Brick, are of special virtue in resolving these Tumors; afterward
chafing the Part a little, apply the following Emplaster.

LIII. Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Galbanum, Opopanax, Sagapenum, liquid Storax
dissolved in Vinegar, A. i. Litharge of Gold jss. let them boil in Vinegar;
then add Bean-meal, Sulphur vive, A. ss. Oil of Lillies, Wax, A. q.s. mix, and
make a soft Emplaster or Cerate.

LIVE. If by the Use of these Applications it should tend to Suppuration, you
must treat it accordingly: but take heed that you be not deceived; for if it
should prove no Suppuration, it may degenerate into Cancer.

LV. And if it inclines to Suppuration, you must have a care that it be not too
much irritated by hot Medicines: and avoid Lancing it, lest it presently turns
Cancerous: and Cauteries and Burning are far worse: except the Tumor is in a
proper Cystis, and then the name of Scirrhus is improper.

LVI. If being suppurated, it breaks, cleanse it with the Ablution of Mercurius
dulcis in Limewater; Basilicon mixed with Mercurius dulcis levigated, or white
Precipitate: and lay over all Diachylon simplex, or some other Emplaster of
like nature.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of a CANCER.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...), and (...) by Galen; in Latin, Cancer; and in
English, a Cancer, or Hard painful Tumor.

II. The Kinds. 1. (...), Cancer; whilst it is beginning, growing, or
increasing, and not ulcerated. 2. (...), Carcinoma; after it is broken, runs or
gleets, by any means whatsoever; called by some, (...), Cancer ulceratus; or
(...), Vlcus canceratum: of these we shall treat distinctly or apart; but some
I know, will have Carcinoma to be a Cancer not ulcerated.

I. A CANCER not Vlcerated.
III. The Definition. Tumor praeternaturalis est, ab atra Bile originem
trahens, rotundus, durus, inaequalis, coloris lividi aut subnigri, magnas and
eminentes circumquaque habens Venas, vel Venis circumcirca turgidis, pedes
Cancri referentibus, dolor, caloreque gravis, aspectu teter and horribilis. A
Cancer is a preternatural Tumor, taking its original from burnt Choler, round,
hard, unequal, of a livid or blackish color; having great and eminent Veins
every-ways round about it; or full of turgid Veins, resembling the feet of a
Crab, full of pain, and very hot, with a cruel and horrible aspect.

IV. The Causes. Authors say the Procatartick Cause is from ill Diet, Meats of
an ill juice, of a thick substance, and a hot quality; as Garlic, Onions,
Leeks, Beans, Pease, Venison, and the like: the immoderate use of strong Wines,
as Sack, Malaga, Sherry and Greek Wines; which exceedingly burn the Humors in
the mass of Blood; hot Air, perturbations of Mind, strokes, blows and external
violence, ill handling.

V. The Antecedent Cause is Atra-bilis, Choler adust or Melancholy: but this
they will not have to be natural Melancholy, which Galen, ad Glauc. lib. 2.
cap. 10. affirms to be that part of the Blood which represents the Lees of
Wine; which is made by the Liver, and is drawn by the Spleen, wherewith it is
nourished: for this superfluous natural Melancholy, they will have only to
breed a Scirrhus.

VI. They will have it then to be from Atra-bilis, which is either natural
Melancholy adust, or yellow Choler adust; which is much more malign than the
former; from a strong hot distemperature of the Liver, which burns the natural
Melancholy and yellow Choler, and so generates this malign Atra- bilis: the
Spleen also by reason of its discrasy, not drawing to it self the superfluous
natural Melancholy; whereby staying so long out of its own proper place, it is
inflamed and burned.

VII. Another Antecedent Cause, may be a stopping of the Hemorrhoids in Men,
whereby they have been usual; and the stoppage of the Courses in Women, before
their due time.

VIII. The Conjoined or near Cause, Galen, de Tumor. praeternat. cap. 12.
says, is, from Atra-bilis seating it self in the Flesh; where if it is mild,
it makes the Tumor which we call a Cancer; but if it is very sharp, it corrodes
the adjacent Flesh, and causes an Ulcer, which is a Cancer ulcerated.

IX. Sennertus, Med. Pract. lib. 5. part. 1. cap. 20. says the conjoined cause
of a Cancer is Atra-bilis, hot, dry, sharp, and salt, corrupting and corroding
all things, generated and bred from the heat of other Humors; which heat now
ceasing, or not being so vigorous, is the reason that it excites not a Fever,
as is usual in a Phlegmon or Erysipelas.

X. Wiseman says, he believes not this Adustion of Humors to be the cause; but
rather that the Matter of the Humor is in fault, which by some error in
Concoction, becomes sharp and corrosive, it may be Arsenical, as appears by the
Sloughs which are sometimes made in a Night.

XI. This Humor being sharp and corrosive of it self, is apt to convert
whatever comes to it of Blood, into the same acrimony with it self: which is
easily done, by mixing such an acrimonious Ferment with a Liquor that abounds
with acid Salts, as the Blood of such persons usually does.

XII. And being such, it increases apace while the Skin is yet whole; but much
more, when upon breach of the Skin, the accession of Air adds to the vigor of
the Ferment; upon which it grows fierce or enraged, and so thrusts it self
forth into a Fungus, Tubercles, etc.

XIII. But it seems to me, that the Antecedent Cause is more truly a discrasy
of the Blood and Lympha, being filled with an acrimonious Salt, and a malign
Sulphur; which they endeavoring to purge themselves from, let it fall through
the mouths of some of the Capillary Arteries; and so protrudes it into the
fleshy substance, where the Part is weak, and made apt to receive the same.

XIV. And the Conjoined Cause is, those extravasated Recrements of the Blood
and Lympha, which (being protruded as aforesaid in a Part accidentally weak, or
naturally apt to receive a flux of Humors) through the depravity of the same, and
a vicious Ferment therein; are farther changed into a malign and poisonous
Matter, of a vehemently deleterious nature, consisting of a stinking Arsenical
Sulphur, and a Catheretick or highly corrosive Salt, extremely subtle and
penetrating.

XV. That this is true, the Death of Mr. Smith, one of the Surgeons of St.
Thomas Hospital in Southwark, gives witness. For at the cutting off of a large
Cancerated Breast, he had (after the Breast was off) a curiosity to taste the
juice or matter contained in one of the little Cystis's or Glands of the same,
which he did by touching it with one of his Fingers, and then tasting it from
the same, with his Tongue.

XVI. He protested that it immediately, like a Gass, pierced or went through the
whole substance of his Tongue, and down his Throat, not less sharp or biting
than Oil of Vitriol, Spirit of Nitre, or some vehement catheretick or caustic
Salt: and although he presently spit out, and washed his Mouth with Water, and
that oftentimes, and also with Wine, and drank presently very freely of Wine
after it; yet could he not get rid of the Taste thereof, but it continued with
him, and brought him (who was a very strong Man) into a Consumption, or wasting
and pining condition, with several other ill Symptoms; and in a few Months
after killed him, the Taste thereof never going off from his Tongue, to his
dying hour: and the tasting of the Juice or Matter of that cancerated Breast,
he declared upon his deathbed, and near the last moments of his life, to be
the true cause of his languishing condition and death.

XVII. The Places. This Disease is apt to seize upon any fleshy part; as the
Cheeks and Jaws, Sides, Back, brawney parts of the Arms, Thighs and Legs, Hands
and Feet; the Liver, Spleen, and Womb; but chiefly such parts as are
Glandulous; and many times it begins in the Glandule of a Part; and most often
affects Women's Breasts, by reason of their looseness, great humidities, and
strong ferment they contain.

XVIII. The Signs. A Cancer in its beginning is very difficult to be known, not
exceeding a Pea or Bean in bigness, and increasing slowly to the bigness of a
Melon or Pompion sometimes, (yet sometimes it suddenly grows great;) and
discovers it self by its grievous Symptoms. Galen, meth. Med. lib. 14. cap. 9.

XIX. It is hard in substance, full of pain, hot, and of a livid, or blackish
color: roundish, but with some inequality, and full of turgid Veins: the whole
resists the touch, and as it increases in magnitude, increases in malignity.

XX. The Hardness is from the thickness of the Humor; the Pain is from the
conjoined Cause, being sharp and corrosive; the Heat proceeds from the
extremity of pain; the Livid or Blackish Color, from the malignity and poison,
which even discolours the purest Metals; its Roundness, from the thickness of
the matter, which cannot spread abroad; its Inequality, from the ferment of the
Humor, and because sometimes it is contained in several little Glands; and its
Turgid Veins, like to Crabs Claws, from the Recrements of the Blood filling
those Parts; which by reason of matter obstructing, or pressing upon them,
hinders its getting forth.

XXI. It is known in part by the place, (though it may breed in almost all parts
of the Body,) as in the Lips, because glandulous and loose: so also in the
Breasts, for the same reason; and in the Womb, from the retention of the
Courses.

XXII. Aegineta, lib. 6. cap. 45. says, a Cancer happens to sundry places, but
chiefly to the Womb and Breasts of Women: and Galen says, Cancerous Tumors are
chiefly in the Breasts of Women, which have not their Purgation according to
Nature. Gal. ad Glauc. lib. 2. cap. 10. and the reason seems to be from the
consent of Parts: for that the Mammariae Veins meet with the Vterinae, under
the Musculi recti of the Belly; by which way there is a translation of the
matter from the Womb to the Dugs.

XXIII. Sennertus says, that with the Pain there is always a Pulsation
attending it, together with a Heat more than ordinary.

XXIV. Where the Pains are very sharp, as if one were struck with a Dart; the
Matter there is very corrosive, and will certainly in a little time break forth
in a Gleet, or some dangerous stinking Ulcer.

XXV. If the Cancer is ulcerated, from the breaking of some of the Tubercles
lying under the Skin, whether the matter is much or little, the Ulcer is
painful, and very stinking, discharging a stinking Gleet; it also thrusts forth
hard and painful Lips, and in time fixes to the Ribs, (where it is in a Breast,
or Side) and in its progress becomes of a horrible aspect.

XXVI. These sometimes bleed, either through the eruption of some Vessels, or
from the corrosion of the Humor gnawing them asunder: and sometimes a Cancer
bleeds whilst it is yet whole; for the same reason, the Blood coming forth
either at the Nipple, or some small pin-hole.

XXVII. Some ulcerated Cancers send forth a Fungus, others consume and eat all
the Flesh away after a wonderful manner: both these often bleed, and in large
quantities, because the Capillary Vessels are eaten asunder; whereby the
strength of the Patient is quickly spent, and they soon dye, as consumed away,
and exhausted.

XXVIII. The Prognostics. Barbett says, a Cancer is seldom cured by Medicines,
often by Surgery, but not without danger: all sharp Medicines exulcerate it.

XXIX. A Cancer of the Womb is said to be incurable, except it be very little,
or may be taken away by Excision: so also a Cancer of any other internal part;
as Mouth, Tongue, Palate, or Anus.

XXX. Galen, ad Glauc. lib. 2. cap. 10. says, that Cancers in the outward
parts, may in the beginning be cured; but when they are come to a considerable
bigness, they can only be cured by Extirpation.

XXXI. To a Cancer inveterate, or of long continuance, in a weak person, you
cannot safely use Excision, Actual or Potential Cauteries; but a Palliative
Cure is only to be prescribed, which in a Cancer not exulcerate, has sometimes
preserved Life even to very Old Age.

XXXII. An ulcerated Cancer can never be cicatrized, but as long as it so
remains, the Sick will live in continual pain and filthiness, and at last dye
miserably; unless it is cured by Excision, Cautery, or Ustion.

XXXIII. If it proceeds from an internal cause in the Blood and Humors, it is
generally incurable, by reason of its malign and poisonous Ferment, and
corrosive Salts; which yield neither to Purging, Vomiting, Bleeding, Sweating,
Salivating, Diet-Drinks, Repulsives, Discussives, Suppuratives, nor any other
kind of Medicines, whether inward or outward.

XXXIV. If it is from external causes, as Bruises, etc. and lies superficially
under the Skin, they may be attempted by Surgery; yea though they lie deeper,
provided they circumvolve no principal Vessel.

XXXV. But proceeding as aforesaid, from malignant Humors and corrosive Salts,
though they may extirpated, yet the success will be doubtful: and though they seem
to be absolutely cured, yet many times they breed again, and break forth either
in the same place again, or in some other.

XXXVI. If it happens in the Head, Jaws, Cheeks, Neck, under the Arm-holes, or
Thighs, it is generally incurable; nor may the Actual or Potential Cautery, or
Excision be made use of; for those Parts are dangerous to be cut, because of
their Vessels, and the great flux of Blood that may ensue.

XXXVII. The Cure. Let the Diet, and regulation of the Non-naturals be as in a
Scirrhus: Purge frequently, with such things as evacuate salt Phlegm, and
Atra-bilis or Melancholy: avoid Bleeding, as most pernicious; as also
Scarification, and the application of Suppuratives and strong Discutients.

XXXVIII. And if it is in a Woman whose Terms are stopped, cause them to return
by Emmenogogicks and Catharticks; and in Men the Hemorrhoids, where they have
been accustomed: and by Aperitives and Abstersive Medicines remove the Defect.

XXXIX. And inwardly, give the Spirit and Tincture of Tartar; Tinctures of the
Salt of Tartar, and of Antimony; Magisteries of Pearl, Oister-shells, Coral,
Crabs eyes and claws; as also the Tincture of Luna, and Aurum potabile; which
are to be given guttatim, in some proper Vehicle.

XL. But before you come to External Applications, you must consider whether
the Cancer is recent and small, or inveterate and great; if recent and small,
it sometimes admits of cure; but if inveterate and great, never, without
cutting off. And then, in this latter case, the Patient is to be consulted,
whether he will be satisfied with a Palliative Cure only, or admit of
Extirpation; if the last, we shall discourse of that when we come to treat of a
Cancer ulerated: in this place then we show the Cure of a small, recent Cancer;
or the Palliation of a great inveterate one.

XLI. Now those things which only Palliate a large and inveterate Cancer, many
times cure a small and recent one; of which kind, are these commended by
Barbett: Roots of Aron, Dropwort, Figwort, Mullein; Leaves of Maidenhair,
Housleek, Agrimony, Tobacco, Plantane, Nightshade, Hounds-tongue, Sperma Ceti,
spawn of Frogs, burnt Toads, Crabs, Frogs, burnt Lead, Man's dung, Emplasters
of Diapompholigos, of Saturn, de Ranis cum Mencurio, Diasulphuris, Camphir,
Saccharum Saturni, and Saccharum vel Sal Jovis, which Paracelsus commends, as
the greatest of all Specificks: also Vnguentum Album, Nutritum, Populeon,
Tutiae, de Plumbo usto.

XLII. Hartman says, he has cured many Women's Breasts, only with an Emplaster
of Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar, and often repeating the same, to a perfect
Cure; and he says he cured Ulcerated ones with the same, if you will believe
him.

XLIII. Juices of Plantane, Endive, Housleek, Nightshade, Rose-vinegar, Cil of
Myrtles, A. i. Venice Turpentine ii. stir them together in a leaden Mortar,
with a leaden Pestle; adding Saccharum Saturni, pouders of Pomgranate-peels,
and of Citrons, A. i. fine Bole, burnt Lead, Camphir, A. ss. mix, and make a
Liniment.

XLIV. So also the simple Juices of Nightshade, Hemlock, Henbane, Housleek,
Endive, Succory, Lettice and Purslane are commended; Cockle-fish boiled, and
made into a Cataplasm; also River-Crabs, Crevises, and green Frogs, out of
which an excellent Oil is to be distilled by Descent, for the easing of the
Pain, and abating the Tumor. See it in Our Doron Med. lib. 3. cap. 2. sect. 1.

XLV. Some make an Unguent with the Ashes of Crabs or Crawfish, or Toads, mixed
with Coriander-seed and Oil of Roses: also Metalline- Calces, washed, and freed
from any biting quality: as of Lead, Tutia, Pompholyx, Litharge, Ceruse,
Antimony, Marcasites, Jupiter; but Lead is very highly to be commended by all,
and may be used many ways.

XLVI. Terra sigillata, fine Bole, Ceruse, A. ss. Tutia prepared, powder of
green Frogs, A. iii. Litharge jss. Vinegar vi. Oil of Frogs i. Oil of Roses
jss. Wax q.s. mix, and in a leaden Mortar make an Ointment, which apply.

XLVII. And of those things which give a consistence to Juices, Powder of
Hermodacts, Calx of Jupiter and Saturn, Rye-meal and flower of Lupins are the
best; because by a specific faculty, they allay the fierceness of a Cancer: so
also Goats-dung mixed with Honey and Vinegar.

XLVIII. A Cataplasm of Snails and Alehoof is commended; and if it is painful,
a Cataplasm of the pulp of Henbane and Hemlock roots, with Rye or Lupin flower,
and Oil of Myrtles, is of good use. Or a Cataplasm of Frog-spawn, brought to a
consistence with meal of Lupins: so also a Cataplasm of leaves of Herb Robert
and Poppies.

XLIX. Oil of Quinces ii. Vinegar of Elder or Roses i. grind them in a leaden
Mortar to a Liniment: it is a famous thing. Or, Emplastr. Diapalma iii. juice of
Nightshade and Henbane, A. i. Oil of Roses x. mix, dissolve, and make it of the
consistence of a Liniment.

L. Aquapendens commends this. Garden-nightshade, Golden-rod, Sowthistle, A.
Mji. boil in Water, bruise; and with Rye-meal lbi. Oil of Roses v. make a
Cataplasm. A Cataplasm of Radishseed and Vinegar is good; so also, a Cataplasm
of Raisons stoned, and leaves of Nightshade.

LI. A Preparation of Frogs, against Cancers. Live green Frogs No. 40. kill
them, and fill their mouths full of Butter, which put into an earthen Pot well
glazed, whose bottom is full of holes, and cover it: put this Pot into the
mouth of another earthen Pot placed in the ground; lute these well together,
and the cover of the upper Pot: then make a Fire of Charcoal about the upper
Pot, which continue for five or six hours, to force down all the Moisture and
Oil into the lower: which done, take the Frogs, and make them into fine powder,
which mix with the Oil per Descensum in the lower Pot: with which anoint the
Cancer daily thrice a day.

LII. Paraeus commends a Plate of Lead besmeared with Quicksilver: also this
following Ointment; Old Venice Treacle, juice of Lettice, Oil of Roses, A. i.
pulp of Crabs ss. yolks of Eggs boiled hard No. 2. grind all in a leaden
Mortar, to the consistence of an Ointment.

LIII. Wiseman commends this. Powder of green Frogs iii. ashes of River-crabs
iv. Litharge of Gold ii. burnt Lead, Tutia prepared, A. ii. Ceruse, vi. juices
of Nightshade and Plantane, A. vi. Vinegar ii. Vng. Populeon, Oil of Frogs, A.
iii. Veal-suet iv. Wax q.s. mix, and make a Cerate.

LIVE. Or, White Poppy seed i. Henbane-seed ss. Opium i. Gum-Arabick ss. make
all into powder, and mix with Oil of Roses and Myrtles, A. iii. and with Wax
q.s. make a Cerate; which is good in case of Pain, in extremity whereof, you
may double or treble the quantity of Opium.

LV. Many Mediums of this kind; for Cancers require variety of Applications,
which are to be made of things which have a power to repress, discuss, and
corroborate; thereby not only to hinder the farther increase of the Cancer, but
also to diminish, and quite take away that which is already in being.

LVI. But these Medicines ought to have a mediocrity in them, and not be sharp
and biting; yet on the other side, if they be too weak, then they give no help
or relief: but if they are too strong and violent, then they either repress and
discuss the more thin parts, and so not only leave the more thick behind; but
also render the Tumor the more unfit for future Applications, in order to their
discussion or dissipation.

LVII. And while these things are doing, if the Patient has strength of Body,
and vigor of Mind, and is willing, a gentle Salivation ought to be attempted;
and if occasion be, to be twice or thrice repeated: for thereby the whole mass
of Lympha, and all the Juices come to be renewed, so that a kind of new Ferment
is begot in the Part.

LVIII. I speak this from Experience, having cured two remarkable Cancers,
(after much other means had failed:) one in a Woman about 30 years old, the
other in a Woman about 36 years of age; where the Salivation was gentle, and
continued in each about six weeks time.

LIX. And as to Purging and Diets, mentioned at Sect. 37. aforegoing, it is not
enough that they be administered once, but are many times to be repeated; and
that for the most part twice a week: for by that means, not only some part of
the Humor will be revulsed from the Tumor; but new matter, which would
otherwise now, will be hindered, and taken away.

LX. Also, as to Topics; if you apply hot and moist Medicaments, which usually
suppurate Apostems, they will procure Putrefaction in this: and if you apply
Corrosives, you will assist the Malignity, and increase the Cancer.

LXI. If notwithstanding all that can be done, the Tumor still increases, and
is in danger of Exulceration; it will be necessary to make the Patient
acquainted with the danger: and if it is loose, and in a place where it may be
safely extirpated, propose it to them in time; lest afterward they do desire
it, when it is late. If you come to Excision, the way and manner of doing it,
you may see Lib. 1. Cap. 33. of this Book, aforegoing.

II. A CANCER Vlcerated.
LXII. What we are to consider in an ulcerated Cancer, is either a Palliative
Cure, or Extirpation: but if is fixed to the Ribs or Bone in any Part, or in a
place dangerous, or not to be come at with Instruments, Excision also will be
impossible.

LXIII. As for Diet, the Patient may eat Barley-cream, Rice-Milk with Water in
it, Milk-Pottage, Ptisan made with Liquorice and the Opening Roots; Broths made
with Borrage, Bugloss, Endive, Succory, Spinach, Lettice, Purslane, Sorrel;
boiled in Broths made of Lamb, Mutton, Veal, Kid, young Hogs-flesh, Chickens,
Pullets, Capons, Partridges, young Rabbets, etc. Fish living in clear and
gravelly Waters, Eggs, etc. a middling sort of Beer, not old; Mead, small Wines
mixed with Water, etc. they may eat Cucumbers, and things cooling and moistning.

LXIV. But Meats hard of digestion, heating and drying, are to be forborne; as
dry Beans, Barley or Pease Bread, old Cheese, old and salt Flesh, old Rabbets,
Hares-flesh, Venison, salt Bacon, Cabbage, Coleworts; as also all other things
which thicken the Blood, heat, and inflame the Humors.

LXV. Purge also twice every Week with an Infusion of Sena, thus made:
White Wind, fair Water lbiv. Salt of Tartar ii. Sena of Alexandria ii.
Liquorice bruised i. infuse in a Vessel close covered, in a boiling heat, for
two or three hours, giving it at last a walm or two; then strain out being
cold, for eight Doses; to be taken in the Morning fasting.

LVI. And in the intermediate days let the Body be kept with a cooling Diet,
made with Fumitory, Hops, and juice of fragrant Apples, with many Hog-lice
bruised; abstaining from the things before commanded: as also from Garlic,
Onions, Leeks, Shelots, Mustard, Pepper, and all other Spices: avoiding also
grief, sadness, great labor, watching, and the like.

LXVII. Then outwardly dress it with Ung. Album, Nutritum, Tutiae, de Plumbo
usto: or with this: Oil of Roses, white Wax, A. ijss. juices of Nightshade and
Pomgranates, A. ii. Ceruse, Aethiops mineralis, A. jss. Plumbi usti, Tutia
prepared, A. ss. Frankincense, Mastich, A. ii. mix, and make an Ointment.

LXVIII. Or, Vng. Tutiae iv. Venice Treacle i. Saccharum Saturni i. juice of
Cranes-bill q.s. mix, and grind them in a leaden Mortar to a consistence and
blewness. Some commend Juice of Mullein boiled with Honey, or Tapsimel; others
Valentia Papaveris and Solani: Riverius says in his Observations, that he cured
one by often dressing it with a mixture of Rose, Plantane, and Corn-Poppy
waters mixed with Mel rosatum.

LXiX. Or, Vng. Album, iv. pulvis Mercurii coagulati ii. juice of Nightshade
inspissate to the thickness of new Honey i. Opium extracted, to the thickness
of new Honey, with juice of Henbane ss. mix them in a leaden Mortar.

LXX. But if notwithstanding all the means that can be used, it cannot be kept
at a stay, but that the Eating goes on, the Patient is in great pain, and
Fluxes of Blood accompany it; it will then be necessary, to save Life, to come
to the Extirpation of it: for the doing of which, Surgeons have three ways;
1. By Escaroticks. 2. By the Actual Cautery. 3. By Excision.

LXXI. 1. By Escaroticks. Hartman commends his Pulvis Benedictus, the
Preparation of which see in our Doron Medicum, lib. 2. cap. 21. sect. 12. made
of black Soot iii. powder of Aron-roots ii. white Arsenick (ground impalpable,
and digested with Spirit of Wine) i. mixed together. This Powder, the Ulcer
being cleansed, is to be once, and but once strewed on, pretty thick; (unless
it is taken off too soon, before the Roots are eradicated;) and an Oiled-cloth
is laid over it, moistened with Fasting-spittle, that it may stick on.

LXXII. This procures great pain, but it is not to be removed till the Cancer
and its roots are eradicated; anointing in the mean season round about it with
Oil of Roses, or rather with Oil of Poppy-seed: when the pain ceases, and the
Cancer is destroyed, remove the Powder, and all that sticks to it.

LXXIII. Then cleansing the Ulcer, complete the Cure with the
Incarnative-pouder described in Our Doron Med. lib. 2. cap. 21. sect. 13. and
the Litharge-Ointment described in lib. 3. cap. 4. sect. 22. of the same Book.

LXXIV. Others commend Oil or Butter of Antimony, anointing it round therewith:
but notwithstanding this, if the Cancer is great, it ought with a Knife to be
wholly cut off to the quick: or by burning it with Actual, or Potential
Cauteries, to be removed.

LXXV. Some wash it with Water, Spirit or Oil of Soot, till an Escar is made;
then apply Oil of fixed Arsenick (washed in Water) till the Ulcer is thoroughly
cleansed. Or else strew on red Precipitate, or a Precipitate made with
amalgamated Sol: after which it is healed with the Incarnative-pouder, and
Litharge-Ointment.

LXXVI. Others, when the Cancer is mortified, and the Ulcer cleansed, heal it
with Balsam of Sulphur and Empl. Diasulphuris; giving them through the whole
Cure, the Sena-Infusion before described; and a Diet-drink made of a great
number of bruised Sows or Hog-lice, (often to be repeated, and for a long time
to be used) infused in half White Wind, half Water.

LXXVII. Riverius in one of his Observations, commends the Escarotick in lib.
1. cap. 33. sect. 10. of this Work aforegoing, applied as there delivered. But
he fays the Paste may be spread upon a Bolster six times lesser than the
Cancer, which may lie upon it twenty-four hours, and it will make an Escar six
times greater than the Bolster: without doubt it ought to be much less than the
Ulcer, because of its aptness to spread; yet not six times lesser.

LXXVIII. This Escarotick (says he) did eat the Cancer wholly away; and when
the Escar fell off, the Ulcer was filled with flesh, and then healed up. But in
case the whole Tumor had not been taken away, but some roots had remained, they
must have been consumed with a mixture of red Precipitate and burnt Alum, well
mixed together.

LXXIX. To incarnate the Ulcer, dry Lint was only used: but while the Paste was
on, a Fever was presently excited, with vomiting, flux of the Belly, and great
provocation of Urine; which Symptoms continued two or three days, Nature being
offended with the violence of the Escarotick: with the same Medicine a Cancer
upon a Soldier's Nose, which had eaten away the tip of it, was Cured.

LXXX. But Wiseman says, that by the use of these Escaroticks, young
Surgeons have been sometimes engaged to their prejudice; and that an eminent
Surgeon undertook the Eradicating of an Ulcerated Cancer in the Breast of a
Woman who had strength, and courage to endure it: he applied one of the
strongest Escaroticks, which penetrated deep, and made great sloughs, and by
repeating the Escarotick, raised new.

LXXXI. But the use of it was not long continued; for the Gleet partaking of
the Corrosives, ulcerated the adjacent parts; and the Cancer was so enraged by
the Escarotick, as showed that there was no good to be done by it.

LXXXII. Indeed (says he) if we could contrive Medicines, which may penetrate
deep, with little pain, there might be some hopes of success: but it is evident
that cancerous Excrescencies, and cancerous Ulcers of the Mouth are increased,
by touching them with Oil of Vitriol or Sulphur, etc. upon which
considerations, it seems, that there does remain, but three ways of treating a
Cancer; viz. either by Palliatives, or the Actual Cautery, or Excision by the
Knife.

LXXXIII. The Palliative Cure we have already showed, which only hinders the
farther augmentation, and eases the pain; so that the Sick may lengthen out,
and lead the remainder of his life with less torment and misery. Now to the
things there enumerated, you may add Empl. de Ammoniaco made with Vinegar,
Ceratum de Ammoniaco Foresti; Emplastrum de Galbano crocatum, Emplast. de Ranis
with fourfold Mercury, or Our Empl. Mercuriale.

LXXXIV. 2. By the Actual Cautery. If the Cancer is in such a place, as you are
in hopes to eradicate it, the Actual Cautery is then a certain Cure; but not by
applying it lightly upon the upper parts; but by thrusting down to the root,
with a Scoop, or Chezil-like Cautery, carrying it away before you.

LXXXV. If there remains any rags, or roots of it, burn it down to a crust,
with a proportionable Button-cautery: if this cannot be effected, then
Palliatives are to be used, as are above directed; by which means, the poor
Patient who has an ulcerated Cancer, may live tollerably well.

LXXXVI. 3. By Excision. Before you do this, see the Patient is fit for it; as
having strength of Body, of a tolerable good habit, and not in a very
declining age; that the Cancer is loose, and the Armpits and parts under it,
be free from painful Glandules: and it would be better, if the original of the
Cancer was from some external Accident, as a Blow, etc. and the Operation to be
done in the Spring or Autumn of the year; not in the extreme heat of Summer, or
cold of Winter.

LXXXVII. Then have in a readiness, 1. Good Rowlers. 2. Compresses or Bolsters.
3. Pledgets. 4. Defensatives. 5. Astringent or Styptick pouders, as in other
Amputations: but Calcanthum, or calcined Vitriol, or other Escarotick-pouders
are not good; for you cannot apply them to the mouths of the Arteries, but they
will corrode the adjacent parts, and cause much pain, which ought not to be in
Cancers: besides, they also require a strict Bandage, which is not without much
trouble, on the Breast.

LXXXVIII. Wiseman proposes the stopping of the Blood with a small
Button-cautery, which (says he) is not done without some pain, but it is
momentary, and serves to correct the indisposition of the Part: these actual
Cauteries ought to be of differing sorts, and kept ready hot for use; lest some
relick of a Cancerous Gland should be left behind.

LXXXIX. But that very skilful Man, Dr. Gardner, the Kings Surgeon, seldom
or never stops the Blood, in this case, with the Actual Cautery; but always
makes a provision of proper Stypticks, not corrosive; which he prepares from
the Caput mortuum of Vitriol: which are always so effectual, as never to fail
the purpose they are intended for, and ever stop the Hemorrhage, without any
pain. These things done:

XC. Having placed the Patient in a Chair, take a couple of large Needles, with
strong silken Strings, or others; which pass through the Cancerated Breast
crosswise, toward the bottom of the Cancer; and taking these four ends tie
them together, by which you are to hold, while you are doing the Operation.
Then taking the Strings in your left hand, take the Knife in your right hand;
which ought to be large, viz. long, broad, and very sharp: and beginning at the
top of the Breast, cut it downwards; and with two or three cuts, cut it close
near the Rib, and wholly off, so as to leave no part of the Cancer behind.

XCI. But others, instead of the Needles and Strings aforesaid, because their
use seems to be frightful and painful to the Patient, provide a kind of
Forceps, turned at both ends in form of a Crescent, like Callaper-compasses; in
such sort, that both ends may fall one upon another when shut; and with these
Callapar- Forceps they lay hold of the Breast, and hold them with the Breast
between them in their left hand, whilst they perform the Operation as
aforesaid, with their right.

XCII. The Breast being thus cut off, the thicker Blood is every where pressed
forth, and with Spunges wiped away; and the mouths of the Vessels are either
closed with the Actual Cautery: or some proper Styptick with Pledgets, is
applied; and the whole is dressed up with Astringent Pouders, as Pulvis Galeni,
etc. (which Wiseman used) a Plaster, a Bolster, a folded Napkin round the
Breast, and a Scapulary, to uphold the whole Bandage, and keep it tight and
firm.

XCIII. The Operation being done, and the Wound bound up; let the Patient be
laid in her Bed, giving her upon the spot a little sup of Our Aqua Bezoartica,
or some other Cordial Water, to revive her fainting spirits; and presently
after an Anodyn-Draught, to allay the Ferment; such as this: Aqua Bezoartica
vi. Aquae Menthae and Lactis, A. jss. Spirit of Sal Armoniack, Guttae vitae, A.
ii. mix them, for a Dose.

XCIV. The next day after, either repeat the same Dose, or give Venice-Treacle
or Mithridate, or Our Theriaca Chymica; which may be used as Antidotes against
the malignity of the Disease, and virulency of the Humor.

XCV. The second or third day after, dress it with some Digestive; as with
Turpentine, mixed with the yolk of an Egg: or with this; Venice or Strasburgh
Turpentine iii. juices of Nightshade, Plantain and Smallage, A. ii. Syrup of
Roses jss. boil to the consumption of the Juices; then add Barley-flower, meal
of Cicers, A.iv. Saffron ii. yolk of an Egg, mix them.

XCVI. If there is pain, you may apply this Anodyn over it. Mucilage of
Althea-root lbj. Wheat-meal, ii. Oil of Roses iii. boil to the thickness of a
Cataplasm, adding at the end of the boiling, yolks of Eggs No. ii. Saffron i.
mix them: but if there is no pain, dress it up with Emplastrum C saris, or e
Bolo.

XCVII. After Digestion, cleanse with Detersives, then bring on the Flesh with
Incarnatives, and with Epuloticks cicatrize, as we show in Curing of Wounds;
and while these things are doing, things which purge Atra-bilis are often to be
repeated; the Infusion of Sena aforesaid, and the like; or the Body is to be
kept soluble with Clysters.

XCVIII. If in Cicatrizing, the lips should grow callous, eradicate it timely
by the Actual Cautery, whilst it is recent, and in a narrow compass, lying but
on the superficies: for if you slight it, till it has seized the musculous
Flesh, it will be too late, and then scarcely capable of a Palliative Course.

XCIX. Whereas, in the Application of Escaroticks, mention is made of using
crude Arsenick; Sennertus says, it cannot be administered without much hazard
and danger; and that Arsenick fixed by melting it with Nitre; by which a fixed
Salt of Arsenick is made, divested of much, or most of its malign and poisonous
quality, is much more safe to be used.

C. And lastly, because Cancers are very apt to return again, the Body ought to
be kept for some time after the Cure, with proper Diets, made of Fumitory,
Hoglice, dried Toads flesh, Vipers flesh, etc. and a constant and due Purging
at certain intervals of Time, with such things as evacuate Atra-bilis; as Sena,
Hermodacts, Scammony, black Hellebor, Lapis Lazuli.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of a CANCER of a BONE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Cancer de Osse, Spina ventosa; and
in English, The Cancer of a Bone.

II. Definition. It is a preternatural, hard, and painful Tumor of the Bone;
arising within the Bone, or between the Bone and the Periosteum.

III. The Causes. The Procatartick Causes may be the same with those of a
Cancer, or of hard strumous Tumors; for which reason, some will have it to be a
species of the King's Evil.

IV. The Antecedent Cause, is a sharp Humor, or thin acid Serum, in the
Medullary-juice; which corroding the Bone, makes its way through the Periosteum;
after which there follows an Ulcer of the Flesh and Skin, which is incurable,
till the Bone is made sound.

V. The Conjoined Cause, is that sharp Humor or Scrum, separated from the Blood
and Lympha, which seizes upon the Fibers, and make a solution of continuity
there, corrupting at length the interior part of the Bone it self; passing its
subtle and malign Humor through the porosities it had made.

VI. This sharp malign Humor by degrees so affects the external surface of the
Bone, as to raise thereon a preternatural Tumor, which extending the
Periosteum, causes much pain and torment: which pain, if it grows so sharp, as
to cause an Inflammation, then an Abscess or Apostem succeeds, and therewith a
fetid, painful Ulcer, difficult to be cured.

VII. The Differences. They arise, 1. From the Humor. 2. From the place of its
Beginning. 3. From the Parts affected.

VIII. 1. From the Humor. The milder the Humor is, the slower the Tumor arises,
and sometimes scarce any swelling appears, or any pain is felt; gradually
swelling, and never corrupting externally. The sharper the Humor is, the sooner
the Tumor arises; so that sometimes it appears in 24 hours, passing through the
cortex of the Bone, and immediately (as it were) causing an Abscess.

IX. 2. From the Place. For it begins either within the Bone, or without the
Bone, between the Cortex and the Periosteum; and according as the interior part
is harder or softer; or the external Cortex is solid, or porous, so it suffers
solution sooner or later.

X. 3. From the Part affected: as, 1. In the Cranium, where the Humor passes
for the most part through the inferior Lamina, affecting the Dura matter, etc.
causing great Pain, Spasms, Convulsions, Epilepsies, etc. this is seldom
discovered before death. 2. In the great Bones of the Knees, Shins, Ancles,
Elbows, Cubitus, etc. where the Humor increases but slowly, and generally
produces Apostems, arising externally from the protuberance within. 3. In the
Os Tali, or Heel-bone; which is spungy within, and full of external Pores, in
which it makes its way speedily. 4. In the Jaw-bones, which are something
porous also. 5. In the Toes. 6. In the Fingers ends; where it is called
Paronychia, or a Felon; of which we have already treated, in Chap. 12.
aforegoing, of this Book.

XI. The Signs. The most visible Signs, are a protuberance or swelling of the
Bone, without discoloring of the Skin; which is either with much pain, or
without much pain; according as the Humor causing it is either sharper, or
milder.

XII. It is known also by the Apostem arising therefrom, which is always
between the Membranes and Tendons: and something of Fluctuation may be felt,
before the external Skin is much inflamed.

XIII. The Apostem being opened, if you then search with a Probe, you may many
time find it penetrates deep into the Bone; and yet the Cortex of it will be
white: whereas in other Apostems, which begin externally, when the Bone is
bare, it will be only superficially carious, and stained with the matter.

XIV. The Orifice, says Barbett, is very little, the edges are paler, the
matter which flows forth, is thin; the Flesh is soft, and somewhat swelled, at
least (as in an Ulcerous Excrescency) it increases of its own accord.

XV. Where it affects a Bone that is spongy, it is admirable to see how quickly
the Fibers of it will be softened, by the sharpness of the Serum of the Blood,
and made apt for a sudden distention; as if it were rather Muscular, than Boney.

XVI. The Prognostics. This Disease is always of difficult cure: and Barbett
says it is incurable, unless the Bone be made sound.

XVII. It is more easily cured in the lesser Bones; as the Cranium, Jaws,
Fingers, and Toes: but if it is in the larger Bones, it is for the most part
desperate; and if at length performed, it is very long first.

XVIII. Infants and Children are most subject to this Disease; because their
Bones are softer, and more porous: Old persons are seldom troubled with it, for
the contrary reason.

XIX. The Bone thus swelling, or seeming to have an Exostosis upon it, as being
big, and seeming to be very hard; yet if you open it, it will be found inwardly
carious, or spongy and rotten.

XX. The Cure. The same method is to be taken here, as is proposed in Apostems
and Ulcers with Caries: seeing when this is Apostemated or Ulcerated, it is
nothing more or less, than such a Disease; except you will say the Humor is yet
more sharp and malign.

XXI. If it is not ulcerated or broken, if very painful, you must first of all
use Incision; which must be made according to the length of the Part, and that
to the Bone it self: for the sooner this sharp corroding Humor is let out, the
better it is, and withal prevents more mischief, which by its being longer
retained within, it would do.

XXII. Being opened, you must dress it with things astringent, drying, and
resisting Putrefaction; as Euphorbium, Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur mixed with
Spirit of Wine, Tincture of Myrrh, camphorated Spirit of Wine.

XXIII. But before opening, while the Disease is recent and young, (a good
Diet, and regulation in the Non-naturals being observed) you ought to purge the
Body well with proper Catharticks, and use a good Diet-drink; such as we
prescribe in strumatick Tumors: and outwardly things astringent and drying; as
Emplast. e Bolo, Empl. Caejaris, de Minio simplex, and cum Sapone; Empl. de
Ranis cum Mercurio; or Our Emplastrum Mercuriale, etc.

XXIV. But after opening as aforesaid, Barbett commends the Powder made of
Turpentine, by boiling it in Water to hardness: he commends it as an excellent
thing upon his own Experience, being mixed with Unguent. Fuscum Wurtzii, or
Aegyptiacum: an actual Cautery also, says he, will be convenient.

XXV. The Cure will also be accelerated, if instead of Tents made of Lint,
Elder-pith be used; because it imbibes the thin and sharp Humors, by which the
Action of Nature is promoted.

XXVI. This is an experienced thing. Vng. Aegyptiacum ii. Tobacco in fine
powder ss. Euphorbium i. mix them, and apply it. You may daily wash it also
with Juice of green Tobacco, raised from Spanish seed, or with a Tincture of
dried Tobacco, drawn with S.V. or with Spiritus Vniversalis.

XXVII. If it is in the Cranium, it is not protuberant, yet you ought to make
inspection; and proceed accordingly by scraping, or the Trepan, as the Symptoms
shall indicate to you.

XXVIII. Those in the Jaws are visible, and require vent by extraction of the
Teeth: after which the Caries must be consumed or removed, by drying
Applications; of which the Actual Cautery is the most speedy and convenient.

XXIX. The Ulcers in the greater Bones, are to opened also; that the matter may
be discharged, and the Bone laid bare, in order to Exfoliation, if possible.

XXX. But if the interior part of it is corrupted, then it will be best to keep
that part of the Ulcer dilated which lies over the aperture, and in the Bone,
by some Dossel dipped in S.V. or Camphorated Spirit, or Tinctura Exfolians, and
to heal up the rest of the Ulcer; prescribing also such Internals, as may
dispose the Body to a better habit.

XXXI. For seeing that for the most part these Diseases arise from the
distemperature of the whole mass of Blood and Lympha; and that when one Cancer
is almost cured, another appears in some other place; therefore it is highly
necessary to have regard to the evil habit of the whole Body: for which
purpose, the following (or some suchlike) Medicine may be taken.

XXXII. Roots of Comfrey, Osmond-royal, China, Sarsaparilla, A. ii. bark of
Guajacum iv. Rhu^arb, Agarick, A.jss. Sena ijss. Cinnamon ss. Cloves ii. infuse
all in Barley-water lbxii. or q.s. then boil with a gentle Fire to lbviii.
Strain, and dulcifie with Syrup of Comfrey viii. and make an Apozem. Dose, iii,
iv, or v. to a Man or Woman: it Purges gently, hastens the Cure, and preserves
from farther mischief.

XXXIII. Those of the Fingers and Toes are to be laid open by Incision, in case
of Apostemation, the length of the Protuberance and the Bone cut into, or cut
out, as you see the case requires; and then the Caries dried up, with such
things as are before related. Mel Rosarum i. powder of Tobacco iii. Euphorbium,
Camphir, A. i. mix them.

XXXIV. The greater Bones will take more time to exfoliate them; and if the
rottenness begins within it, it will consume the very substance of them; so
that no Exfoliation can be expected, but a total removing of the Bone it self,
without which no Cure can be expected: and in this case, Nature it self is so
munificent, as sometime to supply the vacuum with some Callus, or Cartilaginous
substance.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of an ELEPHANTIASIS.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Elephantiasis, Lepra Ar^bum; and in
English, the Elephantiasis, or Elephantick Disease, the Arabian Leprosy.

II. The Name is derived from the Elephant; because those affected with this
Disease, have their Skin, and Members affected therewith tumid and swollen,
scaly, rough and rugged, full of lumps, and unequal, like to the rough skin of
Elephants. Of this Disease we have spoken at large, in the third Edition of Our
Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 6 cap. 15. so that little need be said of it here;
excepting what belongs to the Chirurgick part, which is contained in this
present Discourse.

III. Description. The Lips of such as are troubled with an Elephantiasis, are
made thick, and the Nose swells; so that it looks as if it were pressed down,
or become flat; the Ears become flaggy, and much wasted, the Jaw-bones are
colored as it were, and overspead with a certain kind of redness, and
Tubercles or swellings appear here and there in the Forehead, like as if they
were Horns or bunchings-out; the Cheeks and Face are also affected with a
certain roughness and redness; and the Chin it self is dilated, like as it is
in those that laugh.

IV. It is said to be indeed an universal Cancer of the whole Body,
comprehending under it many kinds of Diseases: so that this appears to be an
Affect greater than all other Diseases, and a Disease almost remediless and
incurable.

V. The Causes. Authors say, it arises from Atra-bilis joined with a malign
property, diffused and spread abroad through the whole Body.

VI. But doubtless it is caused through a Discrasy of the Blood and Lympha,
defiled with a kind of Arsenical or stinking Sulphur, and a malign Vitriolick
Salt; which being conveyed with the Blood and Lympha all over the whole Body,
and altering the Ferment thereof every where, causes this so universal a
defilement.

VII. The Antecedent cause is from a hot and dry distemper of the Viscera, and
Parts destinated for Nutrition: from whence it is, that the Blood and Lympha
are as it were burnt, or very much altered, by the evil Ferment of the Parts;
and they being changed, make in their distribution, that universal change through
the whole Body, which is usually seen in the progress of this Disease.

VIII. The Procatartick Cause is a lewd, debauched, luxurious, libidinous and
evil course of Life: the frequent and common use of salt Meats: as also the
much eating of great quantities of Sugar, and of sharp and sour things, or
Meats overgross and thick, eating of Mans-flesh, and the like.

IX. To this add the Habit of the Air; for this Disease being mostly Endemical,
it is chiefly to be found in some particular parts of the World: where it is
thought the Air contributes much to its beginning, growth, and increase; as in
Egypt, Palestine, Arabia, Africa, Spain, in some parts of Italy and Germany,
and in Narbon and Aquitane in France: as also the Air in which Elephantiack
persons breathe; for that the Disease is affirmed to be certainly contagious.

X. The Kinds. It is said to be twofold: 1. General; of the whole Body, which
is called Elephantiasis Graecorum, or Lepra Arabum; of which we speak in this
Chapter. 2. Particular; which only affects a Part, and is called Elephantia, or
Elephantiasis Arabum; of which we shall (God willing) speak in the next Chapter.

XI. The Signs. Celsus, lib. 3. cap. 25. has given you the whole Idea of this
Malady, which you may see at large in Our Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 6. cap. 17.
sect. 7. to which we refer you: and Sennertus has given you a larger
enumeration of the attending Symptoms: all which you may see in the place
afore-cited, from Sect. 8. to 14.

XII. To these aforesaid Signs, declared by those Authors, we add these
following: 1. There is an augmentation of Magnitude in most parts of the Body;
it being swelled up and down, especially in the external Parts; whose beauty,
feature, and figure are thereby corrupted.

XIII. 2. There is also a hot and dry Distemper, by which the Parts of the Body
are made uneven and rough, and as it were exulcerated and corrupted.

XIV. 3. There is also in Men a suppression of the Hemorrhoids, where they have
been usual, and long accustomed; and in Women, a stoppage of their Terms or
Courses: or the sudden drying up of some long-continued running Ulcer; whose
Humor being detained in the Body, grows worse and worse, and at length acquires
Malignity; which insinuating it self into the Veins, infects and taints the
whole mass of Blood.

XV. 4. When this Disease is first invading the Patient, there goes before it,
and is present, a sluggishness, or slothfulness, with a slow and difficult
breathing; a stinking Breath, unfitness for motion; a daily and continual
Costiveness of the Belly, and the Urine is like unto Beasts Urine; as Horses,
Bullocks, Oxen, and an extreme proneness to Venery.

XVI. 5. The Voice is hoarse and obscure; by reason that the Lungs, and parts
serving to Respiration, are filled or oppressed with thick and adust Humors:
and by reason also of the dryness and roughness of the Trachaea Arteria.

XVII. 6. The Veins under the Tongue swell, and become blackish; and the
Glandules which lie near unto the Tongue, and round about it, have in them
round Tubercles, like unto the Scrophulae in Swine, or those which we call the
Swine-pox.

XVIII. 7. In a word, the whole Body is defiled with an exceeding great
pollution, and a great deformity attends every part thereof: it wants either in
its figure or shape, b^ing either greater or less than it should be, in all its
Members. The surface of the Sain is changed, being red and discolored, hard,
scur^fy, and full of little Tubercles, not much unlike the Elephants hide or
Lion's forehead: the Voice is altered, and sometimes almost gone; and the
Breath so abominable, as not to be endured.

XIX. The Prognostics. This Disease is said to be wholly incurable, unless
taken in its beginning; and then it is performed with very much difficulty,
great trouble, and a tedious application of Medicines; for that few Medicines
are found, that can subdue and conquer the malignity thereof.

XX. And by reason that this Disease discovers not it self soon, nor is at all
manifest, 'till it has taken deep root, and tainted all the Blood and Humors
with the greatest Malignity; so that it has (as I may say) fixed it self through
all the Bowels, and the whole Foundation of the Fleshy Mass, and even
corrupting them throughout, for these Reasons, it is esteemed by all Authors to
be incurable.

XXI. But yet, as it would be great folly to attempt this Cure where the
Disease is inveterate, or has been of long standing, so as that it has
corrupted the whole Body: so it would be as great a weakness and inhumanity, to
deny our help and assistance, for the Cure of such as only seem to be affected
therewith, but are indeed not so diseased; or where it is yet but in its
infancy, or beginning.

XXII. Actius, Tetrab. 4. sermon. 1. cap. 120. says, Humanum enim, and plenum
benevolentiae signum est, in extremis malis, etiam usque ad Experimenta venire,
ad difficultatem Affectionis compescendam: viz. For (says he) it is humane, and
a great sign of good nature, in the greatest extremities, or the worst of
Diseases, to make such Trials as may possibly tend to the benefit of the Sick.

XXIII. The Cure. For, what Diet is necessary, or what things are to be
avoided; we shall refer you to the third Edition of Our said Synopsis
Medicinae, lib. 6. cap. 17. sect. 26. ad 31. and come now immediately to the
Medicinal and Chirurgick Cure.

XXIV. The Humor ought often to be evacuated, which let be chiefly with
Mercurial Preparations: and outwardly a Cataplasm of green Tobacco, mixed with
powder of Bay Berries q.s. is to be laid all over the Belly, and kept there so
long as the Patient can conveniently endure it: for it works both upwards and
downwards, and purges the whole universal Man; evacuating all offending Humors,
of what kind soever.

XXV. And this Application is to be repeated; and that so often as the age,
strength, habit of Body, and condition of the Sick will permit.

XXVI. But the most potent of all internal Remedies, are such as operate by
Salivation; because they drain away all the impure Lympha in the whole Body;
thoroughly purge and alter all the Mass of Humors, and do as much as is possible
to be done by any kind of Evacuating-Medicines.

XXVII. And though by this way the Humors and Juices are much sweetened, and
altered; yet it is to be imagined, by reason the Disease is so deeply fixed in
the fleshy Mass and Humors, that one single Salivation cannot perform a
complete Restoration; but that it must be many times, and often repeated,
sometimes by Internals only, and sometimes by Externals, as by Unction: because
the whole substance of the Flesh, and the Skin also, seem to be thoroughly
defiled therewith.

XXVIII. And by reason this kind of Operation much weakens the Body, there is
to be that distance of time between each Salivation, as that the Patient may be
restored, and gather a competency of strength again: for to continue it too
long, or to repeat it too soon, one time after another, are equally
disadvantageous to the deplorable Patient.

XXIX. For Alteratives, we commend the Viper-pouder, to be taken i. at a time,
every Night going to bed, when the course of Salivation is over; or in the
times between each Salivation: and every Morning fasting, the Potestates
Viperarum; which may be given, a gutt. 20. ad 40. in Mead, or clarified Whey,
or some other proper Liquor or Vehicle.

XXX. To these things we may add, native Cinnabar, Tincture of Antimony,
Mercurius Diaphoreticus, Bezoar-mineral, powder of Toads-flesh, (long to be
continued, because it is a Specific) the powder and ashes of Kites-flesh,
wonderfully commended by Sennertus; and the Specific of Vitriol, so much
extolled by Hartman: which may be given singularly, or rather alternately;
because Nature delights in variety and change, and that for a long time
together.

XXXI. But for Alteratives, nothing seems to have more and greater effects than
the Tincture of Luna, and Aurum potabile; which have a power to alter and
change, cleanse and purify the whole mass of Blood and Humors, after a very
admirable manner; and to drink withal, for some considerable time, the Decoctum
Vlmi, as ordinary Drink, because it seems to be specific in this Cure.

XXXII. Barley-broth made with Vipers-flesh, taken for many Months together, is
a singular Experiment. And because the whole Diet in this Cure ought to be
cooling and moistning, and withal cleansing, we commend Whey clarified with
Fumitory, or with Borrage and Bugloss, Endive and Succory, Sorrel, and
sharp-pointed Dock, Purslane, Lettice, etc.

XXXIII. And Sennertus says, that this Disease more than any other, seems to
require as it were variety, and an interchange of Remedies; and also certain
cessations and intermissions, from all sorts of Medicines: and then the same
are to be used again afresh, and new ones are to be added; for that scarcely
ever any one did recover of this Disease, that placed the hope of Cure in one
only Preparation, though it were never so generous and prevalent.

XXXIV. Thus much for Internals: we now come to Topics; among which Sennertus
commends a Bath of fair Water, in which the Patient may sit up to the Neck for
the space of one hour. But, says he, the Bath ought to be so temperate, that no
Sweat may be caused, either in the Bath, or after the going out of it: for if
any Sweat is caused, it is a sign that the Bath is hotter than it ought to be.

XXXV. It Is true that many Physicians send their Patients to the Natural and
Mineral Waters, and hot Baths; but because they dry vehemently, they many times
do more hurt than good; especially at the beginning of the Disease, whilst the
heat and dryness are at highest.

XXXVI. And therefore a Bath of sweet fair Water is thought to be more proper
and safe; because it tempers the dryness, discusses the Excrements of the
external habit, and looseneth the Skin: but it ought often to be repeated, even
twice a day, and that for several Months together.

XXXVII. And every time owning out of the Bath, the Skin ought to be anointed
with some fat thing; as Vipers-grease, Man's-fat, Oil of Toads, Oil of Ben,
etc. to keep the Skin soft and smooth: or a cooling Ointment may be made of the
juices of Nightshade, Henbane, Hemlock, and Poppies, for the same purpose.

XXXVIII. Some commend the p^der of the roots or leaves of ^ack (...), as much
as the quantity of a large gray Pea, or somewhat more, to be put into a new cut
Issue, whether in the Arm, Shoulder, or any other proper place; and to be kept
therein for some considerable time, as the Artist shall see convenient; viz.
'till it causes a very great Tumor, and mighty Flux of Humors to drain through
the same.

XXXIX. This Application is so powerful, that it needs not twice to be
repeated; and it attracts the Humors so powerfully from all parts of the Body;
and so plentifully, that no Salivation is comparable to it; nor yet any other
kind of Evacuation, whether inward or outward: and being used in many other
Diseases, it will never cease running, 'till all the Morbisick-matter is
perfectly drawn away: for it completely drains all evil, corrupt and malign
Humors, from all parts of the whole entire Man.

XL. Places full of Scurf, Scales, and dry Scabs may in time of Bathing be
often rubbed with common Soap, to loosen them, bring them off, and dry them:
and the largest Scales, and such as stick fast, Wiseman rubs with the
Caustick-stone; which did not only hasten their falling off, but also scowrs
the Skin excel-

XLI. And where the bigger Scabs separate, there remains for the most part a
discoloring, and little Excrescencies of Flesh, by which those Scabs were held
so close on, as if they were nailed fast: these Excrescencies he rubbed off
with the Caustick-Stone, and where there was occasion, dressed the Parts with
Unguent. Tutiae, or Ointment of Litharge.

XLII. He also Bathes in warm Water, rubbing the Body with Balls of Wheat-bran
and Soap; which he continues for several days, till the Body seems to be clear.
Sometimes he Bathes in warm Water, wherein he dissolves a small quantity of
corrosive Sublimate; and alternately uses Salivation for twenty or thirty days
together, repeating the Salivation with Turpethum minerale and Vnguentum
Neapolitanum by turns, till the surface of the whole Body is cleansed of all
its Defilements.

XLIII. From what has been said it appears, that other Baths than that of fair
Water may be used; as a Lixivium of Quicklime, Spiritus universalis made very
weak, a Decoction of Flowers of Sulphur and Salt of Tartar in fair Water, a
Decoction of Hellebor-roots; a Solution of Saccharum Saturni, Nitre, or white
Vitriol in fair Water; a Decoction of Tobacco, and the like.

XLIV. These things alter the Humors very much, and overcome the Malignity
almost to a wonder: but because they dry vehemently, therefore several Authors
speak much against them.

XLV. But there is no Argument against Experience. I know them to do good upon
my own Experience; and there is nothing to be objected against them, but their
great drying property: to remedy which, we prescribe: 1. To Bathe with these
kinds of Baths one time, and then with simple fair Water another time; and so
to use them alternately. 2. After bathing with them, to anoint all the whole
Body with Oil of Ben, rubbing it very well in; or using some other sweet and
cooling Oil, or Ointment.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the ELEPHANTIASIS of a PART.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Elephantia, vel Elephantiasis
Arabum; in English, The Elephantiasis of a Part.

II. Definition. It is a preternatural, irregular, and cancerous Tumor of the
Feet; deforming them, and making them thick and bulky, not much unlike to
Elephants Feet.

III. The Causes. It is said to be caused originally from Varices, and to arise
from Melancholic and Phlegmatic Blood; or rather, the Recrements of the
Bloody-juice, settling upon the depending Parts; as the Legs, Ancles, Feet.

IV. The Signs. Haly Abbas, in Theoric. lib. 8. cap. 18. says, Vlcera quae in
Pedibus and Cruribus siunt, Elephas vocantur; and Elephanticus Morbus Apostema
est Melancholicum, quod in Cruribus fit and Pedibus; and ejus si^num est, quod
Pedis figura Elephanti figurae similis sit: viz. Those Ulcers which arise in
the Feet and Legs are called Elephas; and the Elephantick Disease is a
Melancholy Tumor or Swelling, arising in the Legs and Feet; and the sign
thereof is this, that the shape or figure of the Foot, resembles the form of an
Elephants Foot.

V. The Foot, or Leg, and sometimes both, become a very great irregular Tumor,
and of an exceeding thickness: the Legs are tumid, and much swollen; very red
sometimes, sometimes wan and livid, and sometimes black.

VI. And besides the irregularity, this Tumor is sometimes full of little
Tubercles, and dry Scabs; and sometimes it is abounding with Ulcers.

VII. And as to its magnitude, it is often so great and irregular, that not
only the form of the Foot is lost, but also the Toes are so swallowed up and
hidden, as they can scarcely, and sometimes not at all be seen.

VIII. This kind of Disease you may often behold in Beggars, by the Highways,
and corners of Streets; who get their Livelihood, by begging in those public
and common places: I have often seen them as I have passed up and down
Cheapside, London; lying in the passage, to move peoples charity, as they gazed
on them.

IX. The Prognostics. It is difficultly cured without a long and continued
course of Physic; and if it once becomes inveterate, it is for the most
incurable: because that from all parts of the Body, abundance of Humors are
protruded, and thrust down thither.

X. The Cure. It is done by a long and continued evacuation of the
Morbifick-matter, with those things we have before mentioned in the Cure of an
Elephantiasis Graecorum, in the former Chapter.

XI. For unless those vicious Humors be often evacuated, and emptied forth of
the Body; and the evil disposition of the Bowels (from whence those Humors are
supplied) be corrected and amended, there can be no hopes of a Cure.

XII. The sum therefore of the Cure, consists in a long and continual course of
Physic, as is proper for so contumacious and rebellious an Affect, and a
perpetual evacuation of the Morbifick-matter; which can best be done with a
course of Salivating only, and often to be repeated at due intervals of time.

XIII. During the doing of which, the growth and increase of the Tumor is to be
prevented, by Medicaments partly astringent and drying, and partly by
Discussives and Resolvers, alternately used.

XIV. Of which kind are, Bawm, Camomil, Elder-leaves, Fennel; roots of round
Birthwort, Orrice; Gums, as Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Galbanum, Opopanax,
Sagapenum, a Cataplasm of green Tobacco-leaves raised from Virginia-Seed, which
is an admirable thing; an Amalgama of Saturn and Mercury, or Jupiter and
Mercury, etc.

XV. Amongst Compounds, there are Forestus his Cerate of Ammoniacum, Mynsicht
his Emplastrum de Galbano crocatum, Vigo his Emplastr. de Ranis with a fourfold
quantity of Mercury, a Plate of Lead besmeared with Quicksilver, Vng.
Nicotianae, Cosmeticum, ad Scabiem and Mercuriale, Empl. ad Strumam, and
Mercuriale, with many others of like kind.

XVI. To these things, add proper Baths, and often Bathing; according to the
Directions which we have given in the former Chapter; which are indeed not only
often, but for a long time to be repeated.

XVII. But if the Disease is so inveterate, as to be fixed and confirmed in the
Part, as to be out of all hopes of Cure, you have nothing more to do, but
constantly to apply palliative Remedies to the end of the Patient's life:
unless he will admit of that last and absolute means, to wit, Amputation; which
at once frees him from his Disease, and continued trouble together.

VII. TVMORS, Ex Partium decidentia.
CHAP. XL. Of RVPTVRES.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Ramex, Ruptura, Hernia; and in
English, a Rupture, or Bursteness.

II. The Kinds. The general kinds are three: viz. 1. Proper. 2. Common. 3.
Remote: as we have declared in Lib. 1. Cap. 8. aforegoing, of this Book.

III. The Proper are threefold: 1. Hernia Intestinalis: 2. Hernia Inguinalis:
3. Hernia Omentalis. The Common are sevenfold: 1. Hernia Humoralis: 2. Hernia
Seminalis, or Hernia Vasis deferentis: 3. Hernia Carnosa: 4. Hernia Varicosa:
5. Hernia Ventosa: 6. Hernia Aquosa. The Remote, are threefold; 1. Hernia
Vmbilicalis. 2. Hernia Vterina. 3. Hernia Gutturalis.

IV. Of the Proper, the Hernia Intestinalis is already treated of, both in Our
Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 5. cap. 14. and in general terms, in this present
Work, in lib. 1. cap. 8. of the common we have already handled; the Hernia
Carnosa and Hernia Varicosa, in our said Synopsis, lib. 5. cap. 17. a Hernia
Ventosa, in lib. 5. cap. 15. of the said Book, and in cap. 29. aforegoing of
this present Work; a Hernia Aquosa, in lib. 5. cap. 16. of the said Synopsis,
and in cap. 30. of this Book also; of the Remote, we have also handled; a
Hernia Vmbilicalis, in Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 5. cap. 18. a Hernia Vterina,
in lib. 5. cap. 72. of the same; and 1 Hernia Gutturalis, in cap. 26.
foregoing, of this third Book of Our Surgery.

V. But in regard we have been very brief in our Discourses of the Hernia
Intestinalis, and Umbilicalis in the places before cited; and something is
wanting in our treating of a Hernia Carnosa, we shall in this present Chapter
resume the same again, supplying that here, which was defective there; and
withal we shall now, treat of those other Hernia's of which in no other place,
in any of our Works, we have said any thing at all; though they fall not so
properly under the title of this Chapter.

VI. The thread then of the Discourse of this Chapter, will be concerning, 1. A
Hernia Intestinalis. 2. A Hernia Inguinalis. 3. A Hernia Omentalis. 4. A Hernia
Humoralis. 5. A Hernia Seminalis, or Hernia Vasis deferentis. 6. A Hernia
Carnosa. 7. And a Hernia Vmbilicalis: of all which in order.

I. Hernia Intestinalis.
VII. It is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Enterocele, Oscheocele, Hernia
Intestinalis, Hernia in Scroto, Hernia Peritonaei; in English, a Rupture of the
Peritonaeum, wherein the Guts fall into the Cods.

VIII. It is either perfect, when the Guts fall quite into the Scrotum; or
imperfect, when they fall down but part of the way, and this latter is called
only a Relaxation.

IX. The Peritonaeum is the Membrane that is either broken or relaxed, and
lines all the inside of the Abdominal Muscles; then passing to the Back, does
there involve, and give Coats to the Viscera: it is strong, and every where
double; in the duplicatures of which, all the Viscera are hid, and through which
all the Vessels do pass.

X. The lower part of it is the strongest, to enable the Belly the better to
bear the weight of the Intestines: and being every where double, admits not of
a perforation, for the transmission of the Seminal-vessels; but does so receive
them between its Coats, as that passing between the first Coat, leaves it every
where entire, even both at Navel and Groin: in which latter place, the Seminals
do take the outer Coat of the Peritonaeum along with them; which containing
them in it self, does at length make that Tunicle which involves the Testicle,
and is called Elytroides, or Tunica vaginalis.

XI. Here then, if the inward Lamina, or Coat is strong, it keeps the Guts and
Humors within the capacity of the Abdomen; so that though it is full of Water,
yet it transmits none into the Scrotum: for the watery Tumors of the Cods in
Hydropical persons are generally Anasarcous; as coming outwardly into the
Membranes of the Scrotum, and not passing from the cavity of the Abdomen
thither.

XII. But if this inward Lamina or Coat is through force, or any weakness broken
or relaxt; then the Intrails are protruded to the Scrotum; and if broken in the
top of the Process, the Bowels fall down into the lower parts of the Cod: but
if the said top of the Process suffers only a relaxation, then the Membrane
being extended contains the Guts, and that membranous Partition that lies
between the Guts and Scrotum, is visible.

XIII. The Causes. In Children it may proceed from much crudity or moisture,
vehement crying, struggling, and holding their Breath too strongly.

XIV. In elder persons it is caused from violent Exercise, jumping, leaping,
vaulting, falling from a high place, blows, carrying great burdens, hard
riding, vomiting, straining at stool, or exceeding great weight of the Bowels
in fat People.

XV. The Signs. If the Peritonaeum is broken, it is known by the sudden rise of
the Tumor; whether made by blow, fall, overstraining, and the like; in which
case, the Guts slide down into the Scrotum, or lie in a great Tumor in the
Groin.

XVI. If it is caused by a blow or fall, Blood is sometimes extravasated, and
the Tumor is painful, whether in the Groin or Cods, and it soon falls from the
Groin to the Cods; where, by laying your Hand upon the production of the
Peritonaeum, just at its going forth from the Abdomen; and withal causing the
Patient to sneeze or cough; you may distinguish it from a Sarcoma, or Hernia
carnosa, by perceiving the motion of the Gut, when it is there.

XVII. The Prognostics. In young Children it is easily cured, if carefully
managed; but in youths, with more difficulty: if under twenty, or while
growing, they are curable, though the Guts are fallen down into the Cods.

XVIII. In people of full growth, the edges of the Peritonaeum seldom or never
unite, because they many times grow callous: and if the Gut is not speedily
reduced, grievous pain succeeds, with Colic and Fever, because of the
detention of Excrements; from whence many times comes inflammation, vomiting of
Excrements, yea sometimes Gangrene, and Death it self.

XIX. If the Rupture is very large, the Guts many times do their duty, as
safely in the Scrotum, as if they were in their true and natural places in the
cavity of the Abdomen.

XX. If it is only a relaxation of the Peritonaeum, as it is least dangerous,
so it is the easiest cured of them all.

XXI. If a Hernia Intestinalis be neglected in Women-kind, it will make a round
Tumor near the Pudenda.

XXII. The Cure. In the first place, you must cause the Patient to lie upon his
Back, and endeavor the reduction of the Gut; let his Head be declining, and
his Hips raised high, causing his Heels to be drawn up to them.

XXIII. Then with your Hands, and warm Cloths, try to reduce it, by pressing
moderately and gradually upon it; but taking care withal, that you do not hurt
or bruise the Testicle.

XXIV. If it will not yield to these, there being a repletion of hard
Excrements, you must give Clysters of fat Broth, with much Salt; or
Posset Drink lbi. with brown Sugar iv. or the ordinary Turpentine-Clyster: or
this; I^ Fat Broth lbi. brown Sugar ii Aloes i. mix and dissolve, and exhibit
it warm; which repeat, till the Bowels are emptied.

XXV. In the mean season, foment the Scrotum with a Decoction of Camomil in
Whitewine, applying hot Stuphs dipped in, and s^eezed out of the Liquor; for some
considerable time: and if the Excrements seem to be hardened therein, soften it,
by applying after the Fomentation some emollient Cataplasm, made of Figs,
Onions, Lilly roots, and Mithridate.

XXVI. The Guts being thus emptied, let them be reduced as before directed; and
apply over the Part, Emplast. ad Herniam, or Our Empl. of an Ox-gall: Or this;
Loadstone in fine powder, Aloes, Dragons-blood, Bole Armoniack, Terra
sigillata, Crocus Martis astringens, Mastich, Olibanum, Sarcocolla,
Frankincense, A. ss. Ox-galls evaporated to the consistence of an Extract,
Turpentine, Wax, A. q.s. make an Emplaster; which apply, and renew it, when you
find it will stick no longer.

XXVII. Then bind up the Part with a Bag-truss, made with Bolsters stuffed with
Cotton, and fitted with a steel Spring to keep the Bowels up, and all things
close and firm. Or the Bolsters may be be fixed with steel Plates, having Worms
and Screws therein; by which the Bolsters may be made to sit closer, or or more
distant; and keep the Gut up, without pressing upon the Spermatick-vessels, or
Os Pubis: and these may also be useful in an old Rupture, and where the hopes
of Cure are vanished.

XXVIII. Where the Rupture is very large, through the often falling down of the
Bowels, a Bagtruss is to be proportioned, with a hole for the Penis to pass
through; which is to be put on whilst the Patient is in Bed, and in a declining
posture: by which means the falling down of the Bowels will be much hindered,
and the Patient much eased in his going abroad; and if he is young and growing,
may be in the possibility of getting a Cure.

XXIX. Rest is of exceeding great advantage to the Sick; and therefore the
Patient is required to keep his Bed 40 or 60 days: for by this means great
Ruptures have been cured, to which all other means had been applied in vain,
and the Patient accounted as desperate.

XXX. And if the Patient has any need to sneeze, or cough; and upon going to
stool, or any other violent motion, he ought to feel, and lay his Hand hard
upon the place affected; that if there should be any danger of a Prolapse, or
Relapse, it may thereby be prevented.

XXXI. As for Internals, and the remaining part of the Cure, we refer you to
Lib. 1. Cap. 8. of this Book; and to the third Edition of Our Synopsis
Medicinae, lib. 5. cap. 14. aforementioned, where you may have abundant
satisfaction: though after all, it is my belief that rest, lying in bed, and a
good Truss contribute more to the Cure, than all other things in the World,
whether inwardly given, or outwardly applied.

XXXII. For things inwardly given can never come to the Part, but pass with the
Ordure through the Bowels, without making any stay there: unless the virtue of
the Specific, by mixing it self with the Chylous Juice, and so joining with
the Blood, does by circulation approach thereto, when it is consigned for the
nourishment of the Part. Which Consideration, in my opinion, signifies not much
to the Cure; but only makes the Bloody and Nutritious Juices somewhat more
consolidative and agglutinating.

XXXIII. Nor can things outwardly applied come directly to the Part hurt, any
more than the other; there being the Scarfskin, Skin, Flesh, Membranes, etc.
between, and interposing between the substance of the Agglutinatives and the
Rupture it self.

XXXIV. If the Compress or Bolster sits uneasy, let a Quilt be made to lie
under it, or brown Paper doubled, and soaked in Smiths Forge-water, wherein
some Astringents have been boiled; by which the Truss will sit the easier, and
the better retain the torn or relaxed parts together, for their more speedy
agglutination.

XXXV. But if the Gut by reason of its long prolapsion, and the Excrements
being hardened therein, cannot be reduced by the methods before prescribed; let
the Patient be put into a half Bath, keeping on the Bag-truss the while: after
which, coming out of the Bath let him be set on his Head, or carried with his
Head downwards; by which means many times the prolapsed Bowels are often
reduced.

XXXVI. But if yet all endeavors should prove ineffectual, and the Patients
Life is in apparent danger; which is manifest by manifold Vomitings, Sickness
at Stomach, Inflation of the Belly, through the Patient's not going to stool; it
is better doubtless then to lay open the Production, whilst there is strength;
than to let the miserable Patient perish under the force of his Disease: since
the Operation may be done without any matter of difficulty or danger.

XXXVII. The way of doing it is thus. Lay the Patient flat on his Back, on a
Table or Form, and bind him thereon; then make incision upon the upper part of
the Scrotum, to the Production of the Peritonaeum; which must also be divided,
without touching the Guts or Omentum: then pass in a Cannula, like the common
Director, but as large as a Goose-quill, which put into the cavity under the
Process of the Peritoneum upwards, avoiding the Guts: then make an incision of
such a length as may be sufficient to put your Fingers into the Scrotum, and
raise the Intestines and Omentum, which then reduce into their natural places
within the cavity of the Abdomen.

XXXVIII. The Bowels being thus reduced, you must stitch up the Wound, as in a
Wound of the Abdomen, taking up with your Needle so much of the Production as
may shut up the Cavity, and hinder the falling down again of the Bowels. This
done, you must Cure the Wound, as we shall hereafter show in Lib. 4. following,
where we treat of Wounds of the Belly; this being not so large or dangerous, as
many of them are.

XXXIX. There are many other ways of doing this Operation, two of which are by
Incision; the first of which divides the length of the Process, laying the
Seminal Vessels bare: the other is Castration. There is another way, which is
by Puncture, taught by Paraeus; and two other ways also, the one by the Actual
Cautery, the other by the Potential: but as they are all of difficult
performance, with much hazard, and great cruelty; so we never meet with a
Patient which will submit to any of those ways of Cure; for which reason sake,
we here totally omit them.

II. Hernia Inguinalis.
XL. It is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Bubonocele, and Hernia Inguinalis;
in English, A Rupture in the Groin.

XLI. This is also either perfect, when the Peritonaeum or Rim as they call it,
is absolutely broken: or imperfect, when it is only stretched or extended.

XLII. It is a Tumor in the Groin, either of the Guts, or of the Omentum: the
latter of which we shall speak of under the next Head.

XLIII. The Causes. The Procatartick or remote Causes, are violent Exercises,
falls from high places, blows, strokes, leaping, wrestling, riding hard,
crying, vomiting, coughing, etc.

XLIV. The Antecedent Causes, are viscous and flatulent Humors, in great
abundance, with a great repletion of the Belly.

XLV. The Cause in Women, is many times a dilatation of the Membrane in Travel;
or because of a transition of the Ligamenta Vteri teretia, which pass between
the Laminae or duplicature of the Peritonaeum, after the same manner as the
Seminal Vessels do in Men.

XLVI. The Signs. If there is a Rupture of the Peritonaeum, the Tumor is the
greater, more difficult to be reduced; and in the reduction, you may many times
hear a little kind of noise.

XLVII. But if it is only relaxed or extended, it is known by the smalness of
the Swelling, and its more easy reduction with the Fingers.

XLVIII. The Prognostics. Where it is broken, it is of difficult cure;
Children and growing people may be cured; Old people never.

XLIX. If the Rupture is large, and the Intestines come much forth, and has
been long unreduced; being filled either with Wind, or hardened Excrements, or
both, the reduction will be difficult and painful, and sometimes hazardous to
the Life of the Patient.

L. The relaxed Membrane is much more easily cured; as we hinted in the same
case, in a Rupture in Scroto.

LI. The Cure. First use Fomentations, emollient and discutient Cataplasms; and
then strive to reduce it with your Fingers.

LII. After which, apply a Catagmatick, or an Astringent or Agglutinative
Emplaster; which keep close to it, with either a Whale-bone, or Steel Truss,
made with fit Bolsters for the compression of the Tumor; as is taught in the
foregoing Discourse.

LIII. Inwardly give Vulneraries, and strong Agglutinatives; and let the
Patient rest, and be quiet, keeping his bed for 40 or 50 days; performing the
rest of the Cure exactly as in an Oscheocele, before described.

III. Hernia Omentalis.
LIVE. It is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Epiplocele, Hernia Zirbalis, and
Hernia Omentalis; in English, A Rupture of the Peritonaeum, wherein the Omentum
or Caul breaks forth.

LV. This is twofold; 1. Into the Groin. 2. Into the Cods: and these are both
of them either a complete Rupture of the Membrane, or a relaxation of the same.

LVI. The Causes are the same with the Hernia Intestinalis; whether it is
Oscheocele or Bubonocele.

LVII. The Signs. It is known by its softness, inequality, and slipperiness of
the Tumor: it is also of a continued bigness, whether the Patient is full or
empty.

LVIII. The Prognostics. It is not dangerous: yet by reason of its softness
and slipperiness, it is, after reducing, difficultly retained within it, proper
place; but in Children, it is of easy cure.

LIX. And it is more easily cured in such Bodies whose Habits are humid and
sanguine, than in such as are dry and melancholic: but if the Tumor is small
and recent, and only in the Groin, the Cure is not difficult, be the Habit of
the Body what it will.

LX. The Cure. Whether it is in the Cod or in the Groin, the Method of Cure is
exactly the same with the Hernia Intestinalis, and Hernia Inguinalis
aforegoing: Rest, Lying-abed, and a good Truss being the chief: so that no more
need be said here.

IV. Hernia Humoralis.
LXI. It is called Greek, (...). in Latin, Hernia humoralis; in English, An
Humoral Tumor of the Cods.

LXII. Concerning this Tumor, Sennertus, Med. Pract. lib. 3. par. 9. sect. 1.
cap. 7. has these words: Recentiores hic adhuc unam Herniae speciem addunt,
quam Humoralem vocant, eamque ab omnibus Humoribus, excepta Bile, provenire
statuunt. Verum si a Sanguine sit hic Tumor, and quidem cum Inflammatione,
pertin^t ad Inflammationem Scroti and Testium, de qua supra dictum: viz. Modern
Physicians (says he) do here to these add one other species of a Hernia, which
they call a Humoral Hernia; and make the same to proceed from all Humors,
Choler only excepted. Now if this Tumor proceeds from Blood, with Inflammation,
it is a Phlegmon of the Cods and Testicles; of which before.

LXIII. From this of Sennertus it appears, that a Hernia humoralis is nothing
more nor less, but a Phlegmon of the Cods and Testicles; which may be either
simple, or an Oedematodes, if Phlegm is mixed with it.

LXIV. The Causes. These are the same with other Phlegmons, of which we have
treated at large in Chap. 5. aforegoing of this Book.

LXV. The Signs. It is known by the Tumor, Color, Heat, Pain; and other
Symptoms of an Inflammation.

LXVI. The Prognostics. It is a Disease long in curing, the Part being cold
and membranous; sometimes it discusses and resolves, sometimes it comes to
Suppuration; if it continues long, it is of dangerous consequence, for it
corrupts the Testicle.

LXVII. Cure. First, the Cure is to be attempted by Discussives and
Resolutives; and then gentle Purging, with Bleeding, ought to be administered:
the Sick may also be purged by proper Clysters, which are often to be repeated:
a Vomit with Turpethum minerale, is good.

LXVIII. And in this Cure, as in the other Hernia's, Rest, with lying in Bed,
are material Expedients; together with a Bag-Truss to hold up the Testicles,
and such other Medicaments as the nature and accidents of the Tumor require.

LXiX. But if you find it will not discuss nor resolve, you must change the
Applications, and use (...) things as will promote the Suppuration; then make
incision in the side of the Cod, after cleanse the Ulcer, and consolidate the
Wound, exactly as we have taught in the Cure of a Phlegmon: so that nothing
more need be said of that matter in this place.

LXX. If afterward there remains a hardness, you must resolve it by
Discussives and Emollients; as Avicen advises: Crumbs of houshold-wheaten Bread,
boil them in Oxymel, and add a sixth part of Gum Ammoniacum; which mix, and
boil to the thickness of a Cataplasm: apply it warm, and remove it twice every
day.

V. Hernia Seminalis.
LXXI. It is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Spermatocele, Hernia Vasis
deferentis, Hernia Seminalis; and in English, A Tumor of the Cods, proceeding
from an Afflux of the Seed.

LXXII. The Kinds. It is twofold: 1. Spermatocele, or Hernia Vasis deferentis;
when the Vas deferens falls twisted into the Scrotum. 2. When there is a great
afflux of the Seed to the Testicles, in persons abounding with that Humor.

LXXIII. The Causes. The Procatartick Cause, is high Feeding of things greatly
nourishing, Idleness, and Dalliance. The Antecedent Cause, is Seed not being
timely or sufficiently evacuated. And the Conjoined Cause, is Seed contained
in, and distending the the Vas deferens, and other Seminal Vessels.

LXXIV. The Signs. It is known, by feeling where the Vas deferens is fallen
into the Cod; in the latter case, it is more difficult to know: the person is
at first extremely lecherous, and desirous of Coition.

LXXV. But that failing, the Testicles begin to swell, and the Tumor gradually
increases, with a dull kind of pain, and heaviness of the Cods: this still
increasing, puts the Patient to a trouble in going.

LXXVI. And as the Tumor increase, the pain increases. At the first, the
Scrotum is lank, and one Testicle feels tumified and swelled: and though
possibly, both Testicles may be swelled in this Disease, yet the Affect seldom
seizes more than one Stone; which is for the most part the left, but sometimes
the right only.

LXXVII. And if no stop be put to the Disease, the Cods grow to an incredible
bigness. I once saw a Hernia Seminalis, which was bigger than any Ostriches
Egg, as big as little Child's Head; which being opened by Incision, it
discharged nearly a quart of Seed, or some other thin Humor, not much unlike
whites of Eggs.

LXXVIII. The Prognostics. It is of difficult cure, unless recent: but if
inveterate, and the Tumor is very great, it is cured with much trouble and
pains, and seldom without Section.

LXXIX. Where the Disease has been of long standing, though the Patient meets
with a Cure, yet it leaves the Part so weak, that it is apt to return again;
unless great care is taken in preventing it.

LXXX. The Cure. If it is from the Vas deferens falling down twisted into the
Cod: let the Patient lie backwards, and with your Hands you will easily reduce
it, without any farther inconvenience in it.

LXXXI. The Method of Curing has nothing peculiar in it self; but you must
contrive such Bands, as may keep reduced the fallen down Parts, in their right
places, without hurting the sound ones.

LXXXII. But in this, as in an Enterocele, Rest, keeping Bed for some time, and
a strait Bag-truss, are of essential moment.

LXXXIII. If it is in the latter case, whilst it is recent, if the Man be
unmarried, Marriage ought to be proposed; because that effectually takes away
the Conjoined Cause.

LXXXIV. Then due Purging, both upwards and downwards; and to be reiterated
every day, or every other day many times, according to the strength of the
Patient, 'till there is an apparent diminution of the Tumor.

LXXXV. You may Vomit with Vinum benedictum, or Tartar emetick; but nothing is
equal in this case to Turpethum minerale, which is to be often repeated:
afterward, or between whiles, let the Patient purge with Catharticks, which
evacuate the Pituitous Humor.

LXXXVI. And outwardly, Discussives and Resolutives are to be applied: but this
only while the Disease is recent, and the Tumor small, together with rest and
ease, and a strait Bag-truss.

LXXXVII. But if the Tumor is grown so great, as that none of the other things
will have any effect, there will be then a necessity of doing the Work by
Section; thereby to discharge the Part of the abounding Humor, as in the Case
before mentioned we have declared: afterward the aforegoing Methods must be
pursued, and the Wound healed up, as before declared.

LXXXVIII. But it ought not to (...) perfectly healed up, but a (...) is to be
left in the bottom of^ the Scrotum; which is to be k^pt open either with a
Cannula, or a Tent, for some considerable time; 'till the ultimate of the
Matter is drawn forth, and the Testicle, and whole Part, seem to be restored to
their due form and strength: otherwise a Relapse is to be feared, and then the
work will be to be done over again.

VI. Hernia Carnosa.
LXXXIX. It is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Sarcocele, Ramex carnosus,
Hernia carnosa; and in English, A Fleshy Rupture of the Cods.

XC. Definition. It is a Sarcoma, or lump of Flesh growing to, or round about
the Testicle; which in outward appearance is hard, and many times of a
Scirrhous nature or disposition.

XCI. The Causes. It is caused from a Rupture of some of the Capillary Vessels
of the Part, by which Blood flows more than ordinarily to the Testicles and
Cods; which not being protruded in to the Capillary Mouths of the Veins, is by
the Plastick-power converted into the substance of the Flesh.

XCII. The Signs. Though it is possible to affect both Testicles, yet it commonly
seizes but one, and that, Authors will have to be the right; because Nature
does more easily cast out the Blood to it, by the Seminal Vein, springing from
the Vena Cava.

XCIII. It grows by little and little, the Testicle growing every where
greater; and is known by a hard Swelling, which may be felt with the Fingers;
sometimes with a little pain, but many times without any pain at all,
especially if it is Scirrhous.

XCIV. It is distinguished from a Rupture of the Peritonaeum, or Guts; because
in this, there is no swelling in the Groin, as there is always in that.

XCV. The Prognostics. It is of difficult cure, though it be recent; but
uncurable, if inveterate; unless it be done by Section.

XCVI. If it has been indeed of long continuance, and grown very great; it is
apt to degenerate into a Scirrhus, or Cancer; according to the habit of the
Body, and disposition of the Humor abounding.

XCVII. The Differences. It is twofold: 1. One, in which the Sarcoma, or fleshy
substance sticks close to the Testicle, and cannot be separated, without taking
away Testicle and all. 2. Another, in which the Sarcoma completely involves the
Testicles; but is round about loose from it, so that it may be separated and
cut off, without any hurt to the Stone it self.

XCVIII. The Cure. While it is recent and very young, the Patient is to Purge
often, and also Vomit; which is more especially performed by Turpethum
minerale, which is indeed accounted as a Specific in this case: afterward,
powder of Restharrow-roots, and Opiates are to be given every night.

XCIX. And outwardly, things repercussive and drying are to be applied; or
Empl. de Ranis, with a fourfold quantity of Mercury, or our Empl. Mercuriale.

C. Anointing with Mercurial Ointments also is good, over which you may apply
Ceratum de Galbano, Ceratum nigrum, Ceratum de Spermate Ceti, or Ceratum ad
Tophos, which exceeds them all.

CI. And besides these, the Emplastrum Mercuriale before mentioned, Our Empl.
ad Strumam, and Empl. Arthriticum, we commend upon our own experience; also Our
Diachylon with Gums, where it is but just begun.

CII. Add to all these things, a Bag-truss, which may tie up the Testicle very
straight; rest also, and lying in bed for 6 or 7 Weeks, without which, nothing
at all will be done.

CIII. But when it is manifest, that no Physical means, whether internal or
external will do, you must then positively attempt the Cure by Manual
Operation: and in doing this, you must consider whether the Sarcoma is fixed to
the Testicle, or hangs loose from it.

CIV. If the fleshy substance is fixed fast to the Testicle, so as it cannot be
separated, it is certain, that if you design a Cure, you must come forthwith to
Castration; (those other courses with Escaroticks, being both painful,
troublesome, and dangerous) the Method of which we have plainly taught in the
third Edition of Our Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 5. cap. 17. sect. 18, 19, 20.

CV. But if the Sarcoma be free from the Testicle, and the Testicle hangs loose
in it, (as for the most part it does) then having opened the Testicle longways,
you must gently draw forth the Sarcoma, with the Stone it self: and with a very
sharp Knife you must carefully make incision through the fleshy substance; but
with this caution, that you do not in the least touch the Testicle it self.

CVI. This done, with your Fingers turn out the Testicle; and cut the Sarcoma,
slitting it upwards, (on the same side you made the Incision) as high as you
can: then holding the Testicle upwards, (which is to be done by an Assistant)
let the Artist take all the Sarcoma into his left Hand underneath, and draw it
forth as far as he can conveniently; and he will find the whole substance to
hang upon a kind of Membrane, from which he may separate the Sarcoma, by an
Incision-knife in his right Hand, at one single cut: then replacing the
Testicle, he may heal it up as an ordinary Wound.

CVII. A Cure of this kind was done upon a Patient of mine, about three or four
years since: it was a Frenchman who did the Operation; and though the Patient
despaired of his Life, the French Surgeon did it with such an assurance,
that in about three minutes of time the Section was completed, and not with
the loss of two ounces of Blood, nor did the Man himself at all cry out: after
which, the Wound was healed in about a weeks time, and the Patient restored to
his perfect health. Where note, the Sarcoma here cut out, weighed four pounds
and a half, good weight.

VII. Hernia Vmbilicalis.
CVIII. It is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Omphalocele, and Hernia
Umbilicalis; in English, A Rupture of the Navel.

CIX. It is a breach of the Peritonaeum by the Navel, by which the Intestines
or Omentum, are thrust forth.

CX. The Cause. The Procatartick Cause is external violence, falls, blows,
coughing, crying, great straining at stool, vomiting, or otherwise, etc. The
Antecedent Cause, is a weakness of that part of the Membrane. And the Conjoined
Cause, is the Rupture or Breach it self.

CXI. The Kinds. It is twofold: 1. That in which the Intestines themselves
strut forth. 2. That in which the Omentum or Caul is protruded.

CXII. The Signs. It is known by the diversity of the Matter therein: if the
Intestine come forth, the Tumor is soft, unequal, and is put back into the
capacity of the Abdomen, with some noise or rumbling.

CXIII. But if it is the Omentum fallen into it, the Tumor is soft, and of the
same color with the rest of the Skin.

CXIV. The Prognostics. If it is recent, and in growing People, it is more
easily cured: but if it is in elder people, and inveterate, it is either
incurable, or with much difficulty.

CXV. If it is only distended, not broken, the Cure is the more easy: but if it
is broken, and the Rupture large, it will be the more hard to heal.

CXVI. The Cure. Let the Patient abstain from all violent Exercises; rest, and
for some time lie in bed; as also forbear all flatulent Meats and Drinks, or
Fruits which engender Wind.

CXVII. Then the Sick being laid upon their Back, make a reduction of the
Protrusion; and apply over it Emplast. ad Herniam, Catagmaticum, or some other
glutinative or astringent Medicine, with a good Truss, Bolsters, and Bandage.

CXVIII. If these things do (...), but the Sick seems to be uncurable, unless
it be done by Manual Operation; we will here show you the Method of doing it,
according to Celsus; by Surgery, or Manual Operation.

CXIX. Lay the Patient upon his Back, that the Intestine, or Omentum protruded,
may be put back again: then take hold of the Navel with a pair of Pincers, and
draw it forwards; then pass quite through it at the Basis a Needle with two
single Silk-Threds uncoloured; after which cut off the Thread by the
Needles-eye, and tying the ends together, bind the root of the Navel lifted up,
or pulled forwards, very strongly; that the part of it above the Ligature may
dye, and fall away.

CXX. But Fabricius ab Aquapendente, likes not so well of the former unpleasing
Operation; and proposes therefore to do it rather with a Truss, which he has
often proved; applying a Glutinative Emplaster, or binding Cerate spread upon
Leather. This Truss was made of double Dimity, or Linen Cloth: on the part of
which that covers the Navel, was a caveous Plate made like to a round Cake; in
the center of which was a little round knob of Lint, which goes into the breach
or dilatation of the Navel; to hinder the protruding Matter from coming forth
again; upon which knob of Lint was placed the aforementioned Cerate: the Truss
was then applied, and the Abdomen bound strait enough: from the Truss, went
Bands to pass over the Shoulders, to hinder it from falling down; and Straps on
the lower part of it, to go underneath the Cods, to keep it from rising up.

CXXI. An Observation. One thirty years old, and of a fat gross Body, had a
Hernia Umbilicalis, the bigness or breadth of the palm of a Hand: he had worn
the common Navel-trusses, which sat not steady, but pinched him there, nor kept
up the Rupture; his Belly being very great, and likely to suffer a greater
Rupture, if the weight of it was not timely born up. He had a Bracer made, to
lace in his whole Belly; under which a Bolster might be placed on the Navel; it
reached from the Pubes to the Cartilago ensiformis, and laced behind: under
this Empl. ad Herniam was put, with a quilted Bolster, wrought upon
Sole-leather, which was tackt to the Bracer. Wiseman.

CXXII. One of a full Body who had a Hernia Umbilicalis, through a defect in
Bandage had it much increased, with excoriation of the Skin; the Rupture in the
Peritonaeum was great, and the Omentum and Guts had made their way to the
external Skin of the Abdomen, which was worn very thin. The Excoriation was
dressed with Vng. Tutiae, etc. and a soft Compress applied between the Quilt and
Emplaster; and a Belly-piece was made, to bear the weight, and retain the
compression. Afterward a Bracer was made with a Bolster, to sit under the
Belly-piece, which retained the Rupture; and the Paient went daily abroad.
Wiseman. See more of this matter, in Lib. 1. cap. 8. sect. 35, ad 39.
aforegoing, of this Work.

EXPLICIT LIBER TERTIVS.
ARS CHIRVRGICA. Liber Quartus. OF WOUNDS.
The ARGUMENT.
I. Of Wounds in General. II. Of External Vulneraries. III. Of Internal
Vulneraries. IV. Of an Hemorrhage in Wounds. V. Of Extraneous things in Wounds.
VI. Of Stitching Wounds. VII. Of Binding up Wounds. VIII. Of Accidents in
Wounds; as Pain, Indigestion, Fainting, Convulsions, Palsy. IX. Of a Flux of
Humors. X. Of Hypersarcosis, or Proud Flesh XI. Of Wounds of Arteries and
Veins. XII. Of the Nerves and Tendons; by Bruising, Pricking, Cutting. XIII. Of
the Ligaments. XIV. Of the Limbs. XV. Of the Joints. XVI. Wounds with
Contusion. XVII. Wounds by Biting of Poisonous Creatures; as Mad-dogs, Vipers,
etc. XVIII. Wounds made with Poisonous Weapons. XIX. Wounds by Gunshot in
General. XX. Accidents in Gunshot Wounds. XXI. Gunshot Wounds in the Thorax.
XXII. Gunshot Wounds in the Belly. XXIII. Gunshot Wounds in the Limbs or
Joints. XXIV. Burnings and Scaldings. XXV. Wounds of the Head without the
Scull. XXVI. Wounds of the Temporal Muscles. XXVII. Of the Meninges of the
Brain. XXVIII. Of the Brain. XXIX. Of the Face. XXX. Of the Eyes. XXXI. Of the
Ears. XXXII. Of the Nose. XXXIII. Of the Mouth and Tongue. XXXIV. Of the Neck.
XXXV. Of the Windpipe and Gullet. XXXVI. Of the Vessels of the Thorax. XXXVII.
Of the Breast and Heart. XXXVIII. Of the Back, and Spinal Marrow. XXXIX. Of the
Lungs. XL. Of the Liver and Spleen. XLI. Of the Stomach. XLII. Of the Belly.
XLIII. Of the Guts. XLIV. Of the Reins. XLV. Of the Bladder. XLVI. Of the Womb.
XLVII. Of the Yard. XLVIII. Of the Fingers and Toes.

CHAP. I. Of WOVNDS in General.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...), plu. (...). in Latin, Vulnus, plu.
Vulnera; and in English, a Wound, Wounds.

II. The Definition. A Wound is the Solution of Continuity or Unity; new,
bloody, and without putrefaction, made by external force: and this, as Joel
says, may be by erosion, incision, cutting off, puncture, biting, impulsion,
contusion, fraction, rupture, distention, contusion, collision, and the opening
of a closed Orifice.

III. Differences. 1. The first Difference arises from the place wounded; and
so a Wound is said to be External, happening to any external part of the Body:
or Internal, happening, and penetrating into the Viscera; as the Brain,
Stomach, Lungs, Heart, Liver, Spleen, Guts, Reins, Bladder, Womb, and the like.

IV. 2. The second Difference arises from the accidents of a Wound, and so it
is said to be simple or complex: a Simple Wound is that to which no other
Disease, or Symptom is joined, and without contusion or loss of Substance. A
Complex Wound, is that which is compounded with some other Disease; as
fracture, dislocation, etc. or some other Symptoms, as contusion, loss of
substance, intemperature, ill conformation of the Part wounded, rotting,
inflammation, flux of Humors, proud Flesh, etc.

V. 3. The third Difference arises from the Effect, or Event; according to
which a Wound is said to be, 1. Safe, and of easy cure; which happens to the
Skin, and fleshy parts. 2. Malign, and of difficult cure; which happens to the
Nerves, Ligaments, Bones, and several of the Bowels. 3. Mortal; which are such
as happen to the Brain, Heart, Lungs, Liver, Diaphragma, etc.

VI. 4. The fourth Difference arises from the manner of inflicting it, or the
variety of the Weapon wounding: and so it is, 1. By Chopping or Cutting with a
sharp-edg'd Tool. 2. By a Puncture, with a sharp-pointed Instrument. 3. By a
Bullet shot out of a Gun. 4. By Biting, with the Teeth of Man or Beast. 5. By
Stinging of Bees, Wasps, Hornets, etc. 6. By Falling from an High place, or
from an Horse. 7. By Contusion with a blunt Instrument; wherein the Skin may be
either broken, or not broken. 8. By Burning with Live-coals, or other things
red-hot 9. Scaldings with Water, Oil, Pitch, Tar, running Lead, etc. 10. By
application of Caustic Medicaments.

VII. 5. The fifth Difference is taken from the Part wounded: and so one Wound
is said to be of the Head, another of the Eyes, another of the Nose; others of
the Arms, Back, Breast, Belly, Sides, Liver, Spleen, Womb, Bladder, Legs, Feet,
Nerves, Ligaments, Joints.

VIII. 6. The sixth Difference is taken from the Site of the Wound: from whence
it is said to be, 1. Right, according to the Longitude of the Part: or 2.
Transverse, according to the Latitude of the Part: or 3. Oblique, which is in a
medium, between the other two.

IX. The Causes. And these are all sorts of External Instruments, or other
matters, which by accident or otherwise, are able to make a Solution of
Continuity or Unity: from whence, that made with a Sharp-edged Instrument, is
called a Cut; with a Pointed Instrument, a Stab; with a Club, by a Blow, a
Contusion.

X. Signs. 1. A Wound of the Arteries is known by the Blood coming forth; which
is yellowish, hot, and thin; flowing forth violently, and with leaping.

XI. 2. A Wound of the Veins, chiefly of the greater, is known by its bleeding
thick and red Blood; coming forth constantly and smoothly, without leaping.

XII. 3. If the great Arteries and Veins of the Thorax are hurt, there is an
immoderate flux of Blood, want of Sense, cold Sweats, Swooning, and Death
follows, often in a few Hours.

XIII. 4. If the Nerves are wounded, it is known, 1. From the Place; Anatomy
showing in what Members the chief Nerves are inserted. 2. From the great Pain,
causing Pulsation, Inflammation, Convulsion, and Frenzy: except the Nerve be
cut in sunder, and then the Symptoms are not so vehement.

XIV. 5. If the Recurrent Nerves are wounded, there follows loss of Speech,
Sense, and Motion, without recovery.

XV. 6. If the Tendons are wounded, the Signs and Symptoms are much the same,
as when the Nerve is wounded; and are chiefly distinguished by the place.

XVI. 7. If the Ligaments, and Membranes covering the Bones, viz. the
Periosteum and Pericranium are wounded; the Signs are the same almost, as if
the Nerves and Tendons were wounded, but the Symptoms are not full out so
vehement.

XVII. 8. A Wound near the Joints, gives fear that a Tendon is hurt; because
the Tendons terminate near the Joints.

XVIII. 9. A Poisoned Wound is known by vehement Pain, and a livid color;
becoming suddenly black, having Symptoms more violent than might be expected,
from the quality of the Wound, as Burning over the whole Body, Faint-ing,
Swooning, Trembling Frenzy, etc.

XIX. 10. The biting of a Mad-dog, is accompanied with anger, complaining,
sadness, discontent, Vertigo, distention of the Members, foaming in the Fits,
gnawing of the Stomach, abhorring of Meat and Drink, fearfulness of Water.

XX. 11. Gunshot Wounds are accompanied with Contusion, Pain, Inflammation,
Trembling, Convulsion, and sometimes with Gangrene and Sphacelus.

XXI. 12. If the Meninges of the Brain are wounded, there are most sharp Pains;
especially upon the moving of the Jaws, with frequent vomiting, and sobbings,
or sighings, and a profusion of Blood.

XXII. 13. If the substance of the Brain is wounded, Blood comes forth many
times by the Nose and Ears; with vomiting Choler, voiding of Excrements, a
ghastly Face, senselesness, and a Fever: and in a little time after,
Convulsion, Delirium, or Raving, and Death.

XXIII. 14. If the Marrow of the Backbone is wounded, there is a Convulsion,
which takes away sense and motion, senseless evacuations of Excrements,
Putrefaction, and Death.

XXIV. 15. If the Gullet is wounded, there is difficult of breathing and
swallowing, with Hiccough, and a vomiting of Choler, Meat and Drink.

XXV. 16. If the Lungs are wounded, the Blood issuing forth is yellowish, and
frothy; with a Cough, difficulty of breathing, and pain on the wounded side,
yet lying thereon, is easiest.

XXVI. 17. If the Heart is wounded, there comes forth Blood thick and black,
Pulse weak, Face pale, universal Tremblings, cold Sweats, Swooning, and in
short time, Death.

XXVII. 18. If the Breast is wounded, the Air comes out at the Wound; and the
Patient finds the taste of things applied to the Wound, in his Mouth.

XXVIII. 19. If the Stomach is wounded, there follows Vomiting, Swooning,
Fainting, Sickness at Heart, and Death.

XXIX. 20. If the Membranous part of the Diaphragma is wounded, the Flank draws
up, pain is in the middle of the Back, difficulty of breathing, coughing, acute
Fever, raving, and death: but if it is hurt in the Fleshy part only, there is
hope of life.

XXX. 21. If the Liver is wounded, there is vomiting, flux of Blood, pain,
continual Fever, raving, Convulsions, cold Sweats, Swoonings, and at last,
Death.

XXXI. 22. If the Spleen is hurt, the same Symptoms appear, but on the contrary
side: yet we have seen the Spleen cut out of a living Dog, and the Dog to
recover, and live many years after it.

XXXII. 23. If the Intestines or Guts are hurt, or wounded, the Excrements come
through the Wound.

XXXIII. 24. If the Loins are wounded, they breathe with difficulty, void
frothy Blood at the Mouth and Wound, and cave, having a high color.

XXXIV. 25. If the Reins or Kidneys are wounded, there is a suppression of
Urine, pain in the Groin and Testicles, pissing Blood, great Swelling, and
danger of Death.

XXXV. 26. If the Bladder is wounded, the same Symptoms with the former appear,
unless the Nervous part is hurt; then vomiting, voiding Urine at the Wound,
loss of Sense, and lastly, Death it self ensues.

XXXVI. 27. If the Womb is wounded, there is great pain in the Hips and Thighs,
and a flux of Blood, with loss of Speech, Reason, and Sense, and at last Death.

XXXVII. The Symptoms. The Symptoms follow, for the most part, according to the
nature of the Parts wounded; which in the Cure of Wounds, are no less to be
regarded than the Wound it self.

XXXVIII. And as we have in several other places taught, that almost no
Disease, no Tumor preternatural, no Ulcer can be well cured; except first a
regard be had to the Symptoms conjoined; either to diminish, or take them away.
So also, the same thing is to be understood in the curing of Wounds.

XXXIX. The Symptoms in Wounds are manifold; but the most material are, 1.
Hemorrhage. 2. Pain. 3. Inflammation. 4. An Erysipelas. 5. Indigestion of
serous Humors, which is made of good Blood, or Lympha converted thereinto; for
want of good binding, or application of proper Medicaments. 6. A Fever. 7.
Fainting. 8. Convulsion and Delirium. 9. Palsy. 10. Gangrene, or putrefaction
of the Part.

XL. As to an Hemorrhage, it not only hinders the Cure, but also weakens the
Body, and brings Death, if it is not suddenly stopped; which in the greater
Vessels, especially the Arteries, is very hard to do: for which cause, those
Wounds are for the most part mortal; since Medicines which stop Blood are too
weak, and hard ligature may endanger a Gangrene.

XLI. The Prognostics. Before we go about the Cure of a Wound, we ought to
judge whether it is curable, or incurable: and if Curable, whether the Cure
will be easy or difficult, and will take up a shorter or longer time. And when
Cureable, whether the Patient will have his perfect soundness restored; or
suffer by the hurt of the action of some other part.

XLII. For a Tendon being cut asunder, it oftentimes happens, that the
Motive-faculty of some Part is wholly lost; the Meninges being wounded, the
Memory or Rational-faculty is thereby hurt, etc.

XLIII. Again, whether it is absolutely mortal; or it be not more probable,
that it will degenerate into some long-continuing Ulcer, which may induce a
Marcor or Consumption, and at length, Death.

XLIV. If therefore you would make true Prognostics of Wounds, you must
consider, 1. The Part affected, its dignity, substance temperature, situation,
number, and use of the Part.

XLV. 2. The Adjuncts of the Wound; which are its magnitude, figure, situation,
symptoms; and whether simple, or complicate with some other Disease, as
French Pox, Dropsy, etc.

XLVI. 3. The Habit of the Body; whether it is good and healthful, or evil and
cachectick, scorbutic, strumatick, hydropick, plethorick, cacochymick,
intemperate, gross, or consumptive, etc.

XLVII. If therefore a Wound is made in a noble Part, which is continually in
motion, and the fountain or original of some Faculty, and that it is large or
deep, and accompanied with evil Symptoms, in an evil habit of Body, it is
generally mortal.

XLVIII. Whereas a Wound made in some ignoble Part, or remote from the
principal Parts, in a place where the loss may be suffered, and the Wound it
self not very big, nor having many ill Symptoms, nor in an evil or scorbutic
habit of Body, is generally without danger.

XLIX. Wounds of the Heart do of all others most speedily bring on Death:
because the Heart is a noble part, and the Storehouse of Vital Spirits, and
innate heat: which being extinguished, either by Suffocation, or Dissipation,
Death immediately ensues: if the Wound penetrates into the Ventricles of the
Heart, especially, to the left, the Patient of necessity dies quickly: but if
the Wound terminates in the substance of the Heart, life may be continued for a
while, but Death will be the end of the Work.

L. Wounds of the Brain are in like manner deadly, if they penetrate to the
Basis: because it is a principal Part, the Fountain of the Animal-faculty, in
continual motion, Inflammation and a sharp Fever ensuing. But if it is
superficial only, it is then said to be dangerous, because it is a principal
Part; but with hopes of Recovery, because its soft substance admits of speedy
consolidation.

LI. Wounds of the Lungs, with hurt some of the Vessels; as the Vena arteriosa,
in that part of the Lungs next the Heart, are mortal: for that out of them a
great quantity of Blood is poured forth unto the Heart, overwhelming it, and
suffocating the heat thereof: other Wounds of the Lungs are not mortal.

LII. Wounds in any of the greater Vessels, which cannot by any Art be closed
up, are mortal; for that through pouring forth of great quantities of Blood
(whether from Veins or Arteries) there will be of necessity a speedy
suffocation of the wounded person.

LIII. Wounds of the Eye, penetrating through it to the Brain, are mortal: for
there is great inflammation, with vehement pains, fainting and swooning, and at
length, strong Convulsions, and Death.

LIVE. Wounds of the Aspera Arteria, where the Cartilaginous Rings are cut in
sunder, are incurable: for by reason of the hardness of their substance, they
cannot be made to grow together again; yet such Wounds do not cause a sudden
Death, but a slow and lingering one: other Wounds of this Part are curable.

LV. Wounds of the Vena cava, within the Belly or Breast, are mortal: 1. By
reason of the place, that cannot possibly be come at. 2. By reason of its
substance; for being nervous, it hardly admits of consolidation.

LVI. Wounds of the Liver, though small, yet are dangerous, but they will admit
of Consolidation: 1. Because the substance of the Liver is like coagulated
Blood, and so may easily be united. 2. Because, if one part of it is wounded,
other Parts will do their Office; as is seen in the Livers of such as are
Scirrhous.

LVII. Wounds of the Diaphragma in the Nervous parts are mortal; for a
Delirium, by reason of the Inflammation, ensues always and sometimes
Convulsions. But in the fleshy part of the Diaphragma, though we say not that
they are mortal, yet they are dangerous: 1. Because they cannot be come at, to
be dressed. 2. Because it is in continual motion. 3. Because the parts within the
Breast are easily inflamed.

LVIII. Wounds of the Spleen, if they be not great, or procure an Hemorrhage,
are not mortal: for the Spleen is neither a principal part, nor the fountain or
origination of any Faculty; but only a receptacle of black, melancholic, or
fermentative Blood.

LIX. Wounds of the Stomach, are not to be accounted amongst those which are
simply mortal, which do suddenly destroy a Man; because we have had several
Examples of Wounds in the Stomach, which have been cured: but those Wounds
which happen on its superior Orifice or Mouth, are especially mortal; because
it has Nerves, which spring from those of the sixth Conjugation of the Brain;
whereby it has a very near consent with the Brain, and with the Heart also: so
that it being wounded, vehement Symptoms, as Fainting, Swooning, Convulsions,
etc. presently arise.

LX. Wounds of the Gallbladder are mortal, though not so presently as other
mortal Wounds: but we cannot come to apply any thing to it; then it is of a
Nervous substance, which does not easily admit Unition; and lastly, the Humor
which it ought to contain 'till Excretion, corrupts the parts amongst which it
is spilt.

LXI. Wounds of the Reins, if they pass not to the cavity, bring not inevitable
Death; but if they enter once into the cavities, are certainly mortal, yet at
some little distance of time; there going before Vomitings, Sickness at Heart,
Faintings, Swoonings, and Convulsions, often repeated.

LXII. Wounds of the Bladder are by Hippocrates accounted mortal. But here is a
difference to be made: for a small Wound is soon healed by the intervening of
the Flesh, as experience does teach us. But if Hippocrates his Diacope happens,
(which is, when the Bladder does happen to be cut quite through) it is most
perilous, and especially that which happens at the bottom of the Bladder, and
the nervous part thereof; for by reason of the sharpness and vehemence of the
pain, inflammation follows, with a continent Fever, and Death soon after. But
Wounds in the neck of the Bladder, which is fleshy, are curable; as we see even
in cutting out the Stone.

LXIII. Wounds of the small Guts are for the most part mortal. 1. Because they
are of a membranous substance. 2. Because they are of an exquisite sense; more
especially if they be cut transversly asunder. Wounds of the Jejunum, are more
especially mortal; by reason of the greatness of the Vessels, and the almost
nervous substance of the Tunicle of that Gut; from whence for the most part
there follows vehement sharp Pains of the Bowels, Sobbing, Fainting, Swooning,
and sometimes strong Convulsions, and Death.

LXIV. Wounds of the greater or thick Guts are less dangerous, and more easily
cured, especially if they be not great; because their substance is more thick,
and so admits more easily of agglutination; and being not so sensible as the
small Guts are, Faintings, Swoonings, and other fearful Symptoms do not so
usually invade.

LXV. Wounds of the Mesentery, are inevitably mortal; because there must be a
great flux of Blood, by reason of the great number of Veins in it: because we
cannot approach it to apply Topics; and because it is an hinderance of the
Chylous Juice passing on, to mix with the Blood; whereby Sanguification is
hindered, without which the Body must certainly dye.

LXVI. Wounds of the great Joints, if they are so deep as to let out the Glarea
or humid substance, which is found in the said Joints to moisten them, much
like to the whites of Eggs, the Joint grows stiff, and so the motion is
impaired.

LXVII. As for Wounds in the vest of the Parts, Hippocrates truly pronounces
them not mortal: and Experience teaches us, that the greatest and most
dangerous Wounds have sometimes been cured; (of which Valeriola, lib. 4. Obs.
10. gives us many Histories, also Guil. Fabric. Hildanus, in his Writings and
Observations:) and that very many dye, even of the most slight and
inconsiderable Wounds.

LXVIII. A Wound made with a Poisoned Weapon, or Biting of a Mad-dog, Viper,
etc. though it may seem little in it self, and very slight, yet many times brings
Death with it.

LXiX. The Habit of the Body is also to be considered: for robust and healthful
Bodies bear the most grievous Wounds, and are often cured without much to do,
and beyond all hope and expectation, (when you would think them ready to dye)
recover again.

LXX. Whereas the like Wound, or a lesser, happening in a Cacochymick or Evil
Habit of Body. Nature being thereby irritated and stirred up, is wont to
protrude those vicious Humors to the Wound, which (though in a strong and sound,
or pure Body might be cureable, yet) in a Body of this Evil Habit, will here
become mortal.

LXXI. Those Wounds also which are grievous, dangerous, yea and mortal in an
Old Man or Child; are many times not mortal, yea slight and inconsiderable,
when they happen in a strong Young Man, of a good Habit of Body.

LXXII. Wounds of the Brain, Nerves, and Joints being unskilfully, and
negligently handled, may have an Inflammation, Convulsion, Gangrene, etc. befall
them, and so the Patient may miscarry and perish: when notwithstanding that,
the Wound, had it been rightly managed, was in it self absolutely cureable.

LXXIII. A Wound may happen in a Part ignoble, but yet of very exquisite sense;
from whence comes vehemence of Pain, which causes presently an Afflux of
Humors; and that Afflux, an Inflammation; the Inflammation, a Fever, a
Gangrene, and Death it self: and this happens the more easily, when a Part that
is noble may be drawn into consent with it.

LXXIV. By how much more principal and noble the Part affected is; or which may
likewise bring a more noble Part into consent with it, by so much the more
dangerous is the Wound.

LXXV. Great Wound are more dangerous than small ones, all things else being
answerable.

LXXVI. A Wound joined with a Contusion, is the more dangerous; and therefore
it is of the two, better to be wounded with a sharp-edged, or sharp-pointed
Weapon, than with a blunt or dull one.

LXXVII. Wounds which have past beyond the last and utmost term of Acute
Diseases, viz. the fortieth Day, are not in themselves mortal: but if the
Patient dies, it is either from an ill Habit of Body, or from Errors committed
in Diet, or from want of Skill in the Physician: however, such wounds are not
cured without much difficulty; for that they indicate some grievous cause to be
present, which hinders conglutination of the Wound.

LXXVIII. If an Inflammation should supervene upon a great Wound, it is not to
be wondered at, nor should it terrify us, if it continues not long: but an
Inflammation to follow upon a small Wound, and it continuing long, is very
dangerous indeed, because it is wont to excite Convulsions, and Delirium or
Doting.

LXXIX. A vomiting of Choler (not voluntary or accustomed to be done) so soon,
or presently after a Man is wounded; or while an Inflammation is present, is an
evil sign; for it shows, that the Nervous parts are wounded.

LXXX. The greater the Wound is, the more time (all things else being
answerable) is required for the curing thereof: and the less it is, the less
time it requires: so that some Wounds may be cured in 24 hours time, when
others may require as many days to be perfectly healed.

LXXXI. All Wounds complicated with other Affects, are so much the more
difficultly cured: for the more the Affects are, the more Nature is hurt; and
it is easier for her to correct or take away one only Affect, than many: and
the more the conjoined Affect does hurt the temperament of the Part, so much
the more difficult will the Cure be.

LXXXII. Wounds that are in the Muscles, far from the Joints, and Temples, are
more easily cured than those that are in the Nerves, Tendons, and Membranous
parts and Joints.

LXXXIII. Wounds of the Nerves and Nervous parts, are for the most part
dangerous; for that by reason of Pain; Inflammations, Convulsions, and other
vehement Symptoms do easily happen.

LXXXIV. Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 26. says, the Age, habit of Body, the order and
course of Life, with the time of the Year are to be considered. For a Child,
Youth, or young Men, are sooner cured than one that is Ancient or in years: one
of a strong constitution, is easier and sooner cured than one of a weak and
infirm Body: one not over-fat nor over-lean, sooner than one that is either of
them: one of an entire and sound habit, than one that has an unsound and
corrupt habit: one given to exercise is sooner cured, than one that is slothful
and sluggish: and a sober and temperate Man, than one that is given to Wine and
Women.

LXXXV. Those Wounds are most safe and easy to be cured, which are made in a
straight and direct Line: but those with more difficulty, that are oblique; and
those with most difficulty, which are round, and orbicular.

LXXXVI. That Wound is always evil, in which there is something cut off, or
taken away; and by which the Flesh that is cut off from one Part, hangs upon
some other.

LXXXVII. Celsus, l. 5. c. 26. says, the Inflammation will show it self on the
fifth day, how great it is like to be; on which day the Wound is to be
uncovered, and the color thereof to be well considered: if it is pale and wan,
leaden colored, of various colors, or black, it is certain that the Wound is
evil and dangerous: but this, whenever we well consider it, is not much to
terrify and affright us.

LXXXVIII. A Wound in Arm, Hand, Thigh, Leg, or other Part; being so great,
that by reason of the Arteries and Veins cut asunder, it cannot possibly
receive any farther influx of Blood; the extreme part then dies; and therefore
lest a Gangrene should happen to the sound part, the other is with all speed
that may be, to be cut off.

LXXXIX. That Wound which is not purged and cleansed, but with much difficulty,
is hard to cure, and slow in curing: because that which is an hinderance of the
Cure, cannot be removed without much difficulty.

XC. All things extraneous, or coming from without, sticking fast in the Wound;
if they cannot at the very first be drawn or taken forth, they will much retard
the Cure.

XCI. All the Wounds of the internal parts are much more dangerous, than are
the Wounds of the external parts.

XCII. Wounds are more easily cured in the the Spring time, than in the cold of
Winter, or heat of Summer.

XCIII. If a Nerve, Artery or Vein be wholly cut, or cut through, there is less
danger impending, than if but cut only in part: provided always, that they are
none of the more principal or notable Nerves, Arteries or Veins, and situate in
the deeper parts of the Body.

XCIV. For if a Nerve is wholly cut asunder, there is then no danger of a
Convulsion; which we may always fear, if the Nerve is cut but only in part.

XCV. And so if a principal Artery or Vein be wholly cut, the danger of an
Hemorrhage is wholly taken away, upon the contraction or drawing together of
the Vessel: but if an Artery or Vein be only wounded, and not cut asunder, very
dangerous Hemorrhagies do then often arise.

XCVI. But if it is one of the larger, or most notable of the Arteries or
Veins, which is cut asunder; this then often befalls the Part, that it is
deprived of much of its usual native heat, and sometimes also is the cause of an
Atrophy of the Part.

XCVII. Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 26. says, For a Wound overmuch to swell up, is
something dangerous; but not at all to swell up, is much more dangerous, yea
the most perilous of all: the former being only the evidence of a great
Inflammation, the latter a sign of a mortified or dead Body.

XCVIII. Hippocrates, Sect. 5. Aph. 65. Such, as together with their Ulcers are
troubled with manifest Tumors, are not subject to any dangerous Convulsion, or
Madness.

XCIX. But those in whom those Tumors presently vanish and disappear, if this
happens on the hinder-part, then Convulsions and Cramps follow: but if on the
forepart, then comes Madness, sharp Pain of the Side, an Empyema and
Dysentery, especially if the Tumor is redder than ordinary. Ibid.

C. Hippocrates, Sect. 5. Aph. 2. says, That a Convulsion in a Wound is very
pernicious.

CI. Wounds happening unto Cachectical and Hydropical persons, are cured with
very much difficulty.

CII. A Wound in such a Part as is apt and ready to receive an Influx of
Humors, is cured also with very much trouble.

CIII. Wounds being considered simply as Wounds, can have nothing to do with
Critical Days; but as they may happen in conjunction with acute Diseases, so
Critical Days may have some respect to them: for that Nature her self upon some
certain and fixed Days, both concocts that which ought to be concocted, and
allays the disturbance of the Humors.

CIV. Touching which, Hippocrates in Coacis, says, That in Wounds of the Head,
if a Fever begins on the fourth, or seventh, or eleventh days, it is very fatal
or dangerous: but it is for the most part to be Judged of, if it begins on the
fourth day of the Wound, and continues unto the eleventh: or if it begins on
the seventh day, and continues unto the fourteenth or seventeenth: or if it
begins on the eleventh, and continues unto the twentieth.

CV. And in his Book of Wounds of the Head, he says, That when any Error is
committed in the Cure of a Wound; then for the most part, if it is in Winter
time, a Fever comes upon it before the fourteenth day; but if it is in Summer,
after the seventh day: and there he also asserts, That in Summertime, some
perish before the seventh day; and in Winter, before the fourteenth.

CVI. And therefore whenever on the Critical Days, there is no change or
alteration for the worse, but that all things proceed in a right manner, and
that the Symptoms which before were present, are now quieted and allayed, it
then presages great hopes of a happy Cure.

CVII. But if on the contrary, in those days there happens any evil, as Pain,
Inflammation, Convulsion, or Fever; or if those Symptoms which were before
present are not lessened, but are rather become more intense, and greater than
before, it then presages either Death, or a very difficult, long, and tedious
Cure. See the third Edition of Our Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 1. cap. 50. sect.
1. ad 27.

CVIII. The Cure of a SIMPLE WOVND. There are five principal Intentions of
Cure, 1. The removing things Extraneous, as coagulated Blood, Splinters of
Bones, pieces of the Weapon, Rags, Hair, Sand, Dust, etc. which may hinder
Unition. 2. To join the lips of the Wound even together. 3. To retain the lips
so brought together, 'till they are consolidated. 4. To conserve the native
heat of the Part, in order to unition. 5. To prevent or correct ill accidents,
which may intervene.

CIX. Thus much is required, if the Wound is only simplex; but if it is
complex, with loss of substance, or contusion, then there is something more to
do: as in loss of substance, with Sarcoticks, to assist Nature in restoring
what is lost: and if contused, the converting the contused substance into pus
or matter, which must be done, before there can be possibly any healing.

CX. As to the first Intention, there must be a removing all things that are
extraneous, or of a different substance; for so long as they remain, they will
hinder unition; nor 'till then, can you hope in the least to make a Cure of the
Wound. But before any thing of this kind is done, you are to consider, 1.
Whether it can be done, or not. 2. Whether if it can be done, it can be done
safely.

CXI. For sometimes the broken Weapon or Matter sticks so fast, that it can by
no means be extracted; then you must of necessity leave it to Nature, who, in
this case, does sometimes wonderful things. Splinters, etc. have sometimes
stuck so fast, or have been so enclosed, that by no Artifice they could be
gotten forth; yet at length, upon Apostemation of the Part, they have been
thrust out.

CXII. If it may be done, whether it may be done with safety? For some will
live a Day or more with the Weapon in their Bodies, who would otherwise dye,
upon the moment of extraction. But if you find the Patient is recoverable, then
make haste with the extraction, and let it be taken forth before the wounded
Part is inflamed. How extraneous things are in particular to be drawn forth, we
teach at large, in Chap. 5. following.

CXIII. The Extraneous matters being now drawn forth, and the Wound cleansed by
washing it with a little White Wind mixed with a third part of Spirit of Wine;
you may permit the Wound to bleed, according as in judgment you shall see fit,
respect being had, 1. To the strength, and habit or constitution of the Body.
2. To hinder Inflammation, as the generation of much matter.

CXIV. The bleeding being staid, (whether naturally, or by Art, it matters not
much) let the Hair about the Wound (if any be) be shaved off; and wipe away the
clotted Blood with Sponge dipped in Red-wine or Alicant, Oxycrate or Posca,
(which is Vinegar and Water mixed together, or Wine mixed with Water, etc.)

CXV. But if the clotted Blood sticks deep in the Wound, be not too busy to
remove it with your armed Probe, lest you stir up a new Hemorrhage or Bleeding:
and understand, that this coagulated Blood keeps the Wound warm, and defends it
from the injuries of the ambient Air; and that Nature will cast it out in due
season, by Digestion.

CXVI. The second Intention, is the exact Joining of the Lips of the Wound
together: for without this exact conjoining, a slow, and a deformed Healing
will follow: and this truly is the sole work of the Artist, for Nature has
nothing at all to do in this business.

CXVII. You must not lay a Pledget, or a Dossel of lint, or put a Tent into a
little Wound; for those are the ways to keep the Wound open, make it painful,
cause defluxions of Humors, weaken the native heat of the Part, and prolong the
Cure, which is diametrically contrary to the true intention of Healing.

CXVIII. The parts, or lips of the Wound then separated, are to be brought
together gently and equally; that they may just touch one another, and so be
prepared for Unition.

CXIX. It is to be done, as Fallopius says, by little and little, not hastily,
and at once: if they be equally soft, bring them equally together; if the one
is soft, and the other hard, or immovable, or not to be moved but with
difficulty, then bring the soft part to that other.

CXX. If the Parts are grown stiff with Cold, (as some are, who have lain in
the Field all Night;) in this case, you are to supple them with a Fomentation
of hot Milk, or warm Water; or embrocate them with Oil, till the lips are soft
enough, and then endeavor their reunion.

CXXI. They are also to be conjoined equally, that the parts cut asunder may
answer one another, both in the top and in the bottom; brim to brim, lips to
lips, vessels to vessels; that Nature may be put into a condition to do her own
work; and by virtue of its innate Balsam, reunite, agglutinate, and consolidate
or heal the Wound: in all which Intentions she is the Agent, the Surgeon
only is the Assistant.

CXXII. The third Intention of Cure, is to retain the lips so brought together,
'till they be consolidated; and this is done by deligation, which is the
dressing and binding up of the Wound: for the accomplishing of which, the great
Masters of this Art have left us two principal means; viz. 1. Suturae,
Stitching up the Wound. 2. Fasciae, Binding of it up.

CXXIII. As to Sutures, they they are said to be of three sorts; viz. 1. The
Incarnative. 2. The Restringent. 3. The Conserver: to which add one more, which
is called the Dry-stitch, or Suture.

CXXIV. The first of these is most in use with us, and is done by making so
many Stitches at a set distance. Now you are to consider the Wound; if it is
but an Inch, little more more or less, in length, it is needless to be stitched;
your Medicaments and Bandage will be enough to keep the lips together, and heal
it.

CXXV. But if it is two inches or more in length, make one stitch in the
middle; if it is three inches long, make two stitches; if four inches long,
make three stitches, and so on; making the stitches less by one, than are the
inches it is long: and in declining Parts, we many times make the stitches at a
little more distance.

CXXVI. The Restringent-stitch, which is called the Glovers-stitch, is much in
use with the Spaniards, who stitch almost all Wounds with it: in the Forehead
and Face, it brings the lips very close; the third day they draw the Thread
out, and with the Dry-suture they keep the lips together 'till the Wound is
well, which is commonly in two or three days more. This Stitch is best in great
Fluxes of Blood; but then in stitching, you must endeavor to bring the wounded
Arteries and Veins to their wounded fellows.

CXXVII. The Conserver, or third Stitch is mostly of use in great Wounds; as
those of the Oesophagus, Hare-lips, etc. to hold the parts forcibly together,
and is performed with Pins or Needles, etc.

CXXVIII. The Ancients make another Stitch in Wounds of the Peritonaeum, which
is thus: Have a fit Needle, with a long, strong, round, white Thread in it, and
therewith take up the Peritonaeum on one side, and leave it on the other; then
take it up on the other side, and leave it on this. It it so made, that the
Peritonaeum, which is a dry Body, may be united with the Musculous Flesh:
otherwise the fleshy parts would only unite, and the Peritonaeum lie open; upon
which a Hernia would certainly succeed, and the Patient put to the perpetual
trouble of wearing a Truss the remaining part of his life.

CXXIX. The Dry-suture, is the last kind of Stitch, which is proper chiefly to
the Face, to keep the lips of those wounds close together, and avoid as much as
may be the making Scars; and to be applied also after some of the former
Stitches, to keep the lips together, 'till the Wound is perfectly conglutinated.

CXXX. As to the time of taking out the Stitches, it ought to be when the lips
are agglutinated; which may be sooner or later, according to the habit of the
Body, season of the Year, and nature of the Wound.

CXXXI. In transverse Wounds eight days are required; in lesser Wounds not so
deep, three or four days: in the Face, it ought to be done the next dressing,
lest the Stitches make so many Scars; but in this, every Man must use his own
Judgment. As to the manner and way, how these Stitches are to be performed, we
leave you to the Directions of Chap. 6. following.

CXXXII. Now we come to the Bandage, or Binding the Wound up. If the Wound is
small, and in a fleshy part, Bandage alone, without Stitching, will do the
work: for Nature in giving nourishment to both sides of the lips equally, will
finish the Unition, without any more to do.

CXXXIII. And by Bandage, as the union of Parts cut asunder are promoted, so
also such as would unnaturally grow together, are kept asunder; as in Burnings
and Scaldings, the Fingers would many times grow together, were they not by the
binding up, hindered.

CXXXIV. There are three several kinds of Fasciation, Rolling, or Binding-up:
viz. 1. Agglutinatrix, or Incarnatrix. 2. Retentrix, or Retentive. 3.
Expultrix, or Expulsive.

CXXXV. By the Fascia Agglutinatrix, or Incarnatrix, the lips of the Wound are
brought together, and conserved in their right form: it is more strict than the
Retentive, and more loose than the Expulsive; and is most of use in simple,
fresh, and yet-bleeding Wounds.

CXXXVI. The Fascia Retentrix is used to keep Dressings on, close about the
Wound. This for the most part is of use in Wounds of the Head; and is
moderately to be bound on, not so hard as the former.

CXXXVII. Fascia Expultrix, which is done by a Rowler of one head; whose
special use is, to force or expel out of sinuous Ulcers or Fistula's, the Pus
or Matter lodged therein: as also to prevent the afflux of Humors, and to press
out of the substance of the Part wounded, and places adjacent to it, such
Humors as have already seated themselves there.

CXXXVIII. For the matter of your Rowlers, they must be made of good, strong,
even, white Cloth, clean and gentle, without hems, seams, or threads hanging
by: let the length be such as the place affected requires: and their breadth;
for the Shoulders about 6 inches, for the Thighs 5 inches, for the Legs 4
inches, for the Arms 3 inches, and for Fingers and Toes, 1 inch broad.

CXXXIX. Concerning Bandages, Hippocrates says, Vinculorum aliud per se
remedio est, aliud iis quae remedio sunt subservit: among Ligatures, some are
Remedies of themselves, others subserve to them which are Remedies. And so it
is; the Incarnative and Expulsive are Remedies in themselves; the Retentive is
as the common Servant to the other. Now as to the way and manner, how this
Ligature or Bandage is to be performed, you may see at large in Chap. 7.
following.

CXL. The fourth Intention, is to preserve the native heat of the Part; that
thereby agglutination, incarnation, and healing may be obtained; which though it
is affirmed to be the work of Nature alone, yet she generally acts by the help
of a Medium, which answers in power to Glue, or things of a glewing nature.

CXLI. As soon as the Wound is made, there is a Balsam of Nature ready at hand
for the Cure; which Balsam is Blood, at least the lymphatick, or serous part of
it, by which Nature does the Cure, both by the first and second Intention.

CXLII. A Cure performed by the first Intention, is done per Symphysin, by
Symphysis; which is a reunion of the parts, without any Medium, viz. without
any Callus, Flesh, or other Body interposed; but in this case, the Balsam of
Nature is the Medium, the Instrument of Unity, which knits the parts together.

CXLIII. A Cure performed by the second Intention, is done per Syssarcosin, by
Syssarcosis; which is a reunion of the parts, by, or with the help of a Medium,
viz. with Flesh, or a Callous substance, interposing, or filling up the space
between the lips of the Wound.

CXLIV. And therefore great care is to be taken, that the Blood may not offend
either in quantity or quality: too much is the cause of proud and loose Flesh;
and too little affords not a sufficiency of matter for the Work. And as to its
Quality, if it is cacochymick or evil, it cannot produce good Flesh; for such
as the Blood is, such will the Flesh be.

CXLV. Now to make the Blood such as it ought to be, the Patient is to observe
a good Diet: which ought to be rather slender than full; because a full Diet is
hurtful in Wounds, especially in gross Bodies, where there is danger of great
Inflammations, Pain, and other evil Symptoms.

CXLVI. But a greater liberty may be given to those, who have thin and
exhausted Bodies; so that they may be allowed new-laid Eggs, strong Broths,
Jellies, etc. also some Wine, where the Body has been long accustomed to the
plentiful use thereof; or the total forbidding thereof, may very much hinder
the Cure: and for other things, such Diet is to be observed, as their strength
or weakness may require, and their Stomach permit.

CXLVII. As to Internals; Purging with strong, hot, or violent Catharticks is
not fit; lest stimulating or stirring up the Matter, it should flow to the weak
or wounded part: but in gross and cacochymick Bodies, Lenitives are allowed; as
Cassia, Manna, Tamarinds, Rhubarb, Sena with Sal Prunellae; also Syrupus
Catharticus, and Broths, wherein Borrage, Bugloss, Endive, Fumitory, Lettice,
Purslane, Sorrel, Succory, etc. have been boiled.

CXLVIII. And at set times of the day, they may take Vulnerary-Drinks; made of
Adders-tongue, Agrimony, Avens, Bistort-roots, Bugle, Cinkfoil, Centory,
Comfrey, Fluellin, Ground Ivy, Golden-rod, Herb-trinity, Horse-tail, Hypericon,
Knotgrass, Ladies-mantle, Mouse-ear, Mugwort, Pauls-Betony, Perwinkle,
Plantane, red Roses, Sanicle, Snakeweed, Scordium, Strawberry leaves and roots,
Tormentil-roots, Vervain, Valerian, wild Tansy, Yarrow, etc. as we show more at
large, in Chap. 3. ensuing.

CXLIX. Now in particular, for preserving the innate or native heat, and tone
of the Part, without which no Unition can be hoped for, Topics are usually
applied: it is true, that in small and simple Wounds, which are superficial,
Nature of her own accord commonly does the Cure, and seldom requires more of
us, than to bring the lips of the Wound close together, and defend it from
fluxion: a Pledget of Linimentum Arcaei may be laid on, and over it Emplast.
Diapalma; and then bound up, to keep all things on.

CL. But in greater Wounds, which will not so easily be cured, you must stitch
the lips together; and then strew upon them the following Powder. Fine Bole,
Terra sigillata, A. ss. Sanguis Draconis, Frankincense, A. i. mix them: over
which lay some of the same Powder mixed with the white of an Egg, and over that
a Compress, squeezed out of Oxycrate, and a suitable Bandage over all. This is
the general use.

CLI. But lest by the sticking-to of the Emplastick-medicine, the lips of the
Wound should be torn or disturbed, in taking off the Dressing; you may apply
over the sprinkling of the Powder, the following Sarcotick-Ointment.
Strasburgh-Turpentine iii. Gum-Elemi ii. Frankincense, Mastich, Olibanum,
Sanguis Draconis, A. ii. mix, and make an Ointment; which spread upon a
Pledget, and apply.

CLII. And over the former Pledget you may put Emplastr. Diapalmae, Empl. de
Bolo, Caesaris, or the like; and then bind it up, as before directed.

CLIII. Or, applying first this Powder: Aloes, Galls, red Roses, fine Bole,
Sanguis draconis, Olibanum, Rosin, Catechu, A. i. mix them; and mix some of the
same Powder with Turpentine, Gum Elemi, A. q.s. which spread upon a Pledget,
and put over the Powder.

CLIV. And if there is any fear of an Afflux of Humors, or Inflammation, dip
Stuphs in juices of Plantain, Horse-tail, Yarrow, Perwinkle; or in red Wine, or
Oxycrate: over which lay Emplast. Diapalmae, e Bolo, or some other like
Emplaster; and lastly, bind it up, as before.

CLV. But if you design to cure by Agglutination, forbear the use of
Fomentations, or other humid Medicaments; and preserving, your Stitches, you
will find, that Nature will do her part toward the consolidation of the Wound;
nor will you have occasion for such Applications, if you have proceeded
methodically.

Hitherto of Wounds simplex: now a word or two of the Cure of Wounds complex.

CLVI. These kinds of Wounds are not so often seen in times of Peace, as in
times of War; in which they are frequent, when the Horse fall in among the
Infantry, and cruelly hack them; some cutting twice or thrice in or near the
same place: whereby the Wound is made large, deep, oblique, and transverse at
the same time, the lips being contracted various ways. See Sect. 109.
aforegoing.

CLVII. In order to the Cure of these Wounds, where there is loss of Substance,
you must first cleanse them, and then as much as may be, bring their lips
together by the Incarnative-stitch, making so many stitches as may hold them
together: and if in some of them you think it not sufficient, you may as in the
Hare-lip, pass Needles through the lips of the Wound, with little Plates of Lead,
to secure them from tearing out.

CLVIII. If the Wound has been long undressed, or was not stitcht at first
dressing, whereby it is so stubborn and contracted, that the lips will not be
brought near one another; or if it is so deep as you may suspect the
Incarnating, you must leave a declining Orifice, for discharge of the Matter;
and then foment warm with some Lenient-decoction, made of the leaves and roots
of Althea, Mallows, Violets, Linseed, etc. or foment with new Milk, then join
their lips together, and dress them as Wounds so stitcht.

CLIX. But if you leave a declining Orifice, you must keep it open with a small
Tent, dipped in some digestive; and after Digestion, then you must withdraw the
Tent, and heal up the Wound.

CLX. But the greater Wounds, which cannot be brought together by Suture, must
be digested, and so disposed, that new Flesh may be generated to fill up the
Cavity; for which purpose, this Digestive is good: Turpentine iii. Gum Elemi i.
Barley-flower i. Frankincense i. mix, and make it up with the yolk of one or
two Eggs.

CLXI. To the former Digestive, after a day or two may be added, Honey of
Roses, to make it more cleansing.

CLXII. During the former Applications, the Humors ought to be diverted or
revulst from the Wound, by gentle Purging; such as we have directed in Sect.
146 aforegoing.

CLXIII. And outwardly apply. Topical refrigeratives, with good Compress and
Bandage, to press the lips of the Wound together, that it may be the sooner
cured.

CLXIV. When you find that the Wound is indeed digested, you may cleanse with
this Mundificative of Quercetan, which is also a good Sarcotick: Leaves of
Smallage, Plantain, A. M. j. red Roses P. ij. red Wine viii. boil to the
consumption of one half, then strain out, and dissolve therein brown Sugar ii.
Turpentine i. powder of Juniper Berries, Orobus-meal, A. vi. Aloes, Myrrh, A.
i. boil again gently; then add Wax q.s. and make an Ointment.

CLXV. This is excellent. Juice of Smallage brought to the thickness of new
Honey, Melliginous Extract of Juniper Berries, Honey of Roses, A. i.
Turpentine, Gum Elemi, A. ss. powder of Scammony ii. mix them. It is inferior
to no ordinary Detersive.

CLXVI. But in these larger Wounds, you may do well to foment with warm Stuphs
nipt out of Red or Alicant Wine; wherein the flowers of red Roses and
Balaustians, Cortex Peruanus, or Cypress-Nuts, and Catechu, have been infused
or boiled.

CLXVII. If these Wounds abound with Maggots, as many times they will, in hot
Weather and Summertime, if not soon looked after; you may wash them with a
Decoction of Carduus Bened. Wormword, Gentian-roots and Myrrh, made with half
Water, half Wine: or an Infusion of Aloes and Myrrh in Wine alone: for a
mixture of Wine with a half part of Ox or Hogs or Sheeps-Gall. The Worms being
killed, you may proceed in the Cure, as before directed.

CLXVIII. If the Wound is with Contusion, endeavor that the contused Flesh be
digested, and turned into matter; for which purpose is proper, Vng. Basilicon
applied hot upon Lint, or dissolved in Linseed-Oil, or Oil of Earthworms, or
the like, anointing the parts about with Oil of Roses and Myrtles, beaten up
with the white of an Egg.

CLXIX. And with that mixture, you may make a Restrictive; by adding fine Bole,
Terra sigillata, Dragons-blood, and powder of red Roses; which mix, and apply
over all.

CLXX. But if the Wound has been neglected for some days, then foment it with
Discussives; and embrocate the contused Parts with this: Oil-olive i. Oil of
Lavender and Limons, A. i. mix them well, by shaking in a Glass: and be
sedulous in the application of Suppuratives, after the manner we have taught in
Lib. 3. cap. 5. sect. 134, 135, 136, 137, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149. aforegoing,
of this Work.

CLXXI. After the separation of the contused Flesh, the loss of substance must
be supplied or restored by Sarcoticks or Incarnatives, and then healed up with
Epuloticks.

CLXXII. If the Wound is deep, and the orifice narrow, yet capable of being
made larger, it ought to be laid open in proportion; that the Matter may not be
kept in to create a greater hollowness, and putrify the adjacent parts.

CLXXIII. But if the Sinus is of any great length, and so descending, that the
Matter cannot be discharged by the Wound; you may then make a perforation in
the lower part thereof, for that purpose, by Incision-knife, or Caustic, or
both; first the Caustic, then the Knife: or by a Seton-Needle, or
Syringotomus, as we shall show in Sinuous Ulcers.

CLXXIV. As to the time of Dressing of Wounds, the second dressing ought not to
be till the third Day; by which time, they may be supposed to be somewhat
digested: and from that time, every other day may be sufficient.

CLXXV. Galen, discoursing of the Dressing of Ulcers, says he dressed them but
every third day, though the Matter flowed very much; and but every fourth day in
Winter.

CLXXVI. It Is really true, that too frequent dressing of Wounds is hurtful, and
hinders the speedy Cure: yet there may be occasion of opening them sooner, than
what we have here proposed; either for strengthening the Bandage, or for
preserving the Stitches, by using the Dry-suture; or for the vehemence of some
Symptom enforcing it; the consideration of which is left to the judgment of the
Artist.

CLXXVII. After the Wound is filled up with Flesh, you may Cicatrize with
Epuloticks; as Unguent. Desiccativum Rubrum, Aqua Calcis vivae; or with Vitriol
and Alum-stone, and dry Lint, or some proper Styptick-Water.

CLXXVIII. A word or two now, of Tents: they are not necessary in Wounds which
are superficiary, straight, and breed but little Pus; nor ought the Cure of
Wounds to be retarded by putting them in.

CLXXIX. But if the Wound is deep, oblique, and breeds much Pus; they are
sometimes necessary, that a passage may be kept open by them, for the purulent
Matter to pass out; and for Medicines to enter into the inside of the Wound,
that the orifice may not be closed up, before the lowest, and most inward part
of it is digested, deterged, and incarned in order to healing.

CLXXX. And though Tents are useful and necessary, yet are they many times less
necessary in green Wounds; yea hurtful, and hinderers of the Cure: concerning
which, Tulplus, Lib. 4. Obs. 22. has a very remarkable History.

CLXXXI. A young Woman having six Wounds, rather by pricking or stabbing, than
cutting, was according to custom, tented; but these Tents were so uneasy to
her, that the same night she was forced to take them out; unless she should
have been kept all night from sleeping, into which she fell, so soon as they
were taken out; and linen Cloths being dipped in Spirit of Wine were only
outwardly applied; by the benefit whereof, before the twelfth day, her Wounds
were both happily filled up with Flesh, and healed.

CLXXXII. From this Observation, Tulpius wonders at the folly and madness of
some Men; who that they may be thought to do something, fill green Wounds up
with Tents, thereby hindering them from healing: for that the mutual contact
being prevented, they hinder the necessary coalition; (which is directly
against the first Intention of Cure.) Another Remark I make, which is on the
mighty healing power and virtue, of Spirit of Wine.

CLXXXIII. The fifth and last Intention of Cure of Wounds, is either the
preventing of Symptoms, before they arise; or the correcting and removing them,
after they once appear: for as much as no sincere Healing can possibly be,
whilst they are present.

CLXXXIV. There are many Symptoms and Accidents of Wounds, such as we have
enumerated in Sect. 39. of this Chapter aforegoing: of which we shall treat at
large in Chap. 9. of this Book following. But because the three first of them,
viz. Hemorrhage, Pain, and Inflammation, are incident to almost all Wounds, and
many times nearly as old as the Wound it self, we shall speak something to them
here.

CLXXXV. 1. Hemorrhage. This is incident to all Wounds, more or less, and
sometimes the Cause of all other Accidents. Outwardly, you must bring the lips
of the Wound close together by suture, and then apply such Medicines as have a
drying and agglutinative faculty: as Galen's Powder, made of Aloes i.
Frankincense ii. white of an Egg, q.s. to make it of the thickness of Honey: in
this dip the wool of a Hare, and apply it: also a Plaster over it, made of the
same Restrictives, with Compress and Bandage.

CLXXXVI. But if the Wound is such, as you cannot bring the lips of it
together, apply the aforesaid Powder; or this following, upon Dossels, on the
bleeding Vessels.

CLXXXVII. Salt extracted out of the Cap. mort. of Vitriol, calcined almost to
blackness, powder of Man's. Blood, of the flesh of a Toad, Catechu, Saccharum
Saturni, A. ss. Opium in powder ii. mix them.

CLXXXVIII. And over the Dossels, put next, your astringent Emplaster, with
Compress and Bandage over all: which done, place the Member in such a position,
as may be most for the ease of the Patient.

CLXXXIX. 2. Pain, is the next thing to be considered; in easing of which we
ought to be as speedy as may be, because nothing dispirits and weakens the
Patient more; nor in Wounds especially, causes more disturbance, inducing an
Afflux of Humors, Inflammation, etc.

CXC. Outwardly, apply Anodyns; made of the roots and leaves of Mallows,
Henbane, Hemlock, flowers of red Roses, Camomil and Melilot, Linseed,
White-Poppy-seed, Opium, etc. which may be made into Fomentations, Cataplasms,
etc. being boiled in Sheeps-head-broth, Oxycrate, or new Milk; and the
Cataplasm may be brought to a thickness with Barley-flower.

CXCI. And Inwardly, give Our Specific Laudanum, or Guttae Vitae, in a proper
Dose; which in extreme pains in Wounds, restores Nature, by giving respite, and
causing gentle rest; strengthens her in her Faculties, and accelerates her
Operations of Digestion, Suppuration, Detersion, Incarnating, etc.

CXCII. But if the Pain is caused by Matter which wants a passage forth; you
must give it a vent by the Knife, or by Caustic, or by both, as you may see
reason.

CXCIII. 3. Inflammation. If an Inflammation is already induced, hasten
Revulsion by Vesicatories, Clysters, and Lenient Purges, to loosen the Body;
and lay upon the Part already inflamed, this: Henbane-leaves, boil them in
Milk; add thereto a new-laid Egg, Camphir in powder i. Saffron i. Oil of
Poppyseed i. and with Barley-flower make a Cataplasm, which apply.

CXCIV. If after this Application, it shall seem to tend to suppuration; then
you must proceed exactly as we have taught in Lib. 3. Cap. 5. aforegoing of
this Work, and to which I refer you.

CXCV. Thus have we completed this our Discourse of Wounds in General, which
we thought not at first to have made half thus long: but the matter multiplied
upon us; and we were the more willing to be large here, because it is the true
Ground or Foundation of the whole Art of Curing Wonuds of all sorts: and
therefore this being at first well understood, the whole Superstructure
following, which is built upon it, will become very easy, and intelligible.

CHAP. II. Of External VULNERARIES.
I. WOVNDS are cured either by the first Intention, or by the second: if by the
first, there is no need of Digestives, Incarnatives, or Cicatrizers; for one
only Medicament generally does the work, and commonly at one dressing; of which
kind are Balsamic Bodies, and such things as preserve from Putrefaction: and
Stypticks, these are purely called by the name of Vulneraries.

II. Wounds cured by the second Intention, require more orders of Medicaments,
without which, the Work cannot be performed: if Contusion is, there must be
Digestives; if loss of Substance, Sarcoticks or Incarnatives; and where loss of
Skin, there must be Epuloticks, or Cicatrizers.

III. So that the kinds of Medicaments to answer both the first, and second
Intention of Curing, seem to stand in this Order. 1. Pure Vulneraries, or
Healers. 2. Digestives, or Maturatives. 3. Sarcoticks, or Incarnatives. 4.
Epuloticks; or Cicatrizers.


IV. Sennertus also says, where the Cure is attempted by the second Intention,
that in regard Digestive Medicaments are more moist than others, they are to be
used with great caution: for if they be overlong applied, the matter will not
only be digested, but also so putrify, and the Wound will degenerate into a
sordid Ulcer.

V. Wherefore says he, the safest way is, not always to confide in one
Medicament alone, but rather to compound them according to the nature and
temper of the Part, and to mingle Digestives with Sarcoticks: since that
Experience testifies, that such are used with far better success than mere
Maturatives.

VI. And Franciscus Arcaeus says, that with his Balsam or Unguent, forthwith
applied in the very beginning, he himself most happily cured the greatest, and
most grievous Wounds; the use whereof I my self (says Sennertus) have likewise
very often experienced with very happy success.

I. Pure Vulneraries.
VII. Simple Vulneraries are, Turpentine Common, that of Strasburgh, of Venice,
and Scio, Gum Elemi, Frankincense, Myrrh, Turpentine or Balsam of the
Cedar-tree, Balsam Capivii, de Chili, of Gilead, of Peru and Tolu: of these,
Compound-Balsams are made, as follows.

VIII. Balsam or Liniment of Arcaeus. Sheep-suet ii. Gum Elemi, Turpentine, A.
jss. Hogsgrease i. melt them at the Fire, and make a Balsam.

IX. Another. Sheep-suet iv. Gum Elemi, Balsam Capivii, Balsam of Peru, A. ii.
Oil of Petre i. melt, mix, and make a Balsam.

X. Another. Sheep-suet viii. Frankincense, Strasburgh- Turpentine, Oleum
Terrae rubrum, A. iv. Balsam Capivii, Gum Elemi, Balsam of Peru, A. ii.
Oil-olive, Oil of Petre, A. i. mix, melt, and make a Balsum.

XI. Another. Sheep-suet viii. Balsams of Capivii, Chili, Peru, Tolu;
Strasburg- Turpentine, A. ii. Petroleum i. mix, melt, and make a Balsam.

XII. Another. Sheep-suet viii. Gum Elemi iv. Strasburg- Turpentine, Balsam
Capivii, of Chili, Tolu, and Peru, A. ii. Frankincense i. Oil of
Juniperberries, of Lavender, of Limons, of Oranges, and of Sassafras, A.iii.
mix, melt, and make a Balsam.

XIII. Another. Oil-olive lbijss. juice of Tobacco lbjss. tops of Hypericon,
Adders-tongue, Bugle, Sanicle, Self-heal, Solomons-seal, A. M. jss.
Hounds-tongue, Plantane, Wintergreen, Smallage, Yarrow, A. M.j. roots of
Solomons-seal iv. cut all these things very small with a Chopping-knife; mix
them with the Oil and Juice, and boil to the consumption of the watery
humidity, and strain forth: to the strained Liquor, add Gum Elemi viii. Balsam
Capivii iv. Balsam of Peru and Tolu, Chio- Turpentine, A. ii. mix, and make a
Balsam.

XIV. An Emplaster. Fat Frankincense lbiv. juice of Tobacco lbii. Sheep-suet,
Beeswax, Oil-Olive, A. lbi. mix, and boil to the consistence of an Emplaster;
to which add Gum Elemi, Balsam of Tolu, A. lbss. mix them.

XV. An Ointment. Sheep-suet, Oil-olive, A. lbii. juices of Melilot and
Tobacco, A. lbi. Adders-tongue, Hypericon, Sanicle, Self-heal, Smallage,
Solomons-seal, Yarrow, A. M. iii. chop the Herbs very small with a
Chopping-knife, and boil all together, to the consumption of the Juices: strain
out by pressing, and to the strained Liquor add Cypress-Turpentine, Gum Elemi,
Balsam Capivii and Tolu, A. v. Frankincense iv. Wax iii. Petroleum ii. Oil of
Juniper i. mix them.

II. Digestives, or Maturatives.
XVI. Simple Digestives are, Juices of Adders-tongue, of of Bugle, of
Hypericon, of Ladies-mantle, of Plantane, of Sanicle, of Self-heal, of Parsley,
and of Smallage, boiled up to the thickness of new Honey; Meals of Wheat,
Barley, Pease, Beans, and Fenugreek; Gum Elemi, Frankincense, Mastich,
Olibanum, Turpentine all the kinds, Sugar, Oil of Ben, Oil of Olives, Oil of
Roses, Oil of Mastich, Sheep-suet, fresh Butter, Hogs-lard, Neats-foot-Oil,
Honey, yolks of Eggs, Ox-Gall; pulps of Figs, Raisons, Corans, Dates, Saffron,
Briony-roots boiled soft. Of these Compounds may be made, as follows.

XVII. Unguentum Basilicon, or Tetrapharmacon. Oil-Olive ix. Beeswax,
Frankincense, Ship-Pitch, A. vi. mix, melt, and make an Ointment.

XVIII. Another. Beeswax, Frankincense, ship-pitch, Turpentine, Sheeps or Beef
Suet, A.i. Gum Elemi ii. Oil v. mix, and melt; to which add, being almost cold,
Myrrh and Olibanum, both in fine powder, A. i. mix them well.

XIX. Another. Strasburgh- Turpentine i. yolks of Eggs No ii. mix them well
together.

XX. Another. Strasburgh- Turpentine ii. Honey i. yolks of Eggs No ii. mix them
well together.

XXI. Another. Turpentine washed in White Wind ii. yolk of one Egg;
Barley-flower, Honey, A. q.s. mix them.

XXII. Or, Turpentine washed in Wine, fresh Butter, A. i. Frankincense,
Mastich, A. q.s. mix them.

XXIII. Another. Fresh Butter i. Turpentine ss. yolk of one Egg; Frankincense
i. mix them.

XXIV. Another. Oil iv. Beeswax i. Frankincense, Mastich, A. ii. yolks of Eggs
No ii. Butter q.s. mix them.

XXV. Another. Turpentine i. yolk of one Egg; Oil of Roses ss. mix the
Turpentine and Yolk first, after the Oil, which mix well.

XXVI. Or, Rosin, Wax, Turpentine, Oil of Roses, A ii. yolks of Eggs No iii.
Frankincense, Mastich, Myrrh, A. ii. mix, and make an Ointment.

XXVII. Or, Oil lbjss. Wax lbss. Turpentine iii. Frankincense, Olibanum, Rosin,
A. ii. Mastich i. Saffron i. mix, and make an Ointment.

XXVIII. Or, Juices of Tobacco, Melilot, A. x. juices of Ladies-mantle, of
Sanicle and Saracens-consound, A. v. Turpentine iii. Beef Suet, Oil, A.q.s.
make an Ointment.

XXIX. Or, Oil of Bays ii. Sheeps-suet i. Frankincense, Mastich, Olibanum,
Turpentine, A. ss. mix them.

XXX. Or, Oil of Hypericon, Turpentine, Gum Elemi, Wax, Rosin, Ship-Pitch,
Frankincense, A. viii. Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Oil of Aniseeds, of Myrrh, and of
Wax, A. iv. mix them.

III. Sarcoticks, or Incarnatives.
XXXI. Simple Sarcoticks are, 1. Roots of Bistort, Birthwort, Cinkfoil, the
greater Consound, Comfrey, Hermodacts, Orrice, Sanicle, Solomons-seal,
Tormentil. 2. Leaves of Agrimony, Avens, Balsam-apple, Bawm, Betony, Birthwort,
Burnet, Centory, Cinkfoil, Costmary, Consound, Cyperus, Doves-foot, Fetherfew,
Flixweed, Germander, Goldenrod, Hypericon, Horstail, Hounds-tongue,
Ladies-mantle, Maudlin, Melilot, Mouse-ear, Orpin, Plantane, Sanicle,
Self-heal, Scordium, Speedwel, Shepherds-purse, Scabious, Tansy, Vervain,
Yarrow. 3. Flowers of Hypericon, Pomgranates, Red-Roses. 4. Seeds of Agnus
castus, Bay Berries, Acorus. 5. Meals of Wheat, Barley, Malt, Pease, Beans,
Cicers, Lentils, Lupins, Orobus, Tares. 6. Rosins, Gums; Aloes, Colophony,
Elemi, Frankincense, Mastich, Myrrh, Olibanum, Pitch, Pine-Rosin, Larch-Rosin,
Sarcocol, Sandararcha, Sanguis draconis, Scammony, Tacamahacca, Turpentine of
all sorts, all Natural Balsams. 7. Earths; as fine Bole, Terra Lemnia,
Sigillata, Chalk. 8. Minerals; as Alum, burnt Alum, Ceruse, Litharge, burnt
Lead, Pompholix, Lapis Haematitis, Calaminaris, Tutia, Spodium, Vitriol, Caput
mort. of Vitriol, and Salt of the same, Crocus Martis, Saccharum Saturni, Calx
Jovis, Bezoar minerale. 9. Oils; Oil-Olive, of Ben, of Roses, of the
Balsam-apple. 10. Fats; as of Beef, Sheep, Goat, Deer, Hog. 11. Beeswax,
Honey, Honey of Roses, Ox-gall. Of all these you may make Compound Oils,
Balsams, Liniments, Ointments, Cerates, and Emplasters at pleasure: and among
some Compounds, we have these following.

XXXII. A Vulnerary Oil. Turpentine, Oil of Bays, A. iv. Oil of Roses vi. Oil
of Eggs ii. mix, and digest in the Sun, 'till they have a yellow color.

XXXIII. An Oil, or distilled Balsam, for Wounds of the Nerves. Oil lbiii.
Turpentine lbii. Oil of Bays vi. Euphorbium, Cloves, Gum of Ivy, Ammoniacum,
Galbanum, Opopanax, Sagapenum, Frankincense, Mastich, A. i. mix all together,
and distill an Oil or Balsam by Retort.

XXXIV. An Oil for Wounds of the Nerves, Veins, Bones. Turpentine lbii.
Linseed-Oil lbi. Pine-Rosin vi. Aloes, Frankincense, Mastich, Sarcocol, A. iii.
Mace, Xyloaloes, A. ii. Saffron ss. distill in a Retort, with a gentle Fire: so
have you a clear Water, and a reddish Oil; augment the Fire to the end of the
Distillation, and separate the Oil from the Water. This Oil consolidates
speedily, and without pain.

XXXV. Another Oil for the same. Turpentine lbi. Galbanum, Gum Elemi, of Ivy,
Frankincense, Mastich, Myrrh, A. iv. Aloes, Xyloaloes, Galanga, Cloves,
Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Cubebs, A. ii. Spir. Vini, q.s. digest 24 hours, then distill
in a copper Vesica.

XXXVI. A Vulnerary Oil. Flowers of Sulphur iii. Oil of Myrtles jss. Camphir
ss. Turpentine vi. mix, digest, distill, and keep the Oil for use.

XXXVII. The Oil of Hispania, so called. Old Oil lbiii. Malmsey lbiii. Oil of
Turpentine lbii. Frankincense lbi. Carduus, Hypericon, Valerian, A. lbss.
Cochinele in fine powder, Pine-Rosin, Myrrh, A. iv. bruise the Herbs, and
digest them in Wine 24 hours; then mix the other things boil to the consumption
of the humidity, and strain out the Oil by pressing: after which add Oil of
Turpentine.

XXXVIII. A Vulnerary Balsam. Oil of Roses viii. Turpentine, Frankincense,
Mastich, Olibanum, and Rosin, A. jss. Oil of Turpentine, and of Bays, A. i. Oil
(...) and of Juniper, A.ss. Saccharum Saturni ii. mix, boil a little, and stir
it, 'till it is cold.

XXXIX. An Incarnative Emplaster. Gum Elemi i. Mummey, Aloes, Mastich, Litharge
of Gold, Sanguis draconis, Rosin, A. ii. roots of Comfrey and round Birthwort
in powder, A. ss. Turpentine, q.s. mix, and make an Emplaster.

XL. Another for the same. Wax, Rosin, Pitch, Olibanum, Vitriol, A. iv.
Turpentine vi. red Myrrh, Oil of Juniper, Oil of Eggs, A. ss. Camphir ii. Oil
of Roses q.s. mix, and make an Emplaster.

XLI. An Emplaster for a Wound, new or old. Wax xx. old Oil xviii. Litharge of
Gold xii. Ammoniacum iv. Bdellium, Olibanum, A. iii. Loadstone ii. Galbanum,
Opopanax, Mastich, Myrrh, A.jss. Verdigrise, long Birthwort roots, A. i. Lapis
Calaminaris, Tutia, A. ss. dissolve the Gums in Vinegar, powder the rest; mix,
and make an Emplaster.

XLII. Another for the same. Wax, Rosin, A. lbi. Sheeps-suet, Hog's Grease,
Turpentine, A. iv. Vinegar iii. mix them.

XLIII. An Emplaster for a Puncture, or Pricking. Oil, Rosin, Bears-fat, Sheep
and Beef Suet, A.ii. Oil of Cow-heels iijss. May-Butter vi. Litharge of Silver
xii. Scales of Brass, Mastich, A. jss. Oil of Wax iv. mix, and make an
Emplaster.

XLIV. A Balsam of Mindererus. Cyprus Turpentine, Oil of Hypericon, A. iv. fine
Gum Elemi vi. distilled Oil of Wax q.s. mix, and make a Balsam.

XLV. A Balsam. Roots of the greater Consound, cut and bruised i. Oil-olive
lbiv. boil, and press forth the Liquor, in this Liquor put fresh Roots lbi. and
boil as before; which repeat the third time, and continue boiling till all the
Aquosity is gone. Take of this Oil lbii. Oil of Turpentine lbi. Flowers of
Hypericon and of Celandine, A. q.s. put all into a glass Vesica, or Bolt-head,
and digest in a Sand-heat 20 days; then strain out the Oil by pressing and
repeat the infusion of the Flowers to the third time; then press forth, and
keep the Balsam for use; which you are to drop warm into the Wound.

XLVI. A soft Emplaster. Frankincense, Rosin, Sheeps-suet, Wax, A. viii.
Olibanum iv. Turpentine ijss. Mastich, Myrrh, A.i. Camphir ii. Wine lbss. boil
them to an Emplaster.

IV. Epuloticks, or Cicatrizers.
XLVII. Simple Epuloticks are, 1. Roots of Avens, Cinkfoil, Madder, Comfrey,
Hermodacts, Sarsa, Tormentil. 2. Leaves of Agrimony, Avens, Archangel, Betony,
Buckshorn, Burdock, Coltsfoot, Devilsbit, Flixweed, Fluellin, Horsetail,
Hawkweed, Hypericon, Ladies-mantle, Lovage, Mugwort, Mint, Mullein, Plantane,
Perwinkle, Sanicle, Speedwel, Sage, Shepherds-purse, Strawberry, Self-heal,
Scabious, Southernwood, Tansy wild, Trefoil, Yarrow. 3. Flowers; as red Roses,
Balaustians. 4. Barks or Peels; Jesaits-bark, Pomgranate-peels. 5. Woods;
Sanders red, white, yellow; wood of Aloes, Lignum Rhodium. 6. Gums, Rosins; as
Aloes, Dragons-blood, Mastich, Myrrh, Olibanum, Sarcocolla, Scammony. 7.
Fruits; as Acorns, Galls, Sumach-berries, Grape-stones. 8. Earths; as fine
Bole, Terra Sigillata, Catechu, Chalk. 9. Stones; Lapis Calaminaris,
Spunge-stone, Sponge burnt, Alum. 10. Metals; Lead burnt, Litharge, Minium,
Saccharum Saturni, Mercurius coagulatus, Ceruse, Brass burnt and washed. 11.
Minerals; Tutty, Spodium, Pompholix, Cadmia, Antimony calcined, Caput mort. of
Vitriol, Salt of the Caput mort. flowers of Sulphur. Among Compounds, we have
these following.

XLVIII. A Powder. Scammony, Hermodactyls, A. i. Catechu ss. make each into a
fine powder, and mix them.

XLIX. Another. Roots of Tormentil, Bistort, round Birthwort, burnt Egg-shells,
Frankincense, Dragons-blood, A. ss. Lapis Calaminaris i. Litharge ii. make a
Powder.

L. Another. Salt of the Caput mortuum of Vitriol, Alum in fine powder,
Saccharum Saturni, Chalk, A. i. mix.

LI. Another. Fine Ceruse, Saccharum Saturni, fine Bole, calcined Talck,
Sanguis draconis, Crab's-eyes, Mastich, Tutty, A. i. Camphir ss. powder finely,
and mix them.

LII. Another. Scammony, Mastich, Olibanum, Rosm, A.i. make each into fine
powder, and mix them.

LIII. An Ointment. Oilomphacine, Oil of Roses, A. iii. Oil of Myrtles, Ung.
Populeum, A. ii. Plantane and Nightshade chopped small and bruised, A. M. i. boil
for some time, and then press forth; to which add Litharge of Gold iii. Wax ii.
Ceruse i. burnt Lead ss. Tutia, Brass burnt, A. ii. Camphir i. rub them in a
leaden Mortar to an Ointment.

LIVE. A Cerate. Unguent. Diapompholigos, Empl. Diapalmae, Grisaei, A.i. Gum
Elemi ss. Saccharum Saturni i. Wax, Oil A. q.s. make all into a Cerate.

LV. An Emplaster. Oil of Roses, Litharge, A. lbi. mucilage of Linseed, and
Orrice-roots, A.ii. mix, and boil to a due consistency, then add Wax,
Turpentine, A. ii. Frankincense, Mastich, A.i. mix, and make an Emplaster.

LVI. A Mixture. Pulvis Mercurii coagulati iv. Ung-Diapompholigos, Empl. de
Minio, with a little Oil, q.s. mix them, and apply it: it exceeds most
Epuloticks.

LVII. Empl. de Caranna cum Mercurio, Empl. de Ranis cum Mercurio, or in place
of the latter, Our Emplast. Mercuriale, Ana, melt them together over a very
gentle heat, and apply it to the Part. This not only Skins immediately, but
discusses Swellings, and drives back a Flux of Humors, though in a depending
Part: my own Experience can commend it. After these Examples, you may make a
thousand others.

CHAP. III. Of Internal VVLNERARIES, or WOVND-DRINKS.
I. THE next thing to be considered, is the preparation of Internal
Vulneraries, and Wound-Drinks: for we are to take care to promote an inward
Habit of Healing, as well as an outward; for as much as by these
Vulnerary-Potions, Physicians affirm (as Manardus, and others) they have alone
cured the worst and most desperate Ulcers.

II. Now of these, some Physicians will have two sorts: some, which they call
by the general name of Alteratives; and others, which they specially call
Vulneraries, or Traumaticks.

III. Alteratives under our present consideration, are such things as are
cooling, and incrassating, or thickning; and withal something astringent, but
not greatly astrictive; lest they might otherwise breed Obstructions.

IV. These Alteratives are administered for this purpose, that they may hinder
the Humors from growing hot; whereby they grow fluxil, and so are made apt to
receive a putridness.

V. These Alteratives are formed out of suchlike Simples, as these following:
Alehoof, Apples, Asparagus, Barley, Beets, Bloodwort, Borrage, Bugloss,
Bucks-horn-Plantain, Citron the juice, Coral levigated, Cucumbers, Corans their
juice, Crab's-eyes, Daisies, Dandelion, Dock sharp-pointed, Endive, Fumitory,
Grass, Hartshorn the Jelly, Lettice, Limon-juice, Mouse-ear, Nitre,
Orange-juice, Orpin, Pellitory of the Wall, Pearl levigated, Pomgranat-juice,
Poplar-buds, Poppy-beads, Plantain, Purslain, Quinces the juice, Roses, Sorrel,
Sal Prunellae, Sanders, Shepherds-purse, Solomons-seal, Succory, Tartar its
cream, Tormentil, Vine leaves and tendrils, Violets, Water-lillys, Whey
clarified, Wood Sorrel, Winter-cherries, Yarrow.

VI. And out of these you may make Juices, Infusions, Decoctons, Saline
Tinctures, Distilled Waters, Syrups, Electuaries, Pouders, Potions, etc.
according to the Form most agreeable to the Palate of the Patient, and
convenient to the strength, or weakness, and habit or constitution of the Sick:
and these things may be either Simple, prepared out of one single thing; or
Compound, prepared out of many of them together, as the Physician in reason
shall think fit.

VII. Vulnerary-Potions, or Wound-Drinks are no where made mention of by
Hippocrates, or any of the Ancients; but Moodern Physicians have loudly spoken
of them, and proclaimed their Praises.

VIII. Nothwithstanding, because the Ancients have said nothing of them, there
are some that will (right or wrong) speak against them, with offers of some
weak Arguments, in confirmation of their Opinion: amongst whom is Balduinus
Roussaeus, in his Medicinal Epistles, Epist. 66. who though he admits them, in
those cases where they reach the wounded Parts; as the Gullet, Stomach,
Intestines, etc. where they have but the place of Topics; yet will by no means
allow them an Use in Wounds of the External Parts, but rejects them, for these
Reasons:

IX. 1. Because Hippocrates and the Ancients made no mention of them. 2.
Because they cannot possibly penetrate unto the extreme Part; as Limbs, or
Head, etc. partly because of their distance, and partly, because Astringents
being mixed with them, may hinder their more deep penetration. 3. Because the
Medicaments themselves greatly differ; some of them being hot and opening,
others cold and astringent: whereby it appears not of what quality or faculty
the Medicaments should be, out of which the Potions are to be prepared. 4.
Because that being mostly astringent, they may do more hurt than good to the
Patient; for that they may obstruct the Liver and other the more noble Viscera.

X. To which we answer, 1. That though Hippocrates nor some of the more ancient
ancient Physicians have said nothing of them; yet Galen, Method. Med. lib. 5.
cap. 9. plainly inculcates their use, and has something which comes near to the
Wound-drinks we now make use of, where he speaks touching Potions to be used in
Wounds of the Thorax. But however, if nothing had been said of them by any of
the Ancients: Are they the Measures, and utmost Standards of Knowledge and
Wisdom to all succeeding Generations; have they fixed the Pillars, Ne plus
ultra, to all Mankind besides? If not, why should not Posterity have room and
liberty for Invention; and the privilege of enquiring after, and the hopes of
finding out those Secrets and Truths, which the Ancients knew nothing at all of.

XI. 2. To the second Objection we Answer, That if Roussaeus had known any
thing of the Circulation of the Blood, he would never have made this poor
Objection; for the Virtues of these Medicaments are mixed with the Chylous
Juice, and conveyed by the same into the Blood; where circulating therewith,
they are conveyed to all parts of the Body: and withal, the substance of the
Blood is made more Balsamic, and so endued with a more Sanative property; by
which the Wound is induced to a more speedy Healing.

XII. 3. To the third Objection we Answer, 1. That such Simples are to be
chosen, as may best suit with the Habit, or Constitution of the Patient. 2.
That Harmonies are produced out of Discords: and though the Simples may seem
almost diametrically opposite as to their first, and it may be second
qualities; yet by a due and skilful mixtion, one of an equal temprament may
result, having all the Sanative Virtues required. However, it is necessary that
all Vulneraries have an Astringency in them, for the strengthening the Crasis of
the Blood, which is the Natural Balsam of Life, and the Healing-principle; and
for that reason, most Wound-drinks are astringent: nor does their astringency
hinder their penetrating, since they are conveyed every where with the Blood.

XIII. 4. The last Objection is void; for many things are very opening, which
are also very astringent: What think you of the opening Vitriol of Mars, and
the opening Crocus Martis, which are certainly the greatest Openers in the
World, and yet not much inferior in astringency and stypticity to the Crocus
Martis astringens, which wants the Aperitive quality; the Liver it self is
opened and strengthened by Astringents, as by Rhubarb in Dropsies; and with
proper Astringents, which are Openers, all the Viscera are fortified and
strengthened, and made able to do their duties, and resist, or refuse the Matter
obstructing, let it be of what kind soever.

XIV. And if it should be granted, that none of the Ancients have made any
mention of these Wound-drinks: I pray how many other things have they been
ignorant of? Is it not evident, that many of the most useful Medicaments have
been found out, by those of aftertimes, which the Ancients were altogether
ignorant concerning? there is nothing more certain.

XV. Nor are the Virtues of any Wound-drink, to be estimated only from the
first or second qualities of their Ingredients, or such as arise from and
depend upon them: but from the Properties and Effects which result from the
whole Substance, and are made manifest or known to us, only by Experience.

XVI. These things being said, we will now see what modern Authors say in their
behalf: Johannes Manardus, Annotat. in Composita Mesuae, calce Distinct. 11.
says, that these Wound-drinks are very useful in the Cure of both new and old
Wounds, and that he had more than once made trial of them; and that with them
alone, he had cured the worst, and most desperate Ulcers.

XVII. And to this their Usefulness assent, not only Empericks, but also the
most learned, able, and skilful Physicians and Surgeons of later times; as
Guido, John de Vigo, Johannes Anglicus, Nicholaus Massa, Johannes Tagautius,
Johannes Andraeas a Cruce, Gabriel Fallopius, Andraeas Matthiolus, Ambrose
Paraeus, Fabricius ab Aquapendente, Ludovicus Septalius, Daniel Sennertus, and
a Cloud of other Witnesses, too tedious here to enumerate.

XVIII. Tagautius, Institut. Chirurg. lib. 2. cap. 12. says, that some kind of
Meats are more fit, and convenient for wounded persons, and some again more
offensive and hurtful: Why may we not therefore give the Patient to drink such
Medicaments, as may cause all things in the Blood, and about the affected Part,
to be rightly disposed, and be in good order?

XIX. Guido, Tract. 3. doct. 1. c. 1. says, that he has sometimes used these
Potions in old Ulcers, and Fistula's, Parts Cancerated, in Congelations of
Blood in the Inward-parts, and in a gathering together of Sanies or Matter in
the Breast and Lungs, etc.

XX. Matthiolus upon Dioscorides, l. 4. c. 16. says, shat by such Potions he
had seen healed, as well the Wounds of the Thorax, as those of the Intestines,
which were thought to be mortal, and altogether incurable, by any help or means
whatsoever.

XXI. Ludovicus Septalius, in his Medicinal Animadversions, lib. 8. No 181.
says, we thought good oftentimes to make use of some Vulnerary Potions for
many days together, until we saw the Matter was wholly consumed: and this was
when he perceived great store of Excrements to be from day to day generated;
either from errors of Diets, or the over-abounding of evil and vicious Humors
in the whole Body; or from something amiss and faulty in the Wound; the Body
being first evacuated, and the Inflammation abated.

XXII. And Paraeus, lib. 18. cap. 28. says, that Nature being assisted by such
a Potion, has oftentimes seemed to him to work Effects wonderful and miraculous
in the recovery of rotten Bones, cleansing of Apostems, and healing of Ulcers.

XXIII. For these Potions, (says he) though they do not by the Belly purge away
the noxious Humors, yet nevertheless they are very efficacious in the cleansing
of Ulcers, and in the preserving and freeing them from all the filth of
Excrementitious Humors, the defecating and carrying away the dregs of the
Blood, and the purging the Wound from its ichorous matter and impurity: in the
conglutinating also of broken Bones, and restoring the Nerves to their pristin
Union.

XXIV. And (says he) by these admirable Medicines, the Flesh, or any other
substance that is lost and perished, may readily be restored, and made good
again, and the Part restored to its former health.

XXV. Sennertus, Med. Pract. lib. 5. part. 4. cap. 11. says also, that these
Medicaments consume the excessive humidity of the Blood, which is wholly unfit
for agglutination; they supply a due and fit matter for the generating of
Flesh; and by their moderate astriction, they prevent and hinder the flux of
Humors unto the wounded Part.

XXVI. As for my own Opinion, it is deduced from Experience; and I know that
they beget a healthful habit of Body, and a disposition in the Wound to
healing. For whatsoever things they are which hurt the Wound, they are all of
them for the most part communicated to the Wound, by the fault of the Blood:
and therefore these rectifying the discrasy of the Blood, the distemper of the
Wound is accordingly altered, and so disposed to healing.

XXVII. Yet this all Authors observe, and agree to, that they are not to be
used in the beginning, and while there is no danger from the Wound, but that
Topics may be sufficient for the perfect cure thereof; nor yet if there is a
Fever present, or an Inflammation. But when the Part wounded is vitiated, the
Habit of the Body is cacoethick, and the Wound it self putrifies, and succeeds
not in the Cure: in these cases they may become very successful, not only in
Wounds, but likewise in old Ulcers, and dangerous Fistula's.

XXVIII. The most usual simple Vulneraries, for the preparation of
Wound-Drinks, are these following. 1. Roots; of Avens, Angelica, Alehoof,
Birthwort long and round, Bistort, China, Ceterach, Cinkfoil, Dittany white,
Gentian, Orrice, Rhapontick, Rhubarb, Sanicle, Solomon-seal, Sarsa, Tormentil,
Valerian or Setwal. 2. Herbs; Adders-tongue, Agrimony, Alehoof, All-heal,
Angelica, Avens, Bramble-tops, Buckhorn-Plantane, Bugle, Bugloss, Burnet,
Cabbage red, Calamint, Centory the less, Cinkfoil, Comfrey, Consound greater
and lesser, Consound Saracen's, Daisies, Devilsbit, Fluellin, Goldenrod,
Hart's-tongue, Herb-trinity, Horse-tail, Hounds-tongue, Hypericon, Hyssop,
Ladies-mantle, Mousear, Mugwort, Orpin, Perwincle, Pimpernel, Plantan, Ribwort,
Rupturewort, Sanicle, Savin, Saxifrage, Scabious, Sage, Wood-Sage, Sena,
Scordium, Self-heal, Solomons-seal, Speedwel, Strawberry-leaves, Tansy, Tansy
wild, Vervain, Vipers-Bugloss, Wintergreen, Yarrow. 3. Flowers; of
Clove-gilly-flowers, Hypericon, Lilly-convally, Roses, Rosemary, Sage. 4. To
these things add, Fine Bole, Cloves, Mace, Mummy, Winter's Cinnamon, Guaiacum,
Lentisk-wood, Sassafras, River-Crabs, Sperma Ceti, Vipers-flesh, Steel
prepared, Vitriol of Mars, Crab's-eyes levigated. And out of these Simples,
compound Diet-drinks are made, according to the following Examples.

XXIX. 1. A Vulnerary of Barbett. Roots of Comfrey ss. Wintergreen M. ii.
Sanicle P.ii. Strawberry-leaves, Ladies-mantle, Sage, A. M. i. red Wine q.s.
boil, strain, and dulcify with white Sugar. Dose, iii.

XXX. 2. Red Mugwort, leaves of Tree-Ivy, Sanicle greater and lesser,
Wintergreen, Ladies-mantle, Saracens Consound, A. i. Daisies ss. cut all small,
and infuse in the best Wine lbss. fair Water lbjss. digest in a close B.M. for
three hours; after let them stand all night, then strain out, and add, Nutmegs
Crab's-eyes, Mummy, A. ii. and dulcify with Sugar iv. Dose, iii.

XXXI. 3. Or, Red Mugwort, Sanicle, Ground Ivy, Saracens Consound,
Ladies-mantle, A. M. i. of the best Wine lbvi. boil them them in a close Pot,
over a gentle Fire, till a quarter is wasted; then strain out, and dulcify.
Give a Draught Morning and Night.

XXXII. 4. A Vulnerary-Drink of Barbett, where the Bone is broken. Round
Birthwort-roots j ss. Sowbread i. Self-heal, Cranes-bill, A. M. i. Savin,
Crab's-eyes, A.iv. Mummy, Galangal, A. ii. cut and powder all grossly, and boil
in red Wine lbiv ss. till lbiii. only remains; strain out, and sweeten with
Syrup of Comfrey iv. Dose, iii. Morning, Noon, and Night.

XXXIII. 5. A Traumatick, from Sennertus. Winter-green, Perwincle, Bugle,
Mugwort, Pimpernel, Agrimony, A. M.ii. boil in Wine q.s. to the wasting of a
quarter-part. Dose, vi. Morning, Noon, and Night.

XXXIV. 6. Another, from Sennertus. Tormentil, Strawberry-leaves, Sanicle,
Ladies-bedstraw, Wintergreen, A. M. i. boil in new Beer, q s. Dose, viii.
Morning, Noon, and Night.

XXXV. 7. Or thus: Wintergreen M. iv. leaves of Ground Ivy, M.iii. roots of
white Gentian iv. cut them small, and put them into six quarts of new Beer:
after two days the Patient may drink it. Dose, vi. Morning, Noon, and Night.

XXXVI. 8. Or thus: Saracens Consound the whole Plant M. iii. boil it in Wine
lbiii. to lbii. then strain out. Dose, iv. Morning, Noon, and Night.

XXXVII. 9. A powerful Diet-Drink. Shavings or Saw-dust of Oak-wood, of
Lentisk-wood, of Misselto, A. ii. roots of Birthwort, of Consound, of Centory,
of Madder, of Tormentil, of Valerian, A. ss. Chalybeated-water, viz. that in
which Steel has been oftentime quenched, as Smiths Forge-water lbxii. boil them
in a double Vessel, 'till a third or more is wasted; then add Alehoof,
Parsley-roots, Bramble-tops, Hemp-tops, Mousear, Herb-trinity, Periwinkle,
Horsetail, Strawberry-leaves, flowers of Lilly-convally, A. M. ss. Cinnamon,
Rhapontick, A. ss. and boiling again, almost half an hour; strain out, and add
thereto Aromatick-wine lbiii. lastly, dulcifie with Sugar. Dose, vi. Morning,
Noon, and Night.

XXXVIII. 10. Clary, Wintergreen, Periwinkle, Saracens- Consound, Woodbind,
Sanicle, Speedwel, Ladies-mantle, Tree-ivy, Mugwort, A. M.iii. stale, or rather
new Beer six quarts: mix, and digest fourteen days, or 'till it is a little
sharp; then draw off the humidity in a glass Vesica, in B.M. to dryness. Dose,
three spoonfuls at a time, three times a day.

XXXIX. 11. Another. Raspings of Guajacum iv. bark of the same Wood,
Sarsaparilla, A. ii. yellow Sanders, roots of Bistort, of Consound, of white
Dittany, of Tormentil, of Valerian, A. ss. Spring Water two gallons: infuse all
together for 24 hours, after boil in a double Vessel, or Diet-pot, to the
consumption of a third part: then add Horsetail, Betony, Mousear, Dittany of
Creet, Wintergreen, wild Tansy, tops of Brambles, Herb-trinity,
Strawberry-leaves, A. M. ss. Cinnamon ss. boil 'till three quarts only remain
after a strong expression; and then add of the best white Port-wine lbiii. and
make it pleasant with Sugar. Dose, iv. or more; Morning, Noon, and Night.

XL. 12. A Wound-Drink, which I have had great Experience of. Scabious,
Sanicle, Self-heal, Wintergreen, A. M.ii. Angelica, Betony, Sage, Bawm,
Scordium, Centory, Ladies-mantle, Herbtrinity, Avens, Perwincle, Speedwel,
Hops, A. M.i. Plantan, Buckhorn-Plantan, Borrage, Bugloss, Comfrey, Agrimony,
Hypericon, Cinkfoil, Bramble-buds, Mint, young Oak leaves or buds,
Woodbind-leaves, wild Daisies, Adders-tongue, Rosemary, red Beets, A. M.ss.
Guajacum and Sassafras rasped, Sarsaparilla bruised, A. iv. Rhodium rasped,
roots of Bistort, of Contrayerva, of Tormentil, of Valerian, A.ijss.
Coriander-seed, Caraways, A. ii. all being cut and bruised put them up into a
Bag with a Stone in it; which put into six Gallons of well-brewed Ale, and one
Gallon of Whitewine, with choice Honey lbiv. let all work together, and after
two or three days, the Patient may drink of it as his ordinary Drink.

XLI. 13. Another Excellent Wound-Drink. Avens, Herbtrinity, Ladies-mantle,
Periwinkle, A. M. iv. bruise them, and cut them small, and boil them in Water,
Wine, A. lbvi. 'till one third is consumed: strain out, and add good Spirit of
Wine or Brandy lbii. white Sugar lbi. or enough to make it pleasant. Dose, iv.
Morning, Noon, and Night.

XLII. Now here is to be noted, that Andraeas a Cruce says that these four,
viz. Avens, Herbtrinity, Ladies-mantle and Perwinkle, are to be extolled and
commended for this use: without doubt they are excellent things, but twice or
thrice that number are to be had full as good, and which upon trial, you will
find nothing inferior.

XLIII. Sennertus also says, that Herbs appropriated to the wounded Part, ought
to be observed and chosen; as Betony, Roses, etc. for Wounds of the Head;
Speedwel, etc. for Wounds of the Breast; Agrimony, etc. for Wounds of the Liver;
Ceterach or Spleenwort, etc. for Wounds of the Spleen; Strawberry-leaves, etc.
for Wounds of the Reins.

XLIV. And to the Examples here given, you may add, 1. Decoctum Traumaticum, 2.
Decoctum Vulnerarium, 3. Decoctum Cancri, 4. Decoctum Sudorificum, 5. Decoctum
aperitivum majus, 6. Decoctum aperitivum minus, 7. Decoctum Vulnerarium
Mynsichti: all which you may see in Our Pharmacopoeia Lon^inensis, lib. 4. cap.
14. sect. 5.8.11.20.26.28.30. also Our Decoctum Traumaticum, and Barbett's
Vinum Hydragogum, both which you may see in Our Doron Medicum, lib. 2. cap. 14.
sect. 4. and cap. 12. sect. 7. of the same Book.

XLV. Sennertus also has a specific Traumatick-pouder, which for the
excellency of it, we will give you here. Crab's-eyes levigated jss. Nutmegs in
fine powder i. mix them. Dose, ss, to i. in white Port-wine. Or thus:
Crab's-eyes levigated ii. Ivory calcined white, Pearl, A.vi. Coral iii. all
being in a fine or levigated powder mix them. Dose, i. at a time in Wine, or
Wine mixed with Water.

CHAP. IV. Of an HAEMORRHAGE in Wounds.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Haemorrhagia Vulneris; in English,
the Bleeding of a Wound; which is always to be understood of a violent and
symptomatical Bleeding.

II. And it is distinguished from (...), from the Part and Occasion; this
latter being for the most part a spontaneous bleeding at the Nose.

III. The Kinds. It is threefold: 1. That which proceeds from wounded Arteries.
2. That which proceeds from wounded Veins. 3. That which proceeds from a Wound
or hurt of both those Vessels.

IV. The Causes. The chief cause is declared in the Kinds, which is from a hurt
of one or more of the Vessels; which then always produces some notable
Haemorrhage; from whence proceeds oftentimes Faintings, Swoonings, and other
dangerous Symptoms.

V. Now though the Wound inflicted upon the Vessels is the prime or principal
Cause; yet it happens, and that oftentimes, that the Blood may be now and then
stopped for a season; and that it may afterward suddenly break forth again.

VI. This is many times caused from trouble or commotion of Mind, anger,
vexation, or (if the Wound was made by an Enemy) the presence of the Adversary;
by which the Spirits being perturbed, give a sudden motion to the Blood, and so
induces a new and fresh Haemorrhage in the Wound.

VII. Sennertus gives an Example, in two Brothers, the one of which had wounded
the other: while the Wound was binding up, the Brother which gave the Wound
came in to visit the the other; whereupon (though they were now reconciled) the
Blood presently broke forth afresh; which was without doubt from some secret
commotion of the Mind: for upon that Brother's departure, and being forbidden
any more visits, the Blood immediately stanched.

VIII. The Signs. It is known by sight: if it is from an Artery, the Blood is
seen to come forth by leaping, and with violence; being more hot, fervent,
thin, yellow, and frothy, than that which comes out of the Veins; and is always
accompanied with some notable alteration of the Pulse, weakness, and dejection
of strength.

IX. If it is from a Vein, the Blood is more thick, black, dark, and less hot;
coming forth without any violence or rushing, smoothly, and with an equal
pulse; far less dejecting the Spirits, than that which comes forth by the
Arteries.

X. If the greater Vessels are wounded, the Blood flows forth in greater
abundance, and with greater violence; but with far less, if it is one of the
lesser Vessels which is hurt.

XI. The Prognostics. An Arterial Haemorrhage is more dangerous than a Venal;
because an Artery wounded, is more difficult to be cured and consolidated, than
a wounded Vein, because of its hardness, perpetual motion, and violent leaping
forth of the Blood.

XII. An Haemorrhage from an Artery wounded longwise, obliquely or transversly;
is much more difficult to be stopped, than where the Artery is cut perfectly
asunder.

XIII. An Haemorrhage from an Artery cut transversly asunder, is more easily
curable; because the Artery will be again contracted, and its Orifices close
and shut again, and more easily meet, and grow together again, and be the
sooner covered and consolidated, with the circumjacent Flesh lying round about
it.

XIV. An overgreat Haemorrhage in Wounds, in what kind soever, is very
dangerous, because the Blood is the Fountain and Treasure of Life: for when the
Vital Spirits are called forth, it causes a weakness of the Pulse, with a
frequency and inequality, and sometimes an intermission; also a Syncope, or
fainting and swooning, Chilness of the outward parts, extreme Coldness,
inordinate Sweats, Convulsions, Sighings, Sobbings, Delirium, and sometimes at
length Death it self.

XV. Hence Hippocrates, Sect. 5. Aph. 5. says, that a Convulsion or Sighing,
happening upon an abundant Flux of Blood, is always very evil and dangerous.

XVI. And in Sect. 7. Aph. 9. that a Delirium or Convulsion happening upon a
great Hemorrhage, is evil, and full of danger.

XVII. And this is more especially caused by an Arterial Haemorrhage; because
therewith, there is a greater effusion and dissipation of Native Heat, and
Vital Spirits.

XVIII. A Venal Haemorrhage is without danger, if it is in an external place;
where Applications can be easily made, and the smaller Veins only are wounded.

XIX. The Cure. The Indications of Cure are twofold: 1. The union and
consolidation of the wounded Vessels, of which we shall say nothing in this
Chapter; it belonging to Chap. 11. following. 2. The stopping of the
Haemorrhage, or stanching of the Blood; which where it is very great, dejecting
the Spirits, Strength, and Powers of the Body, ought first to be done, before
the unition and conglutination of the Vessels; that the Patient may not run a
manifest hazard of his Life.

XX. Now an Haemorrhage may be stopped by application of fit Remedies, and well
Binding-up: but if by this means the Blood cannot be stanched, but shall yet
break through the closed Wound and Bandage, by reason of its impetuous violence,
then all those things which do induce that violence, are to be removed and
forbidden.

XXI. As Anger, vehement Joy, Drinking of Wine, Brandy, or other hot Liquors;
hot and thin Humors of the Body fermenting, violent motions of the Body, or
action of the Part wounded; the declining, and downward-position of the Member,
and the motion of an Artery not wholly cut asunder.

XXII. There are several ways by which Blood may be stanched: 1. By the
application of Dossels or Pledgets of Lint or Towe, moistened either in the
glair of Eggs; or in a mixture of Vinegar p. i. with Water p. iii. in tender
Bodies: or Vinegar p. i. with Water p. ii. in more hardy Bodies.

XXIII. This Mixture is called Posca, and is to be applied warm; because cold
Applications are hurtful to Wounds. Dry Lint or Towe must be avoided, because
they stick so fast to the lips of the wounded Parts; that by removing them,
(which must be with some force) a new flux of Blood is often caused; and if
fomenting with some fit Liquor is used, as Milk, Butter and Beer warmed, etc.
it is often prejudicial in Wounds of the fleshy Parts.

XXIV. 2. By the application of Crepitus Lupi, than which there is scarcely any
thing to be named, which can more powerfully and certainly do it.

XXV. For it being of a nature extremely dry, and drying, as it will no way
admit of the flowing forth of the Blood; (which those Medicaments do which are
naturally moist, and therefore are less useful in stanching of Blood;) so it
will likewise subsist, and stick fast in the Vessels.

XXVI. But it will be most useful for this purpose, if it is first with a
Thread tied round, and then pressed hard together in a Screw-Press, letting it
lie therein for some certain time: for so when it comes to be imposed upon the
Wound, it again dilates it self, and puts a stop to the Haemorrhage or flux of
Blood.

XXVII. 3. By Deligation of the Vessels (where it may be) whether Vein or
Artery: this is only used when great Vessels are Wounded. Now here is to be
observed, first that if a Nerve accompanies the Vessel, (as in the
Soporal-Artery which has the recurrent Nerve annexed to it) you must separate
the Nerve therefrom, for otherwise, that part into which the Nerve is inserted
will be deprived both of moving and feeling, besides the great pain which will
be excited.

XXVIII. Secondly, in the deligation of the Vessel, the binding is not to be
too strait, because the thread will cut the Vessel asunder too soon, and so
cause a now Hemorrhage: the thread ought to be either of strong Silk, or Steel
Hemp, as they call it, such as is Sealing thread, which will not easily rot,
whereby there will be less fear of a new flux of Blood, which latter may prove
more dangerous than the former. Ambrose Parey lib. 11. cap. 20. used this way
after Amputation, but it is very troublesome, and not mightily approved of now.

XXIX. 4. By Application of Sarcoticks or Incarnatives. Galen, Meth. Med. lib.
5. cap. 4. Prescribes this. fine Aloes iii. Frankincense ii. make them into a
powder, and mix it with down of a Hare, and white of an Egg, so much as to
bring it to the consistence of Honey. Spread this upon Dossels of Tow, and so
lay it upon the Vessel, and the whole Wound; the Vessel being first closed with
the finger, and then cleansed from the Clotted Blood and moisture, with a piece
of Sounge dipped in red Wine, or some astringent Decoction, and the parts of the
Wound about your Finger be sprinkled with the former Powder.

XXX. The Pledget or Dossel armed as aforesaid, being laid on, presently press
it down with your finger; which keep so, till you have filled up the Wound with
more ar^ed Pledgets or Dossels.

XXXI. This done, apply a double Cloth over all, moistened in some astringent or
styptick Liquor, and wrung out; and then in a fit and convenient manner bind up
the Wound with Swaths or Rousers, beginning to roll below the Wound; but when
you are come to the Wound, you may compass it with three or four
Circumvolutions, then ascend and roll the part above the Wound, to press the
Blood out of the Vessel, that the flux of Blood may be stayed; and open not the
Wound till the third or fourth day.

XXXII. When you come to dress it, all the Pledgets or Dossels are to be taken
away, except the first, which imediately sticks to, and closes the Vessel;
which done, the Wound is to be sprinkled with more of the powder, as before,
and then over it new Armed Dossels are to be applied; and thus the Wound is to
be dressed every other day, till it is incarnated, and no fear is left, of
another Hemorrhage.

XXXIII. But if after the first dressing, the Blood shall begin again to flow,
and the Pledgets of their own accord grow loose; then with your Finger, press
down gently upon the Vessel that nothing may flow forth, and take away the
former moistened Pledget very carefully, dry the Wound, strew on more of the dry
powder, and then apply new Armed Pledgets, binding it carefully up as before;
for so long as the Pledgets or Dossels shall be softened by the Blood, the
Hemorrhage cannot be said to be sufficiently stopped.

XXXIV. These following compositions are also commended in this case. Aloes,
Frankincense, white Starch, fine Bole, down of a Hare, Cobwebs, A.q.s. mix and
make a powder. Archangel, Moss of the Sloe-tree, Nettleroots, Dragons, A. q.s.
make a powder and strew upon the Wound.

XXXV. Guilielmus Fabricius, commends this following. white Starch iii:
Water-frogs dried and poudred i: Whites of Eggs dried and poudred, new Sponge
torrified and poudred, Sanguis draconis, Frankincense, moss of a Man's Skull
Parget, A. ss. fine Bole, Terra Sigillata, A. ii: Down of a Hare torrified and
poudred i: make all into a very fine powder.

XXXVI. Catechu, Cortex Peruanus, fine Aloes, Olibanum, Myrrh, Powder of
Toads-Flesh, A. i: Sanguis Draconis, ashes of an old Hat, Saccharum Saturni,
Man's Blood dried, Crocus Martis astringens, Nut-galls, Opium, A. ss: make each
into a fine powder, and mix them. Now here is to be noted, that these Medicines
are to be used, till so much flesh is bred about the Vessel, as to close up its
Orifice; for till then, the fear of an Hemorrhage will not be over. See lib. 3.
cap. 7. sect. 16. ad 20. and cap. 15. sect. 24, 25.

XXXVII. 5. By application of Astringents and Stypticks, which are yet the more
powerful stoppers of an Haemorrahage. Sennertus, lib. 5. par. 4. cap. 14.
commends this. Take Roch-alum, q.v. powder it, and put it into an Ox-bladder,
and so put it into a Kettle of hot Water to be dissolved; distill this Water by
an Alembick, and continue the Work so long, till the Faeces are dry: these
Faeces dissolve again in an Ox-bladder as before, and distill again; and repeat
this Work till the whole substance of the Alum shall be converted by
Distillation into Water.

XXXVIII. This Recipe is the same, and differs not much in the Preparation from
the Alumen dulce liquidum in Our Pharmacopoeia Bateana, lib. 1. cap. 9. sect.
10. 5. page 376. a. which is a Magisterial Spirit of Alum, and is accounted one
of the best Stypticks known in the World.

XXXIX. And to this you may add the Aqua Styptica, and its Succedaneum; also
Stypticum Regis, or Royal Styptick, Terra Vitrioli dulcis, Arcanum Aluminis:
which you may see in Our Pharm. Bateana, lib. 1. cap. 1. sect. 56. and 57. page
29. and 30. cap. 9. sect. 12. page 378. and sect. 104. page 581. and those
described in lib. 3. cap. 11. sect. 111, 112. aforegoing, of this Work.

XL. If you cannot come to reach the Vessel with your Finger, you may inject
some astringent Liquor; made of fine Bole, Terra Sigillata, red Oker, Sanguis
Draconis, new Galls, Hypocistis, juice of Sloes, Acacia, juices of Plantan,
Comfrey, Knotgrass, Horsetail, Leeks, Bistort, Docks, Yarrow, etc. out of which
you may make such a Liquor as this is.

XLI. Take Smiths-forge-water lbjss. juices of Comfrey, Knotgrass, Horsetail,
Bistort, Yarrow, A. ii. Vitriol-stone in fine powder i. fine Bole, Terra
sigillata, Roch-Alum, Saccharum Saturni, A. ii. mix, and make an Injection;
which inject softly into the Wound with a Syringe.

XLII. 6. By Application of Specificks. Some things are said to stanch the
Blood by a specific property; for which purpose, Strawberry-water is commended
in all Haemorrhages. So also the root of Pseudomelanthium, which some call
Lychnis, sive Lychnoides Segetum, sive Nigellastrum, Cockle, or Corn wild
Campion, being held under the Tongue, is said to stop an Haemorrhage.

XLIII. And there are some which recommend to us for this purpose, the roots of
Succory with the white flower; and it has been found by experience, that
holding the Jasper-stone in the hollow of the Hand, the Blood has been stopped:
others have been cured, by holding Lapis Haematitis, or the Boodstone in the
Hand, or tying it to the brawny part of the Arm.

XLIV. Others have been cured, by applying to the Part affected the powder of
the Boodstone in good quantity; also the powder of the Loadstone, and Crocus
Martis astringens: but nothing stops a Haemorrhage more powerfully, that we
have yet met with, than the Moss which grows upon Humane Sculls, Human Blood
dried, Powder of Toads, and Catechu.

XLV. 7. By applying Revulsives, and Interceptives or Repellers. Revulsives,
are Cupping-Glasses, both without and with Scarification; which, as need shall
require, are to be put upon remote and opposite places: and some Authors
prescribe Bleeding in opposite places, yet this can be, but when the strength
of the Patient is but little impaired; and then to be taken away by little and
little, and not at once.

XLVI. Interceptives are applied, to drive back, or hinder the Afflux, and
incrassate the Blood while it is flowing: and these are to be applied unto the
Vessels by which the Blood flows unto the wounded Part; but above upon the
Part, toward the root of the Vessel, and more especially (where it may be
done) on the exterior Parts, where only the Veins ly hid under the Skin, and
not covered with much Flesh.

XLVII. We ought ( says Hippocrates, Sect. 5. Aph. 23.) to make use of some
cold Medicament, in those who have any Haemorrhage, or are likely to be
troubled therewith; and this Medicament is not to be applied unto the some
place, but to those places from whence it flows.

XLVIII. Now these Intercepters are made of things cold and astringent; as
Posca, rough and acid Wine, Rose Water, Plantan-water, Oak and Nightshade
Waters, Barley-meal, Henbane-seeds, powder of Myrtle-berries, fine Bole, Terra
sigillata, Dragons-blood, Mastich, Olibanum, red Roses, Balaustians, whites of
Eggs, etc.

XLIX. Out of which, and others of like kind, which we have enumerated more at
large, in Lib. 3. cap. 5. sect. 57. ad 78. aforegoing; you may compound and
make various Forms, as you shall see fit; of which you have also various
Examples in the places before cited, so that no more need be said thereof here.

L. The Interceptive being laid on, the Part is to be bound up with a Swath or
Rowler, which may bind close the Vessel toward the root thereof: and the
Ligature is not to be loosned before the third or fourth day; or indeed it is
not to be removed, till the Haemorrhage is thoroughly stopped.

LI. 8. By cutting the Vessels quite through, or asunder, where the Haemorrhage
is made by a Wound of the Vessel oblique, or transverse. This is known by the
great effusion of Blood, which follows upon the Wound; which is always greater,
than if the Vessel was wholly cut asunder.

LII. In this case, you must cut the Vessel completely through, or asunder; for
so you will the more easily stanch the Blood: for the Vessel will be drawn
back, and on both sides contracted within it self; and so its Orifice will be
covered, and shut up with the Bodies which lie round about it.

LIII. And then you may apply those things which we have before directed for
stopping the Haemorrhage; whereby the Orifices of the Vessel will be perfectly
closed, and the Patient secured against a future Flux.

LIVE. 9. By application of Escaroticks. One of the chief of these things, is
Vitriol, which some beat into powder, and apply crude, sprinkling it upon the
Wound, for stopping the Haemorrhage: others dissolve it in Water, and then
moisten linen Cloths therein, and lay them upon the Wound.

LV. Others apply Calcanthum, Atramentum Sutorium, or English Copperas, either
in powder, or else dissolved in some Styptick-water; which is of good use in
Wounds, where the Orifice of the Vessel cannot be closed by compression, or the
application of the Crepitus Lupi.

LVI. Now this Calcanthum being dissolved in Liquor, penetrates even through the
wounded Vessel: for which reason we are to beware, that the Nerves (if any be
near) be not hurt: and therefore that into such deep Wounds, where Nerves are
present, other more safe Stypticks are to be injected.

LVII. Some Authors, besides Vitriol, in this case commend Alum, Aegyptiacum
acuated with calcined Vitriol, Oils of Vitriol and Sulphur, etc.

LVIII. This of Barbett is of good use, because it operates with little or no
pain. Take unslakt Lime, black Soap, A. q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm, and
apply it.

LIX. Or thus. Take Vmber (with Spanish-Brown) in fine powder, unslakt Lime
rubbed to a fine powder, A.q.s. whites of Eggs beaten into glair; mix them into
the consistence of a Liniment, adding also the down of a Hare. This causes
little pain, and also mightily closes the Mouths of the Vessels.

LX. Fallopius in his Book of Wounds, advises to take a Reed answerable in
thickness to the capacity of the wounded Vessel; and stopping one end of it
with a Cork, then to fill it with German or Hungarian Vitriol melted: which
when cold, is to be thrust in at the one end, so as it may be an inch without
the Reed at the other end; and then to be applied to the Vessel, and held there
for the space of an hour, in which time the mouth of the Vessel will be
completely closed.

LXI. Colcothar (which is Vitriol calcined to redness) being also applied to
Wounds, does immediately stop their bleeding; and its Salt being dissolved in
Water, and injected into deep Wounds, does also the same thing: but in this
case, care ought to be taken of the Nerves. See its Preparation in Our
Seplasium, or Druggist's Shop, lib. 2. cap. 12. sect. 14.

LXII. 10. By exhibition of Internals, which are Coolers, Iucrassatives, and
Narcoticks. Coolers, are Barberries, Bole-armoniack, Corans, Coral, Lettice,
Purslan, Pomgranates, Pears, Quinces, Roses, Succory, etc.

LXIII. Incrassatives, are Myrtle-berries, Terra sigillata, Hypocistis, Acacia,
Sloes, Acorns, Comfrey, Lapis Haematitis, Crocus Martis, Jesuits Bark,
Bistort-root, Tormentil, Catechu; which last is inferior to no other thing in
the World.

LXIV. Narcoticks, are Mandrake apples and roots, Henbane juice, roots, and
seed; juice, flowers and seeds of Poppies, Opium; which last among Physicians
is instar omnium, and the most powerful thickner, not only of the Blood, but of
all the other Juices.

LXV. Cut of these things you may prepare Waters, Syrups, Lohochs, Po^ions,
Juleps, Pouders, Electuaries, Pills, Tinctures, etc. which may be easily given,
and in small Dose: Our Tinctura mirabilis, given to one or two spoonfuls, in
Ale or Wine and Water, stops Bleeding to a miracle, and upon the spot; which
may be repeated as often as need requires.

LXVI. This following Potion is also of singular use. Take Diascordium i.
Philonum Persicum, Acacia, A. ss. Tinctura mirabilis iii. Syrup of white
Poppies i. Corn-poppy water iv. mix, and make a Potion.

LXVII. You may also give Our volatile or specific Laudanum; or Dr. Gardner's
Laudanum Tartarizatum, a gr. i. ad gr. iv. liquid Laudanum, a gut. x. ad gut.
xx. or xxvi. or Our Guttae Vitae, a gut. 20. ad lx. or more; according to the
age and strength, etc. in some fit Vehicle.

LXVIII. When the Blood is fully stanched, and shall become clotted, then we
must use the best of our skill to prevent its putrefying; and endeavor to
dissolve it, as we have taught in Lib. 3. cap. 7. sect. 23. ad 29.

LXiX. Or you may give this: Take Rhubarb, fine Bole, Terra sigillata, Mummy,
A. i. make a Powder. Dose, i. in Chervil or Parsley Water. Or, Take Terra
sigillata, Madder, Mummy, Comfrey, Rhubarb, A. i. make a Powder. Dose, i. or
more.

LXX. Or, Take Terra sigillata, Crab's-eyes, A. i. Goats-blood dried, Sperma
Ceti, Angelica and Gentian roots, Rhubarb, Snakeroot, A. ss. Salt of Beef,
Cloves, A. ss. make a Powder, for six Doses, in Hydropiper-Water.

LXXI. Or, Take Crab's-eyes, Mummy, Madder, Goats-blood dried, roots of Madder,
Rhubarb, round Birthwort, sweet Fennel seed, A. i. make all into a powder.
Dose, i. in Syrup of Sorrel, or Juice of Citrons, or in Oxycrate, or Posca.

LXXII. And Posca, which is a mixture of Vinegar and Water, is an excellent
thing of it self: but the Vinegar ought not to be mixed in so large a quantity
with the Water, as to excite a Coughing: being given warm two or three times a
day, it dissolves coagulated Blood.

LXXIII. Donatus commends this. Take Rhubarb i. Mummy gr. vi. Madder gr. iv.
make a Powder; which give in Posca, or Red-wine.

LXXIV. The Diet also should be so ordered, to contribute to the stopping of
the free course of the Blood: for which purpose, Meats ought to be made of
Rice, Amylum, fine Wheat Flour, Barley-flower, Biscuit, Corans, Medlars,
Pears, Quinces, Services, etc. and to abstain from Wine, and all hot and
spirituous Liquors, violent Motion and Exercise of the Body, Anger, Vexation of
Spirit, and all Trouble, and Commotion of Mind, etc.

CHAP. V. Of EXTRANEOVS THINGS in WOVNDS.
I. IF any Extraneous Body or Thing is contained in the Wound, which may hinder
unition, conglutination, or healing, it is to be taken forth. And therefore if
only the lesser Vessels be wounded, the Haemorrhage is not immediately to be
stopped; but we must permit what Blood we find flowing from the lesser Veins
which are cut asunder, freely to flow forth.

II. For by this means there will be a less quantity of Pus generated, and all
the danger of Inflammation and Putrefaction will be prevented: which is evident
from those, who out of simple Wounds are wont either to draw forth the Blood by
sucking with their Mouth; or else to squeeze it out, by compression of the
wounded Part with their Fingers.

III. This being premised, we are to consider, what kinds of Extraneous Bodies
or Things they are, which are to be removed out of Wounds: and these are
extraneous either by accident, or of their own nature.

IV. Things which are extraneous by accident, are, 1. Hair. 2. Clots of Blood.
3. Contused Flesh. 4. Separated pieces of Flesh. 5. Fatty Substances. 6.
Membranes. 7. Tendons. 8. Ligaments. 9. Cartilages. 10. Pieces or Splinters of
broken Bones.

V. Those things which are extraneous of their own nature, are, 1. Pieces of
Garments. 2. Sand, or Gravel. 3. Earth. 4. Stones. 5. Plugs. 6. Glass. 7.
Smallshot. 8. Bullets. 9. Pieces of Iron. 10. Splinters of Wood. 11. Heads of
Arrows. Or, 12. Pieces of Weapons, of various kinds.

VI. If there are Hairs near about the Wound, they are to be shaved away with a
Razor; lest they fall within the lips of the Wound.

VII. If Clots of Blood be in the Wound, which may hinder Unition, excite pain,
putrify, and cause a Feve; they may be washed away with a piece of Sponge, or
linen Cloth, dipped in warm white or red Port-Wine, Aqua Vitae, Posca, Brandy
and Water mixed together, Oxymel dissolved in Water: or, in the Country where
these things cannot be had, in Milk, or Ale warmed: or if need require, they
may be taken forth by help of some proper Instrument.

VIII. But in doing this, you must use no manner of violence at first: neither
is all the clotted Blood to be taken forth, especially if a Haemorrhage is
feared; for that the clotted Blood does in some manner stop the Orifices of the
Vessels, which may grow together under them: but the removing them wholly is to
be deferred to the second or third Dressing, when Nature her self will begin to
expel whatsoever is extraneous, and be helping and assisting in the case.

IX. Nor are you to omit cleansing of the Wound with your Probe, armed with
Lint; and repeated with fresh Lint, as often as need requires.

X. Pieces or Splinters of broken Bones likewise, if any such, are to be taken
forth, either with your Forceps, or Ravensbil; so also pieces of Fat or Flesh,
Membranes, Tendons, Ligaments, or Cartilages, which may stick in the Wound.

XI. But however in the first dressing, those things only are to be taken
forth, that are free and loose; so that they may be taken out of the Wound,
without offering any violence to it.

XII. But as for such small pieces of Bones which stick fast unto the Flesh, or
other Bones; you are to wait for Natures help in expelling them: whereby you
will see, whether she will unite these Fragments to the rest of the Bone; or
make a separation therefrom, and exclude them.

XIII. As for Sand, Gravel, or Earth, they are to be washed out, and taken
away; as we have directed at Sect. 7. above, about clotted Blood.

XIV. If pieces of Garments, or Iron, or if Glass is broken in the Wound, they
are to be taken forth: and this is also to be done, if any other kind of
Matter, or Weapon, or part of a Weapon stick in the Wound.

XV. But before we assay the Extraction of these things, we are to consider,
whether or no the wounded Person is like to live after their taking forth: for
if there is no hopes of Life, the Artist ought not to attempt their removal,
not of the Weapon it self; lest the Patient dying under his hands, it should be
thought that he had hastened his Death.

XVI. As is oftentimes manifest in Wounds of the Brain, and of the Heart, of
the Vena cava, and great Artery; where if the Weapon is left in, the Patient
may possibly live for the space of a day: whereas if it be taken forth, a
vehement Haemorrhage follows thereupon, and the Patient instantly dies.

XVII. But where there is hopes of recovery, we ought to endeavor the
extraction of the Weapon, or other extraneous Matter: for though pieces of
Weapons, and leaden Bullets may sometimes stick very long in the Wound, yet it
is a very rare thing, that the Wound should be perfectly healed, without their
drawing forth.

XVIII. However, you are not to assay the drawing out of such Bodies, as cannot
but with great difficulty and danger, be taken forth; and which remaining in
the Body, the Wound may be cured: as leaden Bullets, and Small-shot, which
sticking very deep, in extreme fleshy Parts, or in great Joints, as the
Shoulder, Elbow, Knee, etc. where being enclosed with Flesh, the Wound is
sometimes healed with them remaining in it.

XIX. This being said, we now come to show how those other foreign Substances,
which are not loose, or cannot be wiped or washed away, may be taken forth; and
that is by a twofold means: 1. By the help of Medicaments. 2. By the help of
Instruments.

I. By the help of Medicines.
XX. Medicines for this purpose, are either Simple, or Compound: and the Simple
are of three kinds; 1. Such as operate by a Specific Virtue: 2. Such as
operate by a Digestive or Putrifactive Virtue: 3. Such as operate by an
Attractive Virtue.

XXI. Specific Simple Medicaments are; Pimpernel, Brooklime, Dittany of Creet,
roots of round Birthwort, Anemony, roots of Narcissus, of Gladiol or Corn-flag,
and Reed-roots, beaten into a Cataplasm with Honey: Henbane-leaves beaten, and
applied in form of a Pultiss: Horned-Poppy-leaves beaten, and used in like
manner: and the Heads of Lizards beaten into a mass, and imposed. See
Dioscorides, lib. 2. cap. 58. and Paulus Aegineta, lib. 4. cap. 52.

XXII. Digestive and Putrifactive Medicaments for this purpose are; Turpentine,
Honey, yolks of Eggs, Sheeps and Beef Suet, Birdlime, old Pigeons dung, Hens
dung, Ducks, Goose and Turkies dung; leven, and the like.

XXIII. Attractive Simple Medicaments for this purpose are; Gum Ammoniacum,
Assa foetida, Aloes Hepatica, Capivi, Elemi, Euphorbium, Galbanum, Opopanax,
Pitch, Pine-Rosin, Propolis, Tar, leaves and roots of Dittany, Garlic, Leeks,
Onions, Shelots; and other like things, hot in the third or fourth degree, of
subtle and thin parts.

XXIV. Out of the substance of these simple things, compound Medicaments are
prepared: as, 1. The Emplaster of Avicen. Leven, Propolis or Honey, A. lbss.
Birdlime, oldest Oil, A. iii. Ammoniacum ii. mix, and make an Emplaster.

XXV. 2. Virgin-wax iv. Turpentine ii. Loadstone jss. Bean-flower i. Deers-suet
ss. mix, and make an Emplaster.

XXVI. 3. Fallopius his Cataplasm. Propolis, Sagapenum, Dittany-roots fresh
gathered, A. iss. Leven, Pigeons-dung, A. i. one Onion boiled, Tar, Honey, A.
q.s. beat all together in a Mortar to a Cataplasm.

XXVII. 4. Another of Fallopius, stronger. Take fresh Dittany roots, powder of
Dittany of Crcet, Assa foetida, Elemi, Sagapenum, Pine-Rosin, A. i. Birdlime
ss. Sulphur vive i. Euphorbium ss. Tar, Honey, A. q.s. mix, and beat them into
a Cataplasm.

XXVIII. 5. Take Bees Wax lbi. Colophony, yellow Rosin, Oil of yolks of Eggs,
A.iv. Loadstone in powder v. juice of Citrons iii. Ammoniacum ii. Bdellium i.
mix, and make an Emplaster.

XXIX. 6. Take Wax, Turpentine, A. vi. Ceruse, Roman Vitriol, A. iv. Oil of
Juniper jss. Oil of Earthworms, Colophony, Ship-Pitch, Frankincense, Camphir,
Mummy, Dragons-blood, A. i. Oil of Eggs vi. Mastich, Oil of Hypericon, A. ss.
powder of Haematitis or Boodstone, Loadstone, Oil of Cloves, A. ii. make an
Emplaster.

XXX. 7. Take Oil-olive lbjss. new Wax lbi. melt them together, and add
Litharge of Gold lbjss. boil them; afterward add Ammoniacum, Bdellium, A. ii.
Galbanum, Opopanax, A. i. dissolved first in Vinegar. These things being mixed,
add pouders of round Birthwort root, Tobacco, Myrrh, Frankincense, Mastich, A.
ii. boil all with a gentle Fire, adding in the end of the boiling, Oil of Bays,
Turpentine, A.v. stir them well together, and pour all into cold Water; and
with Oil of Camomil or Turpentine, anointing your Hands, make the Emplaster up
into long Rouls.

XXXI. 8. Take Oil lbii. Litharge lbi. Colophony lbss. Wax iv. Ammoniacum,
round Birthwort roots, A. ii. Galbanum, Frankincense, A. jss. Gentian i.
Propolis, Aloes Hepatica, Verdigrise, burnt Brass, Dittany of Creet, A. vi.
mix, and make an Emplaster.

XXXII. 9. Take bulbous Narcissus roots No ii. Reed-root i. Gladiol-root ss.
rotten Doves-dung i. Mullein-leaves M.i. roots of the wild Cucumber, of round
Birthwort, of white Dittany, Dittany of Creet, meal of Orobus, A.ss. Honey q.s.
mix, and make an Emplaster.

XXXIII. 10. Take Pine-rosin ii. Stone-pitch i. Ammoniacum, Sagapenum, Elemi,
A. ss. roots of round Birthwort and of white Dittany, Dittany of Creet, A. ii.
old Oil q.s. mix, and make a Cerat.

II. By the help of Instruments.
XXXIV. But if by nothing of Medicinal means the extraneous Body can be drawn
out, we must then make the attempt by help of Instruments: wherein we must
first consider the substance, nature, figure, situation and connection of the
Parts offended, and Parts adjacent. Secondly, the diversity of the Matter to be
drawn forth; its substance, magnitude, and figure; that the Arteries, Veins,
Nerves, and Tendons may not be torn or violated: for it would be much
unbecoming an Artist, that it should be said, that his Hand had done more hurt
than the Weapon.

XXXV. You are also to consider, 1. That the Matter may easily be drawn forth.
2. The fears of an Apostemation, which may corrupt the wounded Part. 3. The
fears of the Matter to be drawn out, being poisoned.

XXXVI. Then in order to this Work, you must consider also; 1. The situation
the Body was in, when wounded. 2. The depth of the place where the Matter is
lodged. 3. The way by which the Extraneous Matter may be best drawn forth. 4.
The Symptoms of the wounded Part; as well those future, as those which are
present. For Example sake; if there is great pain, endangering Convulsions, the
extraneous Matter is without delay to be extracted: but if a dreadful flux of
Blood should ensue after extraction, it is to be deferred, because this latter
may sometimes bring present (...).

XXXVII. In (...) therefore to the Extractive of these things, four things are
to be known: 1. With what Instruments they are to be (...) out. 2. The time
when it is most fit (...) do it. 3. By what ways they are to be taken forth. 4.
The form of the Matters to be extracted.

XXXVIII. 1. As to the Instruments mostly in use in this case, they are chiefly
seven. 1. A sharp, well-set Incision-Knife, smoothly pointed. 2. Two Pair of
good Scissers; the one with sharp Points, the other with one Point knobbed. 3.
A blunt Steel or Silver Hook; to lift up a Vein, Artery, or Nerve, when a
Bullet, etc. is taken out of a Musculous Part. 4. A Pair or two of Forceps,
hollow, strong, and of good Steel, to lay hold of the Matter. 5. Goose-bills,
round, and hollow at the Points, double and single, to take out Bullets, etc.
6. The Ravens or Crows-Bill of Steel, and very strong; to take out Bones,
Splinters, Arrow-heads, etc. 7. Forcipes incisorii; which being dilated, cut on
each side, to make the way out wider; and are of use when a Wound is to be
incised, for the drawing out any extraneous matter: they ought to be of good
Steel, well tempered, and very sharp.

XXXIX. 2. As to the Time, when the Work is to be done. If the Pain is
vehement, the Matter is immediately to be taken out; yet we are not to add pain
to pain, but this being once done, the pain will cease.

XL. If the Matter is poisoned or cankred, you must not defer the Extraction,
though you may be forced to divide the Muscles, Vessels, and Nerves; because the
whole Man is more valuable than a part. In this case, you need not fear the
Actual Cautery; for Fire destroys Poison, and takes away all fears of a
Convulsion.

XLI. But in some cases, you must forbear the Extraction: as, 1. Where an
Hemorrhage endangering Life may ensue; which will be where great Arteries and
Veins are placed. 2. Where fearful Symptoms may happen; as vehement Pain,
Convulsions, Syncope, sharp Fevers, etc. 3. If the Matter is round, or made of
Lead; for which reasons, it may more securely be left in. 4. Where the Orifice
of the Wound is made narrow, by Inflammation, Tumor, etc. in which cases, you
must defer the Work till those Accidents be removed; lest vehement Pain,
Swoonings, Convulsions, Fever, Gangrene, or Sphacelus ensue. 5. When you have
not a fit Instrument at hand for the Extraction: for should you then attempt
it, you will torment the Patient without any effect; and thereby make him
unwilling to undergo the Operation, when you are better provided.

XLII. 3. The Form of the Matter to be extracted: this is perfectly to be
understood and considered; for the knowledge of the Figure or Form of the
Matter to be extracted, contributes much to the information of the Artist; as
to the way and manner, how the Extraneous Matter is to be taken forth, and
whether it will be done with ease, or with difficulty.

XLIII. 4. The way and manner how the Extraction is to be performed. Now the
Matter to be taken forth, is to be taken forth either by Extraction or
Expulsion; by extraction, it is taken out the same way it went in: by
expulsion, it is taken forth by the opposite way, viz. by the way it tends.

XLIV. If the Matter has not pierced very deep, or has not passed through the
great Vessels and Nervous places: if that either right opposite to it, or the
way that it tends, it has Bones, Veins, Arteries, or Nerves, Or, if there is no
great fear of the wide opening of the Orifice by which it entered: in all these
Cases it may be drawn back the same way by which it entered in, and that without
any Section at all.

XLV. But if from the Form of the Matter to be extracted (as rough Arrow-heads)
there appears to be danger that the Flesh may be torn, if it is drawn back the
same way by which it entered: in this case the Wound is to be dilated, either by
Section, with the Forceps incisorius; or else dilated with the Instrument which
Celsus, lib. 7. cap. 5. calls Ypsiloeides, or else with a Swans-bill or
Storks-bill, or some other dilating Instrument; that the Matter may be the more
easily drawn out.

XLVI. This Ypsiloeides is a kind of steel Instrument, made in the form of a
Bill, but so, that if the shanks of the handle are nipt together, the Bill
opens, and so dilates the Orifice of the Wound: after which dilatation, the
extraneous Matter is to be taken forth with the Hands; or when it sticks
deeper, with the Volsella or Puller, or other suchlike Instruments; of which
sort are the long Scissers, full of teeth, strait or callaper-fashion'd, broad
in their extreme part, and likewise round; to which various Names are given, as
Crows-bills, Storks-bills, Ducks-bills, Goose-bills; whose Figures you may see
in Paraeus, lib. 10. cap. 18. as also in Andraeas a Cruce, Scultetus, and
others. The Figure of the Volsella see in Scultetus, Tab. 4. Fig. 1. where it
is largely described, with its use.

XLVII. But in the following cases, it is to be thrust out the contrary way: 1.
If it is almost through, chiefly toward a depending Part; for so the Pain will
be less, and the Pus flow better from the Wound. 2. If the Figure of the Matter
or Body will not suffer it to be extracted the same way, by which it went in;
as in barbed Arrow-heads, etc. 3. If there is no fear of cutting of great
Arteries, Veins, or Nerves. In all other cases, it is to be drawn out the same
way it went in.

XLVIII. Brittle things, as Glass, Bones, etc. which stick in a Wound, are to
be taken forth whole, if possible: but if they cannot be taken out whole,
without much Pain, and fear of evil Symptoms to ensue, they are to be broken,
and then taken out.

XLIX. If also the Matter or Body is thrust in between two Bones; the Parts
lying next to them are to be widened, and drawn or dilated several ways; that
so the space between the Bones may be looser and wider, for the pulling forth
of the Matter got in.

L. But if by no Artificial Means whether of Medicines or Instruments, the
extraneous Body can be drawn forth; the whole Busisiness is then to be
committed to Nature, which in these cases, does many times do wonders,
expelling those preternatural things beyond expectations, which various
Histories almost every where confirm.

LI. Hippocrates, Epidem. 5. tells us of one that had an Arrow shot into his
Groin, whose head was taken forth six years after. Guil. Fabricius, Cent. 1.
Obs. 62. gives relation of one who had a Knife run into the Spina Dorsi, and
broke in it, and he took it forth two years after: and Cent. 2. Obs. 74. he
gives a relation of a Man wounded in the Pylorus or Colon, with a sharp-pointed
Sword, the point of which was broken off, and left in the Wound; the Wound was
healed up, and in about a year after, going to stool, he voided with his
Excrements the very point of the Sword which was thrust into him.

CHAP. VI. Of STITCHING WOVNDS.
I. AS to the Stitching up of Wounds, we have said something of it already, in
Cap. 1. Sect. 123. ad 131. But because what we have there said, is too briefly
laid down, (because it was neessary to carry on the Thread of the Discourse) we
shall now resume the Argument again, and here do that more explicitly and
largely, which there we past over only with a slender stroke of our Pen.

II. Now the Cure of all sorts of Wounds is performed either by the first
Intention, or by the second Intention.

III. The first Intention is (...), Agglutinatio, the Unition of divided or
wounded Parts, no other substance concurring, or coming between: and this kind
of Union or Healing is performed by the first Intention.

IV. The second Intention is (...), Concarnatio, the Unition of divided Parts,
by the intervention or medium of some other substance, as Flesh, etc. which is
to be bred by Incarnating Medicines; and this kind of Union, is the Healing of
a Wound by the second Intention. See Chap. 1. Sect. 142, and 143. and Chap. 10.
following.

V. We shall first show how Symphysis, or Agglutination is performed; which is
a more simple kind of Union, because it is performed without any Medium coming
between: also, because it is more speedily performed than Syssarcosis or
Concarnation; and because it requires neither such skill, or yet such choice of
Medicaments to be applied.

VI. Now whereas in transverse and long Wounds, Swathing alone is not enough;
for drawing the lips of the Wound together, and to keep and preserve them in
such a close condition: for this cause sake, Stitching was designed.

VII. To bring this Symphysis to pass, there are four chief Indications. 1. The
bringing of the Lips of the Wound together. 2. To hold them together by
Stitching. 3. To apply Agglutinative Medicaments. 4. Proper Swathing, Rolling,
or Binding up: the two first we shall perform in this Chapter; the two latter
we shall treat of in the Chapter following.

VIII. The first Indication is to be performed by the Hands of the Surgeon,
wherein he is to bring the Lips of the gaping Wound together; which is to be
done, 1. Gently, and by degrees; not violently. 2. They are to be brought
equally together, not stretching one part more than another. 3. That their
superficies also be even, otherwise the Cicatrix will be unequal and deformed.
4. That if the Lips are stiff through Cold, they are to be fomented with
Hydrelaeum; viz: a Mixture of Oil and Water, or Oil and Ale: in dry Bodies,
more Oil than Water; in moist Bodies, more Water than Oil. 5. That no Pledget
or Dossel be put between the parts wounded, when you intend to consolidate by
the first Intention.

IX. The second Indication, is the keeping of the conjoined parts together by
Stitching: and this is twofold; 1. Sutura, Stitching with a Needle. 2.
Laqueatio, Dry-stitching, or Lacing.

I. Stitching with the Needle.
X. Sutura, or Stitching then, is the holding together of the Lips of a Wound,
by help of a Needle and Thread: Wherein we are to consider, 1. The Instruments
of the Operation. 2. The Kinds of this Stitching. 3. Its Uses. 4. Observations
in performing it.

XI. The Instruments are, Needles, Thread, and the Stitching Quill.

XII. The Needles ought to be either of Steel or Silver. The steel Needles you
may soften by wrapping them in brown wet Paper, and holding them for a while in
the flame of a Candle. Those of Silver will bend best; but you ought to have
some straight, and some crooked; and their points may be round, flat, or
three-square, which last pierce best.

XIII. The Thread. We most commonly use white or crimson silk-Thread (black is
rotten and frets) but strong white Thread made of Hemp may do as well, or
better; because it swells in the Wound, and cuts not as Silk does.

XIV. The stitching Quill, called Canaliculus fenestratus: It ought to be of
Silver (for Honors sake) and has two Uses; 1. To keep the Needles in. 2. In
stitching, to stay the opposite part of the Wound, that the Needle may the more
readily pass.

XV. The kinds of this Stitching. There is, 1. Sutura Continuata, vel
Retentiva, the Glover's Stitch; which is used in Wounds of the Guts, when the
Excrements come out of the Wound. As also in the Great Branches of the Aorta
and Vena Cava, if we can conveniently come at them. The Spaniards stitch almost
all Wounds with this Stitch, and it is called also, The Restrin^eat Stitch.

XVI. 2. Sutura incarnativa, vel non continuata, The Incarnative Stich. This is
done by taking diverse stitches, each distant one from another, so far as the
largeness of the Wound shall require; and so many as may be able to bring or
keep the lips of the Wound in an equality, evenness and smoothness: In every of
which stitches, the ends of the thread are to be cut off near the knot, that
they may not stick to the Emplaster.

XVII. 3. (...), Gastroraphia, Sutura Abdominis; The Belly stitch, which is
used when the Great Muscles of the Abdomen, and the Peritonaeum are divided by
a large Wound; of which Galen has wrote Anat. Admin. lib. 5. cap. 6. and some
others. See cap. 1. sect. 124, 126, 128.

XVIII. 4. Sutura Conservatrix, The Conserver. This is when the Needles are
left in the Wound, passed through the lips; and the lips being brought
together, the thread is twisted about both ends of the Needles, as Tailors do
when they fasten them to their sleeves. This stitch is used in the Cure of Hare
Lips, and when the Oesophagus or Trachea Arteria are wounded: Instead of
Needles you may use Silver or Brass Pins, whose ends (after the thread is
twisted about) may be cut off with a pair of Shears or Sciffors.

XIX. The Uses of this stitching. They are threefold, 1. To procure a quick
agglutination to the Wound, which is done by the Sutura Incarnativa. 2. To keep
the lips of a Wound at a due distance one from another; and this is done by the
Sutura Retentiva; which is of use when a Wound cannot be Cured by the first
Intention, but by the second: In which the lips are not to be too far a-sunder,
lest the Air cool the Parts too much; nor too near, because the Agglutination
is not to be expected without a medium. 3. To stop Bleeding; as when an Artery
or Vein is wounded; and this is called, Sutura Suppressiva.

XX. Observations in performing this Work. 1. In stitching, the lips of the
Wound must not be too straightly drawn together; for then the flowing of the
Quittor will be hindered, and so a Tumor may be induced. On the contrary, If
they be left gaping, the inner Parts may be cooled by the Air: But Ligaments
cut a-sunder, are not to be stitched, because they are only united by the
second Intention.

XXI. 2. A sufficient quantity or substance of the lips of the Wound is to be
taken hold of by the stitches, otherwise they may break out again, and cause
Scars: And withal, you must be sure that your knots are fast; for should they
loosen, you will be enforced to stitch a second time, which will be more
painful to the Patient than at first.

XXII. 3. You must also beware of the Nerves and Tendons; for if they be
pricked or touched, vehement pain will be caused: But in all parts of the Body
the Skin may be stitched, yea, in the Joints, deep Wounds, and Wounds of the
Bones, after smoothing with the Rasp; for thereby the Spermatick Parts will be
covered, and defended from Air, and the natural heat kept in, whereby the Cure
will be the better performed.

XXIII. 4. In deep Wounds of the fleshy Parts, you must take deep stitches; for
if the Skin only be stitched, the Wound will only superficially heal, and the
Pus settling in the bottom, may cause an Apostem, and cavernous Ulcer; or
otherwise the stitches may break out, and make new work again.

XXIV. 5. In long Wounds, begin from one of the ends; but in short Wounds, as
in the Hair-Lip, begin in the middle; for so you will avoid pursing together
the lips of the Wound, which will cause Inequality and Deformity: And in long
Wounds, let the stitches be nearly an inch distant one from another, or above
half an inch at least: If they be too thick, they will cause the more pain; if
too thin, the Unition will not be so easy and complete.

XXV. 6. Lastly, In strait Wounds of the Limbs, you may spare stitching; for
the lips may be brought together by the Dry Stitch, and Swathing: But if the
Wounds are Transverse, stitching is always to be used; because the Flesh, etc.
in such Wounds will shrink toward the whole Parts, and so gape very wide.

II. Laqueation, or Dry Stitching.
XXVI. This is done with pieces of Cloth, which are glewed on each side the
lips of the Wound; and then being dried, the edges of those Cloths are
stitched, and drawn together, instead of stitching the lips of the Wound it
self, whereby the lips of the Wound are also drawn together, as near as you
desire.

XXVII. He that knows how to perform this work well, which may be done in
almost all Wounds, and that in the very first Dressing, knows very well how to
be without the former ways of stitching with the Needle, which Sennertus says
is Cruel, Bloody, and Painful.

XXVIII. And truly (says he) it would be far better, if Chirurgians would
accustom themselves to this manner of joining the lips of Wounds together; for
that in the other ways of stitching with the Needle after a barbarous Fashion,
they many times commit many Errors, besides the causing more pain than was
caused by the Wound.

XXIX. For sometimes (the Needles being too thick) more or less of the lips is
taken up than is necessary, so that the mouth of the Wound is often uneven,
purst up, and as it were pleited, whereby the skin is not close joined to the
skin, nor flesh to flesh, but the skin is sewed in the midst of the flesh: Or,
if they avoid this, they make another fault as great, which is by taking so
little hold, that the Wound is left hollow, and the stitches in a short time
break out; all which Errors or Faults are totally avoided by this Laqueation,
or dry kind of stitching.

XXX. But though this stitching may be used in almost all sorts of Wounds, and
that also for avoiding of new Pain; yet it is chiefly used to the face, and
other visible Parts, for the avoiding of Scars, as also because stitches are
oftentimes broken out before the Agglutination of the Wound; and again in some
Persons, who by reason of their fearfulness, will by no means endure stitching.

XXXI. This dry Suture therefore is used in three Cases; 1. Where we cannot
come conveniently to roll the wounded Part, as in transverse Wounds. 2. When
the Beauty is like to be hurt, by making of Scars, as in the Face, and other
visible Parts. 3. When the wounded Patient will not admit of stitching in the
Skin and Flesh, as Women, and other timorous Persons.

XXXII. To perform this rightly, three things are to be considered; 1. The
Instruments to perform it withal. 2. The sticking Emplaster. 3. The manner of
doing it.

XXXIII. The Instruments are a Needle and Thread, and pieces of Cloth: The
Needle must be one of middle size: The Thread, an even fine waxed brown Thread,
or Silk of the same Magnitude.

XXXIV. The pieces of Cloth must be in number two, one piece for each lip of
the Wound: They must be strong, that they may not yield unto the thread, or
give way: They must be doubled toward the Wound, and pasted or glewed together
with the sticking Medicament, and ravelled at the other ends, which are
farthest from the Wound. Lastly, they must one answer another, as to form,
magnitude and situation.

XXXV. As to their form, they must be indented toward the lips of the Wound,
and backwards, as much as may be, of the form of the wounded Part. If the Part
will admit it, they may be Quadrangular, Triangular, or Oval; but the form
ought to be such, as is fittest to draw the wounded Parts together. See the
Figures here annexed.

depiction of various forms of bandages

XXXVI. The next thing to be considered is the sticking Emplaster, of which we
shall give you several Recipes. 1. Emplastrum Glutinosum Sculteti; which see in
Lib. 1. cap. 20. sect. 10. aforegoing of this Work.

XXXVII. 2. Sennertus prescribes this: fine Bole, Mastick, Sanguis Draconis,
sat Frankincense, A. i. make the three first into fine Powder: Tacamahacca, ij.
mix them with a hot Pestel, which spread upon the Cloth.

XXXVIII. 3. white Starch, Mastick, Gipsum, fine Bole, Aloes, Gum Tragacanth,
and Arabic, A. ij. make all into a Powder, which mix with the white of an Egg,
to the consistence of Honey.

XXXIX. 4. fine Bole, Sarcocol, Mastick, Sanguis Draconis, A. ij. make all into
a Powder, and mix them with the white of an Egg.

XL. 5. Olibanum ss. Frankincense, Bitumen Judaicum, Amber, Mastick, Rosin, A.
i. Gum of Juniper ss. mix, and make a hard Emplaster; which is to be melted at
the Fire when it is to be used.

XLI. 6. white Starch, or fine Flower, Frankincense, Mastick, A. ij. fine Bole,
Chalk, Sarcocol, Singuis Draconis, A. iv. all being in fine Powder, mix them
with the white of an Egg.

XLII. 7. Beat white of Eggs into a clear Glare, then gradually sprinkle in
unslak'd Lime in very fine Powder, q.s. which stir very well together, till the
Whites of the Eggs cease to appear.

XLIII. 8. fine Bole, Sanguis Draconis, Frankincense, Mastick, Pine-Rosin, A.
q.s. make them into Powder, and mix them with whites of Eggs.

XLIV. 9. Others dissolve Ichthyocolla, or Ising-glass in Vinegar, and by
boiling bring it to the consistence of Glue, which they spread upon the Cloth:
but being dissolved in Sp. Vini, either this or Joiners Glue, it is much more
tenacious and strong, and will not be dissolved by the Humidities of the Wound.

XLV. 10. Mastick, Sanguis Draconis, white Starch, Olibanum, Gypsum,
Frankincense, (all in fine Powder) Turpentine, Pitch, A. i. Whites of Eggs,
q.s. mix, and make an Emplaster.

XLVI. 11. Paraeus prescribes this: Aloes, Wheat Flour, Mastick, Rosin, (all
in fine Powder) Ship Pitch, Turpentine, A. q.s. mix and make an Emplaster.

XLVII. 12. fine Wheat Flour, Whites of Eggs, A. ij. Ichthyocolla iss.
Birdlime, Tragacanth, Frankincense in Powder, A. vi. Rose Water q.s. mix them.

XLVIII. This being said, we now come to the manner or way how the work is to
be performed. The double Linen Cloths are first to be glewed together, and then
they are to be spread over with the said glewing Emplaster (some one of the
aforegoing) on that side which is to lie upon the skin; after which they are
immediately to be applied to the part, and they are there to be left so long,
till the Glue or Emplaster is dried up, and the Cloths stick fast to the skin,
which is commonly in the space of four, five or six hours.

XLIX. The Cloths now sticking fast, the Indentures as to be sewed, or tied
together, with ae needle and thread; and they are to be drawn so close, and
then tied fast one to another, that the lips of the Wound may be rightly united.

L. And by this means, without any Pain at all, and without any Scar or
Deformity (such as is wont to caused by the needles) the lips of the Wound will
be drawn together, and agglutinated; and being thus brought together, they will
be so kept and preserved a longer time, than they can be with sewing or
stitching with the needle.

LI. This dry stitching has but one Objection against it, viz. that it is but
of little use till 6 or 7 hours after; for sooner it will scarcely be dried, so
as to stick fast to the Skin; (for which reason some sew with the needle first,
and then apply the dry stitch:) But this delay can bring no damage along with
it. For which reason, if any danger should be feared, such an Emplaster may be
used, as may stick immediately upon the Application: Of which kind is that at
Sect. 37. aforegoing, and some others, among the aforegoing Prescriptions.

CHAP. VII. Of BINDING up WOUNDS.
I. TO the well binding up of Wounds, two things are necessary, 1. The
preparatory Matters for the Dressing; which are vulnerary Lotions, Balsams,
Cerots, Emplasters, etc. 2. The preparatory Matters for the binding up; which,
are Splenia, Bolsters, Ferulae, swathing Bands, or Roulers.

II. The Vulneraries, or preparative Matters for the Dressing, are twofold; I.
Simple Vulneraries, which are taken, 1. From Vegetables: 2. From Minerals: 3.
From Animals. II. Compound Vulneraries, made of the former into Lotions, Oils,
Balsams, Ointments, Cerots, and Emplasters.

III. And these are of three special kinds, 1. Digestives, which generate a
well digested and laudable Pus. 2. Sarcoticks, or Incarnatives, which generate
and fill the Wound up with Flesh. 3. Epuloticks, which produce the Cicatrice,
dry up, and over the Wound with skin: of all which we have spoken at large in
the second Chapter of this present Book. As to the particular Virtues of the
Simples, you may see an explicit and complete Discourse of them in Our
Seplasium, or Druggists Shop, lately Published, to which you are referred.

IV. A Breviate of the binding up Wounds, we have given in Cap. 1. Sect. 132,
ad 139. We shall here deliver the Method of doing it more at large. Now to this
work belongs, 1. The covering Emplaster, or Cerecloth. 2. Splenia. 3. Ferulae.
4. Swathes or Roulers.

V. 1. The covering Emplaster ought to agree to the Indication of Healing; but
for want of such a one, this following may serve in many Cases. Juices of
Tobacco and Melilot, Frankincense, Fir-Rosin, A. lbij. Bees Wax lbi. Sheeps
Suet, Turpentine, Gum-Elemi, A. lbss. Powder of Virginia Tobacco viij. mix, and
with a gentle heat evaporate the Juices, and bring it to the consistency of an
Emplaster. Or you may use the Empl. Diapalma, e Bolo, Caesaris, or the like, if
need require.

VI. 2. Splenia: These are Linnen-Cloths folded together, and so termed from
their Figure, being almost in the form of the Spleen. The Ancients called them
Pulvilli, from the Resemblance they have to Bolsters: also Plumaceoli, or
little Pillows, because they were sometimes made of Feathers.

VII. But as to the Figures or Form they many times differ, according to the
end for which they are intended; for sometimes they are laid upon the part
long-ways, sometimes obliquely, and sometimes transversly.

VIII. Sometimes they are laid single or double; sometimes treble or quadruple;
and sometimes more of them, according to their Use, for what they are designed
to do, whether for interception of Humors, drinking up of Sanies, or filling
up of empty, and hollow places; that there by the whole Bandage may become
equal and smooth.

IX. They are sometimes imposed dry, but most commonly they are soaked or
moistened, with some sort of Liquor, whether Lotion, Decoction, Infusion, or
Spirit, which may be proper for the disease of the part affected. See
Hippocrates de Vuln. lib. 3. Text. 1, 2. and, de Fract. lib. 1. Text. 32. and
lib. 3. Text. 21.

X. 3. Ferulae, or, Splinters. These are for the more convenient binding up of
Wounds or Fractures; they ought to be long and smooth, and fitted unto the
Bones that are broken, or out of Joint, after such times as they are set again,
and reduced to their proper places.

XI. Hippocrates, and other of the Ancients, made them of the Ligneous Bark of
the Ferula (from whence came the name:) but we, for want of that, make them of
thin Splinters of Wood, or Barks of Trees, or Paste-boards, either fingle, or
glued together.

XII. But Guil. Fabricius Hildanus, Cent. 4. Obs. 98. is against the green
Barks of Trees; for that when they are thoroughly dried about a Fracture, they
are apt to excite pain, and put the bones out of their places.

XIII. Hippocrates says, They ought to be smooth, equal, plain, and a little
sloaping at the ends, and something shorter than the swathing they lie under,
that the part may not be pressed too much beyond the Bandage; and imposed (in
Fractures) about an inch distant one from another.

XIV. They are to be so placed and fitted, that their ends are not to reach
above the heads of the Joints which stick forth; nor that they touch upon the
naked Skin, or hurt the Nerves or Tendons nigh unto the Joints. See Hippoc. de
Vuln. Tit. 11. and de fract. lib. 1. Text. 4^. and lib. 2. Text. 5, 7, 11, 64,
69, 71. also P. Aegineta, Lib. ^. Cap. 99.

XV. 4. Swathing Bands, or Roulers. These are Bands long and broad, which being
rouled up, are afterward to be swathed about the wounded part. This the Latins
call Fasciatio, or deligatio per fascias; by means of which we endeavor to
keep the lips of Wounds together, that they may be the sooner, and the more
firmly conglutinated.

XVI. Herein we are to consider, 1. The Matter of Roulers. 2. The Kinds of
Rouling or binding up. 3. The way or manner of doing it. 4. The Uses thereof.

XVII. As to the Matter of which Roulers are made, they ought to be of
Linen-Cloth, somewhat worn, clean, smooth, and without seams or knots, that
they may be soft and pliable, but so strong that they may not be broken: It is
true, they may be made of Woolen, or Leather, if necessity require it; but
otherwise Woolen is not to be chosen, because it is apt to stretch, and cause
itching, whereby it cannot bind so fast; and by irritating, may cause an
attraction of Humors: Nor Leather, because it is not only apt to stretch,
being dry, but much more, if by accident it should be moistened with the Humor,
and withal, when foul, is not to be washed, but must then be cast away.

XVIII. The Roulers are then to be made of Linen Cloth, not too new, lest they
be stiff and hard; nor too old, lest they be too weak: The Cloth must not be
too thick, lest it is cumbersom, nor too thin, lest it falls into wrinkles: nor
too course, lest its unequal Threads should hurt, or press too much upon the
Part: nor too fine, lest by the closeness of the Threads it stops the Pores;
which being foul, it is also apt to do; so that perspiration being hindered, an
Inflammation may be induced.

XIX. As to the length of the Rouler, it is to be provided, according to the
thickness of the part it is applied to, and the number of Circumvolutions,
which the Artist shall think convenient, whereby some are longer, some shorter.

XX. As to their breadth; those for the Trunk of the Body ought to be the
broadest; then those provided for the Thighs; next those which are for the
brawny part of the Arms: The narrower are for the small part of the Arms, and
lower part of the legs; and the narrowest those which are fitted for binding up
of Fingers and Toes. See Cap. 1. Sect. 138. aforegoing.

XXI. The kinds of Rouling are manifold, as Galen says in's Book of those
things which are to be done in the Curing of Wounds, Com. 2. Text. 7. But those
which serve for Our purpose in this place, are chiefly four: 1. Fascia
Incarnativa: 2. Fascia Retentiva: 3. Fascia Expulsiva: 4. Fascia Aequans.

XXII. Fascia Incarnativa, is performed with a Rouler, having two ends, wherein
you must begin to roll in the sound part, opposite to the Wound, and roll
upwards, and so return to the wounded Part with one end; with the other end you
must roll downwards, crossing the former, that the lips of the Wound may be
neatly brought together.

XXIII. In this kind of Rouling, the Rouler ought to be about half the breadth
of the Wound, for thereby it will draw the lips of the Wound together twice;
once rouling upwards, and once rouling downwards.

XXIV. Authors make another kind of this Fascia Incarnativa, which is performed
with one Rouler, which must be broader than the Wound: The middle of it is
applied to the sound Part, that the sides of it may meet about the Wound; after
which the sides are sewed together with a transverse stitch: But this way is
not so ready and convenient as the former, because at every dressing, it
requires new sewing.

XXV. Fascia Retentiva, is a kind of Rouling, which is chiefly used to keep the
Dressing, as Pledgets, Emplasters, Cerots, Bolsters, etc. close to the Wound;
for which purpose a single Rouler will serve the turn; and this ought to be
done no stricter, than what may be enough to stay the Applications in their
proper places; for otherwise it may hinder the Protrusion of the Nutriment to
the Part, and so produce either a Mortification, or an Atrophy, at least, of
the Part.

XXVI. Fascia Expulsiva, is chiefly to press out of the Cavity of the Wound any
Humor, or Matter lodging in it; and also to stop the Influx of Humors, which
many times invade the depending Part: For which reason we begin the Rouling in
the sound Parts below the Wound, and then proceed to the wounded Part; after
which, you may use more or fewer Circumvolutions, as in reason you shall see
fit, and so ascend to the sound part above the Wound, where you may use a more
close Bandage, to hinder the Defluxion of any Humor: Thus you press out the
Matter already in the Wound, and hinder the Afflux of new.

XXVII. Fascia Aequans, ae swathing Bandage; is that which reduces unequal
Parts, some of which are high, some low, to a necessary equality; which is done
by applying of Bolsters, with a single Rouler.

XXVIII. There are also other kinds of Bandages, (but proper to other Parts of
Surgery;) as, 1. Fascia prohibitiva Apostematis, a Bandage which hinders
Apostems, wherein we begin the Rouling about the Wound, and go upwards to the
Joint of the sound Part. 2. Fascia Apostematis factiva, which is a Bandage that
causes Apostemation, and is just opposite to the former. 3. Fascia Disjunctiva,
a Bandage which keeps Parts asunder. 4. Fascia Directiva, a Bandage which
reduces Distorted and Crooked Members to their natural Figure.

XXIX. The Way and Manner of Binding or Rouling. This is in part declared in
the several kinds; but we have these things to add: 1. That the Swathing is to
be begun at one end of the Rouler, and sometimes from the middle thereof.

XXX. 2. Care is to be taken, that the Rouler may not bind or press together
the Part too hard, lest by its overgreat Compression, it occasion Pain and
Inflammation: And on the contrary, that it be not over-loose; for then it will
not sufficiently keep the Parts together.

XXXI. 3. As to the Artist himself, 1. That he carries a light and gentle hand,
so as not to hurt the Patient. 2. That he be nimble and quick in the Dispatch,
that the Patient be not wearied. 3. That he does his work cleverly and
handsomely, so that it may look pleasingly to the eye.

XXXII. 4. If it is a long Wound, the Bandage is best performed by a narrow
Rouler of about three inches broad, and having two heads, viz. that has a
double beginning. And in Wounds that are not very long, the middle of the
Rouler is first imposed upon the opposite part of the Wound; and the rouling of
it about is begun from it, and drawn toward the Wound, and above the Wound it
is straightened or strained, whereby the lips of the Wound are rightly drawn
together: And then after this, both heads of the Rouler are rouled this way,
and that way, that so the lower part thereof may be drawn about the lower part
of the Member, and the higher part about the higher part of the same; to the
end that the Humors may the better flow out, and be pressed forth, from the
part affected.

XXXIII. 5. In Wintertime the Roulings ought to be the more, by reason of the
coldness of the Weather: But in Summer time lesser, lest the Part affected
should grow hot and inflamed.

XXXIV. 6. The knot is to be tied a good distance from the Wound; or rather the
heads of the Swath or Rouler may be pinned or sewed together.

XXXV. 7. That in the Bandage of the greater sort of Wounds, the drawing
together of the lips may be made easier by imposing the Plumaceolus, a little
Pillow or Boulster, or Linen Cloths many times doubled, which are called
Splenia, (of which we have spoken before:) But in the Opinion of Avicen, lib.
4. sect. 4. Tr. 1. cap. 8. the Triangular Bolsters are the most convenient, two
of them being used together, one on each side the lips, according to the length
of the Wound, (and therefore they ought to exceed the length thereof) and
answer each other; for so the Swath or Rouler being drawn upon the Angle of the
Triangular Boster, it forces it forwards, together with the lip lying
underneath, to the contrary part, and so puts a force upon the Fissure or Mouth
of the Wound, which would not be so effectual if the Bolsters were four square.

XXXVI. The Uses of Swathing are either Essential, or Accidental. Essentially
they contribute to the Cure of the Wound, by bringing and holding together the
Parts disjoined, concontracting Parts dilated, and reducing Parts distorted;
repelling Humors flowing into the Wound, and pressing them forth which are
already in.

XXXVII. And accidentally they conduce to the Cure, when they are so applied or
imposed, that they contain or hold to the Medicaments designed for the Cure; as
Hippocrates has signified, where he speaks of Curing VVounds, Lib. 2. Text.
30.31.32.33. and de Fracturis, Com. 1. Text. 21.

CHAP. VIII. Of a FLVX of HVMORS.
I. WOunds often happen to Persons of a Scorbutic, or Cacochymick Habit of
Body; and in such People there is great cause to fear, (from the abundance of
vicious Humors, which have been long in heaping up) a flux of those Humors to
the wounded Part; which may induce great Pain, Inflammation, Apostemation, and
many other evil Symptoms: for which reason, we are to do our utmost endeavor,
to hinder and prevent this afflux of Humors; and so to strengthen the Part, as
to make it able to resist it.

II. Now such a Flux is more especially prevented, by taking care to hinder or
remove all those Causes, which may any ways induce the said Flux: as also all
those things which may very much, and preternaturally heat the wounded Part,
excite Pain therein, or render the same soft and loose, whereby it is made the
more apt to receive the Flux: or may over-heat and rarify the Humors, or make
them thin, whereby they are made more fit for motion and fluxion.

III. The Diet also of the wounded Part is to be considered, that it be such as
may not generate too much Nutriment, nor a great abundance of bad and corrupt
Humors.

IV. And withal, we must assist and comfort the wounded and weak Parts; with
things which corroborate and strengthen, by easing of Pain, abating the
vehemence of Heat in the Body, lessening the quantity of Blood, if need
require, and due evacuation of the vicious Humors.

V. As to Bleeding, we are to consider the strength of the Patient, and whether
Blood enough was permitted at making of the Wound. Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 16.
says, If the Blood flows not forth sufficiently, let a Vein be opened as soon
as may be; provided that the Patient has strength enough to bear this loss of
Blood.

VI. But this is to be done, 1. In great Wounds chiefly, in which there may be
cause to fear an Hemorrhage, and the Patient is strong. 2. If a great
Inflammation has seized the Part, or a Fever invades the Sick. 3. If a
sufficient quantity of Blood did not flow out of the Wound, when it was first
made.

VII. But now that this Bleeding may be effectual, ancient Physicians advise
that a Vein should be opened, at a good distance from the Part affected, and on
the contrary side: but modern Physicians say, you are to open the Veins on the
same side; and those must be either of the Arm, or some Vein near to the
wounded Part.

VIII. As if the Head is wounded, they advise to a Vein in the Forehead, or
Veins of the Temples, and those under the Tongue; of which Paraeus has written,
Lib. 9. cap. 14.

IX. As to the quantity of Blood, it ought to be according to the plenty of it,
which is in the Body, and strength of the Patient: and therefore if much Blood
was lost upon making of the Wound, it ought wholly to be omitted; but if little
was lost, then you may take away, according to the strength of the Patient, and
not otherwise: which you may know by the ^age of the Patient, habit of the
Body, time of the Year, and other Circumstances intervening.

X. The next Intention is Purging, which is either by Vomit, or Purge, or
Clyster. If the Stomach is Foul, and the Body full of ill Humors, gentle
Vomiting is best, for it makes the greatest of all Revulsions; and it is to be
continued every third day, so long till the Stomach is very clear, and easy,
and the Humors carried off which may cause a Fluxion.

XI. For this purpose we commend Vinegar or Wine of Squills, Oxymel of Squills;
but in the more strong constitutions, Vinum Antimoniale, Vinum Benedictum,
Taertarum Emeticum, Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, and other Antimonial Vomits;
to be given and repeated, according to the age, strength, and condition of the
Patient: for these things carry off vast quantities of vicious Humors, which
may not only endanger a Fluxion, but also keep the Wound from a speedy Healing.

XII. If the Patient is weak, and not able to bear Vomiting, the Body must be
emptied of the Morbifick-matter, either by Catharticks or Clysters: for the
Wound will be so much the more successfully and speedily cured; by how much the
ill constitution of the wounded Part is prevented, and the vicious Humors apt
to flow unto the same, are carried off another way.

XIII. And this is to be done, 1. In great Wounds, where, by reason of Pain, a
fluxion of depraved Humors may be feared. 2. In those Wounds where any kind of
cutting or dilating is used. 3. Where any Bones are to be made bare of Flesh.
4. And in all Wounds whatsoever, where the pain is more violent than ordinary.

XIV. But if the Wounds are small, and not affected with any such vehement
Pain, they may be cured without any Vomiting or Purging: but then in this case,
if the Belly is bound, you are to loosen and open it with Clysters or
Suppositories.

XV. Catharticks are to be used also if any pain or heaviness afflict the Head,
or if a Tumor or Inflammation appear, or the Body is Scorbutic or Cacochymick;
and that timely, in the beginning of a Wound, whilst there is strength, absence
of a Fever, and before the Humors are in motion, if possible.

XVI. As to the kinds of Purgers, they oughtnot to be vehemently strong, but
gentle, or else to be gradually taken: Cholagogues are said to be most fit for
Wounds of the Head; for that Inflammations and Fevers (the Symptoms of Wounds)
are said to be the effects of Choler. Our Family Pills may be given, every
Night one or two small Pills; because they work very gently the next day, and
carry off the Humors with much ease.

XVII. Pulvis Cornachini is an admirable Cathartick, given twice a Week, a i.
ad ss. also a Decoction of Myrobalans, mixed with Elect. Lenitivum, or de Succo
Rosarum, or some other Solutive Purge. You may also give the Infusion of
Rhubarb, Sena, and Myrobalans, sweetened with Syrup of Roses, or Manna.

XVIII. Sennertus says, that Hot, Choleric, and Serous Humors are to be
evacuated; because they are more apt for motion and flowing, and make much for
generating Inflammations, Erysipela's, and Fevers; and therefore are to be
evacuated at first, before any Fluxion is excited, or Fever induced: for if a
Fever is present, Purging cannot be permitted, but with some kind of danger.

XIX. If the Humors are very hot and thin, so as that they cannot be well
carried off with Purging, you must come to the use of Opiates; because they
thicken the Juices of the whole Body, and so, not only make them fit for an
After-expulsion, but also by making them thick, do in a very great measure
prevent the Fluxion, which otherwise might fall on the wounded Part.

XX. The Air ought to be temperate and thick; for a hot and thin Air does thin
and melt the Humors, and so make them the more apt for Fluxion; and a cold Air
is hurtful for the Brain, Nerves, Bones, etc. and hinders the Healing of the
Wound.

XXI. The Diet is also to be moderate; Wine is not permitted before 12 or 14
days are past, unless fainting or swooning is present. In those Countries where
neither Wine nor Beer are to be had, the White Liquor, made of burnt
Hartshorn, made pleasant with juice of Limons and white Sugar, may be of good
use: also Barley-Water, made pleasant with Oxysaccharum, or Syrup of Limons, or
Citrons, or Syrup of Violets with juice of Limons, etc.

XXII. If the Wound is with a Fracture, Flesh nor Fish, are scarcely permitted
for the first 8 or 10 days; because they breed plenty of Nourishment, and
consequently of Humors, from whence a Fluxion is induced: and therefore Panada
and Ptisans are advised, as also some other things according to the Season of
the Year, as Asparagus, young Pease, Cabbage, Lettice, Endive, Succory, stewed
Prunes, Raisons; and after Meals things which strengthen and close the Mouth of
the Stomach; as Marmalade of Quinces, codled Apples, baked Apples, Pears baked
or stewed, Conserve of Barberries, preserved Damsens, etc. Caraway-comfits, etc.

XXIII. When Flesh is permitted to be eaten, it ought to be of Chickens, young
Pigeons, Veal, Lamb, Kids, Mutton, young Rabbets, Wild-fowl, Partridges,
Pheasants, Turtle-Doves, Blackbirds, Thrushes, Larks, etc. with Sawces made of
things cooling and moistning; as Sorrel, Spinach, Succory, Lettice, Purslane,
etc. or else of Verjuice, juices of Sorrel, Mints, Oranges, Limons, Citrons,
Pomgranates, etc.

XXIV. Sleep is to be procured in the Nightime, and avoided by Day: and much
Watching is to be avoided, because it induces crudity of Humors, heaviness,
pain of the Head, disturbance of the Mind, and other ill Symptoms: in this case
Opiates prudently given, are proper, and to anoint the Forehead and Temples
with Oil of Poppies, Henbane, or Mandrakes, p. 2. mixed with Vinegar p. 1.
inwardly you may give Syrup of white Poppies jss. mixed with Syrup of Limons,
Lettice-water, A. i. for a Dose.

XXV. Lastly, as to the excretion of Excrements, the Belly ought to be kept
soluble, that there may be a continual sinking away of corrupt and vicious
Humors: and if Nature is dull, or the Body costive, Evacuation is to be made by
Clysters, Suppositories, and the like; and sometimes by a gentle Solutive
Medicine taken by the Mouth: but Venery above all things is to be avoided;
(especially in Wounds of the Head) because great store of Spirits are contained
in a small quantity of Seed; and thereby all the Faculties, but chiefly the
Animal, are weakened and enervated.

CHAP. IX. Of the SYMPTOMS of WOVNDS.
I. SYmptoms which happen to Wounded Persons are manifold, but the twelve
following are chief; viz. 1. Hemorrhage. 2. Pain. 3. Inflammation. 4. An
Erysipelas. 5. Indigestion of Humors. 6. Fever. 7. Fainting and Swooning. 8.
Convulsions. 9 Delirium. 10. Palsies. 11. Gangrene, or Sphacelus of the Part.
12. Proud Flesh; which we hinted at in part, in Chap. 1. Sect. 39. of this Book
aforegoing.

II. (...), Haemorrhagia; is either Essential, which happens upon the first
wounding, before binding up; of which we have discoursed at large in Chapter 4.
aforegoing: or Symptomical, which is when it breaks forth again some day, or
days after the first applications: this is also to be cured after the same
manner, and with the same Medicaments, and therefore we shall say no more of it
in this place.

III. (...). Dolor, Pain; Galen defines or describes Pain to be, Sensatio
tristis, a sad or grievous Feeling; but this shows rather how pain is caused,
than what it is: Cicero, Tusc. 2. says, Dolor est motus asper in Corpore, a
Sensibus alienus: Pain is a sharp commotion or passion in a Body, hurtful to,
or disagreeing from the Senses.

IV. These Descriptions or Definitions answer not exactly the thing: however,
it is an uneasy Feeling, or something disagreeable in the Instrument of
Feeling, caused by that which makes a Solution of Unity; or like Lightning,
penetrates through Nervous and Sensible Bodies.

V. Pain is eased by two sorts of Medicaments, 1. By Anodyns, which the Greeks
call (...), and (...). Asswagers, or Easers of Pain. 2. By Narcoticks, which
the Greeks call (...), ((...), a Stupore) things which give ease by stupifying
the Part.

VI. Anodyns, are such Medicaments as are temperate, and do restore, at least
maintain the natural temper of the Body or Part, open the Pores, and by their
subtilty enter into them, resolve the Humors, and make the Parts soft and
loose, and so less apt to retain the Matter paining: if they exceed a little in
heat, they more effectually open the Pores, and discuss the thinner part of the
peccant matter, by which the pain is abated.

VII. These things are not to be applied where the Pain is tolerable, but where
it is intolerable; which happens more especially when the Nerves or Nervous
Parts are wounded: but they are sometimes excited by Errors committed by the
Patient in the course of his Diet; by eating all manner of bad and corrupt
Food, as Cabbage, Coleworts, salt Fish, and other salt and pickled Meats: as
also by exposing the wounded Part to the cold Air, or overmuch Exercise, etc.
Or by the carelessness or unskilfulness of the Surgeon, applying things too
hot, sharp, or corrosive; too long Tents, too hard Bandage, or leaving pieces
of Bones, or Pus, too long in the Wound: and without any of these Causes, the
Pain may sometimes be excited, through an internal afflux of Humors.

VIII. If the pain is induced suddenly, with unwonted coldness and chilness, it
is an ill sign, and shows an Inflammation immediately to follow, or a Gangren
nigh at hand: these Pains are also the cause of restlesness, want of Sleep,
dejection of strength, and an afflux of Humors to the wounded Part; from whence
comes oftentimes Inflammations, Fevers, and sometimes a Gangren or Sphacelus it
self.

IX. In order therefore to the Cure, you must make a diligent search into the
Causes, which are all to be removed, before any thing else is done: as things
extraneous are presently to be removed; abundance of Pus retained, is to be
brought sorth, etc. but if it proceeds from an overgreat afflux of Humors,
then Medicaments anodyn and rarifying are to be applied, among which the
following are accounted.

X. Of simple Anodynes, the chief are; Roots, of Lillies, Onions, Garlic,
Leeks: Herbs, as Camomil, Dill, Elder, Fennel, Mallows common and marsh,
Peniroyal, Walwort: Seeds, Barley, Beans, Wheat, Oatmeal, Fenugreek, Linseed:
Oils, of Olives, Almouds, Ben, new Butter: Grease, of Capons, Dueks, Geese,
Hogs, Mankind, Vipers: Marrow, of Beef, Lamb, Mutton, Veal: Milk, of Cows,
Goats, Womenkind: Gums, Camphir, Rosin, etc. Flowers, Roses, Saffron.

XI. Out of these, several compound Anodyns may be composed; as, Oil of Ben,
Capons-grease, A.ss. Oils of Dill and Camomil, A.ii. Beef-marrow i, Camphir i.
mix them. Unguentum album camphoratum i. Oil of Elder ss. Camphir i. mix them.
Roots of Lillies, Onions boiled soft in Water, A.ii. Oil of Dill i. Whitebread,
q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm, etc.

XII. Among Anodyns, Sennertus commends Oils of Roses, of Earthworms, and of
Elder, Paraeus Oil of Whelps; a Cataplasm of leaves of Mallows, roots of
Althea, Barley-meal, Bean-meal, and Bran. Oil of sweet Almonds, of Roses, of
Camomil, A.i. yolk of one Egg, Saffron i. mix them. Roots of Althea ss.
Mallow-leaves, Elder-flowers, A. M.i. boil to softness, and pulp them through a
Hair-sieve; to which add powder of Camomil-flowers ss. Barley-meal i. meals of
Beans and Linseed, A. ss. mix, and make a Cataplasm; to which you may add (if
you please) Oil of Camomil, Earthworms, or Roses, q.s. But in extreme Pains,
Oils of Poppies and Water Lillies are commended; also a Cataplasm of leaves or
roots of Nightshade, made up with Oil of Poppies, or Hogslard.

XIII. Narcoticks take not away the cause of the Pain, but are said to give
ease through stupefaction, and these Medicaments are generally cold in third and
fourth degree: of which kind are Apple of Peru, Darnel, Hemlock, Henbane,
Nightshade the deadly, Mandrake, Opium, Poppies, the black chiefly,
Water-lilles, Poplar-buds, English Tobacco, etc. of which you may make Oils,
Ointments, Cataplasms, etc. Vnguentum Populeon and Album, ana i. Oil of
Henbane, or English Tobacco ss. Tincture of Opium as thick as new Honey ijss.
mix them.

XIV. (...), Inflammatio, an Inflammation often follows upon Wounds, more
especially if the Nerves, or Nervous Parts are wounded; or that the Pain
excites an afflux of Hnmors and Blood unto the Part affected; which, when it
cannot sufficiently flow forth, putrifies, and easily causes an Inflammation.

XV. Of this Hippocrates has hinted something in Lib. de Vlceribus: Si statim
pro Valetudine Sanguis plus minusve e plaga fluxerit, and ipsum Vulnus, and
quae juxta sunt, minus Inflammatione praemuntur. If Blood flows forth of the
Wound, whether more or less, so it be in proportion to the strength of the
Patient; then both the Wound it self, and parts adjacent to it, will be the
less troubled and affected with any Inflammation that may possibly follow
thereupon.

XVI. If therefore there is any cause to fear an Inflammation, from the Blood
not sufficiently flowing out, then bleeding is to be proposed, which is to be
in proportion to the strength of the Sick. But if an Inflammation is already
present, then Authors advise Bleeding and Purging too, as the Necessity shall
require.

XVII. If the Inflammation is excited through Pain, that Pain is to be removed
by Application of Anodyns or Narcoticks, such as we have enumerated at Sect.
10, 11, 12, and 13. afore-going: And the Afflux of Humors are to be repressed,
according as we have directed in the former Chapter.

XVIII. Avicen commends a Cataplasm made of a Pomgranate boiled in red or
astringent Wine, then beaten in a Mortar, and made up into a Consistency. Or a
Cataplasm may be made of Flower of Barley, Sea Lentiles, and Mouseear in
powder, with Oil of Roses or Lilies: But if these things do not, you must
pursue the Cure as we have taught, Lib. 3. Cap. 5. aforegoing; where we have
delivered what is necessary to be known in this Matter.

XIX. (...), Erysipelas, A cuticular Heat, and pustular Eruption upon the Skin,
sometimes follows upon the Wounds; which you may know by the Signs of an
Erpsipelas, delivered in the former Book.

XX. Hippocrates, Lib. de Vlceribus, teaches us, Vbicunque Vlceri supervenerit
Erysipelas, purgandum Corpus esse. That whenever an Erysipelas shall follow
upon an Ulcer, that then the Body is to be Purged.

XXI. If Choler therefore does so much abound, as to endanger an Afflux of
Humors to the Wound, it ought wholly to be evacuated with Cholagogues, yet
gently, and by degrees.

XXII. But because many times an Erysipelas has its O^i inal from very thin
Blood, either Simple, or mixed with some Choler, Catharticks are to be very
mode a ely used, and sometimes not at all; but Sudorificks are to be chosen, as
being most useful to open the Pores, and exhale the super-abounding hot
Humidity of the Blood.

XXIII. Hippocrates was wont to impose upon the place affected the Leaves of
Woad, or the Juice thereof mixed with some proper Earth, as Terra Sigillata,
Chalk, etc. You may also apply a Cataplasm made of Elder-water, or Juice of
Elder, with Barley-meal, etc. and other things which we have directed, Lib. 3.
Cap. 17. of this Work aforegoing.

XXIV. But Authors leave this Prognostic to go along with us, That an
Erysipelas (if it is not induced from the Application of too hot external
Medicines) coming upon Wounds, Ulcers, Fractures, and Dislocations, is for the
most part mortal.

XXV. (...), Cruditas, Indigestion in Wounds: This is another thing which
hinders healing of Wounds. Now a Wound is said to be Crude or Indigested, when
it does not afford a laudable Pus or Quittor, viz. white, smooth, uniform, and
not ill scented.

XXVI. The Cause of this is manifold; 1. Want of Application of fit Medicaments
in due time. 2. Being exposed too long in the Cold, or cold Air. 3. From
imposing unfit Medicaments, as things cold, and Heterogene to the Parts
wounded. 4. By reason of a great Flux of Blood continuing. 5. From the Nature
of the Parts, as Nerves, Tendons, deep Wounds in the Joints. 6. From the
Instrument making the Wound, whereby it becomes Contused, as Gunshot, etc. 7.
From Malignity or Poison. 8. By reason of too strict Bandage.

XXVII. As to the Cure; That which is the Cause of the Crudity is to be
removed; the wounded Parts are to be strengthened, and Digestives are to be
applied, accordiug to the Nature of the Parts hurt.

XXVIII. If there is an Hemorrhage, it is to be stopped, as we have taught in
Cap. 4. aforegoing. If the Joints are wounded, Medicaments drying (but not
biting) are to be applied to preserve their Temperature. The coldness of the
Air is to be corrected; fit Medicaments are to be applied to the wounded Part;
an equal and mean Bandage is to be used; Things Comforting and Easing the
Nerves and Tendons are to be imposed; and the Contused Flesh, if any be, is to
be reduced to Pus.

XXIX. The Part wounded is to be strengthened and fortified with Repulsives, or
Interceptives; and with such things as preserve (in a mean) the Natural Heat.

XXX. Lastly, the Wound it self is to be brought to Digestion, by the help of
Digestives, reasonably applied; an enumeration of which, both Simple and
Compound, you have at large.

XXXI. (...), Febres; Fevers happening upon Wounds are of many kinds: As, 1.
From Disturbance of Humors. 2. From Generating of the Pus, 3. From an
Inflammation. 4. From Putridness of Humors. 5. From an ill Preparedness of
Humors.

XXXII. 1. Fevers from Disturbance of Humors, invade from the very beginning,
arising from the Motion of the Body, Passion of the Mind, and Disturbance of
the Blood and Spirits thereupon: As also from vehement Pain disturbing the
Humors, which causing restlesness, sets those Humors on fire.

XXXIII. They are known from their invading the Patient instantly upon
insticting the Wound, and together with it: But a putrid Fever may invade the
Patient at the same moment, as well as one of these Ephemerae, which you are to
distinguish by their proper Signs.

XXXIV. These Ephemerae bring with them no danger at all, yet neither can ye
promise Safety; for that the time of Fluxion and Inflammation that are wont to
follow on the Wound, is not yet past over.

XXXV. This Fever requires no special Cure; but if the Sick will submit to the
strict Rules of Diet, will vanish of its own accord: But all its Causes (if
present, or there is fear of their returning) are to be removed, lest danger
ensue. For otherwise about the fourth day Fluxions and Inflammations may
happen, and so endanger other Symptoms; in these Cases, this is good, of Our
Aqua Bezoartica i. Guttae Vitae. ss. Aqua Elementaria iij. mix: Dose, one
spoonful Morning and Evening.

XXXVI. 2. Fevers from generating the Pus, arise when there is a great
abundance of Pus generated, as Hippocrates, Sect. 2. Aph. 47. seems to
inculcate: For whatsoever abounds in the wounded Part, and cannot be changed
into the substance thereof, putrifies, and causes an Effervescency of the
putrid Matter; yet Nature does whatever she can, to convert as much of the
superfluous matter into Pus. Now from this Ebullition a heat is engendered in
the Blood in the Vessels, which being communicated to the Heart, excites a
Fever, which is more like to an Ephemera plurium dierum, rather than to Febris
putrida, properly so called.

XXXVII. It is known, because the Signs of Putridness are absent, and appear
not, nor yet the Signs of an Inflammation: And it invades at the time in which
the Pus is wont to be generated, which is chiefly about the fourth day: The
Heat is much, but easy; Pulse great, swift, and frequent; Urine like that in
time of Health, and is always alone, or without any other Symptom joined with
it.

XXXVIII. It is without any danger at all in it self, and soon after ceases
many times of its own accord.

XXXIX. The Cure is effected by making a passage forth for the Pus, as soon as
may be: And if the Pus is contained in a more noble Part, or in a Part that has
consent with a more noble Part, the sooner it is let out, the better it is, and
the sooner the Fever ends; and withal, you ought to endeavor to hinder the
future afflux of any more Humors.

XL. 3. Fevers from an Inflammation, are caused from the Matter heaped up, and
causing the Phlegmon; and they arise from the Spirits growing hot, and
communicating this heat to the Heart through the Arteries and Veins, by which
the putrid Vapors are transfused, and do penetrate: And these Fevers are
sometimes Quotidians, and sometimes Putrid, according to the Matter by which
they are induced.

XLI. They are known, because an Inflammation is always present; the Signs of
which we have given you in its proper place: And whether it is a Quotidian, or
truly Putrid Fever, you may know by the Signs of them both, as we have declared
them in Our Synopsis Medicinae, Lib. 7. to which we refer you. If it is a
Quotidian, the Signs of Putridness appear not in the Urine, whereas in Putrid
Futrid Fevers they do appear: And the heat in Putrid Fevers is far greater and
sharper than in Quotidians; so also the Symptoms are more vehement, and withal
there is a greater dejection of Spirits, and of the strength of the Body.

XLII. They are greater or lesser, according to the Magnitude of the
Inflammation, on which they depend; and so likewise they are more or less
dangerous.

XLIII. They are Cured by removal of the Cause, viz. of the Phlegmon, like as
all other symptomatick Fevers are: And therefore you must by cooling
Alteratives endeavor the abatement of the Heat, lest that otherwise a
Putridness of the Humors be induced. And if any Putridness is present, you
must repress and restrain it with all the speed imaginable.

XLIV. 4. Fevers from Putridness of Humors, are caused from the Heat which
induces the Putrefaction, which are kindled, and increase gradually as the
Putridness increases; and this Putridness is in the Wound it self, having an
affinity with the Pus, or thick purulent Matter.

XLV. They are known from the Quantity and Quality of the Excrements flowing
out of the Wound, as a great quantity of Sanies, which is rather Putrid or
Stinking, than laudable or good Pus, and of a various and evil Color, and very
offensive Smell: And though the Sanies may sometimes be but little, yet it is
corrupt and stinking: If the Color of the, Part is changed, and there is pain
and heaviness, it is a Sign of a present vicious Matter, not cast forth, which
stirring of a heat with in, causes this Fever to appear, with Signs of
Putridness in the Urine.

XLVI. They are more or less dangerous, according as the Putridness is greater
or lesser, and in a Part more or less noble, and accompanied with more grievous
or gentle Symptoms; and as the passage for the vicious and putrid Matter is
more difficult or easy for its flowing forth.

XLVII. The Cure consists in resisting the Putridness, and restraining the
Putrid Matter, and that an easy way and passage be made with all speed for its
flowing out: For the Putridness being resisted and destroyed, and the putrid
Matter removed, the Fever then vanishes of its own accord.

XLVIII. 5. Fevers from an ill Preparation of the Humors through the whole Body,
are easily kindled upon the occasion of a Wound; for if the wounded Body is
impure, a Fever, through pain of the Wound, is easily then induced. This may
rather be called a Cacochymick Fever, because of the great provision of Vicious
and Scorbutic Humors heaped up in all places; and it is caused either from
those Humors through the whole Body being inflamed, through the Commotion or
Disturbance of the Spirits after receiving of the Wound, or from a Putridness
engendered in the wounded Parts, from whence depraved Vapors are communicated
to the Veins, where meeting with vicious Humors, a Fever is induced thereupon.

XLIX. These Fevers are sometimes continued, sometimes intermitting, but for
the most part Tertians of either kind, either single or double; very rarely
Quotidians, and more seldom Quartans: And they are known by the Heat, by the
Urine, and by the Pulse, all showing a Putridness and Cacochymy: If they are
caused by a Disturbance and Commotion of the Spirits of the Humors, it is
known by its immediately invading the Patient in the beginning, when there is
no Putridness in the Wound. But if it is caused from any Putridness in the
Wound, then the Fever is not at beginning; but after a short time, when Signs
and Tokens of Putridness begin to appear in the Wound. Lastly, The Nature and
Quality of the Fever is to be known from its own proper Signs.

L. The continual are the more dangerous; the intermitting are of themselves
altogether void of Danger: But continual Fevers falling upon Wounds, have all
of them some danger, more or less, according to the Quality or Condition of the
Putridness; for that a Fluxion may be excited upon the Part affected: Or by
weakening of the Heat of the Part, many Excrements may be generated therein,
from whence many other evil Symptoms may be excited.

LI. As to the Cure of these Fevers, the Putridness must be resisted, by giving
internally Our Tinctura Bezoartica, a gut. xxv. ad lx. in some proper Vehicle;
and in the Remission, part of the Morbifick Cause is to be carried off with
Purging, by giving several Doses of Sal Mirabile; and then cooling the Blood
with Juice of Citrons, or Oil of Sulphur, or Sal Vitriolatum. The Intermitting
are to be Purged in the Intermission; 1. Upwards, with Pulvis Antimonii, or
some small Dose of Tartar Emeticum. 2. Downwards, with Pulvis Catharticus, or
Pulvis Cornachini, or an Infusion of Sena and Rhubarb, that the Cacochymy may
in a good measure be carried off: After which the Fever is to be cured with
Pulvis Antifebriticus, or with the Powder, Infusion, or Tincture of Cortex
Peruanus.

LII. (...), Lipothymia and Syncope, Fainting and Swooning: These differ only
in degrees. In Lipothymia, or Fainting, the Sick loses not altogether the sense
of Feeling, but the Spirits seems to fail, with a cold Sweat breaking forth,
chiefly about the Face, Forehead and Temples.

LIII. Whereas in a Syncope, or Swooning, Motion and Feeling are taken away
together from the Body, so that it lies for a time, seemingly as if it were
dead. In handling this Article, we will only treat of a Syncope, as being the
greater Disaffection; for that the Cure of it being known; the other cannot be
unknown, since that those things, which are beneficial in a Syncope, or the
greater evil, must be much more prevalent in a Lipothymia, or the lesser.

LIVE. A Syncope may be caused, 1. From Fear, or over great Joy. 2. From
Suffocation of the Spirits, from Crude Humors, or Sulphurous Vapors, as
those of Charcole. 3. From the Sensibility of a Part, as a Nerve, Tendon,
Membrane wounded. 4. From the Constitution of the Heart being altered, by the
Malignity of some Disease, as the Plague, etc. 5. From a malign Vapor sent to
the Heart from some other Part, as from the Womb, in Fits of the Mother. 6.
From a malign Matter communicated to the Heart, as in a Sphacelus, or deadly
Mortification. 7. From a deficiency of Spirits, there being not matter enough
for their generation, as in Famine, great Thirst. 8. From the Spirits being
spent by too great Heat, Watching, Grief, Travel, or immoderate Evacuations. 9.
By Antipathy to some particular thing, as smelling to sweet Bryar, or
Wall-flower, seeing or tasting of Shoulder of Mutton, Cheese, etc.

LV. The Signs of a Syncope are, Paleness of the face, with sometimes cold
Sweats; small, slow, and unequal Pulse, dimness of Sight, coldness of Hands and
Feet; at last the Pulse wholly ceases, and the Speech, Moving, and Feeling are
taken away, the Body lying for a while as though it was dead.

LVI. As to the Prognostics, you must know, 1. A Syncope proceeding from an
inward Cause, is more dangerous than that which proceeds from an outward; and
that which seizes one which was before feeble and weak, is accounted dangerous.

LVII. 2. A Syncope which proceeds from an Oppression of the Spirits, is more
easily cured, and less dangerous, than that which proceeds from a Dissipation
of the same, through Inanition: But where Swooning is often repeated without
manifest Cause, the Sick dies at last suddenly, as Hippocrates affirms, Sect.
2. Aph. 41.

LVIII. 3. In a Syncope, if the Sick comes, or revives not again, by casting
cold Water on the face, rubbing them with Rose Water, or Spirit of Wine, or
having Wine or strong Waters put into their mouth, or strong sneezing Medicines
blown up their Nostrils, or strong Spirit of Sal Armoniack held thereto, it may
be accounted mortal.

LIX. 4. A Syncope caused by immoderate Evacuation of Blood in Wounds (if it is
not too great) is not very dangerous, especially if the Sick is of a good Habit
of Body; for that by good Diet new Blood may be generated again.

LX. 5. The Sick coming to themselves again after a Fit; yet if the Pulse and
good Color of the Face returns not, they will immediately relapse again, or
fall into another Fit.

LXI. 6. Lastly, The Syncope, which is the primary Diasaffection of the Heart,
is more dangerous than that which happens by consent of other Parts.

LXII. As to Cure: The means proper in this Case, are either External or
Internal.

LXIII. Externally, Cast in their Faces fair Water, Damask-Rose Water,
Orange-flower Water, Mint Water, etc. And let the Temples and Nostrils be
bathed or moistened with Spirit of Angelica or Bawm, or Powers of Oranges,
Limons, Lavender, Rosemary, or Amber.

LXIV. But if it is a Woman, and possibly may be subject to Fits, you must
avoid sweet Scents, but cause the Fumes of Spirit or Salt of Hartshorn to go up
the Nostrils, Spirit or Tincture of Castor, Volatile Salt, or Spirit of Sal
Armoniack, of Urine, or of Blood, etc.

LXV. Then you must use shaking of the Body, rubbing of the extreme Parts,
hollowing in their ears, and pressing the Parts adjacent to the Joints of the
lower Jaw, under the Lobes of the Ears; and force into their mouth gr. x. of
Our Theriaca Chymica, mixed with a little Spiritus Cordialis, or a drop or two
of Oil of Limons or Lavender.

LXVI. Internally, you may give a Toast well sop'd in Choice Canary, drinking
the Wine with the Toast: Or you may dissolve a little choice Juice of Alkermes
in Our Spiritus Cordialis, or gr. xvi. of Theriaca Chymica in Our Aqua
Bezoartica i. where these things are not at hand, Angelica, Bawm, Cinnamon, and
Mint Waters, may be of use, more especially if mixed with an equal quantity of
mull'd Brandy.

LXVII. Or you may give this Composition. Spiritus Cordialis i. Tinctura
Cordialis ss. Potestates Anisi, Caryophyllorum, Lavendule, Limonum, Pulegii,
Rosmarini, A. i. Cinnamon Water, Mint-water, A. ij. Syrup of the Juice of
Limons and Citrons, A. i. Juice of Alkermes ss. mix them. Dose, one or two
Spoonfuls, now and then, as you see occasion.

LXVIII. (...), Convulsio, a Convulsion, or plucking or shrinking up of the
Nerves, Tendons, and Muscles, or parts appointed for voluntary Motion toward
their Original, viz. the Brain, or Spinal Marrow, which happens now and then to
wounded Persons; this is a vehement and dangerous Symptom, and of which we
should be large here, but that we have treated thereof very explicitly in the
third Edition of Our Synopsis Medicinae, Lib. 2. Cap. 3. and Lib. 3. Cap. 18.
We shall here therefore give you only those things which are proper to be said
upon those Convulsions, which are wont to follow upon Wounds.

LXiX. A Convulsion in wounded Persons, is twofold; either Natural or
Unnatural: That which is Natural happens when one of two Muscles appointed for
Motion is contracted, the other being Transve sly ^ounded; and this may be seen
in Wounds of the Head, when one of the Temporal Muscles is cut asunder; and in
Wounds of the Fingers: For if the inner Muscle of a Finger is cut asunder
transversly, the outward Muscle will be contracted.

LXX. An Unnatural Convulsion is that which happens, not because one of two
Muscles, ordained to perform the same Function or Action, is transversly
wounded, but is otherwise hurt, cut in part, or pricked, and this is either
Motus Convulsivus, or Convulsio Vera.

LXXI. Motus Convulsivus is caused from a thin, or vaporous Matter moving up
and down, and disturbing the Nerve: Which continues not long; for the Matter
being kept in the Part effected, the Brain, and Original of the Nerve are so
affected, that they lose their Action; from whence a Palsy is induced on that
side: Then a malign Vapor being raised from hence, and passing to the Neurotick
Root of the sound Part, not wholly spoiled, the Nerves are shaken; whence comes
this Motus Convulsivus, and differs from a true Convulsion only in this, That
the Matter is less sharp, and the Contraction continues not so long.

LXXII. A true Convulsion is that which is caused from an abounding Oily Matter
stopping the Nerves; or from a Dryness shrinking them up; or by Consent, from
an evil or malign Vapor, sent to the Original of the Nerves of the Muscles, and
contracting them.

LXXIII. Convulsions are either General or Particular: The General are
threefold, 1. (...), Emprosthotonos, when not only the Neck, but the rest of
the Body also is drawn or contracted forwards, that the Sick cannot stand
upright; the Nerves of the Neck and rest of the Spine, which move the Body
forwards, being disaffected.

LXXIV. 2. (...), Opisthotonos, when the whole Body is bent backwards, so that
it cannot be bent forwards; which is caused from the hurt of the Muscles which
bend the Body backwards.

LXXV. 3. (...), when all the Muscles of the fore and back Parts are equally
Convulsed, or Contracted, and kept so, whereby the Body remains stiff, that it
cannot be bended any way.

LXXVI. Particular Convulsions are twofold, 1. (...), Spasmus Cynicus seu Oris
distortio; which, as Celsus, Lib. 4. Cap. 2. says, Is when the mouth is pulled
awry. Now the chief Muscles of the Face are those of the Nostrils, Cheeks,
Lips, and lower Jaw, which have Nerves, for the most part, from the third
Conjugation.

LXXVII. 2. (...), Spasmus flatuosus, seu Flatu abundans; The Cramp, in any
other particular Part of the Body, caused from a thin windy Vapor, contracting
the Muscles or Nerves, making a hard knotty Tumor, with vehement Pain.

LXXVIII. Now the Causes of Convulsions upon Wounds are either Essential, or by
Consent.

LXXIX. The Essential Causes are either from a pricking of the Nerves, and a
vehement Pain thence arising; or else from some malign or sharp Humor or Vapor
twitching some nervous Part, or the Membranes of the Brain; for the Expulsion
of which, Nature, by laboring, excites this Contraction, or Convulsive Motions.

LXXX. Hippocrates, Sect. 5. Aph. 65. says, Those that with their Wounds have
manifest Tumors, are not much troubled with Convulsion Fits, but they are
seized with a sort of Madness: But if these Tumors suddenly vanish, (they
happening on the hinder Part) then Cramps and Convulsions happen thereupon.

LXXXI. And Galen, Art Medica, Cap. 92. says, That the pricking of a Nerve or
Tendon (by reason of the exquisiteness of their Sense, and because they are
continued from the Brain) is very apt to excite a Convulsion of the Nerves; but
then more especially, when nothing breaths forth outwardly, the wound of the
Skin being shut up or closed.

LXXXII. The Causes of a Convulsion by Consent are threefold, 1. From a malign
Vapor offending the Original of the Nerves, as in Poisoned Wounds. 2. When the
Nerves draw themselves toward their Original, by reason of the great pain
which is felt in the wounded Part. 3. From vehement or immoderate Cold, or cold
things making the Nerves stiff.

LXXXIII. The Signs of a Convulsion, are a Contraction of the Muscles and
Nerves toward their Original, against the will of the Sick, and the Member
which they move follows this depraved Motion. But in a convulsive Motion, this
is not performed at once, and so continuing, but it comes, ceases, and returns
often, drawing the flesh several ways.

LXXXIV. As to the Prognostics: Convulsions or convulsive Motions are very
dangerous in Wounds; for Hippocrates, Sect. 5. Aph. 2. says, If a Convulsion
follows upon a Wound, it is mortal; and this is because sharp Humors smite the
Nerves and inflame them. And in Sect. 5. Aph. 3. If a Convulsion follows upon
an immoderate Flux of Blood, or a Raving, or Sighing, and Sobbing upon the same
occasion, it is very evil and dangerous.

LXXXV. Whoever is taken with a Tetanos, dies generally within four days; but
if they escape these, they recover. Hippocrates, Sect. 5. Aph. 6. The reason
is, because the Disease is perperacute, or very acute, and Nature is not able
to endure that horrible pain any longer, caused by the strong Tension of the
Nerves, both forward and backward.

LXXXVI. They who die of a Convulsion, continue hot a long time, because they
die stifled, the Muscles appointed for respiration being also contracted or
shrunk up: For the Muscles of the Neck distended, the Septum transversum, or
Diaphragma, must also be hurt. For Nerves arising from the fourth Vertebra of
the Neck are inserted into the Midriff, and so the Neck being convulsed,
Respiration is hindered.

LXXXVII. The Cure of Convulsions we have taught at large in the Third Edition
of Our Synopsis Medicinae, Lib. 3. Cap. 18. Sect. 21. ad 28. But in Convulsions
and convulsive Motions which happen upon Wounds, (whether it is of themselves,
or by Consent of some other Part) this is particular, that you must have great
regard to the Brain, and Spinal Marrow, and the Nerves which proceed from them.

LXXXVIII. For which reason you are to anoint the Neck, both before and behind,
as also the whole Spinal Marrow, with some powerful Neurotick, such as this:
Cil of Peter, Chemical Oil of Amber, Angelica, Anise, Caraways, Camomil,
Cloves, Fennel, Juniper, Lavender, Limons, Mace, Nutmegs, Rosemary, Sage,
Sassafrass, Savin, Turpentine, A. i. liquid Amber, liquid Storax, Balsams of
Chili, Peru and Tolu, A. ij. mix them; with which anont two or three times a
day.

LXXXIX. If the Convulsion happens from the Retention of the Pus, or other
Recrements, a Passage must be made as soon as may be, for the Excrements both
thin and thick to come forth; and by which some Neurotick Oil or Liquor is be
dropped into the Wound, that has a power to cleanse and give ease.

XC. And outwardly, things which have a power to draw from the depth of the
Wound are to be applied; which must be Medicaments of an attractive force, and
yet Neuroticks withal; of which kind are all sorts of natural Balsams,
Turpentines, and the like.

XCI. The Body, if Costive, is to be kept soluble with Clysters. fat Broths
lbi. Tincture of Sena ss. brown Sugar iv. mix them, and exhibit warm. Or you
may Purge with a Dose or two of Pulvis Cornachini a gr. xx. ad ss. given in a
little Syrup of Roses solutive, which works pleasantly and gently.

XCII. After Purging, Specificks are to be given; as morning and evening Our
Theriaca Chymica, Laudanum Specificum, Elixir Antepilepticum, Spiritus Opii,
Potestates Lavendulae, Limonum, Pulegii, Rosmarini, Succini, and Virtutum,
Guttae Vitae, Sal and Spiritus Cornu Cervi, and other things of like kind, with
which also outwardly, the Parts affected may sometimes be bathed.

XCIII. If the Convulsion arises from poisoned Wounds, whether with poisoned
Weapons, or bitings of poisonous Creatures, etc. you must then dilate the mouth
of the Wouud, that the venomous Matter may have free vent; and Cupping-Glasses
are to be applied, to stop the ascending of the Vapors.

XCIV. The Medicines also which you apply to such poisoned Wounds, must be of a
thin or liquid substance, that it may the more easily pass to the bottom of the
Wound, and they must be of a drying and digestive quality, to resolve and draw
out the virulency or poison of the Matter.

XCV. Such are Ointment of Tobacco, made thin with Oil of Tobacco, Our Theriaca
Chymica, or Mithridate dissolved in Spiritus Cordialis: And in this case a
little of the Princes Powder (to be added with the former mixtures, whether of
the Ointment or Treacle) will be found of extraordinary use.

XCVI. If the Convulsion is caused from extremity of Pain, Anodyns are to be
applied; as Oil made by expression, out of the Seeds of Hypericon, in which the
Flowers of the same Herb are often to be infused, which is commended by
Heurnius; also other Anodyns, and Narcoticks, store of which you may find in
their proper places.

XCVII. If the Convulsion is caused through external Cold, or cold things, or
Applications; you must then keep the Sick in a warm Room, and anoint with
warming or heating Medicaments, such as this: Ox Gall ii. Oils of Amber, Anise,
Sassafrass, and Limons, A. ii. mix them, to anoint withal: Also you may anoint
with the Compositum, at Sect. 89. aforegoing.

XCVIII. (...), Delirium, Dotage, or symptomatical Madness. This Symptom
happening upon a Wound, is dangerous; for the mind not being well, it shows the
Brain is not well, neither its Membranes, nor the whole nervous System; and
therefore it is always a bad Sign.

XCIX. And if it is accompanied with a continual Fever, and Difficulty of
Breathing, it is mortal. Hippocrates, Sect. 4. Aph. 50. And if it follows a
great effusion of Blood, it many times shows a Gangrene is present, and that
the Patient will infallibly die.

C. If a Delirium happens in the beginning of a Wound, it shows that some noble
Part is hurt, and is more dangerous than if it happens afterward; for it
demonstrates the vehemence of the affect contending with Nature.

CI. Since wherever this Sympton appears in Wounds, it is for the most part
mortal, and declares imminent Death; we shall not say much of the Cure of it:
But if notwithstanding that any hope shall appear, 1. Revulsion is to be made
with proper Clysters. 2. Derivation is to be made by the Nostrils with proper
Errhines, such as Juice of Sweet Marjoram, Beets, Primrose Roots, etc. 3. You
must cause them to smell often to volatile Salts and Spirits, as of Sal
Armoniack, etc. 4. Apply Hypnoticks to the Forehead and Temples. 5. Endeavor
as much as may be, to remove any present evil Symptom in the Wound it self. 6.
Give Spiritus Opii Compositus in some proper Vehicle, as often as need requires,
to compose the Spirits, and bring the Patient to rest; or in place thereof of,
you may give a small Dose, as gr. i. or ii. or iii. of Our Specific Laudanum,
or of Our Volatile Laudanum, or Dr. Gardener's Laudanum Tartarizatum; all which
see in their proper Places. See more hereof in the Third Edition of Our
Synopsis Medicinae, Lib. 3. Cap. 6.

CII. (...), Paralysis (a (...), which is to be resolved) The Palsy, or
Resolution of the Nerves; that is, a resolving or loosening of the Nerve, and
Muscle into which the Nerve is inserted, so that they become weakened, and
useless for the performing of voluntary Motion. Or, it is a privation of
Motion, and sometimes of Motion and Feeling, both from an Obstruction of the
Nerves, which puts a stop to the Course of the Animal Spirits, the efficient
Causes of voluntary Motion and Feeling.

CIII. Several Conjugations of Nerves have several Offices, some serve for
Motion, some for Feeling, some for Tasting, some for Smelling, some for Seeing,
and some for Hearing: Now if the Nerves appointed for Motion only are affected,
voluntary Motion only is hurt, not the Feeling: But if the Nerves appointed for
Feeling are only hurt, then the Feeling is lost, the Motion remaining. If the
Nerves of both kinds are hurt, then both voluntary Motion, and sense of Feeling
are hurt together: But if the same Nerve does serve both for Motion and Feeling
together, then both are lost together.

CIV. Thus, in the Tongue, if the third and forth Conjugations of Nerves of the
Brain are hurt, the 7th pair being safe, the Taste is hurt, the motion of the
Tongue continuing; and contrariwise. In the eye, if the Optic Nerves, the
first pair be hurt, the Motory or second pair being safe, the sight will be
lost, but the motion of the eye will remain, and e contra.

CV. Now the proximate Cause of a Palsy is some disaffection of the Nerves
inserted into the Parts destinate to Voluntary Motion; because from the Nerve
every Muscle has the Faculty of moving, for that it conveys to it the Animal
Spirits, the principal efficient Causes of Motion: And this Disaffection is
generally a cold and moist distemperature, which relaxes the Nerve, and makes
it wholly incapable to receive, and convey the said Animal Spirits.

CVI. The Nerves are resolved either by external Cold and Moisture, as cold
Weather, wet Clothes, lying in the Snow, or wet Places, immoderate Venery, cold
and narcotick Applications; or by Internal Defluxions of cold and moist
Humors, too much moistning and cooling the Nerves, and so relaxing them,
altering their natural Temperature, and making them unfit to receive and convey
the Animal Spirits to the Parts ordained for motion, as aforesaid, viz. the
Muscles.

CVII. Now the Nerve being relaxed, and the Spirits not flowing, but a flux of
cold moist Humors filling up and extending in breadth or thickness the Muscle,
the Nerves themselves become compressed, and so the passages of the Animal
Spirits are made narrower, or closed up; or otherwise they are obstructed with
the same flowing Humor, and so they are stopped.

CVIII. And this may be effected either by Compression, Contusion, Laxation,
Luxation, too strict Ligature, Mortification through Cold, or Solution of
Continuity, when the Nerve which conveys the said Spirits to the Muscle or
Part, is either cut a-sunder, cut tranversly, obliquely, torn, bruised, or
eroded with some corrosive or sharp Humor.

CIX. The Signs by which a Palsy is known, are the hurt of Motion, and
sometimes of Feeling, and sometimes of both: But the Part primarily affected,
is found out by that which is manifest.

CX. If one side of the face is Paralytick, the rest of the Body being well,
the Brain is originally affected: But if the Speech is hindered also, and one
side of the Body hurt withal; both the Brain and Medulla Spinalis are grieved.

CXI. If either side is Paralytick, all the Parts of the Head being well, the
Cause is in the same side of the Spinal Marrow; but if both sides are
Paralytick, the Head being well, both sides of the Spinal Marrow are hurt.

CXII. If the Arms only are Paralytick, the fifth, sixth, and seventh Vertebrae
of the Neck are affected: If the Thighs, Legs and Feet are affected, then the
Cause is in the Vertebrae of the Loins, and Os Sacrum.

CXIII. If any particular Part is Paralytick only, then the rooted Cause is
neither in the Brain, nor Spinal Marrow, but in some Branch or Sprig of a Nerve
inserted into that Part. If both sides of the Body are affected, it is then an
universal Palsy; but if one side only, it is an Hemiplegia, or Half Palsy.

XIV. As to the Prognostics; It is manifest, if the Paralytick Member is
actually hot, there is hopes of Cure: So also if a Fever follows after a
Palsy, because it warms, discusses and drys the morbifick Matter. Or if a
Diarrhaea happens naturally, because it discharges the Matter impacted in the
Nerves: Or if a Trembling comes after the Palsy, because it shows the Passages
for the Spirits are made a little pervious or open.

CXV. If a Palsy happens after an Apoplexy, it is scarcely cured, for it shows
the Vehemence of the Cause: It is scarcely cured if it happens in old Age in
the Winter time, because their natural Heat is weak, and Diseases in Winter-are
more rebellous: So also if the Paralytick Member is extenuate, and its fresh
color lost, because the Spirits are few, and the natural Heat weak: Or if the
eye of the Paralytick side is weak, for it argues a defect both of the natural
Heat, and Animal Spirits.

CXVI. A strong Palsy from an inward Cause, is hard to be cured, because it
proceeds from cold, viscous and gross Humors: If both Motion and Feeling are
abolished, it is more dangerous than when one of the Symptons only happens: If
the Paralysis follows after a vehement Luxation of the Spina Dorsi, or
Backbone, it is dangerous, because the Nerves are generally much bruised, and
by reason of Inflammation, are scarcely to be reduced. If it happens from a
Nerve being transversly cut asunder, it is incurable. Hippoc. Sect. 6. Aph. 19.

CXVII. The Cure has respect to, 1. Diet: 2. Internals: 3. Externals; all which
are to be regulated according to the Constitution of the Patient, and Quality
of the Wound afflicting.

CXVIII. 1. As to Diet: Let their bread be Biscake; their meat, the Flesh of
Land, and Mountain wild Foul, as Partidges, Larks, Starlings, Blackbirds,
Pheasants, Chickens, roasted with good Sauce: Their Drink, a Decoction of
Guajacum, used ordinarily; or Wine in which Cephalic and Neurotick Herbs have
been infused.

CXIX. 2. As to Internals, keep the Body soluble either with proper Clysters;
such as the Turpentine Clyster with brown Sugar, or fat Broth, in which
Colocynthis has been infused, or a Tincture of Colocynthis, or Scammony, or
Aloes has been mixed; then Purge with Tinctura Cathartica, Sal Mirabile,
Syrupus Catharticus, Pulvis Antimonii, Pulvis Catharticus, Pulvis Cornachini,
Electuarium Catharticum, or Pilulae Catharticae, which of these agree most with
the Habit and Constitution of the Body.

CXX. And in the Intervals of Purging, let the Patient take morning, noon and
night 60 or 80 drops of the following mixture in a Glass of Wine. Potestates
Lavendulae, Limonum, Pulegii, Rosmarini, Virtutum, A. j. Spiritus salis
Armoniaci ss. mix them.

CXXI. 3. As to Externals or Topics, Bleeding must be avoided, as a thing most
pernicious. The Vertebrae, and Parts affected, may be bathed with this: Powers
of Turpentine iv. Powers of Amber ij. Powers of Juniper j. mix them. Or this,
Oil of Peter, Oil of Amber, Oil of Turpentine, A. i. Oil of Limons and
Caraways, A. ss. mix them. And after some days time, for anointing, you may
apply this Emplaster, to attract Heat and Spirits; Frankincense viij. Ship
Pitch iv. Balsam Capivii, of Peru, and Turpentine, A. ii. Wax i. melt, mix, and
make an Emplaster.

CXXII. (...), Gangraena and Sphacelus, a Gangrene and Mortification. We shall
not say much of these here, because we have very largely discoursed of them in
Lib. 3. cap. 11. aforegoing of this Work; yet a short Observation or two we
shall give you. If a Gangrene appears, bath the Part affected with Camphorated
Spirit of Wine, simple, or mixed with some Water: Water of Crabs alone is said
to be singular; so also Saccharum Saturni infused in Limewater; Fomenting also
with Wine mixed with S.V. and Saffron.

CXXIII. If there is a Mortification, a Fomentation with Wine, in which
Wormwood, Rosemary, Hypericon and Aloes have be boiled, and then mixed with
Spirit of Wine, and a little Spirit of Sal Armoniack, is commended; so also the
Tinctures of Aloes, Euphorbium, and Myrrh made with Camphorated Spirit of Wine,
in which Saffron has been infused: Or those Tinctures impregnated with Spirit
of Sal Armoniack.

CXXIV. (...), Hypersarcosis, Carnis Excrescentia, Proud Flesh. This is
whenever the Flesh grows forth beyond its due measure, whereby it hinders the
Production of the Cicatrize for covering the Wound, or otherwise causes it to
be unpleasing to the sight, or deformed.

CXXV. It is caused mostly for want of Care in the Physician, not applying
Medicaments sufficiently drying, and then the Flesh will not be sound and
solid, but lose and spungy.

CXXVI. Or from abundance of Blood flowing unto the Part affected, and then the
Flesh will be in a right temper, only there will be too much of it.

CXXVII. The Cure is by taking away the superfluous-Flesh, that so the Wound
may be shut up with a Cicatrize; which that this may be done, the Medicaments
must be sufficiently powerful in drying and cleansing, and, if need require,
somewhat corroding likewise.

CXXVIII. If it proceeds from the first Cause, strong Detersives, and such as
may produce a Cicatrize, are to be chosen, as Sponge burnt, Galls, Aloes,
Tutty, burnt Alum, dry Lint; sometimes burnt Alum alone will do, or Pulvis ad
Hypersarcosm, Red Precipitate, etc.

CXXIX. This is commended, Galls, Pomgranate Peels, Sponge burnt, A. ss. burnt
Alum ii. make all into a Powder, to strew thereon. Or, Galls, Pomgranate Peels,
Myrrh, burnt Alum, dried Blood, A. ii. Dragons-blood, Ceruse, Verdigrise, A. i.
Red Precipitate ss. make a Powder.

CXXX. This Powder is beyond all, which is called Pulvis Angelicus: burnt Alum,
red Precipitate ground fine, Ana, mix them. Or the Aqua Viridis, Green Water of
Sennertus, which takes away the Flesh without any pain at all, and generates
the Cicatrize: Crude Roch-alum, Verdigrise, A. ij. Wine xviij. boil till a
quarter is wasted, then filter through brown Paper, and add to it Camphir i.
dissolved in Spirit of Wine i. dip Cloths in this, and lay it on the proud
Flesh.

CXXXI. If it proceds from the Second Cause, or abundance of Blood, you may
apply some of the former drying Medicaments, and withal, the Patient must use
fasting, and a spare Diet.

CHAP. X. Of Curing by the SECOND INTENTION.
I. (...). Syssarcosis, Concarnatio; Curing of Wounds by the second Intention,
is next to be taught, which is the Unition of Parts disjoined by some proper
Medium, or middle Substance; which in Wounds of the fleshy Parts is a like
substance, or Flesh: but in Wounds of a Bone, it is a Callus, etc.

II. Now when a Wound is to be cured by the second Intention, you may discover
by these following Directions: 1. If there is contused Flesh, or loss of
substance; whether it is of Flesh, Membrane, Ligament, Cartilage, or Bone. 2.
When you cannot conveniently or easily bring the lips of the Wound together, by
stitching or rolling; as in Wounds of the Joints, when the great Ligaments are
cut asunder. 3. When without it there would be a great and dangerous
Hemorrhage; as in Wounds of the Neck, where the internal Jugular Veins, and
Soporal Arteries are divided. 4. When we expect the scaling of a Bone, or
separation of a piece of a Ligament, or Cartilage. 5. When great store of Pus
or Quittor is like to flow to the wounded Part: which you may know,

III. 1. By your not being able to hinder the afflux of Humors by Swathing, as
in Wounds of the Armpits and Joints. 2. By the Patient's having a Scirrhus of
the Liver or Spleen. 3. By the Bodies repletion with cacochymical Humors. 4. By
the Patient's having some contagious Diseases; as the Leprosy, French Pox,
Itch, etc. In all which cases, the Cure ought to be attempted rather by the
second, than by the first Intention.

IV. Where there is loss of Substance, the Reasons hindering the Cure by the
first Intention, are, 1. Pain and Inflammation; which may ensue, by reason of
the forcible bringing of the lips of the Wound together. 2. Because of a great
Deformity, which may be in the wounded Part, after the Cure is performed. 3. By
reason of evil Symptoms which are apt to follow, after the Wound shall seem to
be healed; as Pain, Inflammation, Tumor, and a fresh breaking out again.

V. Now to cure a Wound after the second Intention, there are several
Indications; as, 1. To stop the Hemorrhage, if any be, and procure Digestion.
2. To cleanse the Wound of the digested Matter by Abstersives. 3. To fill up
the Wound with new Flesh, or some other Medium of Unition, by Sarcoticks. 4. To
abate or take away the Flesh, if it is proud or superfluous. 5. When the place,
if filled up with Flesh, etc. to produce the Cicatrice, with proper Stypticks
and Epuloticks.

VI. 1. How the Hemorrhage is to be stopped, we have taught in Chapter 4.
aforegoing: some time after which, the Wound is to be brought to yield a
Quittor of a white, smooth, equal, and thick substance, which is called
Digestion, and is performed with Digestives; which, what they are, see in Chap.
2. aforgoing, of this Book.

VII. 2. If the Wound is foul, with any ill or stinking Matter, looks black, or
ill colored, it is to be cleansed with Medicamenta detergentia,
Mundificatives, or Abstersives; and these Medicaments ought to be according to
Galen, Meth. Med. lib. 1. cap. 12. of a drying and penetrating faculty, and are
said to be the strongest kind of Sarcoticks.

VIII. For the slough, or foulness which is united to the Flesh, etc. in a
Wound, is united by moisture: wherefore drying Medicines spending the humidity,
the evil matter is separated; as in things glewed together, if the Glue is too
much dried, it loses its strength and hold.

IX. 3. The filling up of the Wound with Flesh. To do this, four things are
required: First, To reduce the whole Body, and especially the Part affected, to
a natural Temperament, and to cause it to incline to dryness; which if it is,
it is to be preserved; if it is not, it is to be induced, by Purging, Vomiting,
and Clysters, (according as Nature indicates) and the regulation of the course
of living, in the right ordering of the seven Non-naturals; as we intimate in
the Third Edition of Our Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 1. cap. 9. and cap. 19. sect.
1. to which places we refer you.

X. Secondly; the generating of new Blood, agreeable to the temper of the Part
wounded: if a Spermatick Part is wounded, the Blood generated ought to be cool,
thick, and dry; which is to generate a Medium, for the unition of the Parts
separated: but if a fleshy Part is wounded, the Blood is to be hotter, moister,
and thinner: this is done by the power or effects of inward Medicines.

XI. Thirdly, the Surgeon ought to be skilful and hardy: he ought to dress
his Patient with as much ease as may be; and he ought to be careful that his
Applications be neat, soft and smooth, which things add much to the Cure: and
he ought to be diligent in dressing the Patient in due time, not neglecting or
delaying his duty.

XII. Fourthly, you ought to have fit Topical Medicaments, called Sarcoticks,
or Incarnatives; which what they are, we refer you to Chap. 2. Sect. 31. ad 40.
aforegoing. These Sarcoticks, or Flesh-breeders, are drying, yet void of a
sharp and biting quality.

XIII. Now the Differences of these Sarcoticks are taken, 1. From their several
degrees, as they respect the first Qualities of Medicines. 2. From their Kinds.

XIV. As they respect their first Qualities, they are threefold: 1. Of a mean
Operation or Temperature; which are of use when the Pus is laudable, as white,
smooth, thick, and equal. 2. Stronger; when the Quittor or Matter flowing from
the Wound is thin and ichorous; for then the Desiccatives ought to be stronger,
so as to incrassate or thicken the thin Matter. 3. Strongest; when a slough or
filth appears in Wounds, and these are truly Abstersives.

XV. As to their Kinds, they are twofold; 1. Simple. 2. Compound. Which what
they are, you may see at large in Chap. 2. aforementioned.

XVI. The Simple are such as are, 1. Dry in the first degree; as, Meals of
Barley, Beans, Spelt-corn, Rice, Mastich, Frankincense, Olibanum, etc. which
are to be used to soft and tender constitutions, as Children, young Ladies,
etc. 2. Dry in the second degree; as Honey, Gum Elemi, Capivii, all sorts of
Rosin, Ship-Pitch, Meal of Cicers, Minium, Litharge, burnt Lead, etc. washed.
3. Dry in the third degree; as Meals of Orobus, Lupins, Orrice, both sorts of
Birthworts, powder of Tobacco, Myrrh, Sarcocolla, Lapis Calaminaris, Tutia, Aes
ustum, etc. These are fit for Sailers, Rusticks, Mechanics, and such as are of
a hardy, strong, and firm constitution of Body.

XVII. Besides, the differing degrees of these Medicaments, are to be applied
to several Parts of the Body, according to the nature and quality of the Wound.
The lips of Wounds, because they are soft, or softest, may admit of the first
degree; the Nerves and Membranes will admit of Medicines of the second degree:
and Cartilages and Bones require Medicaments of the third degree.

XVIII. Out of the simple Sarcoticks, Compounds may be framed, of which we have
given you many Examples in the Chapter aforecited, so that we need say no more
of them here: but one thing is to be noted, that sometimes Cathereticks (as
burnt Alum, Verdigrise, calcined Vitriol) may become the strongest kind of
Sarcoticks, if they be mixed in a small quantity, with Sarcotick Compositions.

XIX. 4. The abating or taking away of Proud-flesh. Though in a vacancy or loss,
we are to procure the growing of new Flesh, yet we must take heed, that it does
not over-grow, or grow too fast, or too much; the cause of which is, too much
Blood sent unto the Part.

XX. This is abated, 1. By strict or short Diet, and eating Food which
nourishes not too much. 2. By strait Ligature, hindering the flux of Blood to
the Wound. 3. By cooling and astringent Medicaments, applied to the sound Parts
adjacent to the Wound.

XXI. It is taken away, 1. By Instrument, as Incision-knife, Scissers, or
Razor. 2. By rubbing it with a rough linen Cloth, or applying dry Lint to it.
3. By application of Cathereticks.

XXII. Such are, burnt Alum, calcined Vitriol, and red Precipitate: if the
Patient is of a tender habit of Body apply this. Vnguentum Basilicon minus i.
red Precipitate grownd and washed, a i. ad ii. mix them. But if the Patient is
of a rustic constitution. Vng. Basilicon i. red Precipitate levigated, burnt
Alum, A. iv. mix them. See more of this matter in Chap. 9. Sect. 125. ad 132.
aforegoing.

XXIII. 5. To produce the Cicatrice. This is not to be done 'till so much Flesh
is generated, as it seems to be somewhat higher than the natural Skin; for
otherwise the healing up would be hollow, which is a deformity to be avoided.

XXIV. The Causes of making Skin are threefold: 1. Efficient, which is a
faculty resident in the sound Skin, adjacent to the Wound; for that Skinning
always begins from the edges of the natural Skin. 2. Material, which is a
Membranous Flesh dried. 3. Adjuvant, which are Epuloticks, or Skinning
Medicaments.

XXV. The Faculty of these Medicines is to dry strongly, in the third or fourth
degree, that they may consume the present humidity, and stop the influx of more
Blood, which might engender yet more flesh: and therefore they ought to be very
astringent, so as to be manifestly felt by the Tongue, yet without acrimony,
that they might not erode.

XXVI. These are of two sorts: 1. Stypticks. 2. Epuloticks, purely so called.
As to Stypticks, you may find many of them in Our Pharmacopaeia Bateana, as
also in Our Pharmacopaeia Chirurgica in this Work; to which add. Dr. Gardner
the King's chief Chirurgeon's Styptick Water, described in Cap. 11. Sect. 13.
following: or this, Colcothar, or Vitriol calcined to redness, after the Spirit
and Oil have been drawn off, i. burnt Alum, Sugarcandy, A. vi. Red-wine,
Smiths-forge-water, A. xxx. mix them well; digest in a warm Balneo for a Week,
shaking the Glass every day, then letting the Mixture settle; let the Water be
kept upon the Ingredients, pouring off the clear, as you have occasion to use
it.

XXVII. Epuloticks are either simple or compound, both which you may see in
Chap. 2. often aforenamed: if the wounded Person is of a soft and tender habit
of Body, you may use Frankincense, Olibanum, Mastich, bark of the Pine or
Frankincense-tree, Oister-shells calcined and levigated, burnt Lead washed, etc.

XXVIII. If the Patient is of a mean habit of Body, you may use things drying
in the third degree; as Balaustians, Pomgranate-peels, unripe Grapes,
Myrle-berries, Sumach, Catechu, Sanguis Draconis, Cortex Peruanus,
Henbane-seeds, Terra Vmbra, red Oker, Terra sigillata, fine B^le, etc.

XXIX. If the Patient is of a very rustic and hard habit of Body; you may use
burnt Alum, burnt Brass, Caput mortuum of Vitriol, and other things of like
natures.

XXX. Of Compound Epuloticks, some also are for tender Bodies, as Vngnentum de
Minio, Ceratum de Minio, Vnguentum de Tutia. Some are for Bodies of a stronger
habit, as Unguent. Tutiae Nostr. Unguent. Album, Emplastr. Diapalmae, Empl.
Album, de Minio, etc. And some are for rustic Bodies, as Vnguentum de Bolo,
Emplastrum de Bolo, Caesaris, etc. or this, Vng. Tutiae Nost. i. Colcothar of
Vitriol, or burnt Brass jss. mix them.

CHAP. XI. Of WOVNDS of ARTERIES, and VEINS.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Vulnera Arteriarum and Venarum;
in English, Wounds of the Arteries and Veins.

II. The Signs. Wounds of the greater Arteries and Veins have this peculiar
unto them, that there is always a very great Hemorrhage present, which
oftentimes causes Faintings and Swoonings.

III. Now either a large Artery may be wounded alone, or a large Vein, or they
may be both wounded together: and either a great Vein may be wounded, or a
lesser; and sometimes one alone, and sometimes many.

IV. These Wounds are known by sight: for if an Artery is wounded, the Blood
comes forth by leaping, and with violence: but if a Vein, it comes forth by an
equal flowing, and not by leaping. See Chap. 4. Sect. 8, 9, 10. aforegoing.

V. But now what Artery or Vein it is which is wounded, or whether only one, or
more, is to be known by the Anatomy of the Part; which we suppose no
experienced Artist to be ignorant of.

VI. The Kinds. The Wound of the Artery or Veins is made either longways, or
obliquely, or transversly; and the Vessel is either only wounded, or it is cut
quite through: and the Vessels wounded are either internal or external, or lie
very deep, or are more superficial.

VII. The Prognostics. Wounds of the Arteries are more dangerous than Wounds
of the Veins; and Wounds of the great Vessels, are more dangerous than Wounds
of the less: but those Vessels, whether Arteries or Veins, which are cut
transversly quite through are less dangerous than those which are otherwise
wounded, and not cut quite through.

VIII. The greater the Hemorrhage, the more danger; the lesser, the less
danger: but if a Convulsion or Delirium be joined with it, or both, the danger
is yet so much the greater.

IX. If the Vessel wounded is internal, or lies deep, it is so much the worse;
but if it is internal, or superficiary, so as it may easily be come at, the
danger is the less.

X. If an Artery is cut longways, or obliquely, or is wholly cut asunder any
otherwise than transversly, since that it is moved with a continual Motion of
Dilatation and Contraction: by this Motion (especially by the Distention) the
Wound is more dilated, and in every Diastole it gapes; by which means the Blood
is poured out, and leaps forth with violence and rushing. See Chap. 4. Sect.
11. ad 18. aforegoing.

XI. The Cure. There are two Intentions of Cure; 1. To stop the Hemorrhage;
because the Life and well-doing of the Patient depends immediately upon it;
which, how that is to be done, we have taught at large in Chap. 4. Sect. 19. to
the end of the Chapter: so that no more need be said thereof here. 2. To unite
and agglutinate the Vessels; which is the present matter of discourse in this
Chapter.

XII. In the consideration of this Article, we must see whether the Wound is
Simple, or Compound: if it is Simple, many times the things stopping the flux
of Blood do the Cure also, as to Agglutination; more especially if it is an
excellent Styptick, such as that of Dr. Gardner the the King's Surgeon, made
out of the Colcothar of Vitriol, thus:

XIII. Colcothar of Vitriol, or Vitriol calcined to redness, q.v. calcine it
again till it comes to blackness, or a reddish black; then extract the Salt by
boiling it in fair Water; decant the clear Water, and evaporate it to dryness,
which then calcine again with a red-hot heat. This stops the Blood upon the
spot, though the Hemorrhage is never so great, and agglutinates a simple Wound,
to a Miracle.

XIV. Where this Medicament is not to be had, the Agglutination is performed
commonly at one dressing, with some Artificial Balsam; made of Frankincense,
Turpentine, Gum Elemi, Capivii, Wax, Oil-olive, and Oil of Spike or
Juniper Berries: or else with some Natural Balsam, as those of Capivii, Chili,
Gilead, Peru, or Tolu; which scarcely ever admit of being twice applied.

XV. If the Wound is complicated with several accidents, as Contusion, Broken
Bones, Loss of Substance, etc. you must first stop the Hemorrhage by the Method
delivered in Chap. 4. Sect. 19. etc. aforegoing, letting it so remain for two,
three, or four days, as the nature of the Wounds, and Symptoms, if any, will
permit.

XVI. Then opening of it, you must apply Digestives, such as we have enumerated
and descrbed in Chap. 2. aforegoing: after which you must cleanse it with
Abstersives, to keep the Wound and extravasated Blood (if any be) from
putrefying.

XVII. This done, you must fill up the Wound with Flesh (if it is wanting) by
the help of Sarcoticks and Incarnatives; and then lastly, you must produce the
Cicatrice with Stypticks or Epuloticks, or both, as in reason you shall see fit.

XVIII. If the Wound is without loss of substance, or bruised lips, bring the
lips and mouths of the Arteries both together and keep them so by suture;
passing the Needle with a strong waxed Thread through both of them, making the
Glovers-stitch, and apply this. Fine Bole iv. fine Aloes, Frankincense,
Dragons-blood, Gum-tragacanth in powder, A. i. Gypsum, white Starch, A. i.
Acatia, Hypocistis, Sumach, Catechu, A. ss. mix, and with the white of an Egg,
bring it to the thickness of Honey; which apply, with a Compress over it,
squeezed out of Oxycrate, or Red-wine.

XIX. Then roll it up with the Agglutinative Rowler, beginning on the opposite
part, bringing both the heads over the Wound, and taking a turn or two there,
roll upwards and downwards, so as to press the Blood upwards, and restrain the
Inflammation above: let the Bandage be made for the ease of the Patient, and
the Position such as may prevent Pain.

XX. Wounds of the Arteries are not to be dressed oftener than needs must; once in
five or six days (whilst there is danger of an Hemorrhage) may be enough: but
if the Blood makes its way through all the Dressings, then you must take them
off; and if the Stitches are broken, and the lips are not capable of being
stitcht again, the bleeding Artery is either to be taken up, and tied, and then
to be cured by Sarcoticks.

XXI. Or if it lies so deep that it cannot be tied, then Escaroticks are to be
applied to the Vessel, or the Actual Cautery: if Escaroticks, the Wound is to
be cleansed of its clotted Blood, and Dossels may be dipped in this Mixture
following. Calcanthum ustum, Gypsum, A. iii. Frankincense in powder ii. Aloes,
Gum-Arabick in powder, A. i. mix them. Apply this with Lint on the bleeding
Artery, and over it Dossels of Lint dipped in the white of an Egg, mixed with the
Pulvis Galeni, and so dress up the Wound as before directed; and at next
dressing, leave the Escarotick sticking on the Artery, and incarnate with all
the speed that may be.

XXII. But if after all these Endeavors the Artery continues to bleed, you
must use the Actual Cautery; which may be conveyed down to the Artery through a
Cannula or Pipe, the outside of which may be covered with a Plaster, or a rag
dipped in the white of an Egg, that it may not burn through.

XXIII. Then dress the cauteriz'd Part with Dossels dipped in Mucilage of
Quince-seeds, or in the white of an Egg, or some such like thing; and embrocate
the Parts about with Oil of Roses, applying Diapalma with juice of Plantan over
all: the heat being allayed, you must digest, incarnate, and cicatrize the
Wound, as before directed.

XXIV. An Observation. One wounded in the Artery, between the Thumb and
Forefinger, had been dressed three or four days by a Surgeon, yet continued to
bleed: he came to me late one Night, with Dossels crowded in it; I threw them
out, and with a Needle and Thread stitcht up the Artery, and the Wound with it:
then sprinkling some of my Agglutinative Pouders upon the Suture, I dressed it
with a Restrictive Plaster and Bandage, and in three or four times dressing he
was cured. But afterward some vehement pulsation appearing under the
Cicatrice, from a too loose healing up of the Wound: he was dressed with a
Pledget, dipped in a dulcified Tincture of Vitriol, with good Compress and
Bandage: at the next dressing it was contracted, so that no more pulsation was
observed. Wiseman.

XXV. Another. One had an Aneurism in the Palm of his Hand, reaching to third
and fourth Fingers, which at last broke out, and bled at times for eight or ten
days. He was dressed with Tincture of Vitriol aforementioned, once in four or
five days; so the Bleeding was stopped, and the Wound firmly cicatrized, that the
least pulsation appeared not under it. Wiseman, Lib. 2. cap. 2. Observe. 3. and
4.

CHAP. XII. Of WOVNDS of NERVES and TENDONS.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). in Latin Wounds of the Nerves and Tendons.

II. Nerves and Tendons maybe wounded many ways, as by bruising, rending,
tearing, or cutting, or by puncture; and the Cures of them both are performed
by one and the same Method: it is true, they are of another nature than Flesh,
and therefore require other Medicaments than wounded Flesh does.

III. The Signs. They have also an ex quisit and quick sense; and therefore if
they be hurt they bring great Pains, and many times Convulsions; and these
Wounds are known, 1. From the Part hurt; if it has many and great Nerves, etc.
passing through it. 2. By the Symptoms; because there will be vehement Pain,
Pulsation, Inflammation, and many times Convulsion or Raving.

IV. If they are cut through, they occasion no new Considerations in Surgery,
because they wholly cease from Action, and are irrecoverable; but if they are
pricked by a sharp-pointed Weapon, it is called a Puncture, and this is not to
be slighted: but this is to be understood of the great great Nerves and
Tendons, and their main bodies, not the small Fibers of them, which are in
every Wound of the fleshy Parts.

V. Consider the Place wounded, viz. whether near the Joint, in the inside of
the Arm or Leg, or near the end of the Muscle, or in the tendinous parts of the
Hand or Foot.

VI. Whether the Wound is in the heads of the Muscles, or in the ends of them;
whether above the Joint, or in the Joint it self: for if it is in the head of
the Muscle, it shows that the Nerve is wounded; but if in the ends, or near the
Joints, it is a sign that the Tendon is wounded.

VII. If the Nerve or Tendon is cut transversly through, the pain is less; but if
they are only pricked, there is instantly a vehement Pain, and an Inflammation;
by which the Brain being drawn into consent, Convulsions and Delirium's are
also excited; yet the sense of a Tendon is not altogether so exquisite, as that
of a Nerve.

VIII. The Prognostics. All Wounds of the Nerves or Tendons are dangerous, but
more or less, according as they are of use: but whether it be Nerve or Tendon,
the transverse Wound is most dangerous, and difficult of cure.

IX. They are dangerous, because of their exquisite sense, and their consent
with the Brain: and yet notwithanding a Wound by pricking, is more dangerous
than that which is made by cutting: and the Wounds of the Tendons, are less
dangerous than those of the Nerves.

X. Hippocrates, Sect. 5. Aph. 2. says, that Convulsion which happens upon a
Wound, is mortal. This is to be understood without doubt of Wounds of the
Nerves and Nervous Parts; and signifies not, that it always and of necessity
causes Death, but that it is very dangerous, and oftentimes is the forerunner
of Death; especially after too great an effusion of Blood.

XI. And though commonly a Fluxion and Tumor happens in these kinds of Wounds,
unless it is driven back to some more inward, deep, and remote Parts, which is
generally dangerous: yet there is always a ground of hope, if even to the
seventh or Critical-day, no evil Symptoms shall follow thereupon.

XII. For so says Galen, de Comp. Med. lib. 3. cap. 2. If to the fifth, or even
to the seventh day of the Disease, there is no appearance of a Phlegmon or
Inflammation, and that the sick is altogether free from pain; as also that they
feel no extension, or stretching in the Part affected, the Patient will always
be safe and secure. For it is a sign that Nature has quieted the impetuous
motion and violence of the Humors.

XIII. In Wounds of the Nerves, a putridness is also easily generated, for they
contain in themselves but a weak heat, and are of a very dry nature; so that
they are easily hurt by things which are cold and moist, as by Water and Oil,
which are enemies to the Nerves.

XIV. Nor does this putridness contain it self in the wounded Part alone, but
communicates it self unto the next adjacent Parts, and sometimes to Parts that
are more remote: as if the Hand, or the Finger only were wounded, the pain may
ascend to the Arm and Shoulder: or if the Leg or Foot were hurt, the pain may
reach to the Thigh or Hip; and not only Pains, but Apostems may happen in those
Parts also: and sometimes the malign Symptoms may extend themselves to other
Parts also, yea to the opposite side, and sometimes to whole Body, corrupting
all the Humors, whence Rheusmatisms, Fevers, Dysenteries, etc. may be excited.

XV. And yet this you are to take special notice of, that though an Inflammation
or Putridness is, or or may be induced, yet that many times no signs of their
coming do appear beforehand; and oftentimes there are present no vehement
Pains; but that very often they secretly and suddenly (as also Convulsions)
invade the wounded Person.

XVI. The reason is, because the depraved and vicious Matter is thin, and is
hiddenly conveyed through the Nerves unto the Brain; as is manifest in the
Epilepsy, in which a malign, poisonous Vapor ascends to the Cerebrum from the
extreme parts of the Nerves, without any sense of Dolor in those Parts through
which it passes; but only a seeming coldness, like that of cold Water, rising
up gradually to the Head.

XVII. And therefore in Wounds of the Nerves, though there shall be no Pain felt,
nor any Inflammation appear: yet you are not to trust to this, but you must
manage the Cure with all the care, circumspection, diligence, and skill
imaginable.

XVIII. Now the Wounds of the Nerves are truly dangerous, as, 1. Because the
Membrane with which they are covered, proceeds from the Meninges of the Brain,
and that they are filled with plenty of Animal Spirits. 2. Because they act by
consent with the Brain and Spinal-Marrow; which as Galen says, De Vsu Partium,
lib. 12. cap. 11. are the great Fountain and River, from whence the Nerves as
Rivulets only run. 3. By reason of the dreadful Symptoms, (before enumerated)
which are apt to ensue.

XIX. The Cure. Seeing then that in all Wounds of the Nerves, pain and
Inflammation are easily induced, we must endeavor that the pain may be
mitigated, and the Inflammation prevented: These Authors do, 1. By bleeding and
purging out sharp and thin humors. 2. By keeping the Wound also open, that the
excrements may the more freely flow forth.

XX. The chiefest cause of pain in these Wounds, is the excrementitious humor
shut up, which being too long kept, degenerates into a malign, or at least
acrimonious quality, by which it bites the Nerves, and at length putrifies them.

XXI. Hippocrates, Sect. 5. Aph. 18. says, that every thing that is cold, is an
Enemy to the Nerves, Brain, and Spinal Marrow; but that which is warm, is a
Friend to them: and the reason is, because the Nerves, etc. are Parts void of
Blood, and have in them but little natural and innate heat; so that they are
soon, and easily offended with any thing which is cold, it causing Pain.

XXII. And Galen, de Comp. Med. lib. 6. cap. 2. says, Let the Oil with which we
cherish the Wound be sufficiently hot, lest that it offend the Wounded Part;
for as that which is cold is most of all contrary to these kind of Affects, so
that which is but blood-warm, does them but little good: for this reason, (says
he) I my self choose rather to make use of a Fomentation of Oil which is
sufficiently hot, always shunning that which is but lukewarm; but wholly
refusing that which is quite cold.

XXIII. Yet Galen, in Meth. Med. lib. 6. cap. 6. seems to say, that if a Nerve
is discovered, or made bare, then such things as are but tepid, or lukewarm,
are rather to be applied, than such things that are very hot.

XXIV. Now as to asswaging of the Pain, things hot and somewhat moist, are most
fit; yet because those things which moisten the Nerves, do easily putrify them;
therefore such Medicaments as are heating, and drying withal, are rather to be
chosen, being also of thin parts, and strengthening the weak heat of the Nerves,
by consuming and drying up the Excrements.

XXV. Galen, de Comp. Med. lib. 3. cap. 2. and Meth. Med. lib. 6. cap. 2. says,
The faculty of the Medicines to be applied to wounded Nerves, ought to be both
thin, and also moderately heating, and such as may dry without any sharpness or
pain; for that this alone can draw the Sanies from the bottom of the Wound,
without either contracting or biting. And a little after he says, The wounded
Nerves require such Medicines, which may excite a gentle heat, but may dry
strongly; and which from the nature of their own substance, may have the power
of Attraction, and be also of thin parts.

XXVI. Also regard is to be had to the strength of the Patient, and habit of
Body: for the stronger Medicines are to be applied to hard and strong Bodies,
the weaker Medicines to the more soft and tender Bodies: so also you must
consider the Matter to be dried up, and according to the store of Humidities,
you are to choose the more drying Medicaments: for the Medicine ought to answer
in dryness to the quantity of humidity offending.

XXVII. Also Medicaments which are drying, but of thin parts, and carry with
them a notable heat, with a kind of biting, (which is apt to excite Pain, and a
Flux of Humors;) as distilled Spirits, Oils and Balsams, are many times to be
mitigated by mixing them with other things of a milder temper. What Medicaments
are necessary in this case, we shall show anon, when we come to treat of
Punctures, or Prickings of the Nerves.

XXVIII. Now to ease the Pain, preserve the Temperament of the Part, hinder the
Afflux of Humors, and prevent the Inflammation, Medicaments are to be applied
upon the Part affected; as also on all the Parts that lie in the midst, from
the Wound to the original of the Nerves: and they are to be anointed and
cherished with hot Oils, as Oil of Earthworms, of Foxes, of Whelps, of Castor,
of Costus, and the like; using these of themselves, or mixing them with Oil of
Turpentine.

XXIX. If the Nerves affected are those of the Neck, then the Arm, from the
Wound even to the Armholes and the Neck, is to be anointed: if the Nerves
affected are those of the Leg, then the Groins must be anointed, and we must
ascend from them by the Backbone, all along up to the Neck and Head.

XXX. The incision of a Nerve is either straight and direct, or transverse; if
it is transverse, it is cut either quite asunder, or but in part: now a Nerve
quite divided, is less dangerous than that which is only cut in part; as Galen,
Meth. Med. lib. 6. cap. 2. and Guido, Magn. Chir. Tract. 4. doct. 1. cap. 4.
affirms: the reason is, because a Nerve quite cut asunder, cannot cause any
hurt in the Brain.

XXXI. Yet being cut quite asunder, it can never be consolidated again,
according to the first Intention; as we have hinted at Sect. 4. aforegoing: and
so says Hippocrates, Sect. 6. Aph. 19. When the Bone is wounded, or the
Cartilages, or a Nerve, or the thin part of the Cheek, or the Praeputium, it
does not unite, or grow together again.

XXXII. As to the Cure of these Wounds, Galen, de Comp. Med. lib. 3. cap. 2.
and Meth. Med. lib. 6. cap. 3. advises to Topics which dry with little biting;
as Vng. de Calce lota, Vng. Diapompholigos, and the like.

XXXIII. If the whole Nerve is cut asunder, no Convulsion can ensue, because
both ends give way: this kind is cured by Sarcoticks, of which we have wrote
abundantly before, in Cap. 2. Sect. 31. ad 46. now in this kind of Wound, the
motion of the Part into which the Nerve is implanted to move, is abolished.

XXXIV. If the Nerve is cut asunder, but in part, it is first to be dressed
with the Medicaments before prescribed: but if Pain, Inflammation, Putrefaction,
Fever, or Convulsion are like to ensue; the best course is to cut the Nerve or
Tendon asunder, rather than by deferring the Incision, to hazard the Life of
the Patient.

XXXV. This being done, you must apply anodyn and drying Medicaments, and the
Wound being dressed, apply over the Dossels or Pledgets, Diapalma, or Diachylon
simplex, softened with Oil of Myrtles, Quinces or Roses; because the tenderness
of the Part will scarcely admit of any stiff Emplaster.

XXXVI. Then roll up the Part with the Fascia Expulsiva, of which we have
treated before in its proper place; that thereby, the Sanies which does gather
in the place, and a new afflux of Humors may be prevented.

XXXVII. If a Nerve, etc. is contused without a Wound, foment it with hot
Oil-olive, applying over a Sheeps or Lambs Skin, new taken off: but if it is
with a Solution of Unity, then Medicaments anodyn, drying, and conglutinating
are to be imposed; as Ceratum Album, Emplast. Catagmaticum, malaxed with Oil of
Hypericon.

XXXVIII. If the Nerve is distorted by a Fall, or the like, which may hinder
the motion of the Part, you may apply Emplastrum Album mixed with Gum
Ammoniacum, or Diachylon simplex, or cum Gummis.

XXXIX. If afterward a hardness shall remain, which may cause a numbness of
the Part, you must mollify with Oil of white Lillys, of Hypericon; or with
Goose, or Capons, or Vipers Grease, mixed with Ammoniacum or Bdellium; also with
Oil of Sheeps-Trotters, or of Neats-Feet, mixed with Mucilage of
Fenugreek-seed, Lin-seed, or Marshmallow-roots; the Part may also be embrocated
with emollient Oils hot; but nothing exceeds golden-coloured Palm-Oil mixed with
Oil of Aniseeds, ana: which resolves to a Miracle, so also Spiritus Mirabilis:
lastly, you may lay over all Diachylon cum Gummis, mixed with a quarter-part of
liquid Storax.

XL. How the Pain is to be eased, we have already shown at Sect. 28. and 29
aforegoing; we come to show how to resist the Inflammation. This is done by
imposing things cooling and drying; for they both abate the Inflammation, and
correct the Putrefaction: of which kind are, Barley and Bean flower, meals of
Vetches, Chick-Pease, and Indian Maize, boiled with Oxymel q.s. to the
consistence of a Cataplasm; which is to be applied after Embrocating with Oil
of Elder, mixed with Rose-Vinegar.

XLI. If a Convulsion affects the Patient, though it is many times mortal, yet
something (whilst there is Life) is to be done; you must Embrocate all the
Spinal Marrow, from the Head to the Coccyx, with this Mixture, hot: Oil of Ben
vi. Chemical Oils of Lavender, Limons, Juniper, Rosemary, Sage, and Savin, A.
vi. mix them; upon which apply a Sheep-skin newly drawn off, to the Part.

XLII. Then the Part wounded is to be dressed; and if the Wound is in the Hand,
you must Embrocate upwards to the Armpits by which the Nerves pass, and so
proceed to the Vertebrae of the Neck and Thorax: but if the Foot is wounded,
you must Embrocate upwards from the Wound to the Leg, Thigh, and Os Sacrum,
even to the Vertebrae of the Loins; giving inwardly in the mean season this
Mixture: Our Aqua Bezoartica, or Spiritus Cordialis vi. Spiritus Opii
compositus, a ss. ad i. mix for a Dose.

XLIII. These things, as to Medicines, whether Topicals or Internals, we have
said in short upon the Cure of a Nerve or Tendon cut, or other wounded than by
Pricking: we shall next treat of the Cure of a Wound of the Nerves, etc. made
by Puncture; out of which, those things which in general seem necessary to be
said, concerning the Wounds of the Nerves and Tendons, (of what kind soever)
will be plainly and evidently seen.

II. Of the Puncture or Pricking of a Nerve or Tendon.
XLIV. The Puncture or Pricking of a Nerve or Tendon, is either inconspicuous,
not to be discerned by sight, which is called Punctura caeca: or, it is
conspicuous, or manifest, and is discernible outwardly, and is called Punctura
aperta.

XLV. The Signs. This disaffection many times happens in letting Blood, as well
as by other Accidents: and it may be known by its Symptoms, which are sudden,
vehement Pain, defluxion of Humors, Faintings, and Convulsions.

XLVI. Nor does it terminate presently in Suppuration, but gleets, and will not
yield to a simple Anodyn-Cataplasm, made of White-bread and Milk, etc. but will
be accompanied with a throbbing Pain, Inflammation, Fever, and Convulsions as
aforesaid; which Symptoms do never happen where the Nerve is wholly, and
transversly cut asunder; because then the Nerve, etc. no longer continues its
commerce with the Brain, nor can it draw the same into a consent with it;
whence no vehement Pain, nor Convulsion can be excited.

XLVII. It is known also, whether it is Cut or Pricked, from the kind of the
Weapon it self which made the Wound, and the form and nature of the Wound, as
narrow, manifest, or scarcely to be seen.

XLVIII. The Prognostics. A Puncture is the most dangerous, among all the
Wounds of the Nerves or Tendons; for so says Galen, Art. Med. cap. 92. as we
have cited the Passage in Cap. 9. Sect. 82. aforegoing.

XLIX. And Galen, Meth. Med. lib. 2. cap. 6. also says, If a Nerve is pricked,
Pain must needs invade the Person, greater than the Pain which is in any other
Part; and then of necessity a Phlegmon will soon follow thereupon.

L. If in a Puncture of the Nerves a Tumor appears, and then it suddenly
disappears and vanishes again, a Convulsion and Delirium will ensue; as appears
out of Hippocrates, Sect. 5. Aph. 65.

LI. Also the Pricking of a Nerve or Tendon is so much the more dangerous, by
how much the Body it happens to is impure, or (...) disposed, viz.
Cacochymical, Cachectical, Strumatick, or Scorbutic.

LII. The Cure. Though the Indication of Unition has place here, as in all other
Wounds; yet by reason a Puncture has a greater sense of Pain and Acrimony, with
danger of an Inflammation. Therefore the first Intention here, is, by Anodyns
to ease the Pain, and that by all means the Inflammation may be prevented.

LIII. That this may be done, care must be taken that Excrements may not be
heaped up in the Wound; which may be hindered, by not permitting the vicious
Humors to flow to the wounded place, and Part affected; and by not suffering
the Matter already in the Wound to continue there.

LIVE. For which reason, the Skin, as also the Flesh which lies upon the Nerve,
must be kept open: but if the Wound is not open enough, you must make it yet
wider, by incision of the Skin at right Angles, and of the Flesh, according to
the ductus of the Fibers of the Muscle; that so the passage of the Excrements
forth, may be the more free.

LV. The Body is to be purged from vicious Humors, with some Lenitive
Cathartick; or with Pulvis Cornachini, or Our Family Pills; one or two small
Pills being taken every Night going to Bed, as you shall see fit: or with some
proper Purge, as Our Syrupus Catharticus, etc.

LVI. Now as to Topics, you must consider whether the Nerve or Tendon lies
bare, viz. open in view, or is covered with a Skin: if they lie covered under
the Skin, or Membrana adiposa, then the Skin is to be opened, that the
Medicaments may penetrate to the Puncture.

LVII. These Medicaments ought not to be cold, nor hot and moist, nor warm
Water; for Water, and all cold things are Enemies to the Nerves; and things
which are hot and moist, easily excite a putridness in the Nerves, etc.

LVIII. But we ought to use things which are hot and drying, and of thin and
subtle parts; to digest, dry, and resist Putrefaction, but void of any acrimony
or sharpness.

LIX. And, the Wound (says Barbett) is also to be kept open, 'till the Cure is
absolutely performed; that the Matter may flow freely forth; which if kept in,
will increase the Pain, and cause Putrefaction of the Nerve; which if it should
happen, the corrupt Part is to be cut off, or removed by an Actual Cautery.

LX. If the Nerve is bare, warm Medicines only are convenient: but if covered,
hotter Medicaments are required, Purging in the mean time not being neglected.

LXI. Medicines for this purpose are, old Oil-olive, of Earthworms, of Dill,
of Rofemary, of Costmary, of Hypericon, of Castor, of Turpentine, of Wax, of
Marjoram, of Sage, of Savin, of Sassafras, of Aniseeds, of Caraways, of
Juniper Berries, of Lavender, of Oranges, of Limons, and of Time; most of them
Chymically extracted; to to which add Spirit of Wine, Potestates, etc.

LXII. Of Gums and Balsams; Gum Elemi, Tacamahacca, Bdellium, Camphir, Caranna,
Euphorbium, Frankincense, Opobalsamum, Balsam of Sulphur, Balsam Capivii, de
Chili, of Gilead, of Peru, of Tolu, and all the kinds of Turpentine, liquid
Storax, liquid Amber, Petroleum, etc. are to be chosen.

LXIII. Be sure to proportionate the Topics to the vehemence of the Symptoms,
which you will know by the pleasantness of the Heat; as that of the Sun, in
temperate Weather: and by the pleasingness of the Medicine, causing a kind of
Itching: if there is no Heat, there can be no Attraction: if it is immoderate,
it will draw Humors, and cause Inflammation.

LXIV. When the Puncture is bare, either by the Wound, or made so, you need not
apply Medicines so very hot, dry, and piercing, as when it is hid: in this
case, some common Artificial Balsam, or some Natural Balsam, as of Capivii,
Chili, Peru, or Turpentine, dropped on warm, will serve the turn; for by their
Unctuosity they smooth the Part; and by their Heat, they make Attraction, and
ease the Pain, discharging the Place of its Sanies; and lastly, by their
Moisture, they both open, and keep open the Orifice.

LXV. The Medicament (says Wiseman) ought to be hot, dry, and of subtle parts;
that it may consume the Ichorous Water, which first affects them, and causes
the Putrefaction.

LXVI. In the beginning, he used Oil of Roses with a little Bay Salt dissolved
in it: this he dropped into the Part scalding-hot, upon which he applied a
Pledget spread with Basilicon, dipped in the same Oil; and embrocated the Part
about with Oil of Earthworms; and put over it Empl. e Bolo, as a Defensative.

LXVII. If the Inflammation and Tumor is great, he applies this Cataplasm.
Barley and Bean flower, A. iv. powder of Linseed and Fenugrek seeds, A.i.
flowers of Red-roses, of Camomil, of Elder, and Wormwood, A.iii. Wine, or
common Lixivium, q.s. boil to a consistency, adding Oxymel ii. Oil of Roses i.
mix them, and roll up the Part gently.

LXVIII. If the Wound requires Medicines of more drying and subtle parts, you
may use this Mixture: Chemical Oils of Savin and Turpentine, A.ss. mix them. Or
you may dress it with Turpentine-Balsam of Sulphur, or with Oil of Costus, or
of Rue, or of Savin, or of Dill, or of Scorpions, etc. these are all proper
Medicines to dress with; but Oil of Roses, and Salt (says Wiseman) have always
served my purpose.

LXiX. If there is much pain, you may dress it twice a day with the Cataplasm
at Sect. 67 above: if the hardness goes off with the contraction, and the lips
of the Wound relax, it is a good Sign.

LXX. Barbett commends Oils of Wax, Limewater, and Ung. Fuscum Wurtzii, being
rightly used: also this following Ointment. Oil of Hypericon, Venice
Turpentine, Tears of the Fir Tree, A. i. Tacamahac, Balsam of Peru, A. ss.
Propolis vi. Caranna ii. mix, and make an Ointment.

LXXI. Sennertus says, we ought to use Oils of a thin substance, as that of
Earthworms, or of Whelps, or Foxes; if these ease not the pain, to apply a
Cataplasm, made of flowers of Barley, Beans, Orobus, and Lupins; adding Betony,
Camomil-flowers, and Oil-olive; for this eases Pain, dries, discusses,
strengthens the Native Heat, and resists Putrefaction.

LXXII. But if the Nerves begin to be inflamed, or to putrefy, the Cataplasm is
to be made with Oxymel, or with the common Lixivium; and the Wound is to be
managed almost in the same manner, as in the Cure of a Gangren in beginning.

LXXIII. Oil of Turpentine may be used alone of it self, in Children, Women,
and such persons as are of a cold and moist habit of Body; but in such as have
drier Bodies, some Euphorbium may be mixed therewith; also Ammoniacum,
Galbanum, roots of round Birthwort, and all Roots that are bitter, without
Astriction.

LXXIV. Propolis may also be used alone; or with Sagapenum, or with Oil of
Turpentine, or Tears of the Fir Tree, and other Artificial Balsams, which have
power to extract the Excrements from the bottom of the Wound; and withal to
corroborate and augment the native heat of the Nerves, which of it self (but
more especially in wounded Nerves) is very weak.

LXXV. The Ancients commended Sulphur vive, unslaked Lime, Arsenick,
Sandrarcha, Pompholyx, Verdigrise, Chalcitis burnt, etc. which are not safe to
be used, especially, if the Nerve is bare or naked: we have now found out
better things, and Medicines prepared by the Chemical Art, which do their
Office without any pain or danger, and which may be safely applied, whether the
Nerve, etc. is naked, or otherwise.

LXXVI. Many of them we have enumerated at Sect. 61 and 62 aforegoing, and
other places following them in this Chapter; all which obtain that Faculty
which Galen and the Ancients have proposed, and have in them no corroding
quality at all, but a true Balsamic Virtue, which those of the Ancients
wanted; absterging the Wound from the Excrements, agreeable to the Nerves, and
greatly strengthening the Native Heat of the wounded Part.

LXXVII. If the Medicament is of thin and volatile parts, which may easily be
dissipated; as Oil of Turpentine, or Spike, or Savin, etc. then you may mix
with it Gum Elemi, Capivii, Turpentine, Tacamahacca, dissolved in Oil of
Hypericon, simple, or compound.

LXXVIII. Caesar Magatus, de Vulner. lib. 2. cap. 5. has given these following
Compounds or Mixtures. Ammoniacum, Opopanax, Sagapenum, (dissolved in warm
Water) Propolis, Turpentine, A. ss. Oil of Earthworms, made with old Oil-olive
jss. mix, and make an Ointment.

LXXIX. Opopanax, Propolis, Sagapenum; A. ss. Oil of Turpentine, or Tears of
the Figtree jss. Tacamahac iii. Sulphur vive jss. mix them for an Ointment.

LXXX. Fir-tree-tears, Opopanax, Propolis, Tacamahac, A.ii. Artificial Balsam
vi. mix, and make an Ointment.

LXXXI. Diacyhilon cum Gummi i. Carana, Propolis, Rosin of the Pine, Sagapenum,
Ship-Pitch, Tacamahac, A. iii. Artificial Balsam ss. Euphorbium ii. mix, and
make a Cerat.

LXXXII. Oil of Turpentine, or Tears of the Fir Tree i. Propolis, Sagapenum, A.
ss. Euphorbium i. mix them.

LXXXIII. Galen, Meth. Med. lib. 6. cap. 2. commends an Emplaster made of
Euphorbium, where he takes a great deal of pains, and is very exact and large
in treating of Euphorbium in Wounds of the Nerves; the Composition of which is
this: Wax jss. Turpentine, Pitch, A. vi. Euphorbium i. mix, and make a Cerat.

LXXXIV. Now you ought to consider whether the Euphorbium is new or old: if it
is new, it is to be mixed with a triple quantity of Wax: as Oil-olive x, or
xii. Wax iii. Euphorbium i. mix, and make a Liniment.

LXXXV. But if it is old, (which is very hard and dry) it ought to be mixed in
somewhat a greater proportion: as, Oil-Olive xii. Wax iii. Euphorbium, a i, ad
iii. (according to its Age, which is much to be minded) mix, and make a
Liniment.

LXXXVI. If at last, the Puncture yields not to a Cure, by such Medicaments as
have been proposed the Nerve or Tendon is to be divided, to prevent worse
accidents; as Convulsions, Spasms, Gangrens, etc. after which, the Cure is to
be done as in other Wounds; this only requiring more care in the position, and
keeping the Member steady, if it is in such a Joint, where there are Nerves and
Tendons which move contrariwise.

LXXXVII. An Observation from Wiseman. A Tendon being pricked in letting Blood
in the Saphena, near the Ancle, it was dressed with Oil of Turpentine hot; the
Pain increased, and I was consulted, and saw the Surgeon ready to apply his
hot Oils: but on sight of the Wound, the lips being turgid and dry, and the
parts about it inflamed, I showed him his error, and caused it to be dressed
with Vng. Basilicon, warm; and to embrocate with Oil of Roses; and to apply
over Diapalma, malaxed with some of the same Oil, and to forbear dressing it
for some two or three days: during which time, it was cured. The over-using hot
Oils, has in some cases been very hurtful and mischievous to many.

III. Contusion of the Nerves, etc.
LXXXVIII. This is often by a Fall or Blow, the Skin suffering a solution of
Unity; whence comes an Ulcer, and many other Symptoms, from the afflux of
Humors.

LXXXIX. If the contused Nerve is not bare, which may be discerned from the
more continual Pain, than is usual in a simple Contusion of the Flesh; great
care must be taken to resolve the coagulated Blood, as soon as may be.

XC. For should it suppurate, the Nerve would easily putrify, and other ill
Symptoms ensue; so as to force you to cut the Nerve asunder, or do something
worse.

XCI. In such a Contusion of a Nerve therefore let a Cloth be dipped in Oil of
Castor, or of Worms, or of Whelps, or of Foxes, of Dill, of Rue, of Camomil, or
of Rosemary.

XCII. Or you may foment the Part very hot with Sponges, dipped in this
Fomentation: Roots of Orrice, Zedoary, A. i. Hyssop, Fetherfew, Marjoram, Mint,
Southernwood, Tansy, Savery, A. M.ss. White Wind q.s. boil, and make a
Fomentation; to every Pint of which add S.V. jss.

XCIII. Or you may apply this Emplaster: Propolis, Turpentine, Caranna,
Opopanax, roots of Sowbread in powder, A. iv. Oil of Castoreum, of Hypericon,
A. q.s. mix, and make a Plaster. And if Convulsions happen, give inwardly
Chemical Oil of Lavender, a gut. ii. ad vi. dropped into white Sugar, in a glass
of white Port-wine, or Canary.

CHAP. XIII. Of WOUNDS of the LIGAMENTS.
I. THey are called in Greek, (...), pl. (...): In Latin, Vulnera Ligamenti pl.
Ligamentorum: And in English, Wounds of a Ligament, or Ligaments.

II. The Signs. If they be wounded, it is known by the place or part hurt,
which is near some Joint: Besides, the Pain is in no respect to be compared
with a Wound of the Nerves or Tendons, for when these are wounded, they produce
neither Pain, nor Convulsion.

III. And in regard they are void of Sense, at leastwise not so sensible as
are the Nerves or Tendons, so they never communicate their Affects to the Brain.

IV. The Prognostics. The wound of that Ligament which goes from one Bone unto
another, is most of all free from danger.

V. That Ligament which is inserted into a Muscle, if it is not well or rightly
Cured, may bring a great deal more of danger with it; because it is able to
draw the Nerves and Tendons into a consent with it.

VI. Because the Ligaments have but a very weak heat in themselves, therefore
they do not easily bear Wounds, but are very apt and ready to heap up
Excrements, which may contract and induce a putridness, that may excite other
Symptoms and Evils.

VII. The Cure. By reason of the natural coldness, and dryness of the
Ligaments, those Medicines which are useful in the Wounds of the Nerves and
Tendons, are also useful here, especially those that are most drying.

VIII. And truly you may safely enough, make use of the strongest of them, for
that this part is void of Sense, and therefore will not be offended with the
Acrimony or sharpness of those drying Medicaments.

IX. And though Medicaments not too hot are to be used to consume the Sanies,
lest the Ligament rot; yet in respect that those Medicines must not only dry,
but also cherish the weak heat of the Part, and strengthen the same, they ought
to have so much heat, as to be able to Corroborate it; which they can scarcely
do, unless they be hot in the second or third degree.

X. In this case you may use the Oil of Mastich, all the kinds of Natural
Balsams, Artificial Balsams, of themselves, or mixed with drying Pouders; and
over all you may apply, Emplastrum de Minio, or Catagmaticum, malaxed with Oil
of Mastick.

XI. Wiseman says, That Wounds of the Ligaments require much one and the same
Method with the Tendons, only the Medicaments here are to be more drying, as
Euphorbium, Sulphur Vive, Calx lota, or slaked Lime well washed, Lapis Tutia,
etc.

XII. Barbette commends the Restaurative Powder, thus made, Roots of Comfrey,
fine Aloes, Calx Viva, Red Precipitate, a. ijs Mastich, Myrrh, Mummy, a. ij.
make each into a fine Powder, and mix them.

XIII. And at first dressing, the weak heat of the Ligament is much to be
considered, because it is apt to give occasion to a plentiful Collection of
Humors, and other Vehement Symptoms.

CHAP. XIV. Of WOVNDS of the LIMBS.
I. THey are called in Greek, (...) pl. (...). in Latin, Vulnera Membri, pl.
Membrorum: in English, Wounds of a Limb or Limbs.

II. By Limbs here, we understand the Brawny Parts of the Arms, as also the
Hands; also the Thighs, Legs, and Feet.

III. The Kinds. They are Threefold, 1. From the Part, either Superior, as the
Arm, Hand; or Depending, as the Leg, and Foot. 2. From the nature of the Wound,
viz. it is either Simple, or Complicate, where as well as the Skin and Flesh,
the Arteries, Veins, Nerves, Tendons, and Ligaments, or Bones may be wounded.
3. From the kind of the Weapon wounding, according to which, the Wound is
either Contused, a Cut only, or a Puncture. 4. From its being either without or
with loss of Substance.

IV. The Signs. The Part wounded is known by sight: but whether it is Simple or
Complicate, must be known by their proper Symptoms.

V. A simple Wound is for the most part made by Cutting, and it is known by
being void of any vehement Pain, a soft and gentle Bleeding, the Capillary
Vessels being only hurt, in the Musculous Flesh only, and without any evil
Symptoms.

VI. A Complicate Wound, is discovered by the proper Signs of the similar Parts
hurt: so if any considerable Vein is wounded, there is a great flux of Blood,
but it comes forth easily, smoothly, of a Red Color, and more thick Substance.

VII. If an Artery is wounded, the flux of Blood is more considerable, and it
comes forth by leaping, as the Pulse beats, of a more yellow Color, and
thinner Substance than that which comes forth from a Vein, and many times with
fainting Fits, according to the greatness of the Flux.

VIII. If both Arteries and Veins are wounded, the flux is yet greater, and the
Blood flows variously, and seems to be of two Colors and Substances, like
different things not well mixed together; the Pulses grow weak, and if the flux
is vehement, or has been of any continuance, fainting and swooning Fits attend
the Patient.

IX. If a Nerve is wounded by Cutting, and not cut asunder, there is vehement
Pain felt, which many times induces Inflammation, Fevers, and other dangerous
Symptoms: but if the Nerve is cut asunder, there is no pain at all felt, yet
the Sense of feeling remains; but the motion of the Part into which the Nerve
is inserted, is lost, or taken away.

X. If a Nerve is pricked, vehement Pains and Convulsions are apt to ensue,
with Inflammation, and other Symptoms, because the Brain is drawn into consent.

XI. If a Tendon is not cut asunder, the pain is like that of a Nerve, but
something less: but if cut asunder, as it is without pain, so also the motion
of the Member, which it is to move, is lost.

XII. If with the Skin and Musculous Flesh, the Arteries, Veins, and Nerves are
all wounded together, then all the Symptoms before enumerated, are manifest
together, which endanger an immediate flux of Humors.

XIII. If with the Wound, there is a Fracture of the Bone, it is known by
feeling, together with the weakness, or falling down of the Part, as being
unable to lift it self up.

XIV. If there is loss of Substance, it is known by the greatness of the mouth
of the Wound, Cavity, or Hollowness, and many times by finding the Matter which
is cut out.

XV. If a Wound is Contused, it is generally made with a blunt Instrument, or
with Stones, or a Bullet, or by a Fall: If it is an edged Instrument, it is
generally a Cut; but if a pointed Instrument, a Puncture or Pricking.

XVI. The Prognostics. A Simple Wound is without danger: a Complicate Wound is
dangerous, according to the degree of the Complication.

XVII. If an Artery is wounded, it is more dangerous than if a Vein is wounded;
and the greater the Vessel, the greater the danger: if they both be wounded,
the danger is yet more; but most of all, if with the Wounds of these Vessels, a
Nerve is also hurt by cutting or pricking.

XVIII. And if withal a Nerve is wounded, and it is long-ways, there is no
fear of a Convulsion, for that the Fibers are not so much affected: but if it
is wounded transversly, and not cut in two, it may then induce vehement Pains,
Inflammations, Convulsions, and Delirium, or Doting, which the pricking of a
Nerve also does: because from the Fibers that are cut asunder, the pain is
communicated to those which are not cut in two, whereby the Evil is
communicated to the Brain it self.

XIX. If the Nerve is wholly cut asunder, it brings not with it so much danger,
nor is there any fear of a Convulsion: but yet an incurable disaffection
follows it, viz. a debility both in Sense and Motion of that Part into which
the Nerve is inserted, for that the Animal Spirit can be no more conveyed by
the said Nerve into those Parts.

XX. If a Tendon shall be wounded, but not cut through, it causes a debility in
the motion of that Part it usually moved: if it is cut asunder, then the motion
of the same Part is wholly taken away, or lost.

XXI. If there comes forth great store of Sanies, or thin Excrements, it is a
sign of the ill Constitution of the Part, and of the Wound, and that it is
inflamed, and in very great danger; for the Sanies which flows, is always
according to the disposition of the Part affected, sometimes like Water,
sometimes like Whey, and sometimes white and milky; but that which flows from
the Tendons, is more glutinous, like to the white of an Egg.

XXII. The Cure. If it is a simple Wound, and made by cutting and priching, it
may be Cured by the first Intention; and here Stypticks or Balsamicks do the
Work, and commonly at one dressing.

XXIII. But if the Wound is complicate, the Indications of healing must be
according to the number of Complications, whether it is a hurt of any of the
Vessels, or of the Nerves and Tendons, or a Contusion, or with loss of
Substance, or all of these together.

XXIV. In any of these Cases, if any Extraneous thing is in the Wound, it is
(if possible) to be taken forth, and the Hemorrhage (if any be) to be stopped,
then the Lips of the Wounds are to be stitched up, according to the nature of
the Wound, and to be dressed up with proper Anodyns (if the pain is vehement) and
digestively, as we have in the proper places of this present Book, before
declared.

XXV. If the Nerves are wounded by a downright cut, whereby they are commonly
left naked and bare of Skin, you must preserve them as much as may be from the
external Air, which is always an Enemy to the Nerves, and endeavor as much as
may be, to cover them with their own proper covering, and the Skin which lies
upon it.

XXVI. If the Nerve is wounded, according to its length you must with a Swath
or Rowler draw the Lips of the Wound together, that they may be conjoined: but
if the Wound is transverse, and necessity so require, then the conjoining of
the Lips is to be done by Suture or Stitching, taking great Care, that in
sowing you touch not the Nerve with the Needle; because by the prick of the
Needle the same Symptoms may arise, that are otherwise wont to happen in a
Puncture of the Nerves.

XXVII. The Wound then is so to be drawn together, that there may be a free
passage for the Sanies to run out, which if need so require, may be kept open
with a Tent, for that, if the Sanies should be retained or kept in, it might
corrupt and putrefie the Nerve.

XXVIII. And because the Nerves when wounded, do not well bear the stronger
Medicines, as Euphorbium, etc. Galen in these kind of Wounds was wont to use
unslack'd Lime often washed, with much Oil of Roses mixed therewith; also
Pompholix mixed with the same Oil.

XXIX. But Modern Physicians have found out better Medicines than these,
invented by the means of the Chemical Art, an Enumeration of many of which we
have given you in Cap. 12. Sect. 61, 62, and 64. a little aforegoing: and over
all, the Wound it self may be covered, with Diacalciteos, or Diapalma, or our
Emplastrum Album.

XXX. And to preserve the natural heat, that thereby a good Suppuration may be
made, and the Putridness and Corruption of the Humors may be resisted, as also
the Nerve defended from the Cold of the ambient Air, this following Cataplasm
may be very useful.

XXXI. Flower or Meal of Barley, Beans, and Orobus, Powder of Red Roses and
Camomil Flowers, A. ij. Oil of Turpentine, x. Oxymel simple, Oil of Whelps, or
Earthworms, A. q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm.

XXXII. Where the Nerves are transversly wounded, and not cut asunder, if by
the Fibers that are whole, the Brain is drawn into Consent, so that a
Convulsion may be excited; you must do all that may be to prevent it, by using
the Medicines which we have propounded in Cap. 9. Sect. 89. ad 98. aforegoing,
if those things suffice not, the whole Nerve is to be cut asunder, that the
Convulsion may be removed, as we have admonished in Cap. 12. Sect. 86. above.

XXXIII. A Wound made by running of a Sword through the Arm or Leg, is not to
be stitched up, ( because it is apt to be painful, inflamed, and generate a
putrid Sanies) but to be dressed up with Astringents or Stypticks, Compress and
Bandage: by this means such Wounds in a good habit of Body, do easily
agglutinate in a few days; whereas if they be dressed with Tents, they are of
longer continuance, and at last become very difficult to be healed.

XXXIV. In such a Wound, if the Weapon passes not quite through, but you find by
probing it, that it wants not much of passing through, if the contrary side is
more depending, it will be good to open it on that side, by passing a
Seton-needle, or some such like Instrument through it, then to apply
Digestives, and to dilate the hole with a Tent for a few Days, that the Matter
may pass through and downwards, letting the upper part of the Wound heal up: but
the Application of Digestives will be needless, if Stypticks be immediately
applied, upon the first making the Wound.

XXXV. If a Person is run through the Arm, Thigh, or Leg, with a broad Sword, you
may dress the Wounds with Stypticks, or some Astringent Pouders mixed with the
white of an Egg, and Pledgets spread with Sarcoticks, making the Application
upon both Orifices, and then bring the Lips of the Wound close with Compresses
and good Bandage, so will the Wound heal by agglutination, without Pain,
Matter, or Tumor, (there being no Nerve hurt) and that in four or five Days.

XXXVI. But if through some Cause which you could not know, there should be
Inflammation with Pain, or Tumor, you must dilate the Orifice most distempered,
and keep them both open, especially the more depending, with small short Tents,
spread with the common Digestives, and then proceed as in a Body Cacochymick.

XXXVII. If a Wound is made in the Arm, Thigh, or Leg, by a Sword passing
slantingly through, both Orifices ought to be dressed with Astringents, or
Stypticks, and good Bandage, so by the help of the Balsam of the Blood, the
Wound will be healed in few Days.

XXXVIII. But if through the Ignorance of the Chyrurgion, being at first ill
managed, with Tents, etc. the Patient should be in great pain, the Limb or
Member swelled, and the Wound disturbed, whereby it shall seem not to be Cured
but by Suppuration: in this Case you may foment the Member with Discutients,
keep both Orifices open with small Tents dipped in the common Digestive,
Embrocate the Parts about with Oil of Roses mixed with a little Vinegar, and
apply over all Empl. e Bolo, or some such like: The third dressing, if need
require, apply red Precipitate upon a Dosil, and dress up the Wound as before,
etc.

XXXIX. If a Wound in Arm or Leg by long ill dressing is become Sinuous, with a
Flux of Humors, Inflammation, and Tumor; so that the whole Member becomes
Oedematous, or is so weakened that it cannot assimulate its Nutriment, nor yet
resist the Crudities which attend it: in this Case the Sinus may be laid open
by Incision, and the Wound deterged with Mundificatives, as that of Paracelsus,
mixed with Red Precipitate; the Parts about may be Embrocated with Oil of Roses
mixed with Vinegar, and Ceratum Galeni, may be applied over the inflamed Tumor.

XL. The Oedematous Tumor may also be fomented with a Decoction of Wormwood,
Scordium, Elder and Camomil Flowers, Red Roses, Balaustians, and Myrtleberries
in Red Wine; and a mixture of Emplast. Album, with Sticticum Paracelsi, may be
applied over the Swelling with good Bandage, not renewing this dressing above
once a Week to give a breathing to it.

XLI. And wherever you find the Sinus to have penetrated, you must open it,
and deterge it with Abstersives, as the former, and with Vng. Diapompholigos,
or other Epuloticks, produce the Cicatrize, helping forward the Cure by the use
of a Laced Stocking or Compress.

XLII. An Observation from Wiseman. A Gentleman wounded in the Thigh with a
Tuck, was dressed by a young Chyrurgion with Tents reaching to the bottom of the
Wound, by which it was much inflamed. I threw out the Tents (says he) and dressed
the Wound with a Pledgit of Vng. Basilicon, Embrocated with Oil of Roses,
applied over Empl. e Bolo, and then let him Blood. Being Feverish, I also
prescribed him a Clyster, and gave him an Anodyn Draught to dispose him to Rest
that Night. The next Day, I found him in good Temper, and his Wound inclined to
heal; I dressed it, as the Day before, and advised him to keep his Bed three or
four Days: about two Days after I visited him again, and taking off the
Dressings, saw his Wound perfectly Cured; it continued so, and he walked abroad
the next Day.

CHAP. XV. Of WOVNDS of the JOINTS.
I. THey are called in Greek, (...) pl. (...). in Latin, Vulnera Artus vel
Articuli, pl. Artuum, vel Articulorum: in English, Wounds of a Joint or Joints.

II. These Wounds are made either by a Puncture, or by an Incision or Cut, and
they are either in the upper compassing Parts, or else they pierce to the
Cavity of the Joint.

III. Wounds of the Joints are much of the same nature with Wounds of the
Nerves, and are either without Luxation, or with it: and these are such as
happen in the Elbow, Wrist, Knee, Ancle, or Joints of the Fingers and Toes.

IV. The Prognostics. All Wounds of the Joints are dangerous, 1. For that they
are of an Exquisite Sense, by reason of the Nerves, Tendons, and Membranes,
whence sharp Pains do ensue, with an afflux of Humors, Inflammations, Fevers,
Watchings, loathing of Food, Thirst, Weakness, Convulsions, Gangrenes, and
sometimes Death.

V. 2. If they are great, whereby they are the more grievous; for great Wounds
piercing to the Cavity, are most dangerous, and if they happen in the great
Joints, are of Evil Consequence, more especially if that they call the Aqua
Articularis, or Joint-water, issues out from them. Of this Water, Celsus, Lib.
5. Cap. 26. has wrote something; also Paraeus, Lib. 9. Cap. 39. Plater. prax.
Tom. 2. Cap. 17. Lang. Epist. Lib. 1. Epist. 3. and Sennertus prax. Med. Lib.
5. par. 4. Chapter 15.

VI. This Humor being let out, there follows another Excrementitious Humor,
which Celsus says, is either a thin whitish Ichor, or a glutinous Honey-like
Humor, which he calls Meliceria: Paraeus says, this Excrement is sometimes
thick and white, and sometimes thin: Platerus will have it to be a waterish
thin Ichor: Langius likens it to Whey: and Sennertus calls it Sanies, which,
says he, our Chirurgions call the Joint-water, the flux of which Humor can no
ways be stopped, but by restoring the wounded Part to its own natural Temper.

VII. This Humor is cold and moist, and is caused of the Alimentary Juice which
is sent to nourish the Joint; its diversity is from the various Temperatures of
the Bodies wounded; and it is corrupted by the weakness and distemperature of
the wounded Joint.

VIII. Wounds of the Joints are very hard to Cure, because being Parts void of
Flesh, and hollow, they are apt to receive fluxions: and Galen, Meth. Med. Lib.
4. Cap. 6. says, That they easily degenerate into Ulcers of an ill and
dangerous nature.

IX. And they are yet more dangerous in an Internal Part, because in those
Places the greater Vessels and the Nerves are contained; for which cause more
considerable Haemorrhagies and Convulsions are easily excited.

X. Hippocrates also says, That in Wounds of the Joints, if the Nerve is
perfectly cut asunder, the Patient will without doubt be Lame.

XI. Wounds of the Joints with Luxation, or a loosening of the Joint, are yet
more dangerous, for that the Joint cannot be reduced, without apparent danger
of the Patients Life; for that vehement Pains do always accompany these kinds
of Wounds.

XII. So that the Physician by heeding this Prognostic, will do well to save
his Credit; for if the Joint being reduced, continue so, it induces Death to
the Sick, and that in few Days, which is often seen, even upon a very small
Wound.

XIII. The reason is, because the Nervous Parts about the Joint suffer cruel
Pains, whence Fluxions, etc. now if the Joint is brought back again unto its
place, the same Parts are again extended, from whence of necessity there is a
new afflux of Humors, with Inflammations and Convulsions, which being
communicated to the Brain, bring unavoidable Death.

XIV. Sometimes also from the afflux of Humors, proceeding from the Pain and
Extension, the natural heat is suffocated, from whence there follows a Gangrene
and Sphacelus.

XV. In such a Case therefore the Physician is to acquaint the Bystanders,
that if the Joint is reduced, a Fever will succeed, and after that a
Convulsion, which will induce the Death of the Patient, as we have hinted at
Sect. 12. above; there being but few that live beyond the Seventh Day after the
Reduction.

XVI. And this Hippocrates, Lib. de Articul. Text. 74, 76, and 77, positively
affirms in Wounds of the Ancles, Elbows, Wrists, and Knees, where the Bones of
the Leg, Arm, Cubit, and Thigh are dislocated, or seem to stick forth, or are
fallen out, whether toward the Interior or Exterior Parts, etc. whatsoever
they be of these, says he, that upon a Wound are dislocated or loosned, and
hereupon stick out, if they shall be put back again into their places, they
certainly cause Death.

XVII. But Sennertus is of the Opinion, that the lesser Joints, as those of
Fingers, etc. if they be reduced, they do not necessarily bring Death, but many
overcome the Pain, and Live: yet Hippocrates, Lib. de Articul. Text. 78. will
have it, that they will be in danger of a Convulsion.

XVIII. And Galen de Fract. Lib. 3. Text. 16. says, Si vero parvi articuli,
quemadmodum circa digites reperiuntur, neque tunc quoque res periculo vacabit,
qui tamen, si evadant, plerique ob diligentiam magnam in Cura adhibitam, id
consequuntur, viz. If the small Joints, to wit, such as are those of the
Fingers, shall happen to be wounded and dislocated, they will not be altogether
free from danger; but if notwithstanding they escape, and recover, it follows
chiefly from the great Diligence and Pains which has been taken in the Cure.

XIX. Now then, as you ought not to reduce the Joint; so that you may not be
accused of Ignorance or Unskillfulness by the Vulgar, as to have made the
Patient Lame or Maimed; so to preserve your Credit, you must always make use of
this Prognostic, foretelling unto the Standers-by, the danger of Death, that
by such a Reduction, may ensue to the Distressed Patient.

XX. The Cure. If it is without Luxation, the Cure is almost the same, as in
Wounds of the Nerves, by drawing the Lips together, and keeping them so closed,
excepting an Issue or Passage for the Quitter to run out.

XXI. They are also to be defended from cold Air, or any cold thing, because
they have in themselves but little heat; for this purpose, such Oils, Balsams,
Ointments, Cerots and Emplasters, as we have directed in Wounds of the Nerves,
are to be applied here.

XXII. If it is a Puncture, it is to be dressed also, as a Puncture of a Nerve
or Tendon; the Injuries of cold Air are to be avoided, for Cold nips Wounds,
(but these more especially) hardens the Skin, hinders Suppuration, extinguishes
Natural Heat, brings Agues, causes Blackness, Gangrenes, Mortification and
Convulsions; nor must you use Moistening, Unctuous, or Relaxing Topics, unless
by the vehemence of the Pain, you are forced to use Anodyns.

XXIII. But if the Wound is made by cutting, then the Lips are pretty near one
another, or else they gape much; in which latter Case, you must use stitching
first of all, but you must only stitch the Skin, in Persons of ripe Age; in
Children, you may stitch the subjacent Parts, because in such they will admit
of Unition.

XXIV. But you ought to leave a small Orifice in the most depending Part, to be
kept open with a Tent, that the Quitter may be discharged.

XXV. If the Wound pierces not to the Cavity of the Joint, you may dress it
with some good Natural or Artificial Balsam, mixed with some drying and healing
Powder, as, Balsam of Chili or Peru ij. Aloes, Catechu, Frankincense, Mastich,
Myrrh, Olibanum, Sanguis Draconis, A. iij. Comfrey-root, Borax, Centory the
greater, Sarcocol, A. ij. make all these things into a fine Powder, and mix
them with the Balsam, and apply it.

XXVI. Over all you may apply Empl. Album, mixed with a little Oil of Limons;
or this Cataplasm; Barley, and Bean-flower, A. iv. Flowers of Camomil,
Wormwood, and Melilot, A. p. ij. the Common Lixivium, lbi. Vinegar of Roses,
iv. boil all to the thickness of a Cataplasm, adding in the end, Oils of Rofes
and Myrtles, A. iss. This prevents pain, and asswages it, if present.

XXVII. Now here is to be noted, That all Applications must be actually hot;
because actual heat does Concoct, and discuss Excrementitious Humors in the
Joints, and strengthens them.

XXVIII. If the Wound pierces to the Cavity of the Joint, your Medicaments must
be yet more drying. 1. Because the Joints are apt to abound with a thin
Quitter. 2. Because the Bones and Ligaments have no feeling, and so may endure
very strong Medicaments. 3. Because they are in their own Nature very dry, and
therefore require the more drying Medicaments.

XXIX. For this purpose then you may use this: Balsam de Chili, or Linimentum
Arcei ij. fine Aloes, Catechu, Mastich, Myrrh, Olibanum, Sanguis Draconis, A.
iij. Sarcocol, Henbane-seeds, A. iv. Euphorbium ij. all being in Powder, mix
them with the Balsam or Liniment, and apply it.

XXX. The next thing to be done, is to prevent the afflux of Humors, 1. By
Purging. 2. By Interception. 3. By a good Position of the Member.

XXXI. As to Purging, you may do it with Diacassia, an Infusion of Sena alone,
or of Sena and Rhubarb, or Diacatholicon, or Tinctura Purgans, or Sal Mirabile,
Syrupus Catharticus; Elect. Catharticum, Pulvis Cornachini, or Pilulae
Catharticae.

XXXII. For Interception, you may use. Pulvis Astringens, or Stypticum (some
distance above the Wound) over which apply Ceratam Nigrum, Empl. Album,
Sticticum Paracelsi, or some such like.

XXXIII. In the position of the Member, you must be very careful; for an ill
position increases the Symptoms, and causes Distortion, Numbness and
Contraction, several ways.

XXXIV. If therefore the Wound is in the upper part of the Shoulder, a large
Bolster is to be put under the Arm-pit, that so it may bear up the Arm, and
drive the top of the Shoulder up higher, also cause the Lips of the Wound the
more easily to consolidate.

XXXV. If the Wound is in the Elbow, the Arm is neither to be kept straight,
nor yet too much bended, but kept in a mean posture between Extension and
Contraction, viz. in the form of an Obtuse Angle.

XXXVI. When the Lips of the Wound begin to unite, you must cause the Patient
to use a moderate motion of his Arm, that it may prove the more pliable after
the Wound is healed.

XXXVII. If the Wrist, or Joints of the Fingers are wounded, the Hand is to be
kept half-bended, and the Fingers also, lest the Hand should be hurt either by
Extension or Contraction.

XXXVIII. If the Joint of the Hip is wounded, the Thigh Bone must be kept in
its Cavity, which may be done by laying the Patient upon his Back, with Pillows
under the Huckle-bone, applying fit Bolsters and Rowlers: but he must sometimes
stir and move his Thigh, this way and that way, lest there should be a hurt of
the motion.

XXXIX. If the Knee is wounded, it must be kept extended, if you would not have
the Leg Contracted after the Wound is healed, or would prevent Lameness.

XL. If the Joints of the Toes are wounded, they are to be kept in their
natural posture, not bending them inwardly or outwardly, lest it causes
stumbling in going.

XLI. Now that this situation of the Part, may be so preserved, and not
altered, either sleeping or waking, it is to be kept in that posture, either by
fit and convenient Bandages, or else by wooden Instruments made for that
purpose.

XLII. As to the Cure of great Wounds in the Joints, which pass into the
Cavity, though they be Cured, yet the Member will remain stiff.

XLIII. Now a Wound of the Joints is said to be great, in a fourfold respect.
1. From the greatness of the Solution of Continuity. 2. From the great and
vehement Symptoms. 3. From the greatness of the Joint, and nearness thereof to
the more principal Parts. 4. From the evil habit of Body in the Person wounded.

XLIV. And it is said to be Mortal, if vehement and deadly Symptoms do follow
upon it; as Convulsions, with frequent Fainting and Swooning, Gangren and
Sphacelus.

XLV. If the Wound is with a Luxation withal, and in a great Joint, you must
not, as we said before, Reduce it; but the Sick is to be told beforehand of the
danger, if it is restored; and of an unavoidable Lameness that will follow
thereupon, if it is not.

XLVI. These things being considered, you must stop the Fluxion, as is directed
at Sect. 30, 31, 32. etc. aforegoing; and place the Patient and Member in such
a posture, as may be most convenient, and cause least pain to the Patient, as
is sufficiently declared in the Sections above: provided always that the Member
is not depending, or in a hanging posture; because such a position is apt to
add to a Flux of Humors, or to induce it.

XLVII. This being said, the Wound is to be cured, like as are other Wounds,
with proper Balsams, Sarcoticks, and drying Pouders: but yet it is not to be
bound up, in the same manner as other Wounds are; and great care must be taken,
that it is not offended with the Injuries of the ambient and cold Air.

XLVIII. Cataplasms are also to be imposed, not upon the Wound it self, but
upon the near adjacent parts, lest the weight thereof should hurt it.

XLIX. And in regard that Fluxions are easily excited, the Body ought to be
cleansed by manifold Purgations, and that as often as need shall require: and
likewise by Sweating, to be freed from all its vicious and superfluous Humors.

CHAP. XVI. Of WOVNDS with CONTVSION.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...), plu. (...). in Latin, Vulnus contusum,
plu. Vulnera contusa; in English, a Wound or Wounds with Contusion, a Contused
Wound or Wounds.

II. A Wound with Contusion is generally made with a Weapon or Instrument which
is blunt; whereby, besides the solution of continuity, there is a bruising of
the Flesh, or other parts appertaining.

III. The Signs. It is known from the Instrument hurting, the great Pain, and
the black and blue color of the Part.

IV. Now a Contusion is either without a Wound, or with a Wound: if it is
without a Wound, we have already discoursed of that at large in Lib. 3. Cap. 7.
aforegoing: if it is with a Wound, wherein it is not only bruised within, but
is also externally wounded in the Superficies, it is what we intend to treat of
here in this Chapter.

V. The Prognostics. A Wound with a Contusion is more dangerous and difficult
to cure, than that without. For the bruised Parts and Blood poured forth, if
they be not, or cannot be discussed, must of necessity be turned into Pus,
without which the Wound cannot be healed.

VI. And if the contused Flesh, and extravasated Blood begins to putrefy, it
may excite and cause a Gangren, or some other dangerous Symptom.

VII. The Cure. In order therefore to the Cure, you must first have respect
unto the Contusion; wherein you must prevent the afflux of Humors, by
Revulsion, Defensatives, and Repellers.

VIII. Then the Blood which is flowed in, must be changed into Quittor or Pus,
by Medicaments, (not too moist) unless you think it may be discussed; and
Cataplasma Laxativum Schroderi, or Resolutivum Foresti may be applied round
about the Wound, where it is bruised, but not on the Wound it self.

IX. Hippocrates, in Lib. de Vlcerib. says, If any of the Flesh shall be
battered and bruised by the Weapon or Instrument, we are then to take care,
that (as soon as may be) it be converted into Pus: for as it is less dangerous
than an Inflammation, so there is also a necessity, that the battered and
bruised Flesh should (by being converted into Pus) be wasted and consumed away,
that new Flesh may be bred instead thereof.

X. So that when we shall find that there is no cause to fear an Afflux of
Humors, we must endeavor to bring the bruised Flesh and Blood to Pus, which is
done by Maturatives and Digestives; which what they are, we have showed, Lib.
3. Cap. 3. Sect. 29, ad 32. Cap. 5. Sect. 105, ad 108. Sect. 134, ad 137. and
Sect. 145, ad 149. Cap. 6. Sect. 23, 36, 37. and Lib. 4. Cap. 2. Sect. 16, ad
30.

XI. But because they are generally hot and moist, you must have a special care
in the use of them, that they be not over-moist; for that then they are apt to
produce putridness, and a corruption of the Part may easily be excited; for
which Reason, Discussives may also be mixed with them: as,

XII. Roots of Althea i. wild Cucumber roots ss. Origanum, Dill and Fetherfew
tops, A. M. i. fat Figs No vi. Raisons stoned i. boil in Water to softness,
pulp through a Hair-sieve, and add thereto, meal of Lin-seed and Fenugreek-seed,
powder of Orrice-root and Camomil-flowers, A. iv. Sanguis draconis iii. Myrrh
in powder, Galbanum, liquid Storax, liquid Amber, A. ii. Saffron i. Oil of
Hypericon, golden-coloured Palm-Oil, A. q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm; which I
impose about the Wound, not on the Wound it self.

XIII. For so says Hippocrates, lib. de Ulcer. When it seems needful that the
Wound be defended with a Cataplasm, it ought not to be laid on the Wound, but
upon the parts adjacent to it; that so those things may be softened or dissolved
which are not, and the Pus may pass away.

XIV. The next thing to be considered, is the Wound it self; upon which you
must apply a Digestive, made of Rosin, Turpentine, and the yolks of Eggs; or
Triapharmacon, or Vnguentum Basilicon, or some suchlike, out of the things
beforementioned.

XV. The Pus being fully bred, you must then use Abstersives and Glutinatives;
healing it up, as you do other Wounds.

XVI. But if the bruised Flesh will not be converted into Pus, but on the
third, fourth, or fifth day, a Tumor arises with Pain, and so increases from
day to day, whereby its color is extinguished, and it becomes yellowish, with
signs of a Gangren near at hand; then the Part must be scarified, and Vnguentum
Aegyptiacum is to be applied, ordering the rest of the Cure, as we have taught
in Lib. 3. Cap. 7. aforegoing.

XVII. If with the Flesh, the Nerves, Tendons, and Ligaments are bruised,
without any contusion of the Skin, they are to be cherished by fomenting the
Part with Discussive Oils made hot; such are Oils of Dill, sweet Marjoram,
Orrice, Southernwood, Rue, Tansy, etc.

XVIII. But if the Skin is bruised withal, first lay on the white of an Egg,
beaten with Oil of Roses, which will mitigate the pain: and then the pain being
somewhat moderated, you may comfort the Part by fomenting it with red
Port-wine, and then apply a Cataplasm, made of Bean-meal and Oxymel; or
Elm-leaves boiled in Oil; or the ashes of Vine-branches mixed with yellow
Palm-oil and Vinegar.

XIX. If there is vehement pain withal, then take Tar, Oxymel, and Bean-meal,
which mix, and boil to a Cataplasm; laying it on as hot as it can be endured.

XX. If there is more cause of Drying, mix with the former meal of Orobus,
powder of Florentine-Orrice root, or root of round Birthwort; anointing the
place with Oils of Castor, of Whelps, of Camomil, Dill, Orrice, and Rue: or
with an Ointment made of Galbanum and Myrrh.

XXI. And give inwardly, an Electuary made of pouders of Centory the less,
roots of Birthwort, Elecampane, Gentian, and Orrice, mixed with Ammoniacum, and
Mel Juniperinum, or honey-like Extract of Juniper Berries.

XXII. If at last there remains a hardness on the Nerves or Tendon, whereby
numbness and stupidity be excited, then Emollients or Digestives are to be laid
on; as roots of Althea, of white Lillies, Bdellium, Ammoniacum, Opopanax,
Sagapenum, Diachylon simple, and cum Gummi; or Palm-Oil, mixed with Chemical
Oil of Aniseeds in equal parts, or Balsamum mirabile.

XXIII. If the Ligaments are bruised, you must apply such things as heal, dry,
discuss, and strengthen: such are Oils of Mastich, Juniper Berries, Oranges,
Limons, Caraways, to anoint withal.

XXIV. And then apply this: Oils of Mastich, Lavender; and Savin, A. i. Oil of
Mace by Expression vj. Bdellium, Ammoniacum, Galbanum, A.ss. Saffron ii. Wax
q.s. mix, and make an Ointment, or soft Cerate.

CHAP. XVII. Of WOVNDS made by Biting of VENEMOVS BEASTS.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...), pl. (...). in Latin, Morsus Bestiae, pl.
Morsus Bestiarum; in English, The Biting or Bitings, of a Beast or Beasts.

II. We shall comprehend in this Chapter the Bitings and Stingings of all
living Creatures, even the Bitings of Mankind: not that we think every Creature
is Poisonous, yet we are apt to believe, that there is somewhat of Poison or
Malignity, more or less, in the Bitings of all Creatures, Man as well as Beast.

III. And therefore we shall lay down our Considerations in a fivefold order,
as they have respect either to Biting or Stinging; the first of which is made
by Mankind by Beasts, by Serpents, and by Insects.

IV. These Wounds then are, 1. By the bitings of wild or tamed Beasts and
Humankind, not esteemed poisonous. 2. By the bitings of Mad-dogs, and Madmen,
which require the same order and method of Cure. 3. By the ^ing of Serpents; as
the Viper, Rattle-snake, etc. 4. By the biting of the Tarantula. 5. By the
stinging of Scorpions, Hornets, Wasps, Bees, etc. of all which in their order.

I. Of Biting of Wild-Beasts, and Human-kind.
V. We intend to treat of those Wounds here which are made by the biting of
Human-kind, and of Beasts in their own nature not Venomous; as of an Ass, Ape,
Baboon, Bear, Cat, Dog, Horse, Leopard, Monkey, Squirrel, Tiger, etc.
concerning which, yet Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 27. says, That all Bitings of wild
Beasts whatsoever, have in them some certain kind of Venom.

VI. Moreover, these Creatures when they bite, are for the most part enraged;
and Wrath or Rage has in it a great power to disturb the Humors, and corrupt
them; which vitiousness of the Humors is easily communicated into the Spittle,
and by the Spittle as easily conveyed into the Wound; which thing is manifestly
evident, in such as are bitten by a mad Dog or Man.

VII. But if it is supposed that such Wounds are altogether free from any
Virulency whatever, yet the Contusion it self (for Teeth are seldom so sharp as
to wound, and not also bruise) renders all Wounds whatsover the more dangerous
and grievous, and makes them the more difficult to be cured.

VIII. The Prognostics. These Wounds are dangerous as well in themselves, by
reason of the Contusion, as also because the Spittle of the furious and enraged
Animal is supposed to have something of Malignity joined with it; but much more
dangerous, if the Nervous and Tendinous Parts are bitten or wounded withal.

IX. And if they are made by one Man's biting of another, they are not without
their danger. Guilielmus Fabricius Hildanus, Cent. 2. Obs. 84. and 85 gives us
three Instances. 1. A Merchant, who in his Cups was bitten by another, on the
very tip of his right Forefinger; upon which, his whole right Hand became
inflamed, and a Gangren presently began to follow, with Convulsions, a great
burning Fever, Swooning, and continual Restlesness. 2. A Physician, who was
bit, by putting his Finger to the Mouth of a Woman who had a Frenzy, to feel
her Tongue; upon which biting, he was presently taken with a vehement pain, not
only in his Finger, but through his whole Arm. 3. Another Man was bitten sorely
to the first articular of his Thumb, by another furious and enraged person;
upon which he was instantly taken with a vehement pain through the whole Arm, and
soon after with a Fever, and Swooning-fits.

X. The Cure. If the Wound is made by a Beast that has blunt Teeth, whereby
there is a Contusion, the Blood is to be well squeezed or pressed forth, out of
the Wound; and Purging-medicines are to be given, (if need so require) to
prevent the greater afflux of Humors.

XI. And to prevent the Evil from being communicated to the more superior, or
other adjacent Parts, you must apply Defensatives made with Oxycrate, or some
other like thing: and to the Wound it self, for easing the Pain, promoting
Suppuration, and keeping the Wound open, some proper Anodyn, maturative or
digestive.

XII. As, One Egg, Butter iv. Oils of Violets and Roses, A. ij. Saffron ss. mix
them. Or, The yolk of one Egg; Turpentine, Honey, A. ss. mix them well
together; then add Oil of Roses, or Oil of Ben iii.

XIII. And you may (if need require) apply over this Cataplasm. Althea-roots j
ss. flowers of Camomil and Melilot, A. M.j. Wormwood-tops P.ii. boil all to
softness, and beat them together; to which add the yolk of one Egg, Mithridate
i. Oil of Camomil q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm.

XIV. If you should fear, that there is Virulency in the Wound, you may apply
this. Unguentum Basilicon, Strasburgh-Turpentine, A. i. yellow Palm-Oil, or Oil
of Ben, Mithridate, A. vi. yolk of one Egg.

XV. And that what is bruised, may be converted into Pus, you must use this
Digestive. Ung. Basilicon, Rosin, Honey of Roses, A.i. yolk of one Egg, mix
them. Or this: Strasburgh-Turpentine, Mastich in powder, A. i. Honey of Roses
jss. yolk of one Egg, mix them.

XVI. And if any Malignity is feared, you may apply this:
Strasburgh-Turpentine, Mithridate, A.i. Aloes, round Birthwortroot, Myrrh,
Orrice-Florentine, A. ss. all in fine powder, powder of Zedoary, and Winters
Cinnamon, A. i. mix, and with Honey of Roses, q.s. make a Liniment.

XVII. The Wound being digested, and well cleansed, you must fill it up with
Flesh, with proper Sarcoticks, and at last with Epuloticks produce the
Cicatrice.

XVIII. If a Gangren is feared, as approaching, you must pursue the Cure, as we
have directed in the Chapter of a Gangren. Or thus: Bathe all the adjacent
places with Spirit of Wine Camphorated; and upon the Wound apply very hot this
following Mixture.

XIX. Strasburgh-Turpentine Gum Elemi, A. i. yolks of two Eggs; powder of
Earthworms ii. Frankincense, Camphir, A. i. mix them.

XX. If the Pain increases, bathe with this: Powers of Amber, Powers of
Juniper, A. i. Spirit of Sal Armoniack ii. Guttae Vitae ss. mix them: and over
all, apply some proper Anodyn Cataplasm: after which the Pain being something
eased, you may apply Empl. Album, and so Cure it as another bruised Wound.

XXI. But mean season, or during the whole course of this Cure, give inwardly
every Night a Dose of Our Theriaca Chymica; and every Morning fasting this
mixture: Aq. Bezoartica, or Spiritus Cordialis vi. Syrup of Limons iii.
Spiritus Opii Compositus iss. mix for a Dose.

II. Of the Bitings of Mad-dogs, Madmen, etc.
XXII. Whether the Patient is bitten by a Mad-dog, or by a Madman whose Madness
came through the biting of a Mad-dog, the Signs, Symptoms, Prognostics, and
Methods of Cure are all one, and therefore in Treating of the one, we Treat of
the other also.

XXIII. This Poison or Venom which causes this Madness, consists not in the
first qualities, as Heat, Coldness, Dryness, or Moisture, but in a Specific
Property peculiar to this kind of Disease, which is called in Greek, (...),
(aquae metus) (...), morbus, quo aliquis a Cane rabioso commorsus aquam timet;
also (...). in Latin, Hydrophobia, and Rabies; a Malady in which the Patient is
always extremely fearful of Water.

XXIV. Now it is necessary in the first place, to know whether the Dog which
gave the Wound be Mad, or no, which you may know by these Signs. He refuses his
Food, and his Water also, (because he is afraid of Water) Slaver or Snivel
comes forth from his Mouth and Nostrils, he carries his Tail under his Belly,
hangs his Tongue out of his Mouth, which looks either yellow, blackish, or
reddish, his Eyes are red and fiery, and he looks wild, becomes lean, and barks
but little, and that hoarsly; sometimes he runs swiftly, sometimes he stands
still, he knows not his Owner, but runs fiercely upon all Creatures, and
oftentimes in running strikes his Head against Posts or Trees, and when in this
Condition, other Dogs will shun him.

XXV. The Signs. If the Madness is beginning, the Patient becomes discontented
and angry without any just Cause; he feels a gnawing and heaviness in his
Stomach, complains of unreasonable Weather, though it is fair, his Body also
becomes heavy and lumpish.

XXVI. If he sleeps, his sleep is very troublesome, and he is full of fears
without any cause; he drinks less than usually, and begins to murmur and speak
to himself, and desires Candlelight in the Daytime.

XXVII. In the place wounded, though it is healed, a pain is felt, which ascends
toward the Head, whither when it is come, a Vertigo is caused, so that he
cannot walk steadily forwards; now when these last Signs appear, you may be
sure that Madness is at hand, or not far off.

XXVIII. If the Madness is present or manifest, the Face then and Body become
red, he looks wildly, is very troublesome, and foams at the Mouth, and spits
upon those that stand by.

XXIX. Sometimes they snarl and bark like Dogs, and many times offer to bite;
they vehemently hate or are afraid of Water, and all Liquid things, which if
proffered to them, or they come near them, they become more fierce, and are
more offended.

XXX. Their Pulses are small and inordinate, their Urine comes away by drops;
and the Madness increasing, they Vomit either yellow or black Choler, and
become Costive.

XXXI. Their Limbs become more and more lumpish and heavy, their Voice becomes
hoarse, and they are troubled with difficulty of breathing, putting out their
Tongues as if they wanted Breath, or Air, or were vehemently hot.

XXXII. A Day or two before they Die, some of them are troubled with the
Hiccough; and a little before Death with Convulsions, and a dreadful gnashing
of the Teeth.

XXXIII. The Prognostics. The Patient being bitten by the Mad-dog, the Poison
is received; but it manifests its self in Madness in some sooner, in others
later: some grow Mad in a few Days space, as in a Week, more or less; some in a
longer time.

XXXIV. But its general time of manifesting it self, is upon the Revolution of
the Moon to the same place of the Zodiac, where she was when the Wound was
made, which is a Months time.

XXXV. Yet if the Wound was great or deep, or manifold, and the Dog vehemently
Mad, the Patient may possibly become Mad, upon the next New or Full Moon; or if
they escape the New, upon the next Full; or if they escape the Full, upon the
next Change.

XXXVI. Sometimes the Poison lies dormant for a much longer time, as for a Year
or two, before it manifests it self in Madness; but this is caused from the
weakness of the Poison first received, or the shallow, remoteness, or hard
place where it is lodged; and therefore if it manifests not it self in a Month
or two, the Patient is generally supposed secure or perfectly well, more
especially if the proper means both Internal and External have been used
beforehand.

XXXVII. If the Wound is not deep, nor has offended a Nerve, Artery, or Vein,
there is great hope of Cure, and that the Patient may do well.

XXXVIII. But if the Person who is bitten, begins to have the fear of Water
before him, and becomes Mad, the hope of Recovery is very small; nor did I ever
know one such to escape.

XXXIX. The Cure. There are three Intentions of Cure; 1. To draw forth the
Poison out of the Wound, that it may not get deeper into the Body. 2. To
strengthen the principal Parts, that they may be able to resist and repel the
Poison. 3. To destroy the power of the Poison it self.

XL. The first intention is answered in some measure by applying a Ligature,
three or four Inches above the Wound: but Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 27. advises,
that it be not too strait, lest the Part becomes benumbed.

XLI. If it is in a place which will not admit of Ligature, then you must apply
a Defensative, made of fine Bole, Terra Sigillata, Catechu, Sanguis Draconis,
mixed with Whites of Eggs.

XLII. Then you must scarifie the Wound, if it is not large enough already; or
apply Cupping-glasses with much Flame and Scarification, to make the stronger
Attraction.

XLIII. If the place is such as cannot be Cupped, yet it is always to be
scarified, and the Blood to be drawn by a dry Sponge, not wet in Water: after
which you may apply hot Pigeons or Chickens, being first cut asunder.

XLIV. After these things are done at the first, you must apply other Topics
of a very strong Attractive quality, as Cataplasms made of Garlic, Shelots,
Leeks, Onions, Mustard Seed, Cresses, Rue, Salt, Leven, Honey, Mithridate,
Pigeons-dung, Turpentine, Burgundy-Pitch, etc.

XLV. Galen, de Antidot. lib. 2. cap. 1. very much commends an Emplaster made
of Opopanax, Pitch, and Vinegar; and he affirms that he never knew any that
died, upon whom this Emplaster was applied: the Composition is this. Pitch lbi.
which melt, and add thereto Opopanax dissolved in the sharpest Vinegar,
strained, and reduced to a just consistency iii. mix, and make a Plaster.

XLVI. Now these Attractive Medicines are to be applied in three or four Days
after the Wound is made, otherwise they will be unprofitably used.

XLVII. Bleeding in this Case is very pernicious, for it strongly draws the
Poison into the Blood, and so corrupts the whole Mass, whereby, at length, it
seizes both Heart and Brain: Purging, in like manner, is also as deleterious,
especially in the beginning, because it draws the Poison from the outward
Parts, to the inward.

XLVIII. But if the Poison has already possessed the inward Parts, Purging will
then be necessary, for the evacuating of the empoisoned Humors, or morbifick
Matter, and it ought often to be repeated, and that with the strongest
Emeticks, or Catharticks, or both by turns, which ought to be begun after the
20th Day, and before the 40th Day, with Tartarum Emeticum, Vinum Antimoniale,
Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, Wine or Vinegar of Squills, Our Family Pills,
Pilulae Panchymagoge, Pil. Catharticae, Pulvis Cornachini, Sal Mirabile, etc.

XLIX. The second Intention is performed, by giving inwardly Mithridate or
Venice Treacle, mixed especially with a proportionable Dose of Volatile Sal
Armoniack, or Salt of Hartshorn, or Salt of Amber, giving iss. every Morning
fasting, and every Evening at bedtime; but for this purpose Our Theriaca
Chymica almost a Thousand times exceeds them, which you may give every Night
going to Bed; and every Morning a Dose of Our Tinctura Cordialis, in a Glass of
Canary, both which are to be continued for Forty Days at least together.

L. In this Case, Galen, de Antidot. lib. 2. cap. 11. and Dioscorides, lib. 6.
cap. 37. commends the Antidotus de Cancris fluviatilibus, thus made. Ashes of
River Crabs ii. Gentian in Powder i. generous Wine half a Pint: mix them for a
Draught; which is to be taken every Morning for Eleven Days. Galen affirms that
none ever died, who rightly used this Powder of Crabs.

LI. The third and last Intention is to destroy the power and force of the
Poison it self; and this is done chiefly by the help of Volatile Alkalies:
Volatile Salt of Beans is an Admirable Thing in this Case, so also the Volatile
Salts of Hartshorn and Sal Armoniack, also the Volatile Salt of Vipers: but
that which exceeds all other things, is the Volatile Salt of the Livers of
Mad-dogs, which radically destroys the Poison, and may be given daily a gr. x.
ad i. in any fit Vehicle.

LII. But because every one cannot attain this, or it is not ready at hand, you
may make use of the substances of the Liver and Spleen, by drying them, and
reducing them to Powder; of which Powder you may give a ii. ad iv. in a Glass
of Choice Canary in the Morning at Ten a Clock, and in the Afternoon about Five
a Clock; this is known to be a Specific.

LIII. As to the Volatile Salt of the Livers and Spleens of Maddogs, because it
will be difficult to be gotten in any considerable quantity; you may make it of
the Flesh of the Dog, joined with them, which is to be cut into very thin
slices, and then dried in the Sun, or an Oven, till they are perfectly dry, and
being cut into bits, is to be put into a Glass Retort, and distilled in all
respects as you distill Volatile Salt of Vipers.

LIVE. Guil. Fabricius Hildanus, Cent. 1. Observe. 78. has this following Cure. A
Young Man was on the 30th of July, 1602. wounded in the Arm by the Bite of a
Mad-dog. On the first of August (says he) he came to me; I scarified the Bite,
applied a Cupping-glass with much Flame, and extracted as much Blood as I
could, then I washed the Arm in Posca, in which Venice-Treacle and a little
Sea-sait were dissolved; for the slaver of a Maddog, if it dries upon any part
of the Skin, unless it is quickly and diligently washed and wiped off, may
cause Madness; and after this he cauteriz'd the Bite all over, very deep, with
an actual Cautery.

LV. And by the way he advised Young Chirurgions, that they take special Care,
that they cauterize not such Bites superficially, but rather to err in the
excess of their depth, than in the defect, because as it is a dangerous and
desperate Disease, it must have a severe and desperate Cure; and he knew one
who had no Benefit by an actual Cautery, because it was not made to enter deep
enough.

LVI. After the Cauterizing, he was not careful to assuage the Pain, because
unctuous things, as Butter, Oil, etc. which relax the Eschar, he approved not
of, in such Ulcers, they hindering the evaporation of the Poison, and repelling
the Blood, and with it the Venom to the Noble Parts: And since Pain, as Galen
says, attracts the Blood and Humors, out of the Body to it self, it is probable
that if it is moderate, it may do good in such a Case as this is; therefore
after the Burning, he applied Cotton dipped in Aqua Vitae, in which Theriatae
Andromachi was dissolved, to the Ulcer.

LVII. Afterward he laid to it the following Plaster spread upon Cloth. Onions
a little boiled, Leven, Mustard-see, A. ii. Theriaca Andromachi ss. Rue,
Scordium, A. Mss. beat them together in a Mortar, with a little Honey. The next
Day he cut the Eschar every where, as much as he could, and repeated the
Applications of the aforesaid Medicines, and so proceeded till the Eschar fell
off: afterward, lest the Lips of the Ulcer should close, he put Pease into it
twice a Day, applying the prescribed Plaster, keeping the Ulcer thus open for
three Months.

LVIII. But in the interim, he strewed twice or thrice a Week, the following
Powder upon the Ulcer: Red Precipitate levigated, Powder of Bezoar-stone, and
of Angelica-root, A. i. mix them: This, says he, wonderfully attracts the
malignity from within to it self: and inwardly he gave Alexipharmicks, as
Venice-Treacle, Mithridate, Bezoar, Burnt Hartshorn, and the following Powder
in Borage and Bugloss Water. Ashes of River Crabs v. Gentian-root in Powder
iiss. Olibanum in Powder ss. mix them. He neither bled, or purged him, lest he
should have drawn the Poison inwards, but by this means he was perfectly Cured.
See the Third Edition of Our Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 3. cap. 21.

III. Of the Bitings of Serpents, as Vipers, Rattle-snakes, etc.
LIX. The Signs. When one is bitten by an Adder, Viper, Rattle-snake, or
Slow-worm, etc. the Part becomes of a leaden Color, sometimes reddish, or of a
reddish black, and very painful; and if it is not presently Cured, much black
and fetid Pus does come forth from the Sore, like as from a filthy Ulcer.

LX. What we shall say on this Subject, we shall chiefly deliver from Monsieur
Charas out of his new Experiments upon Vipers. 1. A Dog was bitten in his upper
Lip by an angry Viper; he was not much moved at it at first, but by little and
little grew sad, and his Jaw began to swell; a little while after he vomited up
the last Food he had eaten, and discharged by Stool: He refused his Food, and
would touch none of it, and lay in a prostrate manner without complaining: the
place pricked grew livid, and the lividness extended to the Neck and Breast, as
also the Swellings, and at length after Forty Hours he died; without nothing
was observed but the Tumor and lividness in the Part pricked, and places
adjacent; but being opened, in the Trunk of the Vena Cava, a little Blood was
found coagulated, and the rest of the Blood in this place, in the Heart, and in
all other places, was of a dark Color, and of an ill Consistence, like Blood
in part dissolved and corrupted; the Stomach was of a darkish Color, but the
Mesentery and Guts were darker: The Heart, Liver, Lungs, and Spleen were not
altered at all, but of a good Color, and remained in their natural Condition.

LXI. A Dog bitten at the Ear. He howled when he felt the biting, and continued
howling for half an Hour, then was quiet. The place pricked grew livid, and
swelled, as also the Parts adjacent, he vomited not, but voided some
Excrements, would neither eat or drink, and died ^n 24 Hours after he was
bitten: Outwardly nothing was seen but the lividness and swelling. Being
opened, all the inward Parts were in the same Condition with those of the
former Dog, save there was found in the Vessels no coagulated Blood, but only
it was of an obscure Color, of an odd consistency, and in a disposition to
coagulate.

LXII. 3. A Dog bitten on the tip of his Nose by an enraged Viper. He howled
when he felt himself bitten, but was soon appeased, fell to licking the place
pricked, and to seratching it with his Feet or Paws. He lay not down, but
continued that exercise for some time. The place bitten became somewhat black
and blue, but swelled not; and a little while after the Dog cat and drank, as
if nothing ailed him, gradually the lividness disappeared, and he grew as well
as ever. In this Case, I suppose the biting of the Viper scarcely pierced through
the Cutis, which was the principal reason of the Dog's recovery.

LXIII. 4. A Puppy seven or eight Days old, bitten on the Leg by an enraged
Viper. He howled as soon as bitten, and so continued till he died, which was
about an Hour after. The place pricked was swelled and livid; and being opened,
nothing was found but some lividness in the Stomach and Guts, and some
blackishness and ill-consistency in the Blood, but all the other inward Parts
appeared sound.

LXIV. 5. A Dog bitten on the Belly by an angered Viper. He cried presently, but
not long. The place bitten was very livid, and swelled much, the Tumor and
lividness reaching over all the Natural Parts: he drank often, but would eat
nothing, and was always for two Days in this Condition, without growing worse.
(I suppose the Skin was scarcely penetrated). Then he was bitten again, and
that twice, near the same place; he howled much, and the Swelling increased,
and extended it self over the whole Belly, as also the livid Color, but it
went no farther: The Dog often lickt his Wounds, and drank store of Water, and
at length fell to eating, and in five or six Days was Cured perfectly, without
any other Remedy than that of his Tongue licking the Wound. (Either the Skin
was not perfectly penetrated, or else the Attractive Virtue of the Tongue by
often licking, drew forth the Poison).

LXV. 6. A Dog deeply bitten on the Tongue by an enraged Viper. He cried
vehemently, so as to be heard a great way, and continued tossing and vexing
himself for half an Hour together, and then died. He was opened, his Heart,
Liver, Lungs, and Spleen, were found and well; but his Tongue was exceedingly
livid: his Mesentery covered all over with black Spots, some of which were
blacker than Lentils, under which there was coagulated Blood; the Stomach and
Guts were also grown blacker; the Blood very black, and beginning to coagulate
in the Heart, and in the Vena Cava, being like Blood curdled and corrupted.

LXVI. 7. A Pigeon and a Pullet were bitten by an angry Viper, almost at the
same time, in the most fleshy Part, viz. under the Breast. Soon after in both
there was observed a very swift and extraordinary beating of the Heart, which
continued, still increasing, so much, that in less than half an Hour they were
both dead. They were opened, and in both there was found a little Blood
coagulated in the Heart, and Vena Cava, and all the rest of the Blood blackest,
and ready to be coagulated, and as it were, to be corrupted; but the Heart,
Liver, and all the inward and outward Parts were of a very good Color, and in
a very good Condition, except the lividness which appeared only upon the place
bitten.

LXVII. 8. Another Pigeon bitten on the Leg twice, a little Theriaca being
given it beforehand. Upon the first bite, it went too and fro in the room, and
showed not any sign of Illness: but upon the second bite, it grew Sick by
little and little, and died in half an Hour after. The Place which was first
hitten, was much more livid than the Place which was bitten the second time.

LXVIII. When I was in Carolina, I had a Dog bitten by a Rattle-snake upon his
Throat. The Dog cried out immediately, presently grew Sick, Vomited up all that
was in him, and refused his Food, and then ran home, and laid himself down. He
would sometimes cry, sometimes whine, and sometimes groan bitterly; outwardly
the place bitten was livid, his whole Neck was extremely swelled, as also his
Head, and Eyebrows, which seemed to hang over his Eyes. He died in the space
of 24 Hours, but at times, to the last moment groaned vehemently, as if he had
been Heart-sick, and with frequent Convulsions wonderful to behold: Being
opened, the Heart, Liver, Lungs and Spleen seemed to be well, the Stomach,
Mesentery, and Guts were spotted all over with livid and blackish Spots; and
the whole Mass of Blood both in the Heart, Arteries, and Veins was every where
coagulated, and looked almost of a black Color.

LXiX. The Causes. From what has been observed, it appears, that in the biting
of a Viper, Rattle-snake, etc. the Poison goes not directly to the Noble Parts,
for that no alteration was ever observed therein, but the Cause of Death is
from the Poison immediately entering into and working upon the Blood,
coagulates it, and corrupting it, separating its Parts, and disturbing its
Circulation, thereby hindering the Communication of the Spirits through the whole
Body, depriving the Noble Parts of them, and destroying or contaminating them,
with its deleterious Gas.

LXX. The progress of the Poison is from the place bitten; and the swiftness of
its motion from the magnitude of the Arteries or Veins, which receive it, or
which the Teeth did light on. As in the Tongue of the Dog which was bitten; the
Tongue being full of Veins and Arteries, it is no wonder that the Poison meeting
with them, and finding a large way, and very short, should so soon produce its
Effects, and cause Death so much the more speedily, than that which meets with
small, slender, long and winding Branches, though in this latter Case, it will
not fail to do the Work at last.

LXXI. The Vomiting and extreme Pains in any Part, chiefly in the Viscera,
proceed either from the coagulated Blood, or its disposition to Coagulation,
hindering it in its course of Circulation, for that the Spirits contained in
the Circulating Blood, finding their passages stopped by the Congelation, and
endeavoring to make way for themselves, do Violence to the Viscera and lateral
Parts, and so excite those extreme Pains which the Patient reels; as also
Vomitings, by weakening the Tone of the Stomach, etc.

LXXII. And the Cold Sweats, Faintings, Swoonings, and Convulsions with which
such Patients are assaulted, are caused from nothing else, but the defect and
diminution of the Spirits, and the obstruction of their concourse to the more
Noble Parts, with the weakness and putridness of the Blood, which is destinated
as their Vehicle to convey them.

LXXIII. The Prognostics. The biting of any Poisonous Serpent, as the Viper,
Slow Worm, Rattle-snake, etc. is always dangerous; and if it is not immediately
provided for, is for the most part Mortal.

LXXIV. Our Common Vulgar Snake is without danger, though it bites never so
deeply: and the biting of the Chicken-snake, or long black Snake of Carolina,
is also safe, my self was bitten in the Nightime upon two of my Fingers, by
one of those large black Snakes, making in all five Wounds, which bled, and
were sore, but healed of their own accord, without any more than the first pain
or trouble.

LXXV. If the biting of a Viper or Rattle-snake is deep, and in a considerable
place, if no Remedy is presently applied, they Kill in a few Hours time. A
Rattle-snake bit a young Man in the Woods in Carolina upon one of his Legs, and
no Remedy being ready, he was Dead in about half an Hours space.

LXXVI. If Remedies be applied both outwardly and inwardly, and not almost
immediately upon the receiving of the Wound, they oftentimes prove abortive:
and if timely used, yet many times the hazard of Life is not small: and where
the Patient recovers, it is sometimes three or four Days before he is fully out
of danger.

LXXVII. The Cure. The Ancients bound Ligatures three or four Inches above the
Wound, held up the Member as high as might be, scarified, and if they could,
applied Cupping-glasses with Scarification; where they could not be applied
they only scarified, and applied Defensatives about the Part.

LXXVIII. Then they dressed the Wound with Antidotes, Electuaries and Treacles
mixed with Oil of Scorpions, Orvietanum, and the like, mixed with Powder of
Vipers.

LXXIX. And inwardly they gave Simple and Compound Antidotes, as you may find
in Dioscorides, lib. 7. in Nicander in his Theriaca and Alexipharmaca; in
Grevinus, de Veneris, lib. 1. cap. 36, and 37. where he has gathered them
together. Petrus de Abano, in lib. de Venenis, cap. 4. commends these
following, viz. Hypericon, Swallow-root, Elecampane-root, Radish, Dittany,
Birthwort round and long: and these he affirms to be equal in Power and Virtue
with Theriaca Andromach; it self against Poison.

LXXX. But there are many other particular Simples as good or better for the
purpose intended, than those before enumerated, as Angelica, Bawm, Bay, and
Bay Berries, Contra-yerva, Camomil, Gentian, Germander, Juniper Berries,
Lavender, Masterwort, Myrrh, Pyrethrum, Rue, Rosemary, Sage, Savory, Scordium,
Southernwood, Saffron, Tansy, Time, Wormwood, Marsh and Roman, Virginian
Snake-root, Zedoary, etc. of which you make Pouders, Electuaries, Tinctures
both Spirituous and Saline, Volatile or Chemical Oils, Spirits and Waters, etc.

LXXXI. The Ancients, before Mithridate and Treacle were invented, used only
the Juices or Pouders of the Herbs and Roots inwardly, and applied the same
outwardly to the Sores, as the Native Indians in the Continent of Florida do at
this Day, when they make use of the Virginian Snake-root, with which, in this
kind of Cure, they do Wonders: After the Invention of Compounds, the Ancient
Greeks and Romans used Mithridate, Theriaca Andromachi, Diatessaron, and other
the like Compositions.

LXXXII. The Viper-catchers, if they are bitten, they apply to the Wound the
Powder of Vipers, or the Vipers Head beaten to a Mass in a Mortar, and take the
same Powder inwardly: others use Troches of Vipers; and others again commend
the Powder of Tin as a Specific in this Case, both, or either of which may be
mixed with a little Mithridate, and so taken or applied.

LXXXIII. But after all, the Medicaments that are proposed, I am confident none
of them exceeds, nay, comes not up to, the three following Medicaments, with
which I have Cured several who have been bitten with Vipers and Rattle-snakes,
viz. 1. Our Theriaca Chymica. 2. Volatile Salt of Vipers. 3. Virginian Snakeroot.

LXXXIV. The Theriaca Chymica you may give from i. to i. either alone, or
dissolved in Angelica-water, or some Syrup or other fit Vehicle; it may be
given, 1. Upon receiving the Wound. 2. Morning and Evening daily. 3. If
Fainting, Swooning, or Convulsions are induced. 4. If there is present a
Vomiting, and it is constantly Vomited up, it is to be repeated till it will
stay.

LXXXV. The Volatile Salt of Vipers or of Rattle-snakes, which is inferior to no
other thing in the World, and may be given from i. ad i. three, four, or six
times a Day, or as often as need shall require; or instead thereof the Volatile
Spirit of the Viper, etc. which is the Volatile Salt dissolved in the Phlegm, and
is made exactly as you make Spirit of Hartshorn. Indeed all Volatile Animal
Salts, have a power to resist and destroy the Poison of Serpents of all kinds.

LXXXVI. The Virginia Snakeroot does incredible Cures of this kind: you may
give the Powder a i. ad i. in some fit Vehicles, twice or thrice a Day: or the
Tincture thereof extracted with Sp. Vini, a i. ad ii. in a Glass of Wine, twice
or thrice a Day: or the Elixir thereof extracted with the Powers of Angelica,
Rosemary, or Juniper Berries, in the same proportion. I Cured a Dog which was
bitten in the Foot with a Rattle-snake, by giving the Powder inwardly, in a
strong Decoction of it in Milk, and applying the green Root beaten to a
Cataplasm outwardly to the Wound, in less than three Days the Dog perfectly
recovered.

LXXXVII. These things being said, we will give you two Histories or
Observations of Cures of this kind, performed by two very knowing Men, viz.
Ambrose Paraeus, and Monsieur Charas, which are well worth the reading, and so
conclude our Discourse upon this Title.

LXXXVIII. Paraeus, lib. 20. cap. 23. says, A Man was bitten on the Hand (as he
was gathering Hops on a He dge) by an Adder or Viper: He sucked the Wound
immediately with his Mouth, thereby to ease the Pain, and draw out the Poison;
but as soon as the Tongue touched the Wound, presently it so swelled, that he
could not speak: His Arm swelled also, even to his Shoulder, and his Pains were
so sharp and acute, that he twice Swooned away in the presence of the
Surgeon.

LXXXIX. His Countenance was yellowish and livid, like to a Dead Man, so that
his Recovery was despaired of: yet his Mouth was washed with Theriaca dissolved
in White Wind, adding to it a little Aqua Vitae; the Arm was scarified with
many and deep Scarifications, and the Blood which was waterish, and sanious,
was suffered to flow forth plentifully from the Parts about the Sore; and the
Scarifications were washed with Mithridate and Theriaca, dissolved in Aqua
Vitae.

XC. The Patient was laid in his warm Bed, and made to sweat, but not suffered
to sleep, lest thereby, the Poison should have been drawn into the inward
Parts. These means so prevailed, that the next Day, all the malign Symptoms
vanished: wherefore to finish the Cure, I (says he) thought good that the Wound
should be kept long open and washed with Theriaca Andromachi; nor was I (says
he) deceived, for within a few Days after he recovered.

XCI. Charas in his new Experiments upon Vipers, cap. 1. has this Observation.
A certain Man by handling an enraged Viper was bitten on the lateral inside of
his right Thumb, with one of the great bent Teeth. The pricking was no more
than that of a Pin, it seemed not deep, and on the surface there was only a
very small hole, with a very little redness, so that it was not discernable but
by its Color: nor was there either on or about this little hole any sign of
the yellow Liquor contained in the Bags about the great Teeth, which is wont to
be cast upon the Wound when a Viper bites deep.

XCII. Strong Ligatures were made above the place bitten, the Part wounded was
scarified, and an Iron Spatula heat red hot, and often repeated, was held very
near to the pricked place, to keep the Pores open, and attract back, and draw
out some of the Poison: and Theriac. Androm. ii. was given in a Glass of Wine.

XCIII. In less than a quarter of an Hour after the biting, the Patient felt
some debility, and called for a Chair, he grew very pale, his Pulse grew quick,
low, and almost interrupted: after which followed Convulsive motions, and a
kind of Tetanos, for he had a stiffness of his whole Body, chiefly of his Neck,
and Muscles of his Head.

XCIV. He then complained of a great pain about his Navel; he was cold in his
extreme Parts, and in his Face; which was all over covered with little drops of
cold sweat; and his Lips, especially the lower, was also swelled: a while after
he went to Stool, and then swooned away.

XCV. At the same time he Vomited the Treacle before given, and all he had
eaten at Dinner, undigested; and he became so weak, that he was not able to get
up to his Chamber again, from whence he came down.

XCVI. And by reason of the quickness, weakness, lowness and inequality of his
Pulse, and his frequent swoonings, as well as his cold sweats, Viper Powder i.
was given him in Treacle-water and Carduus-water; and a great Cataplasm of
Theriaca Androm. was applied upon the Heart and Stomach.

XCVII. The Mixture he Vomited up presently; Powder of Vipers was then given in
some Orvietan; this he also Vomited up: during all this time, he had his
Senses, and the use of his Reason. This Vomiting not giving time to the
Remedies to be resolved, and communicate their Virtues to the Noble Parts, it
was thought proper to have recourse to the Volatile Salt of Vipers, because that
being exceeding Subtle, and Volatile, and very quickly transmitted to all the
Parts, even the most remote, the Patient might thence feel its Effects with
more speed and efficacy, than from all the other gross Medicines, which had
been cast up, as soon as they had been taken down, whereby they were made
ineffectual, by not imparting their Virtue to the Blood, where the necessity
required.

XCVIII. For this Cause-sake then, there was given of Salt of Vipers i. in
Treacle and Carduus Waters: and about a Quart of this Mixture was given him: he
kept it a little while, and then cast up a part of it, mixed with store of
Viscous Phlegm. He took another like quantity of the same Mixture, which he
also kept for some time, and then Vomited up as much of it as might be
remaining in his Stomach, and therewith much Phlegm.

XCIX. More of the same Composition was still continued to be given him, as
fast as he Vomited it up; he had also several Clysters, to mitigate the violent
and rebellious Pains, which he felt in his Belly about his Navel.

C. His Lips remained yet swelled, his Pulse ill, his Sweats cold, and his
Faintings continued very long; but persisting in the use of the Volatile Salt of
Vipers, his Vomiting at length ceased, and he kept the Eighth Dose in his
Stomach, which was given him about Four Hours after he received the Wound.

CI. From that time the Symptoms lessened, and the coldness began gradually to
retire, and give place to the natural Heat, which was manifestly restored about
Five Hours after the biting, his Pulse also returned, and was even and strong,
but somewhat high.

CII. I left him not ( says Charas) before the Mortal Symptoms ceased, and then
he was carried to his Lodgings, whither I accompanied him, and he was put to
Bed, and there was given him a Mixture made of Confect. Hyacinth, Confect.
Alkermes, A. i. Syrup of Limons i. Carduus-water iv. mixed together: it was
given him at three times, from Three Hours to Three Honrs.

CIII. He had also Citrons to smell to, and now and then he took some slices of
them with Sugar: he took also good Broths, and drank Ptisan made with Roots of
Scorzonera, and Raspings of Hartshorn, made pleasant with Syrup of Limons: a
little Wine was also given him sometimes: and Confectio Alkermes was dissolved
sometimes in his Broth, sometimes in his Ptisan.

CIV. During all the great Accidents or Symptoms, his Finger was not changed,
nor any swelling upon it; but that began when those Symptoms ceased: the Pains
about his Navel still continued, but a little abated, for which reason Clysters
were prescribed: his Belly was a little stiff, but not swelled, his Tongue
whitish, not dry, his Eyes faint and wan, his looks pale, and his Lips still
tumified.

CV. The Tumor of the Finger extended it self that Night over the whole Hand,
which was often anointed with Matthiolus his Oil of Scorpions, mixed with
Hungary-water: but for all this anointing, the Tumor went forwards to the Arm
the next Day, with pain and redness, and ascended to the Eye.

CVI. Then Fomentations made of the Roots of Angelica, of Master-wort, of
Carline Thistle, and of Birth-wort, with the Tops of Centory, Calamint,
Hypericon, Scordium, and Wormwood, boiled in White Wind, which were continued
for some time, with anointings with Oil of Srorpions between whiles.

CVII. This was done with great Care, but no great Effect succeeded upon it,
and he again Vomited up even his Broth; but this Vomiting continued not, yet
the Pain in his Belly remained obstinate, and the swelling, and redness of the
Hand and Arm still increased: and from the beginning of the third Day, it
seized on the Shoulder of the same side, descending to the Arm-pit, upon the
whole Breast, and all the adjacent Parts, even to the whole Region of the
Liver, the continual use of the Fomentation, and Oil of Scorpions doing nothing.

CVIII. And since the External Remedies proved succesless, we had recourse to
Internal Ones: In the Evening of the third Day, Powder of Contra-yerva ad i.
was given in Cordial Waters, mixed with as much of Confect. Alkermes, for all
which, we saw no abatement of the Redness, Tumor, or Pain; but on the contrary,
the swelling seemed to seize on the Left side.

CIX. For this reason, we found it necessary to return to the use of our first
inward Remedy, the Volatile Salt of Vipers, which had an apparent good
Operation, and struck at the Root of the Mischief: Thus in the Morning of the
fourth Day there was given Salt of Vipers ss. in Carduus-water iv. he was well
covered, and made to Sweat.

CX. The Dose wrought according to expectation, for the Sick sweat not only
abundantly, but found also a great amendment in all the ill Symptoms which
remained. His Pain about his Navel was almost insensible, the swelling of his
Lips, and that which was in the Region of the Liver, Breast, and Armpits,
vanished; the other also of the Shoulder, Arm, and Hand, was much abated,
together with the Redness and Pain.

CXI. Finding the Symptoms thus to abate upon giving the last Dose, the next
Morning another like Dose was given him, and all the Symptoms still much more
abated, he sweating powerfully withal. And though the Patient found himself
exceedingly amended, yet the next Morning he had such another Dose again, and
the Morning following one Dose more, whereby all the Symptoms vanished, and
were perfectly taken away.

CXII. In the interim there was applied to the Finger, a little Emplaster to
cicatrize the Scarifications which were at first made, and were healed in a few
Days after. Thus in about a Weeks time, the Patient went abroad, and did his
usual Business, and was as well as if he had never been bitten of the Viper at
all.

CXIII. From this Observation, which deserves to be kept ad perpetuam rei
memoriam, and written in Letters of Gold, the mighty Virtues, Power, and Force
of the Volatile Salt of Vipers is manifest, in overcoming the Poison which so
violently exercised its fury over the Natural Heat, and all the Noble Parts:
and its activity and penetration is manifest, in pursuing the Poison, and
expelling it from the remotest parts of the Body, where it had fortified it
self, and endeavored to regain the place it had lost, and where, in the mean
time it seemed to despise and profligate, all other the most generous and
powerful Remedies.

CXIV. And now we are speaking of the Volatile Salt of Vipers, (though it is
foreign to this present Discourse, yet) we will give you one other Observation
of the same Charas, of a certain Man who had such a vehement and continual pain
of the Head, upon the Forehead near the Temples, which was even so doubled and
redoubled, that he could not chew, nor so much as open his Mouth to swallow a
little Broth, but with extreme Pain and Anguish: and though all things were done
to him that could be imagined, as Bleeding in the Arm and Foot, Purging often,
Frictions of Neck and Shoulders, Vesicatories and Attractives behind the Ears,
opening the Temporal Artery, exhibition of powerful Sudorificks, which were
continued Morning and Evening for many Days together, by which he sweat very
plentifully, pulling out one of his upper Teeth which was sound, thinking
thereby to give some vent to the Humor, etc. yet these means were used in vain,
and left the Patient as bad as they found him.

CXV. At length it was resolved, that a Dose of the Volatile Salt of Vipers
should be given him, in Wine: this one Dose presently removed all the Pain,
which caused as great a wonder in the Assistants and Standers by, as
satisfaction to the Patient. And by this so surprising an Effect, with what
has been said aforegoing, the power, forces, efficacy, and virtue of this Salt
is better demonstrated, than by all the Rhetoric and powerful Reason
imaginable to be offered in the World. Action demonstrates better than Words;
and the Effects of things, more than the most florid Harangues.

IV. Of the Biting of the Tarantula.
CXVI. The Tarantula is a great overgrown Spider, very frequent in Apulia,
called in Greek (...). and in Latin Phalangium and Tarantula, from Taranta, an
ancient City of Apulia; but they are inhabitants of other places besides
Apulia, for I saw several of them in Carolina, a Province of Florida.

CXVII. The effects of the Biting of the Tarantula might almost seem fabulous,
if it were not attested by great Authorities, as Matthiolus and Epiphanius;
besides whom Ferdinandus, Kircherus, and the most faithful Gassendus, declare
themselvee to be Eyewitnesses thereof: besides, it is a thing not only known,
but common in Apulia.

CXVIII. This kind of Insect is most frequent in Summertime, and many times
bites the Countryman, leaving a Venom or Poison behind it: and the Biting is
known by sickness at Stomach, a pain immediately coming upon the the bitten
Part; with swelling, and itching, which in a little time will be in various
parts of the Body.

CXIX. Presently after the Bite, there will be also in various places a
numbness and trembling, Convulsions, a loosning of the Members, with other
Convulsive Symptoms; a great diminution of strength, and other wonderful
effects, as Matthiolus and Ferdinandus have related.

CXX. These Authors have not reported it to be of any great danger, being more
troublesome than any thing else: but I have been informed from one who has been
an Eyewitness of the Distemper, that one of his Acquaintance, who had been
bitten, and had too long neglected the Cure, was afterward affected with an
incurable Trembling and Palsy, which no means that for several Years had been
continually tried, could either take off, or relieve.

CXXI. The Cause. Without controversy, there is a poisonous Infection given
with the Bite; which affects not only the Bloody Mass and Vital Spirit, but
passes withal into the Lympha and Nervous Juice; thereby disturbing the Animal
Spirits, by which it is presently conveyed through the whole Human Body,
affecting all parts.

CXXII. This Venom multiplying it self (like Leven in the lump) and flowing
every where, the Animal Spirits are presently brought into Confusion; and being
irregularly and inordinately moved, they induce Convulsions, or Convulsive
Motions; which are accompanied with Pain and Languishing, sometimes with
Contractures, and sometimes with Resolutions, or Loosning of the contained
Parts, and other Paralytick Disaffections.

CXXIII. The Cure. In the Country where this is common, the People have an
admirable and wonderful Remedy which never fails, and this is by Music. Those
who are bitten by a Tarantula, though they are very sick, yet as soon as they
hear pleasing Music, they are eased of their Pain and Sickness.

CXXIV. For upon the hearing of the Music, says Matthiolus, they fall a
leaping, and begin to dance and jump about; and continue it for a long time, as
if they ailed nothing; but if it happens that the Music gives over never so
little a time, they immediately fall to the Ground, and return to their former
Pains and Sickness, unless by the incessant Music, they dance and leap, 'till
the Poison is wholly shaken off, and vanished.

CXXV. For this end therefore many Musicians are hired, and they continually
play, taking their course by turns; one being weary, another beginning to play;
that the noise and Music may be without intermission, and that those who are
bitten may Dance so long, 'till they are perfectly cured.

CXXVI. And, says Ferdinandus, poor People do waste almost all they have in
hiring these Musicians, who scatter themselves up and down all the Country; for
this only purpose, to play to such as are thus bitten, where the People leap
and dance about the Villages, in public Streets and Fields, for a Day, two,
three, or more, yea a Week or more together, 'till the Cure succeeds; which
it is probable, may be sooner and better accomplished with some Tunes, than with
other-some; as Kircherus and Gassendus have intimated from their own
Observation.

CXXVII. For they assert, that these distempered People are not affected or
excited, indifferently with any Music; but with some particular and certain
kinds of Tunes; and that they leap and dance more to some Measures, than to
several others.

CXXVIII. And truly good Music, by its Harmony and Sweetness, does congregate
and ease, or quiet the dissipated and disturbed, or restless Spirits, (witness
that of David to King Saul;) and disposes them in such an order, that instead
of tumultuating, whereby Convulsions are induced, they move harmoniously, and
give liberty to the poisonous Gas to evaporate and transpire: for by the length
and continuity of the motion of the Body, and all its parts, the fury and rage
of the Poison is worn out; and the Spirits being much wearied, at length rest
themselves, and the Patient wholly shakes off his Madness.

CXXIX. As to the Medical Cure, you may, as to Externals, use strait Ligature
two or three Inches above the Wound if it may be, and Scarification, or
Cupping-giasses therewith: also Vesicatories, or red-hot Irons held very near,
are useful for extracting the Venom: so also to anoint the Spot with Oils of
Vitriol or Sulphur, and Medicaments which are of a vehement, strong, and
attractive force, are immediately, and with all speed to be applied.

CXXX. A Cataplasm made of Phalangium, or Spiderwort, and presently applied
upon the Bite, is said to be a Specific, and to attract or draw forth the
Poison, after an admirable manner: and Authors say, that this Plant is found to
be an effectual Cure for the Poison of that kind of Spider called Phalangium,
or Tarantula.

CXXXI. You must avoid Bleeding and Purging, and only give inwardly Sudorificks
and volatile Alcalies; as Spirit and volatile Salt of Hartshorn, of Ox and
Sheeps Blood, of Urine, of Sal Armoniack, of Ox-horns, and of Vipers; giving a
ss. ad i. and Sweating well upon it, and repeating the Dose twice a day, 'till
the Patient is well.

CXXXII. Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, or of any other Creature ii. Mithridate
jss. Saffron gr. xii. mix, and make a Dose, to be given in a Glass of Wine.
Where note, that the Salt of Vipers in this case, is beyond compare; and all
things which move Sweat, open the Pores, and are Neurotick, are proper to be
exhibited.

V. Of the Stinging of Scorpions, Hornets, etc.
CXXXIII. This Title does not properly belong to this Chapter, yet because it
has some affinity with it, in respect to the Malignity that a Sting infuses
into a Wound, we thought good to add it by way of Appendix, and to treat of it
in this place.

CXXXIV. The Signs. Stinging may be known by the Sense of Feeling, and the
Creature that stings, by the Sight. There is exquisite Pain, more especially if
it is done by a Scorpion or Hornet, and the Pain is sometimes so great as to
cause Inflammation, Tumor, Apostemation, Convulsion, Gangren, and
Mortification, according to the place which may be unhappily stung, and
carelessness of looking after it.

CXXXV. The Prognostics. If a Nerve or Tendon is stung, the pain is the
greater, and Convulsions are presently excited, with Inflammation and Tumor,
Trembling over the whole Body, Fainting and Swooning, cold Sweats, etc.

CXXXVI. If an Artery is struck by a Scorpion, it infuses Poison into the
Blood; the place looks livid, and without a speedy course is taken, an
universal congelation of the Blood follows, and the Patient dies in a few days,
sometimes in a few hours. Paraeus says the stinging of a Scorpion is mortal,
unless Remedies are applied in time.

CXXXVII. And this I believe was the case of one whom I knew, who was wounded
by the sting of a Scorpion, just upon the Pulse of of the right Wrist: the pain
was not extreme at first, but afterward the Hand and Arm swelled, grew livid
and full of pain, which was extended to the Shoulder, Armpit, and Breast, with a
vehement Colic, or pain of the Belly. There being no body near which had
Skill, nothing was done 'till the next day; at which time Fainting, cold
Sweats, and Convulsions seized the Patient; the Surgeon being come, he
endeavored to let the Sick Blood, but in vain; for the Blood was so
coagulated, that he could not bleed: he lay in this condition, without any
help, (for the same things were applied outwardly, and given inwardly: yet as
they were advised without skill, so they were without effect) the Patient
continued growing worse and worse, and on the third day in the morning died;
being dead, the Body was opened, and all the Blood in the Heart, Vena Cava, and
other Vessels was found coagulated, and of a blackish color, etc.

CXXXVIII. But this is not general or universal, for many stung with Scorpions
live and do well, and it is rare that any one stung by them dies: but it is
true, that many great and evil Symptoms oftentimes follow upon their stinging,
and sometimes very hazardous accidents ensue.

CXXXIX. The stinging of a Hornet is less dangerous, and yet less dangerous are
the stingings of Wasps or Bees: to these, if any reasonable means are applied,
they recover upon the spot almost, the vehemence of the pain being upon the
first making the Wound.

CXL. The Cause. The Cause of this exquisit Pain and evil Symptoms, arises from
the Poison or Malignity contained in the Sting; for the Sting is a kind of
hollow Pipe, filled with a malign and acrimonious Liquor, the small end of
which seems to be stopped or covered with a small thin Cuticle; or a congelation
of its internal Juice; this Sting entering into the Flesh of any Creature, the
venomous Juice contained within it, or in the Parts adjacent to it, is ejected
through into the place where the Sting enters, and there left in the substance of
the Flesh, Nerves, Tendons, Membranes, Arteries or Veins, whence come the
Accidents which ensue.

CXLI. And so according to the dignity and sensibility of the Parts stung, such
are the Symptoms, either more or less, in number; or greater or lesser in
magnitude, sensibility, and danger: if a Nerve or Tendon is hurt, the pain is
more acute; if an Artery or Vein, the Blood may be in danger of coagulation,
especially if the mischief was done by a Scorpion.

CXLII. The Cure. If one is stung by a Scorpion, inwardly Sudorificks and
Alexipharmicks are to be given; Volatile Animal Salts, as Volatile Salt of
Serpents, Vipers, Rattle-snakes, or of the Blood of Beasts, etc. mixed with
Mithridate, Our Theriaca Chymica, Juice of Alkermes, Saffron, and other the
like things; and Sweating ought frequently to be provoked.

CXLIII. Outwardly, Anodyns and strong Attractives are to be applied, and
Cupping-glasses, with Scarification: the Pain is eased, and the Stinging cured
by taking a Scorpion or Scorpions, beating them, and applying them to the place
stung, as Dioscorides says. The Oil of Scorpions is both an usual and certain
Remedy, being anointed upon the place. Snails beaten with their Shells, and
laid thereon, presently allay the Pain. Sulphur vive in powder mixed with
Yurpentine and applied, is extraordinary good: so also a Cataplasm of
Rue-leaves laid thereto. The Milky Juice of the Figtree-leaves, or unripe Figs
may be laid upon the Wound: or a Cataplasm of Calamint, with juice of Rue and
Barley-flower. A Cataplasm made of Briony-roots boiled, and mixed with Sulphur
and old Oil, is approved; or made of the Herb Scorpioides, with juice of the
same Herb, Mithridate and Barley-flower, than which few things are more
commended.

CLXIV. The Cure of the Stinging of Hornets, Wasps and Bees, is more easy: the
Sting if it remains in, is to be taken forth; and the Place stung, is to be
sucked hard with the Mouth; or Potashes may be mixed with Leven and Oil-olive,
and applied: and if it can be conveniently, the Part may be put into Water, as
hot as can be endured, for an Hour together, and at last washed with Vinegar,
or Salt-brine. The milky juice of unripe Figs mixed with Honey, or Mithridate,
is approved of; so also a Cataplasm made of Hornets, Wasps or Bees, beaten in a
Mortar, and applied.

CXLV. A Cataplasm of Cresses, eases the Pain, and discusses the Tumor: so also
a Mixture of Ox or Cow dung mixed with Oil, Vinegar, Honey, Mithridate, and
Salt, and applied very hot. An Emplaster made with Turpentine, Frankincense,
Wax, A. i. Oil of Hornets, Wasps, or Bees, q.s. is a famous thing: and not
inferior is a Mixture of Turpentine, Mithridate, and powder of Sulphur vive:
Cloths also also dipped in a Mixture and and Dissolution of Honey, Salt, and
Vinegar, and applied exceeding hot, not only ease the pain, and discuss the
Tumor, but also perfects the Cure.

CXLVI. An Observation of the Biting of a Viper, made by James Wass, a
Surgeon of the City of London. One Samuel Hilden, of Charlton near
Greenwich, of about 25 years of age was bitten by a Viper on the eighth of July
1695, it was on the upper part of the Forefingers end. Coming to me (says he)
about 3 hours after the Bit was given, I found an Escar upon the place of the
Wound, so hard as I could scarcely make an Incision upon it with an
Incision-knife: it was opened about an Inch an half, or nearly two Inches in
length, from the root of the Nail to the middle Joint; to which I applied a
Digestive mixed with a little Venice-Treacle; his Hand and Arm were mightily
swelled, as big as the Skin could hold, of a dark purple or livid color: the
Pain was vehement, and general over his whole Body, and the Poison withal
mightily affected his Head; his whole Hand and Arm, even above the Shoulder,
were well bathed with Camphorated Spirit of Wine; and inwardly a very strong
Tincture of Radix Serpentaria was given, a full Spoonful at a time, in a Glass
of Canary; which being repeated every four hours, for about forty-eight hours,
induced a violent Sweating, by which the Malignity was fully cast out, so that
the very Sheets were stained yellow with the Humor sweat forth; and in a weeks
time after, he was seen well upon the Exchange, London.

CHAP. XVIII. Of POISONED WOVNDS.
I. BY Poisoned Wounds, we here only understand, Wounds made with Poisoned
Weapons or Instruments; and they are called in Greek, (...), plur. (...). in
Latin, Vulnus venenatum, pl. Vulnera venenata: and in English, Poisoned Wound
or Wounds, or, Wounds made with Poisoned Weapons.

II. The Signs. There is an extreme great sense of Pain, or sharp Pricking in
the wounded place, and a strange kind of Swelling, with Acrimony and
Inflammation.

III. The natural color of the Part is much altered, and becomes of a livid or
blackish color; and instantly thereupon grievous Symptoms (for which no other
Reason can be given, than that of Poison) do succeed upon the Wound.

IV. Through the whole Body also, there is perceived and felt a vehement Heat and
Burning; sometimes a kind of Stupidity, and straitness of Breathing, and
sometimes a Palpitation of the Heart, Trembling, Fainting, Swooning, Vomiting
of Choler, and the Hiccup.

V. And as the Poison takes a deeper possession of the Vitals, the Pulse grows
weak, there is a Retention of Urine, Sickness at Heart; and a little before
Death, cold Sweats, Coldness of the whole Body, Vomiting, Pain in the Stomach
and Bowels, and a frequency of Convulsions.

VI. For immediately upon the Poison being received in, by the Veins and
Arteries, it presently diffuses or spreads it self through all the Body,
coagulates the Blood and Lympha, and if not stopped in its career, contaminates
the whole Humane Frame.

VII. The Prognostics. If the Patient is not tender and fearful, and the
Poison has not passed farther than the Part wounded, and it is remote from any
principal Part, or great Vessels, there is the greater hope of Cure.

VIII. But no Wound made by a poisoned Weapon, let it be in what part of the
Body soever, can be absolutely secure, or free from danger: for Poison in its
own proper nature, is such an absolute Enemy to the nature of Man, that it
always threatens destruction.

IX. A small Wound thus poi^, oftentimes br^ Death; (...) otherwi^ great Wounds
(...) ^oisoned, may be healed.

X. So much the Wound is nearer to the Heart, or Brain, so much the more
dangerous it is; the farther off, the less danger.

XI. By so much as the Symptoms are more in number, greater in effects, and
more contumacious in not yielding to Remedies, by so much the more dangerous
they are, and for the most part mortal.

XII. But if the Symptoms are few, and those not grievous, but yielding to
Remedies, there is so much the greater hopes of Recovery and Safety.

XIII. If Remedies prevail nothing, but the Symptoms continue; as cold Sweats,
Fainting, Swooning, Coldness of the Body, Convulsions, Failing of the Pulse,
etc. the hopes of Recovery are past, for Death it self comes galloping.

XIV. If after the using of proper Means, and taking of Antidotes, the Patient
has ease, and the Symptoms begin to abate, there is hopes that the Poison will
be overcome, and that the Sick will recover.

XV. The Cure. The first Intention of the Cure of Poisoned Wounds is, to hinder
the Poison from penetrating inwardly to the the more interior parts. The second
Intention is, that its power and strength may be weakened and destroyed by
Alexipharmicks; which being done The Third Intention is the Healing it up, as
another ordinary Wound.

XVI. We ought then first carefully to see if any part of the poisoned Weapon
remains yet in the Wound; for if so, you must hasten with all possible speed to
take it forth by Manual Operation; otherwise all our Attempts of Curing will be
in vain.

XVII. If it cannot be so taken forth, you must apply Attractive Emplasters,
Cerats, or Cataplasms mixed; which things have a power in them of drawing forth
the Poison, with the extraneous Bodies themselves.

XVIII. And that the Poison may not penetrate to the more inward parts,
especially to the Heart; you must follow the Advice of Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 27.
viz. Supra Vulnus id Membrum deligandum est, non tamen nimis vehementer, ne
Membrum torpeat. That Member is to be bound up above the Wound, yet
notwithstanding it is not to be overhard bound, lest the Part should become
numbed, or lose all its sense of Feeling; or that it should be seized with a
Gangren, which many times comes from the unskilfulness of the Artist. After
which, you must by Alexipharmick Attractives draw out the Poison to the more
external Parts.

XIX. The Ancients to draw out the Venom, used to cause the Wound to be sucked;
of which Celsus in the place afore-cited thus writes: Si ne id quidem est, (hoc
est, si desit Cucurbitula, vel simile quid) Homo adhibendus est, qui Vulnus
exsugat. If indeed that is not done, (to wit, if a Cupping-glass, or some
suchlike thing is wanting) then a Man is to be gotten, that may suck the Poison
out of the Wound.

XX. But indeed Cupping-glasses with Scarification, draw out the Poison more
powerfully: after which, the Wound may be washed with warm Vinegar or Wine, in
which Mithridate has been dissolved.

XXI. If the Poison has not passed farther than the Part wounded, and if the
Patient will admit of it, and that it is not Nervous, or in a Nervous Part; the
most effectual Remedy is the Actual Cautery: for Fire does by its potency both
destroy the Poison, and hinder its penetration into the more internal parts.

XXII. If the Poison has penetrated deeply into the Body, the Actual Cautery is
not to be used; for that would be to add Sorrow to Grief.

XXIII. If where the Actual Cautery might be applied, the Patient will not
admit of it, then the Potential Cautery, or Caustic Medicaments, are to be
applied.

XXIV. These things being done, care is to be taken that the Escar may be made
to fall off as soon as may be; which that it may speedily do, you must make
deep Scarifications, which may reach even to the sound Part; then you must
apply Medicines which may procure the fall thereof, that the Poison may have a
Vent to come forth.

XXV. After which, the Wound is not presently to be healed: but an Onion beaten
with Salt, or wild Garlic, or Rue, are to be applied upon the Wound; or
Vnguentum Nicotianae, of it it self, or Vng. Basilicon mixed with a sixth or
quarter-part of red Precipitate, or Turbith-mineral, and a little of Our
Theriaca Chymica, or Mithridate.

XXVI. To the adjacent Parts, you may apply Oxycroceum; and other Attractive
Emplasters made of Gum Elemi, Opopanax and Sagapenum, as Diachylon cum Gummi,
etc.

XXVII. Let the Sick sleep sparingly, and use a slender Diet; eating such Food
as is easy of digestion, and yield a good Juice.

XXVIII. But if the Patient will not admit of Caustic Medicaments, these
following things as are to be applied; as Onions, wild Garlic, Rue,
Doves-dung, Walnuts, with Garlic, Salt, and Honey; which whether inwardly
taken, or outwardly applied, are able to free the Body from Poison.

XXIX. And to the former things you may add, Angelica-root, root of Masterwort,
of Contrayerva, and Virginia Snake-root; roots of Elecampane, Radish, and
Birthwort long and round; Hypericon, Swallowort, Dittany, Carduus ben.
Scabious, Gentian, Vipers-grass; and all other Simples whatsoever, that have a
power and faculty of attracting Poison.

XXX. It is also to be observed, that Medicaments that are very sharp, are not
to be used to Nervous Parts, lest they excite Pain and Convulsions: and
therefore such things are to be applied, which only draw forth Poison by the
simple property of their substance.

XXXI. And where sharp Medicines are or may be used, yet they are not to be
continued long; but after they have been applied for a day or two, then others
more mild are to be chosen. Mithridate, and Theriaca Andromachi, also Our
Theriaca Chymica, either alone of themselves, or mixed with Oil of Scorpions,
juice of Rue, or juice of Vipers-grass, are of singular use to be applied.

XXXII. This Ointment or Cataplasm is commended by some. Oil-olive, Honey, A.
ii. Quicklime in fine powder, roots of round Birthwort, Rue dried,
Angelica-root, Zedoary, all in fine powder, A.i. mix them, and apply it.

XXXIII. Or this. Onions, Garlic, Leeks, A. ii. boil to softness, and beat
them together; to which add Oil of Scorpions, Mithridate, A. i. roots of
Dragons, of Masterwort, of round Birthwort, and of Florentine-Orrice, A. ii.
mix them.

XXXIV. Or this of Guido. Assa foetida, Galbanum, Opopanax, Sagapenum, Myrrh,
Pepper, Subphur, A. jss. Doves-dung, Ducks-dung, A. ii. Calamint, Horse-mint,
A. i. dissolve the Gums in Wine, then add the Oil and Honey, with the other
things in powder, and make an Emplaster.

XXXV. Or, Roots of Dragons, of round Birthwort, A.i. Rue, Scordium, Tobacco,
all in fine powder, A. ii. roots of Angelica, and of white Dittany, Dittany of
Creet, A. iii. Oil of Turpentine ii. Frankincense, Myrrh, Sulphur vive, A. ss.
Ship-Pitch, Wax, A. q.s. mix, and make an Emplaster.

XXXVI. Or, Potashes, Quicklime in fine powder, A. ii. pulp of xx Figs, Rue,
Tobacco, Wormwood, Southernwood; roots of Angelica, round Birthwort, Zedoary,
Garlic, Onions, A. i. in fine powder; Goats-dung in fine powder, Oil of
Euphorbium, Oil of Scorpions, A. iii. Wine-vinegar lbi. Honey lbjss. mix, and
make an Emplaster.

XXXVII. Or, Propolis, Turpentine, juices of Swallowort and Scordium, A. ii.
Tobacco in powder, Zedoary, Orrice, Birthwort, all in fine Powder, red
Precipitate, A. ii. Oil of Hypericon, of Scorpions, of Turpentine, A. ss. mix,
and make an Ointment.

XXXVIII. Or, Tops of Hypericon, Rue, A. Mii. Carduus Ben. Scordium,
Swallowwort, Tobacco, A. Mj. roots of Dragons, of Angelica, and Bryony, A. ii.
beat all well together in a Mortar, and make a Cataplasm, applying it very hot.

XXXIX. Or, Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Gum Elemi, Galbanum, Liquid Storax, A. ss.
Myrrh, Sulphur Vive, Oil of Hypericon, Oil of Scorpions, A. ii. Euphorbium, red
Precipitate, A. i. Pitch, Propolis, Turpentine, A. q.s. mix, and make a Cerat.

XL. The second Intention, is the destreying the Poison by Alexipharmicks, or
Counter-poisons which may fortify and defend the Heart; such are the
Bezoar-stone, Animal Bezoar, and Bezoar Minerale, Mithridate, Venice Treacle,
but chiefly Our Theriaca Chymica, all Volatile Animal Salts, the chief of which
are Salt of Man's Blood, and Salt of Vipers, than which last, nothing is yet
known of greater force; these things may be given in their due Dose in some
proper Syrup, or Cordial-water, such as are Our Aqua Bezoartica, or Spir.
Cordialis.

XLI. And outwardly the Heart may be guarded, by bathing it with Powers of
Amber, of Juniper Berries, of Camomil, of Sage, of Limons, or of Rosemary,
laying over it a Plaster of Theriaca Chymica, or Mithridate.

XLII. The third and last Intention, is the healing up of the Wound, which you
may do with this Ointment. Gum Elemi, Tobacco in Powder, A. iii. Beef Suet, Oil
Olive, Wax, Frankincense, Turpentine, A. iv. Juice of Tobacco viii. mix, and
make an Ointment, S.A. The rest of the Cure, you must perform according to the
general Rules.

XLIII. But if you find from the continuance of the dangerous Symptoms, as Cold
Sweats, Faintings, Swoonings, etc. that the Poison has already penetrated to
the more inward Parts, especially to the Heart, the wounded Part is not much to
be meddled with, but the Cure is by Internal Alexipharmicks and Sudorificks, to
defend and save the whole from the Power of the Malignity.

CHAP. XIX. Of WOVNDS by GVN-SHOT in General.
I. THese kinds of Wounds were wholly unknown to the Ancient Greeks and Latins,
and therefore they have no proper Names by which we can call them: The Moderns
who have wrote in the Latin Tongue, call them Vulnus vel Vulnera Sclopetarum
globuli; and we in English, Gunshot Wounds.

II. There has been a great Contention among Authors concerning Gunshot
Wounds, and many the Arguments pro and con, whether they are Poisonous, or have
any degree of Fire or Burning in them, or not; some maintaining the
Affirmative, others the Negative, which the Learned Sennertus in his Med.
Pract. lib. 5. par. 4. cap. 20. has Excellently summed up, and given the
Decisive Judgment concerning it, adhering to the Negative Voice: The whole
Discourse is too long to be here inserted, they that desire to read it, may
have recourse to the Author himself, where they may have much Satisfaction.

III. That (says Wiseman) which might be the occasion of their suspecting a
Burning and a Poisonous Quality, was the deadly Color of these Wounds, which
in those early Days, when the Invention of Guns was Novel, surprised them, they
looking not unlike Poisoned and Burnt Wounds.

IV. Where the Bullet pierces (says he) it extinguishes the Natural Heat, and
the Lips of the Wound are livid or blackish; and if they be not rationally
dressed, they inflame, and are accompanied with a Tumor; and Blisters frequently
rise about them: in this Condition the Wound is commonly the first Day, and so
to the seventh; and if not succored, it Gangrens, and so the Patient commonly
Dies.

V. In former Times Artists were deceived by the appearance of the Wounds, and
so dressed them as Poisonous Wounds, which occasioned them so to write of them,
and in their way of managing of them, it was no wonder that they were so
difficult to digest and Cure.

VI. And in Our Times ( says Wiseman) though they are not called Poisoned Wounds,
yet it is a difficult thing to dissuade many of Our Chirurgions, from dressing
them with Tinctures of Myrrh, and Honey of Roses, and thrusting in of great
Tents; by which way of dressing, these kinds of Wounds have been found
undigested on the tenth day.

VII. These lesser fleshy Wounds being undigested, at last Gangren, and it is
not to be wondered at: I will (says he) show you the Experiment every Day in a
Fontanel or Issue made with a Caustic: If you cut through the Escar, and put a
Pea in the middle of it, with Tincture of Myrrh, and Honey of Roses, as some
dress Gunshot Wounds, and the next two or three days after, when you dress it
again, it will be to your sight not unlike a Gunshot Wound: if you continue
your dressing with a Pea, and your Tincture of Myrrh, if it does not Gangren,
yet it will be inflamed, and slow in digestion; which is from the improper
Applications.

VIII. For if this Escar had been dressed with Emollients and Digestives, as
ought to be done, it would separate with Digestion in the worst habit of Body;
and so it will in Gunshot Wounds with little distemper or difficulty, if the
Extraneous Bodies be but timely Extracted.

IX. If therefore Gunshot Wounds be rightly dressed, they will as easily digest
and heal, as any Complicated Wound; and what is said of Gunshot Wounds is to
be understood, when at Sea, of a Wound by a Splinter; which though it may not
have force enough to make a Wound, yet oft-times bruises the Skin to the Flesh,
so forcibly as to extinguish the Natural Heat, and make it black.

X. In this Case, if it is dressed with Spir. Vini, and Ung. Aegyptiacum, or lapt
up with a warm Stuph, it will grow black, dry, and parcht, and become an Escar;
and the Humors which flow plentifully to it will cause an Inflammation, with
Tumor; and an Apostemation is the best which can be expected underneath the
Escar, and consequently it will terminate in a hollow Ulcer; but for the most
part it Corrupts and Gangrens.

XI. Whereas if this Contused Escar is dressed with Lenients, according to that
Aphorism of Hippocrates, Omne quod contusum, necesse est ut putrescat and in
Pus vertatur: viz. All that which is bruised must putrefie, and be converted
into Matter: as with Vng. Basilicon cum Oleo Liliorum, etc. and the Parts about
Embrocated with Oil of Roses mixed with the white of an Egg and Vinegar, and a
Defensative applied over all to prevent defluxion, the Escar would separate as
easily as those made by a Caustic in an Issue, and afterward be incarnated
and cicatrized with a great deal of Ease to the Patient.

XII. By what has been said, it appears what the Nature of these Wounds is, to
wit, that they are only with very great Contusion, and Tearing of those Parts
through which the Bullet passes. And though the Part at a near distance may be
burnt by the Flame of the Gunpowder, yet this belongs not unto the Wound it
self, nor is the Part burnt within: and though it is granted, that Bullets may
possibly be Poisoned, yet this is no ways Essential unto these Wounds, but
merely Accidental.

XIII. Wounds then made by Gunshot, are the most Complicate sort of Wounds;
for there is not only a solution of Continuity, but there is conjoined with
them, Contusion, Rubbing, Tearing in a vehement manner, and sometimes Fractures
of the Bones: to which may be added, sometimes various Accidents, as
Hemorrhage, vehement Pain, Inflammation, Erysipelas, Convulsion, Fever,
Delirium, Palsy, Fainting and Swooning, Sinuous Ulcers, Gangrens, and
Sphacelus.

XIV. The Differences. They are taken, 1. From the magnitude of the Wound, as
it is either great or small, deep or superficial.

XV. 2. From the Part affected, the Skin and Flesh being sometimes only
wounded; sometimes the Nerves and Tendons, sometimes the Arteries and Veins,
and sometimes the Bones are broken. Or thus; The Wound is made either in the
fleshy Parts, or in the fleshy and Spermatick Parts both: The Spermatick Parts
as they are called, are either soft or hard, the soft are the Membranes,
Nerves, Tendons, and Ligaments; the hard are only Cartilages and Bones. The
Membranes may be divided and bruised. The Nerves, Tendons, and Ligaments may be
contused and torn. The Bones may be fractured, by being broken transverse, or
by fissure, or into bits; which last is that which Gunshot most produces.

XVI. 3. From the Modus or Manner; sometimes the whole Body is wounded,
sometimes a part only: sometimes the Bullet sticks in the Wound, sometimes it
passes quite through: sometimes it penetrates into the Body, sometimes it
carries into the Body with it some Extraneous Matter.

XVII. The Signs. What Parts are wounded, are to be discovered by putting in
the Probe, or else from the site of the Wound by Anatomical Deductions: If the
Nervous or Tendinous Parts are hurt, there will be manifest and vehement pain:
If the great Arteries and Veins, a mighty Hemorrhage; yet sometimes the Part
being much contused, the Lips afterward quickly swell, and oftentimes so much,
as to stop in a great measure the flowing of the Blood.

XVIII. These Wounds are generally Orbicular, and either of a blue or livid
Color, or of a blue mixed with green, or of a Violet Color: Sometimes the
Wound it self is black, and the Parts adjacent to it livid.

XIX. There is a heat sometimes in the Part, which arises from the quick and
vehement passing of the Bullet, making a great Contusion of the wounded Parts.

XX. There is also a feeling of the Blow, as if a Stone, or some other heavy
thing was flung against, or entering into the Part.

XXI. If the Wound was made by a Poisoned Bullet, the Color of the Flesh is
more wan and livid, than otherwise it would be; there will be a heaviness and
sluggishness of the whole Body, a Trembling, a Palpitation of the Heart,
Faintings, Swoonings, and sometimes Convulsions, and other like Symptoms to
these.

XXII. The Color of the Wound and Parts adjacent will be ill, as if tending to
Mortification, the pain will be vehement and pricking, there will be
Inflammation, and a Fever of the whole Body, and sometimes dotage and raving
withal.

XXIII. If such a Poisoned Wound is slow in maturation, or generating of Pus,
if there be an extinguishing of the fresh Color of the Part, and its inclining
to a yellow or livid Color, if the Pain remits, without any manifest Cause;
and if the Part ceases beating, and a stupidity is present, etc. the Wound will
degenerate into a Gungren.

XXIV. The Symptoms. If it is an ordinary Wound, they are chiefly these,
Contusion, Pain, Inflammation, Convulsion, Heat, Palsy, Lividness, and (if the
Wound is great, in or near a Joint) sometimes a Gangren and Mortification.

XXV. If the Bullet is Poisoned, all these Symptoms will appear, but sooner,
and more vehement than if it were not.

XXVI. The Prognostics. These Wounds for that they are always made with a
considerable Contusion, are much more dangerous than those that are made with
Sword or Dart, supposing the place to be the same: As to instance, many have
recovered of Wounds made with a Sword in the Belly, Guts, and Bladder, whereas
scarcely ever any one was Cured of Wounds made in those Parts by Gunshot.

XXVII. If in a healthful habit of Body, a fleshy Part is only wounded, and in
a good Air, the Wound may be Cured without any great hazard or difficulty.

XXVIII. But if in a Cacochymick habit of Body, the Spermatick Parts are very
much lacerated or torn, and it is in a hot and moist Air, viz. the Wind being
South, and Signs of Poison do appear, a Gangren, etc. is to be feared.

XXIX. Though a Wound seems desperate, yet it is not to be given over while there
is Life; for it has been oft-times observed, that Nature many times works
Miracles, as it were, and that very many, who have seemed to be near to the
Grave, have yet notwithstanding recovered and done well.

XXX. If there are many, and those the more Noble Parts, that are wounded,
bruised, and torn, and if withal, any Bones are broken or hurt, the Wound is so
much the more dangerous, and the Cure the more difficult.

XXXI. If the Parts are much torn, the Wound then yields a stinking Sanies; and
if a flux of Humors then follows, an extinguishing of the Natural Heat is to be
feared.

XXXII. If these Wounds happen in such Parts, as can easily draw the principal
Parts into consent with them, there is much danger. And such are the Joints and
great Vessels, from which many times there arises not only Vapors, but corrupt
and vicious Humors, which being received and communicated to the Heart, do
easily induce Fevers, Fluxes, as Diarrhaea's, Lienteria's, Dysenteria's,
Faintings, Swoonings, Convulsions, and the like.

XXXIII. If such Wounds happen to a Cacochymical Body, they are much more
dangerous, than if they happen to a Body of a good Habit; from whence it is,
that in Armies and Camps in which Epidemical Diseases rage, most of these that
are thus wounded, die of their Wounds. For in Camps the Air is for the most
part infected with the nastiness of the Camp; and the Soldiers for want many
times of wholesome Meat and Drink, drink filthy and corrupt Waters, and eat bad
and corrupt Food coming next to hand, so that it is no wonder that such a
Constitution is induced, as may render Gunshot Wounds in such Bodies very
dangerous.

XXXIV. These Wounds come more slowly to Suppuration than others do; not only
because the natural heat is much abated; but also because the Spirits are much
wasted and dissipated, by reason of the Contusion.

XXXV. Lastly, If these kind of Wounds are made by a Poisoned Bullet, they are
then indeed very dangerous, and for the most part Mortal, and this more
especially, if they penetrate into the interior Parts: and sometimes these
Wounds, though they are but small to see to, yet they many times destroy and kill
the Patient.

XXXVI. The Cure. The Indications of Cure (I mean of Wounds not Poisoned, for
as to the Cure of them we shall refer you to the former Chapter) are chiefly
three, 1. The drawing forth of the Bullet, if it yet sticks in the wounded
Part. 2. The converting the bruised Flesh into Pus, or Matter. 3. The
Incarnating, or filling the Wound up with Flesh, and then at length cicatrizing
it, which is common with all other Wounds.

I. Of Extracting the Bullet.
XXXVII. The Bullet, or any other Extraneous thing carried into the Wound with
the Bullet, is first to be taken forth, and this is to be done either at first
dressing; but if it is not then fit to be done, you must do it at some other
fit time, during the Cure.

XXXVIII. The Bullet is to be drawn forth, either the way it went in, or the
opposite way, if it lies very deep, is much nearer to the opposite place, and
may be felt there through the Skin and Flesh.

XXXIX. If the Bullet pierces not so deep, then having found it out, by
searching with the Probe, etc. being put into the Wound the same way it went
in, you must attempt the drawing it out with some fit Instrument.

XL. Now to take the Bullet out the way it went in, you must place the Patient
as near as may be in the posture he was in when he received the shot; or if
through weakness he cannot be so posited, let him be placed in a position as near
to it as may be, lest some Muscle, Nerve, Tendon or Ligament, lie in the way of
its passage; the Sick being thus placed, then search for the Bullet, etc.

XLI. The largeness of the Wound will in some measure show you the largeness of
the Bullet, by which means you may make choice of a fit Instrument for the
Extraction.

XLII. Now in Extracting the Bullet, 1. The way must be sufficiently opened by
Instrument. 2. That the Bullet be laid hold of. 3. And being laid hold of, that
it be drawn forth by the Chirurgion's Hand.

XLIII. The Instrument takes hold of the Bullet as a pair of Scissars, or as it
fastens it self into the Bullet, either by comprehending it in its Cavity, or
by laying hold of it by its Bill, being made like a Saw.

XLIV. For which reason there is great variety of Instruments; some lay hold on
the Bullet and draw it out, as they are fastened into it: Others comprehend the
Bullet, having a globular Cavity at the end: Others are nocht like Saws, of
which some are straight, some crooked, according as the Wound is either
straight or oblique.

XLV. You must endeavor to find out the Bullet; if you fail of it by searching
with the Probe, you must try if you can find it by feeling with your Hands
about the wounded Part; for sometimes a Bullet takes such a circular course,
that its way is impossible to be followed.

XLVI. Wiseman gives us Examples of this kind: One who being shot in the Cheek,
he cut out the Bullet behind in his Neck. Another (says he) was shot in the
outside of the small of one of his Legs, the whole Member swelled, and was
inflamed, and no possibility of finding out the Bullet, at last by chance he
felt it, in the inside of the Thigh above the Knee. Another wounded in the
outside of the Arm, he cut the Bullet out below the Scapula; and in some Cases
the Parts extremely pained with Inflammation and Tumor, do sometimes discover
the place where the Bullet lies; and sometimes the pain alone will do it, though
there be no Tumor, etc.

XLVII. In the very work of Extracting, you must be cautious that you lay not
hold of some Nerve or Tendon, and so pluck them along with the Bullet, for then
you will cause intolerable Pain, and grievous Accidents; for which reason you
must not open or dilate your Instrument, till you take hold of the Bullet
therewith, without any of the circumjacent Parts.

XLVIII. Moreover, if the Bullet can be found, it will be best, to attempt the
drawing it forth whilst the Sick is warm (if in heat of Battle) and the Wound
fresh, not being altered much by Air or Accidents, by which means less pain
will follow upon the Extraction; for after the first and second Day the Wound
swells, and the adjacent Parts are inflamed, and so changed in their
Temperament, that they will hide from your fight the Bullet, and what
accompanied it, if any thing, so that the place they lie in will be difficult
to be known; or being known, will not be extracted without great hazard, pain,
and trouble to the Patient; so that then it may be needful to defer that Work
to another time, and by Leniments to hasten the Digestion.

XLIX. To omit the present drawing forth of a Bullet when lodged in a Joint,
may hazard a Mortification, because it is lodged among the Tendons, and will
cause much pain which will not cease; for which reason, the Wound will not
digest.

L. If the Bullet is lodged in a less Noble Part, as in the Musculous Flesh,
and it has not been drawn out at first dressing; in this Case you may more
safely stay the Extraction till the seventh Day; or till the vehemence of the
Accidents are over, and the Wound digested; but then you must be more careful,
for the Wound will be the more painful, and the more slow in digestion: If the
Bullet carries any Rags with it, so long as they remain in the Wound, it will
be very painful, inflamed and vexatious, nor will it digest well, or be cured.

LI. But if the Bullet cannot be found out, by the Probe, or otherwise, as it
chances sometimes when Wounds are very deep or oblique; then the Wound is to be
kept open for a long time, and suppurating Medicines are to be made use of; and
if possible, the Member is to be so placed, that the Bullet may fall forth by
its own weight, or may be expelled by Nature; and therefore in this Case, unto
Nature the whole Business is to be committed.

LII. And though Leaden Bullets may lie long, and be carried about in the Body,
yet Iron or Brass Bullets must be taken forth in some considerable time,
because the first swells mightily, by its rusting; and the other yields
Verdigrease, both which are very painful, and inimical to the healing.

LIII. If the Bullet is lodged in any Noble Part, or a Part that may easily
draw the Noble Parts into consent with it, and that by reason of the Wound it
self, the Patient's Life is in any danger; in this Case you ought not to
attempt the Extraction, since thereby the Sick can have no Benefit, but that
you may probably hasten on that Death, which otherwise the Wound would have
infallibly induced, but in a larger space of time.

II. Of Proper Digestive Medicaments.
LIVE. Our first and great Care here must be, that the Contused Substance may be
brought to Maturation, and separated from the sound Flesh, and sound Parts; for
the bruised Matter easily becomes putrid, and Gangrens; so that our ordinary
and common Digestives and suppurating Medicines, which are made use of in other
Wounds and Tumors, have simply here no place; more especially if the Nervous
Parts are hurt or bruised, which do not well admit of such kind of moist and
simply Oily Medicaments, but require those that are drier.

LV. Those Medicines then which we are to make use of in these Wounds, must be
of that Nature and Quality, that though they will bring the contused Flesh into
Pus, yet they will not produce any putridness, but by their Anodyn Property
ease and alleviate the Pain.

LVI. To accomplish this Intention, Quercetan does to every Ounce of any
Digestive or Suppurative add i. of red Precipitate: Yet this is not to be done
rashly, but with some caution, as where there is a present putrioness, and fear
of a Gangren nigh at hand; for in most other Cases, these kind of Wounds may be
Cured without any kind of Mercury whatsoever: and in Nervous Places, if
Precipitate is used, it may be the cause of very much Pain.

LVII. Paraeus commends highly his Oil of Whelps thus made: Oil of white
Lillies lbiv. two young Whelps, which kill, and boil them in the Oil till the
Flesh falls from the Bones: add to them Earthworms (washed in Wine) lbii. boil
them together, and let them be strained without any strong pressing; then to
that which is strained, add of Venice Turpentine vi. Spirit of Wine ii. mix,
and make an Oil or Balsam. It has an admirable Virtue to ease Pain, and
maturate the Pus. If you apply it to Joints or Nervous Parts, there ought to be
more of the Turpentine than of the Oil, because these Parts require more drying
than the fleshy Parts do.

LVIII. Barbett commends this: Venice Turpentine iv. Calves Marrow, Oil of
Hypericon A. ii. Galbanum i. Venice Treacle ss. Roots of Scordium, of
Scorzonera, A. iii. yolks of four Eggs: mix, and make an Ointment.

LIX. Sennertus commends this as a thing singularly useful: Vng. Basilicon i.
Oil of Linseed, and of white Lillies, A. iii. mix them.

LX. Or this: Oils of Linseed and of Hempseed, A. iv. Honey i. Alum ss. mix
them.

LXI. Joubertus commends this: Hogs Lard, or fresh Butter viii. red Precipitate
washed and levigated i. Camphir ii. dissolved in Aqua Vitae; mix them well
together. Now if instead of Lard you take Arcaeus his Liniment, the Medicine
will be much more effectual. The Lard, or Butter, or Liniment, are Suppurative;
the Precipitate adds to the force of the Suppuration, causing very little pain,
and the Camphir helps Penetration, and resists Putrefaction.

LXII. Oil of Hemp viii. Linseed Oil ii. Juices of Plantane and Nightshade, A.
q.s. boil them till the Juices are consumed.

LXIII. Another of Barbett, more effectual: Yolks of Eggs-No iv. Turpentine,
Ung. Aegyptiacum, A. ii. Amber, Euphorbium, Mastich, Mummy, A. ss. round
Birthwort Roots in Powder ii. Oil of Elder, q.s. mix, and make an Ointment.

LXIV. Sennertus has this: Oils of Linseed and Hempseed, A. vi. Sal Armoniack,
white Vitriol, A. iii. Mithridate, Theriaca Andromachi, A. iss. mix them
together over the Fire: This is of use, when a putridness is supposed near at
hand.

LXV. If Putridness and a Gangren is feared, then add some Precipitate, as,
Ung. Basilicon i. fresh Butter i. red Precipitate levigated ii. mix them
together.

LXVI. Another of Barbett's, more Excellent than any of the former, which also
resists Putrefaction: Oils of Linseed and Roses, (Hempseed I think is better)
Tar, Turpentine, Galbanum, A. ii. Mastich, Frankincese, Nitre, Sal Armoniack,
A.i. Oils of Worms, and of Turpentine, Verdigrise, white Vitriol, Camphir,
powder of Earthworms, A. i. Alum ss. mix them together over a gentle Fire. If
the Part is not Nervous, in a great Putrefaction, you may add some red
Precipitate.

LXVII. Turpentine, Honey, A. iii. yolks of Eggs No vj. boil them with a gentle
Fire, to the thickness of a Liniment.

LXVIII. Oils of Linseed and Hempseed, A.iii. Oils of Roses and Mastich, A.i.
Oil of Camphir i. mix them well together by boiling, and use it warm.

LXiX. Turpentine, Honey, A. iv. round Birthwort root, Aloes, both in fine
powder, A. ss. Alum, Crocus Martis, A. ii. mix them.

LXX. Unguent. Nicotianae, Ung. Basilicon, A.iii. Gum Elemi, powder of Virginia
Tobacco, A. i. mix them.

LXXI. Oils of Linseed and Hempseed A. iv. Ung. Nicotianae iii. Ung. Basilicon
ii. Oil of Turpentine i. mix, and melt them together.

LXXII. Yolks of Eggs No.ii. Turpentine iv. Oil of Hypericon ii. Frankincense,
Mastich, Oils of Linseed, Eempseed, and of Eggs, powder of Tobacco, A. i. mix
them.

LXXIII. If any Putridness is feared near at hand, then you may use some of the
following Compositions. Oils of Hempseed and Linseed, A. vi. Sal Armoniack,
white Vitriol A. ii. Gum Sandrach j ss. mix them over the Fire. Or you may use
the Compositions at Sect. 63, 64, 65, and 66 aforegoing.

LXXIV. Or this. Oils of Linseed and Hempseed, A. iii. Tar, Turpentine, A. ii.
Frankincense, Galbanum, Mastich, Sal Nitre, Sal Armoniack, A. i. Oil of
Earthworms ss. Oil of Turpentine ii. Alum, powder of Earthworms, Camphir, white
Vitriol, Verdigrise, Tobacco, A. i. mix, and melt them over the Fire.

LXXV. And to prevent the Afflux of Humors, this following Defensative is to be
applied. Fine Bole, Catechu, Dragonsblood, powder of dried Ox-blood, A. i.
Nut-galls in powder, Frankincense, Rosin, Crocus Martis, A. ss. Vinegar of
Roses iii. whites of Eggs q.s. mix them, and apply it over the Wound.

LXXVI. Or: Oils of Roses, of Elder-bark, and of Mastich, A. i. fine Bole,
Rosin, Catechu, all in fine powder, A. ss. Vinegar of Roses, q.s. mix, and make
an Ointment.

LXXVII. Or this of Barbett: Powder of red Roses, of Scordium, A. iii.
Bean-meal, crumbs of Rye-bread, A. j. (these two boiled in a little Milk) yolks
of Eggs No.vj. Oils of Roses and Violets, A. ii. Wax, q.s. mix, melt over a
gentle Fire, and make an Emplaster.

LXXVIII. And over the Wounded Part it self, it will be good to lay the
following Cataplasm; which cherishes the Heat of the Part, prevents Putridness,
and facilitates the Suppuration. Roots of Althea, of Comfrey, A. i. flowers of
Camomil, of Hypericon, tops of Wormwood, A. M. ss. boil in Milk to softness,
then mash them together, and add of Barley-slower, or else meal of Althea-roots
and of Beans, A.jss. Wine q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm.

III. Of Abstersives, or Cleansers.
LXXIX. If the Wound pierces quite through, some use the Flamula, or Seton; but
this both Sennertus and Barbett disapprove of, as not safe, and advise to the
use of Tents put into both Orifices; which Penecilli or Tents ought not to be
over-thick, lest they hinder the coming forth of the Pus, and cause Pain.

LXXX. At first, dressing the Wound once a day will be enough; because in
Gunshot-Wounds, there is scarcely any thing which requires Evacuation, seldom
before the third or fourth day: but whenever the Pus begins to flow, it is
then to be opened and dressed twice a day; and when it flows in such abundance,
that unless it is often emptied or cleansed, it may cause grief and pain, then
you must open it, and cleanse it from the Pus or Purulent-matter thrice a day;
but the Acrimony of the Matter will direct you best, whether it is to be dressed
and cleansed once, twice, or thrice a day.

LXXXI. But when the Pus begins much to diminish, twice a a day will be enough
to open and cleanse the Wound: and when it flows forth very little, and begins
to be filled up with Flesh, once a day will be enough, as at first.

LXXXII. At first we admit Tents, to open a passage for the Sanies; at length
Splenia, made of Linnen-rags, four, six, or eight times doubled, or rather
Bolsters may be used, and applied to the bottom of the Sinus, (if possible;)
that by their means, through a harder Binding, the Sanies may be pressed forth,
which will much advance the Cleansing.

LXXXIII. But if there is a vast quantity of Sanies, and the Sinus is deep and
winding, that it cannot all flow or be pressed forth; in this case, the Sinus
is to be cut or laid open, that the Wound or Ulcer may be the better cleansed.

LXXXIV. And whether the Wound or Ulcer seems contumacious or not,
Vulnerary-Potions, or Wound-Drinks, are of extraordinary Use in the Cure; for
they cleanse the Ulcers, and free them from the filth of the Excrementitious
Humors, causing all things in the Wound which are Heterogeneous to be easily,
and the sooner cast forth, assisting Nature therein: if they are useful in any
other kind of Wounds, then certainly they are most of all necessary in these;
variety of which you may see Cap. 3. Sect. 28. ad Sect. 43. aforegoing.

LXXXV. After Concoction or Digestion begins to appear in the Wound, which is
scarcely before the third or fourth day; for that by reason of the Contusion,
the native Heat was much weakened, and the Spirits exhausted; and that there is
neither much Pain, nor any Inflammation; but that the greatest part of the
bruised substance is turned into Pus, then the Wound is to be cleansed, and
after filled with Flesh; which with what things it is best to be done, we now
come to show you.

LXXXVI. Among the number of Cleansers, that which first offers it self is
Vnguentum de Apio, or Ointment of Smallage, both the simple and the compound;
nor have Authors commended them in vain.

LXXXVII. Sennertus has this: Decoction of Barley, juices of Smallage, Plantan,
Agrimony, Centory the less, A.iii. boil them, and at the end add Venice
Turpentine ix. Honey of Roses vi. Frankincense, Mastich, A. ss. Saffron i. mix
them.

LXXXVIII. Mindererus his Vnguentum Decameron. fuices of Arsmart, Celandine,
Century, Dock sharp-pointed, D^es-foot, Groundsel, Hypericon, Plantan, Tobacco,
Yarrow, A. lbi. mix, and digest for some days, for the Mixture to settle:
decant the clear, and add thereto fresh Butter lbiii. green Liquorice well
bruised, Comfry-roots, Tormentil-roots, Houndstongne, all well bruised; Oil of
Myrrh, Deers-suet, A. lbj. boil them all well'till the crackling ceases, and
the consumption of the Humidity, then strain hot by Pressing through a strong
Canvas-bag; and to the strained Matter add Venice-Turpentine, Gum Elemi, A. ix.
Wax q.s. melted, so as to bring the whole to the consistence of an Ointment, or
very soft Cerat; adding after all to every Ounce of the Ointment i. or ss. of
pure refined Verdigrise.

LXXXIX. Or, Meal of Orobus ii. Myrrh, Frankincense, A.i. juice of Smallage,
Turpentine, A. iv. Ung. Aegyptiacum i. mix, and make an Unguent.

XC. Or, Ung. Nicotianae iii. powder of Tobacco i. Gum Elemi ss. mix, and make
an Ointment.

XCI. Among the number of the Abstersives, nothing has yet been found to exceed
Vng. Fuscum Wurizii; the Composition and Preparation of which, see in its
proper place.

XCII. Vnguentum Apostolorum is commended by some, but this may be trusted to:
Aegyptiacum, Apostolorum, A. jss. Gum Elemi vi. powder of Tobacco ii. mix them.

XCIII. Or this: Ung. Nicotianae iii. powder of Scammony, Tobacco, A.. Gum
Elemi vi. Honey q.s. mix over a gentle Sand-heat, and make an Ointment.

XCIV. Meal of Orobus iii. powder of Florentine Orrice, Frankincense, A. jss.
juice of Smallage viii. Honey, q.s. mix, and make an Ointment over a gentle
Fire, or a gentle Sand-heat.

XCIV. An Abstersive Powder. Scammony iv. fine Aloes ii. Tobacco in fine powder
i. round Birthwort-root in powder ss. mix them, and keep it for use.

XCVI. Fine flower or meal of Barley and of Lupins, Honey, A. ii. Turpentine
iv. juices of Smallage and of Wormwood, A. vi. fine Aloes, Frankincense, Myrrh,
Orrice-root in fine pouders, A. i. mix, and boil gently to the consumption of
the Juices: to which you may add Vng. Aegyptiacum ii. if you use it in a Wound
which is very foul.

XCVII. Ung. Nicotianae iv. Unguent. Aegyptiacum i. pouders of Aloes, Scammony,
Tobacco, A. vi. mix, and make an Ointment; which is inferior to none of all the
foregoing Compositions.

IV. Of Incarnatives, or Flesh-breeders.
XCVIII. When the Wound is become clean, it is then very necessary that Flesh
should be generated or bred: because that when all the bruised Flesh is
converted into Pus, the Wound will become empty or hollow, and therefore it
ought to be filled up again.

XCIX. This following Sennertus commends, as useful in these kinds of Wounds.
Betony, Comfrey, Horsetail, Hypericon, Plantan, Tormentil, A. M.ss. Earthworms
(washed in Wine,) Oil of Mastich, A. ii. Pine-Rosin, Manna Thuris, or the finest
white Frankincense, A. ss. Wine q.s. boil'till the Wine is consumed, then
Strain out by a strong Expression; and add thereto Wax, Goats or Sheeps suet,
A.iv. Aloes, Frankincense, Mastich, Myrrh, A. ss. mix, and make an Ointment.

C. We will not trouble you with any more Sarcoticks in this place, having
already given you an ample number and Variety of them in Cap. 2. Sect. 31. ad
46. aforegoing; in the forms of Oils, Ointments, Balsams, and Emplasters. The
Sarcotick or Incarnative being laid upon the Wound or Ulcer, you may cover all
with Empl Diapalmae, or Our Empl. Album.

V. Of Gunshot-Wounds, with Fracture of the Bone.
CI. If with a Wound, there be a Fracture of the Bone, which sometimes is
broken into many pieces, wherein for the most part, the Nervous Parts are hurt;
when these I say, are to be cleared from these Fragments of Bones, there will
be many times sharp and acute Pains, Convulsions, and sometimes a Gangren it
self: which makes some Artists come to Amputation with all the speed that may
be; which yet ought not to be done, so long as there is any hopes of a Cure
without it; for that Nature oftentimes even in these Wounds, is wont to work
Miracles as it were.

CII. The Way of Curing these is the same, as in curing Fractures with a Wound;
of which we shall speak more largely, in Lib. 6. Cap. 5, 6, 7, 8 following: and
in Cap. 23. of this present Fourth Book: however, we think it fit to say
something thereof in general terms in this place.

CIII. In the first place therefore, it is necessary that the great Fragments
of the Bones be restored again into their places, that they may be joined
together by a Callus: but in the application of Splinters, you must use great
caution, lest by them you excite more pain than otherwise would be; and so
cause Convulsions, Inflammation or Gangren, which otherwise by due care, might
not have happened.

CIV. Some apply Glutinating Cataplasms, (which here indeed have no place)
which stick so close and fast unto the Part, and bind it so straightly together,
as to cause very much pain, and many times other ill Symptoms: those are not
rashly and inconsiderately to be made use of, but in their due time and
appointment.

CV. After therefore that the Bones are set again, or composed, or conjoined;
the Member is to be placed either in a thin Plate of Lead, or in a Skin
moistened with Wine; or in the hollows of those Chips which are bored out of
Pumps and Water-Pipes in making, being first moistened with warm Water.

CVI. For all these things, as they hold the broken Parts together; so they do
it in such a manner, and so easily, that they may notwithstanding them, be be
bent as much as you please, and prevent any new access, or cause of Pain: but
instead of these things, you may lay on some of the following Cerats or
Emplasters.

CVII. Mucilage of Comfrey-roots, Cherry-tree or Plum-tree Gum, or Gum-Arabick,
A. vi. juice of Comfrey, fine Bole, Terra Sigillata, A. iii. juice of
Doves-foot, powder of Catechu, A. iv. Turpentine lbj. Oil of Earthworms vj.
yolks of Eggs No xxx. or more: mix them.

CVIII. Fine Bole, Catechu, A. iij. Turpentine, juice of Doves-foot, or of
Comfrey A. iijss. Rosin, Wax, A. viij. mix, and make a Cerate.

VI. Of Dressing Gunshot-Wounds.
CIX. The Bullet, and other extraneous things, as Splinters, Rags, etc. being
extracted, you must come to the Dressing up of the Wound; which is to be
performed as a Contused Wound, with Oleum Catellorum Paraei; the Recipe of
which you have at Sect. 57. aforegoing, which is to be applied hot, as the Part
will bear.

CX. In this case, you are not to heed what any shall say to the the contrary,
who object against it, as a Greasy Medicine; no though it be near a Bone (says
Wiseman,) for the Gleet (says he) will foul it much more than Greasy
Medicaments.

CXI. If you have not the Oleum Catellorum, you may use this. Oils of Hempseed
and Linseed, A.iv. Oils of Lillies and Camomil, A. ij. Turpentine j. mix them.
Or this: Strasburgh Turpentine iv. Gum Elemi, Frankincense, A.ij. Oils of
Hempseed and Linseed, and of Earthworms, A. iij. Oil of Elder jss. Mastich,
Olibanum, A. ss. mix them.

CXII. Or you may use this: Linseed-oil, Oil-olive, Turpentine, A. lbss. Gum
Elemi iij. purified Verdigrise ij. mix them. Or this: Take Turpentine, Balsam
Capivii, Oils of Linseed and of Hypericon, Spirit of Wine, A. lbss. Sanguis
Draconis in very subtle powder j. mix them.

CXIII. Quercetan commends this. Take juices of Coltsfoot and Sorrel, A. iv.
fresh Butter lbss. Oleum Visci Pomorum compositum, ( which see in Quercetan.
rediviv. Tom. 3. page 259.) lbj. Larch-Rosin ij ss. Frankincense, Hens and
Goose grease, A. ij. pulp of xx. fat Figs: put all into a Vessel, which stop
close; and boil on a gentle Fire for six hours, then strain out hot, and
evaporate to a consistence. Where note, if you cannot get the Oleum Visci, etc.
you may use in the place thereof Oils of Linseed, of Earthworms, and of
Hypericon, A. iv.

CXIV. Or this, of the same Quercetan. Take Oil-olive, or Linseed-oil lbj. new
Wax, Rosin, Ship-Pitch, A. iv. Goats-suet, Veal-marrow, A. ij. Oesopus j. melt
all together, and strain, keeping the Ointment for use; to every Ounce of which
he adds i. of Precipitate: yet in recent Wounds the Precipitate is not
necessary; for by experience we know, that these Wounds will digest and
suppurate without it, which frees them from putridness.

CXV. Now to these Wounds you ought to use a soft Tent, and Pledgets dipped in
some Digestive pretty hot, but not so hot as to sealed them: the Parts about you
may Embrocate with Oils of Earthworms, of Roses and Myrcles, A.iij.mixed with
Vinegar i.

CXVI. Let the Applications over the Wound be of that nature or quality, as to
refist Defluxions of Humors, and such as may strengthen the weakened Parts. As,
Take Bean and Barley flower, A. vj. Catechu iij. mucilage of Gum-tragacanth j.
which boil in Posca, or Water and red Wine to a Cataplasm, adding at last Eggs
No ij. Oocymel iij. or you may add Oil of Roses, and Wax, A. q.s. and make it
into the form of a Cerat.

CXVII. Above the Wound lay this Defensative. Take Terra Sigillata vj. Catechu
iij. Litharge, Sanguis draconis, juice of Sloes or Acacia in ponder,
Comfrey-roots in powder, A. ij. Oil of Myrtles, Vinegar, A. xij. mix, and boil
to the consistence of a Cerat.

CXVIII. Or, Take fine Bole, Ceruse, A. vj. Catechu, Litharge, A. iij. Oil of
Roses omphacin xij. Vinegar vj. juice of Plantan and Nightshade, A. ij. Wax
q.s. mix them: apply the Compress dipped in Vinegar, and let the Bandage be equal
and gentle, to keep on the Dressings, and hinder the Afflux of Humors.

CXIX. If much Blood has not been lost, Revulsion may be made on the same side,
as Galen advises, otherwise not: the Bowels may be emptied with a Clyster made
of Mutton-broth or Posset Drink lbj. and brown Sugar or Molosses iv. giving
inwardly now and then a dram or two of Our Aqua Bezoartica, or Spiritus
Cordialis.

CXX. The Air ought to be temperate, because Cold is an Enemy to Wounds; the
Diet ought to be spare, as thin Mutton-broth, Barley-broth, Water Gruel,
Panado, potched Eggs, etc. because it prevents Inflammations; and he ought to
rest quietly, for which purpose you may give this this Dose. Take Poppy-water
iij. Angelica-water compound j. Syrupus de Meconio vj. mix them. Or this: Take
Guttae Vitae Nostrae j. Spiritus Cordialis ss. Syrup of Limons j. mix them.

CXXI. The second Dressing is next to be considered, wherein a Fomentation is
to be provided, made thus. Red Port-Wine lbij. Spirit of Wine iij. Powers of
Wormwood, Juniper, and Angelica, A. ss. Scurvygrass-water lbj. mix: and being
very hot, wring Stuphs out of it, and apply them, which will defend the Wound
from the Air.

CXXII. If the Wound is in a good condition, continue the use of Digestives;
but if it is affected with vehement Pain, foment it with this. Take white
Port-Wine, Decoction of Althea-roots, A. lbj. Spiritus Anodynus j.ss. Broth of
a Sheeps Head lbss. mix them: and afterward apply over all this Cataplasm.
Take Barley and Bean flower, A. iv. Orrice-root in powder ij. Ung. Basilicon,
and Nicotianae, A.jss. Eggs No iv. yellow Palm-Oil q.s. mix, and make a
Cataplasm: it promotes the Suppuration and is Anodyne.

CXXIII. This being done, it is to be bound up, as before; and this course may
be continued to the eighth or tenth day, 'till the Sloughs are separated, the
Wound digested, and a good sort of Pus, (which is white, equal, smooth, and not
stinking) is generated.

CXXIV. If the Pus is wanting in any of these Qualities, you may mix a little
Precipitate with your Digestive or Suppurative, or Vng. Apostolorum.

CXXV. You may cleanse by an Injection, made of the Juices of Smallage, the
lesser Centory, Plantan and Agrimony, mixed with Barley-broth and Honey, in
which you may dissolve a little Venice-Turpentine; first well mixed with the
yolk of an Egg.

CXXVI. Or you may apply this Unguent. Take juices of Adders-tongue, Agrimony,
Centory, Wormwood, Parsley, Plantan, and Smallage, A. j. mucilage of hull'd
Barley iij. boil them together, to nearly the consumption of the juice or
humidity; then add Venice or Strasburgh Turpentine iij. Oney ij. Barley-flower
j. Saffron ss. mix, and make an Abstersive.

CHAP. XX. Of ACCIDENTS of Gun shot WOVNDS.
I. NOW from the first beginning of the Wound to the eleventh or twelfth Day,
these kinds of Wounds may be subject to many and various Accidents or Symptoms,
which not only hinder the Cure, but oftentimes destroy the Patient; as, 1.
Vehement Pain. 2. Inflammation. 3. Gangren. 4. Hemorrhage. 5. Fevers. 6.
Delirium. 7. Fainting and Swooning. 8. Convulsions. 9. Palsies. 10. A Sinuous
Ulcer; of all which we shall discourse briefly, (as these Symptoms may have
relation to these kinds of Wounds, having said otherwise enough of them in
Chap. 9. aforegoing) that we may lead our young Artist, as it were, by the
Hand, through the intricate Labyrinths of the Art of Curing.

I. Vehement Pain.
II. If the Pain is vehement, you must outwardly foment with and apply Anodyns,
with which you may sometimes mix Spiritus Opii Compositus, and sometimes a
small quantity of the Tincture of Opium, Extracted with equal Parts of
Nightshade Water, and Spirit of Wine.

III. And Inwardly give Our Spiritus Opii Compositus in some proper Vehicle, or
this following Mixture: Poppy-water ii. Syrup of Limons i. Spiritus Opii
Compositus iii. mix them. Or, you may give a Dose of Our Theriaca Chymica,
which will not fail of giving the due Ease; or Dr. Gardner's Laudanum
Tartarizatum, or Our Laudanum Specificum; taking which of them is first at hand.

II. Inflammation.
IV. This proceeds either from an ill habit of Body, or from an ill handling of
the Wound in the beginning, which to prevent, you ought to hinder the afflux of
Humors, evacuating that which already disaffects the Wound.

V. First, you ought to Purge, and if the habit of the Body, and condition of
the Sick will permit it, to bleed, which is in some measure the first Days
Work, and if then neglected, to be performed now. Secondly, by Topics; you
must ease the pain by Anodyns, which may repress the heat, as is directed in
Chap. 9. aforegoing, according as it may be either Phlegmon, or Erysipelas.

VI. In the beginning use Repellers and Refrigeratives; in their state, use
moderate Calefactives and Discutients; and lastly, Digestives, which may
concoct, or suppurate the Matter.

III. Gangren.
VII. This is an attendant upon an Inflammation, and is much to be feared, when
the Phlegmon yields not to Discussives, or Suppuratives; for then the natural
heat of the Part is suffocated, either through the great afflux of Humors, or
application of Topics too Refrigerative, and Repercussive, which obstructed
the motion of the Spirit into the Part.

VIII. It is known by the Gleet and change of Color, it beginning to look
livid; as also by the abating of the Tumor, etc.

IX. When you see these Symptoms coming on, you must immediately scarify, not
only till the Blood comes, but you must cut deep through the Escar to the quick,
making it bleed freely, till the Part becomes sensible in its feeling; that
thereby you may evacuate that which would suffocate the Natural Heat, and Vital
Spirits.

X. Having thus made way for the entrance of your Medicaments, foment the Part
with a good Lixivium of Potashes, mixed with Salt and Vinegar: Or you may make
a Decoction of Wormwood, Southernwood, Centory, and Colocynthis in the said
Lixivium.

XI. Bathe also all the places both above and below the Wound, or Mortification
with Spirit of Wine Camphorated, and lay double Cloths dipped in the same over
them.

XII. The Gaugren it self being fomented with the Lixivium, etc. wash the
Scarifications, and apply to the Wound, Vng. Aegyptiacum mixed with Venice
Treacle, dissolved in a little Wine Vinegar, adding also a little calcined
Vitriol; and apply a Cataplasm made of the Flower or Meals of Orobus, of
Lupins, of Beans, and of Barley, boiled up with some of the aforementioned
Lixivium, adding at the end of the boiling a little Oxymel, either simple, or
that of Squills, which is better.

XIII. If in making the Scarification you should cut some Vessel, whereby there
should be a flux of Blood, you must be wary not to choke the heat of the Part,
by crouding in Dosils, for so the Gangren may be increased: In this Case, the
better way is to use the Actual Cautery, for thereby you not only stop the
bleeding, but also resist the Putrefaction; after which, you must dress up the
Wound, as if it was made by burning.

XIV. You must also be wary in this Work, that while you are ae Curing one
Gangren, you make not another, by the too long use of sharp Medicines;
therefore when the Ulcer grows warm, and it ceases gleeting, forbear their use,
and then dress it with warm Digestives, as Vng. Basilicon, with Oil of
Turpentine hot; after Digestion cleanse it with Abstersives, as Mundificativum
ex Apio, etc. according as the removal of the Sloughs require, and then with
Sarcoticks and Epuloticks complete the Cure. See more hereof of lib. 3. cap.
11. and cap. 9. of this Book, aforegoing.

IV. An Hemorrhage.
XV. It oftentimes happens that in separating of the Contused Parts, that great
Hemorrhages succeed, as also after the separating of an Escar: in this Case you
must stop the Orifices, by applying some Astringent Powder; some use that of
Galen, made of Aloes, Frankincense, and Hares-wooll.

XVI. Others use Dr. Gardner's Styptick, rouling up the Wound with a good
Compress, dipped in some Styptick Liquor, such as this: Colcothar, Burnt Alum,
Sugar Candy, A. i. Urine of a young Person, Rose Water, A.xvi. Plantan-water
xxxii. mix, and stir the Liquor for a long time, then let it settle, keeping it
upon the Faeces, and pour off the clear by Inclination, when you have occasion
to use it.

XVII. Bolsters, or double Cloths, etc. may be dipped in this Water, and laid
upon an open Artery, and held close with the Hand, till the Blood stops; also a
small Tent, (according as the Wound may be, may be dipped or soaked in it, and
put into the Part) this Liquor taken inwardly, stops also the Bloody Flux, and
all Hemorrhodial and Menstrual Fluxes, being given a ss. ad ii. in Knot-grass,
or Comfrey water.

XVIII. Lastly, over all some common Defensive may be laid, and the Wound is
not to be opened till three or four Days after. See lib. 3. cap. 15, and 16.
and cap. 4. and 9. of this fourth Book.

V. Of a Fever.
XIX. The Fever is either Continent or Remitting, seldom Intermitting: If it is
Continent, such things must be given, as may upon the spot repress the
preternatural heat, and hinder the farther putrefaction of Humors, of which
kind is Our Tinctura Cordialis, Elixir Proprietatis, Spiritus Sulphuratus,
Spiritus Nitratus, Spiritus Vini Basilii, Spiritus Mirabilis, Spiritus Opiatus
compositus, Sal Absinthii, Sal Cornu Ceryi Succinatum, Sal Mirabile, Sal Nitrum
Nitratum, and Vitriolatum, Sal Vitriolatum, and Sal Prunellae, Antihecticum
Poterii, etc.

XX. If the Fever is Remitting, it is to be considered as in the Fit, and as in
the Remission of the Paroxysm: as in the Fit, you may exhibit any of the
Medicaments in the aforegoing Section, but chiefly those which are Saline.

XXI. As in the Remission of the Paroxysm, the great Medicine which is to be
exhibited, is either the Powder, Tincture, or Extract of the Cortex Peruanus:
give a Dose of it immediately upon the remission of the Fit, and repeat the
Dose every four or six Hours, till the Fit returns, and then forbear it, till
the Remission; after which repeat it again as before, continuing its use, till
you are sensible the Fever is utterly destroyed by the use thereof.

VI. Of a Delirium.
XXII. If the Body is Costive, it ought to be opened with Sal Mirabile, Syrupus
Catharticus, Pulvis Cornachini, or some other proper Purge; and afterward it
is to be kept open with Our Laudanum Catharticum, giving two or three Doses of
it every Night at Bedtime.

XXIII. Outwardly let the Head, Forehead, Temples, and Nostrils, be bathed with
Spiritus Anodynus, or with Tinctura Opii; and let Cloths dipped in the same, be
laid or bound upon his Temples and Forehead.

XXIV. And inwardly give this Julep oftentimes in the Daytime: Poppy-water
(...) Damask Rose Water, Angelica-^ater, A. iii. (...) of Limons iiss. Spiritus
Opii compositus ii. mix them; of which give new and then two or three Spoonfuls
at a time.

XXV. And at Bedtime (if you find the Patient does (...) to (...) by what has
(...) been given) give^ ^node^re Dose of Tinctura Op^ S^rupus de Maeconio,
which may (...) ^ixed with a little of Our The^a^a Chymica; I have constantly
used this Method for many Years past, and never without Success, in two or
three Days times at most; and sometimes, it recovered my Patient from his
Dotage in 24 Hours.

VII. Fainting and Swooning.
XXVI. You may give the Patient Our Aqua Bezoartica, ad i. or Spiritus
Cordialis, or Angelica-water Compound, mixed with a little Syrup of Limons, and
often repeated, till the Fainting or Swooning goes quite away.

XXVII. If the Fainting or Swooning Fits follow thick, and that the former
Prescription will do no good, you must give this: Spiritus Cordialis ss. Aqua
Angelicae simplex iii. volatile Salt of Hartshorn i. Tincture of Saffron ss.
mix for a Dose, which repeat as often as you see occasion.

XXVIII. If this yet prevails not, take this: Spiritus Cordialis i. volatile
Salt of Hartshorn fixed with Spirit of Salt, and evaporated to dryness i.
volatile Salt of Amber i. mix, for a Dose, which repeat as often as need requires.

VIII. Convulsions.
XXIX. Convulsions in this Case are said to arise from Putrid Vapors, or Acrid
Humors offending the Nerves, with which Humors these Wounds do often abound.

XXX. The Parts affected are frimarily the Nerves in loco; secundarily their
Original, or the Brain, by consent, which being irritated, causes an
involuntary Contraction or Convulsion, in the Parts affected, as near the Knee
or Shoulder, where the Convulsion is only to be discerned by a Trembling, which
is the more manifest, the nearer it is to the Joint.

XXXI. It sometimes follows great Inflammations, especially in the Nervous
Parts, and is here for the most part Fatal; a Convulsion upon a Wound, being
generally the Prodromos, or Forerunner of Death.

XXXII. If you will attempt any thing, give inwardly this Mixture: Potestat.
Virtutum i. Spiritus Gordialis iv. Syrup of Citron-peels i. mix them; and at
Bedtime give i. of Our Theriaca Chymica.

XXXIII. Outwardly bathe the Parts with this Mixture: Powers of Rosemary,
Limons, Juniper, and Turpentine, A. ii. Tinctura Opii, Spiritus Vini
Camphorati, A. i. mix them; and apply to the Wound it self this: Linimentum
Arcaei, Ung. Basilicon, Balsam de Chili, Peru, and Tolu, A. ii. mix them.

IX. Palsies.
XXXIV. Palsies which arise from Wounds, immediately affect the Nerves of that
place only; they do not simply take away the Life of the Patient, but do
sometimes threaten a Gangren or Mortification, through a defect of Natural Heat
in the Member.

XXXV. Inwardly give Spirit of Hartshorn, or of Sal Armoniack in some proper
Vehicle; and outwardly, foment the Part with this Mixture: Oil Olive iii. Oils
of Amber ii. of Turpentine iv. mix them, and Embrocate therewith, and round
about the adjacent Parts, apply this: Balsam de Chili, Capivi, Peru, Tolu, A.
i. Camphir ii. mix them, and apply the Mixture with Lint.

XXXVI. After those things have been applied for ten or twelve Days, or longer,
as you see occasion, then apply an Emplaster made of Burgundy Pitch, Ship
Pitch, Gum Elemi, Frankincense, A. i. Turpentine, q.s. which will stir up heat
in the Member, and attract Life and Spirits into the Part.

X. Sinuous Ulcers.
XXXVII. Sometimes after the Separation of the Escar, the Ulcer becomes
Sinuous, especially after a great afflux of Humors; and where Bandage cannot be
used to preserve the Tone of the Parts, as in the upper Parts of the Thigh and
Hip, etc. or from the largeness of the Wound, Contusion of the Flesh, etc. or
Laceration of Parts, whereby there is a great loss of Substance, and an Acrid
Matter, inducing such a like Ulcer.

XXXVIII. Sometimes also it becomes Sinuous from a Cacochymical or Scorbutic
habit of Body, or may be induced from Lues Venerea being joined with it; in
which Cases, you will scarcely ever Cure the Patient, without exhibiting
Antifcorbaticks or Antivenereals, etc.

XXXIX. If the Wound is inflicted on the higher part of a Member, whereby the
Pus cannot discharge it self, but may be apt to lie and create a Sinus, you
must perforate it through the bottom, either with a Syringotomus, or with a
Seton-Needle, retaining a twisted Thread or Silk in the Ulcer, till the lower
Orifice is digested, and then drawing out the Silk, to keep it open by a Tent
for some time, 'till the upper part is healed; and then as the Matter
diminishes its flowing out of the depending Orifice, the Tents may at length be
removed, and the Wound healed up.

XL. But to prevent Sinuosities, you will do well to enlarge the Orifice at
first, and to keep it so wide open, that the Pus may have a free passage out;
which if it cannot be by the way the Bullet went in, you must then consider so
as to find out the best place to open it, so as it may be discharged, as we
have before directed.

XLI. But before you do this, it would be also well to consider, whether it
cannot be done without such an Apertion; as by altering the position of the
Part, Compression, Bandage, hollow Tents, etc. and therefore you must endeavor
by Stuphs, Sponges, Compresses, and good Bandage to force out the Matter, that
the hollow sides may agglutinate.

XLII. These Stuphs, Sponges, etc. may be dipped and wrung out of an Infusion or
Decoction of Baiaustians, red Roses, Sumach, Pomgranate-peels and Catechu, made
in red Wine, and that the Matter may the better discharge between whiles, you
ought to dress it the oftener.

XLIII. And Injections are to be made with a Decoction or Infusion of Roots of
round Birthwort, Florentine, Orrice, of Zedoary, Catechu, Aloes, Myrrh,
Sarcocolla, and Alum in Aqua Calcis, to which Spirit of Wine and Honey of
Roses may be added.

XLIV. If the Orifice is small, and the Sinus lies shallow, as under the Skin,
and in a place where it may be safely opened; you may widen it with Crepitus
Lupi, Gentian-roots, Elder Pith, or prepared Sponge, and afterward cut it open
with a pair of Probe-Scissars, or with an Incision-knife, the Director being
placed within; or you may lay it open by a Caustic.

XLV. The Sinus being thus divided or opened, you may digest it with Turpentine
mixed with yolks of Eggs; or cleanse with some proper Abstersive, variety of
which you may see when we come to Treat of Ulcers in General: Afterward
Sarcoticks are to be used, which that they may be made the more drying, Pouders
of Frankincense, Myrrh, Rosin, and Orrice-roots with Honey, may be added.

XLVI. If the Sinus runs transverse Arteries, Veins, Nerves, Tendons, etc. the
best way will be to make the position of the Part, so as its Orifice may be
depending, (for Cutting will there be dangerous) and by Digestive, and
Abstersive Injections to dress it for some time, and afterward by Sarcotick
and Styptick Injections, with good Bolsters, Compress, and Bandage, keeping the
Orifice open with a Tent, and so complete the rest of the Cure according to
Art: But if after all your Endeavors the Ulcer grows Fistulous, you must then
Cure it, as we shall hereafter teach in lib. 5. cap. 10, 12, and 20.

CHAP. XXI. Of GVN-SHOT WOVNDS of the THORAX.
I. THE Wounds of the Thorax have relation to the Breast, Ribs, and Parts
contained within them, as Heart, Lungs, Mediastinum, Aorta, and other Vessels:
Sometimes the External Parts are only hurt or wounded, sometimes they pierce
through the Ribs and Pleura, in which Case many times the Principal are wounded.

II. If the Wound penetrates not into the Cavity of the Breast, but is only in
the Musculous Flesh, it is to be Cured as a Wound in the fleshy Parts.

III. If there is a Fracture of the Ribs, etc. with it, it must be Cured as a
Wound with a Fracture; the broken Bones (if any) are also to be taken forth,
lest they prick the Pleura, and cause Inflammation.

IV. The Signs. If there is a deep penetration into the Cavity, it may be
discerned by the coming forth of the Air, with noise, also a Flux of Blood
following by the Wound, or by the Mouth, or by both; unless the Blood fall down
upon the Diaphragmd, and then the difficulty of breathing, and other like
Symptoms, will ensue.

V. If the Diaphragma is wounded, besides the difficulty of breathing, there
will be a Hoarsness, the Diaphragma will be drawn upwards; the Backbone will
be affected, and there will be a great pain about the Bastard-Ribs.

VI. If the Lungs are wounded, there will be a Cough, with difficulty of
Breathing, and often sighing: If there is an Effusion of Blood, it will (as it
is much or little) flow forth of the Wound, or be cough'd up, or both, and the
Sick will be much inclined to lie upon the Wound.

VII. If the Medulla Spinalis is hurt, the Nerves are resolved, and a Palsy
ensues; but more especially in the Part under the Wound.

VIII. If the Aorta, or Vena Cava, or Portae, a very great Hemorrhage follows:
If it flows from the Right side, the Vena Cava is hurt; but if from the Left,
it is mostly the Artery, which may be known by its leaping and florid Color.

IX. If the Heart is wounded, the Blood flows vehemently, and is as it were
boiling-hot, there are cold Sweats, with fainting and sinking of the Spirits.

X. The Prognostics. If the Vena Portae is wounded, the Patient dies
immediately; and so he does of most of the Wounds made in the other Vessels.

XI. If the Heart is wounded, the Patient dies, but he lives longer, being
wounded in the Right Ventricle than in the Left: If shot into the Lungs, it is
present Death.

XII. And though almost all these Wounds made by Gunshot are Mortal; yet such as
are so wounded, ought not to be left without help; but the Artist ought to use
a Courage and Boldness to attempt something, for that he may sometimes happily
prolong Life, and sometimes Cure that, which to the Eye may seem uncurable.

XIII. The Cure. First, the Bullet, or any Extraneous Matter, if present, must
be extracted, to give way for the discharge of Blood and Matter contained in
the Cavity of the Thorax.

XIV. Then the Wound is to be dressed with a Tent dipped in this mixture: Fine
Bole, burnt Hartshorn, A. jss. fine Flower i. one whole Egg, Oils of Roses and
Elder, A. q.s. mix them. Or this: Catechu, white Starch, A. jss. Dragons Blood,
Terra Sigillata, A. ss. Mastich, Olibanum, A. iii. two whole Eggs, Linseed Oil,
q.s. mix them: Spread the Compress with one of these, and apply it over the
Wound.

XV. If the Blood stop not by this, apply the following Mixture: Catechu jss.
fine Bole i. Alum ss. Salt extracted out of the Caput mort. of Vitriol ii.
Eggs No i. or ii. fine Flower, q.s. mix them.

XVI. Or you may inject the following Mixture: of the Styptick Liquor described
in Cap. 20. Sect. 16. afore-going vi. Syrup of Comfrey jss. Spirit of Wine, or
rather red Wine i. sweet Caput mort. of Vitriol ss. mix them.

XVII. This Method is good, because the Orifice of the Wound is large enough
for the Injection to return out again; and here is need not only of Stypticks,
but also of Detersives, where for the present Occasion, if the former Mixture
is not at hand, Red-Wine it self is an Admirable thing in such bleeding Wounds,
being given inwardly by the Mouth, or Injected with a Syringe; but much more,
if it is impregnated with the Tincture of Catechu; then it will exceed most
things in the World.

XVIII. Or inwardly you may give Our Tinctura Mirabilis in a Glass of
Port-wine, or this following Styptick, which stops bleeding upon the spot. Take
Oil of Vitriol iiss. Oil of Turpentine i. mix perfectly till you have a
blackish or purple Color; being intimately mixed, add to them Spirit of Wine
rectified viii. and keep it for Use. Dose a gut. xx. ad xi. in a Glass of
Red-wine. These things will stop bleeding upon the spot.

XIX. The Blood being stopped, the Wound is to be digested with this, or some
such like: Take Strasburgh Turpentine, Balsam of Chili, or Peru, A. i. Pouders
of Frankincense, Olibanum, of Fenugreek-seed, A. i. Oil of Hypericon q.s. mix
them: dip short Tents in it, and apply them; and apply over a Pledget spread
with some of the same, or with such other Suppuratives as are used in simple
Gunshot Wounds.

XX. Embrocate the Breast with this Mixture: Take Oils of Whelps, and of
Earthworms, A. ii. Oil of Ben, yellow Palm-Oil A. i. mix them; and apply over
all Diapalma, or Empl. Album, or Diachylon simplex, malaxed with some of the
same Oil.

XXI. After Digestion you must deterge by Abstersives, either with an Injection
(if the Matter is so disposed) such as this: Take Extract of Scordium i.
Whitewine xii. mix, and dissolve. Or, Take Extract of Wormwood i. Juice of
Smallage vi. round Birthwort-root, Orrice-root in fine powder, Scammony in fine
powder, A. ss. mix, and dissolve in Redwine lbii. over a gentle heat, adding
Honey of Roses iii. If it is too strong, you may weaken it, by adding thereto
Damask or Red Rose Water lbss. more or less.

XXII. Or you may deterge with an Ointment, such as this: Take Turpentine iii.
Barley-flower, Pouders of Frankincense, Orrice-root, Olibanum and Scammony, A.
ss. Aloes ii. Honey of Roses iv. mix them, with which dress the Wound in the
fleshy Parts.

XXIII. The Wound being thus cleansed, you must fill up the hollow Parts with
Incarnatives; and lastly, finish the Cure with Stypticks and Epuloticks.

XXIV. But this is to be noted in dressing these kinds of Wounds, that you be
careful to remove the Sloughs without, lest a stinking Gleet falls from them,
upon the Viscera within.

XXV. Also in order to the Cure, the Body is to be kept open with proper
lenient Clysters; and Pectorals are to be given inwardly, to prevent the
harshness of the Aspera Arteria; their Diet ought to be sparing, and their
Drink medicated Ale or Hydromel; and after the Accidents are over, the Patient
may enter into a Milk Diet, drinking either Cows Milk alone, or Milk sweetened
with white Sugar Candy, or Sugar of Roses.

CHAP. XXII. Of GVN-SHOT WOVNDS of the BELLY.
I. THE Abdomen, or Belly, is divided into three Regions, 1. Epigastrium, the
upper Region, the sides of which are called Hypochondria: The Right
Hypochondrium possesses all the Liver; the Left, the Spleen; between which the
Stomach is placed. 2. Regio Vmbilicalis, the Middle Region, in which is the
Navel, and round about which dies the Guts; and behind on each side the Reins
or Kidneys. 3. Hypogastrium, the Lowermost or Inferior Region; the sides of
which are the Illia, and in the middle the Pecten or Pubes, under which lies
the Vesica, or Bladder.

II. The Abdomen consists also of Parts containing and contained.

III. The containing are, 1. Common, which cover the whole Body, as, 1. The
Cuticula. 2. Cutis. 3. Pinguedo. 4. Membrana Carnosa. 2. Particular, or
peculiar to the Belly, as, 1. The Muscles of the Belly. 2. The Peritonaeum. 3.
The Omentum, which has a special relation to the Guts.

IV. The contained Parts, are, 1. For Nutrition, as Stomach, Small-guts,
Mesentery, Vena Portae, Vena Cava, Arteria magna, Coeliaca magna, Liver and
Spleen. 2. For Expurgation, as the Gall, Pancreas, all the Guts, but chiefly
the great ones, Reins, Ureters, and Piss-bladder, also the Vterus, or Womb in
Women. 3. For Procreation, as the Vasa praeparantia, and deferentia, Prostatae,
and Vterus in women.

V. These Parts both containing and contained are liable to Gunshot, from
whence various kinds of Wounds arise, which occasion various Accidents: Some
penetrate into the Cavity of the Abdomen, wounding the contained Parts; others
pierce not, but only wound or bruise the containing Parts.

VI. If the Bullet penetrates not, but only bruises or scratches a little, yet
such a slight hurt may be subject to a Tumor, and therefore lenient
Embrocations, as with Oils of Whelps, Earthworms, Hypericon, etc. are to be
used, applying over them Empl. de Bolo, or Caesaris.

VII. If the Skin and Flesh is wounded, and no farther, it is Cured as Gunshot
Wounds in fleshy Parts, and all those things may be used, which are applied in
simple Gunshot Wounds. But these Wounds, if they happen in a Cacochymical or
Scorbutic Habit of Body, because we cannot bind them up, as we can other
Parts, by reason of their Figure, Site, and continual Motion, are subject to
great defluxions, and the Matter is apt to insinuate it self amongst the
circumjacent Muscles, and raise them up, so making sinuous Ulcers, difficult to
Cure.

VIII. If the Bullet penetrates through the Peritonaeum, and wounds the internal
Viscera, you are to consider what Parts are hurt, which you may discern from
the Place and the Accidents accompanying such Wounds, as also by the proper
Symptoms of each Part.

IX. The Signs. Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 26. says, If the Liver is wounded, there
is forthwith an effusion of gross Blood: If the Vena Cava, or Portae, are
wounded, the Right Hypochondrium is in pain.

X. If the Artery is wounded, the Blood is florid, and comes forth impetuously,
and the Patient makes his exit therewith.

XI. If the Stomach is wounded, a Singultus, or Hiccough follows, with Vomiting
and Nauseousness; the Food with the Chyle comes forth of the Wound; there is
also a cold Sweat, with Fainting and Languishing.

XII. If the Wound is in the Left Hypochondrium, under the short Ribs, the
Spleen is wounded, the Blood which flows forth is black, and there is also
Tension, and difficulty of Breathing.

XIII. If the lesser Guts are wounded, there will be Vomiting of greenish
Matter, and the Food will come out of the Wound in less than half an Hour, and
will continue so to do as long as Life lasts: If the great Guts are wounded,
the Excrements and stinking Smell will show it.

XIV. If a Kidney is hurt, the Wound is in the Region of the Loins, near the
Vertebra, under the Diaphragma: There is also a pain going to the Groins and
Testicles, with a difficulty in making Water; and what is pist forth, is either
pure Blood, or Urine mixed with Blood: If the Ureters are wounded, the Urine
comes forth at the Wound.

XV. If the Bladder is wounded, there is great pain in the Groin, and the Urine
comes forth by the Wound; the Stomach suffers also by consent, and the Part
wounded indicates it.

XVI. If the Womb is wounded, the Groins and Coxa are pained, and the Blood
flows not only by the Wound, but per Vulvam, and are sometimes Frantic, with
other Symptoms of Death.

XVII. The Prognostics. Though Physicians say, That if the Belly is so wounded
that the Excrements come out of the Colon on the Left side, the recovery of
such a one is rather a Miracle than a Work of Art; yet this I can say by
Experience, that when I was in the West Indies, I had a stout Negro so wounded
by a shot, that his Excrements daily came forth through the Wound; yet
notwithstanding that I despaired of his Life, by the Care and Pains I took with
him, I perfectly Cured him in a Months time.

XVIII. Wounds of the Stomach are sometimes Mortal; but I have lived to see
such Wounds Cured, and the Patient to live many Years after them.

XIX. Celsus determined such like Wounds made with sharp or cutting Weapons,
Mortal, how much more then may we judge them so, which are made by Gunshot?
Though it is also true, that sometimes Nature does wonders of this kind.

XX. If the Wound is only in the Region of the Belly, it is not without danger,
more especially if it is in the middle, or Linea Alba: But if it penetrates,
there is much more danger, for these Parts once broken seldom recover.

XXI. The Cure. You must first begin with the Extraction of the Bullet, or any
other extraneous Matter which may be carried in with it, lest they induce
putridness: then you must reduce the Intestines and Omentum, lest they Inflate
and Corrupt. Lastly, you must abate the Inflammation, and hasten Digestion.

I. Gunshot VVounds of Stomach and Guts.
XXII. To dispose the Guts and Omentum to reduction, you must foment with warm
Discutients; and if the Orifice is not large enough, you must make it wider.

XXIII. If the Omentum is corrupted, make a Ligature beyond the corrupt Part,
and cut it off, leaving the ends of the Ligature hanging out, till it is cast
off by Digestion.

XXIV. If there is an Hemorrhage, inject Red-wine mixed with Syrup of dried
Roses, fine Bole, Terra Sigillata, Catechu, Aloes, Frankincense, and Sanguis
Draconis, all in subtle Powder: Or mix the Styptick Liquor (described Cap. 20.
Sect. 16.) with Red-wine and Frog-spawn-water, Ana; and inject with it, being
indifferent hot.

XXV. Or you may use the Injection mentioned in Cap. 21. Sect. 16. which is an
admirable thing, being cast into the Wound Blood-warm.

XXVI. This done, make a Mixture of the subtle Powder of fine Bole, Catechu,
Terra Sigillata, Aloes, Frankincense, Sanguis Draconis, and dried blood, a
new-laid Egg, and Oils of Mastich and VVhelps, which apply upon a Tent fastened
to a Thread: Then spreading the rest upon a Stuph, lay it over all: But if
there is no Hemorrhage, you ought to digest as fast as you can.

XXVII. And inwardly give this: Dr. Gardner's Laudanum Tartarizatum, or Our
Laudanum Specificum, gr. iii. or iv. Tinctura Mirabilis ss. or i. of the
Styptick (described cap. 21. sect. 18.) gut. xx. Red-wine, red Rose Water, A.
q.s. mix, dissolve, and give it for a Dose.

XXVIII. Fallopius commends this in Wounds of the Stomach and Guts: Mouse-ear,
Plantane, roots of Comfrey and Tormentil, flowers of Hypericon, which boil in
Red-wine, strain out, and add thereto Manna, Frankincense, Rosin of the
Fir Tree, Cypress, Turpentine, Saffron, Earthworms in Powder, Oil of Mastich,
A. q.s. mix, and make a Sarcotick.

II. Gunshot Wounds of the Reins or Kidneys.
XXIX. In Wounds of the Reins you must make an Injection with such things as
are abstersive and drying; as, roots of Aristolochia rotunda, of Comfrey and
Orrice, A. ii. Catechu jss. Red-wine, Chalybeat-water, A. q.s. boil, strain
out, and afterward add Powers of Turpentine ss. Syrupof dried Roses iv. mix
for an Injection.

XXX. Or: Tinctura Mirabilis i. Red-wine vi. Smith's Forge-water viii. in which
i. of the Vitriol of Mars is dissolved, Honey of Roses iii. mix for an
Injection.

XXXI. Embrocate with Oleum Hyperici mixed with Oleum Catellorum, Ana; and dress
up the Wound with a Digestive made of Turpentine, and one whole Egg, mixed with
fine Bole, Mastich and Frankincense in powder; applying over all, Our
Emplastrum Album, malaxt with Oil of Hypericon, yellow Palm-Oil, or Oil of
Hempseed. Or this Cataplasm: Take Barley, Bean, and Orobus flower, A. iii.
Eggs, No ii. mix them, adding Oxymel vi. boil to a Consistence, and add Oil of
Hypericon, or of Whelps, q.s. mix them, and applyit.

III. Gunshot Wounds of Liver and Spleen.
XXXII. In these Wounds there is generally a great Hemorrhage, and therefore
you may inject with the Mixture described in Cap. 21. Sect. 16. or those at
Sect. 29, and 30. aforegoing, which will cleanse and heal.

XXXIII. Wiseman gives us this: Take Plantane, Cinkfoil, Knotgrass, Yarrow,
Myrtles, red Roses, boil all in Chalybeat, or Smith's Forge-water, and sweeten
with Syrup of dried Roses, then use it Blood-warm for an Injection.

XXXIV. Or you may add to it (says he) Acacia, fine Bole, Dragons Blood, and
Frankincense in Pouders, and make it up into the consistency of a Liniment, and
apply it upon Tents or Pledgets.

IV. Gunshot Wounds of the Womb.
XXXV. Though these are accounted deadly, yet the Vagina, which some are pleased
to call the Womb, being Gangrened, was cut out of the Body of a Butcher's Wife
by Dr. Gardner the King's Chyrurgeon, without any hazard of Life, and the Woman
is yet alive at the writing hereof, though it is many Years since the Operation
was done.

XXXVI. If there is an Hemorrhage, you must endeavor to stop it with
Injections, such as we have described at Sect. 24, 25, 29, and 30, aforegoing,
or some other proper Styptick Liquor.

XXXVII. Then Apply Embrocations and Digestives, observing the universal Method
of Curing Wounds, application of good Vulneraries and Sarcoticks, keeping the
Body cool and empty with Clysters, and giving inwardly proper Traumatick
Drinks, such as we have in other places described; together with the Mixture
mentioned at Sect. 27. aforegoing.

CHAP. XXIII. Of GVN-SHOT WOVNDS in the LIMBS and JOINTS.
I. THese kinds of Wounds seldom go without Fracture of the Bone; nor is there
any of the five various kinds of Fractures which will not be made by Gunshot.

II. The Signs. Now to discover a Fracture of a Bone, it will be well, as
Hippocrates advises, to compare the sound Parts with the Parts affected, and to
see whether there is any inequality, or not; for if broken, you will feel a
Cavity, if you touch or press upon the Parts above or below.

III. There will be a vehemence of Pain, because of the divulsion of the
Nerves, and distortion of the Tendinous Bodies, also a pricking pain in the
fleshy Parts by the pointed ends, or shivers of the Bone.

IV. The asperity and inequality of the Bone, also searching with your Probe,
and handling the Fractured Member, wherein is perceived a crashing of the Bones
one against another: these, with the Impotency of the wounded Member, so that
the Patient cannot lean or stand upon it, are all demonstrations that the Bone
is broken.

V. The Prognostics. Those Fractures are most dangerous, which are made so
deep in the Flesh, that we cannot well come at them with our Hands, to extract
the shivered Bones, and place the others right, and retain them so by Bandage,
as those of the Pubes, Os Ilion, Os Sacrum, etc.

VI. Those Wounds in which there are many Splinters of Bones, wherein the Bone
is generally shattered to pieces, are extremely dangerous, because their sharp
points are apt to prick the Nerves, Tendons, etc. whereby vehement Pain,
Inflammation, and Convulsions are excited, and many times Death follows, unless
the Member is immediately Amputated.

VII. Though Amputation is not to be used upon every slight account, yet when the
Case is so desperate, that the Cure cannot be done without it, or when it is
necessary to be done for preserving the Patient's Lise, it ought to be done at
first, even upon the receiving of the Wound, whilst the Patient is heated,
furious, and in Mettle, before his Courage decays, Spirits languish, or Pain,
flux of Humors, Inflammations, Fevers, or Convulsions, seize him, and not defer
it to the next Day, at which time the Patient will choose rather to Die, than to
endure the Cruelty of the Operation.

VIII. If the Bone is broken in the middle, it is less dangerous than near the
Joint, where it is more hard to be restored; and being restored, more difficult
to be kept in its place; besides the great number of Symptoms, which are apt to
ensue, which cannot be cured without much difficulty.

IX. The Agglutination of Bones is more easily, and sooner performed in young
Persons, than in such as are old: so also in such as are of a Sanguin
Complexion, rather than in such as are Choleric, Melancholic, or of a
Cacochymick, or Scorbutic Habit of Body; because the former has much better
Juices, Lympha, and Serum, for the generating of a Callus, than the latter have.

I. The Cure of Gunshot-Wounds in the Limbs.
X. Clear the Wound from all extraneous things; as Bullets, Rags, Splinters,
Weapons, pieces of Bones, etc. and if need be, enlarge the Orifice of it; then
dress it with Digestives and lenient Embrocations, afterward deterge it with
Mundificativum Paracelsi; and hasten the Exfoliation of the Bones with Mel
Rosarum and Spirit of Wine, or Tincture of Euphorbium, etc.

XI. The Mundificative of Paracelsus. Honey iv. Turpentine ii. boil with a
gentle heat, to the consistence of a soft Ointment; take it from the Fire, and
mix with it the yolk of an Egg, red Precipitate levigated i. stir them 'till
they are well incorporated. It is said to excel all other Abstersives or
Mundificatives.

XII. If the Fracture is near a Joint, there may be many times through the
violence of the Blow, a dislocation withal: in this case, you must first
restore the Joint, before you meddle with the Fracture: you must also first
reduce the Fracture, before you meddle with the Wound.

XIII. To reduce the Fracture, you must make Extension, and Coaptation, or
Reposition, that the Bone may be restored to its proper place, which ought to
be done with much steadiness and care; and not with such a force as is
necessary in Fractures without a Wound, lest the Musculous or Nervous Parts
should suffer vehement Pain, Inflammation, Convulsions, etc.

XIV. When you begin the Work, if the Orifice is not large enough, widen it,
for the Extraction of the Bullet, broken Bones, and other Extraneous Bodies; so
will the Extension be the easier, and less subject to an Inflammation, and a
small extension will serve to restore the Bones to their former place.

XV. And indeed these Wounds require more dilatation than any other; that not
only the corrupted Blood, and other Excrements may have a free passage out; but
that also the Shivers of Bones, with which these kinds of Wounds usually
abound, may with less trouble be extracted by Instrument, or discharged by
Nature.

XVI. If this Dilatation is not made at first, you may possibly be forced to do
it when the Part is afflicted with vehement Pain, Defluxion, and Inflammation;
or when the Bones are corrupted by the retention of the Matter; which will be a
great disadvantage to the Patient.

XVII. The Wound being laid open, see whether the Bone is bare, or not; which
you may find out either with your Eye, Finger, or Probe: if it is bare, you
must apply drying things to it, as dry Lint, pouders of Aloes, Birthwort-roots,
Frankincense, Myrrh, Orrice-roots, Euphorbium, etc. forbearing all oily and
greasy Medicines, because they foul the Bone, and hinder the Callus.

XVIII. But to the Fleshy Parts you must apply Digestives, because they require
Digestion, without which no Cure will succeed: and therefore over the dry
things laid upon the naked Bone, you may apply warm Suppuratives, such as we
direct to in Simple Gunshot-Wounds.

XIX. Then lay over the Fractured Part Emplastr. Caesar, or E Bolo; or
Catagmaticum malaxed with Linseed-Oil, and Oil of Whelps: or this; Take Empl.
Album iv. Comfrey-roots in powder, Terra sigillata, Catechu, Rosin, all in
powder, A. ss. juice of Plantan j. Oils of Myrtles and of Whelps, A. q.s. mix,
and make an Emplaster.

XX. Apply over the Wound a Stuph, or double Cloths wrung out of a Decoction of
Wormwood-tops, Myrtle-berries, Sumach, red Roses and Catechu made in Red-Wine;
which Compress will serve to keep the lips of the Wound smooth, and defend it
from the injury of the Bandage.

XXI. The next thing to be considered is the Bandage: for unless that is
rightly and well done, no Unition, or Healing can be expected: and though in
Simple Fractures without a Wound, all kinds of Bandage may be admitted, with
many circumvolutions about the Part, and once opening them in a Weeks time may
be enough: in these Wounds it is not so, for the Bandage is to be daily
loosned, and the Wounds to be opened and dressed, for the discharge of purulent
and excrementitious Matter, and exfoliation of carious Bones, which lying,
would corrupt those which are sound.

XXII. But the Bandage ought to be such, as may the least shake or hurt the
fractured Part: for being every day to be opened, the so often rolling the
Wound up would cause much pain, and hinder the Unition; for which Reason,
Authors have invented many kinds of Bandage, to answer all the Intentions of
Dressing, and yet keep the Member immovable.

XXIII. And therefore for this purpose, it ought to be made of soft Linen
Cloths; (broader than those we use in simple Fractures;) yet it may comprehend,
or reach over, both the Fracture and the Wound, keep the Lips down and smooth,
and not hurt them by its too hard compression.

XXIV. The Form of the Ligature. Take a soft broad piece of Cloth, folded four
times double, to give it the more strength and firmness, and so broad as may
reach over both the lips of the Wound, and the fractured Parts, and so long as
to come once about the Fracture: it must have three slits, from the ends to the
middle; which middle must be undivided underneath, to bear more equally the
Member; and the ends must come over one another, with a Compress between or
under them, over the Wound, to press the lips thereof equally down, which
otherwise would swell or stick out with great brims.

XXV. The Compress is useful to receive the matter, and fill up the inequality;
and the Slits or Straps are to be so fastened, that you may easily open them,
and undress and dress the Wound, without disturbing the fractured Member.

XXVI. Now because through the great shattering of the Bones, and laceration of
the fleshy Parts; as also by reason of the largeness of the Wound and Fracture,
causing exceeding pain, the Member is made exceeding weak, that it cannot be
kept steady by this Bandange, you ought to make use of Ferulae or Splints; but
they are not to be used 'till the Flux of Humors and Inflammation cease, which
will be about the seventh day; and 'till then, you may make use of Splenia,
which are folded Linen Cloths four times double, and cut or made in length and
breadth like to the Ferulae.

XXVII. These Splenia are to be spread with Galen 's Cerat, or any proper
Ointment, whereby they may adhere to the Part, 'till you have put the Bandage
over it. They strengthen the Part, and make such an equal compression, as to
keep the Bones in their places, press the Serous Humors out of the Wound, and
cause the Member to lie soft.

XXVIII. The Pain and Inflammation being thus gone off, and the Wound digested,
you may (if you think fit) use pliable Pastbords cut into like pieces, to lay
over these Splenia. Or, having fastened the Splenia, by the broad Bandage with
three Slits, or Straps, cut a piece of Pastbord, fit to receive the lower part
of the Member, and leave a place large enough for dressing of the Wound: and
over the other part of the fractured Member you must lay another piece of
Pastbord, to answer to the former; which ought to be wet, that they may be the
more pliant.

XXIX. And about the Past-bord make a Bandage with three Ligatures, which you
are to fasten in the most fit place for the ease of the Patient: if the Splenia
also are made wet with whites of Eggs, and so applied, they will very much
strengthen the Member, and also keep it steady without those other.

XXX. You may make the Past-board over the first Bandage, to encompass so much
of the lower parts, as may support the Fracture, and come within an Inch of the
Wound: and over the Wound it self you may fasten a Splenium of Cloth four times
double, or a Ferulalike piece of Copper, Pewter, Tin, or Pastbord, lined as you
see the Part can bear it, which may be taken off at each dressing.

XXXI. The first Bandage next to the Cerate, makes an equal compression, by
three Heads, meeting one over another: the lowermost presses the Humors or
Recrements from below upwards, and with the help of its next fellow, keeps the
Bones in their right places, and forces the Pus out of the Wound; and by the
help the middle Bracer has from the uppermost, the matter is pressed out of the
upper parts of the Fracture and Wound, to the mouth of the Orifice: it also
restrains the Influx of Humors from above, by virtue of the Defensative lying
under it.

XXXII. And in the dressing of these Wounds, you are only to undo the middle
Binder, to come at the Sore; but in doing it up again, you must take great
heed, that you make it not too hard nor too slack, but draw it strait in a
mean, that it may not in the least hurt the Patient.

XXXIII. The convenient Position of the Membeer, is next to be considered;
which ought to be so, 1. As it may lie soft and easy; lest the compression
should offend the wounded Parts, and cause Pain, or Inflammation. 2. That it
may lie equal or smooth; for otherwise the Limb will be distorted, or the
Operation ill performed. 3. That it may lie higher than the parts next the
Body, especially for the first three or four days: because if it inclines
downwards, it may be apt to induce an afflux of Humors. Now how this Position
is exactly to be performed, we shall teach in Lib. 6. of Fractures, following.

XXXIV. The Bones being thus restored, the Wound digested, and the Inflammation
or other Accidents gone off, which is about the seventh or ninth day, unloose
the Bandage, take off your Astringent or Restrictive Applications, and impose
Empl. Catagmaticum, or some such like, over the broken Bones.

XXXV. Or this following. Take Frankincense, Wax, A. lbi. Catechu in fine
powder iv. juice of Comfrey, of Doves-foot, A. iij. mix, and melt, reducing it
to the consistence of a Cerat.

XXXVI. Or, Take mucilage of Comfrey-roots, birdlime, juice of Doves-foot, or
Bistort, of Poplarbuds, A. iv. mucilage of Tragacanth, Osteocolla in fine
powder, Catechu in fine powder, A. iij. yolks of Eggs No xx. Turpentine lbjss.
Oil of Whelps iv. mix, and boil all well; adding afterward Wax, enough to
bring it to the consistency of a Cerat.

XXXVII. Some use instead of these, Empl. Sticticum Paracelsi iv. Empl. Album
ij. mixing them together; and over this, or one of the former Emplasters, apply
a double Cloth dipped in Decoction of Wormwood, Southernwood, Sumach, and
Red-Roses, made with Red-Wine.

XXXVIII. Which done, fit to the wounded Part the former Bandage again; and
over it either some Plates of Tin or Copper, or otherwise Splenia of double
Cloths dipped in whites of Eggs, and wrung out hard: these latter will lie close
to the Part, and after they are dry will admirably well strengthen the Member.

XXXIX. In about nine days time the Wound will be digested, after which
Maturatives or Suppuratives are to be forborne, and Abstersives or Cleansers are
to be used; as the Mundisicativum Paracelsi, at Sect. 11. afore-going; or
Vnguentum Nicotianae; or this, Take Tobacco, Perwinkle, A. M. ij. Hypericon Mj.
roots of round Birthwort jss. of Florentine-Orrice vj. Frankincense, Myrrh,
Sarcocol, A. iii. White-VVine q.s. boil, and strain out, and dissolve therein
Honey of Roses iv, vel vi. Inject this with a Syringe, and it will both
cleanse, and breed Flesh.

XL. If there is a caries, or rottenness of the Bone, make a Decoction of
Orrice-root, Gentian, Cortex Guajaci, Scordium, Perwinkle, Hog-fennel and
Myrrh, in Wine; adding Tincture of Euphorbium to it, Camphorated S.V. or
Extract of Scordium.

XLI. If the Caries will not yield to the former Medicament, touch it now and
then with this. Take Oil of Myrrh, distilled per descensum, and acuated with
S.V. iv. Oil of Cloves i. Oil of Sulphur jss. mix them. Or you may use Tinct.
Euphorbii, alone: these will in a short time remove the Cariosity; after which,
you may pursue the ordinary Method of Cure.

XLII. While these things are doing outwardly, you may administer inwardly this
following Wound-Drink. Take round Birthwort-roots, A. ss. the Herbs, Angelica,
Avens, Bistort, Comfrey, Doves-foot, Perwinkle, Self-heal, Scordium, Speedwel,
Ladies-mantle, A. M. j. Wine lbxii. boil them in a Vessel close stopped for half
an hour, or better; strain out, and let the Patient take iv, ad vi. morning and
evening, with Osteocolla i. in fine powder, every time. Or you may make a
Decoction of Perwinkle in Wine, in which you may give Osteocolla, as before
directed.

XLIII. Now in Dressing these kinds of VVounds, you are to observe, that if the
Quittor is but little, it is enough to dress them once in 24 hours time: but if
much Pus flows forth, or there is great Pain, or the Patient is feverish, they
ought to be dressed once every 12 hours.

XLIV. Cooling and Astringent Medicines are not to be used in the first
Dressing; because the first extinguish the Natural Heat; the latter keep in
putrid Vapors, and may induce a Gangren.

XLV. For this cause Anodyns, Emollients, and Suppuratives are convenient; as
Oils of Linseed, of Hempseed, of Lillies, of Eggs, of Hypericon, of Elder, of
Whelps, of Earthworms, and of Camomil; which may be mixed with yolks of Eggs and
Saffron, 'till the Wound comes to Digestion, which may be about the fourth or
fifth day. Or this: Take Crumbs of Bread iv. Milk xii. Barley and Bean meal, A.
j. flowers of Camomil and Melilot, A. P.ij. boil all to the consistence of a
Cataplasm, adding at last yolks of Eggs No ij. Oil of Whelps and of Hypericon,
A. jss. mix them.

XLVI. If Putrefaction is feared, some use Vitriol calcined, and dissolved in
Aqua Vitae; though it is not suppurative, because it resists Putrefaction.

XLVII. Tents, if any are used, may be at first made greater and longer, that
the Wound may be sufficiently dilated: but Escaroticks are not to be used,
without great necessity; 1. By reason they cause Pain, Inflammation, and
Fevers, etc. 2. Because they hinder Suppuration. 3. Because the Escar keeps in
putrid Vapors, which may pass from the lesser to the greater Vessels, and so to
the Principal Parts, and cause a Fever.

XLVIII. If there is any Burning, then such Medicines which are good against
Burning are to be used: as, Take Oils of Linseed and white Lillies, A. ii. Ung.
Album jss. Ung. Nicotianae i. juices of Housleek, of Plantan, of Elder-leaves,
and of green Tobacco, A. ii. Saccharum Saturni iv. boil with a gentle Fire to
the consumption of the Juices, and add Oil of Whelps i. purified Verdigrise j.

XLIX. If the Contusion is very great, and possesses much of the adjacent
Parts, they are to be Scarified, to discharge part of the coagulated Blood,
which is apt to putrify.

L. If by the Signs the Bullet seems to have been poisoned, the brims are to be
scarified, Ventoses to be applied, Antidotes are to be inwardly given, and
Alexipharmicks applied outwardly. Inwardly give Sal Viperarum, or Our Theriaca
Chymica, taking after it a spoonful or two of Our Aqua Bezoartica, or Spiritus
Cordialis.

LI. And outwardly apply to the Wound this Mixture. Take juices of Scordium,
Tobacco, and Angelica, Vinegar of Roses and of Squills, Honey, A. lbss. Sal
Gem, Alum, A. i. Verdigrise purified ss. mix, and boil to a consistence; adding
at the end of the boiling, Mithridate, Venice Treacle, A. i. or of Our Theriaca
Chymica ii. apply this either upon Tents, or Pledgets, or by way of Injection,
as you see fit. See more of this Subject in Chap. 18. afore-going.

LII. If the softer Spermatick Parts are lacerated, you may apply this. Take
Strasburgh or Cypress Turpentine, Oils of Turpentine and Hypericon, A.ii.
Turbith-mineral ss. Calx vive, Euphorbium, Tutty, all in fine powder, A. i. mix
them.

LIII. But if the harder Spermatick Parts, as the Cartilages and Bones are
shivered, then, Of the former Composition ijss. Oils of Hypericon and
Juniper Berries, A. ii. pouders of round Birthwort roots, of Cloves, of
Tobacco, A. i. mix them, and let it be applied hot: this will procure the
Scaling of the Bone, and preserve the sound Part from Cariosity.

II. Of Gunshot-Wounds in the Joints.
LIVE. These Wounds are subject to more grievous and vehement Accidents or
Symptoms, than the former: there are Tendons and Ligaments inserted near the
Joints, for their motion; and Membranes, to make them of a very exquisit sense:
the Trunk of Nerves in every great Joint passes through it, for the use of the
Member beyond it; and Joints being exsanguous Parts, the Natural Balsam of the
Blood and Lympha is more sparingly supplied, for the help of the Cure.

LV. The Prognostics. Great Wounds in the greater Joints, are accompanied with
more vehement pain, than Wounds out of the Joint; and also with Inflammations,
Delirium, Convulsions, and Gangren, which are for the most part mortal.

LVI. The Cure. In these, the extraneous Bodies, and Splinters of Bones, are
immediately to be taken forth; for which reason, the Orifice, if it be not large
enough, is to be made so: but in doing this, in the lower parts in the hollow
of the Ham, Arm, Armpit, or Groin, be cautious, because those Parts are subject
to great Hemorrhages.

LVII. The Extraneous Bodies, etc. being removed, you must with all speed
hasten Digestion by dropping, or applying warm upon Tents, Dossels, or
Pledgets, proper Digestives, such as the following: but Tents are to be used
with much caution in these kinds of Wounds.

LVIII. Take Turpentine washed in S.V. iv. Oil of Hypericon ii. yolks of Eggs
No ii. Frankincense, Mastich, Olibanum, Myrrh, Saffron, A. i. mix them.

LIX. Or, Take Turpentine ii. yolks of Eggs No ii. Oils of Scorpions, of
Castor, of Earthworms, and of Whelps, A. ss. Frankincense, Myrrh, Hartshorn
burnt, A. iss. mix them.

LX. But if a stronger Digestive is required; then, Take Oils of Turpentine and
of Spike, A. i. Oils of Castor, and of Hypericon with Gums, A.jss. Euphorbium
in powder jss. mix them: this is to be dropped very hot into the Wound, and one
of the aforementioned Digestives is to be applied over all.

LXI. Then the Parts adjacent are to be Embrocated with Oils of Whelps and of
Hypericon, over which this Cataplasm may be applied. Take Barley and Bean
meals, A. lbj. flowers of Camomil and Melilot, red Roses, tops of Wormwood and
Scordium, all in powder, A. i. Broth of a Sheeps-head, (if you would have it
Lenitive, otherwise in Oxymel) q.s. boil to a consistency; adding, Oils of
Whelps and Linseed, A.q.s.

LXII. Or, Take mucilages of Altbea and Comfrey roots, A. iv. Barley and Bean
meals, A. vi. meals of Linseed and Fenugreek-seed, A. iv. Zedoary in powder
jss. Wine, q.s. boil to a consistency: and add, Oils of Hypericon and Whelps,
Honey, A. ii. yolks of Eggs No ii. mix them for a Digestive.

LXIII. Then deterge with this Abstersive. Take Turpentine, Honey, Orobus-meal,
A. ii. Orrice-root, Frankincense, round Birthwort-root, A. jss. juice of
Smallage iii. mix, and make an Ointment.

LXIV. The Wound being cleansed, Inearnate with Sarcoticks: as, Take Beef Suet
iv. Earthworms washed, Oil of Mastich, A. ii. roots of Comfrey and Tormentil,
A. ss. tops of Hypericon, Betony, Horse-tail, Plantain, A. M. ss. Wine, q.s.
boil to the consumption of the Wine; strain out by strong expression, and add
thereto Wax iv. Pine-Rosin i. Aloes, Frankincense, Mastich, Myrrh, A. ss. mix,
and make an Ointment. Wiseman.

LXV. If the pain is violent, and yields not to Anodyns, cut off the affected
Tendon, and whatever corrupts, lest it taints the rest: and if the Bone is
bare, you must be careful not to foul it by applying greasy Medicines: also in
great Wounds of this kind, you ought always to consider first, whether they are
curable or not; that by a timely Extirpation, you may save the Life of your
Patient.

CHAP. XXIV. Of BVRNINGS and SCALDINGS.
I. THIS kind of Wound is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Ambustio; in
English, Burning: also, (...), Pustula, Scalding; (...), Vesicatum Aquis,
Scalding with Water; (...), Vesiculatum Oleo, Scalding with Oil; (...),
Vesicatum Picis, Scalding with Pitch, etc.

II. Burning or Scalding, is a Solution of Unity; mostly in the fleshy parts,
caused by an external burning matter; and always hurting the Cuticula, for the
most part the Cutis, and many times the Arteries, Veins, Lymphaducts, Muscles,
Nerves, Tendons, and Ligaments.

III. The Differences. The Differences are taken, 1. From the Nature and
Quality of the Wound. 2. From the Matter or Substance, with which the Burning
or Scalding was made.

IV. From the Nature and Quality of the Wound, it is Fourfold. 1. When heat and
pain are only excited in the Wound; and unless that Medicaments are presently
applied, the Cuticula will be separated from the Cutis, and so Blisters will be
raised, which will contain a clear Water.

V. 2. Sometimes the Cutis it self is burnt; and then a Blister is raised upon
the spot, but no Escar or Crust is produced or made; though many times the Skin
is contracted together.

VI. 3. Sometimes the Skin it self, and the Flesh which lies under it is burnt,
and an Escar produced; so that the Skin is black, and void of sense, and when
the Escar is fallen off, a deep Ulcer is left.

VII. 4. Sometimes not only the Skin and Flesh are burnt, but the Vessels, as
Arteries and Veins; also Nerves, Tendons, and Ligaments; which are many times
shrunk up, contracted, and burnt, so as to break in sunder by force of the Fire.

VIII. 2. The Differences are taken from the Matter or Instrument burning; as,
1. With Water, which is called Scalding; which is more or less, as it is more
or less hot.

IX. 2. With Straw, Stubble, Flax, Chips; which only scald, and raise Blisters,
unless the burning is long continued.

X. 3. With Oils, Fats, Tar, Pitch, Varnish, Honey, Wax; all which scald more
than the other things, causing greater Pain, and larger or deeper Blisters.

XI. 4. Burning with melted Lead, Tin, or Iron red-hot, etc. which are more
vehement and intense Burners than the former things, and many times cause very
deep Ulcers.

XII. 5. Burning with the actual Fire it self, as also with Gunpowder and
Lightning; which cause most vehement Wounds and Ulcers; according to the
greatness and length, or time of the Burning.

XIII. The Prognostics. The lighter the Burning, the more easily it is cured:
but by how much the burning is greater, by so much it is harder to cure; and so
much the more pernicious Symptoms it brings, as Inflammation, Gangren,
Sphacelus, loss of Motion of the Part, and Ulcers very difficult to be cured.

XIV. If the Burn is great and deep, it for the most part leaves a great
Deformity, or unseemly Scars behind it.

XV. Burning by Lightning is dangerous, and for the most part mortal; and if
that, or any other kind of Burning penetrates into the Intestines, it is
incurable.

XVI. Burnings in Bodies Cacochymical, Scorbutic, or Strumatick, are many
times accompanied with an Afflux of Humors, whence arise Inflammations, putrid
Ulcers, and other unpleasing Symptoms.

XVII. If one part is burnt, the danger is less than if there were more parts,
or the whole surface of the Body burnt: in the latter case, the Patient
commonly dies miserably, by the very violence or vehemence of the Symptoms.

XVIII. If the Burning is so deep, as to reach to the greater Arteries, Veins,
and Nerves, it is very dangerous; for the Vessels are contracted and shut up,
whereby the Blood and Spirits cannot flow unto the Parts affected; whence
either an Atrophy, or loss of Sense and Motion, or a Gangren is induced.

XIX. If the Abdomen is burnt, it is not cured but with much difficulty: so
likewise the Burnings of the Groins and Armpits, because those places are
moist, and apt to receive an Afflux of Humors.

XX. The Burnings of the Eyes are dangerous; for they produce either Blindness,
or a deprivation of Sight; or at least a diminishing thereof.

XXI. If the Hairy Parts are much burnt, they remain bald, and the Hair never
grows there again: for in such a Part the Cicatrice is hard, and the Pores shut
up, so that Hair can never be generated there any more; nor if there were
Matter for their Generation, would they be able to penetrate through the closed
Pores.

XXII. The Cure. We shall consider this, as it has relation, 1. To Burning or
Scalding in general. 2. To a light or gentle Burning. 3. To Burnings with
Gunpowder. 4. To Burnings from Lightning. 5. To Burnings of the second Degree.
6. To Burnings of the third degree. 7. To Burnings of the Eyes. 8. To Burnings
of the Joints. 9. To Burnings of the Groin. 10. To the preventing of ugly Scars.

I. Of Burning and Scalding, in general.
XXIII. The First Intention is, to draw out the Fire, which in a light or
gentle Burning or Scalding, does preserve the Part from Blistering or
Vlcerating: and in a great Burning, it preserves from farther danger: and
therefore what is to be applied, is presently to be laid on.

XXIV. Some Physicians, from that common received Axiom, That Contraries are
cured with Contraries, will have it; That Cooling things must be applied to
Burns and Scalds: whereas in all Burnings and Scaldings, the Particles or Atoms
of Fire are communicated to the Part, so that an Empyreuma is produced: in
which case, if cold things be applied, the Particles of the Fire which have
penetrated into the burnt Part, will be driven farther in: whereas on the
contrary, it is the Physician's Business to draw them wholly forth.

XXV. From hence then, upon the imposing of cold things, the fiery Particles
being protruded much lower or deeper into the Flesh; it follows, that the Pain
will be very much increased, Inflammations may ensue, a Gangren may be excited,
and even a Sphacelus it self induced.

XXVI. It is then Heat, and hot things, which are helpful, and call forth the
Empyreuma, or Particles of Fire: and therefore in the more gentle Burnings, it
is not unknown even to the Vulgar, that the burnt Part is to be held near the
Fire, or Flame of a Candle, or a red-hot Iron; to be Burnt again, (as it were)
that thereby the Fire may be drawn forth: Attractionem facit similitudo, atque
Ignis externus, intrinsecum Ignem for as evocat: Similitude and likeness begets
attraction, and the external Fire calls forth the internal Fire, as, Paraeus,
lib. 11. cap. 9. and Sennertus, Med. pract. lib. 5. par. 2. cap. 18. have truly
told us.

XXVII. Barbett therefore advises, that the hurt Part be held to the Fire, and
fomented with warm Water, hot Ink, Lie, or Salt-brine, or Soot may be applied
upon it, or an Onion beaten up with Salt.

XXVIII. Or these following; Roots of white Lillies, Liquorice, Leaves of Beet,
Colewort, Hemp; Onions, Leeks, Garlic, Henbane, Tobacco, Hypericon, Flowers of
Camomil, Melilot, Elder, Seeds of Quinces, Flax, Camphir, Myrrh, Olibanum,
Frankincense, Turpentine, whites of Eggs, Hogs-lard, Oils of Nuts, and of
Rape-seed, Sheeps, Pigeons, and Hens Dung, Nitre, Common Salt, Sal Gem,
Vitriol, Alum, Ink, Lie, Salt-Brine, Ceruse, Litharge, Saccharum Saturni, Vng.
Album Camphoratum, Empl. de Minio.

XXIX. An Ointment of Barbett's: Take Juice of Onions, Hogs-lard, A. ii. Venice
Soap iii. Oil of Rape-seed, Mucilage of Quince-seed, A. i. washed Lime ss.
Common Salt ii. Turpentine q.s. mix, and make a Liniment.

XXX. Or this: Take fresh Sage, M. i. Plantane, M. ii. fresh Butter vi. white
new Hens-dung iii. mix, and fry them together a quarter of an Hour, and press
out the Ointment, which keep for Use. This Ointment is admirable in Burnings of
all sorts, even in the greatest, the burnt Part being often anointed with it in
the Day, and a fresh Beet, Colwort, or Plantane-leaf laid over it: By the use
of this only thing, it is said a Poor Soldier became Rich.

XXXI. If the Burn is blistered, and yet it is not great, the Blisters ought to
be opened the third Day, and not farther to be prolonged, lest the Matter
becomes Corrosive: but if the Skin is wrinkled and dried, the Blisters or
Pustules are immediately to be opened, and the foregoing Ointment applied, or
this following.

XXXII. Take Mucilage of Fleawort-seeds, Meal of Althaea-roots, A. jss. Oils of
white Lillies, of Violets, of sweet Almonds, fresh Butter, Unguentum Basilicon,
Roping-soot, A. i. Saffron ss. mix, and make an Ointment.

XXXIII. If there is an Escar, it ought to be separated the first or second
Day, by the help of some of the former Ointments; but if they will not do,
Incision is to be made into the sound Flesh; and when it is separated, the Cure
must be done as a Common Ulcer.

XXXIV. If any tender Part is burnt, you ought to abstain from the use of
Onions, Salt, Soap, and such other like sharp Medicaments.

II. Of a light or gentle Burning.
XXXV. Here you must do all you can to prevent its blistering, which is by the
speedy Application of Medicaments to draw out the Fire, whereby the Patient is
freed from all the Pain of the Burning: for which purpose (if the Condition of
the Member will admit of it) it may be held near to the Fire, or a red-hot Iron
may be held near to it; or it may be dipped deep, and held therein for some time
in very hot Water, so will the Empyreuma, by reason of the likeness, be
Extracted.

XXXVI. Or, you may apply a Linen Cloth dipped in Varnish, or a Cloth dipped in
Lie or Water, in which unslaked Lime has been quenched; and then presently a
Cataplasm of Garlic and Salt beaten together, is to be applied.

XXXVII. Or this: Take unslaked Lime often washed in Rose Water, and with Oil
of Roses or Hypericon, make a Liniment. Or, Take May-butter, Venice or Castile
Soap, Liquid Varnish, Ana, mix them. Or, Take whites of Eggs, No iii. Oil of
Roses iii. Camphir in powder ss. mix them.

XXXVIII. Take of raw Onions iii. Castile Soap, Salt, A. i. beat them in a
Mortar to a Pultis, and with Oil of Roses, q.s. make an Ointment. Or, Take
whites of Eggs, No ii. Oils of Linseed, and of Olives, A. jss. Salt ss. mix
them. Or, Take green inner Bark of Elder, or young Elder-shoots, q.v. beat them
well in a Mortar, then boil in fresh Butter, q.s. and strain out the Oil.

XXXIX. Take Juice of young Elder-shoots iii. Linseed Oil; Wax, Ana j ss.
Varnish, Rape-seed Oil, Frankincense in powder, A. i. boil them to the
consumption of the Juice.

XL. Take Castile Soap iii. Linseed Oil, Oil of Eggs, A. jss. Oils of Ben and
Rapeseed, A. ss. raw Onions, Salt, Mucilage of Quince-seed, A. i. beat all
together, and make an Ointment.

XLI. Take Linseed Oil iv. new Wax ii. whites of Eggs, q.s. mix over a gentle
Fire, and make an Ointment. Take Craw-fish, q.v. beat them well in a Mortar,
and boil them in new fresh Butter, q.s. till they grow a little red, then
strain out by pressing.

XLII. Paraeus his Ointment. Take choice Lard lbi. yolks of new-laid Eggs, No
iii. mix, and make an Ointment. Or, Take Oil Olive ii. whites of Eggs iv. shake
them together till they become a white Ointment, with which the place is
oftentimes a Day to be anointed with a Feather, till it is well.

XLIII. Ferrarius Art Med-Infant. lib. 4. cap. 25. commends this as a rare
Secret, even where the Burn was Blistered. Take Oil of Roses ii. Rose water i.
whites of Eggs, No ii. mix them well together by shaking; dip a Linen Cloth
therein, and lay it over the Burn, and continually keep it moist with the same;
after the fourth Day is over, instead of whites of Eggs, take yolks of Eggs,
and continue the use thereof till it is well.

XLIV. Juice of the middle rind of Elder iv. Cream xii. boil to a Consistency,
then add fresh Butter, Mucilage of Quince-seeds, Juice of Nightshade, Ceruse,
A. j. mix, and make an Ointment. Or, the inner Bark of Elder, q.v. Oil Olive,
q.s. boil till it is crisp, strain out, and add Ceruse, p. ii. Litharge, burnt
Lead, A. p. i. mix them well in a Leaden Mortar.

XLV. Quicklime so often washed in Water, till it is freed from all its Salt,
may be made into an Ointment with fresh Butter, Oils of Ben, of Hypericon, of
Linseed, or of Roses, which will be very good against Burnings; and sometimes
you may add thereto the Mucilage of Fleawort-seeds, of Quince-seeds, or the
white of an Egg, and Beeswax.

XLVI. Now observe that no Ointment ought to stick too close or fast to the
Part, in these kinds of Wounds, for that then they cause much pain; and the
Sores are to be cleansed only by putting fine, thin, and soft Linnen-Cloths
upon the Part.

XLVII. If Blisters are raised, they are not properly to be opened, because the
Skin will be naked or raw, and so pain will be excited, whereby the Cure will
be the longer in doing; but at length on the third Day they are to be cut, when
a new Cuticula, or Scarf-skin, begins to be formed and bred.

III. Of Burnings with Gunpouder.
XLVIII. In the first place, if any of the Grains of Powder are gotten into the
Skin, they are to be picked out, otherwise the blue marks will always remain:
This, says Sennertus, may be done with a Needle, or with some other Instrument
fit for that purpose; if they cannot all be thus picked out, you must suffer it
to blister (if it is not blistered beforehand) for so by this means many more
of those Grains will be easily taken forth.

XLIX. If this is not done at first, and if after the burning is quite healed,
some of the Grains remain, there is no other way then, but by applying a
Vesicatory, whereby the Grains which are more superficial will be taken away,
and the Sore is to be washed from its blackness with a Decoction of Fenugreek
and Camomil Flowers. But this by the way.

L. If the Burn is only superficial, the Cuticula is raised into a Blister: if
it goes deeper into the Skin, it makes an Escar; if it burns deeper into the
Flesh, there is a hard Crust with a Contraction; in all which there is a
vehemence of Pain.

LI. Wiseman advises by Refrigerants to bathe or anoint the Part, till the heat
is off, and the Escar separated; and then to digest and cicatrize; or by
Calefactives to relax the Skin, resolve and dissipate, which by Accident will
assuage the heat and burning.

LII. Refrigerants are Waters and Juices of Housleek, Henbane, Hemlock,
Nightshade, Mandrake, Stramonium, Plantane, Adders Tongue, etc. as also all
cooling Juices, Oils, Ointments, Balsams and Cerats, Vng. Album, Nutritum,
Populeum, Rosatum, etc. where note, that all these potentially cold things must
be used actually hot, till the heat and pain cease.

LIII. Calefactives are a red hot Iron, or naked Fire held to the Part, whereby
they call forth the Particles of the Fire, and become the Alexiterion: But the
Common Remedy is an Onion beaten with Salt; yet this is not to be applied after
Blisters are risen, nor by any means where the Part is raw, for so you will
exasperate the Pain, and increase the Inflammation.

LIVE. In this Case the Ointment of Sennertus is better. Gum Elemi i. dissolve
it in Oils of Eggs, of Roses, and of white Lillies, A. i. Ung. Basilicon iii.
unsalted Butter i. mix, and make an Ointment.

LV. For the easing of the Pain he prescribes this: Oils of sweet Almonds, and
of Roses, white Wax, A. i. melt them together, then add Mucilage of
Quince-seeds ss. Camphir i. mix them.

LVI. Horse-dung fried in Oil of Nuts, and applied, does extinguish the Fire:
There are also recommended, unripe Grapes, Elder Bark, and young shoots, Dwarf
Elder boiled in Oil, Lime well washed, and mixed with Unguent. Rosatum to a
Consistency, which are to be applied, and often renewed, till the Fire and Pain
are gone.

LVII. If by these things Blisters are not prevented, you may prick or cut them
as they arise, lest they erode and make Ulcers, excite sharp Pains,
Inflammations, Fevers, etc.

LVIII. But if the Burning is to an Escar, or Crust, you must hasten its
falling with Emollients, then digest, incarnate, and cicatrize.

LIX. If there is a Cacochymia of Humors, you may purge by Lenitives often, or
rather by more powerful Catharticks, using a spare Diet, rest, quietness and
serenity of Mind.

LX. Some dress the Escar with Mel Saponis, and embrocate the Parts with Oil of
Roses mixed with whites of Eggs. Or, they anoint the Escar with Honey mixed with
Juice of Onions, and powder of Orrice-roots, and foment the Parts about with
Decoction or Juices of Henbane, Nightshade and Plantane, Mallows, Violets,
Quince and Fleawort-seeds, adding to it a third part of thick Cream.

LXI. If the Parts be raw, they may be dressed with fine thin Linen, dipped in the
aforesaid Decoction, or Juices, or anointed with a Feather dipped in Ointment of
Stramonium mixed with Oils of Eggs or Linseed Oil; by which means places
superficially burned, are healed.

LXII. Parts deeper burnt, when they cast off their Escars, may be digested
with Turpentine washed in Juice of Plantane, mixed with the yolk of an Egg, Oil
of Linseed, and some fine Barley-flower.

LXIII. Afterward you may apply Ung. Diapompholigos, and anoint the Lips with
Ung. Album Camphoratum mixed with the white of an Egg, or with Ung. de
Stramonio, as the Intention, Place or Necessity shall require.

LXIV. Or you may dress with this: Oil of Elder, lbi. Wax iii. Litharge ii.
Ceruse, Lime washed, A. i. Frankincense, Sarcocol, A. ss. mix, and make an
Ointment: and afterward you may cicatrize with a Decoction of Horse-tail, red
Roses, Bramble-tops, Bistort, etc. in which a little white Vitriol or Alum may
be dissolved, or with some other Astringent or Styptick, with which you may be
provided.

IV. Of Burning by Lightning.
LXV. Where Burning by Lightning does not immediately Kill, and that there is
hopes of Life, proper Medicaments are to be applied, viz. such as have power to
dissolve the Congelation of the Humors which causes Suffocation, and resist
Malignity or Poison, for as much as it manifestly appears (from the foetid
Smell it carries along with it) that there is a malign and poisonous quality
joined therewith, for that it has power to hurt the Body, yea, oftentimes to
Kill, even when no visible sign of a Wound or external Hurt does appear.

LXVI. Such a Patient then under hopes of Recovery, is presently to be put to
Bed, and some Alexipharmick and Sudorifick Dose is to be given, which may
resist the Malignity, and dissolve the Congelation, such as volatile Salts of
Hartshorn, of Vipers, of Amber, and of Sal Armonick, Spirit of Hartshorn, and
Sal Armoniack, Our Aqua Bezoartica, Spiritus Cordialis, Tinctura Bezoartica,
Bezoar Minerale, Theriaca Chymica, Mithridate, and Venice Treacle, also
Tinctures of Virginia Snake-root, of Saffron, and Cochinele, Spiritus Opii
Compositus, etc.

LXVII. The Arteries, Temples, Nose, and Tongue, may be smeared with Our
Theriaca Chymica, made thin with Our Spiritus Cordialis; and to the Wrists and
Region of the Heart Epithems or Cataplasms may be applied, made of Our
Theriaca, or the Vulgar Mithridate, mixed with a quarter part of Powder of
Virginia Snakeroot.

LXVIII. Outwardly to the place Burned, a Cataplasm made of Onions and
Mithridate, or Our Theriaca beaten together in equal quantities: and if an
Escar is made, it ought to be as soon as may be, removed with an
Incision-knife, after which you may apply this following Ointment.

LXiX. Take Pouders of the Roots of Angelica, Swallow-wort, Zedoary, and
Contra-yerva, A. ss. Winters Cinnamon, Virginia Snake-root, A. i. Rue, Scordium
in fine Powder, A. iii. Our Theriaca Chymica jss. Honey of Roses iii. Tinctura
Bezoartica, q.s. mix them. If this cleanses not enough, add to it Scammony in
fine Powder vi.

LXX. The Ulcer being cleansed, it is to be filled up with Flesh, with this
Sarcotick Powder: Take Virginia Snake-root, Contra-yerva, Roots of Angelica and
Swallow-wort, Zedoary, Aloes, Succotrine, Tobacco all in fine Powder, A. ii.
Pouders of Scordium, Frankincense, Mastich, Olibanum, Myrrh, Pine, Rosin, A.
jss. Juices of Tobacco raised from Virginia Seed, of Sanicle, A. q.s. mix, and
make Troches, which dry in the shade, and reduce into Powder, as you have
occasion for them.

LXXI. If any Bones should be broken, as oftentimes it falls out, you may apply
a Cataplasm made of the flower of Barley, of Beans, and of Lupins, with pouders
of the roots of Angelica, of Bistort, of Comfrey, of Swallow-wort, and of the
leaves of Rue and Scordium, with Catechu, all in fine powder, mixed with
Mithridate, or Our Theriaca, and a little Tinctura Bezoartica, which is to be
renewed Day by Day, till such time as the Malignity is overcome, and the Part
in some measure restored to its strength, laying also Defensatives round about,
to strengthen the same, and defend it from Symptoms.

V. Of Burnings of the second Degree.
LXXII. If the Burning is so great, that not only Blisters are raised, but also
the Cutis, or Skin, is contracted or drawn together, then such Medicaments
which only draw forth the Empyreuma, or Particles of Fire will not be enough,
but such are likewise to be applied which mollify and soften the Skin; for
which reason all the Pustules are immediately to be opened, that the hot and
sharp Humors, may freely flow forth, which done, the following, or some such
like Medicine may be imposed.

LXXIII. Take yolks of Eggs, No ii. Oils of Hypericon, of Ben, and of white
Lillies, A. ss. Ung. Basilicon i. mix them.

LXXIV. Or, Take Oils of Ben, and of Hypericon, A. i. Oil of Roses, Beeswax,
A. ss. Oil of Scorpions, Palm Oil, A. ii. mix, and melt, then add Mucilage of
Fleawort-seeds i. Saffron ss. mix them.

LXXV. Or this of Fabricius: Take new fresh Butter iii. Barley-flower jss.
Mucilage of Quince-seeds i. yolks of Eggs, Oils of Violets, and sweet Almonds,
A. ss. Saffron i. Wax, q.s. mix, melt, and make an Ointment.

LXXVI. Pulp of roasted Apples ii. Meals of Barley and Fenugreek seed, A. i.
Milk, q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm, to which add Saffron in Powder ss.

LXXVII. Litharge, Ceruse, A. q.v. Wine Vinegar, q.s. boil, and pass the
Vinegar through a filtering Bag; then add Oil of Violets, or Oil of Eggs, q.s.
and mix them together.

LXXVIII. And on the burnt place lay such a Defensative as this: Catechu, Terra
Sigillata, Nut-Galls, Sanguis Draconis, Bistort, Comfrey-roots, all in Powder,
A. i. Oil of Hypericon vi. Wax iii. Vinegar jss. mix, and make an Ointment.

LXXIX. After which, bind up the Member with a Rowler well wetted in Oxycrate,
or a Linen Cloth dipped in the same, that the Pain may be lessened or eased, and
the afflux of Humors hindered; these things being done, the Wound is to be
digested, cleansed and healed, as another Ulcer.

VI. The Cure of Burnings of the Third and Fourth Degrees.
LXXX. If (...) the whole Radical Humidi^ consumed, and the Flesh it (...) is
burnt; and if therewith (...) Arteries, Veins, and Muscles are burnt, making
great Pustules, or an Escar, whence a Gangren may be feared, or other ill
Symptoms; you must then cut the Pustules, and cleanse them of the Humor
contained in them; and you must endeavor to separate the Escar, even the first
or second Day, which if it will not be, you are to cut it with an
Incision-knife, that a passage may be made for the coming out of the Matter,
and intrusion of the Medicines which are to be applied.

LXXXI. The Escar being opened, Fabricius Hildanus applies some such like as
this: fresh Butter iii. Ung. Basilicon i. Mucilage of Quince-seeds, Oils of
sweet Almonds, and white Lillies, A. ss. yolk of one Egg, mix them.

LXXXII. Or: Oils of Ben, and of Hypericon, A. jss. yolks of two Eggs,
Turpentine ss. mix them. Or: Mucilage of Fleawort-seed ii. Oils of Hypericon
and Linseed, A. vi. Turpentine, or Gum Elemi iii. yolk of one Egg, Wax q.s.
make a Liniment.

LXXXIII. And lay over linen Cloths dipped in this Emulsion: Melon-seeds hull'd
ii. Fleawort-seed, Fenugreek-seed, A. ii. Water lbiv. make an Emulsion, in
which dissolve Castle-Soap ss. Camphir ss. first dissolved in a little S.V. mix
them.

LXXXIV. If the Part begins to swell, or a Gangren is feared, Defensatives are
to be avoided, because they hinder Transpiration: but if a Gangren is already
induced, it is to be Cured as we have in several other places declared.

LXXXV. When the Escar, or the Matter or Flesh which is quite burnt is
separated, (which is timely to be done, lest by its putridness, it corrupts the
sound Parts) then by Abstersives you must cleanse the Ulcer, afterward you
must Incarnate, and then you must perfect the Cure with Epuloticks, which yet
are not to be over dry, lest the Cicatrize is rough and deformed.

LXXXVI. To produce the Cicatrize you may use this: Diapalma, or Empl. Album
ii. Palm Oil that is yellow, Oil of Ben, or Hypericon, A. ss. melt them
together, and add thereto Alum burnt, Ceruse, Litharge, Lapis Calaminaris,
Tutiae, all levigated, A. i. Mucilage of Fleawort-seed, q.s. mix, and make an
Ointment, by grinding them in a Leaden Mortar.

LXXXVII. Fabricius Hildanus used sometimes in this Case, Unguent.
Alabastrinum, which softens the Part, eases the Pain, and induces a very fair
Cicatrize.

LXXXVIII. If the Arteries, Veins, and Nerves, are burnt, to prevent an
Atrophy, by reason of want of Aliment, and that the Vessels closely shut up by
the Fire may be opened, this Ointment following may be used.

LXXXIX. Take Oils of Whelps, and of Earthworms, yellow Palm Oil, Oil of Ben,
Bears Oil, A. i. Camphir ss. dissolved in a little S.V. mix, and make an
Ointment.

VII. Of Burnings of the Eyes, Face, etc.
XC. If the Eyelids, Lips, Fingers, etc. which are naturally separated, should
be burnt, that they may not grow together, dry Lint, or Linen, or little thin
Plates of Lead, or white Paper, are to be put between, and proper Medicines are
to be applied.

XCI. It is not fit to apply to the Face when burnt Medicaments made of Onions,
Salt, soft Soap, Varnish, etc. lest the Eyes thereby should be hurt; and
therefore the Ointment of Ferrarius, or some such like, may be applied, which
is thick, and will not spread abroad; as, Venice or Castile Soap i. Oils of
Roses, and of sweet Almonds, A. ss. mix them.

XCII. If the Eyes are burnt, Breast-milk is commended to be dropped immediately
into them, or any other Milk Blood-warm, or Milk mixed in equal parts with
Water or Juice of Fennel.

XCIII. Or this Collyrium: Damask Rose Water, Fennel, and Celandine Waters, A.
jiss. Fleawort-seeds well bruised ii. digest twelve Hours, more or less, in a
warm place, and strain out the clear for use.

XCIV. If it is a vehement burning, and with an Escar or Crust, take heed that
the Eyelid is not drawn back, for that will cause a very great Deformity, to
Remedy which, you must apply Emollient Fomentations and Unguents, and if need
be, the Skin is to be extended oftentimes with your Fingers.

XCV. Roots of Althea, Seeds of common Mallows, A. jss. Linseed,
Fenugreek-seed, and Fleawort-seeds, A. i. Mallow-leaves M. j. Flowers of
Melilot and Elder, A. M. ss. Milk, Water, A. q.s. mix, and make a Decoction,
with which foment warm.

XCVI. Then anoint with this: Oils of Hypericon, of Eggs, and of Whelps, A. i.
Man's Fat iss. Gum Elemi ss. Saffron i. Wax, q.s. mix, and make an Ointment.

XCVII. Or anoint with this: Vipers-grease, Man's Fat, Oils of Hypericon, and
of Whelps, A. i. Oil of Earthworms, Mucilage of Fleawort-seeds, A. vi. Gum
Elemi iii. melt, and mix them over a gentle Fire.

VIII. Of Burnings of the Joints.
XCVIII. As these Parts are almost void of Flesh, and Nervous, and so endued
with an exquisite Sense, so they are easily offended with a flux of Humors, and
other grievous Symptoms, for which cause sake, Universal Evacuations ought to
be made with Syrupus Catharticus, Pilulae Catharticae, Pulvis Cornachini, etc.

XCIX. Topics ought also to be lenient and gentle, mild and anodyn, and not
very sharp, as are those of Onions, Garlic, Salts, Soap, Lees of Wine, etc.
and such as may be Emollient to hinder the Contraction of the Nerves, Tendons,
or Ligaments.

C. Oils of Hypericon, of Whelps, of Earthworms, A. i. Man's, Bears, and Vipers
Grease, A. ss. Oil of Ben vi. Gum Elemi iii. mix, and make an Ointment.

CI. You ought also to fit Ferula 's, or other easy Instruments, to the
Member, to prevent Contraction: but if there is already a Contraction or
Incurvation, then (generals being first premised) the Part affected is to be
fomented with an Emollient Decoction, as, Roots of Althea, of Briony, of white
Lillies, A. ii. Leaves of Mallows, of Alehoof, of Hollihocks, and of Hypericon,
Flowers of Camomil and Melilot, A. M. j. Seeds of Flax, Fleawort, and
Fenugreek, A. i. Water, Milk, A. q.s. mix, boil, and make a Fomentation.

CII. After fomenting, anoint with this Ointment following: yellow Palm Oil,
Oil of Ben, and Oil of Eggs, Oils of Hypericon, of Whelps, and Earthworms,
Beef Suet, A. i. Balsam Capivii, or de Chili, Gum Elemi, A. ss. Balsam de Peru
ii. Wax, q.s. mix, and make an Ointment.

CIII. And upon the Part you may lay Ceratum Nigrum, Emplast. Polychrestum, or
Diachylon simplex; extending daily, and by degrees the Contracted Joint, with
fit and convenient Instruments.

CIV. Besides the former at Sect. 102. above, there are other things which are
powerful in Resolving Contractions, as, pure yellow Palm Oil, Oil of Aniseeds,
A. jss. mix, and anoint therewith; and it will be yet more powerful if Oil of
Vitriol ss. is added to it; so also Spiritus Mirabilis in lib. 1. cap. 59.
sect. 10. which resolves Contractions to a wonder.

IX. Of Burnings in the Groin.
CV. These are Parts which are moist, lax, and apt to receive fluxions of
Humors, by reason of the Glandules, so that a Gangren is apt to be induced; for
which cause sake, the Medicaments which are to be applied, ought to be of a
drier Nature than those which are applied to other Parts.

CVI. If therefore no Blisters arise, these things made of Lillies, Onions, and
Soap, are beneficial; but if large Blisters are already raised, then they ought
to be speedily and timely opened.

CVII. Which done, this following Ointment may be applied: Take Ung. Rosatum,
Nicotianae, Basilicon, A. i. Oils of Hypericon and Eggs, A. ss. Aloes, Myrrh,
Sarcocol, Olibanum, A. i. mix them.

CVIII. And upon the Ointment, let the whole Part be covered with this
Cataplasm: flowers of Barley, of Beans, and of Orobus, A. jss. powder of Roses,
of Myrtle-berries and Catechu, A. vi. Honey of Roses, or Oxymel, q.s. mix, and
make a Cataplasm.

CIX. But if the Wound or Burning is so great, as may give you the fears of a
Gangren, then Medicaments proper against Gangrens are to be applied, of which
we have spoken already sufficiently in other places.

X. To prevent a deformed Cicatrize.
CX. To do this, you must be careful that no Hypersarcosis, or proud Flesh,
grow upon the Wound or Ulcer, for thereby the Cicatrice will be deformed; and
sometime if great Care be not taken, they will seem to be as it were wenny; and
says Wiseman, when they happen upon Women's Breasts, they have sometimes been
supposed Cancerous. In others from ill handling; the loose Flesh (says he) has
grown so high and callous, that one of them which came into my Hands, required
to be burnt again, in order to the Cure.

CXI. In the Face therefore, there is a special Care to be had, as also in the
Eyes, Neck, and Breasts of the Female Sex: In the Eyes, that they be not daubed
with greasy and nasty Medicines; and that the Lids be not dressed with too
drying ones, lest they cause Contraction, and make a Blearedness.

CXII. In the Cure of the Eyes then, you may use Breast-milk, or other Milk,
Blood-warm, also Pigeons-blood, Waters of Fennel, Dill, Nightshade, Plantane,
and Fumitory; also a Mucilage of Fleawort, Fenugreek, or Quince-seed, Trochisci
albi Rhasis, Tutia, Calaminaris, Frankincense, Sarcocol, etc.

CXIII. If the Ear in this Case should grow to the Scalp, or the Fingers to one
another, or the Palm should be Contracted with a hard Callus: in that of the
Ear, the Callus must be divided by Incision, and soft Rags dipped in
Frog-spawn-water, or some proper Balsam or Ointment, must be put between the
unequal Callus rubbed with the Caustick-stone; then the Escar is to be
separated, and the Sore to be Cicatrized with the Vitriol-stone, Vng.
desiccativum rubrum, or some such like Medicament.

CXIV. If the Fingers are grown one to another, they are to be cut with
Scissars, or an Incision-knife; and then the Cicatrices to be taken off with
the Caustick-stone; and afterward to be healed as another Ulcer.

CXV. If the Fingers and Palm are shrunk up, and joined close, you must cut
asunder each Finger, putting between each a very thin plate of Lead, or other
fit Matter; and cause a Roll of Wood to be placed under the crooked Fingers,
which is to be carried with Bars to the inward Parts of the Wrist, and fastened
by Screws, to thrust the Roll gradually forward, till it bears all the Fingers
before it, and by a complete extension, restores them to their pristin form.

CXVI. When therefore after Burning, these deformed Cicatrices are feared, they
are to be prevented by timely applying of Emollients, during all the time of
the Cure, not at all making use of those things which are too drying, for the
production of the Cicatrice; but in the particular use of these Matters, your
own Judgment ought to direct you.

CXVII. Let the Parts where such fear is, be fomented with an Emollient
Decoction, such as we have described at Sect. 60, 95, and 101, aforegoing; and
afterward the Part may be anointed with the following Liniment.

CXVIII. pure yellow Palm Oil, Oil of Aniseeds, A. i. Oils of Hypericon, of
Whelps, of Earth worms, A. ss. Oils of Ben, of Roses, and of Beans, A. ii. Oils
of Myrrh, and of Eggs, A. i. white Wax, q.s. mix, and make a Liniment.

CHAP. XXV. Of WOVNDS of the HEAD without the Scull.
I. THese Wounds are called in Greek, (...), pl. (...). in Latin, Vulnus pl.
Vulnera Capitis: and in English, a Wound or Wounds of the Head.

II. Differences. These Wounds are manifold, 1. Of the Containing Parts. 2. Of
the Contained Parts. Of the Containing Parts they are also, 1. Wounds of the
Hairy Scalp. 2. Wounds of the Temporal Muscles. 3. Wounds of the Cranium; of
which last we shall speak when we come to Treat of Fractures.

III. Wounds of the Hairy Scalp are, 1. A Contusion. 2. A Wound. 3. A Wound
with a Contusion; of all which we shall Treat in order.

IV. The Parts affected here, are the Hairy Scalp, the Membrana Carnosa, and
the Pericranium.

V. The Hairy Scalp is thinnest on the Vertex, or top of the Head; nor is there
any Muscle between it and the Skull-in that Part, except the Membrana Carnosa,
which some of late call a Muscle, because by it many Men move the whole Scalp:
if a Fracture is feared there, you may boldly cut into the Hairy Scalp, because
it is of an obtuse Sense, and easily healed again.

VI. But caution ought to be had in making Incision upon the Forehead, where a
transverse Wound may cause the Eyebrows to fall over the Wound: for which
reason, when we make Incision there, we make it upwards or downwards, according
to the running of the Fibers; but upon the Temporal Muscles no Incision is to
be made, because Convulsions, and other ill Symptoms are apt oftentimes to
ensue.

VII. Under the former lies the Pericranium, which you are to cut through, when
you are making your way to the Skull: and the Hairy Scalp, Membrana Carnosa,
and Pericranium, are to be all raised together, when the Cranium is made bare,
to make way for the Terebra, or Trepan; because the Pericranium arises from the
Dura Matter through the Sutures; and therefore if that Membrane is lacerated or
torn, Inflammation, Fever, and other Symptoms may follow.

I. Of Wounds of the Head in General.
VIII. The Prognostics. A Contusion, if there is no Fracture or Fissure of the
Cranium, is less dangerous than a Wound, or a Wound with Contusion.

IX. Wounds Contused are more difficultly cured, than Wounds made by Incision;
because they require Suppuration.

X. Wounds of the forepart of the Head are more dangerous than those of the
hinder parts: 1. Because the containing parts are thinner in the forepart. 2.
Because the forepart has more Sutures than the hinder-part. 3. Because a
greater part of the Brain is contained in the forepart. 4. Because in Mortal
Wounds of the Head, if it is in the forepart, the Patient Dies sooner than if
it is in any other Part. 5. Because the Meninges have Sinuosities in the
forepart but not in the hinder-parts, 6. Because more offending Matter is apt
to be gathered in thefore-part, which may offend the Brain, than in the
hinderpart.

XI. The smallest VVounds of the Head are not to be neglected though without
Fracture of the Skull; for sometimes dreadful Symptoms may ensue, as Fever,
Vomiting, faltering of the Tongue, Raving, Convulsion, Palsy of one Arm or
Leg, etc. which may be from Concussion of the Brain, or some other internal
unknown Cause.

XII. In Mortal VVounds, the Patient lives longer in the Winter than in the
Summer, because unnatural Heat is not then so prevalent.

XIII. These VVounds in Children prove sometimes Rebellious, because they are
of a hot and moist habit, which is most apt to putridness; and because their
habit is thin, whereby they lose more of their Spirits.

XIV. Hippocrates, Sect 7. Aph. 2. says, it is an ill sign, if the Flesh of the
Brims look livid; for it is a sign of the decay of Natural Heat.

XV. If the Patient has no Fever, is in his right Mind, sleeps well, has his
Body soluble, finds himself well when he takes any thing, if the Wound looks of
a fresh and lively Color, and it yields a good sort of Pus or Matter, there is
then no fear of danger.

XVI. Hippocrates, Sect. 5. Aph. 66. says, If the brims in these Wounds tumify
not a little, it is an ill sign. And in Sect. 3. Aph. 67. If the Tumefaction is
soft, it shows Concoction; and if hard, Crudity.

XVII. Evil may be presaged, if there is blackness in parts near the Wound; a
Convulsion, Palsy, loss of Appetite, much watching, and coldness of the extreme
Parts of the Body.

XVIII. If a Fever invades while Suppuration is procuring, viz. before the
seventh day, it is less dangerous than that which invades after the seventh
day: because about the first Crisis, ill Accidents may ensue.

XIX. A Wound in or upon a Suture is dangerous: 1. Because the Scull is there
parted, and so more apt to open, than a solid Bone. 2. Because in the Suture,
there is a Ligament by which the Meninges are tied to the Pericranium; whereby
a Wound being inflicted there, may easily be communicated to them.

XX. If Reason fail, Speech ceases, Sight is lost, there is a continual Fever,
his Tongue is black and dry, the brims of the Wound blackish and dry: if the
Patient suffers an Atrophy or Palsy, with an involuntary excretion of
Excrements, or an absolute suppression of them, especially of Urine, or there
is a Phrensy, with a Convulsion, it is to be feared that Death is near at hand.

XXI. Symptoms appear sooner in Summer, than in Winter; because in a hot
Season, the Humors are sooner apt to putrify than in a cold, the unnatural Heat
being more easily excited: for in Summertime we expect them at or before the
first or second Crisis, viz. the seventh or fourteenth Day.

XXII. If the Patient is Cachectick, Scorbutic, has the Pox, Leprosy, Dropsy,
Phthisick, Consumption, or Hectick-Fever, or a Cacochymick Habit of Body; the
Wound will be the more difficult to cure, the Blood being corrupt or deficient,
and so unfit for Unition.

XXIII. If a Tumor in these Wounds does suddenly vanish away, it is an ill
sign; unless some evacuation has gone before, or some discussive Medicine has
been applied.

XXIV. If a Fever, with a previous coldness, does appear on the seventh or
fourteenth day, it is dangerous; for it may be feared that a Putridness has
possessed the Brain, the Meninges, or the Scull; which you may know by a
yellowishness of the Wound, and an Ichor like to Water, in which raw Flesh has
been washed.

XXV. The General Cure. It consists in two principal Indications. 1. By
Internals, to avert a Flux of Humors. 2. By Topics, to induce the Healing.

XXVI. The Internals are either Cathartick or Dietetick: the Cathartick is
performed, 1. By things given by the Mouth. 2. By Clysters. 3. By Suppositories.

XXVII. There are three Cases in which Purges are to be given: 1. If the Body
is Cacochymical. 2. If a Tumor or Inflammation appears, as Fallopius advises.
3. If there is an Headache, Sleepiness, Drowsiness, or Lethargy.

XXVIII. And they are to be given, 1. Lest the Fever increase, to prevent it.
2. To divert the Humors as soon as may be from the Head. 3. Before the strength
is prostrated.

XXIX. As to the kind of Purge, it ought to be such as may purge the Humor
abounding: yet some Physicians speak absolutely for Chologogues, because
Inflammations and Fevers are the Smyptoms most apt to ensue upon these Wounds.

XXX. But strong and eradicative Medicaments at first are to be avoided; lest
by a too vehement commotion of the Humors the Strength becomes prostrate, or
Pain, Inflammation, and Fever be induced.

XXXI. Therefore Infusion or Decoction of Myrobalans are commended, either
alone or mixed; Elect. Lenitivum, or De Succo Rosarum, or Diaprunum Solutivum,
or Our Syrupus Catharticus.

XXXII. Some time after the use of these things, you may purge with Pulvis
Catharticus, Pulvis Cornachini, Electuarium Catharticum, or Pilulae
Catharticae; which may be repeated twice a Week, or as you see necessity
requires. Arcaeus, lib. 5. cap. 4. is of opinion, that no other Cathartick
Medicament but Syrup of Roses solutive ought to be used.

XXXIII. As to the Dietetick Course, 1. It consists in the use of the
Non-naturals. 2. In the use of proper Wound-Drinks.

XXXIV. As to the Non-naturals, Fallopius in Hippocrat. de Vulner. cap. 11.
says it ought to be temperate and thick: for a hot and thin Air does melt the
Humors, and make them apt for fluxion; and a cold Air is hurtful to the Brain,
Bones, Nerves, and Marrow of the Backbone: and therefore Medicaments ought to
be applied blood-warm.

XXXV. As to Meat and Drink, Flesh nor Fish are to be permitted for the first
seven Days, especially if a Fracture; nor Wine, before the second Crisis, or
fourteen Days are past; because in this space of time all the Symptoms usually
cease: small Beer or Ale may be permitted for Drink; to weak Stomachs,
Oxysaccharum, or Syrup of Violets, or Red-Roses simple, or Syrups of the juice
of Limons or of Citrons, or Syrup of Vinegar, mixed with Milk-water, etc. And
their Food may be Panada, Ptisan, stewed Prunes, Raisons, Asparagus, Lettice,
Endive, Succory, or Spinach boiled; and after Meals, Marmalade of Quinces,
preserved Quinces, Conserve of Barberries, baked Pears and Apples, Saccharum
Violatum, Caraway and Coriander-comfits. And when Meat is to be permitted, let
it be of Chickens, Pullets, young Pigeons, Veal, Lamb, Mutton, Kid, Partridges,
Pheasants, Turtles, Black-birds, Thrushes, Larks, etc. with Verjuice-sawce, or
juice of Oranges, Limons, Citrons, Pomgranates, or Sorel and Mint, with white
Sugar. If they will eat Fish, let it be of Trouts, Whitings, Soals, with the
aforenamed Sawces.

XXXVI. As to Sleep, let it be in the Nightime, and not by Day, unless an
Inflation has seized the Brain or the Meninges, the Signs of which you will
have in their proper Chapters: and too much Watching corrupts the Temperature
of the Body, causes Crudity, Heaviness and Pain of the Head, and makes the
Wounds dry and malign: in which case, you may Embrocate the Forehead, Temples,
Ears, and Nostrils, with Oils of Poppy or Poppy seeds, of Henbane-seed, or of
Mandrakes, or rather with Our Spiritus Anodynus, or with Tinct. Opii ss. mixed
with Fumitory-water ii. doing it blood-warm; or rather with the same quantity
of Vinegar: and inwardly you may give Tinctura Opii, a gutt. vi. ad xii. or
more, in some proper Vehicle: or Syrup of Poppies ss. in Fumitory-water ii. or
in place thereof, you may give Our Guttae Vitae, a gut. xx. ad xl. or Our
Specific Laudanum, a gr. j.ad iii. in some proper Vehicle.

XXXVII. Rest and Quietness is very necessary; immoderate Exercise disturbs the
Spirits, weakens the Body, and puts the Humors into motion; for which reason,
gentle walking about the Room, when he is able, is enough.

XXXVIII. As to Excretion of Excrements, the Body is to be kept soluble, and if
it is not so, Nature is to be provoked with Suppositories, or Clysters: for
ordinary use, Posset Drink, or Mutton-broth lbi. brown Sugar iv. mix, and give
it warm; which repeat so often as you see occasion: if the Body is bound, add to
it Tincture of Sena made in Wine ss. or Aloes ss. ad i. which may be dissolved
therein. But Venery is above all other things to be avoided, chiefly if there
is a Fracture withal; for a great store of Spirits are contained in a small
quantity of Seed, whereby all the Faculties, but chiefly the Animal, are
resolved and weakened, Paraeus, lib. 9. cap. 14. says, that he has known Death
to have ensued in small Wounds of the Head, by reason of Venery.

XXXIX. Perturbations or disturbances of the Mind, whether from Sorrow or Joy,
are wholly to be avoided; because thereby the Spirits, both Animal and Vital,
are either contracted, or too much dilated, or dissipated; whereby a great
Indisposition may happen to the Body.

XL. Washing and Bathing, as they ad to cleanliness; so being prudently done,
they open the Pores, and cause a dissipation of dark and fuliginous Vapors,
and malign Humors, whose natural course is to the Head; but finding a vent this
way, are stopped in their career; whereby the Spirits are cheared and enlivened,
and the Matter contributing to evil and malign Symptoms, is in part taken away.

XLI. The last things which we shall take notice of here, are proper
Wound-drinks, of which you have Examples enough in Chap. 3. Sect. 28. ad 43.
But two things are to be observed: 1. That the Simples of which this
Wound-drink is composed, ought to be chiefly Cephalicks and Neuroticks. 2. That
it is not to be given, 'till all the Symptoms are past; it being mostly used,
as an Induction to the Healing.

XLII. The second Indication, is directed to the application of proper Topics.
The first thing is Bleeding, (if so be a sufficient quantity did not flow out
of the Wound when it was first inflicted:) which is used chiefly in great
Wounds, and where the Patient has a sufficient strength of Body; or where a
great Inflammation or Fever has made an invasion.

XLIII. If it is incised only, and not contused, Curing by the first Intention
is only requisite, and therefore Agglutination is to be induced with what speed
may be; as with Linimentum Arcaei, and other Glutinatives: if there is a
Contusion withal, you must use Digestives, 'till the Matter becomes laudable.

XLIV. If an Inflammation is feared, the following Cataplasm of Hippocrates,
which Fallopius in Hippoc. de Capitis Vulneribus, cap. 39. commends above all
others, is to be applied. Take Barley-flower iv. Posca vi. boil to the
consistency of a Cataplasm; adding to it Oil of Roses ii. or instead of Posca,
you may use Red-wine iv. Vinegar ii. either simple, or Vinegar of Roses, which
is better; which use to the seventh or fourteenth Day, as you see cause.

XLV. Or, Barley and Bean flower, A.ii. Vinegar of Roses ii. boil them to the
consistency of a Cataplasm; adding Oil of Roses ij. This cools, drys, repells,
eases Pain, allays Inflammations, and hinders the afflux of Blood or hot Humors.

XLVI. Or, Crumbs of Bread, white or brown, iv. new Milk vj. boil to the
consistency of a Cataplasm; adding Ung. Populneum ii. Saffron in powder i.
These Cataplasms are to be applied above the Agglutinating Emplaster, or other
Medicaments with which the Wound is dressed; the Hair being first shaved off a
good compass about the Wound.

II. Of Binding-up Wounds of the Head.
XLVII. In the Dressing of Wounds of the Head, two things are to be considered:
1. The Covering of the Head. 2. The Rowler or Bandage, for Binding it up.

XLVIII. The Covering must be a Cap, made of soft Linen Cloth, basted with
fine soft Tow, but not quilted; so big, as may encompass the white Head: it
ought not to be too thick, too heavy, or too hard; for that the Head requires
pliable, light, soft, and easy Applications: not stubborn, as stiff Emplasters,
which will cause Pain; nor too viscous, which will not be easily removed.

XLIX. The Rowler is to be made of soft Flaxen Cloth, not of Woollen, because
it would be too hot, and cause Itching: it ought not to be new, for then it
would be too stiff; nor yet too old, lest it want strength, and be apt to tear:
nor yet ought it to be too thick, because then it would not be pliant enough;
nor yet too thin, lest it it be too cold.

L. It ought to be about three Inches broad, somewhat more or less, as the
necessity may require; and about three Yards long; so as it may be enough to
encompass the whole Head, with manifold circumvolutions and rowlings, the
better to keep on the Topical Medicaments, and make a gentle constriction about
the Wounds.

LI. It ought also to have two ends, that when they meet, they may link
together; or so cross one another, as to strengthen the Bandage, and keep every
thing from slipping.

LII. It ought to be rolled about, but not too loose, for then it would ill
bind the Head, and not hold the Medicaments close: nor ought it to be too
strait, for then, 1. The Blood might be driven from the wounded Part to the
Meninges and Brain, from the outward to the inward parts; whence vehement
Symptoms might ensue, as violent Pain, Inflammation, Apostemation, Fever,
Convulsion, Palsy, or Apoplexy, and it may be at last Death it self. 2. The
Pulsation of the Arteries might be intercepted. 3. And Fuliginous Vapors would
be hindered from breaking forth through the Sutures and other Pores.

III. Of a Contusion of the Head.
LIII. It is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Ecchymosis, seu Contusio
Capitis; and in English, A. Bruising of the Head.

LIVE. Contusions when alone, do many times produce grievous Symptoms; sometimes
resembling those of Fractures, and sometimes exceeding them.

LV. They are for the most part accompanied with Concussions of the Brain, and
sometimes with Fissure or Fracture, of one or both Tables; in which case, the
spongy medullary substance that lies between the two Tables, is oftentimes
broken into small crumbs, and squeezed together; whence follows Extravasation of
Blood, and other Symptoms: of all which we say nothing here, but refer it to
Lib. 6. following, where we treat of Fractures.

LVI. If with the Contusion there is neither Wound nor Tumor, and yet the
Patient has a Palsy of any Part, or is stupefied, or raving, it is certain that
the Membranes of the Brain are hurt.

LVII. All Contusions of the Head are to be suspected, because from them the
greatest Symptoms do arise: and if in laying open the Cranium, the Patient
recovers not his Senses, an Extravasation of Blood is to be feared, under the
Dura Matter; in which case, Life is in great hazard.

LVIII. The Cure of a Simple Contusion. You are in the first place to shave the
Hair off, and then apply this. The whites of Eggs No ii. Oil of Myrtles, powder
of Catechu, A.i. mix them. Dress twice a day, and use it, 'till the Part comes
to its own temperature.

LIX. But if there is Pain, Inflammation, or Tumor, you may embrocate the Tumor
and Parts about, with Oil of Myrtles mixed with Vinegar, and then apply the
former, or this following Cataplasm.

LX. Barley and Bean flower vi. Oil of Myrtles or Roses vi. whites of Eggs No
ii. Red-roses in powder i. Catechu ss. fine Bole, Cypress-nuts, Roch-alum, all
in powder A.ii. Vinegar q.s. make a Cataplasm.

LXI. The Patient being thus dressed, Wiseman advises to bleed in the Arm or
Neck, some hours after to exhibit a Clyster, and at Night to lay him to rest
with an Emulsion of the Cold Seeds.

LXII. The next day repeat the former Dressing, 'till you have restrained the
afflux of Humors; then foment the Tumor in Red-Wine, in which Camomil,
Rosemary, Southernwood, and Red-Roses have been boiled.

LXIII. Then strengthen the Part with this of Paraeus, lib. 12. cap. 4. Whites
of Eggs No iii. Oils of Myrtles and Roses, A. i. fine Bole ss. Sanguis
draconis, Cypress-nuts, Galls, burnt Alum; A. ii. Vinegar of Roses q.s. make a
Liniment.

LXIV. And discuss with this, Diachylon simple ss. Empl. de Meliloto, and
Oxycroccum, A.ii. Oil of Camomil ss. mix, and make a soft Emplaster.

LXV. If the Tumor goes not away, but grows hard and painful, threatening an
Apostem, foment it with Decoction of tops of Althea, Mallows, Linseed, and
Fenugreek-seed, half Wine, half Water; and make a Cataplasm of the Faeces with
Barley-flower. If after this, it suppurates, you must treat it as a Phlegmon,
or Inflammation.

LXVI. But if the Pain abates, yet the Tumor continues with Extravasated Blood,
you may discuss with this. Barley and Bean flower, A. iii. Red-roses.
Myrtle-berries, A.i. tops of Wormwood, Southernwood, Fetherfew, flowers of
Elder, of Camomil, A. ss. Fennel and Dill seed, A. i. powder, and boil in
Red-wine; adding Honey ii. Oil of Camomil q.s. make a Cataplasm.

LXVII. But if by this means the Humor is not wasted, nor the Tumor discussed,
because of the effusion of Blood under the Membrana Masculosa, which makes a
separation of the upper parts from the Cranium; discerned by the fluctuation of
the Tumor, and a fixed pain in the Part; then make incision, or open it; and if
the Scull is sound, digest and finish the Cure by Medicines which mundify and
dry, and by a moderate compression; avoiding moist Medicines to the Bones,
because they induce cariosity.

LXVIII. You may apply this, in this case. Syrup of red dried Roses, of
Wormwood, A. i. Turpentine, Gum Elemi, A. vi. Aloes, Myrrh, Mastich,
Orrice-root, Barley-meal, A. ss. mix them.

LXiX. If the Scull is not sound, which you may discern partly by sight, it
appearing yellowish, livid, or black; and partly by feeling with you Probe, or
Finger: by which you will find it rugged and unequal, whereas it should be
smooth and slippery: in this case, you must first smooth it with a Raspatory,
then scale the Bone, by applying the following Powder.

LXX. Roots of round Birthwort, of Gentian, of Orrice, Dittany, Barley-flower,
A.ss. Aloes Hepatica, Catechu, Sanguis Draconis, Mastich, Myrrh, Sarcocol, A.
ii. Euphorbium i. make all into a fine powder, and mix them.

LXXI. In great Contusions sometimes Gangrens are induced, by reason of the
extinction of Natural Heat, known by the Part growing of a livid or black
color: in this case, 1. Scarify, with application of Cupping-glasses. 2. Make
Fomentations, and other Topical Applications; such as we have directed in their
proper places, where we have treated of Gangrens, amp;c.

LXXII. If there is a Concussion with the Tumor, first Bleed, and as often as
you see occasion; keep the Body soluble by Clysters: and quiet the Ferment in
the Blood, by frequent draughts of cooling Emulsions; then shaving off the
Hair, embrocate the Head and Neck with Oils of Myrtles and Roses, mixed with
Vinegar and whites of Eggs: and apply the Cataplasm at Sect. 66. above, made
with Red-Wine, or Oxycrate.

LXXIII. After the Symptoms are remitted, apply this Cataplasm: Barley, Wheat,
and Lentil meal, A. ii. flowers of Red-roses, Myrtle-berries, Nutgalls, Calamus
Aromaticus, Cypress-nuts, Catechu, Terra sigillata, all in fine powder, A. i.
Orrice-pouder, Zedoary, flowers of Camomil and Melilot, A. ss. all in fine
powder; rough Red-wine q.s. boil all to a Cataplasm: or, with Wax q.s. make it
into a Cerat.

LXXIV. If the Concussion does not terminate by the aforesaid means, you must
lay open the Part, and proceed as we have directed at Sect. 67. aforegoing.

LXXV. If in a very great Contusion where there is no Wound, the Tumor is
large, and feels soft and pappy, and increases, notwithstanding all your
cooling Applications; it is to be feared, that the quantity of Serum which
raises the Tumor, does proceed from within, from some Fissure in the Scull.

LXXVI. In this case, make Incision into the Tumor, proportionably to its
magnitude; and if you find or feel no part of the Scull bare or deprest, dress
it with Digestives, and do the Cure as before directed, at Sect. 67. above, if
the Humor does abate, and the Wound it self digests.

LXXVII. But if you find there is a depression, and other ill Symptoms appear,
you must lay the Hairy-scalp more open, to make way for a farther inspection,
and then proceed to the Cure, as we shall direct in Lib. 6. following.

IV. Of Wounds of the Head.
LXXVIII. They are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Vulnera Capitis; and in
English, Wounds of the Head.

LXXIX. The Kinds. They are of three Kinds: 1. Such wherein the Scull is not
made bare. 2. Where the Scull is made bare, but not hurt. 3. Where the Scull is
also hurt, but not fractured.

LXXX. The Signs. When the Scull is not made bare, you may know it by seeling
with the Finger, if the Wound is large enough: and partly by the Probe, if with
it you feel no hard substance; and if the Probe slip and slide, meeting with
the Pericranium.

LXXXI. The Cure, where the Cranium is not made bare. These Wounds being made
by Incision, dividing the Scalp to the Cranium; yea if it cut the Scull, if
there be no Symptoms of an internal Hurt, the lips of the Wound are to be
brought close together, and healed by Agglutination.

LXXXII. Some object against stitching these Wounds, lest the Matter thereby be
pent in, and so foul the Bone. To this it is answered, if no evil Symptoms be
present, so that the Wound ought to be speedily healed; it may be safely done,
(and it is easily done) both abroad in foreign Parts, and with us here at home.

LXXXIII. But these kinds of Wounds are not to be crowded with Dossels; for
thereby you may induce a Fever, and prolong the Cure.

LXXXIV. The Hair therefore being clipped or shaved off, you may stop the flux of
Blood with Pulvis Galeni, or some other good Styptick; and lay over Emplast. e
Bolo, or some other Defensative, with Compress and Bandage, bringing the lips
close together.

LXXXV. The day following exhibit a Clyster, and at next Dressing embrocate the
Parts about with Oils of Roses and Myrtles mixed with Vinegar, and dress up the
Wound with Linimentum Arcaei, upon Pledgets, and it will quickly be well.

LXXXVI. But if the lips of the Wound were not brought close together at the
first Dressing, then Digestives must be applied, such as these of Sennertus.
Turpentine vi. Oil of Hypericon iij. Frankincense in powder i. yolk of one Egg,
mix them. Or this: Rosin vi. yolk of one Egg, mix them. Or: Pure Turpentine,
Gum Elemi, A. j ss. Suet ii. Lard i. melt, and mix them.

LXXXVII. G^d Pus appearing the third or fourth day, you may add to the
Digestive Honey of Roses, for the deterging of the Wound; or simple clarified
Honey, or increase the proportion of the Rosin and Frankincense: or you may use
this following Ointment. Venice-Turpentine ii. Syrup of Roses, or Mel Rosarum
i. Aloes, Mastich, Myrrh, A. ss. mix them: after which, the Cure must be
completed with Sarcoticks and Epuloticks.

LXXXVIII. Where the Scull is made bare, but not hurt, the Wound is to be cured
two several ways; viz. either by Agglutination, or Incarnation; that is, by the
first, or second Intention.

LXXXIX. If by Agglutination, first stitch the Wound, (if so large as to need
stitching) then apply ^uivis Galeni, and Pledgets dipped in the white of an Egg:
the next day dress it with Linimentum Arcaei, or some other Balsam; using
neither Tents nor Pledgets, because they hinder Consolidation. See Arcaeus,
lib. 1. cap. 1.

XC. If the Wound yields much Pus, dress it twice a day, until the Quittor
abates; and continue this manner of Dressing 'till the Wound is agglutinated;
which is sometimes on the fourth, and sometimes on the sixth day.

XCI. If you cure by Incarnation, or the Second Intention, which is chiefly
where there is withal a less of Substance; 1. Sprinkle the Bone with some
Cephalic Powder, or that at Sect. 70. aforegoing: then apply dry Pledgets; and
apply to the fleshy Parts some of the former Digestives at Sect. 86. above;
after which, fill up the Wound with Flesh by application of Sarcoticks, as Vng.
Aureum, Basilicon, or Linimentum Arcaei.

XCII. Where the Scull is hurt, but not fractured. The Scull is hurt, when
being made bare, it is dried, by being exposed to the open Air for two or three
Hours; or if the upper Table is separated from the lower; or if both Tables of
the Scull are cut through.

XCIII. In the first of these Cases, (which you may know by its not bleeding,
being rasped with a Raspatory) the upper superficies is to be removed by the
Raspatory, that Blood may be made to come from the sound Bone; then the Wound
is to be stitched, and the Cure is to be performed by Agglutination.

XCIV. If only a part of the Cranium separates it self from the rest, and
sticks to the Cutis musculosa, it is to be taken away; and the Wound is to be
cured either by Agglutination, or Concarnation, as the case may require.

XCV. If a part of the whole Cranium is broken from the rest, so that the Dura
Matter may be seen, you must cure it as we shall direct in Lib. 6. of Fractures,
following: yet this we shall say at present, that this part of the Scull
sticking to the Cutis musculosa, is not to be separated therefrom, lest the
Brain be deprived of its Cover: but it must be reduced into its place, and
there kept, by bringing the lips of the Cutis musculosa together, with so may
deep and strong Stitches as shall be necessary, and then to be cured as other
Wounds of the Hairy-scalp.

V. A Wound of the Head, with Contusion.
XCVI. It is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Vulnus Capitis contusum; and in
Latin, A Wound of the Head, with Contusion.

XCVII. These Wounds are either small, or great: the small or ordinary, are
such as are not accompanied with any dangerous Symptoms, and where the Cranium
is but a little naked.

XCVIII. Here you need not stuff in Dossels; for if the contused Flesh is but
well digested, the Bone will incarnate underneath, with the Wound, with no
great difficulty: and in the very worst habits of Body, they will incarnate by
keeping the orifice a little open, by a small Dossel pressed out of S.V. and
defending the adjacent parts from fluxion, by proper Medicaments, and good
Bandage.

XCIX. To cure therefore these Wounds, first wash and foment the Wound with
S.V. or the Tincture of Frankincense and Myrrh; then if the Wound requires it,
stitch it with Needles, (by the lesser it may be done with the drysuture,) but
leave room for the Matter to come forth; for if that should be shut in by your
dressing, the Wound would be made more hollow, and the Cure delayed, etc.

C. Let the Wound be dressed with Linimentum Arcaei, or for want of it, with
Turpentine; whose Praises, Sennertus, Med. Pract. lib. 1. par. 1. cap. 22. has
loudly proclaimed in these words.

CI. Et omnino hic utilissimum Medicamentum est Terebinthina, omnibus
Vulneribus commoda, praesertim Partium Nervosarum, qualis Pericranium est:
praeservat enim Contusa a corruptione and putridine, ea corroborat, Dolores
sedat, Vlcera mundat, and si acrimoniam aliquam prae se ferat, ea facile
tollicur ablutione Aqua Betonicae; and cum in passivis siccae sit, siccitas
temperatur humidis, ut Ovi vitellio, and Olei Rosaceo modico adjecto. Now above
all things Turpentine is a most excellent Medicine, fit for the Cure of all
sorts of Wounds, but more especially of the Nervous Parts, of which kind is the
Pericranium: for it preserves contused Wounds from corruption and putridness,
strengthens the Parts, eases Pain, cleanses Ulcers, and if there be any
acrimony it carries with it, the same is easily taken away by washing it with
Betony-water; and though it is drying in its passive qualities, it is remedied by
mixing it with humid things, as the yolk of an Egg, and a little Oil of Roses.

CII. The same Sennertus prescribes this. Turpentine, Oil of Roses, A. i. Wax
ss. Saffron ss. mix them: but says he, if an Inflammation is feared, let
Barley-flower ss. be added; and to make it Sarcotick, Frankincense ss. may be
added.

CIII. If the Wound is deep, a Tent must be kept in the depending Part, 'till
it yields a good sort of Pus, and then it is to be taken out, and an Emplaster,
as Diapalma, Empl. Al^um, or De Meliloto, mixed with Empl. Album, or Diachylon,
may be laid on.

CIV. If the Wound is great, or extraordinary, accompanied with strange and
unusual Symptoms; or Inflammation of the whole Head, Neck, and Shoulders;
Fever, great Swelling of the lips of the Wound, and they of a livid color; or
that it casts forth a virulent, sharp, and black, and stinking Sanies; or it
casts off a slough, and leaves the Cranium much naked, though it be not fouled,
either by the Matter or the Air.

CV. In this case, (by reason the Bone is naturally smooth and slippery, so
that the Flesh difficultly grows upon it) you must (as Galen and others advise)
rasp the Bone, 'till you see the Blood ready to come out of it; whereby it will
sooner and better be supplied with the Matter for breeding of Flesh.

CVI. But if the Patient will not admit of Rasping, then you must keep Dossels
close to the lips of the Wound, and make exfoliation from the edges, that the
sound part may cast off the rotten: for neither any inward Medicine, nor Wine
applied with Lint, or other Medicaments, to the middle of a Bone, will signify
any thing to the Exfoliation of it; that is but trifling; for in the mean time,
the Matter from the edges will rot the Bone underneath, and in time pierce
through the first Table, and run down between the two Tables, and do much
mischief: so that at length you will be forced to use the Terebra or Trepan.

CVII. The Bone being thus scraped, or exfoliated, dress it with Pledgets dipped
in Linimentum Arcaei hot, or some such like Preparation made of Gum Elemi,
Balsam Capivii, Cypress-Turpentine, or some of the Natural Balsams: if
Digestion is necessary, apply Digestives to the lips; otherwise apply Pledgets
wrung out of S.V. simple, or a Tincture of Birthwort, Orrice, and Hog-Fennel
roots, etc.

CVIII. In a Wound made by Incision, where part of the Scull is cut slanting
off, or into the second Table; if there are no Symptoms of Concussion, you
ought not to lay open the Wound to set on the Trepan; but cleanse and dress it,
with a fit Dossel pressed out of S.V. digest the lips of the Wound, and wait
for the Exfoliation, and then heal it up: Rasping in this case is needless; for
if the Bone be rightly dressed, the Flesh will soon arise, and make Exfoliation,
and 'twill Incarnate of its own accord.

CIX. If there is any Malignity joined therewith, as being made with a Poisoned
Weapon, or from the Bitings of Malign Creatures, whether Men or Beasts; the
lips of the Wound are first to be scarified, and either Leeches or
Cupping-glasses may be applied; and then the Wound may be washed and fomented
with this following Medicine.

CX. Our Theriaea Chymica, or in place thereof, Mithridate ss. common Angelica
or Scordium water iv. Spiritus Cordialis, or Spiritus Vini, i. Spiritus
Universalis ii. mix them.

CXI. And inwardly you may give this. Our Theriaca Chymica, or Elect.
Antipestilentiale, a i. ad i. Spiritus Cordialis vi. Aqua Angelicae simplex
iii. mix, for a Dose.

CHAP. XXVI. Of WOVNDS of the TEMPORAL MVSCLES.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Vulnus Musculorum Temporum; in
English, A Wound of the Temporal Muscles.

II. The Prognostics. Wounds of the Temples are always dangerous: 1. Because
the Passage of Hearing is in the Temples; and the Instruments of the Senses are
very sensible. 2. Because the Temporal Muscles are placed on the Temples, which
are casily offended. 3. Because the Motion of the Joints of the lower Jaw (in
Speaking, Eating, or Drinking) does hinder unition. 4. Because considerable
Vessels, as the branches of the Jugular Veins, and Soporal Arteries are
distributed there.

III. Wounds of the Temporal Muscle, are commonly accompanied with fearful
Symptoms; and many times they follow some time after the Wound is made; as
Vomitings, deep Slumbering, Convulsions, etc.

IV. If the Wound is made by Puncture, it is to be accounted dangerous; and
many times brings with it very evil Symptoms, as those before named, and other
like.

V. If the Temporal Muscle is cut athwart or transversly, it loses its proper
action, which is to move and lift up the lower Jaw; then the opposite Temporal
Muscle, being whole and sound, and using its strength, the wounded Muscle not
being able to act, or make any resistance, it draws the lower Jaw to it; by
which the Mouth, and most parts of the Face are drawn awry, and suffer a kind
of convulsion toward the sound part, the other being resolved, and falling.

VI. For as often as the Muscles of one kind are equal in number, magnitude, and
strength on each side: the resolution or cutting asunder of the one part,
causes a convulsion of the other.

VII. Besides all this, when we eat, drink, or speak, this Muscle is in
perpetual motion; so that being once cut, it will very difficultly admit of
unition: for this reason, if there should be a Fracture in this Muscle, of the
Ossa Petrosa, (joined to the Scull by Sutura Squamosa, or the Scaly Suture) you
ought not to be too hasty in dilating it, lest Convulsions or other ill
accidents should happen.

VIII. The Cure. If therefore in a Wound of the Temporal Muscles there should
be a fracture of the Bone without ill Symptoms, let the Hair be shaved off, and
the Wound dressed with this. Oils of Whelps, of Earthworms, and of Hypericon,
A. ss. S.V. ii. mix them, and use it warm.

IX. Or, Balsam of Chili, or of Peru ss. Oil of Earthworms i. mix them, and
dress the Wound therewith.

X. If the Muscle is cut transversly, then the lips are to be brought together
by stitching in the Skin: afterward it is to be dressed with Linimentum Arcaei,
or some other Balsam; or those things which are prescribed in Punctures.

X. Or you may apply this Unguent of Sennertus. Turpentine, Gum Elemi, A. iii.
pure Rosin, Oil of Roses, A.iv. Wax vi. Ammoniacum ii. make an Ointment.

XII. Or, Gum Elemi iii. Opopanax ii. Pine-Rosin i. Bdellium ss. Wax q.s. mix,
and make an Ointment.

XIII. Gum Elemi is an admirable thing, as Conciliator, Different. 181. writes,
Attrahit, dolorem mitigat, malam intemperiem, propter familiaritatem quam cum
Corpore habet, corrigit, Viz. It attracts or draws, eases pain, and corrects an
ill temperature of the Part, from its friendly quality which it has to the Body.

XIV. Above these wounds you may apply Sticticum Paracelsi, or Diachylon cum
Gummis, brought to the consistence of a Cerat, by mixing it with some Balsam,
either Natural or Artificial.

XV. And though there may be danger of Death, Celsus advises, That we should not
altogther leave the miserable Patient comfortless, for that it is better to try
a doubtful Medicine, than none at all: and we may avoid scandal, and free our
selves from blame and reproach, by making the probable prognostics to the
Friends of the Sick.

XVI. If the Muscle is wounded only according to the length, you must first
stop the Hemorrhage, with some proper Styptick, the chief of which is that of
Dr. Gardner' s Preparation: then you must unite the brims by stitching them
together, cleansing the Wound first from the grumous or clotted Blood, or other
extraneous bodies.

XVII. Which done, dress the Head or Wound with some of the former Ointments,
or Balsams, Cerats, or Emplasters; and so compose him to rest, raising his Head
somewhat high with a Pillow.

XVIII. An Observation, from Wiseman. One wounded transverse the right Temporal
Muscle, was bleeding almost to death; I stitcht (says he) his Wound, taking the
Artery up with the lips; and for want of other Remedies, dressed it with a little
Wheat Flour and the white of an Egg, applying over it a Compress, pressed out of
Vinegar, with convenient Bandage.

XIX. The third day after the Dressings were taken off, and the lips were found
new agglutinated: being better provided with Medicines, the lips of the Wound
were sprinkled with powder made of Frankincense and Dragons-blood, and a
Pledget applied spread with Linimentum Arcaei, and over it Diapalma.

XX. The fifth day, or second after the former Dressing, the Stitches were cut,
and Epuloticks applied: so that in two or three Dressings more he was cured.
Wiseman, lib. 5. c. 9. page 387.

CHAP. XXVII. Of WOVNDS of the MENINGES of the BRAIN.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...), pl. (...). in Latin, Vulnus, pl. Vulnera
Meningium Cerebri; in English, A Wound, or Wounds of the Membranes of the Brain.

II. It follows in order of Nature, to treat of Wounds of the Cranium: but by
reason they are chiefly Fractures, of which our whole Sixth Book following
treats, we shall here pass them over, and come immediately to treat of those
parts under the Scull, which are the Meninges of the Brain, and the Brain it
self.

III. The Meninges, or Membranes, are the internal containing part of the Head;
and they are two, both which compass the Brain; viz. the Dura Matter, and the
Pia Matter.

IV. The Dura Matter is the outermost Membrane, and being very strong, is placed
under the Cranium; the wounding of which, is very often attended with Palsies;
and in time of the hurt or accident, with Convulsions and other ill Symptoms;
the which are the greater, if the Wound is in the middle part of the Head,
according to its length; there being many Vessels in that place, which if they
chance to be cut, will fill the void space between the Cranium and Dura Matter,
with Blood.

V. The Pia Matter, lies upon the body or substance of the Brain, so close, that
a Wound cannot be made into the Pia Matter, and the Brain escape free: and from
its many Veins being cut, or broken, a Flux of Blood inevitably follows.

VI. The Signs. A Wound of this Part is known by sight; and is for the most
part accompanied with vehement Pain, Hemorrhage, Inflammation, Apostemation,
and Discoloration.

VII. The Prognostics. If drowsiness and sleepiness seizes the Patient, Death
not long after will ensue.

VIII. If notwithstanding the use of Means there is a Putrefaction, and it will
not cease, but still increases and goes on; or a Tumor shall increase and grow
above the opening of the Scull, being immovable, black, and dry: if the Eyes
of the Sick appear of a fiery color, bunch-out, and are still moving; if they
toss and tumble in their Bed, and rave, you may predict Death at hand, and so
much the sooner, as these Symptoms continue constant and uniform. And Death
must of necessity ensue, because of the extinction of Natural Heat, and the
Gangren of a Noble Part.

IX. When the Pia Matter is wounded, (because it is very thin, and sticks fast
to the Brain) the Brain also must be offended, and therefore such Wounds are
for the most part mortal: for the Brain being laid open to the Air, is
presently and easily corrupted by the external cold, which extinguishes the
weak heat of that Part; as also by the moisture which is contained in its
substance, as by that which comes to it by a flux from other places.

I. Wounds of the Dura Matter.
X. The Cure. In this case presently lay-open the Hairy-scalp, and raise it up
with the Bones, that you may in some measure relieve the oppressed Membrane; and
if there is a great flux of Blood, cleanse the Membrane with a Sponge dipped, and
a little squeezed out of hot Red-wine, or Vinegar.

XI. If there is a vehement Hemorrhage, the Membrane being wounded, you must
immediately make way to come at the wounded Membrane, if the Instrument or
Weapon has not made way enough; and then stop it with Galen's Powder, made of
Aloes, Frankincense, Mastich, white of an Egg, and down of an Hare; or Dr.
Gardner's Styptick, or some such like Medicament.

XII. As to the first Dressing, Authors something differ; Celsus would have it
dressed with Dryers, viz. Cum Aceto acerrimo: his factis, (those things being
done, at Sect. 10. above) ea Membrana Aceto acri respergenda est, ut si intus
concretus Cruor remanet, discutiatur, etc. The Membrane is to be sprinkled with
sharp Vinegar, to prevent the bleeding, and to dissolve the coagulated Blood
which remains upon the Dura Matter.

XIII. But Avicen, and most of the Ancients were for Lenients, as Oil of Roses,
that the extravasated Blood lying upon the Dura Matter might be converted into
Matter: in which case, you are to be something guided by your Eye.

XIV. If there is Sanies or Putrefaction, dress with Mel Rosarum mixed with
S.V. and higher Abstersives may be used, as you see the Putrefaction is more or
less: if a Hemorrhage is feared, Celsus his way may be proper, or the use of
some other Styptick. But if neither an Hemorrhage nor Putrefaction are feared,
but that the Membrane is fresh, and of its natural color; you are not to
grieve or exasperate the Pain, with the acrimony of Vinegar, or Detergents: the
use of Vinegar, or Mel Rosarum with S.V. are contrary to the Indication of
Cure, which teaches to digest recent Wounds, before you use Abstersives.

XV. Therefore Lenients, by the Authority both of Ancients and Moderns, are
first to be used. Galen used Pigeons-Blood, or the Blood of Turtles, dropped warm
from their Wings. Fallopius and Aquapendens use Oil of Roses, mixed with Rosin
of the Fir Tree, afterward increasing the Rosin, and lessening the Oil: these
by their Concoctive quality, perfect the Digestion sooner; and by their Anodyn
quality, secure the Part from Inflammation.

XVI. By this simple Medicament, Wiseman says he never failed of good
Digestion, and afterward by the tempering of it, he has both digested and
deterged, never finding the least prejudice the bare Bone received from it: but
this you are also to be cautious of, that you use not Digestives unseasonably,
because thereby the Parts may be relaxed: therefore after Digestion, add more
Rosin, and less Oil.

XVII. Or you may mix Mel Rosarum with the Rosin, instead of Oil; which will
answer the Intentions, both of deterging, and incarnating.

XVII. Or you may use this, to both purposes. Balsam Capivii, Gum Elemi, A.ii.
Strasburgh-Turpentine i. Honey of Roses, Canary, A. iii. Oil of Roses iv. boil
to the consumption of the Wine; then add Cochinel in fine powder iii. Aloes i.
Saffron ss. mix them.

XIX. This you may apply upon the Dura Matter, and a Button of Lint over, to
fill up the hollow in the Bone: and the rest of the Bone may be dressed with dry
Lint, or Linimentum Arcaei, and the lips of the Wound with a Digestive, with
Turpentine, etc. over which apply Diapalma, or Empl. Album, malaxed with Oil of
Roses.

XX. Now one thing is to be noted, that in the Directions at Sect. 10. and 11.
above, you take not out more Bones than needs must: for recent Fractures of the
Cranium, do easily unite, like those in other Parts; if the Pus or Matter has
way made, to be discharged from within: so that having raised up the Bones that
are loose, the others may be dressed dry, with Catagmaticks; taking care, that a
Hypersarcosis or Proud-flesh come not upon them; and thus they will easily
agglutinate.

XXI. In these Wounds of the Dura Matter, besides those mentioned at Sect. 15,
16, 17, and 18. the Oils of Hypericon and Mastich, mixed with Rosin, are
commended: and Archigenes, Galen, and Aquapendens sometimes dressed these Wounds
with juice of Calamint, mixed with the flower of Milium.

XXII. The Unition and Incarnating the Lips of the Dura Matter, is performed by
a Carneous Substance arising from the Membrane, which afterward as it
increases, does unite them; and overspreading that Part, grows up to the
Cranium, and unites with that Callus, (after Exfoliation of the Bone) and
becomes one body with it, filling up the vacancy, or place which was
perforated, and in some grows more firm than the Bone it self.

XXIII. You must be careful that your Lenients make not the Flesh too lax and
soft, lest a troublesome Fungus springs forth; which you may prevent in its
beginning, by using Desiccatives, as red Precipitate, mixed with burnt Alum,
Aloes, and powder of Pomgranate-peels, etc. The Vitriol-stone takes this off
with little pain, and also disposes the Part to cicatrize, if prudently used
and timely. We will have a few words concerning the Accidents or Symptoms, and
so shall conclude this Topic.

II. Symptoms in Wounds of the Dura Matter.
XXIV. 1. Pain. Narcoticks here have no place, for they would stupify the
Membrane; nor emollient unctuous Medicines, because they may induce putridness.
Oil of Roses, mixed with Gum Elemi a third part, are to be put warm upon the
Membrane, 'till the pain ceases, and the Pus appears; then Honey of Roses may
be mixed with Oil of Roses, for better digesting and deterging, etc.

XXV. 2. Inflammation. It is a red Tumor of the Dura Matter, with distention of
its Vessels; so great sometimes, that it sills the hole of the Cranium, and
grows above it. This Symptom is dangerous, and therefore they first Bleed, and
appoint a slender Diet; then they Foment with a Decoction of Althea, Linseed,
Fenugreek-seed, Groundsel and Violet leaves, made in Wine, or in Wine and
Water; this being done, they anoint with Oils of Roses, Myrtles, or Quinces: if
these things prevail not, and that you see it will Apostemate, you are to
dilate the Scull, by taking away more of it.

XXVI. 3. Apostemation. It is known by the extraordinary whiteness of some part
of it, as in Pustules of the Skin; then you must carefully open it, but so as
not to touch the Brain; and drying abstersive Medicaments are to be applied, as
Mel Rosarum cum S.V. Syrup of dried Roses mixed with a little Turpentine, or
Balsam Capivii, or Gum Elemi, and Spirit of Wine, etc.

XXVII. 4. Discoloration. This may proceed from many Causes; as violence of the
Contusion, coagulated Blood, coldness of the Air, application of unfit
Medicines, and from a putridness.

XVIII. If it comes from the Contusion, it seldom lasts above three or four
days: in this case use Oleum Rosaceum, or Mel Rosatum, or Oil of Eggs, with a
little S.V. mixed with some Cephalic Powder and Saffron.

XXIX. If it comes from Coagulated Blood, Powder of Cochenel, of
Chermes-berries, A. i. Saffron ss. Sarcocol ii. S.V. Honey of Roses, A. ii. mix
them; and apply it, 'till the blackness goes away.

XXX. If it comes from application of Unfit Medicines, as being too moist,
unctuous, or sharp, apply such as are in faculty contrary, viz. drying, as
Cephalic Pouders mixed with Honey or Oil of Roses: if from sharp things, apply
such as are mild and lenient, as Oils of Hypericon, Earthworms, or Whelps,
mixed with a little Saffron, and Balsam of Peru.

XXXI. If it proceeds from Putridness, known by the ill smell of the Sanies,
then apply this: S.V. White Wind, A. ii. Syrup of Wormwood, Honey of Roses,
A.i. Ung. Aegyptiacum ss. Aloes, Myrrh, Sarcocol, Precipitate, A.i. mix.

III. Wounds of the Pia Matter.
XXXII. Wounds of this Part are most times mortal: partly, for that this
Membrane is full of Blood Vessels, and so subject to great Hemorrhages; and
partly, because the Brain, being exposed to the Air, is thereby overcooled; and
being corrupted, is apt to be pressed forth by the constant Pain they endure from
the putrefaction of the Cerebrum, whereby it many times comes forth at the
Wound.

XXXIII. You must make clear and open your way to these Wounds, by removing the
lacerated Flesh and Bones, if they will submit: otherwise you must leave it to
Nature, lest the Patient dies under your hands, which is a disgrace to an
Artist.

XXXIV. First stop the Haemorrhage with Galen' s Powder, and Hares Fur, mixed
with the White of an Egg, which use upon Pledgits, to retain the Brain also
within its Bounds.

XXXV. Then the Part is to be cured with Medicaments, drying, warming, and
comforting; such as that described at Sect. 18. aforegoing, and other the like
things, dressing up the Wound as those in the Dura Matter.

XXXVI. If any part of the Lips of the Hairy Scalp is lacerated, shattered, or
seems to be torn in Rags, cut it off, lest a Gle^ drop from them upon the
Membranes or Brain, and so increase the Accidents.

XXXVII. If the Brain be kept within its Membranes, viz. the Pia and Dura
Matter, and they digest and incarnate, then proceed in the rest of the Cure, as
we have before directed in the Discourse of the Wounds of the Dura Meninx.

XXXVIII. Bleeding is also sometimes to be done, as your Prudence shall direct
you: And in a Cacochymia, there ought to be due purging to carry off the
offending Humors, and serous Blood, which, by reason of its thinness and heat,
is apt to fly to the affected part; but this is to be done, according as the
Necessity requires, and the Patient's Strength will admit.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of WOVNDS of the BRAIN.
I. THey are called in Greek, (...), pl. (...). in Latin, Vulnus, pl. Vulnera
Cerebri; in English, a Wound, or Wounds of the Brain.

II. The Signs. Hippocrates, lib. 6. aphor. 50. says, If any have the Brain
wounded, they will have a Fever and vomiting of Choler. And this Celsus, lib.
8. cap. 4. affirms in a very florid Discourse.

III. Hippocrates, Sect. 7. Aph. 58. says, They who have suffered a vehement
Concussion of the Brain, immediately became dumb: and in Coacis Prenot. he
says, they fall a slumbering.

IV. There is also Senselesness, Giddiness, and Dimness of Sight: For
Fernelius, Pathol. lib. 7. cap. 8. says, If the Substance of the Brain is hurt,
the Reason becomes weak, and all the Symptoms increase; and many times a
Portion of the Brain comes out, not without Danger of Life.

V. If the Brain is wounded, the Pus, or Quittor, will be thick, round, and
like a marrowy Substance.

VI. Paraeus, lib. 9. cap. 22. says, If the Meninges are divided, and a
Substance like Fat comes out, which will neither swim above the Water, nor yet
melt with Heat, as Fat will, the Brain may then be said to be wounded.

VII. The Symptoms. The Symptoms are many and dreadful. 1. What respect the
natural Powers, as, foaming at Mouth, darkness of Sight, Vertigo, vomiting of
Choler, a Fever, Convulsion, Deafness, and want of Speech.

VIII. 2. What respects the rational Faculties; as, Stupidity, want of Reason,
a Palsy, Lethargy, and last of all an Apoplexy.

IX. The Prognostics. All Wounds of the Brain are dangerous at least, 1.
Because of the Nobleness of its Parts, and the necessary use of its Functions.
2. Because of its continual motion, considering a wounded part in curing
requires rest. 3. From the Substance of the Brain, being soft and humid, and so
the more apt to Putridness. 4. Because of the Coldness of the Brain, which
generates many Excrements. 5. Because of the Consent of the Nerves, it being
their original. 6. Because Medicaments are not so easily conveyed to that part,
being wounded.

X. But that some have had Wounds of the Brain, and even with loss of its
Substance who have escaped With Life, Authors have reported, and for which they
give us these Reasons; as, 1. The healthy and strong Constitution of the
Patient. 2. The Skilfulness of the Artist in dressing of the Wound; for that
many recover of great Wounds, being dressed neatly, easily, and according to
Art; whereas others die of small Wounds, being negligently or ignorantly
dressed. 3. The difference of the part wounded; some parts of the Brain being
more dangerous when wounded, than other some.

XI. Authors are not wanting in giving us Histories of such, who having been
wounded in the Br^in, have recovered. Galen on Hippocrates, lib. 6. Aph. 18.
says, He saw one cured, who had a considerable Wound in the Brain: And, De Vsu
Partium, lib. 10. he tells us of a young Man, who recovered of a Wound received
in one of the fore Ventricles of the Brain.

XII. Andreas a Cruce, Chirurg. lib. 1. Tract. 2. cap. 14. says, he cured
several whose Brains were wounded, and brings Witness of the Truth thereof: And
Fr. Arcaeus, lib. 1. cap. 6. brings four Examples of the Truth of the same.

XIII. Fallopius de Capitis vulneribus, cap. 45. says, A great Portion of the
Brain may come forth, and yet Life be saved: Therefore (says he) forsake not
the wounded Patient, for I my self have had great Trial of these things. And
Fabricius Hildanus, Cent. 4. Observe. 1, 2, 3. gives us four Examples of this
kind.

XIV. Christoph. a Vega in Hippocrates, lib. 6. Aph. 15. says, That Wounds of
the Brain, if they reach to the Ventricles, are not cured: But we have seen
(says he) many others cured, which pierced to the Substance of the Brain, and
out of which some Portion of the Brain issued. Carpus de Tractatu in fractura
Cranii, affirms, That he saw six Persons who recovered, when a good quantity of
the Brain came out of the Wounds.

XV. Theodoricus Chirurg. lib. 2. cap. 2. assures us, That Wounds of the
Membrane, and Substance of the Brain and Ventricles, may be cured. And Horatius
Augenius, lib. 9. Epist. 2. says, He saw once the whole Substance of the Brain
wounded, and a Portion of the Brain to come out of the Wound, yet that the
Patient was cured, and did well.

XVI. Brassavola in Hippocratis, lib. 6. Aph. 18. reports, That he saw two who
were cured, after their Brains were wounded. And Massa, Tom. 2. Epist. 11.
takes God to witness, and many yet alive (says he) can witness, that I have
cured several, whose Skull is, Membranes and Brain have been wounded; also
naming them.

XVII. Valeriola, lib. 4. Obs. 10. lib. 5. Obs. 9. and lib. 6. Obs. 4. has also
several Examples. And Sennertus, Med. Pract. lib. 1. part. 1. cap. 24. has
given us a famous Example, which was brought to him of a Carpenter who was
wounded in the Brain, and there fell out of the Substance of the Brain as much
almost as the Quantity of a Walnut, who was cured with an Ointment of Fab.
Hildanus.

XVIII. Paraeus, lib. 10. cap. 22. tells us of a young Man wounded upon the
right Bregma into the Brain, so that the quantity of a Hazel-nut came forth
thereat, which he cut away, and recovered him perfectly, excepting that he
continued deaf all his Life after. Wiseman, lib. 5. cap. 9. says, That the
Brain it self is insensible; and that the Symptoms which accompany these Wounds
proceed from the Pain and Anguish of the Dura and Pia Matter. He tells us of a
Patient of his, who was wounded into the Brain, with loss of its Substance, who
lived 17 days after: And, (says he) by what I have seen of them heretofore,
their Cure consists in dressing them as Wounds of the Dura Matter, and in
keeping the Brain within its Membranes, without which no Incarnation can
succeed.

XIX. Cabrolius de periculosissimis Cerebri Vulneribus, Obs. 16, 22, and 24.
has some worthy and notable Histories of this kind. And Skenkius, lib. 1. Obs.
40, 42. has collected many, which for their Rarity are worth reading.

XX. These Authorities being thus alleged, I am unwilling to interpose a
Judgment against such a Cloud of Witnesses, most of them being Men of
Reputation, Honor and Integrity: All that I will say upon the matter is this,
That nothing of this nature ever came within my Cognizance; and though Wounds of
this kind, may be thought by me, with others, extremely dangerous, yet I think
we ought not to judge their Cure impossible; and therefore believe it the Duty
of every Artist, when such Accidents offer themselves, not only to bind up the
wounded Patient, but to do all his Endeavors, and exert his greatest Skill and
Abilities, in order to the Performance of the Cure; since Nature many times
assists us in our Undertakings, even beyond all hope.

XXI. The Causes of the Symptoms. 1. Dimness of Sight. It is caused from a
Dissipation of the Animal Spirits, and a Confusion of the Visive Spirits in the
Optic Nerves.

XXII. 2. Loss of Motion. 1. It is caused, 1. By the Violence of that which
gives the Wound. 2. By Privation of the Faculty of moving, through the wounding
the Instruments of Motion.

XXIII. 3. Slumbering, or Sleepiness. It is caused from the Dissipation of the
Animal Spirits, but greater, and of longer continuance than in Dimness of Sight.

XXIV. A Fever. It is caused by an Inflammation seizing upon the wounded part,
which being communicated to the Heart by the Veins, is from thence by the same
Vessels scattered over the whole Body.

XXV. 5. AVertigo. It is caused from the Circumvolution, or turning round of
the Animal Spirits, and from their violent and irregular Motions.

XXVI. 6. A Vomiting. It is caused from a Communication of Vessels: For the
Brain being hurt, the Disaffection is communicated by the Nerves of the sixth
Conjugation, which proceeding from the Brain, are dispersed through all the
Coats of the Stomach.

XXVII. 7. A Convulsion. It is caused from malign, putrid, or sharp thin Humors
or Vapors, pricking the Original of the Nerves, and so disposing them to
Explosions in various parts.

XXVIII. 8. A Palsy. It is caused by matter obstructed, which piercing the
Nerves and musculous Fibers, especially in their Original, as the Brain and
Spinal Marrow, causes a Resolution in those Parts to which those Conjugations
or Pairs run.

XXIX. 9. Stupidity. It is caused by putrid Vapors or Humors, abounding in such
plenty, as almost to suffocate or put a stop to the Motion of the Animal
Spirits, being obstructed in the Brain.

I. The Cure of Wounds of the Brain.
XXX. Sennertus Med. Pract. lib. 1. par. 1. cap. 24. forbids things cold and
moist; also moist Digestives, and all fat, unctious and oily Medicaments; for
the Brain being soft and moist, is by them easily corrupted.

XXXI. But things drying are to be used; as, Oil of Turpentine, and all the
kinds of natural Balsams, (which cannot properly be said to be unctious or
greasy.) Andreas a Cruce, Chirurg. lib. 1. cap. 14. will have Oil of
Turpentine and Sp. Vi. to be applied till the fourteenth day is past, and then
to drop into the Wound this following Liquor.

XXXII. Generous and strong Wine, as Sherry, x, Juice of Betony ij, Juice of
Calaminth j, inspissate Juice of Centory, Seeds of Hypericon, Aloes, Myrrh,
Dragons Blood, Olibanum, A.ss. bruise and digest all in a Vessel close stopped;
then boil gently to the consumption of a third part; strain, and add thereto
S.V. iij. Oil of Turpentine ij. mix them for use.

XXXIII. Upon the former apply Pulvis Cephalicus; and cover all with some fit
Balsamic Emplaster.

XXXIV. Sennertus says, Pigeons Blood may be dropped in, or some fine Cloth dipped
in Greek (or rather Sherry) Wine, in which Roses and Betony have been infused:
In Wintertime, Aqua Vitae may be used; others use the Juice of Catmint; others
the Powder of pure Frankincense; even till the 7th day, and till the Flesh
begins to grow up.

XXXV. Fabricius ab Aquapendente Chirurg. lib. 2. cap. 20. uses this following,
with good Success. Meal of Milium ss. Mithridate vj. Aqua Vitae v. Balsam of
Peru iij. Oleum Hispanicum j. Oil of Vitriol j. ss. mix them.

XXXVI. And upon that he applies this Emplaster. Barley-flower viij. Oil of
Mastick vj. Oxymel simple v. Powder of Camomil Flowers iiij. Oil of Roses iij.
Spicknard Scaenanth, Staechas, Betony, all in Powder, A. ss. White Wind q.s.
mix, and make an Emplaster.

XXXVII. The Oleum Hispanum, which he wonderfully commends for the speedy
healing of Wounds, is thus prepared. Seeds of Hypericon ij, Roots of Carduus
Ben. and of Valerian A. j. cut and beat them well, then infuse in Sherry Wine
for two days, after which add Oil Olive iij, bruised Wheat jss. boil to the
Consumption of the Wine, then strain, and add thereto Venice Turpentine vj.
Frankincense in Powder ij. give it two or three walms more, and so keep it for
use.

XXXVIII. Andreas a Cruce commends Oil of Turpentine mixed with Honey of Roses
to be applied with fine Linen dipped therein, and then fills up the Wound with
this mixture, Aloes, Mastick, Myrrh, Sanguis Draconis, A. ij. Turpentine ij.
S.V. j. mix them.

XXXIX. Or, Turpentine washed in Bugle-water ij. S.V. Syrup of Roses A. j.
Powder of Frankincense, Mastick, Myrrh, A. ij. Seeds of Hypericon, Sanguis
Draconis, Mummia ex Cranio A. j. mix them.

XL. The same Andreas a Cruce cured a Girl wounded into the Brain, who had lost
a considerable portion thereof, by the Method delivered at Sect. 31, 32, 33.
aforegoing, in about fourteen days time.

XLI. Sennertus commends the natural Balsams as of admirable use: Also the
distilled artificial Balsam out of the following Composition. pure Turpentine
lbij. Pine-Rosin lbss. Frnnkincense, Mastick, Myrrh, Gum Elemi, A. iij. mix,
and distill a Balsam according to Art. It is inferior to no other Medicine for
this purpose in the World: But here I have altered the Proportions, having
found these Limitations, by experience, to be much the better.

XLII. Fallopius, in his Comment on Hippocrates, de Capitis Vulneribus, cap.
45. pours into the Wound Oil of Roses mixed with Oil of Turpentine; because the
Oil of Roses is Anodyn, and the Oil of Turpentine warming and drying; and this
he applies till the seventh day is past; about which time the corrupt part of
the Brain separates it self from the sound.

XLIII. If the Bone is carious, and does not readily exfoliate, you must scrape
it, and dress it with Linimentum Arcaei: if that is too relaxing, S.V. x. Aloes
jss. Myrrh j. Roots of Birthwort, Hog-Fennel, Catechu, A. ss. mix them, and
apply it upon Dossels.

XLIV. In dry Constitutions use this: Aloes, Pumice-stone, Pompholix, A. ij.
Oyster-shells burnt ss. each being in impalpable Powder, mix it with Mel
Rosarum and S. Vini, and apply this Emplaster over all. Lead calcined with
Sulphur and washed, Litharge A. ij. Ceruse, Antimony calcined and levigated, A.
j. Oil of Roses q.s. mix, and boil to an Emplaster. Or, Take Crocus Martis j.
Calx of Egg shells ss. burnt Alum j. mix and make a Powder, which apply.

XLV. If the Substance of the Brain being wounded, seems to be of a livid
Color, Medicaments which are drying and warming are to be applied. Take Spirit
of Wine ij. Honey and Oil of Roses, A. j. mix them.

XLVI. As it is an evil sign, if the substance of the Brain is of a livid
color; so if the Portion thereof, which must be separated, look whitish, like
to Hailstones, and have not a very stinking Smell, it seems that Nature is
strong.

XLVII. If the Wound comes to yield a laudable Quittor, then the Oil of Roses
may be more especially omitted, and only Honey of Roses, and Syrup of Red
Roses, or Syrup of Myrtles, mixed with Aqua Vitae, or Spirit of Wine, are to be
used. Or this, Take Balsam of Peru, Gum Juniper, red Oil of Hypericon (made by
a manifold Infusion of the Flowers) A. ss. mix them. It admirably dries, warms,
resists Putrefaction, and the Prejudices of the ambient Air.

II. Of the Cure of the Symptoms.
XLVIII. 1. Apostemation of the Brain. That this may happen, Valeriolus, lib.
3. Obs. 8. Fernelius de Lue, cap. 7. and Paraeus, lib. 9. cap. 8. with others,
do affirm. And Sennertus, lib. 1. par. 1. cap. 27. says, an Inflammation may
happen to the Brain, and that in time may Apostemate.

XLIX. Authors account this among the most desperate, if not among the mortal
Symptoms: But Arcaeus, lib. 1. cap. 6. gives us a History of one, who having
lain desperate seven days of a Wound of the Brain, had on the eighth day three
Apostemes broke out, and yet was perfectly cured in the space of four Months.

L. The Body is to be kept open with Lenients, or Lenitive Clysters are often
to be given. Fomentations may be applied to the adjacent parts upon the Head;
and, in due time, the Apostemation is to be opened, and cleansed of its
Virulency as soon as may be, lest it contaminate the sound parts of the Brain;
and then the Cure is to be absolved, according to the usual Method.

LI. 2. Concussion, or Commotion of the Brain. If it is vehement, it is always
dangerous, and many times mortal. And Hippocrates, lib. 7. Aph. 58. says, They
who have suffered a strong Concussion of the Brain, must of necessity become
dumb or speechless.

LII. It is to be dressed as a Fracture, when the Cuti Musculosa is whole.
Parcus draws Blood out of the Vena Cephalica, according to the Strength of the
Patient, then he shaves the Head, and applies a Cataplasin made of Barley
Flower, Oil of Roses and Oxymel: But Astringents are forbidden, because they
hinder the breathing of the Fuliginous Vapors through the Sutures, (...)

VII. There are many Compositions of this Emplaster; the chief of which we have
given you in Cap. 6. Sect. 36. ad 47. of this present Book aforegoing. But some
Authors commend the following.

VIII. Rosin, Ship-pitch, Wax, A. ij. Turpentine jss. Taccamahac ss. White
Starch, Calx Vive, Frankincense, Mastick, Olibanum, A. ijss. mix, and make an
Emplaster.

IX. Or this Powder. Frankincense, Mastick, Olibanum, Rosin, Sanguis Draconis,
Fine Bole, Terra Sigillata, Alum, Calx Vive, White Starch A. j. make each into
a sine Powder, and mix them. This is to be mixed with the White of an Egg, till
it becomes of the thickness of Honey, and then to be applied.

X. If the soft parts are transversely incised, and the Wound is long, the Lips
will gape, being far distant asunder. In this case stitching with Needles is
requisite, to bring them close together.

XI. But when you find the Brims of the Wound agglutinated, and that their
Swelling and Inflammation are gone, you must remove the Stitches, and apply the
dry Suture aforementioned, which will be about the third or fourth day; and this
must be done to prevent Scars.

XII. If the transverse Wound is not long, fit or convenient rolling, and dry
stitching may suffice for the bringing and keeping the Lips of the Wound
together.

XIII. As to Medicaments for the Cure of these Wounds, Pouders are not so fit
to be applied, when the Lips are brought together: For in some cases, some
small distance must be left, which by Sarcoticks you must incarnate; which
Pouders, by their Substance and Quality hinder, by their drying too often and
too soon, making an ugly Scar.

XIV. As to the Substance or Consistence therefore of these Medicines, they
ought to be humid and soft, and only drying in their Qualities, whereby Nature
will have time enough given her to complete the Agglutination, by which means
the Cicatrizing will be the more beneficial.

XV. Such Medicaments are all Natural and Artificial Balsams; Oil of Hypericon
mixed with Turpentine, or with Balsam Capivii, or Gum Elemi, and Arcaeus his
Liniment; over which, in Summertime, Empl. Album, or de Minio, may be laid;
but in Wintertime Empl. Sticticum, or some other like it; and if they are too
hard or stiff, you may soften them with Oil of Hypericon, or Oil of Ben.

XVI. The Vulnerary Liquor of Schroder is commended, if used by a skilful Hand.
Liquor ad Vlcera Schroderi, in Pharm. Med. Chym. lib. 1. cap. 66. b. Calx vive,
Sal Armoniack, A. q.v. levigate them, and then mix them together, and melt them
with a very strong Heat, and it will yield a Water, which decant, beat the mass
to Powder; and add to it as much Salt of Tartar, which place in a Cellar to
melt per deliquium.

XVII. He commends it for curing Tettars, Ringworms, Fistulous Ulcers, old,
running, and malign Sores, Cancers, Serpigo, and breakings out of the French
Pox, and such other like, cleansing and healing them: but being mixed with
Wine, or Spirit of Wine, it is said to cure Wounds immediately.

XVIII. When the Cicatrize or Skinning is almost induced, to prevent the
Skarring, Authors advise to anoint the part with Man's Fat or Grease: Bears Oil
is good for this Use, so also Oil of Ben.

XIX. If both the soft parts and the Bones are cut, you must then have more
respect for the Security of the Patient, than for the Beauty of the Face: Here
no kind of stitching is to be used if the Wound is large, and the Bone much
hurt.

XX. The Bone is to be scraped with a Raspatory, and the Wound kept open till
it scales; after which the Wound is to be incarnated with Sarcoticks, and the
rest of the Cure performed as we elsewhere teach.

XXI. If there is a Solution of Unity in the Jaw Bone, you must reduce the Bone
to its natural Posture, that Bone may answer Bone, and each soft part its
fellow; the parts are to be thus kept in their reduced Position with stitching
and convenient Bandage, dressing the Wound with such proper Vulneraries, as we
have taught in the general Cure of Wounds.

CHAP. XXX. Of WOVNDS of the EYES.
I. THey are called in Greek (...), pl. (...) (...), pl. (...). in Latin,
Vulnera Oculi, pl. Oculorum; in English, Wounds of the Eye, or Eyes.

II. In this Chapter we shall treat of Wounds of the Parts about the Eye, as
well as of Wounds in the Eye it self; though the Eye-brow and Eyelid are the
proper Appendices of the Face, and ought rather to have been treated of in the
former Chapter: But in respect to their Affinity to the Eye, and their Name, we
rather choose to treat of them here, where we shall discourse, 1. Of the Wounds
of the Eyebrows. 2. Of Wounds of the Eyelids. 3. Of Wounds of the Eye it self.

I. Wounds of the Eyebrows.
III. A Wound of the Eye-brow is called in Greek, (...). and in Latin, Vulnus
Supercilii.

IV. It is either a Contusion, a Burning, or an Incision. An Incision is either
simple, or with loss of Substance: And if it is simple, it is either according
to the Longitude or Ductus of the Fibers, or Transverse.

V. If it is only bruised, without breaking of the Skin, it contracts a livid,
or black and blue Color, and then you must apply this. Take Whites of Eggs No
iii. Wormwood-water iss. fine Bole, or Terra Sigillata i. mix and apply; or
anoint the Brow with Vng. album Camphoratum.

VI. The livid color is taken away with juice of Wormwood mixed, with Honey,
or juice of Sowbread, or Aloes mixed with Honey, or with a Cataplasm of Anise
and Cumin-seed made by boiling in Water; or a Cataplasm of Meal and Faenugreek
and Beans made with Honey: The Juice of the Root of Solomon's Seal is excellent
in this case.

VII. If the Wound comes by burning, Take Vervain-water iv. Quince-seeds ij.
Faenugreek-seed j. make a Mucitage, which apply; or you may use other things
proper against Wounds.

VIII. If the Wound is caused by a simple Incision, according to the Ductus of
the Fibers without loss of Substance, Agglutinatives, Astringents or Stypticks
are chiefly to be used, which having Power to dry without sharpness, may hasten
the Unition, and produce the Cicatrize.

IX. Some commend the use of Whites of Eggs, mixed with fine Bole, softened in
Rose Water, applied upon Pledgets of Tow or Linen Cloth, more especially if a
little Saffron and Alom be added thereto.

X. Afterward Oil of Hypericon, or some proper Ointment, may be used: Also
Diapalma, or Emp. album. to say over the Wound, Sennertus commends Lac
Virginis, or an Ointment made of Saccharum Saturni, or this Emplaster. Take
Wax, Oil of Melilot Aj. Cummin-seed ss. Camphir i. mix, and make an Emplaster.

XI. If the Wound is transverse without loss of substance, you must bring the
Lips exactly together, so as to answer one another; for otherwise the Patient
will not be able to lift up the Eyelid, without the help of his Finger, but
the Eye will still remain shut.

XI. In this case you must take deep stitches, and as many as you shall see
needful: The Lips being thus joined, you must apply Aglutinatives to reunite
the parts.

XIII. If the Wound is with loss of substance, then you must not make too much
haste in healing, lest the Scar becomes so hard, as to cause the Muscles to
draw up too much the Eyelid, whereby the whole Eye will not be covered: Here
such Sarcoticks as are soft in Substance or Consistence are to be used, the
Natural Balsams, Artificial Balsams, Linimentum Arcaei, etc.

XIV. If the Scar becomes so hard, that the Eyelid cannot be wholly brought
down to cover the Eye, then you must divide the Cicatrix or Scar by a Half Moon
like Incision, according to the Orbicular Ductus of the Fibers of the Muscle of
the Eye, which draws down the Palpebra, or Eyelid.

XV. This semicircular Incision you need not fear to make, for that this Muscle
lies within the Orbit of the Eye, near to the Muscles which move the Eye, and
so it cannot be hurt by such an Incision: Now the Incision must not reach to
the internal Tunicle of the Eyelid, but only to the dividing of the Scar and
the round Muscle, for so the Motion will not be taken away by such an Incision.

II. Wounds of the Eyelids.
XVI. These Wounds are called in Greek (...), pl. (...). and in Latin, Vulnera
Palpebrae, pl. Palpebrarum.

XVII. Each Eyelid has two Muscles which shut them, of a semicircular Figure;
the one seated in the upper Eyelid, which draws it down, and is the greater;
the other in the lower Eyelid, and pulls it only upwards, and is the lesser.

XVIII. And the upper Eyelid is opened, or drawn up by a Muscle which arises
from the upper part of the Frons, near to the temporal Muscle, where the hairy
Scalp ends, and goes directly down, and is inserted into the Eye-brow: Now if
this Muscle is transversely cut asunder, the Eyelid cannot well be opened or
pulled up, unless it be well agglutinated or united again.

XIX. The Wounds of this part then are either straight or transverse: The
straight reach from one corner of the Eye to the other; for this is the Ductus
of the Fibers of the semicircular Muscles of the Eye. Transverse, are only
those Wounds which reach directly down from the Supercilium or Eye-brow,
toward the Ball or Cavity of the Eye.

XX. Again, these Wounds either divide the outer Skin and Muscles only, or they
also divide the internal Membrane of the Eyelid also, which does immediately
touch and cover the Eye.

XXI. If the external Skin and semicircular Muscle are only divided, you may
stitch them together, but with a very small Needle and Thread well waxed; then
you must apply Agglutinatives and Sarcoticks, as those things described at
Sect. 9, and 10. aforegoing.

XXII. Or this. Fine Bole, Terra Sigillata A.ii. Sarcocolla, Sanguis Draconis
A. i. mix, and make a fine Powder, which apply on a soft Linen Cloth dipped in
the White of an Egg: And above this apply Bolsters dipped in a Tincture of
Catechu, made in equal parts of Red Wine, and red Rose Water; which done, let
the Eye be rouled or bound up.

XXIII. If there is need of imbrocating the adjacent parts with Oil of Roses,
or some other Oil, take heed that none of it goes into the Eye, because they
are apt to do hurt, and cause an Inflammation.

XXIV. If also the internal Membrane of the Eyelid is divided, you must not
stitch with Needle and Thread, because the Thread touching the Body of the Eye
would offend it, and be apt to induce an Inflammation: In this case the dry
Suture is most convenient, after which you are to heal it as other like Wounds,
taking heed that the two Lids grow not together.

III. Wounds of the Eye it self.
XXV. A Wound of the Eye is called in Greek (...). and in Latin, Vulnus Oculi.

XXVI. The Prognostics. It is of difficult Cure, 1. Because of the exquisite
sense of the part. 2. Because of a Flux of Humors to which it is apt to be
obnoxious. 3. Because of the Excellency and curious Frame of the Part. 4.
Because of the continual Motion of the Arteries. 5. Because of its consent with
the Brain, as it has respect to the Optic Nerve, or the Motory, or the Muscles
of the Eye, which have many Twigs of Nerves, or Capillaries, from the first,
second, third and eighth Pairs.

XXVII. The Differences. Wounds of the Eye are either superficial or deep:
Superficial are such as pass not through the Cornea: The Deep are such as pass
through the Cornea to other more inward parts of the Eye.

XXVIII. The Cure. First, You must forbear all Oils, fat and unctious things,
because they inflame the Eye, and cause Pain.

XXIX. Secondly, When one Eye only is wounded, you must bind up both Eyes: 1.
That Darkness may be procured every way, because Light offends all sore Eyes.
2. That the sound Fie may be kept from Motion. 3. That the Cure may be
facilitated; for when one Eye moves, the other of necessity moves also; and so
the wounded Eye being moved at the motion of the sound uncovered Eye, the Cure
is also hindered, and an Inflammation induced.

XXX. Thirdly, The Head ought to lie somewhat high, but not so as to bend
forwards, for fear of a Flux of Humors.

XXXI. The Cure of a superficial VVound. You must apply things to ease the
Pain, abate the Flux of Humors, and prevent Inflammation, of which kind are
Whites of Eggs, Frog Spawn-water, rotten Apples and Pears, Plantan, Purslane,
and Nightshade Juices and Waters; Well, Rain, and Snow-waters, Mucilages of
Flea-wort and Quince-seed, and of Gum Tragacanth, Emulsions or Decoctions of
Poppey and Henbane-seed, Decoction of Cypress-nuts, of Galls, Pomegranate-Peels
and Balaustians, Wine of Pomegranates, Woman's Milk, and Milk of all kinds; also
the Blood of Pigeons, Turtle-doves, and Chickens or Pullets, drawn from the
Veins under the Wings.

XXXII. These may be singly applied; or you may make Compositions of them, as
you see need require, which you may apply above the Eyelid, the Eye being
shut, unless much Pus abound, or a Sanies runs from the Eye; for then it will
be necessary to wash the Eye with red Rose Water, Rain, or Plantane-water, or
Juice of Fumitory, or some of those Waters in which a little Alom or white
Vitriol has been dissolved, or Rose Water mixed with Honey of Roses.

XXXIII. Then apply Bolsters made of fine soft Rags dipped in Rose Water, in
which Sief Album has been dissolved: And if the Pain be great, let it be that
with Opium; applying also to the Forehead, Temples and Cheeks, some Anodyn and
astringent Cataplasm, as, rotten Apples, or Pulp of roasted Apples, Pulp of
Cassia A. ii, Mucilage of Fleawort-seeds ss. fine Bole, Catechu, Dragon's
Blood, A. ss. Barley flower q.s. mix, and make a Plaster.

XXXIV. If both the Eyelid and the Tunica Conjunctiva are wounded, you must
have a care that they grow not together; which will happen, if not prevented;
which you may do by keeping them asunder with Leaf-Gold, or Leaf-Silver, or
Tinfoil.

XXXV. The Cure of a deep VVound. The VVeapon either passes through, about the
ends of the Bones of the Orbita, through which the Nerves pass into the Brain;
or, it passes not so deep. In the first case, if the Weapon passes into the
Brain, then the Wound is mortal; but the Patient ought to be dressed, because
the Artist can never see the inward state of the Wound, and so sometimes by
accident may save Life.

XXXVI. If the VVound passes not so deep, then the Humor Aquosus only issues
forth, or the Crystalline and Vitreous also.

XXXVII. If the Aqueous comes out only, then it issues forth either wholly or
in part: If it wholly comes out, the Sight will be totally lost. But if a small
quantity only comes out, the Prejudice may be retrieved, more especially in
Children, whose Moisture will supply the lost Humor; and this Hurt is cured as
a superficial Wound.

XXXVIII. If the Crystalline and Vitreous Humors come forth, the Sight must
also of necessity be lost. Here if there is a Flux of Blood, you may stop it
with what we have formerly directed, or with this. Trochisci albi Rhasis, Tutia
prepared, fine Aloes, A. j. Mucilages of Fleawort-seed and Tragacanth, A.ii.
Red Wine ii. Rose and Plantane-water iv. mix, and make a Collyrium.

XXXIX. If the Pain is great, use Anodyns, or inject Woman's Breast-milk warm,
or Pigeons Blood, Or this, Breast-milk iv. Honey j. VVhices of Eggs No 1. Or
add to the Composition in the former Section Opium j. and outwardly apply this
Cataplasm, Rotten Apples ii. Meal of Linseed ss. Mucilage of Fleawort-seed ii.
Opium ss. Yolks of Eggs q.s. mix, and apply it.

XL. Sennertus Med. Pract. lib. 1. part. 3. sect. 7. cap. 20. advises to purge
Choler, and to use such things as alter the bilious Humor, and cool the Head.
Cum bilis (dixit ille) aliorum humorum sit ad caput vehiculum.

XLI. Outwardly to the Eye, he applies Repellers, made of whites of Eggs beaten
with Rose Water, to which a little fine Bole may be added. Or this: VVhites of
Eggs No ii. Rose and Tormentil Water, A. i. beat them together, adding Alum,
Saffron, A. i.

XLII. Sarcotick Pouders, made very subtle, are commended, as Tutia and
Calaminaris prepared, fine Bole, Terra Sigillata, Sanguis Draconis, Sarcocolla,
Gum Sandarachi, Aes ustum.

XLIII. Sennertus advises to this: Ceruse, white Starch, A.ii. Frankincense
jss. Sarcocolla, Tragacanth, A.i. Camphir ss. infuse in Rose Water in a Vessel
close stopped: boil in Balneo, and strain, keeping the Water for use.

XLIV. Or, Take Gum Arabic dissolved in Rose Water iii. juice of Comfrey-roots
jss. fine powder of Frankincense, and of Aloes-rosata, A. i. mix them.

XLV. Or, Take Sief album Rhasis sine Opio jss. whites of Eggs ii. Tutia
prepared ss. Rose Water jss. mix all in a Leaden Mortar, by much grinding.

XLVI. After seven days are past, things drying are to be applied; and such
also as have a detersive quality, and withal generate Flesh: as, Take Myrrh,
Sarcocol, Breast-milk, A. ss. Tutia prepared i. Honey of Roses q.s. mix, and
make a Liniment.

XLVII. This is wonderfully commended: Fine Bole i. Tutia, Dragons-blood, Gum
Arabic, A. ss. Rose Water lbi. boil in B.M. in a Glass close stopped for an
Hour; then add juice of Pomgranates i. strain, and keep it for use.

XLVIII. Or, Take Honey ii. juice of red Roses iv. fine Verdigrise i. Amber in
fine powder ss. digest in B.M. and strain: of this Liquor you may drop gut. ii.
or more, often into the Eye.

XLIX. Oleum Rubrum Saturni is also much commended; so also the Water which is
found in the Bladders of the Elm-tree-leaves in the Month of May; which does
wonders in curing Wounds of the Eyes, even where the Humor Aqueus, and part of
the Vitreus were let forth; as Henricus ab Here, Obs. Rarior. has
experimentally testified.

L. Lastly, Epuloticks are to be applied, to complete the Cicatrice: and then
when the Eye is healed, you may cause an Artificial Glass-Eye to be made, which
may be put in the place of the Natural, to avoid (as much as may be) deformity.

CHAP. XXXI. Of WOVNDS of the EARS.
I. A Wound of the Ear is called in Greek, (...). and in Latin, Vulnus Auris.

II. In Wounds of this Part, the Ear is either wholly cut off from the
Temporal-part of the Head, or it is but cut in part.

III. If the Ear is totally cut off, you have nothing more to do, but to
produce the Cicatrice with strong Epulotick Medicines; such as the Cephalic
Powder, Vng. de Bolo, de Minio, and many other: variety of which you may find
in Cap. 2. Sect. 47. ad 57. aforegoing.

IV. If the Wound is such, as that it is not quite cut off, or that the
separation is but small, the dry-suture only will do: but if the Wound is
large, a Needle and Thread must be used, that the divided parts may be brought
and kept together.

V. Then because the Part it self is chiefly Cartilaginous, strong drying, and
somewhat agglutinating Medicaments are to be applied.

VI. In Stitching, the separated parts you are to bring together with the
Needle and Thread, the parts of the Skin only, on each side of the Ear, without
piercing the Cartilage; for that may induce an Inflammation, and a Gangren may
follow it, as Aquapendens, in Chirur. part. 2. lib. 2. cap. 33. does testify.

VII. If the Wound reaches to the first Cavity of the Ear, called Meatus
Auditorius, you must then keep a Spunge-tent, or some such other like thing in
it: which will 1. Prevent spongy or proud Flesh growing in it, which might stop
the passage, and so hinder the Hearing. 2. Hinder Pus, Quittor, or Sanies from
falling into the Cavity, which if acrimonious, may exulcerate the internal
parts, and corrode the Tympanum, and so cause an incurable Deasness.

VIII. Sennertus, Med. Pract. lib. 1. part. 3. sect. 3. cap. 5. has these words
concerning Wounds of the Ears: Vitanda vero in Aurium Vulneribus omnia
unctuosa, crassa, gravia, and emplastica, and Ligaturia arctiores: But (says
he) in Wonds of the Ears, all things which are unctuous, gross or thick, heavy,
and emplastick, are to be avoided, as also too strict Bandage or Ligature.

CHAP. XXXII. Of WOVNDS of the NOSE.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Vulnera Nasi vel Naris; and in
English, Wounds of the Nose, or Nostrils.

II. The Kinds. A Wound in the Nose, may be made either in the soft part of the
Nose, or in the hard: if the hard parts are wounded, it is either in the upper
or boney part; and then there is a Wound and a Fracture; or in the lower or
cartilaginous part, and then the Gristle must suffer a solution of continuity.

III. The Cure. If the Wound happens in the soft parts, the Dry-suture will do
well enough: but in these kinds of Wounds we must do all our endeavor, to
procure a fair Cicatrice, that the Scar may be with as little deformity as may
be, because the Nose is the most eminent part in the Face, and a small Scar
will be much discerned.

IV. Medicaments dry and astringent are chiefly to be applied; of which kind
are, Vnguentum Album Camphoratum, Vng. de Minio, Desiccativum Rubrum: also
Emplastrum de Minio, Diapalma, or Emplastrum Album.

V. If the Wound is with fracture of the Bone, then the Bones must first be
rightly set: secondly, the Wound must be consolidated with Sarcoticks or
Agglutinatives.

VI. To Reduce the Bones. You must put into the Nose a piece of Wood, so framed
or cut, that it may easily go in, to bear up the Bones: then on the outside,
you are with your other Hand to reduce the Bones to the best posture you can.

VII. This done, you must have a Pipe prepared on purpose, made of an
Elder-stick, the pith being thrust forth, or of a thin plate of Silver; or for
a present necessity, of a Cane, or of a large Goose or Swans Quill; which Pipe
is not to be so exactly round, but somewhat narrower above, and broader below,
in respect to the natural figure of the Nostril: which Pipe is to be put up
into the Nose.

VIII. Now the Pipe, which is to be wrapped up in soft Linen, is not to be put
too far up, lest it causes Sneezing, which will much hinder the agglutination
of the Bone, and consolidation of the Wound: and it is to be tied or fastened
to the Head with Cloths or Caps, or other Bandage, that it may not drop out.

IX. The Use of the Pipe is, 1. To make way for the Breathing. 2. To make way
for the Pus or Quittor, if any comes from the Wound that way. 3. To keep the
Bones in their Reposition. 4. To make way for a Discharge of the Excrements
from the Brain.

X. The Bones being thus reduced, you must endeavor to bring the soft lips of
the Wounds together; either by the Dry-suture, or with a Needle and Thread, as
the necessity and occasion shall give indication to you.

XI. Then you must apply a desiccative Medicament to the Wound it self, as fine
pouders of fine Bole, Terra Sigillata, Catechu, Chalk, Oker, or Sanguis
Draconis; which are to be mixed with the white of an Egg well beaten, and
brought to the consistence or thickness of Honey.

XII. If the Wound is made transverse, you must apply to each side of the Nose
a soft little Bolster, made of soft linen Cloth, nipt or wrung out of
astringent red Wine: which Bolsters are to be staid on with a Rowler or
Bandage, having a hole in the middle to give a passage to the Breath, and is to
be fastened behind, or sowed on the back parts of the Head.

XIII. But this Bandage is to be no straiter than needs must, for the keeping
of all things in their places; for if it be too strait, it will cause the Nose
to look upwards.

XIV. And near to the Septum of the Nose, another narrow Rowler is to be
applied; which is to be wound about backwards, and brought to the Neck, as you
did the other.

XV. If the Wound is in the lower or gristly part, then is that lower part cut
quite off, and so requires nothing but cicatrizing: or it is only divided.

XVI. And then the Unition is to be induced, 1. By the Dry-suture, or stitching
with Needle and Thread, as the necessity shall require. 2. By the help and use
of a Pipe. 3. By application of Drying Medicaments. 4. By proper and fit
Bandage, as we have even now directed you in the former.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of WOVNDS of the MOUTH.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Vulnera Oris; and in English,
Wounds of the Mouth.

II. We consider the Wounds of the Mouth in a threefold respect: 1. As they
have respect to the Lips. 2. To the Gums or Jaws. 3. To the Tongue: of all
which in order.

I. Wounds of the Lips.
III. These VVounds are called in Greek, (...). and in Latin, Vulnera Labri:
are either in the Skin only, or in the Musculous Parts, or in the Membrane also
which covers the Mouth.

IV. If the Skin is only wounded, ordinary Astringents or Stypticks will do the
work alone: and the Cicatrice may be smoothed with the Spanish Balsam, or Oil
of Hypericon.

V. If the Musculous Parts be also wounded, then ordinary Stitching is to be
made use of, and the application of such Medicaments as are for the
consolidation of Wounds made in other parts of the Body.

VI. If the whole substance of the Lip is divided, and does gape, then such
Wounds are to be dressed as a Hare-lip, after that the edges of it are made raw.

VII. You must pierce each side of the divided Lip with a Needle or Pin, having
on each side of it a thin, small Plate of Lead; through both which pieces of
Lead, the Needle or Pin is to pass, and then the Thread is to be wound
cross-wise about both ends of the Needle, etc. nipping off the point thereof
with a pair of Steel Nippers well hardened.

VIII. The Stitch is to be taken somewhat deep, and about the middle of the
Wound, that the lips thereof may be the more surely kept together: and the
Leads keep the Needle or Pin from breaking through the edges of the Wound.

IX. If the VVound is large, there must be two ordinary Stitches more; one
above the Needle or Pin, the other below it.

X. Authors say, the Needle may be taken out the fourth, fifth, or sixth day,
as you see the conglutination to be made: but in our time, they have been taken
out the third day, and sometimes on the second: and if the Dry-suture be
applied, it many times is taken away the very next day.

XI. Then for Consolidation some healing Balsam is to be applied; as Balsam of
Peru, de Chili, Balm of Gilead, or Capivii, or some Artificial Balsam. In
Winter they may be used alone, but in Summer they may be mixed with the yolk of
an Egg: or, Take Oleum Hyperici, Cyperus Turpentine, A. mix them.

XII. The Oleum Hispanicum described in Cap. 28. Sect. 37. aforegoing, mixed
with Gum Elemi, orTurpentine e Chio, is an excellent thing, and causes speedy
Agglutination: the parts being agglutinated, remove the Stitches, and induce
the Cicatrice by anointing the place with Man's, Bears, or Vipers Grease.

II. Wounds of the Gums or Jaws.
XIII. These VVounds are either of the Gums only, or of the Teeth and Jaw
bones: and the Jaw-bones are either laid bare only, or broken: they are called
in Greek, (...). and in Latin, Vulnera Gingivarum.

XIV. If the Teeth be broken out, they are no more to be restored, unless in
young Children: if only loosened by Blows, contusion of the Gums, or the like,
they are fastened again by use of Astringents; the chief of which is a Tincture
of Catechu made in common Brandy, and mixed with Red-wine: or by holding
Scurvigrass constantly for some time between the Gums and the Cheeks.

XV. If the Gums are wounded, there is commonly a great flux of Blood; this is
stopped with Astringent Pouders, or with Tincture of Catechu, or Dr. Gardner's
Styptick, than which there is no better thing yet known: and the Blood being
stopped, the same Styptick which stopped the Blood, commonly performs the Cure.

XVI. If there is a Contusion, the Gums then for the most part Apostemate; then
they are to be opened with a Lancet, or Incision-knife, and emptied of the
Matter contained in them: afterward, they are to be cleansed with Mel Rosarum
mixed with Oxymel, and Red-Rose Water, and healed with this Gargle or Wash.

XVII. Take Red-rose-water, Smiths-forge-water filtred, A.iv. Honey of Roses,
Syrup of Mulberries, A. jss. S.V. ii. Roch Alum ii. mix, dissolve, and keep it
for use.

XVIII. If the Jaw-bones are made bare, they ought to be scraped with a
Raspatory, and strewed over with a Cephalic Powder, and the Exfoliation
hastened, if need requires: after which, you must Incarnate with Sarcotick
Pouders, and then with proper Stypticks induce the Cicatrice.

XIX. If the Jaw Bone is broken, or shattred, the pieces are to be taken forth,
(if possible, at first Dressing) the broken parts are to be reposited, and the
lips of the VVound to be brought as much as may be together; then to be dressed
with Agglutinative Pouders, and a Dossel dipped in astringent Wine to be laid
over: also outwardly may be applied Emplastrum Catagmaticum, which is to be
bound on, as the nature and disposition of the Part does require.

III. Wounds of the Tongue.
XX. They are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Vulnera Linguae; and in
English, Wounds of the Tongue.

XXI. If a part of the Tongue is wholly cut off, it is no more to be reunited:
but if the Part separated is yet conjoined, though by some small portion, it
ought not to be cut off, unless you see it will not unite again, but begins to
mortify.

XXII. Such VVounds are cured with much difficulty; because neither
dry-stitching nor binding up can be used, nor yet other Topical Means, as
Emplasters, Balsams, etc.

XXIII. In such a case therefore Stitching with Needle and Thread is to be
attempted: the Tongue is to be pulled out as far as may be, and so holden by
the Hand in a Linen Cloth; (if it may be) or with a hollow and rugged pair of
Forceps armed also with Linen Cloth; and so many deep Stitches are to be
taken, as shall seem necessary to hold the parts united, cutting off the Thread
near the knots.

XXIV. We advise to deep Stitches, lest they should break out again, and so
make the trouble the more, and the pain the greater: though we know that Celsus,
lib. 5. cap. 26. says, that the less Flesh the Needle takes hold of, the less
will be the Pain or Inflammation.

XXV. This done, you may use Astringents; such as Syrup of Myrtles, or of
Red-roses mixed with Plantan or Red-rose-water, in which a little Alum has been
dissolved: or Syrup of Quinces mixed with a Decoction of Vulnerary Herbs; and
Saccharum Rosatum may be mostly held in the Mouth.

XXVI. Sennertus, Med. Pract. lib. 1. part. 5. sect. 3. says, Quia vero
Emplastra adhiberi commode non possunt, Linctus and Linimenta ex Syrupo de
Rosis siccis, Mellerojato colato, Syrupis, vel similibus adhibenda: and he
prepares the following Decoction, with which the Mouth is often to be washed.

XXVII. Take bulled Barley M. i. boil it in fair Water 'till it breaks, adding
toward the end of the boiling, Myrtle-leaves, tops of Hypericon,
Plantan-leaves, Red-roses, A. M ss. Balaustians P.i. boil again and strain out,
and dissolve therein a quantity of Honey of Roses.

XXVIII. If it should degenerate into an Ulcer, or an Ulcer should happen to
the Fauces, you may gargle with this: Take Plantan, Horsetail, A. M.i. Roses,
Balaustians, tops of Wormwood, of Willow, A. P.i. hull'd Barley i.
Cypress-nuts, Lentils, Sumach, A. iii. boil all in Water ten parts, mixed with
Vinegar one part: then strain, and dissolve therein Honey of Roses, Wine of
Pomgranats, and Diamorum, A. ii. mix, and make a Gargarism.

XXIX. Or, Take Plantan and Red-rose-water, A. iii. Diamorum, Honey of Purslan,
A.i. Quiddony of Currants, Honey of Rosis, A. ss. mix, and make a Gargarism.

XXX. Lastly, let the Diet the Liquid things, Almond-milk ^ Milk-pottage, yolks
of Eggs, thick Milk, Broths, Gellies, strong Watergruel, Barley-Cream, Panada,
and other things of like nature.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of WOVNDS of the NECK.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Vulnera Colli.

II. These Wounds are either in Parts common or proper: the common parts are
the Cutis, and the Membrana Carnosa: the Parts proper are the Vertebrae, the
Vessels, and the Oesophagus and Aspera Arteria; of the Wounds of the Parts
common and Vertebrae, we shall treat in this Chapter, of the Wounds of the
Vessels in the next, and of the Wounds of the Oesophagus and Trachea Arteria,
in the Chapter following.

I. Wounds of the Cutis and Membrana Carnosa.
III. The Wounds which happen to these common Parts, require no particular
Discourse; being cured by joining the lips of the parts disjoined together, and
applying Agglutinative Medicines.

IV. The Wound is either simple, without loss of substance; or complicate, with
loss of substance: again, if complicate, it is with loss of but a little of the
substance, or with great loss of substance.

V. If the Wound is simple, it it is cured by the first Intension: by bringing
the lips together, (and stitching them if the Wound is large) and application
of Stypticks or Glutmatives: so the work is done in a day, two, three, or four
at most.

VI. If the Wound is with loss of substance, and the loss is but small; seeing
these Parts are loose and flaggy, you may notwitstanding stitch them, and
perform the Cure by the first Intention.

VII. But if the Wound is with great loss of substance, you must then according
to the general Precepts, 1. Stop the Hemorrhage, if it is violent. 2. Bring the
Wound to Digestion, by good Digestiives. 3. Then cleanse by Abstersives, such
as Mundificativum Paracelsi. 4. Incarnate with Sarcoticks. 5. And lastly,
produce the Cicatrice with Epuloticks.

II. Wounds of the Vertebrae of the Neck.
VIII. Sometimes the Wound only divides Museles, and does not pass to the
Spinalis Medulla; and then the Wound is to be dressed, and the Cure to be
performed, as those Wounds which happen in the fleshy parts.

IX. If the Bone is also hurt, the Wound is to be dressed as Wounds of the Head,
in which there is a Fracture of the Cranium.

X. If the Spinal Marrow is wounded, it is wholly cut asunder, or but in part
only. If it is cut through, then the whole Body is deprived of motion and
feeling, breathing will be hindered, and by consequence, death will ensue.

XI. The Signs. Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 26. says, That the Spinal Marrow being
wounded, a Palsy or Convulsion follows, feeling is lost; and after a while the
Sick cannot retain Seed, Urine, or Excrements of the Belly, and sometimes a
total suppression of Excrements will ensue.

XII. Fernelius, Patholog. lib. 7. cap. 8. says, If the Spinal Marrow is
wounded, the inferior parts become paraly^ick, their feeling, motion, and
functions are lost; so that Seed, Urine, and other Excrement, do sometimes come
away involuntarily.

XIII. If the Nerves of the fifth, sixth, and seventh Vertebrae of the Neck are
wounded, Convulsions happen to the Arms: if the the Nerves of the Vertebrae of
the Loins and Os Sacrum are wounded, the Thighs and Legs become in like manner
affected.

XIV. The Prognostics. Since Galen, de Temperament. lib. 3. cap. 3. says, That
the Spinal Marrow is of the same nature with the Brain: and de Facult. lib. 3.
that it is near to the Brain: de Vsu Partium, lib. 16. cap. 2 that it is
derived from the Brain: de Motu Musculor. l. 1. c. 1. that it resembles a
compact Brain: and, de Vsu Part. lib. 12. cap. 11. and 15. that it seems to be
another Brain under the Head and Neck. It follows, That all Wounds thereof, can
be no less dangerous than those of the Brain.

XV. The Reasons are manifest: 1. Because it draws its Original from the Brain.
2. By reason of its Consent with the Brain. 3. Because of its Composition,
being covered with the Dura and Pia Matter. 4. Because of the Symptoms attending
its being wounded; as Convulsions, Palsy, loss of Motion and Feeling. 5.
Because of the Nerves springing from it. 6. Because of its Action and Use,
communicating Motion and Feeling to the Parts. 7. Because of its Situation; it
lying so deep, that the force of Topical Applications can scarcely reach it.

XVI. If the Spinal Marrow is not wholly cut asunder, but only wounded, then
dreadful Convulsions ensue, which for the most part end in Death.

XVII. And the Wounds of the Spinal Marrow are sometimes cured, yet
Hippocrates, in Coacis Praenot. accounts them mortal; which I interpret, that
they are for the most part mortal. See Fallopius de Capitis Vulneribus, cap. 2.

XVIII. If therefore it is wounded in the upper part, or in the beginning of
it, Forestus, Chirurg. Obs. lib. 6. cap. 6. says, that Convulsions of the whole
Body will follow, and so Death must of necssity ensue.

XIX. But if it is wounded in the lower part, the Wound is not always mortal,
unless it is large, or a Puncture, but Convulsions will always ensue.

XX. The Cure. It ought to be attempted, how dangerous soever. Sennertus, lib.
2. part. 2. cap. 22. says, Cum autem Spinalis Medulla quasi Cerebrum
oblongatum sit, eadem etiam Medicamenta ei, quae supra Lib. 1. Part. 1. Cap.
24. de Vulneribus Cerebri proposuimus, adhibenda. In like manner, we say, that
the same Medicaments which we have proposed in the Cure of Wounds of the Brain,
in Chap. 28. Sect. 30. ad 47. aforegoing, are to be used here.

XXI. The Indications of Cure are, 1. To ease Pain with Anodyns. 2. To resist
the Convulsions, with Neuroticks. 3. To induce Digestion, with Digestives void
of biting and sharpness.

XXII. Oil of Hypericon, yolks of Eggs, A. i. Turpentine ss. Oil of Mace by
expression, Mithridate, A. ii. Oil of Aniseeds ss. mix them.

XXIII. Or, Oils of Hypericon, and of Whelps, A ii. Gum Elemi, Oil of Nutmegs
by expression, A. ss. Theriaca Chymica, Chio Turpentine, Balsam of Peru, A.ii.
Oil of Spike i. mix them.

XXIV. And then anoint the whole Backbone and Head with this: Oils of Whelps
and of Castor, A. i. Oil of Nutmegs by expression ss. Oil of Rosemary, of
Limons, of Sweet-marjoram, and of Savin, A. ii. Camphir i. mix them.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the WOVNDS of the WINDPIPE and GVLLET.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Vulnera Asperae Arteriae, vel
Fistulae Spiritalis; in English, Wounds of the Windpipe. Also, (...). in
Latin, Vulnera Gulae; and in English, Wounds of the Gullet, or Swallow.

II. These Members or Parts are seated either in the forepart of the of the
Neck, or in the backpart of the same: in the forepart of the Neck is the (...),
Aspera Arteria, or Windpipe; in the backpart is the (...), Oesophagus, Gula,
Swallow, or Mouth of the Stomach.

I. Wounds of the Windpipe.
III. It has three parts: viz. 1. (...), Larynx, the uppermost part of it. 2.
(...), Bronchus, Caudex, Fistula, the great Pipe it self. 3. (...), Branchiae,
the Branches of the Bronchus, which are spread throughout the substance of the
Lungs.

IV. The Signs. If the (...) or Aspera Arteria is wounded through, then 1.
Wind, or the Breath will come out at the Hole. 2. Blood will come out at the
Mouth. 3. The Speech will be hurt. 4. Coughing will come upon, and trouble much
the Patient.

V. The Prognostics. Though Wounds of the Larynx are not mortal of themselves,
yet they may be such by accident: 1. Because of its necessary and continual
use, it making the Inspiration and Respiration of the Air. 2. Because it it
difficult to be cured, for that Medicines cannot ca^ly be applied or kept to
the Part. 3. Because of the fearful Symptoms many times accompanying such
Wounds.

VI. For, 1. It is near to the Jugular Veins and Soporal Artery; so that it
can hardly be wounded, unless these parts be also hurt. 2. It has several
Muscles, and diverse Branches of the Recurrent Nerves: so that besides a great
flux of Blood, there may be vehement Pain, Inflammation, and Convulsion of the
parts, so that Strangling may at last ensue.

VII. VVounds of the Bronchus, or Pipe it self, though they are not so dangerous
as the former, yet they have some danger also: for being made of a double
substance, as the Annuli, or Rings, which are cartilaginous; and the Medium of
the conjunction of these Rings, which is membranous, they seem to be of
difficult cure.

VIII. For Hippocrates, Lib. 6. Aph. 19. says, A Bone or a Cartilage cut
asunder, or a Nerve, it neither grows again, nor is united: viz. we are to
understand, that the Medium of Unition is not by a like substance: and this he
repeats again, Lib. 7. Aph. 28. to which Galen. Meth. Med. lib. 5. cap. 7.
assents.

IX. Vidus Vidius, de Curat. Morb. Membr. lib. 8. cap. 6. says, That Wounds
which pass through the Windpipe, cause most commonly present death; for that the
Blood issues out of the Jugular Veins, falls upon the Lungs, and causes
suffication.

X. Forestus, Observe. Chirurg. lib. 6. Obs. 4. says, That large Wounds of the
Bronchus, chiefly those which divide the Cartilaginous substance, are seldom
cured, because it is dry, hard, and without Blood; and withal the Patient draws
his Breath by the Wound, which hinders consolidation.

XI. The Cure. The Wound is either transverse, or acccording to the length of
the Bronchus or Windpipe: if it is transverse, then the Patient must bend his
Head downwards; but if according to the length, then he must hold his Head
upwards, that the lips of the Wound may be brought together.

XII. Which done, it is to be stitcht as firmly as you can possibly do it: some
say Needles, as in the stitching of a Hare-lip, are best, because all sorts of
Thread will easily rot.

XIII. After the Wound is stitcht up, Agglutinative Medicaments are to be used:
you may apply Balsam de Chili, Balsam de Peru, or Arcaeus his Liniment, or some
other good Artificial Balsam: and over all you may apply Diachylon simplex,
malaxed with Oil of Ben, or of Myrtles, or of Quinces.

XIV. You must beware in dressing, that neither Blood, Sanies, or Pus fall upon
the Windpipe, lest it causes Suffocation: but that they be outwardly discharged
in a descending Part.

XV. If after dressing, the Patient breathes with difficulty, there is danger
of suffocation: because the cavity of the Larynx or Bronchus is filled with
Blood, or Pus, or both, or by reason of great Inflammation.

XVI. In this case, the Wound is to be dilated, and a Silver Pipe, a little
bended toward the point, that it may not hurt, and Wings on the outward end,
that it may not fall in, is to be kept in, 'till the Patient is able to breathe
freely, and then to be taken out.

XVII. And in the time of the Cure, this following Gargarism ought often to be
used. Take Barley-water of the second decoction lbiii. in which Red-roses,
Balaustians, and Sumach, A. ii. Raisons stoned, and Figs, Liquorice bruised, A.
i. have been well boiled: strain it, and add thereto Tincture of Catechu, Syrup
of Myrtles and Mel Rosarum, A.ii. and let it be used warm.

II. Wounds of the Oesophagus, or Swallow.
XVIII. The Signs. Fernelius, Pathol. lib. 7. cap. 8. says, If the Wound is
deep, Meat and Drink will come out at it, there is difficulty of swallowing;
also the Hiccough, Vomiting of Choler, Fainting, weak Pulse, cold Sweats, with
Coldness of the Hands and Feet.

XIX. And Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 26. says, There is a Vomiting of Meat and Drink.

XX. The Differences. Either the whole Gullet is cut asunder, or it is only cut
in part. If it is cut but in part, then it is either wounded near the Stomach,
or far from it. It is also wounded either straight, or obliquely.

XXI. The Prognostics. These Wounds, if small, straight, and remote from the
mouth of the Stomach; are less dangerous, than if large, deep, and near the
mouth of the Stomach.

XXII. If they are great, deep, transverse, and near the mouth of the Stomach,
they are uncurable, as Guido says, Tract. 3. doct. 1. cap. 1. 1. Because the
passing of Meat and Drink, does hinder consolidation. 2. Because an
Inflammation may easily be communicated to the mouth of the Stomach, which is
very nervous. 3. Because, being wholly cut asunder, the Cure is impossible; for
that the upper part shrinks upwards, the lower falls downwards.

XXIII. The Cure. The first Intention is, by stitching to bring the lips of the
Wounds together; yet leaving an Orifice in the depending part, to be kept open
with a Tent, that the Pus may be discharged, and that the Meat might not stick
there, lest an Inflammation ensue.

XXIV. This done, Agglutinatives are to be applied, such as we have mentioned
at Sect. 13. aforegoing: and a great respect is to be had to the Diet of the
Patient, because the swallowing is with difficulty: and therefore it ought to
be liquid and thin: as strong Broths made of Flesh, Gellies made of
Sheepstrotters, Calves and Oxes feet, Hartshorn, etc. Cows and Goats Milk
sweetened with Saccharum Rosatum, Chicken-broth, and Cordials made with yolks of
Eggs, etc.

XXV. But if the Patient cannot swallow at all, then nourishing Clysters are to
be exhibited; (the Excrements being first removed by Purging Clysters, several
times administered, till the Bowels are sufficiently cleansed.)

XXVI. A Purging Clyster. A Decoction for Clysters, or Mutton-broth x. brown
Sugar ii. Honey of Roses ii. Milk of Scammony ss. mix them.

XXVII. A Nourishing Clyster. Strong Mutton-broth x. good Brandy ii. white
Sugarcandy in powder i. mix for a Clyster. Or, Gelly of Calvesfeet x. yolks of
Eggs No ii. white Sugarcandy in powder i. mix them. Or, New Cowsmilk x. (hot
enough for a Clyster) yolks of Eggs No ii. Gelly of Hartshorn jss. white
Sugarcandy i. mix them for a Clyster.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of WOVNDS of the VESSELS of the NECK.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). and in Latin, Vulnera Vasorum Colli; and
in English, Wounds of the Vessels of the Neck.

II. These Vessels are of three kinds: viz. 1. Venae Jugulares, the Jugular
Veins. 2. (...). Arteriae Soporariae, the Soporal Arteries. 3. Nervi
Recurrrentes, the Recurrent Nerves.

II. Wounds of the Jugular Veins, and Soporal Arteries.
III. The Signs. The Artery is known to be wounded, 1. Because the Blood comes
forth leaping. 2. It is thinner than the Venal. 3. It is of a bright red
color. 4. It is very hot, or much hotter than the Venal.

IV. The Vein is known to be wounded, 1. Because the Blood comes forth softly
and smoothly. 2. It is of a thicker consistence: because, 3. It is cooler than
the Arterial Blood. 4. It is of a blacker, or duller color.

V. The Prognostics. A Wound of the Artery is more dangerous than a Wound of
the Vein: 1. Because the Blood of the Artery is thinner, and so more apt to
flow, and also fuller of Spirits. 2. Because the Tunicles of the Artery are
hard, and the Vessel is in continual motion.

VI. Hippocrates, Pror. lib. 2. says, those Wounds are mortal, where the thick,
large, and great Veins of the Neck and Groin are wounded.

VII. Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 26. says, Periculosa sunt Vulnera, ubieunque Venae
majores sunt: those Wounds are dangerous, wherever great Veins are.

VIII. Forestus, Observe. Chirurg. lib. 6. cap. 4. says, that if the Jugular
Veins have a great Wound made in them, they hardly, and very seldom are cured,
because of the great loss of Vital Spirits, and large effusion of Blood; and
because these Wounds will not admit of such sufficient Bandage, as is necessary
for stopping the Blood.

IX. Fabricius Hildanus, Cent. 4. Obs. 2. proves this thing by an Example. When
an Emperick cut out a Struma in the Neck of a Maid, which had enclosed the
Jugular Vein and Recurrent Nerve, so great a flux of Blood followed, that the
Maid died in the Operation.

X. From what has been said, it is manifest, that if the internal Jugular Veins
and Soporal Arteries are deeply and largely wounded, the Patient can scarcely
escape Death. And the Reasons are, 1. Because the vehemence of the Flux is
such, that the Patient for the most part dies before the Surgeon can come at
him. 2. Because no strait Ligature can be there applied, for so the Patient
might also be strangled.

XI. The Cure. There are two chief Intentions of Cure. 1. To stop the
Hemorrhage. 2. To agglutinate the Wound.

XII. The stoppage of the Hemorrhage is performed either by by deligation, or
by application of Medicaments.

XIII. If by deligation, you must first lift up the Vessel which bleeds from
the subjacent and and adjacent parts with a small Hook, made of Silver or
Steel, then you are to bind them above and under the Wound strongly, and
afterward cut them asunder between the deligations.

XIV. The Medicaments are either Astringent and Styptick, or Escarotick.

XV. An Astringent may be made after this manner. Take Mummy in fine powder,
Mansblood dried, powder of Toads-flesh, A. i. fine Aloes, Alum, Catechu,
Dragons-blood, fine Bole, Vmber, A. ss. Terra sigillata, fine powder of
Puff-balls, Mastich, Olibanum, Salt of Vitriol, A.ii. make all into a subtle
powder, and mix them.

XVI. A Styptick. Take Caput mortuum of Vitriol iii. Dr. Gardner' s
Styptick-salt i. mix them, and apply it.

XVII. An Escarotick. Take fine Bole ii. Vitriol calcined i. burnt Alum ss. red
Precipitate ii. Calx vive i. make each into a fine powder, and mix them. Or
this: Take of the Powder at Sect. 15. ii. Calx vive, Vitriol calcined, A. i.
Auripigmentum, burnt Alum, A. ss. make all into a fine powder, and mix them.

XVIII. Any of the aforegoing Pouders are to be mixed with the whites of Eggs,
to the consistence of Honey, then the down of a Hare is to be added; which
being made into Dossels, the Wound is to be filled with them: and above the
Dossels, large Pledgets are to be applied, and about the Wound, armed in like
manner with the same.

XIX. But because strait Ligature cannot be used about the Neck, for fear of
strangling, you ought to have several Servants in a readinss; that with their
hands they may hold the Medicaments on by turns, till the Hemorrhage is stopped:
after which, they are to lie upon the Wound for three days.

XX. Then you may remove them, but when you do that, and are come to the
lowermost Dossels in the Wound; if they stick, you are not to remove them, lest
a fresh Flux is caused: the others are only to be taken off, and the Wound is
to be filled up with some Astringent Powder, or Sarcotick.

XXI. If you use the Actual Cautery, (which is very cruel) it must be applied
red-hot; for then it speedily makes the Escar, and that the thicker.

XXII. This done, you must do all that may be to Incarnate, lest the Escar
should fall off, before the Flesh is generated; and so, the Wound become worse
and more dangerous, by a new Hemorrhage.

XXIII. When you come to Incarnation, about an Artery, you must use Sarcotick
Pouders, which dry very strongly.

XXIV. Let the Diet be cooling, vulnerary, and drying: and at Bedtime, this
following may be given, to cause pleasant rest. Poppy-water iii. Syrup of white
Poppies vi. Diascordium i. Laudanum liquidum gut. 8. mix for a Dose. Or,
Barleywater iv. of Our Guttae Vitae, a ss. ad i. white Sugarcandy q.s. mix.

XXV. The Hemorrhage being sufficiently stopped, you must consummate the Cure
with Agglutinatives and Epuloticks; of which you may find great variety in Cap.
3. aforegoing of this Book.

II. Wounds of the Recurrent Nerves.
XXVI. These Wounds are also found in the lateral parts of the Neck: and they
are called Recurrent, because they come down from the sixth pair of the Nerves,
and return again up toward the Muscles of the Larynx: using in the left side
the Trunk of the Aorta, and on the right side the Axillar Artery, as Pullies.

XXVII. If one of the Recurrent Nerves is cut asunder, the Voice becomes
hoarse; but if both are divided, the power of Speaking is wholly taken away, so
that the Patient becomes dumb.

XXVIII. The Cure. If in these Wounds there is any great Hemorrhage, it is
first to be stopped; as we have before taught; as also in Chap. 4. aforegoing.

XXIX. This done, the Wound is to be consolidated with this Balsam of Paraeus,
in Lib. 10. cap. 29. viz. Simple Oil of Hypericon iv. fine Gum Elemi iii.
Venice Turpentine vi. mix, and melt them together; to which, when they begin to
cool, add fine Bole, Sanguis Draconis, A.i. Aloes, Myrrh, Mastick, Orriceroot,
all in fine powder, A.i. Aqua Vitae ii. mix them well.

XXX. Linimeatum Arcaei, or Our Friendly Balsam, are incomparably good for this
purpose: so also Balsam de Chili, de Peru, de Tolu, and many other artificial
Balsams.

XXXI. As, Balsams Capivii, de Chili, and de Peru, A.ii. Gum Elemi, Chio
Turpentine, A. iii. Beeswax, Oil of Hypericon, A. iiii. mix, and make a Balsam.

XXXII. These Balsams are to be applied warm, and over the Balsam Diapalma, or
Empl. album malaxed with Oil of Hyperieon, which will also prevent an
Inflammation.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of WOVNDS of the BRAST and HEART.
I. THey are called in Greek (...). in Latin, Vulnera Thoracis; and in English,
Wounds of the Breast. (...). in Latin Vulnera Cordis; and in English, Wounds of
the Heart. (...). in Latin, Vulnera Diaphragmatis; in English, Wounds of the
Midriff.

II. The Kinds. They do either not penetrate, and then they are to be healed
according to the common Method of ordinary Wounds of the fleshy parts; or they
do penetrate, and then we must consider the depth, and whether any Wound is
inflicted upon any of the parts contained within, or that they are free from
any Damage.

III. The VVound is also either in the Mediastinum, in its hollow Cavity in the
lower parts of the Breast, or it penetrates into the lower part of the Thorax.

IV. The Signs. You may know whether the VVound penetrates or not by searching
with a Probe, or Searching-Candle, which will enter into the Cavity.

V. And when the VVound penetrates, if the Patient does but hold his Breath, by
shutting his Mouth and Nose, the Breath will come forth with a Noise, so as it
will move, or extinguish the Light of a Candle.

VI. And sometimes it is known by the large quantity of Blood, discharged by the
Mouth, or Wound, or both; and the Patient will have also a great difficulty of
breathing.

VII. If the Heart is wounded, much Blood will come forth, the Pulse will be
small or fail, the Face will be pale with cold Sweats, and a trembling of all
the Members of the Body; the Patient will be troubled with frequent Swoonings;
and when the Limbs grow cold, Death is at hand.

VIII. If the Diaphragma or Midriff is wounded, the Patient has a Heaviness on
that part, difficulty of breathing, a sharp pain, a Cough, with a Fever also;
and there is a Raving, by reason of the Branches of the Nerves of the sixth
Conjugation of the Brain, which are spread through the Body of it; and sometimes
the Stomach and Guts will, by the vehemence of breathing, be drawn up into the
Capacity of the Thorax, as Paraeus, lib. 10. cap. 30. does seem to affirm.

IX. If any of these Vessels are wounded, there will be a vehement Hemorrhage,
difficulty of breathing, and Fever, which will increase; Blood in abundance
will be poured forth into the Cavity of the Thorax; there will be vomiting of
Blood; and the Blood being putrified, the Breath will stink, Appetite will be
lost; he will be uneasy in sitting up, and subject to often faintings, from
noisome Vapors assaulting the Heart, rising from the putrified Blood.

X. The Prognostics. Wounds which either pierce not into the Cavity; or if
they penetrate, hurt not the Vessels nor Bowels, are not mortal, but may be
soon and easily cured.

XI. If they be in the hinder part of the Thorax, they are dangerous, because
of the Nerves and Tendons; and if they penetrate that way, there is another
great Danger from the great sanguiferous Vessels, which are sooner met withal
this way, than when the Wounds are more forward.

XII. But all wounds of the Breast are dangerous, by reason of the continual
motion of the Lungs, and of the Blood which falls down on the Diaphragma, and
corrupts it.

XIII. Hippocrates, Prorrhet. l. 2. and Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 26. say, That if
the great Vessels, whether Veins or Arteries, be wounded, the wound is mortal,
by reason of the vast effusion of Blood not easy to be stayed: 1. Because they
lie so deep, that no Medicine can be applied to them, nor can they be bound up.
2. Because their Coats are membranous, and so not to be healed by the first
Intention.

XIV. If an Artery is divided, the wound is yet more dangerous: 1. Because the
Blood it contains is more spirituous than that in the Veins. 2. Because their
Coats are harder than those of the Veins, and sometimes Cartilaginous. 3.
Because of an Aneurism, which often remains after the wounded Artery is cured.
4. By reason of the manner and impetuosity of the flowing of the Blood. 5.
Because of the Motion of the Arteries in their Systole and Diastole, which
makes their Consolidation difficult.

XV. In wounds of the Heart, either the Pericardium only is wounded, or the
Substance of the Heart also. If the Pericardium only is wounded, the Wound of
it self is not mortal, because it is but a subservient and ignoble part, having
but sew and small Vessels and Nerves; nor does it cleave to the Heart, but is
at such a distance, as to give liberty to the Pulsation of the Heart, and is
fitted to contain a waterish Humor.

XVI. But by accident they may be mortal: 1. If the Wound is great. 2. If all
the watery Humor flows out; for then an Hectic Fever seizes upon the Patient,
because Nature has ordained that Humor for cooling and moistning of the Heart.

XVII. If the Substance of the Heart is wounded, the Wound is accounted mortal;
as Hippocrates, lib. 5. Aph. 18. Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 26. and Aristotle de
Part Animal. lib. 3. cap. 4. have declared. See also lib. 1. cap. 50. sect.
42, 43, and 44. and lib. 4. cap. 1. sect. 49. of this present Work.

XVIII. And the chief Reasons seem to be: 1. Because it is the very Store house
of vital Blood. 2. Because the Hemorrhage is vastly great, and the Blood
falling into the Cavity of the Breast, causes Suffocation. 3. Because it is the
very Elaboratory of the Vital Spirits. 4. Because it is a very hot Bowel, and
so subject to Inflammation. 5. Because it is the Original of Motion or
Pulsation. 6. Because it is in continual Motion, which hinders Consolidation;
for that Consolidation requires Rest, as Galen. Meth. Med. lib. 5. cap. 8. has
observed. 7. Because its Substance is compact, hard and dry, which does not
easily admit of Agglutination.

XIX. Superficiary Wounds of the Heart, do not so soon kill as deep Wounds: but
a Wound in the left Ventricle sooner terminates Life, than a Wound in the right.

XX. Wounds of the Diaphragma or Midriff, but chiefly if they be in the nervous
Center, are said to be mortal; as Hippocrates, lib. 6. Aph. 18. and Galen in
his Comment. also Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 26. do affirm. 1. Because it is
membranous, and in continual motion. 2. Because the Wounds thereof are very
painful, by reason of the Branches of Nerves it receives from the lower
Vertebrae of the Neck. 3. Because the Pericardium is tied to it.

XXI. And though, if the fleshy Circumference of it be only wounded, whereby some
hopes of recovery are afforded; yet even those Wounds are not without great
Danger.

XXII. And the Reasons are: 1. Because some principal parts must suffer also;
as, the Brain, from the Nerves which are inserted in it; the Heart, by reason
of its Proximity and the Arteriae Phrenicae; and the Liver, because of its
Contiguity and Venae Phrenicae. 2. Because the whole part is in continual
motion. 3. Because breathing is much hindered. 4. Because the Blood flows forth
into the Cavity of the Thorax, which may cause Suffocation. 5. Because of the
dreadful Symptoms which may ensue; as, difficult breathing, sighing, Cough,
Pain of the Back, pulling up of the Heart Strings, Fever, and Raving, from the
Affinity which it has with the Heart and Brain. See Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 26.
Fernel. Patholog. lib. 7. cap. 8. and Forrestus Observe. Chirurg. lib. 6. obs.
47.

XXIII. The Cure. If the Wound penetrates without hurt of any internal part,
the danger is the less: and these, for the most part, are left to be cured by
Nature, which here (as in some other Cases) does Miracles.

XXIV. The Patient being laid in his Bed, his Feet stretched out at length, and
the Orifice of the Wound downwards; the first thing then to be done is, the
stopping of the Haemorrhage with some proper Styptick.

XXV. Then the extravasated Blood is to be discharged, which is said (by
Physicians) to be done three ways: 1. By the Wound. 2. By the Mouth through
Expectoration. 3. By Urine.

XXVI. 1. By the Wound. Tents and Pledgits are here hazardous, lest they should
fall into the Cavity of the Thorax, and so do more mischief; for which Reason a
Flammula or Seton-string may be used, which may be anointed with this Liniment.

XXVII. Oils of Mastick and of Pine-rosin A.i. Gum Elemi ii. Manna of
Frankincense ss. roots of Tormentil, and of Comfrey in Powder, A. ii. Saffron,
Earthworms in Powder, A. i. Sherry Sack i. mix them, and evaporate to the
consumption of the Wine.

XXVIII. Or, Turpentine or Balsam of Peru ss. which mix with the Yolk of one
Egg; then add thereto Oil of Hypericon i. and make a Liniment. This Flammula
may be continued, if need require, even to the fortieth Day.

XXIX. Or instead of a Flammula, you may use a silver Pipe, with large Ears or
Stays on both sides, such as is used in Paracentesis, that a Thread of
reasonable Length may be fastened to it, to keep it in its Posture.

XXX. The Wound and the Pipe may be anointed with the former Liniment or
Balsam, or with Arcaeus his Liniment melted in a Spoon, or with some other
artificial Balsam; and over it Diachylon Simplex may be applied.

XXXI. Where note, That if it is in Wintertime, a Chafing Dish with hot
Charcoal may be convenient in time of dressing to hold near the Wound, to
preserve the natural Heat, and hinder the Intromission of the cold ambient Air.

XXXII. Wiseman puts a Question, Whether the wound should be kept open, or
agglutinated? They (says he) who are for a speedy Agglutination, do urge it,
lest the intromitted Air should corrupt the parts within, and the Heat expire.
They that are for keeping ir open, do design thereby a readier Discharge of the
matter.

XXXIII. In these Wounds of the Breast (says he) I consider the Wound, how it is
capable of discharging the extravasated Blood and Matter. If it is inflicted
so, as that the Blood and Matter may be thereby discharged, then it is to be
kept open, the Welfare of the Patient depending chiefly upon the well-dressing
and governing of it: but if it does not lie well for Evacuation of that
extravasated Blood, then it may do hurt, and so ought to be healed.

XXXIV. The second way of evacuating the Blood and Matter, is by Expectoration;
and then they say, it must first pass (into the Pleura, say some, and so) into
the substance of the Lungs, than into the Aspera Arteria, or Windpipe, and
from thence it is coughed up, and spit out by the Mouth.

XXXV. And then Galen advises to further Expectoration by Exhibition of Posca,
or Vinegar and Water, warm, because it powerfully dissolves clotted Blood; and
if the Sick coughs with Difficulty, Pectorals are to be administered, as Syrup
of Vinegar, of Limons, and of Juice of Citrons, Syrup of Coltsfoot and of
Liquorice, Decoctum Pectorale, Pectoral Lohochs, Oxymel, Syrups of Alehoof, of
Maidenhair, of Jujubes, etc.

XXXVI. The third way of evacuating the Blood and Matter is by Urine; and then
they say, it passes first into the substance of the Pleura, and then into the
Azygos, or Vena sine pari, near to the Diaphragma, by the Spine, whence a
Branch comes, through which it passes by a straight Course to the Emulgents,
and so to the Kidneys and Bladder, as Aquapendens, part. 2. lib. 2. cap. 42.
affirms.

XXXVII. But if we acknowledge the Circulation of the Blood, this Passage is
not allowable; for it is impossible to come to the emulgent Arteries, but by a
prior transition through the Heart.

XXXVIII. However, if the matter of Fact is true, that there is sometimes a
discharge of the matter by Urine, then it will be necessary that Diuretics be
given, to promote the same; as, Infusisions, Decoctions, Syrups, Essences, etc.
of Maidenhair, Betony, Roots of Parsley, of Smallage, of Fennel, of Asparagus,
etc. Also Ptisans made with Barley-Cream, Emulsions, Spirit of Sulphur,
Liquorice, etc.

XXXIX. But says Wiseman, I never saw any that I could say, that passed their
Disease by Urine; nor many of them that had a free passage of their Urine,
during the time of their lying under these Wounds.

XL. Nor have I often seen them (says he) who have recovered, to expectorate
any such quantity of matter, as might be thought to proceed from the great
quantity of Blood extravasated. They cough'd fresh Blood most of them, like to
what they discharged from their Wounds, but more florid.

XLI. Arcae^s, lib. 1. cap. 1. administers this Vulnerary Potion. Juice of
Pomegranates, Waters of Scabious and Bugloss, A. i. Rhubarb in Powder ss.
Madder, Mummy, A.i. Terra Sigillata, i. mix for a Dose.

XLII. And to cause easy breathing, be gives this pectoral Decoction: Hull'd
Barley iiii. Bugloss-roots iii. Liquorice bruised ii. Jnjubes, Prunes, A. No
xx. Raisons stoned i. Rainwater lbxiv. boil to the Consumption of a third
part, strain out, and aromatize with Cinnamon iii. dulcifying it with
Sugar Candy iiii. Sugar Penids iii. Syrup of Roses simple, and of the two
opening Roots, sine Aceto, A. ii. Dose vi. every fourth hour.

XLIII. Fambesarius advises, to give Morning and Evening a vulnerary Potion,
made of Leaves and Roots of Comfrey, Bugloss, Plantane, boiled in Water with
some Vinegar, which being strained, is to be sweetened with Sugar of Roses,
dissolving also in it some fine Bole.

XLIV. And outwardly Injections may be made with Honey of Roses, thus: Decoct.
of Liquorice iiii. Sugar of Roses ii. Honey of Roses i. mix them. But you must
be sure, that all the Injection comes forth again; for if any of it should stay
behind, it would putrefy.

XLV. Lastly, According as the quantity of the Quittor is, less or more, so
dress it once or twice a day; and when the Patient breaths freely, has but
little Pain, finds no Weight toward the Midriff, and there is but small
quantity of Pus flowing out of the Wound, and that good, you may then, with all
the speed that may be, induce the Healing.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of WOVNDS of the BACK, and SPINAL MARROW.
I. THey are called in Greek (...). in Latin, Vulnera Dorsi; and in English,
Wounds of the Back. Also (...); in Latin, Vulnera Medullae Spinalis; and in
English, Wounds of the Spinal Marrow.

II. The Kinds. These Wounds are either in the fleshy parts only, or the Bone
is hurt also: Or there is a Wound of the Marrow of the Backbone.

III. And in this case, the Marrow is wounded but in part, or it is wholly cut
asunder.

IV. The Signs. If the Marrow is only wounded, and not wholly cut asunder, then
dreadful Convulsions will of necessity ensue, and so, for the most part, Death.

V. If it is wholly cut asunder, then the whole Body is deprived of moving and
feeling; breathing it self will also be hindered, so that of consequence Death
must ensue.

VI. Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 26. says, That a Convulsion or Palsy follows,
feeling is lost, and after a while the Patient cannot retain either Seed,
Urine, or Excrements of the Belly; and sometimes a total suppression of the
Excremnnts will follow.

VII. And Fernelius, Patholog. lib. 7. cap. 8. says, That the inferior parts
become paralytick, and that their feeling, moving, and functions are lost. See
cap. 34. Sect. 10, 11, 12, 13, aforegoing.

VIII. The Prognostics. Almost all Wounds of the Spinal Marrow are mortal; if
the Patient out-lives them, they generally leave a Paralysis of some one Part
or other. See the rest of the Prognostics, in Chap. 34. Sect. 14. ad 19. of
the following Book.

IX. The Cure. If the Wound is made only in the Fleshy or Musculous Parts, then
it is to be dressed and cured as those Wounds which happen in the Fleshy Parts.

X. If the Spina Dorsi, or Backbone is hurt also, then it is to be dressed as
a Wound of the Head, wherein there is a Fracture; of which we shall speak at
large in Lib. 6. Chap. 12. and 13. of this Work following.

XI. If the Spinal Marrow is hurt only, the Sick may by chance escape: but if
it be wholly divided, the sense and motion of all the parts under or below the
Wound, which receive their Nerves from the lower parts of the Spinal Marrow,
will be hurt and taken away: for the Influx of the Animal Spirits into those
parts will be wholly obstructed.

XII. The Indications of Cure, as also the Topical Medicaments are the same
with those in Chap. 34. Sect. 20. ad 24. aforegoing of this Book; and therefore
referring you thither, little more need be said concerning the same here.

XIII. However, if the Vertebrae are in part divided, this following Liniment
is commended. Yolks of Eggs ii. Gum Elemi, Strasburgh-Turpentine, A. vi. Oil of
Hypericon jss. Oil of Spike ii. Saffron in powder i. mix them.

XIV. Or, Balsam de Chili, de Peru, yolks of Eggs, A. i. Oil of Hypericon jss.
Mithridate, S.V. A.ii. Oil of Petre i. mix them.

XV. And the whole Spina Dorsi may be anointed with this Mixture: Oils of
Limons, Lavender, Marjoram, Rosemary, Sage, Savin, Sassafras, Amber, A. jss.
Oil of Hypericon or of Ben jss. mix, and anoint therewith.

XVI. And you may Embrocate the whole Back with this: Oils of Hypericon and of
Whelps, A. i. Oils of Juniperberries and of Lavender, A. vi. mix them.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of WOVNDS of the LVNGS.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Vulnera Pulmonum; in English,
Wounds of the Lungs.

II. The Signs. If the Lungs are wounded, the Blood which comes out of the
Wound will be yellow and frothy; the Patient will have a Cough, difficulty of
Breathing, and a Pain on the wounded side.

III. The Sick lies more at ease, when lying on the wounded side, but being
laid on the contrary side, is then in more pain.

IV. The Prognostics. If the Wounds of the Lungs are superficiary and small,
though part of the substance of the Lungs has been cut off, yet the Patient has
sometimes recovered and done well, and lived many Years after it.

V. Forestus, Lib. 5. Obs. 4. says, That if the Lungs are wounded in the fleshy
part, wherein there is a remarkable Branch of the Arteria Venalis, then the
Patient must of necessity dye: for that he will be suffocated with Blood; and
the Blood will be much, black, and frothy.

VI. Horstius, de Morb. Pect. lib. 3. obs. 11. Arcaeus, lib. 2. cap. 1. Fabr.
Hildanus, Cent. 3. Obs. 36. Platerus, Observat. 3. lib. 3. page 690.
Valeriolus, Observat. Med. lib. 4. Obs. 10. and Glandorpius, Speculo
Chirurgico, Observe. 24. with several others, have observed, that dangerous
Wounds of the Lungs have been cured.

VII. Out of what has been said, it appears, that though some dangerous Wounds of
the Lungs have been cured; yet if the Wound is deep, and with the substance of
the Lungs being wounded, the great Vessels are divided also, such a Wound is
always mortal.

VIII. And the Reasons are manifest: 1. Because no Medicine can be so applied,
as to come to the bottom of the Wound. 2. Because the Arteria Venalis, and the
Vena Arterialis being wounded, a dreadful Hemorrhage will ensue. 3. Because the
Lungs being moist, are very subject to inflammation and putrefaction. 4.
Because the intromission of fresh Air for cooling of the Lungs, and expiration
of fuliginous Vapors, are hindered. 5. Because the Lungs are in continual
motion, which hinders consolidation. 6. Because the Heart by its proximity,
will be affected by consent. 7. Because the discharging of the Pus or Matter
will be difficult, it being done by Expectoration; and also dangerous, for that
it is done by Coughing, which irritates the Wound. 8. Because much Blood
falling into the capacity of the Thorax, it presses down by its weight the
Diaphragma, and so causes difficulty of Breathing: and being turned into Pus,
it becomes malign, and so induces a Fever, Phrensy, and Convulsions: and if the
Sick continues any time, there will be an Empyema, and after that a Phthisis,
which generally ends in Death.

IX. Wiseman says, If the Lungs are wounded deep among the great Vessels, though
they escape the first nine days, yet they commonly terminate in a Phthisis or
Fistula.

X. The Cure. The Hemorrhage is first to be stopped with proper Internals: the
Inflammation is to be prevented, or repressed; the Blood which is poured forth
into the cavity of the Thorax, is to be evacuated, and then the Wound is to be
agglutinated.

XI. Medicamenta adstringentia and emplastica adhibenda, quae and Sanguinem
sistunt, and Inflammationem prohibent, and Vulnus glutinant: Sennertus, Med.
Pract. lib. 2. part. 2. cap. 11. Medicaments astringent or styptick, and
emplastick are to be used; which may not only stop the flux of Blood, but also
hinder an Inflammation, and consolidate the Wound.

XII. These Medicaments are either Topics, quae in cavitatem Thoracis
indantur, and infundantur; or Internals, quae ore sumuntur, which are given by
the Mouth.

XIII. Those Topics are to be chosen which bite least, and have no malign
quality: all such Metallicks and Salines, which are useful in other Wounds, are
in Wounds of the Lungs to be avoided.

XIV. But fine Bole, Terra sigillata, Catechu, Frankincense, Mastich, Olibanum,
Gum Avabick, Tragacanth, Acacia, Balaustians, Pomgranat-peels, and suchlike,
are commended.

XV. A Powder may be made of fine Bole, Frankincense, and Mastich, Ana; which
may be blown into the Wound by a Pipe: or Tent, or Alicant may be injected,
especially if diluted with a Decoction made with some Astringents; as
Bistort-roots, Cinkfoil, Tormentil, Plantan, Red-roses, and Horstail: but that
the Powder may be the better applied, the Patient is to attract up, or breathe
forth, as strongly as may be.

XVI. An Injection. Roots of Avens, Comfrey, Tormentil, A. ss. Red-roses i.
Catechu ss. Aloes, Myrrh, A.i. Barley-water q.s. boil, strain, and add to every
Pint thereof, Honey of Roses strained ii. Syrup of d^ied Roses, and of Myrtles,
A. i.

XVII. If there is no Fever, nor Spitting of Blood, or any Weight on the
Midriff, drop into the Wound Balsam de Chili, or de Peru, or Linimentum Arcaei,
mixed with Oil of Hypericon, or some such like, over which apply Diapalma, or
Empl. Album.

XVIII. If there is much Blood in the cavity, after it is come forth, you may
use a Flammula dipped in the white of an Egg, or a Silver Pipe; as we have
advised in Chap. 37. Sect. 2^. ad 31. aforegoing; which may be continued 40
days, more or less, as you see need requires.

XIX. When the Wound runs dige^ed Matter, and but little, the Pipe, etc. may be
removed: and if you think it convenient, you may inject a Vulnerary Decoction,
blood-warm.

XX. During all the time that the VVound runs, (as much as may be) let the Sick
be in Bed, with the VVound downwards, for it^s more easy discharge of the
Matter: at other times, put in the Pipe, and lay on it a Sponge wrung out of
S.V. with keeps the Air out, and extracts the Pus.

XXI. Afterward you may lay over the Pipe this Emplaster: Pure R^sin vi. Gum
Elemi strained iv. Oils of Bays and Turpentine, A. i. dissolve the Gum and
Rosin over a gentle Fire, then mix the Oils. This you may spread upon Leather,
and apply; which change once a day in Winter, and twice a a day in Summer.

XXII. And no way inferior is the Balsam of Peru, mixed with Schroder's Balsamum
Nervinum, or Our Balsamum Amicum; or some other like proper Ingredient, to give
it a somewhat stronger Body.

XXIII. Inwardly Astringent and Traumatick Drinks are to be given, made of the
leaves of Strawbery, Speedwel, Scabious, Devilsbit, Ladies-mantle, Goldenrod,
Sanicle, Woundwort, Perwinkle, Self-heal, Agrimony, Plantan, Red-roses, and
other things of like kind. As,

XXIV. Take Strawbery-leaves, Sanicle, Scabious, Lungwort both sorts, A. M. ss.
Ladies-mantle, flowers of Scabious, Red-roses, A. P.ii. Jujubes No x.
Barley-water q.s. boil, strain, and to each Pint add Julep of Roses ii.

XXV. Or, Take Woundwort, Perwinkle, Speedwel, Strawbery-leaves, Lungwort,
Ladies-bedstraw, Coltsfoot, A. M.i. Devilsbit, Self-heal, Agrimony, Angelica,
Scabius, Self-heal, Plantan, A. M.j.ss. roots of Angelica, Bistort, A. i. cut
and bruise all, and infuse in White Wind, Red-wine, Scabious and Angelica
Waters, A. lbijss. boil in B.M. six Hours, strain, and dulcify with fine Sugar
iv. Dose, iv. or more, Morning and Evening.

XXVI. If the Wound was made by Gunshot; Take Lungwort M.iii. Mugwort, Comfrey,
A. M.j. Wine, Water, A. lbjss. boil in a double Vessel, or in B.M. strain, and
sweeten with fine Svgar iii.

XXVII. Galen, Meth. Med. lib. 5. cap. 13 and 14, commends Diaspermaton, which
was a thing frequent in use with him, in Wounds of the Breast. Some in place of
that Electuary, use Diacodion, which Galen, de Comp. Med. lib. 7. says, Does
induce Sleep, takes away the sense of Pain, and stop Fluxes of Rheum from the
Head, falling upon the Lungs.

CHAP. XL. Of WOVNDS of the LIVER. and SPLEEN.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Vulnera Hepatis and Lienis; and
in English, Wounds of the Liver and Spleen.

I. Wounds of the Liver.
II. The Kinds. Sometimes the Wound is superficiary, sometimes it penetrates
deeply; sometimes the gibbous part, sometimes the caveous part is wounded. In
some Wounds the substance of the Liver is only hurt; in others, the Vessels are
also cut.

III. Sometimes the Wound is made with a sharp Weapon, and sometimes with a
dull or blunt; by which it is rather contused, than cut: sometimes also a part
of it is cut off.

IV. Signs. Whether it is a Wound or a Contusion, may be known by the external
violence, and the kind of the Weapon, and the consequent Effects.

V. Wounds in the Liver are most commonly made on the right side; and if any of
the larger Vessels are wounded, there is a great flux of Blood on the right
side.

VI. The Hpochonders or sides draw toward the Backbone; they often eject
Blood, by Stool and Urine: there is a pricking Pa^ up to the Neck and right
Souther-blade, the Face is wan, and the Sick desires to lie on his Belly.

VII. Sometimes there is a Vomiting of Choler, and sometimes an Hemorrhage at
the Nostrils; and a heaviness and pain is perceived in the region of the Liver,
and parts adjacent. Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 26.

VIII. The Prognostics. Hippocrates, lib. 6. aph. 18. says, If the Bladder, or
Brain, or Midriff, or Small-gut, or Stomach, or Liver be wounded, it is mortal.

IX. Yet Paulus Aegineta, lib. 6. cap. 28. has delivered to us, That upon a
Wound of the Liver, even where some part of it has been cut off, the Patient
has recovered.

X. And Gemma Cosmocritic. lib. 1. cap. 6. tells us of a Spanish Youth, who
being wounded through the right Flank, had lost a large part of his Liver, and
yet was restored to his health. And Bertinius, Medic. lib. 13. cap. 7. gives us
another like History: others also have observed the same.

XI. From whence it follows, that where the Wound is only superficial, or the
substance only wounded, without hurt of any of the great Vessels, as the trunks
of the Vena Portae, and Vena Cava, the Patient is curable.

XII. But where the large Vessels are wounded, the Sick cannot escape; because
of the immediate large effusion of Blood: for before the Vessel can be
agglutinated, the Patient will dye.

XIII. A Contusion of the Liver is more dangerous than a Wound, and oftentimes
degenerates into an Abscess or Apostem.

XIV. Th^se Wounds are also more dangerous in a Cachectick Habit of Body, and
in Old Persons, than in such as are of a sound habit, strong, and juvenile.
Sennert. Med. Pract. lib. 3. part. 6. sect. 1. cap. 7.

XV. If the Patient, has cold Sweats upon his Forehead and Neck; if he often
faints, if the Extremities grow cold, and great weakness attends, then Death is
at hand.

XVI. The Cure. Immediately Astringents and Glutinatives are to be exhibited,
such (...) we commonly give in Spitting Blood: Sennertus commends Red-roses
dried, given ad ii. also Balaustians, fine Bole, Trochsci de Spodio, de Rosis,
Rhubarb in Decoction of Hounds-tongue, Cinkfoil, or Plantan.

XVII. But nothing exceeds Catechu, given in substance ad ss. or i. or the
Tincture thereof made with common Brandy; given from ss. ad i. in some proper
Vehicle.

XVIII. Some commend Pulvis Dysentericus Croll^i, given in a little Syrup of
Roses, strengthening the Viscera with Spices, and Aromaticks, adding also such
things as may provoke Urine, and loosen the Belly, if bound, with Emollient
Clysters.

XIX. Where you suspect there is a Concretion of Blood, you must give such
things as dissolve the Concretion: of which kind are Rhubarb, Rhapontick,
Sperma Ceti, Lacca, Mumia, Sanguis draconis, Crab's-eyes, Amber, powder of
Earthworms, Hog-lice, Schoenanth, Spicknard, fine Bole, Terra sigillata, roots
of Madder, of Tormentil, Chervil, and all Volatile Animal Salts and Spirits;
which may be exhibited in Vinegar, or Chervil, or Tormentil Waters, etc.

XX. Rhubarb jss. Spicknard, Schoenanth, A. gr.xv. Mummy ss. make a powder.
Dose, i. Or, Pine Bole iii. Lacca, Sperma Ceti, A.ii. Roubarb ^i. Mummy ss.
make a powder. Dose, i. or jss. in Vinegar, or Chervil-water.

XXI. Rhubarb, Rhapontick, A. ii. Mummy, Sperma Ceti, Crab's-eyes, roots of
Avens, of Tormentil, A. gr. xii. make a powder, for two Doses. Or, Take Mummy
ii. Rhubarb, Crab's-eyes, fine Bole, A. i. Saffron, Sperma Ceti, Sanguis
Draconis, A. ss. make a powder. Dose, i.

XXII. Let his Diet be thin, and glutinating: let him abstain from Wine, and
drink a Decoction of Jujubes or Corianderseeds, sweetened with a little Sugar of
Roses.

XXIII. Outwardly Astringents and Glutinatives are also to be applied: if the
Wound gapes, or is open, you may sprinkle in this Powder: Catechu, fine Bole,
Terra sigillata, A. i. powder of Red-roses ss. Lapis Haematitis i. white Starch
ii. make a Powder.

XXIV. You may also apply this Liniment. Syrup of Red-roses dried, Honey of
Roses, A. i. Pulvis Dysentericus, or Sperniolae Crollii jss. fine Aloes, fine
Bole, A. i. Catechu vi. Oil of Wax, q.s. mix, and make a Liniment.

XXV. Sennertus commends an Ointment made of Turpentine, fine Bole, and Mummy,
or of Mastich and Frankincense; anointing also the parts adjacent with Oils of
Mastich and Roses.

XXVI. And upon the Region of the Liver this Cataplasm may be applied. Fresh
Violet-leaves, Endive, Succory, A. P.iii. Agrimony, tops of Dill, of Hypericon,
A. P.ii. powder of Camomil-flowers, of Melilot, and Red-roses, A. P.i. Barley
and Bean flower, A. jss. Red. Wine q.s. make a Cataplasm, adding at the end,
Oil of Roses jss. It is good to be applied also in a Contusion of the Liver.

XXVII. In which case also, this following Powder may be given. White Amber,
fine Bole, Dragons-blood, Lacca, Balaustians, Red-roses, Crab's-eyes, A. ss.
make a powder. Dose, i. in Plantan-water vi. in which Tragacanth ss. has been
dissolved.

II. Wounds of the Spleen.
XXVIII. The Kinds. Its Wounds are either superficiary, or profound: and it is
only wounded, or a part of it may be cut off.

XXIX. The Signs. Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 26. says, That black Blood does issue
out of the left side; and the side it self, and Stomach do become hard; the
Patient is troubled with great Thirst, and the Pain reaches to the Neck.

XXX. The Prognostics. Celsus, in the place aforecited says, That deep Wounds
of the Spleen are for the most part mortal, or that they are scarcely ever
cured.

XXXI. The Reasons of which are, 1. Because of a dreadful Hemorrhage not only
of Venal, but Arterial Blood. 2. Because it helps toward the perfecting the
Sanguification. 3. Because it is very easy to be inflamed, being full of Blood.
4. Because it has a great consent with the Heart; for that a multitude of
Arteries communicate with it.

XXXII. Though profound or deep ^ounds of the Spleen may be mortal, yet the whole
Spleen may be cut out, and the Party live. And this I have been an Eyewitness
of in a Dog, in which, before the Spleen was cut off, it was drawn forth out of
the Body, and the Sanguiferous Vessels bound with good Ligature, to prevent the
great Hemorrhage which would have ensued; then it was wholly cut away, and the
apertion of the Abdomen stitcht up, and so left to Nature to heal; the Dog
recovered and did well, and lived four or five Years after it, but was very
much dispirited; nor could we searcely ever provoke him to bark from that time
forth.

XXXIII. But if the Superficies, or its substance, (not the Vessels) are
wounded, it is not (says Sennertus) necessary that such a Wound should be
mortal.

XXXIV. The Cure. It is not performed as in those of the Liver, in which
(sometimes in desperate cases) Nature does Wonders: you may exhibit this
Vulnerary Potion. Comfrey-roots ss. Raisons i. Speedwel M. i. Agrimony,
Spleenwort, Hypericon, Red-Roses, A. M.ss. Self-heal, Wintergreen, A. P.i.
Water q.s. make a Decoction, strain, and Aromatize with Cinnamon iii.

XXXV. And to prevent an afflux of Matter to the Spleen, an Emollient, or
Lenitive Clyster may be given, to keep the Body open: if the Pus seems to be
expelled by Urine, Medicines moving Urine (made of Fennel-roots, the Four
greater Cold Seeds, red Cicers, and the like) are to be given.

XXXVI. But by what ways the Pus is carried to the Vreters, Authors are
scarcely agreed on. Some will have it, that it is carried by the Ramus
Splenicus to the Vena Portae, from thence to the Liver, and through the Liver to
the Vena Cava, and so at length to the Emulgent Arteries.

XXXVII. But this, says Sennertus, Med. Pract. lib. 3. part. 4. cap. 7. is too
long a way, and by too many ambages; a shorter way (says he) is by the Coeliac
Artery to the Trunk of the Aorta, or Arteria magna, and so from thence to the
Emulgent Arteries.

XXXVIII. Others say, that the Blood or Pus, which falls into the cavity of the
Abdomen, is either discussed by the Natural Heat, or else comes forth by an
Apostem in the Groin.

CHAP. XLI. Of WOVNDS of the STOMACH.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Vulnera Stomachi; and in
English, Wounds of the Stomach.

II. They are twofold: first, Wounds of the Mouth of the Stomach, or lower part
of the Oesophagus: secondly, Wounds of the Ventricle, or bottom of the Stomach.

I. Wounds of the Mouth of the Stomach.
III. (...). Vulnera Oesophagi, vel Gulae; Wounds of the Gullet or Swallow,
have been treated of in some measure already, in Chap. 35. Sect. 18, etc.
aforegoing: but to speak truly, we treated of that part of the Gula which was
at a farther distance from the Stomach; here we treat of such Wounds of the
Gullet as are near the Stomach it self, and are properly Wounds of the very
immediate Mouth of the Stomach.

IV. The Stomach has two parts: 1. The Mouth, which is called Oesophagus. 2.
The Bottom, or Belly of the Stomach, which is called Ventriculus.

V. The Signs. Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 26. says, That there is a Hiccough, and
Vomiting of Choler, Meat and Drink comes presently up again; the Pulse grows
feebie, there is Fainting, with cold Sweats, and a Coldness of the Extreme
Parts.

VI. The Prognostics. All Wounds of this Part are dangerous: 1. Because they
cause difficulty of Breathing. 2 Because it can scarcely be wounded; but the
Trachaea Arteria, Soporal Arteries, Jugular Veins, and Recurrent Nerves will be
wounded.

VII. The more remote from the Mouth of the Stomach, they are less dangerous:
but if they are great, transverse, and near to the Stomach, they are mortal: 1.
Because they admit of no consolidation, for that the passage of the Meat and
Drink does hinder it. 2. Because Meat and Drink must be discharged by Vomiting;
for that it cannot go to the bottom of the Stomach; so that the only necessary
Matter for Life being hindered, Death must ensue.

VIII. Wounds of the Oesophagus or Mouth of the Stomach, are more dangerous
than those of the Ventricle: 1. Because it is of a nervous and membranous
substance, and so not easily conglutinated. 2. Because it has a great consent
with the Brain, it receiving Nerves from the sixth Conjugation. 3. Because Meat
and Drink cannot easily pass into the Stomach, without which Life cannot be
long continued. 4. Because, as Celsus says, Vomiting of Choler does many times
ensue, which irritates and enlarges the Wound. 5. Because the Pain is exceeding
acute. 6. Because Topics cannot be conveniently applied, or giving Traumatick
Potions; they either come back again by Vomit, or passing town, make no stay at
the Wound, or otherwise come out at it. 7. Because Hippocrates, Sect. 5. Aph.
2. says, Convulsions may be induced, which are mortal.

II. Wounds of the Ventricle, or Stomach it self.
IX. (...). Vulnera Ventriculi; Wounds of the Ventricle, or Stomach it self,
have the differences with those of the Oesophagus; being either superficiary
and small, or deep, and passing into the cavity of it: and they are either
straight, or transverse; made by Incision, or laceration.

X. The Signs. That the Stomach it self is wounded, you may know, 1. By the
place of the Wound; as if it is under the Diaphragma, or below the Cartilago
mucronata. 2. By the substance coming forth at the Wound; which is either pure
Chylus, or Chylus mixed with the Food, unaltered, except by chewing.

XI. There is also, as Sennertus, Med. Pract. lib. 3. part. 1. sect. 1. cap.
26. says, A Hiccough, and Vomiting of Choler, also a Vomiting of Meat and
Drink; the Appetite is hurt, nor can the Stomach contain, or rightly digest the
Food.

XII. The Patient also spits Blood, and a Pain is perceived in the Stomach it
self: and if the upper part of it is Wounded, the Sick may be afflicted with
inflammation of the Part, a Fever, Delirium, Swooning, and many other ill
Symptoms.

XIII. The Prognostics. If the VVound is small and superficiary, it is easily
cured; but Wounds which penetrate are accounted mortal. Hippocrat. sect. 6.
aph. 18. Celsus, lib. 6. cap. 26. that is, they are very dangerous, and may
prove mortal, or are mortal for the most part: so we understand Hippocrates.

XIV. A Wound penetrating the Ventricle, is not so dangerous, as that which
penetrates or divides the Oesophagus: 1. Because the Ventricle is more fleshy,
and so more apt to consolidation. 2. Because it is not so principal a Part, the
Mouth of the Stomach being the seat of the Appetite. 3. Because it is not of so
exquisit a sense as the Mouth of the Stomach. 4. Because Traumaticks or
Wound-Drinks, and other Agglutinative-Medicaments, can make a longer stay there.

XV. But Wounds penetrating are very hard to be consolidated: 1. Because it is
of a Membranous substance. 2. Because we cannot long live without the service
of its Functions. 3. Because Food, as Meat and Drink, keep open the lips of the
Wound. 5. Because it is a sensible part, and so subject to ill Symptoms; as
Pain, Afflux of Humors, Inflammation. 5. Because Topics cannot be conveniently
applied, to bring and keep the lips together. 6. Because Internal Medicaments
pass forth again at the Wound.

XVI. Yet VVounds penetrating the Stomach are sometimes cured, of which I am an
Eyewitness; besides, we have several Authorities for the same, as Julius
Alexandrinus, in cap. lib. 6. Therapeut. Meth.Galeni; it a testatur similiter
Christoph. a Vega, ad. aph. 18. lib. 6. Hippocrat. and Fallopius, de Capitis
Vulneribus, cap. 1. tells us, that he cured a Man and a Woman, who were so
wounded in the Stomach, that the Chylus came out thereat.

XVII. The Cure. In the first place we advise, that the Patient may eat and
drink very sparingly: for the lips of the Wound will better agglutinate when
the Stomach is somewhat empty, because it will be a little wrincled together.

XVIII. If the Body is Cacochymick, yet Purges and Vomits are to be forborne;
lest vicious Humors should be heaped upon the Part affected, but soluble
Clysters may sometimes be given.

XIX. If the Wound penetrates not, the Cure is best to be committed to Nature:
but if it penetrates, Tents are not to be used; but you must apply Anodyns and
Digestives, which may be made of Turpentine, first mixed with the white of an
Egg, and then with Oil of Hypericon: this eases Pain, produces Pus, and is
glutinative: over all apply Empastr. e Bolo, or some such like.

XX. Sennertus commends this: White Wind ii. Mastich ii. Oil of Fir, or soft
Turpentine i. Manna of Frankincense ii. powder of roots of Comfrey and
Tormentil, A. i. Earthworms in fine powder ii. Saffron i. boil to the
consumption of the Wine.

XXI. The Stomach outwardly may be embrocated with Oils of Mint, of Myrtles, of
Quinces, of Roses, and of Wormwood: and he may drink juices of Pomgranates and
Quinces; or a Decoction of Tormentil, Cinkfoil, Comfrey, Horstail, Mousear, and
Periwinkle, sweetened with Syrup of Quinces.

XXII. And you may often give by the Mouth Syrup of Myrtles' de Rosis, or Syrup
of Comfrey, mixed with a quarter-part of Catechu in fine powder; which last is
to be preserred in this case, before all other Medicaments whatsoever.

CHAP. XLII. Of WOVNDS of the BELLY.
I. THEY arre called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Vulnera Abdominis, Vulnera
Ventris and Alvei; in English, Wounds of the Belly.

II. The Differences. These are either superficiary, and so penetrate not,
reaching no farther than to the Peritonaeum: or else they penetrate, and then
the Peritonaeum is cut through; in which case, if the Wound is large, the
Omenmentum or Intestines will slip out.

III. These penetrating Wounds also are either simple, wherein none of the
Viscera are hurt: or they are accompanied with the hurt of some of the
contained Parts; as the Stomach, Interlines, Reins, Ureters, Womb, etc.

IV. The Wound also is either a Pucture, or a Cut; and if a Cut, it is either
straight, oblique or transverse.

V. The Signs. Make trial with a Prob or VVax-candle, and see whether they go
directly deep in, then you may conclude that the Wound does penetrate: now in
searching, you must see that the Wound is not inflicted obliquely, for then you
may thrust in the Probe, etc. a great way between the Muscles, and yet not
penetrating the Wound: but you ought also to be sure that the orifice of the
Wound is not stopped with any of the adjacent bodies; as the Fat, Membrana
carnosa, or the Muscles.

VI. If you make an Injection with warm Wine, if the Wound penetrates, it will
be received within the cavity: but if it penetrates not, it will return again.

VII. If the Omentum or Intestines come forth, the penetration is manifest: but
if the Wound is small, you much search it with a Probe, or Wax-candle.

VIII. Which of the Viscera are wounded, (if any be wounded) you may guess at,
by the Place, or external Part hurt, but more certainly by their peculiar
Symptoms.

IX. If any of the Viscera are hurt, there is sometimes inflation of the Belly,
Colic, Vomiting, Fainting, Swooning, or Convulsions, or something
extraordinary by Urine or Stool, either some, or all of these Symptoms, or some
other more vehement, not named, according to the dignity of the Bowel hurt.

X. The Prognostics. Wounds of the Abdomen not penetrating, are void of
danger, except they be very large: for in such Wounds many parts must suffer a
solution of Unity; there will be great Pain, with loss and dissipation of
Spirits, and many times fainting and swooning Fits, Convulsions, etc.

XI. If the wound is made in the middle part of the Belly, it is more dangerous
than that which is made in the sides. 1. Because of the nervous Body which lies
there, it being more tendinous, and so more sensible. 2. It is more painful to
be sticht, and so more difficult to cure. 3. Because the Omentum and
Intestines, press most upon that part.

XII. All penetrating Wounds are accounted dangerous. 1. Because they are
commonly large, and always deep. 2. Because the ambient Air is apt to hurt the
Guts. 3. Because the Pus is apt to fall into the capacity of the Abdomen.

XIII. If any of the Viscera, or contained parts are wounded, the danger is
very great, and for the most part mortal: concerning which, Celsus says, if the
Basis of the Brain, or the Stomach, or the Vena Portae, or Vessels in the
middle of the Lungs, or the Jejunum, or the small Guts, or the Reins or Bladder
are wounded, such a Patient cannot escape.

XIV. The Cure. There are four Intentions of Cure in penetrating Wounds. 1. The
Reduction of the Viscera, if started out of their places. 2. The stitching up
of the Wound. 3. The Application of fit Topics. 3. The Exhibition of
Internals, as Traumaticks, and such things as may either prevent or suppress
ill Symptoms.

XV. 1. Reposition. If the Intestines or Omentum thrust out, you are speedily
to reduce them with your hands, lest the former is affected with an Inflation,
or the latter cool and corrupt.

XVI. If the Gout has been so long out, that it is so puffed up, that you cannot
reduce it, you must foment it with Red Wine, Milk or Water, in which some or
most of these things have been boiled, viz. Betony, Camomil, Dill, Fennel,
Fetherfew, Germander, Lavender, Melilot, Mint, Nep, Origanum, Pennyroyal, Sage,
Southernwood, Tansie, Wormwood; Seeds of Anise, Cumin, Caraways, Dill, Fennel,
Bayberries, Juniperberries, etc. which will discuss the Inflammation.

XVII. If notwithstanding the Fomentation, you cannot make the Reduction, you
must enlarge the Wound by Incision, and then put the Intestine into its place.

XVIII. If the Omentum or Caul is slipped out, and it is fresh and warm, it is to
be reduced with your Fingers: but if by reason of the cold ambient Air, it is
much cooled or tainted; which you will know by the unnatural hardness of it, or
by its being black, or of a livid Color, then you must make a Ligature near to
the warm and sound part, and the corrupt part is to be cut away.

XIX. Then the Wound is to be stitcht up, leaving the thread so as to hang out
at the Wound, until the corrupt part separates from the whole, and so casts it
off; and then the thread is to be drawn wholly out of the Wound. Now it is
necessary to use deligation to the Caul, when any part of it is cut off,
because otherwise, much blood would fall into the Cavity of the Abdomen; for
that the Caul is composed of a Texture of Veins or Arteries, interlaced with
Fat.

XX. 2. Stitching up the Wound. This stitch is called, (...), Gastroraphia; and
it is to be done in a clear light, where you may have a right view of the
Wound; also the Patient must be laid upon the side opposite to the Wound, that
the Guts may fall from it, while stitching; and lastly, you must have a
Servant, or Attendant, to hold up the parts which you are to stitch.

XXI. First, You must thrust the Needle through the Skin and Muscles, even to the
Peritonaeum, not touching the Peritonaeum on that side: Then the Needle is to
be thrust from within outward, through the Peritonaeum, and Muscles of the
opposite side.

XXII. About an inch distance from the former stitch, the Needle is to be
thrust through the Muscles of the same side, leaving the Peritonaeum: Then from
within outward, the Needle is to be thrust through the Peritonaeum and the
Muscles.

XXIII. And in this manner you are to go on, if more stitches are required,
sometimes piercing the Peritonaeum, and sometimes omitting it, till the
separated parts are sufficiently united. Some make but one Ligature of three or
four stitches, tying the ends of it firmly together, and using as many
Ligatures as are sufficient.

XXIV. Or Secondly, You may stitch the Muscles together, and the sides of the
Peritonaeum together: In this kind of stitch, the Needle is first to be thrust
through the Skin and the Muscles, to the Peritonaeum; then the opposite side of
the Peritonaeum, is to be joined to the side lying under the Muscles already
pierced.

XXV. This being done, the opposite Muscles are to be pierced; and this course
is to be persued, till all the lips of the Wound are completely drawn together.

XXVI. Or Thirdly, It may be stitcht, as are other parts of the Body; the
Needle is to be thrust through the two sides of the Muscles, and the two sides of
the Peritonaeum: And this is to be done so often, till you have taken stitches
enough, according to the magnitude of the Wound.

XXVII. But of all these several ways of stitching, the first way is esteemed
best: After stitching, you ought to leave an Orifice in the depending part, to
put in a Tent, that the Pus induced by suppuration, may be discharged. And this
kind of stitch is used, because the Peritonaeum being a Membrane, will not
admit of agglutination without the intercourse of Flesh.

XXVIII. And if it should be left unagglutinated, a Hernia or incurable Tumor,
would be left in the outward parts, the Intestines thrusting themselves out
into the Cavities of the Muscles.

XXIX. This kind of stitch ought to be fortified or strengthened by the dry
Suture firmly made, because that in a few days, the Thread will cut asunder the
Lips which are stitched, and the stitches will become loose, by reason the Guts
do continually butt, or cast themselves upon the Abdomen; for which cause, the
dry stitch is as necessary, as in the curing of an Hare-Lip.

XXX. 3. The Application of fit Topics. These ought to be choice Vulnerary
Balsams, as de Chili, de Peru, de Tolu, Gileadense, Capivij, all the forts of
Turpentines, Gum Elemi, and diverse artificial Balsams made of them, as Balsamum
Gummi Elem. Nostrum, Balsamum Vulnerarium Nostrum, Balsamum Amicum nost.
Linimentum Arcei, Vng. Basilicon mixed with Vng. Nicotianae.

XXXI. Over which, are to be laid Agglutinative and Sarcotick Cerats or
Emplasters, as Emplast. de Minio, e Bolo, Caesaris, Diapalma, or Album, newly
made, or not too dry, if it is in Summer time: or Empl. Sticticum Paracelsi,
malaxed with oil of Hypericon, if it be too stiff.

XXXII. To these you may add Cerates, as Ceratum Album, Ceratum de Galbano,
Ceratum Nigrum, and in some cases Ceratum e gummi Elemi.

XXXIII. Aquapendens, in Chirurg. part. 2. lib. 2. cap. 45. advises to
Astringent Pouders. This following is of singular use. fine Aloes, fine Bole,
Catechu, Olibanum, Myrtleberries, Sarcocol, Dragons Blood, Comfry Root, A. ss.
make each into fine Powder, and mix them.

XXXIV. 4. The exhibition of Internals. These are either in order to Healing,
and such are Traumaticks, or Wound-drinks; of which we shall say nothing here,
having said enough in its proper Chapter: Or such other Exhibitions, as may
either prevent, or suppress any ill Symptoms; which are chiefly two, viz.
extreme Pain, and Pus, or Blood collected into the Cavity of the Abdomen.

XXXV. For the avoiding of Pain, you may give every night at Bedtime, a Dose
of Dr. Gardner's Laudanum Tartarisatum, or of our Laudanum Specificum, or
Laudanum Volatile, or of our Guttae Vitae, in any convenient Vehicle.

XXXVI. These things not only ease the Pain, but also by their sudorifick and
rarifying property, dissolve the collected Matter, and cause it in a great
measure, to be dissipated and evaporated.

XXXVII. You may also embrocate all the parts from the Armholes to the Groin,
with this mixture. Oil of Hypericon, ii. Oil of Whelps, i. Oil of Scorpions,
ss. Oil of Spike, Tinctura Opij, A. ij. mix them. By this means the Pain will
be eased, and Inflammation prevented.

XXXVIII. The second ill Symptom, which is the collection of Pus, or Blood,
into the hollowness of the Belly. Give inwardly some of the Medicines at Sect.
36. aforegoing, every-night at Bedtime; and if the Belly is costive, you may
instead of them, give our Cathartick Laudanum.

XXXIX. When such Matter is collected, you may know, 1. By the weight which is
felt there, the pain and tension of the part. 2. By the fluctuating of the
Matter from place to place, when you press upon the belly with your hands.

XL. Now because this Matter cannot be sensibly emptied, by reason Wounds of
the Belly are not to be kept open, lest the Internals be corrupted; you must
endeavor to dissipate it by the Medicaments aforementioned, and other Rarifiers
and Sudorisicks; and you may embrocate the belly, and more especially the
Groins, with the Oil at Sect. 37. above, or with this mixture.

XLI. Oils of Hypericon, of Whelps, and of Scorpions, A. iss. Oils of
Euphorbium, of Castor, of Amber, and of Juniper Berries, of each ss. mix them.
After anointing, apply over the part, Empl. de Minio cum Sapone, or Diachylon
cum Gummi; if these things do not, an Apostem may possibly break out in the
Groin, which must then be opened, through which the Matter may happily discharge.

XLII. 5. Wounds made by Puncture. If the Wound penetrateing be so small, that
neither the Omentum nor Intestin thrust forth, as it often happens, when it is
made by a Rapier, etc. you are to consider, whether the Viscera are wounded by
the Symptoms which occur; if you find them well, you must heal up the Wound by
agglutination.

XLIII. You are not to dress it with Tents, for that may cause disturbance,
pain, flux of Humors, and Inflammation; and by exposing it to the external Air,
a Colic, or Putridity may ensue.

XLIV. For which Reasons, these Wounds are to be healed with all possible speed
that may be, and the Patient is to keep his bed the mean season: for rising in
the day time, the weight of the Guts will press upon the wounded Peritonaeum,
and make their way through it.

XLV. So that though the external wound in the skin, does not give them a
passage; yet they will so insinuate, or thrust themselves between it and the
Peritonaeum, as to cause an incurable Hernia, or Rupture.

XLVI. To prevent which, you ought to hasten the Cure, and not only to keep the
Sick in bed, but to apply good Astringents, Stypticks, or Agglutinatives, with
firm compression upon the Wound, that the parts may be united, while the Hurt
is recent.

CHAP. XLIII. Of WOVNDS of the GVTS.
I. THey are called in Greek, (...). in Latin Vulnera Intestinorum: and in
English, Wounds of the Guts.

II. The differences. Either the great Guts are wounded, or the small: and in
both, the Wound is either superficiary, or it passes to the Cavity.

III. If it passes to the Cavity, the Wound is then either straight or
Transverse; and then they are either great or small.

IV. The Signs. If the Great Guts are wounded, then Excrements will come out at
the Wound.

V. If the small Guts are wounded, the Chylus comes out at the Wound, the
Flanks swell and become hard, the Patient has Gripings in the Belly, vomits
Choler, is troubled with the Hiccough, and is many times affected with cold
Sweats, and coldness of the extreme parts.

VI. The Prognostics. 1. Superficiary Wounds of the Guts are not wholly
without danger, because all the external parts of the Abdomen are divided.

VII. 2. Great Wounds of the Guts are for the most part mortal, but more
especially when they are transverse: 1. Because Topics cannot be conveniently
applied to them. 2. Because they are of a Membranous substance, which has but
little Blood. 3. Because they are very sensible, whereby Pain, Inflammations,
Fevers, and other ill Symptoms may ensue. 4. Because the Chylus and Excrements
do continually pass by them. 5. Because their Office is absolutely necessary
for the preservation of life, the small Guts distributing the Chylus, and the
great Guts discharging the Excrements. 6. Because their Lips are kept asunder
partly by their motion, and partly by their distension by Chylus, Wind, or
Excrements.

VIII. 3. Wounds of the Jejunum are very dangerous, for the most part mortal.
1. Because it has more Mesaraical or bloody Veins than other Guts. 2. Because
by its plenty of Blood, it is soon and easily Inflamed. 3. Because it is
nearest to the Liver, and so the apter to be Inflamed. 4. Because it is of a
more tender or sensible substance than the other Guts. 5. Because it receives
immediately the most acid Choler from the Gall; the other Guts receiving it but
mediately, its sharpness by being mixed with other Juices, being much abated.

IX. 4. Wounds of the small Guts are more dangerous than those of the great. 1.
Because they are most Nervous and Membranous, and so of a more exquisite sense.
2. Because they are nearer to the Stomach. 3. Because they have more Mesaraical
or bloody Veins. 4. Because of their more excellent Office of distributing the
Chylus.

X. 5. Wounds of the great Guts are now more easy to be agglutinated than the
small, and so more easily admit Cure. 1. Because they are of a more fleshy
substance. 2. Because they are not so sensible. 3. Because the Excrements which
they contain, are more solid than the Chylus, and so not being so apt to flow
to the Wound, keep not the Lips so long asunder.

XI. The Cure. There are four intentions of Cure. 1. To stitch the lips of the
wounded Gut together with the Glovers stitch; if the Gut is not without the
Wound, some Authors advise to draw it out gently, and then to sew it with good
thread not waxed, that so swelling, it may not so soon cut the Lips of the
Wound asunder.

XII. But this method, Wiseman in Wounds of the small Guts, likes not: He says,
it is a hard task, and when the Gut is found, what (says he) will it signify,
but to increase the Accidents? He advises therefore, to follow the method of
the Ancients, to embrocate all the Region of the Belly with Oil of Mastich and
Earthworms, to dress the Wound with Sarcoticks, and to keep it close and warm
with Compress and Bandage.

XIII. But if the great Guts are wounded; so as the Excrements discharge that
way, then you may (...) ^pen the VVound, and stitch the Gut with the Glovers
stitch, sprinkling it with some agglutinative Powder, then reducing it back, to
stitch up the external Wound of the Abdomen.

XIV. 2. The Reduction of the Gut. If it has been some time from the making of
the Wound, it must be first fomented with red or astringent Wine, pretty warm,
and if a little Catechu has been dissolved in it, it will be so much the
better. Then an Agglutinative is to be applied to the Wound. Mastich, Olibanum,
Sarcocol, A. ij. Comfry root in powder, Myrrh, Borax, A. j. mix, and make a
powder; which sprinkle upon the VVound.

XV. 3. To stitch together the external parts of the Belly. This is to be done
as we have taught in the former Chapter; and it is better to stitch them, than
to leave them open. 1. Because no more Topics can be applied to the Guts. 2
Because Air will get in, and cause Pain and Griping. 3. Because the natural
Heat being kept in, the Wound of the Gut will be the sooner consolidated.

XVI. 3. Inward Vulneraries are to be administered; as Wound Drinks, Gelly
Broths, which are agglutinating, etc. Wise Man advises to a Vulnerary Decoction
made of Plantane, Horse-tail, Burnet, Mousear, Comfry roots, Red Roses, etc.

XVII. His Food ought to be of moist^ing Meats; and emollient Clysters made of
Chicken or Veal, or Sheepshead or Sheepsfeet Broth, with Yolks of Eggs, Honey
or Sugar of Roses; are to be exhibited.

CHAP. XLIV. Of ULCERS of the REINS.
I. THey are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Vulnera Renum: and in English,
Wounds of the Reins.

II. The Kinds. Wounds of the Reins may be either superficiary, or deep; and
the Carunculae Papillares may be only wounded, or it may reach to the Pelvis:
and this last may be either without any hurt to the Vein and Artery Emulgent,
or they may be wounded also.

III. The Signs. Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 26. says, There will be great pain in the
part affected, reaching to the Groin and Testicles, and that clots of Blood
will come with the Urine, if the Reins are wounded to the Pelvis. Fernelius,
Patholog. lib. 7. cap. 8.

IV. Sennertus, Med. Pract. lib. 3. part. 7. sect. 1. cap. 10. says, These
Wounds may be known by the place where the Wound is inflicted; There is (says
he) either a suppression of Urine, or it is made with difficulty, and it is
blood, or bloody: there is a pain felt upon the Region of the Reigns, which
reaches down to the Groin; and if the wound is large or great, a watery Blood
comes forth from the Wound.

V. If much Blood and Urine do not come forth, the Wound is only superficiary,
or the fleshy substance only is hurt: But if much Blood and Water together come
from the Wound, the Wound penetrates to the Cavity of the Reins.

VI. The Prognostics. Wounds of the Reins, says Sennertus, are very dangerous,
and often mortal: and in the first case, they are difficult of Cure, and it is
not performed but in a long time: but they are said to be less dangerous than
Wounds of the Bladder.

VII. If the Kidneys are wounded through the back, it is for the most part
deadly; for the Wound must pierce the Muscle Psooa, so that the Nerves there
arising from the Medulla Spinalis, can scarcely be free from hurt.

VIII. If the VVound is made in the side, piercing only to the Carunculae
Papillares; it is possible to be cured, but with much difficulty, because the
Muscles of the Abdomen and Peritonaeum must be both wounded.

IX. If the VVound pierces to the Pelvis, it is for the most part mortal, 1.
Because the carrying off the Serum from the Arteries, is absolutely necessary,
otherwise agglutination would be hindered, and a Dropsy induced. 2. Because its
substance scarcely admits of consolidation, partly from the solidity of its
substance; and partly, because it has within its self the Carunculae
Papillares, and the Pelvis, which are said to be Spermatick parts.

X. If the Vein, and Artery Emulgent are wounded, Death may be presaged to
ensue, by reason of the dreadful Haemorrhage, which will infallibly be caused
thereby.

XI. The Cure. If the VVound is not deep (universals being premised) the more
strong agglutinatives are to be used: and says Sennertus, distilled Oils proper
for these Wounds, are to be dropped into them, and then some glutinative
Emplaster is to be applied over all.

XII. If the VVound penetrates to the Cavity, a decoction of Comfrey roots,
Knotgrass and Liquorice made in rough Red-Wine is to be injected; or a
Cataplasm to be applied made of Dates, White-bread, Acacia, and Hypocistis,
boiled in Red-wine.

XIII. And afterward, when the Haemorrhage is stopped, agglutinatives are to be
injected, and then a glutinative Emplast. to be applied over all: but Sennertus
commends as the chief of all, the Vnguentum Sanctum of Joh. Andreas a Cruce, so
called (says he) from its Effects, which you may find described in his Chirurg.
lib. 4. tract. 2. Indicatione 13. and is as follows.

XIV. New Pine Rosin, clear and well-scented, xij. pure Gum Elemi, ix. the best
Turpentine, choice Oil of Bays, A. ij. first melt the Rosin and Gum over a
gentle fire, then and the Oil of Bays and Turpentine, which boil a very little,
and so complete the Balsam.

XV. You may exhibit also for the first days, Trochisci de Alkakengi cum Opio,
if the pain is great, otherwise sine Opio, or de Carabe, which may be given in
new Milk, or decoction of Comfry-roots, sweetened with Saccharum Rosatum.

XVI. And because the Passages of the Bladder are many times obstructed with
clotted Blood, the Share and Groin may be anointed with Oil of Scorpions, or
Oil of bitter Almonds, or a Cataplasm may be applied, made of Saxifrage and
Pellitory of the Wall.

XVII. Let his Food be of good Nourishment: an Emulsion of the four greater
cold Seeds may be exhibited, a little thickened with white Starch: Ptisan also,
and Broths made with White-bread, also rear Eggs, Rice Milk, and Water gruel;
Juice of Quinces may be mixed with his Drink, which yet ought to be as little
as may be, lest a Flux of Humors falls upon the Reins.

XVIII. VVhey of Goats and Cows Milk is good, and Barley-water, in which
Liquorice bruised, Jujubes, Sebestens, and the four greater cold Seeds have
been boiled: He ought to be quiet, and rest as much as may be; and if
costiveness attend, an emollient Clyster made of the Broth of a Sheeps-head,
and sweetened with Honey of Roses, is to be exhibited.

CHAP. XLV. Of WOVNDS of the BLADDER.
I. THey are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Vulnera Vesicae: and in English,
Wounds of the Bladder.

II. The Kinds. These wounds may be either in the Neck of the Bladder, where is
the Sphincter Muscle, which is fleshy: or in the Body of the Bladder it self,
and then the Wound is made either in the sides about the Groins, where its
Ligaments are, or in the other Membranous parts.

III. The Signs. If the Bladder is wounded, it is known, says Sennertus, Med.
Pract. lib. 3. part. 8. Sect. 1. cap. 5. by the place where the Wound is
inflicted, and a Pain about the share: and the Urine will be either suppressed,
or it will come forth with a mixture of Blood.

IV. Also (says he) Urine will come forth from the wound it self; and the
Stomach is drawn into consent, where there is great Sickness, whence comes
Vomiting of Choler, or the Hiccough.

V. Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 26. and Fernelius Patholog. lib. 7. cap. 8. shows us,
that the 'Vrine comes in small quantity, and bloody; and if the Body of the
Bladder is wounded, the Urine then falling into the Cavity of the Abdomen, the
Pain will be communicated to the Groins and Testicles in Men, and an Ascites
will be induced.

VI. The Prognostics. Wounds of the Neck of the Bladder, which is the more
fleshy part, are not mortal, which is manifest in those who are cut of the
Stone.

VII. Wounds in the lateral parts about the Groin, are curable also; if the
Patient is young, and of a good constitution, or habit of Body.

VIII. Hippocrates, Sect. 6. Aph. 18. Wounds in other parts of the Bladder
which are Membranous, are uncurable; and Galen in his Comment upon the same
place, renders a reason for it, because (says he) the Bladder is Nervous, thin,
and has but little Blood in it.

IX. And yet Skenkins in his Observations, gives us an Example of one who was
wounded in the bottom of his Bladder, who was cured: but Spigelius and
Aquapendens will have it, that the bottom of the Bladder is not wholly nervous,
but that the exterior Membrane is more fleshy, and therefore is to be accounted
as a Muscle of the Bladder of a more constringed substance.

X. Yet says (Sennertus) such wounds of the Bladder are seldom perfectly
healed; for though the Sick does not die thereof, yet for the most part, it grows
Callous, whereby a Fistula is induced, through which the Urine issues forth.

XI. The Reasons why wounds made in the Body of the Bladder are so difficult to
be healed, are, 1. Because it is a Membranous Part. 2. Because it contains the
Urine, whose acrimony and and humidity hinders Consolidation. 3. Because its
Wounds are very painful, whence a Flux of Humors and Inflammation, are easily
induced. 4. Because dreadful Symptoms commonly follow these Wounds; as
Fainting, Watching, Delirium, Hiccough, Nauseousness, and Vomiting, and
Convulsions. 5. Because they are apt to gangrene, whence Death infallibly
follows.

XII. The Cure. The Cure ought to be performed by Maturation or Digestion, lest
they degenerate into a Fistula; and therefore Glutinatives are to be imposed.
And about the place you may anoint with Oils of Roses, white Lillies, and
Mastich.

XIII. And Injections may be made into the Wound, of a Decoction of
Comfrey-roots, Myrtle-leaves, Red-roses, and Catechu in Red-wine, to which
Honey of Roses may be added, the Sick drinking but little the while.

XIV. These Pills given Morning and Evening, are good. Take ashes of Man's
Bones, Troches of Alkakengi, A. iii. Catechu, Mummy, A. ii. fine Bole, Chalk,
A. i. Venice-Turpentine a little boiled, q.s. make a mass for Pills. Dose, a i.
ad ss.

XV. Wound-drinks may also be given, made of Wine, and proper Astringents and
Agglutinatives: but they ought not to be given in too great a quantity.

XVI. Topics anodyn, agglutinative and digestive are to be applied; as Natural
and Artificial Balsams made of a due consistence, with powder of Catechu or
Comfrey-roots: also Turpentine mixed with the yolk of an Egg, and some Oil of
Eggs, or of Hypericon, or of Earthworms.

CHAP. XLVI. Of WOVNDS of the WOMB.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Vulnera Matricis, vel Uteri; and
in English, Wounds of the Womb.

II. The Womb is an Organical Part, placed in the Abdomen of a Woman, between
the Bladder and the Intestinum rectum, which is behind it: it is divided into
three parts, viz. the Bottom, the Neck, and the Sheath: it has two broad
Ligaments, and two round: it is also of a nervous and fibrous substance, and is
of different thicknesses, according to the difference of Age, and Time of going
with Child. At the bottom within, there is a cavity whence the Courses flow,
and wherein Generation and Conception are also made.

III. If it is made by the Caesarian Birth, it is manifest; but if it is
otherwise wounded by chance, it is evident from the site, or place wounded, and
a pain which is felt in the Womb.

IV. There also distills forth from Neck, or inner Mouth of the Womb, a kind of
Blood and Sanies: and if the Wound is in the neck of the Womb, the pain is
sometimes greater, than if it were in the bottom of the Womb.

V. The Prognostics. Wounds of the Womb are not impossible to be cured; as
the Caesarian-Birth does demonstrate.

VI. Yet notwithstanding they are not void of danger, but are of very dissicult
cure; as the many great Symptoms to which they are subject, do show.

VII. For which, these Reasons are rendered: 1. Because it is membranous, and if
the Woman is great with Child, thin of substance. 2. Because it has a great
consent with the principal Parts of the Body. 3. Because it is as it were the
Sink of the Body, to receive its impurities; for which cause, these Wounds many
times become cancerous. 4. Because it has an exquisit sense of feeling; whence
Pain, and Inflammation may ensue. 5. Because it is a place perpetually moist.

VIII. Wounds in the neck of the Womb, are more difficult to be cured than
those in the bottom of it; because it is more membranous, and perpetually
bedewed with humidities.

IX. The Cure. It is cured as wounds of the Bladder and other parts are cured:
and by reason of its very great moisture, it requires greater Consolidants: the
Pain also, if it is great, is to be mitigated.

X. Those Medicaments are most commodious to be applied to it, which are put up
the Privity as a Pessary, or injected by a Womb-Syringe.

XI. Pessaries are made of Wax and Lint, or some proper Emplaster, which may be
anointed with some Vulnerary Ointment, such as these following.

XII. Take Wax, Turpentine, Oil of Hypericon, yellow Palm-oil, A. i. Oil of
Roses, Honey, A. ii. Beef Marrow or Suet iv. mix, and make an Ointment. Or:
Take Wax, yellow Palm-oil, A. i. Oil of Ben, Beef Suet A. vi. Bears-oil ss. Oil
of Roses q.s. mix them.

XIII. Or: Take Frankincense, Balsam Capivii, Galbanum, Gum Elemi strained,
Olibanum, A. i. Balsam de Chili, de Peru, A. ss. mix them. Or: Take Turpentine,
Balsam of Peru, A.i. Wax, Oil of Ben, A. ss. Pompholix, Tutty, Ceruss, A. vj.
the three last being levigated, mix with the other things melted, and make an
Ointment.

XIV. Injections, or Vterine-Clysters, are made of a Decoction of roots of
round Birthwort, Cyperus, Catechu, etc. in Chalybeat-water, or rough Red-wine;
adding also Agrimony, Angelica, Sanicle, Selfheal, Mugwort, Plantan, Speedwel,
Red-roses, and other Vulraries, and sweetning it with Honey of Roses, etc.

CHAP. XLVII. Of WOVNDS of the YARD.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Vulnera Penis; and in English,
Wounds of the Yard.

II. The Prognostics. They are known by sight; and are not often without
danger, more especially if they be accompanied with Hemorrhage, great Pain,
Inflammation, and other vehement and dangerous Symptoms.

III. When the Wound is very great, and vehement Symptoms follow upon it, it is
many times mortal; yet we have known the Yard wholly cut in some, who have
after done very well: but if a Gangren happens after the Wound, it generally
kills the Patient.

IV. The Cure. The Cure of this here is as in other Wounds, chiefly in Parts
that are Membranous: for which purpose, a Powder may be prepared, and
compounded of Litharge, Ceruse washed, Tutia prepared, Sarcocolla, and
Tragacanth.

V. The Wound is first to be washed with warm Wine, dried, and then the Powder
is to be sprinkled thereon: or it may be laid on, being mixed with Oil of Roses.

VI. This Ointment following is very good for this purpose: Ceruse washed iii.
Litharge, Sarcocol, A. ii. Tutty, Myrrh, Tragacanth, A. i. Salt extracted out
of the Caput mort. of Vitriol, ss. Oil of Hypericon, q.s. mix, and make an
Ointment.

VII. If there is an Inflammation withal, it is to be taken away as other
Inflammations.

VIII. If an External Ulcer happens, the Cure must be performed both by
internal and external means; lest it should contract a malignity, and
degenerate into Sphacelus.

IX. You may Anoint with this Ointment: Litharge, burnt Lead, A. iv. Scammony,
Quicksilver, A. iii. Aloes, Tutia prepared, flowers of Sulphur, A. ii. Lapis
Haematitis, Crocus Martis aperiens, A. i. Oil of Hypericon, or of Roses, ss.
Wax q.s. mix, and make an Ointment.

X. If the Ulcer yields not to this, by reason of its foulness: Whitewine iv.
Rose, and Plantan Waters, A.ii.S.V i. fine Verdigrise ss. boil a little, and
wash therewith.

XI. If the Ulcer is yet stubborn, you must strew thereon Scammony in fine
powder; and if you please, you may add thereto a little red Precipitate ground
soft; or they may be mixed with Basilicon, and so used.

XII. If it becomes a Sphacelus, it admits of no Cure, but Cutting-off; lest it
should creep inwardly, and so kill the Patient.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of WOVNDS of FINGERS and TOES.
I. THOSE of the Hands are called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Vulnera Digitorum
Manuum; in English, Wounds of the Fingers.

II. Those of the Feet are called in Greek, (...); in Latin, Vulnera Digitorum
Pedis; and in English, Wounds of the Toes.

III. The Kinds. They are either great, or small: and in both, the Musculous
Parts are only wounded; or with them, the Nerves and Tendons, or both.

IV. And the Nerves and Tendons are either contused, or lacerated, or pricked
only, or cut according to their length, or transverse.

V. The Prognostics. If recent, they are not of difficult cure: if the Tendons
are cut asunder, the motion and use of the Part is lost: if the Nerves are cut
asunder, a numness or Paralysis of the extreme Parts is induced.

VI. By ill handling, these Parts are easily to be affected with a Sphacelus:
which you may well know, by no Matter appearing in due time; by the lips of the
Wound being dry, or yielding but little and thin moisture; the pulsation,
redness, and inflammation or heat, which is greater than in the fleshy parts;
by the decay, or extinction of the native heat; and by the lips being turned
in, and becoming livid, and at length black.

VII. If they degenerate into Ulcers, they are apt to be foul, and easily foul
the Bones, become malign, and so hazard the loss of a Joint or Joints, and by
ill management, the loss sometimes of the whole Hand or Foot.

VIII. The Cure. They are cured as other simple Wounds; but if the Tendons be
hurt, care is to be taken, lest a Palsy follows.

IX. You must not put in the Probe too deep, nor too often; and you must be
very careful that the Bandage be not too hard, lest (by reason they are
Extream-parts) you extinguish the Native-heat: and when it is bound up, whether
it is Hand or Foot, it is to be placed as much as much as may be upright, or
parallel to the Horizon, not in a depending posture.

X. If the Musculous Parts only are wounded, you must apply Astringents,
Stypticks, or Glutinatives; which peform the Cure in two days time at farthest,
seldom more.

XI. If the Nerves or Tendons be wounded, you may dress the Wound with Balsam
de Chili or Peru; or with some proper Artificial Balsam, equal to them in
virtue; which many times do the Cure at once dressing, at least they prevent
any future Symptoms, or ensuing danger.

XII. Or you may dress the Wound with this Balsam: Oils of Hypericon, of
Turpentine, A. i. Balsam Capivii, Cypress-Tupentine, Gum Elemi, Balsam of Peru,
A. jss. Oil of Petre, and of Juniper Berries, A.ss. Camphir ii. mix, and make a
Balsam: it commonly cures at once or twice dressing.

XIII. If it is a Puncture of the Nerve or Tendon, dress the Wound with this
Mixture: Balsam de Chili, or de Peru i. Oil of Turpentine, or of Spike, Oil of
Limons, A.ss. mix them.

XIV. If the Tendon is lacerated or broken, so as that it hangs out, it can
never be united again: and therefore, so much of it as hangs forth is
immediately to be cut off; for otherwise it will prevent the Healing; and then
the Cure is to be formed according to the former Directions.

XV. If the Wound grows foul, and it seems to degenerate into an Ulcer, you
must then cleanse it with powder of Scammony, which is one of the best,
easiest, and safest Medicines you can apply in this case: for it operates
effectualy, and yet without any pain, and cleanses even the Bone it self.

XVI. Afterward you may heal up the Ulcer with this Ointment. Basilicon ii.
Scammony in fine powder iii. Tobacco in powder jss. Camphir ss. it powerfully
cleanses, incarnates, yet prevents proud flesh, and cicatrizes or heals.

XVII. If after the Healing, a numness or Palsy remains upon the Extream-part,
it is very doubtful whether it will be recovered to its pristin state, or not:
but in this case you may morning, noon and night, or oftener if you so please,
anoint the Part with the following Mixture, rubbing it well in.

XVIII. Take Oils of Amber, of Aniseed, of Lavender, of Limons, of Turpentine,
and of Petre, A. ss. Oils of Rosemary, and of Spike, A. ii. Oil of Camphir i.
Camphir in powder ss. mix them; and anoint therewith.

XIX. And after the Anointing you may apply this Balsam: Take Balsams of Chili,
Peru, and Tolu, A. ss. Wax, Turpentine, Oil of Amber, A. ii. spread it upon
Lint, and apply it, binding it gently up.

XX. If a Gangren is coming on, you must then apply those things which in the
Chapter of Gangren we have prescribed, either us to prevent, or cure the same:
but if a Sphacelus is already induced, you have then no other Remedy but
Extirpation, or Cutting-off.

Explicit Liber Quartus.
ARS CHIRVRGICA. Liber Quintus. OF ULCERS.
The ARGUMENT.
I. Of Ulcers in General. II. Of Medicines appropriated to Ulcers. III. An
Ulcer simple. IV. An Ulcer with Distemper. V. An Ulcer with Pain. VI. An Ulcer
with Flux of Humors. VII. An Ulcer sordid, foul, and putrid. VIII. An Ulcer
with Tumor. IX. An Ulcer with Proud-flesh. X. An Ulcer Callous. XI. An An Ulcer
Discolored. XII. An Ulcer Cavernous or Hollow. XIII. An Ulcer with Worms. XIV.
An Ulcer Varicous. XV. An Ulcer Carious, with foul Bones. XVI. An Ulcer
Cacoethick, or Malignant. XVII. An Ulcer Phagedenick, or Eating. XVIII. An
Ulcer Cancerous. XIX. An Ulcer by Burning or Scalding. XX. An Ulcer Fistulous,
or a Fistula. XXI. An Ulcer Gangrenous. XXII. An Ulcer of the Head. XXIII. An
Ulcer of the Eye. XXIV. An Ulcer Fistulous of the Eye; or, Fistula Lachrymalis.
XXV. An Ulcer of the Nose, Ozena. XXVI. An Ulcer of the Ear. XXVII. An Ulcer of
the Mouth. XXVIII. An Ulcer of the Throat. XXIX. An Ulcer of the Neck. XXX. An
Ulcer of the Stomach. XXXI. An Ulcer Fistulous, of the Breast or Thorax. XXXII.
An Ulcer of the Back and Loins. XXXIII. An Ulcer of the Womb, and its Neck.
XXXIV. An Ulcer of the Bladder, or its Neck. XXXV. An Ulcer of the Groin.
XXXVI. An Ulcer in the Yard. XXXVII. An Ulcer Fistulous in the Anus, or Fistula
in Ano. XXXVIII. An Ulcer of the Joints. XXXIX. An Ulcer of the Arms and Hands.
XL. An Ulcer of the Thighs, Legs and Feet. XLI. Vlcerated Piles, or Hemorrhoids.

CHAP. I. Of ULCERS in General.
I. THEY are called in Greek, (...), pl. (...). in Latin, Ulcus, pl. Ulcera;
and in English, an Ulcer, pl. Ulcers.

II. The Definition. An Ulcer in the Solution of Unity, putrified: or thus, An
Ulcer is a Wound which is putrified, and sends forth stinking and putrified
Matter.

III. Barbett defines an Ulcer to be a Solution of Continuty, with Diminution
of Magnitude in the soft Parts, from a corroding matter.

IV. The Differences. Joel, Chirurg. de Vlcerib. Tom. 6. Sect. 6. Et quanquam
utraque affectio, and Vulnus and Vlcus, continuitatis in aliqua part sit
solutio and divisio; differunt tamen, quod continui solutio in Vulnere ab
externis causis caesim illatis cum Sanguine eruptione inferatur: Vlcus vero, ut
plurimum ab interna causa, erodentibusque Humoribus producitur; ex quo non
Sanguis, ut ex Vulnere, sed, vel sanies, vel pus, vel putrida colluvies emanat:
quanquam ab externis quoque causis, ut applicatione Causticorum Remediorum, aut
morsu ictuque virulentorum Auimalium, paulatim Vlcera excitari possunt. Here he
shows us the difference between a Wound and an Ulcer. Now although (says he) both
Wounds and Ulcers are a solution and division of continuity in some part; yet
notwithstanding they differ; for that a solution of unity in a Wound, comes
from external causes, as cutting, attended with a flux of Blood: whereas an
Ulcer is for the most part from an internal cause, and is induced from eroding
or corrosive Humors; from which Blood comes not as in a Wound; but either
sanies, or pus, or a flux of sordid filth: sometimes also it is produced from
external causes, as application of Causticks, or bitings or stingings of
venomous Beasts.

V. (...) in Greek, Sanies in Latin, a thin, waterish, bloody Gleet or Humor,
in English; which yet Blancard will have to be, a thick bloody Humor: but it is
truly either thick or thin, according to the Parts from which it issues: Joel
says, it for the most part flows from crude Wounds in the beginning of the
Cure; chiefly if the Nerves or Ligaments are hurt, (and then it is always
thin:) but if it comes from Wounds of the musculous Flesh, then we say with
Blancard, it is thick and bloody. It also flows from many kinds of malign
Ulcers, and then (says Joel) Color vel albo Aquae, vel Sero simili; aut color
rubeo tanquam Aqua Sanguine pauco diluto, quod ut plurimum acre est and
erodens, and cum in Vlceribus (tum in Vulneribus) dolores acerbos excitat. In
malign Ulcers, it is either of a white watery color, or like to Whey; and
sometimes of a reddish color, as if a little Blood were diluted with Water.

VI. But this Excrement in malign Ulcers, is not properly called Sanies, but
Virus, or Virulentia, as words of a more full, large, and ample signification:
and unless this Sanies or Virus is first dried up, or absorbed in Ulcers and
Wounds, it is impossible that they should be healed.

VII. Sanies is also always evil in it self, and by how much it differs from a
watery substance or quality, as being of livid color, stinking smell, and
serous substance, by so much it is the worse.

VIII. (...) in Greek, Pus in Latin Matter, in English; is a digested Excrement
in Wounds and Ulcers; thicker than the Sanies, but thinner than Sordes; and if
it is that which Authors call Pus optimum, and exoptatissimum; or laudable
Quittor; it is white in color, equal and smooth in substance, soft, and not in
the least fetid or stinking.

IX. Such a kind of Pus bespeaks a happy curing of the Wound or Ulcer to which
it happens: whereas on the contrary; if it differs from this description, as
being thinner than it ought to be, feculent, of an ash, livid, or black color,
and of a stinking smell, it is said to be very evil.

X. (...) in Greek, Sordes in Latin, Corrupted Filth, or, Stinking Matter in
English: it is a preternatural Excrement, coming from Wounds and Ulcers: and in
Ulcers it is thick, glutinous, and very tenacious; sometimes livid, black, or
of various colors, and always stinking.

XI. When such Recrements come from malign and putrid Ulcers, it shows them to
be of difficult cure: the cause of such ill Excrements, as Sanies, and Sordes,
is from a weakness or error of the third Concoction, and (...), or right
temperature of the Parts affected.

XII. The Kinds. There are several kinds of Ulcers, arising from several
Accidents and Causes. 1. From the Form of the Ulcer. These arise from its
figure, magnitude, and the like: some Ulcers are small, others great.

XIII. Some Ulcers are long, others short: some broad, others narrow: some
straight, others oblique: some equal, in which the Flesh appears in all places
alike wasted: others unequal, in which a greater part is consumed in one place,
than in another: some Ulcers creep like a Coney-borough, other are Fistulous:
and of those which are fistulous, some have narrow mouths, others broad: some
have round lips, others the contrary.

XIV. 2. From the Part affected. Some Ulcers are said to be internal, others
external; some slight and superficiary, others profound, and difficult to
approach to: some are in parts superior, others in parts inferior and
depending: some in parts musculous or fleshy, others in parts membranous,
nervous, and full of Vessels.

XV. 3. From Accidents, taken from things without the nature and constitution
of the Ulcer: some are recent and new, others are inveterate or old: some are
clean, others are foul: some are simple, others complicate.

XVI. 4. From the easiness, or difficulty of Cure. Those are easy of Cure,
which are recent, simple, superficiary, and accompanied with the least
Symptoms, having a laudable Pus.

XVII. Those are of difficult Cure, which proceed from the more grievous
Diseases, or Causes: or which are conjoined with appendent Symptoms; as
intemperature, flux of malign Humors, Sanies, Sordes: or if there is a
putridity, hardness of the lips, or they breed Worms, or are cavernous,
eroding, rotten, or cacoethick.

XVIII. 5. From Symptoms inherent: some are void of pain; others are with pain,
itching, pricking and burning: some are with distemper of the Part,
Inflammation, Gangren: others are with a Callus, Hypersarcosis, Erosion,
Cancer, Worms, and Rottenness of the Bones.

XIX. 6. From the Causes: come are from Causes internal, as from sharp Humors,
having a corroding faculty: and this Humor is generated either without the Part
affected, that is in the other parts of the Body, and so comes to the place
where the Ulcer is by fluxion: or, it is generated in the very Part affected by
it self. Others are from Causes External; as the application of Septick or
Caustic Medicaments: the Actual Cautery, also actual Fire it self; for that
the Escar which is left remaining, is rather to be accounted among the number
of Ulcers, than of Wounds.

XX. Out of what has been said, it appears that Ulcers differ, 1. In form or
figure. 2. As to the Part affected. 3. As to outward Accidents. 4. As to
Symptoms inherent. 5. As to the easiness and difficulty of Cure. 6. As to the
Causes from which they arise; from which several Differences, those varieties
of Ulcers named or expressed in the ARGUMENT of this Book, are said to spring
or be derived.

XXI. Other Authors, as Barbett, takes these kind of Ulcers, 1. From the Form,
and so they are either great or little, long or short; broad, narrow; right,
transverse; equal, unequal; superficial or deep. 2. From the Part affected, as
being sometimes in the Skin only, sometimes in the Muscles, Nerves, Tendons,
Vessels, Joints. 3. From the Symptoms, and so it is with Distemper, Pain,
Fluxion, Putrid, with Tumor, with proud Flesh, Callous, Discolored, Cavernous,
Verminous, Carious, Cacoethick, Phagedenick, Cancerous, with an Escar,
Fistulous or Gangrenous. 4. From the Causes, which are either Internal, from
eroding Humors; or External, from outward Injuries.

XXII. Others make but two Kinds. 1. Those which arise from the nature and
constitution of an Ulcer. And so an Ulcer is either simple and without
Symptoms, where the consolidation or healing may be immediately attempted: or
complicate, and with Symptoms, in which some or all of them must be removed
before unition can be procured; and these proceed either from inward Causes, as
fretting Ulcers, Nome, Phagedaena, ulcerated Cancers, etc. or from outward
Causes, as Contagion, Poison, Burning, etc. 2. Those which are taken from the
Part affected; and they are either inward, possessing some of the Viscera, or
parts adjacent to them; or else outward, affecting the Skin, Muscles, Nerves,
Tendons, Vessels, Joints.

XXIII. Wiseman divides Ulcers into two several Kinds, or makes them arise from
two several Differences; which he will have to be first Essential, from the
Form, or from the Efficient Cause. From the Form, 1. From the Figure, as being
straight, oblique, round, crooked. 2. From the Magnitude, as being great,
small; superficial, deep; long, short; broad, narrow. 3. From the Equality, in
which the Flesh is alike plain, or inequality, in which it is corroded more in
one place than in another. 4. From the part affected, as being internal or
external, and the latter in the Flesh, Membranes, etc. From the Efficient
Cause, which is either inward from some sharp, eroding, malign Humor; or
external, from burning, biting, stinging Poison, Contagion, etc. Secondly,
Accidental, which arise from induced Symptoms, such as we enumerate at Sect.
21.73. aforegoing.

XXIV. The Causes. The causes of Ulcers are threefold, viz. 1. External, called
Primitive, from Falls, Blows, Burnings, Scaldings, Contagion, Poison, unnatural
Food, etc. 2. Internal or Antecedent; from sharp and corrosive Humors, as salt
Phlegm, Choler, Melancholy, Serum, corrupted Lympha. 3. Near or enjoined; as
eroding Matter gathered together in the place, by reason of the aforesaid
Gauses.

XXV. If this eroding Humor proceeds from internal Causes, it then springs from
an Excess of acrid Serum, which if mixed with any other Humor, as Blood, Choler,
Melancholy, Phlegm, or Lympha, receives its denomination from them.

XXVI. These Humors when they abound so much, as to recede from a right
Temperament, they are apt to separate from the whole Mass, and to be protruded
either quite out of the Body by natural Excretions, as Excrements; or else
fall, and settle upon some particular Member or Part, and so generate an Ulcer.

XXVII. Being thus separated, and protruded from the Mass of Blood, they loose
their Balsamic Property, and become acrid and eroding, or corrosive: and by
how much the longer this Humor has been extravasated or protruded, by so much
the more acrimonious and eroding it becomes: degenerating at long run, into
those very Excrements voided by the Ulcer it self.

XXVIII. The External Causes we mentioned first, at Sect. 24. above; where
speaking of Contagion; we here say, that those things are to be referred to
that Head, which proceed from Psoora, Itch, Leprosy, and contacts with Venereal
Persons; the particles of which Contagion being communicated to the Skin, does
slyly insinuate it self into the Pores thereof, and so exulcerating there,
begets the like Disease.

XXIX. From these Diversities of Causes, a diversity of Excrements does flow,
viz. Sanies, Pus and Virus; a description of which, we have already, given you
at Sect. 5. ad 11. aforegoing: yet these few following things are to be noted
concerning them.

XXX. As to Sanies, Celsus will have it to be twofold, 1. Ichor, which is a
thin whitish Gleet, incident to ill disposed Ulcers, especially among the
Nerves and Tendons: it is generated of a nutritious Serum, degenerated into a
sharp virulent Serum. 2. Meliceria, a thick glutinous Humor of a pale or
yellowish Color, not much unlike to Honey, and affecting Ulcers of an ill
condition, near and in the Joints, which erodes the Membranes and Joints.

XXXI. But ( says Wiseman) that which we call Sanies, is a thin excrementitious
Humor, generated from abundance of Serosity in Ulcers, making them moist: of
which Humors some are hot and reddish Colored, others cold and pale Colored;
and where this Humor is, it is called a Sanious Ulcer.

XXXII. As to Pus, it is a matter of a middle consistency between thick and
thin, for the most part of a whitish Color, and not of an ill Smell: but if it
is of a greenish or yellowish color, it commonly smells rank, but not
stinking. If the Constitution is good, and the Serum well conditioned, then a
good sort of Pus is made, which is white, smooth, of equal substance, not thin,
and easy to the part; and every day it appears nearer and nearer to the
nutritious Juice, till by degrees the Ulcer fills up with flesh, and heals.
This is generated of a good Serum, flowing to the part affected for its
nutriment, which by the weakness of the part, is not assimilated, but converted
into a whitish Substance, called Pus or Matter, and where this is, it is called
a Purulent Ulcer.

XXXIII. Sordes is a thick glutinous Matter, and stinking, differing in kind,
as being whitish, sometimes greyish, and sometimes blackish, and then it is
most stinking, also unequally coagulated in its Substance. It is generated of
much tough matter, which renders the Ulcer foul; or of Blood and Serum grown
Phlegmatic, and afterward gross and slimy, which for want of Heat does still
degenerate, and corrupt into Sordes, a thick glutinous stinking matter or
filth; and where this is, it is called a Purid Ulcer.

XXXIV. Sennertus says, That Internal Humors causing Ulcers flow unto the part
affected, either by transmission or by attraction; but Modern Authors will not
allow of Attraction. We conclude therefore, that they flow by Protrusion; for
which (if we could now spare time) we would render sufficient Reasons.

XXXV. Sennertus will have referred to the Tule of Contagion, those Atoms and
Vapors exhaling from the Lungs of Phthisical Persons, and by others attracted
and drawn in with the Breath, whereby they exulcerate their Lungs, and so cause
in them a Phthisis, or Consumption.

XXXVI. The Signs. We shall consider the Signs of Ulcers, as they have respect,
1. To those which are Internal. 2. As they have respect to those which are
External, or in the outward parts of the Body.

XXXVII. Now an Internal Ulcer is discovered by the Excretion, or kind of
Matter which is expelled, whether by the Mouth, Nose, Urine or Stool.

XXXVIII. If the Urine is purulent, there is danger of an Ulcer in the Reins or
Bladder: if purulent Matter is voided by Coughing, it is probable that the
Lungs may be exulcerated.

XXXIX. If a great quantity of such Matter has been ejected, and signs of an
Apostem have gone before, you may conclude, it is an Apostematous Ulcer.

XL. But if the Purulent Matter has been but little, and no signs of an
Inflammation, or an Apostem have gone before, then it is a primary Ulcer,
proceeding from Erosion through a sharp Humor, dividing the unity of the
substance of the Lungs.

XLI. Pus or Sordes, and Corruption, ( says Sennertus) comeing forth, is a sure
and certain sign of a hidden Ulcer, whether it is by Vomiting, or Coughing,
Urine or Stool: but then in what part it is hid, the property of the Pain, the
Situation and Action of the Part hurt, must instruct us.

XLII. If the Pain is pricking, a Nervous part is hurt: but if it is a beating
Pain, an Artery is hurt. The seat of the Pain discovers also, the part it self
that is exulcerated.

XLIII. If sense or motion is hurt, the Part ulcerated is Nervous: if after
eating, a biting or twinging Pain is felt, the Stomach is exulcerated: if any
one has drunk Cantharides, the Bladder will be exulcerated: if Aqua Fortis, Oil
of Vitriol, Corrosive, Sublimate, etc. the Jaws, Throat, and Stomach, will be
exulcerated.

XLIV. As to external Ulcers, their Figures and various differences, together
with the help of the Probe, make them known by sight: in a great Ulcer there
will be very much Pus, or Purulent Matter, in a lesser Ulcer there will be less.

XLV. The external Causes may be known by the Relation of the Patient, as
whether he was hurt by any Blow, or Fall, Bruise, Buring, Scalding, corrosive
Medicine, Poison, Contagion, or the like.

XLVI. The signs of the other Causes are particular; for if the Ulcer has its
Original from an afflux of Humors, then there will be present signs of a
Cacochymie, either in the whole Body; or of a vicious and faulty Constitution
in some particular Bowel, as Lungs, Liver, Spleen, Gall, Pancreas, etc.

XLVII. But if those vicious Signs be wanting, and that on the contrary, there
is present a Distemper and Weakness of the Part affected, it is then clear,
that the cause of the Ulcer is generated in the part it self.

XLVIII. But then, what kind of Humor it is, which causes the Ulcer, whether
corrupted Lvmpha, salt Phlegm, Choler or Melancholy, will appear from the Signs
of each particular Viscus, and the Pus or Sordes, which flows forth, as also by
the color of the Ulcer, and the Pain thereof, as pricking, twinging, etc. and
the special signs of particular Ulcers.

XLIX. The times of these Ulcers have also their signs, for when that which
first comes forth is thin, waterish, and crude, and that there is great store
of it; it is then in its beginning: which very beginning may also be discovered
by the Seuses, by the Touch, and by the Sight: as also by the Causes of the
Ulcer both external and internal, and by the Pain, Itching, present and
subsequent Symptoms.

L. When the Pus, or filthy Matter begins to be better concocted, and that its
great abundance is diminished, then the Ulcer is said to be in its increment or
increase.

LI. In the State the Pus is at best; and in the declination of the Ulcer, the
Pus is more lessened and diminished.

LII. And yet notwithstanding these several times are also known by the
Itching, the Pain, and the Actions hurt; which if they are augmented, we may
conclude the Ulcer is increased; but if they remit, that all things are
returning to their natural State, and that the Ulcer is then diminished, and in
its declination.

LIII. The Prognostics. Great care is to be taken in making of right and true
Prognostics, when an Ulcer is offered to be cured: for he that undertakes the
Cure of an uncurable Disease, discredits his Art, and causes himself to be
contemned, by such as are simple and ignorant.

LIVE. An Ulcer in a person of a good habit of Body, who digest his Food well,
and sleeps well, is easy to be cured.

LV. An Ulcer in a Body Cacochymick, or of an evil Constitution, where the Skin
is of a Tallowy whiteness, or yellowish, or swarthy, is not so easily cured,
because that salt Phlegm, yellow Choler, or feculent Melancholy may abound,
which Humors hinder the Regeneration of Flesh.

LVI. Ulcers which remain uncured a year or more, either rot the Bone, or alter
it.

LVII. Ulcers which are evil colored and black, are malign, and so for that
reason of difficult Cure.

LVIII. Ulcers in Bodies which are very moist, or very dry, are difficultly
cured; the first is evident in aged people, and such as have the Dropsy; for
superfluous Humidity hinders Desiccation, and so Healing: the latter is also
manifest, in such as have a defect of radical Moisture, which is a great
impediment.

LIX. By how much deeper the Ulcer is, by so much it is the longer in curing:
and if an Ulcer cannot be cured in a long time; or when Cicatrized, it breaks
out again; the cause is, the Bones being foul under it.

LX. If an Ulcer (being filled up, and ready to cicatrize,) begins to run again
without manifest cause, it is in danger to become Fistulous.

LXI. Ulcers near to the Nerves, Tendons, Arteries, or Veins, are dangerous;
and in Cacochymick Bodies, their Cure is very tedious.

LXII. Hippocrates says, That Ulcers having no hair about them, are hard to
heal and cicatrize, also such as come from some Disease, as the Dropsy and
Cachexia.

LXIII. Ulcers in Children, by reason of their exceeding humidity, and in Women
with Child, where the most excellent and Balsaick part of the Blood is used for
the nourishment of the Child, are not easily cured.

LXIV. If the Matter which comes from the Ulcer is good, viz. of a middle
consistence between thin and thick, white, light, equal, and not at all
stinking, it gives hopes of an easy Cure: and on the contrary, if the Matter
flowing is ill, viz. thin and fluid, pale, livid, and of an ill smell, it is of
very difficult cure.

LXV. Ulcers which happen after critical Apostems in the Spondyls of the Back;
or great Joints of the Body, are for the most part mortal; because, after
Sickness and Apostemation, Nature must be much weakened, and the natural Heat
much abated, and the radical Moisture almost spent.

LXVI. Hippocrates also says, that they who have Ulcers accompanied with a
Tumor, do neither fall into a Convulsion, Raving nor Frenzy; but if the Tumor
goes away without manifest cause, and the Ulcer is in the Back, a Convulsion
follows; but, if in the forepart of the Body, a Raving or Frenzy; if in the
Breast, an Empyema or Pleurisy.

LXVII. Old and Inveterate Ulcers ( says Barbet) are not cured without danger,
except the Body is beforehand well Purged, and a good order of Diet
instituted: otherwise Diseases will ensue.

LXVIII. If the place in which the Ulcer is seated, is blackish, bluish, or
greenish, it will be cured with much difficulty; for the Blood and Juices are
corrupt, and the Flesh of an ill composition, and degenerate.

LXiX. Vicers accompanied with Varices or Intemperature, or whose Sides or Lips
are callous, are hard to heal.

LXX. Ulcers with around Figure, are cured with difficulty; and the reason is,
for that consolidation being made by unition of Parts; the farther the Parts
are asunder, the more slowly it is performed: and a round Figure of all others,
is, that whose Sides are at farthest distance within the same bounds.

LXXI. Ulcers in the Extremities of the Muscles of the Arms or Legs, or such as
penetrate the Body, are very dangerous, and difficult to heal.

LXXII. And Ulcers in the Extremities of the Body, as feet and hands,
oftentimes create Phlegmons, or other praeternatural Tumors, which in the
Crisis are difficult to cure.

LXXIII. Hippocrates also says, If one Sick has an Ulcer, and he dies, the
Ulcer will be before he dies, black, blew, or pale, and withal, dried up.

LXXIV. Painful Ulcers in Children are dangerous, because their Bodies being
raw, and their Spirits very subtle, they are easily spent, which much weakening
them, induces Death.

LXXV. Fistula's with many Caverns, are hard to heal: if near to any noble part
(as in the Breast) or in the Bladder, Womb, or Bowels, they are dangerous, and
sometimes mortal: in the Ribs, Back, Joints, or in Ano, they are dangerous and
difficult: and in Cachectick Bodies, they are long in curing.

LXXVI. All Fistula's are difficult to cure, and some are absolutely uncurable:
that which is but newly begun, not deep, in a young and sound Body, the edges
not very hard, but somewhat soft with Matter, is more easily cured.

LXXVII. An Ulcer complicated with another Disease, which maintains or
continues it; the Ulcer according to the nature of the Disease, is either of
easy or hard cure. So Venereal Ulcers in a humid and strong Body is easily
cured; but if the Sick is in a Marasmus, neither the Ulcer, nor the Disease can
be cured; because the use of Dryers (which are only profitable in this case)
will increase the extenuation of the Body, and hasten Death. In like manner
Ulcers in Hectic Persons, and Hydropicks, are equally dangerous; for in the
first, a good Juice flows not sufficiently to the part exulcerated; in the
latter, a superfluous humidity hinders the desiccation and consolidation.

LXXVIII. No Ulcer can be cured whilst the Bone remains foul: if the Caries is
near the nervous Parts, or in the Joints, or about the Tendons, Arteries or
Veins, it is not easily cured, but for the most part, the Nerves and Tendons
are corrupted.

LXXIX. Soft Tumors in Ulcers are good, because they will yield to Medicaments:
but if they are hard, they will not be easily cured, because the Humor is the
more Rebellious.

LXXX. If the Hair falls in places of the Body about the Ulcer, it is an evil
Sign: for it shows, 1. Want of Nutrition. 2. Great acrimony and corruption of
Humors, as in Quartan Agues, French Pox, Leprosy.

LXXXI. Inveterateor Old Ulcers, which eject (...), Elaeodes, a Pus like unto
white Oil, are scarcely ever cured: for it shows a Colliquation of the Part,
and a Consumption of the whole Body.

LXXXII. Inold, deep, and malign Ulcers, the Bone is commonly foul, and unless
it be Scaled, no cure can succeed: that the Bone is foul, you may know by these
Signs, 1. If the Ulcer is skinned, it breaks out again. 2. It yields thinner
and more Matter, than its largeness requires. 3. Its Brims or Lips will not
come in. 4. Its Lips become reddish. 5. If the Bone appears to sight, it is
rugged, not smooth, and of a blackish or ruddy white Color.

LXXXIII. Ulcers of the Bladder are very troublesome, and for the most part
uncurable.

LXXXIV. In an Ulcer where there is cariosity of the Bone, and the color of
the Flesh is livid, the Patient is in danger; for it is a sign of the
extinction of natural Heat.

LXXXV. If an Ulcer casts forth much Sanies, or an Ichorous Matter, which is
very thin, and of a pale, livid, or black color; or if it is glutinous and
stinking, fretting the Skin adjacent, it is hard to be cured: for this Humor
keeps the Ulcer moist, not can it be easily dried up, even by the most powerful
Topics.

LXXXVI. Ulcers of the Nose are hard to cure; for which, respect must be had to
the whole Body.

LXXXVII. From malign Ulcers, two kinds of Matter flow, 1. Sanies or Ichor,
which is thin, which issues from Punctures of the Nerves, and Corruption of the
Tendons and Periosteon. 2. Sordes, which is a thick, glutinous, stinking
Filthiness.

LXXXVIII. Hippocrates, Sect. 7. Aph. 21. is of opinion, That a Flux of Blood
coming upon an Ulcer after strong pulsation, is of an evil consequence; for
there must be a great Inflammation, and the Arteries must be much straightened, so
that a Gangren may be feared.

LXXXIX. Ulcers of the Eyes for the most part leave blindness, especially where
the horney Tunicle is thoroughly corroded, whereby the Watery (and sometimes the
Crystaline) Humor is sometimes let out.

XC. If an Erysipelas is present, the Bone being bare; it is ( as Hippocrates,
Sect. 7. Aph. 19. will have it) an evil sign: for Flesh cannot be regenerated
where such a sharp Humor is present, that causes so hot a Tumor.

XCI. Burnings from Lightning are generally mortal: from other things, if it
hurts the great Vessels, a Gangrene and Sphacelus often times ensue.

XCII. Burns of the Eyes and Groins, are very dangerous; but of the Intestines
always uncurable: Burns great and deep, always leaves Scars behind them: and if
an hairy Part is burnt, the Hair never grows again.

XCIII. Ulcers of the Thighs, are for the most part hard to be cured; more
especially, if they be cherished by any Distemper, or default in the Spleen:
for then the thick and melancholy Humors, which flow to the Ulcer, do hinder
the cure thereof: and indeed, the condition of the Ulcer is of great moment to
be considered, both as to the Quantity and Quality of the Humor flowing to it:
being in a depending part, and the Body cacochymick, the very multitude of
Humors (though otherwise they were not bad) is an impediment great enough of the
cure. If also the Quality is amiss, it is the same, though the Quantity is not
great. For if there is a dry Intemperature, it will many times elude the force
of the Medicament: and it is as bad when the Ulcer has continued so long, as to
bring an habitual Discrasy upon the part, as in Nomae, and perannual Ulcers,
which are seldom cured; and if cured, it is with danger of the Patients life.
The next worse than these, are Phagedenical Ulcers; and the worst of all, are
such as are Cancerous and Sphacelous.

XCIV. The cure of Ulcers in general. In this general Cure, we shall consider
Ulcers only under a twofold respect, 1. As they are simple, consisting in a
solution of Unity and Erosion. 2. As they are Complicate or Compounded, having
other Symptoms or Accidents joined with them.

XCV. A simple Ulcer, as to its loss of Substance, requires Incarnation; and as
to the Solution of Unity, Union, this is performed by Exsiccation. Hippocrates,
libro de Ulceribus, and Galen, Meth. Med. lib. 3. cap. 3. says, That all Ulcers
continually required Desiccation.

XCVI. For so long as an Ulcer continues Sanious or Sordid, it can never heal:
in which cases, Digestion and Detersion are requisite: and whether you go about
to Incarnate, or to induce the Cicatrice, drying Medicines must still be used.

XCVII. The loss of Substance is either in the Skin, or in the Flesh: if only
the Skin is wanting, the Flesh is then to be so exsiccated with proper
Medicaments, as that the Juices flowing to it, may be changed into a Cuticular
or Membranous Substance; for that as Authors say, it is a Spermatick Part, and
cannot be regenerated.

XCVIII. If the Flesh is deficient, it must be restored by Incarnatives,
assisting Nature, who out of a part of that Blood, designed for the nourishment
of the Member, generates new Flesh.

XCIX. Now in the Generation of Flesh in an Ulcer, there is a twofold Excrement
to be separated. 1. One thin, which must be dried up. 2. Another thick, which
must be deterged, or cleansed away.

C. Now in the cure of all sorts of Ulcers, there are four times, or Crises to
be observed. 1. Principium, the beginning, wherein the Excrements running out,
are waterish, and thin. 2 Augmentum, the increase, in which the Recrements flow
less, and are thicker. 3. Status, the state, in which no Iehor or Sanies flow
forth, but only a thinner sort of Pus. 4. Declinatio, when the Pus is laudable,
or white, thick, even, and well scented, which shows, the Ulcer is on the
mending hand.

CI. The Cure of complicate or compound Ulcers. Here many Indications offer
themselves to be considered, according to the varie^y of Causes and Symptoms,
which do attend them. The first Indication, is the removing of the Antecedent
Causes. The second Indication, is that which teaches to remove the proximate
Causes, or those which are conjoined.

CII. The antecedent Causes are foursold, 1. Cacochymia, which is an evil habit
of Body, through the abounding of evil Humors; and this is to be removed by
Purgation and Evacuation of the abounding Humors, by proper Emeticks and
Catharticks.

CIII. 2. Contagium, or Infection, and this is to be overcome and resisted, by
the exhibition of proper Alexipharmicks.

CIV. 3. Venenum, Poison; and this is to be destroyed by the giving of potent
and effectual Antidotes, which not only enervate the Malignity, but even
destroy its very Nature and Force.

CV. 4. Intemperies, The Distemperature of the Part, which is removed by things
of a contrary quality, which is chiefly performed by Alteratives, out of which
are made proper Diet Drinks, Wound Drinks, and the like.

CVI. The proximate or conjoined Causes, are to be removed by those Topics, or
external Applications, which are proper to the four Times or Seasons of the
Ulcers, which we ennmerated but even now, at Sect. 100. aforegoing.

CVII. But in the Cure of these complicate Ulcers, there are many things which
oftentimes hinder the Healing, and render the Cure difficult: As, 1. A
Cacochymie of Humors, and Impurity of the Blood. 2. A Malignity of Humors. 3. A
Defluxion of Humors to the part. 4. A Defect of good Blood, or a dry and
consumptive habit of Body. 5. An ill habit in the Air, as being too hot and
moist. 6. The foulness and putridness in the Ulcer it self. 7. Soft, proud, or
mortified Flesh about the Ulcer. 8. The hardness of the Brims of the Ulcer. 9.
A corruption of the Bone under the Flesh or Ulcer. 10. The Application of
improper Medicaments.

CVIII. Now in order to the Cure, all these impediments, or as many of them as
do occur, are to be removed, as the Indications opposite shall seem to instruct
you.

CIX. In the beginning therefore of the Ulcer, the Sanies requires Concoction,
that it may be made thicker, and turned into good Pus or Matter; and in this
case, Suppuratives are of good use: but they are not to be used to putrid
Ulcers, for they increase the Putrefaction: and in purulent ulcers, they make
the Ulcer more sordid.

CX. But if the Ulcer is caused merely by the Pain, Suppuratives are of
singular use; because by their Sanient and Digestive Virtue, they remove the
Cause, and are to be continued, till the Matter is well concocted: and
therefore it is, that we use them in the beginning, lest the extravafated
Humors should stir up Pain and Inflammation.

CXI. In the Augment or Increase, when the Matter is less in quantity, and
thicker, then we are to use Detersives or Cleansers.

CXII. In the state, or height of the Ulcer, when it is well cleansed, then it
is necessary to use Sarcoticks or Incarnatives, that the Ulcer may be filled up
with flesh.

CXIII. In the Declination, when the Ulcer is filled up with new Flesh; the
next thing then to be done, is to apply Epuloticks or Cicatrizers, that it may
be decently covered over with Skin, and with as little a Scar or Deformity as
may be.

CXIV. Now here, some few things are necessary to be noted; First, That
repelling Topics are to be applied to the Parts about the Ulcer, to repel the
Humor which may flow to it. 1. Because that Suppuratives by their Heat being
apt to draw, the Humors so in duced, may be repercussed. 2. That the Parts may
be so strengthened, as to resist the Fluxion. 3. That by repelling the Humor,
the Deficcation may be promoted. 4. That the innate Heat of the Part may be
strengthened, being thus kept in by the cold of the Repulsive.

CXV. And this Repulsion is performed by repelling Medicines, commonly called
Defensatives, which are restringent and cooling, and rather dry than moist.

CXVI. Secondly, That if it is in a depending Part, it be raised up, and placed
equal with, or higher than the rest of the Body; which will be of great
advantage in the Cure: and the Influx is also to be restrained, and the Member
strengthened by an expulsive Bandage.

CXVII. Thirdly, The Diet is to be proportioned to the Nature and Strength of
the Patient, to resist and diminish the Humors abounding, whether in the whole
Body, or some particular Part, and to contemperate their Acrimony.

CXVIII. Fourthly, The Evacuating of the superabundant Humors, whether they
offend in quantity or quality; and this is done either by Purging or Vomiting,
or both.

CXIX. Fifthly, To resist the Fluxion of Humors, (since most Humors proceed
from that Cause.) 1. By Revulsion: by which, the Matter is drawn to parts far
distant; and the rectitude of the Parts and Vessels restored: if you respect
the rectitude of the Part, and the Ulcer is in the right Leg, the Revulsion is
to made in the right Arm: but if the rectitude of the Vessels, the Revulsion is
to be made in the left Leg.

CXX. 2. To resist the Fluxion by Derivation; which is made in the remote Parts
by the application of Leeches and Cupping-Glasses, both with and without
Scarification, Epispasticks or Blistcring-Plasters, Friction, Bandage, etc.

CXXI. Sixthly, To correct the Humors, and remove the Acrimony: if too serous,
to incrassate them; if too thick, to thin them: and this is done by Alteratives
of a contrary quality, made in the forms of Diet-Drinks, Wound-Drinks, and the
like; as we have hinted at Sect. 105. aforegoing.

CXXII. Seventhly, That after the Vlceris well digested, and yields a good sort
of Pus, Mundificatives are to be applied: (for if Sarcoticks are used before
the Ulcer is well digested and cleansed, then spongy or proud Flesh will grow:)
and these Mundifiers must not be too sharp; which Error you will easily find
out by the pain in the Part, which the Patient by feeling can inform you of.

CXXIII. Eighthly, In the curing of the Ulcer, you may know whether you have
rightly proceeded, and according to Art, by the Effects of the Medicaments
applied: for if they do good, or at least no hurt, it is a sign that they are
proper to the Intention: but if they do harm, by making the Ulcer hotter or
colder, drier or moister, or prevent not the corroding of the Humor; then they
are to be changed, and others more agreeable are to be applied.

CHAP. II. Of MEDICAMENTS appropriated to ULCERS.
I. BEFORE we set upon the Work of Curing Ulcers in earnest, we thought fit to
Arm our young Artist with all such Pharmaceutical Necessaries as are requisite
to the performance thereof: and the Medicaments for this purpose are sixfold,
viz. 1. Repercussives, or Repellers. 2. Helminthicks, or Worm-Killers. 3.
Digestives, or Suppuratives. 4. Abstersers, or Mundificatives: Cleansers. 5.
Sarcoticks, or Incarnatives. 6. Epuloticks, or Cicatrizers.


II. Some of these various sorts of Medicaments we have treated of already, in
Lib. 4. Chap. 2. Sect. 16. ad 57. as Digestives, Sarcoticks, and Epuloticks:
and therefore of those three kinds we shall be very brief here; as only
supplying in this place, some few that were wanting there.

I. Repercussives, or Repellers.
III. Simple Repellers are, Fair Water, Nitrated Water, Lettice, Endive,
Succory, Knotgrass, Horstail, Periwincle, Woodbind, Nightshade, Comfrey,
Purslain, Cucumbers, Navelwort, Housleek, Plantan, Yarrow, Vine-leaves,
Barberries, unripe Bramble-berries, Sloes, Myrtle-berries, Pomgranate-peels,
Balaustians, Red-Rose-leaves, Oak-bark, leaves and apples of Mandrakes,
Henbane, Thorn-apple-leaves, Poppy of the sorts, white, black, and red; deadly
Nightshade, Red-wine, Verjuice, Vinegar, juice of Quinces, Lime-juice, juice of
Limons, Tanners-Woose, before the Leather is put in, etc. Crocus Martis, Caput
mortuum of Vitriol, Saccharum Saturni, coagulated Mercury, burnt Lead, etc.

IV. Sometimes in the Country, where you have not Medicines at hand, you must
be forced to use some of the aforementioned Vegetable Simples, either their
Juices, or Decoction, or Pulp in Cataplasms: these things you are to apply to
the parts adjacent to the Ulcer, in Pledgets of Cotton, Lint, or fine Tow,
moistened in their Juices, etc. and above these Stuphs of Linen or Woollen
Cloth, or Flanel, dipped in the same and wrung out, according to the Temperature
of the Patient, etc.

V. The more cold sort, and such as are Narcotick, must not be too long
applied; but must be removed, before the Part becomes livid, or of a leaden
color.

VI. These things being applied, the Part ulcerated is to be conveniently
rolled up, the Rowlers having been first also moistened in those Juices or
Decoctions: and if your Simples are of a watery substance, it will be good to
mix other things which have an astringent force with them; for thereby you will
the better cool the Part, abate the Inflammation, repress the Fluxion, and more
effectually repercuss the Humor.

VII. Of the former Simples, Compounds may be easily made: as, Oil of Roses,
made of Oil-omphacine; juice of unripe Grapes, juice of Red-roses, A. ii.
simmer them over the Fire, till the Juices are consumed.

VIII. Oils made of pure (not rank) Oil-olive, as of Myrtles, of Quinces, of
Mastich, of Henbane, of Poppy, of Mandrakes, by Infusion, etc. Where note, that
if an Inflammation is present, then Oily Repercussives are not to be used.

IX. Cataplasms made of the Juices of some of the former Simples and
Barley-flower, fine Bole, Terra Sigillata, Amber in powder, Catechu, Saccharum
Saturni, whites of Eggs, Vinegar and Verjuice, beaten together, adding a little
Oil, as you see convenient.

X. Ointments; as Vnguentum Album, Camphoratum, Populeon, Cosmeticum, Tutiae,
Triapharmacon; which may be used either by themselves, or mixed together.

XI. Emplasters; as Emplastr. Album, De Minio cum Sapone, Mercuriale; Ceratum
Album, Ceratum Nigrum, Ceratum Oxylaeum, Refrigerans, Spermatis Ceti, etc.
Diapalma, or Empl. Album, made with juices of Plantan, Horstail, Knotgrass,
Yarrow, Comfrey, Nightshade, Lettice, Purslain, Housleek, Periwincle, etc.
adding them by little and little, as the Emplaster comes to a consistence.

XII. A Defensative of Barbett. Lignum Guajacum rasped, long Birthwort roots,
A. i. Agrimony, Centory the less, Wormwood, A. M.i. Wine q.s. boil, and strain
out: to every five Ounces of which add, Meal of Orobus i. Myrrh in fine powder
ss. Honey iv. S.V. ii. Venice-Turpentine q.s. mix, and make a Liniment.

II. Helminthicks, or Worm-killers.
XIII. Worms many times breed in some ill-conditioned Ulcers; and therefore
when you perceive them, they are either to be taken forth with some fit
Instrument; or otherwise, if they stick fast in the Flesh, or hide themselves,
they are to be killed with some proper Medicaments to be applied.

XIV. Simple Helminthicks. Aloes, Cambogie, Scammony, Euphorbium, Myrrh,
Rhubarb, Aron-roots, Birthwort-roots, Squills, Onions, Garlic, Centory,
Colocynthis, Dittany, Elecampane, Germander, Horehound, Orobus, Opium, Pepper,
Southernwood, Savin, Tansey, Tobacco, wormwood, Bullocks gall, and the Galls of
other living Creatures, powder of Earthworms, Saccharum Saturni, Verdigrise,
white and red Precipitate, Mercurius dulcis, corrosive Sublimate, Cinnabar
Natural and Artificial, Mercury coagulate, or amalgamate; the Prince's Powder,
Vitrum Antimonii, Crocus Metallorum, Tartar-Emetick, Sulphur, Vitriol, Nitre,
with many other things of like kind: and from the aforegoing Simples you may
make the following, and other the like Compounds.

XV. Aloes, meal of Lupins, A.i. Myrrh, Verdigrise, A. ss. Bulls gall ii. Honey
q.s. mix, and make a Liniment.

XVI. Aloes, Cambogia, Scammony, A. ss. Euphorbium in fine powder ii.
Verdigrise i. Tobacco i. Colocynthis in fine powder iii. Bulls gall, Honey, A.
q.s. mix, and make a Liniment.

XVII. Aloes in fine powder, Tobacco finely poudered, A. i. flowers of Sulphur,
Mercury coagulate, Coloquintida, A.ii. Euphorbium, powder of Earthworms,
Verdigrise, A. i. Oil of Hartshorn ss. Oil of Tobacco made by Infusion jss.
Sheeps-suet q.s. mix, and make a Ointment.

XVIII. Tobacco in fine powder i. Scammony ss. Colocynthis ii. Euphorbium i.
white Precipitate ss. mix, and make a Powder, to strew on.

XIX. Take fair Water lbii. corrosive Sublimate in fine powder ss. put all into
an Earthen Pipkin, and dissolve by Boiling; then pour forth, straining it through
a Cloth, and affuse thereon Oil of Tartar per Deliquium; so will the Mercury
Precipitate of an Orange-tawny color, which wash in much fair Water, or in
S.V. and keep it for use: this Water after Precipitation, kills all sorts of
Worms, by washing the Ulcer therewith, and laying double linen Cloths dipped in
the same, over the Ulcer. The Precipitate also kills Worms, being mixed in any
proper Ointment to be laid on.

XX. Take of the former Orangeprecipitate i. Scammony in fine powder iv.
Tobacco in fine powder viii. mix them; to strew upon the Ulcer full of Worms.
Or, you may mix this Powder with Ointment of Tobacco ii. Ox-gall i. and so
apply it.

III. Digestives, or Suppuratives.
XXI. Simple Digestives. The greatest part of these we have enumerated already
in Lib. 4. Chap. 2. Sect. 16. aforegoing of the Work; but to them there
mentioned, these few following may may be added: as, Calves-suet, Capons-fat,
Colophony, flowers of white Lilies, Linseed, mucilage of Althea-roots,
Rape-oil, Rosin. And these, if there is any callosity or hardness: Birdlime,
Balsam Capivii, de Chili, Burdock, Flowerdeluce-roots, Gum Elemi, Galbanum,
Melilot, Pitch, Princes Powder, Spanish Saffron, Storax, Turbith mineral, new
Wax, Wax made from the Myrtle-berry in Carolina and Virginia.

XXII. Of those mentioned in the place afore-cited, and these here added: viz.
Of Flower or Meals, Pulps, Mucilages, Juices, Oils, Fats, Suets, Gums, Balsams,
and Rosins, compound Digestives may be formed, of various kinds and
compositions, according to the habit or temperature of the Patient, nature of
the Ulcer, and season of the Year.

XXIII. Tetrapharmacum of the Ancients, commonly called Vnguentum Basilicon
minus, made of Pitch, Rosin, Wax, and Oil, melted, and mixed together, is an
excellent Digestive. You may see great variety of Compounds, in Lib. 4. Cap. 2.
Sect. 17. ad 30. aforegoing.

XXIV. To those you may add, Dialthea simple, Basilicon the greater, the Golden
Ointment, if red Precipitate, or the Princes Powder rather a i. ad i. of the
Ointment, be added to them. For the Precipitate, or the Princes Powder, or
Turbith-mineral, do admirably digest and thicken any ichorous Humor.

XXV. And over these things you may apply Emplastrum Diachylon simplex, if in
Summertime; or Diachylon cum Gummi, if in the Wintertime, where the brims of
the Ulcer are hard: otherwise Diapalma, or Emplastrum Album, made with Juices,
(as directed at Sect. 11. above) may do well enough.

XXVI. In a callous Ulcer, you may apply this: Of the pulp of Figs and Raison,
A. i. juice of white Lily-flowers, Barley-flower, A. iii. mucilages of Althea,
Linseed, and Fenugreek, A. ii. Saffron in powder i. mix them.

IV. Abstersives, or Mundifiers.
XXVII. Simple Abstersives. Birthwort roots, both long and round; Horehound,
Smallageroot, Turbith, flower or meal of Orobus, Vetches, Tobacco, roots of
Aron, Orrice, Hermodacts, and of white and black Hellebor; juices of Celandine,
Carduus, Beets, Coleworts, Gentian, Centory, Scordium, Wormwood, bitter
Almonds, Savin; the Ashes of all Vegetables, because of the Salt which is in
them; but the ashes of some things are more powerful than of others; as the
ashes of Bean-stalks, of Tobacco, Vine-branches, Aloes, Cambogia, Scammony;
Cockle and Oister shells calcined; Arsenick white, Orpiment, Vitriol calcined
to redness, Alum burnt, Verdigrise, corrosive Sublimate, white and red
Precipitate, the Princes Powder, Turbith mineral: these two last are as
powerful as Arsenick, or corrosive Sublimate, and much more safe; for they
sooner dispatch their Operation, are more familiar to the Body of Man, and
cause not so much Pain, nor so great an Inflammation.

XXVIII. Now the Time when Mundificatives are to be used is, when the Ulcer is
well digested; which is when the Pus comes to be that which they commonly call
laudable; the lips of the Ulcer are become soft and well-colored, and no ill
scent or fume seems to rise from the Ulcer: for if Sarcoticks be used, before
the Ulcer is mundified or cleansed, nothing but a loose or proud Flesh will
arise, which will not admit of Cieatrizing. Of the former Simple Abstersives,
you may form various Compound-ones at pleasure, according to the following
Examples.

XXIX. The Abstersive of Paracelsus. Honey viii. Strasburgh Turpentine iv. mix,
and boil with a gentle Fire, to the consistence of a soft Ointment; then take
it from the Fire; and add thereto red Precipitate levigated ii. (well washed in
Rose Water mixed with a little Oil of Tartar) and the yolks of two Eggs,
stirring them, 'till they are well incorporated. This is one of the best
Abstersives or Mundificatives in the World: but here is to be noted, that the
Precipitate need not be added, unless the Ulcer is very foul, inveterate, and
rebellious, resisting weaker means.

XXX. The Mundificative of Fabricius ab Aquapendente. Take Juice of Smallage
jss. Syrup of Roses, or Mel Rosarum ss. Turpentine ii. meal or flower of Barley
and Lupins, A. q.s. or so much as may bring it to a consistency.

XXXI. In the Shops you may have Unguentum Apostolorum; which is best for
plain, open, and superficial Ulcers; also Unguentum Aegyptiacum, which is good
to be injected into the sinuous Ulcers, being mixed with White Wind, and Mel
Rosarum.

XXXII. You have also Unguentum Aureum, and Unguentum Basilicon; either of
which being mixed with burnt Alum, and red Preeipitate levigated, will make
Medicaments, which will do two works at once, viz. both Digest and Mundify.

XXXIII. Take Basilicon iv. Unguentum Aureum ii. Scammony in fine powder jss.
Tobacco in fine powder i. mix.

XXXIV. Take Basilicon, Ointment of Tobacco, A iii. Scammony, Tobacco, both in
fine powder, A. i. Princes Powder iii. mix them.

XXXV. Take red Prcipitate i. burnt Alum ss. levigate them together upon a
Porphyry-stone, 'till they become impalpable powder, then add to them Scammony
i. Ointment of Tobacco iii. Basilicon vi. mix them well together, and keep them
for use.

XXXVI. From what has been said, it appears that Abstersives are to be drying,
without astriction, and without any great hot or cold qualities, and of a
subtle and penetrating substance; that by reason of their dryness they may suck
up, and consume the humidity of the Ulcer, and by their tenuity take away the
glutinousness of the Pus; yet they ought not to pass the second degree of
siccity, lest they consume the Flesh it self.

XXXVII. By this it appears, that Abstersion is the removing of the Recrements
cleaving to the Ulcer; 1. By drying of it. 2. By dividing the particles of the
glutinous matter, which destroys the viscosity by which it cleaves to the Flesh.

V. Sarcoticks, or Incarnatives.
XXXVIII. Simple Sarcoticks, or Flesh-breeders. To those enumerated in Lib. 4.
Cap. 2. Sect. 31. you may add these: Clowns-Woundwort, Adders-tongue,
Knotgrass, Solomons-seal, green Tobacco, fresh Galls; new made Butter, powder
of Vipers-flesh, powder of Ox-blood, Bones calcined, Hartshorn calcined,
Colophony.

XXXIX. Incarnatives are not to be used, 'till the Ulcer is sufficiently
cleased; which will be, as Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 20. says, when it appears red,
has a quick sense, and looks clean, and neither too dry, nor too moist. If the
Ulcer looks pale or whitish, or of a black or livid color, and is almost
insensible, being either too moist or too dry, it is maninifest then, that
Abstersives are yet to be used.

XL. But if it is a hidden or sinuous Ulcer, Galen, (...), lib. 4. cap. 2.
tells us, that we shall judge an hollow or fistulous Ulcer to be clean, when
the Part begins to be more sensible of the Abstersives injected, than it was
before: and then is the time for the admission of Incarnatives; and such are
all those Medicaments, which are endued with these two qualities of Desiccation
and Abstersion, in a temperate degree.

LXI. Now the Incarnating is properly and principally the work of Nature, viz.
of the Temperament and Faculty of the Part; yet it is requisite to assist
Nature, in the application of such things as may promote the same Intention, by
removing the Impediments which may obstruct Nature in her course of operating.

XLII. For this cause, if you design to cure an Ulcer, you must apply
Desiccatives to moist Ulcers, and Abstersives to sordid Ulcers: for in all
Solutions of Unity, Nature being intent upon the Regeneration of Flesh where it
is wanting; it is evident, that you will err, or not accomplish your end,
where Desiccatives and Abstersives (the true qualities of such as we call
Incarnatives) are not to be applied.

XLIII. Out of the simple Sarcoticks, compounds are made; of which we have
given you many Examples in Lib. 4. Cap. 2. Sect. 32. ad 46. we shall in this
place add only these following.

XLIV. A Sarcotick from Barbett: Take Turpentine vi. Basilicon, Aloes,
Colophony, Mastich, Myrrh, A. iv. Unguentum Fuscum Wurtzii, Litharge of Gold,
A. iii. Gum Elemi ii. Oil of Roses q.s. mix, and make an Ointment.

LXV. An Incarnative, from Clows. Take pure Turpentine, Oil of Roses, A. vi.
Pine-rosin iv. yellow Wax iii. Gum Elemi ss. (or rather ii.) mix, and make an
Ointment.

XLVI. Another. Take Rosin, Wax, A. lbss. Turpentine iv. Barley-flower ii.
Olibanum, Mastich, Oil of Mastich, Honey of Roses strained, A. i. Myrrh,
Sarcocol, ss. mix, and make an Ointment.

LXVII. Another. Take Rosin, Wax, Oil of Roses, A. xii. Turpentine vi. Olibanum
iv. Mastich ii. Saffron ss. mix, and make an Ointment.

XLVIII. Another. Take Rosin, Wax, Oil of Roses, A. vi. Turpentine, v. Honey of
Roses iv. Mastich, Myrrh, Olibanum, Sarcocol, A. ss. Aloes, Saffron, A. ii. mix
them.

XLIX. Take Oil-olive lbjss. Ship-Pitch lbi. Wax, Rosin, A. lbss. Beef Suet
viii. Turpentine iv. yolks of Eggs No iv. mix them. If with either of these
three last, red Precipitate q.s. be mixed, they will excellently digest,
mundify, and incarnate: but if you mix with them burnt Alum, q.s. they will
then adirably mundify, heal, and cicatrize.

L. Take Oil-olive, Rosin, Turpentine, Lapis Calaminaris, A. lbi. Sheeps-suet,
Wax, A. lbss. mix, and make an Ointment; it incarnates and cicatrizes Ulcers.

LI. Take Oil-olive, Sheeps-suet, Rosin, A. iv. Wax, Gum Elemi, A. i. juice of
green Tobacco raised from Virginia seed lbi. green Tobacco leaves stamped M.
ii. boil them over a gentle Fire, 'till the Juice is consumed, then strain, and
keep it for use.

LII. In the Shops you have always ready, Ung. Basilicon and Ung. Aureum, much
commmended. But this is to be noted, in making compound Incarnatives: 1. That
they be neither too soft, nor too hard: if too soft, the heat of the Part will
cause them to spread, and fall from the Ulcer, and they will be apt to generate
proud Flesh; if too hard, the weaker Parts will hardly have the Benefit of
them. 2. That they be smooth and equal; otherwise, they will cause pain to the
Part. 3. That they exceed not the first degree in drying: especially if the
Patient is of a soft and tender Constitution; for in such, the milder
Desiccatives are required for the generality of soft Flesh; but if the Patient
has a hard and dry Flesh, stronger Desiccatives are to be made choice of. 4.
That when the Ulcer is in a place not so fleshy, as in the joints; heads, and
tails of the Muscles, your Desiccatives must be forcible. 5. That if the Ulcer
is large and moist, more strong Driers are to be used, than in those which are
small, and drier.

VI. Epuloticks, or Cicatrizers.
LIII. Simple Epuloticks, or Skin-breeders. To those enumerated in Lib. 4. Cap.
2. Sect. 47. you may add these following. Roots of Bistort; Sheeps-suet,
Beef Suet, Deers-suet; Gumsandarach; Eggshels calcined, Hartshorn calcined
white, Ivory calcined white, Cuttle-bone calcined; Alabaster in fine powder,
Chalk finely poudred, which is done by rubbing it on a broad Tile, and searcing
it; unslak'd Lime washed and dried, or Whiting, Umber in powder, Pumice-stone
poudred; Cinnabar, Crocus Martis, Regulus of Antimony, Henricus rubeus, or the
Caput mortuum of Vitriol washed and dried; an Amalgama of Saturn and Quicksilver
in powder, which is thus made: Lead iv. mels it in a Crucible, then take it
from the Fire, and put into it Quicksilver iii. mix them by stirring, and they
will incorporate together, and when cold, beat and grind into a powder.

LIVE. These are not be used, 'till the Ulcer is filled with good Flesh; for it
is in vain to attempt the latter 'till the former is well performed, lest the
ulcer be healed up with much deformity. The Skin being lost by any Accident,
Nature cannot repair it, for want of the Seminal Matter of which it is
generated: so that there is a necessity of supplying this defect by the help of
Art; and it is done by thickning and hardening the upper part of the new, or
regenerated Flesh, so long 'till it becomes of the nature of the Skin, and is
able to supply its office.

LV. These Medicaments must be, 1. Cooling; that the thin parts may be
coagulated, and the thick parts brought together, as you see in Ice, or the top
of a Hasty-pudding when it becomes cold. 2. Drying; to consume the thin parts;
and the Cicatrice is nothing but the Flesh thickened, dried, condensed, and made
callous. 3. Drying in the third degree; Incarnatives are drying only in the
first degree, because they are only to dry superfluous Excrements: Glutinatives
are dry in the second degree, because they dry not only the Excrements, but
whatever Humor else, though Alimentum, which flows to the Part: Cicatrizers are
to be dry in the third degree, for that these dry not Excrements only, and
other Humidities flowing to the Ulcer, but they also dry the Humidities, and so
have no place here; for they consume not only the Excrements, Humors flowing to
the Part, and the Humidities of the Part it self, but the very subjacent Flesh
also.

LVI. Now as some Epuloticks do dry more weakly, some more strongly; so the
gentlest are to be used to the more moist and delicate Bodies, the stronger to
the more hard and solid: and they are to be applied a little before the Flesh
is even with the other Skin, as Galen, Meth. Med. lib. 13. cap. 5. has advised;
otherwise the Cicatrice will be higher than the natural Skin, which will cause
deformity.

LVII. And when the Sore is come to skinning, since the middle is always deeper
than the circumference or edges, milder Epuloticks are to be applied to the
middle, that the Flesh may not be too soon dried, but have liberty to grow to
its full height: for which reason, soft Cerats or Unguents may be applied to
the middle, Pouders and Cerats to the lips.

LVIII. Compoud-Epuloticks are made out of the simple, of which you have many
very good ones in Lib. 4. Cap. 2. Sect. 48. ad 57. aforegoing; to the number of
which, you may add these few following.

LIX. Sheep-suet viii. Colophony, Varnish, Wax, Oil-olive, A. ij. melt all
together; then removing them from the Fire, add Calaminaris in fine powder i.
Litharge of Gold, Tutia prepared, Caput mort. of Vitriol washed, A. ss. mix,
and make a Cerat.

LX. Oil-olive, Turpentine, Wax, A. lbiv. Beef Suet lbii. Gum Elemi,
Frankincense, A. lbi. liquid Storax, lbss. pure Verdigrise in fine powder iii.
mix, and melt the seven former Ingredients together; then at last put in the
Verdigrise, stirring them well together, 'till almost cold. This Balsam does
all the Intentions of Healing; it digests, cleanses, breeds Flesh, and lastly,
cicatrizes the Ulcer after an admirable manner.

LXI. Oil-olive, Beef Suet, A. lbi. Beeswax, liquid Storax, A. lbss. Oil of
Turpentine iii. Camphir, Ceruse in fine powder, Tutty levigated, Olibanum in
fine powder, A. i. mix, and make an Ointment.

LXII. And to make the Cicatrice as little deformed as may be, you may anoint
every Night going to Bed, with the following Oil. Oil of Ben i. Oil of Tartar
per Deliquium ss. Sperma Ceti iii. mix them. Or with this: Oil of Ben i. Sperma
Ceti iii. Adeps Rosarum ii. mix them. This may serve for the Richer sort of
People.

CHAP. III. Of SIMPLE ULCERS.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...), and the Latins Ulcus simplex, we in English
call A Simple Ulcer.

II. The Kinds. Authors make two kinds of simple Ulcers: 1. One, where the Skin
is only wanting. 2. Another, where there is a loss of Flesh also. The first is
called planum, a plain Ulcer; the other cavum, a deep Ulcer. We shall consider
them in the Cure but as one, for that the Cure of the former is comprehended in
the latter.

III. Now a simple Ulcer, which is a solution of Unity in a soft Part, with a
dissolution of Magnitude putrified, is that which has neither a Disease, nor a
Cause, nor a Symptom adjoined to it, or complicate therewith; besides the
solution of Unity, caused by erosion.

IV. The Kinds. The proximate, or nearest cause of an Ulcer is, a matter which
has in it a corroding quality, whether it is bred in the Body, or happens to
the Body from without.

V. If this corrosive Humor is bred within the Body, it is generated either
without the Part affected, or within the Part affected it self: if without the
Part affected, it is either a Choleric Humor, or Atra Bilis, or Melancholy, or
a salt Phlegm, or a salt, nitrous, and sharp Serum, which you may know by their
particular Signs: these flowing unto any Part, may corrode and exulcerate it.

VI. If the corrosive Humor is generated in the Part affected, it obtains its
acrimony in the Part it self, by reason of some distemper in the said Part,
through a Blow, or Fall, or Overstraining the Part; whereby the Blood or some
other Juice is extravasated; where by its long abode and digestion, it becomes
sharp, and so grows sharper and sharper, 'till it corrupts, putrifies, and
becomes corrosive.

VII. But if its Cause happens to the Body from without, it is from septick,
putrefying, or caustic Applications, whether they be Actual, or Potential. Or
from Contagion; as in the Venereal Disease, Phthisis, Leprosy, Itch, etc. where
the Virus or Poison is communicated by contact, to the Pores of the Skin, where
entering them, it exulcerates it, and there generates the like Disease.

VIII. The Signs. External Ulcers are manifest to sight and touch, so that they
may be known without any other Signs: but the internal ones, which lie hidden,
are known by the Probe, if way is made to search for them; or by the Excrements
flowing from them, the Pain, and hurt of some Action of the Part.

IX. The Excrements show the Part affected, Pus, corruption or rotten Filth
flow forth by the Anus, Urinary Passage, Nostrils, Mouth or Ears.

X. The Pain shows also the Part affected, and where the Ulcer lies hid: a
pricking pain shows, that the Part affected is nervous: a beating pain, that an
Artery is hurt.

XI. The Action hurt, shows also the part: if Sense or Motion is hurt, it
shows, that the Nerves are hurt: if after eating, the Concoction is hurt by a
vehement gnawing Pain in the Stomach, it is a sign that the Stomach is
exulcerated.

XII External Causes do also give us some Signs: if Cantharides be taken
inwardly (without due proportion and correction the Reins, Bladder, or Urinary
Parts may be ulcerated: if sublimate Corrosive, Aqua Fortis, or Oil of Vitriol,
be taken inwardly alone, without mixture or correction, the Throat, Gullet and
Stomach, may be exulcerated.

XIII. The Prognostics. If the Ulcer is only in the skin, or is only
superficial, it is the more easily and speedily cured: but the deeper it is,
and the more noble the Part, by so much the longer it is in curing.

XIV Ulcers in the Extremities of the Muscles, or in Parts subject to much
Humidity, are more difficultly cured than those which are in the middle of the
Muscle, or in Parts dryer.

XV. Ulcers Internal are more dangerous than Ulcers External, more especially,
if any principal Part is drawn into consent or agreement with them, for then
they oftentimes end in Death.

XVI. Ulcers in Cacochymick Bodies are tedious in curing; so also if being
cured, they break out again: for then it is much to be feared, that the Bone
under is foul.

XVII. Ulcers near to, or upon Arteries, Veins, Nerves, or Tendons, or any
Parts of exquisite Sense, are dangerous; for they are able to draw into consent
with themselves other Parts of an exquisite Sense also, or to induce an
Inflammation.

XVIII. Ulcers old and inveterate, are not cured without danger and
tediousness, more especially if they succeed other Diseases, unless the Body is
well purged, and a good order of Diet be observed.

XIX. If the Pus or Matter flowing forth is good, which is that of a middle
consistence between thin and thick, white, light, equal, and not at all
stinking; it gives hopes of an easy Cure: but if it is evil, thin and fluid,
ill colored, livid, and foetid, it shows danger and difficulty in the Cure.

XX. If the Ulcer is great, because the external Air can work upon it; or if
round, because then it is lips are hardly united; or, if it tends to look green,
or livid, or black, because then, it shows a danger of extinguishing of the
natural Heat; in all these cases, there will be either difficulty or danger, or
both, in the Cure.

XXI. The Indications. 1. You must rectify the Cacochymie by due Purging, and a
fit Diet. 2. You must maturate the unperfect Matter by Digestives. 3. You must
cleanse it from it is Filth by Abstersives. 4. You must incarnate with
Sarcoticks. 5. And lastly, You must produce the Cicatrice with Epuloticks.

XXII. The Cure. In Answer to the first Indication, you must purge with our
Family Pills, Pil. Panchymagogae, Catharticae; and if the Ulcer is inveterate,
you may mix with the Purge Turpethum Minerale, or the Princes Powder, gr. ii.
iv. or vi. after taking of which for three or four times, the Patient may purge
again with Our Elixir Vitae, or a strong Tincture of Sena, or of Sena and
Rhubarb in S.V. mixed with equal parts of Nitrated Water.

XXIII. Then the Patient may sweat with Tincture or Diaphoretick of Antimony,
or Tincture of Tartar and Bezoar Mineral given in fragrant Wine, or in the
Sudorifick Tincture of Paracelsas. Or (which is best of all) you may sweat with
our Liquor Vitae, or with Guttae Vitae, mixed with a few drops of Spirit of Sal
Armoniack, or Spirit of Hartshorn, given in a Glass of Sack: giving continually
through the whole Cure, for a constant Diet, some proper Traumatick Decoction.

XXIV. The second Indication, is the perfecting the unperfect Matter with
Digestives. But you are to consider, whether it is necessary to use Digestives
or no, by considering the temper of the Part ulcerated; for some Ulcers are in
so good a condition at first, as to stand in no need of them, and then we
immediately apply our selves to Abstersives for cleansing.

XXV. But then if we find the Ulcer requires this second Indication, you may
apply to it some of the Digestives mentioned in the former Chapter; Or this,
Turpentine i. mixed with the yolk of an Egg: Saffron in Powder ss.
Wheat Flour, q.s. mix them. This or Basilicon, you may say upon Lint, and
apply.

XXVI. But in dryer Bodies, ( says Wiseman) you may add to the former, Barley
flower, Bean-flower, Colophony, Rosin, Frankincense, Powder of Faenugreek seed,
to which sometimes Honey of Roses and Syrup of dried Roses, are added: but
(says he) Basilicon is not inferior to any.

XXVII. These Medicaments ought to be of a moderate consistency, not too
liquid, lest they make the flesh to lax; or run off from the Pledgits, making
the Sore uneasy; nor yet too hard, lest they comply not with the form of the
Ulcer. The deeper Ulcers may admit of the more liquid, that they may reach to
the bottom, and they may be applied upon Lint in the form of Pledgits, Dossils
or Tents, over which may be applied some Refrigerative Empl. as Diapalma, Empl.
Album, to temper the Heat of the Part.

XXVIII. They ought also to be of a Lenient Quality, temperately hot and moist,
in proportion to the habit of the Body as it is Strong or Weak, and to the
temper of the Part they are applied to.

XXIX. Sennertus thinks, that sometimes it is not good to use Digestives alone;
but to mix Abstersives with them, however to vary the Medicine according to the
Constitution: in a soft and moist habit, use this: Turpentine ii. Oil of Roses
i. Yolk of one Egg, mix them. In a dry habit this: Pine Rosin, Oil of Mastich,
A. i. Powder of Olibanum, and Mastich, A. iss. mix them.

XXX. Or this: Honey of Roses, juice of Smallage, A. i. Turpentine vi. Powder
of Frankincense, Barley-flower, A. q.s. mix, and make a Liniment.

XXXI. If you anoint the Parts about, with Triapharmacum and Ung. Populeum
mixed together, you may prevent Fluxion and Inflammation.

XXXII. The third-Indication, is the removing of the Pus or Matter, which is
done by Abstersives; and this is done by such Medicaments as we have described
in chap. 2. sect. 27. ad 36. aforegoing.

XXXIII. Digestives are no longer to be made use of, than till the Matter is
well digested: for being used too long, the Ulcer may be made sordid. In these
kind of Ulcers, says Wiseman, I have frequently digested, deterged, and
incarned with Vng. Basilicon, mixed with red Praecipitate.

XXXIV. This Abstersive is also commended. Oil Olive, Rosin, Wax, A. vj. Ship
Pitch, clear Vernish, A.iv. Gum Elemi, Beef-suer, Turpentine, A. iii. Mastich,
Myrrh, both in Powder, A. i. White Praecipitate, iss. mix, and make an Ointment.

XXXV. The fourth Indication is the filling the Ulcer up with Flesh, by the
help of Sarcoticks; such as we have described in lib. 4. cap. 2. sect. 31. ad
46. and in cap. 2. sect. 38. ad 52. aforegoing.

XXXVI. Sennertus commends this: Turpentine, Frankincense, A. i. Aloes,
Colophony, Mastich, Myrrh, A.ss. Gum Elemi ii. mix, and make an Ointment.

XXVII. But you ought to make a choice of such Medicaments as are most fit and
convenient for each several and particular Constitution; for the moister the
Body is, by so much it requires Medicaments that are less drying and
Abstersive; and contrariwise, the more dryer it is, the stronger and more
drying sort of Remedies: if they are weaker than is fitting, great store of
Sanies will be generated with a loose and flaggy Flesh: if they be overstrong
and drying, the Ulcer will be rendered dry, its lips red, the flesh consumed,
and sometimes the Recrements bloody, with a kind of biting in the Part.

XXXVIII. And therefore the form of the Medicaments are somewhat to be
considered, and they are wont to be applied either liquid, or soft, or dry: in
Bodies hard and dry, and when a harder Flesh is to be generated, Sarcotick
Pouders are to be sprinkled upon the Ulcer: As,

XXXIX. Frankincense, iv. Colophony, Sanguis Draconis, A. ii. Mastich,
Olibanum, A.i. mix, and make a Powder. Frankincense vi. Aloes iv. Dragons
Blood, Sarcocol, Olibanum, A. iss. make a Powder.

XL. You are also to consider the season of the Year; for in a hot season, more
cooling Applications are required; and in cold weather, the more heating; so
that at such times, a thicker Compress is to be applied, and the Rowler to be
oftener wound about, than in hot weather.

XLI. Wiseman has this Sarcotic. Venice Turpentine iv. Frankincense i. Aloes,
Myrrh, A. ss. Gum Elemi iii. Oil of Hypericon, q.s. mix, and make an Ointment.
The more drying Sarcoticks (says he) are, Roots of Orrice, round Birthwort,
Meal of Lupins, Asafaetida, Sarcocol, made up with clarified Honey.

XLII. If these Medicaments be well adapted to the nature and disposition of
the Ulcer, the Pus or Matter will appear of a good consistence, and in a less
quantity; and the Flesh will be of a natural color, firm, and in a healing
condition.

XLIII. The fifth and last Indication teaches, the Cicatrizing of the Ulcer
after it is sufficiently Incarnated, and this is done with Sarcoticks, such as
we have described in lib. 4. cap. 2. sect. 47. and in cap. 2. sect. 53. and 58.
ad 62. of this Book aforegoing.

XLIV. The Ulcer then being filled with Flesh, it remains now to be covered or
clothed; the covering of the flesh is the Skin; and as flesh lost is to be
restored, so is the Skin which covers it: but the Skin being said to be a
Seminal Part, it being lost, it is no more to be restored, because the Matter
of which it is made is wanting: therefore we are forced to find out a Medium,
which is called Cicatrix, being a soft kind of a Callus, and is nothing else
but the superficies of the flesh so dried, as to tepresent the Skin: and as
good blood is the material Cause of good flesh; so good flesh is the material
Cause of a good and pleasing Cicatrix.

XLV. The making of this Cicatrix is the work of Nature, yet it is furthered by
the application of proper Epulotick Medicaments: and if the temperament of the
Part is healthful or well-disposed, you will observe the Ulcer to begin to skin
from the Edges, while it is filling with flesh within.

XLVI. The milder Epuloticks are, fine Bole, Chalk, Oystershells burnt,
Dragons-blood, red Roses, Balaustians, Lime washed, or Whiting, Ceruse, burnt
Lead, Tutty, Sumach. A mixture of these may be sprinkled upon the Ulcer, or a
Decoct. of them applied upon Lint.

XLVII. The stronger are Alum, Saccharum Saturni, Vitriol common and Roman,
Brass burnt, Chalcitis, scowrings of Brass or Iron, Verdigrise, Crocus Martis
Astringens, Sarcocol, any of which being in Pouders, may be mixed with
Ointments, and applied upon Lint; but beware, that by the use of them, you do
not consume the flesh instead of drying it into skin.

XLVIII. Among Compounds, that of Fallopius is much commended, also Diapalma,
or Emplastrum Album: and Heurnius his Cerate mentioned in Meth. ad prax Med.
lib. 1. page 108. of the Octavo, Rotterdam Impression, which is thus composed:
Oil Olive Omphacine, Hogs-lard, Litharge, A. iii. Wax, Pitch, A. iss. Rosin ii.
Ceruse vi. Powder of Lead i. mix, boil over a gentle fire, and make a Cerat.

XLIX. Sennertus has this Powder: Roots of Tormentil, Bistort, round Birthwort,
Acorn-cups, Egg-shells burnt, Frankincense, Dragons-blood, A. i. Lapis
Calaminaris ii. Litharge ss. make a Powder.

L. And he used this Empl. with good success. Empl. Album, or Diapalma, Empl.
Gryseum. Vng. Diapompholigos, A.i. Gum Elemi, ii. Saccharum Saturni i. Wax,
q.s. mix them.

LI. The time when these Epuloticks ought to be applied, is when the flesh is
grown up, almost to the lips of the Ulcer, before it is wholly filled up, lest
before the Cicatrice should be produced, the flesh should receive too great an
increase.

LII. When the Ulcer begins to incarnate, you may dress it two or three days,
with dry Lint only; and then two or three days with Ointment, and then with
Lint again, laying over it Empl. Album, or Diapalma.

LIII. You are not to suffer the Ulcer to be round, for so long it will never
heal: and if the lips of it grow thick, they are to be scarified with a Lancet,
to let out the gross Blood which hinders the Healing.

LIVE. And since good Diet makes and preserves a good habit of Body, and a good
temper in the Part, all those meats and drinks which make the Blood too hot,
too sharp, too thick, or too thin, are to be shunned; and those only to be
chosen which breed good Juice, and are easy of Concoction; and they are to be
taken moderately, and at convenient or fit times.

LV. The Part it self must be kept quiet, for motion heats and disturbs it: if
the Ulcer is too moist, enjoin Watching, because Watching dries the Body, and
consumes superfluous Humidities: if it is too dry, sleeping moistens the Parts,
those chiefly which are nervous, as Membranes, Tendons and Ligaments.

LVI. If the Belly is costive, move it with a Clyster, or a Dose of Elect.
Lenitivum, or some such like: and let the Mind be kept as much as may be, in
tranquillity, and free from perturbations.

CHAP. IV. Of ULCERS with DISTEMPER.
I. WHat the Greeks call (...). and the Latin, Ulcus cum intemperie, we in
English call, an Ulcer with Distemper.

II. The Kinds. It is either simple, or compound. The simple is fourfold, viz.
hot, cold, moist, dry. The compound are, hot and moist, hot and dry; cold and
moist, cold and dry.

III. The Causes. A hot Intemperies or Distemper, may be caused from a
fermentation of the Serum in the Blood, which may arise from an ill habit of
Body, ill Diet, or the like; or from heat of the Air, or keeping the Part too
hot; or from too hard Binding, or too sharp Medicaments.

IV. A cold Intemperies or Distemper may be caused from the too great quantity
of Phlegmatic Humors, or the too much exposing it to the cold Air in dressing;
or not defending it in cold and sharp weather, with warm Cloths and good
Bandage; or from applying Medicaments too much cooling.

V. A dry Intemperies or Distemper, may be caused from exhausting of the
natural Heat in Chronick Diseases, or in any hectic habit of Body, from too
sparing a Diet, want of Drinking, defect of Nourishment in the Part, etc.

VI. A moist Intemperies or Distemper, is caused from a Flux of Humors, or much
Humors abounding in the Body, a moist habit of Body, an hydropical Disposition,
weakness of the Part affected, from a long continuance of the Ulcer, hard
Bandage, or too moist and slabby Medicaments; or from want of Bandage, or
moist, wet and foggy weather.

VII. The Signs. A hot Distemper is known by the heat of the Part exulcerated,
of which the Patient complains; the Parts about the Ulcer will be red, hard,
and Tumified; the Matter will be sharp, pricking, and sometimes an itching is
also felt in the Part: hot Medicaments applied, increase the Heat and Pain,
whereas if cold Medicines are used, the Patient is mightily refreshed, and
benefited withal.

VIII. A cold Distemper is known by the pale, and sometimes livid color of the
Ulcer, and Parts about it; the Flesh in the Ulcer is whitish and loose, and the
Sick complains also of cold, there being mostly withal, a cold habit of Body:
and the Patient finds much good and ease in the application of hot Medicaments.

IX. A dry Distemper is known from a dry habit of Body, for the most part going
before; the color of the ulcerated Part is ill, and not lively; the Body is
lean and dry, and so also the Member or Part diseased; the lips are thin and
lank, with little moisture, and in touching the Ulcer, it seems hard and dry,
for that little or no Matter flows from it.

X. A moist Distemper is known from a moist habit of Body, watery Humors
abounding, too much humidity in the Ulcer it self, the flesh is luxurious and
flaccid; there is a great discharge of Exmentitious Humors, and the Humor which
flows is not acrimonious.

XI. If the Intemperies or Distemperature is compound, the Causes and Signs
thereof are found our, and known from the Causes and Signs of the simple
Distemper, by laying the Causes and Signs of each together.

XII. The Prognostics. All Ulcers laboring under an Intemperies, though they be
never so well handled, yet they are hard of Cure, and may be truly accounted
among such as are stubborn or rebellious.

XIII. And Galen, Meth. Med. lib. 4. cap. 1. says, That for healing of Ulcers,
the Flesh subjacent ought to be wholly temperate; and therefore it is, that
Ulcers with distemper of the Part lying next under, are cured with some
difficulty.

XIV. Ulcers with Distemper, hot, cold, or moist, are cured with less
difficulty than those with Dryness; for with one and the same labor, with the
same Medicines, and at the same time, we may both remove the Distemper, and
cure the Ulcer.

XV. But Ulcers with a dry Distemper, are the hardest of them all to be cured,
because the cure of the Ulcer must be for a while neglected and laid aside as
it were, and the whole Intention must be first in removal of the dry
Intemperies: and the Cure is also long in effecting, because the whole habit of
the Body requires humecting and altering, which is a work of time, whereas
those distempered with heat, cold or moisture, may be cured, whilst you are
removing the Distemper.

XVI. The cure of an Ulcer with a hot Distemper. The Indications of Cure, are
the same with those of a simple Ulcer, save here, you must add, an alteration
of the habit of the Body, or of the Ulcer and Part, or of both, as you see need
requires.

XVII. Here you must use Coolers and Anodynes, which you may impose not only
upon the Ulcer it self, but upon the Parts adjacent round about. Such are
Waters, Juices, Oils, and Ointments of Endive, Myrtles, Nightshade, Plantane,
Roses, Sanders, Vinegar, fine Bole, burnt Lead, Saccharum Saturni, Turpentine,
Cadmia, Whites of Eggs, Oils of Roses and Violets, Vng. Rosatum, Refrigerans
Galeni, Album Camphoratum, of Ceruse, of Nightshade, and of Sanders, etc.

XVIII. Now though the Ulcer may require drying Medicines, yet since the heat it
self, by consuming the Humors, does make the Ulcer the more dry, we must make
use of the milder and gentler sort of Dryers, but withal such as are endued
with some kind of an Astringent Power, and have also an Anodyn property,
because Heat generally induces Pain.

XIX. Wiseman advises for Topics, Vng. Diapompholygos, Tutiae, Album, e
Plumbo, e Calce, Basilicon with Praecipitate, and to apply over the Part
affected, Vng. Album Camphoratum, Empl. Diapalma cum succis, Empl. Oxelaeum,
Vng. Refrigerans, Nutritum, and Populeon; and over them may be applied, Cloths
dipped in Oxycrate, or Red Wine, or juices of Plantane, of Lettice, of Purslane,
of Shepherds Purse, mixed with Vinegar or Red-wine, etc.

XX. Some advise to the use of Aqua Calcis vivae, in which some Litharge has
been boiled: also to Snow-water, in which a little Vitriolum Album has been
dissolved; Or Epsom-water lbi. with which Vinegar iv. is commixed.

XXI. Sennertus advises to this. Oil of Roses, Turpentine often washed in Rose
or Plantant-water, A. i. Barley-flower, q.s. mix, and make a Liniment.

XXII. Or this. Burnt-lead, Pompholyx (both washed) A.iss. Oils of Roses and
Violets, A. iss. Wax, q.s. mix, and make an Ointment.

XXIII. Now these cooling Medicaments are to be imposed, not only upon the very
Ulcer it self, but also upon the Parts adjacent to it, and round about it. The
hot Distemper being thus removed, the Ulcer is to be cured with Sarcoticks,
which yet ought to be less heating and drying, lest the hot Distemper should
return again.

XXIV. The Cure of an Ulcer with a cold Distemper. Here the Ulcer and Distemper
may be cured at one time with Healers or Vulneraries: Barbet commends Oils of
Hypericon, Nard, Orrice, Cammomil, Rue, Dill, Rosin of the Larch-tree, Plaster
of Betony, Spirit of Wine: to these you may add Syrup and Honey of Roses, Rosin
of the Pine or Fir, Tar, Pitch, etc.

XXV. And upon the adjacent Parts, you may use a Fomentation of generous Wine,
in which Rosemary, Sage, Rue, Wormwood, Hysop, Origanu, Mint, Camomil, and
Bay Leaves, or Zedoary, have been Decocted, adding a little Spirit of Wine.

XXVI. And to deterge the Ulcer, Wiseman advises to Mundificativum ex Apio,
Mundificativum Paracelsi, Vnguentum Apostolorum: Empl. Diachylon ireatum, de
Betonica, Barbarum magnum, Diasulphuris, flos Vnguentorum: after which, you may
proceed with Sarcoticks and Epuloticks.

XXVII. In this cold Distemper, a good Diet is to be observed, etc. as in Cold
and Oedematous Tumors, with Purgations to carry off the Cacochymia, and
alterative Decoctions, to attenuate and rectify the Humors, dressing the Ulcer
it self the mean while, with drying, heating, and detersive Medicaments.

XXVIII. You may apply (after a heating Fomentation,) Basilicon majus and
minus, or Arcaeus his Liniment upon Pledgets; and over these Diachylon cum
Gummi, or Emp. de Mucilaginibus, or Stipticum Paracelsi; but you ought to
observe the Age of the Patient, season of the Year, and magnitude of the Ulcer.

XXIX. The cure of a moist Distemperature. In these Ulcers, slabby and greasy
Medicaments (says Wiseman) are to be forborne, and drying to be used, for that
the Part is weakened through too much humidity; and with your Dryers,
Corroboratives are to be mixed, of an Astringent Faculty.

XXX. Barbet advises to Cyprus Roots, Hypericon, Betony, Horehound, Sage,
Wormwood, Mastich, Frankincense, Ceruse, Red-Lead, Litharge, Burnt-lead,
calcined Vitriol, Emp. Gryseum, de Minio, and other things which are very
drying.

XXXI. If to this Distemper ature, a flux of Humors is joined, then
Catharticks, Repellents, and Intercipients are necessary; Issues are also good
if the Ulcer is inveterate; but no fat, or unctuous things are to be applied,
only those things which are strongly drying, which ought often to be renewed.

XXXII. To the former things you may add, Catechu, Dittany, Fether-few, Hyssop,
Mint, Marjoram, Lavender, Southernwood, Time, roots of Tormentil, Cincfoil,
Zedoary, Sumach, Bay, and Myrttle-berries, Nutmegs, Winters-Cinnamon, Cyprus
Nuts, Balaustians, Red-roses, Frankincense, Mastick, Saccharum Saturni, etc.

XXXIII. Wiseman advises to this. Burnt Lead, Pompholyx washed, A. i. Oil of
Myrtles, Wax, q.s. mix them. Also to the use of Vng. Diapompholygos, Tutiae, e
Calce, Nutritum, album Camphoratum, and Desiccativum rubrum. Or to this:
Aluminis scissilis ss. Cadmia iss. Verdigrise, burnt Brass, A. ii. New Wax, v.
Sheeps Suet, q.s. mix, and make an Ointment.

XXXIV. If the Ulcer requires a Fomentation, it ought to be made of hot and
drying Herbs, boiled in Wine or Oxycrate, adding after a little Spirit of Wine:
if the Ulcer is but a little moist, you may to the stronger sort of the former
Dryers, add a little Oil, with Rosin and Wax: but by how much the moister the
Ulcer is, by so much the more sorcible, and strongly drying, ought the Remedies
to be.

XXXV. Some advise to the use of Aqua Calcis vivae, in which Litharge has been
boiled; and Water mixed with S.V. in which white Vitriol, or the common
Copperas made of Iron, has been dissolved. In a Quart of Red-wine you may
dissolve ii. of Roman Vitriol, or ii. of common Vitriol or Alum: this common
Copperas (which is made of Redriffe of Iron) is an excellent Desiccative, and
very fit for the Cure not only of common Ulcers, but of those which are in the
Eyes, Nose, Mouth, Throat, Bladder, Intestinum Rectum, etc.

XXXVI. The Cure of an Ulcer with a dry Distemperature. In this you must
abstain from drying Medicaments, till the Distemperature is wholly gone, and
apply your self to Moisteners. Now this is removed by a twofold, but differing
means:

XXXVII. 1. By Attraction, drawing out the innate humidity to the Part
affected, by opening the Passages, which before by reason of the great Dryness,
were closed; and this is done, partly by Dropaces, and partly by Friction: but
this is of use only when other means will do no good.

XXXVIII. 2. By humecting or moistening; and this is done, 1. By fomenting with
fair Water, lukewarm; which is done with a Sponge, or Flannel, which is the
most convenient way of moistening the Part; pouring warm Water on, or bathing
in it, is not so proper. 2. By fomenting with Water and Oil; which, (says
Sennertus) is far better, being used bloodwarm together; and they are much
better, being used thus together, especially in Wintertime.

XXXIX. This Mixture of Water and Oil is called by the Ancients (...),
Hydrelaeum: Take Water two parts, Oil one part, and mix them: or, Take Water,
Oil, A.q.s. mixing them: warm them in a Vial-glass, then shake well together
till they are mixed, and so apply it to the ulcerate Part, in an Ulcer
moderately dry.

XL. This Topic is of good use in Wintertime; for though warm Water warms the
Part, yet it leaves it cold, because it draws out the heat to the superficies:
but this Mixture is more excellent; for the Oil stops the Pores, and keeps in
the heat.

XLI. After fomenting, you may apply some Cataplasm, which has a moistning
property with it, such as this. Mallow-leaves boiled to softness jss. Oil,
Barley and Wheat flower, A. ss. Honey of Roses ii. Saffron ss. Hogs-lard q.s.
or, Juice of Mallows i. Oil-olive ii. white Wax q.s. mix, and make an Ointment:
or you may foment with Oil alone.

XLII. How long this Fomenting is to be used, you may know by the substance of
the Part, and its color: for when you see the Part a little tumified, soft and
moist, and looks ruddy, you are then to give it over, for otherwise the Humor
attracted will be discussed.

XLIII. But if the Part in which the Ulcer is, is under an Atrophy, so that
this fomenting with Oil, or Water and Oil, will not do, we must then in the
first place endeavor to nourish the Sick with Meats of good Juice, which are
easily distributed, that so much Aliment may be sent unto the Part affected.

XLIV. But if the Habit of the Body is cacochymical, you are before
Fomentation, to empty it of those evil Humors by Purgation; lest too much
moisture, or corrupt Humors be drawn, which will hinder the Cure of the Ulcer.

XLV. The Distemper being removed, you may dress the Ulcer with Sarcoticks, yet
such as dry but a little; lest otherwise there should be a relapse into the dry
Distemper again; as Galen, Method. Med. lib. 4. cap. 1. precautions us against:
and therefore to Sarcotick Pouders, Oil and Fats are to be added.

XLVI. As, Frankincense, Mastich, Olibanum, A. i. Turpentine i. Oil of Roses
ii. Wax q.s. mix, and make a soft Ointment.

XLVII. Wiseman says it is to be dressed with mild Digestives, or with
Basilicon mixed with Precipitate, which is a good Detersive and Sarcotick: or
with this: Frankincense, Mastich, Sarcocol, A. i. Venice-Turpentine jss. Oil of
Hypericon ii. white Wax q.s. mix, and make an Ointment. The Ulcer being
incarned, complete the Cure with Epuloticks.

CHAP. V. Of an ULCER with PAIN.
I. WHAT the Greeks call, (...). and the Latins, Ulcus doloribus vel doloris
plenum; we in English call, An Ulcer with Pain.

II. Pain is one of the Symptoms which obstructs the Cure of an Ulcer, whence
various Accidents many times arise, as Fainting, Watching, Fever, and the like:
for which reason, it ought immediately to be mitigated, lest it attract, or
cause an Afflux of Humors, or enlarge the Ulcer, or cause an Inflammation, or
an Erysipelas to arise.

III. The Cause. This Pain for the most part arises from acrid, sharp, and
corroding Humors, which gnaw the Ulcer, and heat the circumjacent Parts;
proceeding either from a Cacochymie of Humors abounding in the Body; or
ill-applied Topics, as Digestives not used timely enough, or Abstersives too
long.

IV. The Signs. The Patient's being ill at ease will show the Pain, and the
Symptoms the Cause; whether from a Cacochymie, and abundance of Humors; or from
want of Digestion, or Abstersion, as is usual.

V. The Prognostics. There will be no difficulty of removing of the Pain, if
the Cause thereof is rightly apprehended, and that taken away.

VI. But if it continues any long time, it will be apt to induce a Flux of
Humors, Inflammation, or other worse Symptoms.

VII. The Cure. The Indications are twofold: 1. To take away the Antecedent
Cause. 2. To remove the conjoined.

VIII. The Antecedent Cause has relation to the Habit of the Body, and how that
is in fault; and according as there is a Plethora, or Cacochymia, to make
Evacuation, either by Purging, Vomiting, or Bleeding; by some, or all of them,
as the condition of the Patient does require: and and then to strengthen and
fortify the Body by cooling Juleps, Opiats, and a good Traumatick Diet, which
may prevent the fluxion of Humors.

IX. This done, the proximate or conjoined Cause is next to be considered;
which is to remove the Pain by things proper to the Ulcer, and which have power
to remove the Symptoms; and herein the Conjoined Cause is to be inquired into.

X. If the Ulcer is sanious, and the pain proceeds from thence, it wants
digestion; and then such things as are digestive, which have a temperate heat
in themselves, are to be applied.

XI. If the Pain is with Inflammation, Lenients are to be used; as the
Mucilages of Linseed, Fenugreek-seed, Fleawort-seed, Quince-seed, Althea,
extracted in decoction of Mallows, Oils of sweet Almonds, Camomil, Dill,
Violets, Hens-fat, Hogs-lard, Saffron, yolks of Eggs, and Barley-flower, which
may be made into a Cataplasm or Cerat with Wax: or Vng. Populeon, (if more
cooling is required) Vng. Nutritum, Album Caphoratum, Emplast. e Bolo, Ceratum
Galeni, may be applied to the parts about the Ulcer.

XII. And to the Ulcer it self, these Anodyns; as Saffron, Oil of Roses, yolks
of Eggs, Turpentine, and Pine-Rosin; out of which Liniments and Ointments may
be made, and applied.

XIII. If the pain arises from hot and acrid Humors fretting the Ulcer, it may
be dressed with Vng. Diapompholigos, e Plumbo, Tutiae, simply by themselves, or
mixed with Basilicon; with a little red Precipitate, or some of the Princes
Powder; with Compress or Stuphs wrung out of Oxycrate or red Wine, which will
allay the heat, and strengthen the Part, to resist the Influx of Humors.

XIV. If the pain is caused by a sordid Matter sticking to the bottom of the
Ulcer, and hindering Transpiration, you cannot then (says Wiseman) remove the
pain without Detersives; of which, red Precipitate, or the Princes Powder, or
Turpethum Minerale, are the best and mildest.

XV. If the pain is extreme, you ought to fit the Medicament to the Cause;
which being for the most part from hot and sharp Humors, are to be qualified
with lenient Cataplasms, or with cooling Medicaments, or with Narcoticks.

XVI. A Cataplasm. Mallows and Marshmallows, A. M.i. boil to softness, beat
them, and pulp them through a Hair-sieve; to which add yolks of two Eggs, Saffron
i. Barley-flower, Linseed, and Fenugreek, Oils of Camomil and white Lillies, A.
i. Mucilage of Althea-seed jss. Oil of Roses ii. mix, and make a Cataplasm.

XVII. Or, Crumbs of white Bread ii. which soften in Milk, yolk of one Egg, Oil
of Roses jss. Barley-flower, Linseed, A. i. powder of Camomil-flowers, Oil of
Water Lillies ss. Saffron i. mix, and make a Cataplasm.

XVIII. Or, Flower of Barley, and of Millet, A. ijss. Milk viii. boil to the
consistency of a Cataplasm; to which add, pulp of Cassia and of Raisons, pulp
of Pippins or Pomwaters, Oils of Roses, of Earthworms, of Eggs, and of Dill, A.
i. Saffron i. mix, and boil to a consistency.

XIX. If you are forced by the vehemence of the Pain to use Coolers, these
things are commended; Juices of Mallows, Marshmallows, Horstail, Cucumbers,
Lettice, Purslain, Plantan, Water Lillies, etc. to which Barley-flower may be
added, with Saccharum Saturni, whites of Eggs, Vnguentum Album,
Frogspawn-water, etc.

XX. If yet all these things avail nothing, but that the extremity of the pain
continues, you must come to the use of Narcoticks; the chief of which are these
Simples: Hemlock, Henbane, Housleek, Mandrake, Nightshade, Peru or Thorn Apple,
Opium, Poppies: from which you may make distilled Waters, or Juices, or Oils by
Infusion; of which, with Henbane and Poppy seed, Extract of Opium, and Barley
flower, you may make Cataplasms at pleasure, according as the exigency requires.

XXI. Juices of Henbane and Nightshade, A. ii. Barley-flower ii. mix, and boil
to a consistency; then add Oil of Poppy-seeds, Ung. Populeon, A.i. Extract of
Opium ii. powder of Henbane-seed q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm.

XXII. You may also dress the Ulcer with Rose Water, wherein a little Roman
Vitriol, or some Roch-Alum has been dissolved; applying over all Diapalma, or
Empl. Album; renewing the Dressing Morning and Evening, 'till the Pain is
wholly gone.

CHAP. VI. Of ULCERS with FLVXION.
I. WHAT the Greeks call, (...), and (...). and the Latins, Ulcus Rheumaticum,
and Ulcus cum Fluxionibus; we in English call, An Ulcer with Fluxion, or with a
Flux of Humors.

II. This is an Ulcer with Distemper, and having also a Flux of Humors joined
with it: for it is hardly possible for an Ulcer to be affected with a Flux of
Humors, or of Matter, but it must primarily be affected with a Distemperature.

III. The Causes. They are either, 1. By Transmission; the peccant Humor in
either quantity or quality, being protruded or sent forth from some other Part
through the strength of Nature. 2. By Attraction; wherein the Part affected through
heat or pain, draws them. 3. By the natural Motion of the Humor; falling upon
that Part by reason of its weakness, or low situation; which makes the descent
of the Humor more easy.

IV. The Excrements which come from the afflux of Humors to the exulcerated
Part are manifold, as Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 26. has declared. Besides Blood,
there is Sanies, and Pus, which do issue forth from Wounds and Ulcers.

V. Sanies, (inquit) sit Sanguine tenuior vary crassa, and glutinosa, and
colorata. Pus crassissimum, albissimumque, glutinosius and Sanguine and Sanie.
Exit Sanguis ex vulnere recenti, aut jam sanescente. Sanies est inter utrumque
tempus: Pus ex Vlcere jam ad sanitatem spectante. Rursus and Sanies, and Pus
quasdam species Graecis Nominibus distinctas habent. Est enim quaedam Sanies,
quae vel (...), Ichor; vel (...), Meliceria nominatur. Est Pus, quod (...)
appellatur. (...), tenuis, subalbidus, ex malo Vlcere exit, maximeque ubi Nervo
laeso Inflammatio secuta est. Meliceria crassior and glutinosior, subalbidus,
Mellique albo subsimilis fertur: haec quoque ex malis Vlceribus, ubi Nervi
circa Articulos laesi sunt, and inter haec loca maxim ex Genibus. (...),
tenue, subalbidum, quasi unctum color atque pinguitudine, Oleo albo non
dissimile, apparet in magnis Vlceribus sanescentibus. Sanies, (says he) is
thinner than Blood, yet variously thick, glutinous, and colored. Pus is most
thick and white, and more glutinous than Blood and Sanies. Blood comes forth
from a Wound recent, or now upon Healing: Sanies comes forth between these
times: Pus comes forth of an Ulcer, just now upon Healing. Again, both Sanies
and Pus have certain Species, distinguished by their Greek Names. There is a
kind of Sanies which is called Ichor, or Meliceria; and there is a Put which is
called Elaeodes, Ichor is thin, somewhat white, and is thicker, more glutinous,
and not much unlike Honey; and this comes out of evil Ulcers, when the Nerves
near the Joints are hurt, and more especially from the Knees. Elaeodes, which
is thin, whitish, and looks fatty, not much unlike to white Oil, comes from
great Ulcers when they are nigh healing.

VI. But Pus properly is that Excrement of the Ulcer which has its original
from Blood, or from Flesh bruised and dissolved; and it appears in Ulcers void
of all other Excrements.

VI. All the other Excrements which proceed from other Humors, are comprehended
under Ichor or Sanies, and Sordes: the thin and watery Excrements they call
Sanies, and some call them Virus; from which thin Excrements the Ulcer is
rendered moist. The thicker Excrements they call Sordes, from which the Ulcer is
made sordid and foul.

VIII. The Signs. An afflux of Humors, is known by a Tumor or Swelling, which
appears not only in the lips of the Ulcer, but also in the near-adjoining
Parts; and by the Pain, which is very grievous, especially if the nervous Parts
be affected.

IX. It is also known from the great store of Excrements, greater by far, than
what is in proportion to the magnitude of the Ulcer; with an Inflammation
according to the quality of the Humor; and there is a great difficulty in the
Cure, for that the Humors flowing hinder it.

X. The Prognostics. All Ulcers with an afflux of Humors, are very hard to
cure; in regard that from the afflux, the Ulcer is made moist and painful, and
so swells up, and increases thereby.

XI. And by how much the Fluxion is the greater, and also by how much the
flowing Humor is the worse; by so much the more difficult will the Cure of the
Ulcer be. And Celsus in the place before cited, gives you signs how you may
know the goodness or badness of the Humor causing the Fluxion.

XII. The Cure. The Indications of Cure, have respect, 1. To the Antecedent
Cause. 2. To the Consequent Cause, or Conjoined. 3. To the Healing-up the Ulcer.

XIII. As to the Antecedent Cause; the Humor abounding and flowing, whether it
offends in quantity or quality, or in both, is to be removed by Purging, and
Revulsion.

XIV. By Purging we must diminish and hinder the generating of the vicious
Humor; and if the Fluxion is by any fault of the Liver or Spleen, it must be
rectified: for this purpose, the Cathartick must be adapted to the
Constitution, and Humor abounding; as we have already, in many other places,
declared at large.

XV. Also you must constantly administer some notable Traumatick Diet or
Wound-Drink; or the juice of Pellitory of the Wall, because it carries off the
Humidities and Humors by Urine.

XVI. If the Humor is too fluid, it must be made thicker by Alteratives; as
Endive, Succory, Sorrel, Purslain, Lettuce, etc. in Broths; as also with
Barley-Cream, Emulsions, Citrons, Raspberries, and the like.

XVII. And then Revulsion is to be made in some proper Part: of this kind,
Issues have the first and chiefest place, being made in the contrary part: and
Sennertus says they are very necessary in old and inveterate Ulcers; lest the
Ulcer being healed, the Humor should regurgitate into the Veins, and so fall
upon the more noble Parts.

XVIII. The next Indication has respect to the conjoined Cause. And that must
be removed, 1. By Interceptives, or Defensatives. 2. By Repercussives, or
Repellers.

XIX. Interceptives or Defensatives, are such as strengthen the Part, and shut
up the Vessels; and in some measure drive back the Humor; and they are formed
out of such things as are dry and astringent.

XX. Of this kind are, Plantan, Knotgrass, Bramble-tops, and the Berries not
fully ripe; Horstail, Elm-bark, Myrtle-berries, Acorns, Galls, Cyprus-Nuts,
Balaustians, Pomgranatepeels, Oils of Myrtles and Roses, astringent Wine, fine
Bole, Terra Sigillata, Cortex Peruanus, Catechu, Opium, Poppies, red Roses,
Dragons-blood, Alum, Vitriol, with whites of Eggs, etc.

XXI. Some of those things may be juiced, others poudred, and mixed with
Ointments; or boiled in Oxycrate or red Wine, and applied with Stuphs.

XXII. And if the Fluxion is great, and in strong Bodies, Aqua Aluminis, and
Aqua Calcis may be used: to the latter of which, ( Wiseman says) a few grains
of Sublimate may be added.

XXIII. If with the Fluxion, there is great heat, it is to be removed as we
have taught in the Cure of a hot Distemper: if there is great pain, Anodyns and
Lenients are to be chosen: and if there is withal a plenitude of Humors,
slender Diet must be prescribed, and the Belly kept soluble with Clysters, etc.

XXIV. Repercussives or Repellers are applied to the Ulcer it self: such are
Alum-water, Rose Water, juices of Plantan and Cinkfoil, roots of sweet Cyperus,
Unguent. e Bolo, Nutritum, Album Camphoratum, Desiccativum Rubrum, Ceratum
Galeni, Emplast. de Minio, e Bolo, etc.

XXV. But because these Ulcers are frequently affected with sharp Humors
impacted in the Pores, which cannot be repelled, and by their acrimony excite
Pain and Inflammation; you must have regard to the Ulcer it self, applying,
(whil it you outwardly resist the Influx upon the Parts) Digestives and
Detersives, but such as are more drying, than those for simple Ulcers, having
but very little acrimony, such as we have enumerated in the cure of a moist
Intemperies, in Chap. 4. aforegoing.

XXVI. And to the middle of the Ulcer, you may apply some drying Powder, made
of Litharge, Tutty, Lead, Saccharum Saturni, Sanguis Draconis, Catechu, fine
Bole, Terra Sigillata, Chalk, Chalcitis, Vng. Diapompholigos.

XXVII. The last Intention, is the Healing of the Ulcer, by Sarcoticks and
Epuloticks: but here the Sarcoticks ought to be vehement, and of the strongest
kind; not moist, oily, or fat, lest they moisten the Part, and loosen more: yet
they must be without any acrimony or biting at all, that so no pain may be
excited.

XXVIII. Sennertus has this Turpentine, burnt Lead, A. i. Beef Suet, Tutty
prepared, A. ss. mix them. But if the Humor is crude and sharp, some
Frankincense, or Pine-Rosin, must be added, to farther the Concoction thereof.

XXIX. And sometimes it happens, that what did good once or twice, may
afterward (the Humor being dried up) prove prejudicial and hurtful, by
exciting a mordication or biting: in this case, the Medicine is to be changed,
and more gentle ones are to be applied in the place thereof.

XXX. Lastly, the Ulcer being incarned, the Cicatrice is to be induced by
Epuloticks. Guido, m Tract. 4. Doct. 1. Cap. 2. advises to lay on a thin Plate
of Lead, with a Hole bored through it: for Lead cools it, and is of very good use
in suchlike Ulcers, hindering the Influx of the Humor into the Part
exulcerated: and it will be yet the more effectual, if it is besmeared with
Quickfilver; or you may daily dress it with Vng. Diapompholigos.

CHAP. VII. Of an ULCER, SORDID and PVTRID.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...), vel (...). Ulcus cum sorde and putridine, vel,
Ulcus sordidus and putridus; we in English call An Ulcer with filth and
putrefaction, or, An Ulcer sordid, or, foul and putrid. But Dioscorides, lib.
3. cap. 6. has (...), Vlcus putrescens: and Hippocrates, (...), Vlcera putrida.

II. The Differences. Ulcers sordid and putrid, differ only in degrees. That is
sordid, which (proceeding from the afflux of moist Humors) becomes foul, with a
thick and snotty Excrement.

III. That is a putrid Ulcer, when the said Excrements come forth with a noisome
smell, like unto that of a dead Carcas; and withal putrifies and corrupts the
Flesh which lies under it, and contaminates the softer parts.

IV. Guido, Tract. 4. Doct. 1. Cap. 3. says, These Ulcers differ only in
degree, viz. that the one is such in a lesser, the other in a greater degree:
for if the Excrements be simply thick and foul, then we call it a Sordid Ulcer;
but if they likewise receive a putridity and stink, in so much that they
putrify and corrupt the Flesh under it and the softer parts, then we call it a
Putrid Ulcer.

V. The Causes. The proximate Causes of this Ulcer are depraved malign Humors,
in a Body cacochymick, receiving a putridness from external heat and moisture:
or by reason of the too much, or unreasonable use of moist, unctuous, or greasy
Medicaments.

VI. Or from the Use of vehement and over-strong Abstersives; which resolve the
sound Flesh, and stir up a putrifactive heat in the Ulcer; whereby the Humors
become so sharp, that they corrode the parts circumjacent.

VII. The Antecedent Causes are, excrementitious and gross Humors in a
cacochymick Body, from ill Diet, bad Air, Slothfulness and want of stirring,
etc. also from malign Fevers, which by means of the Expulsive-virtue stirred
up, transmit their malignity outward.

VIII. The Signs. A sordid Ulcer is known by sight; there appears in them, a
great abundance of viscid and clammy Impurities; the Flesh is soft and flaggy,
and the lively color of the Part is vanished.

IX. If it proceeds from a fluxion of Humors, whether from the whole Body, or
from any one Part thereof, it will be known by the Signs delivered in the
former Chapter.

X. If it proceeds from the weakness and distemperature of of the Part, it may
likewise be known by its own signs, and signs of the Distemperature; and there
will not then be any appearance of a fresh and lively color in the Part.

XI. If it comes from Unctuous Medicaments, it then appears white, and the
whiteness goes round about the whole Ulcer, like a border.

XII. If it is from strong Abstersives, the Ulcer grows hollow, and every day
more than other, a small quantity of thin hot Quittor flowing forth.

XXIII. If it is become putrid, it will be known by the grievous stinking
smell, and the discolored matter.

XIV. The Prognostics. If by reason of the great abundance, and the thickness
of the Sordes or Impurities, the transpiration is hindered, the Part soon after
corrupts; and so of a sordid Ulcer, it afterward becomes a putrid Ulcer, or
depascent, which is an eating Ulcer.

XV. If the putridity is increased, or be not checked in the Ulcer, at length a
Gangren will succeed, and then a Sphacelation follows.

I. The Cure of a Sordid Ulcer.
XVI. In this kind of Ulcer, great care is to be taken in the course of Diet;
and the Body must be first purged from vicious and corrupt Humors, with Our
Family Pills, Pill. Catholicae, Pull. Cornachini, Syrupus Catharticus, Tinctura
Purgans, etc. and then a Traumatick Decoction is continually to be exhibited.

XVII. Outwardly, you must cleanse with Abstersives; as juices of Smallage, and
Wormwood, and Centory; and meals of Barley and Orobus, Myrrh, and Honey of
Roses, juices of Limons and Citrons, Aqua mulsa, and Salt Water: but more
especially with Wine and S.V. which is of exceeding benefit in cleansing all
sordid and putrid Ulcers; and is therefore to be mixed with other Medicaments.

XVII. If the Ulcer is made sordid by the use of too strong Detergents, Wiseman
commends Vng. Basilicon mixed with red Precipitate, also Vng. Diapompholigos,
as things proper to dress the Ulcer with: and some cooling Unguent or Cerat, as
Refrigerans Galeni, may be applied over it, with a Compress wrung out of
Oxycrate.

XIX. If it is become sordid by the use of Lenients, and is covered thick with
the sordes or filth, you need not fear (says Wiseman) to fill the Ulcer with
red Precipitate, and apply some mild Abstersive on Pledgets of Lint over it,
with a Compress wrung out of Aqua Calcis, or Aqua Aluminosa, and not to dress
it 'till the third day after.

XX. For thereby the pain will lessen, and the Sordes will come away in a
Slough; after which, the Ulcer is to be digested, 'till it looks more fleshy
and natural, and then you are to incarnate with Medicaments of a milder
quality, etc.

XXI. In a common sordid Ulcer: Vng. Basilicon i. red Precipitate iii. mix
them. Or you may dress with Vng. Apostolorum, or with Mundificativum Paracelsi,
mixed with Alumen ustum.

XXII. This Liniment is good. Roots of round Birthwort i. Agrimony, Centory the
less, Wormwood, A. M. i. boil them in Wine: to the straining add, rind of the
Frankincense-tree, Scammony, A. iv. boil in the Wine again, then strain out,
and add meal of Orobus ss. pouders of Tobacco and of Myrrh, A. ii. S.V. i.
Honey of Roses ii. Turpentine q.s. mix, and make a Liniment.

XXIV. Or you may wash the Ulcer with this. Take Barley-water lbi. Honey of
Roses, S.V. A. ii. mix them.

XXV. And you may dress it with this. Take Turpentine, Honey of Roses, A. i.
flowers of Barley and Orobus ii.A. pouders of Myrrh and of Tobacco, A. i. mix
them.

II. The Cure of a Putrid Vleer.
XXVI. If the Ulcer is putrid, you are to wash it with a good Lixivium of
Potashes, in which Centory, Southernwood, Wormwood, Carduus, etc. have been
boiled, or with good Brandy, and Vng. Aegyptiacum.

XXVII. Sennertus advises to wash it with Oxycrate, Lie, Brine; upon which are
to be imposed Medicaments made of meal of Orobus, and powder of long or round
Birthwort-roots, mixed with a Decoction of Squills, in Wine and Honey.

XXVIII. Or, Take Honey ii. Turpentine i. Scammony in fine powder vi. Tobacco
in powder iii. mix them.

XXXIX. If the Ulcer is hollow, you must use some cooling Ointment; as of fine
Bole, lest an afflux of Humors should be excited by hot and biting things.

XXX. If the Ulcer is corrosive, and undermines the lips, making the Flesh
soft, or unfit for healing, you are to deal with it, as we shall show in
Phagedenick Ulcers.

XXXI. However, that which is corrupted must be taken quite away, either by
Incision, or by Cautery, (whether Actual, or Potential, it matters not much)
'till at length we come to the sound and quick Flesh.

XXXII. If you fear it should degenerate into a Gangren, you must use stronger
things; as Balsamum amarum, Oxymel of Squills, Lixivium of Quicklime, round
Birthwort-roots, Scammony, Tobacco in ponder, Emphorbium, the Ablution of
Mercurius dulcis in Limewater, Flower, or volatile Sal Armoniack, Butter of
Antimony, etc.

XXXIII. But if the Putrefaction shall yet be increased, and the Ulcer tends to
a mortification, you must treat it as we have taught, in Our Discourse of
Gangrene and Sphacelus.

CHAP. VIII. Of an ULCER with TVMOR.
I. WHat the Greeks call, (...) vel (...). and the Latins, Ulcus cum Tumore,
vel Ulcus Tumidum: we in English call, An Ulcer with Tumors, or a Tumid Ulcer.

II. The Cause. The cause of a Tumor in an Ulcer, is the same with that in the
afflux of Humors; but according to the nature of the Humor, such is the variety
of the Tumor, whether it be Phlegmon, Erysipelas, Oedema, or Cancer.

III. The Signs. The Tumor it self is known by sight; but the kind of the
Tumor, you may know by the signs of each particular Tumor, which you may search
out in their respective places.

IV. The Prognostics. An Ulcer with Tumor is more difficult to cure, than one
without: and a Phlegmon is more easily cured than any of the other kinds of
Tumors: if it is a Cancerous Tumor, it is rendered in the highest nature
difficult, and is for the most part uncurable, and only admits of Palliation.

V. The Cure. These kinds of Tumors must be here cured, as we have declared in
their several Chapters; but yet, nevertheless, they are so to be managed, that
the Ulcer may not in the least be neglected.

VI. You must first have respect to the vicious Humors, then to the Part
affected; you must apply Medicaments which may either discuss the Humor, which
is the cause of the Tumor, or bring it to Suppuration.

I. An Ulcer, with a Phlegmon.
VII. In an Inflammation, you may apply a Cataplasm made of Quinces, boiled
with the Powder of Myrtle or Barley-meal, Pomgranate-peels, and Red-roses.

VIII. In the Augmentation of the Ulcer, you may add powder of Camomil-flowers
and Bean-meal: but in the state, Mallows, Marshmallows, Meal of Linseed, and
Faenugreek-seed. As,

IX. Barley-flower ii. powder of Camomil-flowers i. Meals of Linseed and
Faenugreek-seed, A. vi. Milk, q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm.

X. If the Tumor tends toward a Suppuration, it is to be helped forward with
Maturatives, as a Cataplasm of Mallows, Marshmallows, Linseed, Faenugreek-seed,
Saffron, Wheat, etc. As,

XI. Mallows, Marshmallows, A. M. j. Water, q.s. boil to softness, and bruise
them well; to which, add Meals of Linseed and Faenugreek-seed, A. i.
Wheat Flour ss. Colophony ii. Saffron ss. oil of Roses, or yellow Palmoil ii.
mix them.

II. An Ulcer with an Erysipelas.
XII. If an Erysipelas be in the near adjacent places, you must apply those
things which we have directed in the Chapter of an Erysipelas, lib. 3. cap. 17.
You may very profitably impose on the external Parts, Waters and Juices of
Elder-flowers, and Nightshade.

XIII. But if you should rashly impose things which stop the Pores, great
Blisters would often be excited, with malign and long continuing Ulcers,
especially in the Thighs, which many times (by suffocating the natural Heat)
degenerate into a Gangrene.

XIV. If it should so happen, it will be then requisite, to apply cooling
things, Dryers, and Astringents together. As,

XV. Plantan-leaves, M. i. Red-Roses M. ss. boil in Water to softness: heat and
pulp them, and add Barley-flower iss. powder of Balaustians ss. oil of Roses,
q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm.

XVI. But that which is often used here, is Unguentum Diapompholygos, unto
which (if you please) you may add a little Saccharum Saturni.

III. An Ulcer with an Oedema.
XVII. If the Tumor is Oedematous, you may apply this: Leaves of Althaea, of
Mallows, A. M. j. boil them in Lie of Potashes to softness; bruise or beat
them well, and add powder of Althea-roots iss. powder of Camomil-flowers i.
powder of Wormwood iii. and of Saffron i. oil of white Lillies, q.s. mix, and
make a Cataplasm.

XVIII. Or this: Pulp of Juniper Berries, Mithridate, A. ii. pouders of
Camomil-flowers and of Orrice-root, A. i. Colophony ss. Zedoary in powder ii.
Saffron i. oil of Roses, q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm.

IV. An Ulcer with a Cancerous Tumor.
XIX. Though the hopes of the cure of this is but small, yet something is to be
done; you may dress it with Empl. de Ranis, with treble Mercury, or our Empl.
Mercuriale.

XX. Or you may apply over it, a thin Plate of Lead besmeared with
Quicksilver, often to be renewed; and you may sometimes wash it with the Water
of the Griffen; or a Lixivium of Quicklime, in which a little Sublimate; or at
least Mercurius Dulcis has been dissolved.

XXI. As to the rest of the Cure, which we might speak to here, we shall refer
you to the particular Chapter of Cancers, in lib. 3. cap. 36. where you will
see the whole of the matter at large.

CHAP. IX. Of an ULCER with PROUD FLESH.
I. WHat the Greeks call (...). and the Latins, Ulcus cum Hypersarcosi; we in
English call, An Ulcer with proud Flesh.

II. The Cause. It is said, to come from too much Blood or Humors flowing to
the Part affected; or from weakness of the Sarcotick, not being so drying as it
should be; in which latter case, the Flesh is loose and spongy.

III. The Signs. It is known by sight, the Flesh is Luxuriant, or higher and
more in quantity than it should be, red, light, loose, and spongy, and withal
very tender.

IV. The Cure. If it comes from too much Blood or Humors flowing to the Part,
the Sick must then use Fasting and a spare Diet; and to the Ulcer, drying
Medicaments are to be imposed.

V. In the Toes sometimes, by reason of the Nails growing in, there is often
Luxuriant Flesh; so that a man can neither put on his Shoes, nor go without
pain; in this case burnt Alum alone, will take away the said Flesh.

VI. If it proceeds from the use of weak Sarcoticks, you must use a stronger
sort of Abstersives, and such as may (if need requires) produce a Cicatrice:
even Septicks must be used sometimes, if occasion be.

VII. But if there is need but of a little Drying, let there then be imposed
dry Lint, or Lint, or Linen Cloths, which have been well wet and soaked in the
following Decoction.

VIII. Nut Galls, and Rinds of Frankincense, Mastich, A. i. Balaustians,
Red-Roses, Rue, A. M. ss. Alum ii. boil all in Red Port-wine. Or, you may use
the first of the Pouders described in lib. 4. cap. 9. sect. 129. aforegoing.

IX. Now the proud Flesh is either but beginning, or else it is come to a great
height: if it does only begin to increase, then strong Desiccatives or Dryers
will serve. And such are these following:

X. First, Vegetable Desiccants. Aloes, Avens-roots, Balaustians,
Bistort-roots, Birthwort-roots, Comfrey-roots, Frankincense rine, Herb
Horse-tail in Powder, Mastich, Myrttle-berries, Nutgalls, Olibanum, Oak-bark,
Pomgranate-Peels, Rue in Powder, Sanguis Draconis, Savin in Powder, Sponge
burnt, Scammony, Sumach, Tobacco in Powder, Tormentil-roots, Yarrow.

XI. Secondly, Mineral Desiccants. Alum burnt, Aqua Calcis, (which dries much
without pain) Aes ustum, Catechu, Caput mortuum of Vitriol, Ce^use, Crocus
Martis, Chalk, Cataminaris, Fine Bole, Flowers of Sulphur, Lead calcined with
Sulphur, Litharge both of Silver and Gold, Minium, Rust of Iron, Saccharum
Saturni, Tutia, Terra Lemnia, Terra Sigillata, Umber, Whiting.

XII. Some of these things, you may use either in Powder or Decoction; if in
Powder, you may mix with them Ashes of an old Hat, or of Leather burnt, and
dried Blood, also burnt Alum, and even red Praecipitate, which in a mixture,
Wiseman says, may be reckoned among the milder Medicaments.

XIII. If you use the most proper of them in Decoction, then you may add a
convenient quantity of either Alum, or Roman Vitriol; by which means you will
not only suppress the luxuriant or soft and spongy Flesh, which is budding
forth, but shall incarnate the Ulcer, and bring it to a healing, and
Cicatrization.

XIV. Roots of Bistort, Comfry, and Birthwort, Catechu, Nutgalls, Oak-bark, and
Pomgranate Peels, A. i. Fair-water lbii ss. or q.s. boil to the one half, and
strain out. If you add to the Decoction, Roch-Alum i. it will be of a deep
Amber-colour; but if a little Roman-Vitriol, it will be blackish, and will
stain the Clouts and Rowlers of an unpleasing dirty Color.

XV. Yet with the Vitriol it will be more effectual than with the Alum, and
chiefly in malign Ulcers. You may dip Pledgets of Tow or Lint in it being warm,
and gently press it out, and so dress the Ulcer therewith morning and evening;
you will find in your practice, such a Decoction, much transcending either
Ointments or Emplasters.

XVI. Though some of the Minerals may be used also in the form of a Decoction,
yet other some, and the most of them, are used in the form of a Powder: they
are, it is true, more effectual than Vegetables, yet it is not so easy to clean
the Sore after them; nor are they so pleasing to the Patient, as when they are
made into Ointments or Emplasters.

XVII. An Ointment. Ceruse, Litharge, Mininm, A. ii. Burnt-brass, Crocus
Martis, A. iss. Tutiae, Caput mortuum, A. i. Saccharum Saturni, Catechu, A. ss.
Camphir ii. Oil of Roses, xxx. boil to the consistency of an Ointment, adding
Wax iv. This is of good use where the Ulcer is hollow.

XVIII. A Powder, from Wiseman. Nut-galls, Pomg^anate-peels, A. iv.
Balaustians, burnt Alum, A. i. make a subtle Powder, and mix them. This (says
he) may be sprinkled on the Ulcer thick, and dry Pledgets, with Compress bound
over it: or it may be boiled in Red-wine, and Pledgets dipped therein, and
applied.

XIX. If the Proud Flesh is grown to a height, so that it will not yield to
Desiccatives, you must then come to stronger Medicaments, which are called
Cathereticks, or yet stronger than those, which are called Septicks; or the
strongest of all, which are Escaroticks: the difference of which, you may see
in the Third Edition of Our Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 1. cap. 69. sect. 207.

XX. Where the Proud-Flesh is soft and sp^ngy, (...) ^he^ ^ichs will be of
sufficient (...), and such are Alum-stone, Alu^ ^nt, Aqua Lapidis
Medicamentosi, Aqua Viridis Sennerti, (which see Lil 4. Cap. 9. Sect. 130.
aforegoing) Chalcitis, p^uder of Hermodacts, Prince's ^ouder, red Precip^tate,
seewing. of Brass, Turpethum (...), Verdigrise, Vitriol while, (...) stone,
Vnguentum Apof^orum, Vnguentum Aegyptiacum, and a mixture of Apostolorum i. or
of Aegyptiacum i. with Basilicon ss. to which add the Pulvis Angelicus in the
place aforecited, Sect. 129.

XXI. Cathereticks pierce not deep, by reason of their thick substance, as also
for their rebated heat; but only superficially corrode the Flesh, and dry, and
without any great pain; because their heat is not very intense, unless mixed
with some other things.

XXII. Aqua Calcis is moderately drying, but if a few grains of Sublimate
corrosive is added to it, it is much more powerful. The Water of Lapis
Medicamentosus and the Aqua Viridis are more strong, but they may be made
milder by the addition of a small quantity of Plantan-water.

XXIII. Red Precipitate, or burnt Alum, do either of them by themselves cause
no great pain; but if they be used being mixed with other things, they both
cause Pain, and a small Escar: yet red Precipitate exceeds most other things,
for it operates with small Pain, concocts and thickens Ichorous Humors; and
being washed, and mixed in small quantity with Incarnative Ointments, it
advances their Operation; and Turpethum Minerale yet exceeds the red
Precipitate.

XXIV. A compound Powder. Balaustians, Catechu, Nut-galls, A. ii. burnt Alum
jss. Ceruss, Dragons-blood, Olibanum, Myrrh, A. i. Verdigrise, Princes Powder,
A. ss. mix them.

XXV. The Vitriol and Alum stones will serve will (says Wiseman) for this
purpose, to keep down loose or proud Flesh, and to cicatrize these Ulcers which
are most luxuriant; and if they be discrectly used, will perform the work with
little pain, and produce a firm Cicatrice.

XXVI. Fallopius his Catheretical Lint. Rose, Plantan, and Nightshade waters,
A. iv. Crumbs of Bread ii. corrosive Sublimate in powder iv. Opium i. boil to
the consumption of one half, and strain through a thick Cloth. Take Lint and boil
it therein for a little while, then take it out, press it, dry it, and keep it
for use.

XXVII. Sennertus makes it thus. Plantan and Rose waters, A. v. corrosive
Sublimate i. boil, and strain through a thick linen Cloth: in the straining, let
the Lint or pieces of linen Cloth be laid to soak, then taken out, dried, and
kept for use.

XXVIII. Of the Ung. Apostolorum and Aegyptiacum, the latter is said to be
strongest; but in plain Ulcers it is not so well to be used, because of its
spreading, and by touching the sound Part, it causes great pain; but it is good
in fretting Sores of the Mouth and Sinuous Ulcers, being dissolved in proper
Decoctions, fit for the same purpose.

XXIX. But the Ung. Apostolorum, though it is a Catheretick in tender Bodies, yet
it is only a Mundificative in such as are of a strong and firm habit of Body.

XXX. If the luxuriant or proud Flesh shall be so firm and compact, as to
contemn all Cathereticks, you must then have recourse to such as are yet
stronger, viz. either (...), Septicks, putrefascientia, corrupting Medicaments;
or (...), Escharoticks, Medicaments producing an Eschar or Crust.

XXXI. Septicks are not so hot as Escharoticks, but of a more subtle and thin
substance, not having so much earthiness and astriction: and so as they more
easily pierce, they cause less pain; which is yet very sharp and pricking, but
of no long continuance.

XXXII. These leave the corrupted Part soft, moist, and of a blackish color:
of the liquid kind are, Aqua Fortis, Aqua Regis, Oils of Vitriol, of Sulphur,
and of Salt: of the solid kind are the white Arsenick or Ratsbane, the yellow
Arsenick: or Orpiment, the red Arsenick or Realger.

XXXIII. Unguentum Fallopii. White and yellow Arse^iak, A. jss. Opium ii. round
Birthwort roots, Verdigrise, A.iii. Hogs-lard ivss. mix, and make an Ointment.
This is effectual in correcting and taking away of stubborn proud Flesh;
besides which, it is of extraordinary use in curing of Cancers.

XXXIV. Escharoticks, by reason of their extraordinary great Heat, cause
vehement Pain 5 and the reason is, that being of a more earthy substance, they
are longer in piercing through the Part; of this kind, these are the chief: 1.
Lapis Infernalis. 2. The White Caustic, of Soap and Quicklime. 3. The Silver
Caustic. 4. Corrosive Sublimate. 5. Turpethum Minerale, whilst white, before
it is washed.

XXXV. Of all these the Lapis Infernalis is the most effectual, and operates
the most speedily, where it can be applied to an upper Part, or can be hindered
from spreading.

XXXVI. The White Caustic is to be applied to the under side of a Part, or a
Part depending, and where there is fear of running; because this Escharotick is
not so apt to run, as is the Lapis Infernalis. It does the work well enough,
but is scarcely so quick in operation, as the Lapis Inf. now mentioned.

XXXVII. The Silver Caustic is harder, and less apt to spread; and therefore
is most convenient for the Parts that are depending, and where the Escharotick
may be most apt to run.

XXXVIII. Corrosive Sublimate is by na^means to be used alone, but it may be
mixed, and grownd with Roman-Vitriol, calcined 'till it becomes red, or like to
red Terra Sigillata.

XXXIX. White, or unwashed Turpethum Minerale, is also to be mixed with the
same Roman Vitriol calcined: this does work more gently, if mixed with some
Narcotick Liniment or Ointment, than if applied without mixture: and it far
exceeds corrosive Sublimate, for that it is more familiar to Nature, and causes
less Pain: and as it is not so volatile and piercing as the Sublimate, so in
tender Bodies it assaults not the Heart and Vitals, nor causes Symptomatical
Diaries, as the Sublimate is apt to do.

CHAP. X. Of a CALLOVS ULCER.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...), vel (...). the Latins, Ulcus callosum; we in
English call, A Callous Ulcer, or, An Ulcer with a Callus.

II. The Causes. It is derived either from the defluxion of a hot Serum; which
is condensed or hardened, either by the overcoolness of the Air, or by
Medicaments which cool and dry overmuch.

III. The Signs. The lips of the Ulcer are hard, livid, and wan, and sometimes
of a whitish color: and they are generally Annual, and through length of time
contract this callosity or hardness, with a livid color.

IV. The Prognostics. From what cause so ever this Callosity happens, the
Ulcer is not possible to be cured, or closed up with a Cicatrice; 'till the
hardness is first taken away, and the Ulcer be reduced to its natural state.

V. If the hardness be not great, it may be removed by Emollients and
Discussives, with good Compress and Bandage: first, foment with roots and
leaves of Althea, of Lillies, and of Mallows, Linseed and Fenugreek-seed;
flowers of Camomil, of Melilot, and of Elder; which rarifies the condensed
Blood, and removes the lividness.

VI. Then embrocate the hardened lips with Ung. Dialthaeae, Oils of sweet
Almonds, of Lillios, and of Earthworms; and apply Ceratum Galeni, Emplastr. e
Mucilaginibus, Diaehylon cum Gummi, or de Ranis cum Mercurio, or a Plate of
Lead besmeared with Mercury, or a Paste of Ceruss and Calx lota, made into an
Ointment with Hogs-lard; and over that, a good Compress and Bandage.

VII. Sennertus advises to the application of the Mucilages of Linseed and
Fenugreek-seed, Oils of Almonds, Lillies, and Earthworms, Hens and Ducks fat,
etc. Or this, Take Mucilages of Althea-seed and Fenugreek, A. iv. Oils of sweet
Almonds and of white Lillies, A. vi. Turpentine ii. Wax q.s. mix, and make an
Unguent; over which you may apply the simple Diachylon-Emplaster.

VIII. But as to the Bandage, Wiseman advises for the Leg, the laced Stocking,
which being well made, preserves the other parts from fluxion, better than a
Rowler can.

IX. If these things will not do, Galen, in Meth. Med. lib. 4. cap. 2. is to be
advised with: When the lips of the Ulcer (says he) are somewhat discolored,
and made a little harder than ordinary, they are to be cut out, even to the
sound Flesh.

X. Wiseman also says, If the edges of the lips are inverted and callous, or
the Ulcer is in such a place, where you cannot make good Bandage; your best way
will then be by Caustiek or Knife to remove it, and then to digest and heal the
Ulcer.

XI. But if the Sick will endure neither Incision, nor Burning with an Actual
Cautery; you must then use Corrosives, such as the Aqua Viridis, (in Lib. 4.
Cap. 9. Sect. 130. aforegoing) or the Pulvis Angelicus, mentioned in Cap. 9.
Sect. 20. but the strongest of Remedies are, the Oils of Vitriol and Sulphur.

XII. Yet nevertheless, whether the Work is done by Incision or Corrosion, you
must be very cautious in the Nervous Parts; and defensative Medicaments are to
be applied to the places adjacent; lest Pain, or an Afflux of Humors be excited.

XIII. An Observation. One 18 Years old, of an ill habit, had an inveterate
Ulcer on the inside of the Ancle, of a round figure, with thick callous lips,
the parts about being livid. There was no hopes by Emollients and Bandage; they
were therefore rubbed round with a Caustiek-stone, the Ulcer dressed with
Basilicon mixed with Precipitate, and Diachylon ireatum was laid over with
Compress and Bandage, designing to dispose the lips to unite with the Ulcer.
The Eschar separating slowly, the lips skinned underneath, and so disappointed
me: but the inverted parts being removed, with the Callus underneath, a Paste
made with Calx lota and Lard, applied with good Compress, forced the lips with
the Ulcer, and so it was healed with a smooth even Cicatrice. Wiseman, Live. 2.
Cap. 8.

XIV. Another. A Maid having such an Ulcer, with livid callous lips, but not
inverted; it was digested with Basilicon and Precipitate, and fomented with a
Decoction, as above mentioned; then Diachylon ireatum applied over the parts
about, and a Compress, with a laced Stock in, put on over it, thereby digesting
the Ulcer, and flatting the lips; and in 3 Weeks time it was incarnated and
cicatrized with Vng. Diapompholigos, though it had been more than 3 Years work in
other Hands. This speedy Cure I imputed to the Laced-stockin, performing all
the Intentions necessary to the curing of such like Ulcers. Wiseman, ibid.

CHAP. XI. Of an ULCER DISCOLOVRED.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...), and (...). and the Latins, Ulcus male
coloratum, vel discoloratum; we in English call, an Ulcer evil-coloured, or
discolored.

II. The Cause. It proceds either from an afflux of malign Humors; or for want
of natural heat, or from too hard binding; or from the coldness of the Air, or
Weather.

III. The Signs. It is known by sight, being discolored, with a wan, livid,
leaden color, or black colored; and sometimes with a yellowish color,
according to the nature of the Humors which most predominate.

IV. The Prognostics. Discoloring of an Ulcer is an evil sign, and foreshews
some other worse Symptoms suddenly to ensue, if the cause thereof be not
removed.

V. The Cure. If it is from an afflux of Humors in a cacochymick habit of Body,
you must make Evacution by Purgation and Vomiting, as also by Diuretics.

VI. And in the intervals of Purging, a good Traumatick Drink is to be taken;
which may alter the habit of the Body, and destroy the malignity of the Humor
abounding.

VII. Outmardly, Interceptives and Defensatives are to be applied to the parts
adjacent to the Ulcer.

VIII. And Scarification is to be made upon the very place where the Discolor
is most manifest; that the vicious Blood may be drawn forth, which you may dry
up with Spunges.

IX. Then in the next place, you must use strong Disiccatives, having but
little sharpness: if these prevail not, you must apply the Aqua viridis
beforementioned, in Lib. 4. Cap. 9. Sect. 130. or some such like Medicament,
especially such as may have the power of Abstersion and Incarnating together.

X. Then with Pulvis Astringens, or with some drying Liniment, Ointment, or
Plaster, you must produce the Cicatrice, as in other Ulcers.

XI. If it proceeds from want of natural Heat, Attractives and Pyroticks are to
be applied, and such things as have in them a comfortable and spirituous Heat;
of which kind are Lixivium's, Spirit of Wine, Euphorbium, and the like.

XII. If it procceds from coldness of Air or Weather, you must (besides the
things named in the former Section) take care to keep it warm by Emplasters,
Rowlers, and warm Clothing.

CHAP. XII. Of an ULCER CAVERNOVS, or HOLLOW.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...). and the Latins, Ulcus sinuosum, and Ulcus
cavernosum; we in English call An Ulcer sinuous, cavernous, or hollow.

II. A sinuous or cavernous Ulcer, is that which has its mouth straight, and
its bottom broad, with many caverns therein, some right, and some oblique,
without any hardness or callosity; and therein it chiefly differs from a
Fistula. These Caverns, by help of a Wax-candle, are easily found out.

III. The Differences. These Ulcers differ one-from another; as the Caverns are
either straight or crooked; deep, or lying only under the Skin; or having one,
or more Sinus's.

IV. The Causes. They many times proceed from Apostems, wherein the Sanies or
Pus, being long continued, either by his own nature, or by its long continuance
becomes sharp and corrosive, whereby it makes or eats a hollowness, not much
unlike to Coney-borows, which the Greeks call (...), and the Latins, Sinus: of
a Sinuous Ulcer, from this Cause, we have already treated at large, in Lib. 3.
Cap. 4. aforegoing, of this Work.

V. But a sinuous Ulcer is not only bred from Apostems, but oftentimes succeed
Wounds, caused thicfly through the ignorance or negligence of the Surgeon: and
these many times happen in Parts descending; as in the Reins of the Back,
Groin, Thighs, Legs, and Feet.

VI. For in suchlike places, where the Muscles are large, if the Wound is not
so ordered, that the Sanies or Pus may be evacuated by the Orifice of the
Wound; it then by its weight descends, and according to the ductus or progress
of the Muscles, and so makes Cavities, Furrows, and Coney-borows; and this more
especially if it is long detained, whereby it becomes sharp and corroding.

VII. The Antecedent Cause is, a Ca^ochymy or evil habit of Body, in which many
evil Humors do abound; occasioned by evil Diet, Excess, Slothfulness, want of
Exercise, and a discontented fretful disposition; which sour the Humors so,
that when the Sanies or Pus proceeding from them is too long detained, as
aforesaid, they become corrosive, and render the Ulcer sinuous.

VIII. For unto the Part affected, being now weakened, Excrementitious Humors
flow, not only from the Parts adjacent, but from the whole Body also, which
makes the Ulcer the more difficult to be cured.

IX. The Signs. They are known from the preceding Causes; whether it is a
translation of Matter from within outward, or from a Phlegmon, or other
Abscess, or a Wound, etc.

X. It may also be known or found by searching with a Probe, or a Wax-candle,
or a Plummet of Lead: and if there are more Orifices than one, they are
discovered by Injections; and the largeness may be known, by the quantity of
Matter flowing forth.

XI. The Prognostics. Sinuous Ulcers, if they have been of long continuance,
they will be of difficult cure; because of the weakness of the Native Heat of
the Part, which makes it unable to assimulate its proper Nutriment, or to
resist the afflux of Humors.

XII. If the Sinus runs upon. or under the Joints, Nerves, or Tendons, where it
cannot easily or safely be laid open, it will be of very difficult cure.

XIII. If it proceeds from a translation of Matter within the Body, the Cure
cannot be effected 'till the diseased Viscera be healed; during which, the
Patient will be in great danger of a Marasmos, or very deep Consumption.

XIV. But if the sinuous Ulcer discharges but little Pus or Matter, and that
well digested, and in a place where it may safely and easily be kept open, the
Cure will be in more hopes.

XV. Cure. There are two ways of curing a sinuous Ulcer: 1. By Injections,
without laying them open. 2. By opening them, and dressing them as another
Ulcer.

I. The Cure, without laying open the Sinus.
XVI. There are four Intentions of Cure. 1. That a good Diet be instituted,
which may be drying, and not generating a large quantity of Excrementitious
Humors: and respect is to be had to the Regulation of all the other six
Non-naturals, which are here in other places largely discoursed of.

XVII. 2. The Cacochymia is to be considered, and the superabundant or
excrementitious Humors are to be evacuated, and contemperated: you may purge
with Syrupus Cathartious, or an Infusion of Sena, Rhubarb, and Mechoacan; or
with Pil. Catharticae, Panchymagogae, or Our Family Pills; or with Palvis
Cornachini, which is no despicable Medicament: and if the Stomach is foul,
Evacuation must be made by Wine or Syr^p of Squills, or some proper Antimonial.

XVIII. The Humor must be contemperated, by giving some proper Traumatick
Diet-drink, and other Balsamic and Vulnerary Potions, as the nature of the
thing requires.

XIX. 3. The Influx of the Humors into the Sinus is to be prevented; and this
is to be done by Revulsion, Interception, and Repercussion; of all which we
have discoursed in their proper places.

XX. The removing of the Conjoined or Proximate Cause: this has respect
immediately to the Cure of the Ulcer; by removing the Accidents which attend
it, as Pain, Inflammation; Tumor, Sordes, etc. without which, there can be no
hope of a Cure.

XXI. In order to do this, we shall observe the Method of doing it, out of the
admirable Franciscus Valeri^la his Observations; who in Lib. 5. Obs. 1. and 7.
has in a most excellent manner delivered the true Way and Method of Healing.

XXII. 1. You must consider the Sinus, how the Matter may be be best
discharged; if the Orifice be in the declining part, it is to be enlarged; but
if the Sinus runs beneath downwards, it will be necessary to open a Hole in the
declining and lowest part of the cavity or hollowness, (either by the
Incision-knife or Caustic) that a way and passage may be made in a depending
place, for the issuing forth of the Sanies, Pus, or Matter.

XXIII. But if the Sinus does run under considerable Vessels, Arteries, Veins,
Nerves, or be in such a place where you cannot conveniently or safely lay it
open; you must then (say (...) ^man) enlarge the Orifice, (...) put the Member
in such a position, as may dispose the Matter to flow forth, and by Compress
and Bandage, contribute your endeavors thereto.

XXIV. 2. That such a compressive Ligature be used, (to prevent the coming of a
Fistula) which may begin from the bottom of the Wound or Ulcer, and end in the
orifice thereof: this always provided, that by how much the nearer it comes to
the Orifice, by so much the looser it may be.

XXV. 3. That, way being thus made for the discharge of the Matter, the Ulcer
is to be cleansed with Abstersives, according to the degree of its impurity:
and that by reason of the foulness of these Sinuous Ulcers, the Spirit of Wine
is very fit to be mixed with other Medicaments, because it has an excellent
property and virtue, to cleanse and purify in such like cases.

XXVI. For truly great and admirable is the power and force of Aqua Vitae or
Spirit of Wine, in cleansing sordid and foul Ulcers, in resisting of a new Flux
of Matter, by strengthening of the Part now weakened by the disaffection; in
glewing together the parts of the Ulcer disjoined or separated; in producing a
soundness and firmness of the Flesh; and in disposing to a speedy healing,
especially if the Affect be in Parts nervous and tendinous: so that there is
scarcely any thing better for that purpose in the World.

XXVII. First of all (says Valeriola) after Vniversals, and a special regard
had to the whole Body, the Ulcer must be cleansed from its thin ichorous
Excrements; without which it can neither be filled up with Flesh, nor
agglutinated.

XXVIII. Broth of whole Barley lbii. Honey of Roses vi. mix, and inject with a
Syringe: it cleanses, without any sharpness; but if Spirit of Wine iv. be added
to it, it will be so much the better.

XXIX. Wiseman says, the most usual Abstersives are, Ung. Apostolorum,
Mundificativum Paracelsi, and Mund. ex Apio, especially being used with red
Precipitate.

XXX. If there is a necessity for Injections, you may cast in with a Syringe
(says he) some of the following Liquors; (having a care not to stop the
Orifice, lest you dilate the Sinus.)

XXXI. A milder Injection is this. Decoction of Barley, which mix with Syrup of
dried Roses, or else with Honey of Roses. Or this, which is stronger. Take tops
of lesser Centory, Agrimony, Horstail, Burnet, A. M. i. roots of round
Birthwort, of Orrice, A. ii. Myrrh, Sarcocol, A. iii. Water lbii. boil and
strain, and add thereto S.V. iv. Honey of Roses q.s. mix them.

XXXII. But if the Ulcer is very deep, you must use strong Cleansers, by mixing
with some of the former Injection a fit proportion of Vnguentum Aegyptiacum:
and if then after 6. 8, or to days, these following things should do nothing,
you may use this following of Valeriola.

XXXIII. Raspings, or rather the powder of Guajacum, and and bark of the same
in powder, A. ii. bark of Frankincense, Myrrh, Sarcocol, A. ss. long Birthwort,
Centory the less, Agrimony, Horsetuil, Pimpernel, Olive-leaves, the greater
Consound, Wormwood, A. M.i. pure Rod-wine lbiv. clarified Honey iv. mix, and
make a Decoction; and strain out for an Injection.

XXXIV. But at the very time of using it, add thereto of the best Aqua Vitae or
S.V. i. for every dose, or using, as often as you administer the Decoction.

XXXV. But if together with the aforesaid Decoction, you add of the best Aqua
Vitae, or S.V. lbii. and so distill them in a Glass-Alembick, in B.M. you will
have from thence a most admirable Liquor; not only for cleansing all hollow and
sordid Ulcers, but also for conglutinating, and closing them safely up; which
we have frequently found (says Valeriola) by Experience.

XXXVI. Son cleanse with this. Wine (in which white Horehound, lesser
Centory, flowers of Hypericon, Carduus Ben. Wormwood have been infused) lbss.
Unguentum Aegyptiacum ii. Honey of Roses ss. mix for an Insection. You can
scarcely devise more effectual Medicaments than these are, for the cleansing of
a sinuous or cavernous Ulcer.

XXXVII. You may easily know when the Ulcer is sufficiently mundified; and that
it is not yet clean, if the Quittor or Matter is either stinking, reddish,
pale, blackish, or thin and water ish.

XXXVIII. But when the time is come, that it is thought sit to sid the Ulcer
with Flesh, you may then make use of this next following Injection; the Virtues
and Faculties of which are both moderately to cleanse; and also to fill up the
cavity with Flesh, and therefore may deservedly be called a Sarcotick Remedy.

XXXIX. Leaves of Plantan M. ^i. of Agrimony, Betony, Cinkfoil, Herb. Robert A.
M. i. of both Consounds, Ceterach, Horstail, Hypericon, Wormwood, A. M. ss.
Water q.s. make a Decoction: at the end of the Decoction, add red Astringent
Wine lbii. Red-roses, Mrrtle-leaves, whole Barley, A. P.ii. boil a little, and
strain, of which take lbiv. and add thereto Bean-meal, Frankincense, Mastich,
Myrrh Pine-Rosin, Sarcocol, r^und Birthwort root, A. i. meal of ^robus,
Florentine-Orrice root, A. ss. Honey of Roses iv. mix, for an Injection.

XL. After the Injection, put in Tents (according to the hollowness) dipped in
some Sarcotick Ointment, (as the Ointment of Litharge) and within the Ulcer
apply this Sarcotick Powder.

LX. Fine Aloes i. Florentine-Orrice root, Frankincense, rind of the same Tree,
Sarcocol, A. ss. make a fine powder, and mix them; with which fill up the
hollow cavities of the Ulcer.

XLII. And withal, to encourage the Healing, you may foment the Ulcer and parts
adjacent with the Decoction at Sect. 33. above; or with this, Centory the less,
Red-roses, A. M. i. Myrrh in powder, iii. Roch-Alum i. boil all together in
Red-Wine, then strain out for a Fomenta^tion.

XLIII. After these things are done, you may use this Epulotick-Injection
following. Leaves of Plantan, green Pvy, Red-roses, A. P.i. Myrtle-berries,
P.jss. leaves and flowers of Centory the less, A. M. ss. Roch-Alum i.
Pomgranate-peels jss. Red-wine q.s. mix, and make a Decoction.

XLIV. And over all, you may lay Emplastr. de Minio, or Diapalma, or
Diapompholigos, or Our Emplastr. Album.

XLV. And lastly, in the curing of these great and hollow Ulcers, (says
Valeriola) after the through cleansing of them, we found by good. Experience,
that there was nothing better, nor more available for the Cure, than the
applying of Pillows or Bolsters, a little thicker than ordinary, round about
the said Ulcers; and so binding them hard on, strongly to press down upon the
Flesh lying underneath, that the separated parts might touch one another: and
Experience taught that agglutination was most absolutely procured thereby.

II. Of Dressing of these Ulcers.
XLVI. First, lay over the whole compass of the cavity Emplastrum Album, and
then inject with a proper Syringe, your Abstersive Medicament blood-warm; for
for the cleansing the Sanies or Sordes, and making the Ulcer sweet.

XLVII. And if the Excrements or Impurities be ichorous and thin, you may put
in this Ointment, which has an admirable and excellent virtue, in speedily
cleansing the Ulcer. Juice of Smallage lbss. (which is a famous thing in
cleansing of foul Ulcers) of the best Honey iv. Barley-flower ii. Turpentine
jss. meal of Orobus ss. choice Myrrh ii. mix, boil all together, and make an
Ointment. Linen rags may be dipped herein, and put into the cavities of the
Ulcer. It cleanses Ulcers excellently, without any biting at all.

XLVIII. Then put into the Orifice a Leaden Tent or Pipe; but let it be short,
hollow, wider in the upper than in the lower part; and having broad lips turned
out, that it may be kept from slipping in; and cover the Orifice and upper part
of the Tent with Empl. Diapalm. cum Succis, or Empl. Album, or some such like,
which let be snipt, to give way to the Matter which may flow out of the Ulcer.

XLIX. Above the Emplaster you may lay a piece of soft Sponge, moistened with
the Decoction with which you dress the Ulcer, and wrung out, which will suck
into it self the humidity, and keep the lips of the Orifice dry; and above the
Sponge, you may lay a Pledget of fine Tow.

L. This done, Bolsters must be laid from the lower part of the cavity, or
bottom of the Ulcer; over which a double soft linen Cloth is to be put: and
then you are to roll it up, beginning the rolling at the bottom, where it must
be somewhat straight, to press out the Pus or Matter, bring the Sides of the
Ulcer together, and procure agglutination: but let not the Bandage be so hard
as to be painful or trou^lesom, for that would distemper the Part.

LI. As you draw near to the Orifice in rolling, it must be somewhat slack,
that the Matter may have room easily to issue forth.

LII. You may dress it but every second or third day, unless much Sanies,
Humidities and Impurities flow forth: and when you do come to the dressing of
it, first, loose the Rowler, the turning of which is about the Orifice, and so
take away the Sponge and Emplaster, that you may come to cleanse the Ulcer.

LIII. Then observe, whether Nature is yet intending to agglutinate the parts;
which you will easily know, by the Recrements issuing forth, their color,
consistence, and smell: and by the Ulcer it self, whether it is with, or
without Pain, or any remarkable Tumor.

LIVE. If the Matter is much, ill-colour'd, and stinking, and the Cavity is
painful, and a manifest Tumor appears, you may be certain that there is no
agglutination; then you must continue to dress the Ulcer in the following
manner, 'till a perfect Unition is accomplished, which you may know by the
Signs.

LV. If the Pus or Matter is but little in the Orifice, there is no Pain selt,
and the Cavity is equal without Tumor, then you may conclude that the
Agglutination is induced; and now you must come to the use of Epuloticks.

LVI. If after some time of Dressing, a thin, gleeting Matter shall yet appear,
especially when the Ulcer is in or near Parts nervous, tendinous, membranous,
or glandulous, you are not to despair, but to continue the Dressings on, 'till
the Tone of the parts hurt are in some measure restored.

LVII. And as to the first Emplaster which is laid over the whole Cavity it
self, it is so often to be renewed, as it is souled with the Quittor, or leaves
off sticking to the part.

LVIII. You are also to dress the Ulcer as seldom as may be: for often dressing
lets in the cold Air, which is prejudicial to Ulcers, and hinders their unition
and healing.

LIX. And this is the manner of proceeding in these Sinuous Ulcers, if the
Excrements have a way to flow from them: which will be, if the Orifice is in a
depending Part, or lateral, the Cavity or Sinus being lateral also: for then,
such a situation or posture may be ordered, as may farther the evacuation of
the Excrements.

LX. But if by reason of the situation and figure of the Cavity, the Ulcer
cannot le discharged of its filth, then no Abstersion, Incarnation, or
Agglutination can be expected, till that hinderance is removed, which is only
to be do^e either by Incision or Caustic.

III. The Cure, by Opening the Sinus.
LXI. The Opening of a sinuous Ulcer is confidered in a twofold respect: 1. In
opening the bottom of the Sinus only, when in a depending Part, it is
lowermost. 2. The laying open all the whole cavity or cavities, when the nature
and disposition of the Ulcer so requires it.

LXII. If the Cavity then is lower than the Orifice, whether directly or
obliquely, though not very deep; or if it goes deep also, as it does in many
sinuous Ulcers; or if it penetrates into the Breast, or Abdomen; or if the
hollowness is very broad and capacious; or if it be in a great Joint; or where
great Vessels, Nerves, and Tendons are: in all these cases, a new way must be
made for the Matter, that it may be discharged downwards.

LXIII. This is done two ways: viz. either by Caustic, or Incision.

LXIV. The Caustic is of use, 1. When the Patient is timorous or fearful. 2.
When the Cavity is in a Part, wherein a great Scar may cause deformity. 3. When
there may be fear of a great Flux of Blood. 4. When the Patient is sick also
and weak.

LV. If the Sinus is in the upper side of a Part, apply Lapis Infernalis, for
it mortifies soonest, deepest, and with the least pain; nor will it in such a
place be so apt by running or spreading, to burn the adjacent parts, or cause a
greater Wound than is intended.

LXVI. But if the Sinus is in the lower or under side of a Part, or in a Part
depending; then use the white Caustic, made of strong Soap-Lye and unslaked
Lime, which will not run.

LXVII. Some of our late Surgeons use the Caustick-stone, by constant
rubbing it on the Part, 'till it is mortified, and then it is opened with an
Incision-knife: but this is not to be done, but when the Skin is thin; because
this rubbing gives far greater pain, than the application of it to the Part,
being defended.

LXVIII. When the Escharotick has mortified all to the cavity or Sinus, then
you must cause the Eschar to fall, by applying to it Unguent, Dialthaeae, fresh
Butter, Hogs-lard, or some such like thing; and when it is come off, a passage
in the lower part will be made for the Matter: after which, you must proceed in
the former Methods to complete the Cure.

LXiX. But if the Patient has courage enough to endure it, you may use
Incision, which is soonest done, is leis painful, and will sooner be cured: it
may be performed either with the Incision-Knife, or with a Syringot^mos, as
your reason shall direct you.

LXX. When you have made Incision, you may arm Dossels and Pledgets, with
mundifying and drying Medicaments, such as this. Vnslakt Lime ijss. Aloes ii.
Amber, Colophony, Scammony, A.jss. Catechu i. make all into ^ine powder; mix
this with the while and yolk of an Egg beaten together; bringing them to the
consistency of an Ointment; which apply to the Incision, or filling it well,
that the lips may be kept asunder.

LXXI. Open it not, 'till the end of the second day; for it will both digest
the Wound, and dry the superflous humidities of the Ulcer: after which you may
go on with the Cure as before directed.

LXXII. But when the Sinus is near no great Joint, nor approximate to any great
Arteries, Veins, Nerves, Tendons, or Glandules; or is not of an extravagant
bigness, or like to bring a dangerous Hemorrhage, but lies on the middle of a
Limb, or along a great Bone: in all these cases it will be the surest way to
lay open the whole cavity the longest way, if it crosses not the Ductus of the
Muscular Fibers: and this is done also, either by Caustic, or Incision, as is
before declared.

LXXIII. The Cavities being laid open, the Ulcer is to be cleansed with
Abstersives, as Oxymelsimple, or with Squills, Unguen. Apostolorum, Nicotianae,
Aegyptiacum, or some of the other things before described in this Chapter:
after which, you must apply Sarcoticks to Incarnate, and Epuloticks to complete
the Cicatrice.

LXXIV. If the Ulcer is from an Abscess within the Body, it will not be safe to
use Injections, unless a way be found how to be let them out again: in such
cases, you must see how you may give Vent to the Matter, for while that is
wanting, there can be no hope of cleansing: but that being conveniently made,
it may be kept open by a Cannula, or some such like thing; 'till Nature, through
the help of Art, shall be disposed to heal the disaffected Viscera.

LXXV. But if these kinds of Ulcers prove-rebellious, and difficult to be
cured, you must prescribe some Traumatick Decoction, or some Decoction made of
Guajacum and its bark, Sarsaparilla, S^ssafras, Chin^ root. Burdock-roots,
Agrimony, Angelina, Avens, Bistort, Borrage, Bugloss, Comfrey, Consound,
Golden-round, Horehound, Hypericon, Ladies-mantle, Sanicle, Solomons-seal,
Tormentil, and other the like Vulnerary Herbs; the taking of which may be
continued for three Weeks or a Months time.

LXXVI. And then wash several times a day, with the Water of the Griffin, by
injecting it in with a Syringe; and if the Ulcer is laid open, by washing it
with a Sponge, and laying a piece of Sponge, or double Clothes wet therewith,
and keeping them still moist with the Water, this cures speedily, and it were
to a Miracle when all other things fail.

CHAP. XIII. Of an ULCER with WORMS.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...). and the Latins Ulcus cum Verminibus; we in
English call, An Ulcer with Worms.

II. The Causes. They are caused from great Putrefaction; and foreshew a great
declension in the state of the Ulcer, from a healthful habit of the Flesh, and
parts about it.

III. But in some nasty People, where Flesh-flies can come at the Sore, they
may be caused from Flyblows, (which in the West Indies I have sometimes seen in
Negroes Legs) if they proceed from this cause, the consequence is not so bad as
the former.

IV. The Signs. As they are bred for the most part in Ulcers sordid, and foul;
so if the Ulcer is large and wide, they are generally known by sight.

V. Or otherwise, if they cannot be seen, they are known by a biting pricking
pain, and a sense of a kind of motion called motus undosus, a wave-like motion;
with a certain filthy stink.

VI. The Prognostics. If they proceed from Fly-blows, there is simply no
danger in them; but if from Sanies or Sordes, by reason the Ulcer had not been
purged or cleansed for a long time, as it shows a great corruption and
putrefaction; so it also declares the Ulcer to be of difficult care; and that
the Tone of the Part is much depraved.

VII. The Cure. The Indications of Cure are twofold: 1. To take away and
destroy the Worms. 2. To prevent and hinder the putridity of the Ulcer.

VIII. If the Worms lie open, or in an open Ulcer, so as to be plainly seen,
they may be taken forth with Instruments, fitted for the same purpose: but some
Authors laugh at this, thinking the pain in doing it will be great, and the
labor fruitless; for that possibly you may not be able to take out all; and if
you should, yet you leave the corrupt humor, and putridinous heat behind, which
bred them, and may also breed more.

IX. But as these Worms or Maggots are for the most part bred in hollow and
sinuous Ulcers, so they lie hid, and cannot be seen, and for the most part
stick so fast, that they cannot be drawn forth. These Worms then are first to
be killed with Medicaments, which may also have a faculty of taking away the
putridity, the corruptive heat, and the overgreat humidity of the Part.

X. Such Simples as are good for killing Worms in Ulcers, we have enumerated in
Chap. 2. Sect. 14. aforegoing of this Book; to which you may add these few
following: Aron-roots, Bearsfoot, Fetherfew, Fern-roots, Hellebor white,
Hellebor black, Lupins in meal or decoction, Mugwort, Peach leaves and flowers,
Quitchgrass, Scordium.

XI. All, or any of which you may use in Infusion, Decoction, Lixivium, Powder,
or Ointment, simple or compound, as the nature and quality of the Ulcer shall
most require: among which, those things which shall be prepared from Bearsfoot,
the Hellebors, Tobacco, Aloes, and Scammony, may be superior to all other
Vegetable-medicaments whatsoever.

XII. In the place afore-cited, from Sect. 15 to 20, we have given you several
Compound-Medicaments for this purpose, of extraordinary effects: yet that we
might not be wanting, you may also take these following Compounds; which have a
power also of destroying the putridity, and drying up the too great humidity.

XIII. To correct the Putridity. Centory the less, Horehound, Wormwood, A. M.i.
Water q.s. boil and strain; and to lbi. add Honey, Aloes, A ii. Ung.
Aegyptiacum iv.

XIV. Or this of Sennertus. Gentian-root ss. white Hellebor ii. Dittany,
Centory the less, Wormwood, A. M. ss. Water q.s. boil, and strain: to lbi.
thereof add Elixir Proprietatis i. mix them.

XV. Or this of Riolanus, in Chirurg. de Vlcerib. cap. 8. Take, roots of white
Hellebor, of Capers, of Gentian, and of white Dittany, A. ii. Centory the less,
Calamint, Horehound, Scordium, Wormwood, A. M. ss. Water q.s. boil, and strain:
in lbi. thereof dissolve Honey ii. Aegyptiacum i. with this he washed the Ulcer,
and over it he laid Vng. Apostolorum.

XVI. Or, Unslaked Lime q.v. extinguish it with Wine-Vinegar; and afterward
mix it well with Oil of Roses q.s. and make a Cataplasm.

XVII. Fallopius in Lib. de Vlceribus, cap. 2. advises to this, which may be
used with a Tent that will reach the bottom. Ceruss, Polymountain, A. ss. Tar
q.s. mix, and make a Liniment.

XVIII. Or, Meal of Lupins i. Bulls-gall vi. Elixir Proprietatis v. Honey q.s.
mix, and make a Liniment.

XIX. Fallopius his Aqua Aluminis Magistralis is commended. Plantan and Rose
waters, A. lbi. Alum, Mercury sublimate, A. ii. the Ingredients being in
powder, mix, and dissolve in a glass Vessel in a Sand-heat, evaporating away
one half of the Water: let it settle a Week, and decant the clear for use: when
it is to be used, it is to be mixed with a double, triple, or quadruple
quantity of Rose Water.

XX. To these things add, the Infusions of Crocus Metallorum, or of Vitrum
Antimonii; the Ablution of Mercurius dulcis, and of Turpethum Minerale in
Limewater, or the Water of the Grissin, which is incomparable; so Vitriol of
all sorts dissolved in fair Water, adding a little Spirit of Wine in which a
little Camphir is dissolved.

XXI. But among Vegetables, scarcely any thing exceeds Tobacco; the Juice of
the green, or the Decoction or Infusion of the dry; used by Injection, or
Pledgets dipped therein, and applied: to this add Vnguentum Nicotianae, either
alone, or mixed with a little red Precipitate.

CHAP. XIV. Of an ULCER VARICOVS.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...). and the Latins, Ulcus varicosum; we in English
call, An Ulcer varicous, or, An Ulcer with a Varix.

II. We have already treated of Varix, as it is a Disease of it self, in Lib.
3. Cap. 16. of this Work aforegoing, so that no more need be said of that here:
we are now only to consider an Ulcer, as being joined with it.

III. The Causes. What the causes of a Varix are, we have told you in the place
cited; and also what the Causes of an Ulcer are, in Cap. 1. Sect. 24, ad 35; by
joining of which together, you may find out the Cause of an Ulcer varicous.

IV. The Signs. They are also easily known by sight; by comparing the signs of
a Varix with the Signs of an Ulcer, as they are delivered in Cap. 1. Sect. 36,
ad 52, of the Book aforegoing.

V. The Prognostics. A Varicous Ulcer cannot be healed, unless the Varices be
first of all healed; as Galen, Meth. Med. lib. 4. cap. 2. says.

VI. And it is to be observed, that if the Varix be very great, that it is
scarcely to be removed with the saving of Life; so very great is the danger of
Death.

VII. And a Varix being ulcerated by the acrimony of the Humor, through some
Accident or Bruise, Wound, etc. then Pain, Inflammation, and Tumor may succeed.

VIII. The Cure. Wiseman says, The Cures of these Ulcers are either Real, or
Palliative; the Real or Perfect Cure is, the total cutting out of the Varix, as
we have taught in Lib. 3. Chap. 16. Sect. 32, ad 44. from Paulus Aegineta,
Cornelius Celsus, Avicen, and Wiseman.

IX. But this way (says Wiseman) has not been admitted amongst us; nor have I
often seen a Varicous Ulcer could be cured by cutting off the Branch leading to
the Ulcer, there being commonly more Veins concerned in it.

X. The Palliative Cure consists (the necessary Purging and Bleeding having
gone before) in dressing the Ulcer with Digestives and Detersives, according as
the Ulcer is sanious or sordid: and while by good Bandage, or a laced Stockin,
(if it is in the Leg) to repress the Humors impacted in the Part; by which
Bandage, the lips of the Ulcer will be disposed to cicatrize with the Ulcer:
but this lasts no longer than the laced Stockin shall be worn; from whence it
is called a Palliative Cure.

XI. Some advise, that if a Varicous Ulcer contemns the ordinary means, to take
up the Varix both above and below, and to open it between the Deligations,
according to the Method of Hildanus, in the place afore-cited, Sect. 45, ad 5.,
that the Blood may be discharged out of it; which is an Operation of no very
great difficulty.

XII. And if in doing this there should be some unknown way (by some small
branches of a Vein, which you had not before hand secured) for the Blood to
fall into the Vein again, whereby an Hemorrhage does succeed, you must stop it
with Pulvis Astringens and the white of an Egg, or Pulvis Stypticus, or some
such like thing, with sitting Bandage; the Swathband being also first wet in
Oxycrate, or some Styptick Liquor; and then it is to be healed after the manner
of an ordinary Wound.

XIII. An Observation. A Woman 54 Years old, had a varicous Ulcer on her right
Leg, which was much swelled, and somewhat inflamed. It was dressed with Vng.
Tutiae, and over it was applied Unguent. Nutritum and Populeon mined together,
which was rolled up with Compress and Bandage. A laced Stockin was provided
against the next day, which was laced on, and the former Method of Dressing
repeated: from that day the pain ceased, the Humors were repressed by virtue of
the Bandage, and the Ulceration cicatrized in ten or twelve days.

XIV. Another Man had Ulcers in the skin of his Legs in several places among
Varices, without Inflammation, but toward night they swelled, and were
painful. The Ulcers were dressed with Vng. Diapompholigos, and rolled up: within
a day or two laced Stockins were put on, (the Ulcers being dressed) with Compress
under them upon the Ulcers, and pieces of Vellum were laid between, to defend
them from the wrincles of the Stockins: by wearing these, the Humors were
restrained, and the Ulcers disposed to Cure; which, with Epuloticks, (an Issue
being made in each Leg) was effected in few days.

XV. Another. A Woman that had a Varicous Ulcer in her Breast, which would not
cure; the Varix lying under the skin felt like network: it was hard, without
inflammation or discoloring, and discharged a well-digested Matter out of the
Nipple, and some small openings near it. The Ulcer was dressed sometimes with
Vng. Basilicon, sometimes with Vng. Tutiae and Empl. e Bolo, applied over the
Breast, with Bandage to support it; and fine Tow sprinkled with Ceruss, was
worn under the Axilla: by which means it was cured in about a Months time.

XVI. Another. A Woman had a sordid Varicous Ulcer in one of her Legs. Her Leg
was fomented and dressed, as in the former Observations, and by Bandage it was
disposed for a laced Stockin. The Ulcers were dressed with Detersives, and with
Compress and Bandage rolled moderately straight from the Foot to the Gartering:
(for the Varix was from the Ham to the Ancle.) The Pituitous Humors impacted in
the Part, thus rarefied, and the Ulcer cleansed, the laced Stockin was put on,
with Compress upon the Ulcer; which straightened the Blood in its passage, and
represt the Humors; and the lips of the Ulcer were made even, and cicatrized in
a few Weeks, without either Purging or Bleeding, and the Leg reduced to its
natural state. Wiseman, lib. 2. cap. 11. Observat. 1, 2, 4, 5.

CHAP. XV. Of an ULCER CARIOVS.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...). and the Latins, Ulcus cariosus; we in English
call, An Ulcer carious; or, An Ulcer with foulness, or rottenness of the Bones.

II. The Causes. That the Bone which lies underneath the Ulcer, is sometimes
foul, and contracts a rottenness, Experience has oftentimes confirmed: the
cause, says Barbett) is either from a long flux of Humors, or from their
acrimony and malignity, or from an occult quality, or from a contusion, some
way hurting the Bone, or from the use of too sharp Medicines.

III. To these Causes, Sennertus adds, that it often happens from the French
Disease, whose malignity and poison makes the very Bones to become carious, the
Skin sometimes remaining whole and sound.

IV. He also adds, that this Cariosity sometimes proceeds also from the nature
and quality of the ambient Air, especially when it is too cold; and another
cause from an Incision with a sharp Instrument.

V. Other Authors resolve the Causes into External and Internal. The External
Causes are, either too great Cold, which destroys the natural heat of the Bone;
or too great Heat, which discussing the natural humidities, drys and corrupts
the Bone.

VI. The Internal Causes are threefold. 1. A glutinous and superfluous
humidity, which first softens, and then corrupts the Bone; oftentimes causing a
distorsion of the Member, and a protuberance of the Bone; and this many times
not proceeding from any Venereal Cause.

VII. 2. A sharp and malign Humor or Matter, which by eroding the Periosteum,
pierces the Bone, and presently corrupts it: and this happens most commonly in
old and inveterate Ulcers. Nor is this a Wonder, since such a like sharp Humor,
will corrupt and rot Teeth, and even eat them away, which are the hardest of
all Bones.

VIII. 3. An occult quality in some particular Humor or Juice of a Part, as in
the French Pox. For if it did with any manfest power corrupt the Bone, it would
first have eroded the Flesh; as being most subject to, and sensible of any
manifest quality: and operates here upon its subject the Bones; just with a
hidden property as the Loadstone draws Iron, and Amber Wheat-straws.

IX. Wiseman adds another Cause, which is from the malignity of strumous
Ulcers, near the Bones, where the malignity begins in the Bone it self.

X. The Signs. We consider the Signs, 1. Where the Bone does appear, and are
manifest by sight. 2. Where the Bone does not appear, and must be known by
conjecture.

XI. Where the Bones do appear, and lie open to sight, they at first appear of
the color of Fat, then yellow, afterward black, and unequal; as Celsus says,
lib. 8. cap. 2.

XII. The Bone may be bare of Flesh, and yet covered with a Viscous Matter;
this being rubbed off, the Bone appears either white, brown, or black: if the
white is porous, the Caries may be deeper, and more dangerous, than if it were
black and hard.

XIII. If also the Bone is felt with the Probe, it finds no resistance; or does
not appear smooth, but rugged; if the Probe slip not, being guided to the Bone,
the Periosteum must be gone; and so the Bone must be more or less corrupted,
both from the external Air, and from the Pus or Matter fixing upon the Bone.

XIV. Where the Bones appear not, but lie hid, the conjectural signs manifest
the Cariosity. 1. If a Fistula, or cavernous Ulcer had preceded; or if the
Ulcer had been of a long continuance, being rebellious to proper Medicaments:
for then the Bone may be thought to be carious, having been long, and much
moistened, and made soft by the Matter.

XV. 2. If the ulcerated Flesh above, is loose, soft, and spongy, or of a pale
or livid color: because when the Bone is carious, the Flesh is made soft and
corrupt, that a Probe may be easily thrust through it.

XVI. 3. If a Tent or Pledget reaching to the Bone should stink the next day,
when taken out, the Bone may well be suspected to be curious: so also if the
Sanies or Matter flowing from the Ulcer be thin, and stinking, or much; being
more than the largeness of the Ulcer should seem to afford.

XVII. 4. If the Ulcer will admit skinning, and often breaks out again, it is
much feared that the Bone is foul: for an Humor still issuing from the corrupt
Bone, causes a fresh Inflammation, which makes the Ulcer break out a new.
Aegineta, lib. 4. cap. 10. and Galen, in Com. sect. 6. aph. 45.

XVIII. 5. If the Matter is very fetid, and the Probe will penetrate into the
Bone, it is then very much corrupted; and if the Matter does stink much, or is
oily, it is a certain sign of rottenness.

XIX. Hippocrates, sect. 6. aph. 45. says, Si Vlcera annua, aut etium
diusurniora fiant, Ossa corrumpi necesse est: and this is so much the more
true, if they be nearer to a Bone, and the Flesh is lax, and white; and it is
so made, says Sennertus, by the Sanies that sweats as it were out the Bone.

XX. The Prognostics. Ulcers with caries, or rottenness of the Bone, are of
difficult cure; and are accounted by some, among the number of Ulcers
cacoethick or malign.

XXI. No Ulcer can be cured, while the Bone remains foul; and if the Caries is
near great Arteries, or in or about the Joints, especially the greater Joints,
as the Shoulders, Elbows, Wrists, Knees or Ancles; or in the heads of the
Muscles, or in Parts Nervous or Tendinous, the Ulcer will not be easily cured.

XXII. Ulcers in the great Joints, as Elbow, Knees, Ancles, with cariosity of
the Bone, and loss of the Cartilage, are for the most part incurable; because
exciting vehement pain and watching, hurting the Stomach, and spoiling the
concoction and digestion of their Food, they generally bring with them an
incurable Marasmos.

XXIII. If any of the Vertebrae of the Spina Dorsi prove foul, the Cure is to
be doubted of: for the substance of the Vertebrae being spungy and hollow, it
will be affected: and as it is a difficult matter to apply Medicaments thereto,
by reason of the Muscles placed above them; so it will be a hard matter to
avoid the conjugations of Nerves, which spring from their transverse processes.

XXIV. Hippocrates, sect. 7. aph. 2. says, That if by reason of the corrupt and
rotten Bone, the Flesh becomes blackish, and of a leaden color, it presages
much evil: and Galen, in his Comment on the same Aphorism, says, It signifies
no small or mean distemper of the Bones, but an extraordinary corruption of
them.

XXV. If the Sternum or Ribs in Ulcers of the Breast are foal, be not too hasty
to undertake the Gure; for the acrimony of the Pus or Matter may easily corrode
and pierce through the Intercostal Muscles and the Pleura, and so lay the Vital
Parts open to the Air; which in a short time will cause an extinction of the
Natural Heat, and so induce Death.

XXVI. In either of the Bones above the Eyebrows, if the Cariosity passes the
first Table, it will be very difficult to bring the Ulcer to a Cicatrice: this
is true in Wounds, where Solution of Unity is from an external Cause; much more
in Ulcers, where the parts are eroded by an internal Humor, which is supplied
from the distemperature of some Noble Part.

XXVII. The Cure. Besides the Indications of the Ulcer, the rottenness of the
Bone shows the corrupted Part must be taken away, for what is dead, can by no
means be again restored: in the Flesh it is called Sphacelus, Mortification; in
the Bone Sapros, Caries, Rottenness.

XXVIII. The Ulcer is first to be wiped clean, the Bone (if it be yet covered)
to be made bare, by cutting off the Flesh, according to the Part, and Ductus of
the Fibers; not transverse, or cross-ways.

XXIX. But yet nevertheless, if there be the greater Arteries, or Veins, heads
of Muscles, Nerves, or Tendons, Section or Cutting cannot be admitted: but in
this case, the way is to be made, as much as may be, with Gentian or Rape root,
or prepared Sponge, or Elder-pith, tenderly conveyed into the Ulcer: and the
Flesh likewise which lies upon the Bone, may, where it is safe to be done, be
consumed with a Caustic, or Potential Cautery, or Cathereticks, neatly
conveyed to the Part, that so the Bone be made bare.

XXX. If the Caries lies just under some considerable Artery, Vein, or Tendon,
you are to consider whether you can remove it, without laying the Bone bare;
because Nature, in some strong and healthful habits of Body, is so prompt in
the work, that she will easily do it, with some little assistance of Art.

XXXI. But if it is not well to be done, you are to consider the prejudice
which may happen to the Patient in the Cutting of those Vessels, etc. comparing
it with the good that may succeed thereupon, and so to proceed accordingly.

XXXII. Incision is not well to be made, if the Bones lie deep; or if not deep,
if there are many Tendons above them; as in the Metacarpium, or upper distance
between the Wrist and Fingers; and in the Metapedium, or Metatarsus, which are
articulate with the Toes.

XXXIII. Exesion is done with Cathereticks, of which red Precipitate and
Turbith-mineral are best; and these are to be used where there is but little
Flesh upon the Bones: or with Cauteries Potential, as Lapis Infernalis, the
White Caustic, the Silver Caustic, and other things of like nature, where the
Flesh is thicker: they are of use in a Cariosity of the Cranium, Vlna, or
Tibia; but they are not to be applied where many Tendons or Nerves are, lest
they should cause Convulsions through Pain, or deprive some Parts of their Motion.

XXXIV. The Bone being made bare, you must remove what is rotten of it, either
by the help of Medicaments, or Surgery: and that by Surgery is performed,
1. By Scraping, Paring, Rasping, or Boreing the Bone. 2. By the Actual Cautery.

I. Of Scaling the Bone by Medicaments.
XXXV. Desquamatoria, Medicaments Scaling the Bone, or which separate the
corrupt part of it from the sound, ought to be very drying, and of a subtle and
thin substance, that they may penetrate the Cariosity, and suck up the
superfluous humidity in the corrupt Part, and dry the very Bone which is sound:
that Nature being assisted and strengthened by such Desiccatives, she may cause
the Bone to send forth of it self Flesh, or a Callus; which being increased,
thrusts off the rotten Scales from the sound Bone, and so induces the Ulcer to
a healing.

XXXVI. These Desquamatory Medicaments have three degrees of Strength: viz. 1.
Mild, or gentle. 2. Stronger. 3. Strongest.

XXXVII. 1. Mild Desquamatories. Blood dried, Bole-armeny, Catechu, Hog-Fennel
roots, Guajacum Gum, Mummey, Myrrh, Orriceroots, Pinetree-bark,
Pomgranatepeels, Dragons-blood, Sarcocolla, Sumach, Sealed-earth, white Briony
roots. These will serve, if the cariosity of the Bone is but superficial; and
are to be used, where the habit of the Sick is soft and tender.

XXXVIII. 2. Stronger Desquamatories. Aloes, Alum, Aqua Vitae, Aron-roots,
round Birthwort roots, Borax, Chrysocol mineral, Camphir, Dragon-roots, dross
of Brass, Guajacum-bark; Oils Chemical of Juniper, of Lavender, of Limons, of
Marjoram, of Oranges, of Origanum, of Penniroyal, of Rosemary, of Sage, of
Savin, of Sassafras, of Turpentine, Pumicestone burnt, Scammony, Spirit of
Wine, Tobacco. These may be used when the Cariosity is somewhat deep, and the
Patient of a reasonable strong constitution of Body.

XXXIX. Strongest Desquamatories. Euphorbium, Figtreeashes, Lime unwasht, Oil
of Cloves, Oil of Camphir, Oil of Pepper, Oil of Petre with Camphir, Oil of
Sulphur, Oil of Salt, Oil of Vitriol; Pastilli Andronis, Musae, and Polyidae,
Salt of Tartar, Spirit of Nitre, Spirit of Salt, Sief de Plumbo, Tinctura
exfolians; Vitriol common, Hungarian, and Roman, calcined; Ung. Aegyptiacum,
Verdigrise. These are to be used when the Cariosity is very deep, the
Constitution very strong, and the Ulcer malign and rebellious: and when these
are applied, the fleshy Parts ought to be very well defended, lest much Pain,
and Inflammation ensue.

XL. Of these last beforementioned, Euphorbium is said to be chief, and is so
accounted by Fallopius; and he writes, that he himself never found any thing
more excellent, or that would sooner take away the corrupted Bone; and Hildanus
is of the same opinion.

XLI. Any of the former (which can be) may be reduced to powder, and then mixed
with Honey, Rosin, Wax, Vng. Aegyptiacum, or some such like, and so applied in
the form of a Liniment. Or you may make Compounds of them, according to the
following Examples.

XLII. Wiseman says, the Pouders may be mixed with Syrup of dried Roses, or Mel
Rosatum; or they may be laid dry upon the Bone, with Dossels of Lint over them,
to keep the lips of the Wound distended; or they may be used with S.V. or in
the form of Injections.

XLIII. Sennertus his Powder. Euphorbium in powder i. Mummey, Sarcocol, A. ss.
each in powder, mix them.

XLIV. An Injection, from Barbett. Juice of Celandine, S.V. A.ijss. Myrrh,
Aloes, A. ii. white Vitriol ii. mix, and make an Injection.

XLV. Another Powder, from Sennertus. Roots of round Birthwort, of Briony, or
Hog-fennel, of Florentine-Orrice, A. i. Euphorbium i. make a Powder; which
strew on the Bone.

XLVI. Take roots of round Birthwort, of Hog-fennel, of Orrice, A. iv. Aloes,
Myrrh, bark of the Pine, powder of Earthworms, Agarick, Scammony, A.ii. scales
of Brass, Euphorbium, A. i. all being in powder, with Honey of Roses, q.s. make
a Liniment.

XLVII. A Powder. Scammony, Tobacco, A. ii. Euphorbium i. make each into a
powder, and mix them: or, Scammony, Tobacco, A.ii. Euphorbium iss. Camphir i.
make a powder, and mix them. Salmon.

XLVIII. Roots of Florentine Orrice, bark of Opopanax, and of the Pine, Myrrh,
Aloes, scales of Brass, A. ii. make a Powder, which mix with Honey, to a
Liniment. Avicen.

XLIX. Wiseman's Injection. Roots of Comfrey, of Gentian, of the Birthworts,
long and round, of Florentine-Orrice, A. i. Balaustians, Red-roses, Sumach, A.
ss. White Wind q.s. boil and strain: to lbii. of the Decoction add S.V. ii.
Honey of Roses, or Ung. Aegyptiacum q.s. mix them.

L. Sennertus his Oil. Take yellow Sulphur lbi. melt it by a gentle Fire, to
which put pure Salt of Turtar lbss. in powder: mix by continual stirring, 'till
they are cold; then powder, and put it into a Cellar or cold moist place, upon
a Marble, to run per deliq. with this Oil you are to anoint the corrupted Bone.

LI. A Powder of Fallopius. Roots of Hog-fennel, of Orrice, A. j. Euphorbium i.
make a Powder: it may be put upon the crumbs of new White-bread cut in thin
pieces, and so applied to the corrupted Bone.

LII. A Tincture. Birthwort long and round, roots of Briony, of Hog-fennel, of
Orrice A. ss. Contory the less, Camphir, A. ij. Aloes, Euphorbium, Verdigrise,
A iss. S.V. q.s. mix, and extract a Tincture.

LIII. A Cerat, from Sennertus. Roots of Hog-fennel, of round Birthwort,
Euphorbium, Opopanax, A. ss. Wax ss. Turpentine i. mix, and make a Cerat.

LIVE. If Medicaments will not do, (which you may know in the space of 40 or 45
days; for Nature very slowly makes a separation of the corrupted Bones from the
sound) you must then have recourse unto Surgery; more especially if the
corruption of the Bone is more deep, and not in the superficies.

II. Of Scaling the Bone by Scraping, Rasping, etc.
LV. If the Caries is in the greater Bones, and lies deep, or is subject to the
inflowing of Matter; the readiest way will be by Manual Operation, viz. either
by Instrument, or the Actual Cautery.

LVI. If you can easily come at the Bone to scrape it, as in the Cranium, that
way will be most proper: and you are to scrape 'till you find it firm, and that
you discern ruddiness in the Bone, and not only 'till it looks white, for that
is the natural color of the outward Cortex or Shell.

LVII. Yet in some it is frequently found porous and carious, whilst it
retains that color; and if you do not rasp, scrape, or pare that away, the
Callus will be slow in thrusting out, and putting off the rotten part: and if
you do scrape it, the deeper you enter into it, the browner and softer the Bone
will be.

LVIII. But you ought to be cautious in the Work, that you penetrate not to the
Marrow of the Bone; when possibly you need not take away more than the external
Shell of it.

LIX. The Bone is to be scraped, (if the corruption of it is small) with an
Instrument for that purpose, called the Scraping-Instrument: or, (if the
corruption and foulness is great) by rasping it with a Raspatory, or by
shaving, or paring it with a Chizel; or else by perforation of it with a
Wimble, or Auger, or Terebellum.

LX. If you do it with the Chizel and Mallet (a Leaden one will be best) the
Bone is then to be made smooth and even with a Raspatory: this being done, some
of the aforegoing Medicaments, or some drying Sarcotick must be applied,
according to the Constitution of the Patient, by which you ought to be guided.

III. Of Scaling the Bones by the Actual Cautery.
LXI. If the Caries is so deep, that it cannot be scraped, rasped, etc. you
must come to the use of the Actual Cautery, to consume the rottenness, which is
the chiefest Remedy for consuming of all the excrementitious Humidity.

LXII. In order to this Work, if the Ulcer is narrow, you must pass it through a
Cannula, fitted to go down through the Ulcer to the Bone; which Cannula or Pipe
is to be covered with an Emplaster, or a Linen Cloth pasted on, and oiled,
that it may pass in the more easily.

LXIII. And indeed, in applying these Cauteries, you ought to be cautious, lest
you burn the Flesh that lies near it; and it ought to be defended some way or
other from the heat of the Fire. And if you use these Cannulae or Pipes, you
ought to have several of them in a readiness, because they are subject to heat;
or you must have a Basin of cold Water, to cool the Pipe, etc.

LXIV. The carious Bone being first cleansed from the filth or matter which is
upon it, with armed Probes you are to place the Cannula upon it; and then pass
the Actual Cautery down, through the Pipe to the Bone, so often 'till you have
dried it; pulling out the Cannula after each heat, to cool or change it: by
this means you will perform the Operation, without burning the lips of the
Ulcer.

LXV. According as the Bone is rotten, so the Humor will spurt out from it,
upon the first application of the Cautery: but upon repeating it, the Bone will
be so dry, that you shall not hear it hiss; and you will also feel it firm.

LXVI. The Actual Cautery is not to be applied to Bones of the Head, lest the
Brain should be inflanied: besides, in Ulcers of the Head, it often falls out,
that both Tables of the Scull are foul; so that you will be forced to remove a
great piece of the Cranium; which is to be performed with the Trepan, Head-law;
etc.

LXVII. Nor is it to be applied to the Vertebrae of the Back (the Spine it self
only excepted:) nor will the Sternon, or Ribs admit of the Cautery: the
Heel-bone requires also great caution, because it is soft, and rarely
exfoliates by rough handling.

LXVIII. The spongy Bones in Hands or Feet, are to be kept bare by Dossels,
according to the length of the Caries: and if the whole Bone is corrupt, it
will dry and separate from the Joints in time, and the Ulcer happily cure; but
to hasten it, you may dry it with the Actual Cautery.

LXiX. But if the Bone be carious only in one part, as in the middle, or at one
end, you may nip it there in pieces with a a pair of Pincers, (to hasten the
Cure) and dress it lightly with some of the lighter Desiccatives; so in few
days the Caries will cast off, and a Callus come on; and, (if the native heat
is preserved) the two ends will be united, as in fractured Bones.

LXX. Now the chief Places to which the Actual Cautery may be applied, dre
where Dilatation is only permitted, not Incision, or the Potential Cautery; and
they are the back of the Hand, and top of the Foot, or Instep you may also
safely apply it to the Vlna and Tibia, laid bare; and also to the Joints, if
the Cartilages be foul, and way be made.

LXXI. This Practice Paraeus used, when he amputated one in the joint of the
Elbow, and the Patient found great ease and comfort by the application of it
See Paraeus, lib. 11. cap. 25.

LXXII. Lastly, this is to be observed, That the Actual Cautery is then chiefly
required; 1. When a flux of superfluous Humors flow to the Bone, known in part
by the moist and cold habit of the Body. 2. If after the application of
Desquamatories, the Bone still appear soft and moist, not changing its color.

LXXIII. There is one passage in Celsus, lib. 8. cap. 2. worthy to be recited.
Igitur si caries alti descendit, per Terebram urgenda crebris foraminibus est,
quae altit^ dine ^itium; aquent. Tum inoea foramina demittenda candentia
Ferramenta sunt, donec inde siccum Os ex: toto fiat. Simul enim post haec and
resolvetur ab inferiore Osse quodcunque ^irtatum est, and is sinus: Carne
replebitur; and Humor auts nullus passea feretur, aut mediocris. Sin autem
nigritie est, aut si (...) ries ad al^eram quoque parteni Ossis transit,
oportet excidi. Atque idem in carry quoque ad alter a^ partem Ossis penetrante
fieri potest^ Sed quod torum vitiatum, totum eximendum est. Si inferior pars
integra^st, eatenus quod corruptum est, excidi debet. Item sive Capiris, sive
Pectoris Os, sive Costa cariosa est, inutilis vitio est, and excidendi
necessitas est. If then the rottenness has descended deep, we ought with the
Terebel or Wimble to make many holes, as deep as what is corrupted in the Bone.
And then red-hot Irons are to be let down into those holes, so long 'till by
this means the Bone is wholely dried. For withal, after this, both whatsoever
is vitiated and corrupted will be loosned from the lower part of the Bone; and
that Sinus or hollowness will be either none at all, or but very little. But if
there is any blackness, or if the rottenness tuns, or spreads to some other
part of the Bone, it ought then to be cut out. And this same thing may be done
in a rottenness penetrating into some other part of the Bone. But that which is
wholly vitiated, is all of it to be taken forth. If the inferior or lower part
is whole and sound, then only so far as is corrupted, is to be cut off. Again,
whether it be the Cranium, or the Sternum, or a Rib which is rotten, it will be
made thereby totally incapable to be restored to its soundness; for which
reason, there will be a necessity of cutting it out.

IV. Of Dressing and Healing the Ulcer.
LXXIV. After the Scraping, Rasping, etc. of the Bone, Wiseman advises to the
application of the milder sort of Sarcoticks, as this: Pure Turpentine iv. Gum
Elemi ii. Pine-Rosin, Mastich, A. vj. Frankincense, Sarcocol, A. iij. mix them
over the Fire. Apply it warm upon Lint, and in few days you will see the Flesh
thrust forth in small Grains, which is Callus; and in a few days more, it will
thrust off small Spells from the Bone you scraped.

LXXV. Where you can safely dilate the Ulcer, you ought to do it; and keep the
Bone bare and dry, by filling it up with Dossels; that the lips of the Ulcer
grow not upon your Work; lest the Matter dropping from thence, should corrupt
the sound Bone under them: for the Work of Exfoliation always begins from the
sound edges.

LXXVI. After Cauterizing the Bone, Sennertus in the first place applies
Rose Water in the white of an Egg, to prevent Inflammation, and lessen the
Pain: afterward he applies Oil of Roses with the yolk of an Egg: and then
after that, Butter with Mel Rosatum: but to the Bone it self, powder of roots
of Birthwort and Hog-fennel mixed with Eupphorbium, or some other of the former
Desquamatories, 'till the Bone scales.

LXXVII. Fallopius uses Pledgets, moistened with Rose Water and the white of an
Egg; to hinder Inflammation for some few Dressings: and he applies to the Bone
Exfoliating Medicaments.

LXXVIII. Guido a Canliaco applies after the Cautery, Oil of Roses mixed with
the white of an Egg for three days: and the same mixed with the yolk of an Egg
for three other days: and afterward Butter, mixed with Mel Rosatum; and above
these some Abstersive, 'till the Bone scales. After which, he incamates and
consolidates with Avicen's Powder, at Sect. 48. above.

LXXIX. Wiseman dresses (after Cauterization) with the writes of Eggs, beaten
with the mucilage of Quince-seeds; and the Ulcer and its lips with Vng.
Refrigerans Galeni; over which and the neighboring parts, he lays a Cerat of
the same; and continues this way of dressing, 'till the heat of Urine is
mitigated.

LXXX. Then if the lips are vesicated, he dresses them with Vng. Alhum, ^riae,
etc. and the Bone with milder Desquamatories or Exfoliatives, keeping the Ulcer
open 'till the cauterized Bones are cut off; after which he casts away ^he
Dossels, and with Incarnatives and Epuloticks compleats the Cure.

CHAP. XVI. Of an ULCER CACOETHICK, or MALIGN.
I. WHAT the Greeks call, (...). and the Latins, Ulcus cacoethe, and Ulcus
malignum; we in English call, An Ulcer evilly disposed, or malignant.

II. This kind of Ulcer the Greeks call, (...). and the Latins from them,
Dysepulote; viz. an Ulcer, hard or difficult to be healed.

III. By some Authors, as Celsus, lib. 6. cap. 28. it is called Chironium; so
also Aegineta, lib. 4. cap. 26. calls this Ulcer both Chironium, and Telephium:
and these Terms are derived from Chiron, who first found out or instituted the
way and method of Curing it; and from Telephus, the Person who was long
affected or troubled with such an Ulcer.

IV. The Causes. The Antecedent Cause Sennertus will have to be from Atra
Bilis; or Melancholy, having some Black Choler mixed with it. Others will have
it to be from one or both those Humors, joined with malignity and virulency.

V. The Conjoined Cause of this rebellious Ulcer, is from the distemper of the
ulcerated Part, or from an afflux of Humors flowing in: the afflux of Humors is
also considered in a twofold respect: 1. As they are bad, and depraved in their
quality. 2. As they are excessive in their quantity.

VI. The Signs. Suchlike Ulcers are known; for that they have their lips
ill-coloured, and for the most part, they are red and itching; and although the
Ulcer is never so gently wiped, it is with pain.

VII. The parts also round about it swell up, and the Ulcer is from day to day
dilated, or grows wider: and not only the Skin, but the Flesh which lies under
it, is eaten through.

VIII. The Prognostics. This kind of Ulcer is always contumacious and
rebellious; being very difficult to be cured, unless it be with extraordinary
Medicaments.

IX. And if the Humor which feeds or vexes the Ulcer, has gotten into the habit
of the Body, or that there is a habit of Breeding it; it will be difficult
without regeneration, or totally altering of it, to reduce it to its natural
constitution or state, or to hinder or prevent its increase.

X. The Cure. This is scarcely to be accomplished, except the Cause be first
removed, and the whole mass of Blood purified: (this more especially if the
Ulcer has been of some years standing, or of a very long continuance.)

XI. And this must be done by manifold and continued Purging, continued
Sweating, and a constant taking of some; traumatick Dietdrink; that so the Body
may be emptied of all its vicious Humors, the Tone of the Viscera rectified,
and the whole habit changed.

XII. Vniversals being thus premised, Sennertus advises to things cooling,
drying, and astringent; yet withal discussive, or mixed with Discussives: as
Balaustians, Bramble-tops, Bistort, Cyprus-nuts, Cinkfoil, Frankincense-bark,
Mastich, Nightshade, Plantan, Pomgranat-Peels, Ceruss, Lead burnt, Litharge,
Minium, Mercury, or Quicksilver, Sulphur, Vermilion, Vitriol, Vitriol calcined.

XIII. To these may be added; Vng. Aegyptiacum, Fuscum Wurtzii, Nicotian^e,
Diapompholigos.; Empl. de Plumbo, de Min^o, Griseum, de Ranis cum Mercurio, vel
Merculiale.

XIV. You may therefore first foment the Ulcer with this Decoction. Take
Plantan-leaves M. i. Balaustians, Rea-rises, Pomgranate-peels, A. i.
Myrtleberries, Sumach, burnt Alum, A. ss. Red-wine q.s. boil, and wash also the
Ulcer therewith.

XV. The Ulcer being washed, lay over it Ung. Diapompholigos, or Ung. Album
Camphoratum: or this, Tutty prepared, fine Bole, A. ss. burnt Lead washed,
Ceruss, A.i. juice of Plantan jss. grind all in a leaden Mortar to to a Mass,
adding Oil of Roses and Wax, as much as suffices to make it into an Ointment.

XVI. A Decoction of Oak-leaves, Alum, Frankincense, and Myrrh, is commended;
imposing over all Empl. de Ranis cum Mercurio, in double or treble quantity:
but nothing is equal to the Water of the Griffin.

XVII Other Authors, for diminishing the Humor impacted in the Part, advise to
do it by catheretick Medicaments; as the Pastilli or Trochisci Andronis,
Polyidae, and Musae; the Preparations of which you may see in my Pharmacopoeia
Londinensis, lib. 4. cap. 34. sect. 23.38. and 39. which being in powder may be
mixed with Vng. Populeon, or some suchlike Ointment.

XVIII. Or yon may use red Precipitate, grownd and washed in a Lixivium of
Potashes; or the Princes Powder; either of which may be mixed with some
Sarcotick Oiniment, to be used in Rheumatick Ulcers, and in tender Persons.

XIX. Or in stronger Bodies, you may take red Precipitate ii. unwashed, and
mixed with burnt Alum i. it is fit to be applied in foul and stinking Ulcers;
such as Herpes exedens, Phagedaena, and Nomae.

XX. Turpethum Minerale, while white and unmixt, is to be preferred before them
all; yea if washed, it exceeds them; and is of mighty use in Venereal and Malign
Ulcers, as also in a Venereal Headache; it may be mixed with Paracelsus his
Mundificative, i. of the Turpethum, to i. of the Ointment, and so applied: it
may be used unwasht to strong Constitutions, but washed to such as are tender
and delicate.

XXI. This Turpethum far surpasses corrosive Sublimate, or Arsenick; being
more safe, and not so painful, or apt to cause Inflammations, or
Symptomatick-Fevers. It may also be mixed, ii. with Alumen ustum i. to evacuate
the peccant Humor out of the Part affected, in such as have a firm and able
Habit of Body: it may be mixed with Vnguentum Nicotianae.

XXII. The next Indication, is the Healing-up of the Ulcer; which has two
Intentions: 1. To to fill up the Flesh, with proper Sarcotioks. 2. To cicatrize
it with Epuloticks.

XXIII. As to the Sarcoticks, they should be such as dry strongly, but have no^
Corrosive faculty; this of Paraeus, lib. 6. cap. 84. is good. Pine-bark ss.
Ceruss, Tutty prepared, A.i. Oil of Roses, Sheeps-suet, A. ii. Wax q.s. mix,
and make and intment: if a little Saccharum Sarurm, or Minium, or Cinnabat be
added, it will be more effectual.

XXIV. Or, Vag. Enulatum cum Mercurio i. flowers of Sulphur i. mix them. This
Paraeus commends as a thing infallible: but if you find the lips of the Ulcer
to be more and eroded, you must be obliged to touch them with Spirit of Nitre,
Spirit of Salt, Oil of Vitriol, or Oil of Sulphur; by which means, these Ulcers
which seem incurable, are often cured.

XXV. Or you may use this. Juice of Tobacco iv. yellow Wax, Gum Elemi, A. ii.
Turpentine, Pine-Rosin, Oil of Myrtles, A. jss. boil to the consumption of the
Juice, then add powder of Tobacco i and where occasion is, you may add to i. of
it, of red Precipitate, or yellow Turpethum Minerale i.

XXVI. The Ulcer being filled up with Flesh, you must produce the Cicatrice
with Epuloticks; among which Desiccativum Rubrum, and Vng. de Minio, are
commended.

XXVII. Lastly, Aquapendens, part. 2. lib. 1. cap. 28. advises to drinks every
day Goats-milk; more especially if the Party is of a thin habit of Body, and in
a Hectick-Fever or Consumption: or otherwise, a Decoction of Sursaparillu; the
Faculties of which, very few of the Chirurgick-Tribe are ignorant of,
especially in the curing of malignant and creeping Ulcers.

CHAP. XVII. Of an ULCER PHAGEDENICK.
I. WHAT the Greeks call, (...). and the Latins, Ulcus Phagedaenicum; we in
English call, A Pagedenick Uler, or, An Eating Ulcer.

II. The Kinds. This Ulcer is twofold: 1. That which the Greeks call, (...);
and the Latins, in imitation of them, Phagedaena; also Vlcus exedens: and we in
English, The Eating, or Sprealing Ulcer. 2. Nomae, also Vlcus depascens, or the
Cancerous Ulcer; of which we shall treat in the next Chapter. This Phagedaena
is derived (...); ab Edendo, a (...), to Eat: so that it may well be called, An
Eating Ulcer.

III. It is an Ulcer with a Tumor; for which reason, some Authors have
accounted and treated of it among Tumors, as Galen de Tumoribus, cap. 14. But
whereas there is always an Ulcer joined with it, the more modern Authors (whom
we here follow) think it more reasonable to be handled in the Discourse of
Ulcers.

IV. The Differences. It diffrain Herpes exedens; for that corrodes and eats up
the Parts lying near round about it; but it corrodes and eats through the Skin
only: whereas Phagedaena is a deep and profound Ulcer; and does not eat only
through the Skin, but even to the parts underneath; eating through the Flesh also.

V. It differs also from Nomae, or the Cancerous Ulcer: for though that is an
eating Ulcer also, yet it is an Ulcer with an eating or devouring putridness,
creeping but slowly, and without any Tumor: whereas a Phagedaena is an Ulcer
without any putridness, though abounding with matter; eating profoundly through the
Flesh, and creeping to the parts adjacent lying round about it; and is always
accompanied with a tumor about its lips, by which it is distinguished from
Nomae.

VI. The Cause. It is caused generally from adust Choler or Melancholy, or else
from yellow Choler with salt Phlegm, and a serous or wheyish Humor, mixed
therewith: which Humor is not so thin, as to produce only an Herpes; nor yet so
thick and malign, as to produce a Cancer.

VII. Now this Humor comes either from some Part affected with a hot and dry
Distemper; or else it is made adust, by some preternatural heat and dryness in
the Part affected.

VIII. Wiseman says, in a Cacochimick Habit, an Herpes exedens often arises on
the Nose and Face, from a small Pimple, or fiery Pustle; which being heated by
scratching, or picking with their Nails, becomes at length corrosive; and from
a Herpes exedens, becomes phagedenical: this by a farther exasperation, becomes
cancerous: these (says he) differing, but only as the Humor becomes less or
more sierce.

IX. The Signs. They are known by what was said in the Differences, at Sect. 4.
and 5 above: but sometimes the Ulcer takes its original from an Abscess in the
Flesh; and sometimes it begins in the Skin, and after eats into the Flesh,
spreading into the parts round about, and dissolving the Flesh in the bottom of
the Ulcer.

X. And the Humor causing this Ulcer, by reason of its great abundance, fills
the lips of the Ulcer, and causes a swelling to appear: but by reason of its
acrimony and malignity, it frets, gnaws, or eats the parts adjacent which are
sound.

XI. The Prognostics. All these kinds of eating Ulcers are difficult to be
cured; and if they happen in a Body of a hot and dry temperature, where the
Aliment sent to the Part, (though it be good) is made sharp and corrosive; they
are so much the more hard of cure.

XII. They resist the force of ordinary Medicaments; which though they are
applied to other Ulcers with good success, yet in this kind of Ulcer they
become utterly ineffectual.

XIII. If this Ulcer happens in a cacochyn ick habit habit of Body, it is yet
more rebellious: and here the Constitution of the Body must be altered, before
this Evil can be cured, which is a matter of very great difficulty.

XIV. If it happens in decrepit Age, or in such as are in a Hectic
Consumption, where the natural heat, and radical moisture are almost spent, and
only acrid and salt Humors abound, the Ulcer then will scarcely admit of any
cure at all.

XV. If it happens from the French Pox, it is cured by Specificks for that
Disease: but if it comes from either Causes, so (says Wiseman) it is extreme
difficult, and does frequently terminate Cancerous.

XVI. The Cure. There are two chief Indications of Cure: 1. To remove the
Antecedent Cause. 2. To destroy the Conjoined Cause.

XVII. The Cause Antecedent is removed, 1. By Purging; which you may do, first,
by Emeticks, if the Stomach is foul, and the strength of the Body will bear it;
and that may be done with Wine-Vinegar, or Honey, or Oxymel of Squills, or with
Tartar Emetick, or Infusion of Crocus Metal. or Vinum Antimoniale, or some
other Antimonial Emetick.

XVIII. Secondly, by Purgation, which may be done with an Infusion of Sena and
Rubarb, Syrupus Catharticus, Pulvis Catharticus, Tinctura Purgans, Pilulae
Catharticae, Family Pills, Pulvis Cornachini; or some Mercurial Purge made with
up Princes Powder, white Precipitate, Turbith Mineral, etc. suited according to
the Constitution.

XIX. 2. By Diet or Wound Drinks, which are to be made of Decoction; of
Guajacum, Sarsa, China, Tormentil, Bistort, Burdock, and Comfrey roots; to
which Vulneraries, as Agrimony Angelica, Avens, Betony, Bawm Hypericon,
Ladies-mantle, Sanicle, Solomons-seal, Woundwort, etc. may be added.

XX. If the Humor flows to the Ulcer in any great quantity, it is to be
diverted by Revulsion, Derivation, and Interception, if it is possible. Some
commend the Purging with Confectio Hamech, a i. ad ss. mixed with Mercurius
dulcis, a gr. 12 ad 24. and this to be repeated twice a Week.

XXI. The second Indication of Cure is to destroy the Conjoined Cause, which is
done by Topics. The virulent Humor affecting the Ulcer requires (says Wiseman)
to be dried up; and the Intemperies to be corrected. But because these Ulcers
differ much one from another in their corrosive qualities, according to the
different habits of Body, the Medicaments therefore must accordingly vary.

XXI. If the Ulcer wants Digestion, Digestives must be applied, before any
thing else can possibly be done: for Digestion has a kind of Fermentative
Power, by which it alters and changes the nature of the acrimonious and
corrosive Humor, destroying its property, at least making it more mild and
gentle.

XXIII. Then, if the Intemperies is hot, your applications are to be cold, with
some little Astringency, as Ung. Tutiae, e Plumbo, de Calce, de Lithargyro: or
you may apply Ung. Populeon, mixed with Album Camphoratum, in equal quantities.

XXIV. If these things will not do, or answer expectation, you must proceed to
stronger: but by the Authority of the Ancients, you ought to scarify these
Ulters, or some-ways provoke them to bleed; that the sharp Blood and Humors may
be thereby discharged.

XXV. Aegineta has this Powder. Vnslakt Lime, Chalcitis, or Vitriol, A. ii.
Auripigmentum i. make all into a powder. Unguen. Nicotianae (of Our
Prescription) i. of the former Powder ii. mix them, and apply it.

XXVI. You may wash with the Water of the Griffin, which is a most admirable
thing; or with some drying Medicaments, which may repress the afflux of Humors;
as Aqua Calcis, Aeruginosa, Aluminosa, or a Decoction of Plantan, Horstail,
Bramble-tops, Balaustians, Red-roses, Cyprus-Nuts, Galls, etc. made in
Smiths-Forge-Water, or Red-wine, q.s.

XXVII. After which, the Ulcer may be sprinkled with pouders of Tutia, burnt
Hartshorn, burnt Ivory, and Oister-shells, Pomgranate-peels, Catechu: or they
may be mixed with Ointments.

XXVIII. Ung. Diapompholigos iii. fine Bole, Sanguis draconis, Balaustians,
A.ss. Oil of Roses, q.s. mix, and make an Ointment; which apply with Compress
wet, and wrung out of some Astringent Decoction, over all.

XXIX. The Ulcer thus dressed, is not to be opened again in three or four days:
for the temperament of the Part being weak, the frequent exposing it to the
Air, renders it more weak, and the Medicaments less effectual.

XXX. To this purpose Galen, Comp. Med. cap. 4. upon the Medicament of
Asclepiades, has these words: For unless the Medicament shall stick somewhat
long upon the Skin, it effects but little or nothing; which most Physicians are
ignorant of.

XXXI. And the truth is (says Sennertus) there is commonly a great Error
committed in this very point, whilst they think that to be the best course, to
wash the Ulcer three or four times a day; when that the Medicament does act
nothing at all, unless by the native Heat it is drawn forth into act: and in
regard that in long continued Ulcers, the heat of the affected Part is very
weak, it needs much time therefore to excite and draw forth the strength and
virtue of the Medicine.

XXXII. For which reason, the Medicament ought to be kept sticking upon the
Part for a long while; nor is its action to be disturbed, for that the virtue
and strength thereof is not in a little while to be drawn forth by the heat of
the Part affected; for which reason, no new or fresh Medicament is presently to
be applied: yet if the Humor is very sharp, it is the oftener to be wiped away;
lest lying in the ulcerated Part, it should more and more corrupt the same.

XXXIII. Or you may apply Ung. Fascum Wurtzii, Ung. Nicotianae Nostr. or some
such like; 'till the Ulcer ceases sprending, appears red, is cleansed, and is
in a good condition; then you may heal it up with Sarcoticks and Epuloticks, as
is usual in other Ulcers.

CHAP. XVIII. Of an ULCER CANCEROVS.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...), pl. (...), (Ulcus and Ulcera quae in Cancrum
vergunt:) also (...), pl. (...), (Ulcus, and Ulcera serpentia, quae depascunt:)
and (...), pl. (...); (Ulcus and Ulcera, quae sunt ejusdem naturae seu
qualitatis, ut depascunt;) and the Latins Nome, pl. Nomae; also Ulcus
depascens, pl. Ulcera depascentia: we in English call, Consuming, feeding, or
cating Ulcer or Ulcers; also Cancerous Ulcer or Ulcers; because they eat like a
Cancer ulcerated.

II. The Kinds. Some Authors will have Nome to be the only Cancerous Ulcer;
others add also Lupus, the Wolf; and Noli me tangere.

III. Nome is a corrosive or eating Ulcer, without any tumor in the lips;
conjoined with malignity, and putrefaction of the Part, and feeding deeply upon
the adjacent sound parts, almost after the manner of a Cancer ulcerated.

IV. Lupus is a most stinking, malign, putrid, and cancerous Ulcer; in the
Arms, Sides, Loins, Hips, Thighs, Legs, or any brawny, or very fleshy Part.

V. Noli me tangere, is a malign, putrid, and cancerous Ulcer in the Nose and
Face, rebellious, and many times very painful, not much differing from Lupus,
but in the place or situation thereof: of these two latter, as they are Tumors,
we have already treated in Lib. 3. cap. 34. sect. 31. ad 53. Here we shall a
little more consider them, as special kinds of Ulcers.

VI. The Differences. Nome is an eating or devouring putridness, yet an Ulcer
which creeps but slowly; and differs from Phagedaena, because it eats with
great putrefaction, moving forwards from the diseased and unsound parts, to
those which are whole and sound; adding to them malign matter, from the
unsound: so that its nature arises not from the substance of the thing
declared, but from the matter accessory, which is to feed; as Galen, Meth. Med.
lib. 5. cap. 4. does demonstrate.

VII. It is distinguished also from Phagedaena; for that as Phagedaena is
always with a Tumor, and the corrosion is only from a a malign quality, and
acrimony of Humors; whereby it eats through the parts and flesh lying underneath,
and that are about it: so Nome is always without a tumor, and the corrosion
which eats deeply and profoundly, (though slowly) is from a certain putrified
Humor, etc.

VIII. It differs also from Herpes exedens; for as that is only a corrosion in
the Skin, without putrefaction; so this is a corrosion in and through the Skin,
but deeply into the substance of the Flesh also, with putrefaction.

IX. The Causes. The Causes of all these proceed from vicious and malign Humors
abounding in the Body, exalted to such a degree of acrimony as may cause
putrefaction; partly from simple Choler or salt Phlegm mixed with Atra Bilis,
and so dispersed through the whole habit of the Body.

X. Chemists will have them to proceed from an Arsenical Sulphur, separated
from the Natural Balsam, or Juices replenishing the Body, and sent or directed
to the Part affected. And indeed, an Arsenical quality best represents the
nature of these kinds of Ulcers: for truly like Arsenick, the Humors here
protruded, are of a putrifactive quality.

XI. The Signs. These Ulcers are known by sight; partly from their kinds and
differences, and partly from the situation, or place which they affect, being
accompanied with putrefaction and eating.

XII. Nome eats deepest into the Flesh; the other are more superficial, and are
sometimes Ulcers upon a Sarcoma, or excrescence of superfluous Flesh, which
sometimes eat more, sometimes less.

XIII. The Prognostics. These, like all other eating Ulcers, are very hard to
be cured: and if they happen in a Body Cacochymical, they are seldom healed,
but last for the most part during the Patient's whole life.

XIV. If they be with an afflux of Humors, or near any principal Vein, Artery,
Nerve, or Tendon, they are not only so much the more difficult to cure, but
also so much the more dangerous.

XV. If they happen to such as are in Consumptions, or are Hectic, or
Asthmatical, they are of evil consequence, and for the most part kill the
Patient; by draining away the remaining part of the Radical Moisture which
ought to support Nature.

XVI. The Cure. All these receive much one and the same Method of Cure; and the
same Medicines which are generally good for one, good for the other also.

XVII. The gentler means, and such as we have prescribed in the former Chapter,
are first to be attempted, because sometimes they may prevail: but if those
things do no good, as it oftentimes falls out, we must be constrained to come
to the use of stronger Remedies.

XVIII. This Powder is commended in a Nome. White Vitriol jss. Crocus Martis
vj. Galls ix. make all into a fine powder, which mix with some convenient
Ointment, as Vng-Nicotianae.

XIX. Or this. Vnslakt Lime, Orpiment; white Vitriol, A. i. Catechu, Galls,
Pomgranate-peels, round Birthwort roots, Tobacco, Alum burnt, Saccharum
Saturni, A. ss. burnt Brass, Crocus Martis, Lead calcined, A. vi. make all into
a fine powder, and mix it with clarified Honey q.s. and make a Liniment.

XX. Or, An Infusion ( of Balaustians, Birthwort-roots, Cardus Ben. Centory the
less, Catechu, Galls, Germander, Pomgranate-peels, Scordium, Southernwood,
Wormwood) in Vinegar viii. purified Verdigrise iv. Honey xiv. mix, and boil to
a consistency.

XXI. Wiseman says, you must use Detersives made of Vnguen. Aeg^ptiacum, red
Precipitate, Troch. Andronis, Musae; also Causticks, and sometimes the Actual
Cautery.

XXII. To these Applications, Objections (says he) have been made: but if
drying Medicaments without erosion will do no good, you must then come to
stronger: and where the putrefaction is great, you will find it necessary to
use the strongest kinds, as the Actual Cautery, it not being only of use to
remove the corrosive Flesh, but to check the malignity, and strengthen the
weakened part.

XXIII. But where the Patient will not admit of that, you must use Causticks,
the parts about being in the mean season defended with Refrigerants: after
separation of the Eschar, and corrupt Flesh, the Ulcer is to be healed up with
Sarcoticks and Epuloticks, as is usual.

II. Of Lupus, the Wolf.
XXIV. Though when other things fail, the former Directions may serve in the Cure
of this Ulcer; yet some things Country People have observed; that the
application of raw Flesh, as of Hen, Chicken, Pigeon, Dog, Whelp, Kitling; raw
Beef, Mutton, Lamb, or Veal, being laid to in slices, allays the fury of the
Difease, abates the malignty, and stops the eating quality.

XXV. Others apply this upon Pledgets of Lint. Take burnt Lead, Tutty,
Prankincense, A.iv. Wormwood in powder, Wax, A.jss. Oil of Roses vi. juice of
Nightshade q.s. mix, and grind in a leaden Mortar, to the consistence of an
Ointment.

XXVI. Juice of Nightshade is wonderfully commended; and it will be so much the
more powerful, if Catechu and Saccharum Saturni be dissolved in it; the juice
of Tobacco has also the same effect: a double or fourfold linen Cloth may be
dipped in them, and applied, and over that a Pledget of Tow, or piece of Sponge
dipped in the same Liquor: Camphir dissolved in a little S.V. may also be mixed
with them.

XXVII. Or you may lay over a green Tobacco-leaf, two or three of them, one
over another; because they may be apt to dry; and dress it with them twice a
day.

XXVIII. Or, Take Honey of Mullein ii. Oil of Mace or Nutmegs i. Catechu ss.
Pomgranatepeels ii. Minium i. mix them.

XXIX. Or this of Fallopius. Take Oil of Roses, Oil-omphacin, A. vi. Oil of
Myrtles, Ung. Populeum, A. iii. leaves of Nightshade and Plantan, A. M.ii. beat
them well; boil all with a gentle Fire to the consumption of the Juice: strain,
and add thereto Wax iv. which melt, and taking it from the Fire, whilst hot,
add moreover, Litharge vi. Ceruss ii. burnt Lead, Tutty, A. ijss. grind all
together in a leaden Mortar for two Hours.

III. Of Noli me tangere.
XXX. Some commend the Sublimate of white Arsenick, because it mortifies in one
day Cancers, Fistula's, Nomae, and other strange and malign Ulcers, applying
round about Defensatives.

XXXI. Some commend this Experiment. Take Salt M. i. Sorrel M. viii. beat them
well together in a Mortar, to which put Water enough to cover it three Inches
over; boil to the consumption of half: strain, and add thereto burnt Alum iii.
white Vitrol in powder i. dissolve, and wash therewith, twice a day.

XXXII. Or you may apply Vng. de Lithargyro, de Minio, de Tutia, Desiccativum,
and other things of like nature, which are only to be used as Palliatives; though
yet sometimes they have cured.

XXXIII. I commend upon my Own knowledge, Ung. Nicotianae made after my
Prescription: the juice of Tobacco, Scammony in powder, and Euphorbium, which
scarcely bites at all in an Ulcer.

XXXIV. This is commended by some. Take Cow Dung lbiv. green Tobacco, or the
dry; Housleek, Henbane, Hemlock, Mandrake, Nightshade, Plantan, Purslan, A.
M.i. beat all together, with twenty River-crabs; which done, either press out
the Juice and use it; or distill a Water therefrom in a Pewter Still, mixing
therewith Camphir iii. dissolved in S.V. dip Cloths therein, and frequently
apply them.

XXXV. And not only in Noli me tangere, but also in Lupus and Nome, and indeed
in all kinds of malign and inveterate Ulcers, we commend the use of the Water
of the Griffin; than which possibly there is nothing more excellent in Nature,
it being able to do more than all other things.

XXXVI. Lastly, this following Diet, to be given inwardly (is not to be
forgotten) in all these kinds of Ulcers, since Experience has confirmed its
efficacy and power. Betony, Fennel, Sanicle, Wintergreen, A. M. iii. Fluellin
or Paul's Betony, M. vi. Album Graecum iv. cut, bruise, and put them into a Bag
with a Stone in it, which put into four Gallons of new Ale or Beer; let them
stand three or four days, and then add volatile Sal Armoniack iv. of this let
the Patient take a Draught, Morning, Noon, and Night.

XXXVII. If Noli me tangere be in the Lip, and it has not eroded very wide, or
spread much, it may be cured by cutting out, after the manner of a Hare-lip,
and that with very little deformity. See Lib. 3. Cap. 34. Sect. 31. ad 53. of
this Work aforeging.

CHAP. XIX. Of an ULCER by BVRNING or SCALDIING.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...). and the Latins, Ulcus ab ustione, vel Ulcus
perustum; we in English call, An Ulcer by Burning; whether it is made by the
naked Fire, or by Scalding with Water, Oil, Pitch, Tar, Lead, etc.

II. It is an ulcerated solution of Continuity made by Fire, or other very hot
things; wherein the Skin is sometimes burnt and exulcerated, and sometimes the
Flesh, with the Vessels, Nerves, Tendons, etc.

III. The Causes are manifest; the Signs by which it is known are; 1. An
Eschar, where it is not fallen off. 2. An Ulcer abounding with Matter, where it
is fallen off.

IV. The Prognostics. If it is small, and in a bealthy body, it is easily
cured: if great and deep, it commonly leaves Scars behind it.

V. If it penetrates into the great Vessels, it generally produces a Gangren:
if it pierces to the Intestines, it is incurable: if it is from Lightning, it
is for the most part mortal.

VI. If it is in the Groins; or the Eyes, it is very dangerous: and if a hairy
part is burnt, the Hair never grows again there, but the place remains bald:

VII. The Cure. If the Fire is not out, you must endeavor to take that out;
which done, you may come to the cleansing and healing of the Ulcer by Topics.

VIII. Our Ointment of Tobacco, we commend as most admirable thing: it is
excellent in the greatest and a most desperate Burnings.

IX. If there are Blisters, they must be cut and opened, that the hot and sharp
Humor may flow forth; and then this Ointment may be applied. Ung. Basilicon,
Oil of Roses, or of Hypericon, A. i. yolks of Eggs No ii. mix them.

X. Or this: Fresh Butter, Hens-grease, A. i. Oil of Lillies, Mucilages of
Fleawort and Quince-seeds, Wax, A. ss. Camphir ii. Saccharum Saturni, Saffron,
A. i. mix them.

XI. If you please, instead of the mucilages of Fleawort and of Quince-seeds;
you may use Barley, or Wheat, or Oatmeal flower.

XII. If the Pain be very great, you must alleviate it with this Defensative.
Take Oil of Roses ii. white Wax i. Camphir i. Barley meal or flower, q.s. mix
them.

XIII. Or this. Take fine Bole, Terra Sigillata, Ceruss, Catechu,
Pomgranate-peels, Red-roses, A. ss. Wax ii. Oil of Roses iv. in which let
Camphir ii. be dissolved: moisten the Powder with a little Vinegar, then mix
with them the melted Wax and Oil of Roses.

XIV. To take out the Fire, and ease the Pain, a Cataplasm made of Onions, Rue,
and Mithridate, is much is commended.

XV. If the Patient is in such violent pain that he cannot sleep, add to either
of the former Ointments Opium, a ss. ad i. dissolved in S.V. or Vinegar: and
use Rowlers dipped in Oxycrate, or in a Pickle made with Water, Vinegar, and
Salt, (if the Part is capable of Bandage) it will excellently repress the flux
of Humors, ease the Pain, and draw out the Fire.

XVI. If there is an Eschar, it is speedily to be removed with an
Incision-knife; and this Ointment following may be applied. Take Oil of Roses,
fresh Butter, Hogs-lard, A. i. yolks of two Eggs: mix them.

XVII. Defensatives are not here so convenient, especially, if there is danger
of a Gangrene, because they are apt to hinder transpiration.

XVIII. This of Guilielmus Fabricius, is good. Take Diachalciteos ii. Hens and
Goose grease, A. ss. melt them together, and and add burnt Alum, burnt Lead,
Litharge, Lapis Calaminaris, A. i. grind all together in a Leaden Mortar: add
mucilages of Fleawort and Fenugreek seed, A. q.s. mix, and make an Ointment.

XIX. You must labor that the Eschar may be removed the first or second day:
if it cannot be by the former Applications, then you must cut it in diverse
places, with an Incision-knife, that so a passage may be made for the issuing
forth of the Humor, and admission of Medicaments to the Affect, such as those
at Sect. 15. and 17. aforegoing.

XX. Now when the Eschar which was burnt shall be separated, the Ulcer is to be
cleansed; and after that, you are with Sarcoticks to incarnate, and with
Epuloticks to cicatrize; as we have before directed, in the Cure of other
Ulcers.

XXI. Yet you are to take care, that those things which you order in respect of
skinning the Sore, be not over-dry; lest the Cicatrice be rough, deformed, or
unsightly.

XXII. Some will have Burnings, etc. to be Ulcers; others, (because of their
immediate Constitution) to be Wounds: the matter is not great which you take
them to be; at first doubtless they are Wounds, afterward they prove Ulcers:
so in respect of the first Consideration we handled them under the Title of
Wounds; where we have largely considered them under many Heads; for which
Reason we have been very brief here: and therefore request you to supply what
is wanting in this place, from the Matter declared there; which you may find in
Lib: 4. Cap. 24. aforegoing.

CHAP. XX. Of an ULCER FISTVLOVS, or, of a FISTVLA.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...). and the Latins, Fistula ille morbus, and Ulcus
fistulosum we in English call purely, A Fistula, Fistulous Ulcer, or, An Ulcer
fistulated.

II. The Definition. It is a sinuous or hollow Ulcer, which is narrow, with a
callosity or bardness in the inner side of the parts; suffering a solution of
Unity, and yielding a stinking and virulent Humor.

III. The Differences. It differs from a sinuous Ulcer only in this, that the
sides are callous: whereas a sinuous Ulcer is totally without callosity.

IV. This Callus, is a thick and infensible heaviness; and it many times
becomes so hard, that the sides can by no manner of means be agglutinated or
united.

V. Fistula's also differ among themselves; some of them proceed from an
Apostem, some from a simple Ulcer, from the Parts affected: some are in Fleshy
Parts, others in Tendinous, or in the Bones or Joints: and some enter into the
Cavities of the Breast or Belly.

VI. They differ also in their magnitude; for some are greater, some lesser: in
their Continuance; for some are inveterate, others recent: in their Figure; for
some are straight and narrow, and some deep or shallow; others are winding, or
capacious: in the Number of their Sinus's; for some have but one Sinus; others
two, or three, or more; which are also either strait or winding, and many times
penetrate to the Bone.

VII. The Causes. Wiseman says, the Callus is hastened, (or made) by the
transpiration and resolution of the thin and subtle Humors, and the
incrassation of the more pituitous: by the congestion of which, a long Pipe of
(hardened or brawny) Skin is made, which branches it self inwards from the
Orifice, quite through all the Cavities of the Ulcer.

VIII. Sennertus says, that Fistula's have their original Causes for the most
part from Apostems; in which, either by the impurity of the Body, or the too
great abundance of the evil Humor, being long contained, a Callus is bred.

IX. Or, they may be caused from the unkilfulness of the Artist, not applying
proper Medicaments, or delaying the Cure; whereby the Pus, from its
corrosiveness, and long detention, makes as it were Coney-burrows, 'till they
become at length very deep, and withal callous, of an insensible brawney
hardness.

X. They are said to proceed also from Phlegm, or adust Melancholy, degenerating
into a fetid and virulent Humor.

XI. The Signs. The edges of a Fistula are white and hard, having little or no
pain; and indeed the whole Fistula is generally void of pain, unless it be in a
Joint, or near to, or touches a Nerve, Tendon, or Membrane.

XII. The Pathognomick Signs of a Fistula are taken from its essence; being of
a Pipe-like figure, with callosity.

XIII. The Accidental Signs are taken from the differences: if the Orifice and
Sinus is but one, or single, the Quittor is less; but if the Sinus's are
manifold, the Pus or Quittor is more in quantity; and it is ever filthy,
virulent and stinking, and sometimes may be pressed out through the Orifice of the
Fistula: the changing also the position of the Body, or part will show them:
for the flowing of the Matter having ceased, if after the changing the
position, it runs out again, it shows that there are more Sinuosities.

XIV. By a Probe you may search the cavity of a Fistula; but in an oblique,
crooked or winding, you must use a Wax-candle, which is best also to be used
when the Fistula is in the fleshy and sensible Parts: the Probe is most
convenient, when it penetrates to the Bone.

XV. If the Fistula is only in the fleshy Parts, that which is touched by the
Probe, is soft; and the matter which comes out, is white, equal, and in great
quantity.

XVI. If it penetrates an Artery, that which comes forth is thin, and shining,
and comes forth with leaping: but if the cavity joins to a Vein, the matter is
like dregs of Claret Wine, but redder and thicker, where the Vein is eroded.

XVII. If it touches a Nerve, there is puin in probing it to the bottom; and
the Pus is as it were fat and oily, but less in quantity; and the action of the
Part is made uneasy, causing a pricking pain, with a certain numbness.

XVIII. If it extends to a Bone, what the Probe touches is hard, not yielding,
and painful, while the Periosteum is not corroded, not if it is corroded, or
consumed, and the Bone is foul, you will find it rough and unequal to the
touch, with a thin, stinking, and black matter, and void of pain.

XIX. If the Probe being pressed slip, no cariosity has seized upon the Bone,
for a sound Bone is smooth and slippery: but if the Probe stay upon it,
appearing smooth, it is disposed to cariosity; and if the Bone feel unequal and
rough, it is carious.

XX. If there are more Orifices than one, you may know whether there be more
Fistula's than one, by injecting a Liquor with a Syringe into one of the
Orifices: for if the Liquor flow forth again by all the Orifices, then it is
all but one Fistula; but if it comes not forth at the other Orifices, then
there are more Fistula's than one.

XXI. And this is likewise discovered in part, by the color of that which
comes forth: for if that which flows forth by all the Orifices is of one
color, it is a sign that the Fistula is but one; but if of a different color,
it shows that there are more than one.

XXII. If by searching, the parts are pained, or if Blood follows your Probe,
the Fistula is not confirmed; but if neither happens, it is a Fistula beyond all
dispute.

XXIII. The Prognostics. All Fistula's are hard of cure, and some incurable:
and it is particularly to be observed, that some certain Fistula's ought not to
be cured, viz. such as are old and inveterate, by which the superfluous Humors
have for a long time been vented: for such Fistula's as these (in regard they
preserve Men from diverse Diseases) are by no means to be closed up; because, as
Hippocrates, Epidem. lib. 6. sect. 3. says, that when they are shut up, they
cause many Maladies. And therefore, on the contrary, if at any time such should
chance to be healed, they ought to be opened again.

XXIV. A recent Fistula in the fleshy parts alone, and not deep, in (...) y^ung
Body of a good constitution, is more easily cured: but an old, deep Fistula,
having many Sinus's, or being near any noble or principal Member, or being in
an old, or cacochymick, or hectic, or emaciated Body, is of very difficult
cure.

XXV. If the edges are not very hard, but somewhat soft and mattery, they
promise a more speedy cure: but coming in those places where Nature is
accustomed to discharge her self of vicious Humors; as the Abdomen, Groins,
Buttocks, Cods, Perinaeum, and Fundament, they are of much more difficult cure.

XXVI. They are also difficultly cured, and for the most part incurable, which
touch the Arteries, Veins, Nerves, Tendons; and those which are in the heads of
the Muscles, or in the Joints, Vertebrae, cavity of the Thorax, Abdomen, Womb,
Bladder, or Guts.

XXVII. Those among the Bones and great Joints, are very difficult to cure; by
reason of the sensibility of the parts, which for the most part admit neither
of Incision nor Dilatation.

XXVIII. Those which are in such places, where you may safely lay them open, or
remove the Callus, are more easy of cure: so also such as are shallow, passing
no deeper than the Membrana carnosa, or at the farthest, than the Membrane of
the Muscles or Muscle; because by incision they may easily be cured.

XXIX. Fistula's winding and turning, and with many Coneyburrows or cavities,
require Incision, that Medicaments may be conveyed to other parts; otherwise
they admit not of cure: and these are of more difficult cure, than those which
have but one Sinus.

XXX. But indeed no Fistula is of easy cure, because of the unaptness of the
Part for conveniently applying of Medicaments: for unless they reach to the
very bottom of the Fistula; (which is not easily to be done) no cure succeeds.
Besides, the Medicaments which are able to remove a Callosity, are vehemently
sharp and biting; causing Pain, symptomatical Fevers, Fainting, etc. and the
Humor which causes the Fistula, is oftentimes malign and stubborn, not easily
yielding to Medicines; for which reasons the Cure many times succeeds slowly,
and ill.

XXXI. Fistula's ending in the Tunicles of Arteries and Veins, are thought to
be incurable, because of Hemorrhages: for if you enlarge the Orifice, or take
away the Callosity by sharp Medicaments, the flux of Blood will be renewed or
increased. This happens most commonly in Bubo's of the Groin, not speedily
cured, and Parotides under the Ear, and in Phlegmons in the Armpits: because
these Parts being Emunctories, are near to the divarication of the great
Vessels, viz. the Aorta and Vena cava, descending and ascending.

XXXII. If in a Fistula in the Back, the Spine be carious, it is it is no
prudence to undertake a Cure; for at length an extenuation of the Body will be
induced, and the Animal Spirits diminished; and withal they will not be
communicated (as they ought to be) to the extremities of the Body, whereby
Death will not long after succeed.

XXXIII. Fistula's in the Joints are dangerous; ( for even great Wounds in the
Joints in Bodies of a good habit, are pronounced by Hippocrates to be mortal.)
For seeing the Joints are framed of very sensible parts, as Nerves, Tendons,
Membranes, and Ligaments; and that Corrosives must be applied to remove the
Callus, great pain will ensue, which may endanger a Flux of Humors,
Inflammation, etc. all which will detard the Cure. Besides, these being
depending Parts, and not fleshy, they are less able to discuss a Flux of Humors
received, by reason of the weakness of the Natural Heat of the Parts.

I. The true or absolute Cure of a Fistula,
XXXIV. The Cure of a Fistula, is either Real, or Palliative.

XXXV. The real and true Cure, is that which removes the Callus, and compleats
the Cure, as in other Ulcers.

XXXVI. The Palliative Cure, is that which meddles not with the Callus, but
only dries the Fistula within, and skins it without, the hollowness
nevertheless remaining, commonly continuing some little while closed, but
easily breaks forth again, being to be kept under by a regular Diet, Purging,
and taking good Wound-drinks.

XXXVII. In order to the real and true Cure, there are several Indications: 1.
To abate the Humor which flows. 2. To correct the vicious Habit of the Body, by
Traumaticks. 3. To remove the Callus. 4. To heal up the Ulcer, with Sarcoticks
and Epuloticks.

XXXVIII. As to the first Indication, which is to abate the Humor that flows,
there are several Intentions: 1. That the Patient keeps a regular and good
Diet; eating things sweetning the Juices and Humors of the Body, or at least
breeding sweet Juices, and of a sparing nourishment, (unless the Sick be in a
Hectic, or Consumption) that the Sore may not be supplied with a superfluity
of Humors: such are Bilket, Meats roasted, (not boiled or baked) Fowls or Birds
of Mountain-places, Partridges, etc. of which we have spoken plentifully in
other places: he may eat also every Morning fasting, an ounce or better of
Green-ginger, which strengthens the Stomach, corrects in some measure the evil
Habit, and drys up superfluous Humors.

XXXIX. 2. To evacuate the evil Humors contained in the Body, which supply the
Fistula with Matter and Humor: this is done by Universals; as general Purges
and Vomits, which carry off and diminish the Humors, and cause a Revulsion of
the same.

XL. For this purpose, you may use Emeticks, which empty the Stomach, and cause
a Revulsion upwards; the chief of which are from Antimonials; as the Infusion
of Crocus Metallortun, Vinum Benedictum, Vinum Antimoniale, Tartar Emetick,
Pulvis Antimonii, Pulvis Rheumaticus, Mercurius Vitae: and among Vegetables, we
commend Oxymel Scilliticum; than which there are not many better things: but in
using these things, you must consider the strength and habit of the Body, and
accordingly make your choice, and pursue them.

XLI. Emeticks having been used their due course, you are next to cleanse the
Bowels by proper Catharticks; such as Tinctura Pargans, Sal Mirabile, Mercurius
praecipitatus Principis, Aurum Vitae, Syrupus Catharticus, Pulvis Catharticus,
Pulvis Cornachini, Electuarium Catharticum, Pilulae Catharticae, Pilulae
Mirabiles, and Our Family-Pills; choosing out of all these things, those which
may most agree with the Humors of the Body, and comport with the strength or
weakness of the Sick.

XLII. And these things are to be continued for some time; or are to be
constantly resumed and made use of, at due intervals of time; as the nature of
the Disease requires, and the Body of the Sick can bear.

LXIII. The second Indication requires to correct the evil Habit of the Body,
by Traumatick Diet-Drinks. Now although we have, in Lib. 4. Cap. 30. given you
many and various Prescriptions of Diet-drinks, out of which you may choose what
most agrees with your present occasion; yet we shall for order sake, give you
some other Examples in this place, which Authors have very much commended.

XLIV. Tagaultius prescribes this Diet-drink. Agrimony M.iii. Plantane M. ii.
Olive-leaves M. i. cut, bruise, and boil in Canary-Wine, q.s. of which let the
Sick drink iii. or iv. every day.

XLV. Or this: Osmundroyal P. iii. Centory the less P. i. Wine q.s. boil, and
make a Decoction: it corrects the Humors, makes a good Habit of Body, expels
and drives forth broken Bones: add in its use, a little Spirit of Wine.

XLVI. Or this: Sanicle, Mugwort, Speedwel, Saracens-Consound, Wintergrcen, A.
iv. Horstail ii. Canary-Wine q.s. boil, and make a Decoction.

LXVII. This, if you would have its Operation yet stronger, you may in drinking
of it, add to each Dose, of levigated Crab's-eyes i. for Crab's-eyes and Savin
are of singular use, in expelling Pus, and other putrified Matter, in consuming
and removing a Callus, and driving forth corrupted Bones.

XLVIII. Another Dict-drink. Avens, Carduus ben. Savin, A. iii. Sanicle,
Saracens-Consound, Speedwel, A. ii. Tormentil-roots i. Wine q.s. boil, and make
a Decoction.

XLIX. Authors mightily commend the roots of Gentian and round Birthwort; i. of
either of them being taken in White Wind in the Morning, either every day, or
every other day, fasting two Hours after it.

L. The juices also of Agrimony, roots of Bistort, of Borrage, of Comfrey, of
Tormentil, and of Osmund-royal; the juices of Centory the less, Golden-rod, and
white Horehound, and of Plantane, Periwincle, and Horstail, being mixed with
Ale and drank every day; sweetened with Saccharum Rosatum, wonderfully
contribute toward the healing: so also the Decoction of Guajacum,
Sarsaparilla, and Burdock-roots, being given morning and evening for a Month or
two together.

LI. Raspings of Guajacum vi. Sarsaparilla split iv. Raisons stoned iii.
Liquorice bruised ii. roots of Tormentil, Osmondroyal, Bistort, Comfrey,
Coriander and sweet Fennel seeds, A. i. Agrimony, Golden-rod, tops of
Hypericon, Solomons-seal, A. M.i. boiling Water ten quarts: infuse for 24
hours, then boil with a gentle Fire, 'till a Gallon is evaporated; strain, and
keep it for use. Dose, half a pint in the Morning fasting, a pint at
Dinnertime, half a pint at 4 in the Afternoon, and a pint at Suppertime: if
the Patient cannot drink this quantity, let him drink as much as he
conveniently can.

LII. The third Indication of Cure, is the removing of the Callus; which how
that is to be performed, and whether by Medicaments or Instrument, or both, we
shall anon show under the next Head, where we shall treat of it at large.

LIII. The fourth Indication of Cure, is the healing-up of the Ulcer. The
Callus being removed, or dissolved into a slough, and cast off, you may deterge
with this. Turpentine washed in Aq. Vitae iii. juices of Smallage and of
Hounds-tongue, A. vi. Honey of Roses strained jss. boil to the consumption of
the Juice; and add to it powder of round Birthwort root, of Tobacco, Myrrh,
meal of Lupins, A.ii. Scammony i. mix.

LIVE. And if you add to the former, powder of Orrice, of Frankincense, of
Myrrh, and Sarcocol, it will become incarnative; and then you may cicatrize
with Vnguentum desiccativum rubrum, etc.

LV. Or you may wash and cleanse with this. Plantane and Rose water, A. lbi.
Ung. Aegyptiacum i. white Vitriol ss. Syrup of dried Roses v. mix, and dissolve
for an Injection.

LVI. Or: Plantane-water, or rather Limewater, which is better, lbi. white
Vitriol calcined ii. fine Bole i, S.V. j ss. in which let Camphir vi. be
dissolved, mix them. With these, you may wash and cleanse the Fistula; more
especially, those into whose bottoms you cannot easily convey other Medicaments.

LVII. Sennertus also says, you may inject by a Syringe Lixivium, (not very
strong) Aqua mulsa, Seawater, Limewater, and Water of the bot Baths, and Aqua
Vitae, or S.V.

LVIII. Now of how great Virtues Spirit of Wine is, in these kinds of Cures, we
have already declared in Cap. 12. Sect. 15. and 16, aforegoing: and here again,
we cannot but by the way observe, That if it is mixed with other convenient
Medicaments, it is then of admirable use and benefit in cleansing and drying
sordid and filthy Ulcers; and will perform ten times more, being mixed with
other Medicaments, than they could do, if used alone without it, or if used
alone with them; which the industrious Artist, if he pleases to try, may easily
prove.

LIX. If you use cleansing Pouders, you may blow them into the Ulcer by a Pipe,
its end being put into the Sinus of the Fistula, the Fistula being but a little
way within the Flesh: but if it is long, it may be opened on the opposite part,
and so on both sides the Medicaments may be cast in.

LX. And here likewise we cannot but intimate, what we have before said, in the
Cure of a Sinus, and of a Cavernous Ulcer; that we must use our utmost
endeavor, that the orifice of the Fistula may be open downwards, that so the
Humors may the more freely flow forth; or if it be not open, then in that very
place it is to be opened, unless there be some weighty reason which may hinder
it.

LXI. Some inject Limewater, in which Mercurius dulcis levigated has been put,
and shaken together: or the Ablution of Turpethum Minerale; but scarcely any
thing exceeds the Water of the Griffin, which in healing Ulcers does Wonders.

LXII. Some deterge with this. White Wind viii. Ung. Aegyptiacum ss. S.V. i.
mix them; with which you may inject warm once a day, or oftener, if you see
occasion.

LXIII. You may know when the Fistula is sufficiently cleansed, if the Pus or
Matter is uniform, equal, smooth, thick, white, and without any ill or stinking
smell.

LXIV. If the Bone be carious, you must consider how far the caries has entered
into it, and endeavor the removal of it either by Actual Cautery, or boring
with the Trepan, or rasping, shaving, or scraping; then by Desquamatories
hasten the exfoliation of the Bone; and so proceed in the rest of the Cure,
with Sarcoticks and Epuloticks.

LXV. But if the Fistula is near, or over some noble Part; or if there is a
Nerve, Tendon, or Artery near; or if it is deep in the great Bones, or in the
Joints, where you cannot proceed by the actual or potential Cautery, and it
will not yield to milder Medicaments; you must then come to the palliative
Cure, by gentle Purgings, Diet-Drinks, Waters, Balsams, and Ointments; which
may give a quietness and ease to the Part affected, as we shall anon declare.

LXVI. The second Intention of this fourth Indication, is to unite and
consolidate the Parts disjoined: this is done in part, by continuing the use of
traumatick Diet-drinks, or some such Liquor as this. Angelica, Avens, Bawm,
Hyssop, Fetherfew, Mint, Marjoram, Savory, Time, Peniroyal, Savin, A. M. ii.
Burnet, Centory, Sanicle, Plantane, Knotgrass, Yarrow, Solomons-seal, A. M. i.
roots of round Birthwort, of Bistort, Comfrey, Gentian, Tormentil, Zedoary,
A.ii. Wine a gallon: put all into a glass Alembick, and draw off in B.M. a
quart or three pints of Spirit: the dregs strain out, and the straining clarify
with whites of Eggs: to this clarified Liquor put a quarter or more of its
weight in Honey, which dissolve, and then add the distilled Spirit to it, and
keep it for use. It may be given inwardly, iii. at a time, Morning and Night;
and also injected into the Ulcer, to incarnate it; applying incarnative Balsams
or Ointments after it.

LXVII. The third Intention of the fourth Indication is, to produce the
Cicatrice; of which we need not say much here, considering we have said so much
of it in former places: only this you may note, that you may know when the
Ulcer is near whole, and sit for cicatrizing; for that the Humor which flows
from it, will be little, thick, and concocted, and the place will be void of
pain and tumor; and when you find it altogether dry and skinned, you may then
say that the Fistula is perfectly cured.

II. The Way of removing the Callus.
LXVIII. We are first to consider whether the Callus can be removed by
Medicaments, or not; if it can, whether it can be taken away without laying the
Sinus open, or not: if it can, then the first thing to be done; is to widen the
mouth thereof, for the better and more easy application of Medicaments thereto.

LXiX. The Callus in the Orifice may be perceived at sight, but the Callus in
the Sinus it self, is to be discovered by Instrument: for the Instrument or
Probe being put in, if there is little or no pain, and it bleeds not, but a
certain hardness it self, there is a Callus.

LXX. In those who are young, whose Flesh is soft and tender, Emollients and
Digestives are sufficient, to dissolve or dissipate the Callus; with which, as
you see occasion, you may mix Abstersives.

LXXI. But the narrow Orifice is first to be dilated, (if it is too straight)
which is performed four several ways: 1. By Incision; which is to be used to
strong Bodies, if the Fistula is not deep, and runs along only under the Skin,
no deeper than the Membrane of a Muscle, and if it is in a fleshy Part.

LXXII. 2. By things which swell; and these are to be used before Incision, if
the Fistula has many sinuosities: of this kind are roots of Briony, wild Rape,
Birthwort, Gentian-roots, Elder-pith, Puffballs prepared and pressed; Sponge
twisted, and bound about with Thread very hard, and then kept in a Press for
some time: this dilates more than the other things, and imbibes more moisture.

LXXIII. Some prepare the Sponge by dipping it in simple Melilot-Emplaster,
when very hot, the^ put between two Trenchers, and pressed strongly in a Press,
and after an hour or two, when it is cold, to be taken out; it will be firm,
and almost resemble green Sage-Cheese.

LXXIV. Others dip the Sponge into Glair or Whites of Eggs, and then in like
manner, keeping them in the Press' till they are dry, and so taking them out.
Either the former or this may be cut out into Tents, of what form, or fashion,
or bigness you please; which being put into the Fistula, will exceedingly
dilate it, by sucking to it the humidity.

LXXV. 3. By the Fistula-Tent: which your may make of fine downy Lint (the
Threads being all taken away,) with this down, and the Glair of Eggs, you may
make Tents of what bigness and length you please, even to the depth of the
sinuosicy. You may do it on piece of Deal-board.

LXXVI. And you may enlarge the bigness of the Tents, to dilate the Fislula as
much as you please: for these Tents being dried, will pierce into any cavity,
like a Probe, without bending, (if they are well made) by reason of their
stiffness.

LXXVII. 4. The fourth and last way, is by Hellebor-root; which opens by a kind
of Catheretick, or Caustic Property, and is to be prudently used: but is, in
truth none of the worser means.

LXXVIII. The Orifice being thus widened, we may proceed to the removing of the
Callus, as directed at Sect. 70. above, with this Ointment. Juices of Smallage
ii, of Celandine ii. of Onions i. Honey of Roses ii. Turpentiue, q.s. mix, and
make an Ointment.

LXXIX. Our Ung. Nicotianae i. Turpethum Minerale i. mix them: and in some very
tender Bodies, Vng. Nicotianae may do it alone: if you have not Turpethum
Minerale, you may use instead thereof so much red Precipitate.

LXXX. And of this nature are, Ashes of Fig-branches, mixed with Goose-fat;
Potashes or Salt of Tartar, mixed with Veal-fat; decoction of Fern-roots,
decoction and powder of Tobacco, and Euphorbium, Diachylon mixed with
Precipitate, Vnguentum Apostolorum.

LXXXI. Amongst the Emollients and Digestives, for resolving and dissipating a
Callus, Wiseman enumerates these, viz. roots of Althea, of Lillies, of
Elecampane, of Solomons-seal, wild Cucumbers, seeds^ of Line and Fenugreek, all
sorts of Marrows, Fats of Hogs, Geese, Cocks and Hens, Mans-grease, Vng.
Althaeae cum Ammoniaco and Galbano; of which, says he, you may make
Fomentations, Cataplasms, Ointments, Cerats, etc.

LXXXII. To this purpose also, he recommends Empl. de Ranis, fine, and cum
Mercurio, (for Mercury has a mighty power in softning Bones, and Ivory it self)
Empl. e Mucilaginibus, Diachylon cum Gummi.

LXXXIII. But for the most part, stronger Medicaments, to consume and remove
the Callus, are requisite: as, the Roots of Spondylium, viz. Meadow or Cow
Parsnip, roots of Asphodel, Snakeweed, Briony, decoction of Lupins; but the
best of all, are the lesser Centory, and the roots of black Hellebor, put in
for 3 days into the Sinus: yet this last will be dangerous, if the Fistula be
in any part of the Thorax, or Abdomen.

LXXXIV. Or, Honey iv. juice of blue Flower-de-luce roots, Red-wine, A. i.
juice of Celandine ss. boil a little; then add Scammony in powder, Litharge, A.
ii. white Vitriol, Tobacco in powder, Aloes, Myrrh, A.i. Turpentine ss. mix
them.

LXXXV. Take Frankincense, Myrrh, Scammony, A.ii. roots of Briony, of round
Birthwort, Tobacco, A. i. Verdigrise ss. Sal Armoniack i. Hogs-lard,
Oil-Olives, A.q.s. mix them.

LXXXVI. If the Callus is somewhat hard, and the Patient in years, you must use
things more harsh, and which mundify strongly: as, Take Ung. Apostolorum i. red
Precipitate i. burnt Alum ii. or instead of red Precipitate, you may use
Turbith Mineral, in the same quantity; mix them well together.

LXXXVII. Or you may use Unguent. Aegyptiacum, with the Precipitate and Alum:
as it is stronger, so it causes more pain than the Vng. Apostolorum, but it
procures not so good a kind of Pus.

LXXXVIII. Aegineta, lib. 4. cap. 49. commends the juice of the roots of
Laserpitium, or Elaterium mixed with Turpentine.

LXXXIX. Vng. Fuscum Wurtzii is a famous thing in this case, if it is reduced
by boiling into the form of a Suppository or Tent, and so put into the Fistula.

XC. Or this of Barbett. Take Agrimony Mss. Scordium, flowers of Hypericon, A.
P.ii. French Barley i. White Wind q.s. boil, and strain; add Virgin-Honey iv.
boil to a thickness, then add Sarcocol iii. Olibanum, Mastich, A.ii. Myrrh iss.
white Vitriol i. mix them: of this make Suppositories or Tents; he says it is
prevalent also against Fistula in Ano.

XCI. But if the Callus is inveterate, and grown to a very great hardness, so
that the former things will do nothing, you must then come to the stronger
Remedies, and such as are Caustic; of which also, some are more gentle, others
more vehemently fierce.

XCII. The more gentle are these. Strong Vinegar vi. white Vitriol iv. Alum,
Verdigrise, A. ss. boil, and calcine in a luted Vessel; then make it into a
fine powder, and mix it with Ung. Aegyptiacum, with which arm the Tents.
Barbett.

XCIII. The Aqua Viridis, or Green Water, (which we have formerly described) is
an excellent thing; being oftentimes cast into the Fistula, with a Syringe.

XCIV. Aegineta, lib. 4. cap. 49. has this: Take Verdigrise xii. Ammoniacum ii.
dissolve the Ammoniacum in Vinegar, and then mix the Verdigrise with it.

XCV. Wiseman says, he commonly uses Lapis Causticus, Trochisci de Minio,
Arsenick, and Oil of Vitriol: or this: Take Wax, Rosin, A. i. corrosive
Sublimate ii. more or less; mix them upon a Fire, and dip a Sponge in it, but
not too hot, lest you burn it; then press it out, and cut it out into such a
form as may serve your purpose.

XCVI. Guido commends Aqua fortis, some Spirit of Nitre, which is better than
A^. fortis, because A.F. is apt to black and foul the Bones, if it should touch
them: others commend Oil of Vitriol, others Oil of Sulphur, and some Spirit of
Salt.

XCVII. If you desire rather an Injection, Wiseman says you may make this, or
some suchlike. Take Ung. Aegyptiacum ss. Soap-lees i. Rose Water ii.
Plantane-water iv. Sublimate ss, Arsenick i. mix, and boil to the consumption,
of a third part; of which cast a little of it in with a Syringe for three days
together, shutting the Orifice up with Wax, of some Emplaster; so shall you
consume all the Callus.

XCVIII. But, says he, you must consider well the situation of the Fistula;
lest by its too far penetrating, it should hurt the Bone, or parts underneath.

XCIX. Take strong Lie iv. Honey of Roses strained jss. Decoction of Lupins i.
Alum ss. mix them: if you would have it yet stronger, you may add thereto red
Precipitate ss.

C. Or, Take Orpiment, Sulphur vive and Calx vive, Ana; make them into a fine
powder, and mix them. Or, Take burnt Alum ii. Vitriol calcined i. Orpiment,
Verdigrise, A. ss. make all into a fine powder. Or, Take Turbith Mineral not
washed, Vitriol calcined, fine Bole, Ana; make all into a fine powder.

CI. The strongest of all are these. Take corrosive Sublimate, Vitriol
calcined, fine Bole, Ana; make them into a fine powder. Or, Take white
Arsenick, Orpiment, Calx vive, Ana; make them into a fine powder: or, (if the
Fistula is laid open, so that you can easily come to the Callus) you may with a
Feather touch it gently with the Butter of Antimony.

CII. As to the use of the sormer Pouders: if you have dilated the Fistula by
Incision, you may sprinkle the Callus with them; but if it is dilated by any
other means, then you may mix the Pouders with Unguent. Populeum, wherewith a
Tent may be armed, and so applied: or you may make Troches of those Pouders,
which being made into form and dried, may be put in.

CIII. But this you must observe, that you must not force out either the armed
Tent, or Troches, before they force out of their own accord: for so they will
bring out the Callus with them whole, the Tent being within the Callus.

CIV. If there are many Sinuosities, so as that no Tent can pierce to their
bottoms: it will be best then to mix these Pouders with some Liquor, as Aqua
Calcis, a small Lixivium, Alum-water, Vitriol-water, or White Wind, and so
inject with a Syringe.

CV. But by reason of the Application of these Medicaments, there is usually
much pain, and sometimes Inflammation; it will be good to provide against it by
some proper Defensative: as, Take Oil of Roses, Whites of Eggs, Ana; mix them
well together, and apply it over the Part affected.

CVI. Or, Take Cows-milk lbi. crumbs of White-bread vi. boil to thickness of a
Pultiss; then add Ung. Populeon ii. Henbane-seeds, ss. Saffron in powder jss.
Opium in powder ss. mix, and make a Cataplasm, which apply Morning and Evening.

CVII. And round the adjacent parts, you may apply this corroborating
Emplaster. Pouders of Red-roses, of Myrtleberries, A.i. Mastich, Olibanum,
Pomgranate-peels, A. ii. Orriceroot iii. yellow Wax, Pine-rosin, Oil of
Hypericon, A. i. mix, and make an Emplaster.

CVIII. Wiseman, to ease the Pain, and defend the Part, uses these Lenients;
Decoctions of Mallows, Marshmallows, Violet-leaves, Mullein, Henbane,
Quince-seeds, Barley; or Oil of Eggs, fresh Butter, Lard, Vng. Basilicon, with
Oil of Lillies, Dialthaea, etc. and over them he applies Refrigerants, as Empl.
e Bolo, Oxylaeum, Emplast. Album, with Juices.

CVIX. But if notwithstanding all that has been said, the Fistula will give
place to no Rememedies, that have or can be applied; we must betake our selves
to the Incision-knife, or the Actual Cautery it self.

CX. The whole Sinus is to be laid open; (unless it be in those Fistula's which
reach unto the great Arteries, Nerves, Tendons, Membranes, which gird in the
Ribs, or other parts of like nature:) which is to be done with the
Incision-knife, according to its position and form; or else with the
Syringotomus of Fabricius Aquapendens, which is very useful in this cause.

CXI. The Fistula being laid open, the Callus is to be removed by some of the
Medicaments before described; or with the edge of a Penknife or Razor; cutting
so far, 'till you come to the good and sound Flesh; which you may perceive, not
only by the color, but by the Blood, and sense of Pain.

CXII. If the Callus is extraordinary hard, it will be the best way to remove
it with the Actual Cautery, or red-hot Iron; which is done, not only with most
speed, but also with least pain, or sense of feeling; yet this Remedy, by
reason of the terror thereof, few People will admit of it.

CXIII. In the mean while that these things are doing, whether by Caustic
Medicaments, the Knife, or red-hot Iron) the Part it self is to be well guarded
with some cooling Defenfative and Repeller; lest the great pain should cause an
Inflammation.

CXVI. The Callus being thus burnt thoroughly, you must then apply things to
remove the Eschar or Crust; as Oily things, fresh Butter, Hogs-lard, Palm-Oil,
Vng. Populeon mixed with Vng. Basilicon; to which you may if you please add a
little Precipitate.

CXV. If the Fistula ends in a Bone, you must (so soon as it is discovered by
Section) diligently scrape and pare away whatever is black and corrupted in the
Bone, which must be in the surface thereof. If the rottenness has corrupted
farther, then the scaly part is to be cut forth with some proper Instrument,
unless it comes forth of its own accord.

CXVI. If the rottenness has penetrated to the Marrow, then that which is
corrupted is to be taken forth; but if the Bone is wholly putrified, it must be
all of it taken out; which may be well enough done in small Bones, but not so
in others.

CXVII. The Bone being now cleansed, you are immediately to apply Incarnatives,
and then to heal it after the manner of a simple Ulcer: if the Fistula does not
give place to healing, it is a certain sign, that all the corrupted part was
not taken away: for which reason, the Fistula is to be opened, and the Bone to
be farther scraped and cleansed with all the care imaginable.

CXVIII. If yet after all this, it will not heal, you may then conclude, that
it has penetrated so deep, as it will be scarcely possible to find out its end
and bottom; and is then to be left unto Nature, whom we are yet to assist and
help with Medicaments: and for this purpose, this Powder of Nicholas the
Florentine, is much commended.

CXIX. Salt decrepitated, Tartar, Agarick, A. q.s. let them be made into fine
powder: this is said to draw forth the Bones which are broken and corrupted,
cats through the putrified Flesh, and heals the Ulcer.

CXX. But this following Powder is better. Salt decrepitated, Tartar calcined,
Scammony, Tobacco, all in fine powder, A.i. Euphorbium ss. mix them.

CXXI. The Callus being removed and quite taken away, if there be any thing
sordid and foul yet remaining, you must make use of detersive and sarcotick
Medicaments, such as that at Sect. 53. aforegoing: and for which purpose
Centory the less, Birthwort-roots, Golden-rod, Pimpernel, and the like are to
be used: and then lastly, with Sarcoticks and Epuloticks you must complete the
Cure.

III. The Palliative Cure of a Fistula.
CXXII. When the Palliative Cure is to be used, we have partly showed at Sect.
65. aforegoing: to which we add, that in what part soever it be, and how simple
soever, if it proves rebellious, and resists all sorts of Medicaments, as it
oftentimes does, in scorbutic, strumatick, and cacochymick Bodies, you must
then apply your self to this Method, as the ultimate of all that is to be done.

CXXIII. For it drys, and shuts it up for a time with a thin Skin, which so
remains, 'till more Humors are generated, and heaped up in the Part affected,
and then it breaks out again.

CXXIV. The Body is to be well cleansed and evacuated (at due intervals of
time) with proper Emeticks and Catharticks, such as we have enumerated before
at Sect. 40 and 41. above: but as the Purging must be continual, it may be for
many Months, or some Years: so a Purging-drink may be thought more expedient;
such as this following.

CXXV. Take fine soft Raspings of Guajacum, mealy Sarfa bruised, choice Sena,
Mechoacan bruised, Hermodacts, Carthamus-seeds, A. vi. Rhubarb, Liquorice,
Fennel and Coriander seeds, A. iii. Scammony, Anniseeds, Winters Cinnamon,
Virginian Snake-root, A.i. Agrimony, Angelica, Avens, Bawm, Ladies-mantle,
Sanicle, Wintergreen, A. M. i. all being grossly bruised, put them into a Bag,
with a Stone in it, which put into three gallons of new Ale; of which after the
second or third day, the Patient may begin to drink; half a Pint fasting every
day, and if it is a Body hard to work upon, as much at 4 in the Afternoon.

CXXVI. And for his constant Drink, he may take this. Take Guajacum rasped,
Sassafros rasped, mealy Sarsa, China, Juniper Berries, Burdock-roots, A. x.
round Birthwort root, Zedoary, Winters Cinnamon, A. v. Aniseed, Coriander and
Fennel seed, Ginger. A. ii. Agrimony, Angelica, Avens, Bawm, Clowns-woundwort,
Albeal, Betony, Sage, Hyssop, A. M. i. all being grossly bruised, put them into
a Bag with a Stone in it; which put into four gallons of new Ale, letting them
work together for two days: after which, the Patient may drink it as his
ordinary Drink.

CXXVII. Let his Diet be drying, and very strengthening; because this continual
running of the Ulcer will drain the whole Body, and be in danger to induce a
Consumption: white Ship-bisket is good, and ought to be his only Bread; his
Meat ought to be roasted; and for Restoratives, strong Broths and Gellies are
often to be given him.

CXXVIII. Let the Orifice of the Fistula be open downwards; if it is not so,
let it be made by Incision or Cautery, or by the help of the Syringotomos, so
that the Humors may freely pass out.

CXXIX. Then as for Topics, Limewater is good to wash, or inject withal, and
sometimes Red-wine, or Red-wine mixed with S.V. or Limewater with S.V.

CXXX. Aqua Calcis (in which Litharge has been boiled) i. Spirit of dried
Roses, or of Myrtle-berries ii. mix them. Or, Take Plantane or Rose water vi.
Spirit of Wine ii. Roman Vitriol in fine powder ii. mix, and dissolve. Or, you
may inject and and wash daily with the Water of the Griffin, which exceeds all
other things in Nature; for that by long using of it, it has many times
dissolved the Callus it self.

CXXXI. In some of these Liquors a Pledget of Lint, or a new Sponge may be
dipped, or thoroughly soaked, and applied to the Fistula, and bound to the place:
and over the Lint or Sponge Empl. Album, or Diapalma may be put, to keep it
fast on: and it needs to be dressed but every other day only, unless very much
Matter flows forth; for then it will require a daily dressing and looking after.

CHAP. XXI. Of an ULCER GANGRENOVS.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...). and the Latins, Ulcus Gangraenatum, or
Gangraenosum; we in English call, A Gangrenous Ulcer.

II. It is a notable and extraordinary Distemper, tending to a Mortification,
which may invade an Ulcer, without any Tumor at all. Yet because it often
follows upon Tumors, especially a Phlegmon, we have amply treated thereof in
the Book of Tumors, viz. Lib. 3. Cap. 11. aforegoing; in which place you have
its various Causes, Signs, Prognostics, and Methods of Curing: here we shall
only give you a few words concerning an Ulcer gangrenated, or sphacelated.

III. The Cause. It is whatsoever destroys the Native Heat of the Part; for as
much as the Life thereof depends solely thereupon.

IV. The Native Heat is destroyed, 1. By vehement Cold. 2. By extreme outward
Heat. 3. By defect of Nutriment. 4. By Suffocation; the Transpiration being
hindered by stopping the Pores, which is many times by too strict Bandage. 5. By
a Venomous Quality; as is evident in a Carbuncle, Bitings of Vipers,
Rattle-snakes, etc. 6. By Septick Medicaments, not prudently and carefully
applied.

V. The Signs. There are variety of Signs and Symptoms, according to the
variety of its several Causes: however, there is a Pustle or Pustles appear,
with a spot in the middle; and if it proceeds from cold, there is a great
pricking, and the Part is first pale, then red, then black. If from heat, or
stoppage of the Pores, the Pustules yield a gleety Humor, and the redness turns
to whiteness. If from too hard Ligature, the Pustules are greater, and full of
a thin reddish Humor: if from Poison, etc. under the Pustule a black Spot
appears, spreading it self over the whole Part.

VI. If it becomes a perfect Sphacelus or Mortification, the Part looks first
pallid, after livid, then black, the Flesh is loose and stinking; the sense,
heat, and pulsation is vanished; and the life of the Part is wholly abolished,
so that if cut or burnt, it is insensible of pain: the Flesh seems cold, and
becomes soft and flaggy; which afterward dies, and becomes black, hard, and
wholly dead, and yields a stink like to that of a dead Carcas.

VII. The Prognostics. All Gangrens are dangerous, if they be in moist parts;
because that the innate Heat in those Parts is sooner suffocated, from the
great store of humidity.

VIII. But a Sphacelus it far more dangerous; because it can no more be
restored to life again, but the Part sphacelated must be cut off, to save the
Life of the Patient.

IX. The Cure. Though we have so largely handled the Cure in the place
afore-cited, yet these things following in an Ulcer gangrenated, are farther to
be observed.

I. The Cure of an Ulcer Gangrenated.
X. If it proceeds from Cold, bathe the Part in very cold, or almost frozen
Water, so will the inward Heat be rouzed up, diffuse it self, and be brought
again into play: and give inwardly Powers of Rosemary, Juniper, Limons or
Sassafras, in a Glass of Canary: after which, you may give a Dose of Our New
London- Treacle; then being in Bed, induce Sweat, by applying glass or stone
Bottles to the sides, full of boiling-hot Water.

XI. Also let Warming-stones or Bricks be heated, and wrapped up in Napkins,
and applied to the soles of the Feet: and if the Gangrene goes on, you must
immediately scarify, and foment the Part either with Lixivium of Potashes, or
with Powers of Amber, or camphorated S.V.

XII. If it proceeds from Suffocation of the Natural Heat, exhibit often
volatile Sal Armoniack in a Glass of good Wine, let the place be scarified deep,
and emptied by Cupping-glasses, and then Defensatives to be applied to the
Part, to which add convenient Purging.

XIII. The Incision being made, the Part is to be washed with Brine, or Lixivium
of Salt of Tartar, boiled with meal of Lupins, or Aloes; adding after boiling,
a quarter-part of S.V. and a tenth part of Spirit of Sal Armoniack: when the
Part is washed, lay on Vng. Aegyptiacum; which here is reputed to be the best of
all other things, being a most efficacious Remedy for taking away putridness,
and separating the dead Flesh from the sound.

XIV. If the putridity be more than ordinary, use this. Take Syrup of Wormwood
and Scordium lbi. Vinegar of Squills vi. Verdigrise iii. juices of Rue and
Centory the less, A. ii. Alum, Sal Armoniack, A. ss. boil to a good thickness,
then add of Treacle and Mithriddle, A. ss. Camphir i. mix them.

XV. Or this Water, which has been used with success. Take fresh Urine lbii.
Oil of Tartar per Deliquium lbss. Oak-buds, Centory the less, A. M. ss. Vitriol
i. boil to the Consumption of a third: then add S.V.iii. strain, and add S.V.
iii. in which Camphir ii. has been dissolved. All these things are to be
applied blood warm, and continued 'till the Putridity is removed.

XVI. If these things do not, you must proceed to Causticks; as the Princes
Powder, red Precipitate, Turbith-mineral, and such other like.

XVII. The Crust, in what way soever it is produced, must be taken away, as we
have formerly taught; not waiting 'till Nature will do the work: but the
highest part of the Crust is with the edge of a Penknife to be cut, even to
the sound part, to make way for Medicines; lest waiting 'till it falls of its
own accord, a new Putridity under the Crust should be contracted.

XVIII. If it be from Malignity or Poison, you must take care to defend the
Heart; and expel the Poison by things Expulsive, Sudorisick, and Alexipharmick;
as Medicines made of Angelica, Avens, Bawm, Carduus bened. Citron-juice, Dittany
of Creet, Lavender, Mint, Origanum, Pepper, Roses, Rosemary, Rue, Sorel,
Wood-sorel, Scordium, Swallowort, Mithridate, Venice-Treacle, Our Theriaca
Chymica; but principally with volatile Salts, as of Vipers, of Hartshorn, of
Urine, and of Sal Armoniack, etc. by which procuring Sweat, the malignity will
be driven forth, from the noble Members to the exterior Parts.

XIX. If the Poison sticks outwardly, you must apply strong Attractives, that
it may not spread abroad: and if it is inward, the Matter is to be called forth
by Scarifications on the Part affected, Cupping-glasses, etc. washing the Part
afterward with a Decoction of Angelica, Centory the less, Dittany, Rue,
Scordium, Southernwood, Swallowort, and Wormwood, made either in Wine, or
Lixivium, or equal parts of both.

XX. Or, you may attract it, and consume it; by applying a Cataplasm of
Garlic, Onions, etc. roasted, mixed with Leven, Turpentine, and other strong
drawers: or the Actual Cautery (which is the most effectual of all) may be
applied.

XXI. The Gangrene being in a fair way of recovery, cleanse the Ulcer with
Detersives; made of juice of Smallage and Honey of Roses, mixed (if need be)
with a little Spirit of Wine.

II. The Cure, when Sphacelated.
XXII. But if there is an absolute Sphacelus, you are to consider whether the
Member be sphacelated wholly, or in part. If it is totally sphacelated, it is
to be ordered as we have directed, Lib. 1. Cap. 32. and Lib. 3. Cap. 11. Sect.
100, to 125.

XXIII. But if the Sphacelation is in part only, first apply Defensatives upon
the sound places adjacent, then make many straight and oblique Sections,
scarify the dead Flesh which lies near the sound; and do this very deep, even
to the Bone: and strew upon the Wound burnt Alum, Potashes, and unslackt Lime,
(avoiding Arsenick, which melts, corrupts, and putrifies the Flesh.)

XXIV. And the Crust which is over the Part affected, is to be taken away with
the Incision-Knife, or a Razor; not waiting 'till it falls of its own accord:
for the dead part will be dried, and so will easily be separated from the sound.

XXV. Some use the Actual Cautery, burning the putrified Flesh, 'till pain is
perceived in the Part, after which they remove the Eschar: and then they
deterge, incarnate, and cicatrize it, in all respects as a simple Ulcer. But
Fallopius likes not the Actual Cautery, where there is much Flesh, because the
Burning makes a most abominable stink.

XXVI. If upon removing of the Eschar, any principal Artery or Vein should be
hurt, you may stop the Bleeding with such things as we have delivered in Lib.
4. Cap. 4. aforegoing; or with this. White Starch iii. Catechu ii. Aloes,
powder of Toadsflesh, A.i. Dragons-blood, Frankincense, fine Bole, A.ss. down
of a Hare cut small, Sponge torrified, A.ii. make all into a powder, and mix
them.

XXVII. Or with this Our Specific. Powder of Mans-blood, iii. powder of dried
Toads, Catechu, A. ii. burnt Alum, ashes of an old Hat, A. i. Salt of Vitriol,
Dragons-blood, Sealed-earth, fine Bole, A. v. make of all a fine Powder.

XXVIII. And over the Powder, you may lay this Emplaster. Fine Bole,
Sealed-earth, Dragons-blood, white Starch, A. i. Fitch, q.s. mix, and make an
Emplaster.

XXIX. Or you may lay on this Sparadrap of Fallopius. Acacia, Aloes, Aloe-wood,
Alipta Moschata, Alum, Cuminseed, Gallia Moschata, Myrrh, red Sanders, yellow
and white Ana, make a powder. Ship-Pitch, Pine Rosin, colophony, A. ii.
Mastick, liquid Storax, A. jss. of the former Powder i. Gum Arabic,
Tragacauth, A. ss. let all be melted, and therein dip a Linen Cloth to make a
Sparadrap.

XXX. All things being thus done, cleanse the Ulcer with abstersives, incarnate
it with Sarcoticks, and Cicatrize it with Epuloticks, and heal it up in all
respects as another Ulcer.

CHAP. XXII. Of an ULCER of the HEAD.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...), and the Latins, Vlcus Capitis: we in English
call an Ulcer of the Head.

II. The Kinds. There are four several kinds of Ulcers of the Head: 1. Tinea,
The Dry Scald Head. 2. Achores, the moist Scald Head with a thin Humor. 3.
Favus, the moist Scald Head with a thick or Honey-like Humor. 4. Vleus Simplex,
from an Apostem, Tumor or Contusion.

I. Of the Dry Scald Head.
III. It is called by the Greeks ( as Aristotle) (...): and by the Latins
Tinea, or Tineae, but this is while it affects the Hair chiefly; and of which
we have said something already in Lib. 2. Cap. 5. aforegoing: but when it once
comes to affect the Skin and Flesh, it may be called Tinea Vlcerosa, (...),
Vlcus aridum, the Dry ^ald: and of this it is we shall speak here.

IV. It is a Crusty Ulcer fretting, the Skin like a Moth, with but very little
moisture, Corrupting the Roots of the Hair, and making a dry filthy Scab.

V. But Petrus Johannes Faber in Chirurgica Spagyrica, Cap. 15. will have it to
be, A peculiar Phagedaenical and Cancerous Ulcer of the Head, arising from a
Vitriolick Salt in the Body of Man, which fretting the Skin, produces the
Scall, sometimes white, sometimes yellow.

VI The Causes. And (says he) as Vitriol in the Great World, while it is
calcining in the Fire, does coagulate into a Mass, either white, if the
calcination is but moderate; or yellow if the Fire is augmented: so Vitriol in
the little World, when it is separated from the Balsam of the Body, makes its
way toward the Skin of the Head, which it corrodes, and produces a Crusty and
Scaly Matter. So that this Vlcus aridum may properly be said to be caused from
Rhlegma Vitriolatum, a Vitriolated Phlegma.

VII. But Avicen, Mercurialis and many others of the Gaienists will have the
material cause from Melancholy joined with some acrid Humor, which provoking
the Expulsive faculty, is thereby driven out at the Skin of the Head, and so
causes this Ulcer; in which opinion there is very little appearance of Truth.

VIII. The Procatartick causes are: 1. From being Hereditary. 2. Or a fault in
the course of the things Nonnatural. 3. Or from the Nurses Milk. 4. Or from
Contagion and Infection.

IX. The Signs. It is known by a filthy dry Crusty Scab, sometimes white,
sometimes yellowish, or of an Ash Color or greenish.

X. The Prognostics. It is a malign Ulcer difficult to be cured; and the more
inveterate, the more malign and hard of Cure; and when cured, many times leaves
behind it an Alopecia, or Ophiasis; or the Humor being diverted to some other
parts, produces a Morphew or Leprosy.

XI. And it is yet harder to cure, if the Skin is hard, or of a shelly
substance sending forth many Scales or dry Scabs, or makes the Hair fall, by
reason of the Acrimony of the Humor vitiating their roots; so if it has been
once cured and returns again; for that it seems a seed of the Disease, remains
fixed in the part affected.

XII. The Cure. There are two Indications of Cure: 1. To remove the Causes,
Procatartick and Antecedent. 2. To remove the Causes Proximate, by application
of proper Topics.

XIII. The Procatartick causes are removed by rightly ordering the things
Nonnatural; in which a good and regular Diet is chiefly to be minded.

XIV. The Antecedent cause is removed by due purgation, and that is performed:
1. By gentle Emeticks, which may empty the Stomach without much Violence. 2. By
Catharticks, which ought to be Antimonial, but chiefly Mercurial.

XV. Paraeus thinks that the means used in curing the French Pox, are
effectual in curing of this Disease; and therefore Mercurius dulcis, Red
Precipitate, white Precipitate, the Princes powder, and Turpethum minerale are
commended: also Aurum Vitae.

XVI. The second Indication has respect to the Proximate or conjoined cause,
which has three Intentions: 1. To separate the Scall or Scab. 2. To take away
the Hair by the roots. 3. To heal the Ulcer.

XVII. To cause a falling of the Scabs, you may anoint with Oil of Eggs, or of
Myrrh, or of Sheeps Trotters, and the mucilages of Althea-roots, Linseed, and
Fenugreek, addding some proper Catheretick; but to young and tender Children,
you must use soft means only.

XVIII. To take away the Hair by the roots, you must apply some sticking
Emplaster or Paste, as a Plaster made of red or green Wax spread upon Leather,
and laid on for 15 or 16 hours, or the Cataplasm ad Porriginem, described in
our Doron Medicum, Lib. 3. Cap. 7. Sect. 1. which when it is fastened to the
Hairs, is to be forcibly pulled off, all at once, and therewith the Hairs will
all come forth by the roots.

XIX. Then to heal the Ulcers, first foment with a decoction of Centory,
Colocynthis, Gentian, Southernwood, and Wormwood; made in red Wine: and anoint
with Vnguentum Enulatum cum Mercurio duplicato, or with Valentia Scabiosa, and
over it lay Empl. de Ranis cum Mercurio Triplicato, or our Emplastrum
Mercuriale.

XX. But Mercurialis applys this Cerate to the part affected. Juices of
Fumitory, of Scabious, of Borrage and sharp pointed Dock, Vinegar, A. iii. Old
Oil lbi. Boil to the Consumption of the Juices: then strew in this Powder.
roots of white and black Hellebor, Sulphur Vive, Vitriol, Auripigment, Calx
Vive, Alum, Nut-galls, A. ss. Verdigrise ii. Make all into a powder, and with
Tar jss. Wax, q.s. make a Cerate: where note, that if instead of juice of
Borrage, juice of Tobacco had been put, the Medicament had yet been the better.

XXI. I have known this cured only with Ointment of Tobacco, and green
Tobacco-leaves, laid over the part affected.

II. The Moist Scald Head, with a thin Humor.
XXII. This Disease is called by the Greeks (...): and by the Latins Achor, and
Achores; and by Us, the moist Scald Head with a thin Humor: because a sanious
matter called (...), Ichor, does flow from it. See Lib. 2. Cap. 11. aforegoing.

XXIII. Galen, libro de Tumoribus, says, Achor is a small Ulcer in the Skin,
which may be caused of a Salt and Nitrous Phlegm, out of which flows a sanious
matter, not altogether waterish, nor so Viscous and thick as Honey: and in
another place, he says the holes in this Ulcer are less than those in Favus,
out of which flows a thin Humor with clamminess.

XXIV. Oribasius ad Eunap. Lib. 4. Cap. 4. say also, that Achor is seated in
the Skin of the Head, having but small holes, out of which a thin, and somewhat
viscous Sanies does flow.

XXV. Aetius Lib. 6. Cap. 68. says that Achor is seated in the Skin of the
Head, having but small holes, out of which a thin viscous Sanies does flow: and
to this description Actuarius de dignosc. Morb. Lib. 2. Cap. 5. and Aegineta
Lib. 3. Cap. 3. assent.

XXVI. The Causes. The Procatartick or remote causes are evil Nutriment, and
Contagion: the Antecedent cause is Atra bilis made sharp, or a sharp
Excrementitious Humor, made so either by nature or accident: the proximate or
conjoined Cause, is the same Humor impacted in the part affected.

XXVII. The Signs. They are in part discovered in the description of the Ulcer,
which is always with an Itching, and a little Tumor or swelling.

XXVIII. The Prognostics. This Disease is most incident to Children and Youth,
many of whom receive the Original Cause from the Mothers Womb, or the Nurses
Milk.

XXIX. If it has continued long, and has much altered and corroded the Skin,
though it be cured, yet it leaves baldness behind it: but if it is hereditary, it
is scarcely ever cured.

XXX. Happening to Children it frees them from the Epilepsy, as Hippocrates
says; for the Humor which might cause that Disease, is derived from the inner
to the outward Parts. The Cure is the same with the next following, and
therefore we shall Treat of it under that Title.

III. The Moist Scald Head with a thick Humor.
XXXI. This is called by the Greeks (...). and by the Latins, Favus or Favi:
and by Us, the moist Scald Head, with a thick Humor.

XXXII. Galen (in loco citato) speaking of these Ulcers called Favi, says, that
it is a certain Tumor or Ulcer having several holes, out of which Matter flows
like unto Honey; and in another place, he say that the holes in this Ulcer, or
Favi, are larger than these in Achor.

XXXIII. Oribasius says, that Favus is like to Achor, but that it has greater
holes, which contain a Matter like Honey.

XXXIV. Trallianus, Lib. 1. Cap. 9. says, that Cerion, or Favus, is a Grief
like to Achor, yet differing in magnitude, for the holes out of which the Humor
issues, represent an Honeycomb, for which reason it was called (...), Favus,
an Honey Comb.

XXXV. Aetius (in the place aforementioned) says, that the Malady (...), or
Favus, is like to Achor, save that in this there are large holes, out of which
issues a thick Matter, like unto that which comes out of Honey-Combs, from
whence came the Name.

XXXVI. And-Actuarius, says, that Cerion, or Favus has greater holes than
Achor, which contain an Humor like to Honey: from whence it appears, that Favus
is like to Achor, saving that the holes are much larger, and the Humor much
thicker.

XXXVII. The Causes are the same with the former to which, you are referred;
save that in this, as the Humor is thicker, so it is derived from an abundant
much grosser Matter, and attended with lesser acrimony, which always thins the
Humors.

XXXVIII. The Signs. They are contained chiefly in the Description of the
Disease, to which add, Tumor, and much Itching.

XXXIX. The Prognostics. They also are the same as in the former: but Favus as
it seems more digested, and has less acrimony in it, so it more easily yields
to Remedies.

XL. The Cure of both these Evils. This we have pretty largely shown in Lib. 2.
Cap. 11. Sect. 12. ad 23. aforegoing; however these following things we think
necessary to be said. 1. As to Diet, strong sweet Wines, and surfeiting Food is
to be avoided; as also salt and sharp things, and Fried Meats, and what ever
creates a gross and impure Juice.

XLI. 2. That in case of Purging, a purging Diet Drink, wherein Raspings of
Guajacum, and Sassafrass, also crude Antimony are put, is chiefly to be chosen.

XLII. 3. That the Head may externally be purged with Errhins and
Sternutatories: some make choice of juice of Primrose roots: others of powder
of white Hellebor; but Tobacco is accounted the best of them all.

XLIII. 4. That you endeavor the falling of the Scabs or Scall, and the taking
off the Hair (if it cannot be done without it) by some proper depilatory, at
leastwise; by the Means directed in Sect. 18. above.

XLIV. 5. This done, to Kill or Destroy the Humor impacted in the Part, you may
apply the Remedies directed in the places before cited, of this work, or some of
these following.

XLV. Take fresh Butter vi. Palm Oil iv. Oil of Scorpions ii. Mercury Coagulate
jss. pouders of white and black Hellebor roots, of Elecampane, unslaked Lime,
Sulphur Vive, A. ss. mix, and make an Ointment.

XLVI. Or, powder of white and black Hellebor, Soot, Pot Ashes, Galls, Alum,
Auripigment, Calx Vive, Litharge, Sulphur Vive, A. ss. Sulphur of Antimony,
white Precipitate, Mercury coagulate, Verdigrise, A. ii. powder and boil all in
juice of Tobacco xiv. then add Palm Oil lbi. Tar, Turpentine, A. i. Wax, q.s.
mix and make a Liniment.

XLVII. 6. That in Children and tender Bodies, you use the more gentle
Medicaments, as this. Sulphur Vive of our Hercules, A. i. Alum, Catechu, A. ss.
Juice of Limons jss. Turpentine vi. Oil of Scorpions q.s. mix, and make a
Liniment.

XLVIII. Or if they be rebellious, Sulphur Vive, Hercules, A. i. Scammony
Stavesacre, Tobacco both in fine powder, A. ss. Sulphur of Antimony, Alum:
Turpentine, A. ii. Oil of Scorpions, q.s. mix, and make a Liniment.

XLIX. 7. That before the Ointments are applied, the part affected be fomented
with Tanners Woose, or red Wine, with Balaustians, Catechu, Myrtle-berries,
Pomgranate-peels, and Sumach have been for some hours infused over a gentle
Fire.

L. 8. That the Ulcers be dressed but once in 24 hours (unless they be
exceeding moist) with the Ointments; and that over them, some Cerate made
chiefly of Wax, be applied.

LI. 9. That if there should be any danger of an Inflammation, instead of Oily
and Greasy Bodies, you are to mix the pouders of both Hellebors, Stavesacre,
Birthwort and Orrice roots, Sulphur Vive, Scammony, Tobacco, etc. with Oxymel
Simplex, making it of the consistency of an Electuary, and so to apply it to
the Ulcers, instead of the Ointments or Liniments.

IV. Of an Ulcer of the Head, from Apostemation, Contusion, etc.
LII. This is that which is purely called by the Greeks, (...). and by the
Latins, Vlcus Capitis; which is a manifest and open Ulcer, like Ulcers in other
parts.

LIII. If it is foul, it must be cleansed with Abstersives, made of the juice
of Smallage: or with this. Honey iv. Gum Elemi ii. fine Aloes ii. mix them.

LIVE. Or you may wash with this. Canary, white Port-Wine, A. ii. S.V.jss. Honey
i. mix them. Or, White Port-Wine, juice of Centory, S.V. A. ii. Honey of Roses,
Syrup of Mulberries, A. i. mix them, to wash with.

LV. If the Ulcer is very foul, and runs much, you may dissolve in the
aforesaid Liquors, Aloes Succotrina iii.

LVI. After the Ulcer is washed, dress it with the Abstersive; and lay over it
Emplastrum de Meliloto.

LVII. Purge with some Cathartick Diet-drink, or with an Infusion of Sena and
Rhubarb in White Wind, or with Our Family Pills, or Pilulae Catharticae; which
may be taken twice a Week, or oftener, if occasion requires.

LVIII. When you see that the Ulcer is thoroughly cleansed, perfect the Cure, by
dressing it once a day with Arcaeus his Liniment, or with Flos Vnguentorum.

LIX. But if the Ulcer proves rebellious, and will not easily heal, apply the
Seton to the nape of the Neck: for by this means the Humor will be diverted or
derived, and the cure will succeed in a short time, without danger of returning
again.

LX. Postscript. In the Cure of Achor and Favus, (which happen as well in old
as young People) the general Method (says Barbett) is by strong Purging,
Bleeding, Sweating, Salivation, Unction, and Pulling-out of the Hairs: but
(says he) without using any of those ways, I have often cured these Diseases,
with this only Decoction.

LXI. Potashes, and with Whitewine make a Lixivium, of a moderate acrimony; in
a quart of which boil leaves of Marjoram, Southernwood, A. M. ii. Maidenhair M.
jss. Rose-leaves M. i. and therewith let the Head be well washed and bathed,
twice or thrice a Week, very hot: and then let it be dried with hot linen
Cloths; thus doing for a few Weeks, the Patient will be cured: but gentle
Purging may sometimes be used.

CHAP. XXIII. Of an ULCER of the EYE.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...). and the Latins, Ulcus Oculi, vel Oculorum; we
in English call, An Ulcer of the Eye, or Eyes.

II. The Kinds. They are considered; 1. In respect to the Part. 2. In respect
to their Qualities, Natures, or Accidents.

III. In respect to the Part afflicted: the Ulcer possesses either the Coats of
the Eyes, as the Adnata or Conjunctiva, Cornea, Wea; of which those in the
Conjunctiva or Cornea, are chief: or the fleshy Corner next the Nose. Those of
the Cornea are either superficial, or deep.

IV. In respect to their Natures: some are mild, and these chiefly possess the
Tunicles of the Eye; or malign, and they possess the fleshy part.

V. The malign are also twofold; viz. either not contagious, or contagious: the
not contagious are twofold, viz. Vlcus depascens, or Vlcus cancrosum: the
contagious are threefold, viz. Carbunculosum, Venereum, and Morbillosum.

VI. So that out of what has been said, we must treat of Ulcers of the Eyes, 1.
As they affect the Adnata or Conjunctiva. 2. As they affect the Cornea
superficially. 3. As they affect the Cornea deeply. 4. As they affect the
fleshy part with Vlcus depascens. 5. As they affect the fleshy part with Vlcus
Cancrosum. 6. As they are contagious in the Small Pox. 7. As they are
contagious, in the Venereal Disease. 8. And as they are contagious, from a
Pestilential Anthrax, or Carbuncle.

VII. The Causes. The Procactartick Causes, are from Blows, Contusion, or some
external Violence. The Antecedent Causes are from a Cacochymy of evil Humors,
or a Plethory, if such a thing is in Nature. The Proximate or Conjoined Cause
is an Inflammation, or Ophthalmy, or sharp corrosive Humors lodged in the Part.

VIII. The Signs. These Ulcers are known by sight; from the Part they affect,
and the nature and quality of the Ulcer.

IX. The Prognostics. They are dangerous, and difficult in the Cure;
especially those in the Cornea, and Pupilla, where for the most part, they
leave Blindness.

X. If the Cornea is wholly eroded, the Aqueous Humor is let forth; and many
times also the Crystalline.

XI. If there is an Inflammation withal, it is generally very painful; and
ought forthwith to be removed, by those things prescribed in an Ophthalmy.

XII. Ulcers of the Eyes in Per sons of a Cacochymick Habit of Body, if they
are cured, (which is always with difficulty) yet they generally leave some
blemish, or other weakness upon the Part.

XIII. If they happen in Children, they are always of difficult cure; because
of their froward and untoward, or fearful and uneasy disposition.

XIV. The Indications of Cure are threefold. 1. By Vniversals, as by proper
Catharticks. 2. By Revulsion and Derivation. 3. By Vulneraries, as Abstersives,
Incarnatives, and Cicatrizers.

XV. An Abstersive Collyrium, from Barbett. White Amber, red Myrrh, A. ss.
Sugarcandy i. Saffron gr. vi. Eyebright-water ijss. white of one Egg, mix them.

XVI. Another. Red Coral prepared, Frankincense, A. ss. crude Antimony,
Hartshorn burnt, white Troches of Rhasis, A. i. burnt Lead, gr. xv. Honey of
Roses, q.s. make a Liniment.

XVII. An Incarnative. Take Celandine-water iii. Gum-tragacanth i. Aloes,
Frankincense, Tutty prepared, A. ss. Glass of Antimony levigated gr. vi. mix
them.

XVIII. A Cicatrizing Collyrium. Rofe-water iv. Saccharum Saturni, Sarcocol,
white Troches of Rhasis, burnt Lead, A. ss. mix them, to wash with.

I. Ulcers of the Eye, affecting the Conjunctiva.
XIX. The Tunica adnata, or Conjunctiva, is derived from the Pericranium, and
is common to the Eyelids: and therefore an Ulcer in that is the most simple,
and easy of cure; and proceeds (as has been said) mostly from an Ophthalmia.

XX. An Ophthalmia is said to proceed from two Causes. 1. It may proceed from
Inward Causes. 2. From Outward; and then it is either mild, when the
Conjunctiva is only inflamed; or vehement, making red, and turning up the
Eyelid, wherein the Humor is so sharp, as to cause an erosion, or ulceration.

XXI. First, cleanse with this. Honey of Roses strained ss. Goats-milk ijss.
fine Aloes ss. mix them.

XXII. Or with this. Take Goats-milk iii. yolk of one Egg, Sugarcandy, Honey,
A. i. Myrrh, Aloes, A. ss. mix them.

XXIII. Consolidate with this. Rose Water iii. Gum-tragacanth i. red Coral
prepared, burnt Hartshorn, Sarcocol, Dragonsblood, burnt Lead, white Starch,
A. ss. Crocus Metallorum, Saccharum Saturni, A. gr. v. mix, and make a
Collyrium.

II. Ulcers of the Cornea, superficial.
XXIV. Some Authors make the superficiary Ulcer to be fourfold. 1. (...),
Caligo, a Mistiness and Dimness of the Sight. 2. (...), Nubecula, a little
Cloud; which is deeper than the former. 3. (...), Vlcus ad Iridem, an Ulcer
growing about the Iris, possessing part of the white, and part of the black of
the Eye; by some said to be Albugo, a Pearl in the Eye; which in the Iris
appears white, but without it is reddish. 4. (...), Vlcus simplex Cculi, a
simple Ulcer or Erosion of the Cornea in the Eye, which makes it ragged, and of
an ash color.

XXV. But of all these, the last, which is a Sore of the Eye caused by Erosion,
can only be called an Ulcer; the Cure of which only we shall here treat of; for
that those things which cure or help the latter, will certainly cure the former.

XXVI. A Collyrium, to wash with. Juices of Celandine, of Fennel, of Rue, of
Southern-wood, white Port-wine, A. iv. Bnlls-gall ii. Aloes, Sarcocol, A. ss.
distill in a Glass-body in B.M. in which infuse Crocus Metallorum levigated i.

XXVII. Juices of Fennel and Rue, A. iv. Honey of Roses strained i. choice
Brandy ii. mix them.

XXVIII. Honey of Roses strained i. Rose Water iv. Aloes finely poudered, Tutty
prepared, Saccharum Saturni, A. i. mix; with this or the former, let the Ulcer
be dressed daily twice a day, and it will quickly be well.

III. Ulcers deep, or piercing the Cornea.
XXIX. Of the deep Ulcers some Authors make four sorts: 1. (...), Fossula; a
hollow, narrow Ulcer of the Eye, without filth, like a round Puncture. 2.
(...), Vlcus cavum; a hollow Ulcer, wider than the former, but not so deep. 3.
(...), Inustio; which is yet deeper, made by Burning; being an impure crusty
Ulcer, through which the Humors sometimes come, when cleansed by Abstersive
Medicaments. 4. (...), Procidentia Vveae Tunicae; which is, when the Cornea is
corroded quite through, and falls down.

XXX. This last or fourth kind, which properly is also fourfold: 1. Very small,
like the head of a Fly or Pismire. 2. Bigger, being fallen down more, and is
equal in bigness to a small Grape. 3. Larger, hanging or sticking forth like a
little Apple. 4. When it is grown hard, brawny, and flat, almost naillike.

XXXI. These Ulcers of the Cornea, viz. the three first kinds, are not to be
slighted, for that they have deeply seized upon the substance of the Membrane;
lest corroding through the whole Membrane, the Humor should issue out, and so the
Eye sink, causing an incurable Blindness.

XXXII. The fourth kind, wherein the Cornea is eaten quite through, having four
several species, they are all of them said to be incurable: but the grape-like
and apple-like, may (if their roots be small) have their deformities in a great
measure abated, by binding them: but this deligation will no more restore the
Sight, already lost, than it can make a new Eye.

XXXIII. The Causes. The Material Causes of all these Ulcers, is a Salt and
Nitrous Humor, as Aegineta, lib. 3. cap. 22. will have it, which is sharp and
corroding; which being in a Cacochymical Habit of Body, renders them always of
difficult cure.

XXXIV. The Cure. This has relation only to the three first kinds, in which
Emeticks are to be avoided, and such Catharticks as are apt to work upwards,
which are always prejudicial to weak Eyes: you are only to use such as are
gentle and lenient, by which you may gradually, or by little and little
discharge the Humor offending; that that which is good may succeed in its place.

XXXV. The Body then being gently purged, Nature oftentimes corrects and amends
the remaining part of the Juices; by converting that which is benign into
Nourishment; and expelling the superfluous, by Stool, Urine, and Sweat.

XXXVI. To these things add, the right Use of the seven Non-naturals:
otherwise, though you may fail of the Cure, yet it may be very much prolonged.

XXXVII. Renodaeus, Pharm. lib. 5. cap. 11. has this Topic. Burnt Lead,
Antimony, Tutty washed, burnt Brass, Gum Arabic and Tragacanth, A. i. Opium
ss. make all into a powder, which with Rose Water form into Troches. Dissolve
one of them in Cucumber, Plantane, or Purslane water, and dress the Eye
therewith.

XXXVIII. Heurnius, Meth. ad Praxim, lib. 1. page 141. (in the Roterdam Edition
in 8o. Printed 1650.) has this: Calaminaris thrice burnt, and twice quenched in
White Wind, ii. burnt Brass iv. burnt Lead washed, Myrrh, A. ss. Saffron gr. v.
Opium gr. ii. Decoction of Fenugreek i. grind all upon a Porphyrystone, and
make a Collyrium. Make the Eyes first clean with a Sponge dipped in Decoction of
Fenugreek and Linseed; then with a Pencil dress the Eyes, five or six times a
day.

XXXIX. The same Heurnius, in the place cited has this also. The Gall of
Partridges, or of a Hare, or of Fishes ss. juice of Fennel ss. Sugarcandy ii.
Syrup of Roses q.s. make a Collyrium. The hard whites of Eggs also beaten with
a little Vitriol, and and the Liquor dropping therefrom through a linen Cloth,
being anointed on the Ulcer, wonderfully cleanses it: the Body in the mean
while is to be kept soluble with Lenitive Clysters.

XL. It has been observed also, that Sows or Wood Lice, being bruised, and
infused in Rhenish Wine, No. 200. to a quart of Wine; and the Liquor drank
every Morning fasting to iii. is excellent to heal Ulcers of all kinds, though
malign, as Depascent and Cancerous, and to help dimness of Sight, and cure most
Diseases of the Eyes.

IV. Of the Depaseent, or Eating Ulcer.
XLI. This is a malign Vleer, which begins at the corners of the Eyes, and
sometimes at the white of the Eye, seizing many times, even upon the
Horney-Tunicle.

XLII. The Prognostics. In Cacochymick habits it frets and eats very much, and
runs on in such sort, that oftentimes it consumes the adjacent parts, as the
Muscles and Lids of the Eye.

XLIII. It is dangerous, and seldom cured without deformity, and loss of Sight;
for which reason the Patient ought to be informed of the event or danger,
before the Cure is undertaken.

XLIV. The Signs. It is known by sight: but it yields a stinking slimy Matter,
the pain is vehement, and there is commonly a Symptomatical Fever,

XLV. The Cure. You may dress the Ulcer with this. juices of Henbane,
Nightshade, Tobacco, and Tarrow, A. i. Honey iii. mix them over a gentle heat.
Or, Juice of Mandrakes, of Nightshades, of Plantane and Purslane, A. i. Honey
of Roses strained iv. mix them over a gentle heat, adding Sacchurum Saturni i.

XLVI. The Ulcer being drost with the former things, apply over it, this
Cataplasm. Pulp of boiled Quinces iv. Barley Flower ii. Unguentum, Rosatum i.
Saccharum Saturni, Henbone-seeds in powder, A. ss. Oil of Poppies, q.s. mix
them.

XLVII. If the Ulcer proves very malign and corroding, it must be corrected, by
dropping into it some of this mixture. Take Rosewater, Henbane, Housleek, and
Nightshade waters, Oil of Vitriol or Sulphur, A. ii. mix them,

XLVIII. And if by the use of it the pain is very great, you may appy this
Anodyn Cataplasm to it. Pulp of Quinces vi. Henbane, Housleek, Mandrake,
Nightshade, A. M. i. juice of Nightshade lbi. boil till the Quince Flesh is
soft: then add, Barley Flower ii. Oil of Poppies i. Saccharum Saturni ss. Opium
i. mix, and boil to a Consistency.

V. Of a Cancerous Ulcer.
XLIX. This is that which is said to be caused of an Arsenical Salt, wherein,
besides the Corrosion, there is a Septick, or putrefactive quality, which
alters the form of the Part after a very strange manner.

L. The Signs. It begins in the black of the Eye; and in it the black and white
of the Eye are reddish: the pain is almost continual, and vehement, and a
dark-colored, sharp, corroding, putrefactive, stinking Humor flows from it:
and it is the more exasperated by the application of sharp Medicines to it.

LI. The Prognostics. Aeginera, Lib. 3. Cap. 22. says, that this is an
Incurable Ulcer: and indeed nothing but a Palliation can be promised, because
it resists the most probable Remedies.

LII. The Cure. Let the Patients Food be Milk, and Milkmeats, Curds and Whey,
Milkpottage, Custards, Panado's, and Milk boild thick with Oatmeal, which
sweetens the Juices of the Body, nourishes, and is of good Juice, and easy
concoction: to which add other Food of easy digestion.

LIII. As to Topics, you may apply this. Burnt Lead ii. red Lead, Cinnabar
levigated, A. i. Mercury coagulated ss. Palm Oil of a Golden color, q.s. mix,
and make an Ointment.

LIVE. Or, Mucilages of Line and Fenugreek seeds, extracted with Poppy-water i.
white Troches of Rhasis with Opium i. mix them, which apply warm, renewing it
morning and evening.

LV. And over all you may apply this Cataplasm. Rotten Apples, or Pulp of baked
Apples vi. Cassia newly Extracted, Barley Flower, A. ii. Burnt Lead jss. white
of one Egg: juice of Nightshade, q.s. mix them.

VI. Ulcers in the Eyes, from the Smallpox.
LVI. They generally follow an Inflammation of the Eye, or when any of the
Smallpox break out in the Eye, as I have sometimes seen.

LVII. They are known by either Tumor, or Crust, or erosion with matter issuing
out, and much pain.

LVIII. Let the Eyes be fomented with warm Breast-Milk, or with warm juice of
Fennel, or with a Mucilage made of Quince, Fleawort, Fenugreek, or Linseed,
with juice of Fennel.

LIX. After which, anoint them with this gentle Abstersive. Honey of Roses
strained, juice of Smallage, A. i. Breast Milk ss. Saffron in powder ss. mix
them, and anoint therewith: this Medicament alone will be enough to heal them.

VII. Ulcers in the Eye, from the French Pox.
LX. When these Ulcers proceed from the French Pox, you will find the Cure of
them very difficult, unless the Cure of the Disease causing them be attempted
at the same time.

LXI. However outwardly you may apply this. Honey of Roses strained i. of our
Hercules, Cinnabar levigated, A. ii. Aloes ss. mix them.

LXII. Renodaeus in Pharm. Lib. 5. Cap. 11. has this. white Wine lbi. Plantane
and Rose water, A. iii. Auripigment ii. Verdigrise i. Aloes, Myrrh, A. i. make
the dry ingredients into fine pouders, and mix them with the Wines and Waters.

LXIII. This is yet a more excellent thing. White Wind lbi. Honey of Roses
strained, Bullocks, Gall, A. iss. Nightshade, Plantane and Rose waters, A. i.
juice of Centory the less, of Smallage, of Scordium and of Tobacco, A. ss.
Cinnabar levigated Vitrum Antimonij, Aloes, Myrrh, A. ii. mix. digest two days,
then use them.

VIII. Ulcers caused from a Pestilential Carbuncle.
LXIV. If it is caused from any Pestilential Venom, there arises first a small
Tumor in the Eye, which is hot, hard, painful and contagious; arising from a
thick, black, burnt and venomous Humor.

LXV. The heat causes the Burning and fermentation of the Humor; and it is
contagious by reason of its Poison and Malignity, which it emits constantly in
fumes or vapors: and when it comes to yield matter it stinks, by reason of its
putrefaction.

LXVI. It is accompanied with great thirst, heat, especially internal,
watching, and raving: and the Urine is sometimes very red, thick, and troubled.

LXVII. The Cure. These Symptoms appearing, you are first to give inwardly
Antidotes, and Alexipharmicks: the vulgar Physicians give Venice Treacle,
Mithridate, and Elect. de Ovo: but we commend our Theriaca Chymica, above all
other things in the World.

LXVIII. For it overturnes the Venom, destroys the Poison, abates upon the spot
all the vebement Symptoms, and secures the Life of the Patient.

LXiX. If you perceive a small Pustule on the top of it, open it with a Lancet
or Incision Knife, and nbate the vehement heat with Aqua Spermatis Ranarum, or
Aqua Solani mixed with a little S.V. in which Camphir is dissolved; or you may
do it with Poppy water in which Saccharum Saturni is dissolved, adding a little
Camphir in powder, laying a Cloth moistened in the same over it to the Eye.

LXX. And above it apply this Cataplasm. Goats or, Cows Milk, or rather juice
of Nightshade lbss. Barley Flower, q.s. mix them.

LXXI. When the Crust is fallen, Mundifie with this. Take Honey of Roses, juice
of Fennel, Ana, mix them: then incarnate by adding thereto Colophony in powder,
a third part.

LXXII. Lastly, cicatrize the Ulcer with this. white Port Wine lbi. Aloes,
Tutia prepared, Ceruse, A. ss. Honey, Sugar Candy, A. iss. Alum, Saccharum
Saturni, A. i. mix: digest in a gentle sand-heat, for 48 hours; then keep it
upon the Faeces for use.

CHAP. XXIV. Of a FISTVLA of the EYE.
I. WHat the Greeks call (...). and the Latins, Fistula Lachrymalis: we in
English call the Weeping Fistula, or Fistula of the Eye. I know some will have
this Ulcer to be called (...) Aegilops, because it is a hollow or cavernous
Ulcer in the Fleshy, or great Corner of the Eye; but Aegilops is no more
Fistula Lachrymalis, than a cavernous Ulcer not callous, is a Fistula.

II. The Place. It is seated in the great or innercorner of the Eye, near the
Nose: or according to to Barbett, in the Punctum Lachrymale, from which (a
hollow Ulcer therein becoming callous) comes the Name of Fistula Lachrymalis.

III. The Causes. It sometimes is caused from Anchylops, or Aegylops, or what
produces the like Tumors in other places: sometimes it is made by Fluxion, and
appears at first very small, like a Phlegmon or Inflammation.

IV. Sometimes, and that frequently, it is caused by the French Pox; and many
times from a strumous Humor, in such as are affected with the King's Evil.
Barbett says, it becomes callous, or degenerates into a Fistula, from a
continual flux of Humors.

V. The Signs. It is manifest at sight: for first, the Orifice offers it self
to view; then, by compression of the Finger upon the Canthus, the matter issues
out; sometimes a mixed matter is discharged, sometimes in a smaller quanrity,
and sometimes in a larger; and sometimes it is not unlike to the white of an
Egg: also, you may run a Probe to the bottom of the Sinus.

VI. If it is from a Strumous Cause, it is made by Congestion, and the Tubercle
is round, without discoloring the Skin: if it is made by Fluxion, there is
pain and redness accompanying it, and inflammation all over the Eye.

VII. The Prognostics, Sometimes this Matter will be so sharp and malign, as
to penetrate, rot, and eat quite through the Bone; so that it will discarge it
self downwards through the Nose, with a fetid smell.

VIII. All these kinds of Fistula's of the Eye, are of difficult cure, let them
be from what cause soever: for the Part being loose and spungy, the Eye very
sensible, and the Part very lax, it makes the Humors apt to soak into it, and
penetrate even the Bone it self.

IX. That which is recent, if it is well opened, is easiest of cure; that which
is inveterate, or of long continuance, is for the most part accompanied with an
Ulceration of the Gland, and a Caries in the Bone, which makes them subject to
a weeping, after they are cured.

X. The sensibility of the Eye, makes it subject to pain and fluxion; and also
unfit to be dressed with sharp Medicaments, such as a Fistula usually requires.

XI. And if the Ulcer is accompanied with Erosion, it will be apt to terminate
Cancerous; (as I once saw one) in which case, the Patient is deplorable.

XII. If it is become Cancerous, (known by its hard and livid lips, sharp pain,
and fetid virulent matter) you are only to use a Palliative Cure, (as in
Cancerous Ulcers) for an Absolute Cure will never succeed.

XIII. If the acrimonious matter has penetrated the Nose, to make a way through
the Bone of the Nose from the corner; then the upper Orifice is only to be shut
up, without scaling of the Bone; which will be a abour both very painful, and
fruitless.

XIV. If the Fistula continues long, as a Year, etc. and the Pus passes through
the Bone to the Nostril, it will cause (...), Oculi Atrophia, a Consumption of
the Eye, which will be incurable.

XV. The Cure. The Indications of Cure are threefold: 1. To cause an
evacuation, alteration, diversion, or revulsion of the Humor. 2. To remove the
Callus, without which the Cure cannot succeed. 3. To heal up the Ulcer, by
Incarnatives and Epuloticks.

XVI. Due Purging ought to precede, by such things as are most universal, and
least apt to cause Vomiting; Syrupus Catharticus, an Infusion of Sena, and
Pulvis Cornachini are commendable: to which you may add, Pilulae Catharticae,
Tinctura Purgans, and Pulvis Catharticus.

XVII. An alteration of the Humor is to be endeavored, by such Alteratives as
are prescribed in the Cure of Strumae, French Pox, Scurvy, etc. using a
Decoction of Guajacum, Sarsa, etc. for many days, with other Alterative and
Vulnerary Diets.

XVIII. The Matter also ought to be derived from the Head by Errhins, applied
to the Nostrils: as, Take Scammony, Guttae Gambae, A. ii. Confectio Hamech q.s.
mix, and make long Rolls for Errhines.

XIX. And a diversion of the Humor is to be made, by applying Cupping-glasses,
Vesicatories, and Causticks to their proper places: Fabricius Hildanus, Cent.
1. Obs. 41. says, that instead of a Cautery, he applied a Seton to the Neck, by
which means alone he has performed the Cure.

XX. And some Authors will have a Revulsion to be made by Bleeding; where there
is (as they say) a Plethory, or platitude of Blood.

XXI. Externally, Repellents (says Wiseman) are to be applied to the diseased
Part, to prevent Fluxion; made of distilled Waters, or Juices of Horstail,
Lettice, Plantane, Purslane, Nightshade, Frog-spawn, etc. with whites of Eggs,
Bole-Armeny, Sealed-Earth, etc.

XXII. And to intercept the Matter, (says he) we apply to the Temples
Gum-mastich, Tacamahacca, Empl. ad Herniam.

XXIII. But if the Tumor increases with tension and pain, it will then be fit
to endeavor a Discussion, by such things as are prescribed in an Ophthalmia;
as Elder-flowers, Hypericon, Lentils, Orobus, Rue, Southernwood, Wormwood,
Melilot-flowers, Camomil, etc. boiled in Wme, or some weak Lixivium.

XXIV. The second Indication is, to remove the Callus; in order to which, the
Orifice (because it is generally narrow) ought to be dilated with a Tent made
of Elder-pith, Gentian-roots, Rope-root, Sponge pressed, etc. according to the
proportion of the sinuosity in the beginning.

XXV. Then you shall yet more enlarge it, by Sponge prepared with
Melilot-Emplaster, or Glair of Eggs; as we have formerly taught; by which means
you will discern all the corners of the sinuosity.

XXVI. The Fistula being thus dilated, we must now apply our selves to the
removing of the Callus: Barbett has Phlegm and Spirit of Vitriol, Aqua fortis,
Mercury-water, Vng. Aegyptiacum, burnt Alum, blue Vitriol, Verdigrise; but Vng.
Fuscum Wurtzii, boiled to the consistency of a Suppository, to be put into the
Fistula, he commends above all.

XXVII. Riverius advises to wash the Ulcer every day with Rue-water, applying
after Ung. Apostolorum, which is to be continued for three Weeks; laying over
it some convenient Emplaster, and defending the Eye with Rose Water. Rue-water
iv. Honey ii. Verdigrise i. mix them. Inject it warm, with a Syringe.

XXVIII. If the Callus does not yet waste, use this following Injection. Rue,
Pilewort, Agrimony, A. M. ss. S.V. lbss. juice of Tobacco iv. infuse
twenty-four Hours, then strain out.

XXIX. After the use of which, apply this following upon Dossels. Wine-Vinegar
iv. Honey of Roses strained iij. Ginger ii. Verdigrise ii. mix, and boil to a
thickness.

XXX. But in application of Medicaments this Part, you have not so great a
liberty, as in other Fistula's: for fluid and running things, having a great
acrimony, are not safe; for passing unto the Adnata, and from thence to the
Cornea, they may possibly erode it, whence a new Ulcer may be made, and so the
Grief may be doubled.

XXXI. And even solid things themselves, must be very carefully applied; that
they go no farther, nor spread beyond the sinuosity, lest horrible Symptoms be
induced, by means of a fluxion, and increase of the acrimony of the Humor,
which may hurt the Membranes of the Eye, adjacent to the Part affected.

XXXII. Some use this. Take water of Elder, or Dwarf-elder flowers lbj.
corrosive Sublimate ii. or better; according to the hardness of the Callus: the
proportion you must guess at by the continuance of the Fistula, Habit of Body,
and Age of the Patient, making it either weaker or stronger.

XXXIII. Others use this. Take Plantane or Rose water vi. Spirit of Nitre iii.
mix them. This they account excellent, but it is very sharp, and must be used
with caution, and sparingly applied to the sinuosity, so that no part of them
touch the Membranes, lest they should excite vehement Accidents.

XXXIV. Others like solid Medicaments better; because the force of their
operation is more durable, and they are more secure, as being not so apt to
spread. In a young, tender, and delicate Body use this. Take red Precipitate,
or Turbith-mineral ii. burnt, Alum i. mix them very well.

XXXV. Afterward, take Ung. Populeon i. of the former Powder more or less, mix
them: with this Mixture arm a Tent, which put into the dilated Fistula, which
let remain 'till it slips out of it self; and continue the use of it, 'till the
Callus is removed: which you may know, if the sinuosity appears soft, and the
Pus sticking upon the Tent be laudable.

XXXVI. If there is a Caries, Wiseman proposes this. Take Vitriol calcined,
Cantharides (their heads and wings cut off) Quicklime, Sal Armoniack, R^-alum,
Ana: mix, and bring them to a body with Boys Urine.

XXXVII. In applying of these things, the parts about must be defended, and the
Fluxion hindered by application of Refrigerants; yet after all, it is a most
painful and tedious ways.

XXXVIII Wiseman proposes the use of the Actual Cautery, which being applied
through a Cannula will with one touch waste the Callosity, and destroy the
Caries: after which, it is to be dressed up with a Dossel dipped in a mixture of
Oil of Roses and the white of an Egg, and a Compress in the same over all: then
it is to be digested, and deterged with milder Prescriptions, keeping the
Orifice dilated with a Dossel dipped in Tinctura Myrrhae, etc. 'till the Bone
exfoliates.

XXXIX. And so Barbett: If (says he) the Os lachrymale, or Zygomaticum be foul,
the Skin being divided, an Actual (or Potential) Cautery must be applied, that
the Caries may be removed; otherwise, (if that be not taken away) it will be
impossible to cure the Fistula.

XL. All Authors, as with one Voice, subscribe to the Actual Cautery, which
must represent in figure an Olive-stone: the parts adjacent must be defended
from the Fire, by a Cannula, or hollow Pipe, as Aquapendens and Wiseman direct:
you must effectually impress it, to dry the humidity, the sooner to procure the
scaling of the Bone.

XLI. It Is true, some Authors prescribe fatty things, to hasten the separation
of the Eschar; yet it is better not to use them, because the Part is moist of
it self; and so the application of such Medicaments might induce a sordid Ulcer.

XLII. What I shall advise to, is a Tent dipped into Red-wine, or Tincture of
Euphorbium; or a Pledget dipped in the same, laying above all Empl. Album, or
Diapalma, or Empl. de Minio simplex, or cum Sapone; the use of these things is
to be continued, 'till the Scaling of the Bone.

XLIII. But because many People (by reason of the terror) will not admit of the
Actual Cautery, it may be performed be Incision, etc. after this manner: first,
with a bended Probe, find out the cavity every way, both upwards and downwards;
and draw a Line with Ink, between the Glandule of the Eye, and the Trochlea or
Pulley; through which the first oblique Muscle, called superior or major, passes,
ending obliquely in the uppermost part of the Cornea.

XLIV. Then divide the fleshy or membranous parts, making Incision to the Os
lachrymale or Zygomaticum: the Part incised divide with the Nails of your
Forefingers, until the Incision is so much dilated, that it may without any
difficulty admit of an indifferent Pledget or Tent.

XLV. This done, put in a Tent made of Vng. Fuscum Wurtzii; or a small Pastil
made of unwashed Turbith-mineral, Vitriol calcined, Sealed-earth, and Vng.
Populeon; mixed, and wrought up into a stiff Paste, and dried.

XLVI. About the Tent or Pastil, apply a Pledget armed with Populeon, over
which lay Empl. Album, or Diapalma malaxed with Oil of Poppies or of Henbane,
or of Hypericon; then defend the orbit of the Eye with little Bolsters or
Pledgets, wet in Frogspawn-water camphorated, and so bind it up; dressing it
twice a day with the Tents or Pastils, viz. Morning and Evening, 'till the
Callus falls out of its own accord.

XLVII. Then view the Bone, and see how much is carious; and thereto apply
this, or some such like. Take roots of round Birthwort, of Orrice, of
Hog-fennel, Myrrh, Euphorbium, A. ss. make all into a fine powder, and apply
it: this may serve in such as are young, and of a tender habit of Body.

XLVIII. But if they be of good years, or middle-aged, and of a strong
constitution, you may apply the powder of Euphorbium; after the application of
which, or of the former Powder, you may fill up the cavity of the Part incised
with prepared Sponge, as aforesaid; and about it apply a Pledget armed with
Vng. Populeon, which hold fast down with Empl. Album, Bolsters, and Bandage.

XLIX. This manner of Dressing you must continue 'till the Scale falls off, or
the carious part is separated, which will be in about 20 days, or very little
more: then mundify with Mel Rosatum, or Mel Rutaceum, or Syrup of dried Roses,
or with this. Take Spirit of Wine iv. Honey ii. Verdigrise i. boil to the
consumption of a third part.

L. Then endeavor the Consolidation, with Syrup of Myrtles, or Syrup of
Comfrey: or with this. Take roots of round Birthwort, of Orrice, bark of
Frankincense, A. iss. Aloes, Cadmia fossilis, Mastich, Myrrh, Sarcocol, A. i.
Honey q.s. mix, and make a Liniment. Or: Take Alum, Antimony, Aloes,
Balaustians, Frankincense, Dragons-blood, A i. Verdigrise ss. make a fine
powder, which mix with Rue-water q.s. and make a Collyrium, to drop into the
Eye, thrice a day, etc. and last of all, cicatrize with some Epulotick
Ointment, Cerat, or Emplaster.

LI. If it so chance, that the whole substance of the Bone of the Nose
subjacent to the Fistula is carious or corrupted, and a Catarrh be also
attending, so that it seems to be often cured, and breaks out again. In this
case, you must first dilate again the sinuosity, 'till the corrupt Bone
appears; then you must pierce the Bone of the Nose with a Gimblet, that so the
Pus or Matter may flow inward, to the Nostrils; and then cure up the Ulcer or
Fistula, as we have taught in other places.

LII. This, though it is no real Cure, yet outwardly no deformity can be seen,
nor shall the Patient himself be able to discern the turning of the Pus, from
the outward Glandule to the Nostril inwardly; nor shall he himself perceive any
smell which shall offend him: as he who smells continually to a Damask-Rose,
shall in a little time perceive no smell at all in it.

LIII. If you perceive the Fistula to be malign, or seems to degenerate into a
Cancer, (known by the Signs at Sect. 12. aforegoing) you must only use a
palliative Cure: for which purpose, apply this Medicament of Heurnius. Lapis
Calaminaris thrice heated red-hot, and quenched in Vinegar i. burnt Brass iv.
burnt Lead washed, Myrrh, A. ss. Saffron ii. Opium i. mucilage of Fenugreek
xxiv. mix them well by grinding together.

LIVE. If you intend to keep it for any time, it will be best to mix it with
Sheeps-suet, Oil of Ben, A. xii. instead of the Mucilage of Fenugreek, because
thereby it will be better preserved. It is an excellent Eye Salve, in all
Ulcers and Fistula's of the Eyes, whether simple, malign, or cancerous.

LV. Fabricius Hildanus, Centur. 5. Obs. 23. has this notable Example. A Boy 13
years of age had a Fistula lachrymalis 4 years together in his left Eye, the
Bone being carious; the Gland was so eroded, that when he cried, tears trickled
out of the Fistula. The Actual Cautery was the best Remedy, yet the Boy refused
it: therefore having ordered his Diet, he was Purged, and a Seton was made in
his Neck: when the Seton ran, the Potential Cautery was applied, which causes
no pain: when the Eschar was fallen, the Fistula was dilated to the Bone, with
an escarotick Ointment and prepared Sponge: afterward good store of Euphorbium
in powder was strewed upon it; and upon that a Plaster of Gum Elemi was
applied. When these things had been used for some Weeks, the Bone scaled; after
the Scale was taken away, half a drop of Balsam of Tolu was applied once a day
to the Ulcer, which soon healed up, and continued perfectly well; and a little
after the Seton was removed, and the Fistula healed up. In this Cure, Hildanus
ascribed most to the E p or bium.

CHAP. XXV. Of an ULCER of the NOSE.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...): and the Latins, Ulcus Narium; we in English
call An Ulcer of the Nose: but the Greeks also call it (...), and and the
Latins Ozaena, Narium Vlcus putridum, (ab humorum acrium defluxu:) a putrid
Ulcer of the Nose. It is called Ozaena, from the ill scent thereof.

II. The Cause. It is from a defluxion of sharp, salt, bilious, putrid, and
eroding Humors, which sometimes corrupts the Bone it self, but chiefly the
Cartilage or Gristle, whereby the Nose is many times made flat, and the Face
deformed.

III. These Humors, if they be only sharp, they produce Ulcers bard to be
cured, but not of a vehement smell: but if the Humor is putrid and corruptive,
then the Ulcer stinks much.

IV. The Kinds. It is clear, out of what has been said, that Ozaena is twofold.
1. That which proceeds from a sharp Humor only, and stinks not. 2. That which
proceeds from a putrid Humor, having a corrosive faculty; of which Actuarius,
lib. 2. cap. 10. speaks.

V. The Signs. The Breath of the Patient always stinks, but more especially, in
a strong expiration: and this proceeds from rotten and corrupt Humors gathered
together about the Meatus colatorii, or Passages of the Os Ethmoides; whence
communicating their malignity and putridity to the adjacent parts, they cause
an ill smell.

VI. There is also a flux, more or less, of a sharp or putrid matter;
sometimes, as Celsus says, it is covered with a Crust.

VII. The Ozaena of the Ancients, was only a malign Ulcer; but most of the
Ulcers of the Nose seen with us, are Symptoms of the Pox, and are contagious,
and by contact may infect others.

VIII. For which reason it is, (as I believe) that Gorraeus, Definit. Med. lib.
13. affirms, that this Disease is more frequent now in our times, than it was
when the ancient Authors lived and practiced.

IX. Aegineta, lib. 3. cap. 24. says, that Ozaena is a carious and rotten
Ulcer; bred of sharp Humors flowing to the Nostrils, and eroding them.

X. Barbett says, that it sometimes spreads it self within the Nose, to the
Palate; and then there is great pain, and a sordid Crust; more especially if it
proceeds from the French Pox.

XI. The Prognostics. If it is recent and simple, there is little or no pain:
and if when it is touched it bleeds, and has a black Crust upon it, 'twill be
easily cured.

XII. If it is inveterate or old, it is hard to cure: so also if it proceeds
from Polypus, or the French Disease: but if it degenerates into a Cancer, it is
incurable.

XIII. If it proceeds from any other, or precedent Disease, that Disease
(whatever it be) must be first removed, or cured, before the Ozaena can be
cured.

XIV. Celsus, lib. 6. cap. 6. says, If the Ulcers be about the Nostril, which
have Crusts, and an evil Smell, ( which the Greeks call Ozena) you are to know,
they will be difficultly cured.

XV. All these kinds of Ulcers are of difficult cure: 1. Because of the
proximity of the Brain, which affords plenty of Humors. 2. Because the Part
affected is of a moist temperature. 3. Because Internals being given, lose much
of their force and virtue, before they come at the Head.

XVI. That which is apparent, is easier to be cured, than that which is latent;
and if this kind of Ulcer continues long, it takes away the Sense of Smelling.

XVII. If it is a Symptom of the French Pox, it is easier cured, than if it is
originally of it self: 1. Because when it is of it self, it comes nearer to a
cancerous quality, than otherwise. 2. Because we have more certain Medicaments
for the cure of the Pox, than for the cure of any thing cancerous.

XVIII. The Cure. There are three Indications of Cure. 1. That which has
respect to the procatartick cause. 2. That which relates to the antecedent
cause. 3. That which belongs to the proximate or conjoined cause.

XIX. The removal of the procatarctick cause, here most respects the Diet: let
the Patient avoid all sorts of Meats which are salt, acid, sharp, windy, or
hard of digestion, yielding a corrupt or evil juice; and that he feeds very
moderately and sparingly, upon that which is good and proper for him.

XX. A sparing Diet at least, and sometimes fasting is necessary for the Cure;
for it hinders the generation of many ill Humors, especially in cacochymick
habits of Body; as it helps concoction and digestion, and causes an appetite,
so it also very much dries the habit of the Body.

XXI. The removal of the antecedent cause is done by purging. Emeticks are not
so good here, as Catharticks; unless the Stomach is foul, and replenished with
corrupt Humors.

XXII. The Catharticks which we shall make use of it in this Cure, are either
vegetable, or mineral: the vegetable may do well enough, where it proceeds from
the lesser and milder Causes: but mineral are to be chosen, when it proceeds
from the more vehement and rebellious.

XXIII. Among the vegetable Simples, these are chief; Agarick, Aloes, Cambogia,
Colocynthis, Hellebor black, Hemodacts, sallap, Mechoacan, Scammony, and Sena.
These may either be used singly, or compounds may be made of them.

XXIV. Such are, Our Syrupus Catharticus, Pilulae Catharticae, Pulvis
Cornachini, Tinctura purgans, etc. and among the Shop-Medicaments, Pilulae ex
duobus, sine quibus; Cochiae minores, de Agarico, Trochisci Athandal,
Diacatholicon, Diacarthamum, Caryocostinum, Confectio Hamech, etc.

XXV. Among Minerals, the chief Preparations are taken from Antimony and
Mercury: from Antimony, you have, 1. Pulvis Antimonii. 2. Pulvis Catharticus:
both which are very great Medicines, and very extrordinary things; and may be
prepared as directed in Lib. 1 ca. 68. s. 1. and 5.

XXVI. The Preparations of Mercury are more effectual; much more if it proceeds
from any Venereal Cause, or if there is any fear of its becoming Cancerous:
those which are most convenient for this purpose, are Mercur. dulcis, white
Precipitate, the Princes Powder, Turpethum minerale, Arcanum Coralinum, etc.

XXVII. The removal of the proximate or conjoined Cause, which is directed by
the third Indication of Cure, and whereby the Ulcer comes to be healed up. And
here you are first to remove the Scab, which fixes it self in the fore or lower
part of the Os Ethmoides, or Os Cribriforme, which hinders the Brain from
discharging of the malign Humor which causes the Ulcer, and also hinders
Medicaments from coming to to Part affected.

XXVIII. Oil of sweet Almonds ii. Sperma Ceti ss. mix them well over a very
gentle Fire. Or, Neats-foot-oil ii. pure Bears-grease, or Oil i. mix them. Turn
the Face upwards, and bend the Head down backwards, and drop it into the
Nostrils, 'till the Patient feels it by the taste in his Throat and Palate.

XXIX. Or, Take Neats-foot-Oil, or Linseed-oil, and cast it upon the Nostrils
with a Syringe; repeating it four or five times a day, 'till the Crust is
loosned; then moisten with this. Take juice of Endive or Smallage iv. Honey i.
mix, and cast it up with a Syringe.

XXX. Or you may inject this, which is stronger. Rhenish Wine vi. juice of
Pomgranates ii. Honey i. Litharge ii. Red-lead i. Mercury dulcified ss. burnt
Alum i. boil a little, and strain.

XXXI. After which, he may snuff up of this Sternutatory. Tobacco i. roots of
white Hellebor, Nigella, A. ss. Rosemary, Sage, A. ii. Musk gr. iii. make all
into a subtle powder.

XXXII. The crusty Substance or Scab being fallen, you may dress it with this
Water. Waters of black Cherries, Plantane, and of Roses, A. iv. Spirit of
Vitriol j. or ss. mix them. Or, Take Smiths-forge-water viii. Alum ii. mix them
well. Or, Take Phlegm or Spirit of Alum, Plantane-water, A.iv. Mercury
dulcified ii. mix them. Or, Take Fallopius his Magistral Alum-Water iv.
Plantane and Rose Waters, A. q.s. to weaken it.

XXXIII. Or you may wash, and inject with the Ablution of dulcified Mercury in
Limewater: or, wash and inject daily the Water of the Griffin, than which few
things are better.

XXXIV. You may also often in the daytime inject some such drying, astringent,
and abstersive Decoction: as, Take Red-roses M. i. Plantane, Knotgrass,
Perwinkle, A. M. ss. Bistort, Tormentil, A.i. Balaustians, unripe
Bramble-berries, A. ss. Water q.s. boil and strain, and to every three ounces,
add Mel Rosatum i.

XXXV. Then anoint with this of Barbett. Ung. fuscum Wurtzii i. burnt Lead,
Ceruse, Tutia prepared, Litharge, bark of Frankincense, Myrrh, round Birthwort
roots, Mercurius dulcis, A. jss. Ung. Album Camphoratum, q.s. mix, for a
Liniment.

XXXVI. Or this of Sennertus, in Med. Pract. lib. 1. part. 3. sect. 4. cap. 1.
Burnt Lead, Litharge, Wax, A. i. Oils of Roses and Myrtles, A. jss. Ceruss,
fine Bole, Balaustians, A. ss. grind them all in a Leaden Mortar, to an
Ointment.

XXXVII. Or, Unguent. Album, and de Tutia, A. i. Oil of Myrtles ss. Scammony,
Tobacco in powder, A. i. dulcified Mercury j ss. mix, and make an Ointment.

XXXVIII. If none of the former things prevail, you must use this. Rose or
Plantane water, or choice white Port-wine, viii. Powers of Mercury ss. or vi.
mix them; and therewith wash, and inject up the Nostrils.

XXXIX. This cleanses and dries, without biting, and oftentimes performs all
the Intentions of Healing: it is a Medicine beyond comparison.

XL. Then heal, and consummate the Cure with Ung. Mirabile; the composition and
preparation of which, see in Our Doron Medicum, lib. 3. cap. 4. sect. (...) for
it is a singular thing in the cure of the Ulcer, though it be malign, or should
proceed from the French Disease: you may dip Tents into it, and put them up the
Nose.

XLI. Or you may fume the Ulcer (if it yet proves rebellious) with this of
Barbett. Amber, Benjamin, Gum Sandarach, Frankincense, Storax, A. i. Artificial
Cinnabar iv. make a Powder or Troches, for Fumes. As much as Nutmeg, is enough
at a time; which is to be put upon live Coals, and the Fume is to be received
up the Nostrils by a Funnel: but it must be cautiously used, as once a day, or
not above twice a day at most, lest a Salivation be raised.

XLII. If the Ulcer proves cancerous, though it is judged uncurable, yet you may
dress and palliate it, either with the former Fume of Barbett, or with this
Water, or you may make use of both. Frog-spawn, Snails, A lbii. Oakbuds,
Ground Ivy, A. vi. mix, and distill a Water like Rose Water; to which add
Camphir calcined, (being mixed with fine Bole, and so put into a Crucible) i.
wash and inject with this, and put up Tents of Lint, or Sponge moistened
therewith.

XLIII. If the Ulcer proves yet rebellious, and will yield to none of the
Remedies, you must come to the use of the Actual Cautery: for according to
Hippocrates, lib. 1. aph. 6. extreme Remedies must be applied to extreme Griefs
or Diseases.

XLIV. The Intention of apply-the Actual Cautery is, 1. To cause an Eschar, by
impressing upon the Ulcer: or, 2. To dry the Ulcer by often applying it; but
always giving off, before the Patient feels any pain.

XLV. If you design an Eschar, both ^ends of the Pipe through which the Cautery is
to pass, must be open: and when the Eschar is produced, the fall of it must be
procured by the means directed at Section 28, ad 31. and then you must proceed
in curing the Ulcer, as is thereafter taught.

XLVI. But if you intend only desiccation, then the end of the Pipe which you
apply to the Ulcer must be shut or closed; and the desiccation will be
accomplished by a manifold iteration of the same; after which, you must pursue
the Cure as is before directed. See more hereof in the Third Edition of Our
Synopsis Medicinae, Lib. 3. Cap. 35. Page 505.

CHAP. XXVI. Of an ULCER of the EAR.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...). and the Latins, Ulcus Auris; we in English call
An Ulcer of the Ear.

II. The Causes. It is caused either by external Force or Violence; as of a
Fall, Blow, Stab, etc. which may hurt and contuse the Part; and from whence
Pus, or other sharp Excrements may be bred, which may erode the cavities of the
Ear.

III. Or from an antecedent Cause; as sharp Humors, sent from the Brain to the
cavity of the Ear, causing Apostems, Ulcers, etc.

IV. The Signs. It is known by Blood and Matter flowing out, and may be
discerned also by pain, noise, and trouble in the Ear; and sometimes if Worms
are there, there is felt an intolerable itching, not easy to be abated.

V. The Kinds. These Ulcers are either without an Excrescence of Flesh, or they
are with an Excrescence.

VI. The Prognostics. If the Matter is white, and without any ill scent, and
the Ear itches much, it is without danger; yet it bespeaks Worms, as aforesaid.

VII. If the Matter comes out of the Ear, and Pulsation is felt with great
Pain; you may judge that a Phlegmon, Abscess, or Inflammation is present.

VIII. If the cure of these Ulcers is long deferred, there is much danger of
Deafness to ensue.

IX. If a great quantity of Pus comes forth of the Ear, you may safely judge,
that it proceeds from a fluxion of Humors from the Brain.

X. The Cure. The Antecedent Cause is first to be removed by proper Purging;
for which we commend the Arcanum Jovis, Pulvis Antimonii, Pulvis Catharticus,
and Pulvis Cornachini: and in some Constitutions, the Electuarium Catharticum,
which makes a good Revulsion.

XI. As to the Conjoined Cause, if any thing is gotten into Ear, it is to be
taken out: and if Humors abound in the Part, a derivation is to be made, by
application of Vesicatories, the Seton: or, making an Issue.

XII. The next thing to be done, is to cleanse the Part with Abstersives: as,
Hydromel lbi. Honey of Roses strained iv. mix; and inject with a Syringe very
warm, then dry it with the Probe armed with Lint.

XIII. But the Medicaments which are put into the Ear, ought to be neither too
hot, nor too cold; for that Part can ill endure any excess, in any of these two
qualities.

XIV. Put no fat or greasy Medicines into the Ear; for as it is composed of
Spermatickparts, (as Physicians speak) so they will be apt to induce a sordid
Ulcer.

XV. Nor let any sharp Medicament be put into the Ear, before the Body is well
purged; lest a Fever be procured, and a flux of Humors be moved to the Part.

XVI. Let all the Medicaments which are put into the Ear, be of a thin and
liquid substance; that they may sink down the deeper.

XVII. And after dressing, let the Patient lie upon the whole Ear, the
disaffected Ear being uppermost, and stopped with some fine Cotton, or Lint, for
a pretty while.

XVIII. Trochisci Andronis dissolved in Elder-Vinegar, are commended for
cleansing; so also Crocus Martis boiled in strong Wine-Vinegar, 'till the
Tincture is extracted.

XIX. The Ulcer being cleansed, you must consolidate and heal with this.
Scurvigrass M. i. round Birthwort roots i. Canary-Wine lbss. boil, strain, and
add thereto Spirit of Wine ii. inject it warm into the Ear.

XX. Or you may inject into it a Sanative Synup, made of the Vulnerary Herbs;
as of Agrimony, Angelica, Avens, Bawm, Comfrey, Horstail, Knotgrass,
Ladies-mantle, Mint, Plantane, Scordium, Sanicle, Solomons-seal, Self-heal,
Winter-green, Yarrow, etc. which is not only good in Ulcers of the Ears, but in
all other cavernous or hollow Ulcers.

XXI. And to these Vulneraries, some few Astringents may be added; as Bistort,
Balaustians, Catechu, Myrtle-berries, Pomgranate-peels, Oak bark and buds,
Red-roses, Sumach, etc.

XXII. If the Ulcer is foul, or has Worms in it, a Decoction of dry Tobacco in
Ale or Wine, will be found an incomparable thing: after injecting, you may
dress it with this Liniment. Take Ung. Diapompholigos i. distilled Balsani of
Myrrh iii. Honey of Roses ii. mix, and apply it with Lint.

XXIII. If these Ulcers yield much pus, or filth, they must be dressed once every
day: but if they yield but little matter, it will be enough to dress them once
in two days.

XXIV. If the Ulcer is malign or inveterate, you must cleanse with this. Take
Rhenish-Wine lbi. Honey of Roses strained iii. Vinegar i. Verdigrise i. burnt
Alum ss. boil, strain, and inject warm to cleanse: then afterward heal the
Ulcer, as directed at Sect. 9, 10, 11 above.

XXV. But withal, it will be necessary to divert or derive the Humor, by
Errhines applied to the Nostrils, and Masticatorics to the Mouth; and the
Patient must use a Diet drink made of Guajacum and Sarfa, etc.

XXVI. If an excrescence of superfluous Flesh does grow in the Ear, (which is
many times does, so as to fill up all the cavities of the Ear, and cause
Deafness) you must first purge the Patient very well, as before directed.

XXVII. Then consume the spongy Flesh or Excrescence, by injecting the
Composition at Sect. 14. above, and strewing upon it this following Powder.
Take Vitriol calcined, Alum burnt, A. i. Auripigment, Verdigrise, A. ss. mix
them. Or, Take Alum burnt, Vitriol calcined, A. ss. red Precipitate,
Turbith-mineral not wash, A. ii. fine Bole, Aloes, A.i. mix them.

XXVIII. And upon every dressing, wash out the Pouders with this Injection.
Take White Wind iii. Honey of Roses strained ss. Ung. Aegyptiacum i. mix them:
after injection, strew in some of the former Pouders again, and continue this
course 'till the whole Excrescence is wasted.

XXIX. Which done, heal and cicatrize with the Vulnerary-Syrup, or some
suchlike thing, dissolved in Plantane or Rose Water.

CHAP. XXVII. Of an ULCER of the MOUTH.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...). and the Latins Ulcus Oris; we in English call,
An Ulcer of the Mouth: under which the Lips, and insides of the Cheeks and
Tongue are comprehended.

II. The Causes. They are either Primary, proceeding either from some external
Violence, or a Flux of sharp Humors: or Symptomatical, caused from some malign
or contagious Disease; as the Smallpox, French Pox, King's Evil, malign burning
Fevers, etc.

III. The Signs. They are known by sight; the Ulcer has generally a whiteness
upon it, and is the same with that which the Country People call the Canker.

IV. The Prognostics. If they be recent, they are the more easily cured: so
also if they proceed from the Smallpox, or some malign Fever.

V. Those which are Symptomatical from the French Pox or King's Evil, are only
to be cured, by curing those Diseases.

VI. If they be malign, or seem to be of a Cancerous nature, they will be of
difficult cure, and sometimes prove to be incurable.

VII. The Cure. There are breakings-out after Fevers and Colds, and Fissurae
Labiorum, Chaps of the Lips; which are caused from a salt, sharp, drying Humor;
which Ulcers are hot and painful, especially if the Patient speaks, eats, or
laughs.

VIII. These are easily cured by anointing with Vng. Album, or with this. Take
Beef or Mutton suet iv. Oil of Ben, or Oil-Olive iii. white Wax jss. Sperma
Ceti i. Camphir ii. mix, and make an Ointment; with which anoint Morning and
Evening: it will not fail.

IX. Or, Take Veal-suet from the Kidneys iv. Oil of Ben ii. white Wax,
Rose Water, A.i. Saccharum Saturni vi. Sperma Ceti iii. Camphir i. mix them. It
heals wonderfully, and if constantly used every Night, preserves the Skin as
plump, smooth, full, and fair, (free from all Wrinckles or other Deformities)
even to Old Age, if the Party was not much above twenty.

X. If the Ulcer of the Lips is benign or mild, it may be cured with Ung de
Minio, or Desiccativum Rubrum camphuratum; which is effectual even against
inveterate or old Ulcers, in what part of the Body soever they be: nor does the
Vng. e Solano come much behind it.

XI. If the Ulcer of the Lips is malign or cancerous, (which you may perceive
by its color, being blackish or livid, and its brims hard, its pain and heat
much, and almost continual, and its yielding an ill-smelling Sanies:) or if it
is from any strumatick or venereal Cause, you must then purge often, and
cleanse the Body with proper Catharticks; and use Sudorifick, Antistrumatick,
and Antivenereal Medicaments.

XII. You must wash it with the Ablution of Mercurius dulcis in Limewater, or
with the Juice of Tobacco, or with the Water of the Griffin, which is a most
excellent thing; or with this. Take Henbane, Hemlock; Housleek, Nightshade,
Plantane, Speedwel or Fluellin, A. M. iii. Stramonium M.ii. whites of Eggs No.
xii. Alum in powder vi. Camphir ii. dissolved in S.V. iv. put all into a
Glass-body, and distill in B.M. in the distilled Water dissolve Saccharum
Saturni ss.

XIII. Afterward anoint with Vng. Nicotianae, or ad Scabiem; or de Tutia, or
with this. Take coagulated Mercury in fine powder vi. Ung. Tutiae iv. Wax, Oil
of Ben, or of Poppies, A. ii. Turpentine i. mix them.

XIV. If the Ulcer is rebellious; and will not yield to these Medicines; you
must have recourse to more effectual Means, such as we have prescribed in the
Cure of Cacoethick, Phagedenick, and Cancerous Ulcers.

XV. If the Gums, and insides of the Cheeks or Lips are ulcerated, with such an
Ulcer as the Common People call the Cankers; it is to be cured by Abstersives
and Driers: for which purpose, Barbett commends this following.

XVI. Take Oak leaves or buds M. i. Balaustians, Roses, A. P.i.
Pomgranate-peels ii. burnt Alum ii. white Vitriol ss. Red-wine q.s. boil and
strain. To half a Pint of the Liquor, add Honey of Roses, Rob Diamoron, A. i.
mix, for a Gargarism.

XVII. Or, Take common Chalk, fine Bole, A.ii. red Lead, burnt Alum, Catechu,
A. i. Mercurius dulcis levigated ss. Vitriol. i. Whitewine q.s. boil; and to
lbj. of the Liquor, add of Fernelius his Syrup of Comfrey iv. mix them.

XVIII. Or, Take Scurvigrass M. iii. bruise gently, and boil in Rhenish Wine
lbii. strain, and sweeten with Syrup of Mulberries: with which wash the Ulcers
daily oftentimes, and keep the Herb Night and Day in the Mouth, upon or against
the place affected.

XIX. If all these things will do no good, you must touch the Ulcers with Oil
of Vitriol or Sulphur, 'till they are overcome; then cleanse and heal with this
Gargarism. Take Plantane or Rose Water, lbii. Saccharum Saturni ii. white
Vitriol i. Honey iv. mix, for a Lotion or Gargarism.

XX. If the Roof of the Mouth is ulcerated, you must take care that your
Applications be not loathsome or distastful, lest the Parts abhor them.

XXI. If the Skin which covers the Roof is ulcerated, first, (if it is foul)
touch it with Aqua Fallopii, allayed with Plantane or Rose Water: or, Take
Water of the Griffin, Honey of Roses, A. ii. Frogspawn-water i. Oil of Sulphur
or Vitriol ii. mix them.

XXII. The Ulcer being touched with the former things, you may dress it with
this. Take Syrup of dried Roses, of Myrtle-berries, and of juice of
Pomgranates, A. i. Syrup of Mulberries ss. Oil of Vitriol ss. or gut. xii. mix
them: or you may wash it with the Water of the Griffin alone, or dulcified with
Honey of Roses: dressing it often in a day.

XXIII. If the Bone of the Mouth is bare, you must dress it with this. Take
Barley-flower, roots of Comfrey, of Orrice, and of Tormentil in powder, A. ss.
Mastich, Olibanum, Sarcocol, Borax, A.ss. Syrup of Red-roses, of Mulberries,
A.v. mix them: and if the rough Skin grows again, or unites, you obtain your
end.

XXIV. If the Tongue is ulcerated, and it is benign or mild, let be often dressed
or washed with this. Take Pearl-barley iv. roots of Althaea, Liquorice bruised,
A. ii. Water lbvi. boil to one half; strain, and add thereto Honey of Roses,
Syrup of Mulberries, A.ii. mix, and keep it for use.

XXV. If the Ulcer proves malign, cacoethick, phagedenick, or cancerous, you
must dress it with Aurum Vitae, or the Princes Powder, or native Cinnabar mixed
with Saccharum Saturni; or those things which we have enumerated and declared
in those places, where we have treated of the curing of those Ulcers.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of an ULCER of the THROAT.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...). and the Latins, Ulcus Gutturis, seu Laryngis,
vel Gurgulionis, vel Gulae; we in English call, An Ulcer of the Throat.

II. And here under this Title, we comprehend, 1. The Ulcers of the Uvula, or
Gargareon. 2. The Ulcers of the Amygdalae, or Tonsillae. 3. The Ulcers of the
Throat, beyond the Uvula.

I. Of the Ulcers of the Uvula.
III. (...). Ulcus Uvulae, an Ulcer of the Uvula, is caused either primarily
from a Flux of sharp Humors, occasioned through cold, or some external violence;
or symptomatically, from the French Pox.

IV. The Signs. It is known by sight, an eating or corroding Humor appearing
upon the Part; and sometimes also, an Inflammation: if it is from the
French Pox, the Breath stinks, and the Patient has a great difficulty in
swallowing.

V. If the Uvula is wholly away, it for the most part causes an impediment in
the Speech; but more especially while the Ulcer is present: but I know a
Patient of mine who has wholly lost it, without the least hurt or defect to
their Voice: and the same thing Guil. Fabricius Hildanus, Cent. 2. Obs. 21.
affirms.

VI. The Prognostics. If it is benign or gentle, it is of easy cure; but if
malign, or accompanied with a Catarrh, it will be cured with much difficulty:
if it is caused from the French Pox, it is not to be cured, but with the cure
of this Disease.

VII. The Cure. If the Ulcer is benign, it may be cured with some of the milder
Medicaments in the former Chapter: or you may first wash the Ulcer with this
Gargarism. Take Agrimony, Avens, Centory the less, Fluellin, Marjoram,
Plantane, Scordium, Solomons-seal, A. M. i. Whitewine lbii. Water lbi. boil
'till lbss. is consumed: strain, and dissolve therein Oxymel simple iv. and
keep it for use.

VIII. Then touch it with this Liniment. Take Honey of Roses strained jss. Ung.
Aegyptiacum ss. Alum in powder ss. mix them, and apply it Morning and Evening.

IX. If it proceeds from the French Pox, you may use the Ablution of dulcified
Mercury, or Turbith-mineral, or red Precipitate, in Limewater; or, the Water
of the Griffin, inferior to none of them.

X. But if with the Ulcer, it is much tumified, or inflamed; or the Patient has
a vehement Catarrh, and a tickling Cough, and that it proves rebellious to all
the things prescribed; it will then be necessary to cut it wholly off.

XI. Let the Body be first well purged; and then take notice how much is
necessary to be cut off, which is at least all that is ulcerated. The Operation
may be done according to the Examples in Lib. 3. cap. 26. sect. 57, 58, and 59.
aforegoing; which are extracted from Wiseman.

XII. If after cutting off, an Hemorrhage should accidentally happen; you may
stop it with some styptick Pouders, or a Gargle made of Alum, and Catechu, in
Red-wine.

II. Of Ulcers of the Almonds.
XIII. (...), plur. (...). Ulcus Amygdali, vel Tonsillarum, an Ulcer of the
Almonds of the Ear; may arise from the same Causes, that an Ulcer of the Uvula
arises from.

XIV. The Signs. It is known by sight, the Tongue being pressed down with the
Spatula. There is in this case, always a difficulty in swallowing, and for the
most part the Gland is very much swelled, and many times out of its place.

XV. The Prognostics. If it is only from a Cold, and without a Fever, there is
the more safety: if it happens in Summertime, it is more apt to spread; if it
is inveterate, it is with much difficulty cured; and if it becomes scirrhous,
it is scarcely ever cured, but with cutting off, or out.

XVI. The Cure. These Ulcers, as also every Ulcer of the Mouth, require
stronger Desiccatives than the Ulcers of other Parts; because they are always
kept moist with Spittle, and are very apt to spread.

XVII. You may use the Medicaments described in the former Chapter, as also in
the Cure of the Uvula, to which you may add these following: let the Patient
gargarize with a Decoction of Devil-bit; or with this Take Tinctura mirabilis
ii. red Port-wine vi. mix them.

XVIII. After gargarizing, anoint them with this Liniment of Sennertus, in Med.
Pract. lib. 2. cap. 22. Take the lesser Centory, roots of Florentine Orrice,
white Dogs-turd, A. i. Honey q.s. mix, and make an Electuary.

XIX. If these things do no good, gargarize it only with the Water of the
Griffin; for if there is any hope or possibility of curing it by Medicaments,
this will do it, yea though it proceeds from the French Pox.

XX. But yet at last, after all, if it resists all Local Medicaments, you must
come to Incision, the manner of doing it we have taught at large, in Lib. 3.
Cap. 26. Sect. 45. ad 56. of this Work aforegoing, to which you are referred.

III. Of an Ulcer of the Throat, below the Uvula and Tonsillae.
XXI. Causes. It arises either from a Flux of sharp Humors, or from some
Stramatick or Venereal Cause, the which you may discern and distinguish by the
Discourse of the Patient.

XXII. The Signs. It is known by sight, pressing down the Tongue with a
Spatula; by pain and difficulty in swallowing, narrowness of the Throat, and
(if it comes from the Pox) a vehement stinking Breath.

XXIII. The Prognostics. If it comes firm the King's Evil, or French Disease,
it is cured by curing them: if it is recent, it is easily cured; if inveterate,
with much difficulty: if the Ulcer has eaten and spread largely, and very deep,
or if any large Vessels are gnawn asunder, it is for the most part mortal.

XXIV. The Cure. The Patient may gargarize with this. Take Plantane-water lbi.
Waters of the flowers of Oranges, Red-roses, A.i. corrosive Sublimate in fine
powder, ii. digest in a Sand-heat for an Hour; strain, and keep it in a Glass
for for use.

XXV. If the Patient cannot swallow any solid Food, give this four Mornings
together, and you will see a wouderful effect. Take dulcified Mercury
levigated, a i. ad ss. Syrup of Clove-Gilly-flowers, or Honey of Roses ss. mix
them. Or you may give the dulcified Mercury in new Milk.

XXVI. If these things do not, you must come to the Water of the Griffin, which
is admirable, and will cure it (if curable) in a Week or ten Days time: if this
does nothing, the Patient must submit to his Fate.

CHAP. XXIX. Of an ULCER of the NECK.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...). and the Latins, Ulcus Colli, vel Cervicis, vel
Juguli; we in English call, An Ulcer of the Neck.

II. The Causes, It may be produced from some external violence, as a Wound ill
managed, or a Contusion: or it may proceed from a Phlegmon, or an Apostem: or
it may be caused from Venereal Contagion, or Poison, or strumatick Tumors, by
degeneration.

III. The Signs. The Ulcer it self is manifest at sight; but the Signs of the
various Causes, must be learnt from the relation or discourse of the Sick, or
some who belongs to them.

IV. The Prognostics. If recent, and not near any of the principal Vessels, or
the Spina, it will be the more easily cured.

V. If it is in the Neck behind, and has corrupted the Vertebrae; the Patient
is then in a dangerous condition; if it has pierced to the Medulla, Death only
can put a period to the poor Patient's misery.

VI. If the Ulcer spreads, and creeps near to the Jugular Veins, or Soporal
Arteries, there is great danger: if they once come to be corroded, nothing but
a Miracle can preserve Life.

VII. If it is inveterate, and has otherwise eaten deep, or taken possession of
the Glandules, (of which that Part is full) though it touches none of the great
Vessels, or recurrent Nerves, yet it will be of very difficult cure.

VIII. If it becomes fistulous, nothing but a palliative Cure can be expected;
and in this last case, keeping the mouth of the Ulcer open, and the Ulcer it
self always clean, it may prove (in Strumous cases) an advantage to the Sick.

IX. If being near the Spina, it should affect some of the conjugations or
pairs of Nerves, proceeding from those Vertebrae; the Parts which are
replenished with Branches from those pairs of Nerves, will be apt to suffer an
incurable Palsy.

X. The Cure. Let it proceed from what cause soever, it is necessary that
Purging precede, or goes hand in hand with the other Operations of the Cure;
that the superabundance of the Morbifick-Matter may, as much as possible, be
carried off.

XI. In all the common cases, and where it is primary, vegetable Catharticks
may do, or those mixed with dulcified Mercury, or white Precipitate; but if it
proceeds from a Strumous or Venereal Cause, (being Symptomatical) it will be
necessary to add to them Mercurials; as red Precipitate, the Prince's Powder,
Arcanum Corallinum, Turpethum Minerale, Aurum Vitae, Praecipitatum per se, etc.

XII. This Purging is to be done at first every third or fourth day, for
eighteen or twenty days: afterward for a Month or six Weeks, only twice a
Week: and after that time, only once a Week, 'till the Ulcer is healed up.

XIII. If it proves inveterate and rebellious, you must in the intervals of
Purging give constantly a Diet or Wound Drink, made of Guajacum, Winter's
Cinnamon, Sarsa, Sassafras, with addition of the principal Wound-Herbs, and and
every Night at Bedtime this following Powder.

XIV. Turpentine reduced to powder by boiling, Crab's-eyes levigated,
Goats-blood dried; Ana; make all into a fine powder; of which give ss. or ii.
going to Bed, in any proper Vehicle. This will cause a great part of the
Morbisick Matter to be carried off by Urine.

XV. As to Topics, if it wants digestion, (as Ulcers in this Part very often
do) you must then dress it with Medicaments proper thereto. This following is
good. Take Venice or Strasburgh Turpentine, Honey, A.i. yolk of 1 Egg, Mastich
in powder ii. mix them.

XVI. After you find the Ulcer is well digested, (which you may know by the
kindness of the Ulcer; not being full of pain, red, fretful, or eating, and the
good condition of the Pus) you must then cleanse it with Abstersives, as Vng.
Nicotianae, Basilicon; or Basilicon mixed with a little Precipitate: or with
this. Unguent. Nicotianae ii. Basilicon i. Aegyptiacum iii. mix them; and over
all apply Empl. Album, or Diachylum cum Gummi, or Emplastr. Mercuriale,
according as the Cause may be.

XVII. The Ulcer being sufficiently cleansed, you may incarnate with
Sarcoticks, as the Linimentum Arcaei, or this. Take Linimentum Arcaei iii.
Unguent. Nicotianae ii. Basilicon i. mix them. And if the Ulcer is apt to be
over-moist, you may add a little Precipitate thereto; which in this case will
keep the Ulcer clean, and also help to incarnate.

XVIII. And now being filled up with Flesh, you have nothing more to do, but
with some proper styptick Water, or astringent and desiccative Pouders,
Ointments, or Emplasters; to induce the Cicatrice, and perfect Healing.

XIX. If it is malign, you must often wash it with the Water of the Griffin;
and apply such things, as we have directed in cacoethick and malign Ulcers.

XX. If it is from a Strumatick or Venereal Cause, it will scarcely be
perfectly cured, but with such a course as may possibly cure those Diseases.

XXI. If it seems to be very habitual, or is become fistulous, you will do well
to apply your self to the palliative Cure, (which we have in a former place
already delivered:) because Ulcers and Fistula's in this Part cannot be laid
open, but with much caution; lest the recurrent Nerves, or the other great
Vessels should be hurt, or suffer in the Operation.

CHAP. XXX. Of an ULCER of the STOMACH.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...). and the Latins, Ulcus Stomachi, vel Ventriculi;
we in English call, An Ulcer of the Stomach.

II. The Stomach is said to be the Shop or Workhouse of Nature, where the
Chylus is prepared; and it is composed of three Tunicles. The outermost is
common from the Reritonaeum, and is the thickest; the middlemost is proper to
it self, and is fleshy; the innermost is from the Dura Meninx, and is wrinkled.

III. It has Fibers of all sorts, and is crusted over with spongy Flesh; and it
is situated in the middle of the Hypogastrium, resting upon the Vertebrae of
the Loins: its left or highest Orifice is called Os, also Stomachus; and its
right Orifice, Pylorus; which is joined to the Guts, to convey the Chylous
Juice to them.

IV. The Causes. It may be caused either from a sharp and acrimonious Humor,
corroding the Tunicles of the Stomach; or from the breaking out of the ulcerous
Pustules of the Smallpox, when they break out inwardly, and then break, or
ulcerate.

V. Or it may be caused from a vehement intemperate Heat: by which the Coats of
the Ventricle seem as if they were parboiled; after which they break, and the
Part becomes raw.

VI. Or it may be caused from the long taking of very acid things; as Juice of
Limons without allay: or from the taking inwardly Oils of Vitriol, Sulphur, or
Salt or Aqua fortis, Aqua Regis, or Spirit of Nitre without mixture: or the
taking of eroding Poisons, or Causticks, such as Vitriol calcined, Arsenick,
corrosive Sublimate, etc.

VII. The Signs. It is known by the exceeding pain and torment the Sick is
almost always in, especially after eating and drinking, and for some hours
after, 'till the Meat or Drink is gone off the Stomach; at what time there is
some relaxation of their pain, and they seem to be a little at ease again; but
immediately after eating and drinking, the pain is renewed, and comes on
afresh, as before.

VIII. The continuation of the Pain, and vehemence of it, makes the Patient
almost afraid either to eat or drink, and in a manner destroys the Appetite: by
which the Patient looks pale and wan, as if in the Green Sickness; and wastes
away, as in a deep Consumption.

IX. Sometimes, by reason of the vehemence of the pain, (it being a nervous
Part, as the Tunicles of the Ventricles are,) the Patient faints, and swoons
away, sometimes vomits up his Food again for ease and relief; and by the
constancy and continuance of it, is brought into a very faint and feeble
condition, as being scarce able to go alone, and they look even like the very
Picture of Death.

X. By reason of this disorder of the Stomach, the Concoction is weakened, the
Food not well digested; and the Excrements of the Body, as Ordure and Urine,
are crude and raw, looking of a very ill and pale color.

XI. The Prognostics. It is a very pernicious Disease, and without timely
help, many times kills the Patient: if it is caused by sharp or acrid Humors,
it is more easily cured than otherwise.

XII. If it proceeds from the Smallpox, or the violent heat of a malignant and
burning Fever, (known by the great burning in the Stomach, vehement desire of
drinking) it is for the most part deadly.

XIII. If it is caused from taking any quantity of Oils of Vitriol or Sulphur,
Spirit of Nitre, etc. it is for the most part mortal: because those vehement
things in a very short time bring a mortification upon the Part, and assault
and empoison the Vital Spirits.

XIV. The Cure. In this Disease the Symptom of Pain is sometimes so vehement,
that respect must be had to it, before we attempt to attack the Disease it
self. And although there may be a foulness in the Ulcer, which ought to be
cleansed and taken away; yet sometimes we are forced to do that, after we have
first abated the pain.

XV. If it is such a kind of anguish or dolor, that neither Cordials,
Aromaticks, nor Antidotes; things hot, or cold, or temperate; things sweet, as
Sugar, Honey, or Liquorice; nor things sour, do any good at all; no nor
Opiates, or any kind of Narcotick or Anodyn whatsoever, do give any relief in
the least measure.

XVI. What is then to be done? truly since the Disease generally proceeds from
an overgreat acidity and acrimony of the Juices; it follows, that it can be
only abated by things opposite to that quality, to wit, things of an absorbent
and alcalious nature.

XVII. And therefore we advise, that this Medicament be given for four days.
Fine Bole, Terra Sigillata, fine Chalk, A.iii. Crab's-eyes levigated, Pearl
prepared, Orient part of Oyster, shells, A. i. make all into fine powder. Dose,
ss. or ii. Morning and Evening in Goats-Whey, or other Whey, if that be
wanting, or in Barley-water.

XVIII. Then proceed to the cleansing of the Vlter, and evacuation of the
peccant Matter, by Lenitives only: for which purpose, Hydromel may be given
alone, or mixed with Manna of Frankincense, as Galen advises; or you may give
Barley-water with Honey of Roses, or Sugar of Roses, in the beginning in the
Morning fasting: avoiding all manner of Vomits, lest they dilacerate the Ulcer
more.

XIX. And giving those things in the Morning, let the aforegoing Powder be
constantly given every day, or night going to Bed.

XX. And if the Ulcer is inveterate or old, you must use Barleybroth,
Decoctions of cooling Herbs, Almond-milk, Sugar of Roses: or new Milk, with
Sugar, and a little Honey: not forgetting to give every Night a Dose of the
aforegoing Powder; without which the Cure will not well succeed.

XXI. Afterward you may give Chalybeat-Milk and Iron-Waters, or
Smiths-forge-water filtred, for ordinary Drink: or Water in which fine Bole or
Terra Sigillata has been infused, which is excellent: adding (in a great
debility of the Stomach) a little rough or austere Wine, for that the heat of
the Part may be weak.

XXII. Give often also some good Tramatick Decoction, as Decoctum Traumaticum
Vulnerarium, Cancri, etc. or this: Take juices of Agrimony, Avens, Bugle,
Burnet, Sanicle, Scabious, A. iii. clarify, and sweeten with Syrup of dried
Roses iv. give it for five Doses, often to be repeated.

XXIII. Decoction of Sarsa and China, with Burdock and Comfrey roots, in
Chicken-broth, given for twenty or thirty days together, is very good; so also
the Mineral-Waters of Vitriol, Alum, or Iron; or Tincture of Iron extracted
with Whitewine.

XXIV. During the whole Cure, keep the Stomach clean, with gentle Purges of
Sena, Rhubarb, Mechocan, Myrobalans, Syrup of Roses, Tamarinds, Diacatholicon,
etc.

XXV. Lastly, to heal up the Ulcer, give Pulvis Haly, or this: Pulvis Haly ii.
fine Bole, Terra Sigillata, red. Coral, Crab's-eyes, and claws, Bloodstone,
Pearl, Oister-shells, (all levigated) Crocus Martis, A. ss. native Cinnabar,
Sar^ocol, Hypocistis, A. ii. make all into a fine powder. Dose, ii. with Sugar
of Roses, in Poppy-Water.

XXVI. Or you may give it with Conserve, or rather Blood of Comfrey roots; or
in a weak Tincture of Catechu, with Syrup of Quinces. You may keep or preserve
it, by making it up into Troches, with mucilage of Fleawort-seeds, or rather
with that of Gum-Tragacanth. Thus have we here given you the Theory and Praxis
of a Disease, from our own Experience, in which, we have followed the Footsteps
of no Man living.

CHAP. XXXI. Of an FISTVLA of the BREAST.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...). and the Latins, Fistula Thoracis, vel Pectoris;
we in English call, A Fistula of the Breast.

II. The Causes. It is either from an External Cause, as from a Wound
penetrating into the Breast: or from an internal Cause, from a Phlegmon
possessing the Intercostal Muscles, and the Pleura.

III. The Signs. It is discovered at sight, having present the Signs of the
other Fistula's: and if the Matter flows into the cavity of the Thorax, there
will be shortness of breathing, and a slower motion of the Breast.

IV. The Difference. It is either with one Orifice, as when it proceeds from a
Wound penetrating into the Breast: or with more Orifices than one, when it
follows after an Apostem.

V. The Prognostics. If the Patient has an Hectic, or is fallen into a
Marasmos, (which this Fistula is apt to induce) the Body growing very thin, and
being in an absolute Consumption, the Disease is for the most part incurable:
for the drying means which are absolutely necessary for the curing of Ulcers,
increase those Diseases, and so hasten on Death.

VI. Celsus also says, that these Fistula's when they have passed the Ribs,
sometimes corrupt the Diaphragma or Midriff; (which may be known by the place
affected, and the greatness of the Pain:) in which case they are ever uncurable.

VII. And indeed all Fistula's of the Breast are hard to be cured, 1. Because
the parts are in continual motion, by reason of its dilatation and contraction,
caused by the intercostal Muscles. 2. Because the Virus of the Fistula does
often corrupt the Rib, whose internal substance (being spongy) is apt to lodge
the Corrupt or Virulent matter. 3. Because the sinuosity (extending it self
between the Pleura and upper Rib, to the distance between it and the lower Rib)
is very difficult to be cleansed. 4. Because it is apt to induce a Hectic or
Marasinos, which renders it uncurable. 5. Because the Pleura in this case is
always Ulcerate, which being membranous, thin, and without Blood, does (like
the Bladder) very hardly admit of consolidation. 6. Because the farther end of
the Fistula is for the most part lower than the Orifice, which hinders the
expurgation of the Pus or matter. 7. Because Medicaments cannot be so well
applied in this case, as in Ulcers and Fistula's of other Parts. 8 Because of
its proximity to the noble Parts, as the Heart and Lungs, upon which the Life
of the Patient depends.

I. The Cure of a Fistula of the Breast.
VIII. The Cure is performed by the general precepts aforegoing: as, 1. Good
and proper Diet. 2. Pectoral Decoctions and Diet-drinks, 3. Proper Topical
applications.

IX. As to the Diet, if there is neither Hectic nor Marasmos, a greater
variety of Meats may be permitted; than when these Symptoms are present: but
let the Food be easy of Digestion, and which may give good and strong
nourishment, of which let the Patient Eat moderately: for Bread, Biscuit is to
be chosen, and for Meat the Flesh of Birds, and other Flesh easy of Digestion,
which ought always to be dressed by roasting; and let his Drink be some of the
following Decoctions, which may sometimes be mixed with a little Wine.

X. As to the Pectoral Decoctions and Diet-drink^, we shall chiefly furnish you
out of Franciscus Arcaeus: but these following Simples are chiefly commended,
out of which you may make a Choice, and form what Diet-drinks you please.

XI. The chief Vegetable Simples. Agrimony, Alheal, Adders Tongue,
Alkanet-root, Aniseeds, Angelica, Avens; Bawm, Bishops-weed, Bistort-root,
Borrage-roots and flowers, Burdock-roots, Burnet; Caraway-seeds, Catmint,
China-root, Catechu, Cinkfoil, Clowns Woundwort, Colstfoot-roots and flowers,
Comfrey-roots, Coriander-seeds, Currants blew; Dead-nettle, Devilsbit,
Dill-herb and seed; Elecampane-roots, Eryngo; Fennel-roots and seeds, Figs
blew, Fluellin; Germander, Guajacumand bark; Horehound, Hyssop; Jamaica-pepper,
Juniper Berries; Ladies-mantle, Liquorice; Maidenhair, Mint, Mallow-roots and
flowers; Origanum; Parsley roots, leaves and seed, Pellitory of the wall;
Raisons of the Sun, Rhubarb; Sarsaparilla, Sassafrass, Sanicle, Scabious,
Selfheal, Speedwel; Tansie garden and wild, Tormentil; Valerian, Violet-leaves;
Winters Cinnamon, Wood-bind; Yarrow; Zedoary.

XII. Franciscus Arcaeus his Pectoral Apozem. Pearl or hull'd Barley, Raisons
stoned, Ana. M. iv. Bugloss-roots bruised and cut, M.iii. Carduus ben. M. ii
Parsley-roots cut and bruised M. i. Cumin-seed ii. Liquorice cleansed and
bruised jss. Jujubes No. xx. Damask Prunes, No xv. Water lbxiv. boil to the
consumption of a third part, and strain out strongly: to which add Sugar
Penides, Syrup of Roses, Syrup of the two opening Roots without Vinegar, A.iii.
white Sugar lbss. Cinnamon iss. mix, and make an Apozem.

XIII. Of this he advises to take xii. two or three times a day, (as Morning,
Noon, and Night:) It will, says he, help the difficulty of breathing, (which
all these kind of Patients have) for it stops the flowing down of the Humor,
corrects and purges the Blood, and does withal sufficiently nourish the Body.

XIV. But he advises, that every day the Body be evacuated, either naturally,
or by help of some Emollient or Lenitive Clyster, that he eat the Flesh of a
Chick or Pullet, boiled with Parsly-roots and Cinnamon, (but Roasting is
better) and eat Almonds (blanched) and Raisons stoned, both after Dinner, and
after Supper.

XV. When this Decoction is done, and drunk all up, his Body (says he) may be
gently purged with Pil. Aggregativae cum Agarico, that the Humors which are
concocted and moved, may be evacuated or cast forth: Afterward he would have
this following Diet-drink prepared, with which he says the Patient will be
perfectly cured, and brought to a good habit of Body.

XVI. The Diet-drink. Take very thin and soft raspings of Guajacum viii. Bark
of the same x. Liquorice scraped and bruised ii. Aniseeds, Cumin-seeds, A. jss.
Raisons stoned M. j. Water lbxii. Wine lbxii. mix, and boil till a third part
is consumed; add dried red Roses M. j. Hermodacts well bruised ii. boil them
again a little, then removing the Matter from the Fire, let it cool and stand
till the next day; then strain off, first the clear, which keep by it self; the
remainder strain out by expression, and keep it in another Vessel by it self.

XVII. The first straining he is to take instead of Drink at Dinner and Supper:
but of the latter straining, which is the thicker, he is to take vi. every
Morning fasting, and every Night going to Bed, cold in the Summer time, but
warmed in the Winter. And to the former Jaeces, fresh Water and Wine may be
put, of which a second Decoction may be made, for his ordinary Drink.

XVIII. This Decoction, says he, is able of it self to nourish and maintain, as
also to make fat, though the Patient only eats Raisons, yea, though he be in a
Continual Fever, or in a Consumptitn: but then he must be utterly forbidden all
other Drink, for this Liquor has great strength in it self, and is able to
support the Patient.

XIX. If he is very weak he may eat the Flesh of Birds, or Mutton, or Kids
Flesh, twice a day; otherwise if he be strong, and in a good habit of Body, he
may eat Flesh but once a day, and at Night Raisons only and Biscuit; and if he
can forbear Flesh, it will be yet better that he eats only Raisons and Almonds,
or Bicket at every Meal in the day: this Course he may pursue for 10 or 12
days: and after 30 days are past, he may eat Flesh once or twice a day, as he
sees fit, but all the while keeping his Bed, even (if need require) till the
fortieth day.

XX. But if the Fistulous Patient has an Hectic Fever, the former Diet-drink
must be wholly forborne; or if it is given, then things which cool and moisten
also, must be given with it, as Barley, Borrage, Bugloss, Cowcumer, Lettice,
Purslane, Spinach, Succory, Sorrel, etc. also Emulsions made of Decoction of
hull'd Barley, or Almond Milk with Almonds, Seeds of Pompions, or Melons,
Muskmelons, Citruls, Cucumbers and white Poppies, etc. Philonium Persicum,
Syrup of white Poppies, red Poppy-water, with Juices of Citrons, Limons, etc.
mixed with white Sugar.

XXI. If there be a Marasmus confirmed, which is an immoderate dryness, with a
vehement Consumption of the whole Body, (known by the Eyes grown hollow, and
hid as it were in their holes, fading of the lively Color of the Skin, the
Forehead dry, and the Skin stretched like the head of a Drum, the Eyelids
heavy, and scarcely able to open, Temples hollow, Face thin, with the Jaw-bones
sticking out, the Cheeks consumed, the Lip and Chin thin, as if nothing but
Skin covered the Jaw-bones; the Breast nothing but Skin and Bones, and the
Cavities of the Breast and Belly hollow, and as if no Vifcera or Guts were
contained in them, the Muscles being so consumed, and the Cavities so drawn in,
that nothing but the Fibers and Skin seem to remain, and the whole Man seems
only to be a living Skeleton:) in this case the Physician ought to attempt
nothing, for the Patient is incurable.

XXII. But if the Marasmus it only in the beginning, known by the Skin becoming
flagey and loose, agility and strength decaying, faintness of the Spirits, with
a manifest defect and impotency in all the actions and functions of the Body,
Animal, Vital, and Natural: I say, in this case there may be some hopes, and
therefore a Restorative Diet is to be appointed, which may repair or restore
the wasted Radical Humidity.

XXIII. Let him have strong Broth and Jellies made of Chickens, Mutton, Veal,
Beef, Legs and Knuckles of Pork, Sheeps Trotters, Calves and Neats-feet,
wherein Juice of Citrons or Limons is to be put. Or they may be made with
Damask-Prunes, Raisons of the Sun stoned, blue Currants, Pippins, Pearmains,
etc. Chicken-broth is also good, or Broth of hull'd Barley, and Almond-milk may
be made with either of them, of which he may eat between Meals; drinking also
Asses, Mares, or Goats-milk, or instead of them Cows-milk, sweetened with Sugar
of Roses: And let him now and then eat the Flesh of a Pig, or young Pork,
Poached Eggs, Chickens, Lamb, Veal, Mutton, sweet Butter, Cream-cheese, Smelts,
Whitings, Perches, Pickrells, Trouts, Flounders, Soles, etc. according as his
Stomach and Appetite most desires, eating all these things by turns, in a
perpetual change of Diet.

XXIV. As to sopicks, these things (over and above the general method) are to
be observed: 1. You may safely ditate the Fistula with a Fistula-Tene, and
Sponge: but in removing of the Callus you must be very careful; for if you
apply the Pastils or Troches, they must not reach to the Cavity of the Breast,
lest the point of it break off or melt, and so full upon the Septum
Transversum, which it will erode, and so cause an Inflammation, a sharp Fever,
a Paraphrenitis, and at last Death it self.

XXV. 2. That the Tent be armed with Populeon, wherewith the Fistula-pouder is
to be mixed, as has been before declared.

XXVI. 3. That the Callus being removed, the Ulcer is to be deterged with Mel
Rosatum, mixed with Aqua Calcis: but you must beware that you inject no Bitter
Medicaments, because they are easily drawn in by the Lungs, from whence by the
Aspera Arteria, they easily come to Throat and Mouth, by which a vehement
Bitterness is felt, as Paraeus lib. 9. cap. 14. twice observed, thereby
provoking Vomiting, and hurting the Appetite, both which are obnoxious to this
Cure.

XXVII. 4. The Ulcer being deterged, you must then consolidate, for Sores in
this Part are not to be kept open long: You may inject Syrup of dried red Roses
mixed with Comfrey, Plantane or Rose Water, laying a Pledger moistened in the
Syrup over it, and over that Sticticum Paracelsi, because it draws the Lips
together, and skins also.

XXVIII. But if the bottom of the Fistula is lower than the Orifice, a lower
Orifice is to be made by Inciston. The left side is safer than the right;
because in this side, the Liver by its Gibbosity, bears up the Diaphragma, and
insinuates it self into the Cavity of the Thorax; so that if either of these
should be wounded, Death may be supposed suddenly to ensue.

XXIX. As to the Point it self which is to be opened, it may be about the
beginning of the next Rib, and not at the lower end of that Rib, above which
the Orifice of the Fistula shows it self, because under it are placed an
Artery, a Vein, and a Nerve.

XXX. First divide the Skin toward the upper part of the lower Rib, then make
way through the intercostal Muscles; this done, dry all things with a Sponge, and
put into the new Orifice a Tent of prepared Sponge, both to delate it, and to
draw to it self the Quittor: If you do thus, not passing any farther than the
division of the Pleura, so that neither the Diaphragma, Lungs, or Perlcardium,
be touched, you will be safe.

XXXI. Or you may according to Aquapendens, run a crooked Silver Pipe into the
Fistula, so that its end may touch the bottom, through which pass a long Needle
threaded with Silk; being drawn through, tie the ends of the Thread together:
This Thread you may dress with some Corrosive Water, Liniment, or Ointment, so
long till the Callosity is removed; and then you are to Cure it after the
manner of a simple Ulcer: But during the whole Cure, the Patient is to drink
plentifully of a good Pectoral Diet drink, etc.

XXXII. And among the Remedies very powerful in this Case, are, Anisated Balsam
of Sulphur, Powers of Anise and Fennel-seeds, and Sassafras, Tinctures of
Antimony and Coral, Volatile Sal Armoniack, Salt of Hartshorn, Ens Veneris,
Spirit of Wine, Balsam de-Chili, etc.

XXXIII. Scultetus, Tab. 39. Fig. 4. shows us the Incision of a Fistula of the
Thorax. It was done suddenly, and almost in a moment, with a Syringotomos, the
point of which was wrapped about with a small Ball of Wax, that when it was
thrust in, it might not rend, or prick the Flesh.

XXXIV. This armed Instrument is to be thrust into the Fistula, and when it
comes to the bottom of it, it is forced through the Skin and Flesh with the right
Hand, so that the Ball of Wax, remaining in the Ulcer, the point of the Knife
may come forth by the hole made, which being laid hold on by the Fingers of the
left Hand, the distance between both holes is cut asunder at one stroke.

XXXV. The Syringotomos is a crooked Knife or cutting Instrument, which upon
the inside (a) has an edge, under the other side (b) it is blunt, or with a
round back, and at the small sharp end (c) it both pricks and cuts.

XXXVI. This Instrument is chiefly used in all Parts of Fistula's having but
one passage, that the end or bottom of the Fistula may be perforated, and the
space between each hole cut asunder, as aforesaid, the point thereof being
first armed with a Ball of Wax, that it may go to the bottom without any
hindrance or hurt. See Tab. VII. O.P.

XXXVII. An Observation from Scultetus: The Fistula was in the Right side, and
left by the Chirurgions of Hailbron as desperate. Generals being premised, the
narrow Orifice was dilated with Elder-pith prepared, till it would admit of the
round Probe, wherewith he felt the Bone rough. To consume the Callus, he put in
a Style dipped in this Ointment. Henbane seeds poudred i. burnt Alum, calcined
Vitriol, A. ss. Butter washed in Plant ane-water q.s. mix, and make an Ointment.

XXXVIII. The Callus being removed, he put a Tent into the Fistula, moistened on
the top of it with a Decoction, and then sprinkled over with Euphor bium
poudred, the rest of it he covered with this Ointment. Vng. Betonicae i.
Aegyptiaci ss. mix them: This hinders the breeding again of any Callous
Substance.

XXXIX. After two Months the Ribs threw off Scales, which being taken out, he
diminished the Tent every day, and dipped it only in the Ung. Betonicae, till the
Ulcer was incarnated; after which it was cicatrized with Ceratum Divinum, the
Sick in the mean time taking a Purging Wine.

XL. Another Observation from the same Scultetus. The Fistula was above the
left Clavicle, with a very small Orifice. It was dilated (the Body being
prepared and purged several times very well) with a Tent made of prepared
Gentian Root, viz. cut into the shape of a Tent, and dried upon a Stone, with a
Thread fastened to one end of it.

XLI. This was put into the hole, and kept in with a Plaster of Diapalma with
proper bandage, for 24 hours; then the Tent was drawn out with a pair of
Pincers: It was swollen with a bilious Matter, and black at the end; but
searching into the Cause, the Bone was rough and moveable.

XLII. It was again Tented with a bigger Root, as aforesaid, (the Parts about
being defended against Inflammation) an the third day with another bigger Tent,
till the hole was big enough to take out the Bone, which wat almost separated.

XLIII. The sixth day, the Fistula was filled up with Buttons made of Sponge,
fastened to a Thread, which did hang out of the hole, over which was put a
Plaster, and Breast Plate Bandage.

XLIV. The Sponge-buttons were thus prepared. Take a new Sponge never wetted,
and dip it into an equal quantity of Wax and Rosin melted together, then press
it strongly in a Press, letting it alone till it is cold; then take it from the
Press and dry it in the shade, cutting it out into round Buttons, and fastening
them to a Thread.

XLV. The seventh day, the Sponges were taken out, and the Fistula being very
open, the Bone was taken hold of with a pair of Forceps, and drawn forth with
very little pain.

XLVI. The eighth day, the Blood being stopped, there was sprinkled upon the
naked sound Bone, this Powder. Roots of round Birthwort, of Hog-fennel, of
Orrice, A. i. Myrrh ii. Euphorbium i. mix them. This was applied with dry Lint,
till the Bone was covered over with firm Flesh.

XLVII. The Ulcer was daily cleansed by sprinkling refined Sugar in powder upon
them, which does also mitigate Acrimony, and at length it was Cicatrized with
Diapalma.

II. Of an Ulcer in the Lungs.
XLVIII. Because the Lungs are contained in the Cavity of the Thorax, or Breast,
and that they being sometimes externally Wounded, are affected with an Ulcer,
we thought good to add as an Appendix to this Chapter, a Discourse of the
Ulcers of the Lungs.

XLIX. The Greeks call this Discase, (...), pl. (...). vel, (...). And the
Latins, Vlcus Pulmonum: And we in English, an Ulcer of the Lungs. But if an
Ulcer proceeds from an inward Cause, then both Greeks and Latins call that
(...) Phthisis, which is a Consumption of the Lungs, of which we shall speak
nothing in this place.

L. The Causes. The Causes of such Ulcers, after a Wound inflicted into the
Lungs, may be, 1. A solution of unity in the Substance and Vessels of the
Lungs, viz. the Arteria Pulmonaris, and Vena Pulmonaria. 2. An Effusion of
Blood into the Cavity of the Thorax, which corrupting, ulcerates the substance
of the Lungs.

LI. The Signs, The Wounds of the Lungs, and of its Vessels, are known, 1. By a
great difficulty of breathing, and a vehement pain of the sides, not feit
before.

LII. 2. By frathy Blood coming forth of the Wound, and also coming forth of
the Mouth by Coughing; for this shows that foam of the Vessels must be wounded.

LIII. 3. The Patient lies easier upon the wounded the whole side, so that many
times he can easily speak so lying, whereas being turned on the whole side, he
speaks with pain and difficulty.

LIVE. When Blood is poured forth into the Cavity of the Thorax, you may know
it, 1. By the heavy weight which seems to press down the Midriff. 2. By the
Increase of a Fever. 3. By the stinking of the Breath after a while, the Blood
being corrupted. 4. By a desire to Vomit, with Fainting and Swooning Fits, from
the Blood's putrefying and turning into Pus. 5. From the difficulty of
Breathing. 6. From the voiding of Blood by the Mouth. 7. From the Patients
being only able to lie upon his Back.

LV. Now that there is an Ulcer of the Lungs, it is manifest from the length of
time, since the inflicting of the Wound: For having dressed the Wound so long a
time, as it is reasonable such a Wound may take in Curing, and it is not yet
healed, you may then prudently fear that a putrid Ulcer of the Lungs is
induced; more especially if no laudable Pus, but a thin Sanies flows out, in
very great quantities, exceeding the magnitude of the Wound.

LVI. The Prognostics. Al Ulcers of the Lungs are Cured with great difficulty,
1. Because the Orifice is not depending always, but for the most part higher
than the Ulcer. 2. Because the lungs are encompassed with the Pleura, (a
Membrane inwardly investing the Ribs) which being accounted a Spermatick Part,
and endowed with but little Blood, is not easily united. 3. Because the Muscles
of the Breast, Heart, and Lungs, are always in motion, which hinders
consolidation. 4. Because Topics cannot easily be applied, and kept to these
Ulcers, by Bandage, Bolsters and Emplasters, as they can to Ulcers of the
External Parts.

LVII. If the Patient has no Cough, a sweet Breath, Expectorates easily, Sleeps
comfortably, his the Bowels soluble, digests his Food well, the Ulcer yielding
a good sort of Pus, or Matter, and his Body wastes or pines not away, nor
usually accosted with Sick or Fainting Fits, you may conceive good hopes of
Cure.

LVIII. But if a Cough be present, or a stinking Breath, or the Pus flowing
from the Ulcer stinks; if there is a difficulty of Breathing, a lingering
putrid Fever, exasperated mostly at Night, with Watchings, Costiveness of Body,
want of Appetite or Digestion; if putrid pieces of the Lungs, or of the
Branches of the Windpipe, be expelled through the Mouth, and the Voice is shrill
and whistling, as if he spoke through a Pipe, and the whole Body pines and
consumes away, the danger of Death is not small.

LIX. So also if the Hair fall, which is caused by reason of the want of
Nourishment, or of the Corruption of it; if the Cheeks and Face comes to be of
a leaden Color, yet after eating seem to be ruddy, and Vapors ascending
thither; if the Flesh on the tops or ends of the Fingers seems wasted or
consumed, the Nails grow crooked, the Feet begin to swell, the Natural Heat
decayed, and Lice increase by reason of the Corruption of the Humors, Death is
not far off.

LX. The Cure. The Indications of Cure are Threefold. 1. The Directing of a
proper Diet. 2. The Correcting the Humor, to induce Cleansing and Healing. 3.
The Application of proper Topics.

LXI. As to the Diet, it ought to he of good Juice, nutritive, and easy of
Digestion, because the Body it apt to be extenuated and consumed in this
Disease. Crabs are much commended in this Malady: So also Snails, but they are
of a thick and slimy Substance, and so apt to breed an Excrementitious Juice:
However, their Broth boiled in Milk, and sweetened with Sugar, or mingled with
other strong Broths, may breed a good Nourishment.

LXII. But nothing seems better than Gelly of Sheeps-Trotters made by boiling
in Milk, and then sweetened with white Sugar Candy: Gelly of Hartshorn is an
Incomparable thing; so also Gelly made of Calves and Neats Feet, of Knuckles of
Veal, and Knuckles of Pork. To these things add the Gravies of Buttocks of
Beef, of Legs of Mutton, of Fillets of Veal, and of other Meats which yield a
plenty of that Liquor.

LXIII. Milk also is an admirable thing, (if there is no Fever) for it
nourishes the Body, generates Blood, and Lympha, and corrects the actimony and
sharpness of corrupt Humors: The wheyish part cleanses the Ulcer, cools, and
keeps the Body soluble; the curdy part breeds good Blood and Humors,
strengthens the whole Body, and consolidates; and the buttery or oily part,
moistens, smooth, and makes easy, hindering the desiccation of the Body.

LXIV. Women's Breast-milk is the best; many have been Cured of a Phthisis, who
have been given over as incurable, merely by sucking of it: Asses Milk is
thinner, and so more apt to absterge: Goats Milk is an incomparable thing;
because of their Food: And Cows Milk obtains in the last place; but that they
may not corrupt in the Stomach, they ought to be sweetened with Sugar of Roses.

LXV. Milk is only to be given when the Stomach is empty, and no other Food is
to be taken, 'till that is digested, lest it curdle, and becomes sour or
corrupted: let the Patient begin with a little at first, and so increase it
gradually every day, according as he finds his Stomach can bear and digest it.

LXVI. To correct the Humors, and induce a cleansing and healing, good Pectoral
Diet-Drinks are to be prescribed. Roots of Alkanet, Bistort, Burdock, China,
Cinkfoil, Comfrey, Guajacum rasped, Liquorice, Orrice, Sarsaparilla, Sassafras
rasped, Tormentil, Zedoary, A.iii. leaves of Agrimony, Alheal, Angelica, Avens,
Bawni, Bramble-tops, Coltsfoot, Fluellin, Fumitory, Hyssop, Mint, Plantane,
Sage, Sanicle, Tansy, Yarrow, A. Mj. seeds of Anise, Caraways, Coriander,
Cumin, Fennel, Jumiper-berries A. iss. Curants, Figs, Raisons stoned, A. iv.
Rain or Spring Water, Wine, A. lbxii infuse in almost a boiling heat for 24
hours; then boil 'till a third part is consumed, strain, clarily, and with
Honey q.s. dulcisie, and bottle it up for use.

LXVII. Or, Roots of Alkanet, China, Comfrey, Elecampane, Guajacum rasped,
Liquorice, Orrice, Sarsaparilla, A. iii. Agrimony, Angelica, Avens, Costmary,
Coltsfoot, Hyssop, Horehound, Speedwel, Sage, Sanicle, Savory, A. M.i. seeds of
Anise, Caraways, Coriander, Fennel, A. i. Juniperberries, Winter's Cinnamon,
A.ii. Figs, Raisons stoned, A. iv. Water, Wine, A. lbx. infuse in a scalding
heat 24 hours; boil 'till a third is consumed, then strain, and clarify, and
sweeten with Honey q.s. and bottle it up.

LXVIII. Every morning fasting, and at night going to Bed, let the Patient
drink half a pint of one of the former Diet-drinks warm; and afterward in the
daytime, let them drink it as their ordinary Drink, as they are a-thirst, or
stand in need of it; and let it be given also at Meals, using no other during
the Cure.

LXiX. We come now to the last Indication, which is the application of proper
Topics, which are chiefly Injections, but made of such things as are not
bitter, for the Reason urged in Sect. 26. aforegoing.

LXX. Barley-water viii. white Port-wine iv. Honey of Roses iv. mix them. Or,
Take Decoction of Parsley viii. White Wind iv. Honey vi. mix them. Or, Take
ctarisied juice of Smallage x. Whitewine. iii. Honey of Scordium iv. mix them
for an Injection.

LXXI. If the Ulcer is sordid, and yields much matter, you must add to every
iii. of the Injection, Vng. Aegyptiacum, a ss. ad i.

LXXII. When you find the Ulcer sufficiently absterged or cleansed, which you
may know by the smalness of the quantity of the Matter issuing forth, then you
must hasten the Consolidation with all the convenient speed that may be; which
may be performed with the following Medicament.

LXXIII. Decoctum Pectorale, clarified juice of Comfrey, a. ijss. Syrup of
dried Red-roses i. red Port-Wine vi. mix, for an Injection:

LXXIV. Or, Take Comfrey, Ground Ivy, Sanicle, Plantane, Solomons-seal,
Perwinkle, Adderstongue, Hypericon, Betony, Bugle, Valerian, Yarrow, A. q.v.
beat all together, and express the juice, which clarify: take of this clarified
Juice viii. red Port-wine iv. phlegm of Alum ii. Syrup of dried Red-roses, of
Myrtles, of Pomgranates, and of Clove-gillyflowers, A. jss. mix them, and
inject warm.

LXXV. The Orifice is to be kept open, either with a Tent, or a Silver Pipe:
the Tent may be made of fine Tow, (which is better than some other things)
because it will stick fast together; or of prepared Sponge, which is best of
all; because it not only dilates, and sticks firmly together, but it draws also
the Pus, and imbibes it: let it be so made, that it may not slip in; for then
it would fall upon the Diaphragma, and putrify there; causing Faintings,
Swoonings, and at last Death: for which reason, it would be good to tie a
Thread to the end of it, to prevent the worst.

LXXVI. But a Silver Pipe (made with stays or ears, to hinder its slipping in)
is much better: it ought to have (besides the hole at the farther end) several
large holes in the sides, near to the end, to make way for the more easy
running forth of the Pus or Matter: it ought to be thick, and roundish on the
sides at the end; that the Lungs, if they should butt against it, might not be
hurt: and its outward end ought to be stopped with a piece of Sponge dipped in
Brandy; over which you may apply Emplastrum Album, or de Minio.

LXXVII. If it runs much, dress it twice a day; if little, but once a day: and
when the Ulcer yields but little, or almost nothing of Pus or Matter, remove
the Tent or Pipe, and cicatrize with all the speed that may be: for if an
Orifice of the Thorax is kept open too long, it will be apt to degenerate into
a Fistula.

LXXVIII. Lastly, if you be so happy as to perform the Cure, cause your
Patient, that he be circumspect in all his motions; whether walking, leaping,
running, or otherwise moving, and that through the course of his whole Life: for
though an Ulcer of the Lungs be cured, yet the Cicatrice may be apt to behurt,
and rent again from the whole part of the Lungs, by irregular or violent
motions, which then may be the cause of an untimely end.

CHAP. XXXII. Of an ULCER of the BACK.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...). and the Latins, Ulcus Dorsi, vel Tergi; we in
English call, An Ulcer of the Back.

II. The Causes. It is caused either from sharp Humors flowing down upon the
Part; or from an Apostem, which follows some other Disease, by translation of
the Matter to that Part; or from Struma, or some Tumor not well cured in a
superior Part, or from external Violence.

III. The Signs. It is known by sight; being either a plain Exulceration,
cavous, cavernous, or apostemous.

IV. The Prognostic. That in the upper Parts, is mo^ easily cured, than that
in the Loins; and that which is recent, than that which is inveterate or old.

V. If it has been of a long standing, and has Coney-borows, as it were, with
many turnings and windings, it will be of difficult cure: so also if it
proceeded from an Apostem, or Tumor, which had been of a long continuance in
the Part, before it broke forth into an Ulcer; for then it may be feared, that
the Musculous and Nervous Parts are corrupted, or the Vertebrae hurt.

VI. If the Patient is extenuated, or there seems to be an Atrophia or
Consumption; it is manifest that the principal Parts are weakened, and that the
Patient is in great danger.

VII. If the Vertebrae be corrupted or foul, which you may easily discern by
your Finger, or the Probe, the Patient is very desperate, if not incurable; but
if the Marrow is touched, all hopes of Recovery are past.

VIII. The Cure. The Cure is to be considered according to the Causes and
Symptoms present, or which do appear; you must first order a good Diet, and
such as may be restorative, because these Patients always seem to be in a
wasting condition: among Restoratives, volatil-mimal Salts have not the lowest
place.

IX. I commend volatile Salt of Beef or Pork, or of Sal Armoniack, to be
dissolved in Rhenish-Wine, or in a Decoction of Sarza and Burdock-roots: or in
a Decoction of Guajacum very thin rasped ss. to a Gallon of Liquor, with
addition of Restoratives.

X. If an Atrophia is present, a Decoction of Sarsa must be used, Chocolet, or
strong Cock-broth, Gelly of Hartshorn, and other Gellies, with Goats and Cows
Milk, all which abound with Volatile Animal Salts.

XI. Let the Patient now and then Purge with gentle Medicaments; as with Sena
infused in Wine; or the Infusion of the Species Hiera picra in half Wine, half
Water: Or this, Electuary Lenitive ss. Elect. of the Juice of Roses ii. Syrup
of Roses solutive i. Barley-water iii. mix for a Dose.

XII. Then if the bottom of the Sinus is lower than the Orifice, open it below
either by Incision or Caustic, as that of Lapis Infernalis, the white
Caustic, the Silver Caustic, etc. and make an Orifice through the Eschar.

XIII. Then use an abstersive Injection, till you perceive the Ulcer to be
clean, as, Whitewine lbi. Honey of Roses iii. Vng. Aegyptiacum ss. mix, and use
it warm.

XIV. Or if it be only caveous, apply this mundifying Ointment. Juice of
Smallage, Honey, A. iii. Juices of Endive, Hops, Elder, Centory, Scordium, A.
ii. Turpentine iss. mix, and boil to the thickness of an Ointment.

XV. If any dead Flesh is present, it is to be taken away with the
Incision-knife, or Scissars, or with some proper Caustic.

XVI. The Ulcer being cleansed, you must Incarnate with this, or some such
like. Take Rose Water i. Syrup of dried Roses iii. Olibanum, Mastich in powder,
A. i. Trochisci albi Rhasis i. mix, and inject warm.

XVII. Or in a caveous Ulcer, dressit with Ung. Nicotianae, or with Arcaeus his
Liniment; and apply over all, Empl. de Meliloto, or Diachylon cum Gummi; after
which Cicatrize, as is usual in other Ulcers.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of an ULCER of the WOMB, and its NECK.
I. WHat the Greeks call (...), and (...). and the Latins, Vlcus Matricis, we
in English call, an Ulcer of the Womb.

II. And what the Greeks call (...). and the Latins, Vlcus Vulvae, vel Colli
Matricis, we in English call, an Ulcer of the Neck of the Womb.

I. Of an Ulcer of the Womb.
III. The Causes. It is either caused from a flux of Humors to the Womb, an
Apostem of the Womb, being broken; or from the Pox, where, in Coition, the
Pocky Seed is cast into the Womb, and ulcerates it.

IV. Or it may be caused from External Violence, or too sharp and corrosive
Medicines injected into the Womb, or taken at the Mouth.

V. The Sighs. It is known by the pain and pricking which is felt in the Part,
as also by voiding of Sanies, Pus, or filthy stinking Excrements, or a virulent
Gonorrhaea, an impure Coition going before.

VI. The Differences. It is either, 1. Simple, wherein the Matter is little,
white, and not stinking. 2. Or Malign, wherein the Matter will be greenish,
yellowish, livid, and party-colored, coming away with Pain and Stink. 3. Or
Venereal, attended with other Symptoms of the Pox. 4. Or Cancerous, attended
with a great Tumor, Hardness, continual Pain, and either a bloody, or black
stinking Running.

VII. The Prognostics. All Ulcers of the Womb are Cured with some difficulty;
nor, according to Hippocrates, is any Ulcer of that Part to be Highted, because
the Womb is a Part very sensible, and as it were the Sink of the Body, to which
a Flood of Excrements perpetually flow.

VIII. If it proceeds from a Venereal Cause, it is not to be perfectly Cured,
but by the Methods which are taken for the Cure of that Disease.

IX. If it is Phagedenick, or Cancerous, it is for the most part incurable, and
vexes the Sick all her Life long.

X. Also, most Ulcers of the Womb, if they be carelessly handled, produce
grievous Symptoms, and sometimes a Gangrene.

II. Of an Ulcer of the Neck of the Womb.
XI. The Causes. It is caused either from a flux of sharp Humors, or from
Pustules breaking out; or from impure Coition, the Pocky Venom of the Man
hanging or sticking to the Part, and eroding the Cutis: Or from overheating the
Part, from too violent and insatiable Coition: Or lastly, from corrosive and
eating Medicaments unskilfully applied.

XII. The Signs. It is known by sight; the Ulcer abounding with Matter sanious
or purulent, and sometimes bloody: There is a Running, with great pain and
pricking, both within, and upon the Lips of the Privity.

XIII. Sometimes the Vlter is with Tumor or Swelling, and sometimes it eats
caveous holes, big enough to lay a long Nutmeg in: And it is for the most part
accompanied with a heat and scalding of Uring, and a great pain, and sometimes
a stoppage in making Water, the Bladder for the most part being drawn into
Consent.

XIV. The Differences. Some are benign and gentle, yielding little Matter,
thick, and not stinking: Others are sordid and malign, yielding much Matter,
ill colored, and with pain.

XV. Some also are superficial, yielding but little Matter; others are
profound, abounding with much filth, and stinking: Some are with Tumor or
Swelling, others without.

XVI. The Prognostics. These are more easily Cured than Ulcers of the Womb,
because we can come more easily to apply Medicines to them; and the benign and
mild are more easily Cured than those which are putrid and malign.

XVII. If they proceed from the Pox, or impure Coition, they are Cured with
some difficulty; and in this Case, it will be prudent for the Patient to go
through the Course of that Cure, especially if they be inveterate.

XVIII. If they proceed from Condylomata, which have been of long standing, or
often returning, they will be of difficult Cure; and when Cured, will be in
great hazard of breaking out again, unless a preventive Course be used for some
time.

XIX. If they be with a virulent Gonorrhaea, or an evil-conditioned flux of the
Whites, being corrosive, it will be impossible that they should be Cured,
unless those Diseases be first taken away. See the Third Edition of Our
Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 5. cap. 75, and 89.

III. The Method of Curing these Ulcers of the Womb, and of its Neck.
XX. Since they are so nearly related one to another, both in respect to the
Parts they affect, and the Causes they proceed from, we shall give you but one
singular and direct way of Curing them. Now because these Ulcers are many times
crude, undigested, and full of pain, they are first of al to be dressed with
Digestives, that they may be made easy, and brought to a good kind of Matter.

XXI. For the Womb you may make this Digestive Injection. Turpentine ss. yolk
of one large Egg, grind them together till they are well mixed, then add to
them new Milk warm from the Cow lbi mix, and make an Injection, which with a
Womb-Syringe cast or inject into the Womb, 3, 4, or 6 time a day: Before you
Syringe with the Injection, be sure that you put in first a Syringe full or two
of warm Water.

XXII. But to the Ulcer in the Neck of the Womb, you may apply this. Turpentine
ss. yolk of one Egg, grind them together, then add thereto Olibanum in powder
ii. mix them. Warm it, and anoint the Ulcer therewith with a Feather or a
Pencil, and apply a Pledget dipped in the same upon the Ulcer, dressing it twice
a day.

XXIII. These things are to be continued so long, till the Patient has some
ease, and the Ulcer yields a laudable or good Matter.

XXIV. Mean season while this is doing, the Antecedent Cause is to be removed
by proper Emeticks and Catharticks: You may make Revulsion with a Dose or two
of Tartar Emetick, or with Wine or Vinegar of Squills, or Infusion of Crocus
Metallorum.

XXV. And you may Purge with an Infusion of Sena and Rhubarb in Wine and Water
ana: Or with Our Tinctura Purgans, or Pulvis Cornachini, or Pulvis Catharticus,
or some other Medicament proper to the Constitution of the Body.

XXVI. And by reason of the moistness of the Parts, and their aptness to
receive a flux of Humors, and the humid nature of Ulcers, it will be necessary
that a drying Diet-drink be prepared and taken daily for some time, made of
Guajacum, etc. as we have directed, Cap. 31. Sect. 16, and 66. and in several
other places.

XXVII. The Ulcer being digested, you must cleanse it with Abstersives, such as
this. Take Hydromel x. Honey iii. mix them. Or, Turpentine, Honey, A. ss. yolk
of one Egg, grind them together, and then add to them Hydromel, or white
Portwine lbi. mix, and make an Injection.

XXVIII. Juice of Smallage and Pellitory of the Wall, A. vi. Honey of Roses iv.
White Wind ii. mix them for an Injection. If the Ulcer is foul and putrid,
dissolve in the Liquor Vng. Aegyptiacum ss.

XXIX. But to Ulcers in the Neck of the Womb, besides the Injection, you may
anoint with Vnguentum Nicotianae, or Vng. fuscum Wurtzii: Or apply this
following Liniment of Barbett. Mercurius dulcis levigated iv. Orrice-roots,
Litharge of Gold, Flowers of Sulphur, Vng. Fuscum Wurtzii, A. ii. Honey of
Roses q.s. mix, and make a Liniment.

XXX. Or you may inject with this. Damask Rose Water lbii. Powers of Mercury
iss. mix them; it cleanses powerfully and safely.

XXXI. The Ulcer being cleansed you may heal with this. Rose Water lbi. red
Wine lbss. Roch Alum in fine powder iii. white Vitriol iss. Saccharum Saturni
i. mix, and inject warm.

XXXII. Or you may inject with Our Aqua Regulata, or with Aqua Ophthalmica, or
with the Water of the Griffin, which is beaten, and not inferior to any other
Wash.

XXXIII. And the Vulva, or Neck of the Womb, may be anointed with this
Ointment. Take Vng. Nicotiang, Diapomp holigo, and Populeon, A. i. Mercurius
dulcis levigated ss. Cinnabar levigated i. mix, and apply it.

XXXIV. If these things do not so perfectly as they should do, you must fume
the Womb with these Troches: Gum of Juniper i. Mastich, Myrrh, Olibanum,
Ainber, A. ii. Cinnabar levigated iv. make all into fine powder; and with
Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth make Troches, weighing each i. One or two of these
Troches will be enough for a fuming.

XXXV. The Fume may be received up into the Privity, by help of a Funnel; and
it may be repeated once every day, till Health is recovered: But in case of the
French Disease, it may be used sometimes twice a day.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of an ULCER of the BLADDER.
I. WHat the Greeks call (...). and the Latins, Vlcus Vesicae, we in English
call, an Vlter of the Bladder; in which we include an Ulcer also of its Neck.

II. The Causes. It is caused either from a Wound, or the Stone, or sharp
Humors, or Diuretic Medicaments, as Cantharides, or from sharp Urine, caused
by drinking much Wine, or stale Beer, and eating hot Meats.

III. The Signs. It is known by the continual or constant pain about the
Bladder and Pubes; and in the Perinaeum and Vrethra; which pain is most
vehement at the beginning and ending of Pissing.

IV. The Urine also is thick with Matter, and sometimes with Blood, and
sometimes with both mixed together, and comes forth many times with an ill
smell; however, it stinks much, after it has stood a little while.

V. And whereas in an Ulcer of the Urethra or Perinaeum, the Pus or Matter
comes forth first, or before the Urine: In an Ulcer of the Bladder, or its
Neck, it comes forth last, or at least mixed with the Urine, which makes the
passage of the Urine difficult, and very hot, sharp, and painful.

VI. The Differences. The chief differences of these Ulcers which we shall
observe here, are, 1. In respect to the Cause, as being from the Stone, Sand or
Gravel, or from Humors, or Cantharides. 2. In respect to the Place, as being
either in the Bladder it self, or in the Neck of the Bladder.

VII. The Prognostics. These Ulcers, as they are very troublesome and painful,
so they are very difficult to be Cured, and for the most part Incurable,
because it is a part Membranous, having but little Blood in it, which causes
^nition and consolidation; and withal constantly washed with the Urine, whose
saline Particles are a perpetual Cause of irritation, pain, and corrosion.

VIII. An Ulcer in the Neck of the Bladder, though it is also very difficult to
be Cured, yet sometimes does admit of Healing, because it is more fleshy, and
bloody, and less, or not simply Membranous, as the Bladder is.

IX. If recent, and in young People, they are easier Cured than when
inveterate, and in old: If they proceed from the Stone, they are impossible to
be Cured till the Stone is taken away: If the Ulcer continues long, as it
causes vehement pain, so also it causes watchings, and wastings, and at length
brings the Body into a deep Consumption.

X. The Cure. The Medicaments to be used in order to this Cure, are either
Internals or Externals. The Internals are such things as may be first, Anodyn
and Cleansing; secondly, such things as may conglutinate and heal the Ulcer.

XI. The White Potion is a good Abstersive, thus made: Strasburgh Turpentine i.
yolks of two Eggs, grind all together till the Turpentine is perfectly
dissolved; then take new Goats or Cows Milk lbiv. white Sugar viii. mix and
dissolve; mix this sweetened with Sugar with the mixture now made, and keep it
for use. It cleanses admirably.

XII. If the Pain is very great, you may use instead of the Milk, as much
Poppy-water: Of this white Potion the Sick may take iii, or iv. Morning, Noon,
and Night.

XIII. You may also give things smooth, slippery, oleaginous and bealing, as
Goats and Cows Milk, Cream with Sugar, Almond Milk, Mucilage of Quince, and
Fleawort, and Faenugreek-seed: Milk mixed with Plantane, Poppy or Rose Water,
Emulsions made with Poppy-water, of which the Patient may continually drink,
abstaining all the while from all things salt, acid, or any wise sharp.

XIV. Chio Turpentine made into Pills with powder of Liquorice, and a little
Honey, is an admirable cleanser; so also Balsam of Tolu; also Balsam of Chili,
or Peru, made into Pills, or a Bolus with Catechu and powder of Liquorice; and
inferior to none of them is Gum Elemi, or Balsam Capivii.

XV. Or you may take their Tinctures, extracted with S.V. in a gentle
Sand-heat, which may be given a ii. ad iv. at a time in White Wind, or in Milk.

XVI. Paracelsus commends Praecipitatus cum Aqua Ovorum, given a gr. iij. ad
vij. and says, that it facilitates the Cure of Fistula's and Ulcers in the Neck
of the Bladder, even of such as are accounted uncurable, if injected into the
Bladder with a proper Vehitle.

XVII. If the Pain is violent, you must mix with you Medicines, (whether given
by the Mouth, or cast in by Injection) a proportional quantity of Opium
corrected by some Months digestion in rectified S.V. or extracted with Our
Spiritus Vniversalis.

XVIII. No Man can tell the Excellency of Opium, thus prepared; for so it
becomes as it were another thing; it is not only altered from its pernicious
qualities, wherein it did formerly very much abound; but its Sanative Property
is very much augmented and exalted.

XIX. And if the Body is hot and costive, it will be good to open it with
gentle Purgers, such as Cassia new drawn, Manna, Syrup of Roses, Agarick,
Rhubarb, Mechoacan, etc. mixed with Mercurius dulcis; or rather with the Princes
Powder, not inferior to any other thing.

XX. The Ulcer being thus cleansed, you must agglutinate dry, and heal with
this. powder of Turpentine (made by loiling in Water) Catechu, A. i. Crabs Eyes
levigated, fine Bole, A. ss. Alum ii. Saccharum Saturni i. all being in fine
powder, with liquid Storax q.s. make Pills, Dose ii. ad i. every Night at
Bedtime: Or you may give the Powder a ss. ad ii. mixed with Milk.

XXI. Barbett commends this, as a thing often experienced. Spanish Juice of
Liquorice, Roots of round Birthwort, Comfrey, Osmund-Royal, A. ss.
Frankincense, Myrrh, Mastich, white Poppy-seeds, Henbane-seeds, A. i. Venice
Turpentine, q.s. mix, and make Pills.

XXII. Or Troches of Winter Cherries, of Amber, burnt Talck, A. ss. fine Bole,
Terra Sigillata, Man's Skull, A. i. Venice Turpentine, q.s. mix, and make a mass
of Pills, which make as big as Pease; of either of these Compositions, the Sick
may take ^ every Morning and Evening.

XXIII. Blood of Comfrey given in Tinctura Martis made with White Wind, for
several days together, is an Excellent thing: So also Tincture of Catechu given
in Poppy-water, and sweetened with Syrup of Comfrey.

XXIV. As for Externals, you may use this Injection. Take Limewater (but not
made too strong) iii. Plantane or Poppy Water ii. white Troches of Rhasis i.
mix them, and inject twice or thrice a day with a Catheter-Syringe.

XXV. You may cleanse by an Injection made of Juice of Parsley, or Smallage
clarisied; to viii. of which Mel Rosatum ii. may be added: But for this purpose
nothing exceeds Our Aqua Regulata, or Aq. Ophthalmica; to viii. of which you
may add Honey of Roses ii. Spirit of Wine i. which may be injected into the
Bladder 3 or 4 times a day. See more hereof in the Third Edition of Our
Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 5. cap. 38, and 42.

CHAP. XXXV. Of an ULCER of the GROIN.
I. WHat the Greeks call (...), and (...). and the Latins, Vlcus Inguinis, vel
Inguinale, and Fistula Inguinis; we in English call, an Ulcer of the Groin, and
a Fistula of the Groin.

I. Of an Ulcer in the Groin, not Fistulated.
II. The Causes. An Ulcer may be caused, 1. From a Wound made by External
Violence. 2. From a Bubo, Phlegmon, or Apostem, being broken or opened. 3. From
a Flux of sharp Humors. 4. Symptomatically, or from a Crisis, Nature expelling
the Morbifick Matter that way.

III. The Signs. An Ulcer is manifest at sight: It many times penetrates deep,
through the oblique and transverse Muscles of the Abdomen, and yields for the
most part a stinking sort of Quittor.

IV. The Prognostics. If you perceive such an Ulcer as aforesaid, you may
judge it not to be easily Cured, more especially if it falls out after a
Venereal Bubo: For, 1. There is a Disease with its Cause joined to it. 2. It
corrupts the Fibers of the Muscles. 3. It sometimes corrupts the Vertebrae of
the Loins, in which last case, the Disease is Mortal.

V. If it is recent it is more easily Cured than if it is inveterate; and if
benign, more easy than if it were malign; and if it continues long, it for the
most part induces a Marasmus, or a deep Consumption; because those Parts being
as it were the Sink of the Body, are apt to drain all the Juices, even the
Radical Moisture out that way.

VI. The Cure. Let the Ulcer come from what Cause soever, upon its first
appearing it generally wants digestion, and therefore Digestives ought to be
applied for sometime, but not too long, (because of the overgreat moisture of
those Parts) for that they are apt to produce a putridity.

VII. The next thing is to deterge the Vloer with proper Abstersives: Vng.
Nicorianae is a good thing, with which if the Ulcer is very foul, you must mix
a little Vng. Aegyptiacum: Some use Vng. Apostolorum; but Vng. Fuscum Wurtzii
is inferior to none of them.

VIII. If it is recent, it may be dressed with this. Take Juices of Smallage and
of Scordium, A. iv. Honey of Roses ii. mix for a Potion; after which dress it
up with Vng. Nicotianae mixed with equal parts of Apostolorum: If it is very
putrid you must dress it with Basilicon mixed with Praecipitate.

IX. The Ulcer being cleansed, you must induce the healing with proper
Incarnatives and Epuloticks, which by reason of the moisture of the Part, are
to be drier than ordinary.

X. If it proceeds from a Venerial or Pestilential Bubo, after they are brought
to maturation, you must use the general Means prescribed in the Cure of those
Diseases.

II. Of a Fistula in the Groin.
XI. The Cause. It is for the most part caused from an Ulcer being continued,
or from the ill management of its Cure, by application of improper things.

XII. The Signs. They are known by sight, and proceed for the most part from
Venereal Bubo's either neglected, or ill handled: Sometimes they happen in the
Emunctories themselves, and sometimes somewhat above the Emunctory, the Matter
not reaching it.

XIII. The reason in this last Case is, either the weakness of the Expulsive
Faculty, or the crossing of the Muscles oblique and transverse, in those Parts.

XIV. Nor is it any wonder that Abscesses, ulcers, and Fistula's, often fall
out in those places, for that they are the sink, as it were, of the Body, where
almost all the impurities flow; so that a perforation of the Guts is sometimes
caused, that the Excrements come out at the Orifice of the Fistula.

XV. And sometimee it so falls out, that the Fistula penetrates many ways, even
to the corrupting of the Vertebrae of the Spina, making the Patient very
uneasy.

XVI. The Prognostics. All Fistula's in these Parts, which pierce into the
Cavity of the Abdomen, are Cured with much difficulty; 1. Because the sink os
the Body is as it were there, a continual flux of Matter is apt to ensue,
either from the Liver, or some other Parts. 2. Because that if Incision or
Corrosive Medicaments are used, the Fibers of the Muscles, and Branches of the
Vena Cava, and Aorta, are in great danger to be hurt.

XVII. If the Guts are eroded, and the Excrements come out at the Orifice of
the Fistula, there is great danger of Death, 1. Because Topics can scarcely be
applied to them to induce the Consolidation. 2. Because the Guts are
membranous, thin, and have but little blood, which is the medium of Unition. 3.
Because we can have but little assistance, either from Hand, or Eye. 4. Because
the Fistula is apt to creep between the Muscles, (which in those places are
many) viz. the oblique and transverse, which are placed one above another.

XVIII. If the Vertebrae of the Spine be corrupted, the Fistula is incurable:
And you may easily know when it is foul by the great quantity of stinking
Sanies flowing from the same: The Patient also grows daily weaker and weaker,
whatever Means is used, and being wonderfully extenuated, at length Dies of a
Marasmus, or deep Consumption.

XIX. The Cure. If the Fistula is not deep, but superficial, make Incision, and
remove the Callus by the help of some Catheretick Powder, or by the ways and
means which we have prescribed in Cap. 20. Sect. 78. ad 103. and in Cap. 24.
Sect. 26. ad 35.

XX. Then Absterge the Ulcer, Consolidate and Cicatrize, according to the
Prescriptions delivered in the general Method of Cure, applying proper
Abstersives, Sarcoticks, and Epuloticks; all which in Ulcers of these Parts
ought to exceed the ordinary Medicaments of these kinds, as to their
desiccative or drying Qualities, by reason of the very great moisture of these
Parts.

XXI. If the Guts are perforated, you ought to acquaint the Friends and
Relations of the Patient with the Danger; but in your own Breast not to Despair,
but to proceed on with Courage, for that Nature does some things (even in this
case) almost Miraculous, and many times wonderfully beyond our utmost
Expectation.

XXII. Let his Food be made of things glutinous and consolidative, as Meat
prepared of Sheeps and Calves Feet, Neats Feet, Knuckles of Veal, and Knuckles
of Pork, Jellies of Hartshorn, and Jellies made of the Guts of Calves, Sheep,
and Hogs, which Cure by a Specific Virtue.

XXIII. Rice boiled in Milk is very good; so also Frumety made of Wheat, having
plenty of Raisons, and blue Curants in it: Thick Milk made with Wheat Flour,
or white Starch, is proper; and very Excellent is Milk boiled thick with
Oatmeal, which nourishes much, consolidates, and yet cleanses.

XXIV. Every Morning and Evening he may drink a good Draught of Alicant, or
Spanish red Wine warmed with a Toasted Biscuit sopt in it, eating the Biscuit;
for the Spirit of the Wine, and its Styptick Property helps on the
Consolidation, and Healing.

XXV. And inwardly you may give, Morning, Noon, and Night, the Powder of Ox
Guts a ss. ad i. mixed with Blood of Comfrey, or Syrup of Comfrey iv. or vi. and
then given with a Glass of warm Alicant. It is a Specific.

XXVI. Outwardly inject some Styptick Liquor, or this Mixture. Take Smiths
Forge-water filtred viii. Syrup of Myrtle-berries, or of red Roses dried ii.
Alum (dissolved in a little Rose Water) ii. mix them; and keep the Orifice open
with a Sponge till the Gut is consolidated.

XXVII. The Gut being healed, you must then proceed to the removing of the
Callus, after which by Abstersives, Incarnatives, and Cicatrizers, complete and
perfect the Cure.

XXVIII. If the Vertebrae of the Spine are foul, undertake no Cure, but if upon
Consideration they will entertain you to dress them, you may inject into the
Fistula the following Sanative Potion.

XXIX. Take Meadow-sweet Water, or rather Smiths Forge-water filtred lbi. Juice
of Scordium clarified vi. Syrup of dried red Roses iv. Tincture of Aloes,
Myrrh, and Saffron, made with S.V. ii. Tincture of Euphorbium i. mix them, and
over all lay Our Empl. Album, Diachylon cum Gummi, or Stypticum Paracelsi.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of an ULCER of the YARD.
I. Of an Ulcer External.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...). and the Latins, Vlcus Penis, vel Virgae, we in
English call, an Ulcer of the Yard.

II. The Causes. It may be caused either from external Violence, as Wounds,
Bruises, etc. Or, application of Corrosive Medicaments; or, from the Poison,
Malignity, and Infection of the French Pox.

III. The Signs. It is known by sight, being a solution of Continuity with
Putrefaction: If the Ulcer is sordid, foul, or putrid, it stinks much.

IV. The Kinds. It is either External, of which we speak here, or Internal,
with Caruncles or Carnosities, which are fleshy Excrescencies.

V. The Prognostics. If recent they are easily Cured, if inveterate with more
difficulty, especially if they are sordid, malign, virulent, or callous.

VI. If they proceed from the French Pox, they are much more difficult, and
sometimes by ill Management degenerate into Gangrene or Sphacelus.

VII. The Cure. First inwardly take (to purge with) Pilulae Holagogae, or Our
Pil. Catharticae, or Panchymagogae, or Our Family Pills: Or you may purge with
Tinctura purgans, or Syrupus Catharticus, Electuarium Catharticum, or with
Pulvis Antimonii, or Pulvis Catharticus.

VIII. Then exhibit a Vulnerary Diet, or, if it proceeds from the French Pox, a
Diet of Guajacum and Sarsa, whose use is to be continued for at least thirty
days; for as much as these kinds of Ulcers are stubborn and rebellious, and
oftentimes return again, or are otherwise apt to degenerate into a Cancerous
Ulcer, and sometimes to Sphacelate.

IX. Outwardly you must for some time apply Digestives, till they yield a good
and laudable Quittor, after which they are to be cleansed with Mundificativum
Paracelsi, or Vnguentum Fuscum Wurtzii, or Vng. Nicotianae mixed with a little
white or red Precipitate.

X. Then anoint with Vng. Mirabile, or Diapampholigos mixed with a little
white, Precipitate, or with this. Litharge iv. burnt Lead, Oil of Roses,
Quicksilver, A. iii. Tutia prepared ii. Aloes iss. Pomgranate-peels i.
Lodestone, Saccharum Saturni, A. ii. Wax, q.s. mix, and make an Ointment.

XI. If this prevails not, by reason of the foulness of the Ulcer, you may use
this. Rhenish Wine vi. Plantane Water iv. Spirit of Wine i. burnt Alum i.
Verdigrise ss. mix, and boil a little; to which if the occasion yet require,
you may add a little Precipitate, or Mercurius dulcis levigated, or Powers of
Mercury vi.

XII. Or you may wash with Our Aqua Regulata, or Aqua Ophthalmica, or which is
better, and transcends all others, with the Water of the Griffin, for that
these things very much hasten the Cure; and if the Ulcer has gotten within the
Vrethra, they may be injected with a Syringe.

XIII. If the Ulcer is Cancerous, you may use this. Take Juice of Bramble tops,
or Juice of the Fruit, Vinegar of Roses, A.ii. Juices of Housleek and of
Nightshade, A. iii. Aqua Vitae iv. Malaga Wine, Oil of Roses, A.vi. Litharge of
Gold i. Frankincense, Mastick, A. ss. Verdiguise iiss. Vitriol, Alum burnt, A.
iss. Camphir i. powder what are to be poudred, etc. and boil all together
(except the Camphir) with a gentle Fire to the Consumption of the Juices, then
put in the Camphir, and with Wax q.s. make an Ointment.

XIV. If a Sphacelus attends the Part, the only Cure is by cutting off, lest it
creep inwards, and perforates either the Bladder or Perinaeum, and so kills the
Patient. See more hereof in the Third Edition of Our Synopsis Medicinae, lib.
5. cap. 44.

II. Of an Ulcer Internal, with Caruncles.
XV. This the Greeks call (...). and the Latins, Carnositas, Caruncula; and we
in English, a Carnosity, or fleshly Excrescence within the Vrethra.

XVI. The Cause. Though it is possible they may be caused from an Ulcer of the
Part, yet they proceed for the most part from a virulent Gonorrhaea, or the
French Pox.

XVII. The Signs. They are known by the stoppage of the Urine, or a great
difficulty in pissing, with heat and pain; as also by searching with the Probe,
Catheter, or a Wax Candle, for that the Caruncle will stop their passage into
the vrethra, and the Urine many times as it comes in small quantity, so it
comes forth in a forked stream.

XVIII. The Prognostics. They are Cured with some difficulty, and scarcely
without very drying and Catheretick Medicaments, assiduously applied for some
considerable time.

XIX. The Cure. It is performed by removing the Caruncle, cleansing the Ulcer
with Abstersives, consolidating and healing with Epuloticks.

XX. To remove the Callus you may often inject with this. Take Lime Water viii.
Mercurius du^cis levigated, or rather the Princes Powder, or Turpethum
Minerale, or white Precipitate ss. Syrup of Roses i. mix them for an Injection.

XXI. And by the help of a Pipe you may put in upon this Carnosity this
Catheretick Powder. Take burnt Alum ii. red Precipitate, Turpethum Mineraele,
white Precipitate, powder of the Griffin, A. ss. all being levigated very
small, mix them together first by themselves, and then with vng. Basilicon, or
Nicotianae, iss. make an Ointment thereof.

XXII. The Carnosity being removed, wash with the Water of the Griffin, which
will alone heal the Ulcer, without any other Medicament. See more of this Cure
in lib. 1. cap. 37. of this Work, where we have handled it more at large; as
also in Our said Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 5. cap. 44.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of a FISTVLA of the ANUS.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...). and the Latins, Fistula in Ano; we in English
call, A Fistula in the Fundament.

II. The Causes. They mostly proceed from Phlegmons, Phymata, and Hemorrhoids,
broken, and ill cured, or not cured in a long time; as also from the Wounds
made with Horsleeches, not well cured, or leaving some Venom behind in them;
which creating a malign and corrosive Juice, insinuates its self farther and
farther, making a long Sinus, which in process of time becomes callous.

III. The Signs. Those which are caused by the inward Piles, are made
gradually, and pass their Matter, ( says Wiseman) which is a thin Gleet,
between the Tunicles of the Intestinum rectum, making their way out, near the
Verge of the Anus, through a small Pin-hole, as it were.

IV. These are discovered by the issuing out of a thin Humor, staining the
Shirt or Shift, rather than by any Pain they cause; which Discharge is thought
to be rather a kind of Sweating than otherwise; yet it is not a sweating, but a
real issue of thin Matter.

V. This in process of time is accompanied with itching, and is subject to
excoriation or galling; from whence sometimes several kinds of Pimples or
Pustles do break out; and sometimes Rhagades, Fissurae, or Chaps; and at length
the Sinus spreads outward, and grows callous, and the Orifice hard, and so
contracted, that a small Probe will hardly go in.

VI. Those Ulcers which are caused by Phymata, cause their Matter to pass deep
among the Interstitia of the Muscles, (as other Abscesses in fleshy parts do)
according as they can make their way: sometimes they penetrate through the
Intestinum rectum, to the very neck of the Bladder, yea into the Pelvis; or at
best, insinuate their Gleet amongst the Musculi glutaei, etc.

VII. These are very painful, and send forth a sanious or purulent Matter,
proportionable to their hollowness: and in length of time, they make as it were
Coney-burrows, and grow callous; being of the worst sort of these Fistula's.

VIII. If a search is made with a Probe into the Sinus which comes from the
Piles, and the while you press your Finger into the Anus, you may feel the
Probe run all along between the Tunicles of the Intestine; and it may pass
through the Pile which gave it its original.

IX. Whereas the Sinus's which proceed from another root or spring, have
outwardly no external Orifice, but an Orifice inwardly, and discharge their Pus
or Matter by Stool: yet possibly in length of time they may make a way
externally, and pass their Matter through one or more Orifices outwardly, at a
farther or nearer distance from the Anus, according as the Apostem lay in the
Intestine.

X. You may easily find out, whether the Fistula does pass through the Intestinum
rectum, or not: for, the Intestine or Gut is penetrated, if an Injection being
made by the outward Orifice of the Fistula, it passes within the Anus: or, if
after breaking of Wind, part of it makes its way through the Sinus: or, if
putting your Forefinger into the Anus, you feel the naked Probe, it being
thrust through the Sinus of the Fistula, by the outward Orifice: or, lastly, if
the Excrements appear to be mingled with the Pus or Quittor, or if the Quittor
smells like the Excrements.

XI. The Prognostics. No Fistula in Ano is easy to be cured, because this
place is as it were the Sink of the Body; and so abounds with plenty of
impurities, and much superfluous moisture, which alwas hinder the Cure.

XII. Those Fistula's which penetrates deep, beyond the Musculi Any, if they be
cured by laying open, the Patient will scarcely after retain their Excrements,
but with much difficulty; and if they reach beyond the Sphincter, the retention
will be impossible.

XIII. Simous Ulcers arising from Phymata, if they have been of long
continuance, are dangerous, and of difficult cure: Ulcers in Ano, are also hard
to be cured, if they discharge a large quantity of Pus, by an opening so far
distant, that you cannot safely lay it open; but the nearer to the Anus, the
more easy the Cure.

XIV. If it proceeds from a Cacochymical Constitution, where the Lungs or any
Viscera are weak; it ought never to be healed, but kept open as a Fontanel or
Issue, for discharge of Morbifick Humors.

XV. But if it cannot be kept open, with ease to the Patient, a good and
sparing Diet is to be prescribed; and the Humors are to be carried off some
other way, before the absolute Cure is attempted.

XVI. In like manner, sinuous Ulcers arising from the Piles, ought to be kept
open, so long as they can be continued without pain trouble, or disturbance to
the Patient: for by this means the Body will be discharged of many superfluous
Humors, and the whole Man kept in health.

XVII. Sinuous Ulcers in length of time grow callous, and so become Fistulae;
and they only differ from sinuous Ulcers as they are callous, which being in
the Fundament, are more tedious than in other parts.

XVIII. If the Fistula does run superficially upwards by the Intestinum rectum,
whether it penetrates the Anus, or not, it is without danger, and may easily be
cured.

XIX. But if the Fistula runs higher up, than you can reach it with your
Fingers, it will be of difficult cure, because you cannot lay it open the whole
length: and if the Humor issues from the remaining Sinus, upon the Part which
is opened, it will hinder cicatrizing.

XX. If the Fistula is become inveterate, runs much, and the Patient is much
extenuated, strength decayed, Stomach lost, or debilitated, with faintness, and
faint cold Sweats; let the state and condition of the Fistula be what it will,
pierce the Intestine, or pierce it not, runs deep or superficial, it signifies
not much; for it is to be feared, the hopes of Cure are past.

XXI. The Cure. It is twofold, viz. 1. Real. 2. Palliative. As to the Real
Cure: a good Diet being instituted, and Universals prescribed, as in other
Fistula's, we shall come immediately to the Chirurgick Part, which is performed
by Deligation, or Incision, and the application of Topics.

I. By Deligation.
XXII. The Cure by Deligation or Ligature, which was the Operation of the
Ancients: but here is to be noted, that Deligation and Incision have place only
when the Fistula is shallow; if it be deep, it cannot well be attempted by any
of these means.

XXIII. If therefore the Fistula penetrates into the Intestinum rectum, first,
dilate it with a Fistula-Tent or Sponge, and remove the external callus as we
have formerly taught; for so the Part which is to be bound will be more thin,
and so more easily cut asunder by the Ligature.

XXIV. Let the Ligature be made of twisted brown Thread, or fine
stitching-Silk, to which some put a Horse-hair, whereby they are made to do the
work the quicker; a twist of three Threads of stitching-Silk may be enough; for
if the Ligature is made too thick, it will too much bruise the Flesh in cutting
it.

XXV. Others make it of fine sealing-Thread, which is made of the best Hemp,
unboiled and unwhitened; which is exceeding strong, and will not rot before it
has done the work a either of these may do, you need not be very curious about
the choice.

XXVI. Where the Fistula has penetrated put one end of the Thread or Ligature
into the eye of a small and flexible Probe, made of sina and pliant Silver, or
of Lead; then thrust the eye with the Thread through the Sinus into the
Intestinum rectum; which done, put into the Anus your Finger, and with it pull
the Thread out of the eye of the Probe, and draw it out at the Anus: or having
bent the eye of the Probe, bring it without the Anus, and then putting the
Thread into the eye, draw that end through the narrow Orifice of the Fistula.

XXVII. If the Sinus is not very thick and long, you may by one strong
deligation bind up all the Sinus: but if the Sinus is thick and long ^ you must
use several constrictions, tying the ends of the Thread with a runningknot,
that it may be the more easily loosed: but some, after one deligation only,
more and more draw in the ends of the Thread, with a round piece of a Stick
turned about.

XXVIII. Where the Fistula has not penetrated the Gut, you may make use of a
short Probe, making the point sharp, to pass through the Intestine; but it must
be very pliant, that it may be the fitter for the work.

XXIX. And in some cases, where the Fistula lies high, and the Sinus is
crooked, you may make use of a fit Cannula, for the conveying the Needle up;
and to strengthen it in its work, that it does not bend in perforating of the
Intestine.

XXX. When all the Sinus after division by deligatiou, lies open, go forwards
in the Cure, as if it had been opened by Incision; by removing the Callus,
Abstersion, Incarnating, etc.

II. The Method by Incision.
XXXI. The laying it open by Incision is thus. The Mouth of the Sinus is to be
dilated by a Tent of Sponge, etc. and the exterior Callus is to be removed; if
it be troublesome: otherwise immodiately go to the Work, and divide the Sinus
with a pair of Scissars; which some Artists approve of, for the speedy division
it makes; and indeed, if the Sinus is short, it is the Best way.

XXXII. But in doing this, you must be careful, lest the folds of the rugous
Coat should fall between; for so you may chance to make two Wounds of one.

XXXIII. But if the Fistula penetrates the Intestine very deep, the work will
be more difficult and bazardous, not only in the cutting, but in the progress
of the Cure: for the newly-divided lips will be apt to fall one upon another,
and so unite again; which if they do, the Fistula is renewed: and a Dossel or
Tent put up the Sinus, will not continue in it, but lie as a Suppository,
continually stimulating the Intestine to thrust it forth.

XXXIV. Whereas the Ligature contuses in some measure the lips, in cutting
them; so that they require to be digested before they can unite, in which the
Sinus fills up with Flesh, and heals within; so that the Fistula seems to heal,
or be cured above, as the Ligature divides below.

XXXV. The Fistula being thus opened, whether by Deligation or Incision, the
Callus is to be removed by Cathereticks, as we have taught in the Cure of a
Fistula in general, then to be digested, cleansed, incarnated, and cicatrized.

III. The Application of Topics.
XXXVI. The Callus being removed by Cathereticks, or Incision, or Canteries,
fill up the hollowness with Dossels armed with an astringent Powder, and the
white of an Egg, to keep the lips of the incised parts asunder: for if you
should endeavor an unition too soon, the cavity may possibly still remain, and
induce a Recidivation.

XXXVII. For which reason, it is necessary that with Incarnatives (not fat or
greasy) you should endeavor to engender good and sound Flesh in the bottom: if
it is fatty it will generate loose and spongy Flesh, which will put you to more
trouble.

XXXVIII. For this purpose you may make use of this. Take Syrup of dried red
Roses, or Syrup of Myrtles, or some other Vulnerary and Sanative Syrup iv.
Pulvis Cephalicus i. mix them.

XXXIX. In opening the Fistula by Ligature, there is wont to be sometimes heat
and Inflammation: in this case, it is usual to apply a Stuph of Tow dipped in
austere Red-wine, and Oil of Roses to allay the heat of the Part.

XL. And every day (whilst the Ligature is doing its work) after going to
Stool, it may be dressed: and if need requires, you may inject a Decoction of
hull'd Barley with Quince or Fleawortseeds, and then apply some Lenient or
Auodyn, as Vng. Populeon, Rosatum, etc.

XLI, It is also to be noted, that in opening it by Ligature, the third or
fourth day, the knot is to be tied streighter: and so in twice or thrice tying
the Ligature, it will cut its way out: or when it is almost through, the
remaming part may be cut with a pair of Probe Scissurs.

XLII. If you use the Cannula, you must first pass it up the Orifice of the
Fistula, and place the end of it against your Finger, which (being first
anointed with a little fresh Butter) you have put into the Intestinum Rectum;
then another holding the Cannula, you may pass your Needle through it into the
Gut; and as it is brought out by your Finger there, slip off the Cannula, and
hasten the Needle forwards on its way, till you have brought it out with the
Ligature: then cutting off the Needle, make the knot upon a bit of Emplaster,
to prevent the Ligatures cutting the out side, tying it as strait as the
Patient can bear it, and making the second knot with a bow, and place the ends
thereof so, as it may not be fouled in going to Stool.

XLIII. If there are shrivell a Piles or Condylomata, etc. about the Verge of
the Anus, cut them off at the same time, or before you make the Ligature or
Incision, to prevent the Inflammation, they might be subject to from the pain,
which may be caused by the Operation.

XLIV. If the Sinus runs deep under the Verge of the Anus, so that the Lips are
like to lie high, to make as it were a Gutter; it will be best to take them
down by application of a Caustic, for it will much hasten the Cure, and make
the Cicatrice smooth.

XLV. But if the Fistula goes so deep inwardly that you cannot convenlently
open it, neither by Ligature, nor Incision, you must in this case, dilate the
Fistula with a Fistula Tent, and the Sponge: then remove the Callus with some
proper Catheretick, as the Fistula Trochisk; the Trochisk being come out, and
the Callus wasted away, deterge it with Mel Rosatum mixed with Aqua Calcis, etc.

XLVI. When it is well digested, and cleansed, and a good Pus comes forth, you
must incarnate with some choice Sarcoticks, or with that at Sect. 38. above;
which you must put into the Sinus upon Tents, which Tents you are day by day to
shorten, till at last the whole Sinus of the Fistula is closed; then cicatrize
with Vng. de Minio, Empl. Album, etc.

IV. The Palliative Cure.
XLVII. Where Fistulae in Ano cannot be Cured, or are not safe to be Cured, but
it is more healthful to keep them open, to help Nature in the discharge of the
Morbisick or Superfluous Humors, descending by the Haemorrhoidal Vessels,
especially when they are without pain, or any great trouble, are small, and
terminate in the Orisice of the Anus; in all these Cases, the Palliative Cure
is to be chosen.

XLVIII. If you see that the Orifice of the Fistula swells, and will not keep
open; or that by reason of the Contraction of the Callus, the Matter may be
straightned; so that it may be in danger of insinuating it self deeper, and
make the evacuation troublesome; it will be good to apply a small Caustic upon
the Orifice, to remove the Callus.

XLIX. And after the separation of the Slough, the Orifice may be kept open
with much ease, as if it were a Fontanel or Issue: And for receiving the
Matter, and preventing Excoriation, the Patient may wear a Pledget of fine Tow,
which will sit close without Bandage.

L. Or it may be spread thin with some softning Ointment, as the necessity may
require, and be kept clean without any very great trouble, till some ensuing
Symptom shall indicate what is more to be done in it; or till length of time
may happily Cureit.

LI. An Observation. A recent Fistula in Ano, coming upon Piles ill Cured, I
perfectly Cured by a good Diet drink made of Guajacum, Sarsa, etc. and sitting
many times on a Close-stool over the Fumes of Amber.

LII. Another Patient I had who had a Fistula in Ano, which proceeded from the
applying of Leeches; it was a young Woman who had it above Five Years, and was
very troublesome to her. I Cured her by a Salivation of 24 days, and a Guajacum
Diet-drink, causing her for a considerable time to sit every day on a
Closestool over the Fumes of Amber.

LIII. Another Patient I had, which I Cured only by sitting for some days, half
an Hour, and fometimes an Hour in a day, on a Close-stool, and receiving up his
Fundament the Fumes of Cinnabar Artificial, made up into Troches in this
manner. Take Winters Cinnamon in powder, Amber in fine powder, A. iss. Gum of
Juniper, Mastich, Myrrh, A. i. Artificial Cinnabar vi. all being in fine
powder, with Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, make Troches, each weighing ss. of
which he used 4 or 5 at a time. See the Third Edition of Our Synopsis
Medicinae, lib. 5. cap. 57.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of an ULCER and FISTVLA in the JOINTS.
I. WHAT the Greeks call (...). and (...). and the Latins, Vlcus, and Fistula
Artus vel Articuli, we in English call, an Ulcer, and a Fistula of a Joint.

I. Of an Ulcer of the Joints.
II. The Cause. It is oftentimes caused by Wounds ill^ managed, Contusions,
external Violence, defluxions of sharp Humors, Apostems, King's Evil,
French Pox; etc.

III. The Signs. It is known by sight; if it is malign, the Sanies running from
it will be thin, and evil-coloured, and of no good smell; also the Patient will
be in much paln.

IV. The Prognostics. An Ulcer of the Joints is not very easily Cured; and if
it is not well managed at first, it quickly becomes sordid, or malign.

V. If it once becomes inveterate, either a flux of Humors, (which some call
the Joint-water) follows it, or it becomes a Fistula.

VI. The Cure. As these Ulcers are commonly very painful, and sometimes
vitiated with a flux of thin Humors, or a running Water, so greater Care than
ordinary ought to be taken in their Cure: You ought often to purge with
Tinctura purgans, or an Infusion in Wine, of Sena and Rhubarb.

VII. Or, the Patient may purge with Our Panchymagogue Pills, or with Pil.
Catharticae, or Pulvis Cornachini, or Pulvis Antimonii, or Pulvis Catharticus
Antimonii.

VIII. During the whole Cure, a drying Diet-drink ought to be taken, made of
Guajacum, Sassafras, Sarsa, China, Mechoacan, and Burdock Roots, with the
Vulnerary Herbs; without which, and often purging, it will not be easy to stop
the flux of sharp Humors: Those who cannot take Pills, may take Our Electuarium
Catharticum.

IX. Then to strengthen the Tone of the Parts affected, the Patient between
purging ought to take every Night of Our Volatile or Specijick Laudanum, a gr.
ij. ad iv. or vi.

X. And outwardly, though the Cure differs but very little from the Cure of
Ulcers in other Parts, yet the Medicaments to be applied, ought to be much more
desiccative, and with as little sharpness as may be; and more powerful Anodyn
Cataplasms, for alleviating of the pain, are to be used; because Pain is an
inseparable Accident of the Ulcers of these Parts.

XI. If the Ulcer is without a flux of Humors, you may apply Deficcativum
rubrhm, and anoint the Lips with this Ointment, Vng. Populeon, Album
Campheratum, A. i. Oils of Quinces and Poppies, A. ss. mix them.

XII. But before you apply the Medicaments, foment the Part with a Decoction
made of Balaustians, Pomgranate-peels, red Roses dried, Myrtle-berries, and
Sumach, in red Astringent Wine.

XIII. But if the Joint-water is present, you must pour warm into the ulcer Our
Unguentum Nicotianae, or, Ung. Fuscum Wurtzii, and then lay upon it, Lint dipped
in the same, over which lay Emplastrum Paracelfi.

XIV. When the flux of Humors is stayed, and the ulcer clean, you must use
Incarnatives of the drier sort, as; Vng. Diapompholigns, Desiccativum rubrum,
Ana. mix, and apply it; or you may use that at Sect. 11. aforegoing.

XV. If any Tumor is approaching, foment with the Tincture of Balaustians,
Pomgranate-peels, Myrtle-berries, Sumach, and Catechu, made in Spirit of Wine.

XVI. If the ulcer is very deep, so that the Ung. Fuscum cannot come to the
bottom of it, make Tents of the Body of the Ointment, being boiled to a
thickness, which put into the bottom of the Ulcer, and cover it so, that it may
not get out again, over which lay Sticticum Paracelsi, as aforesaid.

XVII. The Tent will melt in the ulcer, cleanse powerfully, and repercuss any
Water or Humor flowing into it; being cleansed, you may perfect the Cure with
Balsam of Chili, or Peru, or some Artificial Balsam, with the Emplaster
aforenamed.

II. Of a Fistula in the Joints.
XVIII. These are caused for the most part, either from a flux of Humors
falling down from the Part, or from an Apostem, or from an ulcer ill managed,
or ill cured; or from the King's Evil.

XIX. The Differences. Some are without Corruption of Bones and Cartilages, and
some are with them: Some are without any Tumor of the adjacent Parts, and some
are with such a Swelling; so that the Swelling is either hard, or soft, in
which some of the Tendons of the Muscles are very often corrupted, as in
Fistula's of the Wrists and Ancles.

XX. In some of these Fistula's, the Joint remains firm and strong; in others
it becomes loose and weak, by reason of the relaxation of the Membrane which
covers it, and of the Ligaments which confirm and strengthen it.

XXI. The Prognostics. If in a Fistula of the Instep or Wrist, there be large
and hard Tumors in the Feet or Hands, it is said to be incurable; for that the
Membranes and Tendons of the Muscies and Bones, are for the most part corrupted.

XXII. In a Fistula of the Wrist, if the Bones of it, or of the back of the
Hand, be carious, the Cure will be very bard to be performed, because these
Bones are spongy, and so apt to receive superfluous Humidities, and withal, are
not easy to be scaled.

XXIII. But indeed there is not any Fistula of the Joints, though it is without
Corruption of the Cartilages or Bones, easy to be Cured; partly by reason of
the pain from the sensibleness of the Part; and partly by reason of the
sharpness of those Medicaments, which must be applied to remove the Callus,
which always increase that pain, and so are apt to induce Symptomatical Fevers,
loss' of Appetite, Watchings, Restlesness, Extenuation or Wasting of the Body,
and at last a Hectic and Marasmus.

XXIV. If one of these Fistula's in the great Joints, is accompanied with an
extenuation, or pining, or Hectic Fever, the Case is desperate; for drying
things which ought to be exhibited in the Cure, do add infallibly to the
Consumption.

XXV. And for the same Reasons that a Fistula in the Wrist is bard to be Cured,
is a Fistula in the Ankle or Instep yet harder; for besides the Cariosity of
the Bones, and their sponginess, here is withal a greater danger of a flux of
Humors, because it is a more depending Part.

XXVI. A Fistula in the Elbow or Knee, if it is with Corruption of either
Cartilages or Bones, since they are very sensible Parts, there will be a very
great pain, and a mighty difficulty in the Cure; and if ever it is performed,
it will not be done, but through a great length of time.

XXVII. The Cure. Vniversals, and a proper Diet, with Wound-drinks being
prescribed, as is usual in other Fistula's, we will come immediately to the
Topical Cure.

XXVIII. 1. By reason of the Pain, Anodyn Cataplasms, are to be applied to
alleviate it: This of Fallopius is commended. Take Bran, Flowers of Camomil,
Barley Meal, Oesipus, A. iiss. Oils of Earthworms, of Camomil, and of Dill, A.
ii. Alicant Wine iss. mix, and make a Cataplasm.

XXIX. 2. Toremove the Calsus, we commend, Arcanum Corallinum, red Precipitate,
or unwashed Turpethum-Minerale, as the most Excellent things, and the latter of
them as the best: You may mix it (or the others) with fine Bole, or Terra
Sigillata, and Vitriol calcined, which Compositum may be applied in form of
Troches, or mixed with Vng. Populeon, and so applied upon a Tent; it produces
no vehement Pain, nor inflammation, or other vehement Symptom.

XXX. But beware that you apply not Arsenick, or Corrosive Sublimate, to remove
the Callosity; for they always cause vehement Pain, Symptomatick Fevers, and
(if the Patient be of a Cacochymick habit of Body) many times a Mortification
of the Part: I once saw the application of the latter to a Fistula in the
Instep, but it was with a great deal of Horror.

XXXI. 3. The Callus being, removed either by what is already said, or by Ung.
Fuscum Wurtzii, boiled up to a Consistency, so as to be formed into Tents; you
must mundifie, incarnate, and cicatrize, as we have taught in the Cure of other
Fistula's; but with this Observation, that here, all your Applications ought to
be more desiceative, than in the Fistula's of other Parts.

XXXII. 4. If there is a Cariosity of the Bones, you must dress them with
Tincture of Euphorbium, or with the Powder of the same, it is safe, and without
danger.

XXXIII. 5. If after some trial you perceive the Disease to be incurable, you
must come to Amputation or Extirpation, be it Foot or Arm; and this must be,
before the Patient grows too weak, or becomes unable to bear it: And this you
may more safely do in a young Person, than in such as are aged, or decayed in
their Strength; because in the former, the humidum Radicale is more easily
restored by a good Diet, than in the latter.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of an ULCER of ARMS, and HANDS.
I. WHAT the Greeks call, (...). and the Latins; Vlcus Manus; Vlcus Cubiti; and
Vlcus Brachii; we in English call, an Ulcer of the Hand; or of the Elbow; or of
the Arm.

II. The Causes. They often proceed from External Violence, Contusions, Tumors,
Apostems, King's Evil, French Pox, etc.

III. The Prognostics. They are either easy, or difficult of Cure; according
as they are either recent or inveterate, simple, or complicated with Symptoms,
benign, or malign, etc.

IV. The Cure. Convenient purging, and often is to be prescribed, with Our
Family Pill, Pilulae Catharticae, or Panchymagogae, or Pulvis Cornachini,
Pulvis Antimonii, or Pulvis Catharticus.

V. Or you may give Tincture of Sena and Rhubarb, made with White Wind; or an
Infusion of Mechoacan in White-Port-Wine; or Rosin of Jallap, mixed with
Mercurius dulcis, and powder of Aniseeds or Caraways, or powder of Liquorice,
and so exhibited in a little Syrup of Roses.

VI. A good Traumatick Dietdrink is also to be ordered, made of the Famous
Vulneraries; and withal, a drying (...) drink of Guajacum Sassafras, Sarsa,
Antimony crude, etc. as we have in many places taught.

VII. Then for Topical Applications, if there is a vehemence of Pain, you must
apply Anodyns, which may sometimes (as your Prudence shall direct you) be mixed
with Narcoticks.

VIII. Then if the Ulcer is crude, with an undigested Sanies or Matter, you
must apply Digestives, or Suppuratives, till such time as the Patient has ease,
and the Pus is such as they call laudable.

IX. The Ulcer being digested, you must cleanse with Abstersives; but you must
be cautious that they be not too strong, by reason of the many Tendons, Nerves,
etc.

X. The Juice of Smallage with Honey, or with Honey and Turpentine is
excellent; so the Mundificativum Paracelsi, and no ways inferior is Our Vng.
Nicotianae, or the Vng. Fuscum Wurtzii, which is admirable, yea, though it be
strumous: And some commend Vnguentum Bryoniae.

XI. If there is a great Tumor withal, you may apply this Discussive Cataplasm.
Wine Vinegar, or Lime-juice iv. Bean Meal or Flower ii. fine Bole,
Dragons-blood, A. ss. Orrice-root, powder of Tobacco, A. ii. boil, and at the
end add Oil of Roses ss. and the yolk of one Egg, mix, and make a Cataplasm.

XII. If there is proud Flesh, you may take it away with Basilicon, mixed with
red Precipitate, or with burnt Alum; or with this. The strongest white Wine
Vinegar iii. burnt Alum ii. boil to dryness, and calcine it again.

XIII. The Ulcer being cleansed, you must Incarnate with Sarcoticks, and then
it must be cicatrized with some Styptick Water, or with burnt Alum dissolved in
red Wine, which wonderfully dries all sorts of Ulcers; or with proper
Epuloticks, Ointments, Cerates, and Emplasters.

XIV. If the Ulcer is inveterate or malign, or proceeds from some strumous
Cause, there is nothing equal to the Water of the Griffin for the healing
thereof; for being cleansed of its filth, you may wash the Sore with it 2 or 3
times a day, and keep Linen Cloths 4, 6, or 8 times double, dipped in the same,
and laid upon it, keeping them constantly wet, by often dropping the Water
thereon, which sinking through the folded Cloth, will penetrate to the Ulcer, and
heal it, yea, in a very short time.

XV. Sometimes a laced Compress may be of great use in these Ulcers, especially
if they be cavernous or hollow; but you must take heed, that you lace it not so
hard as to extinguish the Natural Heat, for so a Gangrene and Mortification
will be induced; and withal, take heed that you probe not too deep, nor where
Tents are needful, that you make them not too long, lest you prolong the Cure,
and put the Patient to much Pain.

CHAP. XL. Of an ULCER of the THIGHS, LEGS, or FEET.
I. WHAT the Greeks call, (...), vel, (...). and the Latins, Vlcus Femoris;
Vlcus Cruris vel Tibiae; and Vlcus Pedis; we in English call, an Ulcer of the
Thighs; or of the Legs or Shins; or of the Feet.

II. The Causes. They may proceed from the same Causes which Ulcers in the
Arms, Hands, or other places, may proceed from: Sometimes they may proceed from
the Itch, or a great flux of Humors, because they are depending Parts; as also
from long and daily standing, in Bodies Cacochymick, where the Patient is of
such a Profession, as requires standing for the most part of the time they are
exercising it.

III. The Prognostics. Ulcers in these Parts are more difficult to Cure than
in the Hands, Arms, or other upper Parts; because they are depending Parts, and
therefore the Humors of the Body are more apt, and more easily flow to them
than to other Parts.

IV. If they are recent and benign, without evil Symptoms, they are easy of
Cure; but if they are inveterate, malign, or accompanied with evil Symptoms,
chiefly in Bodies Cacochymick, Scorbutic, Strumatick or Pocky, they will be
Cured with much difficulty.

V. And those in the Ankles, Insteps, and Feet, are more difficult to be Cured,
than those in the Legs or Thighs; because of their being repleat with Vessels,
Nerves, Tendons, and Bones grisly, or porous, more than the other Parts.

VI. The Cure. In order to the Cure, such Internal Medicaments as are of
general tendency, are to be exhibited here, as we have formerly prescribed in
simple Ulcers, as also in such as are sordid, malign, carious, or fistulous, or
accompanied with other Symptoms; as you see the Nature of the Ulcer shall
require, both as to make proper Evacuations by Vomit and Stool; as also for
Traumatick and Drying Dietdrinks, for the healing of the Ulcer.

VII. But in the Cure of the Ulcers in these Parts, besides the Topical
application of Digestives, Abstersives, Incarnatives and Epuloticks, there
ought to be something more; the Thigh, or Leg is to be rolled from the Foot
upwards; and in many Cases a laced Stocking is of extraordinary Service.

VIII. And the Body ought to be well purged twice a week, which is often to be
iterated, but yet always with this caution, not to over-do it, but as you find
the Body can bear it: For as the continuation of the Ulcer may consume the
Juices of the Body, and produce a Tabes, or Consumption, which is often seen;
so also too much Purging may help to induce a Tabisick habit of Body, to the
Fatal Damage of the Sick.

IX. And for change of the Course of Physic, (which is also very necessary)
Sweating ought to be instituted, and to be alternately used, if the Body is
strong, and able to bear it, which may be promoted by giving inwardly
sudorifick Volatile Salts, and other things of like Nature; for that these
Operations very much conduce to the drying up of the Ulcer, and wasting of
those Humidities, which otherwise might be apt to fall down, and hinder the
healing of the Ulcer.

X. If the Ulcer is crude and undigested, Maturatives and Suppuratives are to
be applied for some time; then you may cleanse with Vng. Nicotianae of Our
Prescription, or with Apostolorum, or Vnguentum Fuscum Wurtzii, which last,
(and indeed all of them do in some measure) not only cleanse but incarnate
withal, not suffering any proud Flesh or ill Symptom to follow.

XI. You may incarnate with Linimentum Arcaei, if it is in the Leg or Thigh, or
with that Liniment mixed with a little white or red Precipitate; after which
you may skin with Vnguentum Diapompholigos, simple or mixed with burnt Alum, or
which is better, with Vng. Mirabile, or some Styptick Water, Our Aqua Regulata,
or Water of the Griffin, which consummates the Cure to all Intentions.

CHAP. XLI. Of VLCERATED PILES, or HEMORRHOIDS.
I. WHAT the Greeks call, (...). vel, (...), and (...), vel, (...). and the
Latins, Haemorrhoides Vlcerosae, and Vlcus fici in Ano, vel Ficus Vlcerosa; we
in English call, Vlcerated Piles or Haemorrhoids, or an Vlcerated Fig in the
Fundament.

II. The Differences. These Humors are sometimes Phlegmonous, sometimes
Scirrhous, sometimes Cancerous; and many times they are Varicous, Vlcerous, or
Fistulons.

III. The Part affected. This is chiefly the Anus, which is the exterior part
of the Intestinum Rectum; in which place it is bound about with a
Sphincter-Muscle, which has a contraction and dilatation within it self; by the
first of which, it keeps all the Excrements which fall down thither within the
Guts, till such time as Nature is excited, by either fullness, sharpness, or
some other Accident to expel them; and by the latter of which it voluntarily
relaxes, and by the help of several pairs of Muscles, dilates it self, so as to
make way for their Excretion.

IV. These Mascles, and especially the Intestinum Rectum it self, are fed and
replenished with several Arteries, as, 1. The Arteria Mesenterica inferior,
which (mostly designed for the Intestinum Rectum,) does disperse Branches in a
plentiful manner, all over it, and particularly to the Anus. 2. The Arteria
Hypogastrica, which also sends Branches to the Anus, but chiefly to the Muscles
belonging to it.

V. These Arteries conveying Blood thither, have a correspondent or fit number
of Veins provided for its return, viz. 1. The Haemorrhoidalis externa, which is
a Hranch of the Hypogastrick Vein, corresponding with its namesake Artery. 2.
The Haemorrhoidalis interna (which is indeed the more principal Vessel) that
receives the Blood from all the parts of the Rectum, but more especially about
the Anus, unites into a slender Arm or Trunk; and so passing along the Gut,
runs by degrees into the Mesentery, and is inserted between the Mesenterical
Branches of the Vena Portae, sometimes into the Right, sometimes into the Left,
and sometimes into the Trunk of the Portae it self; yet sometimes accidentally,
(though rarely) it leaves this Course, and is inserted into the Splenetick
Branch, sometimes without, and sometimes within the Spleen.

VI. The Blood then descends hither to the Part affected, chiefly by the
Arteria Mesenterica inferior; by which being let into the middle and inward
Tunicles of the Intestinum Rectum, it is carried back, chiefly by the Vena
Haemorrhoidalis interna.

VII. The Causes. The Procatactick or External Causerie may be from sitting
upon cold places, upon Stones, Earth, Snow, etc. bitings of Leeches, Blows,
Bruises, Priction, or Puncture, application of sh^p Medicines, etc. taking of
Albes, etc.

VIII. The Antecedent Cause, may be from a Cacochymy, where the shirpness of
Humors falling down upon the Part, weakens it, and passing by or near that
place from the Guts, do by their acrimony induce the Piles; which Humors, though
they may be from Internal Causes in the Blood, yet they externally affect the
Anus, in passing out at the same, not much unlike to that of a sharp Clyster.

IX. So that according to the variety and degeneration of the Humor, variety of
Tumors do arise, making several Differences, of which we have spoken a little
above.

X. The Proximate or Conjoined Cause is from the Blood in the Part affected,
which easily flows thither, 1. Because it is a depending part. 2. From the
weakness of the part, being made so by an afflux of sharp Humors, which
prompting Nature to an expulsion, stirs up a Fermentation and boiling in the
Blood of the Part, and so causes it to swell. 3. Because the Veins hereabouts
being small, and without Valves, and the Blood by its heat and fermentation
swelling, it is detained there and stagnates, and by reason of the laxity of
the part causes that Tumor which we call the Piles; which still increasing, and
the Veins not being sufficient or large enough for its discharge, so as to be
taken in by the Arteries, and the Skin thin, at length they break, and so bleed.

XI. These Tumors being very great (in respect to the part) and very painful
with Inflammation, there is many times a Flux of sharp Humors, which cither
thrust out spongy Flesh, as Morus, Ficus, Condyloma, Crista, Phyma; or else by
their Acrimony erode, and so create an Ulcer, which is either simple, benign,
sordid, malign, Cancerous, Cavernous, or Fistulous.

XII. If it is demanded, why the Blood cannot so easily circulate in this Part,
as in others, but must stagnate, and produce the Piles: it is answered, that by
the sharpness and thinness of the Humor attendent, Nature is provoked, and the
Intestinum Rectum is stimulated to make an Excretion, and is always offering to
press or squeez, and contract it self, and so binds up the Vein, that the Blood
cannot ascend, but is by the Violence of the motion kept back, even to the
breaking many times of the Vessel.

XIII. The Morbifick Humor is generally lodged within the entrance into the
Anus: and very often also on the Muscles near it, where the Piles are hidden,
and seldom discover themselves, but only an outward Humor appears, which in
length of time, many times apostemates, and at last ends in a Cavernous or
Fistulous Ulcer; penetrating (according to the duct of the Vessels which seed
it) sometimes into the Gut, and sometimes without it.

XIV. The Signs. Your Eye will tell you, whether it is a Vein, i. e. the Piles
or Hemorroids, or it be some other Tumor: whether it bleeds, or bleeds not; and
whether they are Ulcerated, or not Ulcerated.

XV. In other Tumors, the Figure will discover what it is: if it is Condyloma,
it is like a Pensil-wart with a narrow Neck: if it is Ficus, it is flat, almost
like a Fig: if it is Morus, it is a rough protuberance, much like that kind of
Fruit: if it is Phyma, it is a full red smooth Tumor with heat and pain, like a
Phlegmon: if it is Crista, it has a broad Basis: if it is Phlegmonous,
Scirrhous, or Cancerous, it is known by their proper Signs.

XVI. If the Tunicles are thick, or apt to be spongy, then the Parts swell, and
the Vessels appear themselves bluish, and in cluster's like a small bunch of
Grapes; or else Flesh grows about them, making Ficus, Condyloma, etc. but if
the Humor is of a Saline nature, it makes Rhagades or Fissurae, which are
Ulcers very common.

XVII. The Kinds, respect, I. The Part. It is either, 1. Of the Veins only, and
so they are either Haemorrhoides coecae, blind, internal, and which bleed not;
Or Haemorrhoides apertae, which are open, external, and bleeding. 2. Or of the
Veins with the Muscles of the Anus, generating Phlegmonous, Scirrhous, and
Cancerous Tumors.

XVIII. They respect, II. The substance and Figure, and so it is either Blood
alone, or a Fleshy matter, called according to its Figure, Morus, Ficus,
Condyloma, Crista, as aforesaid.

XIX. They respect, III. The Accidents, and so they are, 1. Not Vlcerated, or
Vlcerated. 2. with little pain, or with much pain. 3. They are small or great,
and with a narrow or broad basis. 4. They are either Temporary and
Symptomatical, or Periodical.

XX. The Prognostics. Those Haemorrhoids which are the Wales are the mildest,
and more gentle: The Morales, are worser, or in a mean between the former, and
the next: the Verrucales, are the worst of all.

XXI. Those Piles which affect that part next the Neck of the Bladder, are more
troublesome and painful, because of the consent they have with it; whence
Inflammation, Phyma, and Strangury many times happen.

XXII. If the Haemorrhoides ^oecae be very painful, and not timely remedied,
there will be great danger of a Flux of Humors, which may induce Inflammations,
Apostems, Erosions, Ulcerations, etc.

XXIII. If they bleed seasonably and moderately, they ease and purge the Body
of gross, and faeculent Blood; and so thereby free it from many and dangerous
diseases, as Pleurisies, Peripneumonies, Quinsies, Phlegmons, Apoplexies,
Epilepsies, pissing Blood, Quartans, etc.

XXIV. If they bleed immoderately, they cause Weakness, Faintings, Cachexia's,
Dropsies, Pining, Consumptions, and the like; it their Flux is unadvisedly
uppressed, after a long course thereof.

XXV, If their Vlceration it plain, benign, and recent, it may easily be cured;
but if cavous, sordid, malign or inveterate, they will be cured with very much
difficulty.

XXVI. If they continue long, are painful, with a Flux of acrimonious or sharp
Humors attending them, they will be in danger of growing Cavernous, if not
Fistulous.

I. The Cure of Blind Haemorrhoids.
XXVII The Body if accustomed to be costive, ought always to be kept soluble,
with some Lenitive, as Extract of Cassia mixed with Cremor, Tartari, or Extract
of Tamarinds: and the Patients Diet must also be such as may keep it in such a
condition, because in this disease they are generally costive, and so avoid
their Excrements with much Pain.

XXVIII. Their Food may be Barley-gruel, Water Gruel boiled full with blue
Currants, hull'd Barley boiled and buttered, or eaten with new Milk or Cream,
and a little Sugar, Pannado, Milkporrage, Milk thickened with Oatmeal,
Butter-milk, Whey-porrage made with Oatmeal, Outmeal Caudle, Veal and Chicken
broths boiled with Beets, Borage, Bugloss, Endive, Succory, Spinach, etc. And
their Drink may be a middling sort of Ale or Beer, but always new, or Water
sweetened with Sugar, or Ptisan, or Wine mixed with Water.

XXIX. Also now and then the Belly may be made soluble with Clysters made of
fat Broth, Emollient Decoctions, or new Milk with Sugar, or Posset Drink with
Sugar, which may be cast in with a Clyster-syringe, made with a short thick
Pipe taper-wise.

XXX. If they be very great, and the Patient in vehement pain, the only Remedy
is to discharge the Blood by application of Leeches, which I have oftentimes
done, successfully; but then presently upon their removal, the Part ought to be
fomented with red Wine, as hot as can be conveniently endured with Sponges, or
double Flanels, and that for half an Hour, or neatly for an Hour together, by
which means they are made to bleed the more plentifully.

XXXI. For want of doing this immediately after the application of Leeches, it
has been many times very prejudicial to the Patient, because sometimes they
leave a Venom behind them, which oftentimes creates an Ulcer, and sometimes a
fistulous Ulcer, by attraction of Humors, which by these means is avoided.

XXXII. If they be not very great, or the pain not vehement, or if they are but
in their beginning I have (I believe) more than five hundred times Cured them
by anointing with Oil of Amber, or Powers of Aniseeds. It is a Disease I have
been often subject to my self, and it used to afflict me vehemently; but after
I had once found out the way of anointing them with Oil of Amber, I soon Cured
my self of them; and if I find upon taking cold that they are coming upon me,
by their being a little swelled, I immediately apply my self to that Remedy,
and so prevent them, by which means I have been kept free from them, for more
than these 20 Years last past.

XXXIII. But if the Piles are broke or ulcerated, these Medicacaments are by no
means to beused; for by reason of their heat, they mightily inflame the raw
part, and afflict the Patient with vehement pain.

XXXIV. Authors use other Medicaments, as this Fomentation, to discuss and dry
them up, where they thrust forth with great pain, and are subject to
Inflammation. Take Plantane, Bramble-tops, Horsetail, A. M. is. Flowers of
Mullein, M.ii. Lineseed ii. Catechu i. Balaustians, red Roses,
Pomgranate-peels, Myrtle-berries, A. vi. Wine, Water, A. q.s. mix, boil, and
make a Fomentation.

XXXV. Having fomented them, apply a Mixture of Ung. Populeon, and burnt Cork,
upon Pledgets of soft Tow, Morning and Evening.

XXXVI. If the Disease is in its state, and the Inflammation and Pain vehement,
either apply Leeches, or foment with this. Mallows, Mullein, A. M. j. Flowers
of Hypericon, M. ss. Root of Hounds-tongue, and of Henbane, A. iss. Linseed,
Fenugreek-seed, A. vi. Seeds of Althaea, and of Quinces, A. iii. boil them in
Mutton-broth, for a Fomentation.

XXXVII. Or, Barley-meal, Juices of Endive and Lettice, A. iii. Fleawort-seeds
ss. Oil of Water Lillies iiss. yolks of Eggs, No ii. Saffron ii. mix, and make
a Cataplasm; but in extremity of pain, anoint with this. Take Oit of Eggs i.
Opium gr. x. which dissolve in a little Water or Wine, and mix with the Oil.

XXXVIII. In the Cure of the Internal Piles, the same Emollient Decoctions, and
Anodyns, before-proposed, will be of good use, to be injected by a
Clystersyringe.

XXXIX. If the pain proceeds from Cold, or a gross viscid Matter distending
them, you must apply things beating and resolving; as Roots of Pilewort,
Onions, Garlic, Squills, Figwort, and Ointments made of them; anoint also with
Balsam of Sulphur, of Rulandus, or the Terebinthinated, or Anisated Balsam of
Sulphur, or sit over the Fumes of Frankincense, or Amber, which is better,
often repeating it.

XI. When you find the Disease in its declination, you must apply things
powerfully drying, as Tinctura Mirabilis; or Crocus Martis astringens,
Saccharum Saturni, Ceruse, Litharge, burnt Lead, Minium, Chalk, fine Bole,
Terra Sigillata, Aerugo, Catechu, all of them in fine powder, which you may
apply either alone, or mixed with a little Honey, or Hogs-lard; washing
beforehand with Aqua Calcis, or Alumniosa, or some other Styptick Water; if
they yield not to these Applications, but are pendent like a Grape, they are
usually cut off; because otherwise, upon every little disorder, or taking cold,
they will be apt to swell.

II. The Cure of the Bleeding Hemorrhoids.
XLI. Whilst they discharge gross and vicious Blood, or are beneficial in
removing other Diseases, and withal, that the Patient has strength of Body to
bear the Evacuation, they ought not to be stopped, or healed; and so much the
more, if they have appeared Monthly, or have been of some Years continuance.

XLII. In these Cases, they ought rather to be continued in their usual flux,
or if stopped, to be provoked thereto; which may be done with Aloes, and Aloetick
Medicaments, as Pilulae Ruffi, etc. Scammony, Colocynthis, etc. given inwardly.

XLIII. But where the Bleeding is recent, or of young standing, especially if
it is over-abundant, to the weakening of the Sick, and abatement of their usual
Health; or if it induces paleness of Countenance, pining, or a consumptive
habit of Body, you ought to use the best means that may be to stop it.

XLIV. Inwardly you must give such things (whether as Food, or as Medicine) as
may Incrassate, and Contemperate the Fermentation of the Blood. As for Food,
things temperate, and not salt, so^re, or spicey; all picquant Sawces, Pickles,
etc. are to be avoided; Food made of Fruits, Gelly and Conserve of Quinces,
baked Wardens and Pe^rs, Purslane, Lettice, Spinnage, Pompions, Melons,
Cowcummers, (not pickled) may be eaten with freedom; Milk-meats, Oatmeal-milk,
Milk-porrage, and the like, are of Service in this Case.

XLV. As for Medicaments, you may give inwardly Syrups made of the Juices of
Quinces, Purslane, Lettice, Plantane, Wood Sorrel, of dried Roses, and of
Myrtles mixed with some proper Distilled Water, as of Alum, Poppies, etc.

XLVI. Profitable also in this Case are, fine Bole, Bistort, Catechu, Crocus
Martis, Hartshorn burnt, Lapis Haematitis, Sanguis Draconis, Spodium Terra
Lemnia, Pomgranate Peels, Troches of Amber, Mithridate, Venice Treacle,
Diascordium, Our New London Treacle, Out Volatile and Specific Laudanum, Dr.
Gardner's Laudanum Samech, Tinctura Mirabilis, etc. for that these things
thicken the Blood and Juices, and so put a stop to the Career of the Flux.

XLVII. Catechu, Crocus Martis astringent, A. i. Lapis Haematitis, Terra
Lemnia, A.ss. Cochinele, dried Blood, (either of Man, or Beast) Saccharum
Saturni, A. i. Of Our Specific Laudanum gr. 5. with Syrup of white Poppies,
make an Electuary for Four Doses.

XLVIII. Outwardly, Catechu, dried Blood, Pomgranate Peels, Cyprus Nuts, Galls,
Hypocistis, burnt Lead, Ceruse, Litharge, Saccharum Saturni, Olibanum, Mastich,
Sanguis Draconis, etc. may be all made into Powder, and mixed with some proper
Ointment, as Vng. Populeon, and applied upon Pledgets of Tow; or with Mucilage
of Gum Tragacanth, they may be either made into Suppositories, and so used; or
else mixed with whites of Eggs, and spread upon Pledgets, and so applied.

XLIX. Or you may foment, if they are External, with the Royal Styptick, or Dr.
Gardner's Styptick, or other proper Styptick Water, as you see convement; or
you may cast these Stypticks in with a Syringe, applying afterward upon a
Pledget Vng. Diapompholigos.

III. The Cure of ulcerated Hemorrhoids, Ficus, etc.
L. If the Ulcer is recent, it may be Cured by applying Balsam de Chili, or de
Peru, upon Pledgets of Tow, to the Part; first of all anointing it well with a
Feather, with the same.

LI. But if the Ulcer is inveterate, Digestives are first to be applied,
because there are many crude and unconcocted Humors many times in these Ulcers;
afterward you must deterge with Juice of Smallage boiled up with Honey, or
with the Mundificativum Paracelsi.

LII. If the Ulcer is foul or sordid, you must continue the use of Abstersives
the longer, forbearing such as are over sharp; lest they should induce by their
sharpness, a great flux of Humors upon the Part, to which it is very subject
upon the least occasion.

LIII. Every time when you dress it, as soon as you have taken off the former
Application, you must foment it with this following Mixture. Juice of Scordium,
and of Parsley clarified, A. iv. red Port-Wine viii. mix them, and foment
therewith warm for almost half an Hour.

LIVE. Which dane, then dress it up with the Mundificative or Abstersive; and
continue this course of fomenting and dressing, till you find the Ulcer to be
very well cleaused.

LV. The Ulcer being cleansed, you must incarnate, if need be, with Sarcoticks:
This is good; Take Ung. Diapompholigos ii. Ung. Nicotiana i. Mastich, and
Olibanum in powder, A.iii. Balsam of Peru ii. mix, and apply it.

LVI. The Ulcer being incarned, you must produce the Cicatrice by anointing
with Ung. Diapompholigos alone, or Ung. de Minio, or some other drying
Ointment, or strewing the Sore over with powder of fine Bole, or Terra
Sigillata, or some proper Styptick as powder of Catecha, or Caput Mort. of
Vitriol.

LVII. But before applying these Ointments, or Pouders, or upon every dressing,
it will be good to wash the Sore with some Styptick Waters, as the Aqua
Aluminosa, the Royal Styptick, Doctor Gardner 's Styptick, or some other, as
you shall see fit; not omitting the Water of the Griffin.

LVIII. But if notwithstanding all that can be done, the Ulcer proves
rebellious and malign, you must make the Patient fit once or twice a day upon a
Closestool over a Chafing Dish of Coals, to receive from the same the Fumes of
these following Troches.

LIX. The Troches. Take Winters Cinnamon, Amber, both in fine powder, A. iss.
Aloes, Myrrh, Sarcocol, A. i. Zedoary in powder, Bayberries in powder, A.vi.
Artificial Cinnabar ground fine or levigated i. all being in fine powder, with
Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, make Troches, each weighing ss. of which (being
through dry) use 3.4. or 5 at a time. See the Third Edition of Our Synopsis
Medicine, lib 5. cap. 54.

Explicit Liber Quintus.
ARS CHIRVRGIGA. Liber Sextus. OF FRACTURES.
The ARGUMENT.
I. Of Fractures in General. II. Of Catagmatick Instruments. III. Of Accidents
or Symptoms in Fractures. IV. Of a Fracture Simple. V. Of a Fracture with a
Wound. VI. A Fracture with a Wound, the Bone not bare. VII. A Fracture with a
Wound, the Bone bare of the Periosteum. VIII. A Fracture with a Wound, the Bone
sticking forth. IX. A Fracture Distorted, and Ill-set. X. A Fracture with too
little, or too great a Callus. XI. A Fracture with Atrophia, or Slenderness and
Weakness of the Part. XII. A Fracture of the Skull. XIII. A Fissure and
Contrafissure of the Skull. XIV. A Contusion of the Skull. XV. A Puncture and
Incision of the Skull. XVI. A Fracture of the Nose-bone. XVII. A Fracture of
the Jaw Bone. XVIII. A Fracture of the Clavicula, or Collar-bone. XIX. A
Fracture of the Shoulder Blade. XX. A Fracture of the Humerus, Shoulder, or
Arm-bone. XXI. A Fracture of the Cubitus, or Elbow-bone. XXII. A Fracture of
the Carpus, or Wrist-bone. XXIII. A Fracture of the Metacarpium, or back of the
Hand. XXIV. A Fracture of the Finger-bones. XXV. A Fracture of the Sternon, or
Brest-bone. XXVI. A Fracture of the Ribs. XXVII. A Fracture of the Vertebrae of
the Spina-Dorsi, or Back bone. XXVIII. A Fracture of the Os Sacrum, or Great
Bone. XXIX. A Fracture of the Coccyx, or Rump-bone. XXX. A Fracture of the Os
Ilium, or Hip-bone. XXXI. A Fracture of the Thigh Bone. XXXII. A Fracture of
the Patella, or Knee-pan. XXXIII. A Fracture of the Leg-bones. XXXIV. A
Fracture of the Bones of the Feet.

CHAP. I. Of FRACTURES in General.
I. WHAT the Greeks call, (...). and the Latins, Fractura; we in English call,
A Fracture, which is the Solution of Unity in a Bone.

II. The Kinds. There are said to be Seven several Sorts of Fractures in a
Bone, viz. 1. Fractura Transversalis. 2. In Modum Causis. 3. In Modum Raphani.
4. In Modum Fissurae. 5. In Modum Assularum, vel Schidiorum. 6. Os Contritum.
7. Os Contusum.

III. 1. (...), Fractura Transversalis, is when the Bone is broken in the midst
obliquely overthwart, but not smoothly.

IV. 2. (...). Fractura ossis per transversum facta in modum Caulis, when it is
broken overthwart into long points like strings, as in the breaking of a
Colwort-stalk.

V. 3. (...). Fractura Raphani modo facta, Aegineta, lib. 5. cap. 89. when the
Bone is smoothly-broken short off, as in the breaking of a Radish-root.

VI. 4. (...). Fissura, Fractura in modum Fissurae, when the Bone is broken
long-ways, but not separated.

VII. 5. (...). Scidia, Assulae, Fractura Ossis (...) in modum Assutarum vel
Schidiorum, when the Bone is broken into Splinters.

VIII. 6. (...). Contritum; when the Bone is broken in small bits, as if it
were ground.

IX. 7. (...). and by Hippocrates (...). Contusus totius ossis, Fractura totius
ossis in modum contusum, secundum ipsius crassitiem, juxta ipsum Articulum.
Galen, Meth. Med. lib. 6. when the Bone is bruised or crushed, and that near to
the Joint.

X. The Causes. They are either External or Internal; the External Causes are
either Contusion or Flexure, wherein some external force, assaying to bow or
bend them, they not being flexible, are broken.

XI. And indeed whatever thing may prick, cut, bruise, break, shatter, or bend
a Bone, may contribute to its breaking; among which things, falling from an
high place may be accounted for one.

XII. The Internal Causes, are either from the Natural Constitution of the
Bones; or from some Accidental Rottenness: From the Natural Constitution of the
Bones, it is, when their Substance is so brittle, that it cannot endure the
least Violence.

XIII. From Accidental Rottenness, it is when they are made weak, or dry, or
porous, by reason of the Poison and Virulency of the French Pox, an Exalted
Scurvey, or an Inveterate Elephantiasis. We have several Memorable Histories of
Rottenness of the Bones, and Fractures occasioned thereby: Memorable is that of
Marcellus Donatus in Historia Medic. Mirabilis, lib. 4. cap. 5. of Bones in the
Right and Left Arm, which broke of their own accord, from a Rottenness caused
by the French Pox.

XIV. And Schenkius in lib. 5. Obs. 8. has two parallel Histories from the
Observations of Camerarius, of Bones which broke of their own accord, from
their supposed Natural brittleness, Fabricius Hildanus, Cent. 2. Obs. 66. gives
another Admirable Relation of a Man troubled with the Gout, who had the Bone of
his Right Arm broken, only by endeavoring to pull on a Glove, which being
reduced, in a little time after it broke again of its own accord in another
place; all which, says he, was from a wonderful unwonted frailty and
brittleness of the Bones, for that he altogether denied, that he had been at
any time troubled with any affect of the Bones; Contracted either from the foul
Disease, or proceeding from any other Cause.

XV. The same Hildanus, in Cent. 2. Obs. 68. has another Famous Observation of
this kind, of a Woman, the Bone of whose Arm broke of its own accord, and was
Cured; afterward the Bone of her Right Leg broke, only by endeavoring to put
on her Hose, which was also Cured: This poor Woman had several other Fractures
of like kind, which made her lie by it in Misery for about two Years, and then
she died: These, says he, were not caused either by the French Pox, or from any
other Disease, she having not been at any time affected with the one or the
other, nor ever in all her Lifetime troubled with any such Sickness: but the
true Cause was from some occult and secret Poison, proceeding from some
extraordinary Corruption of the Humors, which up and down, every where, passing
through the whole Substance of the Bones, corrupted or rotted them in this
wonderful and unexpressible manner.

XVI. The Signs. A transverse Fracture, or that which is made in an oblique
manner, is easily known, because by the very touch, the Extremities of the
sractured Bone are soon discovered; for in the place of the Fracture there is a
Cavity or Hollowness found, which is not natural; and withal, the Body, but
especially the fractured Member, cannot be moved after the due or wonted manner.

XVII. And there is likewise before the Bones are set, or reduced into their
right places again, a most extreme and intolerable pain; for that the
Extremities of the broken Bones prick, or press upon the Parts which they
touch, being very full of Sense and Feelling.

XVIII. Now that these things may be the better discerned, the Member that is
fractured ought to be compared with that which is found; as Arm with Arm, Leg
with Leg, etc.

XIX. It also oftentimes happens, that when a Member is fractured, it is made
shorter than it should be, for that the Muscles draw up the inferior part of
the Bone that is broken.

XX. And for the most part a Fracture may be known from the preceding External
Violence done to the Part, those Violent Causes having a sufficient power to
break the Bone.

XXI. The Fractures made longways in the Bone, are known with more difficulty;
but they may be discerned, from the pain of the Part, its inequality, and the
preternatural thickness of the Member.

XXII. Those Fractures which break the Bones into Splinters, are known many
times by an Apostemation; for that when all their smaller parts and little
pieces could not be reduced, or set in their proper places, the Flesh Corrupts
and Apostemates, whereupon the Splinters become naked of Flesh, and so in
process of time drop forth.

XXIII. And this will be known by sight, by the blackness of the Bone, if it
lies open to view, or else by the stirring and moving up and down of the
Splinters, where they adhere not, or stick not fast to the main Bone.

XXIV. The Differences. They are taken, 1. A Figura, from their Figure, which
is either right, according to the longitude of the Bone; or, transverse, which
is cross the thickness of the Bone, and that either directly or obliquely.

XXV. 2. Ab ossibus ipsis, from the Bones themselves, whether it be in the
Head, Neck, Shoulder, Arm, Hand, Thigh, Leg, Foot, etc. which are also either
greater or lesser.

XXVI. 3. Ab Accidentibus, from their Accidents or Symptoms, being either
without, or with a Wound, Pain, Inflammation, Apostemation, Ulcer, proud Flesh,
Gangrene, Mortification, etc.

XXVII. The Prognostics. A Fracture of the Bones made according to the length
of them, is more easily Cured than that which is made transverse, whether right
or oblique; because there is no such need of any laborious Reposition, it being
enough that they be brought close together again.

XXVIII. And among the transverse Fractures, the right are of easier Cure than
the oblique; and among the oblique, that is easier to be Cured, and has least
danger in it, which is single, or simple, and equal, and in which the broken
Bones are not moved at all out of their places.

XXIX. There is but little danger in those Fractures, where the heads of the
Bones are retuse and blunt; but if they are sharppointed they are the worst,
and most dangerous of any; because you cannot easily set them close, there
being not any blunt part to rest upon: Besides, as Celsus lib. 5. cap. 7. says,
they also hurt and wound the Flesh, Muscles, or Nerves.

XXX. A Fracture wherein the Bone is shattered into many fragments, is of very
difficult Cure; and the more the fragments or small pieces are, so much the
more difficult the Cure: So also when there are sharp points of Bones sticking
out, which prick and wound the Parts near them.

XXXI. When two Bones are joined together, as the Ulna and Radius in the Arm,
the Tibia and Fibula, viz. the Focile Majus and Focile Minus in the Leg, and
they are both broken, the Cure will be more difficult, than if one of those
only were broken: For if one of those Bones remain whole, as the Muscles cannot
so easily contract themselves, being kept out by the unbroken Bone; so the
broken Bone being once set again, the whole Bone is as a prop or stay to that
which is fractured, and a greater help to it than either Swaths or Splinters,
or both together; whereas if both be broken, they will be much more troublesome
and difficult to set; and being set, more troublesome to be kept in their places.

XXXII. Galen, de Fract. lib. 3. Text. 37. says, That in a Fracture of some of
the more eminent Bones, if the Cure is delayed beyond the seventh day, there
will be danger of a deadness of the Bones, or of Apostemation.

XXXIII. Hippocrates, de Fract. lib. 3. Text. 44. says, When the Bones are so
broken, that they cannot possibly be restored again, they will Apostemate in a
short time, and fall forth; so also if they are naked, or bare of Flesh.

XXXIV. The thinner the Bones are, the sooner they Apostemate, and are
separated, it may be, in less than fourteen days time; but the greater and more
solid Bones are longer before they Apostemate and separate; because it is a
longer time before they can be withered, and driven forth by the Flesh growing
underneath, seldom before the fortieth day at soonest; sometimes the
Apostemation and coming forth, is not before the sixtieth day; and sometimes it
is the space of several Months before that Work is accomplished.

XXXV. A Fracture with Inflammation and Contusion of the Flesh, is dangerous,
for that it cannot be perfectly Cured, till the Symptoms are wholly removed.

XXXVI. So much the greater the Fracture is, and by how much the greater the
fractured Bones are, so much the more difficult and slow will the Cure be.

XXXVII. If the Fracture is recent, it will be easy to be consolidated: But if
it has been any considerable time delayed, the Cure will be made the more
difficult and tedious; 1. Because there will then be an Inflammation, and then
the Part cannot be extended without danger. 2. The Extremities of the Bones
become harder, so that they can hardly ever be brought to join again, more
especially in Aged Persons; but in such as are yet growing, the Case is
different.

XXXVIII. If the Bones are so broken and shattered, that they cannot be reduced
as they ought, a perfect restoration cannot be promised: For though the Bones
may possibly grow together again, yet the Member may be much shorter than
before, and so unfit for performance of its former Function or Duty.

XXXIX. The Age, Temper, Habit of Body, Course of Living, the Country, Season
of the Year, and State of the Heavens, and Air, and whatever else has a power
of altering or dispasing of the Natural Strength, so as to increase or diminish
it, do all help to make the Cure more or less easy to be performed.

XL. A Fracture in the middle of a Bone, is lighter and less dangerous, than
that which is nearer to the head of the Bone, whether it he in the higher or
lower Part: For near to the upper head there are very many Nerves; and near
unto the lower head there are many Tendons, which being hurt, excite the
greater Pains, whereby the Cure is made the more difficult and long.

XLI. If the Fracture is very near to the Joint, it is then the most dangerous
of any; for that there are in that place both Nerves and Tendons, as also
Ligaments: Besides, there the fractured Bone cannot be so well bound up; and
withal, the heat of the place is small, and very weak, because it is in a
manner bloodless. And though it may be consolidated, yet it leaves behind it a
defect in the motion of that Member or Joint, because of the Callus, which
constricts as it were the Muscles and Tendons.

XLII. If a Wound and Contusion are conjoined with the Fracture, it is then
very dangerous; and so much the more perilous, by how much the Wound and
Contusion are the greater; more especially if any of the greater Muscles of the
Thigh and Shoulder should be wounded; for then vehement Pain and Inflammation
may easily happen, and afterward a Gangrene and Sphacelus: Besides, Splinters,
and other Necessaries for keeping the Bones in their places after reduction,
cannot so conveniently be applied, for that a hole is to be left open for the
better Curing of the Wound.

XLIII. As for the time of a Fractures consolidation, it is not easily to be
presaged, by reason of the differing Ages, habits of Body, Seasons of the Year,
and other Circumstances: Youth of a good habit, and observing a good Diet and
Order of Living, and in a good Air, are much sooner and easier Cured, than
those who are aged, weak, infirm, cacochymick, and keep a disorderly Course of
Living.

XLIV. Lastly, As to the time more particularly, Fractures of the Nose, of the
Jaw-bones, of the Clavicle, of the Breast, of the Shoulder-blades, the Ribs,
Spines of the Backbone, the Hand, Ankle, Heel, and Sole of the Foot, are
conglutinated in 20 or 25 days; those of the Arms and Legs in 35 or 40 days.

XLV. The Cure. You ought to have in a readiness every Necessary, as a Plaster
of Empl. Album, or Diapalma, something broader than will cover the Fracture,
and long enough to encompass the Member; two Cloths thrice double of the same
length, three, four, five, or six Ferulae, or Splints, clothed with Tow, a
large Cloth to put over them, four or five pieces of broad Tape to bind with, a
Junk of Straw to lay the Member in, Bolsters of Cloth and Tow to put in the
hollow places that the Part may lie smooth and level; lastly, proper
Instruments of Extension, etc. of which we shall speak more particularly in the
next Chapter.

XLVI. Then put the Patient into a fit posture to extend the Member, causing
one to take the end thereof in both his Hands, extending it, hot hastily, but
by degrees, whilst others hold the Sick that he moves not; then let the Artist
grasp the Fracture with both his Hands, that as the other extends the Member,
he with his Fingers may reduce all the broken Bones to their just places, as in
particular Fractures, we shall in the following Chapters Discourse more at
large.

XLVII. This done, lay on the Emplaster, (two Men holding the Part steady) then
put on the two folded Cloths, the one a little above, the other a little below
the Fracture, so that their edges may meet.

XLVIII. Then lay on the Splints or Ferulae, the breadth of a Splint distant
one from another, which with the Tapes tie on, not too hard, for fear of a
Gangrene; nor yet too slack, lest the Eones fall asunder again.

XLIX. Then Cover all with a large Cloth to keep the Part warm, (because a
temperate heat con^tributes to consolidation) and lastly, put the Member into
the Junk made of Straw, or Boards, binding it fast on; and putting the Bolsters
in the hollow places, lay the Member on a Pillow, as straight and as level as
may be.

L. Thus let the Sick rest in his Bed for seven or eight days, unless Pain, or
other Accidents or Causes force you to open it; then open it to refresh it, and
bind it up again for seven days more, at the end of which you may renew your
Emplaster, or apply Catagmaticum, or Sticticum Paracelsi.

LI. I know many Surgeons, even at the very first, do oftentimes apply Empl.
Oxycroceum to the Fracture; or if not at first, yet they scarcely ever fail to
make use of it within a very few days after the Fracture is made.

LII. But the application of this, or of any other hot, or drawing Emplaster,
cannot be done without much danger; as Fabricius Hildan^s shows us by an
Example: for that this Emplaster heats the Part affected, and so attracts the
Blood and Humors; producing either a gentle Itching, or a Pain, with
Inflammation, and Gangrene, especially in Choleric and Cacochymick Habits of
Body.

LIII. With a Lenitive Electuary; or Our Syrupus Catharticus, keep the Body
soluble; and now and then help him to raise up his Back, to refresh it, lest it
excoriate: and to remove his Hips, lest they, or the Leg and Thigh, should grow
numbed or dead.

LIVE. If the Fracture is with a Wound, so order the Clothes and Splints, that
you may dress the Wound, and not undress the Part: and be fure you apply no
unctuous, fat, or greasy thing near the Bone; lest you thereby foul and corrupt
it: but dress it with dry Pouders, and other proper things, as we in their
respective Places teach.

LV. And for the first Weeks time, give the Patient three or four times a day,
Osteocolla-stone in powder, in Syrup of Comfrey; and sometimes (though but now
and then, to refresh him) in a little Alicant-Wine; or give Tinctura mirabilis,
in Syrup of Angelica or All-heal; or Powder of Catechu, or Balsam of Sal-Gem,
or two spoonfuls of the juice of Knotgrass, or Bistort, or of Solomons-seal, or
of Comfrey, in Rhemsh-Wine mixed with Syrup of Comfrey; or in Canary, or Tent,
or old Malaga, or Alicant, every Morning.

CHAP. II. Of INSTRVMENTS for REDVCTION.
I. THERE are several Instruments which are used in the Cure of Fractures and
Dislocation, which are scarcely used in any other part of Surgery: and
seeing that what are generally useful in Dislocations, are also useful in
Fractures, and that they must be treated of somewhere, we thought good to treat
of them here; since it is necessary that they should be known and understood,
before any Cures of this kind are attempted, or undertaken.

II. The chief Instruments for these purposes, are such as have a power to
extend the Parts, or otherwise to make way, so as the Bones may be reduced, and
put into their natural right places again: and they are in number Six, viz. 1.
The Trepan, Modiolus, or Vectis. 2. Hippocrates his Ambi. 3. The Glossocomon of
Galen. 4. The Reductive Ladder. 5. The Pulley of Vitruvius. 6. Hippocrates his
Table, or Scamnum.

I. Of the Trepan, or Modiolus.
III. This Instrument is called Abaptistum, Modiolus, Vectis, or Trepanum; and
is used chiefly in profound Corruptions, Contusions, Cuts, and Fractures of the
Bone.

IV. But it is not to be applied, but 1. When the splinters, or points and
prominences of the Bones prick. 2. When the upper Table is entire, but
depressed, and the lower broken. 3. When the Extravasated Blood is either so
much in quantity, or so corrupted, as to endanger a Suffocation of the Animal
Spirits.

V. The manner of Piercing or Boring therewith, is thus: the Hair is to be
shaven off from the Head, then the Skin is to be cut to the Pericranium;
avoiding as carefully as may be, the Sutures, and the Muscles of the Temples.

VI. And now the Wound is to be bound up, unless the Hemorrhage is so small,
that the Pericranium, or Membrane of the Scull may at the same time be taken
off also.

VII. Then in a few Hours after, you may stop the Ears of the Patient, and take
that Instrument which is the Mastuline Modiolus, or Male Trepan; whose point is
to be fixed in the Scull, but so far off the Fracture, that it touch it not
with its teeth, much less the Suture: (though some never avoid the Sutures, and
affirm, that they have perforated them as happily, as any other Part.)

VIII. Then holding the Instrument fast with the left Hand turn it round with
the right, 'till you have cut round a pretty deep Circle.

IX. After which, take the feminine Modiolus, or female Trepan (which has no
point in the middle) and turn this round, as before: in the mean time, you must
take away the dust or small particles, which proceed from the perforation or
sawing; and moisten the Instrument with Oil and Water, to make it cool, and
slippery.

X. In a little time, Blood will appear; which shows you, that you are gone as
far as the second Table; to wit, beyond the Scull to the Meninx, or Dura Matter;
and then you must press with your Instrument very gently, lest you should
unadvisedly hurt the Membrane of the Brain.

XI. When the Bone begins to be a little loose, you must put something in
between the sides of the Wound; to loosen it the more, and then take it out
with a pair of Pincers, or Forceps. See Lib. 1. Cap. 3. Sect. 2. and Tab. I.
Let. AB, CD, OF, GH, I, M. The Male Trepan OF: the Female GH: the Point of the
Male I, the Head of the Trepan AB.

II. Hippocrates his Ambi.
XII. This Instrument, called Ambi, Ambeen, or Glossocomon of Hippocrates, is
designed to restore a Shoulder luxated into the Armpit, or place of the
Juncture.

XIII. It has first an upright Pillar of Wood A, fastened upon a Foot B, which
Foot is fastened with Screw-pins CC: that it may not stir or move in the
Operation. Secondly, there is fastened a Spatha D, with an Iron Pin E, into the
upright Pillar, which may be turned, lifted up, or pressed down at pleasure.

XIV. To this Spatha are added three strings FFF, for the binding of the Arm,
that it might be kept steady: the Spatha must be four or five Fingers broad,
and two Fingers or Inches thick, and about 30 Inches in length, or more.

XV. The end thereof G, must be round and narrow in that part, but very high,
with Ears or Stops, to hold and keep in the top of the Shoulder; and the upper
part of the roundness must a little stick out, not to touch the Side, but the
top of the Arm. See Tab. XI. Fig. I.

XVI. The Use of the Ambi. Let the Sick sit upon a Seat somewhat lower than the
Frame; that so the Spatha which is thrust into the Armpit may be the more
forcibly deprest on its longer part, so to force in the head of the
Shoulder Bone.

XVII. The Arm must be bound to the Spatha at length, with its strings; 1. Just
below the top of the Shoulder. 2. Next above the Elbow. 3. And lastly, upon the
Wrist.

XVIII. This done, fix the Spatha to the Pillar A, with the Iron Pin E; then
the Artist on the outside shall pull the Arm downwards, whilst a Servant on
the other side taking hold of the Neck and Shoulders, shall likewise pull down
the Patient. See Tab. XI. Fig. II.

III. The Glossocomon, or Commander, of Galen.
XIX. This Instrument is for Fractures of the Thighs and Legs: it has on the
lower part the Axis A, to which must be tied the ends of the Strings or Cords
which extend diverse ways: let the Strings be fastened upon the uppermost part of
the Bone to be cured, and make them so, of two Bands, B and C, that both of
them may have four ends; two on the right F, and as many on the left side G.

XX. From these ends, those things which are belonging to the lower String B,
must be drawn to the Axel-tree, by the Holes made in the lower part of the
Glossocomon D.

XXI. And those things which belong to the uppermost String, must first proceed
to the upper parts; then must they also be p^t through the perforated sides of
the Instrument (fitted with Rundles or Pullies) whereby they are fastened to the
Holes of the Screw F.

XXII. But on both sides, on the outsides of the Glossocomon F and G, the ends
of the upper Cord, C must be carried to the Axis: this done, one turning ^out
of the Axis, both Strings ^or Cords will equally extend; that downwards, which
is bound to the lower part of the broken part of the broken Bone; the other
upwards.

XXIII. The Axis extends the String or Cord B, in the lower part, by a direct
motion: but it extends the String or Cord C in the upper part, (...), by a
Regressive motion. See Tab. XI. Fig. III.

IV. The Reductive Ladder.
XXIV. This Instrument is a Ladder, whose uppermost Rundle has a round body
upon it E; which is to lie under the Armpit, between the Side and the top of
the Shoulder.

XXV. After this, the Artist draws downwards the Arm out of Joint, but not
bound to the Spatha; another laying hold of his Neck, and top of his Shoulder,
draws likewise on the side; a third laying hold of the whole Body, draws
downwards also.

XXVI. It may have four Pullies, (if the Artist so please) FFFF; intimating the
Glossocomon or Commander of Galen.

XXVII. It may serve also for reducing the Thigh Bone out of Joint, or
extending the Thigh, or Leg Bones, if fractured; or for reducing the Hip when
dislocated; whether it slip inward, forward, or out^rd.

XXVIII. The Ladder is to be fixed either to some Stay, or Beam of the House,
or in the Ground; whereupon the Patient is to sit, with his sound Leg extended,
and bound about with the best convenience: but to the Leg out of Joint, or
fractured G, there is to be hanged a heavy Weight, or a Vessel full of Water.
See Galen his Comment upon Hippocrates de Articulis, lib. 4. text. 4.

V. The Pulley of Vitruvius.
XXIX. It is made like a Pulley, viz. DD, within which there lie three wheels,
through whose furrows, or hollows, the Rope runs, which is to be drawn by the
Cord H.

XXX. At the ends of the Pulley are fastened Hooks, the one of which is to
fasten the Pulley to a Post; the other is to draw the Part, being fastened to it
by ^ Ligature.

XXXI. AA, are the Covers: or Heads of the Cases BB, the Boxes or Cases in
which the Pulley is put or enclosed; C, a Screw-pin, made so, that it may screw
into a Post; having a hole somewhat less than the Screw, first bored by a
Gimblet, whereby it may be let in.

XXXII. This Engine or Pulley, drawn with a small Cord, is taken out of
Vitruvius, lib. 10. cap. 4. and is of singular good use in the Extension of
Members or Joints, whether it be Fracture or Dislocation.

XXXIII. The Member or Joint being by this or some of the former means
extended, the Bone is with the Hands and Fingers to be rightly conformed, or
reduced into its true place: and that it may remain so, after the application
of proper Topics, (as we shall hereafter teach) it is then to be well bound
up, and well placed. See Tab. X. Fig. I. and II.

VI. Scamnum, or the Table of Hippocrates.
XXXIV. The Table A may be seven feet long, and three feet wide; and the
thickness Ae which turns up, will be nine inches: it has also four other
Boards, which are round on the upper parts, viz. B, B, which are two at each
end, and are called (...) by Hippocrates.

XXXV. These (...), or Holdfasts, are perforated with a round Hole in their
breadth; through which the Axie-trees CC, CC pass, which at the ends DD, DD have
Handles, to turn them about.

XXXVI. The whole Table from end to end, has hollow places EEE, etc. which are
four inches distant one from another; whose breadth and depth are equally three
inches; in which a round piece of Wood F is set: and these Holes which go not
quite through, Hippocrates calls (...), i.e. Fossar, Holes or Prenches.

XXXVII. This Table or Plank, besines the four (...), bar two other Posts or
Boards GG in the middle, through which Holes are made, and through which is put
the cross-piece of Timber H, which may serve to reduce the Spina-Dorsi.

XXXVIII. The Table is moveable, and may be lifted up, and removed from place
to place: it slands upon six feet, which in my opinion would be more useful; if
they were so made as to run upon six small Box Rundles, or little Wheels, put
upon or fastened into the feet, with Iron Axle-trees: to which Wheels Remora's
may be fitted, to keep them fixed or unmovable.

XXXIX. The Use of the Table, exemplified in the reduction of the Ancle-bone
dislocated. The Anele-bone, whether dislocated inwardly or outwardly, is thus
to be reduced. Lay the Patient upon the Table on his Back, the Leg offended
being stretched out.

XL. Upon the Leg (just under the Knee) bind about the Cord or Swath A, AA,
after the manner it is bound on the Top-must of a Ship; and extend it equally,
and bring the ends of it to the Axle-tree at the end of the Table, which is
above the Head.

XLI. But on the Ancle he must tie the Cord or Swath B, B, and bind the ends of
it to the nether Axle-tree: and then either draw the Part diverse ways; or hold
it so, extending from the lower part.

XLII. And the Strings being drawn as much as needs, redute the Bone into its
place conveniently, when it started forth to the inward or outward part; but
when it is gone to the hinder part, you must make a forcible extension, to make
the reduction; without which, it will not be easily done.

LXIII. And in a fracture of the Shin-bone, or Minor Fossile, or both Bones at
once, where the Leg cannot be extended enough by the Hands, the Patient is then
to placed upon this Table; and the Ligature A being put about the Leg below the
Knee; and the Sandal or Swath B, being bound above the Ancle, let the Leg be
extended by the Bands drawn diverse Ways; then with your Hands reduce the
fractured Bones.

XLIV. The Use of the Table in the extension of the Spina Dorsi, dislocated
toward the external part. This may be done, if the middle Posts G G be removed
with the Priapiscas F, and into the Hole of the right Post A, some hollowed fit
piece of Wood B, is put in; bored through with a hole at D, to keep it in with
a Pin.

XLV. Then the Patient being laid on the Table, with his Face downwards; two
Cords are to be put about his middle, the one about E, the other below F, the
bunch on the back being between; and the ends of those Cords must be fastened
each of them to their proper Axletrees, which being turned about, may duly
extend the Backbone.

XLVI. And the hollowed Post A, must have at least three holes, that it may so
fitly receive the Cross-bar or Spatha, C, as to be conformed to the greatness,
or height of the banch on the Back.

XLVII. This done, the Spatha, or Cross-bar must be laid over, just upon the
bunch, which (at the very moment of time when the Extension is made) is then to
be pressed down with a convenient violence, that the dillocated Bone may be
forced into its own place. See Tab. X. Fig. III. IV. V.

CHAP. III. Of ACCIDENTS or SYMPTOMS of FRACTVRES.
I. THOUGH the Accidents or Symptoms attending Fractares are manifold, yet these
five following are the primary or chief, viz. 1. Pain. 2. Inflammation. 3.
Gangrene. 4. Itching. 5. Excoriation.

I. Of Vehement Pain in a Fracture.
II. Pain, whether great or small, ^ght to be cased and taken away; for by
reason thereof, there may be a Flux of Hunters, whereby manifold Evils may be
excited.

III. You are to consider the cause, and accordingly to remove it (causa
ablata, ^ossitur effectus) and that, if it is possible, immediately.

IV. If the Pain is from a Bon^ that pricks (which is known from ^ndling the
Part) you must ^osen the Bandage; and then either put the Bone back again into
its place; or (if it may not be) take it forth; or else cut it off.

V. For so it is advised by Celsus, lib. 8. cap. 10. It will be best (says he)
to open it, for there is a necessity of cutting off these sharp pricking ands
of the Bones.

VI. If the Pain is from overhard binding (which is known from the swelling
which appears in the Extremity of the Part,) then the Ligature is forthwith to
be loosned.

VII. If the Pain comes from an ill situation or posture of the affected Part,
you are so to change the situation, or posture, and so often, till the Sick
feels himself at ease.

VIII. If the Pain is from an Afflux of Humors, you must cure it altogether in
the same way, as if it were an Inflammation.

II. Of an Inflammation in Fractures.
IX. An Inflammation proceeds from vehement pain, and an Afflux of Humors, and
therefore ought to be opposed in the very beginning, and in that manner as we
have expressed under its proper Title.

X. The Pain ( says Scultetus) is to be abated or eased by Fomenting with Water
and Oil; or with a Decoction or Broth of a Wether's or Sheeps Head, with
Camomil-flowers.

XI. The Inflammation at hand is to be hindered with Anodyn and Repessing
Medicaments applied outwardly to the Part: you may foment with Oil of Roses
above, or else with Oil of Roses beaten up with the White of an Egg.

XII. Scultetus commends sharp Wine, Oil of Roses, and the Whites of Eggs mixed
in a fit proportion, and beaten together with a Spatula.

XIII. If the pain is vehement, he leaves out the Whites of Eggs, and mingles
the Oil with the Wine in greater quantities; in which Medicament, he also wets
his Ligatures, and gently presses them out again.

XIV. For so Avicenna, lib. 4. F. 5. Tract. 1. cap. 5. does advise in the cure
of a Dislocation; and withal, that we should be careful, that they be not laid
on hot and dry: because, if hot, they heat, and attract Humors: if dry, they do
not stick well together.

XV. You may apply this Cataplasm. Barley-flower iii. Pulp of rotten Apples ii.
Powder of Marsh-Mallow-roots, and of Cammomil-flowers, A. i. Boil in sour
Wine, or in Vinegar, and fair Water, A. q.s. to the consistence of a Cataplasin.

XVI. Now, 'till the Inflammation ceases, the Part is not to be bound up, or at
least it is not to be bound hard; nor Splinters to be imposed, or any other
Instrument, unless to uphold the part, and keep the Medicaments close to.

III. Of a Gangrene in Fractures.
XVII. A Gangrene often happens unto Fractures, especially if there be
Contusion withal: and it commonly arises either from taking too much Air, or
from Inflammation, or from hard Binding, which how it is to be Cured, you may
see in the proper places, in lib. 3. cap. 11. and lib. 4. cap. 9. Sect. 22.

XVIII. However, the Part ought to be fomented with Lixivium, in which Te^
^erfew, Sage, Southernwood, Saxifrage, Scordium, Rue, Tansey and Wormwood have
been boiled; mixed also with some Spirit of Wine.

XIX. Or with Spirit of Wine rectified, with which Spirit of Sal Armoniack i.
to lbi. of the S.V. is to be mixed; where note, that if the rectified Spirit is
wanting, common Brandy or Spirits may do.

XX. Or you may foment with this: Spirit of Wine, impregnated with the
Tinctures of Wormwood, Scordium and Saffron, lbi. Camphir iss. mix, and
dissolve: It is a famous thing.

XXI. But above all things, nothing is more excellent, nothing more safe; nor
any thing more speedy to retrieve the Mischief than Powers of Amber, or Powers
of Lavender, of Limons, of Oranges, of Pennyroyal, of Rosemary, of Sage, of
Turpentine, or of Wormwood, being fomented upon the Part.

XXII. Or you may use this: Take Powers of Amber iii. Powers of Turpentine ii.
of Rose mary, and of Sassasras, A. i. Camphir iiiss. mix them for use.

VI. Of vehement Itching in Fractures.
XXIII. The most simple thing to allay itching, is to wash, bathe, or foment
the Part often with warm Water; for it is of good use to wash away the ichorous
Sanies, and to dissipate the Humor, or call it forth.

XXIV. And nothing inferior to Water, is Breast-milk, or the Milk of Asses,
Mares, Goats, or Cows; or Whey of Goats or Cows Milk, being often fomented
warm, for some small time.

XXV. Or, Take Rainwater lbii. Oil of Tartar per Deliquium i. mix them, and
foment therewith, as aforesaid, warm; it opens the Pores, draws forth the
Humor, and admirably allays the itching.

XXVI. Or, Take fair Water, somewhat more than Blood-warm lbii. Spirit of Wine
iii. volatile Sal Armoniack iii. mix them, to foment with.

XXVII. Or, Juice of Cowcumbers lbii. Juice of Lettice lbi. Spirit of Wine iv.
Oil of Tartar per deliquium, i. volatile Sal Armoniack ii. mix, and foment
therewith warm.

V. Of Excoriation in Fractures.
XXVIII. First wash, bathe, or foment the Excoriation very well with warm fair
Water, or warm Milk, or Whey, then strew upon it fine powder of white Starch,
or white Starch mixed with very fine powder of Rice.

XXIX. Or you may first wash it with Aqua Aluminosa, warm, and then strew it
over with the aforenamed Powder, or with fine Bole, or Terra Sigillata, or
Catechu, in very subtle powder.

XXX. Some commend Caput Mortuum of Vitriol, Ceruse, or white Lead; but they
are more effectual, after the washing with Dr. Gardner's Aqua Styptica, or some
other Styptick Water, of like Virtue and Operation.

XXXI. Some advise to wash first with clarified Juice of Nightshade or
Plantane, blood-warm; and then to anoint with Vng. Album Camphoratum, or
desiccativum Rubrum, or Rosatum, or Diapompholigos, etc.

CHAP. IV. Of a Simple FRACTVRE.
I. WHAT the Greeks call, (...). and the Latins, Fractura Simplex; we in
English call, a Simple Fracture, which is a Fracture of a Bone only.

II. The Causes. They are either from External Violence, or from an Internal
Sharpness and Malignity of Humors, which making the Bone brittle, or rotting of
it, causes it to break.

III. The Signs. If it is without a Wound, it is known, 1. By feeling the
pieces of Bones, in handling the Part. 2. In handling, it makes a noise and
crackling in the broken Part. 3. There is a violent pain, by reason of the
divulsion or straining of the Nerves, or from some sharp parts of the Bone
pricking the Nerves. 4. An Impotency in using the fractured Limb, or leaning
upon it. 5. Sometimes there is a crookedness or shortness in the Part. 6.
Lastly, The Causes of Fractures have gone before the foregoing Signs. 7. If
split lengthways, it is uneven, and thicker than naturally.

IV. The Prognostics. No Fracture in the Bone is wholly void of danger, 1.
Because it lies deep, and not easy to be come at; but in a great Bone, they
are more difficult than in a small. 2. And so also harder of Cure in an Aged
Person, where the Bones have done growing, than in a Young; and more hard, when
manifold, than when fingle. 4. And hardest of all, when in or near the Joints.

V. The Cure. This has one only Indication, viz. that what is thus broken and
disjoined, must be again united and conglutinated, which is done by the means
of a Medium, which Physicians call a Callus.

VI. Now when the broken Bones are fallen out of their places, they are reduced
by, 1. (...), or (...), to wit, Extension. 2. By (...), emendatio vel directio
recta, a Conformation, or right replacing of the broken Bones in their own
proper places.

VII. The Member being by some of the former means extended, and rightly
conformed, that it may remain so, it is necessary that it may be, 1. Well bound
up, with proper Medicaments applied, and good Bandage. 2. That it be well
placed, in a convenient and easy posture.

I. Of Extension of the Part.
VIII. Extension is to be made, either by the Hands of the Artist, in a small
part, or where the Bones are not great: Or by Cords on Bands, where the Bones
are larger: Or by Instruments, where the Parts or Bones are very great.

IX. Now because some parts of the fractured Bone may stick out, and others be
hollow; or because one part of the Bone may lie upon the other, making the Limb
shorter, and so give opportunity to the Muscles to contract themselves, (for
they always draw toward their Original) it is necessary that Extension should
be made; otherwise the Bones cannot easily be put in their right places again,
so as to set (in transverse Fractures chiefly) their ends one against another.

X. And though sometimes the broken Bones do not shoot one over another, (as when
there are two Bones, and but one broken) yet the Coaptation cannot be made as
it ought, without Extension; for otherwise the shivers or points of the
fractured Bone would be in danger of breaking off, or of turning round, or of
rubbing their ends one against another; and then if the shivers break off, they
either fall between the ends. of the Bone, and so hinder Conglutination; or
they fall besides the Bones into the Flesh, and prick the Nervous Parts,
causing vehement Pain, Inflammation, Apostemation, etc.

XI. You must endeavor that this Extension be done with no pain at all; or
else with as little as may be: And this will be done, if the Part to be
extended is placed in such a Figure, as that the Muscles may do nothing at all,
but be as it were idle and loosned, that so all their Fibers may be extended
directly, and straight forwards; by which means there will be need of the less
Extension, and the whole Work will be done with little or no pain.

XII. If a Finger is broken, or other small and render Member, the Extension
may be performed by the help and pains of one alone, who laying his Right Hand
on one part, and his Left Hand on the other part, may so draw them one from
another.

XIII. Or it may be done by two together; the one holding part of the fractured
Member, the other the other part, and so extending them: Or if the part is
greater, it may be necessary that one Person should lay hold on one part, with
both his Hands, and another on the other part with both his Hands; so that by
drawing both ways, one part from another, the said broken parts may at length
close together. In greater parts, it is done either by Bands or Instruments, as
at Sect. 8. above.

XIV. This Extension is either equal, or unequal; that is equal, in which the
whole Member is equally extended from both sides of the fractured Bone; that is
unequal, when the Member is more extended on one side than on the other; which
is, when only one of the two Bones of the Elbow, or Leg, are broken; for that
side is most to be extended, in which the broken Bone is placed.

XV. But there ought to be a measure in this Extension; for if it is more
violent than is necessary, then great pain will be caused, whence Fevers,
Convulsions, and Palsies do often arise: And sometimes, as Galen in Com. de
Fracturis, lib. 1. text. 1. says, the Muscles have been pulled asunder.

XVI. Again, if the Extension be too little, the shivers or points of the Bones
will rub one against another, and so break; or else the broken ends will not be
lodged in their proper places.

XVII. Great Bones, and large Muscles, such as are in the Shoulder and Arm, the
Thigh and Leg Bones, (especially if both the Bones are broken) require violent
Extension, because their Muscles draw to their Original very strongly; but the
Radius, or upper Bone in the Arm, requires but small Extension, because it has
no Muscles to draw upwards.

XVIII. As to the time of the Extension, if the Artist comes the first day, he
may make the more forcible Extersion; but if he comes after the first, he must
(according to Celsus, lib. 8. cap. 10.) either not extend at all, or else more
gently, for fear of Inflammation. Also Children, and such as are of a soft
habit of Body, do better bear a more violent or strong Extension, than such as
are full grown, or aged.

XIX. But if the Bone be broken only longways, (which you may know if there be
no Cavity or Hollowness perceived, nor any sense of pricking, nor that the
Member is shorter than it was before) then in this kind of Fracture, you will
not have any need at all for Extension of the Member, or to trouble your self
in the least with the reducing, and fit joining of the broken Bones or Parts.

II. Of Coaptation or Conformation of the broken Bones.
XX. The Diorthosis is performed after Extension, the Artist laying hold on
both parts with both Hands, and thrusting back to the right part the Part or
Bone which is fallen forth to the left; and to the left, that which is fallen
forth to the right, or forward; continuing to thrust back the eminencies, or
stickings forth, into the cavity or hollowness, till the ends of the Bones are
put in their proper places, and the Limb recovers its Natural Figure.

XXI. But these Bones are not to be thrust in with any violence, lest thereby
they should be the more broken, or some bits might break off from them; but
they ought to go in (as it were) of their own accord, which done, and their
ends placed right one against another, the Extension is gently to be loosned,
and they are gently to be joined together.

XXII. All these things are to be done as soon as may be, before Inflammation
happen: But if an Inflammation should be induced, the extending of the Member
afterward, and reduction of the Bones, may easily excite a Convulsion.

XXIII. If an Inflammation is already begun, so as that you cannot attempt the
Extension and Reduction; the Inflammation is then to be removed, as we have
taught in the former Chapter, and other places; and with great care the afflux
of Humors is to be resisted by Repellents, and position of the Part, so as it
may be depending as little as may be, and cause the least pain.

XXIV. Now Hippocrates de Officin. Med. lib. 3. text. 24. teaches us to know if
the Bones are well or rightly placed, which you may know, 1. By the pain
ceasing. 2. By the eminencies of the Bones no longer pricking the Part. 3. If
no cavity, or sticking out, be perceived. 4. By comparing it with its Fellow
which is sound: These things being done, the remaining part of the Cure is to
be performed by the two remaining Operations, of Bandage and Posture.

III. Of Binding up the fractured Part.
XXV. But before we can come to the very action of Binding up the Part, we must
be provided with, and have ready to apply, good and proper Medicaments, to
^prevent the afflux of Humors, and Inflammation, and to help forward the
generating of the Callus.

XXVI. Hippocrates used the Ceratum Rosatum: Celsus dipped Cloths in Oil and
Wine, or Juice of Pomgranates: Others use both these: Some use fine Tow, wrung
out of Al^cant, or other rough red Wine: Others use fine Tow, thoroughly
moistened in Glair of Eggs, and then a little squeezed.

XXVII. Others make a Cataplasm of equal quantities of fine Bole, Catechu,
Consound or Comfrey Roots, Dragons Blood, Frankincense, Myrtle-berries,
Pomgranate-peels, red Roses, Sumach, and Terra Sigillata, mixed with Oil and
Wine, to which some add also Glair of Eggs: Others mix all these things in fine
powder, only with Glair of Eggs, and make a Medicament as thick as Honey, which
they apply upon combed Flax, or fine Tow, applying the same round the fractured
Limb.

XXVIII. These said Medicaments are in all the bindings or dressings so long to
be continued, till there is no farther fear or Fluxion, or Inflammation.

XXIX. And afterward you may apply (if in Summer time) Empl. Album, or
Diapalma; but if in Winter time Empl. Barbarum, or some other like Emplaster or
Cerate fit for this purpose and occasion.

XXX. When therefore you are for strengthening the Fracture, (no ill Symptoms
being present) those Astringent Pouder^ with the white of an Egg, or Astringent
Cataplasms, are to be applied.

XXXI. But if the Patient is in great pain, Ceratum and Oleum Rosatum, and Wine
are to be applied: Or this, Catechu, Dragons, Blood, Linseed in powder,
Comfrey-roots in powder, Osteocolla Stone prepared, Oil of Roses, A. iv. fine
Bole, Coruse, A. i. whites of Eggs No xv. fine flower q.s. mix, and make a
Cataplasm, which put upon the fractured Part.

XXXII. Or, White Starch vi. Catechu ii. Mastich, Oli-banum, Mummy, fine Bole,
A. i. whites of Eggs q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm.

XXXIII. Or, Empl. Albun. iv. Catechu, fine Bole, Comfrey-roots, red Roses,
Osteocolla, Terra Sigillata, A. i. ad in fine powder; mix them over a gentle
Fire, and with Oil of Roses q.s. make an Emplaster.

XXXIV. Some of these things being applied, after two days they may be removed;
and they may be repeated five times one over after another; binding up, and
placing the Part as we shall afterward direct, laying over the Application a
piece of Cloth, wrung out of Wine; and the first and second Rowlers may be dipped
into and wrung out of rough red Wine.

XXXV. By the Application of these things, Accidents and Symptoms will be
prevented, and the substance of the Part will be kept bound; all which are to
be applied before Bandage is made.

XXXVI. And these things are to be done so long, till the Callus is bred, and
the Fracture healed; which in the Thigh may be in about 40 days; in the
Shoulder and Ankle in 30; in the Radlus and Elbow about 20; and in the Bones of
the Fingers in about 5 or 6 days time: However, the time of Healing much
varies, according to the Age, Constitution, and Nature of the Fracture it sent,
being Cured much sooner in a young Person, than in one old; and more speedily
in the Spring or Autumn, than in Summer or Winter.

XXXVII. Now we come to the way and manner of binding up, which we shall
deliver to you, 1. According to Hippocrates his Method. 2. According to Celsus;
though it is certain that some Modern Surgeons, presently take a Rowler, and
roll the Fracture to both ends, not valuing much what either Celsus or
Hippocrates says.

XXXVIII. The M^thod, according to Hippocrates. (...), in Greek, Obligatio, vel
deligatio, in Latin; Bandage in English, is performed after Hippocrates his
way, with Bands or Swaths, which Hippocrates calls (...), pl. (...), and (...),
Ligamen vel fascia pl. Ligamina, fasciae.

XXXIX. These Fasciae, or Swaths, are three in number, made of Linen, that
they might not stretch; not too coarse, lest it hurt the Part; nor to fine,
lest it want strength, and so tear.

XL. The first Rowler, which may be dipped and pressed out of Oxycrate, is to be
put over the Fracture, and then rolled round about it upwards, three or four
turns, so that much of the sound Part be taken in in Swathing, that so the
Bones being reduced, may be kept or held in their places, and the Conflux of
Blood and Humors to the Part affected, may be prevented.

XLI. The second Rowler, which is to be longer than the other by the one half,
or rather twice as long, is to be put upon the very Fracture, and rolled about
the contrary way once, ( viz. if the former was rolled to the Right Hand, this
ought to be rolled to the Left) and then some certain times more, which is here
to be done downwards; that if the Muscles were drawn too much to one side by
the first Rowler, they might be restored by drawing them somewhat the contrary
way by this second Rowler: then after 3 or 4 rowlings downwards, it is to
return again upwards over the Fracture to the sound Part, making a
Circumvolution over the Fracture it self, and so continuing it upwards till it
comes to the end of the first, where it must terminate.

XLII. Where note, that this Rowler is first rolled about the Fracture, that it
may press the Humors from it; for all Bandages whatsoever, have in them a power
of pressing forth the Humors out of those Parts, upon which they are first of
all cast, into those Parts where they are ended: then it is carried downwards,
to stop the Humors which might flow from the lower Parts: And because there may
be a fear of a falling down of Humors from the upper Parts, Hippocrates
therefore does not end the Rowler downwards, but rowls it upwards, that it may
end where the first ended.

XLIII. But that in the greater Bones the Bandage may be the more stable and
firm, Hippocrates puts over the former Bandages, Compresses made of Linen
cloth 3 or 4 times double, and narrow, that 5, or 6, or more of them, may be
applied lengthways about the Fracture, an Inch or better, one from another,
which are to be spread with some sticking Cerate, for their better holding
fast: These Modern Authors call Plagulae, and Splenia.

XLIV. Upon these the third Rowler is to be put to fasten them, making the
first turn upon the very Fracture; then one head of the Rowler is to be carried
upwards, and the other downwards: And it is to be observed, that the Rowlers
are to be drawn straiter upon the fractured Part, than any where else, that it
may the better be kept from Fluxions.

XLV. But yet you ought to be cautious, that the Bandage be not too hard, lest
it cause pain; nor yet too loose, lest the Bones slip out of their places
again; but it ought to be in a Mean, for the Advantage of the Cure.

XLVI. But because these Splenia are very flexible and yielding, and that they
cannot possibly keep the Fracture firm and direct; and that the Bones, when
they a^e reduced, may be the bette ^ept in their true places. Hippocrates
orders Ferulae or Splinters to be put above them, if the nature of the place
will allow it; for that being light, they will not press upon the Part to hurt
it; and being stiff, they will the more firmly keep the Bones in their right
places.

XLVII. But these Hippocrates used mostly after the seventh day; because before
the seventh day, the Intention to prevent Inflammation is more considerable,
than that to confirm the Part; but after the seventh day, the contrary.

XLVIII. On the third day after deligation, Hippocrates unbinds the Rowlers,
because, 1. They begin to grow slack. 2. An Intolerable Itching affects the
Patient under the Bandage, for the Vapors and Humors being detained grow
sharp, etc. this Itching you must allay, as we have taught in Cap. 3. Sect. 23.
ad 26. aforegoing; after which it is to be bound up as before again.

XLIX. And the Patient is now to be kept in this condition from the third to
the seventh day, and on the seventh it is to be opened again, bathed with warm
Water (as before) and hound up again, at what time you are to apply the Ferulae
or Splints: We in our time use thin pieces of Wood, cut off of that which they
call Scabbard, which are wrapped up in Tow; and some use Splints, or pieces of
Hoops of half an Inch thick, or more, whose uses are not only to keep the Bones
fixed, but to preserve the Limb straight.

L. The Method of Binding up according to Celsus, lib. 8. cap 10. Fere vero
Fasciis sex opus est, etc. he says, that it is necessary to have six Rowlers:
But he first applies about the Fracture, a Linen Cloth dipped in Oil and Wine;
then he takes his first Rowler, which is the shortest: Prima brevissima
adhibenda, quae circa fracturam ter voluta sursum versum feratur, and quasi in
Cochlea serpat, satisque est eam ter hoc quoque modo circuire. The first, which
is the shortest, is to be applied, which is to be thrice rolled about the
Fracture, and to be carried upwards winding round like a Screw; and to be
carried thrice round in this manner, will be enough.

LI. The other Rowler is to be twice as long, and is laid also upon the
Fracture, and rolled downwards, and then turning upwards, it must end at the
upper part, above the first Rowler. These two Rowlers, are the two first of
Hippocrates; over these a broad Linen Cloth spread over with some proper
Cerate, is applied to fasten them, and keep them tight.

LII. And where the Bone sticks out, the Linen Cloth is to be applied three or
four times double, dipped in a Mixture of Oil and Wine, (or in the white of an
Egg, if the Fracture is without pain) and over or upon this, the third and
fourth Rowlers are to be put; but so always, as that the following may be wound
the contrary way to that which went before; and the third only to end
downwards, three in the upper part.

LIII. This Bandage is to be continued for three days, which will be good and
well done, if nothing ^rts the Patient the first day, and it also grows
somewhat looser; and yet looser on the second day, and very loose on the third
day, as if it were almost undoing.

LIVE. It is then to be bound up again, and then to the other four Rowlers, you
must add a fifth Rowler; and when that fifth begins to be loose, you are to
bind it about with a sixth, the third and the fifth ending downwards, and all
the rest, viz. the first, second, fourth and sixth ending upwards.

LV. Quotiescunque autem solvitur Membrum, calida Aqua fovendum est: sed si
juxta Articulum, diu instillandum Vinum est, exigua part Olei adjecta,
eademque omnia facienda donec ab eo Inflammatio solvatur. And as often as it is
opened, (says he) the Part is to be fomented with warm Water; but if it is near
a Joint, it is to be bathed for a pretty while with Wine, to which a small
quantity of Oil is added: And all these things are to be done so long, till it
is freed from the danger of an Inflammation.

LVI. Now if there is but little pain, Galen, Meth. Med. lib. 6. cap. 5.
approves most of Hippocrates his Bandage: But if any vehement pain afflict the
Part, Celsus his Bandage is better.

LVII. When the Fracture is bound up so hard, as the Patient can well endure
it, it is well: But if he complains that he is in very great pain, the Bandage
is speedily to be loosned, lest the too hard binding should cause dangerous
Symptoms to arise.

LVIII. But if the Bandage is too loose, and that the Patient says he feels not
the binding at all, it is then to be unbound also, and bound harder; for the
Bandage, if it is over-loose, will make the Member to be depraved or distorted
in the place where the Fracture is.

LIX. If also in the same Day and Night, on which the Fracture was first bound
up, the Patient feels the Bandage to press, but yet lightly, and the day
following a small and soft Tumor does arise in the Extremity of the Member, (as
in the Hand, if the Arm was broke; or in the Foot, if the Leg,) the Bandage is
well made; for the smallness and softness of the Swelling shows that there is
something pressed forth by the binding, from the Part affected, unto the
extremity and utmost part of the Member.

LX. But if no Swelling at all appears, it shows that the Bandage was not hard
enough; but if there is a Swelling, and it is great and hard, so as it will not
readily yield to the Touch, it is a sure sign that the Part affected is too
hard bound up.

IV. Of Collocation, and the Posture the Member is to be laid in.
LXI. The position, or placing of the Member, is the next Consideration; this
according to Hippocrates is to be, 1. Soft, lest by pressing or lying hard, it
causes Pain and Inflammation. 2. Equal, lest it distort the Member. 3. High,
lest by its depending position, the Humors should descend, because even by
their own weight they are apt to fall downwards, and flow to the place affected.

LXII. Therefore the Patient is to be laid in Bed, and the fractured Part is to
be put upon a Pillow, or soft Bed-cloths, stuffed with Flocks or Feathers: Or a
Pasteboard may be formed into a Case, the inside of which may be lined with Tow
for the Arm, and such Parts as do not oblige the Patient to keep his Bed.

LXIII. But if the Patient is confined to his Bed, nothing can be better than
to make a Capsula, or Case of thin Oak, or Deal Boards, and to line or fill it
sufficiently with soft Tow or Wool, that the Part may lie easy in it.

LXIV. As to the posture the Member is to lie in, it ought to be that of a
middle figure, in respect both to the Joints, and to the Muscles: And therefore
Hippotrates de officin. Med. Text. 3. and 30. advises us to heed these three
things, 1. Rest 2. Meanposition. 3. Custom.

LXV. By Rest, is intended such a posture, as a Man is apt to put the Part
into, when being free from Business, he reposes himself for Rest, Ease and
Pleasure.

LXVI. By Mean-position, is meant such a posture, as we naturally lay our Limbs
in when we have nothing to do, which is a mean between extreme Distention and
close or acute Contraction: The Arm is in such a middle position, when it makes
not an acute Angle, nor yet a right in the Elbow, but rather an obtuse Angle,
as if it were half way stretched out; for that is the posture when Men are
Idle, they hold their Arms in, as being most easy, natural, and free from pain.

LXVII. By Custom, we mean such a posture as Nature and Custom has given to any
Part; for that no habit is so easily born, as that to which Nature and Custom
have given preference: And so by this Rule, a straight posture in the Wrist is
only to be chosen.

LXVIII. Hippocrates de Fracturis, lib. 1. adds a fourth, viz. the Course of
the Muscle, which is taken from the Ductus of its Fibers: He so figures and
places the Muscles, that their Fibers may be direct, and stretched forth in a
straight manner.

LXiX. These things being thus all done, and the Patient easy, the rest of the
Work, which is the producing the Callus, is to be committed to Nature: Now it
is bred of the Nourishment of the Bone, which issuing out of the edges of the
Fracture, coagulates and hardens about the fractured Part.

LXX. This though it is no Bone, yet it is so hard and strong, that if the Bone
should chance to be broken again, it will break rather in another part, than in
that where the Callus is.

LXXI. But though the breeding of the Callus is the Work of Nature, yet the
Physician ought to assist and help her in her Operation; and this he may do, if
he prevents Inflammations, or other ill Symptoms; and also by drying
Medicaments so disposes the Aliment, that it may the sooner be converted into a
Callus.

LXXII. The Food for generating a Callus, ought to be such as is viscid and
glutinous, viz. Barley hull'd, Rice, and Wheat boiled in Water, and afterward
mixed with Milk, Gelly of Hartshorn, Sheeps Trotters, Knuckles of Pork and
Veal, Calves Feet, Feet and Stomachs of Oxen, boiled soft, and eaten with good
Sauce, or made into Gellies, and so taken; also strong Broths made of the Flesh
of Fowls; Beef, Mutton, Veal, etc.

LXXIII. The Internal Medicaments which are given in this Case, are chiefly the
Powder and Juice of Agrimony-roots; Powder of Comfrey-roots, and Syrup, but
chiefly Blood of Comfrey; the levigated Powder of the Osteocolla Stone, which
may be given ad i. Morning and Evening, in Syrup of Comfrey, or Blood of
Satyrion; or Parsnip-roots.

LXXIV. In the beginning, a sparing Diet is to be used, till the danger of the
Symptom are over; but when they are over, and the Callus begins to grown,
which will be about the twelfth day, then ^ore plentiful Diet is to be allowed,
because it contributes to the more absolute generating of the Callus.

LXXV. Decoctions or Vulnerary Drinks may be prepared from Wound-herbs, as
Bugle, Comfrey Roots, Consound, Dragonwort, Avens, Agrimony, Angelica,
Primroses, Sanicle, Savin, Speedwell, Yarrow, etc.

LXXVI. Roots of Consound and Dragons, A. i. Roots of Angelica, of Comfrey, A.
ss. Storksbill, Savin, A. M. i. Speedwell, Yarrow, Primrose leaves, A. Mss.
Galangal, Zedoary, Mace, A. ss. Nutmegs. ii. Wine q.s. boil in B.M. and strain;
sweeten with white Sugar, and let the Patient drink of it twice a day.

LXXVII. As to Topics, you may make a Cataplasm of white Starch, and whites of
Eggs, which may be applied to Women and Children.

LXXVIII. To Elder Persons you may apply this of Fabricius Hildanus in Cent. 3.
Obs. ^0. Oil of Earthworms ii. Juice of Earthworms i. Grains of Juniper ss. mix
them, and make a Liniment, with which anoint the Fracture.

LXXIX. Vigo's Plaster for broken Bones, or Catagmaticum, ii. Osteocolla Stone
prepared iss. Powder of Earthworms i. Oxycroceum ss. Oil of Earthworms q.s.
mix, and make an Emplaster, which lay upon the Part affected.

LXXX. The same Fab. Hildames, to hasten the Callus, gives also internally this
Preparation of the Osteocolla. Osteocolla levigated i. Cinnamon in sine powder
iv. white Sugar iv. mix them. Dose, ii. every Morning in strong Broth, made of
Meat.

LXXXI. Where the Callus is bred to confirm it, you may apply this: Catechu,
Terra Sigillata, Aloes, Mastich, Myrrh, Olibanum, Laudanum, Nat-galls,
Frankincense, Comfrey-roots, A. i. all being in fine powder, mix it with whites
of Eggs, and a little Wheat Flour, and apply it.

LXXXII. Or, Wax iiiss. Oil of Roses ii. Frankincense, Mastich, Olibanum, A.
ss. Catechu iii. fine Bole, Cyprus-nuts, Saffron, A. i. mix, and make a Cerate,
which spread upon Linen and apply: This, when the Callus is bred, and come to
its just magnitude, will very much corroborate and confirm it.

LXXXIII. If the Callus is generated less than it should be, you may know it by
its being less than it should be, or when touched, very little or no Callus can
be felt, and the Part being weak in its motion: It is caused from the Patients
using too thin and sparing a Diet, or eating Meats not viscid or thickning
enough, or from the Bandage being too straight.

LXXXIV. In this case the Diet must be more plentiful, and stronger, made of
strong Broths, Gellies, etc. The Medicaments must be less astringent, the
Bandage must be loofer, and the Nourishment must be attracted, by bathing with
Water, only Blood-warm, (not hotter, lest opening the Pores, the Humors should
perspire) till the Part looks red, and swells a little.

LXXXV. If the Callus is too great, (which causes deformity and unaptness for
motion) you may know it by handling of it; you will find its magnitude too
large; and by pressing the Muscles and nervous Parts it causes pain, and hurts
its Function in moving.

LXXXVI. In this case, the Diet must be more thin and sparing, the Bandage must
be straighter; and the Callus must be softened and discussed; you may first
foment, or bathe, with Decoction of Betony, Bawm, Pellitory, Scabious, Scordium
and Speedwell, so long till the Part first grows red and swells, and then
abates again, and corrugates; after which you may anoint with Man's, Vipers or
Bears Grease, and then apply Emplast, de Althaea, e mucilaginibus cum Gummi, de
Ranis cum Mercuris, with other things of a resolving and discussive Nature.

LXXXVII. If an Atrophia happens to the Limb, it is caused from too straight
Bandage, and poor or hard keeping, or too thin and spating Diet: Here Food of
good and strong Nutriment ought to be given, the Patient must feed plentifully,
and of Meats succulent and easy of Digestion; his Meat, he must eat with the
bloody or red Gravey in it: The Part must be often fomented with strengthening
things; and Dropaces or Pitch spread upon Cloth, must be applied to attract the
Juices and Nourishment to the Part; and all these things must be continued so
long till you see a manifest recuperation of the Flesh, and restoration of the
strength of the Part.

CHAP. V. Of a FRACTVRE with a WOVND.
I. WHAT the Greeks call, (...). and the Latins, Fractura cum Vulnere; we in
English call, A Fracture with a Wound.

II. This comes to pass, when the sharp eminencies or points of the fractured
Bones do perforate the Flesh which lies upon them; making thereby the Member
shorter than it was before.

III. The Causes are from various things; sometimes these Fractures happen by
means of some cutting Weapon, which not only cuts the Flesh, but even the Bone
it self.

IV. The Prognostics. If such a Fracture as this is made, where the Flesh and
Skin lying over are still whole and sound, it is more dangerous than where the
Wound is open; because in the former a Pain and Inflammation are excited, and
the Muscles thus affected, suffer a double Extension, the one from the
Inflammation, the other from the Extension in order to the Reduction.

V. And this danger is so much the greater, by how much the Parts fractured are
greater, or more noble and principal, as the Arteries, Veins, Nerves, Tendons
and Muscles.

VI. A Fracture with a Wound made with a cutting Weapon, is dangerous, if the
Bone that is cut is great, such as that of the Shoulder, or Thigh; for in
these, if the Incision is direct and straight, the Bones will very difficultly
be brought to grow together again; partly, because by the Cut the Pores are
obstructed, through which the Juice generating the Callus did formerly pass; and
partly, because the ends of the Bones being equal and smooth, cannot easily be
kept fixed, till the Coalition is perfected.

VII. A Fracture in the Thigh and Shoulder, with a Wound and falling out of a
Bone, is the most dangerous of all; and this in respect to the magnitude of the
Part, and greatness of the Vessels.

VIII. Celsus, lib. 8. cap. 10. says, That it is yet more grievous, when unto
the Fracture of a Bone, there is added likewise a Wound of the Flesh; and
especially if the Muscles of the Thigh, or of the Shoulder be sensible thereof;
for these have always much the more dangerous Inflammations, and they have also
Gangrenes more apt and ready to seize upon them.

IX. Hippocrates, de Fracturis lib. 3. text. 47. says, They seldom or never
escape, the Bones of whose Arms or Thighs, have fallen out outwardly; for as
these Bones are great, and full of Marrow, so there are many other Parts of
great moment wounded; as the Muscles, Nerves, Arteries and Veins: whereupon if
you reduce them, Convulsions are wont to be excited; if you do not reduce them,
acute and choleric Fevers are excited, with sighing, and blackness of the
place affected; so that these do not yet less escape than the other.

X. But (says he) they are in less danger, or more likely, to escape, who have
the lower Bone fallen out, than those who have the upper Bone fallen forth
outwardly: and they do sometimes escape with Life, who have these Bones reduced
or replaced; but this is very rare.

XI. But if the Bone of the Shoulder or Thigh fall forth, to the inward parts
of those Members, the danger is yet more augmented; because in the inner or
under parts of those Limbs, there are Vessels of far greater magnitude and
account.

XII. And in Text 41. he says, that if those Bones be reduced, or restored,
Convulsions are rather produced, than if they be not reduced, or in a
possibility of being restored.

XIII. The Cure. The Indications of Cure are twofold: 1. That the Bones may be
restored to their places, if possible; and exactly joined together again. 2.
That the Wound may be healed. But as to this latter Indication, we shall refer
you to what we have already written of Wounds.

XIV. The replacing of bones here is difficult, because of the Wound, and great
pain, which may hazard a Convulsion, if the Parts be extended. Therefore the
Extension is immediately to be made, (before an Inflammation has (^era'd the
Part) but not with violence.

XV. If this cannot be done you must have in readiness some ^trong Iron Levers
of different bignesses, out of which one that is convenient is to be chosen;
which is to be applied to the lower part of the broken Bone, where pressing
upon the lower Bone, it may lift up the upper part, and so slide it into its
place.

XVI. But, says Hippocrates, de Fracturis, lib. 3. text, 12. if the Bone which
is fallen forth over another, leaves not any place fit for the Lever to enter;
or if it is so sharp, as that it starts away from it; we must with a File take
away some of the broken Bone; or make it hollow, 'till room is made for the
Iron Lever, so as to lay hold upon it.

XVII. But truly these things are are to be done instantly, before any
Inflammation arises; for then no extension, or any such putting forth of the
Bone can be attempted without danger: but it is to be deferred 'till the
Inflammation is abated and gone.

XVIII. If any small part of the Bone so stick out, that it cannot easily be
put back again into its true place; but that one part of it may be a stop to
another, and that it seems not fit strongly to extend the soft parts, lest pain
and convulsion ensue, because some fragments, or sharp ends of Bones, may by
their eduction tear or hurt those parts which lie near them: in all these
Cases, you must by the advice of Hippocrates, de Fract. Lib. 3. Text. 4. Cut
them off, either with the Cutting-File, or with the Saw, as you shall see most
convenient, as may be done with the best opportunity.

XIX. So likewise, if any part of the Bone break the Flesh, and excite pains;
the reduction of them it not to be attempted, because it will induce the
highest tortour imaginable: but that part of the Bone is to be cut off; but
always with this Prognostic to the Bystanders, that that Limb will be shorter
than before, or shorter than its fellow; as our Hippocrates, de Fract. Lib. 3.
Text. 46. has assured us.

XX. But in Fracturs with a Wound, the Skin and Flesh being yet fast to them;
you must be cautious, that before reduction there is nothing at all sticking
between the said broken Bones, for that will hinder their conglutination.

XXI. If any thing is sticking there, as a small part of a Bone, or Flesh, or
any thing else, it is immediately to be taken forth, but without violence; lest
vehement Pain, Inflammation, or Convulsions should be induced.

XXII. But if this is not done at first, even in the very beginning, or it
cannot be done without violence and pain, you must defer it; for Nature her
self will at length expel whatever is foreign or extraneous; but withal you
ought to assist her all you can, by applying proper Attractive Medicaments.

XXIII. The Fracture being set, or the Bones replaced, the lips of the Wound
are to be closed up, and things must be applied to keep the substance of the
fractured and wounded Part sound; and which may ease the Pain, and prevent
Inflammation, repel a Flux of Humors, dry up what is there already, and press
out what is gathered into the Part: and such are Astringents and Glutinatives,
of which we have formerly spoken.

XXIV. If there is Pain in Wintertime, Ceratum Picatum is to be applied, which
Hippocrates says, eases Pain; but in Summer, a simple Cerat of Wax, Oil, and
Vinegar: if there is no Pain, you must endeavor the strengthening of the
Fracture, and prevent Inflammation, by applying fine Tow dipped in whites of
Eggs; or a linen Cloth, dipped in and wrung out of a mixture of rough Red-wine
and Oil of Roses: Astringent Pouders may also be mixed with whites of Eggs.

XXV. The Bandage, or Way of binding up. The Fracture is to be bound up, as we
showed before; but the Rowlers ought to be softer, and broader, than in a
Fracture without a Wound, that they may reach over the edges of the Wound on
each side; and so may close, not press the edges of the Wound.

XXVI. Nor are the Rowlers to be drawn so hard, as in a Fracture without a
Wound, lest by squeezing the Wound, Pain and Inflammation should ensue: for
which reason, the Ancients, as Hippocrates and Celsus, used many
circumvolutions; it being better to wind often about, than to bind too hard.

XXVII. Some bind this Fracture up, as that without a Wound, so that the Wound
may be covered, and they loose this Binding every third day: some roll about
the Swaths so, as that the Wound is not at all comprehended within them, but
left naked: so that from day to day, all fit means may be used for curing
thereof, without frequent binding up, and unbinding the Fracture.

XXVIII. Others use fewer Swaths, and bind up the Fracture after the usual and
ordinary manner; others again use broader, and more Rowlers; that so by their
number, they may accomplish that which might have been done with fewer, when
harder rolled: some use Splints, others slight them: and they that use them,
apply them at a good distance from the Wound; some near, or upon the Wound; but
it is then with some trouble.

XXIX. Now though by all these Ways, you may attain to the same desired End; yet
Hippocrates, and all the more skilful Artists, will have it as undoubted Truth;
That in the first Binding, the Wound ought not to be left naked; but is to be
comprehended within the Swath or Rowler.

XXX. And therefore the Swath is first of all to be put upon the Wound it self,
(for otherwise, the Humors will be pressed forth from the upper parts upon the
Wound, and many dangerous Symptoms may thence arise:) and what is necessary of
the Limb, is to be rolled up within the Swaths; nor from this Bandage need you
fear any kind of danger; for that for the first three days, little Sanies or
Pus will flow forth.

XXXI. Now though this Bandage ought not to be too hard, and ought to be somewhat
less, than if there was no Wound: yet there ought to be a sufficient
compression made, so as to retain and keep the Bones together.

XXXII. And the number of Rowlers may in some sort compensate for the more
loose and easy binding of them; since it is far more safe to roll about the
Swaths oftener, than in the least to hurt the Part by a too hard comprehension:
for which reason, Celsus his. Bandage with Six Rowlers, is the most excellent
in this kind of Fracture.

XXXIII. Every third day the Fracture is to unbound, and then it is again to be
dressed after the first manner; save that now a Hole may be made or cut through
the Emplaster or Cataplasin, which is imposed on the Fracture, and on the
Wound: and in the midst also of the very Swaths a Hole is to be left, that so
fitting Medicines may be applied unto the Wound, that it may be thoroughly
digested and deterged, without any loosning of the Bandage; as Paraeus, lib.
14. Cap. 18. and 23. has directed.

XXXIV. As often as the Wound is dressed, it may be covered with a new Rowler,
which may contain ^th, the Medicaments, and the Splenia, to defend the Wound
from the external Air; which is to be loosned as often as need shall require: but
Ferulae or Splints are here not very profitable, because they are apt to beget
Pain and Inflammation; and for that the number of the Rowlers may very well
supply their places.

CHAP. VI. Of a FRACTVRE with a WOVND, the Bone not bare.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). and in Latin, Fractura cum Vulnere, Osse non
nudato; and in English, a Fracture with a Wound, the Bone not being made bare.
viz. not made bare of the Periosteon.

II. Now it may be in a Fracture with a Wound, that no Bone, or part of a Bone,
as splinters or bits of Bones may be made bare of the Periosteum; yet we may
have great cause to fear, that some broken Bone may apostemate, and be
expelled, or come forth; which is done, when in process of time they grow dry
and withered, so that they cannot be agglutinated again to the whole or sound
Bone: or in a Fracture, when they are so separated from the rest of the Bone,
that they cannot be joined with it any more.

III. For Nature endeavors to expel whatever is troublesome to her, and what
cannot be united again; nor will she be at rest, 'till whatever is offensive,
is wholly cast forth; though sometimes it is a long time first.

IV. The Causes. They are either when pieces of Bones are so separated, that
they cannot be put together again, then an Apostem is generated; or from
corrupt Sanies, which fouls the Bones; or when they are altered by the ambient
Air.

V. The Signs. Hippocrates, de Fract. lib. 3. text. 18. gives us the Signs of a
Bone in danger of Apostemating, and so to be expelled: 1. There flows forth a
much greater quantity of Sanies, than could reasonably be expected, either from
the magnitude, or the nature of the Wound.

VI. 2. The lips of the Wound do not meet together; or if they do so; yet they
soon are separated; and the Wound putrifies, and is provoked and stirred up to
Excretion; the lips becoming loose and spongy, and in the wounded Part, there
is a kind of soft motion.

VII. 3. If you perceive the Bone bare of Flesh, it is a sign of its
separation, and dropping forth; for that it may be altered or corrupted by the
Air, nor can any longer receive Nutriment from the Veins and Arteries, which
used to convey the same.

VIII. 4. If you manifestly perceive the Bone is broken into many shivers or
bits, it is impossible for them to be reposited again; and if not, as they
cannot be conglutinated, so they must apostemate, and be expelled; for Nature
never heals a Wound, so long as any thing remains within that cannot be
assimulated, or agglutinated with the rest.

IX. The Prognostics. It is a sign of a recession suddenly to follow, if good
Flesh breed in the sides of the sound Bone; and also when there is a quick
digestion or suppuration in the Wound.

X. But the time in which the Bones are wont to recede and fall forth, is
various: for if it is in Youth, and in the Summertime, and the Bone not very
great, it may be expelled or thrust forth in 20, or 30, or 40 days.

XI. But if it is in one of full and ripe Age, and in Wintertime, and the Bone
is of the larger kind, it Apostemates not so soon; and it is many times 60
days, before it is separated and thrust forth.

XII. The Cure. If the displaced piece of Bone sticks in the very Wound, it is
presently to be taken forth with the Volsella or Pliers, or Pincers, if it can
be done without pain and violence: but otherwise, the whole Work is to be
committed to Nature: for if Violence be used, Pain, Inflammation, Fever, and
Convulsions may possibly be excited, and a fistulous Ulcer may be induced.

XIII. You ought also to consider the piece of Bone which is to come away, if
it is great, or little; which you may know by the intensness or remisness of
the aforegoing Signs: for if Digestion or Suppuration comes slowly on, and much
Sanies appears, and much loose and spungy Flesh is bred, a great piece will be
expelled; and e contra.

XIV. Now Nature is to be helped by Art, and Medicaments are to be laid upon the
Wound; which have in them a power of Attraction, to draw out of the Wound the
broken pieces of Bones, and whatever is extraneous to the same.

XV. If the part of Bone to be extracted is small, you must be sure that the
generated Pus, may not stay too long in the Wound, lest it corrupt the sound
Bone; but that it may have liberty to be evacuated, (not by pressure of strait
Bandage, lest Pain and Inflammation be excited, but rather) of its own accord.

XVI. Then the recession of the Bone is to be committed to Nature: and you must
use loose Bandage, and frequent openings of it, that the Pus may not stop, but
freely pass forth: Splints, or Ferulae, are to be avoided, lest they cause
pain, by their compression; and such things are to be applied, as may soonest
perfect the Digestion or Suppuration.

XVII. The Wound also, if it is large, is to he stitched, notwithstanding the
recess of the Bone; for Nature will never heal up the Wound, till the pieces of
the Bone are come forth; then the Digestive being applied, as you may see
occasion, the Fracture is to be bound up loosly, but with many Rowlers, as we
have already shown.

XVIII. If the Fragment of the Bone to be extracted is very great, you must, as
before, be very careful not to retain the Pus, but that it may run freely
forth, and the wounded Part is to be handled with all the gentleness
imaginable, as Hippoerates, de Fract. lib. 2. Text. 44. advises.

XIX. For the Fragments of the Bone, not being replaced as they ought to be, if
they be much compressed, they will prick the Parts lying near to them, which
are very sensible of pain; for which reason, those strait bindings which are
necessary in other Fractures, would here do mischief.

XX. Now Hippocrates, Text. 21. of the place afore-cited, makes no use of the
Swathe or Rowler, lest the Parts should be pressed together too much; or being
forced to lift it up, should excite pain.

XXI. But having replaced the Bones as well as may be, he applies unto the
Wound Ceratum Piceum, Ceratum Rosaceum, or some other like Cerate, fit for
green Wounds; for that these things help forwards the Digestion or Suppuration,
and prevent Inflammation.

XXII. If there is much Pain, and danger of Convulsions, he then applies
Linnen-cloths dipped in Oil and Wine mixed together.

XXIII. This done, because of the weakness of the Part, and the imminent danger
of a Fluxion of Humors, he uses many Splenia or Plagulae, made of double
Linen Cloth about two Inches or more broad, and so long as to go once and
almost half about the wounded Member.

XXIV. For if they should be shorter, they would not keep the Fracture stable;
and if they should be longer, they would not be convenient; because when the
Part is unbound to renew the Applications, it must be lifted up and moved; but
they ought to be of such a length, that without stirring the Limb, both the
heads may be so loosned, that the Wound may fully appear.

XXV. These Plagulae (so many as are necessary) are to be dipped into black or
red austere Wine, to make them stick the better, prevent Inflammation, and
preserve the substance of the Part sound; (and Galen keeps them so wet, Night
and Day, or else Sponge; dipped in such Wine.)

XXVI. They are to be so many that no space may be left empty; and they are so
to be applied to the Member, that their heads may be drawn by the place
affected, not round and circularly, but a little sloping, so as that from the
contrary part where they begun, they may be brought together the one to the
other, and cross one another, after the manner of the Letter X, by drawing the
right head to the left part, and the left head, to the right Part.

XXVII. These Splenia, for that they are not very long, and may be so opened
that the Wound may appear, without lifting up or moving the Limb, are very
convenient.

XXVIII. There may also be applied a binding up, which may be completed with
once rolling about, and which may be done with a Swath or Rowler folded
together with a twice or thrice folded Linen Cloth, after the manner of a
Cross-cloth, but so artificially sewed together in the sides, and so broad,
that it may cover the whole Wound.

XXIX. These things performed, the Member is to be laid easily in some proper
Capsula, or other like thing, to keep the Fractured Parts in their proper place.

XXX. When the danger of the Inflammation is over, you must apply things proper
for to remove the Receeding Bone, in which work, Nature is to be assisted by
Art; for this purpose, Oil Olive mixed with Bees Wax, adding thereto of
Euphorbium, j. part: of Comfrey ij. parts: and of round Birthwort iij. parts:
Avicen commends it, to be used in strong full grown Bodies, and in Winter time:
but he used Spurge, instead of Comfrey, which we have put in, instead thereof.

XXXI. Others commend for the Extraction of Bones, Ammoniacum and Bedellium,
disolved in Oil of Lillies: so also powder of Earthworms (some say their
Ashes) mixed with Honey: which brings them forth by a specific property.

CHAP. VII. Of a FRACTVRE with a WOVND, the BONE made bare.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). And in Latin, Frastura cum Vulnere Osseque
nudato. And in English, A Fracture with a Wound, where the Bone is bare of the
Periostenm.

II. The Signs. When such a Fracture as this occurrs, the Fragment or Splinter
feels loose; and if it is in sight, so as it can be seen, it may be pulled
forth with a pair of Pliers or Foreeps.

III. But sometimes the Bone is made bare of the Periosteon, where no Fragments
or Splinters are; and in this case it is known by sight, or feeling.

IV. The Prognostics. Such a Fracture as this is, is much more difficult to be
cured than a Simple Fracture: but not so difficult where there are naked
Fragments, as where they are held fast by the Periosteon.

V. Where there is a Fracture, and the Bone naked of the Periosteon, only
without any Fragment, it is yet less dangerous, and more easy of cure, than
where it is broken into shivers.

VI. The greater the Bone or part, the more difficult and hazardous the Cure:
the lesser the Bone and Part, the sooner it may be effected.

VII. The Cure. Where the Fracture is with naked Fragments of Bones, they are
to be taken forth with an Instrument, if they can be seen; but if they lie hid
in the Flesh, you must apply attractive Medicaments, and wait till Nature
expells them; unless by pricking some more noble part, and causing much pain,
you be forced to search for them, and take them forth.

VIII. Then a convenient extension being made, and a good confirmation, the
Wound is to be closed up by stitching, or otherwise as you see most convenient;
and if there are no great Lacerations or Bruises (the fractur'd Bones being
well set) it may be healed up with Stypticks: as in other places we have
taught; Dryers, and Catagmaticks being applied in the mean season, for
consolidation of the Bone it self.

IX. But if it is manifest that the parts are contused, you must apply
Digestives, that the Wound being suppurated, it may be cleansed with gentle
abstersives, and then healed up according to Art: but in all these
applications, beware of things fat and greasy.

X. But if by reason of the Fracture, the Bone is made naked of the Periosteon
without any Fragments or bits broken off, the Fracture is first to be reduced
(unless any Inflammation is present) and then, it must be defended from the
injuries of the Air, lest it putrefie, and so you be forced to scale it.

XI You are to cover it, not with Oily Medicaments, nor Emollients, or
irritating Abstersives, which may foul or corrupt the Bone, putrefie the Wound,
or cause pain; but with its natural covering, to wit, with the Flesh and Skin.

XII. And then the lips of the Wound are to be drawn together, till they touch,
by stitching; after which you must proceed exactly as we have taught in the
Cure of a Fracture with a Wound, in cap. 5. aforegoing.

XIII. In binding up, you must consider whether any part of the Bone will come
off, or not: if none, or but a small Fragment is likely to be separated, the
Ligature is to be made with three Bands; and the Dressings must be as in a
Fracture with a simple Wound, wherein there is the separation of some small
Bone.

XIV. Now if the Bone that was made naked be presently covered with the Skin,
there is none of it will come off; but contrariwise, if it be long naked and
bare of Flesh, you may expect Excretion: for so the Learned Hippocrates, de
Fracturis lib. 3. Text. 44. has taught us. And Nature likewise, will cast out
all such Bones as refuse, or cannot be replaced.

CHAP. VIII. Of a FRACTVRE with a WOVND, the Bone sticking out.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Fractura cum Vulnere Osseque
prominente: and in English, A Fracture with a Wound, with the Bone sticking out.

II. The Cause is from the greatness of the External violence, by which the
Bone is so broken, and thrust forth of its place.

III. The Signs. It is known by sight, because the end of the naked or bare
Bone is visible, being thrust out beyond the Wound.

IV. The Prognostics. It is of more difficult cure than those Fractures whose
ends come not forth, because it is exposed to the Air, which corrupts the Bone;
more especially if it has been any considerable time in the Air, before the
Reduction.

V. The cure is harder to be performed also, by reason of its hanging out or
over, for that in making the Reduction, the Extension must be greater; which as
it will put the Patient to more pain, so it may endanger an Inflammation, A
postem, Convulsions, or other ill Symptoms.

VI. The Cure. If the extremities of the fractured Bone, break through the Flesh,
and stick out, through the Skin, you must endeavor their speedy Reduction, that
they may not be altered and corrupted by the ambient Air, for then they must of
necessity be cut off.

VII. In order therefore to their replacing, there must be a sufficient
Extension, and if occasion be, for their more easy Reduction, you must make use
of a strong Iron Leaven; then they must be covered with their natural Clothing,
to wit the Flesh and the Skin: after which the Cure of both Fracture and Wound
is to be consumated as we have before taught.

VIII. But if this Reposition cannot be easily done, or not without pain and
violence; then of two evils, the lesser is indeed to be chosen: and therefore
that the Reduction may be made, the end of the longer Bone is to be cut off
with a cutting File, or with a sharp fine Saw, or some other Instrument, that
it may be made a little shorter.

IX. This done, by making a moderate Extension, you may then with your Fingers
reduce the Bones to their places: if the Bones were not broken short off, and
even; it will then be your best way to cut off the uneven parts of both ends,
that they may the more evenly, and better join together.

X. And truly this manner of Operation is much better to be done, than to leave
the Bones not put together; or otherwise by a too great and violent Extension
to cause vehement pain, and thereby induce an Inflammation, Gangrene, or
Sphacelus, and hazard Death it self.

XI. The ends of the Bones being thus made even, you are then by a moderate
Extension, and the help of your Finger, to replace them.

XII. But if notwithstanding this cutting, you shall yet find a difficulty in
their Reduction, by reason you may fear the Effects of a violent Extension;
wherein, by reason of the Wound, many Fibers may be hurt, and great pain be
caused, so as to endanger an Inflammation, or Convulsion, etc.

XIII. In this case, you must by the advice of Hippocrates, (a gentle Extension
being made) put in a strong Iron Leaver, or a Chizle, or some suchlike
Instrument, between the ends of the fractured Bone, and so raise the one, and
depress the other, as with a Leaver; by which means, the Bones will be more
extended than the Muscles, and so they may with little pain be reposited.

XIV. When the Bone is reduced, you must consider whether any part of the Bone
will come off, or not: if it be reduced presently, nothing will come off; but
if not, something may. If nothing is to come off, bind up the Part (having
first laid a suppurative to the Wound) as a Fracture with a simple Wound: but
if something is to come off, order the Bandage as for a Fracture with
separation of a great fragment of a Bone.

XV. But because these Wound, are general, great, and contused, they are to be
cured by the second Intention, and because they breed plenty of matter, they
require often looking to; and you ought also to cut a hole in the Bands and
Plasters, just over the Wound, for the Issuing out of the Pus: and because this
kind of Fracture forbids to lift up the part often, or to unbind the Ligature,
you must take the middle way, which may answer the ends, both of the Wound and
the Fracture.

CHAP. IX. Of a FRACTVRE DISTORTED, or ILL SET.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Fractura distorta: and in English,
A Fracture distorted, awry, or ill Set.

II. Many times a Fracture being ill Set, the broken Bones grow distorted or
awry, by which the function or motion of the Member is much hurt or hindered, so
that in the Arms the laying hold of any thing is prejudiced, and in the Leg or
Foot, a Lameness or Halting is caused.

III. The Causes. It arises either from a too long delay before the Fracture
was Set, because a sufficient Extension could not be easily made, so as to set
the Bones right: Or from the inordinate and perverse motions of the Patient.

IV. Or from that which is generally the chief Cause, viz. either the
Unskillfulness and Ignorance, or the Neglect of the Surgeon: This
disaffection is known by sight.

V. The Prognostics. There can be no hope of restoring the Member to its true
shape, without breaking of the Callus, so that the Fracture may be set de novo
again.

VI. The Cure. We are first to consider, whether the Callus is old or new; if
it is already old, and of long continuance, and that it is grown very hard; and
that the Patient also is either Cacochymick, Weak, or Aged; then the best way
will be not to meddle with it.

VII. For it is not then to be touched without the approach of dangerous
Symptoms, which are usual to follow upon the breaking of the Callus; For which
reason it is better of two Evils to choose the less, and to be satisfied, though
with living deformed, and for many Years so; than by a cruel and dangerous
Cure, to hazard the inducing of deadly Symptoms.

VIII. Nor yet is it a thing possible, if the Callus is old, and extreme hard,
to break it; for if you attempt it, the Bone will sooner break in another
place, than the place where the Callus is.

IX. Moreover, there would not only vehement Symptoms be induced, but the
deformity or crookedness of the Limb would not in the least be taken away;
since that the crooked Callus could not be broken or amended, so that all this
Work would be done in vain.

X. But where the Callus is recent, or not above six or seven Months old, the
Patient of full Age, and strong, and the fractured Bone not great, nor the
function or action of the Member much hurt, the Callus may be broken, and the
Bones better set together.

XI. In order then to the breaking of the Callus, and that it may be the more
easily done, it is for some days to be fomented with a Decoction of emollient
Herbs, and other softning things, as roots and leaves of Althaea, Mallows, fat
dried Figs, Raisons stoned, Lilly-roots, etc.

XII. And afterward an emollient Cataplasm may be laid on, such as this: In a
strong Decoction of Fenugreek, and Linseed, boil roots and leaves of Althaea
and Mallows, A. lbss. of Lilly-roots, fat Figs and Raisons stoned, A. iv.
flowers of Sulphur ii. boil to a thickness, and beat all in a Mortar, to which
add A tificial Cinnabar levigated iii. Salt of Tartar or Potashes ss. mix, and
apply it, renewing it Morning and Evening.

XIII. But at every dressing, and before application of the Cataplasm, it will
be good to foment the Callus for a quarter of an Hour together with this Bath:
Take pure Sulphur iii. melt it in an Iron Ladle, to which put Salt of Tartar in
powder i. stir them together till they are incorporated; then being cold, beat
all into fine powder, and boil it in three Quarts of Water, or more, for half
an Hour, and keep it for use, to foment withal.

XIV. And those who are at or near Bath, may daily go into the Hot Bath once or
twice a day for some Weeks; this has been found by Experience, not only to
soften the Callus, but even to waste and dissolve it, so that it may be broken
with much ease.

XV. Or you may anoint with this Ointment: Ung. Dialthaeae iss. Mucilages of
Fenugreek and Linseed, A. i. Oils of sweet Almonds, and of Camomil, Veal
Marrow, Hens Fat, A. vi. Bdellium, Mastich, Turpentine, A. ss. Wax, q.s. mix,
and make a soft Ointment.

XVI. Also Empl. e Mucilaginibus cum Gummi, e Cicuta cum Ammoniaco, e
Cinnabari, Mercuriale, or de Ranis cum Mercurio, e Galbano crocatum, etc. are
of Eminent Use in this Case, because they soften the Callus almost to a Miracle.

XVII. The Callus being now sufficiently mollified or softened; the Limb is by
the help of two strong Assistants, to be drawn this way, and that way; and so
by pulling with main strength to be extended, till the Bone seems to separate.

XVIII. Then the Artist with his Hands and Fingers is to put each Part into its
true place, thrusting in that which sticks out by great force: If it will not
easily yield to the Hand, he may wrap up in fine Tow, or in a Linen Cloth, a
small Bar of Iron, of an Inch or more broad, which laying upon the Distorsion,
he may be strong Bandage force the Bones back again to their due places, in
which he is to endeavor to keep them, till the Fracture is perfectly well.

XIX. Or otherwise, the Extension is to be made till the Bone is perfectly
broken: Or fixing the Member against his Knee, he may incline the Bone toward
him with both his Hands, till he hears or feels it broken; after which it is
rightly to be Set again, and Cured after the manner of a Simple Fracture.

CHAP. X. Of FRACTVRE with a VITIOVS or EVIL CALLUS.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...), and (...). in Latin, Fractura cum Callo malo
seu vitioso; and in English, a Fracture with an evil or vicious Callus; that
is, in which the Callus is either lesser or greater than it should be.

II. The Causes. When the Callus is generated less than it should be, it is
from scarcity or want of that thicker Nourishment, with which the Bones are to
be nourished, and of which the said Callus is bred: And this scarcity or want,
is either from too spare a Diet, or not eating those things which are most fit
for the breeding of a Callus.

III. Or it may be from the too straight or hard binding up the fractured Part;
or from Medicaments over-astringent, which hinder the affluence of the
Nourishment.

IV. When the Callus is generated larger than it should be, it is either from
an over-abundance of the thick boney Nourishment; or from the too loose Bandage
of the Fracture; or from giving the Osteocolla-Stone too plentifully.

V. For such is the Nature and Property of this Stone, to generate a Callus,
which it performs easily and speedily; and therefore if it is given too much,
it causes the Callus to over-grow, or exceed its due proportion; and therefore
is more fit for elderly or aged Persons, and such as are of ripe Years, than
for such as are very young, or yet in their Youth: For if it is given unto
these, it generates (as Fabricius Hildanus observes) a Callus greater than it
ought to be.

VI. The Signs. When the Callus is less than it ought to be, it is known by
touching, wherein it is felt not at all, or but very small; the aforegoing
Causes went also before, and the Member is also very feeble or weak, in its
motion or action.

VII. When the Callus is also greater than it should be, it is known also by
touching, wherein it is felt tuberous, or greater than it should be; the
aforegoing Causes went also before, and there is a pain from the Compression of
the Muscles and Nervous Parts, for which reason the Part is rendered less useful
in its action or motion, especially if the Fracture be near a Joint.

VIII. The Prognostics. Whether it be ex deficiente, vel ex abundanti, if it
is recent, it may be reformed and cured; but if it is inveterate, or old,
whereby it is grown hard, and the Pores thereof closed, it will be remedied
with much more difficulty.

IX. The Cure, where the Callus is deficient. The Diet must be fuller, and of
greater Nutriment, generating a thick and viscid Juice, of what kind are
Neats-feet, Calves-feet, Sheeps-trotters, Sheeps-gathers; also Gellies made of
them either in Milk or Water, and made savoury and pleasant.

X. Add to these things strong Broths of all sorts of Flesh both of Beasts and
Birds: Pork, if young, is a singular good Food, also knuckles of Pork, and
knuckles of Veal; and their Bread may be a white sort of Biscuit.

XI. The Bandage is to be loosned, and done up slacker, that there may be more
room for the affluence of the Nourishment, which that it may be attracted to
the Part, it is to be bathed with warm Water till the Part appears red.

XII. And then attractive or drawing things are to be applied, as Dropacisms,
etc. which moderately heat, and draw the Nourishment to the place affected.

XIII. Inwardly you are also to give the Osteocolla-Stone levigated, ad i.
Morning and Evening in Comfrey-water, or rather in strong Meat Broth, or in
Alicant; for that as Fabricius Hildanus Cent. 1. Obs. 90. says, it has a
singular Virtue in generating a Callus.

XIV. The Cure where the Callus is abundant. The Diet is to very sparing, and
such as generates not much Nourishment; and such as yields rather a thin, than
a thick clammy Juice.

XV. It must be fomented, and often bathed with emollient and discussive
Medicaments, as a Fomentation of hot Water nitrated, or of Emollient Herbs and
Roots, as of Althaea, Mallows, Pellitory of the Wall, Beets, flowers of
Cammomil and Melilot, roots of Briony and Lillies boiled in half Water, half
Wine, etc.

XVI. You may foment also with the Bath-water, and apply the Cataplasms which
are described in Cap. 9. Sect. 12, and 13. aforegoing, and you may anoint with
the Ointment in Section 15. there following, all which things have a great
power to soften and discuss.

XVII. Sennertus commends this: Goose, Bears, and Man's Fat, A. ii. juice of
Earthworms i. Ammoniacum i. mix them. It will be so much the better if Vipers
Fat ii. be added to it.

XVIII. Also this Fomentation: Roots of Althaea i. roots of Briony, of white
Lillies, Fenugreek and Linseed, A. ss. flowers of Althaea and Mallows, A. M. j.
flowers of Camomil and Melilot, A. Mss. boil in Water, Vinegar, and wine, for a
Fomentation; and of the Mass make a Cataplasm.

XIX. These Fomentations are to be used, not till the Part grows red and swells
only, but also till it falls again, and becomes lank and wrinkled.

XX. And if the Patient is near Bath, it will be good to bathe daily twice a
day, till it is softened, wasted, and much diminished, as we hinted in Cap. 9.
Sect. 14. aforegoing.

XXI. Also the Emplasters or Cerates mentioned in Sect. 16. of the same
Chapter, may be here applied, which may be bound fast on, and renewed as you
see occasion, till the Callus is sufficiently diminished.

CHAP. XI. Of a FRACTVRE with WASTING of the PART.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Fracturacum Atrophia; and in
English, A Fracture, with a slenderness, wasting or consumption of the Part.

II. It oftentimes happens that in Curing of a Fracture, the Limb or Member
becomes slender or wasted, as if it consumed away, which we call an Atrophia of
the Part: This happens both in old and young, but chiefly in such whose Flesh
is soft and tender, and not come to the hardness or firmness of a full or
well-grown Body.

III. The Causes. It is caused from the hindering of Nutriment coming to the
Part, which is done by the too long and hard binding of the Part; by means of
which the Arteries and Veins carrying the Aliment, are nearly closed up.

IV. Or it may be caused from the Folly or Poverty of the Sick, when he has not
Food enough, or what is convenient for him to nourish him withal.

V. And sometimes it is caused by a long-continued rest of the Member or Part,
and its cessation from motion; or at least, this thing may add to the other
Causes, to make them more Potent in effecting this disaffection.

VI. The Prognostics. It is known by sight; and therefore if it is recent, and
in young, tender and growing Bodies, it is easily Cured: But if it is of long
standing, and in a Body done growing, it is Cured with much difficulty: If the
Patient is very Aged, it is Incurable.

VII. The Cure. In order to this Cure, you must endeavor to remove the Cause;
you must order a full and nourishing Diet, and such things chiefly which may
agree with the Stomach of the Patient, and may corroborate or strengthen it: Of
which kind are Gellies of all sorts, and strong Broths made savoury, and also a
little acid with Juice of Limons, which gives to the Nutriment a penetrating
quality.

VIII. You must also use and apply those Means which may attract or bring the
Aliment into the Part; you must slacken the binding: And when you dress the
Fracture, the Part is to be fomented with such things as dissolve Congelations,
and withal, may draw the Nutriment into the Member affected.

IX. You may bathe with the Powers of Amber, of Limons, Lavender, Rosemary,
Savin, or Southernwood; after which you may anoint with this Oil: Oils of Amber
and Aniseed, A. i. Oils of Juniper Berries, of Ben, and of bitter Almonds, A.
ss. mix them.

X. Or, Oils of Costus and Camomil, A. ss. Oils of Castor, and of Neats-feet,
Man's Grease, Ung. Martiatum, A. i. mix, and make a Liniment: This is good for
broken Bones, which grow not as they should do.

XI. And over all you may apply Empl. Piceum, or some other powerful Dropacism,
or Sinapism, which have a strength in them to attract the Aliment powerfully.

XII. Also inwardly you must give such things as resolve and open Obstructions,
even the most inveterate; among which we commend to you, Spiritus Aperiens,
Spiritus Nitratus, volatile Salts of Hartshorn, of Vipers, and of Man's Skull,
volatile Sal Armoniack, Ens Veneris, Salt of Tartar, of Tamarisk and Wormwood,
Salt or Vitriol of Mars, and Tincture of Mars made with Wine grown acid, or
with Spirit of Nitre.

XIII. To these things you may add Powers of Amber, of Aniseed, of Caraways, of
Cloves, of Fennel, of Lavender, of Limons, of Origanum, of Marjoram, of
Rosemary, of Sage, of Savin, of Sassafras, of Time, etc. given in a fit Dose in
Canary twice or thrice a day.

CHAP. XII. Of a FRACTURE of the SKULL.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Fractura Cranii; and in English, A
Fracture of the Skull, or Bone of the Head.

II. The Kinds. Fractures of the Skull are said to be sixfold, viz. 1. A Simple
Fracture (of which we Treat in this Chapter only.) 2. A Fissure. 3. A
Contrafissure, (both which we Treat of in Chap. 13. following.) 4. A Contusion
of the Skull, (Treated of in Chap 14. next after.) 5. An Incision. 6. A
Puncture; (both which are Treated of in Chap. 15.)

III. The Definition. Now a Simple Fracture, is that which separates (by
breaking) a Part from the whole.

IV. The Signs. If the Wound is large, the Fracture may be found out by feeling
with your Finger, but if small, by the Probe; in both which trials, an
inequality, depression, or ruggedness of the Skull, will be felt: But
ruggedness may sometimes deceive you, if the Sutures vary either in form, or in
place; as if the Sagittal Suture reaches to the Ossa Ethmoides: And that the
Suture may sometimes deceive us, Hippocrates, de Capitis vulneribus, Sect. 6.
testifies: The Suture, (says he) may deceive us, for that it is rougher than
the rest of the Bone.

V. You are to consider the Person inflicting the Wound; if a strong Person,
and furiously done; if the Weapon was sharp, or great, or heavy; or if the
Patient fell from some high place; if the Head (chiefly when bare) was struck
against any hard Body, Post, or Stone; if the Blow was violent, or the Skull
was weak or thin, as in Children, and such as are not yet come to their growth;
all these things going before, show the probability of a Fracture.

VI. There are also concomitant or conjunct Symptoms, as, 1. Bleeding at Mouth,
Nose, Ears, Eyes. 2. Deafness, or Noise in the Ears. 3. Vertigo, or Swimming of
the Head. 4. Falling down suddenly after the Blow. 5. Slumbering after the
Wound is received. 6. Vomiting, or Loathing. 7. Swooning away, and often
Fainting. 8. Dumbness sometimes, or loss of Speech. 9. Convulsions, Palsy,
Fever, and Raving. See Paraeus, lib. 9. cap. 2. And Fallopius, in Hippoc. de
Vulneribus Capitis, cap. 18.

VII. There are also Consequent Symptoms, as, 1. A constant Pain in the wounded
Part. 2. A continuing Deafness. 3. A frequent Vomiting of Choler. 4. Hurt or
Dullness of the Judgment or Understanding. 5. A Faltering in the Speech. 6. An
Hurt of the Memory. 7. A Continual Fever. 8. Convulsions, or Convulsive
Motions. 9. Frenzy or Raving. 10. A Palsy in one of the Arms, or Legs. 11. An
Apoplexy, either perfect or imperfect.

VIII. Hippocrates has another Sign, taken from the crashing, which, he says,
the Patient feels, if he chews Paper strongly on both sides of his Teeth: Or if
he holds a Packthread strongly between his Teeth, and it be strongly struck,
the wounded Patient will feel Pain in the Part. But Fallopius, in Hippocr. lib.
de Vulneribus Capitis, cap. 23. makes some doubt of these Signs, not accounting
them certain.

IX. But if the Hair is cut asunder, and sticks up in the Wound, the Skull must
then necessarily be hurt; because it could not be cut asunder, without the
resistance of the Skull.

X. The Prognostics. You are to gather these from the Symptoms; yet let a
Fracture of the Skull look as fair as may be, it is never without danger; but
certainly more perilous, if both Tables are broken; yet more dangerous, if the
Dura Matter be hurt; and most of all, if the Pia Matter be affected too.

XI. And Hippocrates, Prorrhet. lib. 2. advises us, That we carry our selves
prudently in every point of Art, but in the Predictive part chiefly; calling to
mind, that if the Event comes to pass according to our Presages, we shall be
admired, or have an Estimation with the Patient; but if we mistake, or presage
false, we shall be accounted Ignorant, and Despised; wherefore he advises us to
use Discretion in our Prognostics.

XII. Wounds with a Fracture of the Sinciput, or Forehead-bone, are more
dangerous than those of the Occiput. 1. Because they are thinner than those of
the Occiput, and weaker. 2. Because there are several Cavities or Vaultings in
them, by which the Brain is more easily wounded, if the Fracture pierces both
Tables. 3. Because there are many large Blood Vessels in the Forehead, which
may endanger the greater Hemorrhage. 4. Because the most of the Brain is
contained in the forepart. 5. Because the Skin is thinner in this part, whereby
the Skull and Meninges may the more easily be hurt. 6. Because the Sutures
Coronalis and Sagittalis, are in the forepart of the Head, so that the Skull
being there broken, the Dura Matter (which sends filaments through the Sutures to
produce the Pericraneum) may easily be hurt.

XIII. The Ossa Temporum being broken, are next in danger, because these Bones
are very thin and weak; and they are repleat with remarkable Arteries, Veins
and Nerves; also the Pericraneum does embrace the Temporal Muscles, which
Muscles have within, in their middle, a Tendon of exquisite sense, so that a
Wound and Fracture in this Part may easily, even by consent, offend the
Meninges, and the Brain, also the Nerves springing from it.

XIV. But a Fracture upon the Sutures, with a Wound within the Skull, or
without it, is most dangerous, 1. Because the Bones are not of a whole, but
divided Substance, and so least able to resist force. 2. Because Pus bred
there, may easily fall upon the Dura Matter. 3. Because in the Sutures, the Dura
Matter may be affected by consent.

XV. A Fracture being made, there is first Pain by reason of the solution of
Unity. 2. Watching, less of Appetite and Weakness. The Pain will cause a flux
of Humors, the Fluxion will cause Inflammation, and the Inflammation will cause
a Fever, or a Convulsion; sometimes a Gangrene, or a Mortification, if not
prevented.

XVI. In a Fracture of the Skull, you are not to think all the danger to be
past, before an hundred days are gone over; for Experience has testified, that
many have died at the end of that time, even when they thought all things to be
perfectly well. Fallopius, in Hippoc. de Vulneribus Capitis cap. 48. Paraeus,
lib. 9. cap. 13.

XVII. The Callosity which joins together the broken parts of the Skull, does
require 20 or more days to be generated, and after that about 30 or 40 days
more, for the hardening and confirming of it; but the Age, Strength, and good
Temper of the Sick, have a great force in hastening the Confirmation of the
same.

XVIII. It is very dangerous, if after a Fracture a Fever ensue; if the Head
becomes very hot, if the Sick has been subject to a Catarrh; or if he has been
often afflicted with an Erysipelas; so also if the Lips of the Wound swell not,
or grow flat, there is yet more danger.

XIX. If the Skull at the very beginning of the Cure becomes or appears
blackish, and the Patient (having a Scorbutic, Cachectick, or Cacochymical
habit of Body) cannot sleep, but is troubled with much watching, Death is not
far away. Fallopius, in Hippoc. de Vulneribus Capitis, cap. 24.

XX. If the Flesh about the fractured Skull, is of a black Color, becomes dry,
and affords not Pus enough in proportion to the magnitude of the Wound, it is
dangerous, for it is a sign of the Sphacelation of the Part.

XXI. If the Patient is wholly void of a Fever, if he digests his Food well,
sleeps well, with a good excretion of Excrements of no ill Color, nor
offending in Substance or Consistency, Quantity, Time, or other Qualities,
there is great hopes of Recovery.

XXII. So also if the Wound looks of a fresh and lively Color, yields a good
sort of Pus, or Matter; if its Lips swell a little, and are somewhat soft, and
the motion of the Dura Matter is regular, there is great hopes of the Patients
doing well. Paraeus, lib. 9. cap. 13.

XXIII. If much Pus appears upon the broken Skull, or there are Pustules upon
the Tongue, from an acrid Sanies falling down upon it from the Brain, through the
Foramina of the Palate of the Mouth, the hopes of Recovery will be but small;
more especially if these Acoidents continue, and cease not; for they show the
Brain it self to be ill affected. Paraeus, lib. 9. cap. 10.

XXIV. If the Occiput, Os Petrosum, or stone-like Bone behind the Ears, be
wounded or fractured, the danger is the less; 1. Because they are least subject
to Injuries. 2. Because the Bone behind does contain only the Cerebellum, which
is not so noble as the Brain. 3. Because less quantity of Brain is contained in
those places, than in other parts of the Cranium. 4. Because those Bones are
thicker. 5. Because they are more firmly covered; for the Skin on them is
thicker, the Flesh more plentiful, the Ligaments are also strong, to strengthen
the Bones.

XXV. Every Fracture of the Skull, with a Wound in the Head, is dangerous, though
no dreadful Symptom does at first, or for many days appear; for the strength of
the Patient, the soundness of the Body, cleanness of the Humors, wholesome and
moderate Diet, and temperateness of the Air and Clime, do all contribute for
the staving off of ill Symptoms, for a pretty long time.

XXVI. In a Fracture of the Cranium, the Parts above it must suffer a solution
of Continuity, except only in a Contrafissure; for in that the solution of
Unity is in the opposite place to the Fissure, viz. in the place where the Blow
was made.

XXVII. Hippocrates, Sect. 7. Aph. 2. says, That if the Flesh about the
fractured Skull appears of a livid or leaden Color, it is an ill sign; for it
is an Argument that the Natural Heat of the Part is extinguished by some malign
Humor, which has caused the Putrefaction of it, or by some vehement
Inflammation: But if it becomes of a leaden Color, by reason of the greatness
of the Confusion, it is not so dangerous, because the Evil may be prevented by
application of Digestive or Suppurative Medicaments.

XXVIII. If the Memory is impaired, the Reason is hurt, the Tongue falters, the
Eyes grow dim, the Ears grow thick of hearing, or deaf; if the Sick cannot move
himself, or sinks from the head of the Bed downwards, and a continual Fever
with raving is present; if either the Tongue grows black, of Clefts, or
Pustules appear upon it; if the Wound grows dry, and yields no Pus or Matter,
or becomes of a livid Color; if the Excrements be suppressed, a Convulsion,
Palsy, or Apoplexy do ensue, with a weak Pulse, and often Faintings away; if
all, or most of these Symptoms are present, or do appear, you may boldly
presage that Death is at hand.

XXIX. These Symptoms if they appear presently after the Wound is received,
bespeak, that the substance of the Brain is hurt; but if they are manifest
about fourteen days after, more or less, they cause an Inflammation and
Phlegmon of the Brain, by reason of the great Effusion of putrified Blood upon
it. Paraeus, lib. 9. cap. 12.

XXX. Some escape, who have great and dangerous Fractures of the Skull; others
again die, where the Fracture is small, and but slight to all appearance; but
this is caused, 1. From the strength or weakness of the Body. 2. From the
differences of the Parts hurt, some being more Sensible, or full of Vessels, or
more Noble than the other. 3. From the diversity of Symptoms, some being more
gentle, others more vehement; of which you may see Examples in Hippocrates,
Epidem. lib. 7.

I. Of Fractures of the Skull in Children.
XXXI. The Cure. They are either without a Wound, or with a Wound. If they are
without a Wound, nor any fearful Symptom attending; but the Skull is depressed,
and an effusion of Blood out of the Veins, does wave up and down under the
Skin, when it is compressed, (which falls out sometimes in hard Labor) the
Hair is to be shaved off, and a soft Linen Cloth 3 or 4 times double, and well
dipped into a Mixture of Oil of Roses, whites of Eggs, and Vinegar, is to be
applied to the Child's Head, and to lie 24 Hours before it is removed.

XXXII. If it is in the heat of Summer, it is to be applied cold; but in the
Winter time, or cold Weather, it must be warm: This will repress or hinder the
flux of Humors for the future, and discuss those which are already upon the
Part.

XXXIII. After this, to the twelfth day, this Cataplasm is to be applied warm.
Catechu, Myrtle-berries, red Boses, Samach, A. iss. Barley and Bean flower,
Rice-meal, A. i. dried Southernwood, and Wormwood, A. ss. Caraway and Fennel
seeds, A. iss. all being in fine powder, boil them in rough red Wine xiv. to
the consistency of a Cataplasm, adding afterward Honey ii. Oil of Roses iss.
mix them.

XXXIV. Apply it large enough to cover some of the adjacent parts; not too
little of it, lest it grow dry, nor too much, lest it hurts by it is weight; and
warm, that it offends not by its coldness, and let it be renewed Morning and
Evening.

XXXV. And from the 12 to the 24 day, you may apply Empl. Album, malaxed with
Oil of Roses, adding i. of the Oil to iv. of the Emplaster. After the 24 day,
you may apply Sticticum Paracelsi, malaxed with Oil of Roses in the former
proportion, till the Cure is completed.

XXXVI. Arcaeus, lib. 1. cap. 5. advises to dress Childrens Heads thus: For the
first dressing, Vinegar ii. powder of Myrtle-berries ss. Barley and Bean
flower, A. iii. mix, and boil to the consumption of a Cataplasm, adding one
Egg, white and yolk beaten together, with Oils of Roses and Myrtles, A. ii.

XXXVII. Afterward, a Cerate made of Wax, Honey, Lapis Haematitis,
Pumice-stone, Cumin-seeds, Wormwood, and Wheatmeal, is to be applied; or
instead thereof Diachylon malaxed with Oil of Lillies, to be applied as the
former.

XXXVIII. If there is a Wound with the Fracture, but without dangerous
Symptoms, if the shivers or fragments of the Cranium stick together, Arcaeus
will have them by no means to be taken forth, but the Fracture only to be
anointed with his Liniment warmed, and applied with 3 or 4 Feathers, stripped
till you come within an Inch of their ends, and tied together with a Thread.

XXXIX. If dangerous Symptoms are present, as vomiting of Choler, Fever,
Convulsion, Palsy, etc. by which we know the Brain to be affected, the Cranium
is then to be opened: Fallopius, in Hippoc. de Vulneribus Capitis, cap. 47. and
Langius, his Epistles, Tom. 1. Epist. 5.

XL. The Skull being opened, these Wounds and Fractures in Children, are no
otherwise to be dressed than those in full-grown Persons, which in the
following Discourse we shall at large declare.

II. Of Fractures of the Scull, in grown Persons.
XLI. In every Fracture of the Skull, we are to consider how it may be Cured:
It is either without a Wound, and then we are to consider, whether or no the
soft parts above the Skull are to be opened by Section: Or it is with a Wound,
and then we are to consider, whether the Skull is to be opened or not; and if
it is to be opened, by what Artifice it is best to be done.

XLII. If the Fracture is small, and no evil Symptoms suddenly follow upon it,
but that in a few days the depression of the Skull risea up again of its own
accord, without any Inflammation, or other Tumor in the fleshy Parts, the
opening may be forborne safely till you see farther; for many times Nature her
self, (being assisted with some proper Topics) makes a Consolidation of the
Bones.

XLIII. But if the Fracture is great, or very manifest, with evil Symptoms
present, or seeming immediately to follow, there is a necessity then of making
an Incision into the fleshy Parts, even to the Skull; and this by the Authority
of Hippocrates, Galen, Celsus, and other the Ancient Physicians.

XLIV. If Blood or Pus falls upon the Meninges, or the Brain, Death will
suddenly follow after, if a way is not presently made for their Evacuation, by
an Incision of the fleshy Parts, and opening of the Skull; and this daily
Experience shows us, through the omission of these Operations.

XLV. Now the Reasons for this Section or Incision, are, 1. That if dangerous
Symptoms are present, the Skull it self may be viewed, whether it be hurt or
not. 2. For the removal of such things, as Blood or Pus, which may offend the
Membranes, or Brain; also pieces of the Weapon wounding, or Fragments of the
Skull it self pricking those Parts.

XLVI. As to the places where this Incision is to be made. It may be made in
all the parts of the Hairy-scalp, the Sutures, and the Temporal-Muscles only
excepted.

XLVII. The Sutures are to be avoided, because the Filaments or Fibers by which
the Meninges are joined to the Pericranium, are of an exquisite Sense, which
being wounded, may be inflamed, and by consent of Parts, communicate the
Inflammation to the Membranes of the Brain, and Brain it self. Fallopius, in
Hipde Vulner. Capitis, cap. 19.

XLVIII. The Temporal Muscles are to be avoided, 1. Because a Paralysis will be
caused on that side the Head, on which the Wound is made, and a Convulsion on
the other side, by which an uncomely Distortion of the Face will be made. 2.
Because if the Incision is made transverse, (which is the most dangerous) it
will scarcely ever be healed; for that it is almost always in motion, when we
eat, drink, or speak. 3. Because the Sutura Squammosa lies under it, which is
to be avoided for thereason in the former Section. 4. Because many Arteries,
Veins, and Nerves are spread throughout it; and if they should be transversly
cut, many dangerous Symptoms would ensue, as vehement Pain, Inflammation,
Fever, Convulsion, and great Hemorrhage, also Fainting, or Swooning, because of
the want and emptiness of the Vessels containing the Vital and Animal Spirits.
Paraeus, lib. 9. cap. 19. Pallopius, in Hipp. etc. cap. 38.

XLIX. As to the form of the Incision; the Hair being shaved off, you must make
it crosswise, and then with a Chizel, or sharp point of an Incision-knife, and
beginning at the points of the Incision, take all up to the Cranium; then the
Pericranium is to be separated from the Cranium, either with your Nails, or
with some other proper Instrument; and you are to begin the Separation from the
points of the Incision.

L. If the Pericranium is not separated, it will induce great Pain, and an
Inflammation, and possibly a Fever, more especially if it is torn with a
Raspatory or Trepan. Paraeus, lib. 9. cap. 4.

LI. But this is to be considered, that no transverse Incision be made a little
above the Eyelids, lest the Frontal Muscle being cut asunder transversly, the
Eyelid should not be lift up, or a Palsy should happen to the same; for which
reason, in these places the Section must either be strait or oblique.
Fallopius, in Hippoc. etc. cap. 23.

LII. As to what is to be done after the Incision. Care is to be taken to have
all things necessary in a readiness, to stop the bleeding. The Lips of the
Wound are to be kept asunder with Dossels and Pledgets of Lint armed with
Stypticks or Astringents, if an Hemorrhage is feared; otherwise (according to
Arcaeus, lib. 1. cap. 4.) only with the white of an Egg beaten; or if to ease
Pain, with the white and yolk beaten together, according to Fallopius, in
Hippoc. etc. cap. 29. and being thus dressed up, it is not to be meddled withal
for the space of 24 Hours.

LIII. In the mean season, you must be sure to give inwardly such things as
strengthen the Heart, and fortify the Animal Spirits; for which purpose we
commend to you, Tinctures of Coral and (...), Syrups of Corals, and Pears, and
of the Juice of Citrons or Limons, Bezoar Stone, Bezoar Animal, volatile Salts
of Vipers, of Hartshorn, and of Sal Armoniack, Spirits of Angelica, Anise,
Bawm, Caraways, Marjoram, Mint, Limons, Oranges, Sage, Time, Tinctures of
Saffron and Cochinele, Juice of Alkermes, etc. given with Syrup of Juice of
Pomgranates, or of Citrons, mixed with Mint-water.

LIVE. These things being done, we now come to the Fracture it self, and to the
opening of the Skull, which is to be performed in due time, in a proper part,
and with fit Iustruments, as we are even now going to declare.

LV. The Reasons why the Skull ought to be opened. 1. That the pieces of the
Weapon, or shivers of the Bone may be taken away. 2. That the part of the Skull
wholly broken off may be removed; or if yet joined to the rest of the Bone, it
pricks or hurts the Meninges. 3. That if the fractured Part be only depresied,
it may either be reduced or taken away. 4. That if either Blood or Pus be
fallen upon the Membranes, through rupture of some Vessel, it may be taken away.
5. That way may be made for the application of fit Medicaments.

LVI. The time in which the Skull ought to be opened. Fallopius, loco citato,
cap. 34. Arcaeus, lib. 1. cap. 4. and Paraeus, lib. 9. cap. 4. say, that it
ought to be opened before the fourth day: but it is sometimes opened with good
success after the seventh day, both in Summer and Winter.

LVII. If then you are called to one of these Fractures on the fourth day, you
may defer it 'till the seventh day, yea 'till the ninth is past, if ill
Symptoms force you not to open it sooner: for on the fourth day the
putrefaction of the Humors begin, as also the contest of Nature against the
Disease; in which time, it is not good to obstruct Nature, or trouble her in
her work: yet if you fear delay may breed danger, you are presently to do it,
even on the Critical Day.

LVIII. The Place, where it ought to be opened. In those Fractures where a part
of the fractured Scull is to be taken away, for the discharging of the Blood or
Sanies, etc. it is to be done on the depending part; except, 1. The Meninges be
inflamed, whereby they may be apt to swell above the Cranium. 2. When the
Membranes are also wounded, so that the Brain appears: in this case, opening on
the depending part is to be avoided; for the Brain being of a soft and fluid
substance, it would be apt to fall down to the Hole or Opening, or fall out.
Fallop. libro citato, cap. 35.

LIX. The Quantity of the Scull, which ought or may be taken away. Either the
whole fractured piece is to be taken away, or only a part of it. If in a
Fissure or Cut with an edged Weapon, the passage is not wide enough, the whole
Bone which is seen, is to be removed.

LX. If the Fracture is in the Scull, as on the Vertex or Crown, where no
depending Hole can be made to evacuate the Blood, Sanies, or Pus from the
Meninges, the whole piece also is to be taken away: and all the shivered or
splintred Bones which cleave not together, are also to be removed.

LXI. Otherwise, so much of the Scull only is to be removed; as covering the
Dura Matter becomes black: and so much as may make way for the application of
proper Medicaments.

LXII. The Chief Instruments with which the Skull is to be opened: These are,
1. The Rasp. 2. The Levator. 3. The Head-Saw. 4. The Terebellum, or Gimblet. 5.
The Trepan.

LXIII. 1. The Use of the Rasp You may have several sorts of this Instrument,
narrow and broad. First, placing the Patient in a good posture, wrap up the
Head in folded Cloths, stop the Ears with Cotton, that the noise may not offend
them; and cover the lips of the Wound with rags of Linen Cloth, to defend them
from the Air, and keep them from the Instruments touching them.

LXIV. Then, the Head being laid, and kept immovable, make use first of the
broadest Rasp, then of that which is narrower, and lastly of the narrowest: and
that they may cut the better, let them be often moistened with Oil of Roses,
that they may rasp the easier, and not heat the Scull: if Blood comes upon your
Work, use a mixture of Vinegar and Water.

LXV. They are of use in Fissures or Clefts of the Scull, and in Cuts with an
edged Weapon; when the narrow point of the Weapon is left behind in the Bone:
now after the Rasps are used, you must make use of the same Applications which
are used after the Trepan.

LXVI. 2. The Use of the Levator. You may have them of several bignesses and
strengths, and of diverse forms; such as you may see in Paraeus, lib. 9. cap. 4,
and 5. When you use them, you must be cautious, that you gently and equally
lift up the Bone, and every part of it which is to be lifted up: for if any
part of it be left depressed, it may hurt the Dura Matter.

LXVII. 3. The Use of the Head-Saw. It is to be used, when there is a
Depression, or a Fracture on one side of the Bone: for one side being divided
by it, in a straight Line, there will be way made both for the taking away of
the Bone, and for the discharge of Blood, Sanies, or Pus, with very little loss
of the substance of the Scull: it also serves to cut asunder the distances of
the Scull, which are left after the application of the Trepan in several places.

LXVIII. 4. The Use of the Terebellum, or Gimblet. This is an Instrument which
Coopers use, to raise up the slaves or heads of Vessels: it has a screw-point,
which by turning, and pressing upon it as it is turned, fastens into the Bone,
and so helps to pull the piece out of it, after it is in part cut by the
Trepan; for that it is not safe to cut the whole Cranium through, as in the Bones
of the Forehead.

LXiX. It has another use also, which is for reducing, or raising a depressed
part of the Scull; by first making a small hole therein with the Pin of the
Trepan, and then screwing it in.

LXX. 5. The Use of the Trepan. The Uses for which it is applied, are
threefold: viz. 1. To remove all such things which may hurt the Membranes and
the Brain; as Blood, Sanies, Pus, Shivers of the Bone, bits of the Weapon, etc.
2. To raise up a Bone, depressing the Meninges and Brain, etc. 3. To make way
for the application of Medicaments.

LXXI. The Places to which the Trepan may be applied. 1. It ought not to be
applied upon the Fracture: for it will increase the mischief, especially if
there are many fractured Fragments. 2. Nor is it to be put upon a Suture: for
so the Neurotick Fibers, as also the Arteries and Veins, by which the Dura
Meninx is joined to the Pericranium, and which give nourishment to it, would be
lacerated or torn; from whence would come great Pain, Inflammation; and
Hemorrhage; which being communicated to the Membranes and Brain, might much
hurt them. 3. Nor is it to be applied to the Temples; because of the Temporal
Muscles and Sutura Squammosa. 4. Nor to the places a little above the Eyebrows;
because it would scarcely ever after heal, or be skinn'd. 5. Nor to the
Sinciput in Children, not above seven years old; for that it is dangerous to
apply it there, in such as are of ripe age. 6. Nor yet to the lower parts of
the Scull; especially if the Membranes are wounded; left the Brain should press
out through the Foramen or Hole.

LXXII. The Way of applying the Trepan. 1. Take out the Pin, when you are come
to the second Table. 2. Let it be moistened with Oil, that it may cut the
better. 3. The way the Trepan has made is to be now and then moistened with cold
Water, lest by the sawing of the Trepan, the Scull should be healed. 4. You are
to wipe away the Blood with a piece of Sponge, that you may see which part is
deepest cut, and so lean hardest upon the other side. 5. When the Part cut by
the Trepan begins to shake, your safest way will be to lift it up with the
Levator. 6. If there be any ragged or pointed Fragments, which may hurt the
Membranes, they are to be taken away with the Scalptor lenticulatus, or the
hollow Scraping. Levatory, (see it, Tab. 6. K.) 7. The Piece being taken out,
the Wound and Fracture are to be dressed with proper Topics, as we shall
presently teach you. See Lib. 1. Cap. 2. Sect. 3. ad 11. of this present Sixth
Book.

LXXIII. Now because the Trepan cannot well be applied, without a true
knowledge of the Cranium, we shall here give you a short Description of it.
First, the Hairy-Scalp presents it self; in which there is to be considered,
its Sense, Thickness, Vessels, and Muscles which lie under it. The Hairy-Scalp
is thinnest on the top of the Head, nor is there any Muscle between it, and the
Scull on that part; except you will call the Membrana Carnosa a Muscle, which
some Anatomists of late do, and it may be not improperly, because by it, many
Men move the whole Scalp.

LXXIV. If a Fracture is to be feared, there, viz. in the Vertex, you may
boldly cut into the Hairy-scalp, because it is of a dull Sense, and easily
healed up again: but be cautious of making an Incision into the Forehead; where
a transverse Wound may cause the Eyebrows to fall over the Eyes: for which
cause, if you are forced to make an Incision, let it be according to the length
of the Fibers: nor make any Incision on the Temporal Muscles, because
Convulsions and other ill Symptoms may happen.

LXXV. Under the Hairy-scalp lies the Pericranium, which you are to cut through,
in making way to the Cranium: you are to raise them both together, when you lay
the Cranium bare for the use of the Terebra or Trepan: for in tearing this
Membrane, great Pain, Inflammation and Fever may follow; as we have before told
you.

LXXVI. Now follows the Cranium it self, which is a concave or hollow Bone,
composed of many parts joined together by Sutures; of which there are five
which chiefly concern us, viz. three true ones, the Coronalis, Lambdoides, and
Sagittalis; and two false ones, Suturae Nothae; which two, and chiefly to be
regarded, are the Squammosae, that run under the Temporal Muscle on each side,
round about the outermost Verge of each Ear.

LXXVII. Through the Sutures, the Dura Matter passes, and is continued with the
Pericranium: the Sutures also divide the Bones so, that if one part of the
Scull is broken, the other may be preserved whole or entire, which otherwise
would be in much hazard: these Sutures are also weak in resisting of Blows, or
great external Force; and between them Pus or Matter may be unhappily retained,
and cause a Caries, and sooner work through the Dura Matter, than in the other
parts of the Scull.

LXXVIII. Now the way to find these Sutures out, is by drawing a String cross
the Head from Ear to Ear; and another from the Nose to the Crown of the Head:
the former of these will show the Sutura Coronalis, the latter the Sutura
Sagittalis, which usually begins at that Point where these Lines intersect;
being the Part where Fontanels or Issues are made, and reaches to the Crown of
the Head, joining to the Lambdoides; sometimes beginning just at the Nose.

LXXIX. The Lambdoides rises at the end of the Sagittalis, and goes forked down
the two sides of the Occiput.

LXXX. Now this is to be observed, that the Cranium is thinnest in the middle
part of the Head, thickest in the hinder part, and of a middle thickness in the
Forehead: for which reason it is, that Wounds are most dangerous on the Crown
of the Head, where the Scull by reason of its thinness, easily communicates its
Injuries to the Brain; as also for that the uppermost part of the Brain there,
lies high, as it were imbossed; one of the largest cavities being immediately
under the Scull, and many Capillary Veins running so close with it, as to make
themselves Trenches in the concave parts of the Cranium: for which reason, upon
a Blow, Contusion, or Fracture in this place, the Veins may easily be broken,
and the Blood extravasated between the Cranium and Dura Matter; whence ill
Accidents easily follow.

LXXXI. The Dura Matter lies next under the Scull, and under that the Pia Matter,
upon the substance of the Brain; of which see Lib. 4. Cap. 27. Sect. 4, and 5.
under the Pia Matter lies the Brain, in whose Ventricles is lodged the Plexus
Choroides, and under whose Basis lie a great number of branches of both
Arteries and Veins, which by great blows of the Head are sometimes broken.

LXXXII. Now the Scull by violence may be broken; which if it is so broken, as
that a piece is divided from the rest of the Scull, it is properly called a
Fracture: this Fracture consists sometimes but of one piece, sometimes of many
pieces; some whereof are deprest upon the Membranes, yea sometimes into the
Brain it self; whilst others lie entangled in the Flesh: but this you must
observe, that you take not out more Bones than needs must; for recent Fractures
of the Cranium, do easily Unite, like those in other parts, if the Pus or
Matter has a way made, to discharge its self from within. See lib. 4. cap. 27.
Sect. 20.

LXXXIII. The Cranium being thus perforated by the Modiolus, Terebra, or
Trepan, (call it by which Name you please) you are then to come to the
Dressing: first wipe off the Saw-dust of the Bone, with a bit of soft Sponge,
or a little Lint upon your Probe; then come to the dressing, about which
Authors somewhat differ.

LXXXIV. Avicen advises to Lenients: Celsus to driers, and sharp Vinegar:
others to Honey of Roses, mixed with Spirit of Wine.

LXXXV. If there is Putrefaction of the Membrane, then Honey of Roses mixed with
Spirit of Wine may be used; and stronger Detersives may be used, as the
Putrefaction is more or less.

LXXXVI. If much Blood is extravasated, or you fear a Haemorrhage, Celsus his
drying pouders or drying Balsams, with sharp Vinegar may be used; but this is
to be done when there is a Coagulation of the Blood, and danger of Putrefaction.

LXXXXVII. But if the Blood is recent, and exceeds not in quantity being caused
by some scratch of the Trepan, or some little Splinters of the inner Table, and
the Membrane is fresh, and of its natural color, it is not prudent to grieve
the Membrane, now exposed to the Air with Detersives, or with Vinegar, or Honey
of Roses with Spirit of Wine; because these things are contrary to the
Indications of Cure, which teaches us to digest recent Wounds, before we
deterge or cleanse; nor in this case, is there any thing to be cleansed off.

LXXXVIII. Digestives are therefore to be used: some put down into the hole a
long Linen or Silk Rag upon the Dura Matter, which is wet or moistened with hot
Oil of Roses, and tied at the end with a Thread, that it may be drawn out at
pleasure; that so the matter running out, may be turned into quittor, and the
Membranes defended from being hurt by the Bone.

LXXXIX. After the Rag is put in, they stop the place up with dry Lint, laying
dry Lint also upon the naked Bone, and anoint the lips of the Wound with some
Digestive, upon which they lay Linimentum Simplex, with a hole in the middle of
the Cloth, that the Pus may not be stopped in; and over that a mixture of Wax
and Oil; and then bind it up with the Band-Cancer; anointing the Parts adjacent
with Repelling Oils or Ointments, to hinder Inflammation.

XC. Others apply a piece of Satin, or other Silk, moistened in a mixture of
Honey of Roses, and Oil of Roses, which is continued 'till the seventh day:
afterward they use a mixture of Oil of Roses, and Oil of Hypericon; and anoint
the Cranium with Linimentum Arcaei melted, filling up the hole with Dosils and
Pledgets, and laying over it such Topicals as we have before set down.

XCI. Wiseman advises to use Lenients, which by the advice of Fallopius and
Aquapendens is a mixture of Oil of Roses with Rosin of the Fir Tree, or pure
Turpentine, afterward diminishing the Oil, and increasing the Rosin or
Turpentine: this mixture of Oil and Turpentine, by its Emplastick and Digestive
qualities, perfects the Concoction sooner than other things; and by its Anodyn
quality, secures the Part from Inflammation. See lib. 4. cap. 27. Sect. 15. 16.
etc.

XCII. Or, Oil of Roses iv. Honey of Roses, Spanish Wine, A. iii. Venice
Turpentine i. Grains of Kermes ss. Seeds of Hypericon i. boil to the
Consumption of the Wine, then strain, and add Aloes in fine powder i. mix them.

XCIII. In the application of Topics, consider the Part, and habit of the
Body, and add to, or diminish the Ingredients accordingly as you design to
Digest, Deterge, or Incarnate: and though some Authors limit us as to time, to
dress with these or other Medicaments; as to use Digestives to the fourth day;
Detersives to the seventh day; and Sarcoticks to the fourteenth day: yet
herein, you must make use of your own Judgment; always taking care to conserve
the native heat.

XCIV. The Lips of the wounded Scalp you may dress with this. Oil of Roses jss.
Turpentine washed i. Gum Elemi dissolved and strained ss. Yolk of an Egg i.
Saffron in powder i. mix them: by the speedy Digestion of the Wound the cure
will be hastened.

XCV. After Digestion Sp. Vini will be found a thing of singular use, and by
reason of its drying quality is most admirable, not only for Wounds of the
Hairy-Scalp, and Cranium, but of the Meninges also; being used either alone
upon Lint, or mixed with Honey of Roses, or Syrup of dried Roses.

XCVI. Or thus mixed. Take S.V. vi. fine Aloes i. Myrrh ss. Frankincense,
Sarcocol, A. ii. mix them. Or, S.V.. xxiv. Malago Wine xvi. Turpentine vi.
Centory the less in powder jss. Flowers of Hypericon in powder ss. mix, infuse
in B.M. and make a Balsam, which apply warm upon the Meninges.

XCVII. If the Dura Matter has changed its color, and will not be cleansed with
the former things; then, Turpentine washed in White Wind vi. Spirit of Wine
iii. Honey of Roses ii. Myrrh, Aloes, white Sugar, A. ss., mix them.

XCVIII. If the Wound tends to Putrefaction, Scarifie the Lips, and apply this.
Mithridate jss. Venice Treacle ss. Vng. Aegyptiacum ii. Myrrh, Scordium in
powder, A. ii. Spirit of Wine, q.s. mix them, and apply it.

XCIX. When the Putrefaction is removed, you may dress it with this of Johannes
Andraeas a Cruce. Venice Turpentine, Honey of Roses of each equal Parts, mix
them; this and the other Medicaments may be applied upon a piece of Silk or
fine Linen Cloth cut round, proportional to the hole made in the Skull, which
is to be placed under the edges of the Cranium by the Lenticular Instrument, to
keep the edges of the perforated Bone from hurting the Dura Matter: A Thread or
Silk must be fastened to it in the middle, to pull it out at pleasure: and over
it you are to apply Dosils of Lint to fill up the void space in the Bone,
thereby to keep the Dura Matter from rising above it.

C. And daily, when the Wound is bound up, let the Patient promote the coming
forth of the Matter, which is run to the Membranes of the Brain, by Breathing
out at the Nose, keeping the Mouth shut: and when you find the Wound Digests,
and good Pus to appear upon the Dura Matter, or on the Rag tied to the Thread;
you may then absterge with some of the former things, or with Honey of Roses
strained only.

CI. On the Bone lay dry Lint; and upon the Lips, Lint wet, spread with some
detersive Digestive; continuing those things as long as you see needful, with
Hippocrates his Empl. of Wax and Oil, astringent Oils, and the application of
the Band Cancer.

CII. When the Wound and Membrane are fully cleansed, omitting the Rag and
Honey of Roses, or the other Medicaments, you may put into the hole a round
gobbet of dry Lint, applying to the Bone this powder. Orrice-roots,
Birthwort-roots, Frankincense, all in powder, A. i. Sanguis Draconis, Catechu,
Hartshorn burnt, A. jss. Aloes, Mastick, Myrrh, A. ss. make all into a fine
powder, which apply upon dry Lint.

CIII. The Skull will Scale, as Arcaeus lib. 1. cap. 4. says, in about 24. or
25. days, if the Linimentum Arcaei be applied to the Bone; but Paraeus says it
will be 40 or 50 days: from whence it appears that a certain set time of the
Scaling is hard to be determined.

CIV. When you dress the Wound, embrocate the adjacent parts of the Head with
Oil of Roses warmed, as also the Neck, more especially where the Jugular Veins
are; as well to assuage the pain if it is vehement, as to contemperate the heat
of the Blood and Humors.

CV. Dress the lips of the Wound with Linimentum Arcaei, or some other
Sarcotick Ointment, over which lay Diapalma, or Empl. Album, with a Treble
Linen Cloth, wet in a Cephalic Decoction of Red Wine, and then squeezed out;
with these things, and the Linim. Arcaei, let the Bone be covered with good
Flesh, and produce the Cicatrice with Epuloticks according to Art.

CHAP. XIII. Of a FISSVRE or CLEFT of the SKVLL.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Fissura vel Rima Cranii: and in
English, A Fissure or Cleft of the Skull.

II. The Kinds. There are two kinds of Fissures. 1. Fissura simply so called,
which is a Cleft of the Skull upon the very place where the blow was made. 2.
(...). Cranii Contrafissura, a Contrafissure of the Skull; wherein the Cleft is
made on the oppofite side or place, to that where the blow was given.

I. Of a Fissure or Cleft of the Skull, in the Part wounded.
III. Rima, or Fissura, is made by a hard and blunt Weapon, sometimes passing
but through one of the Tables only, and sometimes through both; and this is
accounted one of the simple kinds of Fractures.

IV. Rima, or Fissura, is also twofold, 1. Conspicua, which is easily to be
discerned by the Eye. 2. Inconspicua, which is scarcely to be discerned by the
naked Eye, without something of Art is added; and this is called Rima
Capillaris, because the Cleft seems to be as small as a Hair.

V. The Signs. Rima, or Fissura Conspicua, if it passes but through the first
Table, to the spongy part between the two Tables, it is not only discernable by
the Eye; but the Bone being wiped clean and dry, you will find after a little
time, a little bloody Juice to issue out thereat.

VI. Fissura Inconspicua, or Rima Capillaris, is not easy to be found out: If
therefore you cannot discern it by the naked Eye, or by help of a Microscope,
or Magnifying-glass; you must cause the Patient to hold in his Breath, and to
stretch out his Breast as much as may be, and possibly a thin Sanies or Bloody
Humor may issue out, which is a good sign.

VII. If by this nothing appears, rasp or scrape that part of the Skull most
suspected, and then drop a few drops of Ink upon it, and so dress it up; the
next dressing dry the Skull, and cleanse it with a wet Rag, or Sponge; and if
any Fissure be; you will see the tract thereof by the Ink, which will be sunk
into, and remain in the Capillary Cleft thereof.

VIII. The Prognostics. As no Fracture of the Head is without danger, so that
of a Fissure cannot be exempted; for that sometimes, for want of due Care, it
carries Death along with it.

IX. If a Fissure is accompanied with evil Symptoms, there is much danger; and
if the Skull be not suddenly opened in such a Case, Faintings, Convulsions, and
Death often ensue.

X. The Cure. If the Cleft or Crack gapes so, that Pus or Matter may come
freely forth from it, there is no need to use the Trepan, or to dilate the
Wound with an Ineision-knife; and therefore Chalmetaeus says rightly, that
those deserve to be Censured and Reprehended, who not only in a small Fissure
of the Skull, (though it penetrates not) but also in a great Fissure, are bold to
set on the Trepan, by which great Error, the Cure is very much prolonged, to
the great damage of the Patient.

XI. Therefore, when (in this Case) the Trepan is not necessary, you must
follow exactly the Cure of a narrow Fissure, as if it were after the use of the
Trepan.

XII. If the Fissure passes not deeper than to the spongy part between the two
Tables, it is then so far to be dilated: If it passes through both the Tables of
the Skull, then it is to be dilated even to the Dura Matter, or through the first
Table at least, making way through the second also; wherein you are to leave a
sufficient opening for the clotted Blood, Sanies, or Pus, and in the depending
part of the Head, through the second Table.

XIII. In the Fissura Inconspicua, after you have besmeared it with Ink, and
come to the second dressing, you will see whether any signs of the Ink remains
in the Skull, or not; if so, you must continue your rasping until the Ink with
the Fissure is wholly gone, and the Bone grows somewhat bloody.

XIV. After which you may apply this Powder: Take Catechu, Sanguis Draconis,
Hartshorn burnt, A. iss. fine Bole, Terra Sigillata, Orrice-roots,
Frankincense, Olibanum, A. i. Mastich, Myrrh, A. ss. make all into a fine
powder.

XV. If you fear the second Table is cracked also, or that any Blood is fallen
down upon the Dura Matter, you must continue the Dilatation, even till you can
discover that Membrane; and now you are to make use of the Trepan, or Trafine;
though in all sorts of Fissures, these Instruments at first are to be avoided,
and Raspatories only are to be made use of, by which the Fissure is to be
sufficiently pared; but yet you are not to take away more of the Bone than need
requires.

XVI. After which, the afore-described Powder is to be laid on, or dry Lint,
avoiding Digestives, or Ointments, or any fat or greasy thing; and the Lips of
the Wound are to be dressed in all respects, as after the application of the
Trepan,

XVII. A Digestive is to be applied to them upon Lint, and upon that Linimentum
simplex, or that of Arcaeus, or this Mixture of Hippocrates: Oil of Roses ii.
Wax i. mix them; and you are to bind it up with the Band-Cancer.

XVIII. When good Pus or Matter appears, mix Detersives with Digestives, till
the Wound is perfectly clean, strewing the Bone with the Powder
afore-described, and applying dry Lint thereon; but to the Lips Linim. Arcaei,
or some Sarcotick Ointment with Diapalma, or Our Empl. Album, and over it a
treble Linen Cloth dipped in astringent Red-wine; lastly, incarnate and
eicatrize according to Art.

II. Of a Contrafissure of the Skull.
XIX. A Contrafissure, or a Counter-Cleft, is that which is made (the place
struck remaining whole) in the opposite part of the Cranium, or some distant
place, from that on which the blow was given: This by some is called Resonitus.

XX. The Signs. This is hard to find out, yet there are some signs by which it
may be discerned; there will be vomiting of Choler, a Fever, and other Symptoms
belonging to a Fracture; and the Sick will be often putting his Hand to the
place.

XXI. Some Tumor or Softness will appear in the Cutaneous Part which is
directly over the Fracture, which if you find, you may conclude there is a
Contrafissure.

XXII. If the Fracture (not being in the Wound) is at some little distance from
the Wound, and not in the opposite part, the Wound will not admit of Cure in
that part which is near to the Fracture, but grow ill-conditioned and
rebellious.

XXIII. The Wound will also flow with an ichorous thin Matter, and more
plentifully than the magnitude of the Wound can seem to admit; the Flesh also
growing pear to the Fracture, will be loose and spongy, not firm; and by the
Probe thrust between, you will find the Cutis separated from the Cranium.

XXIV. If the Contrafissure is very remote, or much distant from the Part
wounded, it is either in the self-same Bone, or in diverse Bones. If it is in
the self-same Bone, it may be either laterally, as when the left side of the Os
Erontis is struck, and the right side is cleft, and contrariwise; or,
perpendicularly, from the upper to the lower part; as when not the upper Table
which received the blow is cracked, but the lower Table.

XXV. If the Contrafissure is in divers' Bones, then it is either when the
right side: Suppose the right Parietal is struck, the cleft or crack will be in
the left: Or, if the Os Frontis receive the blow, the Os Occipitis may be
cracked.

XXVI. Now this kind of Fracture happens chiefly to such, who have either no
Sutures at all, or, where they are either very obscure, or very close; for in
such the Air being violently comprest, rebounds to the contrary or opposite
side, with the greater force; and so not being able to get out, makes a cleft.

XXVII. This has been often seen in the cracking of great Bells, designed for
melting down: Do but bind the Bell round firmly with a Cord, or a Hoop; and
then striking very hard upon it with a great Iron Hammer, the sound having not
its wonted liberty to get forth, or make its way through, presently splits the
Bell in the place opposite to that where the blow was given.

XXVIII. To discover this kind of Fissure, the signs at Sect. 21. above, are
for the most part present; besides, if there is a Tumor or Softness appearing,
wherever it is, you may be assured, that there is a Fracture in the Skull
subjacent thereto.

XXIX. The Prognostics. It is difficult to make the proper Prognostics in
this case; and if the Patient should die, the Artist is not much to be blamed,
because of the difficulty of knowing truly how the Case is.

XXX. For if the Cranium should by a violent Contusion be depressed, and
presently return to its own place, leaving no signs of a Fracture behind; it
would be difficult to foreknow the success: So also if the cleft or crack be
only capillar, and hard to be seen.

XXXI. When the second Table of the Skull is broken, the first remaining whole,
it is very doubtful to be known, and therefore no presages can be exactly made.

XXXII. When the Fracture happens in the opposite part to that which is
wounded, by reason it is not to be seen, the most Skilful Artist may easily be
deceived, and therefore he is cautiously to deliver his Judgment.

XXXIII. For these Reasons then, if you suspect the Skull to be fractured, the
Cutis Musculosa not being broken or divided, you are to enquire, whether the
Patient has vomited Choler, whether he lost his sight, or could not speak;
whether Blood did come forth of his Nostrils and Ears, or he seemed to be in a
Trance; or whether he perceived a Vertigo, or giddiness after the Blow, or a
vehement Sickness at Stomach; for if these Symptoms have been, or are present,
they indicate a Fracture: And then, though no other Symptoms do manifest
themselves, you are farther to enquire, whether the Patient had not formerly
the Headache, (for then there is less danger) and whether he was struck with a
heavy Weapon, or by a strong Hand of one enraged; and whether he felt or heard
a noise in the Brain, when the Blow was given; if these signs appear, you are
to suspend your judgment as to any good Event, and regulate your presages
according to some other succeeding Accidents or Symptoms.

XXXIV. The Cure. If no Tumor or Softness appear in the opposite part, you are
to shave the Head, and apply upon the Part Empl. Cephalicum for 24 Hours; or
this, Ship-pitch, and Wax, A. iii. Turpentine, Gum Elemi, A. vi. Mastich,
Orrice in powder, A. iii. mix, and make an Emplaster, and apply it to the
opposice part.

XXXV. If after the Emplaster is taken away, the Cutis Musculosa appears in any
place more moist, soft, or swelled, than the rest of it is, it is very probable
that there is a Fracture.

XXXVI. When the Fracture is found, it is Cured as a Contusion of the Skull,
with a Fracture under a whole Skin; viz. by making Incision in the Skin with an
Incision-knife, and separating it with the Pericranium from the Bone, and then,
(if the crack which penetrates is narrow) perforating the Skull with the
Trepan, etc.

XXXVII. If the second Table is broken, the first remaining whole, then you are
to apply the Trepan, as well for this cause, to take away the Splinters which
may prick the Dura Matter; as for another cause, to make way for the discharge
of Blood, Sanies, Pus, etc.

XXXVIII. Having found out a Contrafissure, you are first to make Incision
through the soft parts above the Cranium, and then with your Rasps to make way
for the discharge of the Blood, Sanies, Matter, etc.

XXXIX. If the Cranium is cleft, ( the Cutis Musculosa, or the soft Parts above
the Skull not being broken or wounded) and no fearful Symptoms appear, then you
are to shave off the Hair on that part of the Head where the blow was received,
and apply Anodyns or Medicaments easing Pain, which may be withal drying and
astringent. As,

XL. Take Barley-flower xii. powder of red Roses, of Myrtle-berries, A. ii.
Catechu, Mastich, A. i. Oil of Roses iii. Vinegar, Water, A. q.s. mix, and boil
to the Consistence of a Caetaplasm; this for Summer; but if it is Wintertime,
instead of the Water, take as much Wine.

XLI. And now and then gently purge with an Infusion of Sena in half Wine half
Water, or with Pulvis Cornachini mixed with Syrup of Roses solutive, or with
Syrupus Catharticus.

XLII. Some open the Cephalic Vein on the same side, or apply Cupping-glasses
with Scarification; and withal drop Oil of Sweet Almonds into the Ears, for
discharge of the Sanies or Pus, if any is gathered there; also the passages of
the Nose are to be made smooth and slippery with Oil or sweet Butter.

XLIII. On the fourth day you may use a Gargarism, made of a Decoction of
hull'd Barley, and Elm-bark, which is to be sweetened with Syrup of Mulberries,
Mel Rosatum, or Oxymel simplex.

XLIV. After the seventh day, apply Discussives, as Diachylon simple and cum
Gummi, Empl. de Betonica, and such other like; which soften with Oil of Roses,
or Camomil.

XLV. But if after the use of all these means, dreadful Symptoms shall appear,
(which may happen, though the Parts above the Skull are not broken or wounded)
you must not then defer the Incision of the Cutis Musculosa, and opening the
Skull; for indubitably there is Blood, or Matter, or both, fallen upon the Dura
Meninx; and this may be known by Blood coming forth from the Ears or Nostrils,
after the blow was given; also by the sleepiness of the Patient, stupidity, or
heaviness of the Head.

CHAP. XIV. Of a CONTVSION or DEPRESSION of the SKVLL.
I. IT is first culled in Greek, (...). in Latin, Cranii depressio, a
depression of the Skull: And (...). Cranium depressum, a Skull depressed.

II. It is also called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Cranii Contusio, a Contusion
of the Skull: and (...). Cranium Contusum, a Contused Skull.

III. A Depression or Contusion of the Skull, is made by a hard and blunt
Instrument or Weapon, wherein the Skull is so hurt, that though it appears whole
on the outside, yet it is depressed down, or bruised, and is for the most part
severed from the whole within.

IV. Others define a depression of the Skull to be a Solution of Continuity in
the Cranium, made by the violence of some external Instrument or Weapon,
whereby several parts of it are brought nearer together, than naturally they
should be.

V. It is indeed when the Skull is beaten down, or inwards: And it is either of
the outward Table only, or of both Tables together; in which latter kind,
shivers of the Skull are many times separated from the whole Skull; and
sometimes they cleave to the whole in one part, and are separate from it in
another.

VI. The Signs. It is known partly by sight, partly by feeling, and partly by
relation of the action, or force which was used, and kind of the Weapon giving
the blow.

VII. In its beginning, it is known by the alteration of the Color of the
Skull; for while the Bone is living and sound, it is of a whitish Color, mixed
with a lively ruddiness; but if it is mortified, or dead, it will be white or
whitish, without any kind of redness: And if it is carious or rotten, it will
be of a livid or blackish Color.

VIII. If therefore you meet with such a kind of Fracture, the pleasant or
desirable ruddiness of the Bone will be gone, and white spots or patches will
appear in it, such as are sometimes seen upon the Nails of ones Fingers: If it
is left untouched, so that the Disease makes a progress, it will be carious,
and of a livid or blackish Color: In this kind of Fracture you are to take
away so much of the Cranium, as is mortified by the Contusion with Raspatories,
and then to heal up the Wound with Sarcoticks.

IX. The Prognostics. If recent, and without evil Symptoms, there is hope: But
if evil Symptoms follow, not gradually, but on a heap, and as it were upon the
spot, the danger of Death is not small.

X. If evil Symptoms come on with violence, and go off again, and then come on
again, it shows that Nature has had a great contest with the Disease: and though
she seems Victrix for a while, yet she is so spent, that at length she is
overcome; and that last return of the Symptoms proves fatal, for they never go
off any more, but with the Life of the Patient.

XI. The Cure. A Depression or Contusion is made in Children sometimes without
a Fracture, (by reason of the toughness of their Bones:) but there is for the
most part the suspicion of a Fracture.

XII. It is cured, as Scultetus says, with admirable success, with the Skins of
Beasts newly killea; especially of a Dog, Cat, Weazle, Rat, Mouse, Lamb, or
Sheep; if applied while they are yet hot, and left on for 24 Hours.

XIII. If the Contusion is not wholly discussed with one Skin, you must apply
another; and the Skin of a Lamb, or Sheep, is as powerful as any other.

XIV. By this one excellent Remedy, Scultetus affirms that he has cured many;
as also, that it never failed him: I have also used it three or four times with
the like happy success: and with Scultetus, I advise all young Surgeons,
that they never open Contusions, or other Tumors, unless they sind them to
resist the help of Topics.

XV. If with the said Contusion there is a Fracture, as in a simple Depression
of the Scull, the Skin being whole above; if the fractured part cleave to the
whole on one side, you are to elevate the other with a Levatory: but if with
that it cannot be done, you are then to apply the Trepan, as near to the
fractured part as you can, that as little of the Cranium, may be taken away, as
may be.

XVI. Afterward, you are either to reduce the depressed part to its own place,
or wholly remove it, as you shall think most fitting: but in doing these
things, you must take great care that the Meninges be not hurt by the sharp
splinters of the fractured Bones.

XVII. But in Children this Contusion many times happens without a Fracture,
(though scarcely ever in those of ripe age:) and therefore in those little ones
the Depression may be raised, as Paraeus, lib. 9. cap. 3. has taught; and that
excellently, with a Cupping-Glass, and reduced to its proper place.

XVIII. Hildanus, Cent. 2. Obs. 5. invented two Helps, viz. a Horn-Cup, and an
Emplaster; which if they prevail not, he then advises to the raising of the
Bone by a Pierce, upon a Triploides: but this is in many things both needless
and unprofitable, yea sometimes very dangerous.

XIX. For that such Depressions in Children, which press upon the Brain,
hindering the generating and distributing of the Animal Spirits, are mortal:
and in others, not only make work for the Surgeon, but oftentimes prove very
dangerous; because the Levitor being fastened upon the center of the Depression,
the Pit in the Scull is easily made greater.

XX. It Is true, that Manual Operation being neglected, the Cure, with danger to
the Fatient, is often prolonged: yet the prudent. Artist ought rather to omit
it, than to lay an Infamy upon the Art.

XXI. The only thing to be applied, is the aforesaid hot Lambskin, for a day or
two; with convenient Ligature of the Band-Cancer.

XXII. When the Tumor is discussed, and no great Symptoms appear, apply under
the Lambskin Ceratum Diapalma, or Emplastr. Album, brought to the softness of a
Cerat with Oil of Ben; which spread upon a broad Linen Cloth, to corroborate
the Part.

XXIII. If there is a Contusion of the Cutis Musculosa, a Depression of the
Scull, with a Fracture of the inner Table, without any Wound in the Flesh or
Skin, or any Crack in the outward Table; you must presently cut the Skin with
the Incision-Knife, either crosswise, like the Letter X; or triangularly, like
the Greek Letter A, or the Greek Letter T.

XXIV. Then the Skin, Flesh, and Pericranium together, must be parted, or
raised from the Scull, and the gaping Wound must be kept open with Pellets; to
see whether there is a Chink, Cleft, or Crack with the Depression in the
outward Table.

XXV. But if no such thing is found in that Table, but it appears whole; yet by
the ill Symptoms accompanying the Depression, it is feared that the inward
Table is broken: the Cranium must then be opened with the Trepan, by the side
of the Depression, that the Matter which is fallen down by the secret Fissure
of the inward Table, upon the Membranes of the Brain, may have a place to come
forth; and the Scull which is depressed or fallen inwards, may be raised up, by
the help of the Levitor.

XXVI. But if the Contusion is without a Depression, or Pitting-down, no Manual
Operation must be attempted, but only the Lambskins aforementioned, are to be
laid upon the place as aforesaid; unless Symptoms showing the Scull to be
broken, follow.

XXVII. But if there is with the Depression, a broad Rife in the middle of the
inward Table, or in one side of the Depression, it requires the taking off the
Pericranium.

XXVIII. The Crack in the middle of the Depression, is either broad or narrow:
if it is broad, and the Depression not great, the Scull must be raised with the
Levitor, in Tab. VI. Let. N, M. But if the Depression is greater than
ordinary, you must raise it with a stronger Levitor, as that in Tab. V. Let.
L, L.

XXIX. If with a broad Crack the Scull is gone far in, the said Levitors are
then of little use; but you must come presently to the use of the Terebra and
Triploides.

XXX. If the Depression has a narrow Crack in the middle, then at the bounds of
the Depression, the Scull must be cut away with the Trepan: and the distance
between the Holes is to be taken away with a Turning-Saw; (which, if rightly
made, with a double Socket, and a firm Screw) is done without the least danger.

XXXI. This done, you may raise the Depression with the Levitors, and take away
any small fragments of Bones, (which are sometimes parted from the inward Table
of the Scull, and prick the Membranes like Thorns) with all the ease imaginable.

XXXII. If with the Depression there is a Crack, whether broad or narrow, at
the side of the Depression, you must (if broad) pre a Levitor under the Scull,
to raise it. Or, (if narrow) the Scull must be evenly terebrated on that side
which is sound and bare, with the Modiolus or Trepan; and then it must be
raised by the help of Levitors.

XXXIII. If the Levitor let down at one hole, cannot raise the Scull; you must
make another hole, and then cut forth the distance between these holes, with
the round Saw; that in what part soever of the Fissure it is needful, the
Levitor may be put down, and the Scull raised by it.

CHAP. XV. Of an INCISION and PVNCTVRE of the SCVLL.
I. THAT which the Greeks call, (...). and the Latins, Cranii Incisio; we in
English call, An Incision or Cutting of the Scull: but when any piece of the
Scull is wholly cut off, then the Greeks call it, (...). and the Latins, Cranii
Excisio.

II. That which the Greeks call, (...). and the Latins, Cranii Punctura; we in
English call, A Puncture of the Scull: but when the Weapon sticks so fast, that
by pulling it forth, the Scull thereby seems to be pulled up, and to vault
forth; the Greeks call it, (...). and the Latins, Cranii concameratio.

I. Of an Incision of the Scull.
III. An Incision is made by a cutting Instrument; wherein either a part of the
Scull is raised up, but is yet fast to the other part: or, a mark of the Cut
only remains in the Scull, according to the figure of the Instrument, which
they call Seeds, or, the Seat; being the Seat of the Weapon: or, a part of the
Scull is cut slopingly through, and quite taken away.

IV. As to the Seeds, where the Print of the Weapon is only left behind in the
Scull; the Wound is to be dilated or opened, and the Skin and Flesh with the
Pericranium is to be raised, and the Seeds or Seat of the Weapon is to be
immediately pared away with a Knife or Chizel; or it must be scraped with a
Scraping-Instrument, and that 'till the whole Seeds or Incision is gone.

V. After the Seeds or Print of the Weapon is pared or scraped away, you must
dress it with convenient Medicaments, such as we use in the Cure of a Fissure,
or after the rasping of the Scull.

VI. If it passes through both Tables, and splints of Bone prick the Meninges;
and way enough is made by the Weapon, for the evacuating of the Pus or Matter;
no farther apertion is to be made, but the Wound is to be dressed, as after the
application of the Trepan.

VII. But if either splinters of Bones do offend the Dura Matter, or the way out
is too narrow for the coming forth of the Sanies or Pus; a farther opening of
the Scull is to be made, with such Instruments as you shall think most fit for
the Operation.

VIII. But if the Seeds passes no farther than the first Table, then the
Cranium is only to be smoothed with Raspatories; that the Pus or Matter may not
settle in the Seeds, and so cause a deeper cariosity; and the Wound is to be
dressed with Linimentum Arcaei, melted in a Spoon: in these Cases many times, if
the Patient is of a good habit of Body, the Cranium casts off no Scales.

IX. If a part of the Scull is raised up by the Cutting, out yet is fast on the
other parts; having dilated the Wound, see whether the Weapon has passed the
first Table only, or the first and second, if the first only, the Bone may be
rasped away; but if both, there will be a necessity of applying the Trepan, to
make way for the Matter.

X. The lips of the Wound may be kept asunder with Pledgets, or Dossels of fine
Tow dipped in whites of Eggs, which will also stop the flux of Blood: the Parts
which are adjacent are to be anointed with astringent Oils made hot, to prevent
Inflammation, and convenient Ligature is to be applied, which is the
Band-Cancer, with a thrice doubled linen Cloth; that the wounded Parts may not
be more hurt by the ambient Air, (which is an Enemy to the Wounds of the Head;)
and that the Medicaments laid on, may be kept close, and not fall off.

XI. The following Figure represents the Band-Cancer, which for Wounds of the
Head, is the best of all to contain them, and also the most useful and
commodious: it is broad in the middle A, and both ways it has four ends; of
which two begin from the Temples, and end on the hinder part of the Head; where
they must be sewed, as E, E: two arise from the hinder part of the Head, and
are bound together on the forepart of the Head, as B, B: two are turned behind
the Ears, and fastened under the Chin, as C, C: and two of them come before the
Ears, and are fastened as the other also, under the Chin; as D, D.

depiction of the band cancer, a bandage for the head The Band Cancer


XII. The second day, let the Wound be dressed; being cleansed of its Sanies, let
some Astringent Powder or dry Lint be laid upon the Bone, and let the lips of
the Wound be dressed with some Digestive, which apply upon Lint; and and over
that Emplastr. Album, or Diapalma, with a Hole cut in in it for the Pus to
issue forth; over which Hole lay Linimentum Arcaei, with a Pledget of Cloth
three times doubled: anoint the Parts adjacent with some Astringent Oil
before-named, then bind it up with the Band-Cancer, and a good Rowler; and
continue this course of Dressing, 'till a good and white sort of Pus, and not
stinking, is produced.

XIII. If the Artist is careful, he will find, where the Bone is only rasped or
scraped, that if the Cephalic drying Pouders be strewed upon it, and dressed
with dry Lent, it will be covered with Flesh the next day: they that will not
endure Scraping or Rasping the Bone, (when it is altered) leave it to Nature
for the Scaling of it: but such Men prolong the Cure.

XIV. The Wound being digested, you must daily apply Detersives, mixed with
Digestves, until it is thoroughly cleansed; continuing the use of the Pledget of
Cloth thrice doubled, with the Unctions and Bandage.

XV. The Wound being cleansed, you must with Sarcotick Ointments, as Linimentum
Arcaei, etc. laid upon Lint, to the lips; fill it up with Flesh, (and not use
Oil of Roses, as some Ignorants do;) and over that Diapalma, or Emplastr.
Album, malaxed with a little Oil; and then a Cloth thrice doubled, wet in
Red-wine, or some Astringent Decoction, and pressed out again.

XVI. The Wound being filled with Flesh, it must at last be covered with a
Cicatrice; which is done either with dry Lint only, or else by applying Ceratum
Diviaum, or such other like; renewing the Dressing 'till the Skin is produced.

XVII. When a part of the Scull is separated, so that the first Table is
divided from the second, and sticks close to the Skin, you must first take away
the Bone, and then cure the Wound.

XVIII. If a part of the whole Scull is divided, so that the Dura Matter is
seen, you must reduce the Incision, being first cleansed with Canary or S.V. or
with them mixed equally together; and so keep it, either by stitching the Lips
of the Wound, or rather by fit Bandage.

XIX. But a smooth Chopping away, or Cutting off a piece of the Skull, requires
no Manual Operation; but it ought to be covered with Flesh, by strewing on it
some Cephalic astringent Powder, etc. as a Skull newly scraped, or rasped with
Rasps.

II. Of a PVNCTVRE of the SKVLL.
XX. If the Puncture pierces not both Tables, (as it seldom does) it must be
taken off with Piercers, or the Trafine, which must be put just upon the middle.

XXI. But if it penetrates through both Tables, the Skull must be opened with the
Trepan, setting the Pin of the Male-Trepan upon the Point or Puncture, and so
turning it round till it make a print, upon which the Female may stand fast.

XXII. Now that these Operations may be performed quickly, safely, and
pleasantly, the Cutis Musculosa and Pericranium must be separated from the
Bone: And when the Trepan has done its work, the rest of the Cure must be
completed, as we have already taught in Chap. 12. Sect. 83. ad 104.

XXIII. In all Fractures, if they be so large, or well-conditioned, that you
can thereby free the Brain, or Place, from Coagulated or Corrupted Blood, or
from the prickings of the Splinters; these Operations will be needless.

XXIV. But if otherwise, there is a necessity, you must use great Care in
applying the Instruments; which ought to be done before the Patient is grown
too weak, or the Cure of the Disease is become past hope.

XXV. It is also to be noted, that if the bare Bone lies open to the ambient
Air but for two Hours, the Bone will be altered; but if it lies open longer, it
will grow black: In these Cases, if the Weapon (whether sharp-edged, or
pointed) pierces not both Tables, or pierces only one, or the Superficies of
the first Table, you must then scrape or rasp off all round about, till the
Color is changed, or the Seeds or Puncture is taken totally away; or till
Blood comes forth of it, etc.

XXVI. If there is a Concameratio, or vaulting out of the Skull, made by the
plucking out of a pointed Weapon forcibly, whereby an empty space or vacuity is
left beneath, and the upper Table is separated from the lower; you have no more
to do, but (dilating the Wound by Incision) to rasp or smooth the Skull, and
then to heal up the Wound according to the Method before laid down.

XXVII. But if it passes through the second Table, you must open the Skull in the
most depending Part with the Trepan, to make way for the issuing forth of the
Sanies or Pus, which of necessity must be lodged in the void space, if the hole
the Weapon has made is large enough to give a passage for the same.

XXVIII. And if any ruggedness or pointed Splinters prick the Dura Matter, the
whole Fracture is to be removed, compassing it with a large head of a Trepan;
after which the Wound is to be Cured, as we have formerly taught.

III. Of an Incision or Puncture of the Skull, under the Temporal Muscle.
XXIX. This is always with a Wound; and the Incision is either transverse, or
according to the length of the Muscle: If it is a Puncture, or a transverse
Incision, it will be of dangerous Consequence, as we have already proved, and
for the most part, Mortal.

XXX. If the Wound is made longways, it is to be dilated by Dosils or Sponges;
and if the Fracture is a Cleft, it is to be removed by Rasps, or some scraping
Tool: But if it is a great Fracture, in which the points of the shivers do
prick the Membranes, or the depression of the Cranium does press them down;
then a triangular Incision is to be made, a little above the Fracture, avoiding
the Temporal Muscle.

XXXI. Which done, the Modiolus or Trepan is to be applied: The Skull being
opened, the Splinters which are perfectly separated from the sound part of the
Skull, are to be taken away; and the remainder which are not wholly separated,
are to be reduced (if possible) to their true places.

XXXII. And as often as the Patient is dressed, you are to cause him to stoop
down his Head, and (stopping his Mouth and Nose) to cause him to force his
Breath strongly, by which means the Sanies will be the better forced out of the
Wound.

XXXIII. This being done, you must make some mundifying. Injection of red Wine,
clarified juice of Smallage, and Honey of Roses strained, or with other things
as you shall see most fit, to wash out all the Sanies, Pus, or other
foulnesses, which otherwise would necessarity lodge there.

XXXIV. And though Pareaens, lib. 9. cap. 19.) advised to keep a leaden Pipe in
the Wound, yet this by reason of its hardness and solidity, would not dilate
the Section, but cause pain; I should rather advise you to compressed or
prepared pieces of Sponge, which is by much the better.

XXXV. For this as it is soft, it cannot hurt; and as it is porous, so it will
dilate it self, and suck up the Impurities; and withal, it will dilate the
Wound, and keep, it sufficiently open, till all the Splinters of the Cranium
are fully come forth, after which the Wound is to be healed up, as other Wounds
of the Head and Skull.

CHAP. XVI. Of a FRACTVRE of the NOSE-BONE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Fractura Ossis Nasi; and in
English, A Fracture of the Bone of the Nose.

II. Hippocrates, de Articulis, Text. 30, etc. shows, that the Bone of the Nose
may be broken many ways; for a part of it may either be broken off, or the
ridge of it may be broken down, etc. wherein a Wound generally happens unto the
Fracture.

III. The Prognostics. A Fracture of this Part is the easiest set of all; if
it is not presently set right and straight, it cannot be set straight at all,
but it will always stand awry.

IV. In this Bone a Callus also is soon bred, and confirmed; and it is healed
in ten or twelve days time, unless the Bone is corrupted: Yet some say it is
not done in less than 18 or 20 days; but this is according to the various
habits of Body.

V. The Cure. If the Bone is equally crushed down unto the lower part, and made
as it were flat; then something is to be put into the Nostrils that may raise
it up again, which may be done with some searching Instrument, or a Spatha; or
else it may be lifted up with the Finger, by putting it up into the Nostrils,
outwardly also nipping it up on both sides, that so it may be restored to its
natural situation and place.

VI. Or wrapping up a little Stick in Cotton, you may put it into the Nostrils
as gently as may be; and therewith raise up the Bone, laying the Thumb and
Finger of your left Hand on both sides the Nose, to direct, reinstate, and
retain the Bones in their proper piaces.

VII. If the Nose is broken only on one side, it is gently to be set right and
strait from that way to which it declines; either by thrusting in the Finger,
or by the help of some fit Instrument as aforesaid, directing it also straight
outwardly.

VIII. And that the Bones thus set may be kept in their proper places, Plugs
made of Linnen-rags are to be put up the Nostrils; or else Pipes of Lead,
anointed with Oil of Turpentine mixed with Spirit of Wine, which may both
support the Bones, and facilitate Respiration.

IX. Some put up Sponges, but they are pernicious, for through the moisture of
the Nostrils they will swell much, whereby becoming very thick, and much
dilated, they are apt to distend the Part, and to move the Bones out of their
places, after they have been well set.

X. The leaden Pipes which are put up, ought to have leaden Ears or Handles, by
which they may be fastened to the Cap, or Head; and if you please, to make them
the more healing, they may be covered with some Empastick Medicament, as Manna
Thuris, (which is a pure white sort of Frankincense, exsudating of its own
accord through the Bark of the Tree, and which in the West Indies I have often
gathered with my own Hands) made up with Mastich, Gum Tragacanth, and Oil of
Roses, into a Body.

XI. If there is no Wound in the Nose, there will be little need of Bandage;
but if a Wound is present, you are to apply proper Topics, and to lay upon
each side the Nose a kind of triangular Bolster, covered with a small piece of
Pasteboard of the same figure.

XII. This Dressing may be kept on with a kind of Bandage, which has four ends
or straps, being a piece of Linen Cloth about two Inches broad, and two Feet
long; it is slit at both ends, and all along, leaving it only in the middle
whole, for about three Inches in length.

XIII. This whole part is to be laid upon the Eracture, causing the upper
straps to go round the Nape of the Neck, which are to be brought back again
forwards: The lower straps are also to be carried backwards to the Neck,
crossing above the Neck upwards, and afterward to be brought again forwards.

XIV. If the Nose, near to the Gristle, is turned away, a glutinative Emplaster
with a little Loop is to be applied to the reclining side of the Nose; which
being dried firmly on, is afterward to be straightened as much as is convenient,
that so the Note may be set straight again.

XV. Paraeus uses this: Take fine Bole, Frankincense, Mastich, Dragons-blood,
A. i. Pine Rosin, Roch Alum, A. ss. all being in fine powder, mix them with
whites of Eggs well beaten q.s. and make a sticking Emplaster.

XVI. Or this Emplaster may be put upon a very broad Tape, or a Linen Rowler,
which may be so long, that being drawn below the Ear, and so wound about the
Head, it may be agglutinated upon the Forehead: After 14 days it may be
removed, and a Cerate laid on, to consummate the Cure, and to confirm and
strengthen the Bones.

XVII. If the Bone is shattered into small pieces, they are, as much as may be,
to be put all in their places again with fit Instruments; nor must you easily
admit the taking of any forth, if it is possible that they may be agglutinated,
lest it cause deformity.

XVIII. Now as some Authors approve of this Bandage, or Binding up of these
Fractures, so others wholly disapprove of them, saying, it is more safe wholly
to omit them; for that they either perform nothing at all if they be loose, or
else draw the Nose awry, or make it flat, if drawn but indifferently close or
hard; and that the broken Bones of the Nose may very easily be kept fast in
their planes by proper Plasters, without any binding at all.

XIX. And truly in this Case only is this Bandage convenient, where in the
ridge of the Nose, the Flesh is bruised with, and the broken Bones stick forth;
so that the Bandage pressing them together, may make them to acquire their own
natural form.

XX. And yet in this very case, Bandage is not altogether necessary or
profitable, for that a proper Cerate or Emplastey may sufficiently do the Work
without it; But we thought good in the aforegoing Sections, so deliver the
Method or Way of doing it, that this our Work might not be thought defective in
that particular.

CHAP. XVII. Of a FRACTURE of the JAW BONE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Fractura Mandibulae vel Maxillae;
and in English, A Fracture of the Jaw Bone.

II. The Signs. When the lower Jaw Bone is broken, it is easily known, both by
sight and feeling.

III. The Prognostics. If in the Practure there is not an Inflammation from
the very beginning, the Cure may be completed in twenty days, the Teeth
remaining safe.

IV. But if the Cure is ill managed, or long delayed, the Teeth may be
vitiated, and rendered unuseful.

V. The Cure. It is restored with ones Fingers, used both within and without
the Mouth; to press the prominences of the Bones into their proper places.

VI. If they be too weak, then one is to draw the Head backward, and the Artist
the Jaw forwards, and so reduce the fractured Bone to its place; and if the
Bones pass one over another, a small Extension is to be made.

VII. If the whole Jaw Bone is broken in a transverse manner, (which yet seldom
happens) let there be an Extension of the Parts, then by compression with the
Hand, reduce or set the Bories together.

VIII. If the Bone is restored rightly, to its place, it will be known by its
equality and evenness, and by the Teeth being restored and disposed again to
their former natural situation.

IX. If the Teeth have been moved on ^sned, they are with a small Gold or
Silver Wire, or with a waxed Silk or Thread, to be fustned to the sound Teeth
which stand next them.

X. These things being thus done, some proper Medicament is outwardly to be
applied to the Jaw Bone, that so the broken Bones being set together again, may
be firmly fastened in their places; and externally a little Bolster of Leather,
or other like thing, may be applied, with convenient Ligature.

XI. The Bandage may be with a Swath two Inches or more broad, slit at both
ends, into straps, or cut longways, that it may on both sides take in and
contain the Chin; and therefore there being four Heads of the Swath, thus slit
at both ends, the two lower of them are to be brought and drawn along to the
top of the Head, and there to be tied together, or sewed to the Nightcap; but
the two uppermost are to be drawn to the lowest part of the Head behind, and
tied together, or sewed, as aforesaid, to the Nightcap.

XII. Others lay a piece of Pasteboard, cut to the stupe and size of the Jaw,
to the flat side thereof; and then with a Bandage nearly twelve Feet long, and
two Inches broad, rolled up with one head, they begin the Application, by
making a Circumvolution round about the Head, and passing over the Forehead;
then the Band is let down under the Chin, and carried up again upon the Cheek,
near the outward corner of the Eye, passing also over the Fracture: Afterward
it is raised up to the Head, and brought down again under the Chin, to hold the
Bolster upon the Fracture; thus three or four Circumvolutions being made upon
the Fracture, the Band is let down under the Chin, to stay and strengthen its
several Circumvolutions, and ends round the Head, in passing over the Forehead.

XIII. If the Jaw is fractured on both sides, it would be necessary to apply to
it a Bolster and Pasteboard (perforated at the Chin) of the shape or figure of
the whole Jaw; and the Bandage may be 18 or 19 Feet long, and two Inches broad,
rolled up with two heads.

XIV. The Ligature is to begin at the middle between the two heads, and to be
applied under the Chin, from whence it is to be carried up, over the Cheeks to
the top of the Head, where they are to cross, and then to be let down again
behind the Head, where they cross again, and so being brought under the Chin,
they cross there also, and are carried over the Fracture on both sides;
afterward the Bands are passed about three or four times over the same, and
rolling upon the Jaws, are turned upon the Chin, and being carried round the
Head, end upon the Forehead.

XV. Let the Patient lie upon the contrary Jaw Bone (when but one is broken)
viz. upon that which is not fractured, but let him not rest thereupon, but upon
his Head, lest the Fracture should renew, or the Bone go awry.

XVI. And keep the Jaw, is much as may be, immovable, or at rest; let him not
speak much, or chew any hard thing, but be nourished with soft and moist Food,
till the Callus is hardened; on the third day dress it, and regulate what
Symptoms you find appear.

CHAP. XVIII. Of a FRACTVRE of the COLLAR-BONE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Fractura Claviculae; and in
English, A Fracture of the Channel-bone, or Collar-bone.

II. Hippocrates, de Articulis, Text. 62. reckons up Six Differences of
Fractures in this Bone. However, it is broken either transversly, or longways;
and these are either in the middle, or near the Brest-bone, or near the Joint
of the Shoulder.

III. The Signs. It may be known both by sight and touching, as also by the
Pain the Patient endures.

IV. The Prognostics. If it is broken transversly, it is the more easily
Cured; if longways, the more hard: And because it cannot be bound about as
other Fractures may, it breeds a Callus, causing a very great desormity.

V. This Bone does easily grow together again, as do all other thin Bones; but
in a thin Bone, the Callus always grows greater than in other thicker Bones;
and the Cure is performed in twenty, or twenty-four days at the farthest.

VI. The Cure. You must make an Extension by the help of two strong Persons;
there must be one to draw the Arm backwards or sideways, and another to draw
the Neck and Shoulders forwards; the Artist himself in the mean time, thrusting
or drawing upwards what was fallen down; and thrusting or putting downwards
what was raised too high.

VII. And if a Ball, or some tuberous Body be put under the Armpit, and the
Elbow is pressed against the Ribs, the Operation will be the more easy.

VIII. But if the ends of the broken Bone are so depressed, that they cannot in
this manner be brought back again upwards; then the Patient is to be laid flat
upon his Back upon a hard Pillow, or Cushion put under his Backbone, between
the Shoulderblades.

IX. Then the Shoulders are by main strength of the Hands lying upon them to be
so pressed down, that the ends of the fractured Bones which are depressed may
be lifted up so high, as to be reduced to their true places.

X. If the Bone is shattered into many small pieces, pricking the Flesh, or
causing a difficulty of breathing; you must make an Incision into the same
Part, and remove them, or cut off the sharp pricks or points of the broken
Bones, and then join the Bones together.

XI. Then drawing the Lips of the Wound close, apply things proper for a
Fracture, and such as may withal hinder Inflammation.

XII. But if there should be many fragments of Bones (the Skin remaining whole)
which are not sharp-pointed nor do at all prick, then a Sprinter of Leather,
Pasteboard, or some other convenient Matter; is to be smeared or anointed with
some proper Ointment or Balsam, and to be applied to them.

XIII. Afterward three coverings must be provided, of a fit length and
thickness; two to fill up the hollownesses on each side the Bone, and a third
to be imposed upon the Fracture sticking forth; all which will keep the broken
Bones in their due place.

XIV. The Bandage. It is to be well bound up with a Swath four Inches broad,
and of a sufficient length, viz. about eight Yards long, rolled up to the
middle at both ends, and so making two heads.

XV. It is bound crosswise in form of the Letter X, which is rather to be often
drawn or wound about the place of the Fracture, than that it should be too
close, or hard bound; and it is to be so rolled about, that it may draw the Arm
unto the hinder parts: which that the Sick may the better endure, Bolsters are
to be put under the Arm-pit, near the Part affected.

XVI. The Ligature is not to be loosned before the seventh day, unless as
Itching, or other Cause require it: but if it is at any time unbound, it is in
binding up again, to be drawn a little closer and harder.

XVII. Or, the Swath being rolled up with two heads to the middle, apply it in
the middle to the Fracture: one of its heads is to be let down upon the Breast,
whilst the other is carried behind the Back, below the Armhole, opposite to the
indisposed Arm-hole; and above the Breast, to be carried over the other end of
the Band, which is raised up to fix a Bolster upon the Fracture: the other end
is to be passed under the affected Arm-hole, and upon that end of the Band
which fixed the Bolster; which is again to be elevated by applying another
Bolster upon the Part: these Circumvolutions are continued round the Body, and
pass over the Clavicle, till it is perfectly covered therewith; and passing
over the upper part of the Shoulder near its Head, it is to be carried over the
space which lies between the Bolsters, and the Circumvolutions of the Arm, and
then is to end, by passing round about the Body.

CHAP. XIX. Of a FRACTVRE of the SHOVLDER-BLADE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Fractura Scapulae; and in English,
A Fracture of the Shoulder Blade.

II. A Fracture may happen either in its point, or top of the Shoulder, called
in Greek, (...) ( ex (...) extremus, summus, and (...), humerus) summitas
humeri; or in the body of the Blade-bone it self, properly and more especially
called Scapula, or Omoplata.

III. The Signs. If the Acromion is broken, it is known both by sight and
feeling, there being a certain unevenness in the Part, especially, if being
compared with that which is sound.

IV. If the Scapula is broken in the middle part, it is known also by the
touch, there being a certain Cavity felt: there is also a pricking Pain in the
Part, and a numbedness is felt in the whole Arm, more especially if it is
stretched directly out.

V. The Prognostics. A Fracture in the Acromion, or top of the Shoulder, is
more difficultly Cured, than in any other Part of the Shoulder Blade.

VI. If the Blade-bone it self is broken, the Cure is generally performed in
about twenty-four days time.

VII. If the Neck of the Shoulder Blade is broken, or the Fracture is in the
Dearticulation of the Shoulder, it is scarcely ever Cured.

VIII. For since near about this Joint, there are the Arteries and Veins of the
Armpits; and the Nerves arifing from the Vertebrae of the Neck behind; an
Inflammation, and other vehement Symptoms do generally happen.

IX. The Cure. First examine the Place and Circumstances of the Fracture, and
see if the broken Bone does still adhere to the Shoulder Blade; if so, you are
with your Hands to thrust back the Prominences of the Bones into their proper
places.

X. But if this cannot be done easily, and that there is need of great
strength, then a Ball of Linen is to be put under the Arm-hole, and the
Assistant is to draw the Shoulder downwards, by drawing about the Elbow unto
the Ribs; and the Artist himself is with his Hand to press down the fractured
piece of Bone, into its right place.

XI. If the broken Bone is wholly separated from the Scapula, but hangs by the
Periosteum, and the Ligaments; and that no vehement Symptoms are induced by
reason of the Pain; you are then to restore it to its place again.

XII. But if the broken Bone is wholly separated both from the Scapula, the
Periosteum, and the Ligaments; or there happens to be any Splinters, which may
prick the Nervous Parts, etc. you must then make an Incision in the Skin and
Flesh, and those fragments are to be taken out, or their points are to be cut
off.

XIII. But if they prick not, they are then to be left remaining; for Nature
will at length expel of her own accord, those things which will not join with
the rest; though sometimes it may be a considerable time before it is done.

XIV. The Bones being reduced as well as may be, proper Medicines are to be
applied upon the Fraction; with convenient Ligature or Bandage.

XV. A Bolster is to be laid upon the Scapula; and a large piece of
Paste-board, of the bigness and Figure of the Bone, over which may be applied a
small Bandage, resembling the Band-Cancer, or a Star, with a Swath five Yards
long and four Inches broad, rolled up with one Head.

XVI. This Swath is to be carried behind the Back, one of its ends lying under
the Arm-hole opposite to the side affected; but the other is to go under the
Shoulder, and afterward above it, crossing the middle of the Back, and so
running under the other Arm-hole; it is brought up to the Shoulder, to run
down, and form a second Cross upon the middle of the Back: these
Circumvolations are to be continued till the Scapulae are all covered; and
Circumvolutions are also to be made round the upper Part of the Humerus or
Shoulder, and then the Ligature is to be completed by a Circumvolution round
about the Breast or Stomach.

XVII. If the Acromion is broken, a Linen Ball is then to be bound under the
Wing thereof, and the Ligature is not to be loosned before the seventh day,
unless some Symptoms urge it.

XVIII. Lastly, Let the Patient lie on the opposite side, and let the Part
affected be kept in as much quietness as may be.

CHAP. XX. Of a FRACTVRE of the ARM.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). In Latin, Fractura Humeri, vel ^ssis Humeri
and in English, A Fracture of the Arm, or of the Bone of the Arm.

II. The Signs. It is known partly by sight, partly by feeling, and partly by
the weakness of the Part, and complaint of the Sick.

III. The Prognostics. A Fracture of the Os Humeri is more eaily cured than a
Fracture in the Bones of the Elbow.

IV. The Shoulder Bone being broken, is consolidated in about 40 days; for it
being a great Bone, it requires a long time for the generating of the Callus

V. The Cure. To restore the Bones to their proper place, the fractur'd Part is
to be extended; one plucking strongly the upper part, another drawing the lower
Bone above the Elbow straight out, and then to reduce it to its place with your
Hands, by closing it on all sides.

VI. If this cannot be done by the Hand above, in such as are of full and ripe
Age, by reason of the thickness and strength of the Muscles, then it will be
necessary to make the Extension by proper Instruments, and Cords, as
Hippocrates has taught us, and of which we have sufficiently spoken before.

VII. In the Extension, let the Sick be kept immovable, whether sitting or
lying along, and let the Shoulder be kept in about the upper part of it, and
let the broken Bone be drawn this way and that way, till you have truly fixed it
in its right place.

VIII. The broken Bones being thus set right and straight, you are to apply fit
Medicaments thereto, such as we have formerly described, and then it is to be
bound up with fit Swaths, beginning at the Fracture it self.

IX. Lay round the Fracture a Bolster dipped in Red Wine, or Oxycrate; then three
several Bands are to be taken, 3 or 4 Inches broad, and 5 or 6 Foot long: the
first of these is to be laid upon the Fracture, with which you are to make
three very straight Circumvolutions; then it is to be carried up with small
Rowsings to the top of the Arm, and stayed round the Body.

X. The second Swath is to be applied to the Fracture, on the opposite side to
the first, with which you are to make upon the Fracture two Circumvolutions; so
that the same Swath may be carried down along the whole length of the Arm, with
many turnings about, and at last terminate below the Elbow, which yet it is not
to cover.

XI. This done, four long Bolsters are to be laid round about the Arm, upon the
Fracture, which are to be kept close with the third Swath; in the binding of
which about, it signifies not much, whether you begin it at bottom, or at top;
and so accordingly it may end either round the Body, or below the Elbow.

XII. The Arm ought also to be encompassed with two thick pieces of Pasteboard,
made round at the ends, and of the length of the Arm, which must be applied so
as not to cross one another, and then tied on with Tape, or Ferret-Ribband.

XIII. After which the Arm is to be put in a Scarf made up with a large Napkin,
which is first to be applied in the middle under the Arm-hole, the Arm resting
upon it, so that the four ends being raised up, may be fastened to the Cloths of
the opposite Shoulder; and the Hand ought to be kept higher than the Elbow.

XIV. And you must always be careful to bind up the Member in that figure or
posture, in which it ought to remain; so as that the Shoulder Bone with the
Elbow-Bones, may make a Right-angle.

XV. Hippocrates binds on Splinters the seventh or ninth day, because of the
magnitude of the Muscles of the Shoulder: for that in a longer time those Bones
would become slender and loose; but you are to be careful, that these Splints
touch not the extremity of the Joints.

XVI. Celsus, lib. 8. cap. 10. says, That they ought to be very long on the
outside of the Arm; somewhat shorter on the brawn of the Arm; and shortest of
all under the Arm-hole.

XVII. If the Splinter be immediately fastened on, at the very first of all (as
indeed most of the Moderns now do,) they ought then to be tied on but loosly;
and after the seventh or ninth day to be bound harder.

XVIII. And that the Member may be so placed, that the Shoulder may not be
perverted, or turned awry; the broad Bandage which encompasses the Shoulder,
should be drawn in a manner round about the Breast.

XIX. Let the Sick (when in Bed) lie upon his Back, putting his Hand upon his
Stomach, and soft Pillows under the Shoulder; and lift up the Elbow by a Scarf
put about the Neck, to preserve the orthogonal figure, and that the Angle may
not be altered whilst the Patient sleeps.

XX. After the second or third Dressing, as often as the Patient is dressed, he
must stretch out his Arm straight; to the end the Tendons which run from the
Arm, and are inserted below the Elbow, (contracting themselves by the long
bending of the Elbow) might cause a very troublesome stiffness.

XXI. The shrinking of Tendons (which Barbers, and ignorant Surgeons call
the Shrinking of the Nerves or Sinews,) may yet easily be cured in ten or
twelve Weeks time, if you cause the Patient to carry every day, some fit or
proportional Weight.

XXII. And then withal endeavor to relax and soften the Tendons with emollient
Fomentations and Embrocations; (abstaining from all Astringent Medicines) and
applying over the Contracture a Cloth dipped in Empl. de Minio, being but a
little more than half boiled.

XXIII. You may also bathe the Contracture twice a day with Spiritus Mirabilis,
which softens hard Parts, and restores Contractures, to a Miracle: then anoint
with this. Man's, Ducks, Goose, and Vipers Grease, A.i. Oleum Catellorum, Ung.
de Althaea, A. ss. Oils of Earthworms, of Neats-feet, of Camomil, and of white
Lillies, A. ii. mix them: and after anointing, apply a Sparadrap of Emplast. de
Minio, a little more than half boiled.

CHAP. XXI. Of a FRACTVRE of the ELBOW.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Fractura Ossis Cubiti; and in
English, A Fracture of the Elbow, or, of the Elbow-Bone.

II. This Part consists of two Bones; of which, the greater, which lies
lowermost, is called Cubitus, or Ulna: and the lesser, which lies uppermost, is
called Radius. Now sometimes but one of these Bones are broken, and sometimes
both.

III. The Prognostics. A Fracture of these Bones, is more easily cured than a
Fracture of the Os Humeri: and if one Bone only is broken, the Cure is easier
and sooner to be performed, than if both be broken together.

IV. And if the Radius is only broken, it is easier to be cured, than if the
Cubitus is broken; because this latter is the larger Bone, and requires a
greater extension: and if this latter is kept whole, whilst the other is
broken, it serves as a Prop, or Stay to the other broken Bone, that it may be
kept the better in its place.

V. If both the Bones are broken together, the Cure is performed with some
difficulty; 1. Because they have no Prop, or any thing to sustain them. 2.
Because they need a greater extension, for that the Nerves and Muscles are very
much contracted; and when extended, there is nothing to keep them so. 3.
Because the Parts adjacent are also the more hurt.

VI. A Fracture of these Bones is generally consolidated in about 30 days, or
little more: but in this case, you must have respect to the constitution or
habit of Body, the nature, disposition, and age of the Patient: all which
things make the punctual time more difficult to be limited.

VII. The Cure. If the Radius only is broken, there is need of less strength or
force to reduce it, than when the Cubitus is broken: if both the Bones are
broken, a stronger extension is to be made, but yet equal, than if one only
were broken: but if one only of the two Bones is broken, the greatest extension
is to be on that part or side, where the Bone is broken.

VIII. For which purpose, a Servant is to be ordered to grasp the Arm above the
Elbow, with both his Hands, and another to lay hold of it above the Wrist;
whilst the Artist reduces the Bones with the palms of both his Hands; and
fixes them so well, as no inequality is felt in any part.

IX. The broken Bone being thus reduced, the Dressing and Bandage is to be the
same with that in the former Chapter, but the Swaths which are carried upwards,
are to terminate above the Elbow: and if the Sick keeps his Bed, his Arm is to
be laid upon a Pillow, and the Elbow is to be laid a little higher than the
Hand.

X. But Hippocrates, de Fract. Lib. 1. Text. 22. would not have the Hand lower
than the Elbow; lest by that means the Blood should flow toward the Fracture,
or a flux of Humors should ensue: and yet it is to be so placed, that the Part
may be as much as may be, at ease.

XI. And it is to be placed in that figure, which may not in the least pervert
any of the Muscles, hurt the motion of the Member, or breed pain: for which
reason, the Arm is neither to be rightout extended, nor to be wholly bent up,
nor to be placed in a supine or prone manner.

XII. The Arm being thus bound up and placed, it will be necessary that the
Patient should keep his Bed for ten days.

XIII. And when he leaves his Bed, the fractured Arm is to be hung in a broad
or soft Scarf or Napkin; which may equally sustain a good part of the Arm
within it, with a part of the Palm of the Hand; so that none of the reduced
Bones may be in danger to be removed out of their places.

XIV. And afterward, every third or fourth day, the Arm is gently to be
stretched out; that the Humors which flow thither, and make a kind of stay
there, may not cause a concretion in the Bones, or a contraction in the
Tendons; nor yet a stiffness in the Arm, not easily afterward to be remedied.

CHAP. XXII. Of a FRACTVRE of the WRIST-BONES.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Carpi Fractura; and in English, A
Fracture of the Wrist-bones.

II. The Prognostics. There is no great danger or difficulty in this Cure; for
the Consolidation of the Bone or Bones is generally completed in about 20 days.

III. The Cure. Two Assistants are to be provided, to make the Extension; one
must hold the Arm above the Wrist, and another the Fingers and Hand: and the
Extension being made, the Artist is to reduce the broken Bone into its place;
so that no inequality or unevenness may appear in the Part.

IV. When the Bones are reduced, or set right, then some proper Medicaments,
such as are usually applied in other Fractures, are to be applied here: and
then the Part is to be bound up with a Swath, in the following manner.

V. You are to provide a Swath two Inches broad, and six or seven Yards long,
or longer; which is to be rolled up with one Head: with this you are to make
three circumvolutions about the Wrist.

VI. The Band is then to be passed over the Hand, between the Thumb and
Forefinger; and so by that passage to be directed again to the Wrist, on which
a Bolster is to be applied, with a little piece of Pastboard, of the same
figure with the Wrist.

VII. After this, having made several circumvolutions over the Bolster and
Pastboard, the Swath is to be carried by several circumvolutions to the top of
the Elbow, and the Band or Swath is to end above it; which done, the Arm is to
be carried in a Scarf.

CHAP. XXIII. Of a FRACTVRE of the BONES of the HAND.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Fractura Ossium Metacarpii; and in
English, A Fracture of the Hand; or, of the Bones of the Hand.

II. The Prognostics. The Cure is performed without much difficulty, and in no
great length of time: the Consolidation of the Fracture being accomplished in
the space of about sixteen or eighteen days.

III. The Cure. Two Assistants are to hold the Hand in the same manner as is
directed in the former Chapter, in Setting of the Wrist-Bone: which being
extended to the fractured Bone or Bones, are to be reduced to their own places
by the Hand of the Artist.

IV. Then proper Catagmaticks are to be applied, such as we have directed to in
the Cure of a Simple Fracture: after which, the Hand is to be bound up with
proper Swaths.

V. The Swaths are to be about two Inches broad, and five or six Yards long;
(because many circumvolutions strengthen the Part, though they are not made very
strait;) and to be rolled up with one head.

VI. This Band is to be fastened to the Carpus or Wrist, with a circumvolution;
from whence it is to be carried to the Metacarpium, over which it is to pass
between the Thumb and the Forefinger.

VII. From whence it is to cross the Hand, and to form the Letter X, which is
to be continued with several circumvolutions, 'till all the Metacarpium is
covered.

VIII. Then a Bolster and Pastboard are to be laid upon the Metacarpium; and
another Bolster in the Hand, in the shape of the Part: which done, the whole is
to be covered as before, with many circumvolutions of the Swath, which are to
be continued above the Elbow, where it is to end.

CHAP. XXIV. Of a FRACTVRE of the FINGERS.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Fractura Ossis, vel Ossium Digiti;
and in English, A Fracture of a Bone, or Bones of a Finger.

II. The Prognostics, This Fracture easily consolidates; and if carefully
looked after, the Cure is performed in 14 or 16 days time.

III. The Cure. A gentle Extension is to be made on the Fingers, whereby the
Bones are to be be reduced to their proper places: after which a small Dressing
is to be prepared for the Finger, much like to that of the Arm, but every way
lesser.

IV. The Fingers are to be a little bent, and the inside of the Hand is to be
fitted with a Bolster, to retain the Parts in that situation; and the Bolster
is also to be stayed with a Bandage.

V. And indeed, if the Fingers should be fractured, they are to be bound fast
to those Fingers which are sound, and next to them: that so by them, as it were
by Splinters bound on, they may be kept immovable in their places.

VI. After which, the hollow of the Hand is to be filled up with a Ball or
Bolster of Linen Rags, as is before mentioned; not only to retain the Bones in
their places, but that the Fingers may also preserve a figure of a middle form.

VII. Care must also be taken, that no Callus be generated in the Junctures, or
places serving for the extension or contraction of the Fingers; for so the
Function or Office of the Hand in laying hold of any thing, would be much hurt.

VIII. Lastly, the Hand is also with the Arm to be hung in a Scarf, or broad
Swath, or a Napkin, from the Neck; that so the whole Hand with the Fingers may
kept up, and resting upon the same, may be kept easy.

CHAP. XXV. Of a FRACTVRE of the BREST-BONE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Fractura Sterni; and in English, A
Fracture of the Brest-Bone.

II. This Bone is seated in the middle of the Breast, being joined to the Ribs
by Cartilaginous Productions: in Children it is almost wholly Cartilaginous,
and consists of seven or eight parts: but after some Years they grow firmly
together, and in ripeness of Age, it seems to be composed but of three parts;
and this in old Age seems to be but one Bone, but (...) distinguished by two
transverse Lines, which show the former division.

III. The whole Bone seems to be of a red fungous substance, the uppermost of
which is thickest and broadest: having in each side a long cavity, assisted
with a Cartilage, to receive the heads of the Clavicles; and a small sinus or
cavity on the inside, to permit a passage for the Windpipe.

IV. The second Bone is neither so thick, nor so broad, but much longer; joined
to the former by a Cartilage, with five or six Sinus's, for the inarticulation
of so many Ribs: the third Bone is the shortest of all, but broader than the
second, and joined to it at its lower end by a Cartilage also, which receives
into its sides the rest of the Ribs: to the lower end of this is joined the
Cartilago Mucronata, or Ensiformis, which is about an Inch long, and of a
triangular form.

V. This Bone thus composed, may be sometimes broken; either by a Blow, or some
external violence.

VI. The Signs. It is known by the Pain, but chiefly from the inequality or
unevenness, which is known by touching; for that being touched with the
Fingers, it will yield to them, or retire inwardly, and cause a kind of
crashing.

VII. Being pressed in where it is broken, it will yield inwardly, and a cavity
outwardly may be taken notice of; with pain, coughing, shortness of Breath, and
spitting of Blood.

VIII. The Prognostics. It is very dangerous, by reason of the Pleura-
Membrane (which is easily hurt with it) and the noble Parts which lie under it:
for which reason, it is apt to cause many sad and terrible Symptoms.

IX. And by reason it is soft, spungy, and thin, it may be consolidated in
twenty days, or twenty-four days time.

X. The Cure. To restore this, the Patient is to be laid upon his Back, on a
great unequal Stone covered with Cloth, or a unequal Bolster: his Shoulders are
both of them to be pressed down, or backwards, that the Sternum which is sunk
down, may be reduced to its right place.

XI. Or an Incision may be made upon the Bone to discover it, and the Modiolus
or Trepan may be applied thereto very gently, to raise it up into its true
place; or it may be done with a proper Levator.

XII. Sennertus advises to put a Pillow under the Spina or Backbone, right
under the Fracture; and then observing the former Directions, the Artist is to
press together with his Hands on both sides, till the Bones are brought again
to their right places.

XIII. After this, those Medicaments which are wont to be imposed on other
Fractures, serving to prevent Inflammation, and for Conglutination, are to be
applied here.

XIV. And the binding up, is to be done with sit Swaths, above the Shoulders,
in the form of the Letter X; which binding ought not to be made too straight or
hard, lest it hinder the breathing.

XV. Or, a Bolster and Pasteboard are to be laid upon the Sternon, almost of
the same figure with the Part; and the Bandage is to be fitted with a Napkin,
and a Breast Plate.

XVI. The Swath is to be four Inches broad, and six Yards or better long, and
wound up to the middle with two heads: you are to begin with it under the
Arm-hole, and it is to be carried downwards with its two heads, the one before,
and the other behind; and passing under the other Arm-hole, the heads are
raised, and they cross one another upon the Shoulder, whence they are brought
down backwards and forwards, forming an X, both before and behind.

XVII. Then the Swath is rolled or carried about the Breast, in making
Circumvolutions, which are continued till the Swath comes to its ends, which
are to terminate by a Circumvolution round the Breast.

CHAP. XXVI. Of a FRACTVRE of the RIBS.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). pl. (...). in Latin, Costae pl. Costarum
Fractura; and in English, A Fracture of a Rib, or Ribs.

II. The Ribs are sometimes so broken as to decline inwardly, and sometimes to
stick forth outwardly; sometimes they are only broken in part, and sometimes
wholly broken; and yet then sometimes they are not moved out of their places,
and sometimes the Flesh about them is broken or contused withal.

III. The Signs. If the whole Rib is not broken, there follows neither spitting
of Blood, nor Fever thereupon, nor any Apostem, or Suppuration, nor any great
Pain; yet there will be some Pain felt upon touching of it.

IV. If the Rib is wholly broken, and yet the broken ends not removed out of
their places, neither inwardly nor outwardly; these seldom spit Blood, or have
a Fever, or any Apostem in the Thorax or Pleura, but the Part is sore and
painful outwardly.

V. But if the broken ends are removed out of their places, then there is an
inequality or unevenness, and a hollowness, that may be found both by sight and
feeling.

VI. If the Rib is broken inwards, there is a very great and grievous Pain,
much resembling the Pleurisy, difficulty of Breathing, and a troublesome Cough,
with sometimes spitting of Blood; to which a Fever is also adjoined.

VII. The Flesh lying upon the Ribs is puffed up, which is known both by
feeling and sight; and if the place is pressed with the Hand, there is heard a
certain noise and sound of Air going out thereof.

VIII. This, if not timely remedied, proves to be an Inflammation, to which an
Apostem succeeds; and sometimes a Corruption of the Bone, or Rib it self.

IX. The Prognostics. If the Fracture is single, without any Contusion, or
bruising of the Parts adjacent, there is little or no danger, and the Ribs will
grow together again in about twenty days.

X. If the fractured Part is driven inwards, and there pricks or wounds the
Pleura- Membrane, then all those Symptoms accompanying a Pleurisy, are here
attending, and the Case then is very dangerous; and if the Cure is
accomplished, it is seldom done in less than 40 days.

XI. If there is a Contusion withal, it is yet more dangerous, because of the
afore-enumerated Symptoms, and sometimes it is Mortal, of which Hippocrates, de
Articulis has wrote.

XII. The Cure. If it is a simple Fracture, it is Cured by only laying on the
Emplastrum Catagmaticum upon the Part. Some apply Cupping-glasses to the place,
to reduce the Bone, but they are hurtful.

XIII. If the Rib stands out, it is to be reduced, or pressed in with ones
hand, and then the Catagmatick Emplaster, or some such like, is to be laid
thereon.

XIV. If the Rib is gone inwards, let the Sick draw in his Breath, as strongly
and as long as he can, thereby to force the Rib outward; the Artist in the
mean time assisting with his Hand.

XV. But if this succeeds not, let the Patient be laid upon the sound Side, and
upon the fractured Rib, let a sticking Emplaster be applied, as a Plaster of
Mastich, or this of Paraeus, in lib. 15. cap. 11. Turpentine, Rosin, black
Pitch, Mastick, Aloes, Wheat Flour, A. q.s. mix, and make a Plaster, which
spread upon strong new Linen Cloth, and apply it.

XVI. When it has stuck some time, pull it suddenly with great violence, and
often if need requires, from below upwards; this sometimes reduces the Bone,
which is fallen into the Breast, to its place; but it ought to be pulled so
often, till such time as the Sick finds ease, and breathes more freely.

XVII. Sennertus has this: Fine Wheat Flour, Whites of Eggs, A. ii.
Ichthyocolla iss. Bird-lime vi. Frankincense in powder, Tragacanth, A. v.
Rose Water (but Poppy-water is better) enough to mix them.

XVIII. But if these things will not do, the only way left, is to make an
Incision therein, and then with your Finger, or a Levatory, to raise it up, and
so to put it into its true place.

XIX. If the Membrane Pleura is pricked by any Fragment of a Bone, the Part
must then also be opened with an Incision-knife, that you may take away, or cut
off the said Fragment; and then Cure it as a Wound of the Ribs, according to
Art.

XX. If the Rib is not wholly broken; or if broken, and not removed out of its
place, apply things to consolidate the Fracture, as a Plaster of fine Bole,
Frankincense, Wheat Flour, and the White of an Egg, or some such like.

XXI. If there is a Contusion or Bruise, give inwardly Spirit of Sal Armoniack
in a proper Vehicle, and bathe the Part with this: Damask Rose Water, or
Poppy-water, or Rosemary-water iii. Spirit of Wine ii. volatile Sal Armoniack
iii. mix, and foment therewith warm.

XXII. Then apply Discussives, and such things as repress an Inflammation: as,
Aloes, Barley-flower, Catechu, Powder of red Roses, Sumach, Myrtle-berries,
Cypress-nuts, Galls, Tormentil, and Bistort Roots, Saccharum Saturni, A. ss.
Whites of Eggs, No ii. Oils of Roses and Camomil, A. q.s. mix, and make a
Cataplasm.

XXIII. If it Apostemates, you must speedily open it, lest the Matter foul the
Bones; after which you must Cure it, as we have in other places of this Book
taught you.

XXIV. In this case it is necessary that the Sick keeps himself as quiet as may
be, and composes himself to rest, without Coughing or Sneezing, or much
Talking, or Laughing; and withal, that he takes a particular Traumatick
Diet-drink; and once in five days purge with some Liquid Cathartick, as
Tinctura Purgans, Syrupus Catharticus, etc. See Galen, in Hippocrat. de
Articulis, lib. 3. Text. 54. and Paraeus, lib. 14. cap. 12. if these things
takes no effect, the Sick falls into a Consumption, and so dies.

XXV. When the Ribs are reduced, though Nature will indeed generate a Callus, yet
Sennertus thinks that this following Emplaster, as one of the best and
chiefest, may be imposed to give assistance therein.

XXVI. Powder of Myrtles, red Roses, A. i. Barley-flower, Meals of Beans,
Lentils, Orobus, Mastich, Acorn-cups, rinds of Cyprus-nuts, Frankincense,
Sanguis Draconis, Aloes, Myrrh, Terra Lemnia, A. ii. Oils of Myrtles, of Roses,
and Oil-omphacine, A. ix. Wax, Turpentine, A. lbss. mix, and make an Emphaster.
If Catechu, dried Blood, A. i. be added, the Emplaster will be yet much more
powerful.

XXVII. Lastly, as to the binding up, a Bolster is to be applied to the
Fracture, with two little pieces of Pasteboard laid in form of an X, and
another Bolster upon the whole Dressing; on which also may be laid a petty
large square Pasteboard, covered with a Bolster: and the Bandage is made with a
Napkin, made into three folds, which is to be put round the Breast, being sowed
to, and supported by a Back and Brestplate, or Scapulary hanging from the
Shoulders, whose two ends are fastened both before and behind to the Napkin.

CHAP. XXVII. Of a FRACTVRE of the BACKBONE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). and in Latin, Fractura Ossium vel Spinarum
Dorsi; and in English, A Fracture of the Backbone.

II. The Signs. Celsus, lib. 8. cap. 9. says, That if any Process of those
Bones is broken, it may be discerned by the touch, because that it may be moved
this way, and that way: and indeed it may be known by a Cavity in the place,
with a Pain and Pricking.

III. If the Sick lies upon his Fuce, the Pain is so much the greater, because
the Skin is extended, and the Flesh bruised and pricked with the fragments of
the Bones, as if they were Thorns or Nails.

IV. But if the Patient stands upright, the fragments of the Bones prick not so
much, by reason the Skin is then slackned or loos^ed.

V. The Prognostics. If an involuntary egestion of Excrements, or a stoppage
or suppression of Urine happen in a Fracture of the Vertebrae, the Patient is
desperate, and in great danger of his Life.

VI. A Fracture in the Process of the Vertebrae, is easily consolidated and
cured; for that those Bones are spongy and thin, unless some ill Symptom should
intervene.

VII. But if the Spinal Marrow is hurt or pressed in, whereby the Arms or Legs of
the Sick become senseless, or that he cannot retain his Urine or Excrements,
Death commonly follows: and this more especially, if the Fracture happens in
the Vertebrae of the Neck; for that with the Spinal Marrow, the Nerves and
Membranes are also hurt.

VIII. If in a Fracture of the Vertebrae of the Neck, the Sick escapes with
Life; yet an inourable Falsie of the Arms and Hands follows thereupon.

IX. If the Fracture happens in the Vertebrae of the Inferior Parts, and Motion
and Sense are not altogether abolished, there may be some small hope of
Recovery; but then by reason the Nerves are hurt, there follows a Palsy of the
Thighs, Legs and Feet: if Motion and Sense are wholly lost, Death infallibly
succeeds.

X. The Cure. The in some of these Cases, there may be but little hopes of a
Cure, yet the poor Patient is not altogether to be deserted, but the most
proper Means are to be attempted in order to a Cure.

XI. If the Spinous Apophyses are only broken, the Patient is to be laid upon
his Belly, and with your Hands you must endeavor to raise up the Bone again,
and reduce it to its own proper place.

XII. Then you may apply to it on each side a small long Bolster, which may be
covered with a Pasteboard of the same shape or form, laying also another
Bolster upon each Pasteboard: the Bandage may be made with a Napkin, which you
may keep fast by a Scapulary falling from the Shoulders.

XIII. As to Topicals, they are such as are generally applied in Fractures,
viz. such as ease Pain, prevent Inflammation, and induce Conglutination.

XIV. If the Process is wholly broken off from the Periosteon, and is loose,
you must make an Incision, and take it out: so also if fragments of the
Vertebrae press upon, or prick the Spinal Marrow, or the Nerves; for otherwise
dismal Accidents may happen, and Life it self may be lost: afterward the Wound
is to be healed according to Art.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of a FRACVRE of the GREAT BONE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Ossis Sacri Fractura; and in
English, A Fracture of the Os Sacrum, or Great Bone.

II. This Bone is the largest or greatest of all the Bones of the Buck, and
does sustain all the other Vertebrae: it is smooth on its inside, and concave;
on its outside, unequal, and uneven, being almost of a triangular form.

III. Its upper part on each side is very firmly knit to the Ossa Ilia, by an
intervening Cartilage; and consists of five or six Bones in Infants, but in
grown Persons scarcely distinguishable.

IV. These Bones resemble the Vertebrae, and are so called; for each of them
had a Body, and Processes, and a large hole for the Spinalis Medulla; the lower
part of these Bodies are always less than the upper, whereas in other Vertebrae
they are always bigger.

V. Their oblique Processes can scarcely be discerned, except the first: the
transverse Processes are pretty long, but so united, that they all seem but
one: and the hinder Processes or Spines, are like those of the Loins, but
lesser, and still lesser the lower; the lowest having no Process but a
Protuberance.

VI. The Prognostics. These, if they shall be so bruised and broken, that
thereupon the Spinal Marrow shall be hurt, the Affect is very dangerous, if not
mortal; for the Reasons which we showed you in the former Chapter.

VII. The Cure. A Fracture in this Bone, is reduced as a Fracture in the other
Vertebrae; but the Dressing and Bandage are made like a T, with a hole
perforated through it, at the Anus or Fundament; or else like the Greek Letter
P, or a double T.

VIII. It is done with a Swath two Inches broad, and long enough to go round
the Body above the Hips; so that to the middle of this Swath, another Swath of
the same breadth is fastened, and of a length long enough to pass over the
Dressing, as also between the Thighs, to be joined in the forepart, to the
first Circumvolution.

IX. The p, or double T, is made by fastening two Bands at an Inch distance one
from another, to the Swath which is rolled round the Body; which Bandage is
also supported with a scapulary, hanging down from the Shoulders.

X. The Topics must be such as are anodyn, prevent Inflammation, and resist a
flux of Humors; being also of an Astringent force, and Catagmatick.

CHAP. XXIX. Of a FRACTVRE of the RVMP-BONE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Ossis Coccygis Fractura; and in
English, A Fracture of the Rump or Crupper Bone.

II. This Bone is joined by a Cartilage to the Os Sacrum, but somewhat loosly,
that it may bend a little backwards; especially in Women in Travail, for the
more easy passage of the Foetus.

III. It is composed of four Bones, the first of which has a small cavity or
hollowness, which receives the last Vertebra of the Os Sacrum.

IV. The other three Bones grow each less than other, and are joined together
by Symphysis or Coalition; and at the end of these, is a small Cartilaginous
Substance or Gristle.

V. It is called Os Coccygis, because in its form, it resembles the
Cuckow's-bill; and it bends inwards (like it) at its lower end, that it may be
a stay to the Intestinum Rectum, and the Sphincter Muscle, which are joined to
it.

VI. Its Bones are spongy and soft, but without Marrow, or any Process, or
Hollowness; for the Medulla Spinalis descends no lower than to the bottom of
the Os Sacrum.

VII. The Bone is commonly fractured by Falls, and then it sinks inwards,
scarcely ever outward.

VIII. The Prognostics. Whilst recent, there is not much danger in it; but if
it is neglected, it may be of very evil Consequence; and if that Part is hurt
and corrupted, to which the Intestinum Rectum and Sphincter Musele are joined,
very evil and dangerous Symptoms may follow.

IX. The Cure. The Cure is to be ordered as that of the Os Sacrum in the former
Chapter; but this has something peculiar to it self: for by putting your
Foresinger into the Anus as far as the Fracture, and thrusting it hard against
the fractured Bones, you may reduce them to their true situation, the other
Hand fixing them in the mean while on the other side.

X. The Dressing and Bandage are the same with the former, but the Sick must be
obliged to lie on one side, and keep his Bed: but if he has a mind to rise, he
ought to sit on a Chair, with almost no bottom in it; yet it is best keeping in
Bed during the whole time of the Cure, etc.

CHAP. XXX. Of a FRACTURE of the HIP-BONE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Ossis Anonymi vel Innominati
Fractura; and in English, A Fracture of the Hip-bone.

II. This Bone consists of three Parts or Bones, 1. Os Ilium, The Haunch-bone,
because it lies under the small Gut, called Ilium: this is the uppermost and
broadest, semicircular in its form, unequal without, and concave within; and is
joined to the Os Sacrum, by a common membranous strong Ligament, and a
Cartilage intervening.

III. 2. Os Ischium, or Os Coxendicis, the Huckle-bone, (which some call the
Hip-bone) this is the outer and lower part of the Os Innominatum, containing
the Acetabulunt Coxendicis, or large Cavity which receives the round head of
the Thigh Bone, the edges of which are covered with a Cartilage, called
Supercilium.

IV. 3. O. Pubis, or Os Pectinis, the Share-bone; which is the lower, and
inner, or forepart of the Os Innominatum; and is joined to its Fellow, on the
other side by a Cartilage, which is much thicker, softer and looser in Women
than in Men, that it may a little give way to the Foetus in Travail.

V. These three Bones in Men of full growth, are so fast knit and joined
together, that they can by no means be separated; but in Children, they may be
divided without much ado.

VI. These Bones may be broken (like those of the Shoulder Blade) either in
their Extremities, or transverse, or longways.

VII. The Signs. A Fracture of this Bone is known by its painfulness, which is
more especially exasperated by the touch and compression; as also by a
pricking, a depression or cavity, unevenness, or inequality, and numbedness of
the Leg on the same side.

VIII. The Prognostics. The Fractures of these Bones are usually consolidated
in the space of 24 days, especially if they be suddenly set; otherwise you may
expect various Accidents.

IX. The Cure. The Fracture is with all possible speed and diligence to be set,
and the Bones are to be reduced into their own places; after which, fit and
proper Catagmatick Medicaments are to be applied.

X. But if there are any fragments of the Bone broken off, which by their
continual pricking may excite Pain, and there is withal fears of an
Inflammation; some advise to make Incision, and take them out, replacing
presently these pieces which have fast hold.

XI. But whereas these fragments or splinters very rarely lie under the Skin
alone, but also under the very Muscles themselves, as also under Arteries,
Veins, Nerves and Tendons, or heads of Muscles; for this cause, such a Section
or Incision cannot be made without much danger.

XII. If any one therefore will attempt such an Operation, he ought to be very
cautious, that he hurts or wounds none of those Vessels or Parts, especially
that very large Nerve, which descends down to the Muscles of the Thigh.

XIII. The fragments or splinters being taken away, and the Parts not separated
from the Periosteon, being reduced with your Fingers, you are to pursue the
rest of the Cure, as necessity, and a recent Wound of those Parts may require.

CHAP. XXXI. Of a FRACTVRE of the THIGH BONE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Fractura Ossis Femoris: and in
English, A Fracture of the Thigh Bone.

II. This Bone, of all the Bones in the whole Human Body, is absolutely the
biggest, thickest, and longest, and may be broken either in the middle, or
toward the extremities, in any of the kinds of Fractures.

III. The Signs. If the Thigh Bone is broken near its Head, it will be very
difficult to be discovered: but if it is broken more toward the middle or
lower part, it may soon be known, because the Bones will tie one over another;
also, one Leg will be shorter than another.

IV. The Prognostics. Celsus, lib. 8. cap. 10. says, If the Thigh Bone is
broken, it must of necessity be made shorter, because it never more returns
into its old place.

V. Peccettus, lib. 4. cap. 24. expounds this Opinion of Celsus to be, when the
Part is less Extended than need requires, and when the Bones are not well and
exactly set together: for we daily see, many having had a Fracture of the
Thigh, to walk straight and upright, without any Lameness at all. And this
Avicenna, lib. 4. Fen. 5. Tract. 3. cap. 14. Guido Cauliac. Tract. 5. Doct. 1.
cap. 7. And Andreas, Chirurg, lib. 2. cap. 14. with diverse others affirm.

VI. But Fabricius Hildanus, Cent. 5. Obs. 86. says, that he never saw nor knew
any, that had this kind of Fracture who escaped without a Lameness, except one
young Maid only, whom he cured after a new and peculiar manner. But this is
chiefly to be understood, when the Bone is broken near to the Hip; and of this
kind of Fracture, the afore-quoted Authors are to be understood to Speak.

VII. But if the Bone is broken toward the Knee, or in the middle, if care and
diligence is used in the Cure, it may certainly be healed without Lameness, or
any great difficulty: but if the said Bone is broken near to the Hip, Lameness
for the most part follows.

VIII. A Fracture of the Thigh Bone will be consolidated, or brought to grow
together again, in about 50 days, and not sooner; in regard that it is the
greatest of all Bones; for which reason, it requires a longer time for the
generating of a Callus.

IX. The Cure. If the Thigh Bone is broken, and the parts removed out of their
places, the Extension must be very strong and forcible; because the Muscles
which encompass the Thigh, are greater than all the rest, and therefore being
contracted, are the harder to be extended.

X. This, if it is in one of ripe years will (...) be done by the Hands,
without some Instrument, (...) Engine, for which purpose we commend either the
Pulley of Vitruvius in Tab. XI. Fig. III. both which two have before described,
cap. ^. sect. 19. ad 23. and sect. 29. ad 33.

XI. Hippocrates approves of Extending this Bone, when it is broken so much,
that the greatness of the Extension may be such that the ends of the fragments
be somewhat distant asunder, and an Empty space may be left between (for
otherwise the Bones will not easily reduce) after which a ligature is to be
made.

XII. But it is not here, as in the Extension of (...) Bones; for the Ligature
is not in his place of such force alone, (...) and keep the Bones and Muscles
in that State, wherein the Artist shall place them; by reason the Muscles are
large and strong, and apt to prevail against the Ligature.

XIII. Paraeus, lib. 15. cap. 20. advises, therefore, that because the
Thigh Bone is hollowed or crooked on the inside, and gibbous on the outer side,
that (...) may be kept in its native Figure by putting into the hollowness a
Compress, or thick Bolster, with a Plaster or Cerate under it spread with Vng.
Rosatum, or some glutinous thing, that it may not fall off; otherwise the
Patient would halt, and be Lame all his Life after.

XIV. Due Extension being made the Artist is to say his Hands upon the Fleshy
parts of the Thigh, and direct his Thumbs to the fractured Bone, and so force
it back into its place.

XV. This done, fit Medicaments are to be applied thereto, with the thick
Bolster, as long as its bending is; and then the Fracture is to be bound up
with good Ligature.

XVI. You must provide three Swaths, each of them 4 Inches broad: let the first
be four Yards long; the second five Yards long; and the third nearly six.

XVII. With the first Band, you are to make three Circumvolutions upon the
Fracture: carrying it upwards with small Ambages, and making it to end round
the Body.

XVIII. With the second Band you are to make two Circumvolutions upon the
Fracture; and this is to be carried down wards with small Ambages, and this is
to end above the Knee; or if you think it fit, it may be continued down the
Leg, and passing under the Foot, and be carried up again upon the Leg.

XIX. With the third Swath, you are to bind on Bolsters and Splints: A bolster
is to be applied to the lower part of the Thigh, thicker at bottom, than at
top, that the Thigh may be every where even; and four Splenia, or long Bolsters
are to be added, on which Splints are to be laid of the same length and
breadth, which are to be wrapped up in Linen Rags.

XX. These Splenia and Splints being (...) about the Feacture, the third S^th
it to be (...) about them, beginning at (...) ^om, and gradnally ascending
upwards with many Circumvolutions.

XXI. Then two large ^feboards are to be applied, which many embrace the whole
Member without crossing one another, which may be tied with three pieces of
Tape; a pair of Pumps are to be put under the Foot and Heel, and to be fastened
with a small Swath.

XXII. Semertus Med. Pract. lib. 5. part. 5. cap. 11. says it will not be amiss
to cut Li^en Cloth into pieces, of a sufficient length, and to mind them r^d
the Hip, and near the Ilia, as likewise the Groins and Perineum; for by this
means, says he, the naked parts will not only be defended against the
Splinters, but thereby a Flux of Humors may in a great measure be prevented.

XXIII. The Placing of the Part is next to be considered, which is to be put
into a Junck or Cose^ so large or long, as it may take in the whole Thigh, from
the very Hip to the Foot; in the end of which, near the foot, there ought to be
a hollow for the Heel.

XXIV. And such in Instrument as this is to be used, because that other sort of
Bandage, (...) about a Fracture of the (...) to hold the Part firm and easy,
can by no means be used here.

XXV. This Case or Truck is to be made of Wood; in making of which, great care
is to take for the bottom of the Heel, that it may lie easy, lest by the
uneasiness of that part, you disorder the whole Member, and bring upon it a
pain, or numbedness.

XXVI. And herein you must observe; 1. That the Part lies soft; and than
nothing which is hard, be immediately applied to it; but that between the
wounded Place and this Case or Trunk, some soft Splenia be interposed; or
little Cushions or Bolsters may be laid on each side; two below the Knee, and
two others below the Ancles, to fill up the cavities: and a thick Bolster is to
be laid upon the Leg, all along in length, as also one upon the Thigh.

XXVII. 2. That the whole Limb may lie smooth and even, and that it may lie
rather somewhat higher than the rest of the Body.

XXVIII. This Case or Junck is to be (...) with many Bands; three for the
Thigh, and three for the Leg; and on both side Woollen Gloths or Flannels are
to be put, that so the Member may not decline either way: all which is to be
done, that the Sick may lie free from Pain, or as much as may be, at ease, and
that he may not move the Part.

XXIX. This you must also observe, that if a Swelling arises in the Ham, or
parts beneath it, greater th^n (...) wight be expected; that then the Ligature
is too hard, and the Splints too strongly bound on, whereby the Part is pressed
too much; and therefore you ought to loosen the binding.

XXX. And the Tumor is to be fomented or anointed with such things as are
anodyn, digestive, and repercussive; applying to it Cotton or Lint dipped in Oils
of Myrtles, Roses, and Whelps.

XXXI. The Ancients advised, that the Ligature should be loosned every third
day, to the tenth day; and from thence every seventh day: but for this there is
no certain Rule.

XXXII. For according as Accidents or Symptoms may arise, so the Sick ought to
be dressed sooner or later; more often, or seldomer, renewing the Ligatures
with the Dressing.

XXXIII. If no Symptoms urge, let not the first Dressing be quickly moved, but
defer it as long as conveniently may be: because broken Bones have very much
need of Rest, for the breeding of the Callus, which begins about the thirteenth
or fifteenth day, and may be farthered by applying Catagmatick Emplasters.

XXXIV. If there is a Wound, with the Fractures or Splinters of Bones, you are
to apply (the Fracture being first rightly Set) a proper Suppurative; such as
Galen's Teirapharmacum, or Vng-Basilicon; and you must daily wet the Swaths
with Wine and Oil, 'till the fear of an Inflammation is over.

XXXV. Then, to help Nature in casting forth the Bones, you must inject
Decoctum Divinum, or some such like; and lay on Empl. Sacrum Galeni upon the
lips of the Wound only, and lay round about the Part affected Empl. Album, or
Diapalma: and if it may be without Pain, it is to be bound up with single
Splints.

XXXVI. The Bones being cast forth, the Wound is to be healed with Ceratum
Divinum, or some other Consolidative; and being brought to the Cicatrice, the
whole Member is to be kept easy, and in rest and quietness; and Ferula's to be
placed round about it, to corroborate the Part, and confirm and strengthen the
broken Bone.

CHAP. XXXII. Of a FRACTVRE of the KNEE-PAN.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...), i.e. Pelvis, vel Patine parvae; in Latin,
Fracture Fatellae; and in English, A Fracture of the Knee-pan.

II. This Bone is sometimes broken lengthways in respect to the Thigh,
sometimes transverse, and sometimes obliquety: sometimes it is broken into two
parts, sometimes, all manner of ways; and sometimes it is with a Wound, and
sometimes without.

III. The Signs. It is easily known by feeling; there is a distance between the
broken Bones, and the Patient has a weakness and disability in going: it is
also known by the cavity, which is in the place where the Fracture is; by its
motion; and by the crashing sound, in the handling the roof.

IV. Prognostics, If it is rightly set, and so preserved, it easily grows
together again; especially if the Fracture was made in the length thereof.

V. If the Fracture is made transverse or crossways, the Patient proves lame,
and for the most part halts all his Life after.

VI. So also if it is broken obliquely; because in both these ways, the
concretion of the Callus being produced, the consolidation does hinder the free
motion of the Knee.

VII. If it is broken longways, it is easily reduced, and consolidated, without
any fear of a Callus bunching forth, or a Lameness following thereupon: because
the extremities of the seventh, eighth, and ninth Muscles, which move the Ancle
and Leg, end in that most strong Tendon which is implanted in the Patella; and
that the Muscles are wont of their own accord to be moved, and to draw toward
the place of their original.

VIII. But Par^us, lib. 14. cap. 22. says, he never saw any one who had this
Bone broken, that was not same, and halted all their Lives after: for that the
concretion of the Callus being produced, the consolidation does hinder the free
bending of the Knee.

IX. This indeed, as to the Transverse Fracture, may be granted; yet, says
Fabricius Hildanus Cent. 5. Obs. 88. this is not always necessary in the
Fracture made longways; because such a Callus so sticking forth, is not of
necessity to be bred: and we may see in the coalition of other Bones, that
Nature many times breeds a Callus with that nearness, that there scarcely
remains the least sign of any Fracture upon the Part.

X. And this more especially happens when the Periosteum is whole, or unbroken;
for then it keeps in the matter of the Callus, that it cannot grow out
overmuch, or bunch, cut too far.

XI. Again, being broken transversly or obliquely, though all the industry is
used that can be, it is not to be cured without Lameness or Halting ever after;
because the seventh, eighth, and ninth Muscles, moving the Ancle, draw the one
part of the Bone up toward the Hip: but the Tendon that under the Knee is
inserted into the Shin-Bone, draws the other part of the Bone downwards; so
that they can hardly by any Art be conglutinated again: whereupon a Callus
bunches forth; which hurting the Muscles moving the Leg and Ancle, causes
Lameness.

XII. The Cure. If the Knee-Pan is broken lengthways, no extension is to be
made; because the pieces of the Bones remain those ways in their places.

XIII. If it is broken transversly or obliquely, as the two pieces fly one from
another, so here an extension is to be made; and the Artist is at the same time
to thrust back the upper part of the Ratella into its true place; and in this
posture it is to be kept, during the time of the Cure.

XIV. Then a Cataplasm or Emplaster proper to the Fracture is to be laid on;
and the hollowness of the Ham is to be filled up with a Bolster, lest the Knee
should bend unawares, whereby the fragments of the Patella would fly asunder.

XV. After which, the Part is to be bound up with a fitting Ligature, if it is
broken crosswise, etc. the Swath ought to be four Yards long, and two Inches
broad, which may be rolled up, with one or two Heads: it is to be applied above
the Knee-pan, making a circumvolution, and crossing under the Knee; then the
Swath is to be constantly carried up and down, 'till the Patella is wholly
covered.

XVI. If the Fracture is longways, a Swath like to the former must be used,
which must be divided, or cut through in the middle: and is first to be applied
under the Knee; and one of the Heads of the Swath is to be passed through the
Cut, by which the Bones are to be well closed, with several circumvolutions
made upon the Patelia, 'till it is all covered.

XVII. Aegineta, de Re Medica, lib. 6. cap. 103. will have the Leg extended,
and the Patella joined with the Fingers, and so kept, 'till the edges of the
broken Bone touch one another, and are grown together: this may indeed be
advised; but I am afraid, that it is a very hard thing to be performed.

XVIII. Then with a Junck of Straw, or made of some other fit substance, (as in
a Fracture of the Thigh or Leg) the Member is to be kept fixed and immovable,
taking care that the Knee is not bended in the least measure.

XIX. If sharp fragments of Bones are separated from the rest of the Bone, and
prick the Skin; some there are, who advise to make incision, to take them out;
but this, if done, ought to be performed with great care and caution; and if
any vehement Symptom should succeed, you are timely to oppose it with proper
Remedies.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of a FRACTVRE of the LEG.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...) pl. (...). in Latin, Cruris Fractura, vel,
Fractura Ossis, pl. Ossium Cruris; and in English. A Fracture of the Leg; or,
of the Bone, or Bones of the Leg.

II. The Leg, is that part which goes from the Knee to the Foot; and consists
of two Bones, viz. 1. (...), Tibia, the Shin-bone; which is the greater,
thicker, and upper Bone. 2. (...), Fibula; which is the lesser, thinner, under,
or outward Bone.

III. These Bones are broken, sometimes both of them together, and sometimes
but one of them only: and the Fracture is either in the upper, or middle, or
nether part.

IV. The Signs. When both Bones are broken; the Leg may be bended or bowed,
many ways.

V. The Fracture of the Shin-Bone may be known both by sight and touching;
there is a sufficient cavity and unevenness, and the Patient is also in much
pain, and unable to go.

VI. But if the Fibula only is broken, it is not so easily known because it is
covered with much flesh, but for the most part the broken Bones incline inwards.

VII. The Prognostics. If one Bone only is broken, the Cure is much easier to
be performed, than if both be broken; for then one Bone is a support or stay to
the other.

VIII. The Fibula being broken, is more easily cured than the Tibia, for that
the Leg in reduction of that Bone, needs less extension; and withal the
Shin-bone, not only supports it, but also sustains the weight of the whole Body.

IX. But the Tibia or Shin-bone being broken, the Cure is done with more
difficulty; because as there is need of greater Extension, lbthe Sick is much
longer, before he is able to walk.

X. As to the Time of the Consolidation of these these Bones, it seldom happens
in less than forty days; but the Patient ought to put but little stress upon
the Leg, 'till fourscore days are past; and this more especially, if both the
Bones are broken.

XI. The Cure. Whether one, or more Bones are broken, the Legis to be extended,
that the Bones may be reduced, and joined together. But so great and strong an
Extension is not requisite, when one Bone only is broken, as when both are
fractured.

XII. This is commonly done by two strong Persons: but if by the Hand it cannot
be accomplished, the Reduction must be performed by help of Engines or
Instruments, as we have formerly taught.

XIII. If one Bone only is broken, it ought to be most extended on one side; if
both are broken, then it it to be equally extended every way: and whilst the
Part is extended by the Assistants, the Artist is with his Hands to reduce the
Bones; thrufting the ends of the Bones exactly one against another.

XIV. And they will be known to be rightly reduced; because the great Toe will
be in its right or natural situation, which otherwise would not be.

XV. The Bones being thus set right, you must impose proper and convenient
Medicaments; and then it is to be rolled about with Swaths, as we have formerly
directed; which ought to be both broader and longer than for the Arm.

XVI. You must prepare three Swaths; one of these three Yards long; the second
of four Yards; and the third of five Yards long, and about three Inches broad.

XVII. The first Swath is to be applied, a Bolster being first imposed, dipped in
some Styptick or Catagmatick Liquor; and three strait Circumvolutions are to be
made upon the Fracture, and the Swath is to be carried upwards, with several
circumvolutions, and to terminate above the Knee.

XVIII. The second Swath is to begin upon the Fracture, with two
circumvolutions; and winding, it is to be brought down, to pass under the Foot,
and then afterward is to be carried up again, and to be terminated above.

XIX. The third Swath is now to be applied, but first the Leg is to be filled
up with a Bolster, thicker at the bottom than at the top; and then you must lay
round four Splenia, or long Bolsters, as long as the Leg, and 2 Inches broad,
upon which are to be applied Splints made of thin pliable Wood: Upon these
Splenia and Splints (wrapped up in Linen Rags) the third Band is to be applied,
which may indifferently begin either at top or at bottom, opposite to the
former; so that it must be carried in its turnings and windings either
downwards or upwards, and so accordingly terminate.

XX. The whole Contexture of this Bandage, is to be encompassed with large
Paste-boards, made round at the ends, which are not to cross one another; but
they must be straighter at bottom than at top, and tied with three pieces of
Tape, beginning at the middle; and the knots are to be tied on the outside.

XXI. And the Leg is so to be disposed of, that it may not be turned away unto
any part, lest the Bones be disordred, which may be don by a Junk of Straw, or
a Wooden Case; where care is to be taken for the easy laying of the Heel, as in
the Fracture of the Thigh Bone we have already advised.

XXII. The Splinters are not to be applied upon the Extremities of the Bones
sticking out; nor upon that Tendon which passes along from the Leg to the Foot,
and is knit unto the Heel, by reason of its exquisite sense, which will not
endure compression.

XXIII. But Hippocrates, de Fracturis lib. 3. text. 23. etc. advises not to lay
on the Ferula's or Splints, till the fear of Inflammation is over, which is
generally after the seventh day; and then they are to be applied with the
Pledgets and the upper Ligature, and to be bound fast with three Girts. His
words are these.

XXIV. 1. Then at length things necessary being provided, the Fracture being
joined (the part being yet extended in a mean Figure) we must bind it with a
Linne^ Rowler, laying the beginning of the first Band upon the Fracture, so
that it may hold it firm, but not yet press it violently.

XXV. 2. When you have Wound the first Band about the same place, the second
and third time, you must carry it upwards, that you may thereby stop the Flux
of Blood coming to it: and there it is to end; but this Band is not to be so
long (...) the second.

XXVI. 3. The other Band, at the beginning of it, is to be wound about the
Fracture once, and then is to be carried downwards, and not pressing so much,
it must take a greater distance in rolling of it about, that so it may come to
that place, where the first did end.

XXVII. 4. After these, Pledgets smeared with some proper Cerate, are to be
laid on, for so by these means, they will stick the faster, and smoother, and
these must be bound on with Rowlers.

XXVIII. 5. But a Band with two Heads, will perform the office of three Bands;
changing the order so among them, that they may be carried sometimes to the
Right Hand, sometimes to the Left Hand, and very much indeed from the lower
parts upwards; and sometimes from the upper parts, they must be carried
downwards.

XXIX. 6. But when the fear of Inflammation is past, you must lay on the
Ferula's, and they are to be contained with Bands very loose, that they may
only be staid on; and that the putting on of the Ferula's, may not add any
pressure to the Part. Thus Hippocrates.

XXX. Lastly, if need be, or you find that Symptoms are induced, you must
sometimes use convenient Purging, with a Vulnerary Diet: let the Sick Eat very
sparingly at first, and as much as may be, be at rest and quiet.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of a FRACTVRE of the FOOT.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Fractura Ossis vel Ossium Pedis:
and in English, a Fracture of a Bone, or Bones of the Foot.

II. Hippocrates, de Articulis, says, That the Bones of the Feet, (as also of
the Hands) cannot be broken, without a Wound of the Fleshy parts, by something
very sharp or heavy: because these Bones are harder th^n ordinary, and
therefore cannot suffer without hurt of the adjacent Flesh.

III. Paulus Aegineta, lib. 6. cap. 106. says, That the Ancle-bone can by no
means be broken, not only by reason of its hardness, but because also, it is
guarded and defended round about.

IV. The Signs. A Fracture of the Bones of the Foot, is found both by sight and
touching; because those parts, have but little Flesh about them; for commonly
they stick out, upon their breaking.

V. The Prognostics. A Fracture in these parts is not very dangerous, or of
difficult cure; yet because the Member is full of Nerves, which are generally
bruised and wounded; there are most vehement Pains, Inflammations, and other
evil Symptoms excited.

VI. If a violent Flux of Humors falls down upon the Part, the Cure will be
exceeding difficult, by reason it is a depending Part.

VII. Otherwise, if no ill Symptoms occur, these Fractures will, be for the
most part consolidated in about twenty days: except the Fracture is near the
Ancle; for then a longer time will be required.

VIII. The Cure. It is nearly the same with that in the Hand: there ought to be
a due extension, and then with the Fingers, the broken Bones are to be put in
their proper places.

IX. This will be best done, if the Sick stands with the fractured Foot upon a
Table, covered with a Woollen Cloth: then proper Medicaments are to be applied,
and the Foot is to be wrapped about with Swaths.

X. Splinters cannot well be imposed here, therefore Splenia ought to be used
to cover the Part, and then the Fracture is to be bound up with Swaths; so the
Bones being once put in their right places, they may be kept there.

XI. You are to have a Swath about two Inches broad, and four Yards long, which
is to be rolled up to the middle, with two Heads.

XII. It is to begin with an Application, and a Circumvolution about the Ancle,
and then it must pass on to the Foot, and n^ like manner make a Circum.
volution round it.

XIII. This done, with the same Swath, you must cross over the Metatarsus,
making some Figures, in form of a Rhombus, or Diamond fashion, as also over the
Toes: and then it is to be carried up again, to end above the Ankle.

XIV. But some are for carrying the Heads up the Leg, and then to end them
above the Knee: this kind of Bandage is called the Sandal, and indifferently
serves for any Fracture of the Bones of the Feet.

XV. The Situation and placing ought to be otherwise than in the Hands, for our
Hands being given us to lay hold with upon things, are to be placed in a
crooked Figure: but our Feet being given us to stand upon, and to go withal,
are to be situated in a straight Figure, lest their Action should be hindered,
or depraved.

XVI. You must also take all imaginable care to hinder as much as may be
Inflammation, and prevent defluxion of Humors; for that, if they once have a
recourse to those Parts, they seldom or never after, suffer a Revulsion,
without great difficulty.

XVII. Thus much upon Fractures: if you would see more upon this Subject, you
must Read the most Learned Books of Hippocrates de Fracturis, and de Articulis,
with the admirable Comment of Galen upon them, where possibly you may meet with
much satisfaction: and yet we think, that herein, we have omitted nothing,
which is absolutely necessary for the Young Artist to know.

Explicit Liber Sextus
ARS CHIRVRGICA. Liber Septimus. OF DISLOCATIONS.
The ARGUMENT.
I. Of Dislocations in General. II. Dislocation Simple. III. Dislocation, with
Inflammation and Pain. IV. Dislocation with a Wound. V. Dislocation with
Fracture. VI. Dislocation reduced, with Convulsions following it. VII.
Dislocation with a Callus, or an old Luxation. VIII. Dislocation reduced,
fallen out again. IX. Dislocation of the Nose-bone. X. Of the Mandible, or
Jaw Bone. XI. Of the Clavicle or Collar-bone. XII. Of the Vertebrae of the
Neck. XIII. Of the Spina Dorsi, or Backbone. XIV. Dislocation of the Backbone
from an Internal Cause, or of a Crooked Back. XV. Dislocation, or sinking of
the Xiphoides or Sternon. XVI. Dislocation of the Ribs. XVII. Of the Os Sacrum
and Rump-bone. XVIII. Of the Shoulder. XIX. Of the Elbow and Radius. XX. Of the
Carpus, or Wrist, or Metacarpium, or hand. XXI. Of the Fingers. XXII. Of the
Hip, or Thigh bone. XXIII. Of the Patella, or Knee-pan. XXIV. Of the Knee. XXV.
Dislocation or Divulsion of the Fibula from the Tibia, or Shin-bone. XXVI.
Dislocation of the Talus, or Ankle-bone. XXVII. Of the Heel. XXVIII. Of the
Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Toes.

CHAP. I. Of DISLOCATIONS in General.
I. WHAT the Greeks call, (...), vel, (...). the Latins call, Dislocatio, vel
Luxatio; and we in English, A Dislocation, or Luxation, or Bone out of Joint.

II. It is the displacing or slipping of the head of some Limb or Bone out of
its proper Acetabulum or Sinus, into another place.

III. And it is either complete, when it is wholly out of its place; or
incomplete, when it is but a little out, or distorted.

IV. Now a Joint which is designed for motion, consists of the head of a Bone,
and a Sinus or Cavity: in the head, all Bones which have a round head, have all
motions, as the Shoulder and Thigh: in the Sinus, all which have a deep Sinus,
are not so apt to be thrust out of Joint, as the Os Coxendicis; and
contrariwise, where the Sinus is shallow, as in the Scapula.

V. But in order to the full understanding of the Doctrine of Dislocations, it
is necessary to know how Bones are joined together, which is, 1. Per Symphysin.
2. Per Arthrosin.

VI. (...), Coalescentia, is a close growing of Bones together, and this is
either immediate, or mediate.

VII. Immediate Conjunction of Bones is also threefold; 1. (...), Sutura, or
indented Conjunction, as in the Bones of the Scull. 2. (...), Harmonia, when
joined in a straight line, without indenting. 3. (...), Gomphosis, by entering
into a Sinus, as a Tooth in its hole or socket.

VIII. Mediate Conjunction of Bones is also threefold; 1. (...), Syssarcosis,
when two Bones are joined by a Medium of Flesh; as the joining of the Teeth to
the Jaw, by the Gums. 2. (...), Synneurosis, when the Connection is made by a
Ligament, as the Ossa Pubis in Women: in Articulation, it is either round, as
that which joins the head of the Os Femoris to the Coxa: or broad, as the
Tendon of the Patella, which unites it to the Os Tibiae. 3. (...),
Synchondrosis, when there is a Union made by Gristles; and by this Medium, the
Sternon is joined to the Ribs.

IX. 2. (...), Articulatio, a Unition by jointing; and this it either, 1.
(...), Diarthrosis, a manifest Articulation; as in the Joints of the Elbow,
Thigh, Knee, etc. 2. (...), Synarthrosis, an obscure Articulation; as in the
Conjunction of the Carpus with the Metacarpus, and the Tarsus with the
Metatarsus. Both these are divided into three several Species, viz.
Enarthrosis, Arthrodia, and Ginglymus.

X. (...), Enarthrosis, is where a large round Head enters into Cotyla, a deep
or profound Cavity, as the head of Os Femoris into that of the Os C^: or into
Glene, a shallow Cavity, as the head of the Os Humeri into the Scapula.

XI. (...), Arthrodia, is where the Cavity is very superficial, as in
Diarthrosis, between the head and first Vertebra of the Neck; and in
Synarthrosis, between the Carpus and Metacarpus.

XII. (...), Ginglymus, is where there is a mutual indenting of two Bones in a
Joint, into each others Cavity, as in Diarthrosis, in the juncture of the
Elbow: and in Synarthrosis, in the Vertebrae of the Back.

XIII. It is good for an ^rtist to know all the various kinds of unition of
Bones; but notwithstanding all that has been said of that Matter, Diarthrosis
and Synarthrosis are the chief subjects upon which this our present Discourse
of Luxations is built.

XIV. Now lest the Bones should easily slip out of the Joint, they are held
fast with Ligaments: some of them are orbicular, which in all Joints encompass
round the head and Sinus: others are round, and are only in such Joints, as are
made for strong Motions, as in the Thigh and Knee: these out of a deep Cavity,
are inserted into the head of the Bone.

XV. Now the Joints which have both sorts of Ligaments, at least the orbicular,
and are very close, are with much difficulty put out of Joint.

XVI. The Kinds. There are two kinds of Dislocations, 1. When the ^d of the
Bone slipped totally out of its proper Sinus: and this is that which is specially
called Exarthrosis, or Exarthroma, Dislocation.

XVII. 2. When the head of the Bone starts a little out of the Sinus, but is
not quite out; and this is called, (...) vel (...), Luxatio, a loosening, or
distortion of the Joint: and this may sometimes come to pass, when the Bones
are lengthned through a laxity or distention of the Ligaments, from a weakness of
the Part, or a flux of Humors. Yet Dislocatio and Luxatio are generally taken
in one and the same acceptance.

XVIII. To these some add a third Species, viz. when such Bones shall gape,
which were before joined; and this happens in three places, 1. When the Scapula
parts from the Clavicula or Humerus. 2. The Radius from the Cubitus. 3. The
Fibula from the Tibia; and this they call a Divulsion or Disjunction, or
Disjoining. See Celsus, lib. 8. cap. 10.

XIX. The Differences. They arise first from the Situation and Figure of the
Part, as upwards, downwards, forward, backward, to the right side, or left side.

XX. Secondly, from Accidents or Symptoms attending them, as, vehement Pain,
Inflammation, flux of Humors, Wounds, Fractures, etc.

XXI. The Causes. They are either Procatartick or Antecedent: The Procatartick
or External, are Falls, Blows, violent Extension, (in which latter Case,
Infants are sometimes hurt by the Hands of the Midwife.)

XXII. The Antecedent or Internal, are from Humors affecting the Joints, which
flowing down upon them, do by their Quantity or Quality either relax the
Ligaments; and so cause the Bones to slip out of their proper places; or else
contract the Tendons, and so pluck them out of their natural seats.

XXIII. The Signs. A Dislocation is known by the extraordinary Tumor of the
Part where the Bone is lodged, emptiness of the place where the Bone was, and
privation of Motion, accompanied with Pain; as also by comparing it with its
fellow, which is not dislocated: the Member is also rendered longer or shorter,
accordingly as the Bone is out of its place.

XXIV. These things then are to be observed, 1. That as long as the motion of
the Member is not lost, though there may be suspicion of a Dislocation, yet there
is none. 2. That the Tumor or Swelling is always on that side unto which the
Bone is slipped, and the hollowness on that side from whence it is fallen. 3.
That the Bone being out of its place, and finding no resistance, the Muscles
will draw it upwards, and so make the Limb shorter, 4. That it will be unlike
to its fellow, which is not dislocated.

XXV. A Dislocation may be distinguished from a Luxation, by the inte^s^ess of
the signs aforesaid; for if all the motions of the Limb is lost; if it is
indeed shorter, and there is a great Eminence and Gavity, and it is very unlike
to the found one, it is a Distocation: and (...) contrar^, it is a Luxation.

XXVI. If the Part is thicker than it ought to be; if where the Bones should
meet, there is a greater, extubera^ce; and if withal the Bones gape, there is a
disjuncture.

XXVII. That sort of Luxation, wherein the Limb is made longer, is known by
these signs, 1. Because the Limb looks as if it were hung on, dangling this way
and that way, by reason of the relaxation of the Ligaments, and the Bones not
touching one another. 2. When the Bone is reduced to its place, it will not
stay there, but fall out presently of its own accord. 3. There is a cavity or
hollowness quite round the Joint, so big sometimes, as almost to put ones
little Finger into it.

XXVIII. The signs that the Bone is well set, are the just contrary to these
which show it to be dislocated: Avicenna, and others, have another sign also,
which is a Crashing noise, or a kind of Snap, which the Bystanders hear, upon
the reduction.

XXIX. But says Wiseman, this is not always a certain sign, nor indeed is it a
very good sign: for it may be made by the head of the Bone cubbing against, and
breaking the Cartilaginous edges of the Acetabulum or Sinus; part of which may
go into the cavity before the Bone, and then no good Reposition can be made,
but the Patient will always be lame, because the Head cannot turn round in the
Sinus.

XXX. Or, the noise may come from the head of the Bone striking against the
bottom of the Cavity, which sometimes may hazard a bruising of the Cartilages,
though many times it is without any such Accident: however this noise is easy to
be distinguished from the other, where the Cartilage is broken.

XXXI. The Prognostics. In Children, and such as have very may Bodies, Bones
are easiest reduced, but they are with much difficulty retained in their
places; and contrariwise in elderly Persons, and dry Bodies.

XXXII. A Dislocation not recent, or of song-continuance, is with great
difficulty and pain restored: and when restored, it is kept in its place with
great trouble, because of the weakness of the Part, and of the Ligaments, the
whole growing emaciated.

XXXIII. A Dislocation of the Vertebrae, occasioned by External Atoi^ or
^elente, is for the most part Mortal; but if it is caused by Congestion, it is
many times Gur^d.

XXXIV. A Dislocation, with a Wound, is more difficult to be cured than
without; so also, if it is with a Fracture: but if it is with Wound and
Fracture both it is harder yet to be performed, and with a great deal of
trouble and difficulty.

XXXV. Luxations or Dislocations, in which the edges of the Acetabulum are
broken off, are worst of all; for though the Joint is restored to its place, yet
it continues not long, but falls out again upon the stightest cause.

XXXVI. Old Dislocations, which are grown hard with a Callus, and have a clammy
or gelly-like Humor filling up the Gavities, are never, or very rarely, cured;
for which reason, every Dislocation or Luxation ought presently to be replaced.

XXXVII. A Dislocation in Childhood, if not reduced, it causes the Member or
Limb to grow less than the other.

XXXVIII. A Dislocation or Luxation of the Head from the Vertebrae of the Neck,
is Mortal; because it compresses the Spinal Marrow at its Original, or first
Rise, and so hinders the Influx of the Animal Spirits.

XXXIX. A Dislocation with great Pain, flux of Humors, Insemination, or Wound,
is hard to be cured, and is not without danger; nor can it be restored without
danger of Convulsions, or Death.

XL. For which reason, Celsus advises, that if the Bone being reduced, there is
an extension of the ^erves (with vehement Pain) It must presently be put out of
Joint again.

XLI. The farther any Bone is fallen forth our of its Sinus, so much the more
difficultly will it be restored again; by how much the nearer, by so much the
sooner and easier.

XLII. A Dislocation of long continuance, by how much it is less able to be
moved by a natural motion; by so much the more it will be extenuated and
wasted, and affected with an Atrophia.

XLIII. And the reason is manifest; for because of the intermission of motion,
the native heat of the Part will be dulled, and wasted also: and because the
Vessels are comprest by the luxated Bone, the necessary Influx of the Blood and
Spirits will be prohibited or hindered.

XLIV. The Cure. In the Cure of a Dislocation, there are (according to
Scultetus) Five Intentions; viz. Extension, Reposition, Deligation, Deposition,
and Religation.

XLV. In Extension, four things are to be considered; viz. 1. The Time. 2. The
Instruments. 3. The manner of the Extension. 4. And the Quantity of the
Extension.

XLVI. As to Time, ( says Hippocrates) it is to be done presently after it is
put out of Joint, whilst the Party is yet hot: but if it cannot be done
presently, by reason no Physician (so I call every good or skilful Chirurgian)
is near, it must be done on the second or third day, except Inflammation hinder
it.

XLVII. On the Fourth Day, nothing is to be attempted, because of great paint;
for it would not succeed well, but many ill Symptoms would follow: and
therefore the Term of the Inflammation must be expected; which is the seventh,
eighth, or ninth Day.

XLVIII. For so Hippocrates, de Articulis, Text. 65. says; unless it can be
reduced in the first three days, it is not to be medied withal: nor on the
tenth, eleventh, or twelfth day is it safe, because the Callus is bred.

XLIX. But before Extension, let the Joint be fomented with warm Water and Oil;
or Wine and Oil; or a Decoction of Althea, or Mallows. Spigelius says, that
nothing is better than a Bath of fair Water.

L. The Instruments of Extension are, our Hands, for small Dislocations; Bands,
for such as are mean; and Engines or Instruments, for such as are great.

LI. The Bands ought to be strong, soft, and tractable; such as are Buck-skins
dressed soft; or, for want of Leather, Linen Cloth rubbed: you must fasten
them on the part which is farthest from the Joint dislocated; lest the Muscles
should be bound, or else torn by violent Extension.

LII. As for the Engines or Instruments, they are such as we have described in
Lib. 6. Cap. 2. Sect. 12. ad Sect. 47. viz. the Ambi of Hippocrates; the
Glossocomon of Galen; the Reductive Ladder; and the Table of Hippocrates.

LIII. The Manner of Extension. This we have sufficiently taught in the former
Book of Fractures; however, it ought to be as straight as possibly it can, viz.
in a right line; for so Extension is made with as little pain and difficulty as
may be.

LIVE. The Quantity of the Extension: This is known, from the Place where the
Dislocation or Lineation is: the Way that the Bone slipped forth: the Place to
which it is fallen: and the Place in which it rests.

LV. When Extension is almost made, the Swooning of the Sick, or of the
Standers by, must by no means under the Operation.

LVI. Reposition. It is done by the Hands of the Artist, which ought to be
anointed with Oil of Roses: and it is either made by circumgyration; or by
forcing it back, to the opposite part, to which it is fallen.

LVII. But these Motions are not always necessary: because that sometimes when
Extension is made, the Muscles are only relaxed, (not contracted) so that the
Joint will slip into its natural placeo, f its own accord.

LVIII. Now if it is well Set, you may know it by the natural shape of the
Member; when neither hollowness for swelilng appears about the Joint, as it did
before it was set.

LIX. Also by the abatement of the Fair, which is always an insepay able sign,
that the Bone is reduced; but the Pain may not be ^aded, because the Museles
may be very much (...) and and sometimes by a crank, or small blow, which the
Bone make^, when it falls into its Socket.

LX. You are to consider, which (...) it is stipt out; for by the same way it
must be reduce back again, if it slipped to the right side, it must be pressed to
the lest; if it is luxated forwards, it must be forced backwards.

LXI. The Shoulder requires one way, the Elbow another, and the Knee or Ancle
another: if the Luxation is not recent, or the Muscles be much contracted, you
must relax them by Emollient Embrocations of Oil of Ben, Rears Oil, Man's or
Vipers Grease; or with Vng. Dialthaeae, lest by too great violence you affect
the Nerves, and cause a Raralisis.

LXII. Deligation. This is considered from the Figure of the Part affected, and
the Ligature it self; which may preserve the Joint being reduced, and prevent
Inflammation.

LXIII. In the Figure, you must consider the Form both of the Joint reduced and
also of the whole Part: some Figures are natural, and without Pain; and some
are unnatural, and with Pain.

LXIV. The Figure of the Arm without pain, is bended; of the Foot, perfect
extension: now the figure in which the Part must stand, must be ordered before
it be bound up, that the binding may be neither too loose, nor too hard.

LXV. The Ligature must be made of Linen Swaths or Bands, and soft; that they
may cause to pain they must be equal, that they may bind equally every where
(...) and they ought to be white and clean, that the Humors, issuing forth (if
any be) may be known by their Colors.

LXVI. The breadth of the Swath or Rowle^ must be according to the Part to be
bound up: for the thinner or smaller Parts, they may be the narrower: in the
Thigh and Knee they may be near four Inches broad: in the Arm and Hand, about
three Inches: in the Fingers, about an Inch, or better.

LXVII. Galen divides them into inner Bands, to wit, such as bind the Joint
under the Plasters; and outward Bands, as those which are put above the
Plasters: Hippocrates uses two inward Bands, and two outward; but one may may
do, where the Joint is not easy to be slipped out.

LXVIII. The length of the Swath is various, in respect to the variety of Parts
to be bound. Upon the Thighs they must be six Yards in length; for the
Shoulder, four Yards and half long; for the Arms and Legs, about two or three
Yards in length.

LXiX. Now that the Swaths may hinder Inflammation, they must be wet in sour or
astringent Wine, mixed with Oil of Roses; or anointed with Hippocrates his
Cataplasm or Cerate, made of Oil of Roses p. ii. Wax p. i.

LXX. Some allow not here of Astringent Pouders mixed with the white of an Egg;
because they either cool, dry, and bind the Joint too much, hindering the
bending of the Joint; or prohibit the flowing forth of the Humors which are
flowed into it.

LXXI. Yet Sennertus, Med. Pract. lib. 5. part. 6. cap. 1. allows of Astringent
Medicaments. First of all, (says he) before binding up, Astringent Medicaments
are to be laid on, which hinder a Flux of Humors, and Inflammation, contract
the Ligaments relaxed, and withal strengthen the Part.

LXXII. These may be made of fine Bole, Dragons-blood, Balaustians,
Pomgranate-peels, red Roses, Frankincense, fine Flower, and the like, mixed
with the white of an Egg. To these things you may add, Acacia, Comfrey-roots,
Catechu, Myrtle-berries, Saccharum Saturni, Sumach, Crocus Martis, etc.

LXXIII. If there is great Pain, you may embrocate with Oils of Roses, of
Earthworms, of Whelps, or of Mastich. Or you may mix some of those Oils with
your Astringents aforementioned; and apply over Empl. Album, e Bolo, or de Minio.

LXXIV. Sennertus commends this Emplaster. Fine Bole, Bean-flower,
Comfrey-roots in powder, A. iii. mix; steep them in Vinegar, and dry them: to
which add Litharge, Wax, Rosin, A. iii. melt these three over the Fire, then
add to them the former three things; and with two Ounces of Gum-Tragacanth,
make an Emplaster.

LXXV. Or, Fine Bole, Comfrey-roots, Dragons-blood, Frankincense, Mastich, A.
ss. fine Wheat Flour i. Sheep-suet iii. Wax q.s. mix, and make a Plaster.

LXXVI. Or, Birdlime, Mastich, Pine-Rosin, A. ss. new Wax iii. mix, and make a
Plaster. Or you may apply Empl. Barbarum, or Catagmaticum, malaxed with a
little Oil of Roses Omphacine.

LXXVII. Or, fine Bole, Catechu, Dragons-blood, Myrtle-berries, Pomgranate
peels, Sumach, Saccharum Saturni, A ss. whites of Eggs, q.s. mix, and apply.
These things being laid on, the Member must be conveniently bound up with
Swaths or Rowlers, and Bolsters, in the same manner as we have taught
concerning Fractures: and if need be, and the figure and nature of the Part
will admit of it, Splints, or such like, made of Pasteboard, Leather, etc. may
be laid on.

LXXVIII. Deposition. This is threefold. 1. Alligation; as in a Dislocation of
the Shoulder or Arm, where the Arm is bound to the Thorax. 2. Suspension; as
when the Arm is hanged by a Scarf or Linen Cloth, put about the Neck. 3.
Collocation; when we place the Part affected in a certain situation or rest: as
the Arm upon the Thorax, or in a Capsula, and the Thigh or Leg in a Trunk or
Case, of Straw or Wood.

LXXIX. And herein you must note, that the Collocation must be, 1. After the
mean Figure of the Part. 2. Soft; that the Sick may lie at ease; therefore is
the Case filled with Hurds or Tow. 3. Equal, or rather a little upwards; that
the Humors may not so easily flow to the Part affected, and cause Inflammation.
4. At Rest; for which Reason, the Ancients used to make a Hole through the Bed
and Blankets, that the Sick in voiding their Excrements, might not be forced to
move.

LXXX. Religation. This is of Use, 1. Where the Part is bound too fast, or too
loose. 2. If there is Itching, or Pain.

LXXXI. If the Ligature is bound too strait, a hard Tumor arise^ in the Extreme
Parts dislocated: if too loose, there is no Tumor at all: if it is too strait,
you must loosen it the second day: but if too loose, you must straiten it the
third day.

LXXXII. If there is Itching or Pain, the Swaths are to be loosned, and fair
warm Water to be poured upon the Part; not only to abate the Itching, and
discuss the sharp watery Humors, but also that the Ligaments may be
corroborated.

LXXXIII. But unless the Ligature is made ill, or the Itching is troublesome,
let the Part remain as it was first bound up, 'till the seventh day: if there
is an Itching, you must loosen it on the third or fourth day, and bathe with
fair Water, as aforesaid: but Wiseman says, with Salt Water, or a Decoction of
tops of Wormwood, Camomil-flowers, Red-Roses, Balaustians, Myrtle-berries,
Juniper and Cypress-Nuts, adding a little S.V.

XXXIV. On the seventh day, which is the time that the Inflammation should be
past, the Ligature must be let loose again; and lukewarm Water poured on again;
(but not too hot, for that loosens the Ligaments: so also all Greasy
Medicaments relax the Tendons, and prolong the Cure.)

XXXV. But the Swaths are no more to be wet, nor to be sineared with the Cerate
of Roses, by reason the Inflammation is over: but upon the Joint, Empl.
Catagmaticum softened with Cerate of Roses, or Oil of Myrtles, or some of the
afore-prescribed Medicaments are to be applied; which may be also applied at
first binding-up, if no evil Symptoms are present.

LXXXVI. After the seventh day, the Ligature ought to be made somewhat straiter
than before: and after this second binding-up, the Part ought not to be loosned
until the end of the Cure.

CHAP. II. Of a SIMPLE DISLOCATION.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Dis-Dislocatio Simplex; and in
English, A Simple Dislocation, or, Simply out of Joint.

II. The Signs and Prognostics of a Dislocation or Luxation, you have in the
former Chapter at large: but this as a Presage may be said, That if it is a
Simple Dislocation or Luxation, it will be so much the sooner and easier cured.

III. We call that a Simple Dislocation or Luxation, which is without Fracture,
Wound, or Contusion, or any other ill Accident or Symptom.

IV. In a Simple Dislocation or Luxation therefore, consider the Place; and put
the Sick into a fit posture, and then carefully extend it: as we have taught in
the former Chapter.

V. Then with your Fingers or Hands, forcing the dislocated Bone the contrary
way, carefully reduce it.

VI. And in young Persons, foment the Joint with some Astringent Decoction made
in Red-wine; but in elder Persons, where the Joints are confirmed, and the
Ligaments hard and firm, you may anoint with Oleum Catellorum, Oil of
Earthworms, or Oil of Hypericon.

VII. After which, you may lay over it Empl. Album, or Diachalciteos, Sticticum
Paracelsi, or Emplast. Catagmaticum, a little softened with Oil of Roses
Omphacine; then rolling it up well with good Swaths or Bands.

VIII. But it will be better, if after anointing, for the first Day or two, you
apply a Cataplasm of fine Bole, or of Catechu, mixed up with the white of an Egg.

IX. If there is a Tumor withal, anoint it well, either with the aforesaid
Oils, or with Oil of Elder, or with this. Golden-coloured Palm-Oil i. Oils of
Amber and Rosemary, A.jss. mix them, and anoint therewith.

X. Then apply a Cataplasm made of Oatmeal, Linseed, Milk, and Oil of Roses; so
will the Tumor discuss: but if it is not of above two or three days standing,
by reducing the Bone, it will presently vanish of its own accord.

XI. If the Luxation is made by Congestion, it requires Emollients, to resolve
and discuss the Crude Humors affecting the Joints, Ligaments, and Tendons.

XII. For which Intention, you may apply this Cataplasm. Roots of Althaea vi.
roots of the wild Cucumber iii. tops of Marjoram M ji. boil them in Broth made
of Calves-feet; which done, bruise or beat them together; and add thereto
pouders of Fenugreek and Linseed, A. i. Oil of Lillies, Man's, or Vipers Fat,
A. q. mix, and make a Pultiss.

XIII. Also, you may apply Emplastr. Diachylon cum Gummi, de Mucilaginibus, de
Ranis cum Mercurio, Mercuriale, etc. for so long time as you see convenient, if
the Fracture is great and hard.

XIV. The Matter being thus resolved, you may then go on to the reducing of the
Luxation: and after you have restored it, you must apply such Medicaments to
it, as may dry up all the superfluous Humidity, and corroborate the Joint: such
as we have directed to in the former Chapter.

XV. And you must also have some extraordinary Bandage, to keep the Bone in its
place: of which we have already discoursed, and shall discourse more
particularly hereafter in in the following Chapter of this Book.

XVI. If the Luxation is old, or of long standing, the former Emollient
Cataplasm, and other like things may be used; after which you may use
Digestives, such as Ceratum de Betonica, Emplastrum Sacrum, etc.

XVII. But before the application of the Emplasters, you may immediately Foment
with a Decoction of Betony, Camomil, Hyssop, Origanum, and Stoechas, in Wine.

XVIII. And if the Humors are much, and hard to be discussed, you must use the
Fumes of the Stone Pyritis, heated red-hot, and quenched in Vinegar, as Galen
has sometimes advised: or a Fomentation made of Roots of Althaea, of wild
Cucumber, of Bryony, and of pulp of Colocynthis, boiled in Wine.

XIX. These by their heat and dryness, will discuss the Matter; and by an
innate property, give relief to the Part.

XX. The luxated Limb may be put also into a Bath of hot Water, and held in the
same for some time; for so it digests the Humors: which done, all the rest of
the Work is to be performed as in recent Luxations, etc.

CHAP. III. Of a DISLOCATION, with PAIN and INFLAMMATION.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...), and (...). in Latin, Dislocatio cum Dolor ac
Inflammatione; vel Dislocatio Inflammata cum Dolor: and in English, a
Dislocation with Pain and Inflammation, or a Luxation Inflamed, accompanied
with Pain.

II. If Pain and Inflammation seizes the Part before the Bone is reduced, you
must take heed of extending the Part, or trying to restore the Luxated Joint,
till the Pain and Inflammation are allayed; lest by the distention of the
Nerves a Convulsion, Gangrene, or some other dangerous Symptoms should be
excited.

III. In this Case therefore, the Part is to be placed in a mean posture, which
may be least painful, and then it is to be anointed with this Emollient. Vng.
de Althaea ii. Oils of Lillies, of Myrtles, and of Roses, A. i. Hogs Lard ss.
mix them.

IV. Then you may apply this Discutient. Cumin and Fennel seeds, A. vi.
Colophony, Frankincense, Mastich, Pitch, A. i. Oil of Dil, Wax, A. q.s. mix,
and make an Emplaster.

V. And Vniversals being premised, the Belly must be kept loose with Clysters:
you may also continually pour on the Part warm Water, mixed with Oil of Roses,
before application of the former things.

VI. For the hot Water will discuss the Humors, loosen the Parts, and ease the
Pain; and the Oil will mitigate the Inflammation, hinder its increase, and
repercuss.

VII. When the Inflammation ceases, the Humors will be somewhat thickened; for
which cause sake, we must gently chafe the Part with our Hand, being first
anointed with Oil of sweet Almonds.

VIII. Then lay on this Gataplasm. Ammoniacum ii. which dissolve in Vinegar:
Wax jss. Hens Grease i. Saffron i. Oil of Roses, q.s. mix and make a Cataplasm:
or you may apply Oxycroceum mollified with Oil of Roses.

IX. The Inflammation being overcome, let the Part be extended, and reduced;
and proper things being applied to it, let it be bound up, and placed as it
ought to be.

X. If the Inflammation succeed after Reduction, by reason of the violent
Extension, and perpetual Pain, the Ligature must be untied, though it fall out on
the first or second day; and lukewarm-water mixed with Oil of Roses, must be
poured on the Part, till the Sick finds some ease.

XI. Then the Part must be bound up somewhat loose, and with fewer Swaths, wet
with Water and Oil; which is to be repeated every day, till the Inflammation
declines, which happens for the most part on the fifth day.

XII. Then apply the before described Cataplasm, or Oxycroceum, to resolve the
remainder of the Inflammation, with a Ligature more loose: when the
Inflammation is gone, you must pursue the remaining part of the Cure, as if it
were a Simple Luxation.

XIII. In the mean season, a slender Diet must be ordered, and revulsive means
used, as Purging, Vomiting, Clysters, etc. according to the Age and Strength of
the Patient.

XIV. If after the Joint is replaced, there is an Itching, the binding must be
loosned, and the place sprin^ed with fair warm Water ( Wiseman says, with salt
Water) or with some astringent Decoction: that the cause of the Itching may be
discust, and the Itch abated: otherwise we must forbear warm Water, lest the
Ligaments should be relaxed.

XV. And to keep the Patient easy and quiet, a Dose of our Volatile or
Specific Landanum, may be given every night at Bedtime.

CHAP. IV. Of a DISLOCATION with a WOVND.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Dislocatio cum Vulnere: and in
English, a Dislocation with a Wound.

II. The Prognostics. A Dislocation or Luxation joined with a Wound, is very
dangerous; and if the Joint be either uncovered, or a little thrust forth
without the Skin, it is for the most part mortal.

III. If it is reduced, the danger is greater, than if it is not: if it is not
reduced, Inflammation will come upon it, sometimes Convulsions, and sometimes
Death.

IV. Or there will be a filthy and Incurable Ulcer; which if by chance it is
brought to Cicatrize at all; it will easily be dissolved, by reason of its
softness.

V. If it is reduced, there will be extreme danger of Convulsion, Gangrene, and
of Death, which generally follows it.

VI. Hippocrates, de Articulis Art. 4. Text. 16, 17. says, whosoever has the Bones
of the Leg Luxated with a Wound, so that they hang forth of the Joint, whether
inwardly or outwardly, they are not to be reduced; for if they be, and so
remain, they shall Die, nor shall they Live many days; for few such pass the
seventh day, by reason of a mortal Convulsion; moreover a Gangrene does also
happen: and these things you must know will certainly come to pass.

VII. This Danger, says Sennertus, Med. Pract. lib. 5. part. 6. cap. 2. is so
much the greater, by how much the Member is greater, and the Nerves and Muscles
about it are greater, and by how much the Wound is nearer the Joint.

VIII. For as much, as because of Distention of the Nerves and Muscles, Pains,
Inflammations, Convulsions, acute Fevers, Gangrenes, and a Sphacelus may be
induced: and therefore it is that Hippocrates, is against reducing of Luxated
Bones, and their Bindings up; and orders us to use at the beginning only things
which assuage Pain, and takes away Inflammation.

IX. And he is of Opinion, that no Bones can be safely reduced except those of
the Fingers, Hands, and Feet: And in a Finger, (in which there is the least of
danger) the Luxation ought not to be replaced when there is an Inflammation,
but either before it comes, or after it is assuaged.

X. But some fear these kinds of dangers only in the great Joints as, the
Shoulder, Arm, Wrist, Thigh, Knee, Ancle; by reason of their strong Tendons,
great Ligaments, and considerable Vessels.

XI. The Cure. If it may be reduced, it must be at first, before Inflammation:
but you are to let the Patient and bystanders know the eminent danger, that
the Artist may save his Credit, and his Art not be disparaged, if things should
not succeed.

XII. This, says Scultetus, the Chirurgian must attempt the first, second,
eighth, or ninth day, that he may not appear to be ignorant; first looking to
the Inflammation, and Convulsion; and then to the Wound and Dislocation.

XIII. If the Joint is replaced, and an Inflammation or Convulsion should then
happen; it must be thrust out of its place again, (if it can be done without
violence.)

XIV. However, you must endeavor to abate the Inflammation, and then the Cure
of the Wound must be ordered, applying to it Lenient Medicaments, as in a
Fracture with a Wound; after which you must take Care of the Dislocation.

XV. But if they possess one place at one time, first respect the Dislocation,
then the Wound, applying over all, Sticticum Paracelsi: and see that the Member
it self be so placed, that the Sick may lie in as much ease as is possible.

XVI. When the Joint or Bone cannot be reduced, care must be first taken for
Vniversals and Diet: and the Part must be placed in a mean Figure, (without any
extension or binding) either hanging from the Shoulder or Neck, or laid down in
a Capsula, or in a Junk or Trunk, that the Sick may feel as little Pain as may
be.

XVII. And if vehement Pain is present, or Inflammation and Convulsions may be
feared to be near, or at hand, they ought to be prevented or hindered by such
things as are anodyn, digestive, a little cooling and repellent.

CHAP. V. Of a DISLOCATION with a FRACTVRE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Dislocatio cum Fractura; and in
English, A Dislocation or Disjointing, with a Fracture.

II. The Prognostics. This is always dangerous, and of difficult Cure; for
that a Luxation with a Fracture, can scarcely bewithout a Wound.

III. The nearer the Fracture is to the luxated Joint, the more danger; the
farther off the Joint, the lesser danger: if attended with evil Symptoms, it is
generally Fatal.

IV. The Cure. If the Fracture is near the Joint, you are to consider whether
the Joint is whole, or not; lest whilst you cure the Fracture only, you should
neglect the Dislocation.

V. If with the Luxation there is a Fracture, you are to make the Extension the
common way; and the luxated Joint must be reduced into its proper place; and
then the broken Bones are to be composed and conformed.

VI. Upon each, you must apply fit Medicaments, such as we have already showed
in the general Method of Cure of Fractures and Dislocations; after which the
Part ought to be conveniently bound up with Swaths.

VII. But if the Joint cannot be restored to its place, without danger, before
the Fracture is cured; then you must first attempt to cure the Fracture; and
afterward when the Callus is generated, and sufficiently confirmed, endeavor
the reduction of the luxated Joint.

VIII. But if you restore the Dislocation first, and then the Fracture, you are
to foment with red Wine warm; and then to apply a Cloth dipped into the Mixture
of Oxycrate, Oil of Roses, and Whites of Eggs mixed together.

IX. And it will be so much the better, if you add thereto a small quantity of
Catechu, which mightily fixes the Bone which was dislocated, confirms those
which were fractured; and strengthens the whole Part.

X. The Dressing being laid on, you are either with Splints, or without, as you
see occasion and necessity to require, to bind up the Wound with Swaths, as we
have formerly taught you.

XI. After it is bound up, it is not to be stirred or opened till the seventh
day, except vehement Pain, Inflammation, flux of Humors; or other Symptoms
enforce it.

XII. At what time, it is to be fomented with hot Water, in which Saccharum
Saturni, or Lapis Prunellae, has been dissolved; after which, you may proceed
by the former Directions, till Health is recovered.

XIII. And during the whole time of the Cure, you are to give Morning and
Evening, the Stone Osteocolla levigated ad i. in Blood of Comfrey-roots, or in
red Port-wine, or choice Alicant.

CHAP. VI. Of a DISLOCATION with CONVVLSIONS.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Dislocatio cum Spasmate; and in
English, A Dislocation with Convulsion.

II. Convulsions in this case, may happen either before Reduction, or after
Reduction: those before Reduction, forbid the present reducing of the Bone:
those after, show that it ought to be put out of Joint again; or at least, that
the Bandage be presently loosned.

III. The Prognostics. If Convulsions accompany the Patient in this case, it
is generally very dangerous; but before Reduction, it is less dangerous than
after it.

IV. If Convulsions come after it, the Bandage is presently to be loosned,
because the Patient is in great hazard: if they cease not upon the loosening of
the Bandage, the Sick is in much danger; and the Bone is then to be put out of
Joint again, or Death will in short time succeed.

V. The Cure. If the Convulsion is before Reduction; or if it is after, (the
Joint being presently loosned) it is for a long time to be well wet, or
embrocated with plenty of warm Water, mixed with Oil of Roses.

VI. The Parts adjacent are also to be bathed with S.V. Camphorated, or with
Powers of Amber, or of Limons, Lavender, Rosemary, Marjoram, or Time; as also
all the Backbone, from the Cranium to the Rump-bone, and to be repeated at
least twice a day.

VII. Inwardly you must give Sudorificks, as Spirit of Sal Armoniack, Tinctura
Cordialis, Tinctura Opii, Tinct. Salis Tartari, Spiritus Cordialis, Spirit of
Hartshorn Compound, Elixir Metallorum, Powers of Lavender, Limons, Rosemary,
or Amber, or Salt of Amber, Laudanum Specificum.

VIII. Or you may give this Mixture: Elixir Metallorum v. Powers of Limons, of
Lavender, and of Rosemary, A. iv. Powers of Pennyroyal, of Marjoram, and of
Time, A. iii. Powers of Savin ii. Powers of Cloves i. Spiritus Cordialis vi.
mix them. Dose, half a Spoonful in a Glass of Canary.

IX. Or: Tinctura Antimonii iii. Tinctura Metallorum ii. Tincture of Salt of
Tartar, Spirit of Sal Armoniack, A. i. Tinctura Opii ii. Spiritus Cordialis ii.
mix them. Dose. 40 Drops, in a proper Vehicle.

X. And outwardly apply to the Soles of the Feet, Bricks warmed very hot, and
wrapped up in a Cloth, or rather the Warming-stone, which holds heat much better:
and to the Sides Bags of Oats, or of Salt made very hot, by frying it dry in a
Fryingpan; that you may induce a powerful Sweating.

XI. For by these Means, the Joints grow equally hot, and Sympathize together;
and withal, the Heart is strengthened and comforted: which is yet farther
promoted, by giving now and then in the Sweat Spirit of Angelica, Bawm, or Mint
a little dulcified and made pleasant, or Spiritus Cordialis alone by it self.

XII. After the Sweating is over, the beginnings of the Nerves, as Nape of the
Neck, and all the Vertebrae down to the Hips, as also the Groins and Arm holes
are to be bathed with the Medicaments mentioned at Sect. 6. above.

XIII. Or you may anoint with such Oils and Balsams as are powerful against
Convulsions; among which we commend Balsamum Camphorae, Balsamum Sulphuris
Rulandi, Elixir Antepilepticum mixed with Balsam of Sulphur, Oils of Amber, of
Juniper, of Limons, and of Turpentine, Oils of Mace, or Nutmegs, by Expression:
or some of these mixed together.

XIV. Some commend Balsam of Amber, Balsamum Nervinum Schroderi, Polychrestum
Mynsichti, Apoplecticum Horstii, and Balsamum Sacrum, or Balsam of Myrrh; which
see in Our Pharm. Land. lib. 4. cap. 4. Sect. 1, 5, 7, 27.

CHAP. VII. Of a DISLOCATION with a CALLUS, or an OLD LVXATION.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Luxatio vel Dislocatio cum Callo,
vel Dislocatio Callosa; and in English, A Dislocation with a Callus.

II. This only happens in old Luxations or Dislocations, joined with a Wound or
Fracture; from which Causes, before the Bone can be restored, there is a
Callous hardness contracted about the Joint.

III. This is found mostly in those Joints which are not compassed about with
much Flesh, as the Elbow, Knee, and Legs: and it is either simply a Calious
Flesh or Brawniness; or else it is as hard as a Stone.

IV. If it is a Callous Flesh only, it is whilst it is young and new; for
growing old, it becomes like to a Stone; and it is known by a Tumor about the
Part, and the Medicaments previously applied, as also from the impossibility of
the Patients moving the Joint, though possibly the Artist may.

V. If it is of a stoney hardness, it is known, first from the dryness and
slenderness of the Joint: secondly, from the immobility of the Joint, so that
neither the Patient nor the Artist can stir it. Thirdly, from the continued
thinness, slenderness, or Atrophia of the Part. Fourthly, from the long
continuance of the Malady.

VI. The Prognostics. If the Callus is soft, there is some possibility of
Cure: but if the Callus is of a stoney or boney hardness, it is incurable.

VII. The Cure. First the Body ought to be emptied of evil and gross Humors, by
due Purging and Vomiting, and a regular and sparing Diet is to be prescribed.

VIII. Then the Part is to be fomented with warm Water, or with Water and Oil;
or rather, it is first to be bathed or anointed with Spiritus Mirabilis, which
admirably softens any callous hardness or contractions, of the Muscles, Nerves
or Tendons; and then afterward foment with the Water and Oil as aforesaid, or
some Emollient Decoction.

IX. And this is to be done every day, twice a day, viz. Morning and Evening,
till such time as you perceive apparently the callous Substance is resolved.

X. After bathing it with the Spiritus Mirabilis, and fomenting with the warm
Water and Oil, or un Emollient Decoction, you may anoint with Vng. Dialthaeae,
or with this Ointment: Pure golden-coloured Palm-Oil iv. Oil of Aniseeds vi.
mix them, and anoint therewith.

XI. After the Anointing, you are to apply upon it this Cataplasm: Roots of
Althaea, of Briony, of wild Cucumber, and of Sow-bread, A. iii. Lilly-roots ii.
Leaves of Althaea, Mallows, ^ettice, A. M. j. Neats feet-Broth, q.s. boil, and
pulp them through a Hair-sieve, and add to them meals of Fenugreek and Linseed,
A. jss. Oil of sweet Almonds, Hogs-lard, A. q.s. mix, and make a Cataplasm.

XII. If the hardness is very great, add to it Gum Ammoniacum, or Galbanum
dissolved in Vinegar ii. yellow Palm-Oil jss. Oil of Aniseeds ss. mixing them
well.

XIII. The Cataplasm having been used for some days, you may then apply
Diachylon Simplex, or cum Gummi, or Empl. de Ammoniaco cum Cicuta, or Galbano
Crocatum Mynsichti, or Empl. de Ranis with Treble Mercury, or Our Emplastrum
Mercuriale.

XIV. When the Part shall be sufficiently mollified, let it be chafed for near
half an Hour together, with your Hand anointed with Oil of Roses, or rather
with the Mixture of Palm-Oil and Oil of Aniseeds.

XV. And after chasing, lay on Digestives, or the Cataplasm in Cap. 3. Sect. 8.
aforegoing; or Oxycroceum malaxed with golden-coloured Palm-Oil, or Man's, or
Vipers Grease, or Goose Grease, Empl. de Betonica, or some of the aforenamed
Emplasters.

XVI. Or you may use the Fumes of Vinegar being cast upon Lapis Pyrites, or
Molaris, i. e. Millstone, a piece of it being heated red fire-hot; or the
Patient may bathe often in a Bituminous or Sulphurous Bath.

XVII. Lastly, When whatsoever was hard is mollified and discussed, the Joint
is in convenient manner to be reduced to its place, and the rest of the Work is
to be performed according to the general Method of Cure.

CHAP. VIII. Of a DISLOCATION REDVCED, FALLING OVT again.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Dislocationis reductae abscessio;
and in English, A Falling out of the Bone in a Dislocation reduced.

II. It is caused, when after a violent Dislocation, the Joint is ill set, and
the Ligaments are not well dried and confirmed.

III. Or, it may be caused from some Tumor which may arise from Inflammation,
being ill cured, so that the Joint cannot be contained in its place.

IV. Or, from an Humor or flux of Humors, running to the Joint; which by their
humidities and acrimony, relax the Ligaments, and weaken the Part.

V. The Prognostics. This is of difficult Cure, because of the relaxation of
the Ligaments; the Tone of the Joint being also hurt, so that it cannot
assimulate as it ought to do, its due Nutriment.

VI. The Cure. If it proceeds from the first Cause, you must use great Driers,
as fine Bole, Terra Sigillata, Catechu, Crocus Martis Astringens, Caput Mortuum
of Vitriol, Dragons-blood, Nutgalls, Sumach, made into a Cataplasm with Whites
of Eggs, and other things of like nature.

VII. If it proceeds from the Second Cause, you must use Emollients and
Discutients, great variety of which, we have formerly enumerated in many places.

VIII. To which you may add, the Fumes arising from Vinegar poured out upon the
Lapis Pyrites red-hot, and continually repeated for some time.

IX. But if it proceeds from the Third Cause, it is more dangerous, and
difficult to be cured: and here you must first well Purge the Body, and order a
proper and fitting Diet, which may strengthen the Joints; after which you must
use Adustion, than which, nothing is said to be better.

X. For this Cauterizing consumes all the Moisture by a hard Crust, which makes
a hollow Ulcer; this being covered with a Cicatrice, contracts the Part
relaxed: for Cauterizing heats, dries, and consumes the Humors.

XI. But to make the Adustion, it is necessary to know the place, toward which
the Bone falls: as if the Shoulder Bone should fall into the Arm-hole; the
Burning then must be made in the Arm-hole.

XII. If the head of the Thigh is out of Joint toward the forepart, the
forepart must be burned in many places.

XIII. But here you must beware, that you burn not the Nervous Parts, nor the
Arteries, Veins, Glandules, or Ligaments; because the Fire is an Enemy to them,
and causes wonderful Convulsions.

XIV. The Burning ought to be made with Iron Tools like to Olives, with sharp
points, and made red hot; which make no very great Scars.

XV. Then after the Adustion, the Patient is to be quiet and still, and the
Joint is to rest with as little motion as may be, for many days; for if it
should slip out again, the Affect would be incurable.

XVI. But for that many will not be persuaded to the use of the Actual Cautery,
by reason of the horror thereof; you must in those cases make use of the
Potential Cautery, which may be effectual to the purpose, though not altogether
so speedy; after the opening of which, the Ulcer is to be cleansed and healed
up with Vng. Fuscum Wurtzii.

XVII. Which done, the Joint is to be strengthened with this Cataplasm applied
for some days: Catechu in fine powder iv. Roch-Alum ii. Saccharum Saturni, Salt
of Vitriol, A. i. all being in fine powder, make a Cataplasm with Whites of
Eggs, and apply it.

XVIII. Having done with the Cataplasm; after all, the Patient must wear upon
the Joint, Empl. Catagmaticum a little softened with Oil of Amber, for
strengthening the Part; which Application is to be continued for some Months.

CHAP. IX. Of a DISLOCATION of the NOSE-BONE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Dislocatio Ossis Nasi; and in
English, A Dislocation of the Bone of the Nose.

II. This Bone is joined to the Os Frontis, and Os Cume^forme, by the Sutures
called Harmoniae; and is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Os Ethmoeides, and
Os Cribriforme (Nasi initium ubi crebra foraminae per quae sternutamentum
mucu^que transit, and percolatur.) And in English it is called, The Bone of the
Nose, or Sieve-like Bone.

III. And the reason is, because it has many holes, by which the Filaments of
the Processus Mammillares, or of the Olfactory Nerves pass into the Nostrils.

IV. It is fixed in the middle Basis of the Os Frontis, at the top of the
Nostrils, and is covered with the Dura Meninx, which goes along with the
Nervous Filaments aforenamed, through the Foramina or holes.

V. On its upper side, it has growing upon it a Triangular Process like a Cocks
Comb, called Crista Galli; and opposite to this on the lower side is the Septum
Nasi, which is a thin hard Bone, dividing the Nostrils into two parts.

VI. In the Cavity there are two other Bones called Spongiosae, because full of
holes like a Sponge or Pumice-stone: these adhere to the former, and therefore
are accounted as parts of the Os Ethmoeides, or Cribriforme.

VII. The Causes. The Bones of the Nose may be disjoined by a fall from some
high place, upon some hard thing; or by some violent blow, or the like.

VIII. The Prognostics. If well set, they easily conjoin again, and become as
fast and as strong as ever: but if ill treated by the Artist, so as that they
once begin to corrupt, there is a great fear of losing, at least falling or
sinking of the Nose.

IX. The Cure. In order to set them, the Artist is to lay his Thumb upon the
Root of the Nose, then putting up a little stick, or some such like, armed with
Cotton, or a fine soft Linen Rag, he may by the help thereof thrust back the
Bones into their places.

X. This done, you must apply the same Medicaments which we have before in lib.
6. cap. 16. prescribed in a Fracture of the Nose-bone, and such like Bandage or
Binding-up.

CHAP. X. Of a DISLOCATION of the JAW BONE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin. Dislocatio vel Luxatio Maxillae seu
Mandibulae; and in English, A Dislocation of the Jaw Bone.

II. the low Jaw Bone being only moveable, it is that only which can suffer a
Luxation; which yet seldom happens, for that the head of the Jaw Bone which is
contained in the Cavity, is encompassed on every side with Bones.

III. Besides, its strait coarticulation, it has many strong Muscles which keep
it in its place, and draw it upwards: and it has two heads, which are not so
apt to slip out as one is.

IV. And on each side it has two Processes in its hinder part, the former of
which drawn forwards, being broad and thin, ends in a point: but the latter is
carried backwards, and makes a long and transverse head: the former is inserted
into the Os Jugale, but the latter is fixed to the second Sinus, which is made
in the Temple-bone.

V. The Jaw Bone (except in young Children) can scarcely be dislocated any
other way than forwards; nor can it ever go out of Joint, unless its acute
Process slips under the Os Jugale, and so cannot get back again.

VI. From which it is manifest, that it cannot be luxated to the hinder part;
because the Teat-like Processes of the Os Temporis do hinder it: nor can it be
luxated to the Right Hand (especially in those of ripe Age) because the left
head of the Jaw hinders it: nor to the Left Hand, because the head of the Jaw,
on the right side hinders it.

VII. Nor can it be luxated upwards, except in a Distortion of the Mouth; nor
yet downwards, unless the Mouth gape very wide.

VIII. The Cause. It may be from a frequent and constant motion of the
Jaw Bone, both in Mastication or Chawing, and Speaking, whereby the Muscles
being tired are debilitated, and so make way for the Luxation thereof.

IX. But the most common Cause, yea, almost the only Cause, says Sennertus, is
the too wide opening and gaping of the Mouth, whether it be by gaping, or
striving to take some very great thing between the Teeth.

X. And though sometimes it may be luxated from the laxity of the Ligaments; yet
it is seldom caused from a debility of the Muscles; because that from both
Processes of the lower Jaw, arise strong and nervous Tendons, with which the
Muscles Crotaphitae and Masseteres are infolded.

XI. The Signs, It is known by the nether Jaw sticking out foremost, and the
Process sticking out by the said Jaw; as also, because the Mouth continues
always open, and the Spittle comes forth involuntarily.

XII. For if the Process resembling a Beak or Bill, falls out of the Os Jugale,
it follows, that it must also hang forth, which in one that is not very Fat, is
known both by sight and touch.

XIII. If the Dislocation is but on one side of the Face, it stands awry, and
the Chin is turned toward the hurt side, having a prominency withal: the Teeth
stand not directly under one another, nor can they be brought together, for
which reason the Mouth remains open.

XIV. If it is dislocated on both sides of the Face, then does it fall
forwards, the Mouth stands open, both the Apophyses are prominent, the lower
Teeth stand farther out than the upper, and the Temporal Muscles are distended,
stiff, and hard.

XV. The Prognostics. If it is dislocated but on one side, it is easily
restored; but if in both, it is much more difficult to reduce, sometimes very
dangerous, and oftentimes mortal, because the Muscles on both sides are
distended.

XVI. And Hippocrates says, that unless it is reduced presently, there will
arise Continual Fevers, Sleepiness, Inflammation, Pain, Convulsion, voiding of
Choler, and usually on the tenth day Death: and this may be reasonable to be
thought, because the Muscles and Nerves (being primarily affected) affect the
Brain by consent; Branches of Nerves being derived to those Muscles from the
third Conjugation of the Brain.

XVII. The Cure. Where the Bone is out on one side only, the Reposition must be
made by motions contrary to them, which made it slip out of its Cavity: as if
it slipped out forwards, it must be thrust backwards: as in opening the Mouth it
is drawn downwards, so it must be forced upwards: and as the Muscles draw the
acute Process upwards, so the Jaw Bone must be drawn downwards: which done, at
once, with a blow of the Hand upon the luxated Bone, it will be reduced into
its natural place.

XVIII. Being reduced, apply Hippocrates his Ceratum Rosaceum ( made of Oil of
Roses ii. Wax i. melted together) to the heads of the Jaw and Temple: and if
there was a strong Extension, you must apply things to hinder Inflammation.

XIX. Then a fit Bandage must be made, beginning from the Chin, and passing
toward the Crown of the Head, which Binding must not be loosed before the
third day, the Sick all this while forbearing to talk, gape, or chew hard
things.

XX. If the Jaw Bone is out on both sides, let the Sick be placed on a low
seat, and let one hold his Head firmly, or let it be held against the Wall, and
putting both your Thumbs wrapped up in Linen Rags into the Mouth upon the
Grinders, the other Fingers laying hold of the Jaw outwardly, and a couple of
small pieces of Wood upon the Grinders on either side, that the Fingers of the
Artist may not be hurt, upon the Bones returning to its place; let the Jaw Bone
be extended or drawn first downwards: Secondly, thrust backwards: Thirdly,
lifted upwards; thus will it be easily and quickly replaced.

XXI. Or, a Band or Strap may be put under the Chin, and an Assistant having
his Knees upon the Patients Shoulders, he may draw the Strap upwards, to
facilitate the Extension; which the Artist does in the mean season make with
his Hands, and at the same time thrusting also the Bone again into its place.

XXII. The Bone being replaced, Medicines must be applied to the heads of the
Jaw Bone, viz. to the Temples, such as Ceratum Rosaceum; and where the
Extension was violent, you may interpose Stup^s wet in whites of Eggs, mixed
with some Astringent Ponders.

XXIII. And the whole Temporal Muscle may be anointed with Oil of Roses mixed
with Oil of Whelps, or Oil of Earthworms.

XXIV. Then it is to be bound up after this manner. The Swath must be applied
to the Chin, where it m^st be slit a little, that it may take hold on the Chin,
on both sides; then on each side the Ears, the Rowler must be slit again, and
the Ear must be drawn through; and then the Rowler is to be fastened upon the
crown of the Head.

XXV. The Patient is thus to be kept for two or three days, or 'till the
luxated Part is strengthened; forbearing any Action (as aforesaid) which may
hurt or disturb the Operation.

XXVI. At second Dressing, apply things which may agglutinate, and strengthen
the Ligaments: as, Fine Bole, Catechu, Sanguis Draconis, fine Flower, Mastich,
Rosin, Pitch, A. ss. whites of Eggs, enough to make a Cataplasm.

XXVII. Afterward you may apply Diapalma, or Empl. Album, malaxed with Oil of
Roses; and other things strengthening, as you find the occasion requires.

XXVIII. If it has been dislocated some few days before it is reduced, you must
use emollient and relaxing Medicines: but when the Bone is put into the Joint,
you must apply Oil of Roses mixed with whites of Eggs, to ease the Pain; and
then put on Cloths dipped in Oxycrate: after which, you must pursue the Cure
according to the Method aforegoing.

CHAP. XI. Of a DISLOCATION of the COLLAR-BONE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Dislocatio Claviculae; and in
English, A a Dislocation of the Collar, or Channel-Bone.

II. The Clavicula is a crooked Bone, made almost like an S; one end of which
being thicker, and almost three-square, is inserted into a cavity, designed by
Nature for it, in the Sternum, and tied by a strong Ligamentous Membrane.

III. The other end is broad and flat, and joined to the Acromium; where it not
only serves to keep the Shoulder at a due distance from the Sternum; but also
assists those several Processes, which are designed to keep the Shoulder Bone
from slipping upwards from its cavity.

IV. It may be luxated two ways, and that only outwardly: 1. Where it separates
from the Sternum, and presses outward, like a hard Lump. 2. At the broad end,
near the Acromium; which may also be twofold, viz. upward, and forward; but no
other ways, by reason of the adjacent Bones.

V. Yet these Luxations, seldom happen, by reason of the firm connection of the
Clavicula with the Parts aforesaid: but being luxated, it is very difficultly
retained when restored, because of the smoothness of his Head, and the small
hold they have of the Acromium and Sternon.

VI. The Cause. It is caused by external violence; as of a Blow, or Fall, or
Pitching on the Shoulder.

VII. The Signs. It is easily known, by the Prominence it makes: the Shoulder
swells: and in the place where the Clavicula is slipped, there is an apparent
cavity.

VIII. Paraeus, lib. 15. cap. 11. says, he has known many Chirurgians, who have
mistaken a Luxation of the Clavicula, for a Luxation of the top of the
Shoulder: but they may be distinguished by their several Signs.

IX. In this case there is also Pain, and an Inflammation; and an impotency to
move and lift up the Arm, or to do other things which are performed by the help
of the Shoulder.

X. The Prognostics. This Bone, as it is seldom luxated, so it is seldom well
set; but hangs forth more or less from the upper part.

XI. But unless it is restored, the Sick will fail in some motion of his Arm;
nor can he move his Hand, either to his Head or Month.

XII. The Cure. To reduce the Bone, let the Sick be laid upon some unequal body,
put between his Shoulders; both which are to be pressed backwards, to raise up
the Clavicle: then he is to be set in a Chair, that the Artist strives to press
the Clavicle and Acromium, so as to join them.

XIII. Sennertus says, the Sick may lie upon his Back, with a Stone or hard
Cushion under his Shoulder: and the Arm is to be extended, pressing it
backwards or forwards, (as the Dislocation requires;) that the Shoulder and
Breast may bunch forth outwardly; then with the Palm of your Hand press the
Clavicula so raised, into its proper place.

XIV. This done, fit Medicines, and many Bolsters must be laid on; and the Part
must be bound straightly; which but few Men can endure.

XV. Which end so ever of the Bone is luxated, Wiseman advises Reduction to be
made, by drawing the Shoulder backwards, and by pressing the luxated end even
with the Acromium; or to the cavity of the Bone of the Sternum, whence it
departed.

XVI. And since neither of the places afford it much room, it will therefore
require your greater Care and diligence; for if it is not exactly reduced, it
will scarcely hold in, or right, 'till you have made your Applications.

XVII. You must have beforehand therefore in a readiness, Calaplasms,
Emplasters, Cerates, Compresses, and Swaths for binding: Splints, whether made
of Pasteboard, Scabberd, or Tin, are sometimes of use.

XVIII. The Swath or Bandage ought to be made up with two Heads, to come over
the Shoulder, and under the Armhole; making so many circumvolutions, as may
retain the Dressings close.

XIX. This being well done, the Arm must be kept up with a Scarf, Napkin, or
Towel, and the Hand placed under the Breast: nor is it to be loosned, 'till you
think the Bones are united, and the Patient is at ease, and has the free use of
his Arm.

XX. Galen, in Hippocrat. de Articulis, Com. 1. Text. 62. says, that he
himself had a Luxation of this Bone, in the thirty-fifth year of his age; so
great, that there was three Inches space between the Shoulder Blade and the
Throat: and that he suffered so strait and strong a Ligation, that he could
perceive the motion of the Arteries under his Throat.

CHAP. XII. Of a DISLOCATION of the NECK BONES.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Dislocatio Ossium Colli, vel
Cervicis; and in English, A Luxation of the Bones of the Neck.

II. These Bones of the Neck (as also those of the Back) are called by the
Greeks, (...), pl. (...). and in Latin, Vertebra, pl. Vertebrae; of which there
can be no perfect Dislocation, but what is mortal: but they may be a little
luxated or loomed; and that the Greeks call (...). and the Latins, Luxatio
Vetebrarum Colli.

III. Each Vertebra is a Bone which is unequal forwards, and a little hollow
behind, but above and below plain: it is not of a solid and hard substance, but
spongy, softish, and reddish of color.

IV. It has three kinds of Processes, growing out toward its hinder side: two
of which are transverse; four, which are oblique; and one, Posterior, which is
acute, and of a harder substance than the chief Bone it self.

V. It has also a very large Hole in the middle, or rather between it and its
Processes, (...) is for the progress of the Spina-Marrow: and on its upper and
under sides, two small lateral Holes, common to it self, and that next it;
which serve for the entrance of the Blood Vessels into the Spine, and the
springing forth of the Nerves, in their several ways.

VI. These Vertebrae of the Neck are seven in number less in m^gnitude, but
harder in substance, than those of the Back and Loins, because they are moved:
nor are they of a semicircular shape, as the other are, but almost apiece:
and their transverse Processes have each an Hole in them; through which Veins and
Arteries pass to the Head, which the other have not.

VII. The first or upper most Vertebra is called Atlas, because the Head stands
upon it, like the Globe of the World, and has no Spine behind it, but only a
little blunt Knob: its oblique Processes, both ascending and descending, have a
Sinus in them, the upper receiving the Tubercles of the Occiput: and the lower,
the ascending Processes of the second Vertebra; and upon these the Head is
moved forwards and backwards: within on the foreside of its great Hole, it has
a semicircular Sinus, lined with a Cartilage, which receives the tooth-like
Process of the second Vertebra.

VIII. The second Vertebra, called Dentata, because out of its upper side,
between its two ascending Processes, there comes forth a round, longish, and
hard Process, (...) shape like a looth; it is in^ted with a Cartilage, and
jointed into the aforesaid Sinus of the first Vertebra; upon which, as upon an
Axis, the Head of the first Vertebra turns round.

IX. And when a Luxation happens there, the Neck is said to be broken: and this
tooth-like process in that part, which enters not into the said Sinus, is
environed with a Ligament, by which it is tied to the Occiput

X. The four Vertebrae which lie next under this, are in all things like it;
save that their transverse lateral Processes are larger, and divided into two,
as well as the hinder Process: the seventh is the largest of all, and is more
like to the Vertebrae of the Thorax, than those of the Neck; its Spine being
singular, and not divided into two, as all the other of the Neck are.

XI. The Signs. The Head leans to one side, and the Face is swelled, and livid;
with a difficulty of breathing and speaking; and the Vertebrae are turned a
little to the hinder or fore parts.

XII. The Prognostics. Unless it is speedily helped, it brings Death: for the
Spinal Marrow is immediately oppressed, at the very original thereof: and the
Nerves thence arising, suffer together therewith, principally those which serve
for Respiration; whence comes sudden Inflammation, Stoppage of Breath, and
Death.

XIII. The Cure. The Sick is to be set upon a little low Stool, and the Artist
drawing the Head strongly upwards with both Hands, an Assistant must as
strongly hold down the Shoulders: mean season, the Artist must with both his
Hands turn the Head to and fro, from one side to another, with as little
violence as may be, 'till the Luxation is reduced.

XIV. And that will be known, by the Pain and other Accidents or Symptoms
ceasing; and the Patient's free moving his Head and Neck every way.

XV. After it is restored, Fomentations must be applied to the Part; and the
Patient being laid in his Bed, must have his Head inclined to the part or side
opposite to the Luxation, taking care to avoid moving his Head.

XVI. The Neck must also be bound up about the Dearticulation of the Shoulder,
but not too strait; lest it obstruct the passage of the Breathing and
Swallowing, and so occasion a Tumor.

CHAP. XIII. Of a DSLOCATION of the BACK-BONES.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Dislocatio, seu Luxatio Ossium, vel
Vertebrarum Dorsi; and in English, A Dislocation of the Vertebrae, or Bones of
the Back.

II. Those Vertebrae which generally make up the Backbone, are those of the
Thorax, and Loins: the Vertebrae of the Thorax are for the most part twelve, to
which so many Ribs of a side answer; there are seldom thirteen of each, but
more seldom eleven: and the Vertebrae of the Loins are always five.

III. Their Spines or hinder Processes, are not divided, as those in the Neck:
the transverse are short and blunt, each having a shallow Sinus, for the
inarticulation of the Ribs, but are not perforated as those of the Neek; the
oblique Processes, which are two ascending, and two descending, serve for the
Articulation of one Vertebra with another.

IV. The descending are a little hollowed, and receive the protuberant Heads of
the ascending Processes of the next Vertebrae below them, successively: and the
forepart of their bodies, next to the cavity of the Thorax, are round or
unequal; the hinder part lunated, or concave; and on each side they have a
smooth Sinus, for the reception of the heads of the Ribs: for into these
Sinus's they are received, as well as into those of the transverse Processes.

V. This Luxation may be made either inwards or outward, or to the right or
left sides.

VI. The Signs. The Dislocation is inwards, when there is a sinking of the Bone
inwards, or a depressed cavity in the Spine, it is outward, when there is a
Bunch or Sticking-out on the Back; and it is to the right or left side, when
they obliquely bunch out to either side, or the Patient is crooked, leaning to
one side.

VII. The Causes. It is caused either by external Force, from Falls, Blows; or
too much, and long, and often Stooping one way: or from Internal Humors, of
which in the next Chapter.

VIII. The Prognostics. The Vertebrae cannot be thrust in without a great deal
of violence; because it cannot be without breaking of the Ligaments, for that
they will rather break, than suffer so great extension.

IX. Paraeus, lib. 15. cap. 11. says, that such a Dislocation is mortal;
because the Spinal Marrow is exceedingly violated by too strait compression;
whence comes loss of sense in the Members lying under: and a Paralysis of those
Parts, which receive branches of Nerves from the Conjugations or Pairs of
Nerves, from the Vertebrae lying below the Dislocation.

X. The Cure. Where the Dislocation is inwards, the Patient is to be laid upon
his Belly; and the Extension is to be made with Napkins put under the Armpits;
and upon the Os Ileon: the Artist in the mean season endeavoring to draw the
Vertebra back again.

XI. If this is not sufficient, Fabricius Hildanus, Cent. 5. Observe. 59.
prescribes a Cure by Cutting. An Incision is to be made upon the Apophysis
Spinosa of the Vertebra: so that after having laid open this Process of the
Bone, it is to be taken hold of with a pair of Forceps, and pulled up again.

XII. Then the Wound is to be dressed with Pledgets, and a Plaster, and bound
about with a Napkin; and it to be treated and cured as a green Wound: but it is
not to be bound too hard, for fear of pressing down again the Spine.

XIII. If the Luxation is outward, it is not so dangerous yet it is seldom
cured, or not without great difficulty: to reduce this, the Extension must be
made as before, the Patient lying in like manner upon his Belly: but in order
to thrust back the Vertebra, two little Sticks armed with Linen Cloth or Rags,
are to be prepared, and laid along the two sides of the Spine of the Vertebra:
but these Sticks ought to be so thick, as to be higher than the Apophysis
Spinosa: then a large Wooden Rowler is to be often rolled upon them, which by
its often turning or rolling backwards and forwards, may thrust or force the
Vertebrae inward: thus when all the Vertebrae are of an equal height, the
Reduction is finished.

XIV. If the Vertebrae are luxated sideways, the same Extensions are to be
made; and the Prominence is to be thrust the contrary way, to be put in its
right place again.

XV. If the way of Extension at Sect. 10. above, be not sufficient, and Men's
Arms are not of force enough; you must then do it by the help of Hippocrates
his Table, which we have described in Lib. 6. Cap. 2. Sect. 34. ad 47. where
you have the way and manner of doing the Work, the which you may imitate upon
occasion.

XVI. As to the Dresing, two thin Plates of Lead are to be laid on either side
of the Spinous processes of the Vertebrae, to maintain and keep it in its
place, and a long Bolster is to be put over them, after which you are to bind
it up with Swaths, after the manner we have taught in binding up the fractured
Sternon.

CHAP. XIV. Of a BVNCHED, or CROOKED BONE.
I. IF the Vertebrae stand forth and make a Bunching out, it is called in
Greek, (...). in Latin, Dorsum vel Tergum recurvam: and in English, A Hunch'd
or Bunch'd Back.

II. If the Vertebrae are depressed, and make a cavity or hollowness, it is
called in Greek, (...), (Incurvatio Spinae dorsi in anteriora:) in Latin,
Dorsum vel Tergum Subsidens: and in English, A Saddle-back.

III. If the Vertebrae are luxated to the Right or Left side, it is called in
Greek; (...), (i. e. Vermem imitans:) and in English, A Crooked-back.

IV. The Causes. It is generally from an inward cause; either from a natural
Imbecility of the Parts, principally of the Nervous Ligaments, by which all
the Vertebrae are bound each to other on their outsides, but not coming to the
Spinal Marrow, which Ligaments are encompassed with a tough and glutinous
Humor, for the freer motion of the Vertebrae.

V. Or, from Cold, Crude, Gross and Viscous Humors, mixed with the Aliment,
which by great Defluxions and Catarrhs, beget a Tumor, which distends the
Nerves proceeding out of the holes of the Vertebrae, and also stretches the
Ligaments by which they are bound together; by which means they draw together
with them the Vertebrae, either inwards or outward, or to the Right or Left
side, and so moving them out of their seats, do dislocate them.

VI. Or, from a fluidness and softness of Body, (which is only in Children)
being hurt by Nurses, by their too straightly Lacing of them, to make them
slender; where by the Breast, Sides, and Inwards, are disturbed in performance
of their Actions.

VII. Or, from the Rickets in Children, in whom sometimes the Rickety Humor
sometimes settles upon the Spina Dorsi, and the Nerves and Ligaments belonging
to the same, stretching and swelling them, and so forces the Vertebrae out of
their places: and indeed upon such Children, it for the most part steals by
degrees, and is many times hereditary from the Parents.

VIII. Or, from a Strumous Humor, in such as have the King's Evil; which Humor,
almost by a Sympathetick quality, does many times seize upon the Backbone, and
its Nerves and Ligaments: and in such, it many times happens to such as are of
full stature, which I have three or four times seen:

IX. The Signs. It is known both by Sight and Feeling. The Ribs grow nothing,
or but little in breadth, but run outward before: the Breast loses its natural
latitude, and stands out as it were sharp, or with a point: it is a Defect so
well known, that it needs no other Signs.

X. The Prognostics. These Bunches, having their Original from an Inward
Cause, are utterly uncurable; unless they be withstood at first, with care and
industry.

XI. Such as have had them from their Ancestors, are never cured: only Infants,
and such as are young and growing, a e to be attempted.

XII. The Cure. Sennertus, Med. Pract. lib. 5. part. 6. cap. 5. says, That if
there remains any hope of Recovery, you must apply to the Part strengthening
Emplasters; on which an Iron Plate is to be laid, which by degrees may force
the Vertebrae into their places.

XIII. Which Plate, or Iron-Bodice, must be full of holes; and be so long and
broad, as to comprehend the whole Bunch, that it may press it the stronger: and
the inside of it ought to be lined with Cotton closely bumbasted, and covered
over with Linen; and the Plate must be so sewed to some Bodice, that when it
is put on, it may comprehend the Part affected.

XIV. This thus ordered, must be tied with Strings, or rather laced; slack in
some places, but very strait about the Part affected; that it may compress the
bunching-out Vertebrae.

XV. Under these Bodice, it is very requisite to apply the following Emplaster.
Oil lbiv. Red-Lead lbi. Vinegar lbss. Vitriol, Litharge, both in fine powder,
A. vi. which strew in by degrees; then add Pitch viii. and boil almost to a
just thickness; at the end of which add Tacamahacca vi. mix, and make an
Emplaster.

XVI. But before this Emplaster is laid on, Emollients should be applied upon
the Vertebrae, for a pretty long season; to loosen the Ligaments, and soften
the Part: and these Emollients may be either Oils, Ointments, or Fomentations,
or all of them, as you see occasion.

XVII. Then the aforegoing Plaster is to be laid on, with compression of the
Iron-Bodice so long together, 'till the Vertebrae are forced back into the
natural places.

XVIII. And the weakened Vertebrae are to be strengthened with this Emplaster.
Emplastrum de Minio, Osteocolla levigated, A. i. Wax, Catechu, A. ii. fine
B^le, Comfrey-roots, A. iii. Oil of Roses or Mastich q.s. mix, and make an
Emplaster.

XIX. An Emollient Ointment, to be used as before directed, at Sect. 16. Oil of
Whelps, of Earthworms, of Orrice, and of white Lillies, A. i. Bears, Vipers,
and Man's Grease, Palm-Oil, Sperma Ceti, A. ss. mix, and make an Emplaster.

CHAP. XV. Of a DISLOCATION or SINKING of the STERNON.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Luxatio Ossis Sterni, vel
Mucronati; and in English, A Luxation, or Sinking of the Sternum, or Brest-Bone.

II. A Description of this Bone we have already given you in Lib. 6. Cap. 25.
Sect. 2, 3, and 4. aforegoing; so that no more need be said of it as to the
matter here: our Business now is to show how it may be luxated, or made to sink.

III. It may be pressed in, and made to sink at the top, where it is joined to
the Clavicula: or it may be dislocated from the Ribs on either side; to which
it is joined by Arthrodia.

IV. The Causes. It may be caused by a Fall from a high place, falling upon a
Stone, or stump of a Tree; or by a very great Blow or Stroke, with a great
Stone; or the end of some great and heavy Stick.

V. The signs. It is known both by Sight and Touch: besides, the Patient has a
vchement Pain within, and shortness of Breath, and for the most part a
Vomiting, and Spitting of Blood.

VI. There a Fever withal, and the Patient seems to have all the Symptoms of a
Peripneumony, or of a Pleurisy: and if it sticks on the top, under the
Clavicula, the Sick is as if he were ready to be choked.

VII. The Prognostics. It is of very evil consequence, and if not soon raised
up again into its place, by the vehement Pains which it brings along with it,
it will be apt to induce Inflammations, Pleurisies, Convulsions, and a
Delirium, with Fainting and Swooning Fits; and if not restored in due time, it
certainly induces Death.

VIII. If it is sunk a little, and not restored, the Patient has always a Pain
and Sickness at Stomach, and is apt to Fain^ away: and by the continuation of
it, it causes at first a Pining only; then it brings into a deep Consumption,
which is always mortal.

IX. The same thing is to be understood, if the Xiphoid Cartilage at the bottom
of the Sternon turns its point inward: for if it cannot be reduced, the Patient
grows sick and out of order, looks pale like Death, is troubled with Sick and
Fainting Fits, and so consumes away, and dies.

X. The Cure. Whether it be sunk in on the top, or on the side, you must fix to
the part or side sunk down, a strong sticking Emplaster; which when it is fast,
the Patient is to be laid upon his Back with a unequal Body underneath, and two
Assistants on each side are to press down the Shoulders or Sides, according as
the Luxation or Sinking may be, on each side; and the Artist is forcibly to
draw up the Sternum, by the help of the Plaster, which when he sees it is
plucked up high enough, the Assistants are to give way to the Clavicula or
Ribs, that they may fall into their right places or Sinus's again.

XI. To raise up the Xiphoid Cartilage, it ought to be Embrocated for some time
with Oil of Turpentine, mixed with an equal quantity of Palm Oil; then the
Patient is to be laid upon his Back, with a unequal Body underneath, and the
Shoulders and sides of the Breast, are to be pressed, to lift up the Cartilage.

XII. If you find that this is not enough to reduce it, you must apply Cupping
Glasses without scarification, till the Part is sufficiently drawn up; and then
a strengthening Emplaster is to be laid upon it.

CHAP. XVI. Of a DISLOCATION of the RIBS.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...), pl. (...), (...), pl. (...). in Latin,
Dislocatio Costae, pl. Costarum: and in English, a Dislocation of a Rib, or
Ribs.

II. The Ribs are for the most part Twelve in number, of which seven are called
Costae verae, True or long Ribs: and five are called Costae nothae or Spuriae,
Bastard or short Ribs: their substance is partly Boney, serving for firmness
and strength; and partly Cartilaginous, serving for Articulation, and the
easier motion of the B^est in Respiration.

III. Within, the Boney part is Spongy and red, and toward the Vertebrae
thick, toward the Sternum, flat and thin, ending in a Cartilage, which is
joined in the first seven to the Sternon: and by reason of their fungous
substance, they are when broken, more easily joined together by a Callus, than
other Bones.

IV. The long Ribs are articulated, both with the Vertebrae and Sternon: their
Cartilaginous ends are received by Arthrodia, into shallow Sinus's in the
Brest-bone: and their boney Heads are received by Synarthrosis into the Sinus's
of the Vertebrae; and these Heads have also a Tubercle or small Prominence
(except the two lowest) which being clothed with a Cartilage, are articulated
into the shallow Sinnus's of the Transverse Processes: these Heads of the Ribs
are straightly tied to the Vertebrae by Ligaments.

V. Of the five Costae nothae, four have their Cartilages bending upwards; and
cleaving one to another, are joined before to the lower side of the Cartilage
of the seventh long, or true Rib: but the last and least is loose from the
rest, and grows sometimes to the Diaphragma, and sometimes to the Musculus
rectus Abdominis, as also does sometimes the next above it.

VI. Behind they are joined by Synarthrosis to the Vertebrae of the back, like
as the true Ribs are: only the two lowest, and sometimes the third, are
received simply into the Bodies of the Vertebrae, and not into the transverse
Processes, which in these places have no Sinus's for their reception.

VII. The Cause. They may be luxated, and fall from the Vertebrae wherein they
are articulated, either by vehement strokes or blows, or a great fall from some
high place; and the Dislocation may be either inwards, or sideways.

VIII. The Signs. It is known that it is slipped on one side, by a manifest
inequality, which makes a hollowness here, and a bunching forth there.

IX. But it is a sign that the Rib is driven in, when there is only a depressed
Cavity in the place where it was fastened to the Vertebrae.

X. Such Luxations cause a difficulty of Breathing, pain in bowing down, or
lifting up the Body, much resembling the pain of the Pleurify; and a rising or
putting up of the Musculous Flesh about the Ribs, by a mucous and flatulent
Humor there generated.

XI. The Prognostics. A Rib dislocated, must not remain long out of its place,
left more grievous Symptoms should follow, as violent Pain, Inflammation,
Gangrene, and Death.

XII. The Cure. If the upper Ribs are removed out of their Vertebrae upwards,
or on the outside, then let the Patient hang by his Arms over the top of a
Door, or some high place, and let the Artist press upon the Prominence of the
Rib with his Hands, to restore it to its right place.

XIII. If the lower short Ribs are luxated, the Patient must then bend himself,
or stoop, laying his Hand's upon his Knees; and the Prominence of the Bone
(moving the Rib to and again) must be pressed in, till it is reduced to its right
place.

XIV. If the Ribs are dislocated inwards, a sticking Plaster is to be laid on
it, and it is often to be pulled away with violence, when it is fast: by this
means, such a Luxation is often restored.

XV. But if the Operation of the sticking Emplaster will do nothing, you must
then make an Incision with a Penknife, and the Rib is to be reduced with the
Fingers.

XVI. After Reduction, you may apply some strengthening Emplaster, such as that
described in cap. 14. sect. 15. aforegoing; as for all the other Dressing and
Bandage, it is the same with that used in a Fracture of the Ribs.

CHAP. XVII. Of a DISLOCATION of the OS SACRVM, and RVMP-BONE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...), and (...). in Latin, Dislocatio vel Luxatio
Ossis Sacri: and Luxatio Ossis Coccygis: in English, a Luxation of the Great
Bone; and of the Rump-bone.

II. What kind of Bones these are, we have described in lib. 6. cap. 28. and
29. and how a Fracture of them is to be cured; we now come to show you how to
help them being Luxated: they may be distorted either inwardly or outwardly,
but seldom to either side.

III. The Causes. They may be Luxated by some violent External force, either by
great and vehement blows upon the Buttocks, or Parts adjacent, or falls from an
high place, etc.

IV. The Signs. If either of these Bones are dislocated, the Patient cannot
bring his Heel to his Buttocks: neither unless with much force, can he bend his
Knee.

V. He goes to Stool with very much Pain; nor can he sit easily, or without
Pain; and if he sits at all, it must be upon a hollow Chair, or a Chair with a
hole in its bottom.

VI. The Prognostics. The Cure will scarcely be done or perfected till about
twenty days after the Bone is set: during which time, the Patient must not go
to Stool, unless sitting upon a hollow Seat, lest the Bone should fall out of
its place again.

VII. The Cure. If the Luxation is outward, you may reduce it by gently
thrusting it back again with your Hand.

VIII. But if the Luxation is inwards, you must put the Forefinger of the
Right Hand up into the Anus, to the Part affected, and then strongly raise up
the Bone; whilst with your other Hand on the outside, you put then in their
true places.

IX. This done, strengthening Emplasters are to be applied to the dislocared
Part, made of fine Bole, Terra Sigillata, Catechu, Sanguis Draconis,
Frankincense, Mastick, and Crocus Martis astringens, made up with the Whites of
Eggs, etc. And then it is to be bound up, as we have taught in Fractures of
these Parts.

CHAP. XVIII. Of a DISLOCATION of the SHOVLDER-BONE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Dislocatio Ossis Humeri; and in
English, A Dislocation of the Shoulder, or Arm-bone.

II. The Os Humeri, or Adjutorium, the great Bone of the Arm is never
dislocated backwards, seldom upwards or forwards; but for the most part
downwards.

III. The Signs. It is therefore luxated, when the head thereof (which is
round, inserted into a shallow Cavity, and fenced with a very loose Ligament)
slips out of its proper place: and this is for the most part under the Armhole,
and then something round and hard is felt under the Arm, and a hollowness on
the top of the Shoulder: If it should chance to be forwards, then there is in
the hinder part a manifest Cavity, and in the forepart a very great
Protuberancy, the head of the Humerus being driven toward the Breast.

IV. If it is dislocated downwards, the Arm is longer than the other, nor can
the Sick bring his Hand to his Mouth; but if the Dislocation is forwards, these
Signs are wanting.

V. When the Bone is in its natural place, the upper Process of the Scapula
appears round, but when out, it appears acute, because the head which made the
roundness, is slipped down.

VI. The Arm is carried far from the Ribs, nor can it without much Pain be
brought to them, and several other motions also of it are hindered; for as he
cannot lift his Hand up to his Head, much less can he stretch it upright
against a Wall.

VII. The Causes. They are for the most part external, by some violent force,
either by Wrestling, Running, Fall from a Horse, or some high place, or by some
forcible Blow upon the top of the Shoulder, by a piece of Timber, etc.

VIII. If the Luxation is made by a Relaxation of the Tendons, the Patients
complaint will inform you; and the Emaciation or Atrophia of the Arm, will make
the aforesaid Symptoms the more apparent.

IX. The Prognostics. If the Bone is dislocated into the forepart, it is
easier to reduce, than if it is fallen into the Arm-pit: and if it is from an
External Cause, it is not very hard to be replaced, if timely taken, especially
if it is in Children, and soft Bodies.

X. But if it is inveterate as old, or is in elderly People, who have hard,
tough, and musculo^s Flesh; or if it has been reduced, and falls out again; in
all these Cases, it will be more difficult, and the Cure, and Recovery to the
former strength and motion, will come slowly on.

XI. Sometimes a Paralysis is induced, and then an Atrophia comes after it; but
with timely and good means it may be prevented.

XII. If in the Reduction, or otherwise, any part of the Acetabulum shall
chance to be fractured, though the Bone may easily be reduced, yet it will be a
very difficult thing to keep it in its place.

XIII. If the Luxation is made by Fluxion, it may also easily be reduced; but
the same Cause which thrust i^ out of Joint first, will be apt to do the same
thing again.

XIV. When the Bone is reduced, if the Parts adjacent are free from
Inflammation, the Sick may presently use his Shoulder and Arm without any Pain:
but it is not Prudence to do it, lest it fall forth again; and this is true in
all other Joints.

XV. How the Humerus is joined with the Shoulder. Nature has formed the
Acetabulum of the Scapula shallow, because it was necessary for the variety of
motions in that Joint: but by reason of the shallowness, it would easily be
thrust out of Joint, had she not otherwise provided for the Security thereof.

XVI. Upwards it is hindered from being dislocated, by the Acromium, the
Proce^us Anchorocides, and the broad end of the Clavicula, which reaching over
the latter to the edge of the former, adds to the strength of the place.

XVII. There is also a strong Ligament, which reaches transverse from the
Processus Anchorocides to the Acromium; and to confirm all, there is placed
underneath these, not only a strong Circular Ligament which involves the whole
head of the Shoulder, (being indeed a Collection of the Tendons or the Muscles,
which lying under and upon the Scapula, serve particularly for the motion of
the Humerus; or else lying upon the Humerus, do take their Original from the
Scapula:) but also a Tendon of one of the heads of the Biceps, which passing
through a peculiar Cavity or Trench of the Humerus, inserts its self into the
head of the Scapula.

XVIII. Over all these Ties the Muscle Deltoides, binding in all so strongly,
that if the Elbow should chance to be so pusht, as to force the Os Humeri upon
this Fortress, it would sooner break all into bits, than make its way through.

XIX. Inwards and downwards it is defended from being dislocated, by its
pendulous posture, together with the many Muscles which keep it in that
posture, chiefly the Tendons of the Biceps Externus, and of the Subscapularis,
with the Rotundus minor.

XX. But these are not so strong, but that between the Fendon of the
Subscapularis, and the Biceps Externus, it is apt to fly out into the Axilla:
all other ways are so fenced up with Bones or Tendons, that a Dislocation those
ways is very difficult: yet sometimes, though seldom, it has been dislocated
forwards, under the Pectoral Muscle.

XXI. The Cure. Hippocrates, de Articulis, and Galen, upon him, in Art. 1.
Text. 5. says, That if the Shoulder is fallen into the Axilla, three things
must be done, 1. The head of the Shoulder must be forced to the forepart. 2. It
must be directed to the upper part. 3. It must be carried to the hinder part,
which are the direct contrary ways to those by which the Luxation was made.

XXII. If the Shoulder is fallen forth forwards, it must be forced the contrary
way, viz. backwards; but that it might be freed from the Muscles by which it is
held, there must be first an Extension, though it be but little.

XXIII. Hippocrates, de Articulis, reckons up ten several ways of reducing this
Dislocation: but Modern Authors considering the Matter, have reduced them to a
smaller number, choosing such as are easiest to be performed, and the most safe:
and of these which we here declare, the Artist may use sometimes one, sometimes
another, as they are more ready or fit for the Occasion.

XXIV. The first Way of Reducine this Dislocation. Let a strong Man hold the
Patient fast about the hurt Shoulder, and let another draw the Arm downwards;
then let the Artist direct or lift up the upper part of the Arm into its
cavity, and the Bone will presently be reduced into its place.

XXV. The second Way, done by one Man alone. Place the Patient in a low Seat;
put your Fingers under the Arm-hole; your Knee or Thigh to the outside of his
Elbow; and your Head to the point of his Shoulder; so you may by your Fingers
strongly bent together, pluck the Bone both forwards and upwards; and by your
Knee or Thigh, you will press his Elbow to his side, by which it will be raised
up, and brought forward; and by the pressure of your Head, you will keep down
the Scapula, that it may not rise with the Bone: But because this Operation is
very troublesome to be done by one Man, it is much better to have an Assistant
or two. Thus the Elbow is brought quite back to the Spine; which being done,
with your other Hand under the Axilla, the head of the Humerus is raised
forwards and upwards, whilst another with his Hands presses down the Scapula,
to receive the Bone. Wiseman.

XXVI. A third Way, used only in Children, and such as have loose Ligaments.
Let the Artist, whilst with one Hand he circumvolves the Humerus, put his
other Hand clencht under the Axilla, so that the middle Knuckles of the Fingers
may force the head of the Shoulder into its cavity. By this way, as the
Shoulder is easily reduced, so it easily falls back again; nor (says
Hippocrates) is it according to Nature, and therefore not so very safe; for
while we turn the head of the Shoulder round upon the Scapula, some Membranous
or Nervous Bodies or Ligaments may be hurt, and the edges of the Sinus broken;
upon which may follow a flux of Humors, Inflammation, etc.

XXVII. A fourth Way. Get a proper lusty Fellow, on whose Shoulder you must
hang the luxated Arm, bringing his Hand over the Fellow's Breast: and if the
weight of the Patient is not enough to make the Extension, some other Person
may be ordered to hang upon him: in the mean season press the Shoulder
downwards, and work the Arm to and fro, till it is reduced to its true place.

XXVIII. A fifth Way. Lay the Patient upon his Back on the Ground, and under
the Arm-hole put a Leather Ball, or Ball made of some other soft Matter, of a
middle size, fitted to it; then the Artist (being set opposite to the Sick)
must apply his right Heel, if it is the Right Shoulder; or the Left Heel, if it
is the Left Shoulder, upon the Ball which is put under the Arm-hole, and with
both Arms he must draw the Arm toward him; whilst with his Feet he forces the
Shoulder at once to the forepart and upwards: lastly, let him force back the
head of the Humerus into the cavity of the Blade, toward which Motion, the
Muscles themselves do very much help.

XXIX. A sixth Way, by Bandage. A Ball or Bolster being put under the Axilla,
let one with a Swath or Girt draw the Shoulder upwards, toward the Head of the
Patient, pressing with his Foot the top of the Shoulder, while the Artist draws
the Shoulder downwards; another Man mean season holding the opposite sound Arm;
so will the Bone be reduced safely, and without any great labor; because it is
done by a way contrary to the falling forth of the Bone, and with Extension,
which is almost natural.

XXX. Or thus. You are to have a Swath or Girt, which is to be placed to a
convenient Bolster in the middle, and the ends to be sewed fast together: then
the Patient is to be so placed, that part of the Girt with the Bolster being
placed under the Arm-hole, the other part may be put over the Chirurgions Neck,
that he may thereby, with all his force, raise up the head of the Humerus:
which that he may the better do, an Assistant must fit behind, and pull his Arm
backwards, with all his strength; then the Artist pressing with his Hands upon
the head of the Scapula at the same time, the Bone will be the more easily
reduced.

XXXI. Or thus. Lay the Patient on his Back on the Ground, and the Artist being
behind him, let him make Extension with the aforesaid Girt placed under the
Axilla, whilst an Assistant lying along by the Patients side, presses with his
Heel upon the aforesaid Bandage and Bolster, and at the same time, taking the
Patient by the Hand, pulls his Arm with all his strength: thus the head of the
Humerus may be raised and reduced.

XXXII. The seventh Way, by the Reductive Ladder. The form of the instrument,
with its use, we have described in lib. 6. cap. 2. sect. 24, ad 28. aforegoing:
at the bottom of the Ladder, a Stool is to be placed for the Sick to stand
upon; and upon the uppermost round, the Arm-pit is put, and the luxated Arm is
drawn downwards: in the interim, the Shoulder is moved up and down, and the
sound Arm is strongly drawn downwards at the same time, by a Servant on the
opposite side, and the Stool also taken from under his Feet; so by means of the
Patients thus hanging on the Ladder, the Shoulder Bone becomes Reduced.

XXXIII. The eighth Way, by the Ambi of Hippocrates. This is also described in
lib. 6. cap. 2. sect. 12, ad 18 together with its use, in the Reduction of a
Shoulder out of Joint: which being so largely and plainly said there, we need
say nothing more of it in this place.

XXXIV. The ninth Way, by the Pully of Vitruvius. This we have also described
in lib. 6. cap. 2. sect. 29, ad 33. its use is thus: let a strong lusty Fellow
hold the Sick fast about the luxated Shoulder, and another by a Swath or Girt
lift up strongly the Os Humeri, whilst a third extends the Arm, by means of the
Pully fastened into a wooden Post or Pillar at one end, and tied to the Arm with
Swaths above the Elbow at the other.

XXXV. Or thus, which is safer. Have a Colstaff with a bunch in its middle,
somewhat Wedge-like, covered with a soft Bolster, in a readiness: then seat the
Patient near some Post or Pillar, in which let the Pully be fastened at the one
end, the other end tie fast with Swaths or Bands, above the Elbow; after which
let the Colstaff be placed under the Patients Arm-hole, and supported by a
couple of Assistants; let the Artist stand on the contrary side, and with his
Hands on each side the Scapula press it downwards, and keep the Patient firm in
his seat whilst he manages the Reduction; taking care that the bunch be placed
right, whilst the Extension is making, lost the Bone be broken, or other
Mischief be done.

XXXVI. If the Shoulder is luxated to the forepart, it is reduced almost the
same ways by which the former was done, viz. by extending the Shoulder, and
drawing its head up and down, there by forcing it up, into its cavity: but
herein, the Shoulder being drawn downwards, must be driven to the hinder part;
the Artist ought also to beware, that in the Action the Bone falls not into the
Arm-hole; which may be prevented by putting a Ball there, and making a Servant
with a strong and broad Swath to draw the Bone forcibly upwards.

XXXVII. The Bone being reduced, you must apply things which hinder
Inflammation, and strengthen the relaxed and soft Ligaments, of which we have
spoken before in the general Cure both of Fractures and Dislocations, and
elsewhere.

XXXVIII. In Swathing, you must have a Ball made up of Linen, or coarse Flax,
and dipped in proper Medicines, to be put under the Arm-pit, that the head of the
Shoulder Bone returns not thither: then let the first Swath be here, afterward
let it be rolled once or twice about the Joint; hence let it be brought to the
Shoulder Blade, and again descend to the Joint: at length that it may draw the
Arm the more upwards, and keep it so, let it tend to the Neck on the other
side, and there be bound, not loosening it, till the third or fourth day,
unless an Inflammation force it.

XXXIX. But the Swath being taken off, Empl. Album, or Diapalma is to be
applied, if it is Summertime: Or Empl. Barbarum, or Oxycroceum, or
Catag^naticum, malaxed with a little Oil of Roses, if it is Wintertime.

XL. Only a Ball, etc. being laid under the Axilla, upon that a Bolster may be
laid with four heads, which may be crossed upon the Shoulder; as also a Bolster
under the sound Arm-hole, that it may not be galled by the Bandage, etc.

XLI. Or, after Reduction, things being applied to prevent Inflammation, and to
strengthen the weakened Ligaments, (as fine Bole, Catechu, Powder of
Comfrey-roots, Dragons-Blood, Frankincense, Myrtle-berries, Pomgranate-peels,
red Roses, Sumach, Terra Sigillata, etc. all in fine powder, and brought with
Whites of Eggs, to the Consistence of Honey; in which Stuphs or Cloths are to
be dipped, and imposed, as also a Ball dipped in the same, and put under the
Axilla:) the Part affected is then to be bound up with good and firm Bandage.

XLII. Laying over all a Cloth wrung out of austere Red-wine, a Rowler must be
brought about it, which must keep fast the Ball, and always draw the Arm
upwards, or at least keep it so.

XLIII. First then, the middle of the Rowler must go over the Ball, and be
carried once or twice round the Joint, then both the heads must be carried
round the Neck, on the other side.

XLIV. When three or four days are over, the Bandage may be loosned; and if all
fear of Inflammation is not over, or if the Ligaments continue lax, the like
Medicine must be renewed, till all fear of Inflammation is over, and the
Ligaments are strengthened; after which you may leave off the Rowlers or
Bandage, and apply over the Joint the Emplaster, named at Sect. 39. aforegoing.

XLV. If the Humerus is luxated by a Relaxation of the Ligaments and Tendons,
it is to be restored to its place by some of the Ways aforementioned; after
which it is to be bound up, and retained in its place, with good Bandage, and
all other Circumspection imaginable.

CHAP. XIX. Of a DISLOCATION of the ELBOW BONE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Dislocatio vel Luxatio Cubiti; and
in English, A Dislocation of the Elbow.

II. The Elbow consists of two Bones, 1. (...). Cubitus, vel Os Cubiti, vel
Vlna, the greater and lower Bone of the Elbow. 2. (...), Radius, the lesser,
and upper Bone of the Elbow.

III. The Os Humeri ends toward the Elbow, with a double head; the inward of
which is fitted for the reception of the Vlna, the outward for the Radius.

IV. The inward head is exactly shaped and covered with a Gristle, which makes
it smooth, and fit for the motions of the Ulna, which with a suitable Cavity
plays about it, inserting upon every Extension of the Arm, its utmost Process
called (...), Ancon, or (...), Olecranon, in the large cavity which is situated
on the backside of the Humerus: and in every bending, its lesser Protuberance
plays into a lesser cavity, in the Exterior part of the said Humerus.

V. In the mean season, the Radius, being round and flat with a very small
excavity, does play upon the outward head; both which heads by their respective
Processes, make a station for several Muscles: the outward Protuberance giving
Original to all the Extensors of the Hand and Fingers, the innermost to all the
Flexors of the same.

VI. Or thus: The upper end of the Ulna, or Cubitus is Articulated with the Os
Humeri by Ginglymus; for its Process before is received into one of the fore
Sinus 's of the Os Humeri, in bending the Elbow-joint: and its hinder Process
upon stretching out the Arm, enters into the hinder cavity of the same Bone,
behind the Trochlea; by which the Cubit is stayed from a farther Extension than
to a straight line, as is intimated at Sect. 3. above.

VII. At the same end, the Cubit has also two Sinus's: the one of which is
lateral and external, receiving the head of the Radius: the other, is between
its two Processes, and receives one of the Processes of the Os Humeri, which
moves in it as a Rope in a Pully.

VIII. The Joint it self, besides this Ginglymoide Connection of the Ulna to the
Humerus, is strengthened by a very strong Ligament, and well bound in with
Muscles: on the inside it is lined with the strong, thick, and very soft end of
the Brachiaeus internus, whose Ligament, though hard and thick enough, has yet a
soft Bed of Flesh interposed between it and the Joint, that so the Pressure may
not hinder the motion thereof, but rather give way to it: yet the Pressure is
strong enough to keep the place firm, being very much corroborated by the
accession of the Tendon of the Biceps, Pronator radii teres, and supinator
longus, etc.

IX. On the outside it is well guarded by that great strong Muscle, which is
commonly reckoned for two, to ^it, the Biceps, and Brachiaeus externus, which
uniting together, have a fleshy soft inside, with a strong broad Ligament, ^ixt
on the outside to the Olecranon: as also with the little Muscle Anconeus, which
reaching from the end of the Humerus, obliquely transverse, does insert it self
into the Vlna, much strengthening the Joint.

X. The Radius lies on the outside of the Cubit; its upper end is the
slenderer, having a round head, one side of which is received by the Ulna, but
its tip has a round shallow cavity in it, which receives the outward Process of
the Os Humeri by Diarthrosis: its lower end is thicker and broader, and by a
sinall Sinus in its side receives the Vlna; and at its end has two other small
Sinus's for the reception of the little Bones of the Wrist.

XI. The Radius is also bound close to the side of the Ulna, and to the Humerus
by two remarkable Ligaments, viz. the circular one which involves the Joint;
and the broad one, which unites it and the Vlna together: it is also bound down
by the neighboring Muscles, especially by the two Supinators, and the Pronator
teres.

XII. These things being considered, together with the figure of the Ulna, and
the great strength by which it is tied to the Humerus, one would think, that it
were almost impossible for this Joint to be dislocated; and yet sometimes such
a force is put upon it, that, as Authors say, it may be put out four several
ways, viz. outwardly, inwardly, and to each side: sometimes the Vlna is
dislocated alone, and sometimes the Radius is dislocated with it.

XIII. The Causes. They are either External, or Internal: The External are from
violence and force: the Luxation of the Elbow to the forepart, is for the most
part from a violent and sudden Extension of the Arm: but if it is to the hinder
part, it is from a violent bending of the Arm. And inwardly or outwardly, it is
from a forcible ^version of the Arm.

XIV. The Internal Causes, are from Humors flouring to the Joint, which by
degrees filling up the cavities which are made both in the lower part of the Os
Humeri, as also in the Ulna and Radius, thrust forth the Cubitus and Radius out
of their seats; and this I have several times seen in such as have had the
King's Evil; and sometimes in young Children who have had the Rickets, a flux of
Humors accidentally falling down upon that Joint.

XV. The Signs. It is easily known, both by sight and touch: if it is luxated
to the forepart, the Arm is extended and cannot be bent; and in the forepart
there is seen an unusual Tumor, and in the hinder part a Cavity.

XVI. And contrariwise, if it is luxated to the hinder part, the Arm is
crooked, and can by no means be extended; the Tumor appears on the hinder part,
and the cavity on the forepart: the same understand, if it is dislocated
toward the outside or inside, the Tumor will be in the place to which the Bone
is forced, and contrariwise.

XVII. If the Radius follows the Cubitus or Ulna, it is known by the same
signs: but if there is only a divulsion or departing from the Vlna, without a
Luxation, a gaping and disjoining demonstrates it, the place is hollow, and the
bottom may be found with the Finger.

XVIII. The Prognostics. A perfect Dislocation of this Joint does seldom
happen; if it does, it is restored with much difficulty: the reason why it is
not easily dislocated, is, by reason of its fast and firm Coarticulation with
the Os Humeri, and its plenty and strength of Ligaments.

XIX. If with the Dislocation, there is a Fracture of any of the Processes of
the Joint, the Case is very deplorable.

XX. Of all the Luxations which happen in the gibbous part of the Elbow, the
most dangerous and painful is that which is to the hinder part, as Paulus
Aegineta, de re Medica, lib. 6. cap. 115. does maintain.

XXI. A Divulsion of the Radius from the Cubitus, is not easily restored: for
two Bones so joined together, if once separated, do not easily return to their
old place, but the Part becoming swelled, they are soon encompassed with a
Callus.

XXII. If a Luxation of the Elbow is not speedily restored, there will follow
great Pains, Inflammations, vomiting Choler, acute Fevers and Convulsions; and
sometimes Death it self.

XXIII. The Cure. If the Cubit is luxated forwards, Extension must be made in a
proper figure, not directly, but obliquely; lest you should break the Process
or Tip of the Vlna: the Extension must be made so much, that one Bone may not
hurt the other in setting.

XXIV. If the Hands be not strong enough, then bend the luxated Arm about some
Pillar, or steadfast Post, and by the help of Swaths or Bandage, extend it,
pressing the Bone backwards, till it is reduced.

XXV. Two Persons being employed, the one must hold the Humerus, and the other
must pull the Arm below, but obliquely: the Artist in the mean season must
guide the Elbow so as to keep it bent, and to direct the Bone.

XXVI. This may be done also by pressing (...) ^lster upon the bent of the Jo^,
or by a Girt, or other Ba^age pulled behind, or by one in the nature of a
Stir^p, in which the Artist may put his Foot, and make Extension that way: in
the mean season, putting his Hands to the Cubit, he must bend it, and press it
backwards.

XXVII. If the Cubit is luxated backwards, Extension must be made obliquely, as
before; and then the Artist with his Hands is to direct the Bone to its place.

XXVIII. Hippocrates, de Fracturis, says, he has sometimes cured the Elbow
luxated to the hinder part, only by a sudden and continued Extension of the
Arm: which if it suffices not, convenient Extension being made below the Elbow,
it is then to be forced inwards

XXIX. If the Cubitus is luxated to the outward or inward Part, it is very
easily reduced, if Extension is made, and it be forced from the Part to which
it is fallen, into the contrary: this is easily done, if it is not inveterate.

XXX. The same manner of Reduction is used in replacing the Radius, if it has
followed the Luxation of the Elbow; but if it is only a Divulsion, or a
departure from it, it must be pressed close with the prominent Parts of the
Hands, the Arm being posited in the natural figure.

XXXI. The Bones being reduced, Medicaments must be applied, to assuage Pain,
to prevent Inflammation, to contract the lax, and strengthen the distorted
Ligaments.

XXXII. If there is Pain, you may use Oleum Myrtinum, or Rosaceum, with
astringent Pouders, as fine Bole, Catechu, etc. mixed with Whites of Eggs; or
Ceratum Rosaceum spread on Linen, and then Stuphs must be applied, dipped in
astringent Pouders mixed with Whites of Eggs.

XXXIII. After which it is to be bound up with a Swath six Yards long, and two
Inches or better broad, rolled up with one head: in applying of it, begin with
a Circumvolution about the lower part of the Shoulder Bone, over the bending of
the Arm; then make a Circumvolution about the upper part of the Cubitus;
crossing it in the bending: then continue the Circumvolutions upon the Elbow,
crossing the inside of the Arm, upwards and downwards, till the Elbow is wholly
covered: then the Swath is to be carried up to the top of the Arm with
Circumvolutions, and stayed round about the Body; and the Arm is to be hung in
a Scarf or Napkin, as in a Fracture of the Arm.

CHAP. XX. Of a DISLOCATION of the WRIST and HAND.
I. A Dislocation or Luxation of the Wrist-Bone, is called in Greek, (...). and
in Latin, Dislocatio vel Luxatio Carpi.

II. A Dislocation or Luxation of the Bones of the Hand, is called in Greek,
(...). in Latin, Dislocatio vel Luxatio Metacarpii, vel Ossium Metacarpii.

III. The whole Carpus or Wrist is joined to the Elbow-Bones; viz. the Cubitus
and Radius by Diarthrosis, or a manifest Motion by Articulation. But the
Metacarpium, or Back of the Hand; by Synarthrosis, or Obscure Articulation, in
which there is no manifest Motion: and the Metacarpium is joined again by
Diarthrosis with the Bones of the Fingers.

IV. The Carpus is composed of several Bones; one of them lies out of order,
the three others of them are joined to the Processes of the Radius and Vlna,
and the four to the Metacarpium: all which are bound in by a strong Ligament,
by the strength of which, the Joint is made very firm.

V. These Bones may any one of them be thrust out of Joint singly; and they may
also be put out all together; and that either inwardly, or outwardly, or to
either side.

VI. The Cause, Is from some violent Motion or Force, Blow, Fall, Perversion,
Contorsion, or Extension.

VII. The Signs. They are common with other Luxations: in the place to which
the Bone is slipped, a Tumor appears, with a hollowness in the place from whence
it is fallen.

VIII. The Part cannot be bent, nor the Fingers extended, by reason of the
compression of the Nerves and Tendons going to them: if the Bones are luxated
inwards, the Flexors of those Fingers are so strecht, that the Extensors cannot
move them.

IX. On the contrary, if the Bones are luxated inwards, the Extensors are
immovable: and if they are luxated side-ways, the Hand leans either to the
Thumb, or to the little Finger.

X. The Prognostics. These Luxations are not dangerous, for as much as they
are in Parts remote, and may easily be reduced.

XI. The Cure. Whether the Luxation of the Wrist is made forwards or backwards,
the Hand is to be laid upon a Table, the Back downwards, if the Luxation is
made forwards; and the Back upwards, if the Luxation is made backwards: and
then Extension is gently to be made by two Servants; the one pulling the Arm,
the other the Hand: and whilst Extension is making, the Artist must sprce the
luxated Bones the contrary way, with his Hand, in soft and tender Bodies; but
with his Heel, in such as are stronger: so will the Bones be reduced.

XII. Celsus lays a Bolster of Linen Cloth upon the Luxation, where it is to
be chiefly pressed; that so the Intrusion may be the stronger, and the Pain less.

XIII. If the Luxation is outward or inwards, as the Extension is making, the
Artist must also force the Bones the contrary way.

XIV. If the Bones of the Metacarpium are luxated, the Hand is to be placed on
a Table, with some hard body put under it; then a moderate Extension is to be
made: so the Bones are to be thrust into their places, by the Hand or by the
Heel, either forwards or backwards.

XV. A Swath of six or seven Yards long, and two Inches broad, is to be applied
to the Luxation, with three circumvolutions; and it is to pass diverse times
over the inside of the Hand, between the Thumb and Forefinger, crossing upon
the Thumb, having made several turns upon the Wrist.

XVI. Two pieces of Pastboard are also to be laid upon the sides of the Wrist;
which are to be bound on with the same Swath, by rolling it about them: the
Hand being kept hollow, with a Ball made of Linen Rags, to keep the Fingers in
a mean position: then the Swath is to be passed above, to strengthen it; and
carried up, winding, to the whole length of the Cubit, and to terminate just
below its upper end.

CHAP. XXI. Of a DISLOCATION of the FINGERS.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Dislocatio, vel Luxatio Ossis, vel
Ossium Digiti; and in English, A Dislocation, or Luxation of the Bones of a
Finger.

II. The Fingers may be Lu^ated all manner of ways; as toward the forepart,
and toward the hinder-part, and also to either side.

III. The Signs. The single Luxation of the several Bones, may be demonstrated
by their protuberance, by sight and touch, and the complaint of the Patient.

IV. The Prognostics. If recent, they are easily reduced, nor is there any
danger: but if the Luxation is once grown old, it is not to be done without
much pain and trouble: because a ^llous hardness is there easier bred, than in
other places.

V. The Jointing of the Bones. The Bones of the Fingers (including the Thumb)
are the largest; and their upper Appendices have one round Sinus in them,
whereby they receive the round heads of the Bones of the Metacarpium, and this
is by Enarthrosis, or by Arthrodia; and by a singular conjunction with the
Bones of the Metacarpium, the Fingers have a motion also sideways: their lower
Appendices have each two heads, divided by a Sinus, which are received by the
double Sinus of the upper Appendix of the next Bone.

VI. The second Bones of the Fingers, have in their upper Appendices Sinus's,
parted by a small Protuberance; and these Bones are joined to the first
aforenamed by Ginglymus; and by these the Fingers are stretched out and
contracted: their lower Appendices have also each of them two heads, divided by
a Sinus, as the former.

VII. The third and last Bones of the Fingers, have their Appendices like those
of the second, with two Sinus's, parted by a small Protuberance, and are joined
to the former by Ginglymus also: but these third and last Bones are received by
none, being only covered with Flesh and Skin, and fenced with Nails.

VIII. The Jointings of the Thumb, answer to those of the Fingers, except that
its upper Appendix is not joined to any Bone of the Metacarpium, (with which it
has no communication) but immediately to the Wrist; and its lower end has but
one head; whence the second Bone has but one Sinus in its upper Appendix, to
receive it.

IX. The Cure. To reduce the Fingers, you must lay them straight upon a Table;
and then making Extension by the help of two Servants, you are to press them
down; so will the Bone go easily into the Joint, by reason their Sockets are
not deep, the Articulation but short, and the Ligaments not so strong, as in
other Joints. Sennertus, Med. Pract. lib. 5. part. 6. cap. 8.

X. This done, Medicaments hindering Inflammation, and strengthening the Joints,
ought to be applied: the common Restrictive may do in this case, with good
Bandage, and putting the Fingers into a fitting and easy posture.

XI. If the Luxation is in the first Articulation of the Joint, the Bandage
Spica is to be used; being a Swath rolled up with one head, about an Ell long,
and an Inch broad.

XII. You must begin with Circumvolutions about the Wrist, and then to pass
over the Luxation, in in going between the Fingers: these Circumvolutions are
to be continued, to form a Spica upon the Luxation, and the Swath is to
terminate at the Wrist.

XIII. If all the Phalanges were dislocated, it would be requisite to make as
many upon every Phalanx, and with the same Swath, or Band.

CHAP. XXII. Of a DISLOCATION of the HIP or THIGH BONE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Dislocatio, vel Luxatio Ossis
Femoris; and in English, A Dislocation, or Luxation of the Hip; or rather, of
the Thigh Bone.

II. The Thigh Bone is the largest, or longest and thickest in the whole Body;
before it is round, behind a little depressed or hollow: on its upper part it
has a round head, with a slender part underneath it, called the Neck; which is
pretty long, and oblique.

III. The Neck is an Apophysis, or Process to the Bone it self; and the round
Head an Epiphysis or Appendix to the Neck: this Head is received by the large
Acetabulum of the Coxendix, and is detained therein by two strong Ligaments:
one which encompasses the lips of the Acetabulum; and another which springs out
of its bottom, and is inserted into the tip of this Epiphysis or round Head.

IV. At the lower end of the Neck, there spring two Prominences from the Bone:
which because the Muscles called Rotatores are fastened to them, are called
Trochanteres: the hinder and lower is the lesser Trochanter; and the lateral or
uppermost, the bigger.

V. The lower end of the Thigh Bone, grows thicker gradatim, and has two
indifferent large Apophyses or Heads; having a Cavity in the middle between
them, which receives the Apophysis of the Tibia; which is tied therein by a
Ligament; as the upper end, or head of this Bone is tied to the Acetabulum of
the Coxendix.

VI. The Acetabulum of the Os Coxendicis ( which is a large Cavity, tipped round
its Lips with a Cartilage called Supercilium) receives the Apophysis or Head of
the Os Femoris, by that kind of Articulation which we call Enarthrosis.

VII. Now as the Thigh Bone is joined by Enarthrosis to the Bosom of the
Hip-bone; so that Sinus is fully large and deep enough to receive its Head: and
as it is strongly united to it by a most firm Ligament arising from the bottom
of the Hip, which is implanted into the narrow Sinus of the Apophysis of the Os
Femoris; so thereby, it is much the more safely, readily and casily extended,
turned or moved any way, and will not easily slip forth.

VIII. The Kinds. The Dislocation of the Thigh Bone, is either perfect, or
imperfect, which is called a Luxation; yet some Authors will not allow of an
imperfect Luxation in this Joint.

IX. To which it is answered, That though Aegineta, de Re Med. lib. 6. cap. 118.
will only allow of a perfect Dislocation, and not of a Subluxation; yet this
only is to be understood where it is caused from external force and violence.

X. But if it is caused from a Flux of Humors to the Part, those Humors
sometimes so relax and mollify the Ligaments, that they cannot retain the Head
of the Thigh Bone firmly in its Cavity, whence follows a certain Subluxation.

XI. The Causes. Out of what has been said it appears, That a Luxation or
Subluxation is caused, the first from External Violence, the latter from
Fluxion; as in an inveterate Sciatica, where the violence of the Pain induces a
Flux of Humors upon the Part; where thickning and concreting, they by degrees
thrust the Bone out of its place.

XII. The Differences. They are drawn from the several Ways by which the
Dislocation may be made, 1. Inwards. 2. Outward. These two happen very often,
because at those places the lips of the Acetabulum are lower than in other
places. 3. Forwards. 4. Backwards. These two happen very rarely, because the
Lips of the Cavity are in those places higher than in others.

XIII. The Signs. If the Dislocation is Inwards; the Leg is longer, and moves
with difficulty; the Knee, and Foot stand outward, (for if one end of a thing
inclines one way, the other end must recline the contrary way:) the Head of the
Thigh Bone may by the Hands be felt under the Groin; but the Thigh it self
cannot be bent toward it, because the Musculi Inflexores are straightened and
hindered, that they can neither lift up, nor bend the Thigh: and in the
Perinaeum, viz. the Region between the Testicles and Anus, a manifest Tumor
appears.

XIV. If the Dislocation is Outward; the Leg is made shorter, and the Knee,
Leg, and Foot are turned inwards; the Sick can then indeed bend his Leg, but
scarcely bring it to the Ground: in the Perinaeum there is a cavity and
leanness; and on the contrary, in the Butrocks a certain Tumor: the Heel
touches not the Ground, and the Patient when he endeavors to walk, goes on
tiptoes.

XV. If the Dislocation is Forwards; the Groin is swelled, for the head of the
Thigh Bone leans to the Pubes; the Buttock is fallen, hollow, and wrinkled;
because the whole Thigh with the Processes is slipped forwards: the Leg is
neither shorter nor longer; nor can it be bent, but with trouble; because the
Musculi Inflexores are hindered, and pressed by the Head of the Thigh: the Urine
is stopped also, because the Head of the Thigh Bone presses upon the Bladder: nor
can the Toes of the Foot be easily extended, or turned to the Ground, and the
Patient is forced to tread only on the Heel.

XVI. If the Dislocation is Backwards; the Patient can then neither stretch
out, nor bend his Leg; because the Musculi Extensores which are behind, are
pressed, so that they cannot be drawn toward their proper Principles: he cannot
bring his Heel to the Ground; which if he should force himself so to do, he
would fall backwards: the Member affected is shorter than the other, because
the head of the Bone is got above the Acetabulum: there is a hollowness in the
Groins; and if the Buttock is pressed upwards, you will find an unusual Tumor,
because the head of the Thigh Bone sticks out at the Buttock.

XVII. The Prognostics. These Luxations are never without danger, because they
are hardly reduced; and being reduced, are in danger of falling out again. The
reason why they are difficult to reduce is, because of the exceeding strength
of the the Muscles, which are not easy to be extended.

XVIII. An inveterate or old Luxation of the Thigh Bone, which has contracted a
Callus, and whose Sinus or Acetabulum is filled up with Humors, or a Gelly, is
incurable: and though in this case, the Bone should be reduced, yet it will not
stay in its place, but fall out again. See Celsus, lib. 8. cap. 20.

XIX. The same will come to pass, if that the Ligament in the Cavity is
preternaturally relaxed or extended, or by any means is broken.

XX. If the Luxation is not reduced, the Parts adjacent will waste and consume
by degrees; because the Veins and Arteries will be so straightened and compressed,
that a free passage for the Blood, Nutriment, Vital and Animal Spirits will be
wanting: and because the Part will not have its due motion, its heat will
decay; whence an Atrophy or Paralysis may be feared.

XXI. If the Dislocation is Inwards, it is difficult to reduce, and as easily
slips out again; whereby the Part affected is wasted, and the Sick lamed: if it
is not reduced, when they go, they wheel about their Thigh outwardly; because
it is too long, and they cannot well bend, so that they are forced to wheel it
about.

XXII. If the Dislocaiton is Outward, if it is not right set, yet the pain
will vanish of it self, and the Sick will in time be able to go without
Crutches. If it is not well restored in those that are of ripe age, the Flesh
into which the head of the Joint falls will grow callous; after which the pain
will go away, and he will be able to walk without a Staff.

XXIII. If the Dislocation is Forwards, though it be not rightly set, yet the
Patient will in length of time go indifferently well upon it, though oftentimes
it is so, that he is forced to trail his Leg after him. But Sennertus, Med.
Pract. lib. 5. part. 6. cap. 9. says, That though it be not reduced, yet the Sick
will be able forthwith to go upright upon it, and perfectly upright, without a
Staff: for by reason of the inflexibility of the Groin, they use the whole
Thigh more straight in going, than before it was dislocated.

XXIV. If the Dislocation is Backwards, though it be not reduced, yet the pain
will vanish in time also; because the part which touches the head of the Bone
will grow callous, and the the Leg may be bent again: but it will be shorter,
yet straight, for that the Foot will be turned neither inwards nor outward.

XXV. The Cure. The Way of Reducing the Luxation is almost the same with that
of Reducing the Shoulder; and truly the manner of Extension may be common to
all the four Species of a dislocated Thigh: but the manner of forcing and
restoring the Head of the Thigh Bone, must be, according to the variety of the
places into which it is fallen: for that which is fallen inwards, must be
forced outward; and that which is fallen outward, must be forced inwards, etc.

XXVI. The Thigh Bone may also be reduced either without Extension, or with it:
without Extension it may be done two ways: but not at all, unless the Luxation
be recent, and in a Patient who has soft Flesh, and moist Ligaments, and where
the Bones stands but a little way from its Sinus, and it be also in a Child's
Body.

XXVII. The first way is to turn round the head of the Thigh, about the Ilium
(as we do sometimes when the Arm is out of Joint) and not to separate it, if it
gets into the Sinus, or Cavity: But this way is not accounted safe, for fear
the head of the Bone should rub against the edges of the Acetabulum.

XXVIII. The second way is, to bend the Thigh suddenly; for so sometimes it is
replaced, as Paulus, lib. 6. cap. 98. has told us. These ways possibly may do
in Children, but to reduce the Bone with Extension, is certainly the safest and
best way, which we now are a going to teach you.

XXIX. The General Method. Lay the Patient down upon a Table on the Back, or
whole side, for the three first Species; but on the Belly if the Luxation is
backwards: then between the Legs put a strong Staff, wound about with Linen,
which with Ropes, Reins, Girts, or some such like, let it be drawn strongly
upwards, by one or two Men; or you may do it by Swaths or Bandages above.

XXX. In the mean season, let another draw out strongly the Leg: and while the
Extension is making and made, let the Artist with his Hands put the head of the
Bone into its place, thrusting that outward which is fallen inwards, and
contrariwise; and that backwards, which is fallen forwards, and contrariwise.

XXXI. If it cannot be reduced by the former means, you must be forced to make
use of Engines or Instruments; as the Reductive Ladder, the Glossocomium of
Galen, the Table of Hippocrates, or the Pully of Vitruvius, all which
Instruments, together with their several uses, we have at large described and
delivered in lib. 6. cap. 2. of this Work aforegoing.

XXXII. The Bone being reduced, you must apply proper Medicaments, with fit
Bandage and convenient Situation, as we have largely taught in the proceeding
Discourse of Fractures: and both Thighs must be bound, that the Luxated Bone
may be kept in its place, which must not be loosed before the fourth day: the
Patient must also continue long enough in Bed, and not walk too soon, lest
straining the Part whilst it is yet weak, it should be put out of the Joint
again.

XXXIII. The particular Methods of Reduction, are as follows. If the Luxation
is inwards, let the Patient be laid with his Back upon the Scamnum Hippocratis,
or some other Table, in which a thick Wooden Pin, about a Foot long is to be
fixed, which is to be set between his Thighs, to detain the Body when the Legs
are drawn down: then a Strap or Girt is to be passed above the Joint of the
Thigh, to draw the Ischion upwards; and the Thigh is to be drawn downwards,
with another Bandage fastened about the Knee: mean season, the Artist is to
thrust the Thigh Bone upwards and outward, to reduce it to its Acetabulum;
upon which, the Extension is to be somewhat slackned, to facilitate the
Operation.

XXXIV. If the Luxation is Outward, the Patient is to be laid upon his Belly,
and the Extension is to be made after the same manner, as we have even now
shown: in the mean time, the Thigh Bone is to be forced from the outside
inwards, to reduce and set it right in its Sinus.

XXXV. If the Luxation is Forwards, the Patient is to be laid upon the opposite
side to that which is dislocated; and the Extension is to be made by drawing
upwards and downwards, as before; then the Head of the Bone must be forced
strongly with the Knee, a Ball being first laid thereon; and so reduced to its
proper place.

XXXVI. If the Luxation is Backwards, the Patient may be laid upon his his
Belly, and the double Extension, upwards and downwards, is to be made; and with
the Knee, the Bone is to be forced back again into its proper place.

XXXVII. These things being done, a Bolster or Splenium is to be applied, with
strengthening, Balsamic, and Spirituous Medicaments; and it is to be bound up
like in anner, as we have taught in the Binding-up of a Dislocated Shoulder.

CHAP. XXIII. Of a DISLOCATION of the KNEE-PAN.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Dislocatio vel Luxatio Patellae;
and in English, A Dislocation, or Luxation of the Knee-pan.

II. The Patella, vel Pelvis parva, is a Bone upon the Knee, not joined with
any other Bone; it is roundish, about two Inches broad, smooth and unequal
without, and concave within; and covered with a Cartilage.

III. It is placed before the Thigh Bone, and the Tibia, to strengthen and
defend the Articulation; for otherwise the Os Femoris would be in danger of
slipping out forwards, in going down a Hill, or the like.

IV. It is involved by the thick Tendons of the second, third, and fourth
Muscles which extend the Tibia or Leg; and are implanted into its fore-knob,
whereby it is fixed in its place or station.

V. Its substance, in thole that are newborn, is very soft and also callous,
or cartilaginous, and continues so for many Months: but in length of time it
becomes hard, and of a boney substance, but full of holes, or porous; as all
those Bones are, which are derived originally in their substance from
Cartilages.

VI. The Patella may be luxated to the upper, lower, outward, and inward parts:
for that it has no obstacle any of those ways, to hinder its Dislocation.

VII. But it can never be luxated to the hinder parts; because the Bones of the
greater Focile and Thigh, which cover it, do hinder such a Dislocation.

VIII. The Causes. It may be caused either by a Fall from an high place, great
Blows, Jumping, or a violent Distention of the Leg.

IX. The Signs. It is known both by sight and touch: nor can the Knee be
rightly or easily bent or moved, as it should be.

X. The Prognostics. Because this Articulation is more loose, this Bone may
easily be restored to its place: and being restored, it is easily put out
again, unless great care be taken for some considerable time, 'till the Part is
sufficiently strengthened.

XI. If the Luxation is old, or of a long standing, it ought not to be reduced;
because it is in vain: for though it is put in its place never so well, it can
never be kept there long, but will fall fall out of its seat again.

XII. The Cure. In reducing of it, let the Sick stand upright, and so press it
into its place again. The Bone being restored, proper Medicaments must be laid
upon it: and on the side to which it was forced away, you must lay a Splint or
Bolster; the Ham likewise must be filled up with Bolsters, or else one or more
compressing Splints; which must be bound on so fast, that the Patient may not
bend his Knee.

XIII. At last, when you think the danger of falling out again is past, the
Patient must by degrees accustom himself to bend the Joint.

XIV. Some advise, that the Sick should keep their Bed during the whole time of
the Cure; which in my Opinion, is safe and good Advice: and the same Bandage is
to be applied, with that which we shall prescribe in the next Chapter, for the
Dislocation of the Knee, or Bones of the Leg.

CHAP. XXIV. Of a DISLOCATION of the KNEE, or BONES of the LEG.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...), pl. (...). in Latin, Dislocatio Ossis, pl.
Ossium Cruris; and in English, A Dislocation of the Bone, or Bones of the Leg.
It is also called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Dislocatio Genu; and in English, A
Dislocation of the Knee.

II. The Thigh Bone in its lower part has two eminent Apophyses, tending to the
hinder part, with a Cavity in the middle, which receives the Apophysis of the
Tibia; which Apophysis is tied to that Sinus, by a Ligament arising from the
Vertex of that Head: and the Apophyses of the Os Femoris are received by the
Cavities (which are not deep, but shalllow ones) of the Os Tibiae: this
Articulation is loose, and is of that kind which we call Ginglymus; the
forepart of which is called the Knee, and the hindermost the Ham.

III. This Joint is guarded on the forepart by the great and large Muscles,
which running to, and beyond the Patella, join it to the Tibia, and bind it
down upon the Articulation: and on the hinder-part, it is guarded with the two
Ham-strings so called, viz. the Tendon of the Biceps outwardly; and of the
Sartorius gracilis, Semimembranosus, and Seminervosus, inwardly: between which,
through a little Cavity made for that purpose, all the Great Vessels have their
passage to the Legs.

IV. Now this Joint being thus strengthened, does scarcely admit of of any
Luxation forwards, (for that the opposition of the Patella does hinder it)
unless the Cause or Force is exceeding violent: but there may be a perfect
Luxation, either inwards or outward, which are often seen; and sometimes
backwards, but that is very rare: as also a Subluxation, according to the
variety of Causes.

V. The Causes. If it be caused by Falls from high places, vehement Blows,
Jumping, hard Running, strong Extension, Contraction, or Distortion of the Leg.

VI. It may also be subluxated, through the afflux of Humors, as in the Rickets
in Children, (which I once saw) and in the King's Evil in elder People; also in
an Oedema, of which I knew a Patient to dye.

VII. The Signs. A Luxation in this Part is known by Sight and Touch, because
it is almost a fleshless Part: there appears a Bunching-out of the side to
which the Bone is fallen, and a hollowness in the place from whence it is
fallen; the figure is depraved, and the motion is weakened and abolished; for
the Thigh is extended, and and cannot be bent.

VIII. The Prognostics. If it is compared with the Elbow, the Knee is oftener
dislocated, and more easily reduced: it also less dangerous, nor does an
Inflammation easily happen, because the Reduction is without any great force.

IX. The Cure. The Luxation, either inwards or outward, it easy to be restored
by a moderate Extension, either with Hands in a new Luxation, and in Child's
Body: or with Swaths or Bands in a Luxation not so recent, and in a stronger
Body; forcing the Bones with the Hand, into the part from whence they fell.

X. A Luxation backwards is restored by placing the Sick to lean over a Bench,
and putting a Linen Ball into the hollow of the Ham, where the Bone sticks
forth; and then strongly forcing the Bone forwards, whilst another takes hold
of the lame Leg, and on a sudden so bends it, as to make the Heel touch the
Buttock; so will you hear it snap, when it enters into its place.

XI. Or thus. If the Tibia is luxated Sideways; one Attendant must draw the
Thigh upwards, and another must in the mean season draw the Leg below the Knee
down toward the Foot; and the Artist the mean while must force the Bone the
contrary way: in a grown Person, and a perfect Luxation, there will be need of
Swaths, Bands, or Girts; or the use of Engines, to make a sufficient Extension.

XII. If the Luxation is Backwards, the Patient is to be laid upon his Belly;
then Extension is to be made, and the whilst the Artist is to bend his Leg, by
making the Heel approach to the top of the Thigh, or Buttock.

XIII. These things being done, Embrocate the Joint and Parts affected; and
apply Astringent Medicaments in the Ham, with Compress and good Bandage.

XIV. You must prepare a Swath four Yards long, and two Inches broad, rolled up
to the middle, with two Heads: then a circumvolution is to be made above the
Knee, and the Letter X is to be formed underneath; then making a circumvolution
above it, the Swath is to be carried up again over the Knee; which is to be
rolled about, and crossed again underneath, 'til the Knee is perfectly cured.

XV. If it is a Sublaxation, it is Cured by a very little Extension; upon
which, the Bone is to be forced back to the Part from whence it is somewhat
removed.

CHAP. XXV. Of the DIVVLSION of the BONES of the LEG.
I. THis kind of Dislocation is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Divulsio
Ossium Cruris; and in English, A Divulsion or parting asunder of the Bones of
the Leg: That is, a separating or pulling asunder the Fibula from the Tibia.

II. The Leg, strictly so called, is composed of two Bones, 1. (...), Tibia,
Focile majus, the greater Bone, which is almost three-square, and by its smooth
or flat side, and sharp edge before, makes that which we call the Shin. 2.
(...), Fibula, Focile minus, the lesser Bone, which is as long as the former,
but much slenderer, and is the outward Bone of the Leg.

III. These two Bones are slightly conjoined to one another near each end; but
in their middle they recede one from another; yet so, as they are tied together
by a strong Membranous Ligament, which comes between them.

IV. The Tibia at its upper end has a little head behind, which is below its
upper and larger Appendix; this little head enters into the upper Appendix of
the Fibula. At its lower end it has an Appendix, which is lesser than its
upper. Appendix, which jets out with a notable Process toward the inside of
the Foot, making the Malleolus internus, or inner Ankle: it has two Cavities,
one less, in its side, by which it receives the Fibula; another greater and
lower, divided into two by a small Protuberance in the middle, and lined with a
Cartilage, which receives the unequal head of the Talus that lies under it, as
the said Protuberance is received by the shallow Sinus or Cavity in the unequal
head of the Talus.

V. The Fibula in its upper part has an Appendix, which reaches not so high as
the Knee, nor is it joined to the Thigh Bone, but to the Tibia, as in the
former Section is declared. At its lower end it has also an Appendix, which is
received by the Sinus of the Tibia, as aforesaid, and extending its Process to
the side of the Talus, makes therewith, the Malleolus externus, or outward
Ankle.

VI. The Causes. This Divulsion may come from those Causes, from which we said
the Knee might be luxated, especially when walking in a slippery place, the
Foot treads not firmly, but is wrinched either inwardly or outwardly; as also
from heavy Blows, Fall from an high place, etc.

VII. The Signs. A Tumor appears in the Part to which the Fibula is thrust
forth; it is known by sight and touch; the motion also is hurt: and the Fibula
may. be drawn from the Shin-bone three ways, viz. to the forepart, and on both
sides.

VIII. The Prognostic. It is easily reduced, if it is recent: but if it is so
old, (before replacing) that a Callus is bred, it can never be restored.

IX. The Cure. The sides of the Foot are to be pressed, to draw it back again;
and it may be kept close with the Bandage which is ordered in the Fractures of
the Tarsus.

X. Or you may easily bring it back again to its place, by forcing it to the
contrary part with your Hands; after which, convenient Emplasters, Bolsters,
Ligature, and Placing, must be ordered, with quietness and rest for some Weeks,
till the Ligaments are confirmed.

CHAP. XXVI. Of a DISLOCATION of the ANKLE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Dislocatio vel Luxatio Tali vel
Mulleoli; and in English, A Dislocation or Luxation of the Ankle, or Ankle-bone.

II. The Talus, Astragalus, or Ankle-bone, is of a various shape; alone, it has
a head a little unequal, with a shallow Sinus in it, articulating with the
Tibia; and by the Process of the Tibia which makes the inner Ankle, it is
fenced in as it were on the inside, as it is by that of the Fibula on the outer.

III. Before, it has a long Neck on which grows a round Appendix, which enters
into the Sinus of the Os Naviculare, upon which jointing, the Foot is moved
sideways. Behind, it is rough, and in its upper part, has a transverse Sinus or
Cavity, to receive the Ligament of the Tibia; and in its lower part a little
descending Sinus, by which the Tendons of the Muscles of the Foot pass.

IV. Below, it has a Sinus behind, and a Protuberance before, by which it is
articulated with the Os Calcis by Ginglymus: between the Sinus and
Protuberance, there is a long and something deep Cavity, and over against it,
such another in the Heel-bone.

V. The Bone of the Ankle is articulated by Ginglymus to the Tibia, joined with
the Fibula: underneath which lie all the Ossa Tarsi in order, to wit, under the
Talus, the Os Calcis, and before it the Os Cymbiforme: outward of that, joining
to the Os Calcis, is the Os Cubiforme; and between the Os Cymbiforme, and the
Metatarsus, lie the three Ossa Cuneiformia.

VI. This Joint is involved with strong Membranes and Ligaments, and bound in
by diverse strong Tendons: Behind, by the Tendon of the Gastro^nemius; and yet
close underneath in the hollow of the Calcaneum, by the Flexores Pollicis, and
Tertii internodii digitorum lateralis: inwards, by the Tibialis Posticus:
outward, by the Preconei: and forwards, by the Tibialis anticus.

VII. These being joined to the strong Ligaments which every where bind up the
Part, and assisted by the figure of the Bones, do make a joint, not easy to be
dislocated, without a great weight or force.

VIII. But from a great weight and force it may suffer four ways, 1. Inward. 2.
Outward. 3. Forward. 4. Backward. Both by a perfect and imperfect Luxation.

IX. The Causes. It is caused commonly by violent Extension, great Blows, or
Falls, or by Distortion, or Wringing of the Foot.

X. The Signs. If it is inward, or to the inside, the Sole of the Foot turns
outward; if it is luxated outward, or to the outside; the Sole of the Foot is
then turned inward.

XI. If it is luxated to the forepart, then the strong and broad Tendon lying
under the Heel, becomes hard and stretched; and the Foot is lesser and shorter;
because the Leg and Joint are moved forward, and take up a great part of the
Foot.

XII. If it is luxated to the hinder part, then on the contrary the Heel is
almost hid, the Sole of the Foot seems to be greater, and the Foot longer.

XIII. If these signs are plain and manifest, it is then indeed a perfect
Dislocation: but if they are obscure and doubtful, it is then only an imperfect
Luxation.

XIV. The Prognostics. The Ankle is both easily dislocated, and easily
reduced: but because of the multitude of Bones which go to the constitution of
the Joint, it is with great difficulty confirmed.

XV. The Reduction, while recent, is not difficult, yet these Luxations are
subject to great Pain, and are many times accompanied with Tumor and
Ecchymosis, and the Patient is long lame of them.

XVI. The Cure. Let the Part be completely extended, either by Men's Hands, one
Man holding the Leg, another the Foot; or, with Swaths, Reins, or Girts; or,
with proper Engines or Instruments such as we have formerly described and
explained.

XVII. Then let the Artist force the Joint with his Hands to the contrary part,
viz. to that from whence it is fallen, and afterward apply convenient
Medicaments and Bandage.

XVIII. You may use Astringent Pouders made of Aloes, fine Bole, Catechu,
Dragons-blood, Caput Mortuum of Vitriol, Crocus Martis astringens, Sumach,
Terra Sigillata, etc. mixed with Whites of Eggs, which may be applied about the
Joint with Tow: and if there is Pain, Lenients and Anodyns are then required.

XIX. In this Luxation, the Sick must keep his Bed the longer, for at least six
Weeks, because the Ankle supports the whole Body; and unless that be completely
restored, so that the distended Muscles and Ligaments, which are now made more
loose, do acquire their pristin Strength; it cannot be imagined that the Cure
can be completed; and this is seldom accomplished before the fortieth day is
expired.

XX. Sometimes the Ankle-bone is apt to turn out on either side, by reason of a
Relaxation of the Tendons; in such a Case, though you may reduce it, yet it will
be ready upon the least walking upon it, to let the Bones slip out again.

XXI. Some Years ago ( says Wiseman) such a one was brought to me: I reduced it
easily, and it as soon slipped out again, whereupon I caused a Shoe to be made,
by which the Ankle was kept steady; and at length by the application of
Astringents, etc. it recovered its strength.

CHAP. XXVII. Of a DISLOCATION of the HEEL-BONE.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Dislocatio vel Luxatio, Ossis
Calcis vel Calcanei; and in English, A Dislocation or Luxation of the Heel, or
Bone of the Heel.

II. (...), Os Calcis vel Calcanei, The Heel-bone is the second Bone of the
Tarsus, and the greatest of the seven Bones which complete the instep: it lies
under the Talus, with which in its upper side it is articulated, being joined
thereto by Cartilaginous Ligaments.

III. In its fore-end, it is received by the Os Cubiforme: Behind it receives
the great Tendon called Nervus Hectoreus, or that great Chord, which is
composed of the Tendons of the three Muscles which extend the Foot.

IV. On its inside it has a large Sinus or Cavity, by which the Tendons and
larger Vessels descend to the under side of the Foot: and on its outside, it is
uneven with several Protuberances, for the firmer Connection of the Ligaments
and Tendons.

V. The Causes. The Heel is for the most part luxated from the Ankle, by
leaping or falling from an high place, the Patient falling upon the Heel;
sometimes also it has been dislocated in Dancing.

VI. The Signs. It is easily known by the great Pain, depraved figure of the
Part, and hurt of the Action.

VII. The Heel-bone lying under the Ankle, is often dislocated, but more
especially forward or backward: very seldom to the Sides, whether inward or
outward.

VIII. The Prognostics. A Luxation of the Heel is very dangerous, because the
Arteries, Veins, and greater Nerves which it receives, and also the Tendon
conjoined with it, are easily drawn into consent; whence may arise acute
Fevers, Tremblings, Ravings, Convulsions, Swoonings, and many other pernicious
Symptoms.

IX. The Cure. It is reduced into its pristin condition by a light Extension,
putting with your Fingers the Bone into its right place.

X. When it is reduced, it must be so bound up, that the Humors abounding may
be driven from it to other Parts; and the Sick must so long rest himself, till
the Joint is fully confirmed.

XI. If there is a great Weakness in the Part, or a Flux of Humors, Astringent
and Strengthening Topics are to be applied, renewed, and continued so long as
you see need shall require.

XII. And the abundance of Humors flowing to the Part are to be diverted, by a
daily and constant giving of proper Emeticks and Catharticks, according as the
Strength of the Sick will permit; such are Tartar Emeticum, Infusion of Crocus
Metallorum, Wine and Vinegar of Squills, for Vomiting: and Syrupus Catharticus,
Pulvis Catharticus, Pulvis Cornachini, and Our Family or Panchymagoge Pills,
for Purging, with other things of like-nature.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of a DISLOCATION of the BONES of the FOOT.
I. IT is called in Greek, (...). in Latin, Dislocatio Ossis, vel Ossium Pedis;
and in English, A Luxation of a Bone, or the Bones of the Foot.

II. Under this general Name we comprehend, 1. (...), Luxatio Tarsi, a Luxation
of the Instep. 2. (...), Luxatio Metatarsi, vel Pedis; a Luxation of the top of
the Foot, or Foot it self. 3. (...), Luxatio Digiti vel Digitorum Pedis, a
Luxation of a Toe, or Toes.

III. The Tarsus, or Instep, consists of seven Bones, 1. The Talus. 2. The Os
Calcis; of which we have already spoken in the two last Chapters. 3. The Os
Naviculare. 4. The Os Cubiforme. 5, 6, 7. The Ossa Cuneiformia of which five
last we, shall speak a word or two here.

IV. The Os Naviculare or Cymbiforme, is so called from its figure: behind it
receives the Talus in a large Sinus: before it is unequal, with three fattish
smooth heads, which are received into the three shallow Sinus's of the Ossa
Cuneiformia.

V. The Os Cubiforme is less than the former three, and stands in one rank with
the third Cuneiformia: it has six sides, and articulates with the Heel-bone
behind; is bigger than any of the Cuneiformia, and is seated on the outside of
the Foot. On its foreside, it is joined to the fourth and fifth Bone of the
Metatarsus: on the inside to the third Bone of the Cuneiformia: but its other
three sides, outer, upper and lower, are joined to none.

VI. The three Cuneiformia, or Wedge-like Bones, (which are thick above, and
thinner below) being joined, do all of them represent a Vault; and are unequal
above, and concave or bending underneath, in which the Muscles and Tendons are
placed, so that in going we do not press upon them, and bruise them: These
three behind, are joined to the Os Naviculare, and before to the three first
Bones of the Metatarsus.

VII. The Metatarsus, Pedium, or Body of the Foot, has five Bones, each Bone
being appointed for the sustaining of a Toe: their Substance is hard, and
solid, and hollow within like so many Pipes: that which is articulated with the
great Toe is thickest, but longest; the other are almost of an equal thickness,
but each shorter than other; their lower ends are round, and inserted into the
Sinus's of the first Joints of the Toes: but their upper ends are hollow, to
receive the Bones of the Tarsus.

VIII. The Bones of the Toes are fourteen in number; of which the great Toe has
only two, the other four three apiece; they are hard and solid without, hollow
within, and articulated like those of the Fingers.

IX. The Bones of the Tarsus and Pedium never suffer a perfect Dislocation or
Dis-jointing: and those of the Toes seldom, because upheld by most strong
Ligaments, and many Tendons.

X. They may be so many ways dislocated or luxated, as may the Bones of the
Hands, and as easily reduced as they.

XI. If the Bones of the Instep or Foot, should be moved upwards, the Patient
must tread hard upon a plain place, or a Form, or Table, and the Artist with
his Hand must thrust them into their places.

XII. If any of them should start outward, you must them press them upwards,
and restore each Bone to its place: the same you must do, if they should bear
out sideways.

XIII. If the Toes are dislocated, they are restored altogether by the same
Ways and Means as are the Dislocations of the Fingers: but with this note, that
when any Bone is dislocated here, the Sick is necessitated to keep his Bed for
at least twenty days, till the dislocated Part is perfectly confirmed.

The CONCLUSION.
NOW to the Great and the Holy One, the Just and Eternal Power, a God Glorious
in Holiness, Fearful in Praises, Doing Wonders; who taking hold on Judgment has
remembered Mercy, and delivered me his Servant out of the Jaws of Cruel Dogs,
who for several Years past have been worrying me, and saved me from the
Depredations of Beasts of Prey, making me in some measure, even to Triumph over
my Adversaries. To the Infinite and Almighty Being, who has been merciful and
kind unto me, causing my Lot to fall in a pleasant Ground, and has been
pleased to give me the Possession of a Treasure which can never be wasted, and
a Substance which can never wax old, nor decay; filling me with full Measures
of his Consolations, making my Cups to overflow; and who has given me Wisdom
and Understanding to begin, go through, and perfect this great and desirable
Work: I say, for these, and all his other Mercies and singular Favors, with
which he has daily visited me, a thankful Remembrance of which can never pass
from me; my humble Soul, under a deep sense of all this his unspeakable
Goodness, pours forth before the Throne of his Grace (as the Sacrifice of a
Thankful Heart) all possible Praise and Thanksgiving, to whom be Honor and
Glory for Ever. Amen.

From my House by Black-Friers-stairs, London, October. 30. 1697. W. SALMON.

THE END.
THE CONTENTS.
LIBER PRIMUS. Of Instruments and Operations.
I. Of INSTRUMENTS.
Chap. 1. OF Surgery in General Page 1 Chap. 2. Of the Small Instruments 3
Chap. 3. The large Instruments 5 Chap. 4. The Form of the Chirurgians Chest 13
1. The Old Form 13 2. The New Form 14
Chap. 5. The Furniture of the Chest 15 1. Cista Hildani. 16 2. Woodall's
Viaticum 18 3. Woodall's Epitome 21 4. Salmon's Repository 22 5. Salmon's
Reformed Chest. See the Preface.

II. Of OPERATIONS.
I. SYNTHESIS.
Chap. 6. Of Fractures 24 Chap. 7. Dislocations 28 Chap. 8. Ruptures 30 Chap.
9. Strutting out of the Eye 34 Chap. 10. Falling out of the Womb 35 Chap. 11.
Falling out of the Fundament 38
II. DIAERESIS.
Chap. 12. Opening of a Vein. 39 XIV. Propositions concerning Blood-Letting 40

Chap. 13. Opening an Artery 43 Chap. 14. Opening the Windpipe 44 Chap. 15.
Opening of the Breast 45 1. A Dropsy of the Breast 45 2. An Empyema 46 3. A
Pleurisy 48
Chap. 16. Opening the Belly, or Paracentesis 49 Chap. 17. Opening closed
Orifices 51 1. Of Closed Eyes 51 2. Orifice of the Ears closed 51 3. The
Nostrils closed 52 4. The Mouth closed 52 5. The Praeputium closed 52 6. The
Glans not perforated 52 7. The Anus not perforated 52 8. Pudenda Virginum
closed 53 9. The Vagina closed 53 10. Inward Orifice of the Womb closed 54
Chap. 18. Opening of Apostems. 55 1. With a Tunicle 55 2. Without a Tunicle. 56
Chap. 19. Of Opening of the Skin 56 1. By Vesicatories or Blistrings 57 2. By
Fontanels or Issues 58 3. By the Seton 59 4. By application of Leeches 60 5. By
Cupping-Glasses 61 6. By Scarification 62 7. By Vstion or Burning 62 8. By the
Haemorrhoids 63 9. The opening of Varix 63
Chap. 20. The Dividing of closed Parts 63 1. Hydatis, under the upper Eyelid
63 2. Hordeolum, under the Eyelid 64 3. Grando, a hard stoney matter 64 4.
Lagophthalmos, narrow Eyelid. 64 5. Ectropion, lower lid fallen down 64 6.
Hypopion, under the horney Coat 64 7. Tongue Tied 65 8. Cutting Infants Gums 65
9. Growing together of Fingers, and Toes 65 10. Cutting of a Wry-neck 65
Chap. 21. The Dividing of Bones 67 1. Trepaning, or Perforation ib. 2.
Scraping, Filing, and Sawing. 68

III. EXAERESIS.
Chap. 22. The Birth of a Living Child 69 Chap. 23. The Birth of a Dead Child
71 Chap. 24. Extracting the Secundine 73 Chap. 25. Extracting a Mola 74 Chap.
26. The Caesarian Birth 75 Chap. 27. Cutting out the Stone 77 1. Apparatus
minor 79 2. Apparatus major ibid. 3. Apparatus Hypogastricus 80
Chap. 28. Drawing out of Teeth 81 Chap. 29. Bullets, Arrows, Thorns, etc. 83
Chap. 30. Urine Stopped 84
IV. APHAERESIS.
Chap. 31. Couching of Cataracts 89 Chap. 32. Amputation 92 1. The Common way
93 2. That of Aquapendens 95
Chap. 33. Cutting off Cancers 96 Chap. 34. Cutting off Wens 98 Chap. 35.
Cutting a Sarcocele 100 Cutting an Oskeocele 101

Chap. 36. Cutting out Warts and Corns 103 Chap. 37. Removing Caruncles 104
Chap. 38. Removing Humors 105 1. By Friction 106 2. By Bathing ibid. 3. By
Sweating 107 4. By Fasting ibid.

V. DIARTHROSIS.
Chap. 39. Crookedness in General 108 Chap. 40. Crookedness of the Back 110
Chap. 41. Crookedness of Arms and Legs 112 Chap. 42. Crookedness of the Fingers
114 Chap. 43. Crooked Feet and Toes 116
VI. PROSTHESIS.
Chap. 44. Baldness 119 Chap. 45. A Hare-lip 120 Chap. 46. Parts of the Head
supplied 123 1. The Eyes ibid. 2. The Nose ibid. 3. The Ears 124 4. The Palate
ibid. 5. The Teeth ibid.
Chap. 47. Artificial Arms and Legs 125
VII. REPORTS.
Chap. 48. Of Reports in General 126 1. Wounds Mortal, Dangerous, Safe 126 2.
Wounds Great 128 3. Diseases Great or Small, Long or Short, Mortal or not 128
4. Wounds considered, in respect to the Parts hurt 129 5. What the Event of
Wounds may be 130 6. In a Dead Person, whether the Wound was made before, or
after Death 131
Chap. 49. Reports, where no Wound appears 132 1. By Blows, Beating, Falls,
etc. 132 2. By External Suffocation 133 3. By Internal Suffocation 134 4. By
Thunder and Lightning 135 5. By Poison 137
Chap. 50. Reports from the Viscera being wounded 1. Wounds of the Brain 137 2.
Wounds of the Stomach 138 3. Wounds of the Liver 139 4. Wounds of the Lungs 139
5. Wounds of the Diaphragma 140 6. Wounds of the Guts 140 7. Wounds of the
Bladder 141 8. Wounds of the Spinal Marrow 141 9. Wounds of Arteries and Veins
142 10. Wounds of the Aspera Arteria 142 11. Wounds of the Reins 142 12. Wounds
of the Spleen 143 13. Wounds of the Heart 143
Chap. 51. Reports from Wounds External 144 1. Of the Malignity of Wounds 144
2. Whether a Wound kills, or not 145 3. How Men Die of Small Wounds 146 4.
Wounds Dangerous 147 5. Wounds of Nerves and Backbone 149 6. Wounds of the
Head 150 7. Wounds of the Forehead 151 8. Wounds of the Cheeks 152 9. Wounds of
the Arms 152 10. Wounds of the Hands 154 11. Wounds of the Thighs 154 12.
Wounds of Legs and Feet 155
Chap. 52. Examples of making Reports 155 1. Of Death presumed to ensue 155 2.
A Report in a doubtful Case 156 3. In case of the loss of a Member 156 4. When
Wounds are found in diverse Parts 156 5. When a Woman is Delivered of a Dead
Child 157 6. Of a Wounded Person found Dead. 157

VIII. EMBALMING.
Chap. 53. Embalming the Egyptian Ways 158 1. Salination with Salt alone 159
2. Salination with Salt, and Juice of Cedar 159 3. Salination with Salt and
Aromaticks 159 4. Embalming with Aromaticks alone 160
Chap. 54. Embalming the European Ways 161 1. Embalming without Dissection,
called Encering 161 2. Embalming with Aromaticks 162 3. Another Way to do the
same 163
Chap. 55. Embalming the Modern Ways 164 1. A Special Way of Embalming, very
Excellent 164 2. Timaeus a Guldenklee his Way 165 3. Gabriel Clauder his Way,
at large 167

IX. MEDICAL STORE, Or, Pharmacopoeia Chirurgica.
Chap. 56. Of Simple Medicaments 171 1. Vegetables 172 2. Minerals 173 3.
Animals 176 4. What are to be chosen for the Chest 176
Chap. 57. Of Waters 178 1. Aqua Elementaria 178 2. Aqua Antifebritica 178 3.
Aqua Vitrioli 179 4. Aqua Calcis Vivae 179 5. Aqua Stomachica 180 6. Aqua
Tartarisata 180
Chap. 58. Of Tinctures 181 1. Tinctura Cordialis 181 2. Tinctura Mirabilis 181
3. Tinctura Opii 182 4. Tinctura Purgans 183 5. Tinctura Exfolians, seu
Euphorbii 184 6. Tinctura Absinthii 185 7. Tinctura Antimonii Purgans 185 8.
Tinctura Cathartica 185 9. Tinctura Martis 186 10. Tinctura Sacra, seu Amara
187 11. Tinctura, seu Elixir Proprietatis 188 12. Tinctura Antimonii crudi 188
13. Tinctura Salis Tartari 189
Chap. 59. Of Spirits 189 1. Spiritus Cordialis 189 2. Spiritus Vini Camphorat.
190 3. Spiritus Sulphuratus 191 4. Spiritus Vini Basilii 191 5. Spiritus Nitri
192 6. Spiritus Nitratus 193 7. Spiritus Salis Philosophic. 194 8. Spiritus
Corn. Cervi Compos. 195 9. Spiritus Salis Armoniaci 196 10. Spiritus Mirabilis
197 11. Spiritus Opiatus Composit. 198 12. Spiritus Sulphuris, vel Ens Primum
199 13. Spiritus Universalis 200
Chap. 60. Of Oils Chemical 201 1. Oleum Anisi 201 2. Oleum Caryophyllorum 202
3. Oleum Cerae 203 4. Oleum Juniperi 204 5. Oleum Limonum 205 6. Oleum Macis
per Express. 205 7. Oleum Philosophicum 207 8. Oleum Rosmarini Compos. 209 9.
Oleum Succini 209 10. Oleum Sulphuris 211 11. Oleum Tartari per Deliq. 212 12.
Oleum Terebinthinae 213 13. Oleum Vitrioli 214
Chap. 61. Of Balsams Distilled. 216 1. Balsamum Antimonii 216 2. Balsamum
Salis Tartari 218 3. Balsamum Camphorae 218 4. Balsamum Sulphuris Rulandi 219
5. Balsamum Sulphuris Commune 220 6. Balsamum Saturni 221 7. Balsamum Mirabile
222 8. Butyrum Antimonii 223
Chap. 62. Of Elixirs 224 1. Elixir Antepilepticum 224 2. Elixir Proprietatis
226 3. Elixir Metallorum 226 4. Elixir Cranii Humani 227 5. Elixir Pulmonum 228
6. Elixir Sanguinis Humani 228 7. Elixir Viperarum 229 8. Elixir seu Sanguis
Symphiti 229 9. Elixir seu Sanguis Satyrii and Pastinacae Albae 230
Chap. 63. Of Powers 231 1. Potestates Fuliginis Clauderi 231 2. Potestates
Seminum Anisi 232 3. Potestates Baccarum Juniperi 233 4. Potestates Lavendulae
233 5. Potestates Caryophyllorum 234 6. Potestates Limonum 235 7. Potestates
Pulegii 236 8. Potestates Rosmarini 237 9. Potestates Succini 238 10.
Potestates Terebinthinae 238 11. Potestates Virtutum 238 12. Potestates
Viperarum 239 13. Potestates Ungulae and Cornu Cervi 240
Chap. 64. Of Salts 241 1. Sal Absinthii 241 2. Sal Aluminis 242 3. Sal
Armoniacum Volatile 242 4. Sal Ciner. Clavellatorum 243 5. Sal Cor. Cervi
Succinatum 243 6. Sal Fabarum Volatile 244 7. Sal seu Lapis Infernalis 245 8.
Sal Martis 246 9. Sal Mirabile 247 10. Sal Nitratum 248 11. Sal Nitrum
Catharticum 248 12. Sal Nitrum Nitratum 249 13. Sal Nitrum Vitriolatum 249 14.
Sal Polychrestum 250 15. Sal Prunellae 250 16. Sal Saturni 251 17. Sal Succini
Volatile 253 18. Sal Tartari 253 19. Sal Vitriolatum 254 20. Ens Veneris 255
21. Vitriolum Lunae 255
Chap. 65. Of Flowers 257 1. Flores Sulphuris 257 2. Flores Bismuthi and Zinci
257 3. Mercurius Sublimatus Corrosivus 258 4. Mercurius Dulcis 259 5.
Cinnabaris Artificialis 261
Chap. 66. Of Magisteries 262 1. Arcanum Corallinum 262 2. Arcanum Jovis 263 3.
Antihecticum Poterii 264 4. Bezoar Minerale 266 5. Gryps Mercurii 267 6.
Mercurius Vitae 268 7. Mercurius Praecipitatus Albus 269 8. Mercurius
Praecipitatus Rubrus 271 9. Mercurius Praecipitatus Principis 273 10. Mercurius
Praecipitatus Luteus, vel, Turpethum Minerale 273 11. Mercurius Praecipitatus
perse 274 12. Mercurius Praecipitatus Solaris, vel, Aurum Vitae 275 13.
Mercurius Praecipitatus Lunaris 276 14. Tartarum Emeticum 277
Chap. 67. Of Syrups 279 1. Syrupus Simplex 279 2. Syrupus Volatilis 279 3.
Syrupus Limonum 279 4. Syrupus Antifebriticus 280 5. Syrupus Catharticus 281 6.
Syrupus de Meconio 281 7. Mel Rosarum 282 8. Oxymel Scilliticum 282
Chap. 68. Of Pouders 285 1. Pulvis Antimonii 285 2. Pulvis Antifebriticus 285
3. Pulvis Bezoarticus 216 4. Pulvis Cachecticus 286 5. Pulvis Catharticus 287
6. Pulvis Cornachini 288 7. Pulvis ad Diabeten 288 8. Pulvis Emeticus 289 9.
Pulvis Herculeus 290 10. Pulvis Rheumaticus 290 11. Pulvis ad Vermes 290
Chap. 69. Of Electuaties 291 1. Theriaca Chymica 291 2. Electuar.
Antipestilentiale 292 3. Electuar. Antihecticum 293 4. Electuar. Catharticum
293 5. Electuar. Catarrhale 294 6. Electuar. Stomachicum 295 7. Electuar. ad
Tussim 295
Chap. 70. Of Pills 296 1. Pilulae Catharticae 296 2. Pilulae ad Luem 296 3.
Pilulae Mirabiles 297 4. Pilulae Hystericae 297 5. Laudanum Samech, seu
Tartarisatum 298 6. Laudanum Specificum nost. 299 7. Laudanum Catharticum nost.
301
Chap. 71. Of Lotions 302 1. Aqua Ophthalmica 302 2. Aqua Styptica 302 3. Aqua
Calcis cum Mercurio 303 4. Aqua Divina Fernelii 303 5. Aqua ad Gonorrhaeam 303
6. Aqua Mercurialis 304 7. Lac Mercurii 304
Chap. 72. Of Oils External 305 1. Oleum Calefaciens 305 2. Oleum Refrigerans
305 3. Oleum Anodynum 305 4. Oleum Paralyticum 306 5. Oleum Cosmeticum 306 6.
Oleum Diacolocynthidos 306 7. Oleum ad Vermes 307
Chap. 73. Of Balsams. 308 1. Balsamum Vulnerar. nost. 308 2. Balsam. Anodynum
nost. 309 3. Balsam. Gummi Elemi nost. 309 4. Mel Saponis 310 5. Balsam. de
Sapone 310 6. Balsam. Amicum 310 7. Balsam. Arthriticum 311 8. Balsam.
Polychrestum 311 9. Balsam. Ophthalmicum 312
Chap. 74. Of Ointments 313 1. Ung. Aegyptiacum 313 2. Ung. Album 313 3. Ung.
Basilicon 314 4. Ung. Fuscum Wurtzii 314 5. Ung. Mercuriale 314 6. Ung.
Nicotianae 315 7. Ung. Populeon 316 8. Ung. Cosmeticum 317 9. Ung. ad Scabiem
317 10. Ung. Tutiae 318
Chap. 75. Of Pouders External 318 1. Pulvis Mercurii coagulati 318 2. Pulvis
Vitrioli Absters. 319 3. Pulvis pro Ulceribus 320 4. Pulvis pro Ulceribus
Venereis 321 5. Pulvis Stypticus 321 6. Pulvis ad Hypersarcosin 321 7. Pulvis
Sternutatorius 322 8. Errhina 322
Chap. 76. Of Cerecloths 323 1. Ceratum Album 323 2. Ceratum Viride 324 3.
Ceratum de Galbano 324 4. Ceratum e Gummi Elemi 325 5. Ceratum Nigrum 326 6.
Ceratum Oxylaeum 326 7. Ceratum Refrigerans 326 8. Ceratum Sperm. Ceti 327 9.
Ceratum ad Tophos 327
Chap. 77. Of Emplasters 328 1. Emplastrum Album 328 2. Emplastrum Diachylon
simplex 329 3. Emplastr. Diachylon cum Gummi 329 4. Empl. Epispasticum 330 5.
Empl. Febrifugum 331 6. Empl. de Meliloto 331 7. Emplastr. de Minio cum Sapone
332 8. Empl. Mercuriale 332 9. Empl. Polychrestum 333 10. Empl. ad Strumam 333
11. Empl. Vulnerarium 333 12. Empl. Arthriticum 334

LIBER SECUNDUS. OF DEFOEDATION.
I. DEFILEMENTS, or VICES of the HAIR.
Chap. 1. OF Cleaving of the Hair 337 Chap. 2. Falling of the Hair ibid. Chap.
3. A Fox-like Shedding of the Hair 340 Chap. 4. A Serpentlike Falling of Hair
341 Chap. 5. The Hair-Worm 344 Chap. 6. Baldness 346 Chap. 7. Hoariness 348
Chap. 8. Elf-Locks, or Matted Hair 351 Chap. 9. Lousiness, or Lousy-Evil 356
Chap. 10. Scurff and Dandriff 359 Chap. 11. A Scall'd Head 360
II. DEFILEMENTS, or VICES of the SKIN.
Chap. 12. Of Sun-burning 363 Chap. 13. Freckles 365 Chap. 14. Lentils, or
large fixed Freckles 366 Chap. 15. Mother-Spots 369 Chap. 16. Red-Gum 370 Chap.
17. Liver-Spots 371
III. DEFILEMENTS, or ERUPTIONS of the SKIN.
Chap. 18. Red Pimpels of the Face 374 Chap. 19. Morphew 377 Chap. 20. Profound
Morphew, or, the Spotted Leprosy 379 Chap. 21. The Black Scab 381 Chap. 22.
Pimples 382 Chap. 23. Galling 384 Chap. 24. The Shingles 386 Chap. 25. Wildfire
388 Psydracia, or Pustules of the Head ibid.

Chap. 26. Worms in the Skin 389
IV. DEFILEMENTS, or VICES of SKIN and FLESH.
Chap. 27. Of Scabbiness 393 Chap. 28. The Chin-Scab 400 Chap. 29. The Ringworm
402 Chap. 30. The Tettar 404 Chap. 31. Worms in the Feet 405 Chap. 32. Warts
408 1. Verruca, Myrmecia 408 2. Thymon ibid. 3. Acrochordon ibid.
Chap. 33. Corns 410 A Callus 412 Cornua, or Horns ibid.

V. Of DEFILFMENTS UNIVERSAL.
Chap. 34. Of the Itch 414 Chap. 35. The Leprosy 417 Chap. 36. Sudamina, or
Measles 420 Chap. 37. The French Pox 421 1. Salivation by Internals 431 2.
Salivation by Unction ibid. 3. Salivation by Fumigation 432
Chap. 38. A Clap, or Running of the Reins 441 Chap. 39. Evil Smell of the Body
445
VI. DEFILEMENTS, or VICES of the EYES.
Chap. 40. Blisters of the Eyes 452 Chap. 41. Swelling in the Corner of the Eye
453 Chap. 42. A Running Sore in the Eye 454
VII. DEFILEMENTS, or VICES of TEETH and GUMS.
Chap. 43. Discolored, filthy, and stinking Teeth 456 Chap. 44. Corrosion and
Rottenness of the Teeth 458 Chap. 45. Looseness of the Teeth 459
VIII. VICES of HANDS, and NAILS.
Chap. 46. Clefts of the Hands 462 Chap. 47. Rough and deformed Nails 463 Chap.
48. Discolored Nails 465 Chap. 49. Cleaving and Falling of the Nails 466 Chap.
50. A Whitloe 467
LIBER TERTIUS. OF TUMORS.
I. TUMORS arising from BLOOD.
Chap. 1. OF Tumors in general 471 Chap. 2. Corpulency 478 An Atrophia 482

Chap. 3. An Abscess, or an Apostem 486 Chap. 4. A Sinus in Tumors 492 Chap. 5.
An Inflammation 498 Chap. 6. A Bubo 520 Chap. 7. Of a Contusion 524 Chap. 8. A
Carbuncle 530 Chap. 9. A Tumor behind the Ear 537 Chap. 10. Phyma, a Tumor of
the Glandules 539 Phyma juxta Anum 542 Phygethlon, a Tumor under the Jaws 544
Chap. 11. Gangrene and Sphacelus 545 1. A Gangrene ibid. 2. A Sphacelus 557
Chap. 12. A Felon 561 Chap. 13. A Push, or Bile 565 Chap. 14. Chilblains or
Kibes 568 Chap. 15. An Aneurism 570 Chap. 16. A Varix 576
II. TUMORS arising from CHOLER.
Chap. 17. Of an Erysipelas 582 Chap. 18. Herpes Miliaris, or Vlcerrous
Pustules 589 Chap. 19. Herpes Exedens, or Eating-Pustules 592 Chap. 20. The
Smallpox 595 The Confluent kind 598


III. TUMORS arising from PHLEGM.
Chap. 21. Of an Oedema 610 Chap. 22. The Cystick Tumor 616 Atheroma ibid.
Meliceris ibid. Steatoma ibid. Talpa 617 Testudo, Topinaria 618 Natta 618, 621
Chap. 23. A Wen 622 Chap. 24. Gums, Nodes, Tophs 627 The Cure of Gumms 629 The
Cures of Nodes 630 The Cure of Tophs 630
Chap. 25. Of a Fungus, or Spongy Flesh 633 1. A True Fungus ibid. 2. Pterygium
of the Eye 635 3. Condyloma, Ficus, Cristae, Thymi 636
Chap. 26. Bronchocele, or a Tumor of the Throat 637, 639 A Ranula 638, 641
Tonsillae 638, 642 Cutting off the Uvula 644
Chap. 27. The King's Evil ibid.
IV. TUMORS arising from WIND.
Chap. 28. Of the Windy Tumor 656 Chap. 29. A Windy Rupture 660 A Windy Rupture
of the Navel ibid.


V. TUMORS arising from WATER.
Chap. 30. Of a Watery Rupture 663 1. Hydrocele ibid. 2. Hydromphalus 666
Chap. 31. A Watery Tumor 667 Chap. 32. A Dropsy 670 1. Sarcites, or Anasarca
670 2. Ascites, or Dropsy of the Belly 673 3. A Tympanites 675 4. An Hydrocele
Derivative 678
Chap. 33. A Dropsy of the Head ibid.
VI. TUMORS arising from MELANCHOLY.
Chap. 34. Of a Polypus in the Nose 681 A Sarcoma, or Noli me tangere 683

Chap. 35. A Scirrhus 687 Chap. 36. A Cancer 693 1. A Cancer not Vlcerated ib.
2. A Cancer Vlcerated 700
Chap. 37. A Cancer of a Bone 706 Chap. 38. An Elephantiasis 709 Chap. 39. The
Elephantiasis of a Part 715
VII. TVMORS, ex PARTIUM Decidentia.
Chap. 40. Of Ruptures 717 1. Hernia Intestinalis 718 2. Hernia Inguinalis 722
3. Hernia Omentalis 723 4. Hernia Humoralis 724 5. Hernia Seminalis 725 6.
Hernia Carnosa 726 7. Hernia Umbilicalis 728

LIBER QUARTUS. OF WOUNDS.
Chap. 1. OF wounds in general 732 1. Wounds Simplex 743 2. Wounds Complex 749
Chap. 2. Of External Vulneraries 753 1. Pure Vulneraries 754 2. Digestives, or
Maturatives 755 3. Sarcoricks, or Incarnatives 756 4. Epuloticks, or
Cicatrizers 758
Chap. 3. Internal Vulneraries, or Wound-Drinks 759 1. Simples for Wound-Drinks
763 2. Examples of Wound-Drinks compounded 764
Chap. 4. Stopping an Hemorrhage in Wounds 766 1. By Dossels or Pledgets 770 2.
By application of Crepitus Lupi 771 3. By Deligation of the Vessels 771 4. By
application of Sarcoticks ib. 5. By application of Astringents and Stypticks
772 6. By application of Specificks 773 7. By applying Revulsives, etc 8. By
Cutting through the Vessels 774 9. By applying Escharoticks ib. 10. By exhibition
of Internals 775
Chap. 5. Extraneous things in Wounds 777 1. Drawing them out by Medicines 779
2. Drawing them out with Instruments 780
Chap. 6. Stitching Wounds 783 I. Sutura, Stiching with the Needle. 1.
Instruments of Stitching 785 2. Sutura Retentiva ibid. 3. Sutura Incarnativa
ibid. 4. Sutura Abdominis, Gastroraphia ibid. 5. Sutura Conservatrix ibid. 6.
Observations on Stitching 786
II. Laqueatio, Dry-stitching. 1. Instruments of Dry-stitching 787 2. The
Sticking Emplaster, twelve Forms of it 788 3. The Way and Manner of performing
it 789

Chap. 7. Of the Binding-up Wounds 790 I. The Materials for Binding, etc. ibid.
1. The Covering-Emplaster ibid. 2. Splenia, folded Cloths, or Bolsters ibid. 3.
Ferulae, Splinters 791 4. Swathing-Bands, or Rowlers ibid. 5. The Matter of
Rowlers 792
II. The Kinds and Ways of Rowing or Binding-up ibid. 1. Fascia Incarnativa
ibid. 2. Fascia Retentiva 793 3. Fascia Expulsiva ibid. 4. Fascia Aequans ibid.
4. The Way and Manner of Binding-up, or Rolling ibid.

Chap. 8. A Flux of Humors in Wounds 795 Chap. 9. The Symptoms of Wounds 798 1.
An Hemorrhage 799 2. Vehement Pain 799 Anodyns 800 Narcoticks ibid.
3. An Inflammation 801 4. An Erysipelas ibid. 5. Indigestion of Humors 802 6.
Fevers from Humors disturbed 802 7. Fevers, from generating Pus 803 8. Fevers,
from Inflammation ib. 9. Fevers, from Putridness of Humors 804 10. Fevers, from
Ill-preparedness of Humors 805 11. Fainting and Swooning 806 12. Convulsions
general 807 13. Convulsions particular 808 14. Delirium, or Dotage 111 15. A
Palsy 812 16. Gangren and Sphacelus 814 17. Removing of Proud Flesh 815
Chap. 10. Curing by the Second Intention 816 Chap. 11. Wounds of Arteries and
Veins 820 Chap. 12. Wounds of Nerves and Tendons 823 1. Cutting a Nerve or
Tendon 827 2. Pricking a Nerve, or Tendon 829 3. Contusion of a Nerve, etc. 833
Chap. 13. Wounds of the Ligaments 834 Chap. 14. Wounds of the Limbs 835 Chap.
15. Wounds of the Joints 841 Chap. 16. Wounds with Contusion 846 Chap. 17.
Wounds, by the Bitings of Venomous Beasts 848 1. The Bitings of Beasts, and
Human-kind 849 2. Bitings of Mad-Dogs 851 3. Bitings of Serpents 855 4. Bitings
of the Tarantula 865 5. The Stinging of Scorpions, Hornets, Wasps, Bees 867
Chap. 18. Wounds made with Poisoned Weapons 870 Chap. 19. Wounds made by
Gunshot in general 874 1. Extracting the Bullet 879 2. Proper Digestives 881 3.
Abstersives or Cleansers 884 4. Incarnatives 886 5. Wounds, with Fracture of
the Bone ibid. 6. Dressing Gunshot-Wounds 887
Chap. 20. Accidents or Symptoms in Gunshot-Wounds 890 1. Vehement Pain ibid.
2. Inflammation ibid. 3. Grangrene 891 4. An Hemorrhage 892 5. A Fever 892 6. A
Delirium 893 7. Fainting and Swooning 893 8. Convulsions 893 9. A Palsy 894
10. A Sinuous Ulcer 894
Chap. 21. Gunshot-Wounds in the Thorax 896 Chap. 22. Of Gunshot-Wounds in the
Abdomen or Belly 898 1. Wounds of the Stomach and Guts 901 2. Wounds of the
Reins or Kidneys 901 3. Wounds of Liver and Spleen 902 4. Wounds of the Womb 902
Chap. 23. Gunshot-Wounds in the Limbs, and Joints 903 1. The Cure of
Gunshot-Wounds in the Limbs 904 2. The Cure of Gunshot-Wounds in the Joints 910
Chap. 24. Burnings and Scaldings 911 1. Burnings and Scaldings in general 913
2. Light or gentle Burnings 915 3. Burning with Gunpowder 916 4. Burning by
Lightning 918 5. Burnings of the Second Degree 919 6. Burnings of the Third and
Fourth Degrees 920 7. Burnings of the Eyes, Face, etc. 921 8. Burnings in the
Joints 921 9. Burnings in the Groin 922 10. The preventing of ugly Scars 923
Chap. 25. Wounds of the Head, without the Scull 924 1. Wounds of the Head in
general 925 2. Binding up Wounds of the Head 929 3. A Contusion of the Head 930
4. A Wound of the Head 933 5. A Wound with Contusion 935
Chap. 26. Wounds of the Temporal Muscles 237 Chap. 27. Wounds of the Membranes
of the Brain 939 1. The Wounds of the Dura Matter 940 2. The Symptoms of those
Wounds 942 3. Wounds of the Pia Matter 943
Chap. 28. Wounds of the Brain 644 1. The Cure of Wounds of the Brain 947 2.
The Cure of the Symptoms 949 1. Apostemation of the Brain 949 2. Concussion of
the Brain 949 3. Convulsions 950 4. A Fungus of the Brain 950 5. A Flatulent
Tumor of the Brain 951 6. Gangrene and Sphacelus 951

Chap. 29. Wounds of the Face 951 Chap. 30. Wounds of the Eyes 953 1. Wounds of
the Eyebrows 953 2. Wounds of the Eyelids 955 3. Wounds of the Eye it self 956
Chap. 31. Wounds of the Ears 959 Chap. 32. Wounds of the Nose 960 Chap. 33.
Wounds of the Mouth 961 1. Wounds of the Lips 961 2. Wounds of the Jaws, or
Gums 962 3. Wounds of the Tongue 963
Chap. 34. Wounds of the Neck 964 1. Wounds of the Cutis and Membrana Carnosa
965 2. Wounds of the Vertebrae of the Neck 965
Chap. 35. Wounds of the Windpipe and Gullet 967 1. Wounds of the Windpipe
969 2. Wounds of the Oesophagus or Swallow 669
Chap. 36. Wounds of the Vessels of the Neck 970 1. Wounds of the Iugalar
Veiny, and Soporal Arteries 970 2. Wounds of the Recurrent Nerves 972
Chap. 37. Wounds of the Breast and Heart 973 Chap. 38. Wounds of the Back, and
Spinal Marrow 978 Chap. 39. Wounds of the Lungs 979 Chap. 40. Wounds of the
Liver and Spleen 982 1. Of the Liver 982 2. Of the Spleen 985
Chap. 41. Wounds of the Stomach 986 1. Wounds of the Mouth of the Stomach 986
2. Wounds of the Ventricle, or Bottom of the Stomach 287
Chap. 42. Wounds of the Belly 989 1. Reduction of the Viscera 990 2. Stitching
up the Wound 991 3. Application of Topics 992 4. Exhibition of Internals 992
5. Wounds made by a Puncture 993
Chap. 43. Wounds of the Guts 994 Chap. 44. Wounds of the Reins 996 Chap. 45.
Wounds of the Bladder 998 Chap. 46. Wounds of the Womb 999 Chap. 47. Wounds of
the Yard 1001 Chap. 48. Wounds of the Fingers and Toes 1002
LIBER QUINTUS. OF ULCERS.
Chap. 1. OF Ulcers in General 1005 Chap. 2. Medicaments appropriated to Ulcers
1018 1. Repercussives 1019 2. Helminthicks, Wormkillers 1020 3. Digestives or
suppuratives 1021 4. Abstersives or Mundifiers 1022 5. Sarcoticks or
Incarnatives 1023 6. Epuloticks or Cicatrizers 1025
Chap. 3. Simple Ulcers 1027 Chap. 4. Ulcers with Distemper 1033 1. With a hot
Distemper 1034 2. With a cold Distemper 1035 3. With a moist Distemper 1036 4.
With a dry Distemper 1036
5. An Ulcer with Pain 1038 6. Ulcers with Fluxion 1040 7. An Ulcer Sordid and
Putrid 1044 1. The Cure of a Sordid Ulcer 1045 2. The Cure of a Putrid Ulcer
1046
Chap. 8. An Ulcer with Tumor 1047 1. With a Phlegmon 1047 2. With an
Erysipelas 1048 3. With an Oedema 1048 4. With a Cancerous Tumor 1048
Chap. 9. An Ulcer with proud Flesh 1049 Chap. 10. An Ulcer Callous 1053 Chap.
11. An Ulcer discolored 1055 Chap. 12. An Ulcer Cavernous or hollow 1056 1. The
Cure without laying open 1057 2. Dressing these Ulcers. 1060 3. The Cure by
opening the Sinus 1062
Chap. 13. An Ulcer with Worms 1064 Chap. 14. An Ulcer Varicous 1066 Chap. 15.
An Ulcer Carious 1068 1. Scaling the Bone by Medicines 1072 2. Scaling by
Scraping, etc. 1074 3. Scaling by Cautery 1074 4. Dressing and Healing the
Ulcer 1076
Chap. 16. An Ulcer Cacoethick 1077 Chap. 17. An Ulcer Phagedenick 1080 Chap.
18. An Ulcer Cancerous 1084 1. Nomae, or Eating Ulcers 1085 2. Lupus the Wolf
1086 3. Noli me tangere 1087
Chap. 19. An Ulcer by Burning or Scalding 1088 Chap. 20. An Ulcer Fistulous,
or of a Fistula 1090 1. The True or Absolute Cure 1093 2. Removing the Callus
1097 3. The Palliative Cure 1103
Chap. 21. An Ulcer Gangrenous 1104 1. The Cure of an Ulcer Gangrened 1105 2.
The Cure when Sphacelated 1107
Chap. 22. An Ulcer of the Head 1108 1. The Dry Scald Head 1108 2. The Moist
Scald with a thin Humor 1110 3. The Moist Scald with a thick Humor 1111 4. An
Ulcer from Apostemation, Contusion, etc. 1113
Chap. 23. An Ulcer of the Eye 1114 1. Ulcers affecting the Adnata 1115 2.
Ulcers of the Cornea superficial 1115 3. Ulcers of the Cornea deep 1116 4.
Ulcers Depascent or Eating 1117 5. Ulcers Cancerous 1118 6. Ulcers from the
Smallpox 1119 7. Ulcers from the French Pox 1119 8. Ulcers from a Pestilential
Anthrax 1119
Chap. 24. A Fistula of the Eye 1120 Chap. 25. An Ulcer of the Nose 1126 Chap.
26. An Ulcer of the Ear 1131 Chap. 27. An Ulcer of the Mouth 1133 1. Fissurae
Labiorum 1133 2. Ulcers of the Lips, etc. 1134 3. Ulcers of the Roof 1135 4.
Ulcers of the Tongue 1135
Chap. 28. An Ulcer of the Throat 1136 1. An Ulcer of the Uvula 1136 2. An
Ulcer of the Almonds 1137 3. An Ulcer of the Throat below the Uvula and Almonds
1137
Chap. 29. An Ulcer of the Neck 1138 Chap. 30. An Ulcer of the Stomach 1140
Chap. 31. A Fistula of the Breast 1143 1. The Cure of a Fistula, etc. 1144 2. Of
an Ulcer of the Lungs 1149
Chap. 32. An Ulcer in the Back and Loins 1154 Chap. 33. An Ulcer of the Womb,
etc. 1155 1. Of the Womb Ulcer 1155 2. Of an Ulcer in the Neck of the Womb 1150
3. The Method of Curing Ulcers of the Womb, and its Neck 1157
Chap. 34. An Ulcer of the Bladder 1159 Chap. 35. An Ulcer in the Groin 1161 1.
An Ulcer not Fistulous 1161 2. A Fistula in the Groin 1162
Chap. 36. An Ulcer of the Yard 1164 1. An Ulcer External 1164 2. An Ulcer
Internal with Caruncles 1166
Chap. 37. A Fistula in the Anus 1167 1. The Cure by Deligation 1169 2. By
Incision 1170 3. Application of Topics 1170 4. The Palliative Cure 1172
Chap. 38. An Ulcer and Fistula in the Joints. 1173 1. An Ulcer in the Joints
1173 2. A Fistula in the Joints 1174
Chap. 39. An Ulcer in Hands or Arms 1176 Chap. 40. An Ulcer of Thighs, Legs,
Feet 1178 Chap. 41. Vlcerated Piles or Hemorrhoids 1179 1. The Cure of Blind
Hemorrhoids 1182 2. The Cure of Bleeding Hemorrhoids 1184 3. The Cure of
Vlcerated Hemorrhoids, Ficus, etc. 1185

LIBER SEXTUS. OF FRACTURES.
Chap. 1. OF Fractures in General 1188 Chap. 2. Instruments for Reduction 1194
1. The Trepan, or Modiolus 1195 2. Hippocrates his Ambi 1196 3. Galen his
Glossocomon 1196 4. The Reductive Ladder 1197 5. Vitruvius his Pulley 1197 6.
Hippocrates his Table 1198
Chap. 3. Accidents or Symptoms of Fractures 1199 1. Vehement Pain 1199 2. An
Inflammation 1200 3. A Gangrene 1200 4. Vehement Itching 1201 5. Excoriation
1201
Chap. 4. A Simple Fracture 1202 1. Extension of the Part 1203 2. Coaptation or
Conformation 1204 3. Binding up the Fracture 1205 4. Placing and Posture of the
Part 1209
Chap. 5. A Fracture with a Wound 1213 Chap. 6. A Fracture with a Wound, the
Bone not bare 1217 Chap. 7. A Fracture with a Wound, the Bone made bare 1220
Chap. 8. A Fracture with a Wound, the Bone sticking out 1222 Chap. 9. A
Fracture distorted or ill-set 1223 Chap. 10. A Fracture with a Vicious Callus
1225 Chap. 11. A Fracture with Atrophia 1228 Chap. 12. A Fracture of the Skull
1229 1. Fractures of the Skull in Children 1233 2. Fractures of the Skull in
grown Persons 1234
Chap. 13. A Fissure of the Skull 1244 1. A Fissure in the Part wounded 1244 2.
A Contrafissure of the Skull 1246
Chap. 14. A Contusion or Depression of the Skull 1249 Chap. 15. An Incision
and Puncture of the Skull 1252 1. An Incision of the Skull 1252 2. A Puncture
of the Skull 1255 3. An Incision or Puncture under the Temperal Muscle 1256
Chap. 16. A Fracture of the Nose-bone 1257 Chap. 17. A Fracture of the
Jaw Bone 1259 Chap. 18. A Fracture of the Collar-bone 1261 Chap. 19. A Fracture
of the Shoulder Blade 1263 Chap. 20. A Fracture of the Arm 1264 Chap. 21. A
Fracture of the Elbow 1267 Chap. 22. A Fracture of the Wrist-bones 1268 Chap.
23. A Fracture of the Hand-bones 1269 Chap. 24. A Fracture of the Bones of the
Fingers 1270 Chap. 25. A Fracture of the Sternon 1271 Chap. 26. A Fracture of
the Ribs 1272 Chap. 27. A Fracture of the Backbone 1275 Chap. 28. A Fracture
of the Os Sacrum 1276 Chap. 29. A Fracture of the Rump-bone 1277 Chap. 30. A
Fracture of the Hip-bone 1278 Chap. 31. A Fracture of the Thigh Bone 1280 Chap.
32. A Fracture of the Knee-pan 1283 Chap. 33. A Fracture of the Leg 1285 Chap.
34. A Fracture of the Foot 1288
LIBER SERTIMUS. OF DISLOCATIONS.
Chap. 1. OF Dislocations in General 1291 Chap. 2. A Simple Dislocation 1299
Chap. 3. A Dislocation with Pain and Inflammation 1301 Chap. 4. A Dislocation
with a Wound 1302 Chap. 5. A Dislocation with Fracture 1304 Chap. 6. A
Dislocation with Convulsions 1305 Chap. 7. A Dislocation with a Callus, or an
Old Location 1306 Chap. 8. A Dislocation Reduced, falling out again 1308 Chap.
9. A Dislocation of the Nose-bone 1309 Chap. 10. A Dislocation of the Jaw Bone
1310 Chap. 11. A Dislocation of the Collar-bone 1313 Chap. 12. A Dislocation of
the Neck-bones 1315 Chap. 13. A Dislocation of the Back-bones 1317 Chap. 14. A
Bunched or Crooked Back 1319 Chap. 15. A Dislocation of the Sternon 1321 Chap.
16. A Dislocation of the Ribs 1322 Chap. 17. A Dislocation of the Os Sacrum and
Rump-bones 1324 Chap. 18. A Dislocation of the Shoulder Bone 1325 Chap. 19. A
Dislocation of the Elbow-bones 1331 Chap. 20. A Dislocation of the Wrist and
Hand Bones 1335 Chap. 21. A Dislocation of the Fingers 1336 Chap. 22. A
Dislocation of the Thigh Bone 1338 Chap. 23. A Dislocation of the Knee-pan 1338
Chap. 24. A Dislocation of the Bones of the Leg 1344 Chap. 25. The Divulsion of
the Bones of the Leg 1346 Chap. 26. A Dislocation of the Ankle 1347 Chap. 27. A
Dislocation of the Heel-bone 1349 Chap. 28. A Dislocation of the Bones of the
Foot 1350
FINIS.
ARS ANATOMICA. OR, THE ANATOMY OF Humane Bodies.

In Nine Books.

Containing, a Description I. Of Parts more Simple; as Skin, Flesh, Membranes,
Fibers, Ligaments, Cartilages, Tendons, Fat. II. Of Parts less Simple; as
Arteries, Veins, Nerves. III. Of the Muscles of the whole Body. IV. Of the
Bones, or Skeleton entire. V. Of Parts Improper; as Hair, Nails, Juices, Blood.
VI. Of the Upper Ventricle, or Head. VII. Of the Middle Ventricle, or Breast.
VIII. Of the Lower Ventricle, or Belly. IX. Of the Limbs, or Extreme Parts.


REPRESENTING To the Mind or Apprehension, in a Logical Scheme, (as it were) a
true and complete Idea of the whole Humane Frame.

EXTRACTED Out of the Writings of the most Learned and Accurate Anatomists,
both Ancient and Modern; and Reformed according to all our more late
Discoveries.

ILLUSTRATED and ADORNED With XLVIII. Tables of Copper Sculpts, and their
several Explications.

The most complete thing of this kind, yet published in the English Tongue.

By WILLIAM SALMON, M. D. Living at the Great House by Black-Friers-Stairs,
LONDON.

The Book is now in the Press, and will be finished with all the speed that may
be.

depiction of various surgical instruments, including trepan saw, trephine,
crows-bill forceps, and parrots-bill forceps Tab. I.


depiction of various surgical instruments, including the trepan of Hildanus,
obstetric hooks, scalprum (raspatory), razor knife, and cranes-bill forceps
Tab. II.


depiction of various surgical instruments, including seton forceps, seton
needles, seton cautery, dismembering pincers, gouge or hollow chisel,
dismembering chisel, lapidillum, mallet or hammer, and small head saw Tab. III.


depiction of various surgical instruments, including catheter, goose-bill
spatula, director, bladder hook, goose-bill forceps, file, myrtle-leaf
penknife, cataract needle, and seton forceps Tab. IV.


depiction of various surgical instruments, including stitching quill, spatula
or speculum linguae, razor knife, head saw, meningophylax or membrane
preserver, levatory (elevator), small probe, crows-bill forceps, scissors, and
ranula cautery Tab. V.


depiction of various surgical instruments, including cauteries, wound needles,
incision knife, uvula spoon, goose-bill forceps, crooked forceps, levatory
(elevator), spoon catheter, wound hook, and cranes-bill forceps Tab. VI.


depiction of various surgical instruments, including head saw, speculum
matricis, pliers, dilatator, lenticular, trephine, syringotome, and decussorium
Tab. VII.


depiction of various surgical instruments, including cauteries, dismembering
chisels, dismembering saw, dismembering knife, hare-lip needle, speculum any,
and speculum oris Tab. VIII.


depiction of various surgical instruments, including yard syringe, womb
syringe, clyster syringe, fistula syringe, dental pincers and forceps, dental
scraper, dental levatory (elevator), and dental polychon (pelican) Tab. IX.


depiction of various surgical apparatus, including the pulley of Vitruvius and
the table of Hippocrates (Hippocratic bench) or scamnum Tab. X.


depiction of various surgical apparatus, including the ambi of Hippocrates,
the glossocomium of Galen, reductive ladder, elbow compress, knee compress, and
wrist compress Tab. XI.


depiction of various surgical and bandaging techniques for arm and leg wounds
Tab. XII.



