The True ACCOUNT of the Behavior and Confessions OF THE Condemned Criminals
IN NEWGATE, VIZ. Samuel Presby, Richard Hooker, Edward Linsy, Robert Nichols,
Thomas Crompton, Mary Fisher, Thomas Gardner, Richard Jones, Katharine Brown,
Matthew Morgan, Mary Collwood, Ann Davis. OF WHICH Samuel Presby, Richard
Hooker, Thomas Crompton, were Executed at Tyburn, and Edward Linsy on
Tower Hill. AS ALSO Henry Cornish (who was Executed in Cheapside) and Elizabeth
Gaunt, was likewise Executed October 23d. 1685. she being Burnt for
HIGH TREASON, AT TYBURN.
AT the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, and Gaol Delivery of Newgate, held for
the City of London, and County of Middlesex, at Justice-Hall in the Old Bailey,
the 14, 15, and 16 Days of October, 1685. These Persons following reeieved
Sentence of Death, viz. Samuel Presby, Richard Hooker, Edward Linsy, Robert
Nichols, Thomas Crompton, Mary Fisher, Thomas Gardner, Richard Jones, Katharine
Brown, Matthew Morgan, Mary Collwood, Ann Davis.

The Ordinary earnestly Admonished them on the Lords day, that they would
redeem their misspent Time, in a serious consideration, for what special Sins
the Lord had withdrawn his preventing Grace; which he never does, till Sinners
have quenched the motions and excitations of his Holy Spirit, enviting them by
his Long Suffering unto Repentance.

Before the Ordinary began to read Prayers, he advised all the Prisoners, as
his usual manner is, to observe most Solemnly the the Lords Holy Day, and to
return unto him, as the only rest of their Souls, by seeking true Satisfaction
and Delight in him, and his Service, from whom they wandered all the Week past,
by the Vanity of their Hearts and Conversations: And that the Condemned
Criminals in a special manner would be very Intentive on the public Prayers of
the Church, and to the Sermons which should be Preached to them, which they
promised to do.

In the Forenoon the Ordinary Preached on the 21 Ver. of the fifth Chap. of St.
Paul's Epistle to the Romans, viz. As Sin has reigned unto Death, so has
Righteousness unto Life, by Jesus Christ our Lord. From which, he informed them
of the deplorable Estate of all Men, being virtually concerned in the Apostasy
of the first Adam, whose Sin was complicated with many Aggravations; and that
by the single Offense of this first Man, being under the Covenant of Works, as
requiring of him personal perfect Obedience, being Created after the Image of
God, in perfect Righteousness, the least declination from his Obedience did
involve most justly himself, and all his Natural Posterity, as being their
common Representative and Trustee for them, in the same State of Sin and
Misery. Thus his Sin reigned unto Death, in all such who sin after the
similitude of his Transgression: Inasmuch, that beside the vicious Inclination
of their Nature, they make his Sin become their Own, by a voluntary increasing
those sinful Dispositions inherent in themselves. In like manner, as a Vicious
Offspring, do strengthen and augment an hereditary Disease, by their proper
and voluntary Intemperance and debauched Excesses.

Therefore it is very unreasonable and absurd to cast the blame of our personal
Provocations upon any fatal Destiny in God or on the imputation of Adams first
Sin to his Posterity, considering that every Man entitles himself to the guilt
of Adams Sin, and adopts it voluntarily to become his own, by treading in the
same steps of Disobedience.

Here was declared what personal Sins became most deadly, as being least
capable of Gods Mercy in Pardoning of them; then what are the poenal horrid
consequences of such Sins, they being more aggravated in their own Nature. Also
it was declared what are the characters by which we may discover, which is that
chief beloved Sin, as reigning in us, and will certainly prevail over us unto
Death Eternal, if not timely and sincerely Repented. Hereupon was added many
Arguments to mortify such Sins chiefly, lest they ^eig^ unto Death. Also the
difference betwixt true and counterfeit mortification of Lus^s; with directions
how to subdue the Law of Sin, that it may not prevail over us.

Then the Ordinary proceeded to show the misery of all such in whom Sin reigns,
in the Love and Indulgence of it; and that it is impossible to be set free from
the Law of Sin and Death, but only by the infinite Righteousness of Christ's
Active and Passive Obedience, imputed to Sinners, by Gods free Grace upon
timely Repentance, and a sincere Faith, deriving strength from the influences
of Christ's Spirit, for the renovation of their Hearts, and universal Obedience
to Gods Commandments: inasmuch as true justifying Faith accepts of Christ in
all his Offices, in his Kingly Righteousness to rule us by his Laws and Spirit,
as well as to save us by his Priestly Righteousness. This is the only true
complete method of Salvation, because God has sent his Son to bless us. How?
By turning us from the love and dominion of all our Iniquities, equally, as in
turning them from us in the damning guilt of them.

Thus God justifies none in an ungodly state. We must first be Regenerated;
which contains Faith, Repentance, and new Obedience, before we can obtain Gods
actual Pardon, in as much as these are the Terms and Qualifications of the
Covenant of Grace, to make us capable of the Benefits purchased by Christ for
us, so that his Kingly as well as Priestly Righteousness must reign in our
Sanctification, and obedience to his Laws, that we may inherit Eternal Life. As
for that Objection That God Justifies the Ungodly it cannot be meant of such
whom he finds in an Ungodly State, but only of Regenerate Persons, who are
called Ungodly in a less degree, as having still the remainders of Defilement
in them, which makes even them unlike to God, as having ^ot in this Life
perfect Holiness, and therefore Justification is not by our best inherent
Righteousness, which needs constant daily extending of Christ's Righteousness to
cover the s^ots of our holiest Services.

Here the Ordinary excited them to a regular Genuine Faith and Repentance, that
so, as the Malignity and Infection of Adams Sin, confirmed by their customary
Excesses, had reigned unto Death; so the Benign efficacy of Christ's
Righteousness might reign more triumphantly in the infinite value and virtue of
it; as for our Justification, so to produce in us by the Almighty Operations of
his holy Spirit, not only a state of Sanctification, but with it all degrees of
Spiritual Life, in progressive Holiness, till it be consummated in Eternal
Glory.

Here those degrees of spiritual Life were enumerated, and how Christ's
Righteousness reigns in those in a transcendent Efficacy beyond all the degrees
of spiritual Death contracted by the Malignity and Defilement of the first
Adam's Sin, of ou^ personal voluntary Pro^ocations.

After this the Ordinary made a *s;hort Speech to the Condemned Malefactors,
and dismissed them with Prayer and the usual Benediction of the Church Liturgy.
In the Afternoon he read the solemn appointed Offices, and another Sermon was
preached to them on these Words, To Day if you will hear his Voice, harden not
your Hearts. Which the Person who preached treated of very closely and
pathetically: So that I hope it made a good Impression on them.

Now I proceed to give an account of what fitness they were in for their
approaching Death.

Katharine Brown, of the Parish of Twitnam, Indicted October the 4th. for that
being Delivered of a Bastard Child, on the same Day she carried the Child to a
Brook, and put it there in, Choking and Drowning it with Water. It was proved
the Prisoner confessed the Child was hers, and that she was Delivered thereof
in a Meadow, but that it was Born Dead: but being no ways Credited, she was
brought in Guilty.

In this sad Instance, which is too frequent, its observable how Satan prevails
upon Sinners by degrees: first he Tempts them to Immodesty, and Laciviousness
in Conversation, by not setting a Watch over their Hearts, to prevent inward
Lusting in the first Motions and Ebullitions of it; then by unwary Converse
with profane Persons, Tempts them from Chambering and Wantonness, to comply
with flagitious desires of gratifying sensual brutish Commixtures; to cover and
conceal the turpitude and shame of which, he draws them to Murder their
Illegitimate Offspring; which is a most unnatural Crime, in as much as the
very Sea Monsters Suckle and Preserve their Young. But common Reason depraved,
grows impatient of any restraint from the dictates of Nature, and so exposes to
the most abominable Crimes.

Murder, especially that of the Mothers Murdering of her own Child, is a most
horrid Sin, which cries loud to Gods Justice for the Discovery and Punishment
of it. The Ordinary assured her, that without a sincere extraordinary
Repentance, the guilt and defilement of so abominable a Crime could not be
expiated: for she ought to have considered that she conceived the Child in a
base way, and therefore stood engaged to have declared her Remorse in bringing
it to Christ's Holy Baptism, and to have acknowledged publicly her great
scandalous Sin. Yet she was so averse from this Ingenuity, that to cover her
vile Offense, she offered not her Child to Baptism, which is the Laver of
Regeneration, that so it might be dedicated to the holy Trinity, but had chosen
rather to devote her self Soul and Body to eternal Destruction, by embrewing
her Hands in the Blood of her Innocent Babe. She was told how difficult it was
to Repent of such a Murder; when as no Sin is more hardening of the Heart, it
being so directly against humane Nature, and renders the Murderer more stupid
than any Beast.

That she was not to sink in Desparation, yet so to aggravate her Crime, as
upon sincere Repentance, to look up to a Crucified Jesus, who prayed for those
who shed his most sacred Blood; which if she beg fervently of God, to apply it
by an unfeigned Faith, the infinite Merits of it will not only atone Divine
Vengeance, but expiate the deep defilement of so horrid a Crime.

She was not able to reply any thing more to me, than that she was truly sorry
for so great a Sin, and desired me to Pray for her, that God would soften her
obdurate Heart, and work in her a through Repentance, that she may not Die in her
Sin, tho she might suffer a public shameful Death for it.

She was ignorant in Soul concernments, and could not Read, therefore could
give the less account of the change of her Heart.

Mary Fisher, Mary Collwood, and Ann Davis, were not free to Discourse with the
Ordinary, concerning their present Repentance, in order to their Everlasting
Happiness, because upon pleading they were Quick with Child, and the Jury of
Women bringing in their Verdict it was Truth, they three Criminals were ordered
to be kept in Goal till they shall be delivered in Childbed.

The Ordinary told them that he had observed some Criminals in the same
circumstances with them, had grown more Obdurate by so long a Respit from
Death, perverting the Equity and Clemency of the Law, that the Innocent Child
shall not Perish with the guilty Mother, into an occasion of greater Security
and Impenitency. He wished that their Reprieve might not produce such ill
Effects in them, but rather, that they would consider whether their Children
were Legitimate: if not, this was but a very Sinful Artifice to prevent a
sudden Execution, hoping thereby to get a Transportation. But if they did not
Redeem precious Time, and repent sincerely of all their vicious Courses, the
Justice of God and Man would yet bring them to condign Punnishment, and by the
Abuse of longer time they would be less fit to Die, and so aggravate their
Eternal Condemnation. They took my Advice in good part, and I shall not be
wanting in my Sermons and Prayers to remind them of their Promises to improve
their respit from Death to the belt advantage of their Souls.

Matthew Morgan, Indicted for breaking up the House of Elizabeth Bell,
September the 18th. and stealing thence 7 s. in Moneys, he having little to say
for himself, was brought in Guilty.

The Ordinary endeavored to convince him of the greatness of his Crime,
because he could not but offer Violence to the contrary dictates of his
Conscience, before he broke open the Closet-door, to carry away the Goods of
her who prosecuted him. He confessed he had been a Sinner many ways, but he was
convinced now of his evil course of Life, and earnestly begged of God, that he
would give him Repentance, an hatred of his Sins, and an obedient frame of
heart unto his Laws, and then hoped he should find mercy at the hand of God,
whether he lived or dyed.

Robert Nichols and Thomas Crompton, were Indicted for assaulting, Aug. 30. the
Body of Edward Herring, with a Sword, giving him a mortal Wound, on which the
said Herring dyed. Nichols pretended he did not draw his Sword himself, but the
Scabbard was drawn from his Sword by another: But setting aside Pretenses, upon
Evidence sufficient, Nichols and Crompton were found Guilty.

The Ordinary told them, that it was a great sin to obstruct the course of
Justice, in endeavoring to rescue any man arrested, out of the hands of the
Bailiffs; that such a practice brought on fatal Effect;, in shedding Innocent
Blood: and that to Kill an Officer of Justice in the Execution of his Office
was Murder.

They expressed much Grief for offending God, in the violation of the Laws of
the Nation, providing against such outrageous Attempts, and for all other
provocations of God by their evil Courses, which might expose them to the
committing of this Crime. So that they hoped, through Christ's meritorious
death, which made satisfaction to God's offended Justice, that he would pardon
them, and wash away the defilement contracted on their Souls, by shedding
humane Blood, though they did not maliciously design it.

In my next Visit of them, I told them, That the Heart of Man is very
deceitful, and that they were not to rest in, much less to trust to any initial
Sorrow for Sin, but to endeavor what lay in them, that they might obtain of
God the carrying on of their Convictions to a perfect work of Conversion.
Therefore I enquired of them, what grounds they had to believe, that God was
reconciled to them in Christ. I assured them, that as the Enmity betwixt him
and Sinners is mutual, so he expected that they should be reconciled to him, in
casting away their rebellious dispositions, as they desire he should be at
peace with them, in pardoning the guilt of their Sins, that the chief Blessing
of his Free Grace consisted, in turning them from the love of all Iniquity,
that Christ may be formed in their hearts as the hope of glory. This lively
hope they could not have, unless they were conformed to the power of his Death
and Resurrection, in dying to the indulgence of their Lusts, and in being
quickened to the life of Holiness.

Upon this they were desirous to be farther directed by me, how they might
proceed safely to hope for a blessed Eternity. I told them they must be willing
ingenuously and sincerely to declare what their former course of life had been;
and that the review of their Sins must be with as bitter a detestation, as they
had committed them with delight, that so they might leave some public
Testimony of the truth of their Repentance, because their Crimes had been so
Notorious.

Hereupon Edwand Linsy, Condemned, for Feloniously deserting the Service of the
King, after he had taken Pay, said that he was heartily sorry for his Crime,
and all other Sins whereby he had provoked God to leave him to such Disloyalty.

I told him that it was a great Crime to withdraw himself from the Service of
His Majesty, and that he could not have any pretense for it. But this
Disloyalty was founded on the breach of his Vow and Covenant, made to and with
Christ at his Baptism; he had not fulfilled that Sacramental Oath, wherein he
engaged to forsake the Devil and all his Works, that he might become Christ's
faithful Servant and Soldier to his life's end. Neither can any man be truly
Loyal to his earthly Sovereign, who is not faithfully obedient to his heavenly
Father and Almighty Redeemer.

Richard Hooker was not so affected and penitent for his Crime as he ought to
have been.

Samuel Presby was formerly burnt in the hand, yet took no warning, and gave
but a slender account of any remorse for his Sin.

Henry Cornish, late Alderman of London, was Indicted for High Treason, in
conspiring the death of the late King with other Traitors, to raise a
Rebellion, in order to subvert the Government, was, upon a full Evidence,
brought in Guilty; who is to be executed in Cheapside, facing King (...), near
Guildhall.

Also Mrs. Gaunt, for harboring, and assisting several of the Rebels that were
in the West, was Convicted of High Treason, and Executed accordingly at Tyburn.

Mrs Elizabeth Gaunt was very morose and obstinate, and would not admit the
Ordinary to convince her of her great Crime, nor to pray with her.

About Nine of the Clock in the morning, those Prisoners Convicted of
High Treason, were drawn in Sleds, the others in Carts, to the several places
of Execution, who seemed very penitent all the way they went, Mr. Ordinary
praying with them. After which, they exhorted the Spectators to take warning by
their untimely End of the Effects of Sin. Then they prayed earnestly by
themselves, desiring the People to pray for them, after which they were all
Executed.

Dated this 23d of October, 1685. Samuel Smith, Ordinary.

This may be Printed, 1685. R.L.S.

These are to give Notice to all Persons, That the true Account of the whole
Trials of Henry Cornish, John Fernly, William Ring, and Elizabeth Gaunt, at the
Sessions held at Justice-Hall in the Old-Bayly, pursuant to an Order Granted by
the Right Honorable Sir James Smith, Lord Mayor of the City of London, will be
Printed and Published by George Croom.

London, Printed by G. Croom, at the Blue-Ball in Thames Street over against
Baynards Castle. 1685.


