Clayton Mayor.
Martis xix. die October. 1680. Annoque Regni Regis CAROLI Secundi Angliae, etc.
xxxii.
THis Court does desire Mr. Smith to Print his Sermon lately Preached at the
Guild Hall Chapel, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen.

Wagstaff.

LIGHT out of DARKNESS. IN A SERMON PREACHED before the Right Honorable Sir
ROBERT CLAYTON Knight. LORD MAYOR OF THE CITY of LONDON, In GVILD-HALL Chapel, The
26th of Sept. 1680.

On Zech. XIV. 7. In the Evening it shall be Light.

Wherein are Contained, Rules how to support our Selves under Dark Providence,
when they seem to supercede Divine Promises.

Also, Directions how to obtain a Prospect of Serene and Happy Times.

By SAMVEL SMITH, Ordinary of Newgate, formerly Fellow of St. John Baptist's
College in Oxford.

Psalm. 9^.2. Clouds and thick Darkness are round about him, yet Righteousness
and Judgment are the Habitation or Stability of his Throne. LONDON, Printed by
Tho. James, for William Leach, at the Crown in Cornhill. M.DC.LXXX.

To the Right Honorable Sir ROBERT CLAYTON, Knight. LORD MAYOR, AND THE COURT of
ALDERMEN.
My Lord,
IT is Safe and very Commendable, for every Magistrate to take the prospect of
his Duty from the Watchtower of Circumspection, by consulting the Infallible
Oracle of the holy Scriptures.

Herein it is promised to such who fear the Lord, that in difficult Times, and
in perplexing Doubts, he will guide them in untrodden Paths, and make the
darkest Dispensations of his Providence, if not plain and clear before them,
yet comfortable in the Issue.

Your Honor has signalized your Wisdom, Courage, and Fidelity, in the happy
Conduct of this Renowned Metropolis, under the Banner of Truth and Peace. Yet
the Jews say, That God gives no man the Title of Saint, until he be dead.

So needful is perseverance in a course of Piety and Righteousness, not only to
make a Magistrates Fame survive and spread unto Posterity; but also, to beget
an universal Spring in Virtue, by the impregnating influence of his good
Example.

While Vulgar minds have turned Giddy, and sordidly complied with Factious
Novelty; your Honor, as another Aristides, has cleaved to Principles of
Vprightness, amidst all Commotions in Church and State.

As you were unanimously chosen to sit in the Pretorian Chair, so you have in
every respect discharged that Duty, which correlates to so high and weighty a
Trust.

Neither the Syrene Charms of Popular Applause, have puffed you up, in your
steady Impartial Administration of Justice, joined with the Amiability of
Moderation.

Nor has the fear of rude Clamors, made any impression upon your undaunted
Fidelity, to slacken the Rains, or betray the prudent Ends of Government.

May your Lordship, with the rest of those Worthy Senators, who influence the
public Counsels of this Metropolis, as Patrons of Righteousness, and Patterns
of Loyalty, be shielded by the Supreme Governor of the World: May the present
and future Generations, pay due Reverence to You, by a grateful remembrance of
your constant Solicitude and exemplary Endeavors, in promoting the
Tranquillity and Felicity of this Renowned City; which is, and shall be, the
hearty Prayer of him, who continues to be

Your Honors most humble and devoted Servant, SAMUEL SMITH.

ZECH. XIV. 7. In the Evening it shall be Light.
THe infinite Wisdom of the Supreme Governor of the World, has in all Ages
judged it necessary, to set forth some Providence of such wonderful Intricacy,
as may exercise the utmost vigor of Christian Faith and Patience. The most
exquisite search of Humane Reason, is utterly incapable of comprehending their
mysterious scope and tendency.

Therefore, the Lord to prevent all repining Prejudices against his dark
Dispensations, has furnished us with this foundation of Support, That in the
Evening it shall be Light.

This Evening, may partly be meant of the last Age of the Christian Church,
when the Jews shall be converted to their Messiah; which shall be as a
miraculous Restoration from the Dead.

This shall not be a mixed day of Brightness stained with Darkness, but one
Entire day, in an uninterrupted flux of Grace and Mercy.

If it were capable of any Evening, that very Declining time, or Twilight,
shall be accounted full of Brightness.

This is a Truth: But I rather understand this Evening, to be the whole Series,
or Current of Divine Providence, which by Intervales, will be mixed with much
Gloominess, as to misapprehensions about the scope or tendency of Cloudy Times
upon the Christian Churches; gross Darkness shall cover the Earth, by the
Apostasy of many Professors; and Debauchery shall spread, as a righteous
punishment on such Apostasy,

Hereupon, the Providence of God will become dark and severely dreadful, in a
seeming Reduction of the Times to a Dismal Chaos of Confusion.

Notwithstanding, in the Evening, when Darkness seems to grow more and more to
a perfect Midnight, yet even then, it shall be Light.

The Observation from the Text is this, It is the Lord's usual Method, not to
give out any comfortable prospect of the safe and happy issue of dark dismal
Providence, till the Case be desperate in appearance.

This great Truth, 1. I shall demonstrate from Scripture Instances and Examples.

2. I shall show the reasons, why the Lord delivers not, till Distresses run
out into Extremities.

3. I shall set before you some Rules, how to interpret Dark Providence, for
your Support under them.

4. I shall state some Directions, how we may gain a Prospect of Bright and
Happy times, when we are wrapped up in a Night of Trial and Distress.

5. I shall make an Improvement of the whole, by inferring what our Duty is,
upon the fulfilling of so grand a Privilege; That in the Evening, it shall be
Light.

Scripture Instances to demonstrate the truth of this comfortable Assertion.

1. After Adam's grand Apostasy, when he stood trembling at the Serpents doom,
inferring that his own should be more severe, yet behold, the Judge himself
turns Advocate: The Curse upon Satan, is interwoven with the dawning of
restoring Grace to rebellious man, in this Fundamental Promise; The Seed of the
Woman, shall break the Serpents head.

2. In that terrible Night-Vision, wherein the Lord Covenanted to deliver
Abraham's Seed out of Egyptian Bondage, there was presented a shining Lamp in
the midst of a smoking Furnace; as an assuring Pledge, That though they had
lain among the Pots, yet they should become as the Wings of a Dove covered with
Silver, in an innocent, speedy, and beautiful Restoration from the Severity of
their Servitude.

3 When the Jews dry Bones were kicked about in scorn, then the Lord
miraculously opened the Sepulcher of their long confirmed Captivity, and
restored them with splendour, as laden with Treasure to rebuild the Temple.

Thus a Nation was born to Freedom in one day, and exalted to Safety by a new
Creation.

4 Was there not a Midnight of Superstition, and abounding Corruptions in the
Jewish Church and State, when the Scepter was departed from them? What hope was
there that ever this Cloud should be dispelled? Yet, even these Mists of
Darkness ushered in the Day Star, Christ Jesus, to enlighten the Gentiles, and
become the Glory of his People Israel.

Let me give you one Instance more in your own Experience, Was not a thick
Cloud on the Eye of the Clearest Understanding, to conceal from us the proper
Means of Slackning or Extinguishing that Dreadful Conflagration, which burst
out to the Consumption of all our precious and delectable Enjoyments?

And yet, even then, we were hid in the midst of a Devouring Fire; So
preserved, that the Sons of Violence durst not in that Extremity, take the
Advantage to assault our Persons; thereby to out-act the Cruelty of the Flames.
Is not our City revived, as a Phoenix, out of its very Ruins? Built fairer and
firmer by an Awful and Wonderful Restoration?

Surely, Its very Dust was precious to that God, whose Good Will continued to
dwell in the Flaming Bush, to give it a fresher Verdure.

May this City of Solemnities become a Pattern of Reformation to the whole
Nation. This will strike a Terror into Restless Incendiaries, who even execrate
our greater Luster, as the Center of the Lords delight.

I hope the Envious Viperous Brood of Jesuits, who are studious in contriving
Mischief, shall never effect our Second Desolation.

And that, while we cleave to the Lord in our Integrity, there shall be a
Covering of Defense upon all our Glory.

However, If any Cloud of Malice should stain and darken the Beauty of our
present Prosperity, yet the Most High has Wise and Gracious Ends, in
permitting Distresses to exspatiate into Amazing Extremities, before he appear
to check them. I shall briefly mention some of them.

1 Hereby the Lord humbles and tries us, to fit us for Comfort. Thus he led
Israel through Fire and Water, the most Forlorn Distresses; yet, when they bowed
with Submission to his Will, he brought them forth into a Wealthy Land.

His Delays are no Denials, nor Arguments of Insufficiency to Help, but only
Whets to the Importunity of Prayer, a Touchstone to try the Sincerity and
Vivacity of Faith, Love, Self-denial, and Obedience.

2 Reas. Hereby he makes the Mercy of Deliverance appear more Glorious. He
beautifies the Work of Salvation, while it is interwoven with Difficulties.
Prepaired Mercies are longer before they be exhibited. As they are curiously
framed with deeper Impressions of Wisdom and Power, so they would not be
dispensed with faithfulness, were they entailed upon such, who cannot wait the
Lords leisure of Bestowing them.

3 Reas. Sudden Help does not so deeply affect with Thankfulness, nor advance
the Heart to so high a Pitch in Duty. We prize what we obtain with Difficulty.

4 Reas. It is Wisdom in God to straiten before he relieve us, least we should
ascribe Enlargement to our selves.

The Use serves for Information: Thus,

Under all Extremities of Affliction and seeming Ruins of the Church, there
lies hid the Seminal Hope of an Happy Restitution; which may command a dreadful
Restraint in Enemies, and a Venerable Esteem from Friends.

Those Planets have the sweetest and most benign Influence, which are of the
slowest Motion.

Let not therefore the Suspension of Gods Help, breed any Suspicion of his
Love; because the choicest Exhibitions of Mercy are detained a while, that the
Beauty and Bounty of them may gratify our patient Waiting for them.

Usually all the Benjamins of Mercy, are first Benonies of Misery.

We many times meet with Storms, which hazard a Shipwreck, before precious Gems
and Fragrant Spices unlade themselves into our Bosom.

Sampson's Honey Comb was the more pleasant, because taken by Conflict out of
the Carcass of a Lion; so Mercies relish sweetest, when taken out of the
Bowels of the most affrighting Providence.

The Lord settles his Church, by shaking It, that so the Desire of all Nations
might Center in Christ, under whose Banner only, they can possess a Secure and
Glorious Resting Place.

Be persuaded then, to act this Life of Faith. O the Usefulness and admirable
Effects thereof! This scatters our Fears, raises our Courage, cherishes our
Hope, silences our Repining, spirituallizes our Duties, evidences the Truth and
Strength of Love; brings Light out of Darkness, Life out of Death.

Faith is the Parent of Self-resignation to God's Supreme Wisdom, which makes
the Soul to expect Comfort in his Time and Method; It prevents any Contrivance
how we may free our selves at once of all Discontentedness, by any preposterous
or unjustifiable Expedient.

Faith tramples on all the broken Reeds of Creature-props and Dependences.

It abhors the thoughts of Complying with such Sacrilege to God's Dishonor,
as to accept of any Creature to become bound with infinite Strength and
unchangeable Faithfulness, for the fulfilling of any Promise.

Therefore, in all Straits, suppress the shifting Life of Sense.

This is much like the Sick man's turning from one side of the Bed unto the
other. It may give a little ease, or palliated Cure for the present, but cannot
root out the habituated Distemper of Discontent with our Condition. Judging by
Sense is a low-spirited-life, which produces nothing but airy expectation from
the Creature, and so loses that very Comfort which it seeks, with an impetuous
Impatiency.

Rather maintain Serenity in your Mind, by Invigorating the Heroical Acts of
Faith. This will not leave you Floating on a dark Sea, but will Pilot you to
Christ in the Promise, as a secure Harbor. Therefore, amidst all Storms and
Rocks, let this steer and overruled your Course.

But you will say, May not the Providence of God seem to thwart or supercede
his Promises? When these are very Gloomy and Tremendous, how shall we do to
support our selves, or to demean our selves so, as not to censure them, out of
Ignorance or Discontent?

To support our Hearts under dismal mysterious Dispensations, consider these
Rules and Directions.

1. Rule. You must know in the general, that it is God's Prerogative to keep
secret (for some Tract of Time) the ultimate scope of his Oblique and Circulate
Dispensations; He will set forth some Occurrences, to puzzle Sense, to silence
Carnal Reason, to abate the swelling of a proud Heart. That so, man by his most
curious search, may not find out any thing, which God is resolved to lock up in
his own Breast. Besides, if every Providence did run in a smooth Channel, where
were any Trial of the Faith and Patience of the Saints?

Yea, the most Cloudy and Dreadful Cases, serve to make up the Beauty of God's
Government, as White and Black Marble intermixed, makes Checquer-Work the more
admired.

Though Dust and Rubbish fly in our Eyes, while the Lord is fitting and
pollishing the rugged Materials of his Temple, yet we shall see clearly the
glorious Contrivance of the complete Structure, when the Scaffolds of our
Self-conceited-Models which raise Pride and Prejudice, are totally removed.

There is a secret Harmony betwixt Providence and Providence. These, like Fiery
Exhalations, seem to clash; yet, as to the main Design of God, they combine to
the Stability of our Faith, and the Reward of our Duty in a patient waiting for
their appointed Issue.

The Lord can make the Lion and the Lamb Cohabitate, allay the contrariety of
jarring Elements, by commanding them into an amicable and happy League.

He can so overruled all blustering Animosities, that they shall not overset
his main Design; but conspire to hasten it to its desired Port: Thus, by
variety, the Wheels in Clock-work seem to cross each other, yet, all help
forward the universal motion, for the regular pointing out of such set Seasons,
which best are fitted to the accomplishment of our Purposes.

Therefore, as the Israelites readily marched after the Pillar of the Cloud in
the Wilderness; so, must we follow the Lord's Conduct without repinings, upon
the bare sight of our Warrant, though we know not a step of the way.

2. Rule. When there is not any particular Promise which faces and suits to a
dark Providence, yet the main Body of the Promises (which are the Common Places
or Repositories of a Christians Comfort) may become as a Constellation, to
guide us when we are Tossed upon the darkest Ocean.

3. Rule. Treasure up the Experiences of former Ages, those will hold us up
from fainting in Extremities, so that we shall not charge God foolishly.

Awake, awake, O Arm of the Lord, put on Strength as in the Ancient times, as
in the Generations of Old: Art not thou he, who have wounded Rahab, or Egypt,
and cut in pieces the Dragon, or Pharaoh in the Red Sea; Isa. 51.9, 10, 11.

It is very observable, That the Lord gave that unruly Death-threatning
Leviathan, to become Food, to strengthen the Faith of the Israelites.
distressed afterward in the Wilderness, Psalm. 74.9, to 15.

Yea, when the Church in Babylon lamented, that they saw not their Signs, nor
had any Prophet among them to give them any Prospect of Hope, that they should
be delivered; yet, they drew an Argument to relieve their desponding Thoughts,
from the Interchangeable, yet constant orderly Courses of the Night and Day, of
Winter and Summer.

Thus they Reasoned: Is not the Day thine, as well as the Night? Thou have
prepared the Light, and the Sun.

Yea, the darkness of the Night, sets off the beauty of the Morning Light, and
makes it to be more wonderfully accepted.

Thus ought Christians, not Idly to behold the Face of the Heavens, but to
make an Improvement of the Stationary Courses of the Seasons of the Year: We
may fetch Relief to our drooping Thoughts, from God's Covenant in Nature, to
confirm our Faith in his Redeeming Love, as to the expectation of special Grace
and Mercy.

It is very observable, That the Psalmist in Parallel Allusion, says, Thy
Mercy, O God, reaches to the Heavens, and thy Truth, or Faithfulness, to the
Clouds.

The Lord suffers these to gather, and grow big with Black Vapors, even unto a
Boisterous Contest; yet in their Dissolution, they perform a Kindness in
Watering the dry Furrows of the Earth, to make them Smile with a Fruitful
Verdure.

So the Saints Graces, which seemed Imprisoned in an Earthly obdurate Heart,
being bedewed with Afflictions, bud afresh with a lovely Luster.

In all Distresses therefore, let us thus argue, If the Lord order the
Contrariant Seasons of Nature, to conspire in a mutual Benefit to the Universe,
will he not much more exercis^ a tender Care over his Church, for whose sake,
the whole Creation is guided with a steady unerring Hand; even in such Changes
which sometimes stagger the Faith, and tire out the Patience of his Afflicted
Servants?

Hence I infer, That when one Providence is complicated within the mysterious
Darkness of another, Then, the Word of Promise must be our. Staff to lean on,
and the Precept our Rule to Walk by.

The most Conflicting Distresses which cross our Hopes and Desires, oftentimes
ripen the Promises, to the furtherance of God's Design.

Thus, Joseph's being sold into Egypt, made way for his Advancement in
Pharaoh's Court: The Intombing of Jonah in the Whales Belly, buried him into
Life; It gained Reverence to his Person, being Miraculously preserved, and the
Demorage of his Embassage, (himself being plunged into the heart of the Sea)
made his Letters Credential to be better attested and believed.

4. Rule. When Providence are Dark, Prayer must join Issue to clear them up;
This is the readiest, most dexterous Key to uncypher these Mysterious
Characters, in the profound meaning of them.

Especially when you have an Eye of dependency on Christ's prevalent
Intercession, for this very purpose.

Worthy is the Lamb slain, who Purchased the Promises, and Ratified them in his
Bloodshed, to open the Sealed Book of Providential Mysteries.

The Lord would lose the Glory of his Works, if they should always be concealed,
as illegible Characters, which none could understand; Therefore, he has
ordained the Spirit of Prayer, to illustrate dark Prophetical Passages recorded
for future Comfort.

Now, if Prayer obtain not a speedy satisfaction to our Doubts, yet our Hearts
shall be quieted with this Consideration, That all things shall work together
for good, to such who fear the Lord.

Therefore, Genuine Christians will wait, till the whole Platform of God's
Government, amidst all Vicissitudes of Changes, shall be presented in One view.

This will certainly be unfolded in the World to come. Then, Shall we know as
we now are known: That is, We shall plainly see the true Reason, why the Lord
veiled his Providential Actings, as if he had forgotten to be Gracious.

Yea, we shall acknowledge, that he could not have taken a fitter, wiser
Course, to bring us to a blessed Station, than by the way of his dreadful
Rebukes, when we grew wanton with Mercies, and froward in our Sins.

5 Rule. When you cannot follow God in untrodden paths of Providence, yet
consider, it is good and safe, to draw nigh to him, in your undoubted Duty.

Resolve therefore, tho he whisper not all his Secrets into thine Ear, yet he
shall be sure of the Obedience of the Heart.

Persevere in seeking the Beauty of his Face, when thou can not participate
of his Bounty, nor find out the intricate Windings of his Works.

Conform to his Known Will, when thou can not spell out his Secret Decrees
and Purposes.

6 Rule. Justify God as holy in all his Ways, and righteous in all his Works,
when you cannot judge positively concerning them; Psalm. 97.2. Clouds and thick
Darkness are round about him, yet Righteousness and Judgment are the Habitation
of his Throne: That is, Equity, Wisdom, and Moderation, are the Stability of
his Government.

How awful and yet serene Majesty, is resident in the Lord, while he wraps
himself up in most dreadful Appearances.

He ranks these Clouds, while they contest, and rides on the Wings of the Wind,
giving a Law unto them, while they threaten to overwhelm us with a Storm. Many
times, Dark Administrations are the Dust of his Feet, which he raises in order
to his merciful approaches toward us: Therefore speak honorably of the Lord,
when you are at the lowest, in point of Hope and Help.

Wherein you cannot discover God clearly, it will be your Duty, Modesty, and
Safety, to be devoutly blind.

7 Rule. Though Providence should be Gloomy and Dreadful, yet be not
discouraged, because the most Startling Appearances of God, have usually
ushered in the most Remarkable Degrees of Peace and Establishment unto the
Church; Jer. 30.5, 6, 17. Jer. 33.6, 10, 11. Zech. 13.8, 9. Psalm. 71.20, 21.
Ps. 65.5. By terrible things in righteousness, have thou answered us, O God of
our Salvation.

He fulfills Prayer many times in such a strange way, which will make our
hearts to tremble.

The Lord appeared to Job in the Whirlwind, when he came to comfort him, and
justify his Righteous Cause against his Censorious Friends. Thus, the place
was shaken, when the Apostles were filled with the Holy Ghost; Acts 4.31. So,
Paul was struck blind, and taken up for dead, when the Lord chose him to be a
Vessel of Mercy and Honor, to bear his Name before the Gentiles; Acts 9.9, 17.
Fire came down from Heaven to consume the Sacrifice, in Attestation of Its
Acceptance.

The highest Joys are built on the lowest and most tried Foundation.

The deepest, most boisterous Inundation of Calamities, shall not drown us, if
they advance us in Heavenly-mindedness: Hereby we shall gain the prospect of
Gods Covenant, Mercy and Fidelity, as a Securing Rainbow about the Throne of
Amazing Justice.

8 Rule. Reserve your passing Sentence on the Darkest Dispensations, until the
winding up, in their ultimate Scope and Tendency.

As we must be Witnesses of Gods Truth, to the present Generation, and Trustees
to transmit it pure unto Posterity; so, when Providence are most stupendous,
we must treasure up Prayers, and antedate Praises, for those Salvations, which
God will work in After-ages.

We should rejoice, to think that the Lord will provide more Halcyon days for
the Successive Generations of the World, though our selves should fall in the
Wilderness, and never set foot on the Canaan of a Desired Rest.

But fearing, lest this Day Star may be perverted in its benign Influence, by
breeding presumption, in a sinful or slothful, secure state, let it cast an
Aspect of Caution, in Conjunction with its comfortable Rays, that none may be
misled by the abuse thereof.

1st, Let not Romish Doctors expect, that the Saving Light of the Knowledge of
God in Christ, should beam into them, while they wilfully yield themselves, as
Captives to the Power and Prince of Darkness; or delight to strengthen a
Combination with restless Atheistical Workers of Iniquity.

Such are afraid least the light of Gods Truth should disturb their Security in
a Sinful Course; yet there is no shadow of any pretense, under which Antichrist
may presume to lie safe from that Winged Desolation which watches to ensnare
him.

As the Path of the Just is like the Morning Light, which shines brighter to
perfect Serenity in the Conscience; so the Way and Designs of the Ungodly shall
perish: For these, the Blackness and extremity of Darkness, is reserved for
ever.

They may sportingly presume to warm themselves with their own deceitful dying
Sparks, kindled out of the Grandeur of the World, and a pompous False Religion;
yet, they shall lie down in the shame of Disappointment

When once an Evening of unexpected Terrors shall overtake them, these shall
increase to a midnight of desperate Sorrow in a perfect Desolation.

2dly, Let not the Enthusiast pervert this Comfortable Promise in the Text, as
if the Kingdom of Christ were to be promoted by the Invention of any Novel
Arrogating Opinions, which such Men expect should be idolized for Undubitable
Maxims.

These can never usher In, those glorious Accessions of Truth and Peace,
promised to the later Age of the Christian Churches.

Under a Pretense, that, In the Evening it shall be Light. Scepticks
irreverently pry into the Cabinet of Gods Secret Counsels.

Such, do not with a modest safety advance in the Search of true Wisdom, but
rather rudely dictate Rules to the Supreme Governor of the World. Proud
Dogmatical Spirits, exalt the Phenomenon, or Mock-light of their Wanton
Fancies. Under pretense of illuminating others, they despise the Sacred
Institutions of Christ, as if those were weak, faint, obscure, Streams of
Light, adapted and fitted, only to the Infant State of Christianity.

Such Deceivableness of Unrighteousness, flows not from the Father of Lights,
but from Romish perverting Emissaries, the Locusts of the Pit of Darkness.

3ly. There is another Caution, I would give to such, who expect the glorious
Accession of Jewish Converts to the Christian Churches.

Let them not disturb Christ's sweet repose, among the Lillies of Evangelical
Virtues, by becoming Thorns and Briars, to tear and rend in pieces his Seamless
Coat of Unity and Concord.

The Divisions of Christians among themselves, obstructs the Conversion of the
Jews, are the Engines which Rome makes use of to batter down the Bulworks of
our Safety. Fiery Contests among Protestants, scare the Wild Savages from
embracing Christ's Pure Religion. His Healing Influences, as the Sun of
Righteousness, cannot spread to such Nations, who still remain under the power
of Pagan or Popish Blindness; when they hear that Christ's Doves quarrel one
another with as great bitterness of spirit as, That whereby Wolves designedly
prey on the Lords Inheritance.

What a shame is it, That these Lovely Twins of Truth and Peace, should be
divorced, when as the Fruits of Righteousness can neither be sown nor reaped so
advantageously, in a Storm of Passion.

If we would have Gods Mercy and Truth meet together in fulfilling the Promise
of our Establishment, Let Righteousness and Peace kiss each other in our own
Breasts.

But if a perverse spirit be mingled among us, all Counsels and Means used for
Safety, will prove abortive.

Let us not by our Animosities, Jealousies, and Immoralities, attempt that
Destruction upon our selves, which all our Enemies could never yet effect:
While the Jews severally contended in Parties, they were universally overthrown.

Many are in expectation of Glorious Promises to be fulfilled in the Last Age
of the World: But we can never become terrible to Antichrist, till all
Antichristian Lusts be pulled down in our own hearts, nor till we display the
Banner and Beauty of Truth with Unanimity.

This will credit, propagate, maintain, and secure the Protestant Religion and
its Professors, in the hearts and estimation of all Men: When the Lord shall
restore Sion to a more settled State, the Worshippers of his Name, shall see
Eye to Eye; they shall agree in the same Sentiments of Religion, and in Candor
of Affection.

In the mean time, while it is only Twilight, among the most knowing
Christians, let us not reproachfully stigmatize one another in those less
considerable Controversies, which at this day perplex the Christian Churches.

The Genuine Spirit and Profession of Christ's Pure Religion, is full of
Meekness, and not sowred with Envy, Malice, nor any proud Partiality in judging
of Opinions.

It does not wrangle in a Peremptory asserting the Truth lies on the side of
this or that Party only.

Such Clashing Corruscations, are Portentous Forerunners of Destruction, and
not that Divine Light which they pretend to be.

They are rather Wildfire, thrown into the Sanctuary of God, to fill it with
Smoke and Clamor.

We must not turbulently plead for any Truth, tho clear to us, and very
considerable in it self.

This will render our Testimony to be suspected in its Validity and Sincerity.
We ought with serenity of Mind to wait, till the Father of Lights, shall clear
up such Mysteries in Religion, which as yet, may be hid from others of Weaker
Apprehensions.

Let none therefore out of an Impatient Curiosity, presumptuously obtrude, or
irregularly propagate, any private Conceptions, as if they were Indubitable
Maxims, to be embraced by the Implicit Belief of other men

The Lord has promised to spread the Revelation of Truth in his own Time and
Method, thereby to supersede all froward Contests and rash Forwardness in any,
to disseminate their own Opinions, by the Disturbance of Public Peace and
Order. Let this Consideration moderate all Contests about Circumstantials in
Religion; viz. That the Forcible Birth of Reformation, is every way as
perilous as the Dilatory Production of it.

Such who doubt not of their way, must not proudly contemn Dissenters. Some are
to be pitied in their Errors, when they are not indulged by the neglect of
searching after Truth. But a dissembled Compliance, before through Conviction,
is an Hypocritical Flattery, and will for advantage, secretly undermine
Foundation Principles. Truth is best preserved, when those who formerly opposed
it, are convinced of their Error; and then, such ought gladly to become its
humble Clients: yea, much rather its blushing Captives. With how peaceable
Deportment did the very Apostles spread Evangelical Light to the Idolatrous
Nations, that they might win them to the Obedience of Christ's Scepter. This
caused them to triumph, in leading the captivity of the Devil captive;
forasmuch as they powerfully insinuated the Truth, by the Conviction of an Holy
Life, made amiable by the Exemplarity of Meekness and Heavenly Self-denial.

But the separation of Peace from Holiness, is a secret contempt of the God of
Truth, and will prove the Carcass only of Prosperity.

Therefore, let us hold fast the Mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience, as we
expect, that the darkest Providence should be cleared up to us, in a
propitious creating of serene and happy times.

Often times the Church of Christ, which is the Darling of his Providence,
becomes a fiery Beacon by extremities of Affliction, to warn others, that if
the Lord's own People violate their Soul Chastity, in not walking according to
the Purity of the Christian Faith, even They shall smart severely for it.

Let not the Romish Synagogue therefore, boast of her pompous Visibility in her
Prosperous Iniquities. For, though her outward Painting and Patching in
Religion, draw the Wonder of the Nations, before they Wander after her
Deceptions; yet Heresies and Abominations (will in due time) undermine a
Semblance of Tranquillity, and Strip her bare, as an Harlot, of all the
Ornaments which cover her obstinate Degeneracy.

The true Church may be Hid for a time, as a Lilly among Thorns; yet Rome in
all her Glory is not arrayed like one of those Lillies, when stained with
Calumny, or rather Beautified with the Blood of Martyrdom.

How comely and prevailing with God, for Deliverance in Distress, are silent
Penitential Tears, in the Dove-like Eyes of his People; especially when they
retain their Integrity, in defending the Dowry of Truth, and the Standard of
Real Holiness.

Light is sown for the Righteous, and Joy for the Upright in Heart.

This shall secretly spring up for such, while dark Providence wind themselves
about, in rich Mines of Comfort, through the Labyrinth of their perplexing
Doubts and Fears.

Directions. If we would get a Prospect of Bright, Serene, and Happy times;
observe these Directions following:

First, Let the Eye of our Faith be cleared up from Prejudice, and steadily
fixed upon That vital Influx of Divine Power, Wisdom, and Fidelity in God, which
constantly takes care of his Espoused Interest, under all those
Convulsion-pangs, which seem to dissolve the very Ligaments of Truth and Peace.

Faith can fetch a Desponding Soul to Life, when Deadly Fears assault us.

Even while we are giving up the Ghost of Hope, Mercy may come forth, to meet
us with Salvation.

Thus the Disciples cried out, It is a Spirit, when Christ walked on the Sea
toward them, to calm the Storm, and allay the greater Tempest (even Fears) in
their own Hearts.

Thus the darkest Season of the Night, immediately precedes the Dawning of the
Day.

The thickest Throws and Agonies, not only contribute toward, and make Way for,
but are the Signal of a Joyful and Speedy Birth.

Even Obstructions (as Divine Wisdom orders them) shall smooth the way to
Safety.

A skilful Archer shuts one Eye, to strengthen the Visive Spirits in the other,
that he may more dexterously level at the Mark.

So, suppress Carnal Reason, as an unfit Judge of Divine Dispensations; if you
would gain the support of God's Propitiousness under seeming Desolations. We
should count our selves safe, while the Helm is in God's Hand:

For though he suffers Storms and Difficulties to Encompass us; yet, no Engines
shall ever gain their designed Point against the Lord's Inheritance.

2. Direct. Be wonderfully Affected with, and Thankful for, the First Fruits of
Deliverance; Zech. 4.10. It is very unbecoming, to despise the day of small
things; yea, it is a great sin, to prejudge the Lords Work, by the first view;
especially when it is certain, that the Lord reserves his choicest Mercies, as
lovely Colors, to be superinduced at last, when he is resolved to express the
Beauty of his Providence to the Life; for a Confutation of our impatient
Curosity. A thankful Valuation of the least beam of Light, when all hope of
relief seemed perished, is the only way to bring forward Deliverance to
Maturity.

The Lord does not undertake Works instampt with wonder, to lay them aside,
without any care of bringing them to a Perfect Birth.

The widest, deepest, overflowing Rivers, spring from a little Conduit Head.

So, Sions Salvation goes forth at first, like a Lamp only, before it prove a
Constellation of Brightness, spreading over all the Expansions of Distress.

During the saddest Contexture of Providence, the Spiritual Glory of Christ's
Evangelical Kingdom, shall never set, it shall spread the more, by Opposition;
become Illustrious by those very Fogs and Mists, which ascend out of the
Bottomless Pit of Popish Heresy, Treachery, and Cruelty.

Those very Prayers which seemed lost, shall return laden with the Richest and
Choicest Mercies. The Lord will beautify the Meek with Salvation, therefore
beg a Spiritual Eye, to take a Prospect of Deliverance beyond the Limits of
Present Sense.

Thus David, having obtained Gods Word only, for the Conquest of his Enemies,
triumphed before he struck a stroke; so confident was he of Success.

He cried out, Gilead is mine, Manasse is mine, over Edom will I cast my Shoe:
Which was a Sign of taking Possession of the Promise, as if he were actually
dividing the Spoil on this and that side Jordan; because God had spoken it in
his Holiness and Veracity.

How much more, should we strengthen our Faith, when the Lord makes the least
Stricture of Light, an Assuring Pledge of the Glorious Perfection of Felicity.

3. Direct. Lay aside your Selfish Interest, and with a single eye aim at the
Lords Glory. Thus the Church affirmed, That even in the way of thy Judgments
(while the Yoke of their Captivity was firmly wreathed about their Necks) have
we waited for thee, O Lord: The desire of our soul, is to thy Name, and to the
remembrance of Thee. As if they had said, Let us never be delivered, rather
than Thy Name should be eclipsed; whatever becomes of Us, provide for the
Imblazoning of thine own Glory.

Be content to stay in the Furnace, rather than not to have your Dross
separated.

Be willing to learn the Mystery of Divine Recumbency on the Lords Fidelity,
though we be tutored to it by the greatest Exigents.

Impatiency of Spirit, is a Signal of Impenitency, that we are not as yet
capable of That Mercy, which we seek, in the frowardness of our Hearts.

Jacob endured many and sharp Afflictions, because he fore-stalled the Blessing
by Deceit.

When we snatch at Mercies, as the fruit of the Promise before it be ripe, it
breeds the Worm of a Proud Self-conceitedness at the Core, or a Surfeit of
Sensuality, in abuse of the Choicest Manna.

It is the Property of a Proud Hypocrite, to be Ptisical in Prayer, and not
able to wait for Gods Salvation.

But an humble Patience, which believes In Hope against Hope, is as a Branch of
the Myrrh Tree, which (some report) preserves Travelers from tyring and
fainting, though they walk through the Valley of most Deadly Snares and Fears.

4. Direct. Submit to the Lords Method of Carrying on his Own Work, though the
Means seem very unlikely, weak, and contemptible, yea contrariant to that
Model, which we have foolishly forecast in our Carnal Wisdom.

Shall the weak Potsherds of the Earth, dispute Gods Sovereign Wisdom and
Authority, when they should comply with his severest Dispensations?

It is the undoubted Privilege of every wise Man, to dispose of the
Concernments of his own Family, as Himself pleases.

And shall we not submit to God, who is uncontrollable in Majesty, and
unaccountable in his holy and righteous setting out the various Schemes of his
Providence, in all the Circumstanees of our Pilgrimage? Shall we reject his
Conduct, in disposing of the Affairs of Nations?

Shall the Shallows of our reason, prompt us to repine, whereas all Creatures
obey the Law of their Natural Instinct, and wait upon the Lord for his
Blessing, in the Execution of their various Offices.

Yea those Creatures, which have an Antipathy each to other, yet are wisely and
calmly overruled, by a Divine Invisible Hand; so that they conspire, in
promoting the Harmonious Stability of the Creation, for a Common Universal
Benefit.

If the Lords Providence condescends exactly to number the very Hairs of our
Head, can we (in reason) think that he will make a Spoil of Kingdoms, in
tossing them from the Center of their Tranquillity, without just Demerit in us,
or Reluctance in Himself?

Get an Interest therefore, in the Unchangeable Love of God; then you will be
above the Reach and Hurt of every Outward Change.

5. Direct. Put the Promises in Suit. The Lord stirs up a mighty Spirit of
Prayer, before he excites Himself to create Deliverance for his Afflicted
Churches.

Would we have him awake, and make bare his Arm for our Relief and Defense; We
must rouse up our selves from our Security, and stand up to our Duty.

Jacob's Example and Success, who would not desist wrestling, though he limpt,
may provoke Us to Zeal in Prayer: He well knew, that after a Tedious Night
spent in Tears and Supplication, the Morning would dawn in a Solemn Blessing.

Let our Zeal, like His, be confirmed by opposition; and it is very probable,
that This Generation shall survive, to see Rome buried in That Desolation,
which She contrives for Others: How did a Dark Night of Distress lately involve
us, while Antichrist designed (as a Dying Beast bites fiercest) to have slain
the Witnesses of Christ's pure Religion?

Yet how wonderfully are Magistracy and Ministry preserved, in the free
Exercise of their Functions, because Christ overshadows those Mystical Stars in
his Right Hand, and binds them as an honorable Signet on his Arm.

Blessed be God, who has turned the Dark Evening into a Day of Jubilee, by the
disappointment of such an unparalled Conspiracy.

What now Remains, but that we should resolve to continue Loyal to God, and his
Vicegerent, in the Face and Dispight of the greatest Dangers.

Thus Stars shine brightest in the darkest Night. Let us hold On, in an even,
steady, cheerful Course of Righteousness, notwithstanding the virulent
Reproaches of the Common Enemy.

This Viper of Detraction, shall not always Infest the Churches Peace and
Reputation, but shall Swell only, till it burst it self, and be cast into the
Fire.

A right-bred Faith, can digest Difficulties, and Extremities of Danger, by
turning them into Arguments of Stability; yea, into the brisk Spirits of
Triumphant Joy.

But then let us remember, That Preservations prove not real Mercies, but
Snares, if not improved by a wise, circumspect, and holy Conversation.

An humble, heavenly Frame, can only sweeten the bitterest Dispensations by
Contentment; as also preserve us from a surfeit of Pride and Sensuality, in the
highest float of Earthly Peace and Felicity.

6ly, And lastly, Pay those Vows of Self-resignation, which you made when your
Lives hung in Doubt and Suspense, because God had no more Assurance of your
Love and Obedience.

We are usually very Gracious by fits, when Pangs of Distress are upon us:
Then, like Nephthaly, we give goodly Words, fair Promises of Reformation; yet,
set at Liberty, we soon wax wanton like a wild Hind, and will not be confined
within the Verge of God's Righteous Laws.

But there must be a new Creation within us, if we would have the Lord work a
new Salvation for us.

Though our Deliverance seemed to have been wrought in a Dream, It was so
wonderful; yet our selves, must not continue under the Lethargy of an
Impenitent Security.

If any man shall presume to strentghen himself in his Wickedness, and yet
expect, that the Lord should save him in Distress, he puts a notorious Cheat
upon himself.

The Promise of Deliverance, shall become as a Vanishing-Night-Vision unto such.

Let us therefore, being delivered from our Enemies round about, Edify our
selves in our holy Faith, and walk in the Fear of the Lord, as Incompast with
the Comforts of his Salvation.

Would we have the Lord's Fidelity, go forth as a Lamp of Brightness for Sion's
safety? Let us put our selves to the Blush for our Undutifulness, and
multiplied Provocations against the Holy One.

So will the Lord appear in the Glory of all his Attributes, to build us up,
with Stability in Church and State.

He shall make us become, not only Formidable to our Adversaries, but also a
Bulwark of Defense to Others in Distress.

Then shall it be Verified of England (as of Sion) that God is in the midst of
Her: Therefore, he will help Her right early; He will surround her with his
Mercy as with a Shield; till She become the Perfection of Beauty, the Praise
and Joy of the whole Earth: To which State of Safety and Renown the Father of
Lights conduct us, for the Merits sake of our Blessed Redeemer; to whom with
the Holy Spirit of Truth, Unity, and Concord, be ascribed (as most due is) all
Honor, Praise, Dominion, and Obedience, now and forever. Amen.

FINIS.
Title r. supersede, P. 29. l. 7. read Myrtle, l. 29. r. Shallowness


