A brief Abstract of the CASE concerning the Letters Patents for Reprizals
(hereunto annexed) against the States General and their Subjects, whereupon
Capt. Compton Gwyther, William Coats, Joseph Bullivant, John Baxter, Francis
Wansell, Francis Martin, John Gibson, and William Jones, Prisoners in the
Marshalsea, are to be Tried for their Lives, according to the Common Law of
England, on the 18th of Februvry instant, upon the Statute of 28 Henry 8. cap.
15. under the pretense of PIRACY, for taking a Galliot-Hoy [called the Love of
Rotterdam] laden with 160 Tun of Wine, and Prunes, on the 3d of December last,
bound from Bourdeaux to Dort: Faithfully Recollected out of all the Originals,
by Thomas Smith Gent. With some Remarkable Observations both upon the Matters
of Fact, and the Law in the whole Case.
IN the year 1635. King Charles the First being truly informed that the
East India Company of England had wasted several great Joint Stocks, and not
settled themselves in any Credible Factories in India, or parts adjacent of any
considerable strength, since the first Erection of the said Company, but had
rendered themselves subject to the apparent Insolences and Injuries of the
Dutch; whereupon Sir William Courten, Endimion Porter Esquire Capt. John Weddell,
Nathaniel Mountney, Thomas Kynaston, Merchant, and their Partners, were
importuned and encouraged by the King and Council to undertake Trading-Voyages
to the Coast of India, China, and Japan: In which enterprise Sir Paul Pyndar
advanced the sum of 36000 l. sterling, in the year 1636.

The East India Company of the Netherlands foreseeing that it might lessen
their Trade and Commerce in those parts, sought by all indirect ways and means
to undermine and spoil the said Courten and his Partners, in their
Trading-Voyages: whereupon the two Ships named the Dragon and Katharine, richly
laden to the value of 200000 l. homewards bound from China and Japan in the
year 1638. were lost and destroyed both Men, Ships, and Goods, and never heard
of to this day.

In the year 1642. Sir William Courten being dead, William Courten his Son and
Heir, and sole Executor, did with the rest of his Partners set forth (amongst
other Ships) the Bona Esperanza, and Henry Bona Adventura, which were
injuriously seized and taken by the Officers of the East India Company of the
Netherlands in the year 1643. and converted to their own use, to the damage of
Courten and his Partners the sum of 151612 l. as by the said Letters Patents
annexed appears.

Upon the Kings most happy Restoration, the surviving Partners, and the Heirs,
Executors and Administrators of the rest of the Adventurers, addressed
themselves in the year 1660. to the King for relief: whereupon a signal Compact
and Agreement was made (after two years debate) between the King and the
States General, in the 15th. Article of the Treaty concluded at London, Anno
1662. That upon the Restitution of the Island of Poleron, and entire
satisfaction to be made to the parties Interessed and Injured concerning the
said two Ships Bona Esperanza, and Henry Bona Adventura, all other Offenses,
Injuries and Losses, suffered by the Subjects of England, should remain
cancelled and extinguished.

Whereupon Sir George Downing, his Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary to the
States General, in pursuance of the said Treaty, had several Conferences with
the Deputies of the said States, and the East India Company of the Netherlands
in the Hague, to liquidate the said loss and damages, for the space of two
years more, without any other effect, then an inconsiderable offer of Two
hundred thousand Gilders, for the whole Spoil and Depredations; pretending they
had paid some part of Courten's proportion in the year 1649. to Jacob Pergens,
who had given security by Peter Boudaen to indempnifie the Company from the
claim of Sir Paul Pyndar and Sir Edward Littleton, who had intimated their
Right by Jonas Abeeles and a Public Notary, in the year 1648. to the said
East India Company at their Chamber in Amsterdam, as by the several and
respective Acts and Deeds may appear.

That the said George Carew in the Letters Patents mentioned, putting great
confidence in his Majesty's most sacred Covenants, and Grant under the Great
Seal of England, sold his Manor of Aunton, alias Aldington, in the Valley of
Evesham, with the Lands thereunto belonging, for the sum of 3800 l. to Mr.
Thomas Foley, to satisfy Sir William Powell, John Whitfield Esquire Henry Soam and
others, that had the Interest in Sir Paul Pyndars and Sir Edward Littletons
Assignments, and the Deeds thereof, who refused to join with Mr. Carew in the
prosecution of his Right against the East India Company of the Netherlands, and
other particular Inhabitants in Holland and Zealand; whereupon they assigned
their Right and Interest to Carew, the Administrator of Sir William Courten,
with his Will annexed.

In the year 1665. His Majesty and diverse Ministers of State, having duly
considered the great Services and Sufferings of Sir William Courten and Sir
Paul Pyndar for the Crown of England, and their Loss and Damages of the Bona
Esperanza and Henry Bona Adventura. Upon the application of the persons
mentioned in the said Letters Pattents, wherein His Majesty declares, That he
was concerned in Honor and Justice to see them satisfied; after a years
examination and debate of the whole matter by Sir Robert Wiseman and Sir
William Turner, (Advocates General to His Majesty, and the Duke of York, Lord
High-Admiral of England for the time being;) Assistants to Dr. Exton upon the
King's Command in that Case, the Grant passed with those special Clauses of
continuance, until satisfaction of the Debt and Damages, which was also
controverted several months by the Lord Chancellor Hyde, before he gave his
Fiat, who then enjoined the said Carew to give a Discharge to the Farmers of
the Customs for 10000 l. due to him in right of Sir Paul Pyndar, which was paid
to Mr, Charles Cox, Dr. Robert Gayer, and the Executors of Sir William Vdall,
Elizabeth Feilding, Joas Godscal, Henry Marsh and others, by Sir Edmund Turnor,
upon the Account of Sir John Wostenholme, Sir John Jacob and Sir John Harrison;
out of Mr. Carew's allowance granted by the King. The remaining part whereof
being post-poned to this day.

In the same year James Boeve of London Merchant, by the appointment of Mr.
Carew, delivered an authentic Copy of the said Letters Pattents to Mr.
Vandam, Advocate of the East India Company of the Netherlands, and acquainted
him that there was such an Authority in the said Grant, coupled with an
Interest according to the Law of England, that could not be repealed or
revoked, without satisfaction to the parties interessed and injured; and
therefore desired him to acquaint the Directors of the said Company to consider
thereof, how to compose the Difference, being a matter of great weight and
concernment.

In the year 1666. certain Creditors of Sir William Courten, Sir Edward
Littleton and Sir Paul Pyndar importuned the said George Carew to have a
particular Assignment of a third part of the said Debt and Damages so
ascertained by the said Letters Patents, in lieu and satisfaction of their
Debts, that amounted to 64320 l. sterling, which was, by consent of all
parties, assigned to John Graham Esquire and John Brown Gent. on the 14th. of May,
1666. with power to recover the same by force of the Patrent; as by the said
Deed and Schedule of the Creditors Names, annexed thereto, appears.

In the same year several Attempts were made to reprize some part of the Debt
and Damages in the Channel, and several Ships were brought in by force of the
said Grant, but in regard it was in time of War, the Dutchmen traded under the
Colors of Hamburgers, Swedes, Oastenders, and others in Alliance with England,
that there was not so many Prizes condemned as paid the Charges of Equipping
out Ships to take them; And the King wanting Seamen in that juncture, there was
a suspention of any further Execution, until times of Peace, if the Debt and
Damages were not in the mean while composed by the States, or the East India
Company of the Netherlands.

In the year 1677. A Treaty of Peace and common Alliance was concluded at
Breda, between the King and the States; wherein it was mentioned generally,
That all Offenses, Injuries, Damages, and Losses, and all Actions and Pretenses
of either side, should be obliterated and disannulled, and all Letters of
Reprizals, Marque and Countermarque comprehended therein:

That although the persons interessed in the Letters Patents held themselves
not obliged by the said Treaty, nor their particular Right included, as others,
who had only a bare ambulatory Authority, revokable at the King's Pleasure, yet
they did acquiesce for a time, being unwilling to obstruct the King's Affairs,
after the most dreadful Fire and Plague in the City of London.

That in the year 1672. upon new differences between the King and the States, a
second War was proclaimed, and the Treaty at Breda declared absolutely void,
and of no effect; whereupon the Proprietors and Creditors addressed themselves
again to the King and Council, That His Majesty would be graciously pleased to
take care that they might have satisfaction and reparation for their Debt and
Damages in a public way, rather than by putting the Letters of Reprizal in
execution, in all times of Peace: Then a select Committee of Lords of the
Council, whereof the Earl of Shaftrbury was one, reported upon a Reference in
this Case, That the States had cancelled all Obligations of past Treaties and
Agreements, and left His Majesty and His Subjects as free in all Justice and
Equity as if they never had been made, reciting the said Letters Patents and
Debt stated therein. Wherefore it was just and seasonable for the King to
insist upon Reparations for the Loss and Damages aforesaid; as by the original
Order of Council, and Report thereupon (ready to be produced) appears.

In pursuance whereof, instructions were given to the Plenipotentiaries from
the King to insist upon entire satisfaction in the next Treaty; Then Mr. Carew
having procured a Pasport from the States Ambassadors to travel through Holland
with Mr. John Sherland, to solicit that Affair by Order of the King and
Council; they were apprehended contrary to the Law of Nations, and committed by
the States of Holland, as Spies, and Carew condemned to be Executed, which had
been effected if Mr. Walkendonck and Advocate Sass had not been, by way of
Retortion, committed to the Tower, where they remained Prisoners during that
War, as Carew and Sherland did in Holland.

That in the year 1674. a second Peace and common Alliance was concluded at
London, between the King and the States; upon a Compact and Agreement (amongst
other things) that 800000 Pattacoons should be paid to the King, at four equal
proportions by the States, 200000 whereof was paid (upon ratifying the Treaty)
to Alderman Backwel, for other Services; and the remaining three parts, which
were to be paid in 3 years following, was by confederacy and combination,
between the Earl of Danby, Lord High-Treasurer of England, and the States of
Holland, assigned to the Prince of Orange, for pretended Debts of his Father
and Grandfather, contracted for old Arms and Shipping upon the late King's
Account, and no further provision made for the Bona Esperanza, and Henry Bona
Adventura, then the durable Grant aforesaid, for Reprizals.

But in the said Treaty an Article was projected by the States, That the Treaty
at Breda, and all former Treaties should stand in full force, without
contradicting that Treaty, Chatham and the cancelled Obligations forgotten.

The Creditors and Proprietors being surprised at this sudden separate Peace,
caused protests to be made to the chief Magistrates at the Hague, Amsterdam,
and all the principal Cities in Holland and Zealand, That if a considerable
part of the Pattacoons were not assigned for the present toward the Debt and
Damages relating to the said Ships, they should be necessitated to put in
Execution their particular Letters of Reprizals, when the States should be at
Peace with all Nations, that common clamours might not obstruct the due
prosecution thereof.

That in the year 1676. several Actions at Law depending in the Ordinary Courts
of Justice in Amsterdam, Middleburgh, and the Hague, at the Suits of the
Administrators and Assignees of Sir William Courten, Sir Paul Pyndar, and Sir
Edward Littleton, against Jacob Pergens, and the Heirs and Executors of Peter
Boudaen, for Moneys due upon Bonds, Bills of Exchange, Merchants Accounts in
Partnership of Trade, and Legacies, amounting in the whole to 132000 l.
sterling, (no ways relating to the said Letters Patents for Reprizals) being
ready for Sentence, were positively Interdicted, by express order from the
States of Holland, who prohibited the respective Judges from giving any
Sentence in the said Causes, upon pretense that all particular Actions
whatsoever were discharged and extinguished by the said two Treaties made and
concluded at Breda and London as aforesaid; from which Arbitrary Order the
persons Interessed appealed to the States General, to Reverse the said Order,
being an apparent Breach of the Laws of Common Amity and Alliances: who
answered, They could not intermeddle therein, the States of Holland being
Sovereigns in their own Province.

Then the Proprietors and Creditors appealed by two several Petitions to the
King and Council, for Justice and Reparations in the case of the Letters of
Reprizals, and the other Civil Actions depending at Law as aforesaid; whereupon
two several Orders were made on the 24th. of July 1677. that they should be
heard on the 10th. of October following, and that all persons concerned
therein, should attend with their Council and Advocates; which they did
accordingly, but could not then be heard, nor at any time afterward, although
they often and earnestly solicited the same; more especially the said Carew,
who has further expended 5000 l. and upwards, concerning the premises, at
home and abroad, for which his Estate in London and Richmond is in Mortgage,
having paid Interest for the said Moneys (so expended) many years together, to
several eminent persons in the City of London.

That in the month of April 1680. the persons Interessed in the Debt and
Damages so ascertained under the Great Seal of England, according to Law,
agreed and prepared to fit out three small Vessels, with Men and Provisions, to
Reprize what they could take toward their satisfaction and reparation: many
Orphans and Widows being concerned in the same, that want their Bread which is
eaten by Strangers.

Then Orders of the Councel-Table issued out to the Lords of the Admiralty in
an Arbitrary way, to stop all Men and Ships employed in that Service.

The Prince of Orange and the States insisting upon their broken and cancelled
Treaties, importuned the Secretaries of State by their Ambassador, (ignorant of
the Laws of England) to move His Majesty to Revoke the said Letters Patents by
Supersedeas, which was sent into Holland under the Great Seal, without calling
the parties by Scire facias Judicially to plead for themselves, or offering to
refund any of the Pattacoons, (resting yet in the States hands at Interest) or
making any other Compensation for the Debt and Damages aforesaid, so secured by
Law: wherefore to prevent a failer of Justice, and not to suffer a President of
such dangerous consequence to the Rights and Properties of the Subjects of
England; the said Captain Compton Gwyther, Commander of the Ship called the
George Bona Adventura, being ready fitted and entered in the Admiralty,
according to the usual form and custom formerly observed, did in the month of
June last, proceed upon his intended Voyage, having a Commission for that
purpose.

The said Captain, after many difficulties, having met with diverse Storms at
Sea, spent most part of his Provisions, and sold several of his Guns and small
Arms, in Harbor, many of his men disserting him, at last took the said Galliot
Hoy, on the 3d. of December, 1680. near Dungeness, laden with Wine and Prunes,
from Bardeaux, for Dort, being first assured that the said Ship and Lading
belonged to the Subjects of Holland.

The said Ship being so taken, and the Dutchmen used with all kindness and
humanity, who took with them on shore what they pleased to carry; the Captain
intending to send the Bills of Lading, with one of his men, and one of the
Dutch, to the Admiralty Court in London, in order to a Condemnation, keeping
two of the Ships Company on board to be Witnesses to all their Actions; but
meeting with further distress of Weather, was forced to sell four Tun of Wine,
most part whereof being upon the Deck, to provide a Pilot, more Men, and
Provisions: then coming to Anchor near Cows Castle in the Road, the Dutchmen
that were set on shore applied themselves to Daniel Gyles, Marshal of the
Vice-Admiralty in the Isle of Wight, promising him 100 l. if he would set out
Boats with Soldiers to Re-take the said Ship and Lading from the said Captain
and his Men, that had boarded and taken her; which he did accordingly, and
having seized upon the said Captain, took away his Commission, and brought him
and the seven men before mentioned Prisoners up to London on foot, pinnion'd
together as Thieves and Robbers, having about ten days after his seizure
procured a Warrant or Order of Council to that purpose, and committed them into
the Custody of Mr. Lowman, Keeper of the Prison of the Marshalsea, on the first
of January 1680. where William Joins Marshal of the High Court of Admiralty,
caused Irons to be put upon them for some time, until Mr. Carew desired the
contrary, saying it was a sad return for all the Services and Sufferings of Sir
William Courten and Sir Paul Pyndar, that had such vast Estates and Credits so
employed for the benefit of their King and Country, unto whom the Crown of
England stands engaged for 250000 l. sterling.

The said Daniel Gyles having taken the said Galliot-Hoy, with her Lading, out
of the possession of the said Captain Gwyther, and Company, by an Arbitrary
power, without any legal Warrant or Authority, and keeping the same by force,
he was Arrested this Hilary-Term at the Suit of the Proprietors for 2500 l.
damages; and also at the Suit of the Seamen in the Marshalsea, who had their
Apparel, their Arms, and other necessaries taken from them by the Soldiers
employed by the said Gyles: But the Judges of the King's Bench, (lately
questioned in Parliament) upon the Motion of Mr. Pollexfin, discharged Giles
upon Common Bail, pre-judging the said Cause with that heat and partiality,
threatening that the Captors should be Hanged for acting under the said Letters
Patents.

The seizure made by Captain Gwyther and his Company, was not done Felo animo,
with a Felonious intent, having a Commission in the nature of a Withernam;
which was intended to be brought to Judgment in the Admiralty, by a
determination of the Law, according to his Instructions in the Commission. So
the selling of four Tun of Wine was not criminal, but a breach of Trust at
most; and the taking the Ship and Wines out of the Captains possession by
Gyles, was both an Assault and Trespass not answerable, the Wines being wasted
and spoiled since in Sir Robert Holmes his Custody.

The Galliot-Hoy whereof Sebastian Jansen was Master, did belong to the Here
Sebastian Vice Admiral of Rotterdam, who applies himself to the States of
Holland for satisfaction, and they refer him to the East India Company of the
Netherlands, who call upon Mr. Pergens and Boudaens, that are caution to
indempnifie them for 85000 Gilders, part of the damages for the Bona Esperanza,
etc. and they move the Prince or States to allow part of the Pattacoons
unsatisfied; so Justice follows them home to their own doors. Jurae naturae
equam est neminem cum alterius detrimento and injuria fieri locupletiorem.

Some Remarkable Observations both upon the Matters of Fact, and the Law on the
whole Case.
IT is very remarkable and apparent, by the very Words both in the preamble and
the body of the Letters Patents annexed remaining of Record, that the King was
not surprised or mistaken in his Grant; But that by the common Law of England
it was within his power and prerogative Royal to do the same of common right to
his Subjects, under all those circumstances, conditions and limitations therein
expressed and declared.

The persons interessed in the Bona Esperanza were prompted (in the year 1664.)
by several Ministers of State to bring in an Abstract of their Loss and
Damages, with the State of their Case to the Commit of Grievances, which was
done accordingly; The Chairman the next day reporting the same to the House of
Commons a Vote passed to supply the King with five and twenty hundred thousand
po,unds: After that other supplies followed, to several millions, besides all
the Dutch Ships taken by the King's Fleet, in order to the protection of his
Subjects; for all which, and the large present to the Duke of York for his
Conduct at Sea, this only Debt of 151612 l. was stated and ascertained (for
reparation with costs and charges) under the Great Seal of England, the highest
Security of the Kingdom.

It is very observable, That the Proprietors and Creditors, which have waited
with so much patience, to a miracle, do aver, That since the King's
Restoration, they have not (by the judicial and durable Grant for Reprizals,
nor by any other ways and means whatsoever) gotten half their Expenses and
incident Charges concerning the Premises: Wherefore they humbly hope, in due
time to repair and satisfy themselves their Debt, Costs and Damages, by force
of their Letters Patents.

When the Grant passed to Carew, who had the Right and Administration in Law to
the Damages, an Authority vested in him to compel the payment by force, which
he could not do before; It is not a bare and ambulatory Authorit that passed
(as in every ordinary Commission) but an Interest of 151612 l. coupled or
joined with an authority, whereby the King binds himself to see it satisfied
paid; and the Reasons and Arguments why it should be so, and not otherwise, are
unanswerable.

1. It Is granted, pro confesso, there was a real Debt and Damages contracted by
the States. 2. There was a provision made in a public Treaty, An. 1662. for a
full and entire satisfaction and reparation for it. 3. That Carew, upon passing
the Patent was enjoined by the Lord Chancellor Hyde to release ten thousand
Pounds due to him out of the Customs, in discharge of Sir John Wostenholm's
Debts, contracted upon the late King's Account, which were (bona fide) paid by
Sir Edmund Turnor out of that individual Money; his name being used only in
trust in the said Patent for Carew and others. 4. That several of Courten's,
Littleton's and Pyndar's Creditors gave up their Bonds and Securities, for an
assignment of a due proportion of the said Debt so secured by Patent, with
power to put the same in Execution, when they see their own time and
opportunity.
Yet, notwithstanding, the Ministers of State in this Age are not ashamed to
wound the King's Honor and Reputation by their Arbitrary and Extrajudicial
Orders of the Council Table, with a pretended Supersedeas, and Proclamation, as
forms and ways of repealing, recalling and revoking the said Letters Patents,
so solemnly obtained under those considerations that cannot be extinguished,
without satisfaction and reparations, by one side or the other.

It would be a President of the most dangerous consequence in the world to all
civil Society and Commerce, if it should rest in the King's Power or the States
to take away the Subjects right and remedy, without a compensation.

The Law of England is possitive in it, that there can be no other ways to
repeal or make void the King's Letters Patents, than by judicial proceedings,
either by Inquisition or a scire facias, that the parties concerned may have
liberty to plead and defend their own Right, which they cannot do unto a
White Hall Supersedeas on Proclamation. The Lord Coke in his Reports says, that
an Indictment is not to be concluded contra Regiam proclamationem, but contra
Leges and Statuta, etc. for the King cannot create an offense by his
Proclamation, which was not an offense before, for that would be to change the
Law. And in the fourth part of his Institutes, cap. 8. p. 88. treating of the
Jurisdiction and Office of the Lord High Chancellor of England, and the
Judgments concerning cancelling of Letters Patents by scire facias, says, Quod
praedictae literae patentes dicti domini Regis revocentur, cancellentur,
evacuentur, adnullentur, and vacue, and invalidae pro nullo penitus habeantur,
and teneantur; ac etiam quod irrotulamentum eorundum cancelleter, cassetur, and
adnihiletur, etc. And all this is to be done judicially, by hearing the
parties, and not by any Order of Council, Supersedeas, or Proclamation: which
the King or States may do by Scire facias, when the Debt is paid, recovered or
compounded.

By the grand Charter of England, confirmed by so many Acts of Parliament,
(wherein the King is a party) no man shall be disseised or destroyed but by
legal trial, nor Justice denied or delayed, but right preserved by the Law of
the Land: And the King and his great Ministers of State are sworn to observe
the same accordingly.

Admitting a Foreign Sovereign Prince, granting Letters Patents for Reprizals
to a Corporation of his Subjects, against a Sovereign State that had spoiled
them of their Ships and Goods to the value of a million of Rix Dollars (under
the same circumstances) that the Grant should continue effectual in the Law,
until the Debt and Damages should be recovered. Afterward the said Prince and
State treat togethere, and settle a common Alliance, upon a sum of Money given
to the said Princ, without mentioning the particular Grant to the said
Corporation of his Subjects, for the Rix-dollars and then becomes insolvent
(admitting the said Prince or his People are the Debtors;) And the Corporation
(unsatisfied) puts in Execution against the said State, the Letters Patents
remaining enrolled in the Supreme Court of Judicature upon Record, and takes
Ships to the value of the Spoil and Damages mentioned in the Patent.

The Question is, Whether it would not be deemed an act of Inhumanity against
the Law of Nature in the State to prosecute any of the persons, or their
Agents, (they had formerly spoiled) for their Lives as Pirates, acting under
the said Patent, and coming under the Power of the said State? Or whether it
would not be an abomination and most horrid act in the Prince, or his
Ministers, to prosecute those for Pirates, that he himself or his People ought
in Conscience, Reason and Equity to satisfy?

No men can be safe in their Lives, Liberties or Estates under a Government
where there is a failer of Justice, that the Subjects cannot be protected
according to the Laws of God and their Country.

Fiat Justitia, pereat mundus.
Actum per T. S.
Feb. 12. 1680.

