A NARRATIVE Of the Royal Fishings OF GREAT BRITAIN and IRELAND, with Busses
for Pickled Herrings and Barrel-Cod, after the manner of the HOLLANDERS.

WITH Further Discoveries and Helps for the Management thereof in a profitable
way for the UNDERTAKERS.

Published for the satisfaction of all therein concerned.

LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid in Little-Britain over against the Anchor-Inn.
1661.

A NARRATIVE ABOUT The Royal Fishing.
IN my former Treatise about the Royal Herring-Buss-Trade, printed 1641. I have
given directions for the building, rigging, and fitting out of a Buss in an
experimental way, practiced by the Right Honorable Philip Earl of Pembroke and
Montgomery, Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household from the year 1632. till
the year 1640. which was carried on in the way of an Association; by which many
Busses were builded and employed by the Directions of the
Netherlandish-Fishermen, whom Sir William Courten of London Merchant procured,
and got them Endennized, and they, their Wives and Children, dwelt here, and
taught our Shipwrights to build Busses after the Holland manner; and cure the
Herrings, and make the Nets, and all things thereunto belonging; by which means
our English Fishermen attained to all the Arts and Skill thereof, and made many
thousand Barrels of pickled Herrings and Cod-fish, and did vent them in the
places where the Hollander vented, and found current sale, and full allowance
of the goodness of the Fish equal to the Hollanders; as by the several Factors
Accounts, which the Author of this Treatise has ready to be produced to any
that are desirous to peruse them. Now since the printing of the said Book,
which was perused by a Parliament-Committee, and appointed to be published for
the general direction of the whole Kingdom; whereof no fruit hitherto has come
to the Nation, though all generally approved of the Work; yet finding no man to
put it into action, I was much discouraged thereat, having formerly in my
Narrative made it plainly appear, that the ill success we found in the way of
our Associations, was not through the unprofitableness of that Employment, but
in the unskilful Managers thereof, and the extraordinary discouragements we
encountered with; for the Dunkirkers and others the Subjects of the King of
Spain in the Low Countries, have taken sundry of the Busses, imprisoned and
evilly treated their Fishermen, some of them died in prison, others they
ransomed at great sums. The Damage which the said Earl and his Associates do
justly challenge for their Busses so taken, loss of men and Ransoms, detention
of their Goods, and preventing of their Fishing, amounts to 50000 l. and
upwards. And having since met with a Book called Britain Buss, printed in anno
1615. which does very exactly set forth such Instructions as the Author could
then attain unto, which he took upon enquiry and information, but not on his
own knowledge or others practice, only he cites Sir W. Harvy a noble Knight
that builded and set out a Buss of 100 Tun, whom I well knew, and had several
meetings with at Mr. John Fletcher's shop a Ropeseller in Thames Street, who
was Partner with him in the building the said Buss, in an. 1615. which no man
seconded until the Lord Chamberlains Association, that began in the year 1632.
as is before mentioned. Also I have seen sundry Treatises that have been set
forth about this Subject, as I find by the Book called Lex Mercatoria, who
cites one Book called, The British Monarchy, printed in the year 1576. Another
entitled, Hitchcocks New-years-gift, printed an. 1685. Another called,
Englands way to win wealth; and another called, The Trades Increase, in the
year 1615. And the Author of the Book called Lex Mercatoria, does set forth,
That its not much above 100 years since that the Hollanders Fishing-trade began
for Herrings, Cod, and Ling, which took its original from the English. One
named Violet Stevens, and other discontented Fishmongers, which departed the
Realm of England, and went to the Town of Anchusen, where they procured the
Inhabitants to fish for them in the Seas, Streams, and Dominions of Great
Britain; which Inhabitants upon the decease of the said Englishmen took the
whole Trade to themselves, which afterward was dispersed into several Towns,
whereby the Trade is so increased, that Holland and Zealand have above 2000
Busses and Fishing-Vessels, which by the blessing of God that above 600000
Lasts of Fish are taken yearly in the Dominions of the King of Great Britain.
And he says, that one Tobias Gentleman a Fisherman, made a Treatise,
Entitled, Englands way to win Wealth; who says they are seen to sail out of
the Maze, Texell, and fly 1000 Sail together to catch Herrings in the North
Seas, most of them Ships of 120, some of 100 Tuns, and others of 60 Tuns
apiece; having in them 24 men, and some 20; some 16 men in a Vessel, and they
continue their course Northwest and by North until they arrive at the Island of
Sheteland, which lies in the height of 60 Degrees of Northerly Latitude; and
the Herrings which they take, are presently sent away by other Vessels, called
Yagors, into the East-countries, some to Riga and Revel, some to the Narve,
Russia, and Stockholme; and all Poland, Prussia, Pomerland, Littuania,
Stattene, Lubeck and Denmark, Deep, Bordeaux, Rochel, Nants, Morloix, Cane,
Rouen, Paris, Amiens, and all Piccardy, etc. Their Cod and Ling is done with
smaller Ships of 40 Tuns burden, called Pinks or Well-boats. Also they have a
Fleet of Fly-boats of 200 Tuns burden or more, which be at the North-east of
Sheteland, having small Boats with them, called Cobbles; and the commodious
Fisher-Towns he notes to be Colchester, Harwich, Orford, Alborrough, Dunnidge,
Walderswick, Sold, Yarmouth, Blackney, Wells, Lyn, Boston, Hull, Scarborough,
Hartlepoole, Whittby, Marske, Stockton and Gisborough, Newcastle and others
Northwards, etc. And further he tells us, that St. Dunstan the Bishop, termed
to be the Patron of the Goldsmiths, had no other Elixar or Philosophers Stone
than the Cold and Silver, which by the Benefit of Fishing was obtained; whereby
the Kingdoms Plate and Bullion was procured. For the advancement of which
Fishing-Trade he did advise, that three Fish-days ought to be kept in a week,
which caused also more abstinence; and hence the Proverb came, That St. Dunstan
took the Devil by the nose with his pinchers. All which recital is to show,
that the English formerly had the sole Fishing, and did serve the Netherlands
and all other Nations with Pickled-herrings, Cod, and Ling, whereby the Poor
were relieved, and Trading thereby much cherished: which Employment the
Netherlanders having gotten, the States of Holland and West-Freizland, by their
Proclamation say, that the Trade of the general fishing for Herrings, and the
great fishings, is one of the principal Means and Happiness of their Countries
and the Inhabitants thereof. Now for as much as his Majesty was graciously
pleased to receive a Petition exhibited in June, 1660. The Copy whereof
follows.

TO THE High and Mighty MONARCH CHARLES the Second, By the Grace of God King of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith, etc.
The Humble Petition of Simon Smith, late Agent for the Royal Fishing.
SHOWS,
THat Your Majesty's late Royal Father of Glorious Memory, did in the year
1632. upon the following Motives, viz.

1. The great plenty of Fish in the Seas, Rivers, and Creeks of His Majesty's
Dominions.

2. The employment of all sorts of People.

3. The advancement of Trade.

4. The increase of strength to the Navy.

5. The profit that might accrue to His Majesty's Subjects.

6. The increase of sundry Manufactures for setting at work idle and vagrant
people, whereby they may be able to relieve themselves and others, and
Merchandise and Traffic may by their industry be improved; Constitute and
establish a Society of Fishers, and declared that he was resolved by all good
occasions favorably to assist the said Trade, and graciously to accept the
forwardness of all those who should express their zeal to His Majesty's Service
in so general and public an undertaking; it being then resolved and concluded
by His Majesty, that the said Trade in it self was very honorable and
necessary for this Kingdom, as also hopeful and likely to prove very
beneficial to the particular Adventurers. Now, that the true managing, and most
advantageous prosecution thereof, is by experience discovered, as by the
Petitioners Book annexed are expressed. Whereupon the Right Honorable Philip
late Earl of Pembroke and Mountgomery, and his Associates, did cause sundry
Vessels to be built, which employed many Families in making of Nets and other
Provisions which yearly went out to the fishing, and performed the taking and
curing of Herrings and Barrel-Cods, and found Foraign vent, which continued
until the year 1640. although the Adventurers were much hindered and damaged by
the Dunkirkers, to the value of ten thousand pounds and upwards, for which no
Reparation could be as yet had, whereby the prosecution thereof was given over,
and the Fishers and others that were trained up to a right understanding of the
business, were dispersed by reason of the National Troubles increasing; which
Troubles having begotten great numbers of poor Families and Vagrants in the
Nation, who for want of Employment are brought into a miserable condition, and
will perish unless some speedy course be taken for their relief. The
consideration whereof has stirred up Your Petitioner humbly to present this
Herring-Buss Fishing to Your Majesty, as the only Employment for redress
therein; First, For the making of Nets, which will set on work all sorts of
people, both young and old, in the Trades of Hemp-beaters, Hatchelers,
Hemp-dressers, Twine-spinners, Net-makers, Beetesters, Brayders, Laborers for
tanning the Nets, etc. Also, Shipwrights, Joyners, Mast-makers, Pully-makers,
Rope-makers, Sail-makers, Smiths, and sundry others; Also the provisions for
Casks, Clap-boards, Coops, Cleevers, Hoopers and others; The Manufactures of,
and belonging to every Buss will set on work twenty Families, besides the
breeding of Country Youths to be serviceable Mariners in short time, the
exportation of the Herring to Foraign parts, will employ many Ships, and make a
greater importation of commodities, as Hemp, Pitch, Tarr, Rozen, Masts, Deals,
Clap-boards, Salt, and sundry other Provisions. This Work being of so great
consequence, requires Your Majesty's most gracious and serious consideration,
to be made a National business, and such persons chosen for the managing
thereof, as for conscience sake, may be for the public good, and not
self ends; for if it be recommended to all Corporations in the Nation, and in
every County, to raise a stock to buy Hemp and other Materials, to set their
poor on work, and to provide Artists to teach and manage the making of Nets,
etc. to be sent to a Magazine, at the next Port a B^ss may be there built and
furnished out for that County, Town or Corporation, and so in the
Fishing-season may go forth to the Fishing-grounds at the Island of Sheteland,
where the Hollander has his Rende^vouz for all his Busses, as by the annexed
Book thereof appears, and return with great profits to the Imployers.

Your Petitioner therefore most humbly implores Your Majesty's gracious favor
to take the Premises into Your Majesty's Consideration, and to give such
furtherance and countenance to the same, as to Your Gracious Majesty shall seem
fitting, and the benefit of such a business requires.

And Your Petitioner shall ever pray for Your Majesty's long and happy Reign
over us.
And thereupon* His Majesty (manifesting his great desire to have all his poor
People employed) did the 23 of July following write his Letter to the Lord
Mayor of the City of London; as is hereafter expressed.

CHARLES R.

RIght Trusty and well-beloved, We greet you well. Whereas Our Royal Father of
Blessed Memory, did in the year 1632. Constitute and Establish a Society of
Fishers, and Declared that He was resolved by all good occasions favorably to
assist, and graciously accept the forwardness of all those that should express
their zeal to His Majesty's Service in so general and public an Undertaking;
It being then Resolved and Concluded by His Majesty, that it was very honorable
and necessary for this Kingdom. Now that the true managing and most
advantageous prosecution thereof, is by experience discovered by Philip late
Earl of Pembroke and Mountgomery and his Associates, who did cause sundry
Fishing Vessels to be provided and built, which employed many Families in
making of Nets and other Provisions (one Vessel employing twenty Families in
work) besides the breeding of Country Youths to be made serviceable Mariners in
short time, as by the Book called The Royal Herring Buss Fishings, presented
unto Us does plainly appear. And whereas We are informed that the Nation does
abound with great numbers of poor Families and Vagrants, who for want of
employment are like to perish, unless some speedy care be taken for their
relief: And that the several Wards and Suhurbs of this Our City of London and
Hamlets adjacent, are burdened with multitudes of poor people, not only which
are born in the said places, but such as come out of sundry Countries to seek
Relief: For Redress whereof, We do hereby recommend unto the care of You Our
Lord Mayor of the said City, to advise with each Alderman, and cause his
VVard-moote Inquest to give in a particular of all the poor Inhabitants within
his Ward, what their employment is, and how many are without employment, and
present the same to the rest of the Inhabitants in his Ward, with a Copy
thereof, and excite them to a free subscription for raising a Stock to buy Hemp
and Clapboards to make Herring Fishing-nets, and Barrels for the furnishing and
fitting out of one Buss or Fishing Vessel to belong to the said Ward, which
will give all the Poor and Vagrants employment; the said Ward husbanding the
same to their best advantage. The which We shall in like manner recommend to
all the Counties, Cities and Towns within Our Dominions, whereby to make it a
National employment for the general good, and will give all fitting assistance
unto the Undertakers for their encouragement. That, so when Provisions shall be
made ready and Storehouses built in commodious places about the River of
Thames, (where breaches have been made) and the like in the several Ports,
Magazines may be fitted with Nets, Caske, Salt and all things in readiness, the
Busses may all go forth to Our Island of Sheteland as their Rendezvous to keep
together in their fishing, according to certain Orders prescribed in the
aforesaid Book. And to take that privilege of the Fishing-grounds which
belongs to Us before all Nations whatsoever. And so We bid you heartily
farewell.

Given at our Court at Whitehall this 23 day of July, in the Twelfth year of
our Reign. By His Majesty's Command. ED. NICHOLAS.

To our Right Trusty and well-beloved, the Lord Mayor of Our City of London, to
be Communicated to the Court of Aldermen.

But although it be thirteen Months since, there is nothing done therein;
which His Majesty finding so great remisness in putting the business into
action, has now granted a Commission unto 36 Noble Personages and great
Officers, whom His Majesty has nominated and constituted to be the Council of
the Royal Fishing of Great Britain and Ireland, of which His Majesty will
vouchsafe ever to be, and be called Protectors; and has granted many
Privileges and Immunities, as to Persons, Vessels, and Goods, as therein is
largely expressed; which being under the Great Seal of England, is printed;
together with the Letters Patent for a free Collection over all England and
Ireland, and Dominion of Wales, committed to the care of the High Sheriffs in
every County, to be read in all Parishes; sent under the Seal of the Right
Honorable the Earl of Pembroke, who is appointed by His Majesty to be the
Treasurer for receiving and paying out of all such moneys as shall be paid unto
him; which Moneys is only to be employed in the building of Wharfs, Docks,
Storehouses, and Graineries, for the ease and accommodation of all those that
shall employ any Stock in building of Busses; the want whereof formerly hindered
the Adventurers, and put them unto extraordinary charges, having no convenient
places for receiving Provisions, and tanning and drying their Nets, and
repacking their Herrings, to make them Merchantable Ware for Foraign vent,
according to the Holland Orders expressed in the Book called, The Royal
Herring-Buss Trade. So that now whatsoever shall be collected in the County,
City, or Shire, shall be applied unto that Port which does thereunto belong,
for the building them Storehouses, Wharfs, etc. whether the work of the Poor,
in making of Deepings or Quarter-nets of 60 mashe deep and 40 yards long, may
be sent, and there tanned und made up, and fitted for the Buss or Busses which
that County shall build or buy, and fit out against the season of fishing,
according as His Majesty's Letter expresses. And because the setting up a new
Trade in the Countries not of late years taught or practiced, will seem
unacceptable unto some, yet the easiness of learning, which is taught in half
an hour to make a Mashe in the right manner, one will teach another; and the
publishing of this Employment will bring forth those that are experienced to
teach all the Arts thereunto belonging; and the getting of the Provisions of
Hemp to be beaten, hatcheled, and spun into Twine, for the making of Nets;
wherein the least child may be employed, and the lame and blind may get a
livelihood, and the Poor of every Parish raise by their labors weekly a
sufficient maintenance thereby to relieve themselves and the aged and impotent
of that place; whereby there will be no need of Assessments on the Parishioners
for their maintenance, if once the business were in action, the benefit thereof
would soon appear. For encouragement, we have the Hollanders flourishing estate
before us, who by this Fishing-Trade commands the Wealth of all Nations, and
causes all the Poor of the Netherlands to live comfortably, and not a Beggar
or Vagrant to be seen amongst them. For there is not a Maidservant amongst
them, but has her Adventure in the Busses that go out, and has her
proportionable profit at the return of the Busses; which makes them take spare
time to make half a dozen of Nets in the winter, and fits them ready against
the Season, to send as her Adventure, and at return receives them, and gets
them tanned, newed, and fitted against the next setting out, having made as
many more ready to put in their rooms; and so every one looks to the
preservation and husbanding of their own Nets, which is a great help in the
dispatch of the Buss to her Fishing-grounds. And that the Fishermen may have
all Provisions ready in the Storehouses, of Salt, Cask, and Nets, with Beer
and Biscuit, etc. for their dispatch. And if the monied-men in the County or
place where these Magazines shall be erected will be pleased to employ their
Moneys in furnishing the Storehouses with the Provisions for the Fishers, they
will find it their best Trade; for the Merchants and others that will set out
Busses, will be much encouraged in their Proceedings, when as they know there
are Wharfs and Magazines for their accommodations, as it is in the Netherlands,
where the Ship-wrights have in their Docks, Busses to sell ready for the
Merchant to buy, or to hire, and Nets, Wayeropes, and all Provisions in the
Magazines to be bought, and in a few days they are furnished out to the
Fishing-grounds without loss of time; so that any one, either by himself or in
an Association, may please to make an experiment of the Trade, and shall enjoy
all the Privileges that are granted, mentioned in the Commission, to make his
Employment profitable, for his future encouragement.

Now forasmuch as since the publishing of His Majesty's Letters Patent in the
Churches, the generality not much regarding what was read, having been too
often troubled with Briefs, gave in a formal way very sparingly; others not
conceiving the business, took some prejudice thereat; and others desiring to be
better informed how to begin and set upon the Work, I do humbly offer these
particulars following, for explaining and information of the Work.

First, If any man will propose by himself alone to employ a Stock in setting
out of one Herring-Buss, the burden not exceeding 60 Tuns, which is the best
proportion, and will require 800 l. stock; for there must be 100 Nets fitted,
which is, 50 at setting out, and 50 kept ready at return, when the Buss
delivers her first 50 to be newed and tanned against her second return; the
Buss may be built or bought, as best can be provided, an able Husband being
first gotten, that can manage the business with knowledge and honesty in the
frugallest way, who may procure able Fishermen, and may soon be furnished out
of those small Boats which are called Traules, Cobbles, and Trinckerboats,
which fish all about the Coasts, which being poor men, by those small Vessels
can hardly maintain their Families, and therefore would hold it great
preferment to be called into such Busses; and from Yarmouth get two or three
good Gippers, Salters, and Packers of the Herrings, and good Masters who are
trained up thereunto, who would gladly be employed; and their Art and Skill in
one Voyage would be attained. The directions of all things belonging, I have
particularly expressed in my Book called, The Herring-Buss Trade, to be had at
the Widow Bourns Shop, at the South entrance of the Royal Exchange, London, to
which refer.

Secondly, He shall have the accommodation of the Wharfs, Docks and Storehouses
which are to be builded in all places where the convenience will be most
advantageous for the business, there to have the Nets tanned and dried, newed
and fitted up, and their Herring packed and made merchantable for Foraign vent;
according to the Hollanders Orders in the said Book; which will be both very
convenient and profitable, for it will save 10 per cent. in charges.

Thirdly, He shall enjoy all the Privileges and Immunities granted by His
Majesty's Commission, and reap the Profits to himself, and have his Stock at
his own command, only to be ready by the last of May to set forth for the
Island of Sheteland, whither all the Busses are first to go as their
Rendezvous, and observe the Orders; whereof every Buss at the setting out from
the Port, shall receive a printed Paper of Directions and Orders to be
observed, according as the Agents deputed and authorized shall appoint.

And having met with a Manuscript (the Author and time unknown) concerning this
Herring-Fish-Trade, apprehending the same to be worth the publishing, have
added it in this my Treatise, directly as the Author has framed it, which men
of ingenuity may make use of to their best advantage.

A Design for G. B. Mo for Sea-Security.
THE first thing required is Strength, to Defend and Offend, as occasion
requires; that is, the Making and Building of 156 Sail of Ships. And for a
Petty Navy-Royal to be Men of War, fitting in all points, in a proportion
assigned as may be related in all particulars. And the Charge may be 388000 l.

If this may be performed, then employ 78 Sail, being the one half of 156, to
be at Sea, and there to continue the full time of six Months; and at the six
Months end, the other 78 Sail to be with the former, to relieve those Seas and
Sea-places, as the former has done; and there to continue the full time of six
Months more. And the former to return presently to the Ports assigned to them.
And so from six Months to six Months to continue for ever.

The Use of this Navy is great, in defending our Seacoasts, as this design
requires. First, we begin from Shotland, in 59 degrees 30 minutes
North-Latitude, and down round about the South part of England, Wales, and
South-South West, and West Coast of Ireland, up to the Black-Rock in 53 degrees
30 minutes North-Latitude. In this Petty Navy-Royal may be employed 7848 Men,
both with Victuals and Pay, and the Charge may be 188352 l. a year.

The Proportion assigned for the 90 Busses, are these 6 Sorts, and according to
these, all the rest go generally in propertion the one to the other in their
nature.
B. Tun. 1 15 122 1 15 105 1 15 087 1 15 070 15 052 15 035 90 472 The Charge in
general for the 90 Busses, Nets, Victuals, and Pay, in 4 years time.
l. s. d. 90 B 46164 07 06 5070 N 27330 00 00 1 Y Fish C 57579 08 09 2 Y Fish C
72576 11 03 3 Y Fish C 67281 11 03 4 Y Interest C 43200 00 00 The genesis Charge
in 4 Year 314130 18 19

The Profit of fish taken in the three years time.
l. s. d. 3 Y Fish P 449550 00 00 3 Y tenth 044955 00 00 R in M P 404595 99 00
4 Y C 314130 18 09 R in M P 090464 01 03 R in Stock M 067281 11 03 R in M cle
023182 10 00

If this aforesaid being performed, then this design following may well
prosper, with great increase to G. B. M.o both in strength and in wealth, to
defend that against any two Kings in Christendom.

A Proportion assigned touching the Art of Fishing.
If 90 Adventurers put in 1500 l. a man, to make a Stock of a 135000 l. to
continue for 4 years time, and allowing Interest 8 per cent. for the ^^^e.

And the Stock of 135000 l. will perform this design; that is, to build and
make those 90 Busses in a proportion assigned: and 5070 Nets to furnish thse 90
Busses, and also to Victual and Pay, Cask and Salt, as it may be in particulars
appear.

Here it appears, that the Stock 135000 l. is all paid, and in 3 years time
of Fishing and Interest 43200 l. paid; and the tenth of Fish 44955 l. paid,
which is in all 223155 l. paid.

And rest in Stock, l. s. d. Re. in Stock 90 B 46164 07 06 R in Stock 5070 N
27330 00 00 R in Stock in M 67281 11 03 RG in Stock b.n.m. 140775 18 09 R in
Cash in M 23182 10 00 l. 13500 l. s. d. 043200 Rest in Cash in M 23182 10 00.
044955 -- 223155

The 90 Adventurers out of this R. in Cash take 250 l. a man clear gain, and R.
in Cash 682 l. 10 s. 00 d. over and above all charges deducted: And in 4 years
time a good profit.

So here it appears, that the 90 Adventurers has gained 140775 l. 18 s. 09
d. for a continual Stock always yearly to be employed, with allowance yearly in
the charge before propounded, 67281 l. 18 s. 09 d. therein for the repairing
both of Busses, Nets, Salt, Cask, as need requires.

And every Adventurer has clear to himself 250 l. in ready money for their
pains, and yet a rest in Cash 682 l. 10 s. over and above all charges. And if
good-husbandry be therein performed, there may be the better part of 20000 l.
saved, and made by the best advantage, in managing the same. But I leave that
to their wisdoms, that shall perform the design.

All this is gained, and that in 4 years time.

After this time, then every years Fishing for Herring, Ling, and Cod, there
may be gained by well employing this Stock 67281 l. 11 s. 03 d. the sum of 700
l. a year to each Adventurer; a fair purchase, and without any money given for
it.

If it prove but 600 l. a year, it is a great increase; and maintain better
than 100000 persons, Men, Women, and Children.

Now admitting 16 men and boys to serve in a Buss, they may be these, a Master,
a Mate, 4 Fishermen, 4 ordinary Saylors, and then 6 Land-men and boys to be
trained up by the former in the Art of Sailing and Craft of Fishery, it will be
a means that every Buss shall be a Seminary of Saylors and Officers; which will
be no small addition to the strength of this Kingdom.

And whereas its doubted, we shall not find utterance and sale of Herrings
when we have them; I am informed that there is yearly uttered and spent in His
Majesty's own Dominions, 10000 Lasts of Herrings, which being served by our
selves, will keep in the Land abundance of Treasure, which the Dutch yearly
carries out for the Herrings which they catch on our own Coasts and sell to us.

Sundry Quaries and Objections offered to consideration.
1. Whether the raising of stock in the Parishes for setting of the poor on
work, whereby they may get 3 s. 4 d. a week a piece for their maintenance,
either by beating of Hemp, spinning of Twine, making of Nets, etc. or by way of
Assessment in every Parish, to allow them 6 d. or 8 d. a week to maintain them
in idleness; and so lose that profit which their labors would produce, is most
profitable and honorable for the Kingdom?

2. Whether any other Employment for the Poor is more profitable to the Kingdom
than the Herring-fishing is? for the consumptive charge is only Salt and
Barrels, the cost thereof is but 4 s. for a ^^rrel of pickled Herrings or
Cod-fish, which is sold for 20 s. And so there is gained by the labors of the
Poor 16 s. per Barrel, for the wear and tear of the Buss and Cordage. Or that
the Stranger shall be permitted to ta^^ the Herrings and Fish at our own
doors, and make us to buy them at their own price; whereas we might serv^
th^^, and employ many Ships in the exportation o^ them, and in the imp^rtation
of their proceeds.

3. Whereas it is d^^^red (...) the Fishmongers in London, that the Nation may
be (...) eat Salt-fish certain days in the week, for the better vending
thereof; it shall not need, for the Foraign vent will carry (...) more than out
own Fishers can take; and that if such an Injunction should be, it would be a
great damage to the Nobility and Centry of this Kingdom, because their Tenants
could not subsist without raising of Cattle for the improvement of their Farms,
whereby they may have money to pay their Rents.

4. This Fishing-trade will be both profitable to Pishmongers, Crasiers, and
Farmers; for every Fishing-Buss is victualled forth with a quantity of Flesh
and Fish, and Bacon, Biscuit, Pease, Oatmeal, Beer, Butter, Cheese, and sundry
Implements, etc. which sundry Tradesmen will find benefit by the furnishing of
all Necessaries; and as the Busses do increase, so the expense will be more and
more; and their victualling with fresh fish will cost them nothing but their
pains to catch them.

It remains now, that men will up and be doing, to put so great, honorable,
and profitable a business into action, without any further delay, putting the
poor and vagrant People to work, for the making of Nets and other Provisions
against the 30 of May next, which is the time the Busses must go to the North
Seas fishing, according to the seasons wherein the Herrings rise first at
Sheteland, and the Doggerbank in June and July, about 100 Leagues eastward;
which Herrings are called Seasticks, and are bought at Sea, and carried to
Danzick and Hamborough, and those places near for vending of them, being fat
Herrings, and must be spent.

This great Work of the Royal Fishing being put into a National Employment, and
not by way of a Corporation, or in a joint stock, is left to every man's liberty
to employ his own stock as he pleases, either by himself apart, or in a way of
Association, setting the Poor on work to make his Deepings and Nets, and all
Provisions there unto belonging, and then he shall enjoy all the Privileges
granted by His Majesty; and all the Profits he shall raise thereby, he shall
enjoy to himself. So there will be no need of any Subscription^ ^or raising a
stock as the way of the East India Company is. But the several Wards and
Hamblets about, and all the Towns, Cities, and Parishes in His Majesty's
Dominion^ ^f England and Ireland, may raise stocks amongst themselves for
setting of their poor on work, either by Subscriptions or Assessments, or b^
Leg^cies and Gifts, and enjoy their Stocks and Profits to themselves, together
with all the Privileges granted, or to be gran^^^ by ^is Majesty. And those
Honorable Lords mentioned in the ^^mm^ss^^^, have nothing to do with their
Stocks; they only appoint Law and Orders to be observed for the batter
government of the Tra^^, ^^^^^ermen and Mariners, and to delegate Judges in all
convenient places near the fishing Ports, to decide those controversies that
shall arrise; and to elect, constitute and depute, make and authorize, Officers,
Ministers, and Agents, to manage, act, and perform all such Affairs, Business,
Transactions and Employments, as concern or be effectual and advantageous to,
and for, the carrying on this good and great Work; and to procute of His
Majesty from time to time all such other Privileges and Immunities necessary,
as shall be desired; and to cause that the moneys gathered by the Briefs, and
raised by the Lottery, shall be truly employed in the building of Storehouses,
Wharfs, and Docks, for the benefit of all those that shall set forth Busses,
etc. And the work which the Officers, Ministers, and Agents, whom they shall
delegate Power unto for managing this great Business, is.

1. To procure the Moneys collected by Briefs, and by the Lott^ry, to be
spe^dily brought in to the Treasurers.

2. To visit all the Po^ts for the best ^^nveniency of building Storehouses and
Docks.

3. To contract for the Grounds with the Owners thereof.

4. Treat with able and honest Workm^^ about the Buildings.

5. To provide the Timber and Planks, and all materials.

6. To place Overseers and Visitors over the workmen and Laborers to take care
that they and every of them perform and do their works and labors sufficiently
and honestly.

7. To settle Clerks to keep a Register of all Contracts made, and to keep
account of all the Materials bought and spent, that nothing be wasted or
imbesseled.

8. To keep a Leger-book of Accounts, wherein to post up all the Journals and
Cash books belonging unto the business, both Debtor and Creditor, which may
always show the Lords Commissioners the true state of all the Transactions of
their Business.

FINIS.

