By Public Authority.
DOctor SALMON's Pills, Drops and Balsam, those so famously known throughout
all England, fitted for the cure of most diseases in Men, Women and children.

1. FAMILY PILLS, which cure the Headache. Megrim, giddiness or swimming
Apoplexy, Lethargy, Melancholy, Frensy, Madness Dimness of sight, thickness of
Hearing, pain and noise in the Ears, Distillation sore Throats, shortness of
Breath, stinking-Breath, Green Sickness, want of Appetite, Vomiting, Pains and
stoppages of the Head stomach, Liver, or spleen, pains in the sides, Plurisie,
Wind Gravel, stone, Worms in Children, Pain, stoppage and heat of Urine,
pissing Blood Convulsions, Falling Sickness Palsy, Lameness, Numbness, SCURVY,
DROPSY, GOUT, Sciatica, Jaundice King's Evil Rickets, running of the Reins,
Barrenness in Women (though of twenty years continuance) stoppages of their
courses, and other Disease belonging to the Sex. They purify, cleanse and
sweeten the Blood, rectify all Distempers of the Head, quicken the senses,
clear the sight, add a good color to the face, and make the Body able to
withstand Diseases.

2. CORDIAL DROPS, which comfort the Heart, revive the Spirits, strengthen the
Body, and after a strange and wonderful manner cure Comsumptions in old or
young, and give present ease in the GOUT, or any other Pains, though never so
great, and in short time after perfectly cure them. They cure Feavors and Agues
of all sorts, the Cholick, are eminently good against griping of the Guis,
strengthen a weak Back take away fits of the Mother, prevent Miscarriage, and
help the Tooth ach in a moment. They are good against coughs, colds,
Destuctions of Rhume, Vomiting, pains of the stomach, Liver and Spleen They
stop any Looseness, Lask, Flux, or Bloody-siux, in a day or two at most; they
suddenly and strangly ease pains proceeding of Wind, Cold, Surfets, or any
other cause; they are also very excellent against Mlancholy, and pains of the
Spleen.

3. A BALSAM, which cures Pains, sprains, swellings, Bruises, Burns, scalds,
scabs, Wounds, Sores, old Ulcers Fistula's, and the like: It is very good
against Tetters, Ringworms, Morphew, Scurffs, Biting of Mad-Dogs, redness of
the Face, Freckles, sunburning, seabs, Itch, pimples, or any other deformity or
breaking out whatsoever. It strengthens weak Limbs, helps shrinking of the
sinews, and cures any wound in the Head, or other parts. It is very good to
anoint with in Palsies, Gouts, Sciatica, and Numbness; it is very good against
the Cramps, or any external pain. It ripens swelling, cleanses Wounds, Ulcers
and Apostumes, breeds Flesh, and skins any sore; not suffering Corruption,
putrefaction or dead flesh in any Ulcer, Fistula, Kings Evil, or the like. The
Price of a Box of the Pills is 6 d. of the Drops 6 d. and of the Balsam 6 d.

4. The way of using them. The PILLS may either be swallowed down alone, or in
the pap of an Apple, or Honey or a stewed Prune, or dissolved in a little Beer,
Ale, or Mace-Ale, Wine, or Broth, as they like best, and so taken at night
going to bed, without observation of any other order. You may give from half a
year old to three years, half a Pill, or a Pill; from three years of Age to
ten, one or two Pills: from ten years of age to fifteen give two or three: from
15 to threescore and upwards you may safely give four or five.

The DROPS give in Sack, or Ale, or Mace-A^e sweetened, five or ten drops to
young Children: from three years old to fifteen give twenty or thirty Drops:
from fifteen to threescore and upward, give from a quarter of a spoonful to
half a spoonful or more; let them be given at night going to bed: but in Agues
two or three hours before the fit, a whole spoonful.

In using the BALSAM, anoint therewith morning and night, and apply it also
Plaister-wise to the part afflicted.

5. These Family-Pills are of excellent use for all travelers, Seamen, and
such persons who live on bad diet, in ill airs, moist places, and near the sea
coast, and of such as are given to excessive drinkings, and who cannot attend
upon a cure, but are forced to go about their business; they may take them to
sea with them, (because they keep their virtues many years, nor does the water
spoil them) the which will be found to stand them in great stead in all
sea-sicknesses, sickly seasons, Calentures, Fevers, Fluxes, Poisons, Agues,
Scurvys, Poxes, etc. which commonly afflict such as go to Sea.

6. They give present ease, relief, and comfort, working gently by Urine and
stool. they strengthen the body, and agree with all constitutions; thereby
curing most cureable diseases, taking away all pains lameness and inward
stoppages: They are an excellent head-purge for all diseases in the head, as
headache megrims giddiness and Rheumy Eyes, beyond any medicin ever yet known:
and for all such as have spoiled their bodies by heats and colds, or
hard-drinking, in their young days; more can scarsely be done by any medicine.

7. They cure the Scurvy, when it is grown so bad, as to become scandalous, so
as that many people think it to be the POX: for the Scurvy often causes great
pains in the head and nose, shoulders and shin bones, with other pains all over
the whole body, dullness and heaviness, and redish or bluish spots and
breakings out in the skin, weakness in the back and loins, a bad stomach, and
sometimes loss of appetite, loosnesse and soreness of the teeth throat, and
mouth, a discolored skin, with spots, stains, pimples, morphew and scurf, and
a general weakness, and faintness all over the whole body, insomuch at last
that it gets into the bones, and infects the very marrow of them; this cruel
disease these family pills cure at a few times taking.

8. They purge by stool phlegm, choler, and melancholy; they dispose old Ulcers,
Fistula's, running sores, sore-Breasts, sore-eyes, scald heads, King's Evil
sores, tetters, ringworms, salt humors, scabs, or any other breakings out to a
speedy healing, by purging away the evil humors which feeds them.

9. They are an excellent help for all risings, Vapors, cloggings, stuffings,
gnawing or illness at the stomach; for such as grow too fat, pursie, sweat or
spit much, have costive or hot bodies, and for all such as have lost their
complexions by the Scurvy, Jaundice, or green sickness; such as are overtaken
with lingering diseases, growing worse and worse every year than other, with
melancholy stoppages in the head and breast, shortness of breath, and ill
digestion, till such time as they fall into dropsies, the Jaundice, Hectic
fevers or deep Consumptions, lingering and wasting away with dry coughs,
wheesings, faint sweats and the like; these my Family-Pills carry off all those
diseases the right way, by taking them once twice thrice or four times a month.

10. They are the only Pills now used, in the Cure of all the aforesaid
diseases, not only in England, but in many foreign countries and Kingdoms,
being cried up, and prized above all other medicines whatsoever, insomuch that
in some hundreds of families, on most occasions, they are their only Physic;
(and from hence they came to be called Family-Pills) being known to be safe in
opperation; and certain in the end proposed: for no person curable, troubled
with any of the aforesaid diseases, has failed of Cure, who has continued,
(without delaying of time, or taking of other Physic) the use of these pills
according to the directions aforesaid.

11. With these my Family Pills, I have cured two hundred and twenty Persons of
the Scurvy; one hundred and twelve of the Dropsy; one hundred Eighty Six of
the Green-sicknesse; one hundred twenty five of the Evil; one hundred and
fourteen of the Headache; ninety seven of Worms; Eighty four of the Jaundice;
seventy three of stinking breaths; besides vast numbers of people, (which come
daily to me) of most other distempers, with the drops I cured one hundred and
thirty of Consumptions; one hundred forty two of pain and weakness of the
back: and I have sold them and caused them to be given away to above two
thousand persons that have had agues, with a promise to all such as bought
them, that if they cured them not, they should have their money again; and yet
never heard to this day, that ever they mist the cure of one man, woman, or
child; although I have used them upwards of 20 years. By using these pills and
drops inwardly, and the balsam outwardly, I have cured above one hundred
persons of the Gout, some of which had gone on Crutches above a dozen years.

12. They cure the Gonorrhaa and sharpness of Urine, with all manner of
Diseases Veneral, although of many years standing; all ulcers and stoppages in
the reins, bladder and womb; they kill all sorts of worms, cause a good
appetite and a strong digestion; taking away all swellings from the belly,
Thighs, and Legs, being the best remedy known in the world for the Dropsy and
Gout; taking away all manner of pains from the very bones, when no other means
whatsoever (...) they dissolve the Stone, and bring away slime, Sand, and
Gravel causing those to make water plentifully, which could not in many days
before; this they have done in several hundreds to admiration. Many bed rid,
and given over to all appearance, have unexpectedly met with a cure almost to a
miracle; in so much that many learned Physicians, could not but admire at their
Virtues.

13. The success and safety of these Pills, have brought them into credit and
Estimation, almost through the whole world; forasmuch as they that take these,
need not go under long, dangerous and chargable courses of Physic, suffer by
bad medicines, and be driven time after time from one Physician to another.

14. Where the disease has been of long continuance, a perfect Cure cannot be
expected in 5 or 6 times taking, in those cases take them in the largest dose;
and at le^st ten, fifteen, or twenty times, as need requires, omitting them
sometimes a day or two, as you see cause.

Lastly, They may be taken without confinement to the house, or keeping (...)
there any positive necessity to take broth or posset drink, or the like with
them, as in other Physic, but as the patient pleases, being safe and gentle in
their opperation, and fit to be taken by all persons, from half a year old to
threescore and upwards, at any time and season of the year.

They are to be Sold in London, at the Doct. house at the Blew B^ls Mitre-court
Fleetstreet. Kingston, by Tho. Brichet, at Rob. Shorters near the King's Head.
Worcester, by William Tompkins, Barber, near the Cross. Newbury, by Thomas
Stockwell Habberdasher of hats. Braintree, by Joseph Hunwick. Ruthin, by
Richard Win Postmaster. Leichfield, by Edward Millward Bookseller. Stafford,
by Thomas Jennyns at the Maidenhead. Dochester, by Samuel Coven at the George.
The Devises, by Cornelius Cork at the White Swan. Gloucester, by Anna Jordan
Bookseller.



