Imprimatur.

April 16. 1687. Ex aedibus Lamb-hithanis. Jo. Battely.

A Future World, In which MANKIND shall Survive their Mortal Durations,
Demonstrated by RATIONAL EVIDENCE, From NATURAL and MORAL ARGUMENTS Against the
Atheist's Pretentions.

By WILLIAM SMYTH, D. D.

Vera Beatitudo, quam Deus dabit, non tantum Authoritate Divina, sed adhibita
Ratione, qualem propter infideles possumus adhibere, clarescat. St. Aust. de
Civ. Dei, lib. 19. cap. 10. LONDON, Printed by T. M. for R. Clavel at the
Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1688.

To the Right Honorable WILLIAM Earl and Viscount Yarmouth, Treasurer of His
Majesty's Household, AND Lord Lieutenant of Wiltshire.
My LORD,
Although I do humbly Acknowledge, That it is too Great a Happiness for me, to
have both the Honor and Advantage of sheltering my Self in this Adventure
under Your Lordship's Protection, yet I hope I may presume upon another Favor
from Your Lordship, by this Address: And that is, That Your Lordship would
please to Interpret and Accept it, as an Instance of my Grateful Acknowledgment
of many Signal Kindnesses formerly received from some of Your Lordship's Noble
Ancestors.

And though, My Lord, there may be an Exception made, That I should Dedicate a
Book that relates to a Future World, to a Person of Honor, in the Youthful
Flourish of his Age, and in the very Point of his Ascendency to Temporal
Greatness; yet I am so far Assured of Your Lordship's Ingenuity and Goodness,
that You will neither refuse to be advertised, nor be aggrieved to think, That
when You have passed over the several Stages of Your Mortality, You must become
an Inhabitant in the Future World, whose Real Existence I have endeavored to
ascertain to the Reason of a Man, as the Truth of it is more especially
secured, by the Faith of a Christian.

And, My Lord, I doubt not, but that this Discourse will be the rather
acceptable to Your Lordship, now You are so Honorably engaged in His Majesty's
Service, as that it may possibly add to the Numbers of His Majesty's Dutiful
Subjects: And that, because there are no sorts of Men more ready to Degenerate
into Republican Principles and Practices, than those, who when they are told of
their Duties to their Prince, upon Religious Obligations, can Mock at the
Concerns of another World.

And now, My Lord, as to Your Own Person; If Your Lordship shall, upon Your
Perusal of this Treatise, meet with any thing which may Contribute to Your
Lordship's Happy Interest in that Following World; as such a Success will amply
Recompense me for the Pains I have taken upon that Famous Subject, so it will
answer the affectionate Desires and Prayers of,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Obliged and most Obedient Servant, WILL. SMYTH.
March 28 th. 1688.
A Prefatory Account TO THE READER.
AND he is to be Advertised, That the cogent Reason which overruled my
Thoughts, to engage at this time in a Discourse upon this Subject, is, because
I am convinced, that there has not been the same Industrious Care taken, to
Control the Atheist's Pretentions, against the Belief of A Future World's
Existence, as in many other Cases of lesser moment and danger, it has been
expressed.

For though Men may Answer in Excuse for that Omission, because a professed
Unbelief of that State, is in its self so odiously abhorrent, as that few Men
have adventured the reproach of making any Open Discoveries of their
Unbelieving Sentiments: Yet such as are guilty of that Omission, have not well
considered, what an Inclination there is in Men, grossly Irreligious, to listen
to any suggestions, which may (though covertly) licentiate their continuance in
their most Impious and Immoral Practices; Nor have they considered, that there
has not been such men wanting, as were ready in their loose and complying
Societies, (though sometimes but slyly and sportfully) to insinuate such
Atheistical Thoughts into their Associates Heads, (of the prodigious Effects of
which we cannot be unsensible:) I say, these things considered, (of which I
shall presently give a further account) I know not what can be said in real
Excuse for that Omission.

And further, to evince the Truth of this Charge, let the numbers of Books,
which relate to the different Opinions about Religion, be computed, in which
Fellow Christians have expressed their Zealous Labors one against another; and
then let a Man examine how few Treatises there be extant, which have been
engaged in the Defense of another World's Existence, in such a manner, as might
convince Atheistical and Doubtful Minds, and I am confident, such an Enquirer
into that Disparity, will find, that not One Book of a Thousand, has born any
singular Attention to that Work; and yet perhaps none more Needful to have been
undertaken; as I shall presently make it appear.

I confess, I have a good while had these Papers finished by me, but I have
been hitherto discouraged from publishing them, because I perceived the late
Controversies have so swallowed up the Minds, and devoured the time of Reading
Men, that the Books upon any other Subjects could obtain no attentive Regard at
all; Nor would those men permit themselves to enquire after any Discourses, but
such as bore some alliance to those present Controversies.

But now, at this juncture of time, supposing Men to be thoroughly wearied with
those Tossings of Dispute; and with being continually Spectators of such
endless Oppositions; and even nauseated with those numerous Pamphlets, sent
abroad almost every Week, with the heaps of which, their very Houses are
encumbered, as well as their Heads: I say, I imagined, for those Reasons, that
such men would now be in a disposition, if it were but to alleviate their
fastidious Minds with some Variety, to attend to some other Discourses, which
might abett no Party on either hand. And the present Subject, I am sure, may
challenge an Exemption from any such biased Concernment.

And then more particularly, this Discourse may the rather claim a greator
Attention from every Party, because it is in the Defense of a Subject which is
the Prime Fundamental (next to the acknowledgment of a GOD) upon which all
Religions, howsoever variated by different Persuasions, must necessarily be
superstructed; and without a firm Belief of which, what would signify such
elaborate Multiplications of the present Controversial Differences? Which,
perhaps, by some men's manner of management, may, in time, give no small
occasion for the Usefulness of such a Discourse as this: Especially if there
should be the same Event from the Intestine and Civil Wars of the Pen, as from
those of the Sword; according to my Lord Verulam's Observation about the
Introduction and Increase of Atheism.

And now I wish I had no more to say to my Honest-minded Reader for his
satisfaction. But some Captious men have provided other Work for me. For I hear
(upon the very notice of my design) that there are many Exceptions intended,
whereby to overruled the Necessity, and to disparage the Lawfulness of my whole
Undertaking. And therefore I must entreat my well-intending Reader's Patience,
while I endeavor to solve the Import of those Exceptions before I begin. And
they are especially these Four.

First, Some (as I hear) are prepared to say, that this Author must needs
himself suppose, and would have others to think, that there be many People at
this time, who are very extraordinarily Defective in their Belief of this
Fundamental Article; or he would never have taken upon himself to engage in
this particular Subject, with so much earnestness; nor have been so solicitous
in solving every Little Allegation and Exception, as if a studied Sceptick
stood always at his Elbow, to suggest them to him.

My Solution of this Exception is, That I must needs Confess, I do really
think, that there are more Considerable Numbers in the Nation, (occasioned
principally by the Former Ages unhappy Rebellion) than men are ordinarily aware
of, who do at this time (though for fear or subtilty they don't always discover
their Thoughts) either wholly disown the Being of any Future at all, or else
that do admit the Belief of it, but (dimidiata side) with a skeptical and
doubtful Faith, and under some disordered Apprehensions; such as may License
them in their Irreligious Ways of Living, without any control from a Sense of
what is to come in Future. And if those men's Practices may be allowed for a
Demonstration of such defects in their Faith, what Arguments of that kind can
be supposed to be wanting in their Actions, to assure such an Evidence?

For though it is true (as some are apt to allege) that a bare supine
inconsideration in some Men, and some Prejudices and odd Nations of Religion in
others; and perhaps some Unhappy Educations, and disadvantageous
Exemplifications in many more, may so far prevail, as that many men may be
tempted to a Carelessness of Conversation; that is, perhaps to be engaged in
some fashionable Vices, and common Follies; or to be regardless of some
Religious Offices: But when we shall see men so professedly Wicked, as to make
no Conscience at all of the grossest Immoralities; and so profane, as to make
a Mock of all the salutary Expedients which a Gracious GOD has provided in His
Church for their Eternal Good and Happiness; What can induce a Man to think
otherwise, but that such men's minds must be debauched, either with a Latent
Unbelief of Another World; or with such an imperfect Sense of it, as by which
their Thoughts might not be affected with any Judgment or Punishment to come,
for whatsoever they do?

And why may I not think my Conjecture to be reasonably enough deduced, when
(if the Targums sense of the case may be accepted) such an Observation may be
verified from the Beginning of the World, in the Famous Case of Cain and Abel?
Here lay the ground of their vastly-different States and Events. The one
believed a Future State, and made use of his Faith to perform an acceptable
Sacrifice to GOD, in order to a Future Reward: The other Brother denied the
Being of such a state. For whereas its said, (Genesis 4. 8.) That Cain talked with
his Brother Abel; (as the Targum expounds it) the Discourse was about a Future
World; and Cain told Abel, Respondit Cain and dixit Abeli, non est judicium,
nec judex, nec saeculum aliud, etc. Respondit Abel, est judicium and judex,
etc. Et propter harum rerum caulam, contendebant super facies agri, and
surrexit Cain contra fratrem suum, and fixit lapidem in front ejus, and
interfecit eum. Targ. Jonathan. B. Vriell. Bibl. Polrg.
that there was neither Judgment nor Judge, Reward nor World to come, etc. But
Abel told him, that all those were to be believed as true. Upon this Difference
Abel suffered Martyrdom in defense of his Faith; and Cain, by his Unbelief,
became a Murderer, and Famously miserable.

Now, as no man can think it impossible, but that there may be some men in this
Age, who may be as irreligious and malicious, as revengeful and profane as
Cain was; then why may it not, without breach of Charity, be presumed that
there may be such also amongst us, as have entertained in their minds the same
Atheistick Principles which Cain indulged? And though this my Conjecture may seem
to some men surprising and too severe, yet I cannot imagine how any observing
man can behold the little conscience that is made but of that one Horrid and
crying sin of Perjury only, by which the Power and Justice of God are so often
dared to his Face; and the import of the Sacred Bible, upon which they swear,
as often scorned, and (as it were) defied, but he must incline his mind to my
unhappy Conjecture.

But if some men, (out of civility to Mankind, the Nation and their Neighbors)
should refuse to admit such a manner of answer to this Exception and be
resolved to think, that there be no men so defective in their Faith of another
World, how irreligious soever they may be in their Lives; yet I can assure my
self, that this my Discourse may be useful, not only to them, but even to the
most Religious sort of Believers; Who may be highly pleased and gratified, when
they shall understand that that Fundamental upon which they had adventured all
their hopes of being in Future Blessed, should not stand upon the only point of
Believing, for which they might suffer, from some Atheistick Persons, the
reproach of an easy Credulity, (a Credat Judaeus Apella) but that they can now
be able to defend themselves in that point, against such Atheists, even upon
the Evidence of their own Principles.

2. The next Exception is entertained by them, who will say, that my way of
Arguing for another World's Existence by Rational Demonstration, is wholly to
the disparagement of the Evangelick Revelation; and that it calls in question
its sufficiency to do its own Work, as having brought Immortality to light, and
given the most convincing Evidence for the Belief of another World. And that
therefore there is now no more need to fly to Philosophical Argumentation, than
there is to the Miracle of one rising from the Dead for further Conviction. For
say my Exceptioners, Luke 16. 29.
they have Moses and the Prophets, to whom the Unbelievers being sent, the
Officers of Religion are discharged of any further Care for such men's recovery
from their Infidelity. But then also they will be ready to object and say, that
such a Proceedure, by Rational Demonstration, will turn all Religion into
Skepticism, and bring Christianity back again to Philosophy.

First, In my answer to this most material Exception, I shall consider of what
importance that alleged Text of Scripture is, to make good that Charge against
me in this Case. And then I say, that that Text is only to be understood, that
the Divine Revelation may be sufficient for the Belief of another World's
Existence, without any new instances of Attestation; such an one, as one rising
from the Dead, to confirm the Credibility of that, which was sufficiently
testified before. But it does not thence follow, though there should be no more
need of Testimonial Proof, That men should be denied (when the occasion
especially requires it) the Benefit and Use of Rational Demonstration, to
evince the Truth of A Future World's Existence. Which when it is done, it will
be so far from being a Disparagement to the admitting the Truth of it by Divine
Attestation, That it will add much to the Credit of the Testimonial Authority,
which exacted the Obedience of such a Faith.

And therefore, since it has pleased God Almighty to allow Men the Advantage
of both ways to evince the Truth of this Fundamental Principle of all Religion,
surely it was not his design, that they should disparage or amaze one another,
but that they should be Auxiliaries, and subservient one to another.

Secondly, I answer, That it was a method which the Church frequently undertook
to convince the Heathen World; especially when Miracles became unfrequent.
Therefore Clemens Alexandrinus owns both those Advantages from God: First, that
of Revelation, -- (...) -- (...), etc. Strom. lib. 1. Mihi page 282.
as principally to be attended to; and then also of Philosophical Demonstration
to be made use of, in the behalf of the Gentile World.

And the Primitive Apologists transcribed me such a Copy of what I have here
attempted, (though they managed it by measures agreeable to their then Opponents)
that either my Exceptioners must question the proceedures of those Ancient
Defenders of Christian Faith, or they must think themselves unjustifiable in
condemning me. Especially when they may consider, that it is very probable,
that I may have a sort of men to deal withal, who may maintain as stubborn an
Opposition to the Scriptural Revelation, and all other the Churches Testimonial
Proofs of a Future States Existence, as those ancient Heathens may be presumed
ever to have entertained. And by the Sense of the Increase of such an Obstinate
Modern Atheism was Curterius Governed, when he gave his Reasons for the Edition
and Interpretation of the Famous Philosopher Hierocles. -- Libellus, qui
philosophicis rationibus, ab illis id extorqueret, (nisi hominis naturam
exuerint) quod divini Verbi Authoritas persuadere non potuit. Praef.
As when he says, That it was not without a Divine Providence that such a Book
should come to public View, which by Philosophical Reasonings should extort
those Truths from them, (unless they would unman themselves) which the Divine
Revelation could not prevail with them to admit.

Thirdly, I answer, in Justification of those Ancients. Practice, and my own
Undertaking, That there is no Attempt or Method so proper, and in its self so
reasonable, to bring such Atheistical Minds to embrace the Christian Religion,
as that which I have endeavored by this present Discourse. For if once such
men's Understandings can be convinced by any means, to entertain an assured
Acknowledgment of A Future World's Existence; and then shall be sensible of
those events, which are reasonably consequent to such an Acknowledgment, it
will of course engage them (if they have any minds at all) in the study of
finding out the best way, how they might most securely provide for their own
Safety in such a Following World.

And when, for that purpose, they shall have considered of, and surveyed the
several Modes of Religion in the World, they cannot but find Christianity more
accommodable to the serious Conceptions of an Intellectual Mind, than any
Institution that was ever tendered to the Thoughts of Man, especially when he
shall understand that it is a Principle that has in all Ages endured the Test
and Trial of the acutest Literature; and has hitherto born down all
Oppositions with the greatest Success. That has been innobled with the highest
instances of Generous Resolution, even to Death it self, in the declared
defense of it. A Religion that has made the most absolute Provision for the
Welfare of all Societies: That is, that it keeps up Sovereign Power with the
Intirest Loyalty, and the Rights of Men with the exactest Justice, and provides
for the Needs of Mankind with the Tenderest Mercy. And that where its
Institutions are truly observed, it makes men civil and obliging; placable and
condescending; and will engage them to do nothing, but what is seemly and
prudent, faithful and honorable.

But then, when upon these considerate Thoughts, our Convert, by such a
Rational Conviction, shall be once brought to the Door of Christ's Kingdom,
(the main intention of my Design) he is not to expect, nor will the Christian
Institution admit it, that the Heavenly Contrivance and mysterious Doctrines of
it, should depend upon, or necessarily be accounted for, by the same Rational
and Demonstrative Way of Proof, which at first induced him to entertain the
Thoughts of Embracing the Profession of that most Holy Religion. He will then
find Reasons to think, That to Believe will be made his Duty; and that he must
Walk by Faith, and not by Sight, as St. Paul declares positively. And that then
also he must not give leave to his Captious mind; to be always enquiring for
Demonstrating Reasons for every thing that is tendered to his Belief. It Is
true, That Rational Evidence did first bring him to Christianity; but it must
be his Faith, that will make him a true Professor of it: And the Conformity of
his Life and Actions to that Holy Faith, will at lust bring him to the
Happiness of that Future World; of the Existence of which, he was so convinced.

And thus, I hope, I am sufficiently acquitted of that suspicious Objection, as
if, when I endeavored by Rational Evidence to bring an Atheist to the Belief
of such a World to come, that I designed to turn all Religion into Skepticism,
and the Christian Faith to Philosophy. This solves the Second Exception.

3. The Third Exception is made by them, who will be ready to say, That since I
have undertaken, against the Modern Atheists, to Demonstrate a Future World by
Rational Evidence, how comes it to pass, that I have not also endeavored to
Offer at the same Way of arguing, to evince the Being of One Supreme GOD? And
Is there not (say they) the same Necessity for the one, as for the other,
against the Atheist's Pretentions?

To this Exception my answer is, That in the management of this my
Demonstrative Way of arguing for A Future World's Existence, I have not been
precariously Presumptive of any one other Principle, either Philosophical or
Divine, but only of that One, viz. the pre-supposed believed Existence of a
Supreme and Infinite GOD, as the Creator, and consequently the Sovereign
Governor of that His Created World. And I presumed, that such a Concession no
man, that consults his Reason, would ever deny me, because no man can
disbelieve His Divine Existence without a Violence offered to his Reasoning
Understanding. In which, if that Notion be not naturally implanted, (as many
Learned men believe) yet it will so uncontroulably Command any Considering
Minds assent, as that no Nation, how barbarous soever, nor any man so rude, but
he must submit to the acknowledgment of a Deity; Tusc. Quaest. Lib. 1.
as Cicero positively discourses.

But if my Exceptioner shall, in prejudice to me, still proceed to lay that
Omission, as a Stumbling Block, in my way, I desire that he would but seriously
consider, Whether the Opinion of the World's Eternity, or its coming into that
Figure, in which it now exists, by the casual Confluence of little Atoms (the
only two Refuges to support the Denial of such a First creative Cause) can be
managed in any man's Thoughts so accommodably and naturally, as may the
acknowledged Being of an Eternal GOD, to be the Original Creator of such a
World; whose Greatness must proclaim His Power; whose Orderly Figure His
Infinite Reason; and whose regular and constant Continuance in that Order, when
so many Beings are naturally subjected to such numerous intercurrent Motions
and Contingencies, must evince His Providential Wisdom and Government? This the
Third Solution.

The Last Exception, with which I am most likely to be attacked, is offered by
them, that will say that my Discourse is upon a Subject which has been already
handled by a great many considerable Authors; and that I shall but still add to
the so much complained of redundancy of Books, with which the World is already
too much encumbered.

My Answer to this Exception is; That as I had never inquired after, nor ever
read any Treatise that Concerned the Defense of another World's Existence,
before I had exactly finished my own Arguments; so since, though* I have made
as strict an enquiry as I could, to find out such Discourses, I could not meet
with any but such, as generally managed this important Case, either but as in
some digressive Passages, or as occasionally inter woven in Discourses
otherwise designed. And where any Treatises may have given any likelihood of
being purposely published for the purpose in hand, yet their Arguments were too
concise and summary, to solve a nice and Skeptical Doubt, much less to
overruled an Obstinate Opposition.

For though the Substance of the Truth might be couched in such short Mediums
of Proof, yet I conceive, that they were too like the contracting a
considerable Controversial Cases, into an Article of Aquinas; which must be
presumed to be by far otherwise better managed, when the controverted point
shall be agitated by industrious Opposition. And which then may occasion whole
Volumes to discharge the Debate, when a few Lines, at another time, would have
served the turn. I say, the Arguments were too Compendious and Epitomized, and
therefore (...) many cases, for want of fuller explanations, they would seem to
be built upon Principles and Premises too precariously presumed. And then, for
that Reason also, they could not possibly provide against those numerous
Exceptions, which Scrupulous and Steptick Minds would be apt to interpose; and
of which there must have been more particular and exact Solutions, or such men
would never have admitted the Conclusion.

To avoid all those Inconveniences, I have endeavored in the whole Progress
of my Arguings to understand beforehand, what could possibly be suggested in
such Cases; wheresoever I could either hear, read; or think of them. And if
thereby I may seem to have made too Copious Enlargements, either in the
Explanations of the Premises, or solving the Exceptions, I must crave such
Readers Patience and Ingenuity to think, that I have done it for their sakes,
who (I thought) did specially need them, or that would exact them from me. And
thus my Fourth Exception is solved.

But, I confess, I might have most justly subjoined one more, and perhaps the
Greatest, and with which I am sure to be sufficiently assaulted; and that is,
the Unsufficiency of my Performance. But of that I need not be advertised, I
have Reasons enough in my own mind to humble me; and no Man can speak meaner of
it than I think.

I know it were silly in me to say, I was too inadvertently surpised into an
Allowance of the Publication of this Treatise, or that when it was once in a
Learned Friends hand, I did not only give him leave, but desired him, that a
flame might make it never to be thought on more; yet this I am sure, I may
inoffensively say, that I shall be so much the less concerned at whatsoever
kind of Reception, the nice Age shall please to allow it, as that I have but a
short step to make, before I shall enter into that other World, where (to be
sure) I shall not be affected with the little Notices of a For or Against. But
if I were so Unfortunate, as to be concerned, yet I could not but consider,
that there is but a Die cast for my Lot: And that a Book's Entertainment in the
World, is even as Hazardous as a Juries Verdict; where Dissatisfaction,
Prejudice; or Ignorance, may cast the issue on the wrong side. It may be my
case, though this whole Preface was designed to prevent such a Consequence, and
to provide a necessary defense of the Subject's Usefulness, and my own Credit,
against such Exceptions as are managed against both. And I hope this will
justly plead my Excuse for the length of such an Introduction.

A short Account of the Heads of the Five ARGUMENTS, with the numbers of those
Pages where they all begin.
THE First Argument is founded upon the Promiscuous usage of Good and Evil in
this World, and begins Page 2. The Second from the Rational Faculties, not
given for this World only; and begins Page 85. The Third upon the
Encouragements to Virtue from another World only; and begins Page 187. The
Fourth from the Miseries of Mankind in this World; and begins Page 281. The
Fifth from men's Innate Desires of Happiness, not satisfied in this Life; and
begins Page 367.
INDEX.
A.
APpeals to God's Tribunal 20 Adam's Sin 331 Age described 301
B.
Belief of a Deity 213
C.
Conscience of Evils 16 Contemplation 143 Chiefest Good 406 Covetousness 115
D.
Dead-Mens Future State concealed, and why? 50 Death described 301 309
Discontents 92 297 Drunkenness 119
E.
Exemplification 259
F.
Fools by sensual living 109 Fools Charactered 115 Friendship 295
G.
Government 137 Its End 221 Gospels easiness examined 267
H.
Heathens opinion of the other World 3^ Hobbs his Necessitation examined 204
Happiness naturally desired 373 Differences about it 406 Happiness, by
Memorials left behind, examined 409 Honor 247 395
I.
Jews Temporal Promises 237 Justice at one time or other 7 Justice not done in
this World 26 Justice respited to another World, why? 52
L.
Learning 125
M.
Miseries of Mankind represented 288 From God; why? 323 Murderers of
Mens-selves examined 337 Miseries beneficial 353 Surplusage of them examined
357
P.
Predestinarian Principles 201 Philosophical Rules to prevent Self-murder,
examined 345 Parents Case to their Children 337 Pleasures 396 403
R.
Rational Faculties not given for this Life only 87 Rewards may be proposed 207
S.
Spiritual things satisfy 152 In Men's power 160
T.
Temporal things not satisfy 92 Not in Men's power 99 Time how to be spent 181
V.
Virtue described 195 Virtue her own Reward examined 229 Virtues difficult;
how? 243 Reasons for it, why? 269
W.
Wisdom by Religion 167 Wise and good man's Character 171 Wealth examined 398
Useful 417
These following ERRATA, being most material, the Reader is desired to Correct
with his Pen, and pardon the rest, as I hope, of less moment.
PAge 4. l. 12. for That is, r. And. P. 6. l. 4. for God r. His. P. 18. l. 22.
r. Menalaus. P. 42. l. 6. add Poets. P. 48. l. 12. r. Sensibly. P. 50. l. 16.
add Scholastic. P. 51. l. 2. r. a Rheiorick (...) P. 59. l. 3. r. disposed. P.
63. l. 12. r. thus. P. 65. l. penult. dele. that. P. 99. l. 1. add is. Ibid. l.
20. r. Constitutives. P. 102. l. 10. dele are. P. 141. l. 18. add if. P. 144.
l. 5. r. (...). P. 184. leave out all from Notion, l. 19. to makes, l. 21. P.
189. l. 16. add a. P. 262. l. 28. r. Ingenuous. P. 275. l. 3. r. to signify
their. P. 278. l. 25. dele sense and. P. 378. l. r. dele, and. P. 381. l. 7.
for as r. at. P. 382. l. 19. r. a Being. P. 383. l. 14. for [*] put [*] P. 386.
l. antepen add It Is certain. P. 390. l. 4. for stout r. afflicted. P. 401. l.
28. for Honor r. Fame. P. 403. l. 27. r. Excesses. P. 404. l. 19. for disease
r. disgrace. P. 413. l. 5. dele Happiness and. Ibid. Blot out from satisfaction
l. 5. to concerning l. 8. inclusively. Ibid. l. 8. dele Kind of Happiness. P.
426. l. 12. r. were they.

First Argument.
The Sum of the FIRST ARGUMENT.
THE First Argument designed to demonstrate the necessary Existence of a Future
State, is founded upon an obviously acknowledged Observation, That there is not
Universal Justice, Judgment and Equity done to Mankind in this present World,
according to the different Qualifications of their Lives and Actions. But that
Good Men, and their Righteous Causes, are very frequently oppressed and
defeated; and that Evil Men, and their Unjust Undertakings and Practices, as
commonly prosper and succeed.

All which cannot but reflect upon the essential Goodness and Wisdom of
Almighty GOD; because those unequal Proceedings and Events could not be acted,
and brought to pass, without His Divine Permission; and also, because it was
always in His Power to have prevented them when he pleased.

Now if nothing else can solve that Reflection upon those Divine Attributes,
but only the belief and acknowledgment of a Future World, to which God's
impartial and complete Administrations of Justice, Judgment, and Equity, should
be respited and adjourned: That is, if it shall appear, that that Adjournment
of it to that State, can only secure the Universe in its naturally stated
Order; and then that no other season of its Administration, can so sufficiently
acquit GOD's gracious care of, and love to Mankind, according to the Nature he
gave them: Then it must needs follow, That he has ordained and constituted
such a Future World, and State.

Now, that this Argument may more fully attain its designed End, and that I may
take away all possible Exceptions against the Premises, or what relates to
them, I shall divide the general Concern of it, into Three Chapters or Heads
of. Discourse, in order to the clearer Inference of the Conclusion at last.

In the first Chapter, I shall offer to proof, That what is just and equitable,
will by a Good and Just GOD be impartially administered to all sorts of Mankind,
according to the different Qualifications of their Lives and Actions, at one
time or another; that is, either here or here after.

In the Second Chapter, it will be made evident, That Almighty GOD does not
execute such an universal administration of Justice to Mankind in this present
Life; and then I shall take into consideration, what an Influence that Omission
had upon the Minds of the Heathen World.

In the Third Chapter, it will appear, That GOD's respiting and adjourning the
completely impartial Administration of His Divine Justice to a Future World,
can only solve the apprehensions we have, That GOD intended to preserve the
present Universe in the same Order that his Power and Wisdom had at first
Created it, especially as to his Divine Care of Mankind, whether as socially,
or individually considered.

And if all these Three Premises shall, upon sufficient Proof, be found to be
certainly true; there will be no Cause at all to question the Conclusion for
the undoubted Existence of another World.

A FUTURE WORLD'S EXISTENCE Demonstrated by Rational Evidence.
CHAP. I.
THE First Chapter is designed to represent and prove, That GOD Almighty will,
without doubt, administer an impartial distribution of Rewards and Punishments
to the Good and Evil, according to the different Qualifications of their Lives
and Actions at one time or another. And the truth of this necessary
presupposition, is founded upon these Five Grounds or Reasons, which make up so
many Sections.

Section I.
THe first Reason that I shall offer for the necessary belief of such an
impartial distribution of Justice ar one time or another, is alleged from the
believed Existence of a God, with a particular respect to his Natural and
Essential Goodness, which by a necessary consequence from his being
acknowledged the World's Original Maker, must be believed to be as infinitely
Operative, as any other of those Divine Perfections, which the Creation of the
World must necessarily suggest to belong to such an infinite First Cause, and
Independent Being.

And for the reasonableness of this deduction, I appeal to the Philosopher
Simplicius, who upon the account of considering God as the Cause of Causes, --
(...) -- (...). Page (mihi) 210.
and Beginning of all Beginings, presently as a necessary concomitant with such
a conception of him, concludes him to be Goodness of Goodnesses, that is, Good
to all Perfection.

Now whatsoever Being, is in any degree, or sense, a real Goodness in it self,
must be supposed to afford a reason of that denomination, from a Good that is
done according to its capacity, where there be Objects that need it, or Causes
that require it.

And if the Goodness of God be such, (which no man can suspect without
Blaspheming the Divine Nature, and contradicting his own Reason) the mind of
man cannot possibly suggest a doubt, but that it should express it self in the
Case in hand. That is, that a God of infinite Goodness and Equity, when it is
always in his Power, as to understand, so to do all that is good and right,
should at some time or other, vindicate and justify the innocent Causes of Good
Men; that is, should recompense and reward their undeserved Sufferings;
especially when for their adherences to virtue, they have been harassed and
perplexed by the malicious usages of unjust and unreasonable men. I say, if the
verification of his infinite Goodness be not to be thus expressed, What Cases
are there, by which the reason of man can be otherwise satisfied, that that
glorious Attribute has a title to the same perfection, which the rest are
presumed to have? or how otherwise, in any kind of practical Notion, can any
reasonable Being understand, for what end or purpose he is commanded or obliged
to be good at all? or how can a created moral Agent be so accounted either by
God or Man upon such an omission? To refuse to do Right and Good, when it is
always in his capacity to do it, would make but an untoward Character of such a
Person, by an indifferent Judge of what Goodness is. And therefore to suppose
God (with Epicurus) to be so wholly unconcerned in the Government of the World,
and especially at what happens amiss to good men in it, so as to take no care
at all of their vindications, when they are unjustly used and oppressed, would
be reason enough, not only to reproach God's infinite Goodness, but, upon a
very reasonable consequence, to tempt men to question his whole Existence. This
is the first Reason.

Section II.
THE Second Reason is alleged from the Nature of Man, as God was pleased to
make him a free and voluntary Agent, designed to be left to the conduct, and in
the hand of his own Counsel; that is, because God gave him by his nature, in
distinction from all other visible Creatures (who act necessarily by a
sovereign Impulse, from which they cannot depart) a Power in himself to think,
deliberate, and act Good or Evil at his own choice, and as he should judge fit
to determine his own Mind and Actions. And the reason of this deduction is,
because either the same Wise God, that formed him into such an arbitrary
Nature, must have certainly provided and constituted for him some superior
Judge and common Arbiter, by the dread of whose sovereign Authority and
Justice, he might engage his mind and conscience to do what is just and good,
and to whom he might be accountable for his actions whether good or evil; or it
must be presumed that God made him possibly to be, the most (I may say the
only) lawless, unsociable, and ungovernable part of the whole Creation. That
is, that he should live (as it is manifestly seen men do, where such a Judge is
neither regarded nor sufficiently considered) both to be his own folly and
ruin, and the world's trouble and misfortune.

Hence Athenagoras ingeniously observes, That as it is necessary to man's nature,
that having an appetite he should have meat to preserve his life; (...), etc.
de Resur. P. 60.
and that as he is a mortal, he should have posterity to preserve his species;
so as he is a rational Creature, that he should have a common Judge of all his
actions, and from whom he might expect a reward, and dread a punishment.

Now if such an Universal Judge, and Arbiter must for that reason be thus
necessarily supposed, then it is certain that there can none be believed to be
so universally qualified for it, as the same God that Originally gave man his
being; and who by the Title of Creator was invested with a natural Sovereignty
over all his Creatures which he made; and especially over Man, to whom he had
given such a figure of mind and being, as naturally to need his Governing
Dominion, more than any other Creature besides, if not only.

For none can be such a competent Judge, but a Being that is Omniscient, and so
is capable of understanding all Causes, Minds, and Actions; that is of an
infinite goodness, and so can love, approve, and bless all that is done well,
justly, and worthily: And lastly, of an infinite power so as to be able to
execute all his own judiciary purposes and determinations, how and when he
pleases.

No Being, that wants any of these qualifications, can possibly be a Competent
Judge of Men and their Actions, so that Universal right and equity may be
completely and impartially done to the whole world of such Rational and
Voluntary Agents. And because God Almighty can only be qualified for such a
Judge, what can make a Suspicion, that he should not execute that just,
necessary, and sovereign Office, at one time or another?

As for what concerns the committing his Judiciary Authority to sovereign human
Powers, it will be accounted for in the third Argument (chap. 2. sect. 3.) that
is, how far thereby the Divine Care of administering universal Justice to the
world, is attained and discharged.

Section III.
THe Third Reason that secures a Belief, that God will at one time or other,
undertake the vindication of all righteous persons and causes, and bring them
all to a true balance of impartial Right, is from a plea, and a just appeal,
(and that upon most Rational Consequences) which all that are unjustly
oppressed, may make to the holy and sovereign God, in their own behalf.

First, By alleging, that the promiscuous world of Mankind, in which good men
are unavoidably subjected and exposed (for reasons which a Future World can
only solve) to the hazard of such miscarriages, and disadvantages, was
naturally so disposed by God's own Original pleasure and ordination, as
possibly to admit and produce such unequitable effects. And therefore the evil
usages of virtuous and good men in such a world, must needs, in that respect,
be the consequences of such causes and occasions, which God might have
prevented if he had pleased, but which themselves could not control, when they
would.

Secondly, And more particularly, good men that are so oppressed, may further
allege, that those very faculties and capacities, by which, unjust men, as
men, are naturally empowered to choose and act their evil designs against the
innocenter part of Mankind, were not only the Issues of Gods own Workmanship,
when he was first pleased to Create Man; but they must be still kept up in
their natural Use and Operations, by his Wife and Ordinative Permission.

And from hence it is, Jud. 3. 12.
that the Scriptures (to whom an Atheist will permit an Appeal, 2 Samuel 16. 10.
to illustrate such a natural truth) do all along attribute to God, 2 Cron. 21.
16.
and interest him in (with expressions, Psalm. 44. 9, etc.
which bear a very near alliance to Causality) the worst Actions, Lam. 2. 1,
etc.
which wicked men have most voluntarily, Amos 3. 6.
and of their own evil minds, contrived and acted against Himself, his Church,
and choicest Servants.

Now the sum of these thoughts is, That if there be any such thing as a
righteous Cause, or if any case may be reputed a causeless oppression; if there
were ever any such men as were good and virtuous, Genesis 18. 26.
and that in Abraham's sense might be adjudged in God's esteem righteous
persons: or if there were ever any such, Luke 1. 6.
besides Zacharias and Elizabeth, that walked in all the Commandments of God
blameless, that is, acceptably so: And yet if nevertheless such good and
righteous Persons have been oftentimes unjustly oppressed, and sometimes have
passed away their whole mortal lives, racked, and worryed by the undeserved
malice of evil men. And then lastly, if it be considered, how much God himself
was concerned (so far as I have represented the Case), who can resist a belief,
or what good man can silence his complaint and expectation, but that Almighty
God, who is so much more or less interested, will at one time or other, order a
thorough justification of his innocence, and redress his wrongs by some
gracious method, and in the most proper season, which his own great wisdom and
impartial equity, shall think fit to choose in this Life or another? This is
the third Reason.

Section IV.
THis fourth Reason that supports a belief, that God will undertake, at one
time or other such an Administration of his Divine Justice, is alleged from
that natural conscience, and innate disposition; to fear the doing of (at
least) notorious Acts of Immorality, which do universally and naturally (though
in different degrees) attend the minds of men. And which must either signify,
that there is a vindicative hand above, which will at one time or other return
their wicked Actions upon themselves in some proportionable punishment; or else
it must be presumed, that God gave them naturally and unavoidably such a
Conscience only for their Delusion, and implanted in them that natural fear, to
be only of something, that may possibly (if there should be no other world)
never come to pass. Which is a consequence, that no good mind can entertain,
that has any regard at all for the Honor of his Maker's infinite justice and
goodness.

Now, though some men have labored all they can to usurp upon that natural
temper of their minds (whether by the influence of great examples of
wickedness, or by the surprising temptations of some mighty present advantage;
or upon the flattering hopes of the greatest secrecy) and may have, for a time,
subdued the Authority of their Natural fear and conscience: and given
themselves leave to be engaged in some vile and villainous practices: Yet when
they had once acquired their ends by them, and digested the success (how great
soever) of their unjust attempts, they have been afterward inwardly arrested
and attended, with an unaccountable dread of something (they knew not perhaps
distinctly what) that might befall them for what they had done: Or at least they
have been pursued with such an uneasiness and disorder of mind, that they could
afford themselves no true rest or contentment, and but a very small
satisfaction, in their own rightful, much less, in their unjustly acquired
enjoyments.

Now of this sad and dismal after-game of a debauched natural conscience, there
be so many instances in divine and humane story, that its become as luxuriant a
common place, as any whatsoever; and have afforded Stories for common talk, and
(sometimes) divertisement, as much or more than any Subject that can be named.

So that, if I should now undertake to spread my present discourse, with an
Enumeration, but of some of them, (considering the Skeptical Humor of those
men, whose Theistical Principles I design to control) I should but alarm their
incredulity into a fit of derisive sport. And therefore I shall only offer one
or two intimations of what may be said for it by such men, whose observations
they have no reason to undervalue or suspect.

What do they think of the representation of the Case by Euripides, in
personating the humor of an avenging conscience in Orestes, Men. (...); Orest.
(...), etc.
who being asked by Menalaus, what disease it was, that destroyed him, could
answer, That it was his own mind or conscience, for the great evils that he had
done? Or what did Juvenal mean, when he averred it of those Roman Emperors
(that were most famously the greatest Tyrants) that in their unjust successes
they had not escaped all their enemies; -- Nec tamen hosts Evasisse putes,
quos diu conscia facti Men's habet attonitos and surdo verbere caedit. Lib. 5.
Sat. 13.
for they had every one of them one in their own guilty minds, that was always
their attendant scourge, and that would perpetually wound them with the
severest strokes of inward guilt? Or why did the Philosopher Simplicius say,
(...). cap. 38.
That such men shall punish themselves with the most acute torments, of their
own minds, which shall be more vexatious to them, than the sharpest tortures of
any bodily disease; and shall less admit of comfort or remedy? I say, what
suspicion can our unbelieving Opponents create to themselves, That those men,
who were Heathens themselves, should not deal fairly with the world in
declaring their own Sentiments of this Case.

And then the Sum is, whence can that natural fear of crimes (where there be
temptations for present profit, honor or pleasure) before they are committed,
and such unsufferable reflections, uneasiness, and sometimes torments of mind,
after they are perpetrated, proceed, but from an undeleble, implanted Principle
in man's Nature, to revere the vindictive Power, and severe justice of a God
above, to be executed upon them at one time or another; especially when it is
considered, that sometimes those wicked men could neither have them upon any
other account, that can be imagined; nor could they lay them down, or escape
them, when they most resolvedly endeavored to release their minds from those
most afflictive impressions. This is the Fourth Reason.

Section V.
THis Section offers a Reason, or rather a pregnant presumption, which some Men
perhaps may think fit to make use off: And though it be not singly of it is self
sufficient to convince; yet in conjunction with the former Reasons it may serve
to persuade, That God Almighty does so take notice of the Oppressed, that he
will at one time or other, and by what methods he pleases, vindicate the Causes
of good men, and justify their innocence.

And that is from a consideration of those men's practice, who for their
causeless Sufferings, and undeserved Oppressions, having been deprived of all
manner of redress from the Powers and Judicatories of men, have solemnly
appealed to an impartial Tribunal above; and in the deep pressures of their
Souls, have implored some signal indications, that God designed their
Justifications in another World. Of these I shall give some few instances
instead of the many, that might be offered.

The first I shall give, is from what several Authors have reported, of one
Lord John Thursin among the Vestogothi, who with greater Severity than Equity,
commanded a certain man to be Beheaded, who before the separation of his Head
from his Body, said to that Lord, I cite thee this hour to appear before the
Tribunal of Almighty God, to answer to him, why thou have condemned me to Death
being innocent. And immediately that Great Lord, after the man was Beheaded,
fell from his horse and died.

Baptista Folgoso relates it of a Genoway Captain, who condemned a Catalonian
Commander to be hanged; who Pleading for mercy, and finding none, thus said to
the Genoway Captain; Since thou will needs execute upon me this most unjust
sentence, having never in my life offended thee, or thy Nation, I appeal unto
God the just avenger of injured innocence; and I desire that this instant day,
thy Soul may appear with mine before Him, to yield an account for the wrong
thou have done me: And not many hours after, the Genoway Captain died.

Camerarius mentions it of a Master of the Teutonic Order, who, upon a falsely
pretended Crime, had caused an innocent Person to be condemned to die; who
being lead to his Punishment, cited the Master thirteen days after to the
Tribunal of Christ; and the thirteenth day being come, the Master being hayle
and well, with his own mouth confessed to several persons, that he must now
appear before Christ's Tribunal, and that day died.

Both Exnerus and Lipsius tell us of Ferdinand the Fourth King of Spain, that
when Peter and John, the two Brethren of Carvaialius were suspected for the
murder of Benavidius, and upon an unsufficient proof being Convicted, the King
sentenced them to be thrown down headlong from the top of an high Tower. They
crying out that they were to die innocently, and the Kings ears being shut
against their just defense, they summoned the King within thirty days to appear
and answer to the high God for what he had done; and the very thirtieth day
after the King was found dead in his Bed.

Lipsius gives us a story, from Lambertus Schafnaburgensis, whom he calls a
famous Writer, and worthy of belief, of Burchardus Bishop of Halberstad, who
entering into an unjust controversy with the Abbot of Helverden about Tithes in
Saxony, which he had taken away from his Monastery; and the Abbot finding no
relief from any Judicatory on Earth desired Frederick Count Palatine to tell
the Bishop, That he appealed to Almighty God for Judgment, and that both of
them should prepare themselves to try the Cause before the Divine Tribunal. In
a little while the Abbot died, and presently after the Bishop; who falling from
his horse, was heard to say, that he was just then snatched away to God's
Tribunal there to be Judged.

To these I could have added many more of this kind, such as the famous stories
of the Templar at Bordeaux, of Radulphus Duke of Austria, and the like; but
then I must have exceeded the proportion of this Paragraph. Therefore I shall
now only take notice of a passage that looks that way in the Holy Scriptures.
And that is of Moses in the Case of Corah and his accomplices. It was very like
an appeal to the Justice of God, when for his Justification he said; Number. 16.
28, 29, 30, 31, 32.
If these men die the common death of all men; or if they be visited after the
visitation of all men; Then has not God sent me. God answered his Appeal, For
the Earth opened and swallowed them up quick, etc.

Now as to the other former Instances, they may be supposed to have been acted
from sudden Efforts of deeply oppressed Passions, and not from any known Rules
to licentiate them in those practices, and so the Appealants could not have
promised themselves any assurance of those extraordinary events upon their
provocations. And therefore it has been and ought always to be questioned,
whether it may be allowable or lawful ordinarily to imitate the practice of
such appeals. And for this I shall not engage in the Controversy: My design was
only to take notice of such as happened, to be made use of to our present
purpose, as any man shall think fit; reputing them extraordinary Cases, and
unusual instances of the Divine Justice; and as Lipsius calls them, Exemppla
mira, and supra fidem videantur, sed fides Authoribus scripta. Mon. and Exem.
Cap. 11.
Wonderful Examples, and which might seem to exceed belief, but that they are
related by Faithful Authors, and Memorials. This the Fifth.

Now these Five Sections being ended, in which I have endeavored to prove,
that God Almighty will at one time or other, administer impartial Justice and
Judgment to all Mankind, I should presently make a nearer approach toward the
Conclusion for a Future World's Existence upon the account of this Argument,
were I not obliged to consider, whether Almighty God does not execute such
administrations of his Justice to the Good and Evil in, and with respect to,
this present life. And as to that enquiry, the Second Chapter is concerned.

CHAP. II.
IN this Chapter I am concerned to offer to Examination, Whether or no Almighty
GOD does not execute, or permit the Executions on Justice and Judgment to
Mankind, according to the different Qualifications of their Lives and Actions,
in this present Life. And this Enquiry will occasion three distinct Sections
designed for several debates. In every one of which, something will be improved
for the better illustrating the Reasson of the Argument.

In the first Section will be managed the Matter of Fact, and therein it will
be evidenced, That the administrations of Justice and Judgment to the Good and
Evil, is not impartially executed in this World.

In the second, will be offered to Observation, what an influence the sense of
that Omission had, upon the Minds of the Heathen World.

In the third, an occasion will be taken to offer Reasons, Why the imperfect
Apprehensions, that are generally had of the state of the Dead, and of the
manner of GOD's Management of his Justice in the other World, do not at all
invalidate the belief of it is real Existence, nor of the certainty of GOD's
making an impartial Completion of his universal Justice and Judgment to the
Good and Evil, in that state.

Section. I.
FIrst, in this Section I am engaged to represent that universal Justice is not
impartially done to all Mankind, according to the different qualifications of
their Lives and Actions in this their present Existence. But if it be alleged,
That the Notoreity of the Fact, and a more general consent in the Case, is
sufficient to supersede the offering of any thing, that is Explanatory to
confirm the Truth of it: My Answer is, That as I cannot foresee what evasions my
attendant Scepticks may suggest to elude the plainest Presumptives, so I am
willing (as I shall do all along) to indulge such as are already Believers,
with the clearest explanations of the Case; If not the more fully to assure
them, yet the more lively to represent to them, the attested Truth of their own
Observation. And for that end, I shall take leave to trouble the Common Reader
with some authoritative Testimonies. And to avoid Redundancy, I shall produce
but two only of every sort.

First, I shall offer the Scriptural sense of the case, and that only as it is
represented by two Prophets of God, who by their interrogatory manner of
speaking, do more strongly confirm that Matter of Fact.

As, Why does the way of the Wicked prosper? Jer. 12. 1.
wherefore are they happy, that deal Treacherously? (says the One). And,
Wherefore boldest Thou thy tongue (says the Other) when the Wicked devoureth
the man that is more Righteous than he? Hab. 1. 13.
To which I might easily have added innumerable more, if I could have thought
it necessary, or any way reasonable in this case, as to our Modern Theists.

Secondly, I shall subjoin the sense of two Fathers of the Christian Religion.
The first is that of Athenagoras the anicent Apollogist. And he undertakes an
Argument for the assured belief of a future Judgment, because (says he) We
have seen many Wicked Men that have studied all their lives to do all manner of
unjust things, -- (...). De resur. Mor. p. (mihi) 61.
and yet never met with any Evils to afflict them here; when others of approved
Virtue, have wasted away their Lives in Sorrows, Vexations, Reproaches, and all
kinds of Calamities.

The next is Salvian, who in his Book of Providence, seems to alarm the
Reader's wonder, Si totum quod in hoc mundo; est curae and gubernaculo and
indicio Dei; Cur melior multo sit Barbarorum conditio, quam nostra? Cur inter
nos quoque sors bonorum durior, quam malorum? Cur probi jacent, improbi
convalescunt? Cur iniquis potestatibus universa succumbunt? Lib. de Prove.
saying, If all things in the World do depend upon the care, and government of
God, Why is the condition of the Barbarians, much better than ours that are
Christians? Why do the Good meet a harder portion in this Life, than those that
are Wicked?

And if my sceptick Reader, to invalidate the credit of these Authorities,
shall object; That such men might be conducted into those affirmations, only to
serve the faith of the divine Revelation, for the Existence of another Life; I
shall therefore (fully to take off that exception) add the like number of
Heathen Philosophers, who as positively as either of them have attested the
same thing.

The first shall be the sense of Cicero, (though perhaps he may personate
Cotta, or some other man in speaking it) who was so greatly concerned in this
case, that discoursing of the Gods, he says, That if they have taken upon
themselves any care of the world at all, it would be well with the Good, and
otherwise with the Evil: But (says he) there appears no such thing. And then
the Philosopher further ingageing in an enquiry after it, confirms his own
observation, by several instances that relate to it for it is verification. As
when he says, Cur duos Scipiones Poenus oppressit? Cur Hannibal Marcellum
interemit? etc. Not. Deor.
Why did the Carthaginian oppress the two Scipio's? Why did Hannibal prevail
upon Marcellus and kill him? And then proceeds with a Catalogue of other
examples of the oppressed Virtuous, and of as many more of the prosperity and
success of Men extremely wicked.

The second that I shall allege, shall be Simplicius, who in discourse admits
a concession, That the Wicked may flourish in this Life in power, (...). Cap.
38. 212.
riches and health, and may continue in a prosperous state, even to their
death, and may leave their Posterity in the like Prosperity: and that the Good
and Virtuous may in the mean time, be harassed in the world, without any
remarkable instances of Relief or Compensation.

These be the three kinds of Authorities, which I thought, if not absolutely
necessary, yet very convenient, to be offered in this Case: For though the
matter of fact be obvious enough, yet our Scepticks know, that upon its
unquestionable concession, the weight of the whole Argument depends; and
therefore we must not be precarious in the least instances of proof, upon which
we Argue.

But what says the Heathen world to all this? or what influence had it upon
their minds? that is now to be examined: Therefore,

Section II.
IN this second Section, I have obliged my self to represent, what a remarkable
influence, the ordinary omission of that impartial administration of God's
justice to the good and evil in this life, had upon the minds of the Heathen
World it self. And the reason why I take occasion to do it in this place, is
because I perceive, that they were especially controuled into whatsoever they
affirmed or doubted, concerning the Existence of a future state, from an
observation of the promiscuous usage of the Good and Evil in this Life.

Now, that I may fully discharge this design (which will appear so considerable
an improvement of the present Argument) at once, I shall produce, or point at
something, from the most famous Heathen Philosophers, with a transient Aspect
upon the general run of the Poets, as to the case in hand.

First as to the Heathen Philosophers, I shall not here take any notice of the
Sense of Plato, or his Followers; or of what they and some others have affirmed
concerning Socrates in that case. But I shall only make use of some such
Philosophers, (and of those the most considerable) as lived since our Savior's
time; it being presumed that they should maintain an opposition to the
acknowledgment of a future World, in pure defiance to Christianity; and that
because the professors of it had so positively declared that state, and the
issues of it, as its principally rational Fundamental of all their virtuous
Practices, and resolute Sufferings.

Now, it will appear, that as those Philosophers could not escape the
Observation of God's ordinary omission of his impartial justice to the Good and
Evil in this life, so as often as that consideration came intentively into their
minds, it so staggered them in their Atheistical Hypothesis concerning a future
World, that sometimes they were necessitated to admit the thoughts of it,
though (as Minutius Foelix observes, dimidiata fide) but with a halfway, or
doubtful Faith.

The first of that sort, of whom I shall take notice, shall be Seneca, who
lived not many years after our Savior's Resurrection, and was Tutor to Nero,
and whose Authority goes a great way with our modern Theists. He indeed
expressed himself very frequently with a positive denial of any future World at
all. As when he said, To die, was not to be at all: And that there shall be as
much after me, Mors est non esse. Hoc erit post me, quod ante fuit -- nos
quoque accendimur, and extinguimur. Epist. ad Luc.
as there was before me: Our birth (says he) kindles us into life, and our
death extinguisheth us into nothing.

But notwithstanding, when he was to comfort Polybius, for the death of his
Brother, a virtuous Person; and considering how impossible it was for him to
offer any sufficient reasons to support his Patience, without suggesting
something concerning a future World, he could then say to him, Ne ita invideris
fratri tuo, quiescit tandem liber, tandem tutus, tandem est aeternus -- Fruitur
nun^ aperto and libero coelo -- Erras, non perdidit lucem frater tuus, sed
securiorem sortitus est -- Non reliquit ille nos, sed antecessit, etc. De Cons.
ad Polyb. cap. 28.
Be not troubled for your Brother; He is safe, and that eternally: He enjoys a
free and spacious Heaven; and is brought into a Glorious place by Him, who
receives separated Souls into his bosom: He has not left us, but is gone
before us. And upon the same account, comforting Martia, greatly afflicted for
the Death of her Son, he could then say, Why run you to his Sepulcher? he is
translated to the lofty Regions, Non est, quod ad Sepulchrum ^ilij curras, --
ad excelsa sublatus, inter felices currit animas, excipitque illum coetus
sacra, Scipiones Catonesque -- De cons. ad Martiam, cap. 25.
to move among the Souls of the happy, and is received into the sacred society
of the Catoes, and Scipioes, and such excellent Men as are set free by the
benefit of their Dying. Thus, as Seneca was not consistent to himself, so he
stands our Theists in no such stead as has been pretended.

The next shall be the most famous Plutarch, who lived in the time of Domitian
and Nerva, but especially flourished in the days of Trajan. And, what I said of
the former, I shall affirm the same of him; that is, That he frequently
declares his good will, to baffle the Faith of a future Life; otherwise how
could he have once said, that The the Dead should fall into the same condition,
(...), etc. Page (mihi) 109.
in which they were before they were born: And, that as before they came into
the World, it was neither good nor ill with them, so shall it be with them,
when they are gone out of it. And that it shall be the same state with us after
our death, as it was before we were born. And in his tract of Superstition, he
attributes the fear and apprehension of future Punishments to that cause; and
he there tells us, (...). De Super.
That Death is the Boundary of Life, but Superstition extends it further, and
suggests fears, that when men have passed over all the Evils of this life, they
may meet with more after death, which shall never have an end.

All this the Philosopher imputes to vain and needless Superstition, as he does
in that tract very many ridiculous persuasions. But nevertheless, though he had
so often expressed his willingness to disbelieve a future World, yet to show
how impossible it was for him altogether to blot out of his mind the thoughts
of it, and how improbable it was to him, that the Good and Just, after all
their pursuits of Virtue, and the pious improvement of their Time and Beings,
should find no other recompense, but Annihilation: I say, When he was to
comfort Apollonius for the Death of his Son, (whom he had commended for his
Modesty and Piety, toward the Gods, his Parents, and Friends, and for his
Virtuous Life) he could then tell him, That If what the Ancient Poets and
Philosophers had said of the Pious, be true, which ((...)) was very likely to
be so; that is, That after their death they shall attain to Honor in a happy
place; (...), etc.
That then he ought to hope well of his Son, that he now dwells with the Souls
of the Pious, that he enjoys that happy state. And then he caresseth him with
what Pindar spoke of the Dead, and with what Plato had discoursed of the Souls
immortality.

Now, what shall we think of the ingenuity and honesty of this Great man, (who
could affirm of himself, That he had rather Plutarch were not Plutarch, than
that Plutarch were not virtuous) in the managery of his Comfort to Apollonius,
Did he believe another World's Existence, or no? If he did believe it, with
what Integrity could he so often express himself to the contrary? If he did not
believe it, Why did he deal so insincerely with Apollonius, as to put him upon
such a delusive hope in his distress? Or, if it be said, that Apollonius
perhaps might have been before affected with what Pindar and Plato had said,
about a future World, but then Why did he not reprove him for his Folly, in
busying his Head with such Romantic Dreams, and not rather direct him to that
solid comfort, which a Stoick's Reason (as is pretended) might have afforded
him? Or, Lastly, If to solve all this, it may be suggested, that whatsoever he
had said, he indeed might doubt of that States Existence, I have so far
attained my End, as that I can interpret, That he doubted of that state,
because he could not avoid the force of this and other Arguments, that so
cogently demonstrated it to his mind, in despite of all his Resolution to
maintain the contrary against the Christian Cause.

To these I may add something very considerable from the Famous Emperor Marcus
Antoninus, who always spoke very confusedly of what should become of men, when
they die: As once he did concerning Alexander and his Muliteer, that they
should be reduced ((...)) to something, he could not tell what; that is, that
they either should be received into the same Principles whence they came,
(...). Lib. 6. Sect. 24.
or be dispersed into Atoms: Yet when he came afterward to consisider, that
the gods had done all things else so orderly, and with such singular Love to
Mankind, he wondered at their neglect of one thing; that is, that they should
take no Care, that Men, who had held such correspondencies with them by pious
Actions and Sacred Ministrations, should, when they die, be no more, and be
wholly extinguished. I say, at this Block he stumbled, and would be offering
some Reasons for it, but such as were hypothetical and uncertain; and therefore
begins with a ((...)) How can it be? (...), etc. Lib. 12. Sect. 5. Gat. p. 117.
or, How comes it to pass that it should be so? etc. And it is enough for my
purpose, that I have attained this from that excellent Philosopher.

Thus I have represented how those Philosophers (by whose, if by any kind of
Authority, our present Scepticks must pretend to Patronize their Atheism) who
lived after Christianity was planted in the World, were necessitated to behave
themselves in the case of a future state: Which had they positively maintained
and published, coincidently with the Christian Faith, they foresaw, that they
must have disbanded the greatest part of those their credulous Followers, who
were then persuaded to oppose it. And that because those Philosophers
understood, that all the Practicks of the Christian Religion were so consonant
to, and perfective of, right reason; so conducing to the Safety of all
Societies, and that did oblige its Professors to be, upon that main reason, so
virtuous and innocent, that it was necessary they should make them ridiculous
in trusting to a future reward and happiness, (which they designed to laugh at,
as fond and superstitious) whom they could not represent to the World, as
scandalous and offensive in their morals and practices.

And this their halting and shuffling in a matter of that importance, seems to
me a greater Argument to confirm the credibility of another World's Existence
on this account, than if I had cited a Thousand Authorities of such
Philosophers, as positively believed and professed it; because thence it
appears, that the reason of the thing was so prevailingly convincing, that it
controuled their minds (as it were, whether they would or no) sometimes into a
serious doubt, at other times into a seeming concession; though they were fain
to retract it, as often as the interest of their cause, and their opposition to
Christianity exacted it from them.

And now having dispatched the Philosophers, or these some famous ones instead
of them all, I could have added many and great Authorities to our Purpose, from
the Heathen Historians, though of a more ancient Date, such as one from the
famous Deathbed Speech of Cyrus, to his Sons, in Xenophon; And of Veturia's
Oration to her Son Martius, to be Merciful to the City of the Volsi, Recorded
by Dionysius Halicarnesseus. But I omit the use that may be made of them, as
unnecessary.

And then as to the Heathen Poets, (by whose Works the Ancient Philosophy,
natural Theology, and indeed most kinds of Learning were so considerably
preserved) it is obvious enough, how positively they declared their thoughts of
a future World's Existence, and what apprehensions they had of the Rewards and
Punishments of another Life, upon the account of the unequal Distributions in
this World, to the Good and Evil. And for that purpose they described the
Rewards of the Virtuous, by an Elysium; That is, by certain pleasant Fields,
fitted for all advantages of Pleasure and Happiness. And thus they did, as to
the Punishment of the Wicked, by a great many instances of dreadful
Representations: As by such frightful Officers, grim Judges, and by some
particular Examples of several severe punishments, such as of Tantalus, Ixion,
Sisiphus, and Titius. And this ingenious way of representing the state of the
Dead, was so ancient, that Diodorus Siculus affirms, Lib. 2. c. 4.
That Orpheus received it from the old Egyptians. But the general Run of the
Poets is so well known to abett our design, that it were an inexcusable
redundancy, to offer at a citation of their innumerable Expressions to our
purposes.

And thus having made use of these few instances of the Heathen World's
Opinions, concerning a future Life upon the account of this Argument; let no
man think that I design to approve or answer for all the imperfect Notions, or
doubtful Representations, which many of those Philosophers (such as Plato and
his Followers especially) that asserted the Being of a Future state, had of the
manner of the Soul's Existence in it: Much less do I intend to account for the
Lusory and extravagant Fancies concerning the modeled circumstances of that
State: But so long as it appears, That upon some natural convincing Reasons,
and especially upon the Prospect of the promiscuous usage of the Good and Evil
in this World, nothing could so solve the difficulties of such Observations,
but that they were necessitated to admit the acknowledgment of a Future World,
I have, as far as I designed in this case, attained my End.

And now, if any Skeptical Theist should go about to perplex this way of
Arguing, and shall allege, That the confused and unaccountable Apprehensions,
which those Learned Heathens had of the manner, place, and other circumstances
of Men's Existence in that State, and how the Rewards and Punishments are there
to be executed to the Good and Evil: And then to strengthen their Exception,
should object to us, That the Christians themselves, who pretend the greatest
assurance of the Future World's Existence, have expressed almost as imperfect
an understanding of those mentioned Cases and Circumstances of that Future
World; and sometimes have discoursed as wildly of the state of the Dead, as
others had done; And then, that their Great Apostle St. Paul should affirm,
That the knowledge of those future Events, (...). 1 Cor. 13. 12.
was but as by a Riddle, at the meaning of which men, were left to guess; or,
like one that sees through the imperfect medium of a Lattess: I say, if by
these Allegations such a Sceptick should encourage his Denial or Suspicion of
the Reality of such a World's Existence; My answer to such an Exception shall
be managed in the next Section by its self, in which I shall offer Reasons, why
God was pleased, that there should be such an imperfect knowledge, or such a
concealment of the manner, place, and other circumstances of the state of the
Dead in another World. And this I do the rather take care to explain, because
it is probable, that even a Believer may sometimes stumble at the difficulty of
that Solution.

Section III.
IN this Section, I shall therefore endeavor to represent, That men's imperfect
knowledge of the state of the Dead, that is, of the place, manner, and other
the precise circumstances of that State, and especially of the way and method
of God's disposure of Mankind to their respective Rewards and Punishments in
the other World, are no reasonable Arguments to suspect the reality of them,
and much less of the State it self, in which they are to be Administered.

And this I shall do by way of an answer to a Cavillers exception, and it shall
be thus laid. Says he, I have no mind to be imposed upon by a pretense of such
Encouragements, as are so presumptively and generally, and therefore,
obscurely, proposed; nor be obliged to a Religion for an end, of the particular
manner of whose enjoyment, I can have no explicit understanding, and of which
no man can give any sufficient demonstration to my mind and reason. I cannot
thus answer the exprobation of my friends, nor solve my discretion to my self,
for living such a strict and self-denying Life. That is, that when I come to
die, I cannot convincingly tell my self, or them, whither I shall go, or what
shall then become of me; so that if I can receive no better account of those
Future Events, I am like to live as pleases my self at present, and to adhere
to those thoughts, that have engaged my suspicion of any Real Existence of
another World at all.

In Answer to this exception thus laid, though some men, whose minds are firmly
settled in the Faith of what is necessary to be believed concering another
World, would choose to leave such persons in their incredulity, as if there were
nothing in Rational Evidence to control their unbelief, yet I hope I have
something to offer in this hard case, that may reasonably persuade, if not
absolutely convince them, out of the Error of their own suspicion. And I shall
attempt it upon the account of these two Reasons. The First shall be with
respect to the present State of humane understandings. The second upon a moral
reasonableness of Gods permitting, that the manner and circumstances of that
Future State, should be so darkly represented, and imperfectly understood.

The First Reason that I shall offer, is, because we may presume, that men's
understanding Faculties are not at present capable of admitting a direct
apprehension, or representation of objects, that are by their sublimity of a
different Kind and Nature. And the Reason is, because those Faculties, at
present, are tied down to so many restraints, and limitations. As First, by
their natural dependence upon the outward Senses, which must first intromit
those and all other Notices, before the Mind can manage its Conceptions of
things. And then Secondly, because the grosness of those Corporal Organs, by
which men naturally Act their intellectual Powers, does render the mind too
dull and unfit, to entertain such unaccommodable, and disproportioned Objects,
and notices of things, especially that are at such distances of Place, and Time.

And therefore it is possible our Case, as to the present understanding of that
State, and of the nature of those Divine and after-Dispensations in another
World, if they were never so well discoursed to us by the best Reason, and the
most advantageous Revelation, may be like to the man's that is born Blind in
respect of Light, who can never be made to frame a right conception of it in
his mind, by all the definitions and descriptions, that can be made of it to
him. For if he be told, that it comes from a body, that is seemingly not above
a foot and half Diameter, and yet notwithstanding, that it gives Luster, Heat,
and Life to all the visible World; or suppose that a man should make use of any
other glorious appellations of its Nature and Qualities, they would but amuse
and confound the blind man's mind, and perhaps he would think, that the person
came on purpose to abuse him. But then suppose that blind man's Eyes to be
opened at an instant, he can then be presently satisfied with a right
conception of it. Now it is as unreasonable to doubt of a Future State, because
we can have nothing in our present Conceptions, that answers to it, as it is
impertinent for a blind man to disbelieve the Existence of Light, because he
can never be able by all the discourses that are made of it to him, to frame a
right Notion of it in his mind.

And further, if this objection were reasonable, and should succeed, our
Sceptick, might as well on that ground, take confidence to question the very
Existence of God himself; because he does not offer his Nature to the Knowledge
of his Creatures by any direct tender of it to the apprehension of their
Senses, when by the common reason of mankind (upon the acknowledgment of His
Infinite Being, which none that considers the Existence of the World, can
possibly resist) he must always be believed to be as near us as the Objects
which we see or touch. A notion of His absolute Perfections can admit no less.

But these men should be discoursed a little further on that account, and
asked, whether they do not believe, that there be innumerable things in Real
Being, which they cannot directly and sensible discern and apprehend, because
perhaps they are too fine, or too abstruse, or in other respects
disproportioned to their present Senses, and for that reason the natures of
such Beings, could never come into any intelligible cognizance? or do they not
think, that there be thousands of other Beings, that are in ken of sensible
perception, and have come under Philosophical disquisition, and yet the most
diligent enquirers into their Existencies, have been sensible how much they
have fallen short of the perfect knowledge of the Natures of most of them? and
are there not as many extraordinary Phoenomenas, or manifest appearances in
nature, that are not under observed causations, and yet are believed to be
true, though how they are, or should be so effected, they cannot, with all
their skill and industry, find out? Of this nature I account, especially
Witchcrafts, and Apparitions; of whose Existences we may be perfectly
satisfied, by as plain and notorious matters of fact and testimonies, as by
which any thing in the world was ever made any ways sufficiently credible. And
now if because some instances of that kind have been acted by knavery, and more
of them suggested by fear, whereby the real facts have been sometimes put out
of credit and countenance; If I say, for those reasons my sceptick may take
occasion to deride my taking notice of such things in this place, I shall admit
his Scoff with so much the less dissatisfaction, as that with me, he must
reflect upon the universal Wisdom of Mankind. And I challenge him to show me
any learned Age or Nation in the world, to whose general Opinion I may not
reasonably appeal in this Case; only always excepted, that in every Age there
might be here and there, perhaps one or two (such an one as Diagoras was among
the Athenians) who might in a dogmatizing humor be singularly promoting their
private Opinions against the binding Authority of Common Judgment.

Now as to the matter in hand, if the unequal distributions of Justice and
Judgment, of Rewards and Punishments to the Good and Evil in this Life will
enforce the reason of men to assent to the belief in general, that there must
needs be another World to follow, wherein a Just and Holy God will allow all
his Creatures (that are capable of it) Impartial Right and Judgment; why should
any man quit his faith of that State, though his senses at present, cannot
give, or his understanding admit any direct information of the Manner,
Measures, Place, and the other Circumstances of its Existence, because they
cannot; or because for good reasons they ought not? And if some men, to cure
this Scruple, have been too busy and positive in their descriptions of the
State of the Dead, I think such adventurous Conjectures have not at all added
to the evidence for the credibility of a Future World; but, on the contrary,
they have contributed a great advantage to them, that have a design to call in
question, and to deride the whole Faith of that State. Such kind of additions
to an Article, being like to the Mixtures of the Author's Wit and Invention in
a Serious History, which may reasonably bring in question the credit of all its
relations; or like the commendations of a virtuous Person to excess, which may
make a suspicion of Flattery in the whole Encomium: An Article, like a man, may
be so imposed upon by a dress, that the knowledge and belief of it may be lost
in the disguise. This the First Answer.

My Second Answer to our Captious Scepticks exception, is, That as it is certain
that we have not faculties in this mortal State, that are figured and fitted
for a direct and sensible perception of such distant and unaccommodated
Objects; so the moral Reason why GOD Almighty might be pleased, that there
should be such a concealment of them, may be because, that if that state, and
all that is enjoyable in it, were in all points and circumstances made
cognizable to us in such a manner as sensible representations can make any
thing to be, though such a kind of knowledge of them, might possibly satisfy some
Men's curiosities, yet it would be a very considerable hinderance to men's living
virtuous and religious Lives with reference to their future Interest. And the
reason is, because they being placed here to act, as in a state of trial and
probation, for that future Reward and Happiness, upon condition of living such
kinds of Lives; if such a sensible notice, and exact conception of the
measures, and manner of all the particular Instances of that Future Happiness,
were allowed them in this Life, such a Discovery would probably over-balance
their Souls equally poized Liberty (which can only consist with the notion of
their being probationers) too much on the one hand or side. That is, it would
incline it too much toward a necessity of acting its virtuous Purposes. To
which necessity, every approach of the Mind (whencesoever it proceeds) would
take away so much of the reason of all Good Actions being accountably
rewardable. But of this more in my Third Argument.

And now if it should be said against this, that indeed if men were put into
any enjoyment of the happiness of that Future State, it might take off that
freedom of acting, and incline the Will too much on the one side of the Scale
of its natural Liberty, and preponderate the Mind too much toward that
determined State, which it shall enjoy in the other World; but this (says our
Sceptick) is only a present particular knowledge of that Future Happiness, and
it is no more, that I enquire after.

To this I reply, That such a knowledge would be a kind of enjoyment in its
self, especially, if it be considered (as reasonably it ought) that the
intellectual part of man (by which he essentially is, and acts himself) will be
most principally concerned in the fruition of that Future Bliss; when the
Judgment and the Will shall be freely determined (that is, determine
themselves) to the Embraces of that mighty Happiness. And therefore, though the
Blessed shall for ever unconstrainedly choose to serve God, and to do all the
Good they can in that state (and there may be occasions for it more than we can
conceive) yet I think that those their virtuous Actions shall not then be made
so Rewardable, as when they were acted in a state of Probation, upon an equal
poize of choosing Good or Evil at their own Election; but will be rather a part
of their Joy, Bliss, and Fruition. This the Second Answer.

And now having thus solved this grand Objection, I hope there is nothing more
to be alleged to put any further stop in our way, but that we may fairly
proceed to show, how far the respiting and adjourning of universal Justice to a
future World, will administer new Reasons for a stronger demonstration of a
future states Existence on that Account. But that is the business of the next
Chapters adventure. Therefore,

CHAP. III.
IN this Chapter, that the Argument may be found to be of sufficient validity
to attain its End, I shall endeavor to demonstrate, That GOD's respiting and
adjourning the Completion of his judicial administrations to a future World, is
so naturally reasonable, that nothing else can solve the apprehensions we may
have of GOD's Design, to preserve the present universe in that natural order in
which by Creation it was at first fitted to subsist: Neither can any other
expedient secure a belief, that GOD intended a regard to the Good and Happiness
of Mankind, whether as socially, or individually considered.

But here be several things, which must be distinctly and apart considered, in
so many Sections by themselves.

In the first Section, it must be examined how that part of the universe, which
consists of necessary Agents can otherwise be preserved, in its natural Order.

In the second, we shall examine the case, by that part of the universe, that
acts in it as rational Agents; and first, as they are to enjoy their Well-being
in social Communions.

Thirdly and Fourthly, we shall offer to examination, how otherwise GOD's care
of Mankind may be acquitted, as they are individually to be considered. And
that particularly, as they may be distinguished into the two sorts of Evil and
Good.

In all which respects, there will appear cogent Reasons, Why Almighty GOD
should adjourn the completion of his judicial administrations of Justice and
Judgment to another World.

Section I.
IN this Section I am concerned to represent, That if Almighty GOD should not
respit the completion of his judiciary purposes for the Good and Evil to
another Life, but should in this world be universally and actually justifiing
and abetting every righteous Person and Cause; and should also as universally
be constantly correcting and confounding every Evil Man's unjust adventures, it
would certainly discontinue the natural order of those Agents, that act by
necessary impulse, as often as they should be made use of for those judicial
executions. And that because they cannot subserve an extraordinary proceedure
of the Divine Justice, unless they should be continually interrupted in the
order of their natural Causations and Operations.

And to make this Observation the more convincingly conspicuous, we may take
measures by some few famous Cases, in which, GOD was sometimes pleased to
exercise his absolute Dominion, and extraordinary Authority over those
necessary Agents, for the present executions of his Justice. That is, suppose
that all the Seas and Rivers of the Universe should be forced from their
natural Courses (of which there be some instances) to fourd over all those good
Persons in their flight from an Attachment, as often as there were no other means
for their escape, and that the Sun should as often stand still, as it were
necessary it should, to crown a good Cause with a complete Conquest; or
suppose, that as often as any man were ready to perish with Thirst, every hard
Rock or natural mound to Waters, should be forced open for a River to run in
dry places, to supply their present want; or that the Clouds should suspend
their kind showers to refresh the growth of Plants; or that the Sun's
enlivening warmth should be turned into a Flame to burn up the surface of the
Earth, so often as the Inhabitants thereof should deserve those instances of the
Divine Judgment upon them: I say, if these, and a thousand such like cases as
these, should so often become necessary for the completion of GOD's Favor to
the Virtuous and Innocent, and for the just execution of His Displeasure to
wicked Men in this world, the necessary Agents, which were naturally disposed
to serve the necessities and conveniences of Mankind, would be found to act
contradictions to their own Natures; and their orderly Causations would be so
daily and hourly changed into miraculous Events, that the Universe it self
would appear to be nothing else, but a scene of Prodigies, to amuse and
affright Mankind.

Now, though such wonderful executions of the Divine Justice, and especial
Favor, may well enough consist with the world's present created order, when
they are so unfrequently done, and upon some extraordinary occasions, yet if
they were constantly and fully acted, for the completion of every single
Persons reward or punishment (which must be supposed, if the Arguments in my
first Chapter, that GOD will certainly do it at one time or other, be true) the
necessary Beings, which should be subservient to those ends and executions,
must be so often interrupted in their natural motions and causations, that
nothing would follow, but the World's universal Disorder, if not its total
Discomposure.

But perhaps, things may go better among the Rational Agents. But that is next
to be inquired into. Therefore,

Section II.
IN this Second Section, we are engaged to examine the next grand inconvenience
and disorder to the universe, as God by his own Sovereign Wisdom stated it,
with respect to that part of it, which are called Rational and Voluntary
Agents, as they are naturally and necessarily to subsist together in Social
Communions one with another for their common welfare. And then I say, that if
God Almighty should in this life universally execute those administrations of
Rewards and Punishments to the Good and Evil, it would destroy the ordinary
good subsistence of all humane Societies. For if while the dispensations of
Gods providence are so promiscuously dispensed to the Good and Evil, whereby
they do so constantly share in one another blessings and misfortunes, Mankind
do attain the good ends of their Social Subsistence with so much difficulty and
hazard, as that in a thousand Cases it had been better, in that very respect,
for innumerable single persons never to have known what a world had meant, what
disorders, and cross accidents, what perpetual dissolutions of a Governments,
and frustrations of the most material contracts, and agreed proceedings in
Common Affairs, what calamitous interruptions in all manner of Societies, from
an Empire to a Family, must necessarily succeed? in so much that the World of
Rational Beings, would presently become the only confused rout of Creatures
that ever God made; and the Existence of the meanest Animal were rather to be
chosen, than to enjoy a Being amongst them: All which inconveniences, nothing
but a respiting the Completion of God's Justice to a Future World, can possibly
prevent.

And now I appeal to any Theistical mind to tell me, Whence can all this be? or
how should the understanding of man, upon such a prospect of things,
conjecture, that God should at first make a world of Rational Beings, naturally
subject to so many oppressions, and unjust usages one from another, and that
yet, when they happen (as they daily do in all places of the world) they should
not possibly be universally redressed, without a greater inconvenience to, if
not, with a certain ruin of all their present Societies, (in which it is
naturally necessary they should subsist) but from a design of making an
universal after-view of all the Actions of Men at a time, when all such mixed
societies shall have their irrevocable periods, and that the good and evil
shall be separated to their several distinct communions, and apartments by
themselves?

And by this observation will our Savior's parabolical representations of the
present State of Mankind, Mat. 13. 29, 49.
appear highly reasonable. That is, That the Wheat and Tares (by which is meant
the Good and Evil) should grow together, till the Harvest, least a present
plucking up of the one should endanger the Success, if not the very being of
the other; and that the good and bad Fish should both of them be promiscuously
comprehended, not only in the same Sea of the World, but in the same net of the
Church together. Now let the Hectorers down of the belief of another world
assign me a conjecture for any other reasonable expedient how to solve this
doubt, and I shall then renounce the use that may be made of this observation
for the necessary Existence of another world.

But to all this, if an exception should be interposed from the sense of them,
that are true believers; who (says our Caviller) will be apt say, that if God
Almighty does for the most part respit the the executions of Justice and
Judgment to a Future World, the apprehension of such a suspension would take
away a great deal of the reason and encouragement, why good men should so
constantly pray (as it is done in public Litanies and private Devotions) for
their own Justifications, and the common deliverances of the Church from its
implacable Enemies. And therefore were it not better, and more reasonable for
such good men to sit down in a patient acquiescence than to be so solicitous in
their prayers for that which (as the Second Chapter has assured us) does so
uncommonly, and uncertainly come to pass.

My answer to this exception, is, that all prayers of that nature, as for all
other temporal blessings, are supposed to be always made interpretatively, if
not in direct words, upon some conditions, and terms of limitation. And of
those conditions there be two especially to be considered.

First, Good men, so often as they supplicate to be delivered and justified, or
any other way blessed in this World, do always desire those Mercies at the
Hand of God, upon a condition, that they may consist with the common Good and
Safety of those public Societies, in whose communions they enjoy their present
Subsistence. That is, they desire not, that their private Satisfactions and
Vindications, should be purchased at the rate of common Ruin, or upon the terms
of any destructive alterations of the communions in which they live. And that
might be the reason, 2 Samuel 24. 17.
why David desired that the Punishment of God might rather fall upon himself
and Family, than upon the People in general.

And as Good men would not enjoy their particular Exemptions from Oppressions,
in exchange for a common Disturbance or Mischief; so, nor would they desire
their Personal Justifications, as to their private Enemies, if they must be had
upon terms, which must infer either their present, or their future Ruin: Lest
a Thought of Revenge should tempt their innocent minds to a complacency in
their Enemies misfortunes.

And therefore that Saying, (fiat justitia, ruat mundus) Let Justice be done,
though the whole World should perish, cannot be true Divinity, unless the
meaning of it be, Let the World perish, rather than any man should do what is
unjust; but it is false to desire it should perish, rather than suffer what is
most unjust.

And that you have the first condition upon which a Good man's Prayers are
supposed to be made, when he implores the present vindication of his Right and
Cause.

Secondly, I answer, That when Good men pray to God for the present
deliverances and justifications of their Persons and Causes, they have always
another condition in reserve; that is, That God would grant their Petitions for
their deliverances, unless a continuance in their Sufferings should tend more
to their present and future Good, otherwise they can interpret and believe,
that it is a mercy of God to have their Prayers in such cases denied. And
therefore, when they perceive that their Petitions are in such instances
rejected, they are ready with all submission and contentment of mind, to think
and say, that, Had they not some way or other needed their implacable Enemies
success, their Prayers had certainly prevented it: And that there was something
defective in themselves, which God thought fit in that manner to correct, in
order to their own final Good and Happiness, or such an event had never fallen
out, so contrary to their Supplications.

And thus by such wise and pious reserves they can reasonably satisfy
themselves, when they meet a disappointment in their expectations of Temporal
Blessings, after they had prayed for them, and were denied.

These, and such as these, are the conditions upon which Good men pray for
Temporal Deliverances, and their present Justifications. And, as such Prayers
are sufficiently consistent with a Belief of God's respiting and adjourning the
complete executions of his justice to another World, so it is encouragement
enough (and sure it is all that need be given) that when those conditions will
bear it, Good men may assure themselves, that God will not, nor did ever fail
to answer their Petitions, and grant their requests. And this perfectly solves
the Sense of our Savior's indefinite Promise, with respect to Temporal
Mercies, that Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my name, John 14. 13.
he will give it you.

And further, it is to be considered in that case, That when the reason of those
Conditions has intervened between God and his Petitioners, though they have
been denied their Supplications in kind, yet, for their encouragement still to
pray, they might and ought to believe, that God would grant them in some other
equivalent matter and manner, for a compensation of all they asked, and were
denied. Howsoever, in the mean time they can satisfy themselves, that they
have been doing their Duties, and paying the daily Homage they owed to God, and
may live comfortably under the expectation, that God will do them right in
another World.

And, let it now be also especially remarked, that what I have here said
concerning the Conditions upon which Good men pray for their Temporal
Deliverances and Vindications; and upon the reason of which they are so often
denied their Petitions, may hold good also in the case of God's executing his
Justice, as to the Rewards and Punishments of this Life: That is, That that God
will so often act those measures of Providence, as the reasons of those two
mentioned Conditions will admit it. That is, when it may be done; First,
without bringing any common destruction to those communions, by which the World
ordinarily subsists; and, Secondly, when such a present execution of his
Justice shall on any account tend most to the concerned person's present or
future Good and Interest.

But in all other cases, where the reasons of these two Conditions are
superseded, the executions of the Divine Love and Justice to the Good and Evil,
are so often reserved and respited, for his impartial retributions in another
World.

Now, as this Observation may enable us to think, that there be no small number
of Cases, that are so reserved and respited, so it will easily, and very
naturally solve those men's doubts and enquiries, Why either all those
Executions are not universally done in this Life; or why there should be any
part of them certainly effected; that is, why there should be always so many,
and sometimes such remarkable Examples and Instances of God's justifying the
Persons and Causes of Good men, and of his baffling the unjust Interests and
Dealings of the Evil in this World. Of which, as there will be always so many,
as may be enough to control the pretensions of the Epicureans, and our present
Atheists, That God takes no care of the World at all; so there may be also few
enough to suppress and silence the murmurs of those men's too-forward minds and
hasty desires, who, upon a bare possibility, and some rare Examples of God's
executing his Justice visibly in this Life, have been apt to raise their
expectations even to a criminal discontent and impatience of their own present
recompenses and justifications. When they ought to have considered the reasons
of the former conditions, (as also what other reasons God may give himself,
which we (perhaps) cannot understand) upon which they are so often omitted, and
should rather have endeavored to wait with patience, till the season
approaches, in which there shall be an impartial execution of Justice to the
whole World of Good and Evil.

And this finisheth the second Section or Reason, that may be given, why God is
pleased so observedly to deferr the Executions of his impartial Justice to the
Good and Evil to a future World, with respect to Mankind in general, as they
are ordinarily to subsist in Social Communions. But, besides this Social
Concern of Mankind, there was somewhat offered, as to God's care of them in
other respects. Therefore,

Section III.
IN these two remaining Sections I am concerned to represent the case more
particularly, as Mankind may be divided into the two sorts of Evil and Good;
and as God's just and gracious care of them both, as so distinctly and apart
considered, may be sufficiently acquitted by reasonable and religious Thoughts.

Now, this Third Section first offers the case of the Evil part of Mankind:
That is, of such as have wilfully and temerariously permitted themselves to be
betrayed into any state of Vice and Immorality. I say, if GOD Almighty should,
in this Life, be presently confounding every such Evil person, as soon as he
begins to persist in his unjust and immoral ways; it would prove such a
disparagement of the Divine Care, Equity, and Goodness, as could hardly in any
case be imagined or represented, upon several accounts.

First, Because he could not then have allowed them such sufficient
possibilities of Recovery, as were consistent with the Mercy of a Gracious GOD
to Creatures, that were made so defectible by their own original Nature.

That is, Who cannot consider, that such men have generally fallen into that
irreligious state, sometimes by the importunities of their own natural Passions
and sensual Appetities within them, which they could not unmake, though it were
in their power, with some difficulty, to have overruled them; and that
sometimes they fell into that state of Sin, by the Temptations of the World's
variously-enchanting Objects without them, which they could not remove, though
it was in their own power, with the same difficulty, to have controlled and
resisted them? I say, when these occasions of their falling into a state of
Sin, are thoroughly considered, and then how much those occasions do referr to
God, as Creator and Supreme Governor of all things, What mind can reasonably
entertain a suspicion, but that an infinitely good God should allow them the
most equitable possibilities of Recovery, which an adjournment of his
Administration of Justice to a future World can only admit?

And hence appears the reasonableness as well as the mercy of some Metaphorical
Expressions in the Scripture, designed to represent this case. There we find,
that the field was not presently thrown off to Briars and Thorns, (it were
against Reason and common Custom so to do) till the respite for Rain and
Dressing had given a further Experiment of its unfruitfulness. Heb. 6. 7, 8.
Nor was the Fig Tree sentenced to be presently cut down for the first or
second, and at last, not for the third years barrenness, but it was still
respited, Luke 13. 6.
and husbanded, till the ordinary term was past, that, by a wise Husbandman's
reasonable observation, it might be judged hopelesly unfruitful.

And as by this respiting and adjourning the Divine Justice, every impenitent
Sinner is made altogether inexcusable, Romans 2. 1. (...).
so is God's love and equity universally acquitted, as having most reasonably
allowed him all advantages for his recovery, which the case and nature of the
thing would bear. So that I doubt not, but that Almighty GOD may as justly say
to every unfortunate impenitent person, as he did to his unfruitful Vineyard,
Esaias 5.
What could I have done more, that I have not done? That is, not limiting God's
Power in himself, but supposing him to act according to the measures and nature
of men, as reasonable Creatures. This is the first reason.

Secondly, To evidence that it is reasonable that God should suspend his
completely universal Justice to the evil part of Mankind, to a future World, is
not only that he might allow them a fair and equitable possibility of recovery,
as to their own interest, but because such a present execution of his Justice
upon them, would be highly detrimental to the common Good of the World in its
several Societies. That is, if Fire should come down from Heaven, to consume
every Oppressor, as often as zealous Innocence might possibly cry for it; or,
that God should throw away every unjust person from his protection, and as often
cut him down in his vengeance, as the justifying of every Good man's Cause
might be effected by it; What great advantages might the World's Societies be
deprived of, by the loss of so many Evil men, to whom God had allowed, and
accepted an after-attempt for their Repentance and Recovery?

If there had not been such suspensions of God's Justice to such men, then had
St. Matthew never been called a Saint; nor had he become so useful an
instrument for the first establishment of the Christian Faith: Saint Paul had
died a Persecutor of the Church and Doctrine of Christ, of which he afterward
became such a successful promoter, and so stout a defender: And the Christian
Religion had then been deprived of the Patronage of Constantine the Great, for
the scandalous Sins of his Youth. And as I have instanced in these few, so if
we had notice of those millions of Evil men, who on that account have been
afterward useful to such like purposes, we might easily be convinced of the
reasonableness of God's suspension of the administrations of his Justice, upon
every man, as soon as he became wicked; and who, at several seasons of their
mortal Lives, have so successfully made after-attempts for their recovery to
Virtue, with so much advantage to the World.

3. The third Reason to demonstrate, that it was God's design, that the
suspension and adjourning of his universal judgment to a future World (besides
for the equitable possibilities of their recovery to their own benefit, and for
their afterusefulness in general) is, because it can only solve a considerable
doubt in his ordinary visible providence as to many of those Evil men, even
while at present they live in a state of Sin. And that is when we see that such
men do not only live in a tolerable well-being in the World, but that they very
frequently enjoy greater instances of a flourishing Prosperity, Psalm. 73.
and (as David complains) that they sometimes come in no misfortune like other
men. And then the reason is, that with respect to a Future World, they might
have an encouragement, as well as a respite to repent. That is, as if God
designed to tell them, that as he has at present so much favor for them, as
to allow them, by his general Providence, more than ordinary considerable
Portions of Advantage in this World; so that they might from thence reasonably
interpret, that God is not as yet made unplacable to their Persons, or would
rejoice at their following unrelievable state of misery; but that on the
contrary, his mercy and goodness are always most ready to admit them to his
present Spiritual Blessings and future Happiness, whenever they shall prepare
themselves for their reception. And that, as* He has already so much Love for
them, as to permit His Sun at present to shine upon them, sometimes with a
greater Benignity than upon others; and to let his Rain descend upon their
Fields, sometimes with more refreshing showers than upon other men's; so that
his mercy and pardon shall be as readily afforded them, whenever they shall
endeavor to qualify themselves for the Greater Blessings that relate to a
future Life.

But if in contradiction to all these manifestations of God's Favor and
Patience, they shall still obstinately set their hearts to do evil, Eccl. 8. 7.
because sentence against an evil work is not speedily in this world executed;
yet they have all the reason imaginable, (with the vain young man in the same
wise Book) to consider, that after all their sensual enjoyments, they must all
come to Judgment. And though (and because) they may escape the execution of
God's Vengeance in this World, yet they cannot (if they will allow their minds
a liberty of considering like men) but fear it in another.

And as by acknowledging such a respite our scepticks may thus reasonably
extricate that doubt in providence, so such as are believers may solve another
query in the Christian Religion. That is, why our Savior should so
extraordinarily engage his Disciples universal Charity to such evil men, even
sometimes when they are their own most deadly enemies. That is, that he should
call such a Charity, Mat. 5. 48.
the nearest approach to Perfection, and an especial assimulation of the
Godhead; Luke 6. 14, 15.
or that he should make no after-remark upon any other Article of his own
Prayer, but upon that of Forgiving Trespasses; and should make it the most
indispensable condition of all the pardon they themselves can expect from Him.
And then that this Charity, upon special command, should oblige them to all
manner of methods for their recovery, as by reproving and advising them by
forgiving and praying for them, and by supporting their lives with all manner
of necessaries, when they want them. Now the solution of all this is, that as
these acts are to be accounted very considerable instances of a good man's
duty, and that he shall be rewarded for it; so we may believe, that God the
rather instituted them to be so, not only from his mere preceptive authority,
but that they might be expedients of his own Divine Love and Care of that part
of Mankind, that needs his Pardon upon their Repentance and Amendment; I say,
what can possibly solve this query, but the belief of Gods respiting and
adjourning the administrations of Justice to a Future World, to express his
reasonable kindness to the evil part of mankind in order to their recovery?

Now, if against this whole reason it be objected, that God sometimes permits
not wicked men to live out half their natural periods, but cuts them down in
the midst of their time and sins; and that of this as the Scriptures have given
some extraordinary instances, so common observation can in every Age and Place
afford us daily Examples.

My answer to this allegation is, first, That very many instances of that
nature are of such Persons, as have been apparently the willful causers of the
Shortning their own lives, and of depriving themselves of that possibility of
their own safety, which God, as to all reasonable Creatures, had allowed them.
And then how is God concerned in such fatal miscarriages?

But in cases where God may be so far chargeable as by permitting the
concurrence of natural causes (of which perhaps they themselves were not any
ways at all presumptuously and wilfully causal) to put a sudden period to such
men's lives, it may be presumed that upon a foresight of what they would
afterward do, God might permit it in mercy to their own persons, that is, from
their doing greater evils, whereby their accounts might be at last the more
pitiable. And then in kindness to others, that their sudden surprises might be
exemplary to other evil men, that survive, to take them off from too confident
a presumption of enjoying life, thereby to make a further delay of their
repentance (in which delay they might otherwise proceed, till their neglects of
it might make their conditions irremediable) if some such examples were not
sometimes set before their eyes. And in this manner some have endeavored to
solve the Eternal punishments of the damned in Hell; That is, that they may
there be executed upon the Evil, like the judiciary punishments of Malefactors
in a State, to be possibly exemplary to some new worlds of Probationers, which
may as possibly succeed. In which respect, if such a solution may be allowable
(which I referr to better judgments, and do but with submission mention it) why
may not all such examples, as I have discoursed them, be accounted also as
instances of Gods mercy to numerous others, that shall at that present time or
afterward exist, rather than to think, that God should be any otherwise pleased
with such sudden and severe executions of his Justice upon such single Persons.

And thus this Objection being answered, it does upon the consideration of the
former Reasons appear most accountable, that God should respite and adjourn his
universal Justice and Judgment for the sake of the Evil Part of Mankind.

But Gods regard to that Part of Mankind, concludes not His care of the rest.
Therefore,

Section IV.
IN this last Section I am concerned to demonstrate, That an adjournment of so
great a part of GOD's universal Justice to another World, does not only acquit,
but highly advance his most gracious care of the good and virtuous part of
Mankind. And this I shall do upon several Accounts.

First, that the belief of such a Respite might keep their minds in a constant
satisfaction, That GOD intended to make better provisions for their
Recompenses, than can be had in this present world: In which, the best
advantages that can possibly be attained, are hardly considerable enough to
bear them up above the ordinary discouragements, which they may daily meet with
for nothing else, but because they are good: And therefore it is there happiness
to know, that when their duty calls for a submission to more afflictive
portions of Trouble, an expectation of present recompenses would be almost a
contradiction in the thing, and that because the bearing of the Cross does in
it self import a destitution of what might make them conveniently happy in this
Life: And then, that such a consideration might put them upon a kind of benign
necessity, to keep themselves entire and close to the desire and expectation of
those adjourned Recompenses, that can only be such, as may make them truly
Blessed; insomuch, that should the virtuous but too commonly and ordinarily
meet their justifications in this Life, and too generally be crowned with
present successes, as often as they prayed for it, or expected it according to
the justice of their Causes, they might suspect, that GOD designed to give them
their Portions in this world only, and that, in some displeasure, he had turned
them off, to be content with such an unfortunate exchange.

Secondly, it is highly reasonable, that God should respite and deferr the
rewards and recompenses of Good and Virtuous Men to a future State; because it
very often falls out, that it is their best interest, that they should not be so
happy, as always to succeed in their justest Enterprises; nor be always
gratified with present, though desired Advantages in their secular
Undertakings; and that because some tempers are not at all capable of bearing a
successful interest, and the best and strongest Piety has been staggered and
endangered by it. What a prodigy of miscarriage, and of a lost virtue was David
once in his great prosperity, and how did the following unsuccessful passages
of his life, restore him to a virtuous temper, hardly to be paralleled? How
much less than a man was he in the one, and how much more than an ordinary
Saint in the other?

And this is the reason, Why some Men of eminent Piety, being sensible of the
danger of too great and too successful an affluence, have voluntarily chosen to
abridge themselves of their own just enjoyments; and have been cheerfully
thankful, when Providence has offered them some cross overtures in their
affairs, thereby to abate and lessen in them too great a complacency in their
present fruitions.

But upon this subject I shall enlarge my self afterward.

The third Reason, why God might please to order an adjournment of his
recompensing Mercies to the Virtuous and Good to another World is, that he
might the more equitably admit them in his mercy, to the compleater degrees of
them in that state. For, who cannot consider, that all good men (of which none
are more sensible than themselves) have their Failings, and some unavoidable
Miscarriages, even when they are endeavoring to pursue their integrity as
well, and as far, as they can? And that there be many of them, who, though they
may now be as good, as their infirm mortal nature and circumstances will at
present admit, had past some considerable Portion of their Lives, before they
returned to Virtue, in an universal neglect of God, and Goodness. And
therefore, in both respects, GOD in his Wisdom and Justice might please to
leave them unjustify'd in many cases that concern this Life, that being at
present chastised, and as it were, punished for their many follies, before they
returned to Virtue and Goodness, and for their manifold Infirmities after they
had been so recovered they might not be laid to their charge afterward, so as
to occasion any abatements of their happiness in another World.

In these three Reasons is contained, what I had to say concerning God's care
of the Virtuous Part of Mankind, for the adjourning the complete
administrations of his Divine Justice to another world. And so I have finished
the design of my Third Chapter; and then all the premises are Ripe for the
assumption.

The Conclusion.
AND now having stood my ground against all the Suggestions, that could be
offered to invalidate the Three Constituent Parts of the Argument: That is,
having in my first Chapter demonstrated, that the Just and Holy God, at one
time or other, will certainly act the part of an Impartial Judge of all the
World, in Justifying the Just Causes of the Virtuous, and Punishing Evil men
for their unjust undertakings, and all their Immoral Actions, and Proceedings:
In the Second Chapter, having sufficiently evinced by all manner of
Authorities, and by every man's own common Observation, that that Work is not
done in this life, to any such degree, as may acquit the Universal Justice of a
good and just God to his Rational World: And lastly, having Demonstrated the
Reasonableness of his respiting and adjourning the executions of his Rewards
and Punishments to another State, and how it evidently tends most to the Order
of the whole Creation, and particularly and especially for the good of Mankind
in all Capacities; I say, having shown that all these Premises are certainly
True, I cannot conjecture what exception can possibly be alleged against the
just inference of the Conclusion, that is, That on this account there must
needs be a Future State in real Existence.

Second Argument.
The Sum of the SECOND ARGUMENT.
THE Second Argument that demonstrates the Existence of a Future State, is
founded upon Man's being created with those Rational Powers or Faculties of his
Soul, by which he has a mind, essentially advanced above the State of all
other visible Animals, and may be presumed to come up to a near Resemblance or
Image of his Sovereign Creator, viz. his Understanding and his Will.

By the one he is made capable, first, discursively to learn and know, and then
judicially to determine, what is most fit to be undertaken and done for the
attainment of such an End and Good, as may properly and sufficiently answer,
and be accommodable to the quality and natural temper of his own Rational Mind.
And by the other, viz. his Will, he is naturally capacitated with a power in
its self, first, freely to choose such a Good so adjudg'd, as his principal
Interest and Happiness; and then also as freely to embrace, and act all the
Means and Methods proposed for the assured attainment of it.

Now if it shall be made evident by plain and convincing Reasons, that those
great faculties of his Soul, were not given him designedly for the sake only of
his Mortal Duration, nor for the attainment of any End or Good, that relate
only to, and are determinable, by the Period of his present Life; but that they
were given him most specially and purposely for the end and Interest of a
Future World, and for his making use in this Life, of all such means, as
directly tend to the attainment of the Happiness of that State, then it
naturally and necessarily follows, That GOD Almighty has constituted the
Existence of such a World and State.

Now that this Argument thus generally stated, may the more unexceptionably
attain its design, I shall endeavor to offer at whatsoever needs a more
particular explanation in three distinct Chapters. The sums of whose Contents
are these:

In the first Chapter, I shall give Reasons to prove, That those Rational
Powers of the Soul, were not given to Man for the sake only of his Mortal Life.

In the second, I shall endeavor to solve some Objective Exceptions, by which
it is pretended, that those Faculties may be improved for the attainment of
several ends in this Life, which may appear to be sufficient Reasons, Why GOD
Almighty should give them to Mankind, though they should never be concerned for
any thing, that relates to a future World.

In the third Chapter, I shall positively demonstrate, that those Rational
Powers were principally, and upon the most special purpose given to Mankind,
for the sake and concern of a Future Life.

And if what I have thus proposed to be made Good in these three Chapters,
shall be found to be demonstrably true, they must necessarily infer the
Conclusion for the undoubted Existence of another World.

A FUTURE WORLD'S EXISTENCE, Demonstrated by Rational Evidence.
CHAP. I.
IN which I am concerned to demonstrate, That those rational Faculties or
Powers of the Soul, were not given to Mankind for the sake only of their mortal
Durations: Nor for the attainment of any End or Good, that relates only to, or
is determinable by the period of their present Lives.

And this I shall evince by the Evidence of these three Reasons.

First, Because there is no End or Good attainable in this World, whose
enjoyment can afford the rational mind any real satisfaction, rest, or
acquiescence.

Secondly, Because those best Enjoyments, that are most likely in common
opinion and estimation, to make the life of man more acceptable to himself, are
not in the power of those faculties to obtain at pleasure.

Thirdly, Because the more designedly and intently Men act for those
Enjoyments, as their principal Interest and Concern, the less they can escape
their being engaged in such Follies and Absurdities, as are inconsistent with
their Characters of being Reasonable Creatures.

And these will require the attendance of so many Sections to explain them.

Section I.
THE First Reason that I offer, why those Faculties, or the Rational Mind of
Man, were not given him of GOD, for the attainment of any End or Good, that
relate only to his present Mortal Life, is, because the best enjoyments of this
world cannot allow him any real or permanent satisfaction, or rational
acquiescence: As it is supposed they should, if his Existence were to be wholly
determined at the period of his mortal duration; or otherwise it must be
believed, that God Almighty had given him a more unhappy Being, than He had
done to any other Creature besides, in that respect.

Now, as to any direct arguing for this Truth; that is, that the best
Enjoyments of this world cannot afford the Rational Mind any such satisfaction
or acquiescence, if the common Sense of Mankind cannot supersede my Concern in
that point, I must then referr my Reader to the Fifth Argument, that is
principally engaged to make good that Observation. And I shall only in this
Section proceed so far in that Case, as to give the Reasons, why the Mind of
Man can admit no such Satisfaction from any, the best enjoyments on this side a
future World, or from what relates to it in this Life.

Now, the natural Reason of all that deficiency in those Temporary Enjoyments,
to afford the Mind of Man any such real and permanent satisfaction, is not only
from the Troubles, uncertain Events, and cross Accidents that generally attend
them, (as universally men complain and suggest as the only reasons of their
coffeehouse) but principally because by Divine Ordination all such
Enjoyments do properly and naturally relate, not to the satisfactions of the
superior and Rational, but of the inferior and animal part of man's Being.
For, though the superior mind does concern it self in the managery of those
Enjoyments, for the better conveniencing men's mortal Lives, yet is that rather
matter of Ministration and servile Employment, than of real and satisfactory
fruition.

It Is true (to make good our Reason) that those enjoyments of this Life may
sometimes be pleasing Entertainments for the Fancy and Imagination, and may
gratify men's Senses, corporeal Appetites, and the other Dispositions and
Inclinations which humane Nature holds in common with sensitive Beings; but
it is very rare, and impermanent, and almost unnatural, if the Rational Soul
shall permit it self to entertain any kind of satisfaction by the fruition of
any of them.

And this appears experimentally true, because the more intently any man allows
his considering mind to balance the worth and importance of any such fruitions,
let them relate to Pleasure, Knowledge, Honor, Profit, or Dominion, or to
whatsoever else it is, that tempts to a value, and a present acceptance,
especially as to any real satisfaction, resulting from them: And the more he
strives to make his intellectual Self to come in as Partner with his animal
dispositions, in the perception of them for such an End, he will always be so
much the more sensible, how defective they are for the making up of any such
sufficient Good, as may accommodate the nature, or natural temper, of his
Rational Mind.

And therefore hence it is, that the imaginative Faculty, Senses and lower
Appetites, do never entertain those present Objects so easily and acceptably to
themselves, as when men do either want, or resolvedly, wholly renounce, or but
divert the use of their considering and reasoning Powers, from making too near
an inspection into the Ends which they attain. And this may be verified by some
observable instances.

First on this account it is, that many great Persons do designedly deliver up
their minds part, that is, the Rational conduct of their affairs, and managery
of their Fortunes, to the care and reason of some prime Officers; that
themselves, if they be Religiously disposed, might improve their understandings
to more proper and satisfactory purposes; or if they be sensually inclined,
that they might caress themselves in their Pleasures, with a greater freedom,
for the satisfaction of the sensual and animal part of their Beings.

And then upon the same Reason it is, that men are so apt to applaud, and with
such great delight to recount the happiness they did enjoy in the childish and
youthful part of their time; that is, because they then enjoyed all the
necessaries and conveniences of Living, by the benefit of other men's rational
Care and Understandings; and that themselves did look no further, than the
gratification of their Senses and Brutal Appetites.

And this was the cause that induced Heraclitus (as Laertius reports it of him)
when the Ephesians desired him to undertake the Government of their City, De
Vit. Phil Lib. 8.
that he betook himself to play among the Children; intimating thereby, that
it, was much easier for him to be so engaged, than to have his mind taken up
with the managery of their Public Affairs, from whence it was not like to
receive any real satisfaction, or contentment to its self, though perhaps his
imagination (if he would have permitted that, as an end of his undertaking)
might have been gratified with the Plenty, Veneration, and splendid Title of a
Governor.

Now as this unsatifaction of the Superior and Rational part of Man, may thus
arise from the natural propriety, that all outward Enjoyments bear to the
Animal part of his Nature, so is that unsatisfaction much more increased,
(which I make as an additional Reason) by the greatness of that Impropriety,
which those Enjoyments of this present Life, do hold to the Rational Mind; for
they are not only things indifferent to it, but such as are alien, diverse, and
unally'd to its natural temper; and are objects as foreign and improper to it,
as those would be useless to one sense, that properly belong to another. And a
man may as well imagine, that his Taste should be affected with a Dish of
Colors, or a Glass of shining Light; or that his Ear should be delighted with
some fragrant Perfume, as that the Rational Mind of Man, as such, should be
really satisfied with the fullest Fruition of any thing that relates only and
properly to the Animal Part of himself.

And now if any man of an enquiring humor, should, upon this kind of arguing,
ask for a Reason in Nature, why the same Person integrally considered, should
be so vastly differently affected in himself; and how his Nature should require
for his universal satisfaction, Objects, that bear such evident improprieties
on several accounts, both among themselves, and to his own mind; My Answer
would be, Because there is in every Man, two kinds of Selfs, viz. the Rational
and Animal; each of them requiring different, and sometimes almost contrary
designs, business, and objects for their several natural ends and
satisfactions. And for this distinction, the Scriptural Revelation does not
only give us a most plain Account, by the different notions of a spiritual and
carnal Mind and State; the one referring to the government of a Man's mind and
life by Religion and Reason, and the other, according to the humor of his
lower and animal Inclinations: But the Heathen Philosophers themselves,
admitted that distinction a great way toward the same purpose, even by their
Rational Discourses and Apprehensions. But I shall instance only (though I
might have alleged* Heirocles and others) in one of them, and he (perhaps)
remarkably as great an Enemy to Christianity, as I could have well lighted
upon; and that is, Phorphyry; who affirms, That the Souls exists in the Body,
(...), etc.
but for a foreign Employment, and as in a strange place: Sent. 239. (mihi)
And that it is adjoin'd to a substance, that is altogether diverse from it.

And all this said to confirm the Reason given, Why those Rational Faculties,
that is, the Intellectual Mind could not be given for the sake, that is, for
the ends and purposes of Man's mortal Life only, because all the present
Enjoyments that are celebrated, as the only expedients of humane Happiness, do
principally and properly relate to the satisfaction of that part of his nature,
which bears an agreement with sensitive Beings.

Section II.
THe second Reason designed to demonstrate, That those Rational Faculties or
Powers of the Soul were not given to Man for the sake, ends, and intendments of
his Mortal Duration, only is, because it is evident, That all the most
considerable constitutions of his present Well-being, and that are in common
estimation most likely to become a satisfactory happiness to himself in this
World; are not directly, nor at all certainly placed in his power to obtain
them, when he most needs them; nor can he with any assurance recall them, when
he has been deprived of them.

And then were it not a hard thing to make such a conception of a good God,
that he should Place man in such a world for his whole Existence, in which
there should be nothing assured to him as attainable by the principal Powers of
his Being, which might render his life acquiescent and satisfactory to himself?

I say, who knows not, that it is not in any man's power certainly to enjoy
Peace, Health, Credit, Friends, Success, Plenty, or any thing else that may
make his life capable of any real contentment to its self, when those faculties
act their utmost for their attainment?

Let men know and study for them by their intellectual capacities, as much as
they can, and choose them as earnestly as their elective faculty can exert it
self; yet the unfortunate men of the world, (which are always in one respect or
other, by far the greatest part of Mankind) will tell you, that they might as
well have been obliged to alter the general fixed course of nature in its Stated
order, as to attain all those perquisites that must ordinarily concur, to make
up such a kind of living, as by which they may think themselves to have escaped
their being more miserable, than any other visible Creatures whatsoever.

And therefore our wise Master, when he had advised his Disciples, not to be
solicitously concerned about the necessaries and conveniences of their Mortal
lives, gave them this reason, Because they were no more at their dispose and
command, Mat. 6. 27.
than was the heightning their Stature by another Cubit. That is, that they
were by Divine ordination not certainly in their power at all. And though it
may be said, that some men do sometimes (and their number is not great)
successfully advance themselves in some prosperous seize in their Mortal
state; yet it may be presumed, that those present advantages have by far the
most generally fallen out, where there have happened Cases so effectually
circumstantiated, as if they were purposely set by providence for such
successes: and which were interpretatively little otherwise, than as it may be
said, that a man's hand can take up Gold, when it is laid before him; or embrace
his prosperity, when it is provided for him, as an effect of some propitiously
concurrent causes and accidents, which gave Solomon the Reason to say, That the
Race was not to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong; neither Bread to men
of Understanding, nor yet Favor to men of Skill, but Time and Chance happens
to all. That is, that those happy events did not certainly come to pass
according to those men's excellent qualifications, but that they proceeded from
some overruling cause of that Time and Chance; of which expect some account at
the period of this Section.

And this solves the observation why it does so often come to pass, that the
best outward materials of a pretended happiness in this world, do become the
Portions of men but indifferently qualified in the regions of their minds, and
very frequently of such, as are hardly so much as are sensible of the value of
their own plenteous circumstances: or else of such as are sensually disposed,
and then they either abuse. Them by their pride and intemperance, or else
disimprove them through their own indiscretions and carelessness to their own
discontent, rather than the lots of such as have the largest share of
intellectual endowments, or that are the greatest Friends to Worth and Virtue.

And for that reason it has been observed, even to a Proverb, that men of the
finest and most ingenious parts have seldom acquitted themselves from the
severe streights of Fortune, nor from very undecent dependencies: And that to
have been said, to be as indigent as a Poet or a Philosopher, was thought as
severe an exprobation of being poor, as could well be given.

It Is true (to invalidate my thus reasoning) that it is commonly affirmed, That
an exact frugality will make a man Rich; That a close retirement will procure
him Quietness of Life; and, That Temperance will secure his Health and long
Life: And then (they will say) that all these expedients for those considerable
events toward a man's easier and happier Being in this life, are all of them in
the power of the rational faculties to judge, choose, and undertake at pleasure.

My answer to this Allegation is, That those expedients do so uncertainly and
contingently attain their ends, that all cases considered, it will hardly allow
a man's thoughts a probability, that they ever should succeed according to the
undertakers Expectations. And to evince this, I shall admit those three cases
to a more minute examination.

As to the first of them, a strict and cunning Frugality: Let me demand of my
Objecter, whether he thinks that the most anxious care can prevent
unfaithfulness in all them, upon whom the industrious Frugals must be presumed
more or loss to rely, on one occasion or other, for trust or employment; or can
their nicest observation secure them from common Cheats, or secret frauds? or
can a Box of writings or a Chest defend their Wealth from the harassings of
War, and all other the common accidents of humane Life? And if so, what kind of
certainty can such men presume upon to encourage them in this undertaking, for
their own sufficient happiness in this World?

Then as to the second, viz. Retirement in order to a quiet Life: Can it secure
a man from all the effects of contempt, the certain attendant of a designed
privacy? Can it prevent the inconveniences of being friendless, as often as his
relation to the Public calls for the favor of men in power, to help him to
what is right or kind? Or can it secure him from being seized upon as a prey by
those who mark out the private, and the solitary, for the execution of their
mischievous, and sometimes bloody purposes? And then, I say, with what a
strange kind of improbability, must such an expedient attain its end to their
satisfactions.

As to the last expedient, Temperance, in order to the securing a man's health
and long life: Is it yet determined, upon any general ground of reason or
experience, what should be the certain measures of such a Temperance? Or did
ever any skilful Person pretend to give any such infallible rules of it, as
might be universally accommodable? Or if the methods of a temperate life could
be stated by a common measure, would they secure a man's health and long life,
from hereditary evil constitutions, or from common contagions, or from the
sudden surprises of Epidemick diseases? Or lastly, from such distempers, as may
be occasioned by diabolicals impressions, which may at any time, through the
Divine permission, be as commonly acted, as instances have been given of such
cases, by most credible and unsuspected relations, and as they stand upon
Authentic records? For which the Learned Bodinus may be consulted; I say, all
those Cases being duly considered, who can presume to think, that God has
placed any man's health or long life, with any assurance in his own power, by
the best use he can make of his intellectual Faculties?

And now, because I have thus undertaken, in favor of my Argument, to remark
this last temporal Blessing, and Enjoyment, Health; which in most respects
ought to be accounted the principal and necessary Attendant and Concomitant of
all present humane Well-being; Let me a little further engage my Observation of
the defect and insufficiency of Man's rational faculties for the attainment and
preservation of it. And that not only because a man's own Understanding may be
so easily defeated in finding out the expedients of its safety, but because the
Reason and Skill of those Men, who have made it the study, business, and
employment of their whole Lives to administer to it, do so much fall short of
any certain attainment of that Happiness to Mankind. And for this observation,
I shall only remark, what that admirable Patron of Learning Sr. Francis Bacon
discourses concerning it, Corpus humanum maxim capax remedii, sed vicissim
illud remedium maxim est obnoxium errori. Page 266. Ars ista (praesertim quo
nunc habetur modo) inter praecipue conjecturales reponenda. Page 267. Nam
Medici traditionum and experientiae fructum Magistratibus destruxerunt and
sustulerunt. 282. Tamen si quis ea, quae praescribere and ministrare soleant
Medici, acutius introspiciat, inveniat pleraque vacillationis and inconstantiae
plena, and quae extempore excogitantur, and in mentem illis veniant absque
certo aliquo, aut praeviso curationis tramite. p. 286. De Augment. Scient. lib.
4. cap. 2.
and that only in the Margin, and without interpretation, to avoid offense; for
I have said all this upon no other design, but to improve the notion I have
here undertaken upon my Reasoning for the certain Existence of a Future State.

And now having thus concluded my second Reason, let me superadd one
observation upon that account; that is, Suppose it should be inquired, that
since Man has naturally so little power over the circumstances of his own
Well-being in this World, by what other cause or causes are Men's present
conditions conducted, or whether by none at all?

My answer is, that the acknowledgment of a Future World; and GOD's design,
that Men's principal Happiness should be placed and expected in that State, does
most plainly and naturally answer that Enquiry; and that, without flying to
stubborn Fate, or blind Fortune (as some, even great Philosophers have done) it
does perfectly solve the doubt. That is, that GOD was pleased to take upon
himself the care of disposing every Man's portion of outward things in this
Life; and in that manner as he saw might best suit with every man's particular
temper, and circumstances, for the better attainment of his happiness in the
other World. And then moreover, that men, upon a prospect of the uncertainty of
their own endeavors for any assured successes in this life according to their
own desires, might have, as a greater reason, so more leisure and opportunity,
to attend the concerns of another to come: That is, as our Savior reasons,
that they might not be folicitous about what they should Eat, or Drink, or put
On, but should leave all those events to the wise conduct and care of a
Gracious God, and then entertain them with the same indifferency and
unconcernment, that sensitive Beings do, who subsist by the ordination of the
same Alldisposing Hand of God. Always considered, that as those Animals comply
with the Divine Providence, by a natural care of themselves, and in actions to
which their nature obliges them for their own preservation; so should men make
use of their Rational powers for the careful improvement of all such means,
which God allows them (as he thinks fit) for the better management of their own
Wellbeings in this world; but still with deference to their principal business
and design, of attaining the happiness of a following life. This the Second
Reason.

Section III.
THE third Reason intended with further explanation to represent, that man's
Rational Faculties, and Intellectual Mind, were not likely to be given him, for
the sake of his mortal life only, is because it is commonly observed, that the
more designedly, and intently, men employ their minds and lives, for the
attainment of such ends and satisfactions, as relate only to their present
enjoyments; the less are they likely to escape their acting such follies and
absurdities, as cannot consist with their characters of being Reasonable
Creatures. And that the highest wisdom such men do commonly arrive at, will in
their best successes, amount to little more than what the natural discretion
Brute animals themselves express, in the mannagement of their well-beings.

And therefore it were well for the happiness of most of that sort of men, who
appear to live to no other purpose, but to serve the interests of their mortal
durations only, that a few of thousands of them, could in the managment of
their secular and sensual designs, arrive at the common and natural prudence of
ordinary Brutes. So that when it is usually said, that if men live only for
their own ends and sensual satisfactions in this world, that they degenerate
into Beasts, they put a disparagement upon the Honor of those Creatures (whom
Porphyry contends to make, De Abst. lib. 3.
as it were, co-brethren with us in the Rational world) and that because they
regularly act their natural powers and faculties for their own good, agreeably
to the ends for which they were made; whereas when men renounce the concerns of
another world, they act commonly in contradiction to their own principal
natures, and do degenerate, not so much into Brutes, as that they turn Fools
and Sots.

And though it is a common custom to call men wise, who live at that rate, with
any present success in their worldly designs; yet it must be presumed, that it
is at best by way of comparison, that is, that they may be lesser Fools than
others; or perhaps this may be done by a kind of mutual combination among such
men themselves, to call one another Wise, where there is no manner of manly
reason, why they should be so accounted; and perhaps all the reasons in the
world, why they should be reputed otherwise, if their designs and ends, actings
and discourses, were measured by the Standard of that, which is true and
genuine Wisdom.

And further, to enforce the Reason why on this account it may more manifestly
appear, that Almighty God did not furnish Mankind with those Rational Powers on
purpose for the sake only of their mortal Durations, (which must be so* if no
World in future) is because it is obviously observed, that the greater Portions
of intellectual abilities, whether complexionall or acquired, that those men
have, who live only to their own present sensual ends; and the more
solicitously they apply their minds for the attainment of them, without any
regard at all of what is to come in a future World, so much the more remarkable
are their degeneracies to folly and absurdities.

And therefore we may take notice, that such kinds of men, if they be but
indifferently qualified in their Understandings, and of duller Capacities, do
always act all their sensual Adventures, as with weaker desires, so with fewer
imprudencies, and do even seem comparatively wise and discreet in their very
follies. And I shall instance in some cases, their Covetousness (when it falls
out to be the present humor) is less solicitous; Their Amors more
indifferent; They drink more quietly, talk more temperately, and their Passions
are more tolerable: And indeed, as in these, so in all other kinds of sensual
and secular regards, they act like prudent men in comparison of those Persons,
that are of more lively and brisk Capacities. For their covetous humor is
managed with more cunning and overreaching Intrigues; Their Amors are violent
and disturbing: Their Drink makes them as riotous as Bethlems; Their Passions
rage and are intolerable; Their Talk is clamourous and provoking: And indeed in
all their Sensualities, their Wit engages them to act their several humors
and inclinations, to their own greater folly and misfortune. So that in the
event, many of them may be easily tempted to wish that they had been born
natural Fools, Brutes, Trees, or any thing, rather than to have been made
Intellectual Beings, so much to their own disadvantages.

Now, how could such Rational Creatures be possibly engaged in such reproachful
miscarriages of their Understandings, but that their Minds had lost their
proper and natural Authority over their own Affections and Appetites, and
consequently over their own Thoughts and Actions, for want of being principally
concerned for Religion and Virtue, in order to the happy events of a future
World? For their Rational Powers being left to have nothing to be employed
about, but for the ends, and pretended satisfactions of this Life, it is no
wonder that they should admit, if not administer to, such wild excesses of
Folly and Indiscretions.

So that if any unconcerned Person of an observing humor, would but take the
pains (if it were but for his diversion) to make an impartial Survey of the
Rational World, as at any time men generally do appear to act their several
parts in it, and then would but recount, as far as he can make a Prospect, the
various Follies and Imprudencies which the men wholly unconcerned for Religion
and another World, do daily commit, and habitually persist in, he could not but
judge, that too great a part of it would look like one entire Scene of Fools
and Madmen. That is, should he but particularly take notice how sillily one
man manageth his love of Money, another his fondness to a Woman: With what idle
extravagancies a Third is treating the pride of his Heart; while another is
tugging hard for a Feathercap promotion: And shall then observe, how such a
man's next Neighbor is, by his restless humor, storming every body out of
their peace and order; while he spies another sort of cunning Men sit close
together in a corner, drinking away their Health, Fortune, and Reason; with a
thousand suchlike idle Adventures, to which their unconcernedness for Religion
and another World, do daily expose them.

And now, if any man should advise me, the more convincingly to make Good what
I have thus so severely affirmed concerning so great a part of Mankind, who
will be apt to rage to see themselves thus ridiculously exposed, I could think
of no other expedient, that would more effectually acquit me, than to make use
of a little Burlesque, which an honest Country Droll has promised me, to dress
up some of those intellectual Fops in their proper Garbs. For some great
Authors have told me, That the best way of handling an artificial Fool, is to
do it in his own kind: And to laugh him into Discretion would be the best
expedient to recover him from his Folly.

But then the Author's desire is, That it may stand in the midst of this
Discourse, but in the nature of a Parenthesis; some telling him that it is too
light for the gravity of the Argument; and others again, of another opinion,
persuaded him by all means to let the Fools see how the representations of
their Folly does become them, when they have read their own ridiculous
Characters. And let it go at all adventures.

(The first ridiculous piece among the silly Crew, of whom my Neighbor brought
me a description, was of one, whose debauched Imagination, for want of being
concerned for his best Interest, had betrayed his Reason to think, that it
would be principally for his happiness, if he could but grow famously Rich; and
that with an especial design, to raise up a succeeding Family, big enough, to
make a great Show in the World. And as the most likely Expedient for the
carrying on his wise Project, he imploys all his intellectuals, how he may best
attain to the mighty Art of Thrift. And then to that as to his Deity, he
devotes all the powers of his Soul; and sacrifices to it, not only all that
may be useful to others, but convenient or decent for himself. And for that
end, (to instance in some cases) if necessity does but at any time hector him
into a mind to cloth his Carcass, his design (for that can only solve his
discontent about the Charges of it) is to wardrup up the old Case, as part of
his Stock, to be Inventoried by his Executor when he dies.

If he eats, the only Hautgoust that relisheth his Meat, is either that it
costs him nothing, or as it best agrees with his stomach in his Pocket; for
there principally lays his hunger and thirst, and the palatings he delights in.

If he rides abroad, it is generally upon an Animal, whose bones he designs to
tell in for money, in the next Sum he takes Bond for. And if at any time he
seems kind or civil, it is only to them, of whom he designs to make a Prize upon
a foreseen Bargain.

The Furniture of his House is nothing but a rubbag'd heap of Pawns and
Stresses: and his Storehouse is generally stocked with nothing else but the
atoning Presents of his afrighted Creditors. But if a Vote for a Tax be
rumored, though the King's, or the Church's Safety lays at stake for want of
Money, it sounds in his Ears like a Knell, or a Raven. His Religion is a
Conventicle to choose, for there he can sit or lie along, pull his Hat over his
Eyes and Count, and not be interrupted with sometimes standing up, and then
kneeling down, and ever and anon, with saying, an Amen, or a Lord have mercy
upon me* or with the like Invasions upon his Christian Liberty. But if the
Preacher in that place must have Money, then farewell to that Religion; says
he, I can discharge my Christianity at a cheaper rate at home: that is, by
reading some Chapters every Sabbath night: let them be out of Genesis or
Matthew, Canticles or Corinthians, that is all one to me; so they be read.

But to be sure, he hates all those Religions that put men to Charge for
Ornaments, Vtensils, Repairs of Edifices, and Moses and Aarons: Nothing so
abominable to him: And then a Sacrament with an Offering, and a Priest in a
Dress, and who must have Tithes too; and if so, that are uncrampt by a Two
penny-custom: All this, says he, is downright Idolatry and Antichristian. And
as for those days they call Holidays, they are mere loss of time, and turn to
no common Profit: And they are Popery too.

Now all this while, when there is any thing to be got by it, he is as poor as
he can creep, and looks always of such a kind of Quality, that did not some
men now and then mistake him for a Conjurer, one would swear, that he were
downright some Vnder-Officer in the Commonwealth of Beggars. And indeed to
save Charges, he could find in his heart to take a turu or two with them about
the Country: but to be sure, it shall be no longer, than till they come to
their General Rendezvous: He knows how to make better use of his Money, than to
bear a Club among those merry and generous companions.

But stay! While this Man of Gold is going on thus hastily in his wise Journey
for getting Money, suddenly a Fever arrests him for an old Debt, ready to burn
down his Souls dry Tenement; or a Dropsy opens a Flood to drown it. And then
he sighs, and is troubled in Conscience, that he has yet but enough to make
some Body, but an ordinary Knight or Squire. And if he dies upon it, the last
event of all his wise Endeavors is; Octo pedes Caesar habet.
that when the joy-sorrow of his Heir has once Serjeanted up a Prisoner to an
eight-foot Dungeon, with a Pompous Funeral; it is odds but the World will smile,
that he has gotten all that Treasure for one, that is like to know little more,
than how to talk idly and swear; go gay and drink; and to turn the New House in
the Country, designed for the Seat of the Chymerical Family first into an Inn,
or a Seraglio, and then perhaps into a sheet of Parchment, for the use of
another Fop, that may act the Part of Father or Son.

As Soon as my merry Neighbor had dressed up for me the former hopeful
Adventurer, for a present Happiness, in his Fools Coat, he presently changes
the Scene, and dresseth up another intellectual Brute, of a quite contrary
humor, and he is as wise as Drink can make him. And the first Enterprise that
his contriving Understanding puts him upon, whereby to get rid of the
encumbrances of his Wit and Money, is to lead about a Hog (I mean himself) in a
string from Town to Town, to make Sport for a Regiment of Boys and Tapsters,
with his frantic adventures.

But in a while, being tired with making so much work for Constables, Justices,
and Glasiers, he resolves, upon important Reasons, to take a wiser method for
his own greater happiness; and that is to set up for himself, and to be his own
Innkeeper at home. And for that end he furnishes his House with all manner of
Utensils for the sooping Employment; he turns all his Apartments into drinking
Rooms: Only he solemnly devotes his Cellar for a Chapel, where he and his
devout drunken Assembly do constantly finish their last completorium, with
their Hats off in great order, and sometimes upon their knees, if the Health be
to Somebody; and in the morning they return thither again, and are as zealous
as Thirst can make them, to pay their early Devotions at the Tap. And in this
more solemn place, as in a Repertory, he sets up all his drinking Laws and
Sanctions; and at the heads of the Vessels stands up chalked, the only
Almanac, by which he understands how the Year passes, always accounting from
the famous Months of March and September.

And by this time you may imagine, that the Head-house is become one entire
Inn, or indeed one nasty Trough, common to all the Swine in the Country: Where
all the Year long they are swallowing down the Sun, and drinking up the Night,
till the Morning discovers how all the Rooms are spread over with so many
sprawling Monsters, where one has lost his Legs, another his Eyes, and All,
their Wits; so that, if a Stranger should come in, and would have but patience
to stop his Nose, he cannot but think, that he had in prospect some
new-fashion'd Hospital, or that he had in view those imperfect shapes which the
Egyptian drunken Mud produces, when it has a while debauched it self with the
Nile's lusty Liquor.

And now having a few Years constantly attended to this wise way of living, (as
if he had been shut up to be fatted in a Sty) at length his body swells to the
likeness, and perhaps, to the bigness of one of his large Casks, which in a
short time begins to leak at so many Orifices, designed by Art and Nature, to
prevent the inundation of a Dropsy, that at last his Associates are
necessitated, for fear of a common Contagion, to remove that unweildly Puddle
of humors, and lodge it in a little dark Cellar under ground, where a brisk
Club of little Good-Fellows of his own breeding, stave him, or (as they call
it) dust him, and merrily drink him up to a drop, before they have done.)

Thus ends the long (and to some perhaps unwelcome) Parenthesis; but they may
pass it over if they please; and there is no hurt done.

Now, to these two, I could have added many more such like Characters of other
sorts of Fops, who are as constantly acting their silly Parts upon the World's
Stage, but my designed method would not admit such an Enlargement in a single
Paragraph; And, perhaps, these two are too many already in some men's opinions.
But if I had not thought, that I might do some considerable Good by such an
attempt, I had certainly chosen to have laid them aside. That is, That when
such men should see, as it were in a Glass, their own ridiculous deformities,
they might bethink themselves of putting on a wiser and more acceptable Garb of
Living; and then that others, who were not yet engaged in those Follies, might
endeavor to prevent their appearing in the World, such Monsters of Absurdity.

And this was done, not that I thought that all men who are not concerned for
Religion and another World, do always make use of their Rational powers to so
very ridiculous purposes, as such a piece of sportful Characters do represent
them; yet I am assured, that there be always too many in the world, that do
really come up even to the highest degrees of such kinds of follies, and even
among them that have no cause to complain of any defect, either in their
Natural, or acquired Rational abilities.

And then as for those that do not come up to such famous and clamorous pitches
of absurdity, in the management of their Sensual engagements of life, I am so
far satisfied, that there is no man, that resolv'dly quits his mind of all
concerns for a Future World, but when he acts only for present ends and
satisfactions, as the sole happiness, which he resolves to expect, but that his
practices and their events, must more or less bear a resemblance to such
described follies. And though perhaps some men's actions may admit mixtures of
some discretion, comparatively of some other sensualists proceedings, yet
generally such men cannot but move and act beneath the dignity of a Rational
Being; and their actions will be found to be as great a condescension from
their natural humanity, as if a Prince, who exempting himself from his
Governing Affairs, shall spend his time in catching Flies, and tending an
Aviary, or practicing the Trade of an Artificer, with such like impertinent
Adventures. And though some other ways of passing away the time, that are in
fashion, may have gained a better reputation in common opinion, (setting aside
what use may be made of them, for innocent divertisements) may yet in
themselves be as silly and childish as the former; when right Reason, the great
judge of human actions, shall arraign their importancies, and how far they come
short of that Wisdom, to which the Grandeur of a rational Being should aspire.
This the last of the three Reasons.

And thus I have argued, how those Ratational Faculties and man's Intellectual
Mind, could not be given him for the sake, ends, and intendments only of his
present life. I should now attend to what may be said to prove, that they were
principally, and on the most special purpose given him, for the sake and
concern of another World. But my exceptioners have designed other work for me,
and I must first attend to them, and fairly acquit my self of their suggestions
to the contrary of what I have endeavored to prove, before I can be engaged in
that main business which concerns the chief strength of my Argument.

CHAP. II.
IN this Chapter we must endeavor to solve those Objective Exceptions, by
which some men have alleged, that there be several cases; for the reasons of
which, God Almighty might be pleased to give those Rational Faculties to
Mankind, though they were never to be concerned in their use and operations for
any thing, that relates to a Future World. And those Cases are Three, to be
examined in so many Sections.

1. The First respects the attainment of all manner of Learning.

2. The Second is, that a man by those Faculties may be the better enabled to
manage the Government of National Societies.

3. The Third is, that those Rational Faculties may be improved for the
admirable use of Contemplation, which some Philosophers have represented, to be
a very considerable expedient of human happiness in this Life.

Section I.
IN this Section we must wait upon the learned Nation, who will be apt to
suggest and say, That though those Noble Faculties, when they are wholly
employed about the unsufficient Ends and Happiness, which worldly prosperity,
pleasure, and a sensual way of living, can be pretended to afford, may be found
so defective (as has been represented) yet as they may be improved for the
attainment of universal Learning, which has been always accounted such a
special accomplishment and satisfaction of the Mind, it may be one sufficient
End, why Man might be furnished with those rational qualifications, though they
were never to be concerned at all, for what relates to a Future World.

My Answer to this seemingly great Exception is, that I shall evince that that
which is reputed Learning in all its parts, can no more accommodate the natural
temper of Man's rational mind, as to any real satisfaction, than the enjoyment
of any other temporal Good; and that it is subject to the same defailancies for
such an end, even in the highest acquisitions, that humane life can possibly
admit.

And all this I shall endeavor to represent upon the account, of two Reasons.
First, from the way and manner of its attainment; Secondly, from the value and
Importance of it, when it is so attained. But in the management of which
Reasons, I must crave an ingenuous consideration from the Lovers and Students
of that universal Learning for what end I do it; that is, thereby intending
only to control the Theists Pretensions, who are apt to take all occasions to
invalidate the necessary belief of another World's Existence: and not at all
designing to disparage the Honor, or discourage the Diligence of them, that
attend to the attainment of it.

The first Reason, why such seize of Learning could not be a sufficient
end in its self for GOD's giving those rational Faculties to Mankind, whereby
any man might allow himself the thoughts of enjoying such a sufficient Good, as
might answer the temper, and satisfy the desires of his intellectual mind,
without a principal regard had to his Concern in a Future World, is from the
manner of his attainment of all Rational Learning.

For then we say, how can the mind of man entertain any such real satisfaction
to its self, when it is considered, That so great a part of his Mortal Duration
must be spent and worn up in the very preparative and proemial Labors toward
the acquisition of any one part of that which is reputed Learning, before he
can be presumed to be so much a Master of it, as to have the pleasure or
satisfaction of comprehending, what is Intellectual or Rational in it. For he
must first be supposed to endure the unpleasant hardship of a kind of Captive,
and must be several years tied to the drudgery of (as it were) dragging about a
Mill, only for the acquiring the little skill, how to read and speak
congruously and sensibly. He must then incumber his head with a company of hard
terms, definitions, and distinctions in an instrumental Art, which are like to
give his mind as much satisfaction, as toil can administer, before he can be
able to work out the distinct notions of things, or be capable to think, or
discourse intelligibly of them.

And when after this he comes to a nearer approach toward any Art or Science,
he must then spend some time in charging his memory with the proper Elements,
and some introductive general Principles, (as Prolegomena) before he can engage
in the true understanding of it. Now what contentment or satisfaction can all
those previous Labors be to a Rational Mind, any more, than the tuning a set
of Viols to a musical Ear, or the confused noise of Axes and Hammers, and the
unmethodiz'd prospect of a heap of Tools, and unfinished Materials, be to him
that has undertaken a Design for a stately Edifice? But then after our
Students laborious Preface to his obtaining an entrance into the wide field of
Learning; What true satisfaction can he possibly give his mind, when he cannot
but have heard, that his whole Life (too little for the perfect attainment of
any one considerable Science) must be always in a progressive motion toward
the end, which he proposes to himself; and for that Reason, he cannot but
expect to live in a state of a continued Imperfection, and to be all his days
in the capacity of a Disciple.

The Sense of which, though it may sometimes be made use of, to drive further
on in his Studies; yet a little time and experience will inform him, that it is
no more, than a going forward toward something, from which he shall always
find himself as far off, (if not much farther) as when he first set forth. And
the reason is, because the more he knows, the more he shall still, to his great
dissatisfaction, find cause to think, that there is yet much more to be learned
and known. Every degree of his acquired knowledge, will be but a further
discovery of his ignorance of other things, and advance his thirst of what else
is yet to be understood.

And sure it was from hence, that Antonius took occasion to represent his
thoughts when he advised, (...). Lib. 2.
That a Man should drive out of his mind the Thirst of Books, lest he should go
murmuring to his Grave; but rather be content, and give the gods thanks for the
knowledge he has a capacity ordinarily to attain.

And now, when the expectant Student has once considered, how he has sped in
the former part of his short Existence, he may then suggest to himself, what
satisfaction he may hope for, after he has past the Meridian of his days: That
is, whether, as he grows older, he does not rather go backward than forward in
the field of Learning; and upon a nearer approach toward the period of his
life, whether he finds not apparently that he is upon the retrogressive and
losing point. I don't speak of that declension of age, when it is possible for a
man to forget his own Name; but I mean, whether all along (when he should be
presumed to reap some Harvest of his proposed satisfaction to the comfort of
his own mind) he perceives not a continued diminution in his stock of Learning;
which perhaps he imputes to the streightness of his minds Repertory, that
either the later notions do (as it were) run over into forgetfulness, or else
being crowded together in so small a room, that they stifle and confound one
another. So that, what by the imperfections of his approaching age, and the
frequent interruptions by infirmities; What by attendancies to those affairs,
which the necessaries and conveniences of Living do exact from him; and what
by adhering to those Studies, to which in his Youth he had accustomed his mind,
perhaps he may live to see himself baffleable by every fresh Adventurer, so as
to bear the shame of being outdone in common Talk by any such an one, as is
better acquainted with the newer methods, and later notions of his own
Sciences. And this accounts for the first Reason.

The Second Reason, which I intimated before to represent, That the attainment
of Learning (to such a degree as the Mind can admit in Man's short duration)
could not be a sufficient end, why GOD Almighty should give those Rational
Faculties to Mankind, for any real satisfaction of humane Life, is from an
examination of what importance and value such an acquired Learning may be in
its self, so as to answer the Mind's natural temper, and its innate desires of
knowledge; And I think I may, in that respect, without offense, affirm, of all
the Learning in the World, That were it not that it may be made serviceable to
Religion, and practical Goodness, in order to the Interest of another World, it
would hardly deserve its own Name, especially with such a Character, as the
World allows it. And by reason of the defective attainment of every part of it;
no man did ever think himself, in all points, so sufficiently learned, as to
allow his mind any manner of complacency, or real satisfaction, but the
ignorantlybold, and such an one, whom flattery and vulgar applause had seduced
into such a blind opinion of himself.

And therefore it has been always reckoned among the wise and modest, to be a
considerable advance of a judicious Understanding, for a man to think himself
to know too little, or even nothing, Dieg.
(as it is reported of Socrates, that he should so affirm of himself) that is,
Laer.
That he knows nothing comparative of that, Lib. 2.
which he cannot but be sensible is more and more yet to be understood.

What Science is it, that was ever yet believed by the judicious to be brought
to any tolerable perfection? That which has been most likely of late to gain
the best improvement toward it, is Experimental Philosophy, especially as to
those attempts that have been made, for the finding out the natures of Beings.
And though they have offered at those discoveries with considerable success,
and perhaps to a greater degree than have yet been attempted and attained, yet
nevertheless, I am apt to believe, that they have so far fallen short of any
perfect attainment, that if Six Thousand men were appointed to find out the
nature of every single Vegetable (as they account their number) and so many
Thousands more, about the numerous species or kinds of Animals, Insects, and
Minerals, they might be presumed to find so far work enough for their whole
Lives, as that Basilius Valentinus, who writ of Antimony, did affirm, (as Mr.
Boil relates* -- Not. Hist. p. 13
it) that The shortness of Man's Life makes it impossible for one man to
understand thoroughly, or to learn that Mineral only; in which, every day there
was something behind, that was to be discovered afterward.

And what I may affirm of the great distance of that kind of Learning from
Perfection, the same also may be said of all the parts of Learning whatsoever.
That is, (to instance in some particulars) if he that designs a Happiness to
his mind, by furnishing it with the best Treasures, which the Historian
Learning can afford, could be sensible and secure, that there were such a Body
of History, in which there should be nothing related, that were neither Partial
nor Romantic: Or, if he that aims at a great felicity, by the attainment of
the best knowledge in the learned Languages, were sure, that if he were Master
of any one of them, as far as Art and Study could advance him, that he should
never have Thoughts of any defect in the acquisition or use of it: I say, if it
might be so affirmed of these, and all other parts of humane Learning, there
might be some pretense for the mind's attainment of some sufficient
satisfaction in this life, without respect to another; but when it is known to
be far otherwise, it lessens the wonder of Sextus Empericus his Confidence,
Cap. 1.
when he went about to prove so industriously, that there is no Learning at
all, but in uncertain opinion; and that in another place speaking of the
Mathematical Science, Nam etsi forte fortuna quisquam hoc verum assequatur,
nescit tamen se esse acceptum, sed putet, and opinatur.
(of which one should think that the least doubt were to be made) he should
assert, That he that has attained to the knowledge of any Truth in it, yet
that it was but by Good fortune; and that he cannot certainly know whether he
has attained it or no, but only may opine and think so. Or, that Cornelius
Agrippa should assert not only the difficulty, -- Tam est scientiarum omnium
cognitio difficilis, ne dicam, impossibilis, ut prius vita tota hominis
deficiat quam vel unius disciplinae minima ratio perfect investigari possit.
Proleg. de Van. Scient.
but even the impossibility of attaining to the least Reason of any one Science
perfectly in the whole Life of a Man.

Or, Lastly, That Sextius Romanus, (of whom we have an account in Plutarch) who
had parted with his honorable Fortunes, De prob. Virt. page mihi 77.
upon design to attend to the Philosophical Studies, Edit. Gr. and Lat.
should after a while fall into so great an unsatisfaction of mind for what he
had done, as to be weary of his life, and to make an attempt to cast it away.

And this discharges me of my Second Reason, given to evince, That the value
of Learning is not such, as that either the mind of Man should have a
sufficient satisfaction in its self, by the attainment of it, or that it were
reason enough why GOD should give Mankind those rational faculties for that
end, though they should never be concerned for a future World.

And now I would not that any man should prejudge by these Reasons offered,
that I intend to put any disparagement upon Learning, in that imperfect degree
it is attainable, (as I cautioned the Reader in the beginning of this Section)
or to give any discouragements to the Lovers of, or Endeavourers for it; For
upon the supposal of the Existence of a Future World, and of that Religion, and
the knowledge of it, that is necessarily requisite for the attainment of the
happiness of that state, I do most heartily acknowledge, that all kinds of
Learning, in the proportions to which they may be improved, are sufficiently
and satisfactorily useful, and in themselves highly honorable. -- Dio. Laert.
Lib. 6. In vita Crat. The.
And I wish the Studious of them may meet better encouragements in the World,
than by the measures of that man's unworthy Bounty, who gave Three Pounds to
his Cook, a Dram to his Physician, a Talent to his Mistress, and
Three-half-pence to the Philosopher. And this concludes my Answer to the first
Exception.

Section II.
IN this Section, we must attend those Men's Exception, who will allege, That
those rational powers of the Soul, are necessarily useful for the conduct of
governments, and that without which, there would not be capacities sufficient
for the contrivance of expedient Laws and Orders; and for other the manageries
of public Affairs, to preserve National Societies in Peace and Welfare: and
that then there is another end, why GOD Almighty should furnish Mankind with
those intellectual qualifications of mind, though they should never be
concerned for another World. To this, my first Answer is, that if our
Exceptioners have any eye toward that humane Learning, which we have lately
discoursed upon, as if that, as such, were sufficient to influence Men's minds
for the better management of Governments, they offer their exception with too
great a hazard of being disbeliev'd. For the contrary has frequently, and
famously been experimented to be true. And therefore Clemens Alexandrinus
informs us, -- (...). Strom. lib. 1.
That such Men, by their sophizing and Oratory, have served frequently to
amuse, and steal away the minds of the People, and sometimes have occasioned a
Cadmean War, and its unfortunate Events. And for that Reason, the Philosophers
and Poets have been oft-times banished from States, -- Neque illis solum
temporibus nimis rudibus, necdum Graeca doctrina expolitis Philosophi ex Urbe
Roma pulsi, verum etiam, Domitiano imperante, Senatus-consulto evecti, atque
Urbe and Italia interdicti sunt. Qua tempestate Epictetus quoque Philosophus,
propter id Senatus-consultum, Roma decessit. Lib. 15. Cap. 11.
as Dangerous to their Peace. And thus the Romans did, (as Aulus Gellius tells
us) not only when they were Rude and Impolite, but even in the learned Age of
Domitian, when Epictetus himself was not excepted.

But secondly, I answer, that if our Exceptioners mean only, that those
rational Faculties do sometimes furnish Men with a greater natural sagacity;
and which being improved by experience and observation, may better qualify
them, to contrive and act, what is most convenient for the Piece and
well-Governing of Nations, it must be allowed as true. But then I say, that if
those qualifications be not accompanied with a concern for a Future World, and
with some sense of the necessity of being Good and Virtuous, as an universally
acknowledged condition of obtaining the Blessing of it; and that thereby such
men may have some kind of Conscience of what is Right and Good, to oblige them
so to act and govern; there would be no society in the World, with which it
were worth the holding any Communion. All such natural and acquired
Capacitations for public Good in such men, would presently (as it is too
generally observed) be made use of for the more successful prosecution of
private Interests and designs. Princes could no longer enjoy their Thrones in
peace, nor the People their Social Rights in safety, than that there wanted
men, that had ambition, covetousness, and power enough, to interrupt and invade
them both: Nor would the Communion it self in the issue subsist, but by a state
of War, with all its attendant calamities and savageries, and the miserable
consequences of the longest and most successful Sword. Which would highly
defame the Creator's Wisdom and Goodness, that His most excellent creatures,
beneath the Heavens, should have no better means allowed them to preserve
themselves in their Social Communions, but by being always in apparent danger
to be harassed with the bloody attempts of cunning and ambitious men, who would
be perpetually contending for Sovereignty and Power. To prevent which
confusions, when Princes have to deal with a mutinous and seditious People,
they are sometimes necessitated to secure themselves, and the common peace, by
armed force.

And therefore the great Masters of Policy have adjudg'd Religion, with regard
to future rewards and punishments, so necessary for the safety of Governments,
that they have in the first place (as Matcheavil observes) endeavored to
establish the profession of it among the People. In id enim prae caeteris
incumbere debent, ut verum Religionis cultum recte instituant and venerantur.
Disp. lib. 1. cap. 12.


Which Profession of Religion (says Plutarch) is so necessary, that the Belief
of the gods was the first and greatest thing to be considered of in the
constitution of Laws. (...), etc. Adver. Colorem. p. 1125.
Thus Lycurgus provided for his Lacedaemonians, Numa for the Romans, the
ancient Ion for the Athenians, and Deucalion for the Grecians. It Is possible
(says he) that a City may somewhere be found without Walls, or Learning, or
Wealth, but no man ever saw a City without Temples and Prayers.

Particularly for this reason, Livy observes, That Numa Pompilius was
necessitated to go an extraordinary way to work; that is, to feign that he had
communion with Aegeria, and that by her command and direction, he was obliged
to constitute a Priesthood, Dec. 1.
and appoint such Orders and Holy Rites, Lib. 1.
as might advance a greater Solemnity and higher veneration of the gods.

And Matheavil offers to consideration, that when the World began to despise
the Oracles of Jupiter Ammon and Apollo at Delphos, then men began to be
impious, and to be fit for all manner of public disturbances. Impii ex ea re
facti sunt, and ad omnia turbamina prompti. Disp. lib. 1. cap. 15.
And then he concludes, That Princes ought (if they intend to be obeyed, and to
have their Kingdoms quiet) to hold their Subjects, as much as possible,
inclined and devoted to Religion.

And it should be hence suggested, that it is a disparagement to Religion, when
it is alleged to be so far concerned in politic designs; and that it gives too
just an occasion to lewd and atheistical persons, to reproach and decry it, as
only a contrivance of ingenious men to keep the world in order. My answer would
be, that if it were true, it would give such a reproach to the Divine Wisdom
and Goodness as nothing but a spite to the belief of a Deity, could possibly
suggest it. For it must suppose, that either God could or would not (when all
Beings were in his hand to dispose of as he thought fit) otherwise provide for
the worlds social subsistence and welfare, but by giving men a capacity and a
necessity to invent a lie to do it, and to put a cheat upon mankind, to attain
that End.

But suppose that some men, who were no ways at all affected with the sense
(and perhaps the belief) of Religion, should be the Authors of that advice to
Princes, to keep the People in more peaceable Order; would it thence follow,
that Religion it self had no real foundation in it self, for that and greater
Ends* Is it not known, that some particular Persons, and even whole parties of
men, have artificially contrived a Religious guise in Hypocrisy, thereby the
better to pursue their private, or their popular designs and ends? and can any
Argument be reasonably thence deduced, to bring the Truth of the Religion they
abuse into question? But that rather the contrary must be true, for a deguise
must be of something that is somewhere in real Being, or there would be no kind
of pretense for acceptance upon dissimulation. If there were no such thing as a
Real Friendship in the world, what entertainment would a false, and a
barely-pretended kindness obtain?

Now the Sum of this Section is to demonstrate, That no acts of the
Intellectual Powers can make competent expedients to preserve the World in any
tolerable order, unless as founded upon the belief of another world, as it is
only practical encouragment (of which expect an account in my Third Argument,
Chap. 3. Sect. 1.) whereby the Reasons or Consciences of men may be obliged to
live innocently, and quietly, both to their Governors, and one toward
another. And thus I have dispatched my Second Exception.

Section III.
IN this Section I must consider the last exception against my asserting, that
the Rational powers could not be given to man for any end, or good attainable
in this his present Life, and consequently not for the sake only of his mortal
duration. And the Exception is thus suggested, that is, that those Rational
Faculties may be made use of, for the Excellent Office of Contemplation, which
in it self is so great a satisfaction to the mind, as that it may make him
truly happy, though they were never improved for the concern of a Future World.

Now the reason why I do the rather oblige my self to take notice of this
Exception, is, because so great a man as Aristotle has in his Ethics so
solicitously contended to make Contemplation ((...)) a self-sufficient
happiness of human life in this world.

But to show the vanity of that pretension, abstract from the use, that may be
made of it, with respect to that state of mind and life, which do necessarily
conduce to the self-sufficient good of a Future World, I offer these several
things to consideration.

First let it be inquired into, what such an operation of mind can, in it self,
naturally do; and then I say, that accordingly as men are disposed to either
Good or Evil, so by their Contemplative Faculty, they may act wisely or
foolishly, happily or unhappily for themselves, as they shall think fit to
make use of it for either. For by that power of the mind, they can contemplate
of God, his Word, and Works, of Religion and Virtue, and of the happy Events of
both, or of any innocent thing, that may reasonably consist with their welfare
in this or a following World. And all this may be done to the comfort and
contentment of men's lives.

And then on the other side, by the same Faculty, they may contemplate or think
on Things or Objects that do really tend to their own misfortune and disquit.
That is, they may thereby be projecting designs, and amassing heaps of mischief
together against themselves. They may accumulatively augment their own sorrows
in a fit of sadness; and at another time advance an Eutopian Joy, as idle and
insignificant as a fond Dream. They can thereby serve their fruitless Love,
Anger, Fear, and the rest of their affections and passions, with imaginations,
that are accountable to no manner of Use or Reason: And all this may be done,
and a thousand times worse, to the discomfort and uneasiness of their own minds
and lives, so that the faculty it self is naturally upon a pure indifferency,
to act both for the Good or Evil of him, that admits his mind to make use of it
for either. Now if it shall appear, (as I shall endeavor it) that no other
Objects, upon which it may be employed, but such as bear a consistency with
what relates to a Future World, as it is only proper encouragement, why it
should so think or contemplate, can possibly make any account for the real
happiness of humane life, then what is become of the pretense of its
self-sufficiency, without the concerns of such a State to come?

And if it be said, that that thinking or contemplative power, may be exercised
upon Objects of this present life, thereby the better to convenience a man's
worldly affairs, as that, by the use of it, he may act them the more
deliberately and prudently; it is granted to be true But then (if he designs any
substantial happiness to himself, or satisfaction to his thoughts) those
Contemplative or Thinking operations, must be acted from a mind that is
generally influenced by the hopes or fears of the events and issues of a Future
World, or it will meet the same unsatisfactions in the obtaining such
advantages, to which it is subject by the real enjoyment of them. Of which an
account has been already given, in the first Chapter of this Argument.

And moreover, it may be also further considered, that without such a regard to
what is to come in that Future State, as the same contemplative or thinking
Faculty, when placed upon such present Objects, may the better enable him for
such advantageous successes in his worldly business; so also it may capacitate
him the more subtlely to pursue his ends by undue methods; it may help and
enable him to cheat and deceive, with more artificial dexterities, as well as
manage with greater prudence. And how few are there in the World, whom any
other principle can restrain, from such unwarrantable proceedures in their
affairs, when so virtuous a person as Socrates should affirm of himself, That
if he could believe there were no other world, he should not be afraid to do
any thing that were unjust? But the case is more fully managed in the third
Argument.

Secondly I answer, that as for Aristotle's way of Arguing for his notion of a
present ((...) as he calls it) self-sufficient Felicity, by the use and benefit
of a Rational Contemplation. If I could possibly think that his Arguments were
not purely romantic, and as sounded upon a supposal of something, which is
altogether unaccountable upon any other Reasons, but such, as must be deduced
from the believed acknowledgment of a Future World, I should choose to give an
attendance to every one of them. Upon what other principle could any man allow
those fits of contemplation, the appellations with which Aristotle adorns his
notion, of that pretended felicity? As when he calls it, The most perfect
Blessedness -- the best of all humane Actions and Operations -- and that the
man that exercises it, -- (...) -- Lib. 10. Cap. 7.
is the most absolutely blessed; with such like Divine expressions, which can
be accommodable to no other kind of happiness, but what is presumed to be
enjoyable in another world; or otherwise they can no where be found, but in the
regions where speculative impossibilities exist.

It Is true, I solemnly grant, that if our Contemplator be religiously disposed,
and is hopefully sensible, that his Life and Actions are pleasing and
acceptable to the Mighty GOD, and so bear a tendency to his happiness in
another World; I say, I then grant and believe, that such a man's contemplation,
when he is meditating upon the regularity of his own actions, the excellencies
of GOD's Love and Favor, and is recounting the measures of that Joy and Peace,
Love and Society, which he shall meet withal in the other World, may attain to
such a degree of his minds satisfaction, as may very nearly accord with the
Philosophers high appellations of such a thinking Operation.

But then, on the other hand, if the contemplative power be acted by a Person
that is vitiously and immorally disposed, there is no peradventure, but he
imploys it to his own greater infelicity. That is, he will be apt either to
devour his own contentment with invidious or revengeful Thoughts, or be
creating his disquiet with anxious Cares, or needless Fears, or with the like
destructive Operations of his Mind: Or, if we suppose it to be acted by one
that is of an inoffensive and virtuous Humor (upon which supposition I
conceive the Philosopher did principally found his Discourse of the
contemplative Happiness) yet if that man shall resolv'dly entertain no thoughts
at all of, or be in no manner concerned for, the events of a Future World, it
must be presumed, that he will be most apt always to think at best, worldly, if
not altogether vainly and impertinently, and in the manner of men, that are
always talking idly, and to no purpose. Whereas, that Religion which relates to
a Future World, will oblige him to make Conscience of his inward Thoughts, as
well as of his overt Actions; and for some Reasons, and in many respects, it
will be found his Duty to give his greater attendance to avoid those Evils of
his thinking Mind.

And now, how otherwise can our Exceptioner imagine, that the contemplative
Faculty, that GOD gave Mankind, should be restrained from such absurdities, or
that his Thinking Mind, that is always busily at work upon one Object or
another, should be able to confine it self to such only, as tend to Virtue, and
his own satisfactory Good and Happiness, when his own unruly Passions and
impetuous Appetites within him, and the loose and vain World without him, will
be perpetually soliciting him to be thinking of those other objects, that may
really make him unhappy, except it be from the grand encouragement of securing
his future and principal Interest in another World? And for a fuller
demonstration of this Truth, my Reader may respit his Thoughts till he is
engaged in the Third Argument intended for that purpose. This the last
Exception.

And thus I have accounted with my Sceptick for all his three Exceptions, and I
think we have lost no ground in the defense of my assertion, That the rational
faculties, and intellectual mind of Man, were not given him of GOD, for the
sake, ends, and intendments of his Mortal Duration only; but upon a more
especial purpose, and principally for the sake of another World. And that is
the business of the next Chapter to prove.

CHAP. III.
IN this Chapter I shall endeavor to evince positively, That those Rational
Faculties were principally, and upon the most especial purpose, given to
Mankind, for the sake, ends, and intendments of another World. And that, when
they are exercised in their natural Operations, about the attainment of the
happiness of that state, (it will appear) they will be then engaged in their
own most proper and natural business and employments.

Now, the most reasonable method to be undertaken, to demonstrate a Truth of
this nature, will be to show, That the Reasons offered in the First Chapter,
why those Faculties were not given to Mankind for the sake of this Life only,
(which must have been true, if there were no other to succeed) are perfectly
solved, when they are employed about the concerns of a Future World.

And, because those Reasons were three especially, I shall therefore confront
them in the same number and method, in so many Sections for that purpose.

Section I.
IN this Section, I shall remind the Reader of the first Defailance of those
Rational Faculties, upon which I founded my First Reason, to prove that they
were not given to Man for the sake only of his mortal Life; and that was,
because the enjoyments of it could not afford the mind any settled or
sufficient satisfaction, though a man were most prosperously possessed of them,
much less provide for him any solid contentment, through the various Turns and
Exigencies of humane life. And then I also showed, That though such Enjoyments
might for a time naturally gratify the inferior part of a Man's self, yet
that by the impropriety and unalliance they bear to the Rational and Supreme
part of his Being, (which is most properly himself) they could never affect the
Mind with any real or accommodable acquiescence, or natural satisfaction.

Now, to confront that defailance, it will evidently appear, That when those
Rational Faculties are made use of, to judge and choose the Interest of another
World, as Man's chiefest Good; and then be actually engaged for that virtuous
and religious way of living, that naturally tends to the obtaining the
happiness of that state, they will be found experimentally to enjoy as much
ease and satisfaction to themselves, as the mind of Man is capable of in this
life; and as Objects, whose completion stands at such a distance, can possibly
affect it. And those faculties will then as naturally acquiesce in their
operations, when they are so employed and engaged, as do necessary Agents, when
they attain those ends, to which, by natural instinct, they were obliged: Or,
as when the outward Senses are exercised in their operations, about their
proper Objects.

But my attending Sceptick will here except, and say, That all these are but
precarious Presumptives only; and therefore they can carry no certain Evidence
for demonstration or conviction. To this Exception I shall answer, First, That
the last Argument will give a fuller and more natural account of this Case,
(being its most peculiar business) to which I must referr my Reader, to prevent
my saying the same things over again.

But then, Secondly, I answer, That I shall in this place only offer one single
Expedient, and it is as considerable to our purpose, as such a case can possibly
bear to evince a Truth of this nature; because the mind can only be convicted
in its self, as to what it understands or thinks, and cannot convince another,
but upon the credit of its own discovery. And the Expedient is this, viz. A
Solemn Appeal to the Faith, Conscience, and Experience of any of those men, who
have been generally observed to live habitually in a course and state of Virtue
and Piety; and that have solemnly professed themselves, by word and deed, to
espouse the happiness of another World, as their principal and governing
Interest; I say, to such a kind of person (be it whom my Exceptioner will, that
can think and speak understandingly) I solemnly appeal, to declare upon his
conscience, what Sense he has had of his choice of such an Interest, and of
all those Actions, and of that way of Living, which (upon the common agreement
of all unprejudiced Minds) do naturally conduce to the happiness of a Future
World: That is, whether he did ever repent himself, when his mind was free to
judge, of the choice of that Future Interest; or that ever he continued in any
dislike, or serious dissatisfactions of mind, about any virtuous designs or
practices, which he had labored to promote and act? Or, whether he was not
generally pleased with himself, while he led his life strictly in that manner,
and only then apt to be troubled, if at any time he had been surpised into a
neglect of his Duty, or inadvertently overcome by the strength of any
Temptations, to omit or do any thing that might abate his hope of his future
Safety? Or, whether at any time, if he were afflicted with Sickness, or any
other oppressive circumstances, his mind did not then retire into its self, and
find there Reasons resulting from its religious temper, to support his
pressures with more content and patient satisfaction? I say, if such a good
man's sense and judgment may be believed to be true, it is easy to understand
what those objects are, and what manner of Enjoyments those must needs be, with
which the Rational mind should be thus satisfactorily affected and pleased.

But my Sceptick has yet more to except, and tells me, That all this may be
nothing else but either the effect of an Enthusiastic Imagination, or
otherwise vitiated Fancy, whereby the man's Reason may be so disordered, as
that himself (how honest soever) should not be a competent Judge even of his
own Sentiments. To this my answer is, That I grant, that there is such a
possibility of a man's being himself deceived in his own thoughts; but if that
were accounted at all times sufficient to control every affirmative Truth that
depends upon a man's Solemn discovery of his own mind, there would want one of
the most considerable Expedients, by which the World is to be kept in Peace,
and regular Communion. And besides, it would be considered, that such a
disordered Reason as our Exceptioner mentions, must be presumed to carry its
own symptoms with it, and so be easily discovered for the invalidation of the
credibility of what he affirms. But we offer our Exceptioner to stand to the
sense and judgment of such an one, whose well-weigh'd understanding in the
management of all other his Actions, can overruled all manner of suspicion of
such an uncertain imagination. But then again, replies our Caviller, Such a
man's Integrity may be called in question, and Who knows how far Hypocrisy may
be baited with Temptations of Honor, Friendship, or other Worldly Ends, to put
on all manner of taking-disguises of Religion, and amongst the rest this in
debate? My answer to this is much the same with the former, that is, That such
a false mind has its certain Symptoms, as well as a disordered Reason, by
which the dissimulation may be detected, and the affirmation may be judged
invalid. And therefore, if we grant, That when we thus appeal to the Faith and
Conscience of a Good man, concerning the inward Satisfaction of his Soul in his
Religious Course, that we may possibly meet an Enthusiastic, or an Hypocrite,
affirming the same thing; yet our arguing in this case runs no hazard at all,
the largeness of our Appeal supersedes all danger of being disbelieved; for
unless all that live piously in the World, be Enthusiasticks or Hypocrites,
that is, Fools or Knaves; we cannot miscarry in this point of Proof. And though
some such Good men, sometimes in a Fit of deep Melancholy, occasioned generally
by the ill-disposition of their Bodies; or by some unhappy Principles imbibed
in their Education; or else by too nice and sensible an apprehension of their
own infirmities, (which for want of a clear Judgment, they cannot at present
solve) may for a time deprive themselves of the comfort of their own happy
state: Yet, to be sure, the ground of their discomfort never arose from any
unkind apprehensions of their being virtuous and religious, or for their choice
of another World's Interest, as their principal happiness; but rather they were
troubled from a Fear they were not good enough, or that their hopes of their
future happiness were not so sufficiently assured to their thoughts, as they
desired. And in the saddest posture of mind, we shall ever find such Good men,
(we may be assured) that they will never lose their serious approbation of
Virtue and Piety, and that they will be always ready to declare, That a
religious Conversation is incomparably preferrable to the living, in a state of
Sin, though attended with all the prosperous advantages of humane Life; and if
put to competition and choice, would, without any further doubt, embrace such a
Conversation at all adventures.

And, Lastly, We are so secure of the Truth of all Good men's satisfactions of
Mind, while they continue in their virtuous engagements and practices, in order
to their happiness in another World, that we dare thus far appeal to most Evil
men, even in their worst sensual habits, when they have at any time admitted
their own minds to serious Thoughts, (which the worst sort of such men cannot
always escape) to declare, Whether they did not then think, that it were much
happier for them to have lived otherwise, and in an habitual course of Virtue;
and then also most heartily wish, that their Children, for whom they have the
most endeared regard, might so live?

Now, Whence can all this be, but that such religious engagements and hopes are
in themselves naturally accommodable to the intellectual powers of the Soul?
And that, if at any time they be reduced and overruled to embrace the Objects
that are proper only to the inferior and sensual Part of Man, it will become
so unnatural to the superior mind, that there will be a kind of violence done
to it; and like Animals out of their own Elements, and like Inanimates out of
their proper places, it can never have any rest or true satisfaction, till its
Operations be entertained and made use of, for the Concerns of Virtue and a
Future World. This the First.

Section II.
IN this Section, I shall endeavor to confront the second defailance of the
Rational Faculties, upon which I founded a reason to evince, that they were not
given, for the Sake, Ends, and Intendments of Man's mortal life only, and that
was, because all the proper Materials, and necessary Constitutives of man's
Well-being in this world, and which are universally celebrated as such, were
not by Divine ordination certainly, if at all really, placed in men's power, by
the use of those faculties, to obtain them when they did most diligently seek
after them, or specially need them. But to solve this defect to our present
purpose, and thereby to demonstrate, that the interest and intendments of
another world, were the principal End why God Almighty gave those Rational
qualifications to man's Nature, it will appear, that the choice of the other
worlds happiness, and the actual performance of all such Virtuous and Religious
methods, as naturally conduce to the assured acquisition of it, are all placed
in men's capacities by the use of those intellectual powers, as sufficiently to
understand and judge, so also as designedly to choose and put in practice at
their own free election.

It was before suggested, that every man could not at his choice, and upon his
best endeavor be certainly Rich and Healthful, live Prosperously and
Peaceably, when he pleased: But no man in his Wits can question, if he allows
himself the free use of his Reasons Authority (which the interest and
encouragement of another worlds happiness can at all times admit him to, as
will be made evident in the next Argument) he may live Virtuously and
Religiously if he will resolve upon it, and diligently attend it? What can
hinder his Pious intentions, or prevent his Virtuous resolutions, or frustrate
their consequent Happy events, but his own wilful refusal, so to live and act?
he can always, in the midst of all discouragements, act Justly and Honestly,
live Soberly and Peaceably, and do any thing else, that may dispose him for the
happiness of another life, if he will improve the use of his choice by such
Counsels, as his understanding mind can suggest to him. Of that possibility he
is secure. But he cannot always act successfully in his nearest concerns for
his mortal Well-being, of those advantages he has naturally no assurance. What
man can be certain of enjoying one hours Health more, or of Bread for another
days subsistence, or of his very Life for three moments to come? A thousand
unthought of Accidents may discontinue his possession of those, and all other
his present enjoyments; and it were an unexcusable Folly in him, if he did not
allow his mind a liberty so to think. But all his Enemies, whether Devils or
Men, cannot, by all the power they have, disseize him of his Virtuous purposes,
and an innocent and religious Mind, unless he will wilfully choose to consent to
his own mischief, and designedly become his own deadly Foe and Traitor; if he
turns not first his own Devil, the powers of Hell can never hurt him.

It Is true, the great man may discharge him of his employment to his undoing,
and he may throw him upon his potent Malice and Revenge to his Ruin, but it is
not in his power to deprive him of his Patience, or his Charity; of his Justice
or Sobriety, or of any other virtuous or religious Qualifications, or
Intendments whatsoever: Of those, GOD has made him naturally His own Sovereign
and Master, and in danger of no other Being, to ravish or extort them from him.

Upon the supposition of this Truth, it is, That all wise and good Men do
account it not only unkind, but very barbarous, to reflect upon, or upbraid the
Unfortunate, as to this world; that is, they don't reproach Men that are
unhealthful, or contemptible, poor or deformed, because they cannot tell,
whether such unhappy men could ever have avoided those hard and oppressive
circumstances of their lives; but every one is ready to blame and accuse those
that are impious and immoral, because they are sure, that such men must act
their own miscarriages and misfortunes, in contradiction to the use they might
have made of their own understandings; and in opposition to that possibility of
living otherwise which God Almighty had as certainly allowed them, as that ever
he had given them any Rational Minds at all, or Natural Capacities to improve
it.

And if that possibility were not permitted them, it would be not only a
disparagement to the Divine Goodness, but it would so evacuate all manner of
real obligation to be good or virtuous, as that there could not be in moral
consideration, any such thing as Virtue or Vice at all; much less any true
reason of Reward or Punishment, from any Authoritative Judge or Arbiter
whatsoever. And therefore as an Evil man, if he could not have voluntarily
avoided his being Vicious, ought not in justice to be reputed a criminal, so
neither can any one that is Virtuous, if he might not have been otherwise if he
would, have any more just title to that denomination, than if one should go
about to applaud the innocence of a Stone or Flower.

Now, if our Exceptioner should allege, That that distinction between things
in and out of our Power and Choice, depends only upon a Scheme of a Theology
formally digested, the more speciously to impose upon men's credulity, as in
others, so in this particular Case.

My answer is, that I shall prove the contrary, by offering to him the sense of
the Heathen Philosophers themselves, who could not escape the reasonableness
and apparent necessity of allowing such a distinction.

First, Epictetus lays it down as a Principle in the first Chapter of his
Enchiridion; (...), etc. cap. 1.
That some things were not in our power, as Money, Glory, Dominion, etc. and
some things were in our power, as Desire and Aversation, and indeed all our own
Works or Actions. By which, he especially means such as are morally either Good
or Evil, as Simplicius explains his Meaning; and thence he oftentimes asserts,
-- (...), etc. Page (mihi) 88.
That that liberty of Choice of the one and the other to be such, as no Power
whatsoever, can either force it on the one hand, or restrain it on the other.

Antonius affirms the same, and positively declares, That in every place and
time, (...). Lib. 7.
and present case, it is put in all Men's power to deal one with another,
according to what is Right and Just.

But Cicero most elegantly explains this case, and discourses the difference
between things that are not at our Command, Salvos, incolumes, opulentos, etc.
Justos, temperatos, sapientes, etc. Lib. 3. de Not. Deo.
Such as are to be Rich, Healthful, Safe, etc. And things that are in our
power, as to be Just, Temperate, Wise, etc.

He that cannot command (says Aristotle) the fixed Order of the Earth, (...).
Eth. lib. 10. cap. 8.
and Motion of the Sea, to serve his present Interest, yet has it in his power
to do good and worthy things.

And now having secured this Point by the common consent of these famous
Philosophers, my Reader will easily be convinced of the truth of that
distinction, upon which I have endeavored to found the main stress of my
Second Reason, why those Rational Faculties were principally, and on the most
special purpose given to Mankind, for the sake, and intendments of a Future
World. And that was, because whatsoever is supposed to conduce to the happiness
of that State, is only absolutely in the power of those faculties to act and
attain at pleasure. Always considered, that herein we only differ from the
sense of those Philosophers, that the proposal of that Future Happiness, is
necessarily required in the mind to encourage and actuate it for the
performance of such Religious and Virtuous undertakings. The truth of which the
next Argument is designed to evince.

But my Reader is in have to attend to my third Reason; Therefore,

Section III.
IN which I am obliged to take notice of the third Defailance of the
Intellectual and Rational Faculties (mentioned in the Third Section of the
First Chapter) when they are employed and engaged in their use and operations
for the concerns only of Man's mortal duration. And that was because it is
observed, when a man's Mind and Life are wholly taken up for the ends,
purposes, and enjoyments of that state, without any regard at all to what
relates to the events of a Future World, such a person will hardly escape his
doing many, if not most things, that upon the account of Rational Judgment,
must at best be but vain and trifling, if not (as it most generally falls out)
directly foolish and absurd; and always beneath the wisdom and dignity of that
Reason, with which GOD has naturally endowed humane Souls.

And upon this pregnant Observation, we endeavored to found a Reason to prove,
That those Faculties of the Rational Mind were not likely to be given to
Mankind for the sake, ends, and intendments of their mortal Durations only;
which must be so, if no World in Future.

Now, on the contrary, to prove, That those Faculties were given principally,
and upon the most special end, for the intendments and business that relate to
that Future State, it will manifestly appear, That when Men do engage those
Faculties in their use and operations upon such designs and purposes, and do in
all things govern themselves by those measures, all their actions will be all
that while the effects of genuine Wisdom, and such as will become the Prudence
and Dignity of a Reasonable Creature. So that, by the regularity of such a
Conduct, they shall never habitually continue to think, speak, or do any thing
that is absurd or foolish, or of which they shall ever have cause to repent, to
their own shame and sorrow. And therefore it is conclusively true, That to be
Wise and Good; to live Religiously and Intelligibly; to act by the Influence of
a Future States Belief, and by the Conduct of right Reason; do all, as to
practice, import the same purpose, and do all require the same measures and
ways of living.

And here, by the way, we may observe a wonderful Contrivance of Mercy in our
Good and Wise GOD, that He should please so far to consult, not only the
possibility, but even the easiness of Man's attaining his Chiefest Good and
Felicity, as that the Conditionals and Methods of its attainment should be so
accommodable to the Powers and Principles of his Nature, that the discretion
and prudence of his very mortal life should generally depend upon his designs
and endeavors to be made Happy in another World.

But if an Exception should be here offered against this Observation, by
alleging, That there may perhaps be as many men, who acknowledge the Existence
of a future State, and that sometimes do pretend to the hopes of being Blessed
in that Life, that do as many absurd and foolish things as other men. My Answer
is,

First, That probably some such actions may but seem so, in the invidious or
mistaken opinion of Worldly and Sensual Men. But then,

Secondly, If many actions of such Believers should happen to be really
foolish, yet they must be then presumed to miscarry only in their Wisdom, when
they kept not to the plain Paths of Virtue, and opposed the natural Influence,
which the Faith and Hopes of another World might have made upon their Minds and
Lives. Had they been steady in their Actings for that end, they had never
ceased to be Wise, as well as Good. So that men's deviation from the Rules of
Religion, does not only make them Sinners in Guilt, but makes them Fools in
Practice and real Notion.

But, because this general and presumptive way of Arguing may be thought
unsufficient for Conviction; therefore, as before, my merry Neighbor dressed
up for me a parcel of silly Worldlings, and Sensuallists, that were adventuring
for a present pretended Happiness, in their proper Sportful Garbs, such as for
their Follies they deserved to wear: So, now let my serious Thoughts attempt a
description of that man's Wisdom, who has improved his intellectual powers, to
think and live the intent and interest of another World. Let me delineate, in
short, his beauty and comeliness in every Limb, and draw up an abbreviate Plat
and Scheme of his whole Life's wisdom and felicity, in every Relation he bears
to Society, and in every quality and condition of Life, by which he is acting
his particular part, with respect to his own Personal Happiness in the Scene of
his Mortality.

First, I shall begin with him in the instances of all his Social Capacities,
and that because his Prudence and Felicity is therein the more remarkably
expressed and enjoyed.

And the first shall be of that, which concerns the greatest of his Social
Interests. And then I demand of Mankind to judge, whether the man must not be
accounted Wise and Happy, who never was justly exposed to the hazard of being
brought upon the Stage for any Seditious Words, or Mutinous Practices? That
never could be charged for running a Nation into Blood and Confusion, by
endeavoring to disarm his Prince of that Sword, by which he should be able to
protect his People, from acting that violence upon one another, to the loss of
their universal peace and safety. And that did never go about to starve the
Government, and as it were, to tie up its Hands, and make it incapable to
preserve it Self, till a foreign Enemy should usurp upon the Nations Peace and
Honor. Nor that ever could be accused of a fordid Neutrality at any time, when
his Prince's just Cause was in dispute. This is that wisdom, in which his
Religion and a conscience of his Duty to GOD must instruct him, against all
Temptations of discontent and frowardness, to act the contrary.

Or, (which is next in concern for Social Wisdom) Is not he a wise and happy
man, that has chosen to bear a part in a neighborhood of universal Peace;
where, if every one were conducted by a Religious Fear of GOD, there can be no
such offense given or taken as may at any time interrupt it? Where Justice acts
every ones right, and Mercy provides for every ones need: Where all are
obliging one another with mutual Civilities and Kindness; and with a common and
reciprocal defense and guard of every Neighbor's Peace and Proprieties.

Or, (which is the last case of Social Prudence and Felicity) Is not he truly
Wise, who acts his part in a Family of an Angelick Communion; That is, where
nothing inhabits, but quiet, cheerfulness, and contentment: where every one in
the House is constantly acting the Offices and Duties of his proper Place and
Relation: where there be no brawls, jealousies, or spightful intermedlings; but
the whole House is full of sweet joy, and mutual endearments of Respect and
Love?

Now, if we enquire what it is, upon the account of which, we may adjudge every
Member of those Societies to be so Wise and Happy as I have represented them,
the whole reason of it is obvious; for it is no more, but that every one that
bears a part in such Communions, would be Good, and make Religion his main
concern, and the Happiness of a Future World his principal aim and interest,
and the business, without more ado, is done. It is nothing but men's deviations
from those intendments and practices, that can expose any Societies to those
Follies, which must necessarily disorder the happy composure of all Communions.

But to come to an Examination of that Wisdom, which in a more Personal respect
concerns Mankind. And then I demand again, whether is not that man truly Wise
and Happy, who admits Temperance to the government of all his meals in the day,
and that at night lays himself down to sleep upon a chaste Pillow: and that
regulates all other his natural actions by a rational judgment?

And, Is not he the same, that can keep up the credit of an unsuspected
fidelity, and never offended God or virtuous Ears, with loud Oaths and
Imprecations, upon a vain, yet generally an unsuccessful pretense, the better
to secure it? And then, Whose peaceful and placable Soul can, upon the greatest
provocations, so allay his Passions, as not to incumber his mind with any
troublesome Intrigues of Revenge; and, if possible, to prevent the chargeable
attendances, with which the Laws vexatious periods do too much afflict the
contentious World?

And, Must not Mankind judge him Wise and Happy, that does not perplex his mind
with such anxious cares and fears, as may create in him an habitual discontent,
about the measures of his present quality and manner of subsistence? That is,
That can really and satisfactorily judge his Allotted Habitation, (of what
figure soever it is) as acceptable to himself, as the Great man's splendid
Palace; And be so fully content with the little Income he enjoys, as never to
wish with a sigh to be Master of another man's more plentiful Fortune: And
withal, who makes the most substantial assurance for the continuance and
improvement of his own; and for a Provision for his Children when he is gone; of
whose welfare he contentedly judges himself as certain, as that GOD Almighty
has passed His Promise for it? And there be them that have challenged the
World to give any famous instances of the nonperformance of His Word.

But, suppose our Good man to be placed by Providence in the Lowest order, and
that he must labor for his daily Subsistence; Is not he as wise and Happy as
his quality can admit, whose peaceful Soul and pious Contentment can make his
sweet Sleep in the night compensate for his weariness in the day; and that can
take a greater pleasure in the hautgoust of his dearlyearn'd Bread, than those
Sensuallists can do, when they are daily puffing over their nauseating
Varieties? Whose cheerful dependence upon God, to provide for his Children,
supersedes all manner of anxious solicitude; knowing that for their concern, he
shall not be affected with those encumbrances of mind to which the Rich are
subject, when they are torturing their heads with fears of having their
Honors at present, and their Fortunes afterward, shipwrack'd, to promote
their Children in the World. To be short, This is the man that is so wise, that
his Innocence gives him Cheerfulness; his meekness begets him Love, and his
Fidelity, Trust; whose Industry gains him Employment, and his Honesty such a
Friendship, as may support him till he has ended his Labors, and exchanged
them for a perpetual Rest. Now that Poor man, that cherishes a constant hope
of another Worlds Happiness, and lives according to the expectation of it,
cannot but be such an one as I have described him; and then, Who lives, that is
Wiser and Happier than he?

And, Does not that man deserve the reputation of being Wise, who lives so
inossensively, as stoutly to defy all manner of instances of shame or covert;
to whom a Whisperer, or the invidious serutinies of the malicious, can give no
concern; That is not solicitous, if the doors of his whole Soul stood always
unlocked, or that all the moral actions of his Life lay common to every Eye;
and whose innocence renders a false rumor, or a causeless accusation, so far
from being a vexation to him, that he only heartily pities the follies of men's
malice, and by a ready forgiveness, permits not his passions to forment and
arrest his sleep, or at any time to disorder the steady temper of his mind?

Further, Is not he a Wise and Happy man, who, when the World is alarmed with
the evil Tidings of National Disturbances abroad, or that lives amidst the
Broils of a divided state at home, can unconcernedly discharge his mind of all
afflictive Fears, by an entire resignation of his Thoughts to God, to bring
about what events he thinks fit; and then that always cheerfully interprets,
that all things shall be well with him in the end, whatsoever God shall please
should come to pass?

Lastly, Is not he highly wise for himself, who has provided beforehand a
Store of Contentment to support his patience, when Sickness, or any kind of
Misfortune shall invade his Health, or impair his Plenty? And that has laid up
such a stock of Reasons and Arguments, in his mind, as may be always ready to
relieve his unpleasant Thoughts, when he shall begin to feel his
Clay-Tabernacle reel with age; and when his Life is grown encumbered with the
sense of all its decaying circumstances? And then, that can fearlesly make the
gradual approaches of his last and necessary period, to be thought only so many
steps of advance toward his everlasting Rest, and the blissful state of a
following world. And finally, when he is come to the last point of his
mortality, that has no conflicts of doubt about A Future World's Existence;
that has upon his Soul no such guilt, as may ruffle his Thoughts with the
amazing fears of the Divine Vengeance; nor does any Horror sieze his steady
Hope? And in the last gasping moments, when the World's Factors for present
Pleasures and Prosperity, are with a disordered reason uttering the broken
Expressions of their last and heavy Farewell; then shall our Wise man be
admiring his mighty Creator's Love and Goodness, with such a joy and
satisfaction, as shall, if not wholly remove, yet so allay all the natural
Terrors of Dying, that he shall go out of the world as cheerfully as a
Traveller, when he has reached his home; and shall leave all his mortal
affairs and enjoyments behind him, with the same unconcernedness that a Pilgrim
removes from his last nights Lodging.

Thus I have drawn a resemblance to the Life, of that man's Wisdom, whose Mind
and Life are governed by the great Interest of another World, and by the Rules
of such a Conversation as naturally conduce to the attainment of it. And though
it cannot be presumed, that he should escape all humane inadvertencies, and
casual mistakes in the management of his habitual Virtue and Piety, (to which
the best of men are subjected, and) which may somewhat abate the perfection of
an absolute Beauty, yet those errors being no parts, but only spots in the
Feature, the comeliness of the representation may nevertheless not be the less
acceptable, and perhaps the more graceful, because it is the most natural and
genuine figure of a Good man on this side of a Future World.

But all this while, I have almost forgot to confront what I offered in the
Third Section of the First Chapter, where arguing, That the Rational Faculties
were not likely to be given to Mankind in their use and operations for the
designs, business, and ends of Man's mortal Life only, because it was generally
observed, That where there was no concern at all for another World, and that
men acted according to the influence of such an unconcernment, the greater
proportion that such men had of either complexional or acquired intellectual
Capacities, their degeneracies to Folly would most commonly appear to be so
much the greater and fouler, and their actions and practices so much the more
remarkably absurd and foolish.

And now, to improve our present Arguing for a future World, and to show, That
those Rational Faculties were principally, and on purpose, given on that
account, we can affirm, That it is notoriously observed, that as Good men's
minds are advanced with more knowing qualifications and ingenious
understandings, so they do generally act their virtuous and religious
Intendments, with a Wisdom incomparably above the common measures of such as
are qualified but with ordinary endowments, though those Persons should be in
no degree inferior to the most ingenious, in the uprightness of their minds
and lives. For such men's knowing judicious managery of their Virtues, will not
only create a bare acceptableness of, but they must give a conspicuous Luster
to their lives and practices: by which they will so adorn all the exercises of
their Goodness, that they cannot escape their being specially marked out for
Love and Honor.

And therefore, such men do not only live the End, but the Honor of their
Nature, and by their wise and unblameable conversations, they take off those
prejudices and exceptions that are daily offered against Religion it Self, to
which the indiscretions of men of ordinary capacities may have oftentimes
exposed it. But, among all the signal Excellencies that attend and adorn an
ingenious Piety, there is nothing more remarkable, than the wise use and
disposure of Time; which like the Rational Faculties themselves, was
principally given to Mankind, for the employment of what concerns a Future
World: And it is for want of that proper business, that it so often becomes
uneasy and burdensome to such men, as are in no order of mind to make use of
it for that especial purpose; and that sometimes to such a degree of
uneasiness, that their very Lives themselves grow tiresome to their own
Thoughts. So that were it not for that reason, that Time was allowed Man
principally for the sake of another World to solve the doubt, it would make one
stand amazed to think, that Creatures endowed with a Rational Understanding,
should ever condescend to employ it about actions that are sometimes so
troublesome and uneasy, and at other times so childish and silly, that they
bear no more toward manly ends, than the dancing of a bubble, or the pursuit
of a Fly. Hence it is, that men unconcerned for a Future World do sometimes
swine away their Time in drink and debaucheries; while others are trifling off
their precious hours in Courtships and Gallantings, in nicer dressings, and
other sensual pleasures: And to be sure they all must sleep away the sweet
mornings, lest that serious season should attack their minds with the sense of
their midnight fooleries. These, and such as these, are the pitiful shifts
which men unconcerned for a Future Life are fain to busy their time away with
something that is nothing to the purpose.

Now, on the other hand, How happily will men, whose minds are advanced in
higher degrees of thinking and judging understandingly, when they are really
Virtuous and Good! I say, How happily will those men be able to engage
themselves in such a wise managery of their time, as may secure them not only
from finding it a burden to their own Thoughts, but from being tempted to throw
it away upon such unaccountable misadventures. To prevent which
inconveniences, they can ingeniously methodize their time into various
Apartments, and successively distinct Periods, the better to alleviate the slow
Progress of their hours. That is, they can set out these days and hours for
Devotion; Those for the Offices of doing Good, or for secular employments; and
then some for keeping up friendship and civil conversation; others again for
innocent recreations and divertisement. All which wise divisions of Time, will
shut out all occasions of its disimprovement to weak and silly purposes; and
which being once made easy by an habituated regular observation, they shall as
delightfully reciprocate those several Duties in their proper season, as they
do their Meals or times of Rest.

And then all this while, how pleasant and satisfactory will the use of time
thus wisely, because religiously managed, be to their own Minds and
Consciences? And with what a ravishing contentment will they recount such spent
hours, when old Age shall allow them little else to do, but to think of what is
past? But then chiefly, How will such Thoughts alleviate the horror of their
dying Scene, when they shall go out of the World with Minds full of Hopes of
the longexpected Returns of a well-spent Time and Life?

And now having dispatched the design and import of this Last Section, Who is
it that can call in question the judgment of the Sacred Revelation, when it so
often declares the distinction of the Good and Evil, by the severe
discrimination of Wise and Fool; or, that Repentance should there be described
by a Turning to the Wisdom of the Just; Luke 3.
and that St. James should call so many Virtues of humane Conversation, even to
innocent Civilities (as the Text imports) The wisdom from above? Jam. 3. 17.
And Lastly, Why should any man ever dispute the conclusive Sentence of the
wise Ecclesiastes, when he determines, That to fear God and to keep His
Commandments, is not only the principal Expedient of all humane Happiness, but
that it is that, by which alone Man may live up to, and attain the end of his
own nature, as he is a reasonable and arbitrary Creature? For, so says the
Text, This is (not the whole Duty, -- (...). Eccl. Septuag.
as it is sometimes interpreted, but) This is Man: Or as Aristotle, (discoursing
of Virtue in his own notion) whether he thence learned it, -- (...). In Eth.
or only in his Reason complied with it, makes use of almost the same words:
This is especially Man. These Premises being thus clearly stated, let us await
the Conclusion.

The Conclusion.
THat is, if it be sufficiently proved, that the Rational Faculties of Man's
mind, by which he is essentially himself, were not given by Almighty GOD to
Mankind, for the Sake, Ends, and Intendments only of their Mortal Lives; as it
appears in the First Chapter:

And if those pretentions for a sufficient use of those Faculties in several
concerns relating to a man's Mortal Life be as sufficiently overruled and
answered, as it is in the Second Chapter:

And then if it be positively proved, as in the Third Chapter, that those
Faculties were given to Mankind, principally, and on the most Special purpose
for the Sake, Ends, and Intendments of something that is Future; what can be
suggested to Doubt, but that God has most certainly constituted the existence
of a Future State?

Third Argument.
The Sum of the THIRD ARGUMENT.
THE Third Argument to demonstrate the real Existence of a Future State is
founded upon a Consideration, That if Man's Being should extend no further than
the Boundary of his Mortal Life, and that there were no other World, whose
Rewards and Punishments might affect his present Hope and Fear; then it must
necessarily follow, That he can have no sufficient encouragements; that is, no
sufficient Reasons (they being both the same in this case to Rational and free
Agent) to oblige himself to live a Virtuous Life. Which consequence being true,
it cannot but reflect upon the Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness of GOD, who by His
sovereign Will and Pleasure, gave him that limited Duration; and then obliged
naturally to enjoy his Being in such social Communions, whose universal
Welfare should necessarily depend upon Men's living Virtuously one with
another: and yet in which social World, it was not possible for him to meet any
sufficient Encouragements or Reasons to oblige him so to live. And if nothing
else can solve the Vindication of those Divine Attributes, but only the
acknowledged Existence of a Future State, whose Rewards and Punishments, being
proposed to the mind of Man, may be sufficient encouragements or reasons, why
be should live such a Virtuous Life: then it is certain, that GOD Almighty has
ordained and constituted such a Future World.

Now there being many parts of this Argument, which will require some
considerable explanations, I shall therefore endeavor them in Three several
Chapters.

In the First Chapter, it will be requisite to set free the terms and sense of
the Argument in general, as it is in the whole stated and proposed, from some
opinions that would evacuate the force and import of it, for the end it is
intended.

In the Second Chapter, I shall endeavor to solve some objective exceptions
against the inference of the conclusion by it, as so stated.

In the Third Chapter, Reasons will be given, Why no other motives or
encouragements whatsoever, can sufficiently oblige Men to be Virtuous and Good,
but such as are deduced from the acknowledgment of a Future World's Existence.

A FUTURE WORLD'S EXISTENCE, Demonstrated by Rational Evidence.
CHAP. I.
IN which I design something, that may be preparative for the Arguments clearer
proceedure, and that is to secure the true Sense of it, in the manner and order
it is Stated and Proposd. And this I shall do, by detecting and representing
some erroneous Opinions, which must reflect upon the right understanding of it
in general.

Now those erroneous Opinions are these three; By the first, we mean some false
glosses that are put upon the notion of Virtue, or living Virtuously. By the
second, we understand such as have been offered by some men, to make God to be
altogether unconcerned, how men live and act, morally or immorally in this
World. And the third sort of such Opinions are those, by which some men have
been persuaded, that it is unlawful to propose Rewards, as encouragements to
live Virtuously; or Punishments, to deterr men from living Vitiously.

These be the three Opinions, that must needs perplex the Stating of the
Argument in general, and therefore must first be controlled, before we can
admit it to a free and clear proceedure. And that shall be endeavou'd in these
three following Sections.

Section I.
IN which we shall first endeavor to free the Argument from some mistaken
notions of Virtue, or living Virtuously. For if we have not a right
understanding of that, before we begin, it is in vain to argue for what
encouragements will be sufficient, to engage men so to live. And then by living
Virtuously, I here especially, though not only, understand Virtue in a social
respect, that is, as to men's endeavoring to live and act one with, and toward
another, by the strict rules of Universal Justice, as in a larger sense it
comprehends Universal Goodness, in all their several Parts and Branches.

First, by men's living up to the rules of Universal Justice (as it is strictly
to be considered), I mean the allowance of what is right and due to every man.
First as to that, which is called Distributive Justice, which is the just
performance of all relative and reciprocal Offices and Duties between all
Superiors, (whether Natural or Politic) and their respective Subjects and
Subordinates. And then as to that, which we call Commutative Justice; I
understand it to be men's doing what is Right and Just, in all manner of mutual
Transactions, Contracts, and intercurrent Affairs whatsoever.

And then by Universal Goodness (as Justice in a larger sense comprehends it) I
understand not the acts only of doing all men Right, but of men's doing Good one
to another (according to their respective capacities morally considered) as
there is need of one another mutual help; whether it be for one another
Honor, Peace, Liberty, or in any other Circumstances of their Well-being. And
this habit of Goodness, Sir Francis Bacon calls The greatest of all Virtues,
Essay. 13.
and Dignities of the mind; being the Character of the Deity; and without which
(says he) a man is a Busy, Mischievous, and Wretched thing.

Now the man that lives according to the Rules of Justice in all these
acceptations, is the man that ought most properly and especially to be
denominated Virtuous. Not but that we suppose a necessary concurrence of all
the other personal Virtues, as they are branched out particularly in
Theological, and Philosophical Schemes. But then it is to be affirmed of most,
if not of all of them, that they do one way or other especially referr to
Justice or Goodness, as I have here described them; and as that their contrary
Vices do generally receive their essential notion of being Evil, because in one
respect or other they make a breach upon the Rules of doing Right or Good.

Hence it is, that it is no wonder, that the Moralists have always expressed
that regard to the notion and practice of Justice, (as it is in all respects to
be considered) that whether it be, because it is so nocessary for the happy
being of all Humane Societies; or whether for its attendance upon the menage
and events of most other Virtuous actions, they have enobl'd it with the most
comprehensive, and general name of Virtue. Thus Aristotle calls it, not only
the best of Virtues, (...), etc. (...). Eth. Lib. 4. Cap. 1.
but observes, that it came to a Proverb, That all Virtues did exist in
Justice; or as Hierocles expresses it, that it comprehends all Virtues, as its
Parts or Members: (...). Hier. in Carm. Pythag.
And not only the Philosophical Moralism, but even the Christian Religion it
self, as it referrs to all those Duties, which it enjoins to be performed to
God and Man, is commonly expressed by the name of Righteousness or Justice; He
that does Justice (or Righteousness) is Just (or Righteous,) 1 John 3. 7.
and the true Professors of it, Righteous or Just; as it is promiscuously
rendered in our Translations, from the same word in the Original, which the
Philosophers made use of.

Now, the reason why, in the first place, I offer this term of Virtue, or
living virtuously, thus to consideration, is, because there has been too
commonly a very false notion of Religion, or living Religiously: Some men
placing it only in some Rites and Offices, proper to such or such a Religion;
upon the performance of which, they have tempted one another to think
themselves, if not wholly exempted, yet in some measure fairly dispensed from
living virtuously, as I have represented the Notion of Virtue. And this has
been observed, not only when Religions have been artificially instituted by
Wise men in several Heathen Nations, (of which some account will be given in
the following Arguments) but even then, when Religions have been tendered to the
World, by the clearest Evidence of Divine Revelation.

Thus did the Jews most grossly prevaricate with God, Es. 1. 13. 14, 17, etc.
by their intolerable omissions of living virtuously, that is, by the Rules of
Universal Justice and Goodness, Jer. 7. 4, 8, 9, etc.
as His holy Prophets so often complain. And for this did our Savior, in his
time, so severely reprove those strict Religionists, Mat. 23. 24.
the Scribes and Pharisees.

And it is observed, That the Wise men of almost every Age of the Church, have
engaged themselves in making such complaints of the Times they lived. in. And I
wish heartily, that I had not too just a cause (which gave me the chief
occasion of this Section) to complain of a Religion of a later date, in which
Justice and Goodness have been so wonderfully laid aside, as if they bore no
part at all of the Profession of it. And the better to solve that intolerable
contradiction to the very design of Christianity, they have taught themselves a
most scandalous distinction between Grace and Virtue; between Godliness and
Justice; between Saintship and all Moral Honesty, in their notion, and (as we
have seen) practice of Religion, to the great disparagement and dishonor of
whatsoever bears that Sacred Name. This the First.

Section II.
THis Section will represent another very dangerous prejudice, as to the manner
of our stating the Argument. And it is to be done by making and answering an
Enquiry, whether or no Almighty GOD will be at all concerned, as to Rewards and
Punishments, how men live and act, whether morally or immorally in this World.
For if he be pleased to be so indifferent and unconcerned, the Argument is
void; and that because a Proposal of any such things, as Rewards or
Punishments, to encourage and deterr, would then be the most impertinent
Concern of Mind that it is ordinarily capable of.

Now, though it may be thought, that there should be but a very few, or none,
that acknowledge a Deity, so desperately inconsiderate of His Divine Honor, as
to own and publish such a contradiction to His Essential Holiness, and to that
sovereign and wise Authority, which he must be presumed to have and exercise
naturally over that Rational World, which he created and made at his own
choice: For it were the same thing, as to believe, That he intended to
licentiate men in all those horrid practices and confusions, which should ever
be acted and fall out to the World's end; yet it is certain, that there have
been, and are opinions entertained, which must imply such an indifferency and
unconcernment in God, howsoever men live and act. And I doubt not, but that
they have been made use of by many, thereby to encourage their continuance in
their most immoral practices and vicious ways of Living.

Now, the opinions which have brought forth that wretched effect in men's minds,
are three, to be especially considered and rebuked.

The first which I shall take notice of, is that which does directly and
professedly make God to be owned as Author and Cause of Sin: And then, How can
He be concerned at all at that sinful action, of which He himself should be
really causal? Of which horrid and blasphemous opinion, Lib. 5. c. 20. cap. 34.
Eusebius accounts one Florinus to be the first Promoter; though Vincentius
Lerinensis makes one more ancient, and averrs Simon Magus as its first Patron.
And the Fathers did charge that Heresy afterward upon Cerdon, Marcion, and
others, as concurrent with their several Heterodoxies.

But the most remarkable Restores in this later Age, of that abominable
Principle, were the late Libertines, (as the Historians and Divines of those
Times called them) in Germany, that thereby they might go on with their
intolerable Profanations and desperate Immoralities, for their thorough-work
(as they called it) of a more perfect Reformation, with greater Liberty and
Encouragement. By whose Example, and upon their Principles, we have too great a
reason to suspect, that out late rebellious Reformers, transcribed too
resembling a Copy, both in their minds and practices; and for whose sakes I
have taken occasion to offer at this representation.

The Second Opinion that must consequentially infer an indifferency and
unconcernment in God, how Men act and live, as to the Rewards and Punishments
of another Life; is that of an eternal and irrespective decree of some men to
Salvation, with the inevitable preterition of all the rest of Mankind.

And that because that Doctrine must in consequence suppose, not that Man, but
that GOD Himself should be the efficient Cause and principal Agent in all the
Good and Evil Actions that are done in the World; and then, How could the one
be reasonably rewardable, and the other punishable? And first, as to the Good
and Virtuous Actions of them, that are so absolutely elected to Salvation, they
cannot be supposed to be properly their own, but God's; because they are
wrought in them (as they commonly affirm) by such an impulse of His Grace, as
which they have not a Liberty in themselves to resist or defeat.

And then, as to the sinful actions of them that are under that fatal
preterition, How can they be morally their own, but God's, (as Causa deficiens
in necessariis est efficiens) because they become unavoidable for want of that
Grace, by which it was only possible for those unhappy men to have escaped and
prevented them? And though our Opinionists dare impudently pretend, That those
men have all of them a sufficient Grace given them, yet nevertheless they most
senselesly mean, That it is sufficient in it Self only, but not as unto them,
so as possibly to effect upon their best endeavor, any advantage to themselves.

And now, How can God be reasonably concerned to Reward the actions of the one,
or to Punish those of the other; when neither of those actions were properly
and voluntarily their own; that is, when neither of those sorts of men were
ever allowed to act by a Mind that had any truly-balanc'd Liberty of choice in
its self? And therefore, in such a case, the proposal of Rewards and
Punishments (upon which the Reason of the Argument is founded) to encourage the
Good or deterr the Evil, were as impertinent, as if a man were counseled to act
an Adventure for an Estate, when he is confirmed in his opinion, that either he
has had a fore-decree for an undefeizible Title to it, or else of which he
were assured to be deprived by an insuperable Bar, long before put in against
him; I say, If he were sure, that one of those two unalterable causes were upon
him, though he did not know which it was, What manner of encouragement is it,
that should reasonably induce him to do any thing for the securing or obtaining
such an Estate? And where lays the difference of that Case from this in debate,
I can make no conjecture.

The Third Opinion that necessarily implies, That God should be indifferent and
unconcerned how men live and act, as to Rewards and Punishments, is from Mr.
Hobs his Necessitation of all humane actions, from a Chain of Causes linked
together at one another end, to the very immediate Last that necessarily
determined the Understanding so to judge, and the Will so to choose. The
unaccountable Sense of which, his shiftless distinction can never solve, as
when he averrs, Leviathan.
That though a Man can Do what he will, yet that he cannot Will what he will:
For if the binding up the last and immediate Causes of the Action (that is the
judgment and will of Man) to a necessity of judging and choice, (if it be not
Nonsense to call it a judgment or a choice at all) can give any rational Man
leave to think, that that Action can be an effect of true Liberty; then may the
natural motion of an Inanimate, and the operations of a sensitive Being, which
do spontaneously (yet nevertheless) necessarily, (as necessity stands in
opposition to rational Liberty) follow that impulse, which the Creator had put
upon their several Natures, be properly called an act of a free and voluntary
Agent. Now whosoever has entertained such an opinion of the necessitation of
all humane actions, must suppose, that the first Link of that Chain of Causes,
that moves or knocks the next to it, and so every next successively his next,
till the last Cause drives the Will into a necessity of Choice; I say that
first Link of Causation must be soveraignly held in the hand of God, as he is
the first cause of all Motion, as well as of all Being. And then it must also
be supposed, that none of those intermedial or secondary Causes, can break from
the natural order of that train of Causations (without an extraordinary
intervention of the First Causes, Will and Power) till the Action, be it good
or evil, be chosen and effected. So that if there be any cause of the Action
that is truly voluntary, and by which it may be really denominated morally Good
or Evil, it must be the first only: for all the other Causes are under a
natural or fatal necessity of acting what they do, and the Judgment and Will of
Man, which should make the moral distinction, are under an impossibility of
judging or choosing otherwise, (as Mr. Hobs asserts) and therefore, there being
no other Will at liberty, by which, such an Action is to be freely chosen, if
there be any morality in the Action, it must have it from the first Cause, or
no where: and then what a piece of Blasphemy are we fallen upon? For it makes
God not only a cause, but the only cause of all evil and immoral Actions, as
such: which a bare spontaneity in the Will of Man, can no more solve, than it
can make a necessary Agent, when it is any way instrumental to a mischievous
Event, really a Criminal: so that I may be angry with the Stone that hits me,
and like a Dog in rage, bite it, as well as with the person that threw it, if
in both of them there were as much necessity of the Action, as is consistent
with a natural spontaneity. And then how can GOD be concerned in such Actions,
as to Rewards and Punishments, any more, than that they should be capable of
Praise or Blame, (...). Strom. lib. 1. p. 311.
as Clemens Alexandrinus argues against such a necessity of acting in moral
Agents.

These be the three Opinions, that support the second Prejudice, or mistaken
Notion of GOD's being unconcerned, how Men live and act, whether morally or
immorally, as to Rewards and Punishments. But the very explaining of them, with
a consideration had of their intolerable consequences, makes them sufficiently
their own abhorrence, and confutation.

There is one erroneous Notion more, that concerns a lesser sort of People; and
now my hand is in, it shall not pass unrebuk'd.

Section III.
THis Section is designed to overruled the last prejudice, which would also
make void the sense of the Argument, as it is stated. And that must be done by
making another enquiry, Whether or no Almighty GOD (if it be granted, That He
will be pleased to concern Himself; as to Rewards and Punishments, how Men live
and act) intended, that men should think themselves obliged to live virtuously,
upon the account only of His own Sovereign Authority, and absolute Command, and
that they should charge themselves with no other motive or reason, but only
that? Or whether GOD designed not also, in that case, as in all others, to deal
with Mankind, as rational and voluntary Agents; that is, that they might
propound to their own Minds, some considerable Interest or Happiness, upon the
encouragement of which, they should oblige themselves so to live and act? And
then on the other hand, whether they might not also, as reasonably propound to
their own Thoughts, a Consideration of the many Inconveniences at present, and
their certain Ruin in the event, to dissuade and deterr themselves, from
living immorally and vitiously? Now the Reason, Why I offer this case to
enquiry, before I further engage in the pursuit of my Argument, is, because
it is known, that there be some Men, (even enough to make a party) who being
resolved not to be otherwise persuaded, but that a proposal of Rewards to
encourage Men to be Religious, and to do good, is a most dangerous approach to
Popery; (the ordinary expedient, used by such men to affright Minds, where
Reasons are wanting) and that it can import nothing less, than the Romish
Merit, and I know not what.

And then on the other side, (say they) for men to suggest to themselves, the
dread of Future Punishments, (though for that reason they are proposed as
objects of the Christian Faith) is nothing else but slavish Fear, (by which
they falsely represent that religious Act of mind) and that to avoid sinning on
that account, can no way be acceptable, but rather distastful to Almighty GOD.

But these men's prejudices in this point, have yet further ends and little
notions to serve. For (say they) such a proposal of Rewards and Punishments, do
tempt men to give too much to the Creature; it hinders the Advancement of free
Grace, and takes men off from bottoming themselves upon Christ, (as they phrase
it) and from rolling themselves by Faith, inconditionately upon his Merits;
with many more such like humouring Notions.

Now such unhappy imposures as these, have vulgar minds admitted, to the vast
prejudice of Virtue, and an active Religion; and all this because they would
fain go to Heaven, without any incumbring moralities, such as are the Virtues
and Graces of strict Justice, Restitution and Satisfaction upon the Breach of
it; entire Loyalty to their Princes, and Obedience to their Superiors of every
kind; Charity to their Enemies, and doing Good to all Men as much as in them
lay, and the like; And that instead of them, they may go to Christ (they think)
for Salvation, by a shorter (...), as by the force of an imaginary Faith, or a
delusive Reliance, and the like; which will not put them upon so much trouble
and charge. And now if such prejudiced men would but consider, how much such
triflings with God and their own Souls, are inconsistent with all solid Reason,
and how foreign such Notions are to the express purpose and end of the Gospel,
in which all along its Professors are obliged to observe all its strict rules
of obedience by the special command of God, John 15. 10. Romans 2. 6, 7. Mat. 10.
42. Rev. 22. 14.
upon the hope and encouragement of his present Love and Blessing, and of his
future Rewards and Recompenses; secured to them by so many gracious and
infallible Promises, they should need no other confutation but their own shame,
for dealing so irrationally with so plain a revelation of the express will of
God, to the contrary.

And now having finished the preconsideration of these three Prejudices or
Mistakes, that might have been pretended by our apponents to call in question
the right stating of the Argument in the terms it is proposed, it may now be
thought that I might bring the Argument to its final issue, upon a positive
Proof, that no reasons or encouragements can be sufficient, to oblige men to
undertake such Virtuous lives, but what relate to the concerns of another
World. But this hasty proceedure must be justifiable in the opinion of such
only, who have not considered how many subterfuges are to be detected, and how
many exceptions and objections are to be controlled and answered, before I can
make so near an approach toward the conclusion. And therefore that is the
proper work of the next Chapter.

CHAP. II.
IN which I shall endeavor according to the method proposed, to solve some
exceptions, which may be made use of to confront the Argument in general as so
stated, and to render it unsufficient to infer the conclusion. Now the design
of those Exceptioners, is to pretend, that there are several expedients and
encouragements, which may be sufficient to engage men to be Virtuous and Good,
and to deterr them from living Immorally and Vitiously, though there were no
belief or apprehension of the concerns of a Future State at all.

But I shall reduce them all to Five Heads, which I shall handle apart in so
many distinct Sections; and I shall begin with those that are more easily
solved.

Section I.
THis Section offers the first Exception, and that is made by those who will
say, that there is no Nation, how barbarous soever, but that by their native
Light, and the use of their natural Faculties, may attain to the sense and
acknowledgment of a Deity, Nulla Gens tam fera, nemo omnium tam sit immanis,
cujus mentem non imbuerit deorum opinio. Multi de diis prava sentiunt (id enim
more vitioso effici solet) omnes tamen esse vim and naturam divinam
arbitrantur. Tus. Qu. l. 1.
(as Tully observes;) and then, that such a sense and acknowledgment, may be
sufficient to overawe such Men from acting immorally, and against the Rules of
Common Justice, without any apprehension of a Future Life to restrain them.

To this exception it is answered, that I grant it to be certain, That such a
kind of People may in that manner attain to a notion of a Deity: but then it is
very probable (where there be no additional institutions further to instruct
them) that they will entertain that notion of his Being, with an apprehension
chiefly of His singular kindness and goodness to them: and that because a great
part of that demonstration, which they can make for His Existence, must arise
from an opinion of His being their first Maker, and constant Benefactor. And if
they shall so represent the Deity to their Minds, they may as easily suggest to
themselves, that he could not but indefinitely design them to be happy, when at
first he made them; or that otherwise, he would never have given them the
enjoyment (or rather the misfortune) of a Being at all.

And then they at present seeing no other way, how any Happiness may be
atain'd; but by a present power and plenty, and an easy Way of living, would
soon satisfy themselves, That that Deity has given them an allowance, to make
use of all their natural Skill and present Power to atempt any thing,
whatsoever it be, whereby they may promote for themselves the attainment of
such a desirable way of living.

And further, those natural Theists, knowing perhaps at present nothing to the
contrary, but that that Deity has put them originally into the same condition
with all other Animals in general, What Arguments can they offer themselves to
the contrary, but that they may as lawfully choose to imitate the same freedom,
which by a natural instinct, is allowed to such Animals, who do generally
preserve and please themselves, by preying upon the Labors and Lives of one
another? Is it not evident, (say they) That the most Famous of those sensible
Creatures in their several Elements, viz. the Lion, Eagle, and Leviathan, do
make use of that their natural Power and Liberty to the utmost, sometimes not
sparing the lives of Men, to maintain their sensual Greatness, Ease, and
Pleasure? And do not the very Plants themselves, (say they) especially such as
naturally aspire to Grandeur, substract their Juices for growth and
nourishment, from the lesser Vegetables of the Neighborhood, though it be to
the making them grow Feeble, Fruitless, and Die?

And then, when that suggestion is over, cannot those men, thus naturally
convinced of a Deity, tell themselves, That they may have the same freedom in
their private capacities, which the most famous Conquerors do assume to
themselves in order to their public Achievements? And then, say they, (if
they have had notice of it) How did Alexander the Great rob and destroy whole
Nations to gratify his own ambition of Greater Power, and larger Dominions?
And who is it that blames him for his Usurpations, or that does not rather
applaud him, and entertain his Name and Memory with Renown, for his Success and
Valor? And they will also allege, (if it has come to their knowledge) That
the World admires and applauds the ancient Romans for their famous
Acquisitions; Though it is known, say they, that they advanced themselves to
that greatness from first to last, by disordering the Peace, preying upon the
Plenties, Si qua soret tellus, quae sulvum mitteret Aurum; Hostis erat. Petr.
Arb.
and destroying the defense of their neighbor Nations. And from this it is,
why Seneca observes, That Poverty was the Foundation and Cause of their Famous
Empir^* -- Paupertatem fundamentum and causam imperii sui.
That is, (we suppose him to mean) their real or pretended want of Power, and
Plenty, was thought a sufficient Reason to justify them in all their Invasions
and Usurpations. Epist. Lib. 13. Ex. 88.


Now, (say these natural acknowledgers of a Deity) sure such Conquerors as
these did believe God, or gods, as well as We, (for some of them (we hear)
consulted their Oracles) and that those gods allowed them in what they did, or
they durst not otherwise have adventured upon such methods, to advance their
own Greatness and Power; and then, What should restrain us from the like
Liberty in our several Capacities, to pursue our own private and particular
Interests of Profits and Pleasure, by whatsoever actions we shall invade our
weaker Neighbors Lives and Proprieties?

And so, thus far we see, That the bare acknowledgment of a Deity, without some
other consideration had to dissuade them from all immoral acts, to serve their
own present desires and designs, for a prosperous Being in the World, cannot
reasonably be thought a sufficient Ground and Reason.

Section II.
IN this Section we account, That that acknowledged Deity may, by further
reasoning, be represented to men's Minds, not only as indefinitely good and kind
(as before) but also as just, that is, impartially so: and that, as his
Goodness may be apprehended in conjunction with his universal Equity.

And then (say they) such a notion of a Deity may influence men into a belief.
That he designed, that every man should be happy, as well as any; and so that
no man that has any veneration for him, as so represented, should presume to
pursue his own private Interest and Well-being otherwise than is consistent
with common Justice and Equity, and with the safety of other men's Lives and
Proprieties.

And in this Exception it may be further suggested, That when there is at
present but such an imperfect notion of a Deity, it is possible, that in a short
time there may arise men of clearer thoughts and apprehensions, Lib. 1. De Vit.
Philos.
who may set up for Philosophers, (as Diogenes makes mention of the
Gymnosophists, Druids and Magi, in the several barbarous Nations) and may be
able to form Digests, and stated Rules of Justice and Goodness, and may then
suggest into Peoples minds, That the same Just Deity would certainly be
favorable to, and reward them that shall observe those Rules; and will be
displeased with, and severely punish the Transgressors of them. And upon this
possible Supposal our Exceptioners will allege, That there may be then a
sufficient Expedient offered to oblige men to be Virtuous and Good, and to
overrule them from immoral practices, without a necessary consideration to be
had of what relates to another World.

In answering this Exception, I shall contract my Reply to this latter period
of it, where there only does appear whatsoever is cogent in it. And then, I
say, That whereas it is suggested, that those Philosophers might influence such
men's minds into a Belief, that God will be favorable to Good men, and punish
Offenders; if they mean (as they must, except they own a future State) that the
executions of that Deity's favor and displeasure are only to be acted in this
World, then is the pretended Expedient an unsufficient Subterfuge.

For if that Deity should not constantly keep up his favorable Providence to
the Virtuous, so as always to answer their reasonable hopes and expectations:
or if he should not as constantly rebuke and punish the Offenders, so as to
secure their constant Fear of Him; Men would not be affected with the uncertain
hopes of the one, nor dread of the other, so as to decline any advantageous,
though the most unjust Adventure, for their present ease, profit, or pleasure.

And that God Almighty does not administer the exact Executions of His Favor
to the Virtuous, and of His Displeasure to the Vicious in this Life, common
experience does sufficiently evince: And it has been the business of the First
Argument, to demonstrate the Truth of it.

But now, suppose, that it were certain to all, as it falls out sometimes to
some, that that Deity would infallibly do that work in this world, according to
the merits and demerits of the one and the other; yet would the Criminals
easily avert those fears, by considering, that either the Divine Justice would
strike them with an immediate death, and (as it is the sense of a Theist) throw
them into a present annihilation; and then they would judge for themselves,
that such a a state of being nothing (if I may be allowed so to call it) is a
thousand times more preferrable, than to live miserably or uneasily, if those
cases came at any time in competition; or if their punishments were to be
executed by the measures of some tedious calamity (the severest case that can
be suggested) yet then they would also consider, that at hardest it would but
make it eligible for them, to put a present period to their own miserable and
vexatious Lives, and in one instant be reduced to the same quiet nothing; which
they knew a few years or days might perhaps determine for them in some very sad
and more afflictive Method.

And surely Socrates might upon these considerations averr to Simia and Cebes,
That if he did not think that he was going into another World, (...). Plat.
Phed.
the fear of dying should not have restrained him from doing any thing that
were unjust.

And thus we see the defect of this Second exception, though stated to the
highest advantage. But these are but light skirmishes, before we engage in a
war with others, that are pretended to be more formidable Adversaries.
Therefore,

Section III.
THis Third Section tenders us the exception of them that will allege. That
God Almighty has delegated the executions of his Providence, in this Case, to
humane Powers and Authorities, to make Laws and Edicts which may keep the World
in order, and that the accountableness of men's lives and actions to their
Cognizance and Umpire, for the rewarding the Virtuous, and punishing the
Immoral, thereby to oblige all men to act well and virtuously, is all that the
Great Creator designed or intended for the Administration of his justice on
either hand in that Case, so that there is no need of a consideration to be had
of what concerns another world, to work that effect.

To this exception I answer, That it could not be the purpose of our Gracious
God, in his ordering the worlds Government in the manner and method it is
constituted, that Mankind might universally (for it must be so, if there be any
Sense in the Allegation) offer themselves sufficient reasons and encouragements
(as to rewards and punishments) to oblige themselves to be Good and Virtuous,
or restrain them from being immoral on that account, without a consideration of
a future State, upon these two especial Grounds and Reasons.

First, Because, where there be the best Laws and Constitutions that ever were
made and established, it must suppose all Supreme Powers and Governors to have
a sufficient Prospect of the merits and demerits of every individual Person and
Action, as they are to be balanced by the measures of all their various
circumstances: And then to be always intent, curious, and constant in the
performance of their rewarding and punishing Offices, for the Interests of
every such single Cause and Person, as well as in Matters of general and
public import: And again, in this Case, it must be further supposed, That all
the substituted Administrators of their Princes Laws and good Intentions, (the
Work being impossible to be always done in their own Persons) must also be as
knowing and faithful in their due subadministrations: I say, If it were
possible to be presumed, that all Governments and their Subordinates, were
designed of God to be always thus qualified and disposed, there might be a
tolerable Plea and Pretense to believe, that he intended no better, or no other
reasons to oblige men to be Good and Virtuous, and to restrain them from being
Evil: But if common, and sometimes woeful Experience, can prove the contrary;
and if the Maxims of Government, which the grand Politician Machiavil have
offered the World, Collected by a Learned Italian, and Translated into English
by J. B.
be justifiably represented, the doubt and uncertainty is too great for a Good
man to depend upon such administrations for his reward, and the former
Supposals too unlikely to be True, so as to restrain an Evil man, that is
either bold or cunning, from his unjustest intendments and undertakings.

Secondly, The next reason to evince, That it could not be God's Purpose, that
all men's accountableness to Governors, should be their sufficient Reason to
live virtuous Lives, or to deterr them from living otherwise, is, because their
Laws, how well and wisely soever constituted and administered, are
experimentally found to be always so avoidable, by some men's Greatness, by
other men's Cunning, and by most men's favorable Constructions, that it too
often comes to pass, that virtuous persons have been so far from obtaining a
Reward for doing well, that they have hardly acquitted themselves by the
benefit of the Laws, for their own ordinary Rights and Safety. And that on the
other hand; unjust men have been so far from being so sufficiently terrified,
as to restrain them from doing Evil, that they have oftentimes been rather
encouraged to adventure upon the worst of actions, by an Observation, that it
is but a small number, whom the Law rebukes and punishes, in comparison of the
multitudes of Delinquents that daily escape.

It Is more than probable (they will say) that there is never a man beheaded for
Treason, or arraigned for lesser Crimes, but that there be hundreds in the
Province, who have deserved as much or more, yet of whose actions the Laws
ordinary proceedure has taken no hold at all. And if from the great Estates
that have been raised by frauds and oppression, (where the Laws have silently
passed them by) the men that advanced them and their Heirs, were enforced to
refund to the satisfaction of the injured, many great men must descend into a
parell equipage with their honest Neighbors of a meaner quality. And if every
delinquent should come into the Congregation in a White Sheet, that have
deserved it as much as they that do, the Congregation in some places would
perhaps come to too near a resemblance of a Collegiate Assemblies Complexion.

These be the Two Reasons, by which is evidenced the deficiency of all humane
Governments and Laws for the ends pretended.

But now comes my Sceptick, and he offers a reasonable Enquiry to know, that if
this be not, what then is the end, which Governments do obtain, so as to answer
Gods Wise Intendment in their Constitutions?

My Answer to his Enquiry is, That it is without all doubt, that God Almighty
obliged all Authorities, upon their Duty to him, and in his place, faithfully
to endeavor the justification and protection of the Good and Virtuous, and for
the punishment of evil doers (as St. Paul discourses); Romans 13. 4.
but because all those persons, that are so entrusted to act that good to
Mankind in their several Authoritative Capacities, are free Agents, Created
with Faculties indifferently disposed to Good and Evil, and are themselves (as
all other men are) set in a probationary State for another World, and so are at
choice, whether or no they will prepare themselves for a future Reward or
Punishment, by their performing or omitting their respective governing Offices;
therefore, as it could not but be a contingency, whether they would be so just
and careful, so it could not but be a conditional intendment in God, when he
first designed their constitution.

But more closely to solve the doubt, I conceive that the absolute end, which
God designed that his deputed Authorities must certainly attain, and without
which attainment they must of course cease to be, what they are, is, That the
Nations and Communities under their respective charges, might be kept in social
or national subsistences, whatsoever the miscarriages of their Governments
otherwise should be in all other respects. That is, when Princes are careful so
to keep up their Authorities, that the People may not by their Seditions bring
themselves at pleasure into an Anarchical and tumultuary State; which ought to
be accounted the most fatal misfortune to Mankind, and of all evil, humane
contingencies in this world, the greatest.

So that the wisdom and Goodness of God in constituting and upholding
Governments, is not then only to be owned and acknowledged, when every single
virtuous person, and just cause, is perfectly rewarded and vindicated; nor when
every unjust man is as fully Rebuked and Punished (a work not to be expected to
be completely done, while defectible Mortals are engaged in that management of
it) but Gods mercy is then to be acknowledged, when the Peoples safety is so
far provided for, that evil and licentious men (though they may sometimes
disturb, yet) cannot at will overturn the Established Governments under which
they live, and are protected. And therefore it is on all hands adjudg'd, that
the worst Tyrannies, and the most oppressive Governments, are incomparably to
be preferred to no Government at all; that is, when all men are left at liberty
to act how and what they please: and so become (as certainly they will) their
own greatest Tyrants and Oppressors; and without any control from any other
expedient, but that which God himself has appointed for their safety and
deliverance: and that is, Sovereign Authority, and their submission to it.

And if these solutions cannot satisfy our Cavillers enquiry, when he offers any
other, that shall appear more sufficient to an unprejudiced understanding to
solve this observation, in which the Creators honor it is so much concerned, I
shall then renounce the use I make of them, as evidential for another world's
Existence. And this solves the Third Exception.

Section IV.
THis Fourth Section is designed to take off another exception of more
difficult import, and which many have thought an immovable block in my way.
And that is, that it is encouragement and reason enough for men to live good
and virtuous lives, without the necessary consideratien of what concerns
another world, because virtue is her own sufficient reward in this life.

With this famous subterfuge I have often been assaulted by some considerable
persons, and such as were no enemies to the belief of another world upon other
accounts, and therefore I must bespeak the Readers patience, if my stricter
examination of the case, in order to a thorough detection of the fallacy, shall
a little longer than ordinary, detain him in this Paragraph; and my Answer and
Solution will be managed by several steps.

1. First I take notice, That that Opinion (or Saying rather) That Virtue is
her own Reward, was originally put into reputation, as by the Stoics
principally, so also by some other Philosophers, on purpose to uphold the
Belief of the possibility of Man's attainment of a sufficient Happiness in this
present Life, to avoid the necessary Belief of placing it in another World. For
those Wise men having tumbled about their Thoughts where to fix that sufficient
Good and Happiness, and finding that those, who had placed it upon any present
Enjoyments for a prosperous and sensual way of living, could not possibly stand
their ground, against those pregnant Reasons, that every man's Experience could
dictate to the contrary: So those Wise men were at last necessitated to pitch
upon this Expedient of making Virtue her own Reward, as being subject to the
least Exception. Though in the sense and manner, how it should effect that
Reward, the Philosophers were no more likely to agree, than those men, who
designed to place men's Chiefest Happiness in any other thing, whose enjoyment
was determinable in this present World. Of which the Reader will find a full
account in the last Argument, Chap. 2. And this Philosophical Principle has
since been kept up by the Predestinarian Divines, as better consistent with
their notion of irrespective Election, of which I have given some account in
the First Chapter, Sect. 2. And from that kind of Divinity, I verily believe,
that notion has been inconsiderately and unwarily entertained even to this
day, by Divines and others, of a better Mind and soberer Judgment.

2. Secondly, I answer, That as that Opinion or Saying had those unhappy
Interests to serve in its First Rise and Process, so, upon a more strict
Examination, it cannot in it self be True. And, first, as to the nature and
proper notion of a Reward; which cannot but be of something that is kindly as
well as equitably bestowed, by any Person concerned to give or allow it to
another: For no man can be properly said to reward himself; he cannot in any
tolerable Sense be the Giver, Receiver, and Judge of the Equity of the same
thing; which must be True in a strict Propriety of Speaking, if Virtue may be
said to be properly her (that is, the virtuous man's) own Reward.

Then, Secondly, If it be alleged, That Reward in that Saying ought to be
taken in a Metaphorical Sense; but neither then can the notion hold good in
that acceptance, to the purpose, for which that Saying was to be made use of.
For to be metaphorically accepted, is as much as to say, That Virtue is her own
Reward, because it becomes something that is like, or resembles a Reward: but
then it must be such a something, that must be supposed (if they will allow the
Mind to be the proper Seat of a Rational Beings happiness) to depend upon the
virtuous man's opinion and imagination; that is, That he is sufficiently
rewarded and happy, if he can think himself so, and so long as his Mind is in
temper to imagine himself to be so. But then, if a man would consider how
insecure any such virtuous person must needs be of keeping his mind in that
good humor, upon several accounts, he would soon find cause to blush at the
pretense of believing Virtue to be her own Reward, upon his Thinking act of its
self-sufficiency. For Who knows not, but that sometimes his Minds kind temper
(without any reason to be given for it) may alter by his imaginative Faculties
natural disposition to change and variation: sometimes according to the present
temper of the Body, (as in Hypocondriack Persons especially) sometimes by the
Minds inability at all times, to subdue the clamours of its unruly Affections,
and lower Appetites; and very often by a virtuous man's observation of his own
many defects and imperfections in his best intendments and performances? I say,
when these various cases happen, What Is then become of that Reward, or that
which is Tropically like it? Can it give the Mind a Beatitude, without its own
allowance or consent? Or, Can the Mind have satisfaction, and be unsatisfied at
the same time? In short, Can that be a man's sufficient Happiness, of whose
enjoyment he cannot be one hour secure?

Thirdly, That the weakness of the pretense of making Virtue her own sufficient
Reward, without any other expectation, may yet be further discovered: It Is
observed, that the greatest Contenders for that saying, do sufficiently
demonstrate its defect, by supposing a concurrence of almost all parts of
humane prosperity, as necessary to support that, which they call Virtues Reward.

And to make this good, I shall here only offer the Opinion of Aristotle, (who,
as industriously as possible, had endeavored to have Man's self-sufficient
Beatitude placed in Virtues being her own Reward) and he tells us, that there
be unfortunate cases that concern Honor, Children, Beauty, and the like; which
by no means can allow the virtuous Man to be a happy Person. And then (says he
in the same place) how can he be happy that is deformed, -- (...), etc. Lib.
Eth. cap. 8.
ignorant, or that lives unsocially, and without Posterity, etc.

Now, if such a concession, and supposal of the necessary confluence of so many
conveniences of living well and easily in the world, do not show the
unsufficiency of such a pretended self-Reward, we must disclaim every
consequence that is most rationally inferred. Hence it is, That the Ingenious
None facile invenies multis de millibus unum,
Virtutem pretium qui putet esse sui.
Ipse decor recti, facti si pramia desunt
Non movet, and gratis poenitet esse probrum. Ovid.

Poet had so slender an Opinion of Virtues being her own Reward, that he even
derides the Humor of that presence, and tells us, that it would but teach Men
to repent, that ever they had been Virtuous at all, if they got no more by it.

Fourthly, and lastly, I answer and grant, (to save our Pretenders Credit) That
it is with that saying of Virtues being her own Reward, as it is with many
other general Axioms, and common Proverbial Speeches, that are grounded upon
some certain Truth, which yet in other respects, may admit several Restrictions
and Exceptions, and with which, those very Axioms may be so over-balanc'd, that
there may be sometimes as good ones taken from some of their very limitations.

And there may be some Axioms so equally balanced between true and false, that
it were indifferent, if they were given either negatively or affirmatively.
Upon this consideration, I do allow some Truth in the common saying, That
Virtue is her own Reward, that is, the mind may sometimes by living virtuously
receive some general satisfaction to its self, and that some Virtues may
sometimes convenience a Man's credit, health, peace, and the like: but then on
the other side, when it is considered, that there is no such absolute certainty
in attaining those conveniences, as to make up an entire and self-sufficient
Happiness, without any reference at all to the grand Rewards of another Life: I
say, when all those Restrictions are put into the balance, I dare as positively
affirm, that Virtue is not her own Reward, as to say it is. Nay, I must say
it is impossible it should be so affirmed, if any man (as the Philosophers did)
shall go about to confront the Beatitude of another World, by giving it
Appellatives, that can only be proper to the blessedness of the Beatifick
Vision, or an enjoyment of the nearest Communion with GOD Himself. (...). Eth.
lib. cap. 9. (...). Cap. 7. vid. cap. 9.
For so Aristotle calls it the greatest, the most excellent, the best and
divine Good: Elsewhere, he calls it the highest, most perfect, and
self-sufficient Good.

And now, after all this that may be offered in disproof of that Saying, as it
bears a design to exclude (though but in notion) any other kind of Happiness to
stand in competition with it, I cannot but wonder, that any man of the
Christian Name, should go about a defense of it; or that any Divini should dare
to affirm (as it has been usually done) in public, That if there were neither
Heaven nor Hell, it were encouragement enough to live a religious and virtuous
Life, because Virtue was her own Reward. What could be said more to the
disparagement of the Sacred Institution of the Gospel, whose main design is to
tender the Rewards of another World, as the most reasonable and prevailing
Inducement, to engage men to live good and virtuous Lives? Of which surely St.
Paul was sufficiently sensible, when he avowed, That had they Hope only in this
Life, they were of all men most miserable. 1. Cor. 15. 19.
He had forgot, that Virtue was her own self-sufficient Reward, and that by
which they might all have been perfectly Happy, notwithstanding their want of
any such Hope.

And thus my Argument has escaped the Danger of this Fourth Exception.

Section V.
THE Fifth and Last Exception against our^ Proceedure upon this Argument, with
which our Sceptick designs to war against us, with a Weapon fetched from our
own Tents, is, That GOD Almighty made no other Proposal to the Jews, to
encourage them to live vertously and religiously, but of Temporal Blessings
only; And, What (says he) GOD himself thought might then be sufficient for his
own dear People, surely should not at any time be called in question as
insufficient.

First, I answer, That it is true, that God Almighty, in the Mosaical
Dispensation, gave the Jews no other plain and direct Promises, but of Temporal
Rewards, as they are in those cited Chapters more especially enumerated: Levit.
26.
But then he gave them notice of some express general Promises, Deuteronomy. 28.
as that which he had made to Abraham, to be his God, and his great Reward,
Genesis 17.
in which the Blessings of a future World could be thought to be no more wholly
excepted, than in that affirmation, when the Psalmist so confidently averred in
general, Psalm. 58. 11.
That Verily there is a reward for the Righteous, doubtless there is a God that
judges the earth: or, that he should say of himself in particular, Psalm. 27.
15.
I should utterly have fainted, but that I believe verily to see the goodness
of God in the Land of the Living.

Now; in respect of the obscurer way of God's allowing the Jews the notices of
another World's Rewards, (as for other reasons) St. Paul calls the Law, A
shadow of good things to come; Heb. 10.
that is, though the clear revelation of a future state was respitted to the
Evangelical Dispensation, yet the Jews might, in that darker manner, have as
much certainty of its Existence, as a shadow can evince, That the Sun is in
Being, though its own body of Light were then not directly looked upon; or, as
when in a gloomy day the Sun is mantled with a Cloud, yet it may be apprehended
as certainly, That the Sun is in the Horizon, and that it is Day, as if there
were never an Interposure in the Firmament: The Lineaments of a Face, though
drawn with a Cole, can assure one, that it represents such a Person, though it
wants the attractive beauty, which the finishing strokes may afterward add to
the Picture.

And had there not been such a known Certainty, though in such shady
representations, of another World's Rewards and Blessings, to the Ages
preceding the Messiah, Heb. 11.
How could St. Paul averr of the ancient Saints of God, of whom he makes such a
large Catalogue, That what they did and suffered for GOD and Virtue, was upon
the encouragement of hoping for a better Country than Canaan? or, that he
should say of Moses himself, That when he renounced the Egyptian Glories, and
the present Pleasures of Sin, he was encouraged to it, by having his Eye upon
the Recompense of Reward?

So that the manner of God's giving them the Understanding of a future World,
was but accommodated to all other the parts of their whole Dispensation.
Particularly to instance in the Case of their solemn Expiations, by the Blood
of those Animals, which were appointed for that Service: Now, as it was
impossible for the Jews to believe so grossly, Heb. 10. 4.
as if the Blood of Bulls and Goats (as the Apostle argues) should take away
Sins: but that there was something more to come, of which that Blood was
Typical; so the same Thoughts we must have of them, as to a future state: It
was not possible that such Persons could think, that all the Blessings which
God designed to His obedient and faithful Servants, should look no further than
the Advantages of Temporal Blessings, (of which it is questionable, whether God
constantly continued to them so vastly a greater share than he did to other
Nations) which they could not but see, to be generally and promiscuously
disposed both to the Good and Evil.

Secondly, I answer, That though God gave them no express Revelation for the
Existence of the other World, yet they had the common Benefit which God allowed
to Mankind in general; That is, to be able to demonstrate the Existence of that
state to themselves and others, by Rational Evidence; by which they, as well as
the Heathen World, might be encouraged to live virtuous Lives, according to the
common measures of Natural Religion, of which the substantial part of the Jews
Dispensation did especially consist.

And GOD might be pleased, in His sovereign Wisdom, to admit the Jews to no
express revealed way of understanding the certain Existence of that future
state, but by such an Expedient, of which the Heathen World might be capable,
as well as themselves: That is, that the Gentiles might be the more reasonably
invited to it, and the more readily entertain the Jewish Religion, when they
saw, that the principal Fundamental of it did stand upon so firm a bottom as
Rational Demonstration. And the reason of that might be, because the Jewish
Dispensation had no such considerable Attestations to confirm its credibility,
as the Gospels had; nor were all the Precepts of it in themselves so
universally consonant to right Reason, nor so perfective of natural Religion,
as the Gospels was; so that to adventure the knowledge of a future state upon a
bare Proposal of Revelation only, might then have put those Gentiles Minds into
a Suspicion, That that part of the Revelation had had no better Foundation in
Reason, than many other parts of the same Revealed Religion had. Now, it was
otherwise with the Evangelick Dispensation, because all the principal practick
parts of its Profession were so Rational, and so agreeable to natural Religion,
that had not the Article of a future World, and all that relates to it, been
offered to Faith, and not left to Demonstration, (as the Jews in a great part
might have it) the whole Christian Religion would have seemed to a Heathen
Mind, and perhaps so to some others, rather to be of Philosophical than of
Divine Institution.

Thirdly, I answer, That it is very probable, that such a Rational way of
demonstrating another World, might be also somewhat encouraged by Tradition
from the Patriarchal state of the Church, from which the Jews had many things
in great veneration, and constant practice.

But howsoever, that knowledge of the other World reached their Minds, it is
certain, that the belief of it was a Doctrine so catholic among the Jews, that
the Sadducees (whose Sect began about the time of Alexander the Great, that is,
about three Centuries before Christ came) were accounted amongst them as
Heretics, for denying the Existence of Spirits, the Resurrection of the Dead,
and of another World. Afterward, in the early Age of Justin Martyr, Trypho the
Jew, in his Dialognizing, acknowledges, That pious Souls, after their
departures from the Bodies, -- (...) Dial. cum Tryph. page 223.
shall exist in a better place; and, that the unjust and the wicked shall be in
a worse state, expecting the time of their Judgment. And the Author of Europae
Speculum, accounting the present state of the Jews, Europ. Spec. Page 223.
informs us, That the Belief of the end of the World, and of the final
Judgment; of the restoring of Men's Bodies, and of their everlasting Happiness
in the height of the Heavens, is Good in general. And by these Answers, our
Sceptick, I hope, will place no confidence in this Last Exception.

CHAP. III.
WHerein (as the proceedure of the Argument does necessarily require it) I
shall endeavor to represent positively, That there can be no other sufficient
Motives or Encouragements; or (which is the same) no other sufficient Reasons
morally to oblige a man, that is, (as he acts rationally) really to enable him
to live a virtuous Life, or to restrain himself from being vicious and immoral,
but such as bear a relation to a Future World. And to make this appear
convictively true, I shall reduce all I have to say about it, to one general
Head, which, with what relates to it, must necessarily occasion two distinct
Sections. In the First, I shall offer Reasons for it from the mighty
Difficulties, with which a man must engage, when he is about the work of living
a Virtuous Life. In the Second, I must Answer two Exceptions against what those
Reasons import, concerning the difficulties of being Virtuous and Good; and I
shall also give Reasons, why GOD was pleased that the possibility of being so,
should be so encumbered.

Section I.
IN this First Section, I shall pursue that order; that is, It shall endeavor
to demonstrate, That no other Encouragements or Reasons (for in the case of
rational Agents, they are both the same) can morally be sufficient to determine
a Man's resolution and practice to live a Good and Virtuous Life, but such as
relate to a Future World. And the Representation of it, will be founded upon
the consideration of the very many, and otherwise, uncontrollable oppositions,
difficulties, and discouragements, with which GOD thought fit, in His Divine
Wisdom, That the possibility of Man's being Virtuous and Religious, should be so
encumbered, That no less Reasons or Encouragements should be thought sufficient
to balance his mind resolutely to grapple with them, but such as concern
another World. And all this I shall endeavor to illustrate, by giving the
Reader a full prospect of those Encumbrances, under these Five Heads.

But before I can well begin to explain those several cases, I must first
endeavor to obviate one great Exception; and it is offered by them, that will
be ready to say, That there be some natural dispositions to Virtue in many, if
not in most Men, more or less, that may even of course, make the way of Virtue
more easy and less encumbered, without any necessary consideration had to the
encouraging and obliging Concerns of anotehr World. Now our Exceptioner means,
some Men's natural Modesty, and Goodnature; other Men's placable, peaceable,
honorable and generous Inclinations; and then, that such natural Tempers may
in themselves facilitate a Virtuous Life.

My Answer to this Exception, will be managed upon several Considerations.

First, as to such Virtuous Actions, as derive from those Men's natural good
Tempers, as they come up to some degree of necessity in acting them, and may
resemble the Virtues of some Brute Animals, that act by instinct, so they may
oft-times, be rather materially, than truly, formally Virtuous. And therefore,
Divines ought to advertize such kinds of Persons, not to be overconfident of
their being really Virtuous (especially upon a Religious Account) from Actions,
that perhaps, may be no more than the natural Effects of their complexional
dispositions to some particular Virtues.

Secondly, I suggest, That Men of those naturally good Qualifications, though
in the beginning of their converse in the World, may readily act such Virtues,
as relate to their complexions, yet when they come afterward to meet strong
Temptations to the contrary, may find the same difficulties and discouragements
to preserve their naturally good Temper, as others of a different humor. What
prodigies of a lost Modesty, of a baffled good Nature, and of a debauched
Honor, have some men appeared to be, that had the natural advantage of those
Excellent Qualifications?

Thirdly, I offer to consideration, That such Men, as are naturally endowed
with any of those complexional dispositions to Virtue, may yet be observed, to
have in their Tempers, some other Humors and Inclinations, which may create as
great a difficulty to preserve their virtuous Conversations entire, as those
Men meet withal, who have the task of contending with the want of such
naturally good dispositions.

Fourthly* and Lastly, As to that more famous natural qualification of an
honorable temper, upon which principle In grant, that many excellently
Virtuous things have been, and are acted in the World; but then I say, how
easily is the Notion of true Honor lost, and what mistaken measures and
disguises of it are too generally entertained in the world; so that, though
such persons may show a greatness of mind in some cases, yet if they have no
Religious Principles in them to give them a beter conduct of their actions, how
will their natural and complexional honor extravagate into such wild excesses,
as are altogether unaccountable to any sense of Reason, or Virtue? how will
some such men maintain their hardy resolutions, and natural stoutness in a
Duel, perhaps only for an offensive word, that would not so honorably express
it in all those acts of strict justice and goodness, as I have represented the
notion of virtue, and living Virtuously, in the First Chapter of this Argument,
Sect. the First?

And now having acquitted my self of this exception, I shall presume upon the
force of my Arguing, That the difficulties and encumbrances of being truly
virtuous are such, that no encouragements can be sufficient to oppose and
control them, but such as may be proposed from the concern of a Future World.

First, let a man attentively consider in his mind, the true Figure of his
whole compounded self; that is, how he is in general made up of two greatly
diverse, and in many respects, very incongruous parts and principles, viz. a
Body and a Soul; each of which supposed to be naturally qualified with so many
different capacities of acting, and which require such varieties of objects,
about which, to exercise their operations. And then how those operations do
bear a tendency to so many disagreeing ends and purposes, that a man's whole
Nature seems to be a miscellany of Beings, or a complication of many natures in
One.

And then let him further consider, that most of those Parts and Powers of his
thus compounded self, such as be his Imaginative faculty, the affections and
passions of his Soul, and the various appetites of the Corporeal and Sensual
part of his Being, are not only disposed to exert their several operations in a
great disparity to, and with one another, but most commonly in direct
contrariety to his reasoning mind.

Now here lays the mighty difficulty of being Good and Virtuous, because it is a
very hard thing to bring all those several parts of humane Nature, which are so
variously multiplied both in Soul and Body, and are so inconsistent one with
another, to the Rule, Conduct, and Dominion of right Reason; insomuch, that for
the gaining that power, no man can acquit his endeavor, without a kind of
Tyranny upon a very great part of himself: Of which Porphyry (though a Heathen)
could not but be so sensible, that speaking of the purgation (which you may
also frequently have notice of, in other Philosophers) of a man's sensual
Appetites in order to Virtue, discourses, that it cannot be done without the
Souls divorce from the Body, (...). Sent.
and its sensual motions: Or (as St. Paul expresses it) without taking upon
him the office (as it were) of an executioner, Galat. 5. 24.
and that in the hardest instance of its employment without a Crucifixion of
himself in his affections and lusts.

Now, if a man had been all Soul, and that Soul all Understanding, it would
have been thought no hard matter to be Virtuous and Good, and that because his
understanding power would not have allowed any thing to be undertaken and
acted, that is contrary to its self: But when it is considered, that there be
besides that faculty in humane nature, so many principles of action both in
Soul and Body, that hold such a strong opposition to his reasoning Power, and
will be constantly soliciting for satisfaction, against the interest of virtue,
that man must be very credulous or unconcerned, that can think any
encouragement (even for one that would desire to be virtuous) to be sufficient
to engage him to enter the lists of that war with himself, and to uphold his
mind against such powerful contradictions to his good intendment, except it be
by a proposal to himself of some attainable happiness, whose interest may
appear to him far greater and more considerable, than any of those
satisfactions, which the inferior parts of his Nature exact and call for. And
if it were not so, this absurdity must follow, That his Reason must be supposed
to be left to act without a reason; that is, without a sufficient encouragement
from some end or other, whose value and preference might overruled and control
all other interests whatsoever, that are in themselves found to be less
esteemable. Now I desire that any man would suggest to me, what happiness there
is attainable in his Mortal life, which he may propose to himself to be so
considerable, as may engage his superior mind to oppose the satisfactions of
his imagination and passions of his Soul, and the sensual appetites of his
bodily Self, in order to Virtue. And if he cannot find any thing in this world,
that may affect his mind with such a value (as I have in other Arguments
convinced, that there is nothing) then either he must fly to something that is
beyond this present mortal State, or else it must be presumed that God Almighty
has afforded him no sufficient encouragement to be good and virtuous at all.
The sum is, That God has designedly (as I shall represent in the next
Section) made man in such a figure, and gave him such a kind of nature, that
nothing can sufficiently encourage him to be Religious, Good, and Virtuous, but
only the concern of another World.

2. Secondly, as a man's intendments for virtue may be thus perplexed with a
mutinous company of his inferior Passions, and sensual Appetites within him,
so let him consider, what a kind of world it is, in which he is by Divine
Ordination, socially to enjoy his Being; and then, how much therein all
virtuous intentions will be constantly encumbered with so many differently
flattering objects, that are not only foreign, but sometimes contrary to the
exercises of Virtue, without him. Which kind of objects wheresoever he lives,
with whomsoever he converseth, or in whatsoever quality of life he is employed;
will always attend his senses and imagination, and be soliciting his affections
and sensual appetites for entertainment. And if ever those bewitching
enchantments for a present seeming satisfaction, do but gain a preference in
his fancy (which will be a hard matter for him to escape) and after that shall
but once come to interest his Affections, it is beyond a peradventure, but that
the Supreme Part of his Soul, though it should then stand on the side or part
of Virtue, would soon be wearied in the contest; and grow weak and imprevalent,
if it has not greater encouragements to enable it to undergo the conflict with
those competitours, than such as he can possibly suggest to himself, from any
the best concerns of this present life.

And then, when by the treachery of his Debauched fancy and affections, the
Rational part of his Soul shall stoop to admit an imposure upon its self, so as
to approve and consent to what the Inferior parts of himself have so
suggested; it is more than probable, but that all manner of virtues will
immediately, not only become nauseous to him in his opinion, but will be
represented to his mind under some reproachful characters of disparagement.
That is, perhaps his mind will be overruled, to think Temperance too
unpleasant and unsociable, Fortitude too dangerous, Prudence too formal,
Gratitude and Ingenuity the silly effects of an easy Nature, Justice and
Honesty too nice and unthrifty; and all other kinds of Virtues too
unaccommodable for his present Interest, Pride, or Pleasure.

And if the Rational Judgment be once thus disordered and prejudiced, what can
restore him to the true estimation and love of what is Good and Virtuous, in
order to a Manly resistance of all those powerful Temptations, that will be
daily gazing upon him, to persuade him to the contrary? Surely there is nothing
else can come in balance with those potent Enemies to Virtue, so as to
overruled his mind to resist them, but a lively and a prevailing concern, for
what relates to a Future World. It must be such an apprehension or none, That.
can enable him to make an impartial Judgment of the necessity of being Good, or
that can advance a sufficient rational Power in him to conquer his abused
Imaginations and Affections; which will otherwise, in despite of all other
Arguments that can be given him to the contrary, every day more and more
endanger his mind, to be immoveably affixed to the present World's delusive,
and vainly admired Shows, and Fooleries.

3. Thirdly, The difficulty of designing and living a Virtuous Life, is yet
further increased, when it is considered, That so great a part of Humane Life is
past and gone, before a Man is grown old enough to be himself; that is, before
his superior mind will think it self at leisure, or indeed, be ordinarily
capable at all, to encounter with his natural Affections, and unruly Appetites
within him; or with the delusions of the World's deceitful Objects without him.
I say, it is a great while, before a right, and well-inform'd Reason, that
should undertake Virtues Work, will be tolerably able to exercise its Authority
over his Affections and Actions, or of passing a right Judgment upon his own
principal Good and Interest. And especially if it be true, (which St. Austin
averrs, as the Judgment of the most learned Men of that Age) that the natural
Boundary of Youth is, Circa triginta quippe annos, definierunt etiam hujus
saeculi doctissimi homines, juventutem. De Civ. lib. 22. cap. 15
when a man comes to the age of about Thirty Years.

And then, if all that while he allows himself such a loose conduct of his
Actions, (as is ordinarily observed in that time of Life) in what is he likely
to pass away this ungovernable part of his Existence, but in trifling and
folly, and in the ordinarily observed misadventures and miscarriages of Youth,
-- (...), De lib. educan.
(as Plutarch fully represents them) without any sufficient Control from his
yet immature, and unperfect Mind?

And when he is thus tumbling down his youthful Precipice, if the Wisdom of
Virtue stops him not, before the Meridian of his time be past, he is in great
danger of encountering with another potent Enemy to Goodness. And that is, with
the Dominion and insulting Authority of a long-contracted habit of doing Evil,
or, at best, of living idly and impertinently; which habit, if it be not timely
rescinded, will strengthen it self every day more and more, like a shrunk
Nerve, till it grows inflexibly stubborn against all remedy and relief, and
obstinately set against all that Age and Experience may offer in Advice for his
undertaking wiser measures of Living. So that it is not ordinarily so frequent,
that men do get into a state of Virtue, either when they are very young, or
very old: not when they are very young, for the reasons already alleged; Nor
yet when very old, if they have continued their evil habits through the maturer
part of their Lives; the proper season, when men should recover themselves from
their former habituated follies, and be rationally fixed in the love and
practice of Virtue.

It Is taken notice of, That Moses took that nick of time for his recovery: Acts
7. 23.
For (as the Texts infer that observation) he was full Forty Years old when he
seemed to have begun that Mighty Work. Heb. 11.
He then unloosen'd himself from the Glories of the Egyptian Court, and
renounced the transient Pleasures of it, and engaged himself into a course of
Virtue; though he were sure then to act it in a state of great afflictions,
with the then-suffering People of God. And for the performance of which (as the
reason of the thing required it) he placed his encouragement upon the Concerns
of a future World: Heb. 11.
For (says the Text) he had an Eye upon the recompense of Reward. He durst
stay no longer, lest a farther adherence to his Vanity had captived him beyond
the relief of his reason; nor durst he adventure to trust his Soul with any
less encouragement, to engage himself in that necessary Work, lest he had
miscarried in that most important Enterprise for want of it.

It Is true, I confess, that there be always some good young men in the World;
but then it is observed, that their virtue has been (I speak not of all) but
commonly contingent, or complexional; that is, either as growing upon the
advantage of a good Education and Discipline, or as upon the Stock of their own
naturally-sweet and tractable Dispositions. But then it has also too often
been observed, That afterward those pregnant and promising Hopes of a virtuous
Life, have become abortive, when those young men have been left to act purely
upon the strength of their own Minds and Reason. Like some Plants, which we
take notice of to thrive well, while they feed only upon the nutriment which
the body of the Seed afforded them, but when they come to grow upon the
strength of the Ground only, after all their first vernant shows, have
withered away, through the weakness of a defective soil: So many young men have
been commendably virtuous upon the advantage of their own good Nature and
Education, who afterward have failed, when they came to live abroad in the
World's wide Field.

Now, upon this whole consideration which I have made, concerning the time of
Youth, What can be supposed to be offered to a young man, while he lives
subject to be overruled by his passions and natural appetites? Or, What
Arguments can be presumed to be strong enough to bring his Mind to any
sufficient attendance to the Counsels of Virtue, amidst the prospect of so many
enticing Objects, to divert him from it, but an alarm from the most serious
consideration of the Concerns of another World? Therefore, when Solomon
advertised the vain young man, Eccl. 12. ver. 1.
to Remember his Creator in the days of his Youth, and had told him, ver. 13.
That nothing but Fearing God and keeping his Commandments, could make him
Happy, he obliges his attendance to that Sovereign Counsel, (as knowing that
nothing else could be sufficient) upon the Concerns of another World; because
(says he) God shall bring every work into Judgment, with every secret thing,
whether it be good, or whether it be evil.

4. Fourthly, Let us, after all these mentioned difficulties of being engaged
in a course of Virtue, further consider, That he that designs to live
virtuously, ought also to suppose, that it is not only possible, but very
probable, that he must live counter to the Examples (in one kind or another) of
the greater part of Mankind: And sometimes not only to the Examples of them,
with whom he chooses to converse, but oft-times even of them upon whom he must
necessarily depend: and (which adds much to the difficulty) very often to the
Examples of such, whose Age, Station, Learning, and Experience had given some
credit to loose and vicious practices.

Now, if a man shall but seriously inform himself of the universally
acknowledged prevalency of evil Examples, and how, (if they be too general)
like a raging Torrent, they are apt to bear all that is Virtuous down before
them; and then shall consider, how that prevalency arises not so much from any
taking Argument that there is in vicious and debauched Examples in themselves,
as from that inclination that is naturally implanted in all men, to be governed
by Example, rather than by any other method of Conduct; the difficulty of being
virtuous must, on that account, be still very much increased. It Is known by
common observation, That Orations, Sermons, dexterous Reasonings, and a
diligent attendance to Books, (though they may very much influence, yet) are
experimentally found to be far less prevailing with the natural temper of most
men, than is a constant Prospect of actual Presidents and Examples,
whithersoever they tend either to Good or Evil.

And therefore, our Savior, in his famous Sermon upon the Mount, after he had
prefac'd it with Eight qualifications of Mind, as necessarily required in them
that intended to engage in the Observation of his following Precepts, begins
the Sermon with that which he judged most considerably conducing to a Good
Life, and that was, to make the Good actions of his Hearers exemplary to one
another. (Mat. 5.) And as it was our Savior's prime care to promote the
Benefit of a good Exemplification: So it has been ever since believed of such
as were to be afterward the Substitutes of his Priesthood, that they have the
more remarkably prevailed in their Ministerial Offices, Potior enim, est been
vivendi quam been loquendi facultas.
when their good Examples have given Life to their other endeavors: And, the
building up of God's Church, has then most successfully gone on, when they
have wrought with both Hands, that is, both by Life and Doctrine.

Now, this whole Discourse, concerning the nature and importance of
Exemplification, amounts to this, That if there be such a natural Prevalency in
all Examples to control the Minds and Lives of men: And if there be so
observably, always in the World, so many such Examples, as will be encouraging
Vice, Immorality, and the Universal Neglects of Religion; What an addition is
it to the difficulty of men's Undertaking to live good and virtuous Lives? What
Power can stem such a strong Tide? or, What encouragements can the Mind assume
to its self, from any thing that this World can tender, to restrain a man from
following a common Mode (perhaps at that time most fashionable) of ill-living,
for which he has daily so many Presidents before his Eyes? Surely nothing can
enable him to bear up against so powerful an opposition to Virtue, unless he
advances his Soul to be concerned in what relates to another World.

5. Fifthly, and Lastly, They that design to live virtuously, that is, strictly
so, besides the mentioned inconveniences of bad Examples, must also expect to
be entertained (more or less) with as many discouragements, as the vicious and
immoral can possibly contrive. For there is a malignant disposition in the
Minds of most men that are habitually evil, which will commonly engage them
either in an open Enmity, or in a secret Spite, against the Persons of the
Virtuous: And in whatsoever other instances their Malice shall fail them, yet
they will be sure to put the Actions of the Virtuous, let them be never so
upright and innocent, upon the rack of all possible misconstructions for their
discouragement.

If such Good men shall live quietly and inoffensively in the World, it must be
accounted from a pusillanimity and meanness of Spirit. If in any instances they
be observably grateful or ingenious, it is nothing else, but an effect of a weak
and untutored Judgment. If they cannot comply with some men's Riotism and
Debaucheries, it is Penury and straitness of Soul. If they be cheerful, they are
vain; if reserved, it is Sullenness. If they be generally civil and obliging in
their Behavior, it must be Flattery, Neutrality in public Concerns, or base
Compliance upon design: And then, if they keep distance, it is Pride and an
unsociable Singularity. If the Good man shall go about to oblige such men by
Kindnesses, they will hate him the more, because he was in capacity to do them:
And if upon apparent affronts and abuses he be ready to offer terms of
reconciliation, they will never forgive him the Injury (as they will account
it) of his taking any notice at all of their Unworthiness: If the common
business of the World brings the Good man into Company, he hears no body
commended but the Thriving, and the Cunning, and no man applauded as Wise and
Happy, but the Rich and the Successful; they are to be always the best men (as
they call it) of the Neighborhood, howsoever unfurnished in the Region of
their Minds, or how irregular and unworthy soever in the course of their Lives.
And while he is among them, if he offers to talk to purpose, no man listens to
him: If he advises well, none attends his Counsel: If his indignation against
such Trifles of Mankind, makes him speak a stout Word, that relates to Virtue,
or another World, there is presently an alarm given either for an universal
Sport, or a Quarrel. But if at any time a stronger temptation, and a snare
laid, shall betray his virtuous Soul to comply too far with the humor of the
loose Society, it shall never be forgotten to his reproach; and how soon and
well soever he shall retract his Surprise, yet it shall be thought sufficient
to justify all the affronts and unkind usages that the immoral and vicious
shall for ever after design and offer upon him: And it is well if his Posterity
escape.

And then, a further disencouragement is, if he that designs to be Virtuous, be
of Honorable Extraction, it shall be suggested to him, That his strictly
managed Life, will lessen him in his Honor, if not degrade his Quality: If he
otherwise stands in good and plentiful Circumstances, he must expect (in as
many respects as they can) to be made a prey to the Vicious, who shall take the
same pleasure to do it, and to boast of it, and shall be as little blamed for
it, as he that robs an innocent Churchman of his due, or that plunders one,
that refuses to be Disloyal in a time of Rebellion. As for that Man's share in
ordinary civilities, such as keep up Societies in mutual Friendships, he shall
be sure to have the least proportion of them; and his strict and virtuous Life,
shall set a mark upon his door, and teach the common Visitours to pass it by,
like a House infected with the Plague: And at last, they shall grow so weary of
his Neighborhood, that they will always be wishingly enquiring (with the Evil
Man in the Psalm, Psalm. 41. 5.) When shall he die, and his Name perish? These,
and such as these, are the discouragements, which he that intends to lead a
Virtuous Life, may reasonably propound to himself to encounter with, from the
evil part of the World; not that I think, that every Virtuous Man, and at all
times alike, shall be assaulted with every one of them, in the manner and order
that I have now represented them; yet nevertheless, we may be confident, That
all Virtuous Persons (if strictly so) do meet with some of them, and some, with
most of them: And they that meet with fewest, considering their other mentioned
Encumbrances from within, and without them, will find work enough to bear up
against them, that they may keep their minds and lives close to their Virtuous
Resolutions. And then who can imagine, That they should entertain their minds
with the hope of any such Encouragements, as may elsewhere balance their
Reason, to overruled so many Discouragements, but of those only, which they may
suggest to themselves, from the favor of a Good GOD, as it relates especially
to the hopeful concerns of another World? This the last difficulty: but Why did
GOD permit all this? That Is the business of the next Section to solve.

Section II.
HAving thus laid down the Five Instances of the several difficulties, with
which Men, that would live Virtuously, must expect to be encumbered, I might
now come up close to the conclusion, did I not foresee a Rancounter from my
constantly attending Caviller: and he has two things to object against the
Representations which I have made of those Difficulties. 1. First, says he,
How can all this consist with your own Principles, and the Notion, that is
ordinarily made of the Christian Religion; of which it is affirmed, That its
Commandments are not Grievous: 1 John 5. 3.
or that Our Savior should say, That His Yoke was easy, Mat. 11. 30.
and His Burden light?

First, I Answer, that though Our Savior declared His Yoke to be easy, etc.
yet is it a Yoke, and a Burden still; and so those Metaphorical Expressions,
must suppose and import something in their proper meaning, that is severe and
difficult. And though His Commandments are not grievous, yet are they
nevertheless Commandments still; that is, restraints, limitations, and
boundaries of something, that Men are apt to account their natural Freedom.

Secondly, I Answer, That that easiness and non-grievousness may be spoken but
as comparatively of something that is harder, and more oppressive. And that is,
either as to the bondages of the Mosaical Institution, or as to the Slavery and
Drudgery of living under the intolerable Dominion and Tyranny of sinful Habits;
which notion of easiness in those Two comparative Respects, does not at all
supersede what I have represented concerning the difficulties of living a
Virtuous and Religious Life.

3. Thirdly. The Evangelical Virtues may be represented as easy, as they are in
a more general account accommodable to right Reason, and as they are in
themselves more approvable to a man's natural understanding: and therefore cannot
be thought grievous to the supreme part of himself, (which is especially
himself, and denominates him a Man) abstractly considered, how troublesome and
difficult soever the practice of them may be in a complex and compounded Notion
of himself; that is, as he is made up of so many inferior passions,
inclinations, and sensual appetites, as I have represented the case, in the
former Section.

4. Fourthly, I Answer, that His Yoke, Burden, and Commandments may be found
the more easy, and less grievous with respect to those excellent dispositions
of Mind, with which every true Disciple of CHRIST that undertakes a Profession
of his Religion, must necessarily be supposed to be qualified; that is, with
meekness and lowliness of heart, such a submissive and humble temper of Mind,
as he there advises to, in the same period of Discourse, as learned by his own
Example, will make his Yoke so much the easier, and the practical Observance of
his Commandments so much the less grievous to him, that designs to live a
Virtuous and Religious Life.

5. Lastly I reply, that those fair accounts of the easiness of the Christian
Virtues, may be founded upon the belief of a future world, and with respect to
the great rewards of that Blessed State; for the attainment of which, nothing
ought respectively to be accounted hard, that is possible, as the bitterest
Dose is cheerfully taken upon an assured prospect of Health, and as the
Merchants hard adventure is made light of, upon a fore-assurance of the import
of his rich floating Cargo. And this solves the first Exception.

But then Secondly, our Sceptick Dares arraign the Equity and Goodness of GOD
to Mankind; and says, That if Almighty GOD had ever seriously intended that
Men should live Good and Virtuous Lives, upon which, His Divine Favor, and all
their own Happiness, should chiefly and necessarily depend, (as it is pretended)
he would never have been so unkind, as to put them upon such a way of Living,
whose terms should be so hard and hazardous, and that cannot be performed
without so many amazing difficulties, and discouragements; but would rather
have obliged them so to live, upon conditions which might have had the same
ease and security, by which other Animals attain their proper ends; from which
they are in no natural danger to depart, by any wilful miscarriages of their
own.

My Answer to this bold Charge upon those glorious Attributes of God, in which
he chiefly delights, shall be by offering sufficient reasons to justify God,
why he was pleased to allow Mankind the possibility of being Good and Virtuous,
upon such severely difficult, and discouraging terms, and conditions. And the
Reasons are these Five.

First, Had not man some such difficulties and discouragements to contend with
in his attempts to be Virtuous; the very name or notion of Virtue must have
been insignificant to all the purposes of its Reason, and Recommendation. If
there were no enemy to conflict with, nor any danger to be incountred, there
could be no reasonable account given either of courage, or conquest; And if it
were naturally easy, and commonly obvious, to be Learned and Knowing, what
honor were it to be accounted a Philosopher? So if the world had no enchanting
Objects, no sensual Pleasures, no admired Splendor and Greatness in it, what
Virtue were it to oppose temptations to Pride and Vanity, Revenge and
Arrogance, or to be constantly engaged in mutual condescentions, and in an
universal practice of living peaceably and doing good? And if some parts of
man's nature had no contrary propensions, and aversations; it would be no more
to be Virtuous, than to Eat or Sleep; no more for a Man to be Temperate, than
for a Lamb; his chastity would be no more commendable, than that of a Flower,
and his peaceable and innocent Conversation, would be just so much accountable,
as that of a Tree or Stone.

So that if the matter be closely considered, it must not only acquit God's
Justice, that he has permitted (of which men are too apt to complain) some
discouraging difficulties of being Virtuous, but it would highly advance his
Goodness, as that thereby he had a gracious contrivance, how to make man
possibly capable of being Good and Virtuous at all. And therefore when some men
shall go about, upon that account, to make their vicious lives, and their
resolutions not to amend, the more excusable to themselves and others; and when
others that mean better, shall be always murmuring and complaining at every
encumbrance they meet with in the way of Virtue, both the one and the other
sort of men, ought to be informed, that all that while they are most
ungratefully arraigning and undervaluing one of the choicest instances of God's
Infinitely Wise Love to, and Care of Mankind.

2. But then Secondly, another Reason, why God Almighty was pleased to permit
those Encumbrances and Difficulties to be so great (as they are to be measured
by those five mentioned Instances) was upon a further design of his Love and
Goodness to Mankind, in order to promote a greater advance of their happiness
in another World: That is, that the will of man might by those discouragements
be the more duly and equally balanced in his choice of being Virtuous, so as to
be capable of those vast Rewards and Blessings, which God designed for, and
promised to him. And the Reason, is because upon God's proposal of those
extraordinary returns of Reward and Blessing in another World; the very sense
and expectation of them would otherwise have over-balanc'd the freedom of his
choice of being Virtuous, too much on the one hand, toward a determination of
his will, and a necessity of choosing, had not the greatness of those
difficulties and discouragements so counterbalanc'd his mind and poised his
will, for a more equal freedom in his election of Virtue: so that, had GOD
Almighty been pleased, that the way of Virtue and Religion, should have been
more easy; that is, less encumbered with those difficulties and
discouragements, it ought to be reasonably presumed, That God would have
communicated to the mind of Man, lower Apprehensions of that Future Happiness;
and so the freedom of His Will, would have been balanced for a lesser stress of
choice, and consequently with lesser hazard. But then it must be also as
reasonably presumed, That the Happiness attainable as such a Reward in the end,
would have been proportioned to such an easy, and less hazardous Choice. Waters
are observed to rise to no higher pitch, than according to the advance they
have from the original Spring.

Therefore, I say it was a mighty instance of GOD's Wisdom, that he permitted
those difficulties and encumbrances to be so great and numerous, that thereby
he might make the hoped for Happiness, proportionable for Man's equally balanced
Choice of so much Virtue, as was necessary for such an attainment. But then His
Goodness is infinitely to be admired, that all this should be done on design,
to advance him to so much the higher and nobler degrees of Happiness in another
World.

Thirdly. It Is very reasonable to believe, That GOD was pleased to permit those
difficulties and discouragements, and to allow the possibility of being
Virtuous, upon those hard Terms, that he himself might act his Divine Favor to
the virtuous part of Mankind, as near as possible, to the measures of Justice
and Equity, as well as of Grace and Goodness. That is, that thereby he might
make the free Donations of such extraordinary rewarding Blessings to the
Virtuous, the more accountable and (as it were) the more justifiable to His own
infinite Reason and Wisdom; which St. Paul 2 These. 5. 6.
calls the Righteous Judgment of GOD; that so all His Divine Attributes, might
be the better balanced in making His Creature, Man, completely happy. And who
knows not, That it is ordinary for many wise and good Men (more especially
Commanders in Armies) to offer such Employments to their Friends and
Favorites, (whom they design to advance in Repute and Preferment) as have the
greater trouble and hazard in them, for no other end, but to justify to their
own minds, Discretion, in being nobly kind to such adventurers; and in which
they may have more satisfaction to their generous minds, than for any manner of
advantage, that they may receive to themselves, by such their Friends and
Favorites hazardous Engagements? And then, Why may not we as reasonably have
the same Thoughts of a Wise and Merciful GOD, as to the case in hand? This the
Third Reason.

Fourthly. GOD was so far pleased to permit, (I could say to order) that every
Person might encounter with such oppositions, difficulties and discouragements;
not only that His own mighty Favors to them, might appear the more reasonable
to Himself; but that also (to the greater Glory and Justification of His
Justice and Goodness) they might approveably appear so to all His created
rational Beings, When he shall come to be admired in all them that believe in
that Day; 1 These. 1. 10.
as St. Paul expresses it.

And first, as to those Beings that had already struggled through those
difficulties, and conquered those encumbrances, and are arrived at their Reward
in another World, How much will it advance the Glory of an infinite Benefactor,
when they shall recount (as it is reasonably imagined they will) what every one
of their Fellow Saints had done and suffered for Virtue; and what hard
Adventures they had made in the time of their Probation in the former World, to
keep up their Virtuous and Religious Integrities? I say, How can it but advance
the Glory of GOD, that all the glorified Saints and Angels can be able to say,
That such a man is not in the blessed Place, altogether by a partial kindness
with particular respects of his Person only, and so to have nothing to applaud,
but such a mere and irrespective Love; but that in the free donation of his
Happiness they can observe that all other the Divine Attributes did concenter
with His Love; and so they may have Reason, as to magnify his Wisdom, Justice,
and Equity, for the extraordinary measures he took to bring him to that blessed
State in such a manner, so also His transcendent Love, in bestowing that
blessing at all so graciously upon him? And then on the other side, those
unhappy beings, who by their Cowardice had refused to conflict with those
difficulties and discouragementr of living Virtuous Lives, and had thereby
cheated themselves out of all those future Blessings, upon the temptations of a
few vanishing Pleasures, and a little transient sensual Satisfaction, I say,
why may it not be thought a wise ordination in God to permit those encumbrances
in being Virtuous, that when those unhappy Souls shall observe, that God had
bestowed those mighty Blessings upon those that adhered to their Virtuous
Living, so encumbered, they might for ever justify his equity, that it was not
for nothing, or for what was very inconsiderable, or for what was not in their
own power to have done, as well as in theirs, that he was pleased in his free
love to bestow those mighty blessings upon the Virtuous in that happy
apartment; so that in both respects, both to the Good and Evil, God's design
was to have his Justice magnified as well as his Mercy. Therefore St. Paul 1
These. 1. 6.
calls both those events, a Just and Righteous thing, or Act with God, etc.

5. Fifthly and Lastly, God was pleased that man might not go through with a
Virtuous state, without those difficulties and encumbrances, that the Virtuous
might not only enjoy the hopes and expectations of those future Blessings at
present with a more advanced inward pleasure and value (as having paid so dear
for them) but that they might afterward enjoy them in the other world, with so
much the greater satisfaction to their own happy minds; And that because they
may be sensible of something done by themselves (though it be very
inconsiderable in respect of the transcendent superredundancy of their reward)
why they should be conferred upon them by a Just and Merciful God. For as a
happiness that comes in any degree toward a notion and nature of a Reward,
(being therefore the more accommodable to the mind of a Rational Creature)
cannot but be preferrable to any kind of happiness, that is merely and
inconditionately gratuitous; so must the sense of the happiness, to him that
has hardly adventured for it, be so much the more welcome and valuable in his
own sense and esteem.

Now all this was so ordered by a Wise and Good GGD, that the Virtuous might be
the more rationally happy, and so the more agreeably to their own nature in the
other world. This the last Reason. And thus this third and last Chapter being
ended, it is time to attend the conclusion.

THE CONCLUSION.
NOw upon the truth of all those Premises, which I have in the three Chapters
and their Sections made so plainly and unexceptionably acknowledgable, and
which cannot but challenge an assent from every unbiased mind; That is, having
in my first Chapter rightly stated the terms of the Argument, against all such
mistaken senses of them, as must have at first view invalidated the very Reason
of it in general: And having in my second Chapter accounted with all those
exceptionists that would fain have found out something, by which God might have
otherwise provided, to engage men to live Virtuously, without a consideration
had to what concerns another World: And lastly having in my third Chapter given
sufficient Reasons to show that it is impossible there should be any competent
encouragements, that is, any sufficient reasons, why a man should undertake,
and go through with a Virtuous Life, but by the supposal of what concerns a
future State; I hope I may now without any violence to, or imposure upon any
man's credulity, conclude that God Almighty has certainly constituted the real
Existence of another World.

Fourth Argument.
The Sum of the FOURTH ARGUMENT.
THE Fourth Argument to evince the Certainty of a Future State's Existence, is
sounded upon Mankind's being born naturally subject to so many, and those so
greatly afflictive Troubles and Calamities, as that they exceed, both in number
and quality, all the Miseries of the whole created World besides. So that, if
their whole Duration should be limited to the term only of their present mortal
Lives, as a Nonexistence were rather to be chosen, than to enjoy a Being upon
such hard terms, so it cannot but reflect upon the Infinite Wisdom, Justice,
and Goodness of GOD, who by His own sole Sovereign Will and Pleasure, should
choose to make a Creature to be naturally so Unhappy.

And if the Honor of those Glorious Attributes of GOD, and Man's hard Opinion
of his own Being, can no other way be possibly solved, but by the supposal of a
Future State's Existence, in which Mankind might be made capable of a Redress
and Compensation, for the Evils to which their Nature has subjected them: And
if it shall also further appear, That for the better obtaining such a Redress
and Compensation in that State, all those Evils, to which they are naturally so
subjected, may be found to be designedly Subservient and Instrumental; then it
cannot but demonstrably follow, That GOD Almighty has certainly ordained and
constituted such a State to come.

Now, that this Argument, thus generally laid, may the more manifestly appear
to be sufficiently concluding, I shall divide the management of its Explanation
into these Three Parts or Chapters.

In the First, I shall endeavor to demonstrate, That Mankind* are naturally
born subject to more and greater Calamities and Miseries, than the whole
visible created World besides. And in effecting this, I must be necessitated to
spread my Discourse into a larger Explanation than, perhaps, every Reader may
judge so needful in his first Thoughts.

In the Second Chapter, I design to represent such intolerable Consequences, as
must, in Reason, be inferred upon that Observation, that is, such as cannot
possibly consist with the Honor or Notion of the Divine Attributes, nor with
Man's tolerably-well Enjoyment of his Being, whether as socially or
individually considered.

In the Third Chapter it is intended to demonstrate, That the supposal of a
Future World's Existence, can only solve all those intolerable Consequences;
and will also manifestly evince, That all those Evils, to which Man is
naturally born subject, were designedly ordered, and permitted by the Divine
Wisdom and Goodness, to be instrumentally subservient to the better attainment
of that Future World's Happiness. And from those Premises, so explained and
demonstrated, I shall (I hope) justifiably infer the Conclusion, for the
necessary Existence of that Future State.

A FUTURE WORLD'S EXISTENCE, Demonstrated by Rational Evidence.
CHAP. I.
IN this Chapter I shall endeavor to represent, That Mankind are naturally
born subject to more and greater Miseries and Calamities, than the whole
visible created World besides; and that by their Nature, with respect only to
their mortal Lives, they are the most Unfortunate of Beings. And I shall manage
the Proof of this part of the Argument, in Three Sections.

1. In the First Section, I design (as particularly as I can) to give an
account of the common Evils, to which Men are born naturally subject, to the
last period of their mortal Lives.

2. In the Second, I shall represent the Opinions of the Great and Learned Men
of the World, in that Case, as authoritative Attestations of the Truth of it.

3. In the Third, I shall offer humane Evils to a comparison (...) all those,
to which all the other parts of the whole visible World besides are subjected;
and therein I shall more fully discuss the Case of Brute Animals, in which our
Theists assume no small confidence for their Cause.

Section I.
IN this First Section I am obliged to give an Account of the common Evils of
Mankind, to which they are naturally subjected. But, in doing this, I shall not
pretend minutely to enumerate every one of them; for that were to undertake an
Office, as difficult as precisely to number the Stars or Sands. But the better
to explain the Truth of the allegation, I shall only take Leave to represent
some general Heads, or sorts of those common Evils, which I will presume to
place, as in so many several Rooms of an Imaginary House, into which I may
invite the Readers observation, that he may thereby be, (as it were) an
Eyewitness of what I shall offer to his Belief.

1. And in the first Apartment of that House of Calamity, let me tender to his
view, those Nations and Places, where all the wretched Sufferers by the Three
great and astonishing Plagues and Scourges of Mankind, the Sword, Famine, and
Pestilence (when they happen in the World) do, at the then present time, live
and bear their several shares in the sad effects and consequences of such
calamitous Causes.

And here our Observer cannot but take notice of so many, and such amazing
spectacles of humane misery, that the very Prospect it self (though himself
were perfectly secure from every one of them) will hardly give him leave to
think, That if he were now to choose a Being, (though otherwise accommodated
with the fairest conveniences) upon condition to be a constant Beholder of
such Objects of Misery, he would not be very fond to accept it upon those
terms. But certainly, those men themselves, that are at any present time
sensible of those terrible occasions of humane Calamity, cannot but think it
their great misfortune to Be at all; if there were no assurance of a Better
state to succeed, by the hopes of which, they might relieve the present sense
of their own confused conditions; and, which might atone their oppressive
Wishes, that they had never Been at all.

And though these great Distresses happen but seldom in the World, and but at
some periods of Time, yet every man is born naturally subject to them all; and
knows nothing to the contrary, but that he may bear his Portion in every one of
them, before any Cause or Accident shall be so kind to him, as to determine his
miserable mortal Being, to prevent them.

2. Through this extraordinarily lamentable Apartment, let me lead our Observer
into a Room called, The Lazar; that is, a place where ordinarily all the Sick,
the Languishing, and the greatly Tormented, lay along on Beds and Couches,
groaning and complaining under the heavy Pressures of their present numerous
Distempers:

Of which there be so many several kinds, that the Learned Physicians account
Four Hundred, as the proper subjects of their Art; besides the innumerable
accidents upon Men's Limbs, and Senses from without, which are the proper
business of the Chirurgeon's Skill and Employment.

And of the Diseases, in which the Physicians are concerned, besides those that
are promiscuously incident to Mankind in general, some are Hereditary, and
descend from Parents, without any fault at all of the Diseased. Others there
be, that are proper to their Countries, and are called Endemial, such as be the
Bronchocele to them that live about the Alps, the King's Evil to the Spaniards,
Consumption to the Portuguez, and Scurvy to the Northern Nations: to all which
Diseases, the afflicted might have contributed neither Cause nor Occasion. Then
others there be, which are called Epidemical Diseases, with which, sometimes
the greatest part of a Nation is at once unexpectedly surpised from the
concurrence of some malignant, and sometimes, unaccountable Causes.

And now, if a Catalogue were made by those Persons, whose Calling and
Employment it is, to attend the Infirmities of that part of Mankind, which at
all times some where or other lay under their Hands and Cures, of all the
several calamitous Circumstances, which such afflicted Persons, and their
Families endure, it would easily satisfy any considering mind, how much a
Nonexistence were to be preferred to such Men's present Beings; if they could
not believe, That GOD has allowed the Afflicted, an assurance of a better State
to come.

3. From a view of these woeful Objects, to whose Calamities, Men's Bodies have
exposed them, I lead our Observer into a Third Room, where all that are
disordered in Mind, make up a Great and miserable Society. And there the Sick
and the Diseased are more numerous, and their disorders by far more afflictive
and uneasy, -- Morbi perniciores sunt, pluresque, quam Corporis, etc. Tusc.
Quest. lib. 3.
than those of the Body, as the Philosopher observes. Now the Diseases of the
Mind (as he there accounts them) are Madness of all sorts; Envy, Diog. Laer.
lib. 7. de Vita Zenon.
Anguish, Sorrow, anxious Cares and Fears; to which Zeno, in his enumeration of
them, adds Jealousy, and Confusion, or Perplexity of Thoughts, Emulation, and
Terrors, Shame, and an unweldy Tiresomeness, or Lassitude of Mind.

With any one of which, whosoever has his Head affected and encumbered, will
be hardly able to allow himself any considerable satifactions in the sense of
his own Being, though he were otherwise accomodated, with all other the kindest
circumstances of living: and for this, take great Plutarch's Words, thus
expressing the Case. Fill thy Coffers with Gold and Silver, and fit thy self
with all the circumstances of Pleasure; fill thy House with Attendants, (...),
etc. (...), etc. (...). etc. Lib. de Vitiis and Virtute.
and the City with Debtors, except thou can conquer the Affections of thy
Mind; except thou can set thy self free from all its Vexatious Fears and
Cares; all thy Enjoyments can no more cure thy Discontented Mind, than if thou
gave Wine to abate a Fever, or Honey to allay a Redundancy of Choler. All
humane bodily Infirmities may, in comparison of the Mind's Distresses, be
tolerable; that is, a Man's Reason may in some measure support him under them,
Prove. 18. 4.
but, a Wounded Spirit who can bear? Says Solomon.

4. Having dispatched my Observer from this dismal place, I shall presently
show him in the next apartment, an infinite number of such, as are made unhappy
and unfortunate by the Evils, which Men are every day studying to bring
reciprocally one upon another: and for that Reason it is, that when Seneca was
asked, Quid homini inamicissimus? Homo.
What was the greatest Enemy to Mankind? he should Answer and say, That it was
Man. And surely his meaning was, Because in Man, might be found whatsoever in
all other Creatures might be Offensive to the Well-Being of Mankind. The
Savageries of the best armed, and most enraged Animals, the Noxious
Antipathies, and Poisonous qualities of Plants and Minerals, and the most
destructive Insects, are not more pernicious to Mankind, than are the ill
humors of men, one toward another. And herein their Barbarisms exceed those
of the most mischievous Animals, -- Parcit Cognatis maculis fera. Quando Leoni
Fortior cripuit vitam Leo? quo nemore unquam
Expiravit Aper majoris dentibus Apri?
Iudica Tigris agit valida cum Tigride pacem
Perpetuam. Savis inter se convenit ursis.

because that those creatures do commonly suspend their Cruelties to those of
the same kind; but it is otherwise in men, the objects of whose baser actions
and intentions, are chiefly those of the same species with themselves.

So that if we would but count the open Oppressions, secret Frauds, and all the
arts of Falsehood and Subtlety which are every day made use of, to invade and
violate men's Rights, and Fortunes; And if we could take a sufficient notice, of
what private insinuations, and spiteful invectives, are daily invented and
acted, to undermine and blast one another honors and reputations; and if we
should then reckon the intolerable practices of revenge, as they are every
where prosecuted by the powerful interest of great men, by the vexatious
methods of the Law, and by the common Malice of the world: and if to the
complaints of those, were added the mournings of oppressed Widows, Parents
tears, Brethrens unnatural fewds, Childrens hardships, and all other the
oppressions and unkindnesses which many men endure, at the hands sometimes even
of such, who by all the obligations of Duty and Gratitude, should be just and
kind; I say, if all these Calamities which men suffer one from another, were
considered and accounted; there would be cases of Misery enough to afflict and
tire out all the Compassionate Ears and Hearts, that are at leisure to hear and
resent them, and (if there were no other World to relieve them) to lament, that
so many distressed Persons had ever been at all.

But if that which is called Friendship, may be presumed to abate this severe
representation; and if it be objected, that some Philosophers have thought that
mutual endearment, a sufficient compensation for all the mischiefs and evils,
which they can otherwise receive from the rest of Mankind: I may answer with
one of the wisest of them, Dio. Laer. lib. 5. De vita Arist.
(as Phavorinus relates it of Aristotle) when he said, O my Friends, there is
no Friend at all: That is (I suppose he means) if all those that are engaged in
that excellent Society, had not in the beginning of it any private ends and
designs of their own to promote by it; and if all those, which after a begun
Friendship, could by no temptations become unconstant, or unfaithful; and if
all those that undertake that profession, would steadily follow Seneca's Rules,
That is, To be willing to be reciprocally equaled and counseled, En quid
amicum paro? ut habeam pro quo mori possim, et habeam quem in exilium sequar,
cujus me morti opponam, ut impediam. Epist. lib. 1. Epist. 9.
and to interpose a relief for one another misery, even by Banishment, and
Death it self; I say, if all such were only to be accounted Friends, though I
will not presume to affirm with the Philosopher, that there is no Friend at all;
yet I think I may say, there are very few such to be found in the world, or at
least not so many, that in any tolerable degree, can compensate for the
innumerable mischiefs and misfortunes, that Good men, and even most men,
endure, by the malice and falsehood of the rest of mankind. To whom the kind
miscarriages of the truest Friends, are oft-times no small addition of trouble;
That is, when their indiscreet, though sincere affections, do prove as
vexatious as the hatred of an Enemy; as Seneca observes. And the truth is, it is
hardly possible, Saepe nihil interesse inter amicorum munera, and inimicorum
tela. Quicquid accidere optant, in id horum intempestiva indulgentia impellit
and instruit. Lib. de Ben. 2.
that the excellent union of Souls, and the entire management of true
Friendship, can be supposed or expected to be any where else found but among
those, who are qualified with that Honest and Religious Temper of mind, to
which the hopes and fears of a Future World, have raised their Souls, above all
such temptations, as might induce them to act unfriendly or unworthily.

5. But if this Room be not a sufficient Prospect, to convince my Observer of
the Truth of my Supposition, I will carry him into another Place, almost as
large as the World it self, where he shall hear a mixed company of all sorts of
men, continually repining and complaining of the particular Evils, that
inseparably accompany every different condition, and quality of Life.

What shall I say of the Cares and uneasy Affairs of the Rich and Great, to
support an empty show in the world? What of the Streights and Improvisions, the
Contempts and Bondages of the Poor and Low, and how almost the whole species of
mankind are made Drudges, and driven about like Machins, to serve the Pride,
Pleasures, and Profits of a few? And if it were possible to find out a man,
that had no kind of visible Misfortune upon him at present, yet are there
reasons to be given, Ita enim foelicitas, se, nisi temperatur, premit. Sen.
Epist.
that his very prosperity (as the Philosopher Observes) may in time oppress
him, and become nauseous, burdensome, and afflictive to his thoughts.

In this place it is, that the Married and the Unmarried are framing arguments
to act their own Repentance in the state they are in at present; and when their
conditions are changed, they are condemning themselves for believing their own
Arguments and Reasons why they desired it. Here the Public and the Private,
the Inhabitants of the City and Country, are arraigning their present States,
by the various Opinions of those, who had studied to enquire and determine,
whether of the two ways of living were encumbered with lesser or greater
inconveniences; and while each of them are complaining of their own present
State; they wish, and perhaps attempt a change with the contrary; which when
they have once done, they commonly encounter a new Tide of greater
Dissatisfactions.

Hence it is, that men of several Callings and Employments, are expressing
their Discontents, Qui fit, O Mecaenas, ut nemo quam sibisortem, Seu ratio
dederit, seu fors objecerit, illa Contentus vivat? Iaudet diversa sequentes. O
fortunati Mercatores, gravis annis Miles ait, multo jam fractus membra labor:
Contra Mercator, etc. Hor. Sat. lib. 1.
and torturing their Heads with the Opinion and Sense of their own proper
incommodities, and invidiously admiring the conveniences that others enjoy, by
the contrary ways of living; as the ingenious Satyrist represents the Case.

So that by this natural misfortune it comes to pass, that Men are always
tempting themselves to make War upon their own Contentments; and (if the
Religious Concerns of a Future World do not determine them) to oppose the
little satisfactions they might possibly otherwise enjoy, in the state they are
in at present, by harassing their thoughts with the unavoidable Evils, with
which every one of them is naturally born subject to be encumbered. But that
which mightily adds to this kind of Unhappiness, is, That the more fine,
modest, and ingenuous the minds of Men are, they will always be the more
afflictively sensible of their lesser Misfortunes, and the more vexatiously
tyrannical to themselves in greater. A sweet Soul is turned away from his
Benefactor with a rebuking Look, and frets upon the unkindness, while the Bold
and the Immodest, can withstand a thousand Denials, and remembers no affronts
to his discouragement.

This is the last room of the Afflicted, in our imaginary House of Humane
Calamity.

Now, if these several apartments were brought into one prospect, and that I
could show my Observer at once all those, that are at any time afflicted in
their several Rooms, the World of Mankind would look more like one common
Hospital of the Miserable, than a Society of Beings, which are presumed to be
Superior in order, and the Divine Care to all other the visible parts of the
Creation besides.

But then, if it be objected, That there be many who have had the good hap to
pass away a considerable part of their Lives with tolerable ease and
satisfaction: That is, Suppose some young men, who in the strength and vigor
of their time, are at present gratifying their sensual Appetites in the several
Pleasures of their Youth: Or, suppose some others of further Progress in their
space of living, who are now applauding themselves in their Skill and Success,
for the attaining a more than ordinarily considerable Portion of Knowledge,
Wealth, or Honor. I say, Suppose that any of, or all these, should reclaim
against the Truth of what I have said, yet I must tell them, they are all to
consider (though nothing else should ever happen to interrupt their Eutopian
Happiness) that if they should live toward that boundary of time, which GOD
and Nature has appointed for the common duration of humane Life, they all must
assuredly expect (and that expectation alone will be no small abatement of the
Pleasure they pretend to take in any Enjoyment whatsoever, if they look no
further than their present state) that a considerable portion of their days
must be worn away at last, with the labor and sorrow, pains and weariness,
contempt and uselessness, decays of Sense, and loss of Strength, and with other
the many Calamities, naturally incident to old Age. Of which Stoboeus has
collected such a Description from Wise and Great men, (...), etc. Ser. 113.
that nothing could be offered to the Thoughts, so full of Horror and dreadful
Representation. For, if their Proprieties be then too narrow, they must bear
the shame of being a Burden to the World; and if their Enjoyments be very
plentiful, unkind Posterity will be apt to make promising Inspections into
their years; and will be ready to think, and perhaps to say, (if Religion
grounded upon the Hopes and Fears of a Future World prevents it not) that their
continuance is an unhappy Obstruction to the completion of their Successor's
long wished for Fortunes. Who can without a passion behold how much a stranger
a poor old Father and Mother are sometimes made to their own Estates and
Circumstances? And, What imperious Proprietors will their Children be apt to
make themselves, in their decaying Parents Houses and Fortunes?

Therefore so sensible have some whole Nations been of the wretchedness and
calamities of old Age, that in mercy they would forestal Natures tedious
acquitment of old men from their universal unhappiness, by a speedier way of
exemption. (...), etc. Lib. 4. de Abst. S. 21.
Of which Practice, Porphyry has afforded us a large Account and Catalogue.
The Massagetes and Derbicians (says he) did slay and eat up those old men whom
they loved best. The Tebarins threw them down a Precipice; The Caspians and
Bactrians committed them to wild Beasts, for an hasty deliverance out of their
miseries: The Scythians burnt them upon the Funeral Piles of their deceased
Friends: Lib. 4. cap. 15.
And the same usage had old men (as Diodorus Siculus reports) among the
Troglodites.

Now, these Offices were very hard, and (in the Sense of men that own another
World) very unwarrantable, yet the men that contrived and used them, thought,
That what old men endured by such Expedients of release, was very short, and
comparatively more elegible and tolerable, than to have them continued in the
weariness and pains, scorns and sorrows, and other calamities, to which they
knew a long old Age would have exposed their Friends. And that if they had
lived it out, to its last natural period, Stultus est, qui non exigua temporis
mercede, magnae rei aleam redemit. Paucos longissima Senectus ad mortem sine
injuria pertulit. Ex. lib. 8. cap. 59.
(as Seneca tells us) they must have done it so much to their own damage, and
greater inconvenience. But by this sad Scene, in which men act their old Age,
the natural Tragedy of Man's declining time is not yet fully concluded: Nor
does it determine all his mortal Infelicity. And therefore, that which makes
the Case yet much harder, is, that all those mentioned miseries may conclude
with a terrible conflict at last, before the uneasy Mind can ordinarily be
loosened from its vexatious Imprisonment, or a man's decaying Life be
discharged of his Ages intolerable Burden.

They are still to dye: And if that last Epilogue alone were truly considered
and represented, in all its ordinarily natural circumstances, the enjoyment of
such a trifling Being as is a mortal Life, would, on that very account, be
thought an unequal compensation, for this last Evil of it only. But, if men
could be made thoroughly sensible of what some dying Persons endure, there would
be but a few, (if it were offered to trial, and to their choice) that would be
easily persuaded to accept of a mortal Existence, with that one severe
condition; if there should be no state in Future, whose possible Happiness
might balance the reason of their choice, to Be at all.

For, Who can be otherwise assured, but that in his bitter Agony of Dying, he
may not only endure as exquisite Tortures, as may even exceed the Inventions of
the most barbarous Tyrants, but (which is worse to a generous mind) that he may
die in such circumstances, as to be made a spectacle of Contempt, by the
undecent effects of a confused and disordered Reason: And that so, in both
respects, he may go out of the World, like a Malefactor and a Fool, both at
once. And surely, upon the thoughts of this last respect it was, that that
Excellent Author of the Religio Medici (a man not to be thought on by them that
truly know him, without Love and Honor) could affirm, That he was not so much
afraid of Death as ashamed thereof. Part 1. Sect. 39.
It is (says he) the very disgrace and ignominy of our Natures, that a moment
can so disfigure us, that our nearest Friends, our Wife and Children, stand
afraid, and start at us.

Now, upon the whole matter, If a poor mortal shall consider, that after all
the forementioned miseries of humane Life, this last completion of its Calamity
(of whose approach he knows not, but that every next day may bring him the sad
Tidings) may succeed, What possible reasonable satisfaction (if ever he
seriously thinks of it) can he be presumed to allow himself in his amplest
Plenties and Pleasures, Quae enim potest in vita esse jucunditas, quum dies and
noctes cogitandum sit, jam jamque esse moriendum? Cic. Tusc. quest. Lib. 1.
if there should be no Future State, whose Belief and Hopes might at present
relieve his oppressed Thoughts, and whose after enjoyment might for ever
compensate him for all the sorrowful circumstances of his former Life and
Death? But I am not singular in this account of Humane Misery. Therefore,

Section II.
IN this Second Section, lest any man should suggest, that I have been too
partial in the Representation of Man's Unhappiness, in favor of my Argument, I
shall call in the aid of some Authoritative Testimonies, (and those that shall
give no suspicion of serving our cause by incompetency of Judgment) which do as
fully attest the Truth of asserting the Miseries and Calamities of humane Life,
as any of those former Instances may be presumed to demonstrate it. And I am
sure, that there is no subject of Discourse can be abetted with a more solemn
account from the Great and Wise men of the World. But I shall limit my self,
and offer a few Testimonies of some of them, enough only to avoid the censure
and suspicion of improving a Foundation for an Argument, beyond the common
Opinion of other and Wiser men.

Stobaeus accounts the Words of Aristotle thus, describing Man: What is Man
(says he) but an exemplary Instance of Infirmity, (...), etc*
the Spoil of Time, the Sport of Fortune, the Copy of Inconstancy, and a
Balance tossed up and down between Envy and Misery? And he gives elsewhere the
Sense of Herodotus, -- (...) Ser. 103.
whom he reports to have affirmed, That Man was nothing else, but one entire
piece of Misery and Calamity. Or, -- (...). Cons. ad Apoll.
as Plutarch renders it, (quoting Cantor for the Expression) It Is not a Life,
but a Punishment, and to be born is the greatest misfortune. Arrianus framing a
Question, what Man is, makes him a part of the Universe, (...). Arr. Ep. Lib. 2.
but the Disease of it, with the Evils of which he is a while to conflict, and
within a short time to die.

But, to omit the Thousands others that might be produced, I shall conclude
with Seneca, who when he had given some instances of humane Infelicity, at last
resolves them all into this Interrogation; Quid opus est parts deslere?
Urgebunt nova incommoda priusquam veteribus satisfeceris. Lib. Cons. ad Martian.
To what purpose should I complain of it by Parts? The whole Life of Man it
self is one Scene of Sorrow, in which Troubles follow one upon another in
constant Succession. And he elsewhere calls Man's whole Life, Omnis vita
supplicium est. Ad Polyb. Cons.
A mere Punishment upon another occasion.

And therefore, the Ancients were so severely sensible of the Miseries of man's
mortal Life, that, in favor of their deliverance from them, they constantly
celebrated Death, (though in its natural account, the most formidable instance
of amazement and terror) with Encomiums of the kindest Representations, only
because it gave a period to all the rest of humane miseries. Arrianus, how
careful soever to defend his Stoicism by the Rules of Patience, flies at last
to the common Remedy; (...). Ar. Ep. lib. 4.
and for that end calls, Death the Haven and Refuge of all Misery. And Tully
cries out, O ye immortal Gods! how sweet is that Journey, Proh dii immortales
Quam obtabiliter iter illu ineundum, quam jucundur esse debet, quo confecto,
nulla reliqua cura, nulla so licitudo futura sit? Tusc. qu. Lib. 1*
(speaking of Dying) which being ended, all cares and troubles shall be
determined and finished? And in another place, calls Death a safe Port after
the restless Voyage, and storms of Mortality; and represents it as the Refuge
of a sorrowful Life. For that end it is reported, That anciently, at a place in
Spain, there was a Temple dedicated to Death, as to a common and certain
Deliverer of all Mortals miseries.

But perfectly to silence all suspicion of my partiality, I appeal to the
Sacred Revelation it self, (which we must suppose to be especially concerned
for the Creator's honor) and that sets forth man's present mortal state, under
as severe representations, as any Authority that can be alleged. Man that is
born of a Woman (says Job) has but a short time to live, Job 14. 1.
and is full of misery. To which his birth has made his portion as naturally
necessary, Job 5. 7.
as the sparks fly upward. Solomon calls the whole natural Circle of Man's
duration, Eccl. 6. 12.
the days of his vanity, which he spends as a shadow. And he accounts all his
Enjoyments (which might be presumed to balance all the inconveniences of his
Life) no more considerable, than the most superlative Vanity, Eccl. 1. ^.
and no easier than that which must be the vexation of his spirit, may be
presumed to be esteemed. No wonder then, Eccl. 4. 2.
that He praised the Dead, which were already dead, more than the Living, which
are yet alive.

But now let me ask my former Observer, whether or no, I have imposed upon his
credulity, when I first asserted, That Man's natural subjection to such severe
Portions of Misery and Calamity, made him (as I first suggested) the most, if
not properly the only unhappy and unfortunate Being of the whole Creation. But
this must be further examined. Therefore,

Section III.
IN this Section I shall more strictly account, how Mankind in this respect,
are comparatively by their very nature, more unfortunate in their Beings, than
all other the parts of the whole Visible Creation besides. And I shall there
attack the Grand Exception, which the Theists make use of, concerning Brute
Animals.

First, Let our Observer in his most serious Thoughts round the whole created
Universe, (the case of Brute Animals I shall account for by its self) from the
mighty Bodies above, to the smallest insect, that creeps under his feet: Let
him strictly examine all their Natures, with the same curiosity, as if they had
all the ingenious Societies in the World, to make it their whole business, to
attend the notices of their several orders, figures, and manners of Existence.
And I am sure, the issue will be, that a mighty occasion would be given to
advance Men's minds to a greater admiration of their Creator's Power and Wisdom;
an abundance of Nature's Phenomenon would be solved* but as to instances of
misery and calamity among those Beings, they would not be so much as once
named, or thought on. A Theme, which no Man ever attempted, or would adventure
at, unless he designed to teach men to disparage the Honor of that Great
CREATOR, whose perfection of Goodness and Essential Happiness, could not admit
a thought of making any Creature naturally, that is purposely, and necessarily
unhappy.

First, if our Observer designs a consideration of all inanimate Beings, his
thoughts are presently discharged of all suspicion of their unhappiness.

The Heavens or Earth, or which of them it is, that is daily moved about, is
not wearied with its Rapid Revolution. The bright and burning Luminaries above,
are not scorched with their own Flames: The Stars of lesser Magnitude, are not
emulous of, nor oppressed by those of the superior Orders: The Plants are not
unfortunate by the Wounds they receive, when they are dismembered or cut down;
nor are the Rocks disturbed, when they are torn open for Materials to serve the
Health or Fortunes of Men; nor are the several natural Causes, that act their
Powers to serve the Universe, tired or encumbered with their busy and constant
Operations.

As for what concerns Brute Animals, I must assault the strongest Hold, on
which our Theists principally rely, to secure their opposition to their belief
of a Future State, upon the account of this Argument; and they will object and
say, What necessity is there of a supposal of the real Existence of a Future
State to recompense Men, after their calamitous Lives and Deaths, more than the
Brute Animals, who also are naturally made subject to as many afflictive Evils,
pungent Torments, and ill Usages in their kinds; and at last, must pass out of
the World, with the same ((...)) Disorder, Convulsions, and Conflicts, as Men
do?

To all which it is answered, First, that it is not true when its affirmed, that
Brute Animals miseries (if in any propriety of speech they might be so reputed,
in comparison of those, which men endure) are as numerous, as those of Mankind.
For upon an ordinary computation it must be acknowledged, that they are
incomparably fewer in any one kind of them, and almost none at all in most; and
for those Evils, with which those few seem to be encumbered, the Great Creator
has taught most of them, by a natural instinct, without the trouble and hazard
of foreign aid, or counsel, (which men must employ for their relief and health;
and which oftentimes, upon mistake, or worse, proves their greater misfortunes)
to find out their own Cures, and remedies; or by a sagacious foresight to
avoid and escape their approaching dangers. All which Arts in Brute Animals
(says Proclus) are from without, Et aliunde curantur, ea videlicet condition,
qua movet ipso motor: Orbata scilicet ea facultate, qua aliquid seipsum ducere
valeat atque servare. Proclus de anima and daemone. Ficinus interpr.
and from an impulse, which they have received from the Original of all Motion.
Hence it is, that they toil not for Manufactures to cover them, nor do they use
Engines fetched from the bottoms of Mountains for their Armature, to defend
them. Their parturitions are easy, their declension to their natural period's
but a very little varied from the vigor of their perfect Age. And when men are
racked and worn up with Cares and Labors to live in a tolerable plenty, their
Tables are spread, and their Little-Ones provided for, by Natures munificence.
All which advantages put the ancient Poet Philemon, into such a fit of
admiration of their Felicity, that he passionately cries out, O thrice Happy,
and thrice Blessed Brute Animals, (...). per Heart.
that are free from such Calamities, as Men endure.

As for such as die for man's use, that is no more than a kind hastening them to
their quiet Annihilations; a benefit, which many poor oppressed Slaves, and
many others, that live in calamitous conditions, and even some in their
prosperous circumstances, would judge an acceptable Relief, if Nature would
allow it them.

But Secondly, I answer, that Brute Animals, in whatsoever they endure, and
howsoever their Senses, and sensitive Imaginations may be affected, are yet
wholly freed from all the oppressions of a reflecting mind; which properly
imports the special reason of all real Misery. From which, if Rational Agents
in their Calamities, were as much exempted, they would not in most cases so
much consider (in comparison of what they suffer by the Minds concurrence) the
common Evils, to which their Natures have otherwise exposed them.

Hence it is, that Brute Animals have no discursive antecedent fears of
dangers, before they come; nor can they be intellectually sensible of their own
infelicities when they are upon them, nor do they sorrowfully account them,
when they are past. As for those mournful Postures, Sighs, and Outcries, by
which they express their oppressive sensations, they are not the chosen effects
of any inward trouble, or conflict of mind, (as ordinarily in men) but such as
necessarily result from those different figures and alterations of parts, into
which they are naturally and necessarily cast, when any offensive impressions
are then upon their Bodies. And so they seem to import no more, than those
Groans and Sighs, which are observed in men, when they are in no perturbation
of mind at all, but are purely natural acts, consequent to some (sometimes
unobserved) straitnes or oppression in the inward parts of their Bodies; Or as
when those acts are expressed by men in a fast sleep, and their Minds are not
in a capacity to consider them. And it is like, that Brutes suffer no more by
such impressions upon their Senses, either in Diseases or hard Usages, than a
Soldier feels smart by his wounds, in the heat and fury of the Battle, when
his mind is not at leisure to reflect; Or their dying conflicts, and
convulsions (as when it is said, As Dies the one, Eccle. 3. 19.
so Dies the other) may be no more afflictive to them, than that man's are, who
goes out of the world in a Lethargick, or Apoplectick Fit.

I know that Porphyry did strongly contend, to have Brute Animals reckoned as
fellow brethren in the Rational World, (...), etc. De Abst. lib. 3.
and to be capable of Reason, though in an inferior degree to Man, and so
might have the same recompense at* God's hand by his equitable providence, one
way or other, or at one time or other, as well as the afflicted part of Mankind.

And for the proof of which, he alleges the Subtilty and Wiliness of some,
and the Virtues of others, such as Fortitude, Temperance, Gratitude, and the
like. And then he offers to observation, their skill in the foresight of
dangers, and of approaching different seasons. He instanceth in their
teachableness of tricks, and imitation of many humane actions, for Sport and
Divertisement.

To all which it is Answered, first, That those mentioned Actions, that hold
such an assimulation to those of Rational Agents, are only such as proceed from
a natural necessary Principle, which their Wise CREATOR implanted in their
several kinds in different manners, to supply the want of an intellectual
Faculty. Therefore Nemesius, first a Philosopher, and then a Bishop, in his
Book of the Nature of Man, observes, That in Brute Animals, there is an
Understanding that is Natural, Cap. 2. 7.
but not Rational; and then gives a Reason for it: Cap. 2. 7. number. 3.
Because (says he) every Creature of one kind, does the same thing in one and
the same manner; every Hare uses the same subtilty, every Fox the same
wiliness; and every Ape is alike, an imitator of Humane Actions: But (says he)
it is not in all cases so with Man; for his Actions of Reason, are infinitely
various, and of different sorts; in several individuals; and are variated by
choice and freedom of Mind in the same Person.

Then Secondly, as to those Actions of Brute Animals, which are called
Virtuous, it only proves, That they have natural Qualifications, that make
resemblances of Humane Virtues, but they are by instinct and necessary, and not
of choice, nor upon any apprehension of doing Right or Good; nor from the
proposal of any end, as is necessary in any action, that may be called morally
Virtuous, such as must be supposed to be in Rational Beings.

And lastly, as for their Dexterities and Tricks, it is certain, that they are
learned, and done, not by any inventive or discoursive faculty, but by a
greater natural quickness and sagacity of their Senses, which fits them for
imitation, and mechanical direction, how to act such things; which at present
become as unaccountable, and may occasion as much present wonder in Spectators,
as the nimble feats of Jugglers, because they escape the Beholder's
observation: And so much as Jugglers are truly reputed Conjurers, so much may
those Brute Animals, for that reason, be as justly esteemed Rational Creatures.

Now upon the whole account of what I have said in the case of Brute Animals,
it is so different from that of Mankind, that it can no way be imagined, How it
should be unjustifyable in the Sovereign Creator, if they should meet no
future Recompense for such comparatively very inconsiderable Endurances.

And, if it were granted with Porphyry and others, That they were endued, in
some degree, with a Rational Capacity, yet for as much as they want all manner
of sense of a Deity, and are altogether incapable of morally, either pleasing
or offending Him; forasmuch as they have no Faculties, by which in their
Afflictions they can either dread His Justice, implore His Mercy, or make any
Complaints to Him; how can it be supposed, That they can have any Capacities,
by which they should either be expectant, or acceptive of any Rewards or
Compensations from Him in a Future World?

But then as to Man, how is it possible, That he being made a Creature
furnished with Faculties, by which he can make Conceptions of a GOD, that can
own Him for his Creator, and can love and serve Him, and fear to offend Him;
by which he can complain for a Relief, and hope for a Redress: I say, How is it
possible, That such a Creature as this, after all the indurances of a
Calamitous Life, should at last be so forgotten and forsaken, as to have his
Being shut up in an empty Nothing? What a Gratification and Pleasure would the
thought of this be to every rational Enemy of Mankind? And how would the
Adversaries of Goodness and Good Men rejoice, if they were assured, that when
Virtuous Persons, whom at present they scorn, hate, and oppress, were once gone
out of the World, they should not only be in no better condition than
themselves, but in no other, than what their Dogs and Horses pass into when
they die?

This mighty Objection, in which the willing Adversaries of a Future State
placed such a Confidence, being thus solved, I hope I have fairly acquitted my
self of the first part of my designed Method, to promote this present Argument;
that is, I have endeavored to represent, that Man, by the Divine Order and
Permission, was created and born subjected and exposed to bear such severe
Portions of Misery and Calamity, that if there be no other use and end of them,
but only that they should be endured, as his subjection to them is soveraignly
imposed, and no provision reserved in future, whereby he might enjoy a
succeeding settled State of Rest, Freedom, and Compensation after them, then
must Man, (as it was at first suggested, and since proved) be the only
unfortunate Being of the whole Creation. And that the Existence of any other
Created Being whatsoever (be it of a Stone, or Plant, Worm, or Fly) were rather
to be chosen, if he had a liberty allowed him of making his Election. But
concerning that, there are severer Thoughts still to follow. Therefore,

CHAP. II.
IN this Chapter it is designed to represent the several horrid and intolerable
Consequences, which every rational and considering Mind must necessarily infer
upon the apprehension of Man's being born naturally subject to those many, and
greatly Afflictive Evils, without a consideration had of a Future World. And
they will occasion three several Sections.

1. The First demonstrates, That such a natural subjection to those Evils,
cannot possibly consist with the Honor of GOD's Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness,
who soveraignly gave Mankind a nature so unhappily subjected.

2. The Second Section shows the Inference of many other desperate
Consequences, by which Mankind's Subsistence in this World must necessarily be
universally disordered; especially by that consequence of the Reasonableness of
men's putting a present period to their own Afflicted Lives.

3. In the Third Section, I shall endeavor to solve several Grand Objections,
against the reasonableness of this last consequence.

Section I.
IN which I shall endeavor to demonstrate that Mankind's universal Subjection
to those forementioned troubles, miseries, and calamities, (without a
consideration had of a Future Life) cannot but infer, to a reasoning mind,
very unkind Reflections upon those Attributes of God, without which, it is
impossible to form conceptions of His infinitely happy Being; that is, when an
understanding mind shall consider, that such a disordered Effect should be
produced by a cause of such an infinite Wisdom, which in all other His Works is
so manifestly renowned; and that the perfection of Goodness and Equity, should
choose to give a Being to any Creature, by which it may be sensible, That it is
made so much the more unhappy, by the very Enjoyment of it; and that whereby it
may reasonably judge it self much better, never to have been at all; (...).
Simplic. cap. 38.
as the Wise Philosopher Simplicius offers his Opinion.

But Plutarch represents the Case, not as his private Opinion, but as true by
universal suffrage; and as a notion made trite by common Discourse; -- (...).
Plutarch. Cons. Polyb.
that is, that (upon the consideration of humane Miseries) it were better for a
Man never to have been, or that he should immediately die: so that, the mind of
Man, will be apt to suggest, That if any one in any humane, sovereign
Authority, should follow such a Pattern or President; that is, if any Prince or
Parent, without any other respect had to either, should out of mere Dominion
and Arbitrary Power, make a Subject or Child to be unavoidably unhappy, when it
was in their capacities to have prevented that misfortune; I make no question,
That neither Almighty GOD, nor any created rational Being, would approve of
such an use of their Power or Authority: and if it should be alleged, That the
Sovereignty of GOD over His Creatures is more absolute than a Prince's or
Parent's over his Subjects or Children: I must Answer, That His Divine Goodness
must also be believed to have the same infinite demensions with His Dominion;
and that it is dishonorable to the Divine Nature to imagine, That there should
be any act of the one, which should not be completely consistent with the
other. Upon the assurance of which, it is, that the Son of Syrach could say, We
will fall into the Hands of the LORD, Eccl. 2. 18.
and not into the Hands of Men: for as His Majesty is, so is His Mercy.

But, against the Inference of this dreadful Consequence, I must encounter
Three grand Objections, pretended for the vindication of the Divine Attributes
in this case.

First, It will be objected, That though GOD Almighty gave Man such a Being, by
which, in some respects, he may live a more afflictive Life than other visible
Creatures; yet nevertheless, it is to be considered, That GOD has, in
compensation, allowed him a far larger share of many happy Advantages in this
World, by which he may be sensible of enjoying more Knowledge, Honor, Power,
and Pleasure, than any other Creature besides can be possessed of.

To this Objection, my Answer is, That whatsoever that Portion be, if there be
no apprehension of a future Bliss, to make such Enjoyments acceptable in their
esteem and use, it is known, (as my next and last Argument will sufficiently
explain the Case) that whatsoever they be, they must be such as, in their
nature, are neither universal, satisfactory, nor certain; nor in any man's
power, at choice, to obtain them, when they most passionately desire them, or
most extremely need them. And when they are possessed, they are such, as will
be perpetually incumbring the Minds of Men, with so many fears, and unexpected
turns and interruptions, and with so many attendant Evils, that any one of them
considered, and felt, (as the nature of Man's mind is) may more afflictively
assault its notice, to the Sense of its own Infelicity, than all other the
integral parts of Prosperity can afford it contentment or satisfaction. So
that, if it falls out, (and it is rare if it does not) that the most prosperous
man in all other respects, should be invaded either in Body or Mind, with any
of those greater Evils, to which his nature has subjected him, all other his
Enjoyments (how many and great soever) would appear not only inconsiderable,
but ofttimes nauseous to his Thoughts. First, A Fit of any violent Torment upon
his Body, shall render his stately Palace, his plenteous Fortune, and his
honorable Character, so unconcerning, as that a Noble man of this Nation (as I
have been informed) should in a continued Fit of the Gout, wish an exchange of
his condition in all those his famous circumstances, with an healthful Porter,
rather than enjoy all other the parts of his Prosperity with that one attendant
Evil.

And then, Secondly, It Is the same with any such Person, how prosperous soever
in all other respects, that happens but to have his Mind affected with any
disordered imagination, (how causeless, perhaps, or unreasonable soever) as
that a great Lady of this Nation also, (as it was related to me by one that
knew her) who at the same time that she was discoursed by her Favorite, to be
the happiest Woman in the World, in respect of her Youth and Beauty, Noble
Extraction and Fortune; and standing at a Window in view of a poor
Oyster-woman, then passing by, should be so unsensible of the great advantages
of living happily, which she enjoyed, as to say, That she could be content to
exchange her own present condition with that Poor woman's, at all adventures
whatsoever. No wonder then, that the Wise Antoninus should so passionately
express himself in our Case, as to say; (...), etc. Anton. lib. 5.
What is there here that should tempt the desire of being any longer detained
in this Life? A company of poor outward things, so transient, so apt to change?
Shall such obscure senses, that are so easily deceived? shall a little soul,
that knows not it self? shall a vain and empty Name and Glory? What should
thou desire, but a present Annihilation or Transition? And this (I think)
sufficiently solves my first Objection.

2. The Second Objection that is pretended to obviate the reflection upon those
Attributes of God, with respect to the abovesaid humane Infelicities, is thus
laid: That is, That GOD may be so far justified in Mankind's subjection to
them, as that those Evils are supposed to be inflicted upon men as punishments
for their offenses, and as effects of their own guilt. That is, That they have
deserved them at God's Hand.

My Answer to this seemingly great Objection is, That that kind of Solution of
the consequence, does rather improve the Reflection upon the Divine Attributes,
and must even blaspheme the Goodness of GOD it self, upon several accounts.
First, Because it must suppose, that GOD designed to punish a Man, even in his
Birth; it being an Infelicity in it self to be so born. Secondly, Because the
real miseries that may attend his Infancy, Childhood, and the innocenter part
of his Youth, must be reputed Punishments for Offenses uncommitted, and but
only in possibility. And then, Thirdly, When such Calamities have befaln men of
fuller Age, they could not be really accounted Punishments, that is merely and
properly so, because they come to pass generally in a promiscuous order and
manner, and in most instances, without any visible distinction between the Good
and Evil: And that Virtuous persons (who, though they be not absolutely
perfect, yet perhaps not wilfully wicked) are alike concerned in those natural
Evils, and in the ordinary contingences of Calamity, Non omnes honos esse
beatos, quum in omnes bonos, ea quae ille in malis numerat cadere possunt. Cic.
Tusc. quest. lib. 5.
as well as the obnoxious and great Offenders. Are not Good men (says Cicero)
surprised. in common Miseries as well as the Evil? Are they not as afflictively
sick, poor, and old? And, do they not pass along in their mortal Durations,
with the same severe circumstances of natural Troubles, and sad Accidents, as
other men? And in many cases are they not observed to meet even harder usages
than those that be enormously vicious? And if so, then (I say) Cannot Mankind
in general be said to be subject to them, and afflicted by them, under the mere
notion of Punishments? For though Providence may, and does order them ofttimes
for the Punishment of Evil men, yet it is to be accounted not by a natural, but
by an occasional Ordination: That is, they are Primarily the miseries of
Mankind, according to their nature, and then but Secondarily, and by occasion,
the Punishments of Evil men, when they happen to them. As the same Evils and
Misfortunes may in like manner be occasionally and ordinatively the acts of
God's Paternal care and love, and for the greater Advantage of Good men, when
they happen to them, as those Evils may be the discipline and chastisement of
his Wise Love to, and care of, them.

But then the Reason of all this must be founded upon the supposed Existence of
a Future World. Otherwise it would be a great irregularity in Providence, if
innocent Infants and Children, and that men of perfect age, who endeavor all
they can to be Good and Virtuous, should nevertheless be made miserable, and be
afflicted in the same manner, and to the same degree that wicked and vicious
men are punished for their gross offenses. Which must be True in consequence,
if (I say) the consideration of a Future World does not solve the doubt.

But I shall respite the giving a sufficient Evidence for that Solution, to the
Third Chapter. This the Second Objection.

Object. 3. The Third Objection which our Theist does choose to lay in our way,
is borrowed from some of the Christian Name, (and it must be accordingly
answered) 1. Who have been apt to affirm, That though it cannot be said, that
Man's subjection to those miseries and natural calamities, were imposed upon
Mankind universally for their own offenses, yet God may be justified in
permitting, if not in inflicting them (without any consideration had to a
Future State) for the imputed sin of another; that is, because that every man
is born guilty of Adam's transgressions, and by that guilt alone, every man may
be justifyably born subject to the unhappiness of all those mentioned Evils.

To all this objection; First I say, That our Church indeed in her confession,
Art. 9.
does profess, That Original Sin is the fault and corruption of every Man, that
is Naturally engendered of the Offspring of Adam, etc. And that therefore in
every Person born into the World, it deserves God's Wrath and Damnation. In
which last words of the Article, as it is severest consequence, my Objecters may
interpret, that man's natural subjection to those mentioned Evils is
comprehended and understood; though the Article takes not any particular notice
of that consequence of Adam's Sin.

But the Tridentine Article indeed does suppose it in express words: Si quis
Adae praevaricationem sibi soli, and non ejus propagini -- mortem and poenas
corporis tantum, -- etc. Caranza p. 910.
And the Bohemian Confession does enumerate those very natural calamities, as
particularly as I have done; as being comprehended in that menace, The day thou
Eatest thereof thou shall surely Die. Genesis 3. 5.


But in full Answer to the Objection, I say that the Article is so far from
being improvable to take off the reasonableness of that intolerable
consequence, which so much reflects upon the Divine Attributes, upon the
account of Man's natural subjection to all those Evils; that, were it not for
the consideration and supposal of a Future State, it will appear, that the
Sense of it cannot possibly be consistent or accountable. For whatsoever
imputation of guilt is presumed by it to be derived from Adam's Sin to his
Posterity, certainly God never designed thereby to be so unmerciful, as
naturally to punish any man so severely for it, who should not afterward
deserve it by his own offenses, as that it may be believed, that God did but
take occasion by the imputation to put Mankind under a new, Romans 5, 16, 17, 18.
and a more gracious Covenant, for higher and nobler Interests, and upon
easier, and more feisible Terms; for the better performance of which, man's
natural and contingent Evils were to become designedly instrumental, and highly
serviceable; otherwise it would argue such an act of Revenge, as can hardly be
paralleled by the worst imaginary case; and that in an instance, that God has
most solemnly disclaimed, as when he so expressly reproved the use of that
reflecting Proverb; Ezekiel. 18. 1.
The Fathers have eaten sour Grapes, and the Childrens Teeth are set on edge.
Thereupon he renounced all manner of partiality in the execution of his Divine
Judgment, and positively approved the equality of his own ways, upon a
Fundamental of Eternal Equity; that is, v. 20.
That the Son shall not bear the Iniquity of the Father.

As for that instance which has been made use of to justify God in the present
Miseries, and even in the Eternal condemnation of the greater part of Mankind,
for Adam's Sin, because the Sons of Traitors may be punished for their Fathers
Offenses, it holds no resemblance at all to this Case; for that is done, not
that the Government does not know, that there is an hard thing done to an
innocent and unfortunate Heir, but out of pure politic necessity, to
discourage others from attempting the like Treasonable designs to their own,
their Posterities, and the Governments Ruin. Now this case is altogether
different from the other; for here is only the punishment of one or a few, to
prevent the undoing a numerous Many, and for a Public Safety: But there must
be supposed such an imputation of one man's fault, as must put the whole world
into a state of Misery without any consideration had to their own offenses. A
belief of such a proceedure cannot possibly consist with the very Notion of a
Supreme Deity, without Reasons that might be given for such a Fact, from the
consideration of man's designation to the happiness of a Future World; as for
the better attainment of which, all humane miseries may be made subservient, as
shall presently appear.

And thus notwithstanding the objection, though the truth of the Article be
assented to; yet it cannot take off the intolerable consequence upon the Divine
Attributes, without a respect had to the Existence of another World. This the
last Objection.

But there be other severe consequences of another Nature, which must be also
considered, but they are the business of the next, or Second Section.

Section II.
IN this Section I shall add several other very severe consequences, besides
those that concern GOD Almighty, which are of themselves really destructive to
humane Nature, both as Socially, and Personally considered: And which may as
reasonably be inferred from Men's being Naturally subject to those Evils; if we
should not be able to balance such unhappy thoughts by the assured belief of a
Future State, which is to be the enquiry of the Third Chapter.

The first Consequence of that nature, is, That Parents would then be
unaccountably cruel, who should permit a propagation of Beings, which they knew
by undoubted Arguments of Discourse, and the Suffrage of universal Experience,
must be born to an Inheritance (at least) of continual Toil and Trouble, if not
of intolerable Misery and Calamity. Upon which observation, Clemens of
Alexandria has delivered us the Sense of an ancient Poet, (...)
(...),
(...). -- Strom. lib. 3.

who was persuaded, That Parents ought not to bring Children into the World,
when they saw to what Evils they must be born: And makes mention of some, that
thought, that the Pythagoreans, for that end, abstained from all the natural
means of propagation.

Secondly, On that account it would be true, That in cases of violent Torments
or languishing Diseases, an Assassinate might more properly be sent for, as a
fitter Instrument of Relief, than a Physician; a great part of whose Skill and
Care would, in such Cases, be but a Tyranny to the Afflicted, except it were
employed to hasten them to their Rest, and to facilitate their periods for
their quiet Annihilation.

The last Consequence (as that which I principally design to take notice of)
is, That in a Thousand Cases it would then follow, That it would be every man's
Duty to himself, Magna vis est in iis malis, quibus iste naturae vincitur
sensus, quo mors omnimodis, omnibus viribus conatibusque vitatur: Et si non
potuerit aliunde contingere ab ipso homine sibimet inferatur. Aug. de Civ. lib.
19. cap. 4.
to study for the readiest Euthanasie, (as the Romans in some cases did) to
expedite their departures from their miserable Sations, that they might attain
a lasting Repose in a nothing, rather than endure the misery of some Years
torments, want, or disgrace.

Therefore Seneca speaking like a Stoic, did boldly affirm, At si inutile
ministeriis est corpus, quidni oporteat educere animunm laborantem? -- Et cum
majus periculum sit male vivendi, quam cito moriendi, stultus est qui non
exiguo temporis mercede magnae rei aleam non redemit. Lib. Ep. 8. Ep. 60.
That if a man's Life became uneasy to him, He were a Fool if he did not drive
out that troublesome Inhabitant within him, that made him sensible of his
present Unhappiness; or that he should refuse to purchase so great an Advantage
to himself, upon so small an Adventure.

On this account, What can be sufficiently said to condemn Mithridates, that he
made his own Sword his Reprieve, from being dishonourably tied to Pompey's
triumphant Chariot? Or to reproach Cato's courage, when he chose to allow
himself a present Death, rather than to live in the disgrace of being a Trophy
to Caesar's Victories? With many more Examples of that sort of men, whose
Stoicism having afforded them an Allowance, it was but reasonable for them to
make use of that Liberty, to set themselves free, when they were oppressed with
the heavy Sense of being Unhappy.

And what Kindness these men did themselves, for ought I yet see, (if there be
no Future State, nor Laws to govern men's actions in order to it) my Friend,
when he sees me in sorrow or torment, might as innocently do it for me, as to
kill a Fly, and with far greater reason; and to whom I might appeal for my
release, as it was told David, That Saul should do the Amalekite, Stand upon me
and slay me, 2 Samuel 19.
because my Life is yet whole in me.

This is the last of that sort of ill consequences, and it is the most famously
considerable of them all. And therefore, against it, I must be attacked with
several Objections, which will take up the next Section.

Section III.
IN this Third Section, I shall undertake the Answer of Three Objections,
against the just Inference of this last horrid Consequence; that is, of men's
taking a Liberty to put an end to their own Lives, as often as they find
themselves oppressed with those Calamities, to which their natures have
subjected them.

1. The First Objection is, That Men may be restrained from such destructive
Attempts upon their own Lives, by a natural fear of, and a customary abhorrency
from Dying; though they had no Faith at all of another World.

2. The Second is founded upon an Observation, That persons who professedly
renounce the Belief of another World, do not ordinarily, and but very rarely,
make use of that Expedient, to free themselves from their own afflictive states.

3. The Third Objection is, That the Heathen Philosophers have allowed the
World a notice of some Wise Rules, by which it is presumed, that men may
contentedly bear their natural and contingent Evils, without doing that
violence to their own Lives, and also without any necessary consideration had
of a future World.

Object. 1. The First Objection is, That a desire of Living and
self-preservation, is as connatural to Men, as their very Beings, and that it
is in some Sense true, what Satan said, Job 2. 4.
Skin for skin, and all that a man has, will he give for his Life. And
therefore such an innate and (especially being made a) customary desire of
Life, will be sufficient to hold men's hands from offering that confusion to the
Societies of Mankind, upon every man's taking a Liberty to die, as often as he is
oppressed with any cross or calamity. And, so that there needs not any
acknowledgment of a Future State, to prevent that grand inconvenience to the
World.

To this I Answer, That though it be granted, that there is such a natural
desire of Self-preservation, and that it be moreover allowed, that that desire
is ordinarily advanced by a customary fear of Dying; yet if it be reasonable in
it self, because it is far easier to pass out of the World with a gentle
stroke, but of one minute's duration, than to endure a long languishing
Disease, or a tormenting Pain, or a permanent Oppression of Mind, (there being
no fear of a following account, for the irregularity of the Fact) it is all I
pretend to in this consideration. For what is purely reasonable in its self,
may in time conquer a natural, sensual, and imaginary fear, and the power of
custom; and subdue the common clamours of men's disapprobation of the Fact, and
at last, by common usage, give Laws to the World, and a Reputation to the
Design: As it has done among the Indian Women, who cheerfully, in the briskest
vigor of their Age, throw themselves into their dead Husbands Funeral flames,
to prevent a following accustomed dishonor to themselves: And as it is among
the Japanesses, who customarily rip up their own Entrals, rather than adventure
the disgrace of being respitted, till the Executioner shall do his Office. Thus
is the first Objection solved.

Object. 2. The next Objection is, That if because, where there is no concern
for a Future State, it will follow, that such an Expedient to set a miserable
Person free from his present want, torment, or disgrace, would be a reasonable
attempt (as I have discoursed): If this were True (says my Objector) How comes
it to pass, that that irreligious sort of men; who do professedly mock at the
belief of another World, should not very often, if not always, act that kind
piece of Friendship to themselves, when they happen to be greatly Unfortunate?

To which I Answer, that I confess there is such a sort of men in the World,
that do make a scorn of all Religion, and a Future Life; and that would be
thought sufficiently able to defend the Case, when once they have picked up two
or three notable exceptions against the Holy Bible, and can cross some
Catholic Principles of Christianity, with a few hints of the Malmsburian
Divinity; or when they can get no better Arguments to persuade their lewd Crew
to comply with them in the same contempt of God, and of all that is Sacred and
Good; they can think it at present a sufficient confutation of all that can be
said in their own defense, if they do but swear down the man in Black, with a
thousand Oaths and Curses, and with Unmanliness enough, can but droll upon him
with some idle stories, purposely set on foot, to make themselves merry, with
the defamation of the whole Sacred Order.

But in the mean time these men give us no sufficient Reason to think, that
they are sincere, and truly in earnest at the bottom in all this: For if they
did but really believe, that there were no other World, as they swear and
pretend, it were Impossible that they should be so dull and silly as to choose
to be unhappy any one hour more; but that, when they are oppressed with want of
money, with a baffled Amor, or loss of health, or when they are rotten, and
creep about the town with half a Nose, or with other the like symptoms of their
own debaucheries, they should determine their miseries at one blow; and
prudently commit themselves to rest in a quiet annihilation; which they knew
they might effect with so much ease and speed. If some of them would but
briskly go about that work, they might gain a belief from us, that they meant
what they said; otherwise they must excuse us, if we think, that they either
are a pack of abominable cowards; (of which their blustering humor is a very
probable indication) or else that they have some unlucky doubts of the
Existence of another World creeping about their minds, that hinders the Rope,
or some good old Well, from doing them a kinder Office, than the best friends
they have in the world can otherwise do for them; if it were true, as they
pretend, that there is no Future World, account, or punishment. But then the
wonder is, that if that doubt, can, on the one hand, restrain them from an act
so much to their present ease and deliverance; and yet that the same doubt,
should not on the other hand, reclaim them from doing the most unreasonable
thing in the World, that is, from living such infamous and prodigiously wicked
Lives so much to their own danger of being eternally undone, if (as they doubt)
there should happen to be such a thing indeed, as a following and dreadful
Account in another World.

But that I may thoroughly solve these men's Credit, I had rather tell the
Objecter, That I am persuaded, that after all this, most of them do really
believe the being of a God, and of another World; and they do in their best
thoughts approve a Virtuous and Sober Life, only they are resolved to keep up
their Atheistical and Hectouring humor, to show their bravery in being Wicked:
That is, they speak and act such extremities of profaneness, that they may be
admired for a more than ordinary Greatness of Mind, and so may insult over
those little Sinners, that choose to creep to Hell, for a company of Low and
Sneaking Transgressions.

And then, they having past away a considerable part of their time in that
wretched manner of Living, upon this and the like fashionable motives; they are
at last arrested with the fatal symptoms of a decaying and a dying State; and
then they begin to whine for their own Follies, and admonish their surviving
Friends, of taking wiser measures, and of making better provisions for
themselves in another World. This solves my Second Objection.

3d. The Third and last Objection, which I must encounter, is offered by them
that will say, that Philosophy alone can suggest a sufficient relief to a mind
under the severest pressures of natural or contingent Evils, as without such
men's undertaking their deliverance, by putting a present period to their own
uneasy lives, so without any consideration of a Future World as sufficient to
prevent it.

To this it is first Answered, That upon the carefullest survey of Cicero's
Arguments; (who I believe has said as much, and as wisely, as can well be
suggested in that Case) I find nothing that he offers that so much as pretends
to any exemption from those natural Miseries, much less that tenders any thing
in compensation for them; only he has given some certain Rules, which (as it is
presumed) may direct men how better to submit to, and the more patiently to
bear up against, their present misfortunes; that is, to be more wisely
miserable: But nevertheless, the afflicted man endures them still; that is,
notwithstanding all those Rules, he is still an unhappy man.

Secondly, I Answer, that all those directive Rules they give are a relief and
cure by far narrower than the largeness of the distemper; that is, they are too
Philosophical for the hundredth part of the afflicteds capacities, to learn or
understand them: And they generally purport just so much help to the miserable,
as if all men that want Money, were sent to the Philosophers Stone, to cure the
disease of their Purses.

Thirdly, My Answer to that pretense is, That I observe our Philosopher makes
the succesfulness of those his Rules, -- Sic contra, illi sunt beati, quos
nulli Metus terrent, nullae Libidines incitant, etc. Tusc. Quest. lib. 5.
to depend upon such severe qualifications of Mind and Life, and upon so many
strict acts of self-denial, (such as throwing off all natural Fear, and the
force of all sensual Appetites, and the like) that the afflicted Persons may be
ordered to go about almost to unman themselves, as well as pretend an Obedience
to all his numerous and difficult prescriptions; which nothing but the
Encouragements of a Future World can possibly enable them to undertake; as my
Third Argument has evinced.

Fourthly, I Answer, That those Philosophers did so far believe their own
notional Schemes of Patience to be unpracticable (and as a full confutation of
all other their pretentions for the relief of the unfortunate) that at last
they were driven to fly to the Rock of Fatal Necessity, Quid ergo expiationes,
procurationes* que, quo pertinent si immutabilia sunt Fata? Permit mihi illam
rigidam sectam tueri eorum, qui accipiunt ista, and nihil allud esse Fatum,
quam aegre mentis solatium. Lib. 2. Nativ. Quest.
to give any tolerable quiet to men's uneasy Minds. This Seneca pleads as the
last refuge, and the only remaining comfort for a Sick Mind; and without which,
all other attempts for its relief, were altogether unsufficient.

Now, if ever any manner of carriage could intimate a defective cause, This
certainly must do it, as to our present concern; if there be no other, or no
better shifts, to avert the cogency of our thus arguing for a Future World, on
the account of men's natural subjection to such miseries and calamities of
humane Life, the Controversy is at an end.

What! Is there no other way to solve the Reflection upon the Divine
Attributes, and to keep a Man from offering Violence to his own miserable Life,
but by engaging him to think, that he must of necessity be Unhappy, and that an
immovable Fate has chained him down to it? What can be added more to complete
his misery? The least hopes of Deliverance has some Relief; but where there is
none at all to be admitted, an Invitation to Patience is an additional
oppression, and looks more like a revengeful Exprobration, than a rational
Support.

But, Fifthly and Lastly, To show how those men are necessitated to trifle in
finding out a Relief for the Afflicted's Patience, (where the Concerns of
another World are designedly to be laid aside) it may be observed, That the
great Philosophers were so diffident of their own stated Rules, especially of
their beloved Principle of Fate, that they themselves have dispoil'd the Credit
of them, and proclaimed them all to be insufficient, by allowing a speedier
Remedy for all humane Miseries; and, that is, by acquiting themselves of their
Misfortunes and Beings all at once. Concerning this, I have already given some
instances, and could have added many more great Examples of that desperate
Expedient; which those Philosophers mention with so much approbation, that
Seneca taking occasion to speak of Cato and Scipio; of the later, Multum fuit
Carthaginem vincere, sed amplius mortem. Ep. lib. 3. Ep. 34.
he has this expression; that It was a great thing that it could be said of
him, that he conquered Carthage; but much greater, that he had overcome
himself; that is, ended his Life with his own Sword.

And then, Do not the reason of the sad mentioned intolerable consequence
recurr? Does not what I have here said sufficiently show, that what I before
affirmed was true; that is, that it must necessarily follow, that if there be
no Future State considered, it is reasonable for a man to put an end to his own
Life and Misery together? Or, Why should such men (in whom this last Objection
had its Concern) so often choose to make use of that Expedient, and in a
Thousand Cases think it more reasonable to put an end to their wearied Lives,
than to endure their present Miseries? This solves my Last Objection.

And thus all my Opponents are disappointed of their Design to baffle the
reasonableness of all my intolerable consequences: Which must hold immutably
true, till the acknowledged Existence of a future State shall release them of
their horror, and allow them a sufficient Solution; which is the business of
the Third and Last Chapter of this Argument. Therefore,

CHAP. III.
THis Third Chapter is designed to demonstrate, That the Acknowledgment and
Supposal of a Future State can only naturally and without all Exception, solve
all those mentioned intolerable Consequences, to the immortal Honor of the
Great CREATOR, who was pleased to creat Mankind in such circumstances: And to
the full satisfaction of every Good man, that considers himself to be so
created. And this I shall endeavor to do, in two distinct Sections.

Section I.
IN this First Section, I shall represent, That the Belief of a Future state,
will most evidently solve all those consequences, that reflect upon the Honor
of the Divine Attributes: And that whatsoever has been suggested to disparage
GOD's Goodness and Equity on the former account, will now be found to be falsely
concluding, and that ought to be renounced as unreasonable and impious; when
the Gracious Intention and Wise Designs, why GOD made Man naturally subject to
all those temporary Infelicities, be but once thoroughly examined, and seriously
considered. For then it will appear, That GOD made Man subject to such severe
circumstances of a present mortal Unhappiness, for no less end, than to serve
His own most Gracious Purposes of making him perfectly and eternally Happy in
another World.

Had not GOD made him a Rational Creature, he had not been capable of
understanding his Duty, and of the proposal of an End to oblige him to it; and
had also wanted a faculty of being receptive of any Blessing upon the
performance of it: Had not Man been made a voluntary Agent, he had been
unconcerned in all moral actions, and so incapable of Rewards and Punishments:
And had he not been born subject to those natural Evils, he had wanted the best
reasons of a Probationary state; that is, he had wanted occasions for the
choice and exercise of most of those Graces and Virtuous Actions, that were
requisite to make him Good, and to keep him close to his Hope, and to his
dependence upon GOD.

And, if the worst Evils he encounters be improved to those excellent ends,
(which all men that love and fear God, must believe they should) they will soon
be experimentally found to be instances of God's favorable Ordination and
Providence, and to be not only tolerable, but highly reasonable and approveable
in their kind and nature. And not only so, but the afflicted man may in time
find Reasons (which he can never want, if he studies for them) so to attemper
his mind, that he may be as thankful for them, as for any other of God's
Gracious Contrivements, to further his Good and Happiness. And on that account,
he may as reasonably be able to rejoice for a fit of trouble, as for a hit of
Preferment; for a Portion of Contempt, as for the refreshment of a Meal; for
the Wicked man's oppressive Malice, as for the kind effects of an affectionate
Friendship; and for a day of severe persecution in an innocent case, more than
for a successful Conquest over his most imperious and implacable Enemies.

Are they poor? (says Salvian, speaking of Good men) they are pleased, and can
approve their present fortune: Pauperes sunt? paupertati delectant: Lugent?
lugere gestiunt: In honori sunt? honorem respuunt. Sal. de gub. des:
Are they made contemptible? They can despise Honor: Are they sorrowful? They
can rejoice in their Mourning: Are they infirm and sick? They can find reasons
to make their Infirmities acceptable instances of Providence.

How many pious men are there in the World, (and it is not God's fault, that
all are not so) who living to, and hoping for the Happiness of a Future state,
would not have chosen an uninterrupted Health, nor put an end to a valetudinary
state, nor have been perfectly freed from the unkindnesses of the malicious,
nor willingly have renounced their Portion in other humane Evils, when
Experience has once ascertained them, how much they have all sensibly proved
advantageous Instruments, and Occasions of their more entire love of, and
adherence to GOD and Virtue; and of their keeping a stricter watch upon their
own minds and actions?

And then further, How many such men have there been, that would not have
wished of their decaying Time, nor willingly have refused the inconveniences of
old Age, when they have considered how much thereby they have overgrown all
Temptations to youthful Follies; and found time to recollect the happy issues
of their own Experience; and (what is more) are improving the Advantages of
their natural timely Warning for their following Change? And, that every day,
as they more and more decline, they are more and more strengthened in their
satisfaction and contentment upon the present repasts, and lively hope and
apprehensions of their near approaching transmigration to a Happier State.

Thus, Vita humana, quae tot and tantis hujus saeculi malis esse cogitur
misera, spe futuri saeculi, sit beata sicut and salva. Aug. de Civ. Dei lib.
19. cap. 4.
Though the Life of Man, as it is encumbered and oppressed with the so many
Evils of his Mortality, may justly be accounted miserable, yet upon the
expectation of the Happiness of a Future State, it ought to be esteemed happy
and safe; as St. Austin discourses.

But then, let it be further observed, and that very considerably to our
purpose, That God is so far justified in making and permitting Man's subjection
to such Evils and Infelicities, (as I have represented them) in the Sense of
them that have firmly believed, and that then, upon that Belief (which is
unanswerably unreasonable, if they do not) are providing for the Blessed
Interest of such a Future World; as that some of them have not thought their
ordinarily incident and natural Evils great and many enough, to secure their
Virtue and Innocence, but in imitation of God's own natural order and method
for their Good, have voluntarily contrived more to themselves, when their Piety
and Prudence have thought it needful.

And this may be justifiably verified, from the innumerous Primitive Examples
of Mortification; when the Saints of God have chosen severe Fastings, and a
constant hard Diet; afflictive Labors, and wearisom Employments; tedious
Devotions, and the incredible Renunciations of (the so much admired) Temporal
Greatness, Splendour, and Pleasures of the World; that they might with lesser
hazard attain the great end of a Future Bliss.

And, Lastly, For a further justification of the Divine Wisdom and Goodness in
the case of humane afflictions, the consideration of a Future World will solve
one great doubt and difficulty. And that is, If any man should demand a Reason,
Why GOD is pleased that some men shall meet a greater Portion of present Misery
than others, (as at all times, by many instances, it may be pregnantly observed
and verified) and that one person's Life should be very calamitous, while
another is but tolerably uneasy: That some men should but taste of the Waters
of Affliction, while others are plunged so deep in them, Psalm. 69. 2.
that the Floods run over them: That is, That some should meet but with
Troubles, while others are necessitated to encounter with Extremities. And
then, if such extraordinarily afflicted People should sorrowfully bewail their
surplusage of Discipline, comparatively to most other Examples of Misery; and
should be tempted to call in question the impartiality of God's Goodness and
Equity, to, and over them, the Belief of the real Existence of a future state,
solves all this great difficulty also, (which nothing else can possibly effect,
to the CREATOUR's honor, and Man's satisfaction) and makes such an unequal
distribution of present Troubles and Afflictions, as reasonable and justifiable
as any other the wise effects of God's Love, and His Gracious Providence, for
their eternal Good, on these Two Grounds.

First, Such extraordinarily afflicted Persons may, and ought to tell their own
minds, that such unusual degrees and measures of calamity, may be more
specially necessary for them in their particular capacities, than for other
men; and that GOD saw they needed the severer methods of His Discipline, and
correcting Love, more than others. Had I had but a tolerable Plenty, (says one
under the most oppressive Poverty) I had been much worse than any man that
enjoys the largest proportions of Wealth. Had I been Possessor of the least
degree of that man's Honor, (says another, laboring under the burden of the
greatest disgrace and contempt) I should never have managed it with the same
Modesty and Vnconcernedness that he has done. A Rebuke was sufficient to make
another Good, but a pressure is hardly enough for me: An ordinary Discipline
keeps this Man in order, but GOD thought fit to hedge up my way with Thorns,
Hos. 2.
to restrain something in my ungovernable Temper. A little Dose secures another
man's Health, but a whole course of Physic is handly enough for me.

Thus does the devout Soul easily reconcile the different disproportions of the
afflictive Evils of humane Life; and interprets of the several of them, that
they are Arguments of God's greater love, and more especial care over his Soul;
and renders his own Hope thereby the more reasonably applicable to the comfort
of his own Mind.

But then, Secondly, He may also as reasonably inform his Mind, that where
there is such a redundancy of Troubles, the man that is afflicted with them,
may, and ought also to his mighty comfort, believe, that as God's ways are
always designedly Good and Equal, so that He might send them upon a design,
and on purpose to allow him a greater degree of Happiness in a better state,
and a recompense proportionable to his greater afflictions in another World.
And for which he may as assuredly hope, as that he that has improved his
Talent in acting greater measures of Good, than others may on that account,
believe himself to be answerably then rewarded. For as no one drop of cold
Water in a cup of Charity, shall not be unrewarded in the one case, so shall
not one Tear that is shed in sorrow for greater afflictions, Psalm. 56. 8.
be unrecompensed in the other.

And if all men were sensible, how valuable any advance of happiness were in a
State of Glory, they could not but think, that whereinsoever they have hindered
themselves, from doing all the good they can possibly do, they have acted very
imprudently for their own interest; so if the men that meet more than ordinary
afflictions in this world, did but consider the abundancy of their recompense
in another; they would be so far from murmuring at their greater misfortunes,
that they would (as our Savior in one instant case represented it) on the
contrary, Mat. 5. 12, 13.
rejoice and be exceeding glad, for their greater reward in Heaven.

Now, as to the whole that I have said in this Case, as it will easily appear
upon the belief of a Future State, that is was GOD's Gracious Design to make
the enjoyment of a happiness in it, the Great End of Man's Creation; so also,
that those mentioned Evils, to which his nature has subjected him, may be
improved into many instrumental advantages, to prepare and adapt him for it.

And therefore, Mankind ought to be so far from making any unkind reflections
upon the Justice and Equity of GOD, for their natural subjections to all those
Evils and present Infelicities, that they must justify, and applaud his Wisdom
and Goodness, that he ordered them for such excellent Ends and Purposes.

And now, I shall once more call for the Observer of the formention'd Rooms of
the calamitous of all sorts, but it is upon a new Errand; that is, not that he
should stand still as a witnessing spectatour only of their Miseries, but that
upon the Reasons which I have given, he may pass another judgment upon the
place; That is, that now he may not think those Rooms to be nothing else, but
so many Apartments of Misery; but to be either so many Divine Laboratories, in
which God designed to refine the Souls of men, and to prepare them for the
purer Regions of a Future Bliss; or he may judge them to be so many Sacred
Oratories, in which all the oppressed may (according to GOD's Ordinative love
to them) be more strongly obliged to be daily adoring Him, and performing their
constant Offices to implore His Blessing upon their several afflicted States:
or lastly, he may look upon them as so many Military Theaters, in which, the
Afflicted may with religious courage, be contending for the lofty Prize, that
God has set in their prospect, by Faith and Hope.

And thus, I hope, I have so fully solved the First intolerable Consequence,
that they, that shall hereafter complain of God for their subjection to their
present Evils, must arraign his Love for doing them good, and reproach his Care
in carrying on a design for the better securing their Future Happiness. And
thus ends the solution of what might reflect upon the Creatours Honor.

Section II.
THis Second Section contains the solution of the other mentioned Intolerable
Consequences, which the Afflicted may suggest to their own minds, from the
Miseries and Calamities, to which their Nature has subjected and exposed them,
upon the belief of the Real Existence of a Future State, and of an established
Happiness there enjoyable; I say all such other consequences will be easily,
and naturally answered and controuled, upon the same Reason, that the Great
CREATOURS Glorious Attributes have been already vindicated.

First, what was alleged concerning Parents cruelty, in propagating Beings to
be subject to the possibility and danger of so much wretchedness and calamity,
is presently solved, by a belief of such a Future State: For Parents can then
on that Ground, most reasonably propound to their own thoughts and hopes, that
they shall bring forth so many Candidates for an everlasting happiness, and so
many Rightful Heirs of a most Glorious Inheritance; and that as so securely
settled upon every one of them, that no Power, Malice, or Contrivance
whatsoever, can disseize them of it, unless they shall wilfully resign up
their own Right, and Title to it.

So that if they should certainly foreknow, that those their Children shall
infallibly meet the hardest circumstances of humane life; yet considering, that
Parents have so much reason to believe, that the most afflictive Evils of
Mortality, are possibly improveable for the better securing a Happy State in
another World; it will be sufficient to remove the discouragement, which the
mentioned consequence suggested to them. For upon a supposed tender of
election, a good Parent would in no sense have his Children Great and
Prosperous, if it stood in competition with his choice of having them Good and
Virtuous, though they were assured, that their Children were to be encumbered
with the greatest misfortunes, to which their natures have subjected them.

Then Secondly, As to what has been discoursed to justify men's putting a
present period to their own uneasy lives, when they are heavily oppressed, with
any of those severest Evils of their Mortality, though that practice would be
reasonable enough, if there were no Future World (as I have shown Reasons,
Authorities, and Examples of it); yet that State being once acknowledged and
believed, and the men that do believe it, actually engage in the practice of
those Virtuous Actions, that necessarily conduce to the happiness of it, they
would then, not only hold their hands from such destructive attempts, but
rather might find sufficient Reasons to own the continuance of their lives, as
a Blessing in any condition.

They would then be patiently and wisely accounting with themselves, That
Almighty GOD may be mercifully pleased to continue them still in their uneasy
Lives, because (perhaps) some part of the necessary work of their great
salvation, is yet unfinished; that is, that possibly they may have some
portions of their lost time to redeem some Remains of their Passions still to
subdue; some further Additions to be made to their Heavenly Stock; some Defects
in their daily Offices to be amended; or some further Degrees of Love and Zeal
for GOD, and Goodness to attain to, before they die: Or they may be satisfying
themselves, by telling their own minds, That GOD in Mercy to the World, may let
them still live to be further Instrumental to some Common Good. Perhaps some
distressed Families and Persons would want their support, or the careless
Congregations, their devout Amens; or (perhaps) the Church cannot yet spare any
part of Her Defense, and that if they were gone, there might be wanting some of
the number that uphold a sinful State.

In a word, as such Men can never want Reasons to judge honorably of GOD for
their continuance in their mortal, though afflicted Lives, so they would not
forgive themselves a thought of the least inconvenient usage of themselves,
that might shorten their uneasy Abode in their present Circumstances,
whatsoever they are. And this is the last instance of solution of the mentioned
intolerable Consequences.

Thus we see with what unconstraint, and unexceptionable coincidency; and how
without any pretense of force or opposition, they are all solved and
reconciled. And now what can we immagine should offer the least Doubt or
suspicion, but that the solution of these intolerable Consequences, should as
naturally, and as it were of course, infer the Truth of the designed
Conclusion; especially, when we see all things do cohere with the same fitness
and agreeableness to it, as a dislocated Bone falls into the same place, whence
it was distorted, to the Patient's present Ease; or, as the scattered Materials
of a Structure, when they are once fitted for a regular Frame, are presently
put together, and accommodated to those Places and Positions, for which they
were at first wrought and designed? So easily, and so naturally, do all those
consequences admit their solutions, from the acknowledged belief of a Future
State. But let us attend the Conclusion.

THE CONCLUSION.
AND now the sum is, That if no Man can deny the first Foundation of the
Argument to be true in the First Chapter; that is, That Man is created and born
naturally subject to such severe Portions of Misery, and Calamity, that he is
by his Nature, made the most unfortunate Being of the whole visible Creation,
if his Existence should be limited to the duration only of his Mortal Life. And
then secondly, as in the Second Chapter, if from thence all the intolerable
Consequences, which reflect so much upon the Honor of GOD's Equity and
Goodness, and against the comfortable Thoughts of a Man's own Being be truly
inferred. And lastly, as in the Third Chapter, if it be true, That nothing else
can possibly solve those Consequences, but the Belief and Acknowledgement of
the Real Existence of a Future World: then it is infallibly certain, That GOD
has designed, and constituted such a State.

Fifth Argument.
The Sum of the Fifth and Last ARGUMENT.
THE Fifth Argument to demonstrate the necessary Existence of a Future State,
is founded upon an Observation, That Mankind are naturally born qualified with
the most earnest Desires, and the most constantly importuning Appetites of
being happy: and yet, that there is nothing offered or allowed them as
attainable or enjoyable in this present World, by which those natural Desires
and Appetites can possibly be determined or satisfied; so that, if the duration
of their whole Beings should be limited only to their present Mortal Lives, it
cannot but reflect upon the Honor of the Creatour's Wisdom, Justice, and
Goodness; Who, by His own Sovereign Will and Pleasure, gave Man a Nature
qualified with such Desires and Appetites, and yet placed him in a World, in
which there is nothing to be had, that can give any sufficient satisfaction to
his own mind; the proper Seat, in which all true Happiness must necessarily be
presumed to reside. And because the supposal of the Real Existence of a Future
World, in which GOD may have provided such Enjoyments, as may naturally and
sufficiently satisfy those restless Desires and Appetites of being Happy, can
be the only possible solution of that Reflection upon those glorious Attributes
of GOD, it necessarily follows, That GOD Almighty has constituted such a
Future World.

But that this Argument thus generally laid, may the more clearly and
convincingly infer the designed Conclusion, I shall order the full Explanation
of all the parts of it in these Three Chapters.

1. In the First Chapter, I shall represent, That GOD has certainly created
all men with those strong Desires, and predominant Appetites of their own
Happiness; and that it is not in their own Power, when they please to lay them
aside, or sufficiently to control them for their own ease: and then, that it
cannot be doubted, but that GOD Almighty in His equitable Kindness, and
essential Goodness, has one where or other, made Provision for their Rest, and
Satisfaction.

In the Second Chapter, I shall evidently evince, That there is nothing allowed
to Mankind, as attainable in their present mortal Lives, but what is
unsufficient to make them truly Happy; or to give any constant, or indeed, any
tolerable Acquiescence to their own restlesly desiring Minds.

In the Third Chapter, I shall thoroughly demonstrate, That the supposal of the
real Existence of a Future World, and of a sufficient Happiness there
attainable, will naturally solve all those evil Consequences, that may be
suggested against GOD's Attributes, for giving Man a Nature so qualified; and
will also fully answer all manner of Exceptions and Complaints, that are
ordinarily made against his Temporal Enjoyments by reason of their natural
transiency, uncertainty and unsufficiency to make him completely Happy, during
the time of his Mortal Existence.

A FUTURE WORLD'S EXISTENCE, Demonstrated by Rational Evidence.
CHAP. I.
THE First Chapter is designed to represent the Truth of two things, both which
must be presumed as Grounds, upon which I may build up the Argument so far in
preparation toward the Conclusion. The two things are,

First, That every man is certainly born with a Mind endued with those strong
Desires and importunate Appetites of being Happy; such as are not in their own
power to lay aside or control at their own pleasure.

Secondly, That it cannot be doubted, but that a Wise and Good GOD has one
where or other provided for their rest and satisfaction; or he would never have
naturally given them such qualifications. But these will take up two Sections.

Section I.
IN this First Section is designed the first Truth; And in order to a full
Explanation of the case, it is requisite, that we first take notice, that God
has ordered all other Beings, both sensible and insensible, to be carried on
by a necessary and natural impulse, to the attainment of all those their proper
ends, to which, by his own sole Will and sovereign Authority, they were at
first by their nature unchangeably determined and affixed. But it was other
wise in GOD's design, when He created Man: For His Divine purpose, as to him,
was, That he should be created with such free and self-determining Faculties,
as by which he might be first enabled to understand and judge, and then be left
at his own freedom to choose and act for his own end, that is, his own
Happiness; for nothing can be proposed as a proper and natural end to a
Rational Creature, but some adjudged and chosen attainable Happiness, that may
satisfy the importunity of his Appetitive Mind, and be accommodable to the
measures of his Rational Nature; as Aristotle discourses the Case in the first
Book of his Ethics.

Now, that Man might be sure to endeavor the attainment of that his proper
end, by the use of those his natural Faculties of judging and choosing it for
himself; GOD gave him also as necessary an inclination, and as forcible an
appetite to spur him on, to look after his own Happiness, as any other Creature
had, to attain its natural end, and by as uncontrollable an instinct.

And therefore it is certain, That as there is no qualification in his Nature
more closely adherent to his very Being, Omnium certe sententia est, qui
ratione quoquo modo uti possent, beatos esse omnes homines velle. Aug. de Civ.
Dei lib. 10. cap. 1.
nor more unexceptionably universal to his whole Species, so is there no part
of humane nature more predominant and authoritative. For it always gives Laws
to all the Faculties and Affections of his Soul, and commandingly governs and
controuls all the designs, actions, and undertakings of his whole Life.

So that the CREATOR's powerful Will is not more sovereignly expressed in the
natural qualifications and inclinations of any kind of inferior Beings to
attain their natural Ends, than in this of Man's unsuperable Principle to will,
desire, and act, for his own suitable Happiness.

The Stone tends not downwards, nor the Sparks mount upwards, more necessarily
and naturally.

Or, to make use of the words of a late Author, who says, That It is a
disposition of mind, that is so prevailingly fixed against all attempts of
losing it, Virtutibus valedicere, vitia derelinquere, opes profundere, honores
contemnere, valetudinem pessundare, and vitam ipsam prodigere possumus; sed
soelicitatis appetitus naturae adeo adhaeret, ut eam nisi and naturam
excutimus, excutere nequeamus. Stern. Apho. de Foeli. p. 11.
or departing from it, that a Man may bid a farewell to all Virtue, he may cast
away all his Plenty, and his Honor, he may undervalue and endanger his Health,
and at last throw away his Life; but the desire of being Happy, does so firmly
adhere to his very Being, that unless he can shake off Nature it self, he can
no way unloosen himself from it. Animus hominis cupere nunquam desinit. Tusc.
Quaest.
His Mind can never cease to desire, says Cicero.

An early Intimation of this natural and necessary Impulse, is observed even in
his very Childhood; for no sooner does the Eye of his Mind begin to open, but
the first thing it looks after, is to show its little inclinations for the
choice of something, in which he may be pleased.

And as by the addition of a few years, his Reason gradually improves, and
begins to have a little Skill to understand Discourse, and to mind any plain
reasonable Inferences, so it presently teaches him to knit little obvious
Occurrences into Designs and Projections, and will be laying small Trains how
to attain to something of a satisfaction, that is at present, agreeable to the
measures of his yet imperfect Judgment and Capacity.

And then afterward, when he has attained to a compleater maturity of his
reasoning Faculties, this impetuous natural disposition restlesly drives him on
to the choice of some Undertaking or other, by which he promises to himself an
attainment of some kind of Happiness, as the end and scope of his intendment.
And as Men are variously inclined, and differently (perhaps though but
occasionally) biased in their Opinion of this or that way of living, so does
this restless Principle (by which men are universally acted) always attend,
and haunt their several Minds, to hurry them on to the search after, and the
choice of something, whatsoever it is, upon which they have fixed their opinion
of being Happy by it.

And hence it is, That when that natural Impulse scourges one man into the
pale Study, to pass away his time (and sometimes his Health and Fortune) in a
solitary converse with Papers, for the attainment of Learning, as his proposed
Happiness; and when another is called out by the same natural Principle, to
sacrifice his Peace and Quiet upon the Military Theater, or to wind himself
into the Intrigues of public business, upon a design of being Happy by some
Applause or Honor; a Third makes use of all his Skill and Friends, to shroud
himself in the most private retirement, and to live in a total Seclusion from
all public affairs, as he judges it to be the best Expedient, how he may live
an Easy and Happy life. And as in these, so in all other instances of like
nature, men are always tumbling up and down in this busy World, and do behave
themselves like Messengers sent out for some lost or undiscovered Treasure, who
though they go a Hundred ways to find it, yet they all went out upon the same
Errand, and were carried on by the same Impulse and Design of projecting and
prosecuting something, in which they all might expect and presume a
satisfaction to themselves. And all this is done by the force of their natural
implanted desires, and impatient appetites of being Happy, which GOD gave them,
and which they could not at choice resist.

And this explains our meaning of the First Truth, of which we are in quest.

Section II.
THis Second Section informs us, That as by these few intimations, Man's
natural overruling Appetite of being Happy, must needs be acknowledged; so, by
a direct consequence, it must as necessarily be believed, that GOD has not
denied him somewhere or other, Neque enim omnes homines naturali instinctu
immortales and beati esse vellemus, nisi esse possumus. Aug. 4. Cont. Julian.
some sufficient means, and a tender of some suitable Objects, which his
rational and discursive Understanding may judge fit to be chosen, and in the
enjoyment of which, he may be able to find out something that may be
commensurate to his natural Desires, and which may answer his present
endeavors for it, to his own Mind and Reason.

All which must as infallibly be granted to be True, as that it cannot be
believed, that the All-Wise and Good GOD should create Man to be such an
intolerable Encumbrance and Infelicity to himself; as to be always by Nature
restlesly disposed to desire, seek, and attempt that, which was never put into
his power and capacity to attain. For that were to give him a desire, and to
dispose him for an endeavor of something, that were impossible: Which would be
so irrational in its self, and so reproachful to the Divine Nature, as that it
cannot be supposed, that such a disposition should be intentionably implanted
in him by a Good GOD, unless any man can be so prosane in his Mind, as to think
that GOD intended to make Man certainly Unhappy, at the same time when He first
designed to give him a Being: Or, that He should please Himself in such an act
of Sovereignty and Power, which should be so greatly inconsistent with His Love
and Equity.

And then afterward (which is worst of all) that the holy God should be
presumed to behold a poor wretch, that was made by his own free choice and
pleasure, and that always lays at the Foot of his own Dominion and Authority,
to baffle himself like a Fool, and to toil like a Slave, for that which
(without any fault of his own) he can never find out, or arrive as; or that
after all his fruitless labors, and lost endeavors for some unsufficient
Prize, he must at last be so unhappy, as to applaud the Being of a Stone, that
lodges quietly in the Bosom of a Mountain; or be tempted to envy so many
Plants and Animals, that infallibly enjoy the end of their nature, without any
observable miscarriage in their actions, and certainly without any discursive
and habitual sense of their own disappointment or dissatisfactions.

These are such conceptions of a Good and Holy GOD, that they can never enter
into the Heart of any man, but his, that resolves to maintain a dispute against
his Sovereign Goodness, and indeed against his Real Existence; or that loves to
sport himself, in managing Satyrs against the perfectest visible piece of work,
which his Infinite Power and Wisdom ever brought forth into Being.

And nothing but the supposal of a Future State can silence these unbecoming
conceptions of the Divine Nature, as it will fully be made evident in the
latter part of this Argument.

Now the design of this First Chapter is to evince, that infallibly there is
implanted in man by a natural and insuperable instinct, such a desire and
appetite of being Happy. And then, that in consequence Almighty GOD has either
provided some where or other a Happiness that may answer and determine those
desires, and satisfy those appetites of his nature, or else it must be
presumed, that he Created him with the same infelicity, as to his mind, as if
as to his Body he had qualifyed him with a natural thirst and hunger, and then
had allowed him nothing, or what should be unsufficient to satiate such
importunate Appetites. A Creation of being in such circumstances, would look
more like an act of absolute Tyranny, than the effect of a Gracious Power and
Authority.

But has not God provided a sufficient means by the happy enjoyment of a man's
own being in this world (as other Creatures have) for the satisfaction of his
natural desires and appetites, so that we shall not need to have recourse to
the Existence of another World, where (we suppose) such desires may be answered
and determined? But that Enquiry is the business of the next Chapter. Therefore,

CHAP. II.
IN this Chapter I shall evidently evince, That there is nothing allowed to
Mankind as attainable in their present Mortal Lives, that is sufficient to give
any tolerable acquiescence to those desires, and appetites, which GOD had
Soveraignly and Naturally implanted in their minds: And that without a
consideration had to the possible enjoyment of the happiness of another Life.
All that they can be possessed of in this world, will be so far from
determining their desires, that they will be found to be little better than
frustration, and disappointment; and being relied upon (as in reason they
should, if nothing else can be expected or found) as their present happiness,
will become little more than a burden, and an oppression to their own lives.
And the Truth of this will be managed in three Sections.

Section I.
IN this First Section, I shall State the Measures of what can possibly be
reputed man's special happiness in this Life. And for that end let it be first
considered, That all that, which God has set in man's present view, and that
most immediately stands at the door of his senses (the common in-lets of
objects to his affections, and the imaginative part of his mind) for his desire
and entertainment; and that is agreed upon and celebrated in the world by an
universal consent and suffrage, as man's principal happiness in this life (where
there is no concern for a Future State in Faith or Practice) must be at least
that which may be commonly thought, and esteemed a present sufficient
Well-being, or an enjoyment of it in some such degree and proportion as may
acceptably accommodate the natural temper of a man's innate desires.

Now if we strictly examine the nature of all that, which can be presumed to
make up such a present Well-being, it will be found to consist in the enjoyment
of so much Knowledge, Health and Plenty, as may procure a man so much
Reputation, Friendship, Power, Peace, and other such like accommodations as may
afford him, in his opinion, an easy and satisfactory way of Living. For
nothing else can otherwise be suggested, which in any Sense may be called a
present attainable Happiness, if the concern of another State be laid aside.

As for the pretense of a sufficient Happiness in this World, by Virtue's being
her own Reward, the folly and insufficiency of it has been examined in the
Fourth Section of the Second Chapter of the Third Argument. And then, as to the
Pretensions of Learning and Contemplation (as some Philosophers have contended
for them) they also have been sufficiently accounted for in my Second Argument,
Chap. 2. Sect. 1. and 3.

Now, as to our described present Enjoyment of a well-Being, allowing some
circumstantial alterations in the opinion of it, according to the different
humors and inclinations of Men's Minds, though the whole World admire,
proclaim, and desire it, as their chiefest Happiness in this mortal Life, yet
it is certain, that in its best circumstances, and most desirable successes, it
could never be designed of GOD (for whatsoever other ends he might please to
allow it, of which an account shall be presently endeavored) to be a Man's
natural and sufficient Felicity, upon the warranty of these Three Reasons to
the contrary.

1. The First is, That if GOD Almighty had intended it as Man's sufficient
Happiness, He would either have soveraignly given it to every Man, necessarily
to enjoy it, or he would have put it in every man's power to attain to such a
well accommodated State, and way of living at his own choice, and upon his own
endeavors for it. Which sovereign Donation, or possibility of attainment, must
be necessarily supposed, in whatsoever it is, that is propounded to such an
intellectual Agent as Man is, for the satisfaction of his Rational Desires, and
the Natural Appetites of his Mind; or those qualifications will appear to be
given him, not only infinitely to his own disadvantage, but to be his perpetual
Calamity and Encumbrance.

A Desire, and not to enjoy, is upon any account a very uneasy State of Mind,
but such a Desire, without any possibility of Enjoyment, is an intolerable
Oppression.

Now, that every man cannot attain to the enjoyment of the several mentioned
Branches and Constitutives of a present well-being, by his own contrivance, and
at his own choice. And then, Can any understanding Mind be so inconsiderately
credulous, as once to imagine, that any such thing can be a man's proper,
natural, and sufficient Happiness, which, when he most especially needs it, he
cannot have it, and when he solemnly chooses it, and most earnestly endeavors
for it, he cannot assuredly obtain it? But this Case has been largely
accounted for already. Are. 2. Chap. 1. Sect. 2.

2. But then, Secondly, Upon a supposal that some few men, by some
extraordinary concurrent favorable hits of Providence, should be so successful
in the World, as to be made rare Examples of such a Happy way of Living, with
all its mentioned adjuncts and circumstances (which not one of Ten Thousand
ever enjoyed) yet it is certain, that even then, that successful State, (in
whatsoever degree it is allowed them) could never be designed of GOD as their
sufficient Happiness (which must be supposed, if no future World) because it
could never be found to give their Minds any constant and settled satisfaction,
when they were so possessed of it, but that the more, and the longer those men
enjoyed it, though no interruption had ever intervened (which were a monstrous
Vanity of Mind to have presumed) the more they could not but discover its
insufficiency to terminate their Desires. And to what degree soever they had
raised their expectations of it, before they attained it, yet they always
experimentally sound the Enjoyment of it to have come so far beneath a
tolerable satisfaction, that it has often proved little better than a baffle
and real disappointment of Mind. And further, it is observed, that in the
pursuit of such a present Felicity, the accession of every new Acquist does
always but inflame men's Appetites, and heighten their expectations of some
more, newer, and other Seize: So that, in that respect, such men's
Thoughts must necessarily be supposed to be always wandering up and down, and
unweariedly fluctuating in an infinite Circle, and endless Maze, and
Reciprocation of Desires and Unsatisfactions, Expectations and Disappointments.

And, the main Reason of all this (as Seneca well observes) is, Because there
is not any thing in the World that is enough; Cupiditati nihil satis. Si
desiderabit aureis fulgentem vasis supellectilem, and antiquis nominibus
artificum, etc. nunquam explebis inexplebilem animum, non magis quam ullus
sufficit humor ad sanandum eum, cujus desiderium non ex inopia, sed aestu
ardentium viscerum oritur. De Cons. ad Alb.
and that the highest Enjoyments are too strait and disproportioned. For
though, perhaps, they are not so for men's present ordinary use, yet they will
always be found to be so, for the satisfaction of the natural desires of their
Minds.

And this is the very Reason, Why many Persons that enjoy the fullest Plenty,
and in appearance to others, all they could wish for, yet may be unaccountably
uneasy in their own Minds, and oftentimes very unbecomingly froward in their
demeanor to others, and even to them, whose fidelity, kindness and diligence
they have cause to applaud and love: I say, all this is, because their Desires
were originally and naturally fitted for a bigger, and indeed, for another kind
of Happiness, than what this World could afford them.

And upon this account it is, that Sir Francis Bacon takes notice, Cogita,
quamdiu eadem feceris, mori velle, non tantum fortis, aut miser, sed etiam
fastidiosus. Ess. 2.
(which he borrowed from Seneca) that The Fastidious, that is, such as are
tired with any considerable continuance in their Enjoyments, are as willing to
die, and leave them, as the stout, and the miserable that wants them; and that
because (says he) they have created a weariness of doing the same thing so
often over and over. It Is certain therefore, by a most necessary and reasonable
consequence, that men's Appetites are to be satiated with some thing that is not
here to be found, and therefore that must be future, and in reversion, or no
where at all; which would be a Reproach to the CREATOUR's Honor, in giving him
such a nature, and yet depriving him of a suitable satisfaction. But this has
been more fully managed, Ar. 2. Chap. 1. Sect. 1.

The Third and Last Reason, to show the insufficiency of all the Enjoyments
with which a Man can possibly be possessed of as his present Happiness in his
mortal State, must fall so much short of answering his natural importunate
Desires of being Happy, is, because they will always be (and he cannot but
know it, if he considers) a possession of what is most unconstant and uncertain:
Words that have from thence received their native Sense and Meaning, and which
are never so properly expressed, as when they are used as Epithites and
Adjuncts of every Temporal Enjoyment; and therefore, for which, nothing that is
called a Rational Judgment, can have any kind of true satisfaction in them.

There is nothing here (says Seneca) that is not vanishing and deceitful,
Nihil non lubricum and fallax, and omni tempestate mobilius. Jactantur omnia,
and in contrarium transeunt, and in tanta volutatione rerum, ut nil cuiquam
nisimors certum. Epist. de Con. Am.
or not unconstant as Seasons; all things are tossed up and down in their
interchanges, and pass into their contraries; and that in such unsteady
revolutions, as that a Man can call nothing Certain, but his Death: Or, as he
expresses it in another place; In tanta inconstantia turbaque rerum, nihil
nisi quod praeteriit, certum est. Idem.
The unconstancy of things is such, as that there is nothing Certain, but what
is past.

Who is it that is certain of the contrary, but that Flames to morrow may throw
him out of his stately House or Palace, into a despicable Tent or Cottage; or,
that a Tempest may prevent the safe arrival of his importing Treasure; or, that
War, Rapine, and a sudden change of Seasons, may defeat his Expectations in his
fruitful Fields; that a malignant Distemper may empty his House of his numerous
Posterity, and a Thousand Accidents may invade him in all the circumstances of
his well-being? And then also, he cannot but know, that in despite of all his
most powerful defense, he lays every day, one way or other, at the mercy of the
malicious, and the spightful.

What privilege can I claim against the devouring Tyranny of the Covetous, Anne
ipse privilegium impetravi ab invidia and avaritia, inexorabilibus tyrannis?
Quod alicui, omnibus contingens est, quod omnibus, mihi. De Art. Volun. lib. 3.
223.
and the Envious (says Neirembergius)? What may happen to any, may happen to
all; what to all, to me.

And, if that man may think himself Happy, or can be cheerful, that knows a
Sergeant, or an armed Party stands at his Door, upon design to arrest him; or
when he understands, that his House stands amidst an infected Neighborhood,
ready every moment to seize upon him; then may a man be reasonably pleased, and
happy, that considers, That all his Enjoyments are possessed with a perpetual
danger of Change and Uncertainty. I say, Where things are thus insecure, What
considering Mind can suggest a Reason of being Happy by any the greatest
Enjoyments? And surely, where right Reason can give no Judgment: for it, that
Mind cannot be truly satisfied in it.

There is nothing in Nature truly Blessed, but what is exempt from fear. Non
enim beatum est, nisi quod intrepidum. Inter suspecta male vivitur.
No man lives but miserably, where all things are suspected, says Seneca. And
so are all things else, but the present Favor of GOD, and the Hopes of being
Blessed in a better World, to him that lives a Virtuous and Religious Life.

These are the Three general Reasons, which I have offered against the
possibility of man's being truly happy by any thing that bears the name of an
outward Well-being, in it is best Circumstances; and therefore not likely to be
designed of GOD for Man's choice, as sufficient to answer, and determine the
created natural Desires of his Mind after his own Happiness. But the Sensual
has something to say against all this, which must be considered.

Section II.
THerefore, this Second Section tells us, That the earnest Pretenders to a
present possible Prosperity, and the mighty Admirers of it, will,
notwithstanding all this, think and say, That they are not to be turned off
from their own sense of being happy with such a dry Philosophical Lecture as
this; and that instead of being convinced by these Reasons, they will with
Indignation and Scorn enough, mock at the Divine that preaches them, or the
Philosopher that disputes for them; or at the Sober and the Meek, the Just and
the Charitable, that do exemplarily make use of them, to the practical
Exprobration of their Follies.

But then I am particularly obliged to take notice, That there be three sorts
of such Men, (of which a great part of Mankind do appear at all times to
consist) who are always more obstinately and uncontroulably bent against
these, and all other Arguments, how reasonable soever, that can be offered in
this case: And with these Men I am willing to treat apart, and by themselves in
a closer Method.

And the First of those Three, are the mighty Men of Wealth, who in Contempt of
the former Reasons (which they can no more answer, than be wise) are resolved
to think of no other Happiness, but to be perpetually listing numbers to their
Regiment of Creditours, and catalogueing more Inhabitants to their increasing
Territories, that they may be proclaimed Rich, and admired as Prodigies for
their famous Acquisitions. For it is generally observed, That Covetousness and
Pride, are complicated in the same Person, and do show themselves in all their
Actions, where they may be competible. And therefore, these men will defy the
Man, that dares presume to charge their Reason with an obligation of being just
or merciful, ingenuous or humble upon the reasonable Arguments of making a safe
Provision, and an undefeizable Estate for themselves, in another, and a better
World.

The next silly Unattendant to the former Reasons, is the Man of Bustle and
Ambition, and he wonders that any man should dare, with such Arguments as
these, to affront his humor in the present sense of his own sufficient
Happiness. And when he is accounting in a long List, the Names, Wealth, and
Virtue of his Ancestors; and is relating some instances of his own Valor, and
successful Achievements (though it were (perhaps) but in a Duel for a vain
Woman, or in Revenge for an idle Word) that Man, that shall refuse to
aggrandize his Bravery, and to admire his Happiness upon such pretensions, or
inform him of any other sober instances of Honor, and true Fortitude, must be
content for a while, to bear the Character of an ignoble and despicable Spirit.

The Third of that obstinate sort of Men, is the sorry Voluptuary, who, with
Contempt enough of the pretenses of both the other, blesses himself in the
opinion of his own Happiness, and thinks that there needs no other to be
offered to him for his present satisfaction, than to be rocked asleep in some
sensual Pleasures; and would fain immagine that he enjoys his Being to Purpose
and Happiness enough, while he is gratifying his Sensual Apperites; and then
laughs at all those, that shall bring Reasons to advise him to the contrary, as
a Pack of pitiful empty Fellows, that don't understand the Town, (as they call
it) and that don't know what is Good Breeding; Eating, and Drinking, Gallantry,
and Love.

These are the three sorts of men that almost divide the vain World between
them, and that are especially presumed not to be at leisure, to attend to the
examination of such general Reasons, as are alleged for the unsufficiency of
all present enjoyments, or of what may be offered for the happiness of another
World: And therefore, are obstinately set to resist all possible counsels, that
may be given to engage them in the serious thoughts of it.

And now, that there may be nothing omitted, to oblige such men to take a full
account of their own follies, I cannot but judge it very reasonable, that
besides those three general imperfections, to which all temporal enjoyments are
in common certainly subjected, and as so qualified, are rendered incapable to
afford any true happiness to such a rational Creature, as can discourse its
measures; I say, I cannot but judge it both Necessary and Charitable, that I
may make the conviction more complete and available; that besides those three
Arguments that may inform their reasons in general, I may particularly arrest
these men's several humors, and mistaken sentiments of their own happiness,
with a proper remonstrance against every one of those pretended principal
constitutives of humane prosperity; proving that every one of them have their
proper and particular insufficiences, (besides those former general
defailancies) to make a Man truly happy. And I shall give every one of them a
fair Trial apart.

1. And then, as to the first admired Instance of humane happiness, Wealth, let
the forementioned men of Money seriously count and consider with themselves,
what it is in its self and proper nature; and in the Issue of their thoughts
they must find, that it is no more, but a servant to their natural necessities,
and at best, but an expedient to attain the better conveniences and decencies
of their short and mortal lives: And then, what there is more than will well
serve those ordinary ends, (which an indifferent plenty may attain to with less
trouble, and fewer dangers and fears) must in reason be accounted a redundant
surplusage, either to become a prey for them, to whose trust and management it
is committed, or to be thrown over board, to be caught up by them, that
perhaps neither loved his person, nor deserved the advantage.

And indeed, What signifies a vast and overgrown fortune, but noise and
trouble, when the Fruitless Splendor of it shall be considerately discounted?
For if the Owner of it be Good, Virtuous, and Religiously qualified, the burden
of his Duties to GOD and Man is but so much the more increased, and the
acquitment of a good Conscience so much the more nice and difficult; and his
temptations to Folly will be infinitely multiplied. If it be said, that his
plenty and greatness in the World's eye, may upon several accounts adapt him
the better to assist in the conduct of public Government, it is truly
affirmed: But then where lies the Happiness of it? Magna servitus est magna
fortuna. Sen. ad Polyb. Cons.
It is no more than to ease others of that common burden, and for the benefit
of those, who know not how to be satisfied with their own good: It is but to
keep tame an unruly multitude; and when others may sleep quietly in their
retired privacies, to be awake to watch over Lions and Tigers from devouring
one another. For all which, he must expect little else, but ingratitude; and
perhaps he may be paid for all his Cares and Pains, with nothing else but
Spite and Hatred, the usual Vulgar Returns, for the most careful and vigilant
Authorities.

But if that Great Man been't good; that is, first, if his humor be to put his
surplusage to a Trade of further Increase, how much is he better than some
common Officer, or public Receiver of a great Revenue; by which, in time, he
may gain the repute of being the common Cash-keeper of the Country, and so may
possibly be on all hands addressed to, to find Money, to defray the Expenses of
Fools and Sots with Sums, which (perhaps) his eyes may never see more, but in
a little Scrole; or which his next Generation may abuse to maintain the Charges
of some vain and silly way of living? Or if the mighty Man be sensually
disposed; that is, if he expends his redundant surplusage in debaucheries, how
much will his house differ from a common Inn and Hostage, unless it be, that
it is so much a greater one? And if he has a parcel of loose People of both
Sexes in it, his abused Plenties may perhaps procure his House a more famous,
but a worser Name.

Moved with the sense of these Vanities and Inconveniences thus discovered, the
Romans called Riches (Impedimenta) real Encumbrances, like the Cumbersome
Baggage to a moving Army. Omnia ista bona, quae nos speciosa sed fallaci
voluptate delectant, pecunia, dignitas, potentia aliaque complura, ad quae
generis humani coeca cupiditas obstupescit, cum labor possidentur, cum invidia
conspiciuntur, eosque ipsos, quos ornant, premunt; plus minantur, quam prosunt.
Sen Lib. ad Polyb. Cons.
And, for which Reason, many great Philosophers have rejected the Enjoyment of
that, which is called Wealth, and renounced the name of Rich: And many Great
Potentates have unladed themselves of their worldly Greatness and Splendour, to
enjoy the ease and freedom of a poor Monastic. Dio. Laer. in vita Crat.
And last of all, How can that be called an Expedient of a Man's proper
Happiness, Theb. in vita Zenocr. Chaled.
(such as GOD should design to answer, and satisfy his natural Desires of being
happy) that cannot, in the truest sense, make the possessor really either the
more Virtuous, or the Wiser; Tusc. Quaest. lib. 11.
as the Philosopher argues? And thus we have examined the first material a
Mortal's present reputed Felicity.

2. Secondly, As to the Man of Honor, What signifies that which he calls
Greatness or Splendour, or an ambitiously designed popular reputation in the
World, when the nature of it is closely examined? For, it will be found to
depend chiefly upon incompetent Judges of worth; and it seldom falls out to be
the Portion of them that truly deserve it. Insomuch, that many Wise and
Virtuous Persons have been so far from being ambitiously struggling for such an
Honor, that they have shunned and avoided it, as much as they could: And have
been more really ashamed of a popular Courtship and Applause, than other vain
men have been concerned to be disappointed of them.

But then, when it has happened, that the vulgar Vogue has not been mistaken,
(which is very seldom) yet that acquired Honor must lay at the Feet of
unconstant Mortals, and upon the hazard of every trivial Miscarriage, and
misconstruction of Actions; for which solicitous Envy (it is certain Attendant)
will never want a contrivement, and an opportunity.

Besides, we see, that Worldly Honor very seldom follows either Virtue, or any
other worthy qualification of Mind, but that it purely depends upon Wealth, by
what indirect Acts and Arts soever attained, and how unworthily soever used and
managed.

For he that has Money, shall certainly be flattered as, Valiant, Omnis enim
res,
Virtus, fama, Deus, divina humanaque pulchris
Divitiis parent; quas qui construxerit ille
Clarus erit, fortis, justus, sapiens, etiam rex,
Et quicquid volet.
Hor. Lib. 2. Ser. Sat. 3^

Just, Wise, a Prince, and whatsoever he pleases to be (says the Poet.) And
without it, no man must expect to have a greater proportion of Honor, than a
Virtuous Virgin without a Dowry; a Learned Priesthood without the Churches
Patrimony; a Valiant Soldier in Age and Rags; or a Man nobly Born without a
Fortune. And this is the sorry Nature of the Second reputed Constitutive of a
Man's present Prosperity.

3. Then as to the Man of Pleasure, if the nature of it be balanced by a
considerate mind, it will be found at best, but immediately to affect the
brutish part of Man; that is, his inferior Appetites. And about which, his
superior Faculties shall be concerned in nothing more, than in discovering
it is Folly and Vanity, or controuling its Successes.

And if you measure the duration of sensual Pleasure, it is gone as soon as
known; and its fruition, is its end and extinction. And if it has any repeated
Periods, the most desirable instances of it, will in time nauseate, like meat
to a full Stomach, and become as tiresome as Labor, and as unapprovable, as
what is old, worn, and out of fashion. And which is more, there are no
Pleasures, which Religion and Virtue, and the sense of another World cannot
account for, but are generally purchased at the choice of so much unworthiness,
as to make others miserable, or at least, uneasy by them.

Therefore, the great Philosopher, though he would fain have found out a
sufficient attainable Happiness in man's mortal Life, yet found Cause of all
men, to call the Voluptuaries the Burden of the World; (...).

Arist. Eth. Lib. 1. Cap. 5.


and the Disease of Mankind. And Epictetus advises all Wise Men to abstain
from them, if they design any after Joy, or satisfaction to their own Lives. --
(...). Ench. Cap 56.
This is the Third and Last integral part of Man's supposed present Prosperity.

And thus I have strictly examined the several Natures, and particular
Qualities of the three pretended Constitutives of all humane Prosperity in
their proper kinds, and seriously weighed the Concomitant Defects, and
Imperfections of every one of them in particular, where the Concerns of a
Future State are laid aside. And now, What Understanding can be so ridiculously
credulous, as once to believe, That any true Happiness can result from the
Concurrence of such defective Causes; or that is built up of such incompetent
materials, that the possessor should applaud the Enjoyment of it, as his
summary and sufficient Felicity? And then, let a^ considering man further
seriously consult the Reason of his Soul, whether it be possible for him to
have such unworthy Thoughts of a most Good GOD, as that he should create a
Being with Faculties capable to judge and balance the terms and nature of all
the Happiness, with which he must enjoy his whole Existence, and for the
obtaining of which, he is by a natural instinct to be encumbered with the
perpetual toil and solicitations of his own Desires and Appetites; and then
should afford him the Enjoyment of no other, or no better Happiness, than what
is offered to him in this World, as I have truly described the nature of it.

But further, to evince how improbable it is, that the Happiness, which can
only answer those desires and appetites which GOD implanted in all men's
natures, should be lodged in any present enjoyment of humane Life, I shall
remark how ridiculously the wisest men have behaved themselves in their
Adventures to find out a way how to fix it in this World. But that is the
business of the next Section.

Section III.
THis last Section discovers the disordered and disagreeing apprehensions of
all those Philosophers and Wise men, who endeavored to promote a possibility
for the attainment of a real Happiness in this present State. And, it is
observed, that even the Learned sort of them, like men at a loss where to
fix and determine such a chiefest Good, and sufficient Happiness, ventured at
every thing to which their humor, inclinations, and their resolved compliance
with a Sect, guided their Sentiments and Apprehensions: Dealing in their
Opinions of Man's summary and chiefest Happiness, as the old Egyptians did with
the Supreme Deity, which, because they found it not among the Objects of a
present sensible perception, they placed it in every contemptible part of the
Creation, and unmanly adored it where they fixed it.

But then our Opinionists distant and innumerous disagreements among
themselves, was a certain sign, that they had all lost their Mark and Standard;
and were become like men, who finding no certain Path to direct their Progress,
(as it is the universal fate of all Error) wandered about, whithersoever their
private Fancies, or some instant Accident determined their choice and motion:
But still they found themselves out of the way, and the farther they went on,
to look for such a present Happiness, the more their bewildered Minds
discovered to them the misfortune of their Mistakes.

Therefore, of the many that ever pretended to have succeeded in their
Enquiries after the True Happiness of Man, few agreed in any one thing, in
which it should consist. St. Austin reckons up from Marcus Varro Two Hundred
Eighty eight several Opinions of Man's Chiefest Good. Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib.
19. cap. 1.
And Tully accounts a great many, and those (as he averrs) according to the
Sense of the most remarkably Learned Adventurers, to find it out.

The Epicureans placed it in Pleasure, the Stoics in the habits of Virtue, the
Peripateticks in the Acts and Exercises of it: Some of them placed it in
Knowledge and Contemplation, and others in Power and Dominion, Eth. lib. 10.
and many in Friendship, as Aristotle largely discourses the Sentiments of
them. Therefore the same Cicero acknowledges, That there was never any
question, De nulla quaestione majorem esse inter summos viros dissentionem,
quam de ea, quaenam res sit summum honum. Lib. 5. de finibus.
about which the most considerable sort of men had so many different Senses, as
about that, in which Man's chiefest Good and Happiness should be placed. And
Stobaeus quotes the words of the Ancient Philemon, complaining, That the
Philosophers had labored away their time, (...). Ser. 53.
how they might find out the Chiefest Good, but all in vain. And while some
placed it in one thing, and some in another, some in Wisdom, and some in
Virtue, they did rather perplex the Notion, than find out what it was. Thus a
Heathen could represent the Case a great while ago.

But, among the different fond Opinions which the layers aside of a Future
State, whether in Faith or Practice, have vainly suggested to their Thoughts,
as their most satisfactory Felicity; I must not forget more strictly to examine
those many men's pretensions, who have projected for a Sense of being Happy, by
endeavoring to transmit something of themselves to Futurity, though it were
but to keep alive their Names and Memorials to after Ages.

And the Folly of this I shall at last the more industriously and fully
endeavor to represent, because I perceive, that in those men, with whom such a
design of Happiness has prevailed, their intendments have been generally more
steadily and constantly fixed and prosecuted, than in any other of the former
Pretensions to humane Happiness; where the thoughts of another World have been
suspended and superseded.

And the Reason of this my Observation, is, Because such kinds of Designs as
these, are more accommodable to that natural disposition, that is generally
implanted in men's Minds, to aim at something that is Future, and indeed (if
possible) Immortal. And therefore it is, that those men that have in any kind
been governed by that natural temper, are so much the more apt to be pleased
with their own mistakes, as that their Designs do bear a nearer assimilation
and alliance to the prosecution and attainment of the truly immortal and
eternal Happiness; for which (it will appear) Man was principally and
designedly made.

And without doubt, that temper in Man's mind, toward Futurity, howsoever it is
abused to such trivial purposes, was wisely and graciously allowed by a Good
GOD to him in his very Nature, as a great advantage for his more easy and more
natural prosecution of that, which should be really his immortal Bliss, when he
should go about that Happy Work.

Now, an instance of this natural disposition, is very often expressed in
Planting, Building, Experimenting, and Writing, and in such like Intendments;
even when of the benefits of such Undertakings, the very Projectors themselves
could not but understand, that they should either never be partakers, or but
for some inconsiderable space of time. But, the Reason upon which they founded
their Encouragement, was, That they found themselves like to be pleased that
their Projections might remain to Futurity, as standing Remarques of their
Care, and Skill, and Honor, or they know not what. And possibly, these men
having before experimented (as it is frequently observed in the World) the
defects of all other sensual Pleasures, they adventured upon this last Design
in the wiser and declining part of their Lives, as that which did more
accommodate the natural Propensity, that is in all men (if they did not
overruled it) toward the most substantial Happiness of a Future Life.

And, I believe, thus were the Thoughts of Solon governed, when he had told
Croesus, the rich Lydian King (after he had shown him his vast Treasures, and
asked him, Whether he did not believe him to be an Happy man, that was Master
of such Wealth and Kingdoms) That no Man ought to be reputed Happy, till after
Death. I say, Something of that nature prevailed with Solon to use that
Expression, -- (...), etc. Eth. lib. cap. 1.
as appears by the manner of Aristotle's large and industrious confutation of
him in the first Book of his Ethics. And it is supposed that Ovid turned it
into Verse, in the behalf of Solon's persuasion. -- Scilicet ultima semper
Expectanda dies homini, dicique beatus.
Ante obitum nemo, supremaque funera debet.



Now, as this mistaken Expedient for humane Happiness has governed no
inconsiderable part of the vain World, and more particularly such, whose Age
and Experience might have stocked them with a sounder Judgment, so it has been
mightily endeavored by Two sorts of men, of whom I must now especially take
notice.

And, the first of those are they, whose design it is to be preparing Monuments
of their Skill in Arts and Sciences, and in some very chargeable and laborious
Experiment, thereby to survive their mortalities, and to acquire an everlasting
Fame to themselves, when they were gone off from their mortal Stations.

Secondly, I take notice, that there has been others of another distant
temper, who all their days had been drudging in Gare and Toil, and constantly
exercising all their skill, and denying themselves all reasonable satisfaction
in their own present Plenties, with a design to heap a Fortune big enough to
set up a Family of their own Name in vogue and note in the World, when they
were gone; thinking thereby to immortalize themselves in their own Posterity;
and thereby creating to themselves so much the greater opinion of their own
Happiness and Satisfaction, as that they had gone so far toward a perpetuation
of their pretended Happiness: Concerning which kind of Happiness, the excellent
Author of the Religio Medici has this Expression. Part 1. Sect. 40.
This Conceit and counterfeit Subsistence in our Progenies, seems to me a mere
Fallacy, unworthy the desires of a Man, that can but conceive a Thought of the
next World: who in a Nobler Ambition should desire to live in his Substance in
Heaven, rather than in his Name and Shadow in the Earth.

Now, as to both which Designers for any present or after Happiness, (I know
not which to call it) were it not that sometimes many commendable things have
been done for the benefit of those that are present and to come, so as that
their doing Good might turn to some happy account to themselves in a Future
State, their design is liable to as many unaccountable Exceptions, as most
other the former unfortunate Contrivances for a settled Happiness in this Life,
have been subject to.

1. As for the First sort of these I mention, who had stifled their natural
Appetite, designed by GOD and Nature for the better pursuance of something, by
which they might be made really futurely Happy; and then would give themselves
leave to think of no other Happiness, but what they might acquire by leaving
some lasting Monuments of their Skill and Labors after them, What words are
little enough to express the fondness of such an Intendment?

For, if we measure the substance of their Happiness, with respect to such a
Futurity, (as is pretended) it can be placed no where else, but in a fond
Proposal of something to their own minds, of which (supposing their denial of a
Future State) they themselves can never have any possible sense or enjoyment,
and of which at present they can have no perception, but as in a pure Romantic
notion, and empty imagination: And by which, they shall have just so much real
Happiness, as that man can presume himself to have a sufficient defense in a
time of Danger, who had studied to build Castles in the Air, by his extravagant
Fancy.

What present real Felicity could Ovid propound to himself in his own
perception, as to a future Fame (which was the only thing that he is presumed
to aim at) when he flourished his vaunting Epilogue to his Metamorphosis any
more, than if his Name had been designed to survive but for his being the
Author of such a ridiculous Story as Tom Thumb; or, as if Juvenal had named him
among his blundering Poets; or, that his Reputation had been buried with others
as considerable as himself, in a perpetual night of Oblivion and nothing?

And, What more could other the famed Authors of extraordinary experimental
Inventions propound to themselves, by the credit of their Operations, when they
could not but know, that in a short time they should have far less sense of any
happiness or satisfaction by them, as to their own minds, than the Worms should
enjoy, who were ready to try fresh Experiments upon their Bodies in those
natural Laboratories, their Graves?

And, if it be said, that possibly it might be some happiness to them, that
they could take a certain present satisfaction in their Thoughts, that they
should survive themselves in their Reputations; My Answer is, That that
Pleasure could be no more or greater than if the same men should, like Knights
Errants, have persuaded themselves, that they should have the honor to be
afterward reputed as Kings, and Princes; and then should take a great deal of
silly care to be so recorded in a Romantic Story.

The Happiness of them both in each respect is much the same. And then, Who but
mad men could imagine it to be a Felicity so considerable, as that GOD should
allow them no other, or no better enjoyment, to determine their natural desires
of being Happy, but in such ridiculous Triflings of their own imaginations?

2. Then, Secondly, as for the Happiness of those that have all their Lives
laid long Trains, to purchase large Territories, and build stately Palaces, on
design to perpetuate their Names in a famed Family after them, it is much the
same with the former pretensions, and perhaps the folly of it is, in some
respects, less accountable, if they also shall have really neglected the
Concerns of their future Happiness in another World.

For, First, The Foundation of this imaginary Happiness to themselves, is not
certainly True; for it is yet a Dispute among men, Whether a transmission of a
greatly famous Fortune can make Posterity more happy than a lower Plenty; and
the wisest men have agreed upon the latter. But then, Secondly, If the
Foundation of their fansied Happiness were in that respect really True, yet it
were infinitely vain to rely upon it, and that, because it were upon a very
great uncertainty and hazard, whether their own Posterity should ever inherit
it, or whether any of their near Relations should ever share their amassed
Fortunes, when they die: But that their Estates might become, like a rich
shipwreck, to be divided among Strangers, or perhaps among such whom they
neither loved nor valued. Or, Thirdly, If it be granted, that those which they
designed should enjoy them, yet it was still very uncertain, whether they would
then preserve those famous Fortunes as they intended, or not ridiculously
scatter them, as fast as themselves had gathered them together; or whether
otherwise they had not all their lives been providing a vast Stock, for a Sot
to play the fool with, or for some unworthy Person, that shall ungratefully,
yet justly, deride the Gainers of it, (though perhaps his own Parents) for
their ridiculous penury to themselves, to obtain such a fortune for him; or,
Fourthly, If it shall happen that their Fortunes shall be possessed by one of
an honest and worthy Mind, yet it is possible, that the same Person that enjoys
them, may judge himself never the better, if not much the worse for them, in
many respects. That is, When he shall find himself subject to more Temptations
to miscarry in his Virtue, and to be involved in such encumbrances as may make
his life more uneasy; and that especially if he shall be sensible, that that
Estate was unworthily and unjustly gotten, or basely and scandalously kept for
him.

So that if all those silly promoters of great Estates, should within a few
Years after they were committed to their little tenements underground, rise
again, and take a prospect of what becomes of the Issue of all their pinching
Frugalities, Cares and Cunning, they would commonly see little else, but the
wretched effects of their own folly and mistaken designs, and find, that the
happiness they enjoyed upon their projections for Posterity, had all along been
nothing but one vain Dream of something, that never was like to come to pass
according to their own purposes and expectations. But then lastly, if all
things had succeeded according to the measures of their own fancy and design;
yet it is certain, that their own dried and broken Skeleton (all that is
presumed to remain of themselves, if no Future State) shall no more be
concerned in the Flourish of their succeeding Generations, than in the Grandeur
of the great Mogul, or the Persian Monarch; and that it shall then be all one
to them, whether their Sons be Emperors or Laqueys, or whether they be
Sovereigns of the Ocean, or but Admirals of some poor Indian Canoo. For what is
the difference to a dead Parent (for any sense he can have of it, supposing no
Future State) whether his Child be a Triumphant Tamberlain, or a Captive
Bajazet, a Victorious Caesar, or an unfortunate Pompey, or to have been a Slave
to either of them. The drudging projectour may have Joy or Sorrow in his
present Portion while he lives, and he does his duty if he provides for them
that come after him, but he cannot be concerned in the Prosperity of any of
them, whom he leaves behind him (as Aristotle observes in his Contest with
Solon's Principle); (...). Eth. Lib. 1. cap. 10.
They shall be so much nothing to himself, as is the Bliss of another World,
which he has neither believed, thought of, nor endeavored for.

And now, what I have said in particular of these two famous sorts of triflers,
with their natural inclinations, to perpetuate their happiness on that account,
I may say the same in general of all others, who have any other ways proposed a
design of felicity to themselves by leaving memorials of their names behind
them.

It Is true, the memory of the Righteous is Blessed; that is, to others, whether
as some additional honor to relatives, or as exemplary to them and others, but
as to themselves, they shall have no more perception of it, or of any happiness
by it, (laying aside the thoughts of another World) than the senseless Dust, or
the cold Monument that covers them: All the most famously remarked instances of
their Virtue, or wisdom, shall be no more to them, than if it were recorded, at
what time, or in what Country, they had tied up their Garters, or turned to the
Wall for their Natural Ease.

What real happiness could those famous Egyptians promise to themselves, that
their Bones were to lie under the vast Pyramides as their lasting Monuments;
more than a poor Roman Soldier, whose Ashes being lodged in an Urn without an
Inscription, informs the World, That there was such an one buried there, that
was content never to be remembered more?

And thus I have accounted for some of the various sentiments of those that
have studied all that is possible, to six Man's summary Felicity in something
enjoyable in his present Mortal Life, or with reference to futurity in the
ridiculous sense I have just now represented it; and my design therein is, that
it may appear, that such men have sufficiently baffled and condemned themselves
by their own confusions of mind, and that by the absurdities of their different
opinions, and their several defective methods of endeavoring to be happy in
this life, they have expressly convinced the World, that there is no kind of
happiness can determine men's minds to an universal agreement, that is founded
upon any thing that is proposable or enjoyable in this mortal State.

And therefore it is very reasonable, and very necessary to be believed, that if
God had designed, that such an happiness, as might possibly have answered and
fixed all men's Desires and Appetites, should have been attainable in this
mortal life, there would have been a proposal of some common and universal
Good, which all men might have plainly understood, and in which all minds
should have as universally and naturally agreed.

Thus I have discharged my self of the Second Head of my Discourse, toward the
perfecting this Argument for a Future State; that is, I have endeavored to
demonstrate, That there is nothing proposed as enjoyable in Man's mortal Life,
by any Objects and Acquisitions whatsoever, that can tolerably answer Man's
natural Appetite of being Happy, or that can agreeably suit that Capacity that
GOD gave him by Creation to enjoy it.

And this I have done by an examination of every thing in the World, that is
pretended for it in particular; and by showing to what intolerable defects they
are all subject in general.

Therefore it must necessarily follow, or nothing else can reconcile the mind
of Man to any kind representation of God's Goodness, that he should give to all
men by a necessary instinct, such an unanswerable desire and restless
expectation of an Happiness, which cannot be found any where while he remains
in this present State; I say, It must then necessarily follow, that there is
another State to come, in which all that heartily desire it, and regularly
labor for it, upon the performance of such terms as GOD requires, and which a
found Reason may suggest as necessary for that end, may be made completely, and
satisfactorily Happy. But that is the business of the next Chapter.

CHAP. III.
IN this Chapter I shall thoroughly demonstrate, That the supposal of the real
Existence of a Future State, and of a sufficient Happiness there attainable,
will naturally solve all those intolerable consequences, which must reflect
upon the Honor of the Divine Attributes, as GOD has of His own Will and
Pleasure created Man, qualified in his mind with those restless and importunate
Desires and Appetites of Happiness, and yet, that He has allowed him nothing
in this present World, by which it is possible it should be attained to. And the
same supposal will also as naturally answer all manner of Exceptions against
the unsufficiency, transiency and uncertainty of all those Good things, which
GOD allows Mankind to enjoy in their present mortal Lives. And this will be
discoursed of in these Three Sections.

Section I.
IN this First Section, I shall plainly manifest, that whatsoever may be
suggested against the Honor of the Divine Attributes on that account, will be
perfectly solved by the acknowledgment of a future State. And to evidence this
great Truth, and to show how naturally all those Attributes in this case are
solved by the supposal of such a State, I need not here go about to advance the
Happiness of it, by any conjectural Excellencies. The nature and measures of it
are a reserve with GOD, and it were a criminal Curiosity, and a great
Immodesty, to be too inquisitive into it, as I have discoursed the case more
fully in my First Argument; I shall here therefore only offer by way of
illustration, what the present universal Experience of the Virtuous and Pious
can evince and verify.

For, whosoever he is, that shall set his Heart to exert those natural and
strong inclinations of his Mind, for the attainment of that Great end, and
shall affectionately place his Thoughts and Desires, his Designs and Hopes upon
it, and then shall accordingly live up to such terms and conditions, by which
it is agreed upon all common reason, that it is to be expected and attained at
the Hand of GOD, (upon whose good Pleasure and free Donation it perfectly
depends) I say, That man shall find such a fitness and suitableness of all
those his natural qualifications to those excellent Objects, that in time he
may be made sensible, that Almighty GOD might have denied him any other temper
of mind whatsoever, rather than that natural powerful Appetite after his own
Happiness; which he now observes to be so necessary, to drive him on through
all the adventures of what he is to do and suffer, for the attainment of that
future State of Bliss.

So that he shall be so far from complaining and objecting against God, for
creating him with such a temper, and (otherwise) troublesome disposition of
mind, that he shall find pregnant Reasons, not only to justify, but to love
and glorify His Goodness, for making him such a Creature as he is, and with a
mind so naturally qualified.

For though, while his inclinations and desires were trifling with the vain
Objects of this Life, and were engaged in their natural Vigor, for the
attainment of a present pretended Happiness by them, they were uneasy and
unquiet, as being employed about an end, for which they were not naturally
disposed, yet they were once terminated upon the concerns of a Happiness to
come, and then exercised about the Actions and Offices that tend to it, they
will be found to all purposes so approveable, as they will appear needful to
enliven his Courage against all Temptations to his own abuse, by the choice of
every trifling Object; and to heighten his earnestness in the performance of
all such good actions, as reasonably tend to its attainment.

And further, Such a man shall not only think well of GOD, that He gave him
such natural dispositions of mind, merely because they adapt him for those
better Enjoyments in future, but also for the present ease and complacency,
which he shall find in the very use of them to that Great end, by the proemial
repasts of a most easy, and sometimes a ravishing Expectation. That is, Such a
Pious man's Desires will be qualified with Contentment, while he is in the way,
as well as be completely satisfied at his Journeys end. So that, as he would
not refuse the Objects of his religious desires for any other whatsoever, that
can be offered him besides, so he would not exchange the very Comfort and
present Happiness of those expectations, for the real Possession of all the
Pleasures and seeming satisfactions which this World can afford him.

The sum is, If these Experiences be duly considered, What can be alleged to
justify the least unkind Thought or Opinion of GOD's Wisdom and Goodness, in
putting Man's nature into such an order, or that He implanted in him such a
Disposition? When it appears, that it is so subservient for, and so suitable
to, his Chiefest Good; that is, that it is so fitted for the use of all the
methods of attaining it here, and that it renders him so adequately
capacitated, for the better reception of it hereafter.

A faint Desire would not have encouraged so great an Engagement, nor have been
receptive of so mighty an Object.

And this solves the First Doubt which concerned GOD, as Creator: About which
something has been offered in my Second Argument.

Section II.
IN this Section it will appear, That the supposal of that State will also
solve all those Exceptions, (which we have already discoursed) that are so
earnestly managed against the forementioned Enjoyments of Wealth, Honor, and
Pleasure, and all other the Accommodations which God has set in man's view,
for his present entertainment.

All which, as they will then be believed in themselves to be Ordinations of
GOD's Great Wisdom, to preserve Mankind in their general order and well-being,
during their mortal Lives; so a Good man will as easily find Reasons to account
them the effects of his Love, and considerable Arguments of his Favor to him,
whenever he is possessed of them.

And then, the Outcries that are raised by Philosophers, Poets, and some
contemplative Persons against them, and the ordinary clamours of idle men's
experimental dissatisfactions by them, (whereby oftentimes unkind Reflections
are made against the Providence of God, in his ordinary dispensations of them)
will be found to arise from no other cause, but from their not believing, or
not sufficiently considering the certainty of a Future State and Happiness,
(for whose Interest they may be improved) to determine their higher desires and
appetites.

For, all those Exceptions and Complaints would then appear to take their
Original from men's promising and endeavoring to make those present Enjoyments
their principal End, and summary Felicity (which God did never intend they
should, for the Reasons already given) and then finding that they came short of
their expected satisfactions, have rendered them obnoxious to such undecent
accounts and representations.

Had they believed, and made (as in reason they ought to have done) the Bliss
of a Future World their Chiefest end, and proposed it to themselves, as their
Supreme Happiness, and then had looked upon those outward Temporary Enjoyments,
to be desired and used in a manner, and with a value answerable to their kind,
and no more; that is, to serve their natural present needs, and for the
conveniences and decencies of their mortal Lives; they would soon have found
them good and acceptable in their kinds and qualities, received them at God's
Hand with Thankfulness, and possessed them with ease and contentment in all
proportions.

And then, all their Complaints of their uncertainty, transiency, and
unsufficiency, to make men completely Happy, would soon have been confuted by
such a Virtuous and Religious Mind, as is resolved on the greater aims, and
that has entertained the noblest designs of attaining the Bliss of a Future
State: To which he knows, that all the Enjoyments of this Life may (one way or
other) be made considerably subservient, notwithstanding their proclaimed and
adjudg'd imperfections.

Upon which account, when a Good man once understands they were chiefly given
him, and then endeavors only to use them for that end, he will soon be
satisfied with their enjoyment in every different degree, and must approve
GOD's Wisdom and Goodness in making them, as they are, (whilst they serve those
purposes) the Objects of His present Care, Desire, and Usage.

It is men's esteeming them too much their Happiness, that makes them found to
be too little, and their using them unworthily, that makes them none at all.

And therefore would men have studied the true notion of their Nature, and as
they are qualified in their proper kinds, and learned, that the uncertainty,
unconstancy, and unsufficiency to complete men's present satisfactions in them,
were but the necessary and natural dispositions, and inseparable qualities of
all earthly Enjoyments; and then would have labored for, received, and relied
upon them but as such, they had never understood what discontent, frustration,
or disappointment had meant; nor ever had they been tempted to make such
passionate Complaints against them, so much to the disparagement of the
incomparable Order of the Divine Pleasure and Providence.

They then would have been no more displeased with them, because they found
them so qualified, than they would think it reasonable to be angry with Horses
or Dogs, because they cannot speak to them, or cannot keep their accounts, or
will not last always, as well as be at present instrumental to their pleasure
or profit in their kinds.

Nor would they have thought the worse of their Money, that GOD gave them as a
Blessing, for many good purposes of Life, because it could not furnish their
minds directly with knowledge and discretion, nor secure their bodies from
Diseases and Torments, or that it could not be its own defense against Loss and
Cheats, or that it would not be a constant Possession, when themselves threw it
away, to serve their Pride, Folly, and Sensualities.

Hence it is, that when the silly Worldling is plaguing himself with his
insatiate Desires of grasping more than will properly suit his needs and
conveniences; and is unkindly crucifying his Mind, because of this or that
disappointment of greater improvements; or for the news of some unlucky
miscarriage in his Affairs: The easy Soul of him that has fixed his design
and hopes upon a future Happiness, (when such things happen to him) is as
unconcerned as a common Spectator.

And when the uncertain turns and cross contingences of the World, do keep the
Good man down to a lower Fortune, he is so far from finding Reasons to murmur
or complain, that he can frame Arguments in his own mind, by which he can
represent his present condition to himself, whatsoever it is, with the same
contentment and satisfaction, as if it were the issue of his own choice, and as
if he had carved it out for himself, by the Rules of his own and other men's
most deliberate Counsels.

And then, if at any time this Good man has reason to foresee any approaching
dangers, to disturb his present order, he presently atones his fears with his
greater hopes: And if those dangers do really come to pass, it is but treating
his mind with more lively apprehensions, and his advancing the expectations of
his future Bliss to a higher pitch, and immediately he is discharged of the
afflictive sense of all those interruptions of his present quiet, whatsoever
they be.

So that he that has once espoused the designs of, and fixed his hopes upon
the Happiness of a future State, will be so far from permitting himself to
murmur or complain, that he will always be studying to furnish his mind with
Reasons to think, that the nature (such as it is) of all the outward Enjoyments
of this Life, is most approvable, and that the manner of their dispensation is
to the best purposes, for his present and future Good and Happiness.

And then also he may find Reasons to believe, that the Great GOD will one day
convince the World, that His Wisdom and Goodness did in no part of His
Creation, and of His constant course of Providence, appear more illustrious,
and designedly propitious for the good of Mankind, than that by His ordination,
those their present Enjoyments should pass in the same unconstant and
unsatisfying order, as they ordinarily do.

And that all vain men will one day be forced to acknowledge to their own
shame, how many advantages they had received and rejected, by their admired
Enjoyments universal insufficiency to give them full contentment, to have in
time attended to better Counsels for their own good, and to have relied upon
more certain Hopes and Blessings, for their own happiness and satisfaction.

And, Lastly, That all Good men, to GOD's everlasting Glory, shall proclaim to
all the World, that had they not been convinced by the many changes and
unsatisfactions in their Temporal Enjoyments of their certain Vanity; and that
they had found no reason to expect any complete Happiness from them, they had
neither loved nor valued, hoped nor endeavored for the higher Blessings of
another World, as they ought to have done: but might have lived and dyed in
their own folly, and in the loss of those incomparable Provisions for their
future Bliss and Happiness. And this concludes the Second Section.

Section III.
IN this Section, I shall plainly represent, That those men who have really
espoused the Interest of that State, and that do actually apply themselves to
those methods that are designed of God for its attainment, shall not only be
able to possess those Temporal Blessings contentedly and thankfully, and bear
all their natural inconveniences and insufficiences, patiently and cheerfully,
but they shall also enjoy a very real Happiness from every part of them, in
their own kinds, and that in such a degree of perception (though inferior to
their advanced expectations of a future Bliss) as other men could never be
affected with, that had enjoyed them in their largest accommodations, with
designs to set their minds upon them, as their principal Felicity.

And this will easily be acknowledged, by examining again the several mentioned
constitutives and parts of all present humane Prosperity.

First, As to Wealth, (so far as a Good man is furnished with it) when thereby
he finds himself enabled to do good with it; that is, to support the
necessities and decencies of his own Life, and in a tolerable manner to provide
for those that depend upon him, and can spare any Portions of it for the relief
of others, it will make him sensible of the Happiness of being Rich, and shall
admit his mind to a mighty contentment in his own Plenties, whatsoever they
are, such as no man can enjoy, when they are made instrumental of Splendor,
Greatness, and Pleasure: -- (...). Plut. Sept. Sapien. p. 155.
He shall go into his fine Habitation with Joy, because he knows it is so
qualified, as Solon would have a Rich man's House; that is, Because there is
nothing in it that is unjustly gotten, or kept with Fear, or spent with
Repentance.

And, as he may thus refresh himself in the very enjoyment of his Plenties, so
he may also solace himself with the fairest hopes of their Constancy, and allow
himself the most reasonable expectations of their Increase, that can be given.
No man is truly Rich, but he that is Good and Virtuous.

And, Secondly, as to Honor, It will in despite of all his neglects of it, be
a certain consequence and result of his Virtuous and Religious Actions,
incomparably above all that can be attained to, by the most ambitious pursuits
of it on all other accounts. For he that governs his actions exactly by the
conduct of that Religion, which secures his Future Happiness, cannot, must not,
but always do that which is civil and truly worthy, and in some respects, that
which is greatly brave and noble; and that, upon the most generous occasions
(when there is need) for the preservation of his KING and Country. His
Principle obliges him to do so, beyond all the advantages of Birth and
Breeding, where the Concerns of another World are not considered.

Then, as to the Last general reputed Constitutive of humane Prosperity,
Pleasure; No man knows what is truly such, but the Virtuous, and the Innocent,
and he that lives in the hopes of a future Bliss; he only sweetly and serenely
enjoys it, when the pretended Voluptuary shall not possess the least shadow of
true satisfaction from his sordid Sensualities. It is the Temperate that enjoys
the true pleasure of his Meals, and the refreshment of an undisturbed sleep;
and that can methodically delight in making an orderly distinction of the Night
and Day, for the ends they were naturally intended: He drinks Waters out of his
own Cistern, and his chaste Bed is full of sweet Love, that bounds his Desires
to his own satisfaction. And if at any time, his want of Health or Plenty, or
the troublesome Scene of public Affairs, shall interrupt the delight he might
have taken in his honest Enjoyments, his Religion can raise his mind to a
pleasure that is intellectual; he has that in reserve, by which he can take
such a satisfaction in his Hopes, that in the midst of all his natural sorrows
and saddest circumstances, he can contentedly smile upon the expected Objects
of his future Happiness.

Now, from what I have been able thus to say in the instant case, we are in
Reason as well as Duty, prepared to admire the Mercy of God, and the Wisdom of
His Goodness, that He has in His Gracious Care so fully provided for Man's
universal Happiness both here and hereafter. And this was the Design and Reason
of our Savior's Promise, Matt. 6. 33.
when He assured all those that would seek the Kingdom of GOD, and His
Righteousness; that is, that should direct their natural Desires of being Happy
to the Blessedness of another World, and then should always endeavor to
persist in that religious way of living, that tends to it, all those things,
that is, all that concerns their present Happiness in this World, shall be also
added to them in the Sense that I have represented it.

Thus we may be satisfied, that all that is called humane Prosperity in every
part of it, was not given and allowed to Mankind in this World in vain: It is
only the Evil and the Inconsiderate that makes it so; but Good men may, and do
commonly enjoy it to as many purposes of Happiness, as themselves would desire
and wish for, with respect to that of another World. And they are not concerned
in the Three former Arguments, to prove the insufficiency of all present
Enjoyments for Man's summary Felicity; it was that they never aimed at; and in
that they were never disappointed; so it is evident, that notwithstanding their
imperfections, though they could not make them completely Happy, yet they
might, in other respects, make them really so in their kinds in this present
Life.

And thus I have got over the Third part of my intended design, by which it may
demonstrably appear, that the acknowledged Existence and Belief of a future
State, does thoroughly solve all Objections against GOD, for giving Man
naturally such an impatient inclination and desire of Happiness, and against
all present Enjoyments, because their Imperfections might render them incapable
of making Man completely Happy in this World.

THE CONCLUSION.
NOW the Conclusion is, because GOD has made no other Provisions in this
mortal State, to give satisfaction to Man's natural Desires and Appetites of
being Happy, but such as are subject to such imperfections, it necessarily
follows, that there must be such a Future State in real Existence, the
sufficiency and immutability of whose Bliss and Happiness, should fully answer
Man's natural Desires and Appetites, and become a Blessing suitable and
proportionable to all the lofty Capacities of his being a Rational Creature.

And if all this were not to be considered as infinitely True, but that Man's
Being here were designed to be concluded within the short span and
inconsiderable space of Time, (far exceeded by many Vegetable and sensible
Creatures) between his Birth and Death, and that nothing else had been provided
for him, to answer the earnestness of his natural Desire and Appetite of being
Happy, but what is here offered to his present view and possession; it were not
too severe to think and say, that Mankind (especially as to the far greatest
part of it) would seem to have lived here, to a very little better purpose,
than to be always baffling themselves with the fair Promises, and the deluded
Hopes of something that they could never arrive at, and of a Happiness that
has always fled from them upon their nearest approaches to it; and that a
great part of the humane World were never like to be much happier, than one
that is continually tossed up and down with the reciprocations of Fears and
Hopes, Expectances and Disappointments: Or, to be resembled by an Hydropick
Person's condition, who is always drinking, and yet always thirsty, burnt and
drowned at once.

Every other Creature, without Sense of any defect or disappointment,
necessarily attains its end: The Brute Animals are satisfied (according to the
capacity of their faculties) with what they are, and what they have: Only poor
Man (upon a supposal that there is no Future State) must pass away his days in
dragging about a Mill of constant Toil, to serve his natural Needs, and to be
always a Drudge to his inferior Appetites; and then being wearied with a few
Annual Circlings of Care and Labor through the time of his strength and
vigor, must at last, in his Age, be left to languish under the Unhappy
apprehensions of the frustration of all he sought for, and for the little
purposes, for which he had ever been reckoned among the Living.

How reasonable then is the Sacred Revelation! and, How much does it approve it
self to be Truth, when it declares and tenders such a Future State of
Happiness, as may fully answer all the Reasons of Man's Creation, and that can
only be adequate and adapted to his Minds natural frame and inclinations?

Had Man's real Happiness and complete satisfaction been attainable from any
Enjoyment here, (which GOD wisely designed it never should) all the suspicions
that the Modern Atheist can allege, might with some Justice be objected
against the Scriptures incomparable Manifestations of GOD's Blessing to Good
Men in another World.

But since it appears by all Experiences and universal Agreement, that the
contrary is True, I cannot conjecture whence the denial and disbelief of a
Future State, or the unaccountable neglect of it, by them that do believe it,
should gain so many Proselites, except it be found among such as are resolved
to live and die like Fools, that is, with a brutish inconsideration of any
thing that is beyond the present survey of their Senses; or among such, who
desperately purposing to live debauched Lives, can no otherwise avoid the
Reproach of being the most Irrational Creatures in the World, but by
endeavoring to hector down the Belief, or at least the Concern of a Future
State, and the dreadful Thoughts of a Following Account.

FINIS.

