AN Holy kiss of Peace, Sent from the SEED OF LIFE Greeting all the Lambs and
little Ones with a Tender Salutation. With a few Words; entitled, Relief sent
forth into the Camp of Israel.
OH ye little Ones! who in the eternal Power of the everliving God, are raised
and redeemed out of the Earth, and from the glory of its fading beauty, and in
whom, and through whom the everlasting love of the Father is made manifest, and
in your hearts shed abroad* by which you are drawn into the one-life and power
of the Pure God, in whose Eyes you have found favor, and through the leadings
of his Power, has made you partakers of the riches of his Grace wherein ye now
stand, and has also brought you into the Covenant of his Life and Peace, and
therein is present with you, and daily making manifest his everlasting goodness
to you, that your Souls in him might be replenished daily, and thereby grow up
into him who fills All in All; his love is strong unto you, and his
Compassion does not fail you, for he has chosen you because he delights in
you. Oh what manner of love is it that he bestows upon you, and wherewith he
loves you, and daily renews unto you, even before the sons of men; whereby when
you read you may understand. And all his benefits retain, and do not let them
slip out of your minds, but consider your Calling, and walk worthy of it, and
know assuredly that Gods determinate Council is to do you good; for he will
save you from your Enemies, and deliver you from the hands of those that hate
you; for mavelous loving kindness he has prepared for you, and manifold
Mercies will he give unto you.

Oh his Love! his Love, his dear and tender Love, it runs and abounds toward
you, and with mighty overflowing streams it reaches to you; meet it in the
salutation, and rejoice in the lovely Greeting, for it will seal upon your lips
everlasting Peace.

Oh my Brethren! What is like the Cords of Love? and what Vessel can contain it
when it arises in its strength* Many Waters cannot quench it, neither can the
Floods drown it, nor Prisons keep it, but through the World it runs to visit
the little Babes that cannot live without it* Oh this is the Day of Loves
abounding and overflowing; prize it highly, esteem it chiefly, for the strength
of it breaks the bonds of Deaths; and this is not shut up from you, but with a
swift motion runs toward you, that it might draw you, and with its strong
Cords gather you, that you might dwell in it, and it might dwell in you.

Oh! my Brethren, be not at all cast down; the strength of Love will blow over
the Storm, and will gather you under the shadow of its own Wing until all be
passed over; For certainly the Lord is with you, and the shout of a King is
sounded amongst you, and dreadful will his Appearance be unto the whole Host of
the uncircumcised; sealed is his Council, and his Decree with Abraham's Seed
must stand, for he has blessed it, and it is blessed for ever. And this is his
Love unto you, who in the blessed Seed has gathered you, that he might not
leave you nor forsake you, but in his eternal Power preserve and save you, and
unto the end keep you and reward you.

Oh! draw nigh, draw nigh ye little Ones, the Cords of Love are about you cast,
come willingly on and halt not in the way, that his virtue and goodness you may
taste; for Mercy stands ready Truth to meet, and Righteousness is prepared
Peace to embrace: Oh! feel them in their Meeting* and rejoice in their lovely
Greeting and Salutation. Oh! the Lord is gathering his little Ones, and from
all the Quarters of the Earth he is bringing up his Sons and Daughters, and in
the bundle of Life he will bind you all, and in the Covenant of Peace he will
join you perfectly together, and make you stand as one man in the power of the
holy Birth which in you is born; that with one heart and mind you may glorify
his Name; and this is the end of your Calling Brethren, to give up your selves
freely unto him, who tells you, That according to his good pleasure he may work
his work in you, and glorify his own Name in the beauty of Holiness; you are
the Vessels prepared for his use, and with the Heavenly Treasure of his Love he
is filling you full.

Oh! The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord is Holy, which Temple you
are; he has made you and formed you, and in the New Creation has stamped his
Heavenly Image upon you; and this is the Work the World does not know, neither
can their corrupted Eye behold the beauty of it, for which Cause they hate you,
and do despite unto you, and speak all manner of evil against you, which is a
sure Seal that you are not of the World; for if you were so, they would love
you; but because you are not so, therefore do they hate you; and think it not
strange because the World hates you, for they hated him before they hated you;
and if they hated him they will also hate you; and if they persecuted him they
will persecute you, for you are not greater than your Lord, who endured the
Mocking, and Spitting, and Buffetting, and the Contradiction of Sinners against
himself, and through Sufferings was made perfect, and Reigns for ever.

Oh my Brethren, unto him keep your Eye, lest you be weary and faint in your
minds; for it was a sharp Cup when he cried that it might pass from him, yet he
learned Obedience though he was a Son, and yielded up himself into the Fathers
eternal Will, and offered up himself an Acceptable Sacrifice; this is your
Forerunner, who is gone before the Way to open and make easy for you; be
faithful and shrink not, but follow with boldness, and be of good Courage, and
think it not strange concerning the Trial that is come amongst you to prove
you; but rejoice in as much as you are partakers of his Sufferings, and counted
worthy to bear his Reproach, for the recompense of Reward will answer it all
for ever; And know that all things work together for your good, and through it
he will perfect his praise.

Oh my Brethren, be Bold and of a good courage; for the Lambs day is come, and
you has he Chosen to be followers of him; be not slack to yield all Obedience
to him, for the day is his, the Wicked shall know it, when through Egypt he
smites in the fierceness of his wrath, be you strong in his Power and valiant
for his Cause, and certainly he will plead it for you, and speedily will he
make a short work in the Earth; Look up unto him all ye little Ones, his love
breaths strongly toward you, and is exceeding dear over you; it Greets you and
Salutes you with a kiss of Unity, to comfort you and refresh you with its
living Virtue. And dear Brethren and little Ones, hold fast your Confidence
unto the end, for the Lord is now separating and sorting, and in the fire the
Dross and Tinn he is purging, and the Gold Refining and Purifying; in the
comings forth it will appear without mixture; then his Jewels he will make up,
and gather his Wheat into his Garner, but expose the Chaff to unquenchable
fire; this is the day of his mighty Power, where shall the wicked stand? and in
what place shall the ungodly appear? For he will bring them all to an end, and
establish the Just for ever and ever: This is his own work, and who shall let
it? Be ye lift up ye little Ones; Your strength is above all mortal men, faint
not in the furnace, but cheerfully abide the Trial, that out of the mixture you
may be freed, and a sound and solid Substance may be brought forth fixed; then
will Isreal's King sit upon his holy Throne, and the pure Seed into perfect
Freedom will be born: Read and understand; my Life runs to and fro amongst you,
and with Cords of love it is bound up with you, and with sweet and tender
Greetings it does salute you; How often do I behold you, and with what joy do I
meet with you? my love continually breaths unto you, for as the Rose in Summer
you are unto me.

Oh my Bowels, my Bowels! I am filled with love, the strength goes forth and
sends a taste amongst you, which runs more swiftly toward you than Streams in
the South.

Oh! thou Immortal Babe, where thou art born thou know me, and thy lips
stand ready to receive me and to rejoice with me; what can separate from thee,
or stop the flowings forth of love unto thee? the Salutation reaches thee, and
with an Holy Kiss of Peace I sweetly Greet thee, and with an Arm of sincere
love I embrace thee.

Oh the Unity in the Life, how sweet it is! We are always near together, and
in the pure lovely life meet one another, and in Christ Jesus the Seed of Life
we are gathered all in one.

And now my Brethren, What shall we render for these inestimable Mercies and
stretched out Favors from the God of our Life? And what is our reasonable
service that we may Answer his loving Kindness? he delights not in burnt
Sacrifice, nor in the fat of Rams, but a broken and a contrite heart he
despises not.

Oh! into the Love sink down, that with the strength of it you may be overcome,
that in brokenness of heart you may offer up an acceptable Sacrifice; for this
I know and do impart it unto you my Brethren, That when the heart is broken and
tender in the strength of Love, then is the Seed sweetly comforted and
refreshed in the Streams of Life; and through this lovely Salutation, and
tender Greeting, and few words from the Life arise to exhort you, and admonish
you to abide in the love of God, and in it dwell together, that the sweet Unity
may be felt amongst you as Brethren; and Bear and Endure, for that is true
loves nature; and keep cool and quiet in your minds, and busy not your selves
with the things of others, for through much business have many been wronged,
who would make themselves busy in every thing, by which the Enemy has drawn
them from their own measures, that they have not been truly Serviceable in any
thing* This has been of little use in the Church of God, but has both wronged
the Particular and the General: therefore all Friends, keep to the Power of God
and dwell in it, for it was before the busy worker, and will judge him down in
you, and bring him to his end; and in stayedness and quietness feel your Peace,
and do not mind so much to appear as to be approved; and keep out of Thoughts
in your Particulars, and also concerning one another; for amongst many Thoughts
have evil surmizings been begotten* and a secret whisperer risen, and then the
Life has been eaten up, and Unity broken.

Oh Friends! be careful and hurt not one another, for ye are Brethren, and
gathered in one Truth to walk, how should you not then love one another? And be
tender hearted and kind one toward another, and if any thing be upon you to
speak to one another, do it in singleness and plainness as in the sight of God;
and if a fault do appear, prove it in Gods Wisdom and let it be freely
forgiven, that you may make it manifest that you are his faithful Ones in
showing forth your love to him, and also unto one another; for where the
contrary stands, it does more hurt amongst you then all your outward enemies
can do unto you; for they can but reach the Body and afflict that, but the
Surmizings and Whisperers eats up your Life and destroys the Inner-man, and
brings Gods pure Seed into fore travail and bondage: Therefore give all
diligence, and keep to your Watch that you may not hurt and wound one another,
but be ready to heal and restore one another, and watch over one another with
that Eye out of which both the Beam and the Mote is cast, and then you will see
clearly and singly, and be able to discern rightly: And be careful after your
own safety and preservation, and wait diligently upon the Lord God, that you
may be kept clear in your understandings, and also faithful to what you do
understand, that whilst you suffer in Body by the Wicked's Cruelty, and bear
forth a Testimony in outward Bonds unto the Truth of God, the pure. Life in you
may not come into Sufferings, by the working of the subtilty in begetting in
you and amongst you hard Thoughts one of another, and striving to be lift up
one above another.

Oh let all diligence be used amongst you, that the pure eternal Unity in Gods
Covenant of Life may be preserved and strengthened; and he that would be
greatest let him become your Servant, that none may be puffed up one against
another, but every one esteeming each other better than themselves, that the
Lamb in you all may Rule and be the Head, and have the Dominion and
Pre-eminence amongst you; for this is his Day, and the Appearance of his Glory,
and he begets into true love, lowliness, gentleness, patience, meekness and
peace, and which brings forth his own mind in you, that the same mind that is
in Christ Jesus will be in you; and then you will be a sweet and savoury People
unto God, and unto one another, and you will be good Patterns and Examples one
unto another, and Watch over one another with a tender lovely Eye; and where
any thing may be seen amiss amongst you, to be ready to Restore such an one in
the Spirit of Love and Meekness, that as the Lord God in his Mercy has Chosen
you, and made you Children of one House, so no Division may be found amongst
you, but perfect Love, and Peace, and Unity may abound in the Name of the Lord
Jesus Christ.

And take heed of many Words, for they gender unto Bondage, and in the
multitude of them there is evil, and where they are much used, and not in the
Power and Wisdom of God for Edification and Comfort one of another, they bring
Anguish and Pain upon the Seed of God.

And be Watchful over the Boaster, that nothing may arise in any of you to
glory in your Parts, or Gifts, or Sufferings, and bring forth an Exaltation in
what is made manifest and your Suffering for it: And being many in this Day,
whose Testimony is now born forth in a state of Suffering, and are in Prisons
together for Truths Cause, and your Obedience to the Commands of Jesus Christ;
be diligent in your Walking, and run not into many Words one with another, but
as they may stand in some Service; Nor glory not in your Sufferings one unto
another, for so will the Enemy work a Conceitedness in you, and lift you up in
it, and then draw a Security over you through Sufferings; And beware you run
not into affectionate Unity one with another, which does not stand in the
Wisdom of the Seed.

Oh! you will find, my Brethren, the great need of Watching and Praying, that
ye may not enter into Temptations; And what I say unto One, I say unto All,
Watch, that the Enemy may not get any Advantage upon you, to hurt and wound the
Innocent Life in you.

And Brethren, be diligent to the Lords Counsel every moment of time, that you
in his hand may be kept, and in his Power preserved, that the Wicked One which
is near unto you, may not have power to touch you: And now is the Lord God
Trying you in a state of Suffering, that through the Path of Suffering he may
wean you and draw you out of all the Paths of the World, and from the Desire
and Love of all things in it, so as you may forget your Kindred and your
Fathers House, with all your outward Relations whatever they may be unto you;
And all your Earthly Substance, of what nature soever it is, yea, and your
lives also; For through the Affectionate love unto things that are without, the
Pure love to God has been cooled within; so that many have not only cooled in
their Love, but have quite lost it by letting in the Tempter, and running into
his Temptations, which he has presented in the Earthly Substance, and outward
Relations, And this is the Ground of your Suffering, Brethren, that you may be
a Redeemed People unto God, and not to have your Love or Life in any thing
besides him, and yet have a true Interest and Possession of all things in him*
and hither will the Lord God try you, that the Scripture may be fulfilled, He
that loves any thing more than me, is not worthy of me: And this Cup will be
sharp to drink, when Life and Substance, and Relations must be given up and
exposed to the Censure, and also to the danger of Loss in the Wills of Cruel
and Wicked men: And this is not to set the Wicked over you, but to exalt the
Seed in you, and set it in everlasting Dominion; For Iniquity must have its Day
and be filled up, and the Sufferings must be completed and finished through
the whole Body, that they which are gone before us, and we that follow after
them in Faithfulness, may be all made perfect in One.

Oh! Keep your Eye out of all things below, and keep it single to that which is
above, that you all may be ready to Answer his Will, in what he calls unto, or
permits to come. And Faithfully follow the Lamb, for He alone must Reign, this
is his Day, and in his Glory he is Risen* do not Deny him, but bear forth your
Testimony to him, and in his Life an Holy Kiss of Peace does reach you, and
with the Lip of unfeigned Love does Greet you and Salute you, even with tender
Yearning Bowels over you.

20th Day of the 11th Month, 1660. In Worcester County Goal. From your
Brother, and Companion in Bonds, bearing the light Affliction of his present
time, W.S.

OH Lord God everlasting! whose Holy Covenant has been ever sure with thy
Seed, and from Age to Age thou have remembered thy Mercy, and performed all thy
Promises faithfully. Oh! look down this Day, and behold thy Heritage; Comfort
all thy little Ones, and in thy eternal love do thou strengthen thy Innocent
Lambs: Be not thou far from us, O Lord, but hearken to the voice of our
Supplication; for it is thy own that makes Intercession. O Lord, the Spoilers
are risen, and the Devourers are ready for their Prey; make haste to help us,
for our Eyes are to thee; smite them and dash them, and with thy powerful Arm
do thou break them, and thy own Heritage do thou save and deliver from them,
that with thy People thy Faithfulness may appear this day, as with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob of old; that the Heathen may know, that thou O Lord God of
Hosts, art the God of thy own Seed, and safety of thy Chosen People this Day;
And let all thy People Trust in thee, O Lord, and Magnify thy Name; for thou
have Chosen us, and thou will not forsake us, but Strength thou will give us to
stand and overcome; Therefore let all thy Children, and Chosen Ones, say in
Truth, O Lord, Thy Will be done. Amen.

Relief sent forth into the Camp of Israel.
OH Israel! The Visitations of Love has been large unto thee, and with tender
Bowels of Mercy has the God of thy Salvation Reached thee, and with his
outstretched Arm he has done Great and Wonderful things for thee; Thou wast
without an Helper, and he has helped thee; Thou wast in sore Travail, and he
has Eased thee; he has made thy Rising glorious, and thy Coming forth
exceeding sweet and precious; He has been a Nursing Father unto thee, and
through many Trials he has given thee-strength to stand: Thou have been as a
Plant springing up in the midst of pleasant Showers, and as a Vine dressed to
bring forth glorious Fruit; Thou have spread thy Branches over the Nations, and
the taste of thy Fruit has delighted the Hearts of many; Thou have been
terrible unto the People, and powerful amongst the Mighty; The Nobles have been
smitten, the Strong have bowed down; The Horse and his Rider has fallen
together, and none has hitherto been able to Encounter with thee, or to stand
before the God of thy Strength: Thou have known his Goings on, and thy Way has
been prepared by his Arm: He has poured forth his Plagues for thy Redemption,
and wrought Signs and Wonders for thy Deliverance and Freedom; This has thy
God done for thee, and has not forsaken thee, but has ever appeared with
thee, and with his Right Hand has done valiantly for thee; His Ear has been
open to thy Cry, and out of his Holy Hill he has heard thy Groanings; And who
amongst all the gods, that has been able to divert his Goodness from thee?
And, is he not the same God for Ever? Is his Hand now shortened that he cannot
save? Or his Ear heavy that he cannot Hear? Or will he now give thee up to be
Spoiled? Or to become a Prey without Redemption? Oh Israel! He will not so deal
with thee, for thou art his Chosen Nation, and will thee is his Love sealed for
ever: Oh! let thy Heart ponder and thy Vital Parts awake, and Consider that
thou may know and understand thy present state and Condition* for the Day of
Trial is come upon thee, because thou have been Careless, and halt not so
prized the Day of thy Benefits as thou ought to have done s^ neither have
thou followed the Lord fully, but have neglected his Goings on, until thou lost
the feeling of his living Power; and then made to thy self a Rest, and have
sitten down at Ease, promising to thy self Security in thy professed Formality,
where thy Vitals have been stopped; and thy love, which once was fresh upon
thee, has been exceedingly cooled; and thy strong Cord of Unity has been
broken, so that thou have not been like Sheep in one Fold, nor like Lambs of
one Flock; for which cause has the Lords Spirits been grieved, and his
faithful Messengers have been much discouraged, because in thy own State and
Condition thou have been so strongly Conceited, and have been in thy own
Thoughts so safely secured, which did begin to bring forth Stubbornness and
Hardness in thee; and to Exalt thee above the Word of Reproof, where thou
becamest a Trampler over the Innocent Life, that the Burden was turned into
fore Heaviness, and the Pressure of it into deep Lamentation and Bitterness.

Oh Israel! Consider of this speedily, and Return to thy first Love, that thou
may Recover thy Strength in the Cord of Unity; for thou art found a very
feeble Nation; and much Weakness is in thee, that every Appearance of the
Philistines Host becomes dreadful and terrible to thee, and a Fear enters thee,
and Distrust and Unbelief comes upon thee; which draws thy Eye to look back
again, and causes thy Heart to Return into Egypt; Oh Israel! where is thy
Strength, and where is the Rock of thy Salvation? Has ever such Faintness been
upon thee? Or has Feebleness at any time so possessed thee? How have thou
forgotten the Days of Old, and the Years that are lately past? in which thou
felt Gods Covenant with thee; and his sure Mercies therein performed unto thee:
Let not Distrust now come upon thee, neither let Unbelief Enter within thy
Bowels; but look up to the God of thy Strength, and to the Horn of thy
Salvation, and arise in the Strength of his Might, and boldly pass on thy Way;
for a Rest he has promised, and in faithfulness he will perform it. Oh! Why
should thou Fall in the Wilderness? or Faint in the Desolate Land? The Hands
of Moses are held up for thee, and the Lord of Host appears with thee, though
Unbelief has veiled thee, that thou see not his Arm which he has made bare
to drive back Amaleck from thee: Oh! Why should thou be cast down at the
sight of any Nation? Or at the Appearance of the Mighty in Strength? Be thou
but Faithful, and stand in the Life of Unity, and who can Enter thy Camp, or
come upon thee to spoil thee in thy Habitation? Who can Besiege thee to Famish
thee out of thy Dwelling Place; the Spring of Life runs in thy Camp, and
Heavenly Manna falls about thy Tents; Wherefore then do thou Murmur? Or why
do thou Complain? for the most High is thy Strength, and his Arm of Power is
stretched forth for thy Salvation. Oh! Consider where thou art, and what is
come unto thee, and ponder it early before deep sleep fall upon thee; and all
that have been gathered within Isreal's Camp, and have stood in the Appearance
of the Host, and feels that Unbelief has Entered you, and Fearfulness has
surprised you, through which you are driven back, and your Feet near turned
aside; Arise, arise, make speed and haste within the holy Camp again, for you
have Reasoned away your Life, and Consulted over your Strength; but the Enemy
has stopped you, and has begotten a lingering in you; and not only so, but
also drawn you back again, that you Deny the Lords faithful Host, who in the
Strength of his Might stand boldly in the Battle.

Oh* Turn with speed, for the Lord is near to show Mercy unto you, and very
ready he is to pass by and forgive you, and your Backslidings to Heal freely;
And this flows from the Fountain of Love unto you, and is sent forth to
Relieve you, who are bewildred amongst your Thoughts, where the Seed sits
Groaning and heavily Mourning.

Oh! Arise, arise, Join to the God of Strength, and be not fearful, but
believing; and appear for the Lord, and for his living Truth, and Deliver not
up your Camp into the hands of your Enemies; And if it be permitted for them to
Come upon you and Take you, be therewith Contented; but in any wise do not
Deliver up the Host unto them, for that will cause their Triumph: And if for a
time you must sit down by Babylons Rivers, and hang your Harps upon the
Willows, let not your Hearts faint, neither let Sorrow overcome you; but
Patiently Wait for the Appearance of your Deliverer, who will Arise for you,
and bring forth Everlasting Salvation unto you; then shall your Mouths be
filled with Laughter, and your Tongues with Songs of Praises, for the Ransomed
of the Lord shall Return to Sion with Joy; and this will God, even thy God, Oh
Israel, perform unto thee, and no Weapon formed against thee shall Prosper;
neither shall any Reach thee to send a Curse unto thee, for the Lord has
Blessed thee, and Glorious is the Habitation of thy Resting Place; Therefore
why should thou Doubt? or of whom should thou be Afraid? The Lord JEHOVAH
is thy Strength, and in thy Camp he is very great.

And all you Faithful Ones, who are Preserved in this Day of your Testimony,
and goes forward with Boldness, Abide in the Life, and Fulfill the Testimony
with Joy, and be Tender over the Weak, and bear them in their Travail; and
leave them not Behind, lest they be Smitten and Die; neither do you go forth in
haste, lest the Enemy come upon you and Smite you; but all Keep in the Power,
and Walk in the Power; and Jordan will Divide, and Jericho Walls will Fall; for
it must be Compassed, and the Rams Horn within thy Camp must be Sounded; for
Strong is thy King, and thy Camp is very great, Oh Israel.

W.S.
Worcester County Goal the 26th Day of the 11th Month, 1660.
THE END.
LONDON: Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Windmill, in Martins Le Grand, 1660.


