A SERMON Preached on the FOURTH SUNDAY IN LENT, IN THE Cathedral Church OF
NORWICH. WHEREIN Is Represented the Great Sin and Danger of Neglecting the HOLY
COMMUNION.

By W. SMYTH, D. D. Prebend of Norwich.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's- Head, in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1680.

TO THE Right Reverend FATHER in GOD ANTHONY Lord BISHOP of NORWICH.
My LORD,
THE Motive that induced me at this my Lemen-Course in the Cathedral, to
Discourse upon the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood, and particularly with
respect only to its absolute necessity, was that, with which every man must be
very much affected, that has any concernment for the welfare of Souls, or any
regard to the Honor of Gods Worship, or the peace of his Church.

For whosoever truly understands the present state of too many of our Parochial
Congregations, cannot but be sensible, that there is not that regard had to,
nor Conscience made of, that most considerable Office of the Christian
Profession, that ought to be, or that has been accustomed, in better times.
And then what shame, as well as sorrow, must it needs be to the Faithful
Curates of Souls, who as soon as that Office begins, must behold their Charges
to flee from it in throngs, as if they were frighted with some approaching
danger; or to turn their backs upon it; as if they combined to offer an affront
to the Priestly Function, and that Sacred Ordinance: And which is the worst of
all, that they should so often in the year, repeat so many dreadful. Acts of
Excommunication against themselves; which they must be really presumed to do,
when they customarily exclude themselves, from the greatest Blessing upon their
Souls, which they can expect and hope for at God's hand, on this side Heaven?

But the comfort is, that malice it self cannot charge the Church of England
with that disorder: For it is certain, that no Church could ever have made
better provisions to Instruct, Encourage and Oblige men to that Sacred and
Necessary duty. We have not (blessed be God) deprived the people of one half of
this Sacrament, in contradiction to the pattern of Christ in the Institution;
nor do we perform the Service in a Language that may perplex their
understandings, when its Administered: which the Romanists are known to do, and
which the people might presume to be sufficient reasons to justify their
absence and omission. Neither on the other side, have we set up a new frightful
Tribunal in every Parish, which should examine, and Arbitrarily determine, the
fitness of every Communicant, by the measures of their Adherency to a Party,
and by their dexterities in giving account of some Religious phrases and
opinions, peculiar to their Sect. As some of them, that have made a defection
from the Established Church, have been observed to do, and by which, and for
their unsolemn manner of its Administration, such as had understood the Lovely
Order of its Communication according to the Church of England, were easily
tempted altogether to decline it.

No, my Lord, the disorder we complain of, and the intolerable scandal, which
the neglect of the Sacrament has put upon our assemblies, is not the fault,
but the misfortune and affliction of our Church, and was first occasioned by an
unhappy abuse, that was put upon the peoples minds in the late Confusions, by
such, whose interest it was to break down all the fences of the Churches Unity,
and thence to dispossess the vulgar of their orderly, peaceable, and obedient
temper, that they might be the better prepared, to permit, and comply with
their unwarrantable intendments.

And where some men's obstinate approbation of those practices, has hindered the
complete repair of those breaches, the present calamity is, that not only the
Separating party are departed from the Sacrament, as they do from the
established Worship, but even the looser and more inconsiderate sorts of men,
being encouraged by their example, do presume to take a reproachful liberty to
themselves to escape at that open gap, and do resolvedly continue in the same
neglects, without any regard to what concerns Religion in general, or the
public appointed Service in particular: So that in those places Faction and
Profaneness join hand in hand in the same opposition, and do give the
Government the same encumbrance, and Almighty God the same dishonor. But the
mischief ends not there; For it is visible, that too many also, that are
restored to, and that do continue in a fair Communion with the Church in all
other respects and parts of the Established Worship, do yet retain an
unaccountable obstinacy against the Sacred Office and blessing of the Holy
Sacrament; and are always at work to contrive all possible ways to decline and
escape it.

And if at any time they be closely pressed to it, they are ready to clamor
against it as a persecution of their Christian Liberty, and are resolved no way
to be made sensible, that the intention and prosecution of the Law, is no more,
than an Act of the Churches Charity, and an expedient of Gods mercy to their
Souls. So that the Curates of Souls in such places, are brought into a
necessity of this unhappy choice, that is, Either tamely to see their
Parishioners continue in that scandalous defection from so considerable a part
of their Christian Profession, and to connive at the Abominable Perjury of the
Officers, that are sworn to guard Gods Public Worship, or else to live in
perpetual broiles and encounters with them (whose peace and welfare should be
as tenderly dear to them, as their own lives) by the necessary Prosecution of
the Law, in those Judicatories, where there is Provision made, to reclaim them
from their Defailancies in such cases; and which are the only remaining
expedients then to be made use of, when all other attempts to reduce them to
their duty, are defeated and made unsuccessful.

Now, my Lord, to obviate all these evils by the best and most Christian
method, that (I think) could be undertaken, was the great motive, and main
inducement, why I chose at that time to Preach upon that Subject, and why I now
have offered the Discourse it self to Public view.

And thus, my Lord, having given your Lordship a full account of the Motive
that prevailingly induced me to what I have done, and which may reasonably
justify my attempt in that respect: I can with less difficulty acquit my self
for my confident throwing it under your Lordships Protection. And that is,
because it is visible to the world, that wheresoever your Lordship has
exercised any Jurisdiction, it has not been your Design only but your Zeal, to
promote the Interest of the Holy Sacrament, and to recover the People under
your several Successive Charges, from their long discontinuances and neglects
of it. And for this I could offer some pregnant instances of your Lordships
care, even in this your present Diocese, if I thought your Lordship would
permit me. So that whether I consider the Usefulness of the Discourse, for them
that may need such an information of their duty: or the suteableness of it to
your Lordships Design and Inclination, I hope it will not be a Presumption in
me, to beg and expect Your acceptance of it, as it is Humbly presented to Your
Lordships Patronage, by

My LORD, Your Lordships Obedient Son and Servant, W. SMYTH.
Norwich, March 26. 1680.
A SERMON PREACHED On the Fourth Sunday in LENT.
LUKE xxii. 19. This do in remembrance of me.
THough a Veneration to Primitive Devotion, the great President of General
practice, the express Laws of our own Church, and the Prayers that we have
joined in, to beg for Abstinence at this time, cannot be admitted as competent
Arguments to us, to attend the Discipline of the Lent Fast: Yet surely the
reason of the thing, that is, how Fasting in it self, may in several respects,
be made advantageous to the Souls of men, might make us afraid to decline, much
more to despise, this Office of Religion. But I have already discoursed of
those things, in this place, and upon this occasion. That which I at first
propounded to my self to endeavor at this time, was to prepare you for the
Holy Sacrament you will shortly be invited to, it being one principal reason,
why the Ancients practiced and pressed the Observance of this Solemn Fast, that
men might the better prepare themselves for this great Ordinance, at the great
and Solemn Feast of Easter; And for that reason it was commonly called the
Paschal, or Easter Fast.

But while I was limiting my thoughts to that subject, I was discouraged with
fears that in a great measure I should lose my labor, considering that this
Sacrament it self is almost as generally neglected, as is the Fast which should
prepare for it. And thereupon I thought, it was more advisable, First, to
endeavor to fetch men off from their disregard to the end, and to possess them
with a right understanding and due esteem of it, before I engaged them in the
means preparatory to it. For which purpose I have made choice of this Text
which I shall not manage, as usually it has been, either by making
Observations upon the Occasion which our Savior took for its Institution, from
the Jews Posteoelium, or by wearying you with an accumulated collection of the
advanced expressions of the Fathers, concerning its worth and excellency; or by
multiplying cases of Conscience, (in which I am afraid some men have been too
busy,) as to its preparation; And much less by engaging your Attentions to the
controversal points about it: But my present design shall be to prove that
every Christian stands obliged in Conscience to close with all opportunities
that are offered him, for the receiving of the Lords Supper.

This I find no proof of in the Ancient writings, because the necessity of it
was always so presumed to be understood by every man that bore the name of
Christian, that they might have been suspected to have thrown away their
Bibles, or to have renounced the whole Christian Faith, as soon as to plead for
an habitual neglect, or refusal of it. Not to receive the Sacrament was all one
as not to be a Christian at all, in their esteem; and would have made a
Christian as great a prodigy, as he was, who at Athens denied a Deity. It Is our
only Age and Nation, that can complain of so many, who, to the scandal of our
Profession, have either humorously scrupled it, or impudently refused it, or
that are so unwillingly hald to it.

This therefore is my Design at present (so far as my present Office, and the
short time for it, will allow me) to bring men's minds into a better temper, to
fetch home the scattered parties, that do run away from Christ's fold, and that
will not submit to the Communion of the Flock: It is to make men truly
Christians, in the highest instance of the Profession of their Religion, and to
persuade them to that whereby they are especially distinguishable from Jews and
Pagans.

And all this I shall attempt to do by my mentioned method: Not by a kind and
passionate Exhortation; the Church has saved me that labor; nor shall I do
it, by suggesting to your notice, the just menaces of the Law; for both those
expedients have been found not sufficiently successful; and are daily
controlled by obstinacy, and pretense. But I say it shall be my endeavor, to
set before you, such sufficient reasons, as may uncontrouleably bind the
Consciences of men; and convincingly prove, that every Christian is absolutely
and indispensably bound upon the hazard of his Souls eternal loss, customarily
to receive the Sacrament of our Lords Body and Blood. And my reasons are formed
into these sive Arguments.

First, the Receiving the Holy Sacrament is absolutely necessary to Salvation,
necessitate praecepti, Arg. I.
that is, it is an express command of Christ: Hespake imperatively, in the
Institution, ((...)) do this. It Is my will, my Injunction. It Is not left at
your liberty as indifferent, to be performed, or omitted, at your pleasure.
Neither did our Saviors Injunction relate only to the then present Apostles,
but St. Paul repeats the very Institution it self, and applies the obligation
of it to the Corinthians; and upon the same account to all Christians, in all
succeeding ages, to the Churches period: That thus they 1. Cor. 11.
should show the Lords death, till his coming again.

And therefore, it ought to lie as close upon your Consciences as any other
Commandment of the Gospel whatsoever: and perhaps more closely, as being with
the other Sacramental Precept, enacted by Christ's purely Sovereign and absolute
Authority. And therefore the observance of it, is a greater trial of your
submission to his peculiar Dominion; and manifests a greater regard to his
Person, than can be expressed in other preceptive cases, where our duty was
prescribed before by Natural Religion and the reason of the thing.

And now I advise you to consider, what you will answer to those expressions of
the holy Jesus, when he so solemnly made the keeping of his Commandments, (
Joh. 14. 15.) the great Test of our love to him: If you love me (says he) keep
my Commandments; And again when he makes the keeping of them to be the most
assured evidence of his love to us; If (says he) ye keep my Commandments (Joh.
15. 10.) ye shall abide in my love, even as I abide in my Fathers love: I say
what can you answer to Christ in that case, if among those Commandments, this
is especially to be accounted one, and that which is more peculiarly his, as
it is of his proper Institution, and by his own Sovereign appointment? What? can
you think that some one or more of other Christian duties can expiate for the
neglect of this, that is equally as necessary? or shall much hearing, and
praying, believing, and applying compensate for such an omission? Heavenly
Justice admits no such arts of Commutation. Why do you make Conscience of any
other Commandment, or think your selves obliged to any other service of God?
why don't you hope to go to Heaven with Blasphemy in your mouths, with blood
and Rapine in your hands? or why cannot you dispense with hypocrisy,
intemperance, unchastity, disloyalty, or even with impenitency it self (so far
as you think your selves to be concerned in Gods Laws to the contrary) as well
as when you wilfully live in the breach of the express command of God, in the
case of the Communion.

Shall not an offense in this one, (in St. James his sense, James 2. 10.) make
you guilty of all? That is, put you into the same state of danger, as if you
were guilty of all. Or can you be so vain, as to believe that any obedience can
be sincere and acceptable to God, but that which is entire and universal? No it
is certain, that no Soul can be said to be truly acted by a right principle of
the Love and fear of God to do his duty, but (as the Psalmist devoutly speaks)
it will make him to have an eye, or a respect to all the Commandments.

The sum of this Argument is, that to receive the Lord's Supper, is the matter
of an Evangelical precept, of a special Law of Jesus: and therefore necessary
and indispensable.

Secondly, The receiving this Holy Sacrament, is necessary, necessitate medii:
that is, as a means without Arg. II.
which we cannot reasonably expect Gods blessing upon our other Christian
performances and endeavors. For whatever means God has appointed for a
Blessing, (be they what he pleases) it is necessary, (where Providence has
not put a Bar) that they should be used for it; otherwise the blessing is in
vain expected from God, though yet we think to substitute other means in their
room. Indeed to hope for it in an extraordinary way without the use of that
means which is ordinarily appointed, is an affront put upon the Wisdom and
Authority of God. And to expect it by substituting one means of that blessing
for another, is as unreasonable as if one should think to reap the benefits of
prayer which he neglects, by reading or hearing. All the means of Grace tend to
one and the same end of making us truly good, and improving the Graces of God
in us; but they operate several ways toward it, each according to its own
nature: and therefore that good effect which is proper to one, we must not
expect from another, while we neglect that. We aim at life and health, both by
Food and Physic; but we do not take Medicines for ordinary nourishment; nor
rely upon our daily bread, for recovery from a dangerous sickness. I suppose we
all grant that the Holy Communion has its peculiar operation, and contributes
something in a way proper to it self toward the life of God in us. The Cup in
the Holy Supper is the Cup of Blessing, not only because it is Blessed by the
Prayers of the Church, but because we are afterward to be blessed in the use
of it. The Bread which we break is the Communion of the Body of Christ, not
only with one another, but with God, at whose Table we feast upon the Sacrifice
that was once offered to him for us. And can we imagine that these expressions
do not imply that there is some Blessing and Grace conferred upon the Worthy
Receiver that is peculiarly an effect of the Holy Sacrament? The spiritual
benefits of Receiving were indeed obtained for us at Gods hand by that one
alsufficient Sacrifice of our Lords Body and Blood upon the Cross: But as they
are Sacramentally represented and tendered, so are they really Received by the
Faithful in the Lords Supper. It is farther to be considered that the means of
our Spiritual life and growth do not contribute toward the end, but by a
supernatural Operation upon our minds. But he that neglects one of the means
of Grace, especially if it be the greatest, has no reason to expect the
concurrence of Gods blessing with his use of the rest. Where God has commanded
us to use means more than one, there the use of all but one is not a sufficient
discharge of our duty, and therefore no sufficient qualification for that Grace
which is promised to a sincere use of all.

We are agreed with those that occasioned the Sacraments once general neglect,
and of the too frequent dis-use of it now, that the Grace and Blessing of
Spiritual knowledge is communicated by means appointed. And the people are
taught strongly to believe it, or they would not be so nice in their choice of
its Administrators, nor would they so zealously post up and down after it; nor
sometimes so dearly pay for it: But then it is strange that though a greater
blessing is to be communicated to them in the Holy Sacrament, yet that
nevertheless they should not (without any Conscience of their duty to God, or
value of the blessing to themselves) take a journey of a few steps, to the
place where Gods Minister stands ready in Gods Name to tender the means of that
blessing to them. But then the wonder is still increased, when it is
considered, that though their beloved Guides have by their peculiar mode of
Preaching, perpetually accustomed them to the Notions, of getting Christ,
laying hold on Him, applying Him, and getting an interest in Him, that is, (as
is supposed) of enjoying a Communion with Him, for the saving of their Souls,
that yet they should not apply those expressions to the enjoying of him in the
Sacrament; and should not as customarily be pressing them to that Sacred
Ordinance, concerning which those their expressions may be much more properly
used, that is, where they may undoubtedly have the readiest access to him, and
the nearest Communion with him, or as our Church assures us, where they may
dwell in Christ and Christ in them, they may be one with Christ, and Christ
with them. And if they had so sent them to Christ, when they were constantly
calling upon them to get him, it would have solved the Preachers sincerity,
when he plied them with those uncertain expressions of their Duty. And the
people might have understood, how they should have reasonably answered such
exhortations.

And further, this would have helped us to know, how to manage our dying
people, who (by being accustomed to that mode of Preaching) instead of desiring
the sacred Office of the Church, that is, of making Confessions of their Faith,
of requiring the Churches wise Expedient to cure their wounded Consciences, and
of making restitution to whomsoever they have injured, are (according as they
had been taught, and their good meaning had been abused) crying out for Christ,
or are using such kind of words, to express their desires of having and
enjoying his Person. Could we have made them sensible, that what they
complained for, they might have attained in the Holy Sacrament, answerable to
the very terms of their complaint, which has been always adjudged the proper
(Viaticum) provision for a Christians journey into another world; We might have
understood our duty, and cheerfully performed it, to the dying persons
unspeakable comfort. But woeful experience has taught us the contrary, and that
among that sort of people we find no such desires, and very seldom an allowance
of our advice to them in that kind. Had those people been taught, that the
Preacher when he so called upon them to get Christ, or an interest in him,
intended an obtaining his Love by keeping his Commandments; and an interest in
his Redemption, and the blessings of the New Covenant, by their endeavoring to
perform the Conditions of it, it had been tolerable. But then why did they not
insist specially in pressing them to the keeping those Commandments, and
performing such Conditions in which they were more like to fail, than in their
Applying or Relying upon Christ? But that would not have served their turn.

Now this strange way of managing the Christian Religion, offers such an
affront to the common Reason of mankind, and is such a reproach to those
peoples pretense, and labors for a greater knowledge than other men have; and
indeed does so reflect upon the discretion of the Nation, that it is necessary
to trace the occasion, how men of common sense, and that have the Bible before
them, should ever come to entertain so gross a mistake in the common Notion of
the Christian Religion, and of the Sacrament particularly. And I shall here
give you a short account of the Occasion of it.

It Is known, that in the days of the late Rebellion, some of those men that had
Usurped Cures, did not administer the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper at all,
during the years they possessed their Invasions: And some of them, that by
great Importunities did administer it, did it very rarely; and then they so
forestalled it with such frightful notions, that the people (as too many of
them still continue to do) instead of coming to it as a Feast of Joy, and with
a cheerful expectation of mercy and kindness from a gracious God, come as if
they were going to their Execution, and as if they were to appear before a a
Tyrannous Deity, that had laid a trap to ensnare them to their eternal ruin.

But with what Integrity could these men create such an extreme niceness and
fear in the poor peoples minds, about that severe word ((...)) Judgment or
damnation, (upon which they founded their formidable positions) as when St.
Paul says (1 Cor. 11. 29.) He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks damnation to himself: and yet should suffer (even teach) the same
people to be so tamely fearless of the very same word and danger in another
case, as when the same St. Paul says ( Romans 13. 2.) Whosoever resists the
power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves ((...)) damnation.

Must that word and its dangerous meaning make them so nice as to be afraid of
their duty in the Sacrament; and yet must the same word and danger be so
represented as to dispense with the same men, in cases of the grossest
disloyalty to Authority? If this be not Juggling with the Sacred Texts, I
desire to know what is.

Now having discovered how the poor people in many places came to lose the true
esteem of this Sacred Institution of Christ: The sum is, that if our Lord has
appointed the Sacrament, to be a means of Grace and Blessing; and that the
benefits of his death and passion are there exhibited and communicated, with
what Conscience or safety to your Souls, can you turn your backs upon it, would
be seriously considered.

This the second.

Necessitate gratitudinis, that is, it is necessary to Receive Arg. III
the Sacrament, because it is necessary to be thankful for the death of Christ,
and the benefits of it.

For as we cannot but acknowledge, that all the mercy that can bless us, is
wholly owing to it, so for the full discharge of our duty of showing the Lords
death till his coming again, (as St. Paul expresses it, 1 Cor. 11. 25.) this
Sacrament was especially enjoined.

And for that reason it has been commonly called ((...)) the Eucharist, or
thanksgiving: that is, because it is eminently the greatest; and as if all
other names, and acts of Thanksgiving were nothing without it, or
inconsiderable in comparison to it. And for the same reason also, the Ancients
very frequently called it a Sacrifice: Not an Expiatory (as the Papists would
have it) for the quick and dead, but a Representative and Commemorative; that
is a Sacrifice of Praise and acknowledgment, to be perpetually offered up to
God for all the mercies, which the one real and great Sacrifice of Christ's
blood obtained for us. And for that end did our Savior then constitute and
appoint it, when he so solemnly and (I may say so) passionately enjoined a This
do ((...)) in remembrance of me.

And therefore Christ having thus once Soveraignly enacted it, as an especial
instance by which we should express our Gratitude, as we might not before
prescribe to him the means of his Grace and Blessing, so neither here must we
prescribe to him the methods of our thankfulness and acknowledgment. We must
express our Gratitude, as he has appointed it, or we do it insufficiently for
the discharge of our duty.

But some will say, that they do thank God for those mercies every day; and
others allege, that they can do it in the common form of Thanksgiving
appointed in the Churches Service.

My answer to those subterfuges and pretenses is, That though such men have so
far done their duty, yet not all their duty, nor the principal part of it, that
is incumbent upon them in this case. For they are to understand, that such
gratulatory Offices as those, are so far from expiating or commuting for the
omission of the doing it, in the way that Christ has specially appointed, that
(how good soever those offices may be in themselves, yet) they will on that
account, not only be found insufficient to discharge the duty required, but may
prove little better than unwarranted and presumptuous adventures in Gods
esteem: and the person that performs, them with such a design and pretense,
cannot evertheless escape the character of an ungrateful wretch in God's sight:
and so often as he wilfully departs from the Assembly before that work be done,
Christ may as justly reprove him, as he did the unthankful cleansed Lepers for
not returning to give Thanks and Glory to God. And his pretense of giving
thanks for Christ's death, by such or any other method of his own choice, may be
as unjustifiable an act, as Naamans had been if he had stood peremptorily to
his opinion for washing in the Rivers of Damascus, to cure his Leprosy; and
had refused the river Jordan, that God had appointed.

But then the wonder is, that in the crowd of the unthankful on this account,
there should be so many of them, who in a nicer concern for Religion, should
clamor for a pattern in the Mount, (as they use to phrase it) in the
regulation of the Public Worship, and that can out of a tender Conscience,
question an innocent commanded Rite or Circumstance, because it came not from
the Mount, that is, from an immediate Divine Ordination; and yet can dispense
with the most substantial part of God's Worship, though it be appointed and
enjoined by the special order and institution of Christ himself.

But to improve this my Argument in general, against all that on any account
dare turn their backs upon the Holy Sacrament. I shall here endeavor to
represent the full import of Christ's passionate invitation, as well as Command,
when he said Do it ((...)) in remembrance of me: and it will be found to
intimate these following motives, to engage men to the constant Receiving it,
in that respect.

First, in remembrance of me, is, as if Christ should say, (supposing him in
his invitation to it, to have a respect to his death and passion, that were yet
to come, as undoubtedly he must be presumed to have) can you have any
consideration of what I have suffered for you, at the hands of God and man? can
you remember the bitterness of my Agony, the shame and sharpness of my death?
have you ever heard of my heavy complaint, that my Soul was sorrowful even unto
death: or of that doleful complaint when I cried (lama sabacthani) my God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? Have you any sense of the insolent reproaches,
the contumelious usage, the bussetings and scourgings, the shame and the pain
of the Cross which for your sake I endured? and then can you think, there is
not in all this enough to oblige you to attend to my passionate request, to do
this in remembrance of me, in respect of my Sufferings?

But then secondly, if what I have suffered for you be not sufficient to oblige
you to this Remembrance of me, yet methinks that the advantages, which accrue
to your selves by those Sufferings, should engage you to do it.

Was not my blood, (you must think your Savior thus speaking to you) O was not
my Blood the price of your peace, and reconciliation, with an offended and a
displeased God? Is not all the hope of the forgiveness of your sins, founded
upon it? are not the mercies of the Covenant obtained, and sealed by it? Is it
not by the virtue of my death, that I am made unto you, Wisdom and
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, ( 1 Cor. 1. 30.) and can you now
pretend to have any value for those mercies, or any estimation of my death,
that so dearly purchased them, if when I call upon you to do this in
remembrance of me, and gratefully to show that death of mine, you refuse or
neglect it? But thirdly,

If these two Improvements of the Obligation cannot prevail, yet surely you will
not be so unworthy as to resist my invitation, when you can consider, what an
easy return it is, that I expect at your hands, for all this that I have
suffered and done for you.

Had I commanded you to commemorate my Passion, by Lancing your selves, as the
Baalitish Priests did; or to represent my Death by cruelty upon your bodies;
Had I called upon you to engage in frequent tedious journeyings to a Jerusalem,
or to offer chargeable Sacrifices to me; You might then have had some pretense,
to decline my invitation: No, it is only a thankful remembrance of me, that I
require of you; and that to be expressed in an instance, that could not have
been easier, if your selves had chosen it.

It Is only that, which you do every day, a short repast of the common
necessaries of natural life. Only you are advised moreover, to lay aside your
follies, and to examine and judge your selves, for what must undo you, before
you come. It is only in an act, wherein you may show your greatest love to your
selves, when you are about to express it to me. Thus in these three respects
you may well suppose that Christ spoke to you, when he said, do this in
remembrance of me. And can you after all this turn your backs upon so kind, and
so passionate an invitation?

O Ingratitude without parallel! could you forgive any resemblance of it, to
any of your nearest relations? The name of unworthiness was ever given in vain,
if it makes not his Character, that can refuse or neglect that Office, whereby
he is thus kindly called upon, to do This in remembrance of such a Savior.

This is my Third Argument.

The Fourth Argument, by which every Christian Arg. IV.
may be fully confirmed in the truth of the three former, which I have deduced
directly from Scripture to prove the absolute necessity of receiving the Holy
Sacrament, is from an obligation, that no Christian ought wilfully to depart
from the declared Judgment and Practice of the Universal Church; especially in
a case, so little subject to exception, as is the necessity of Receiving the
Blessed Communion.

Quod ab omnibus, quod semper, hoc Catholicum, hoc Apostolicum, that which has
been done and held by all Christians, and at all times, must be reputed truly
Catholic and Apostolic, says Vincentius Lirinensis, above twelve hundred
years ago.

And to evidence, that the constant usage of this holy Office was such, the
very Arguments that prove that there was ever any Christianity in the world, do
concurrently give testimony to it; as being always reputed one integral part
of the Solemn Worship of God, and an indispensable means of making Christian
Profession.

And that the first Christians did daily receive the Holy Sacrament, we have
the Testimonies of St. Jerome, and St. Aug. And therefore when it is said, (Acts
2. 46.) that they were daily with one accord in the Temple; the learned Dr.
Hammond Paraphraseth, that they daily received the Holy Sacrament in some upper
rooms of the Temple.

In St. Austins time (as he testifies,) it was in ordinary course administered
once a week. And when the Church afterward thought fit to urge the necessity
of receiving it at the three Solemn Feasts (without which they were not to
enjoy the name of Catholics, says the Eliberine Council) yet it was but, as
at the least, and was not designed to exclude a more frequent usage of
Administering and Receiving it, at other times also.

Thus stands the case of Primitive and Universal practice: and shall we now
separate Christianity from its Catholicisme? or shall we hope to go to Heaven,
out of Catholic Communion, when we wilfully separate from it? or dare we
venture to travel in an untrodden path, in which we have none to go along with
us, but a few malcontents, that have nothing to guide them but a presumptuous
and an enthusiastic opinion of their own private light? or shall we suspect,
that God had so deprived his Church of the promised guidance of his Spirit, as
that all the Professors of Christianity should always have been engaged, in
such an unnecessary attendance upon this Institution; or so mistaken, when they
advanced the reputation of its blessings with such lofty expressions of its
worth; or shall we plead for, or trust to a Religion, or choose to feed on bread
made of the Tares, which the devil few in our enclosure since Forty one, and
refuse the common and substantial wheat (the True Christian Catholic Doctrine
and Practice) that was sown by Christ and his Apostles, and which have ever
since grown in the Churches field, for Sixteen hundred years before?

But say some, This Argument smells rank of Popery. How? Is that worn and
baffled refuge of the non-plus'd and the malicious, revived again upon us? have
not the True Professors of this Reformed Church, done, suffered, wrote, sworn,
prayed, and said, enough to confute that false and unworthy scandal and
contrivement, designed only to expose us to the peoples hatred; that when it is
convenient, we should once more be devoured by their fury?

But I will answer those kind men and tell them; that they are mistaken, and
that the contrary is true. And that to urge Primitive and Universal practice,
is a mighty Argument against Popery it self. And that it is known to the
Learned, that they never durst stand to that Trial for the differences between
us: as the incomparable Archbishop and Martyr challenged them, in his
Conference with Fisher. But we are now further to consider, that this Argument
is not only to satisfy your Consciences, that by the receiving of this Blessed
Sacrament at all, you comply with the Primitive and Universal Church, but for a
further direction, that is, you are to take notice, that they received it, not
only as being necessary sometimes, but frequently; and (as may be believed) as
often as they could.

And is not its frequency peremptorily presumed in St. Paul's advice, when he
said, As often as ye eat and drink it, etc. (1 Cor. 11. 26.) Is not the Holy
Sacrament by all acknowledged to be the food of our souls? and do not the very
Sacramental Elements, (the daily instances of common nourishment) intimate a
belief, that as those bodily nourishments require often repetitions to preserve
our bodies: so that which is represented the spiritual food, may also require
an answerable repetition, to preserve our souls?

Might not our Savior in the choice of those Elements purposely denote the
reasons not only of the necessity of the Sacrament, but of the frequently
repeated celebration of it? I think the instruction is very natural.

Why are we so desirous to feed our understandings with the word of Christ: and
yet have little or no appetite after the souls more considerable food, the Body
and Blood of Christ? If the frequency of Preaching be thought so good and
necessary a means for the promoting of the power of godliness; let us not
forget that in ancient times the frequency of receiving the Lords Supper was as
much valued for that very reason.

But if you should enquire for the measures of that frequency, and how often
every Christian man is bound to receive it; my answer is, that it is a case of
Conscience, that can never be resolved, but by every man's doing it as often as he
can, that is, as often as the Wisdom of the Church shall think it fit to be
Administered; fearing lest for want of such a frequent receiving, as holds
proportion to the nature and reason of the command, and the practice of the
Ancient, and the Universal Church of Christ, we should not have so sufficiently
discharged our duty to God, nor acted so securely for our own eternal safety,
as we ought.

This the Fourth.

Fifth Argument, to oblige your Consciences Arg. V.
to a frequent and constant receiving the Sacrament, is because you are bound
in Christian justice and charity, to recover as much as in you lies, the loss
of those Graces, and the most considerable practices of the Christian Religion,
which were very much kept up, and did considerably accompany the general and
constant usage of it; and which are in a very great measure either wholly lost
or languishing by its long discontinuance, and by the slight and sparing
performance of it. And those Graces and necessary practices, are these that
follow.

First, the constant use and repetition of the Holy 1.
Sacrament, kept men up religiously to the rules of justice; and was a sense to
common honesty, in men's dealings one with another. The fresh remembrance of the
last Sacrament, and the thoughts of another ere long returning, gave them not
respite enough to hatch base contrivements: and made the strongest temptations
to villainous attempts, the weaker and more imprevalent, for want of time to
ferment in. And if any temptation had surprised them, they made haste to
restitution before the next Sacrament, which as they durst not omit, so neither
durst they receive it, with injustice upon their Souls. For they understood,
that if they were not sit to receive the Sacrament, neither were they sit to
dye; and which might next approach, they could not tell, but they durst not
adventure it. And thus was Justice and Faithfulness preserved, and the present
falseness and scandalous neglect of doing Right, that is every where complained
of, may in a very considerable proportion be imputed to the small regard the
generality of the people have had of this Sacred Institution.

Secondly, the constant use of the Blessed Sacrament 2.
did considerably keep up the practice of Christian charity. Anciently the Holy
Table was the poors and Gods Exchequer; the Treasures of Providence were there
deposited for the relief of the indigent: and good men struck Tallies there for
their Heavenly rewards.

And it is observable, that since that method of doing good has been dis-used,
the Law has extorted what might have been there voluntarily offered: and God
has severely punished this nation for the want of keeping up that pious
opportunity and occasion of showing a charitable mind, with a greater increase
of men's needs, and with a prodigious multiplication of the poor in all places;
that it is now become a burden and a tax, which might have then been a
free-will-offering; and for that reason more acceptable to, and most certainly
rewardable by, a gracious God. And though that pious and ancient custom be
almost out-dated, yet it is out of question, that the frequent and Religious
participation of the Blessed Sacrament, does dispose men's minds to the divine
temper of love and goodness, and engages them to charitable acts and
distributions, as gifts reasonably returned back to God for those eminent
mercies which they are just then ready to receive, by that excellent expedient
of the divine charity to their Souls. Neither can we hope that the minds of the
people will be ever restored to that heavenly temper, till they have recovered
the ancient and conscientious regard to the Holy Table, which is as it were
God's Mercy-seat where we learn mercy.

Thirdly, the frequent use of the Sacrament did 3.
very advantageously keep up the Divine Grace of humility in the Souls of men.
For there the poor Lazar, and the meanest of the people are admitted to an
equal share of honor, with the greatest Prelate that stood by the side of the
Altar, and with the greatest Potentate that kneeled at the foot of it.

There the highest Prince must descend from his Throne, and the mighty General
from his loftiest advance of power, and with the lowest subject, and meanest
Soldier appear upon one level, and kneel upon the same pavement, shall be
addressed to with the same kindness, and treated with the same entertainment,
and with the same solemnities.

O how may such a prospect often repeated, pull down the pride, insolency, and
towering vanity of a scornful mind: and dispose it to entertain that great
instance of a Christian temper, to be meek and lowly in heart, according to
Christ's great example!

Fourthly, the constant and conscientious use of the Blessed Sacrament, was a
defense to the 4.
Churches unity, and a proper expedient that God provided to secure it from
Schism and Division.

Had men kept close to that Sacred tie and contesseration (as Tertullian calls
it) of our Communion, they had not been so easily separated from their folds,
nor would they have so desperately become runagates into the herds of the
devourers of Christ's flock.

It Is very probable we had considerately continued in one mind and in one
judgment, and might have been at this day, serving and praising God together
with one mouth and one heart.

Fifthly. As the constant use of the Sacrament kept up the unity of the spirit,
as to the Churches 5.
peace; so it was the most successful expedient to preserve the social peace of
common neighbourhoods, and the lesser apartments of men. It set up little
Chanceries and Assizes in every village, which commonly brought their
disagreements, to final determinations amongst themselves. And if either part
of the Litigants had made the agreement more difficult, yet when they
approached toward the Sacred office of the Communion, they were there
generally overruled to lay down, first their stomach, and then their gift
before the Altar: And the thought of what they were there to do, so wrought
their minds into a forgiving humble temper, that no condescension on either
part was thought too much to purchase the peace, with which they knew God was
so well pleased, and without which they thought men could not safely be
entertained at his Holy Table. And thus they kept the devil of dissension and
variance out of their quarters. Now the dis-use of the Sacrament pulled down
those fences of common peace. Passions had time to ferment: heats long covered
broke out into flames: Families began to stand in a posture of war one against
another: Suspicion and jealousy taught them to be unkind; and then little
accidents improved that unkindness to open hostilities. The places of
Judicature are commonly to be the seat of the war. Armies out of the
neighbourhoods must be levied at a great expense and trouble to end a
difference, which a soft word might have concluded, and a meeting together at
the Sacrament had certainly prevented.

Sixthly, the constant use of the Holy Sacrament, 6.
kept up a due veneration of God's Priesthood, and of the Sacred offices of
their holy calling; upon the reputation of which, the credit, and consequently
the practice of Religion so considerably depends.

For so long as the people believed the necessity of the Sacrament, and that it
could not be obtained but by the hand of a lawful Priest of God, it kept up
that respect and veneration, which the devil was resolved to overthrow, for
otherwise he could never have succeeded in his design of confounding our
Church, and then of ruining Religion.

And for that end, his Agents were employed, (as they endeavored it, by all
other ways to rob them of whatsoever might support their reputation) to
overthrow the customary regard, that the people had to the constant receiving
of that Sacrament; that is, either to deter them from it, as dangerous; or to
dissuade them from it, as being indifferent. As for the Office of Preaching,
which was annexed to the Priesthood, the people were soon wheadl'd into an
opinion, that forasmuch as that concerned only the information of the
understanding, they might supply that part of the Priestly Office, as well, if
not better themselves, and by their own methods. That is, either by reading a
parcel of Chapters at home, or by the help of some little Officer of the
family, who might talk prettily of Religion at the Tables end, and so save them
the trouble of making an unnecessary journey to Church: or they might go to a
Barn, where by some storms of passion now and then allayed, with some sweet
similitudes, they might be better edified.

By such resemblances as these of the Preaching office, the people were more
easily tempted to think that the Priesthood was unnecessary. But while the
Sacrament stood in reputation and usage, they durst not adventure to make a
mockery of that, that was always too hot for their fingers.

The seventh and last loss, and that which also 7.
gave a great blow to Religion in general, by the neglect of the Sacrament, was
an undue and deplorable intermission of the solemn acts of Repentance.

The Sacrament was Ordained upon a mighty design of God, to oblige men to
frequent Examination of themselves and lives: and to judge and condemn their
former miscarriages and follies, in order to future amendment, as St. Paul
intimates (1 Cor. 11. 28.) That is, it was Gods especial call to repentance.

By the other Ordinances they were only advised, by this they were engaged. The
other might admonish them, this necessarily constrained them to it. The other
Ordinances variously prevailed, according to the different skill of the
Preachers: but as to the event of this, it purely depended upon a plain and an
unvariable institution; so that no difference of parts in the Administrator,
could make it a contingent, or an uncertain blessing. If therefore you have
cause to complain of the unusual numbers of loose and impenitent men, consider
how much it is to be imputed to the discontinuance and intolerable neglect of
the Blessed Sacrament.

This the Last.

Thus have I shown you the losses of almost all the considerable parts of
Religion, And (as you may perceive) how the very substance of Christianity it
self was shaken and tottering: and how it so continues, where there is a
professed neglect of a due veneration to, and use of this Holy Sacrament.

O how can you acquit your selves before your good God, unless you endeavor by
your exemplary and constant attendance upon it, and a greater zeal for it, to
bring men back to the exercises of those graces, and necessary duties of
Christianity, which have been lost, or impairing ever since those unhappy days,
that gave encouragement to its dis-use and discontinuance?

And now you have heard all these Arguments, I shall make no other Application
of them to you, but only in the name of God, I shall lay a general charge upon
your Consciences, from every one of them.

That is, if no man can wilfully turn his back 1.
upon the Blessed Communion, but he is a Rebel to an express command of his
Savior, as to the first Argument.

Secondly, If he cannot do it without a manifest 2.
resistance of the Counsel of God against himself, as the Sacrament is a means
of Grace and Blessing, as to the second.

Thirdly, If he cannot so depart from it, but he 3.
must go away an unthankful wretch for the death of Christ, and the inestimable
benefits of it; as to the third Argument.

Fourthly, If he cannot so continue to do, but he 4.
must separate himself from the Communion of the Catholic Church; as to the
Fourth.

And lastly, If he cannot customarily turn away 5.
from it, but he must so long stand guilty of the loss, or the impair of those
so many mentioned graces, and necessary duties of Christianity: I say, if all
these ties of Conscience be put together, then certainly, if God Almighty has
required at your hands any thing that may be called Religion to be performed
and done, in order to your Salvation, This duty must come under the same
necessity and obligation. From which there is nothing can dispense you, but
what Divine Providence may permit to be an insuperable bar against all
possibility of receiving it. And therefore none of those subterfuges and
pretenses, that are ordinarily made use of, can possibly acquit you; that is,
no exception against the person of him that Administers it, or against the
company with whom you are to communicate, or against the circumstantial manner
of its administration, when the substantial Institution is entirely observed;
or lastly, when a continued unpreparedness is alleged: I say none of these
exceptions can possibly be admitted as such a bar, unless you can be as fully
assured, that God has provided for the innocence of your omission upon the
account of any of them, by as evident a declaration of his will in Scripture,
as that, whereby he has made the duty of Receiving the Sacrament to be
absolutely necessary; or that our Savior intended not what he said, when he
had so positively and passionately published his Pleasure and Command, with a
Do this in remembrance of me.

FINIS.

