The CAUSE plainly showed OF THE Persecution Which is now upon the Innocent
people CALLED QUAKERS; And here is also A true DECLARATION OF THEIR Just and
honest intentions; and in this all moderate people may see the ground of their
SUFFERINGS.

By WILLIAM SMITH.

LONDON Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Black-spread-Eagle and Windmill in
Martins Le grand. 1661.

The Cause plainly showed OF THE PERSECUTION Which is now upon the innocent
people, CALLED Quakers, etc.
THe sure foundation is Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God, in whom there is no
variablensse; but is to day as yesterday, and the same for ever; in him is all
goodness, mercy and peace; and in the virtue of his life and holiness is fruit
brought forth, and it is like him, and does not differ from him; and this is
his own work in the hearts of all the children of obedience, whom he has
gathered to be followers of him, and to keep his commandments; and he is become
their leader, and their salvation is in him, and their testimony is unto him;
for which cause they are evil entreated and persecuted, and their bodies and
estates exposed to danger and loss, and through all the earthly powers
changing, they have been kept under deep sufferings and sore persecution, and
yet their patience has been made manifest in bearing and enduring; and they
can truly say they bear no evil will to any who have caused their sufferings,
neither is it in their hearts to seek any revenge upon them, but cheerfully
commit their cause unto him that judges righteously: and these things do not
arise against the form or shape of our persons; for they be now in appearance
the same, as when we had much love professed, from such as now are great
enemies unto us; And whilst we were one with them, and did abide amongst them,
and could have run with them in excess and vanity, we were not then reproached,
nor reviled, nor persecuted and imprisoned, but seemingly much beloved: But the
Lord God having redeemed us from amongst them, through the power of his living
word, which in his love has entered within our hearts, and has shaken the
foundation of the earth, and caused the mountains to fall, and also has purged
our consciences from those lusts which once we lived in, and has crucisied the
flesh, and destroyed the body of sin, and the life which we had in those things
he has taken away; and the Lamb he has raised, from whom the life of
righteousness is brought forth, and has translated us into his likeness, and
stamped his Image upon us, which the world does not know; therefore are we
hated, and from this ground arises all the persecution which is this day upon
us, and all the enmity and evil that is against us, and is uttered concerning
us; and if any bears but the name of a Quaker, then the cry is to hang them,
and banish them, and famish them, with much more, which is from the very
cruelty of peoples hearts uttered concerning us, without enquiry whether any
evil be committed by us, or any thing done worthy of such things as they utter
forth concerning us: and this is for all people to consider coolly, and to
weigh it in the balance of moderation and patience, and search truly into the
ground; and if we do commit evil, or do wrong to the person of any man, or
disturb the nations peace, then let such punishment fall upon us, as in such
case is provided for such offenses; but if no such thing can be justly charged
upon us, or proved against us, then let people stay their hands from violence,
and their hearts from purposing cruelty, and stop their mouths, and do not
utter words so rashly; and let the King, Parliament, Councils, Judges,
Justices, Officers and Soldiers, all know, and also be overcome to believe,
and be persuaded in their own consciences that we are an innocent people, and
seek the well-being and peace of all men: And if this will not be received, nor
cannot be believed, yet know, that we do believe, and also are fully persuaded
in our own consciences, that our purposes and intentions are just and honest
toward all men, and to live quietly, peaceably and godly in this present evil
world; and that we neither seek to destroy or ruin the lives or estates of any
persons or people upon the earth; neither do we conspire, plot, or contrive any
such thing; for we know that all plots and conspiracies, insurrections and
rebellions, do arise from that spirit that lusts to envy, and not from Christ
Jesus the Lamb of God; and it is an evident testimony, that where such things
are practiced, they spring from that wicked one, and are nourished from the
cruelty that is lodged in his enmity, out of which comes all murders, plots and
conspiracies, rebellions and persecution; and the Scripture-testimony is clear
against all such practices, and the holy men of God they never walked in them,
they never plotted or contrived, nor ever persecuted any people; nor Christ
Jesus, the Prince of peace, he never was of that mind, as to destroy men's
lives, but to save them, and ought not the same mind to be in people as was in
Christ Jesus, who laid down his life for his enemies? he did not seek to
destroy them, or persecute them, though they were his enemies* now such are far
off from his mind, that seek to destroy and persecute such as are not enemies,
but truly friends and lovers of the whole Creation: now this is not his mind,
nor does not arise from him, but is brought forth from a contrary spirit, that
was always against him: And where does the Scripture declare, that Christ
Jesus the Prince of peace did ever persecute, or command persecution? or where
did he require an oath, or allow of an oath, but plainly has forbidden all
oaths, and given forth a positive command not to swear at all, but to keep to
yea and nay, for what was more was evil; (mark this) what was more then yea or
nay was evil. And here was no definition or distinction of Oaths, for one to be
lawful, and another unlawful, but plainly forbids them all, and bids them
keep to their yea and nay: And we can truly say before the Lord, that we do not
deny swearing upon any other account, but in obedience to his commands; and it
is neither disaffection nor disloyalty to the King nor his Government, but to
manifest our love to the King of Eternal Glory, in keeping his commandments;
and though this be the great cause, at present, of our suffering and
persecution, and from which so much wrath and fury is now against us, yet are
our consciences void of offense, and in that we have peace, and we know our
salvation and deliverance is in the hand of the Lord our God; and we know that
persecutors have been always ignorant of the things of God; for had they known
him, they would not have crucified him; and if the truth of God was known, as
it is this day, in which the Yea stands, and is performed, innocent people
would be freed from all this persecution which is upon them, and be in their
honest callings, and with their families, over which God has set them. And all
this persecution for not swearing, is come up since the Apostles days; there
was no such things imposed upon them, to bind them in Allegiance to any King or
Kings in those days, and it was many years after that Statutes were made for
imposing an Oath of Allegiance, and for refusing, to imprison the body and
seize upon goods; this is not agreeable with any practice in the Scripture, but
is come up in the dark night of Apostasy, since the power of God was lost, and
the spirit of truth ravened from. And in that day when Laws and such Statutes
were made for the imposing of an oath to bind to allegiance, there might be
such a people as were manifestly against the King or Government, and might be
deceitful in their promises, and no trust to be reposed in them, though they
might make fair promises; such a people there might be in that day, and such a
people there may be in this day: but number not the innocent amongst the
transgressors; for the Lord God of power has made manifest his living truth in
our hearts, and has gathered us in it, to show forth his praise, and in the
power of truth is deceit purged out, and our words and promises in the truth of
God are sure and faithful, and our yea is yea, and we are come to that which
leads us into all truth, and was before Laws and Statutes were, or any Kings
reign in England, whose Statutes are now in force for imposing Oaths.

And for our Allegiance to the King, we have made it manifest above many
others; for unto him have we declared the counsel of the Lord, and also
faithfully warned and exhorted him to obey the Lords counsel, that his Rule and
Government might stand in the power of God, unto which we are truly allieged
and willingly subject; and we have not at any time appeared against the King or
his Government, nor plotted or conspired any evil against his person or power,
but have paid our tribute in all lawful things, as subjects to him: and this
is a more evident testimony of our allegiance to the King, then persecution and
cruelty, wrath and fury; and all this swearing and imprisoning for refusing
Oaths arises from the wicked one, that has seated himself in peoples hearts,
and has the dominion over them, and brings forth his cruelty through them; and
so people having lost the power of God, that keeps faithful in the yea and nay
without an oath, they impose oaths upon one another, and swear one unto
another, but do not perform their oaths faithfully; then what is your oath
worth, if there be not faithfulness to perform it? and this is not without a
witness in every conscience, this day, how many several impositions have been
invented, to engage and bind to every several Government, as it has risen,
and how have they falsified their Covenants and Engagements? and it will be so
though people be sworn again and again, until they come to the power of God,
that teaches to deny swearing, and to perform every promise faithfully without
swearing; and who are not come to the power of God, that keeps faithful in yea
and nay, they are not faithful to their oath; so that it is not an oath that
makes any faithful to the thing they are sworn unto, but the power of God that
forbids swearing, and keeps faithful to what is promised in the yea, and to
what is testified against in the nay. And here stands true loyalty and
faithful obedience, both to God and man: The love is truly manifested unto God
in keeping his Commandments, and the Allegiance faithfully performed to the
King, in living peaceably and quietly under his Government, without any
Insurrection or Rebellion; and it has been so found amongst us without any
deceit or guile, whilst others who have sworn have not been found faithful to
their oath; therefore take our yea, and try us in it, seeing it is only for
conscience sake that we cannot swear; and if we be not found faithful in our
yea, then we shall fall into your hands as evil doers, and bear our punishment;
but until you have proved us and found us transgressors, do not so cruelly
entreat us and persecute us, for it will draw down judgment, and not mercy;
and hitherto we cannot be charged with the breach of our yea, since we have
been gathered into Gods truth: therefore have we peace in our sufferings,
because we stand clear before the Lord, and have no guilt upon our consciences,
as to the cause we suffer for this day. And were it not much better that people
would come to the power of God, that forbids swearing, and keeps faithful in
the yea, then to be strangers to the power of God, and run into transgression,
and falsify their Oaths? And this is the ground of distrust and unbelief one
of another, because people are not come to the power of God, then they dare not
trust one another upon their yea, but impose oaths one upon another, which
never makes any people faithful. The Saints yea was yea, and they were trusted
upon their yea, and believed one another upon their yea; and the Kings in those
days did not impose any oaths upon them, for the spirit of truth led them
into all truth; and what they promised in their yea, the spirit of truth led
them faithfully to perform it. And so were they trusted and believed upon their
yea, without any imposition of an oath to bind them beyond it: And all the
distrust one of another, and the unbelief one of another, as to what is
promised in the yea, it is come up since the days of the Apostles, that the
true spirit has been lost, and the false spirit has got a seat in people, and
rules in his dominion, and leads their minds into deceit, that their yea is
not performed; then does the false spirit beget in them an imagination to
impose an oath upon people to make them faithful, and so has all this
swearing come up in the dark night of Apostacy, and all distrust and unbelief
one of another is got up since the power of God was lost, and so nothing will
be taken for truth, but what is sworn unto; and this is a manifest token of the
spirit of error, which works in the minds of people, and draws them from
obedience to the doctrine of Christ and the Apostles, and then labors to draw
others into transgression with them.

And it is said by many who are amongst the oaths, We swear, and you must
swear, and the nations law is so to do, and you must obey or suffer; and the
Scripture declares of swearing, and they did bind their promises solemnly with
an oath, and an oath for confirmation is an end of all strife; and Abraham
swear, and many others that were holy men of God, they swear; and it was not
counted unto them for transgression.

Now what they might do in the dread and fear of the Lord God, in promising
solemnly some words in their own freedom, as a sure confirmation of their true
intentions to perform their promise, it does not make the lawfulness of an Oath
imposed: And this they did do, and might do without transgression: but what is
this to the proof of an Oath formed, and people to lay their hands upon the
Bible, and then to have these formed words read unto them, and to say, You
shall swear unto such things, and then pronounce, So help you God, and then to
kiss the Book? Is there any Scripture that makes mention of Abraham, or any of
the holy men of God, taking such an Oath? or was ever such an Oath imposed upon
them? And Christ Jesus is come, who has put an end to the strife, and to the
Oaths that stood in the strife, and he now creates Peace, and leads into Peace,
where there is neither striving nor swearing. And we can truly, pronounce our
Allegiance to CHARLES the Second, now King of England, and can truly promise
subjection to all his just and lawful Commands, and not to contrive or
conspire, or any way to rebel against His Person or Power, but to be assisting
in all lawful things that may be for the preservation thereof; And we do
renounce the POPE and all Jesuiticall practices, with all Idolatrous
superstitions; and we do not, nor shall not hold any Correspondencies or
Intelligences with the POPE, or any that do belong unto him, as to the owning
of his Supremacy. And this we can freely promise in the presence of the Lord,
who is the searcher of all hearts, and knows that we lie not; and we can seal
it with our Yea, and sign it with our Hands; and the contrary with our Nay,
and sign it with our Hands.

And this Innocent Testimony of our Allegiance and Subjection to the King and
all his lawful Commands, I that am now a sufferer in Worcester County-gaol,
because I dare not swear and run into condemnation, am made free in the Lord to
declare it unto all people, in behalf of my own innocence, and also my
faithful brethren, who are this day sufferers with me for the testimony of a
good conscience; and if it be so that we cannot be trusted, and be believed in
our Yea, and subscription unto this or some other just testimony; we are also
free to declare, that we cannot swear for conscience sake, and for no other
cause or matter whatsoever; and we are freely given up into the hand of the
Lord our God; and what may be permitted to fall upon us, either in body or
substance, we wait upon the Lord for strength to bear it patiently, and to rest
in it peaceable, until he arise our innocent cause to plead, who now are in
Sufferings for keeping his Commandments, and no other thing that any have
against us: And if people did but know the Peace and Joy which in the we have,
they would surely rather choose to suffer with us in the same cause, then in any
wise to oppress us and persecute us in our bodies: For in the day determined
all shall receive a recompense.

From the County-Gaol in Worcester, the 23. day of the 11. month 1660. W. S.

THE END.

