TWO SERMONS Preached at Two Public Assizes For the County of SVFFOLK, In the
Sheriffalty Of Will. Soame of Hawleigh in Suffolk Esquire.

By Will. Smyth D. D. Pr. Nor. and Vic. of Mendlesham in Suffolk.

LONDON, Printed by Andr. Clark for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-head in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1674.

FOR Sir WILLIAM SOAME, Late the Honorable HIGH SHERIFF Of the County of
SVFFOLK.
SIR,
WHen by my Transcription of these Papers, I had a more perfect Survey of them,
I found them so much inferior to your earnest desires for, and dear purchase
of them, that I judged nothing, but your professed respect to my person, and a
kind habituated Acquaintance, could seduce your Opinion to so undeserved an
estimation of them. Sir, when you heard them, your tenderness of my Reputation,
before so great an Assembly, sat at Stern to govern your apprehension; and the
gay circumstances of your solemnity, allayed the severity of your observation.
But now, Sir, they are under your eye, and your mind at leisure and freedom to
exercise an impartial judgment upon them, I fear they may sink in your Opinion,
like an artificial Beauty at a nearer inspection. The hearing of a Sermon, is
like a standing to view a transient Cavalcade, which if it stood still, and
every part of it were offered to a steady observation, how would the Glory of
it be lessened (in a wise man's opinion) to little more, then the Gaiety of some
idle Pageantry? But, Sir, why do I prognosticate so much evil to my self, when
the Stars of my fate, are in the hands of so great an ingenuity? I will not
choose to suspect, where I have so much cause not to be jealous. For, Sir, I
rest in this satisfaction to my self, that if these Papers will not answer your
expectation, yet my truth in performing my promise, and my duty in obeying your
command, will be approvable, and acceptable to you: and that shall be reputed
with me, a sufficient compensation for all the inconveniences I have objected
against my self. And, Sir, for the regard you have shown me, and the honor you
have done me, in your so friendly a choice of me (in the midst of so many
excellent persons, that better deserved your favor) to be interested in your
so honorable an employment, let it be adjudged a perpetual obligation upon me
to perform all possible Service to your Self and Family, that ever can come in
the Capacity of

Honored Sir, Your late Chaplain but unchangeable Servant and Friend William
Smyth,
Mendlesham Jan. 24. 1673.
THE FIRST SERMON Preached at BURY St. EDMUND At the Public Assizes, Feb. 27.
MDCLXXII.

SERMON. I.
1 Pet. 2.21. Because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that
we should follow his steps.


YOu may presume, at the hearing of these words, that I designedly wave all
temptations of intermedling with the concerns of Public Affairs, or
entertaining your attentions with reflections upon any State-emergencies. I
would not be willingly exemplarily guilty, of tempting you from that excellent
order of Your studying to be quiet, and of doing your own business.

But as I would not move in a circumference larger then my Office; so I would
not willingly be confined to one narrower, that is, I would not spend (I may
say, lose) an hour in instructing them in their duty, who understand it better
then my self; much less in quarrelling the miscarriages of of the Laws
proceedings, some of which will be always unavoidable upon the best management;
and in others we may easily miss our mark for want of a right understanding the
Nature of those Affairs. Either of which have been seldom done without many
unkind reflections upon other men's Callings and Employments.

Nevertheless, I solemnly design to do you the best good I can; and that not
without a particular respect to your present Affairs. But I shall endeavor it
from the best expedient of Instruction that the mind of Man is capable to
receive; that is, from the influence which Christianity in general, may and
must have upon all the actions of men; infallibly conducting them to the two
great ends of Nature and Religion, that is, In all things, and to all men, to
do that is right and Good.

Nor is there any method wherein I may place Christianity more in your view in
so short a time, or express it with so much advantage for the obtaining of both
those ends, as by representing it in the blessed Pattern of our Saviors Life
and Actions. Especially if we can believe our selves obliged (according to my
Text) as he has left us an example, to follow his steps.

In the management of which Doctrine of following Christ as an example, though
the Socinians do affirm little other use or benefit to have been designed in
all that he did and suffered, but to be a pattern, by which we should govern
our lives and actions, and in that sense to redeem us from all iniquity: Making
his death neither expiatory of the guilt, nor meritorious of the pardon of it;
much less satisfactory to the Justice of God in order to either. Yet ought the
Doctrine to be considered in its due place, and carefully pressed, as the most
successful expedient to secure and promote the universal practice of all
Gospel-holiness in the lives of men. Learn of me, says Christ, Matthew. 11.29.
that is, study to be instructed by my personal Virtues and Practices, as well
as be conducted by my Laws and Precepts; which will appear to have greater
force and luster from my exemplification of them. And St. Paul obliges his
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.1. to be followers of him, as he was of Christ. To whose
Image and Pattern we were predestined, says the same Apostle, Romans 8.29. to
be made conformable; that is, Christ left us an example to follow his steps.

In the handling which words, according to my proposed design, I think all
Expositors will afford me a liberty to interpret that they intend, not only an
imitation of him in his sufferings, but much more in the manner of his
submission to them; that is, in all those Graces, Virtues, and imitable parts
of holy life, that attended his suffering state, and were designedly practiced
by him for our perpetual imitation. All which I shall endeavor to represent in
several the most considerable parts of his excellent example, such as will be
most requisite for us to follow in order to our great Salvation.

Eminent and Extensive Love. A Love that had no narrow limitation of a private
concern, like the new admired prudential love and Leviathan kindness of the
World, designed only to center in self interest. Nor like the love of Factions,
knit together in combined strengths for mischief; which always proves like the
kindness of Wolves, (to whom our Savior compares them, Mat. 7.15.) who when
they have assisted one another in united Companies to destroy the innocent
Flocks, do in the end exercise their ravenous nature in devouring one another.

But our dear Saviors love, as it was wholly resigned up to, and terminated
upon the good of all men, so it admitted no restraint, refused no attempt from
the greatest disobligations of them that needed it, even to the loss of life it
self; which he suffered not only for them that were most unworthy in
themselves, the ungodly. But as they were most unworthy to him, even while they
were his Enemies, as S. Paul ( Romans 5.) discourses the commendation of his
love.

This kind of love, and in such proportions as our abridged capacity can
advance it, our Savior intended for our necessary imitation. And so he
declared his will, and instituted his command, That ye love one another, as I
have loved you, Joh. 13.34. And by this shall all men know that ye are my
Disciples, if ye love one another.

And this Copy of Christ's love was so eminently and universally transcribed, by
the Primitive Christians, that Tertullian observes, that it became Proverbial
even among their enemies, To love like Christians.

But then we must further understand from Christ's example, that our greatest
Enemies, even upon the strongest provocations to the contrary, are to be
admitted to all the measures of that holy love, that is, to all acts of strict
justice, and mercy, of forgiveness, and blessings* and that upon the peril of
our souls, if we live habitually in the breach of any part of that love.

But O unhappy face of Christianity now in the World! How do men make
temptations from little differences in Opinion, nice distinctions of Parties,
some small affronts, or casual mistakes, to study spite, and mischief, ill
turns, and unkind usages, secret hatreds, and open hostilities; to the
oppression and ruin one of another.

Can these things be justified by the example of Christ? Can these be the
proper effects of that Profession where love should be predominant? Do we not
know that he that loves not his Brother, 1 John 3.10. that is, every man, and
in the measures I have mentioned, is in the same state of danger toward God,
as he that does not Righteousness; that is, universally and grossly wicked. The
sum is, he that refuses the love of Christ for an example to imitate, cannot
without presumption rely upon the benefit of the same love for his souls
blessing and salvation.



There is nothing recorded of him from first to last, except his
transfiguration (the glory of which was very transient and private) but what
speak the lowest abasement and depressed humility. His birth, fortune, society,
and quality, the price of his Presentation in the Temple, and his value at his
death, and the manner of his sufferings, do all declare that he chose the
bottom of contempt, and poverty. Therefore St. Paul was at a stand how to
express it, and because he thought (...), Phil. 3.8. he humbled himself, was
too little, he adds (...), he emptied himself to nothing, to exemplify his
humility.

This is the pattern, which he gave his Disciples for their imitation; and so
he commands, Learn of me for I am meek and lowly in heart, Mat. 11.29. And what
he said upon one particular instance, of his Condescension, Washing his
Disciples feet, may be supposed to be obliging to all other parts of his
Humility; I have given you an example to do as I have done, Joh. 13.15.

O let us be studious to transcribe this blessed Copy, and adorn our
Profession, by imitating his holy example. Let us put on humbleness of mind,
let it be prevalent over all our faculties within us; Let us be clothed with
humility in our whole conversation without us, as the two great Apostles St.
Paul and St. Peter advise, Col. 3.10. 1 Pet. 5.5. that is, let us be humble in
our thoughts, and private communions with our minds; let us be humble in our
discourses, carriage, and conversation with others; let us be humble in all our
disputes with all those that differ, and in all our reproofs of all those that
offend God or us; let us condescend to the capacities of those whom we are to
instruct, and to the infirmities of them with whom we live and converse; let us
stoop to the meanest offices of doing good, and serving God, in doing which
nothing can be truly accounted mean, or beneath us; if we take Christ for our
pattern, his Religion for our rule, and his Rewards for our encouragement.

On the other side it is Pride that puts an irreconcilable difference between
the World and Christ Kingdom, Joh. 1.2, 16. For wheresoever it is, and
practiced, it does not only debauch the use of all humane Faculties, banish all
Moral Virtues, and all Remarks of natural Goodness, but makes the Soul an unfit
habitation for every grace of God, of which it naturally destructive. And when
that Idol is once set up in the Soul, all the capacities which God God gives us
to be instrumental of good, shall all be sacrificed to the self-deity of a vain
mind, and made to serve the interests of Envy and Revenge, of Luxury and
Ostentation. He therefore that follows not Christ in the example of his
humility here below, ought not to pretend to a hope of a participation in his
exalted Glory in a future state of bliss above.



Now as this Grace is distinguishable in its practice by the different objects
of God and Man, so was his Patience eminent in both respects, to the highest
perfection. As it respected God, it was most emphatically manifested, when in
the severest passion of his soul, his stupendous Agony; and when he saw before
him the bitter cup he was to drink, he fully submitted to Gods pleasure, with a
nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will, Mat. 26.39. Of which Tertullian
would have no other sense made, but as exemplary of what we should do in our
greatest extremities.

Then as his Patience respected men, though he encountered the hardest usages
that the Combinations of Power, Malice, and Ingratitude could offer him, in all
kinds of sufferings, from all kinds of persons, yet he never expressed the
revenge of an hard word; he did neither (...), nor (...), recriminate, nor
threaten; (the words dependent upon my Text) he made no other returns, but
Silence, Forgiveness, Prayers, and Blessing.

And I do not wonder, that when Justin Martyr was asked what was Christ's
greatest Miracle, that he answered, his Patience: Or that it was St. Austins
Opinion, that the Justification which the Centurion made of him hanging upon
the Cross, Mat. 27.54. Truly this was the Son of God, was rather from the
wonder of his patience then his power. But as great as it was, it was certainly
designed to be made exemplary to us, and exactly to be followed by us, if we
intend upon any account to be his Disciples.

O let us then be concernedly careful whatsoever afflictions it shall please
God to lay upon us, by whatsoever instruments they are effected, that Patience
may have its perfect work upon our souls, not murmuring against God in his
severest dispensations: who will (if we would but study his gracious ends, and
the happy effects of all afflictions) be always justified in his sayings, (or
doings) and clear when he is judged, Psalm. 51.

And if the malice and mischief of men be instrumental to the evils we suffer,
(as no good man shall want his portion) let us be sure strictly to answer our
Saviors pattern, and his holy Apostles triumphant exemplification of it; who
when they they were harrassed with the most violent oppressions that any sort
of innocent men ever endured (as St. Paul expresses their miseries, 1 Cor. 4.)
yet all the returns their patient souls contrived, was no more then that, being
reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we endure it; being defamed, we entreat,
v. 12.

These, these were the weapons with which the Primitive Christians contended
with, and subdued their most powerful adversaries: with which they set up their
spiritual Trophies upon the Thrones of Princes, and brought the Kingdoms of the
World to be Provincial to Christ's heavenly Empire, These carriages are the
prevailing arguments that command the Worlds acknowledgment, that we belong to
God; and that render our souls an easy possession to our selves in the midst
of all disturbances. And which is more then all, they shall have a peculiar
return of blessing from God, as the holy Apostle expresses it, (just before my
Text, and with a particular aspect upon it) they shall be (...), favor with
God, welcome and acceptable to him. Of which David was so sensible, that when he
was studying some special return for some extraordinary mercies, he did not say
( sacrificabo tauros and altilia) I will offer some great sacrifice of any
commonly-judged signal value, but calicem salutis, I will take the cup of
salvation, that is, (as many of the Fathers interpret it) the Cup of
Affliction; the patient bearing of which, he judged the most grateful sacrifice
to God for all his mercies.

The conclusion is, he that wilfully refuses to bear the Cross of Christ, in
any of these instances of Patience to God or Man, ought not to be so
presumptuous as to expect any benefit by the same Cross, to the blessing and
salvation of his soul.

Peter, Acts 10.38. He went about doing good. The Syriack reads it,
perlustrans, looking about; the Greek, (...), going through, and about, to find
out all occasions and opportunities of relieving the miseries of the afflicted.

And this he did not only in greater and more famous instances, as when he went
about (as St. Matthew testifies of him, Matthew. 4.23.) healing all manner of
diseases, and all kinds of infirmities; but (as it may be presumed) in the
smallest cases and opportunities: witness his first recorded Miracle, when he
supplied the want of Wine, though it were but to relieve the modesty, and to
salve the repute of a Wedding entertainment.

And though the Divine Story has recorded little more then the miraculous part
of his doing good, yet it appears that he did not then step aside from his
universal design, when it is considered that all his Miracles (not like the
tricks of Apollonius and Mahomet, which could serve no other ends, but of
mirth, cheat, and vainglory) were all real acts of Mercy and Charity: the
particulars of which, were they recorded, (to use St. John's Hyperbole) I
suppose the whole World would not contain the Books that would be written.

In this part of our Saviors Example, we must be most especially concerned to
follow him; for the harvest of the eternal reward, will at last answer this
seed-time, as S. Paul allegoriseth, Call. 6.) and in such proportions, he that
sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly; and that St. Paul intended by sowing,
doing good, his inference evinceth, As therefore we have opportunity, let us do
good to all men.

It is this part of Christianity that must properly fit us for the great
account, as our Savior represents the measures of it, Matthew. 25. and that
shall make the discrimination at the Worlds resurrection, when the (...), they
that have done good shall only rise to the life immortal, Joh. 5.29. O then, if
there be any design for heaven in your minds, of any ray of Grace or Virtue
shining in your souls, let it light you to walk in this path of blessing. And
let not only all your earthly designs stoop to it, but let all parts of your
Religion be governed and conducted by it. Do not think that the Religion of the
Ear, Tongue, and Knee, can acquit your purse, and other capacities of doing
good, when your disposition for the great reward shall be inquired into.

But what can those men answer to God, when in stead of our Saviors going
about doing good, in stead of the Primitive Christians transcription of his
excellent Copy in wiping away the tears of Widows, stilling the cries of
Orphans, easing the chains of Prisoners, redeeming Captives, dealing bread to
the hungry, and such like acts of doing good, some are running about to make
disturbance in Church and State, alienating the minds of innocent people from
just submission to legal establishments for Peace and Order? Others are
traversing the habitations of Prostitutes, losing their precious hours in
Visits, Courtships, and arts of pleasure, which they use (not as alleviations
to more serious employments, but) as the important business of their lives.

Now I wish the Christian World would once consider, whether a Confession,
Absolution, and a Dirge on the one hand; a Ministers Prayer, a few good words,
and a dole, on the other hand, can commute for such neglects, expiate their
omissions, and compensate for the rewards of eternity, against Christ's example,
and his express precepts, the tenor of the threats and promises of the Gospel
to the contrary.

Jews themselves.

He never attempted either to reproach their Government, or resist their
Authority in the least branch appointed for its execution. And thus he behaved
himself, when he met all manner of temptations to do the contrary: as first
when they universally opposed the great Work and Cause of God, then upon his
hand; that is, the greatest Reformation that ever was in the World, the change
of the Jewish Religion to the Gospel Dispensation. And then, at a time the
whole Nation (from the then universally observed signs of his near approach)
were pregnant with the expectation of a Messiah, who they believed should be
their temporal Redeemer from the Roman Yoke, and therefore might be presumed to
be fitly disposed to comply with any attempt to oppose and control that
Government. Lastly, To complete the evidence of his unquestionable Loyalty, all
this he did when it was in his power to have freed himself and his cause from
all their opposition; when he could have commanded Legions of Angels, Matthew.
26.53. when he could have convented the hosts of Heaven, and made the Stars in
and out of their courses ( and conjurati veniunt ad praelia venti) to have
assisted him. Further, he was so far from any kind of resistance, that he
expressed very many positive approbations of their Authorities: as first, When
he commanded the Sword, that had smote off the Highpriests servants ear,
(though drawn by St. Peter in his defense) to be put up, with this reflection;
all they that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword, Matthew. 26.52. that
is, that draw and use it against lawful Authority, though abusing its Power,
(as the excellent Annotator paraphraseth.) He paid the tribute due to the
Temple, (a Custom merely Judaical) when lest he should offend, a miracle
supplied him, Matthew. 17.27. And lastly, When upon the view of a piece of money,
he declared for the Imperial Power, Give unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, Matthew. 22.23.

Now that Loyalty, which our Savior so unexceptionally practiced in his own
person, the Apostles and Apostolical Churches after confirmed, both by their
precepts and practices. As to their precepts, such as that of Romans 13. and the
like, being worn by every Tongue and Pen, I shall not need to urge. But for
their Practices (the best Commentaries upon their Doctrines) nothing could be
more agreeable to to the Pattern and Example of Christ. Witness their carriage
before, and in the Ten bloody Persecutions; in the bitterest Storms of which,
it could never be said, that any Christian made the least undutiful reflection
upon their Emperors, or their Government: as the great Apologists. Justin
Martyr, Tertullian, and the rest that lived in those early Ages, do beyond all
exception testify. And this innocence they maintained, not only in their
greatest incapacities of doing otherwise, but when some of the Heathen
Emperors Armies chiefly consisted of them, and had sufficient power to have
grappled with them for their indempnities: as Tertullian glories, and of which
afterward the famous story of the Theban Legion was a renowned instance.

And now, who could believe it possible, if there were nothing else to be
alleged for the strictest obedience to Authority, but the example of Christ
and his immediate followers, there should be found any that bear the name of
Christian, that should study and contrive Arguments for the allowance of the
Principles and Practices of Disloyalty, as some of our Adversaries on either
hand have done, to the disturbance of the Christian World, when the Church of
England has always stood an immovable Rock of Loyalty, between them both. But
I shall make no unkind reflections upon our late miscarriages, of which I
believe many have truly repented, most have been ashamed of, and of which there
will be little danger that Posterities should make approbation, unless we can
suspect them to be in love with the greatest dishonor, that could be done to
Christianity and the severest blow that the Reformed Religion ever received.

O then, let us persuade our selves that we can never walk acceptably to God in
a religious course, till we have exactly transcribed our Saviors Copy in all
our carriages toward our Governors, of every order. And to do this, not only
when we are pleased, but when affairs move most unsuitably to our private
judgment or interest: considering, that sometimes Princes are obliged, or
pleased to lessen the concerns of some, to balance their favor to all; which
when they do, it is our duty, with all quiet and innocence, to make the best
interpretation, and the tenderest submission.

But those, who can reconcile and promote their professions, with bold
disobedience to just Authorities, may as well, and as reasonably hope to go to
Heaven with Adultery and Murder upon their souls, for they do equally
contradict the Example and Religion of Jesus.



And in this respect, he so instituted his life, in the whole course of it, as
not only by many degrees to exceed the measures of those Laws which he had
constituted, but to act and suffer, in many instances of which he had given no
express commandment. As for instance, when he designed to contemn the World, as
one part of his holy life, first he did it (as to the riches of it) in such a
degree, as to choose the lowest Poverty, beneath the propriety which the Foxes
and Birds of the Air enjoy. Then as to the Honor of it, he not only despised
it as a necessary duty; but he renounced it to that degree as to choose to
appear in no higher quality then in the form and reputation of a servant, Phil.
2. Lastly, as to the pleasures of it, he so far receded from all innocent
satisfactions, as to make himself emphatically a man of sorrows all his life.
And when he came to die, he chose more then to die; that is, for the joy that
was set before him, he endured the Cross, and despised the shame, Heb. 12. that
is, to die with all the aggravations of torment and dishonor.

Now all that I propound as imitable from this part of his example, is not the
exact following him in all the degrees of the former duties, nor in all other
his chosen acts of greater perfection; as his prodigious Fastings,
Pernoctations in Prayer, Agonistick Devotions, and the like; which had they
been universally obliging all his Disciples and Professors of his Religion,
(though some of them have been fondly imitated by some Orders of the Roman
Communion, and other fanatic Enthusiasts) would not only have been
inconsistent with our humane frailties, and natural frames of Body and Mind,
but have endangered the safety of all humane Societies.

All that I intend by it, is that holy persons, who are affected with a more
enflamed love of God, and would express it; that are transported with a more
heightened desire of pleasing God, and are studying how to do it; that design
^u^^er assurances of Gods love, and aspire at greater degrees of Reward and
Glory, and would be informed of the best method to attain them; I say, such
persons should endeavor to improve their engagements to Self-denial, Charity,
Piety, and universal Obedience above the lower degrees which the latitude of
the Precept may be presumed to allow; and not to stop in their walking with God
in the practice of them, at the minimum quod sic, lowest pitch of the
absolutely necessary adjudged duty.

For instances; First, Not to stand at the denial of themselves, in renouncing
all that is directly evil, but to change (as often as the case will bear it)
the most innocent and allowable freedoms and satisfactions; into severer
exercises and religious employments.

Then as to Charity, to study to do more then is absolutely necessary sub
periculo animae, that is, beyond what Divines can or ought to declare, as
universally obliging: sometimes imitating the Macedonians charity to do good,
(...), above what they are well able, 2 Cor. 2.8. And not only to abjure all
occasions that are sinfully expensive (with which no man that hopes for Heaven
can in reason acquit himself) but sometimes to part with portions which their
order of life usually require, when objects and opportunities of pity call upon
them for their help. And this is done especially, when God shall enable men to
perpetuate mercy, by settled erdowments for the successions of the miserable. Of
which, there be three such noble monuments, founded within these few years, by
three excellent men of the Episcopal Order, (all very lately gone to their
rewards) as are sufficient to outballance the unworthy opinions of the Age,
against that Hierarchy, if it were capable to understand, or love what is truly
good.

So in the case of Piety, first particularly that of Prayer; when above the
common measures which judicious men may account generally competent, for the
observation of the Precept, holy men shall choose to warm their Devotions at the
flames of diviner fires; and think it not enough to be measured by the
Repetitions of the Jews daily sacrifice, or Daniels three addresses; but rather
imitate David's seven times a day, and his midnight office, Psalm. 119. or the
Primitive Christians every third hours return, and then choose to fill up every
interval of time from company and employment, with the shorter Offices of
private Ejaculations. As for public Devotions, when they shall think it not
enough to make legal compliances, but moreover shall express their love to God,
and his public worship, by a more tender regard to the honor, propriety, and
peace of them that minister to his holy Name and Service. And then sparing no
cost, not only to uphold, but to advance the Greatness, Splendour, and Beauty of
places separated to the service of the great God, and the Eucharistick Offices
of his holy Son. And this gives a just title to the pious zeal of Governors,
when they shall take care, not only to see the substantial parts of commanded
worship, truly performed. But when out of a greater love to God, they shall
endeavor to advance the honor and beauty of it with decent rites, and
circumstances, that it may appear more comely and reverential.

Now of all these particulars, and other rarer instances of heightened zeal
above the ordinary allowed performances of preceptive duties, we have
innumerable pregnant Examples, for the encouragement of such as choose to climb
the heighths of Religion, with which the Stories of the Ancients abound to
amazement; of which these few minutes will not give me leave to make any
tolerable enumeration; yet I will endeavor to give you a short view of some
few of them, but of such as were in the first, and unsuspected Ages of the
Church.

It was this heightened love to God that inflamed the Primitive Christians, not
only to die when it was their duty, but for a greater encouragement and
confirmation of others in the Holy Faith of Jesus, to offer themselves to the
fury of their enemies, and run into the flames of Martyrdom, till they had
tired their Persecutors, as Tiberianus President of Palestine complained to the
Emperor. This made the famous Edyssa run and complain she should come too late
to the Crown of Martyrdom. This Angelick zeal, was the reason why they did not
only provide convenient Places, for the Christian Assemblies, but raised up
Temples in (...) days of Constantine, to the vastest height, threatening the
very Clouds; and with the greatest splendour, auro and ebore nitentia, their
roofs shining with Gold and Ivory, as St. Jerome witnesses.

Then the heighths of their Charity, were so seraphick and memorable, that
Clemens Romanus (the first Father) affirms, that besides their ordinary
engagements of relieving the Poor, some of them sold themselves to bondage, to
redeem others in greater extremities; and let themselves out to Services, that
by their wages, the more impotent might be provided for. Nazianzen reports of
his Father, that he was wont to part with that in charity which was reserved
for necessary uses: and that he had heard his Mother oftentimes wish, that she
and her children might be sold, that the price might purchase supply for the
wants of the afflicted. To which I may add the famous story of Paulinus, who
when his money was gone in redeeming Captives, delivered himself to the
Vandals, to redeem the Widows son. Who has not heard of the Empress Placilla,
who went daily to the Hospitals, to dress the Ulcers with her own hand? And of
Sr. Jeromes Fabiola, a Roman Lady that sold all she had, and bought an
Hospital, and executed the Offices about the Lazars in her own person?

Thus I have given you some few instances, the thousandth part of what might be
offered. More of which, who designs to see, may find some of these, and many
more, collected lately, by an excellent person giving an account of Primitive
Christianity. But if I have offered enough to convince you of the temper of
ancient Zeal and Devotion, I have attained my end, why I mentioned them.

And now to obviate that reproach which some may study to throw upon this
innocent and noble principle of advanced Piety. First they are to know, that I
intend not to give credit to the Romanists fond and unallowable excesses, as
worshipping of Figures and Images, Praying to Saints and Angels, their
ridiculous Pilgrimages, and Pennances, and their such like extravagances; but
that this heightened love to God, be expressed only in rational engagements,
such as are really good in themselves, not contradictory to holy Scripture, and
the Analogy of of Faith; and that are nearly agreeable, and consequent to the
nature and reason of the constituted Precepts. Much less do I advise them as
meritorious, or as challenging by their own virtue any thing at Gods hand, to
whom (in that sense) when we have done all we can, we are unprofitable
servants. But least of all as works of supererogation, of which the Romanists
account is, that they are done as satisfactory not only for their own sins, but
abounding to the satisfaction of the sins of others. Neither do I plead for
them as universally necessary; but as Christ advised once in a matter of like
nature, Matthew. 19. he that can receive them, let him receive them. Or as St.
Paul declared his sense, in a particular case of this kind, to be made use of
for a general purpose, He that does them not, may do well; but he that does
them shall do better, 1 Cor. 7.

But I propound them as highly profitable and advantageous for these great
purposes.

1. Because such acts of heightened Zeal and eminent Piety, will establish the
souls of good men with fuller assurances of the love and favor of God; and
will deliver them from the discomfort of a doubtful medium, and suspense,
between hope and fear, which an ordinary performance of Religious duties, do
too often afflict the Spirits of good men living and dying.

2. Because they are such acts, as though for which God has not made express
command, yet with which he will be well pleased, and are secure of his gracious
acceptance; as the Jews Free-will-offerings were, and as David's design was,
when he had it in his heart to build him an house, for which he gave him no
commandment, 1 King. 8.17. And as Mary Magdalens act of love was, when she
anointed our Saviors feet with precious ointment, for which she had no
positive rule or precept.

And if (as once against her chargeable expression of her zeal) it shall be
objected against some more noble and costly acts of Piety (as in building or
adorning Gods* Houses, and the like) that they might have been spared, and the
money given to the Poor, I shall only mind them to consider, who it was that
said so, and I am superseded from the trouble of giving any further answer.

3. Pious souls should be affectionately desirous to be exercised in such
advanced acts of Charity and Piety, from the assurance that God will reward
them. For if a Cup of cold Water shall not lose his reward, much more will
every act of greater import have its proportioned recompense, for Jesus sake.
This was Placilla's encouragement when she was reproved by the siner Ladies of
her Court, for her forementioned acts of Charity, when she answered them ( pro
regno hoc ago) I do them in expectation of a better Crown and Kingdom then my
own. And indeed such chosen acts of more eminent goodness, are the proper
engagements which God rewards; if we will observe St. Paul's reasoning, 1 Cor.
9. how he expected a greater reward for his (...), his voluntary costless
preaching the Gospel, for the noble end of doing more good, then for the
necessary commanded duty of preaching it at all.

Fourthly and lastly, From the great advantage which Christianity obtains from
the amiable prospect of eminent strictness, and such heightened degrees of
Charity and Piety.

O what need have the remiss and Under-Professions of this Age; to be intended
and advanced by presidents of such heightened zeal for God and goodness. It is
necessary that some men should not only walk in the light of an ordinary
Profession, but shine as lights, to warm and melt the hearts of others, who are
frozen and fixed against most acts of Charity, and almost all of Precy: and
then be able not only to correct all such erroneous zeal, that spends it self
in unwarrantable practices of Mistaken Godliness, but put a stop to the Worlds
bold defiances against all that is good. But if Churchmen especially, would
assume it as their more proper care, to live and act in those heighths that I
have mentioned, (by which they principally, in the purest Ages, obtained the
name of Spiritual Persons, in opposition to Secular; that is, to men that were
not engaged in such advanced Professions of stricter holiness,) I say, if they
were more generally so engaged, (though I am assured no Christian Nation in the
World can parallel the number of such as are) it would sooner confute the
spite that is against them, wear off the contempt that is upon them, and would
be found the most successful expedient to bring dissenters to sober opinions
and peaceable conformities.

Thus have I endeavored to represent to you the measures of Christ's great
Example in the six several steps we should walk in; which if by the grace of
God you shall faithfully endeavor to follow, as you will be out of all danger
of miscarriage in your present services, (for I think I need give no other
directions) so will you be best prepared to receive the Crown of Immortal
Bliss, when Christ shall come to render to every man according to his works at
the general Assizes of the World, the great and universal Resurrection. And
that Almighty God may afford you and us all his heavenly assistance so to do,
let us join in our prayers one for another, in the words which the Church has
taught us in the Collect for the second Sunday after Easter.

ALmighty God, who have given thine only Son, to be unto us both a sacrifice
for sin, and also an ensample of godly life, give us grace that we may always
most thankfully receive that his inestimable benefit: and also daily endeavor
our selves to follow the blessed steps of his most holy life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE Second Sermon, Preached at BURY St. EDMUND At the Public Assizes, Sept.
13. MDCLXXIII.

SERMON. II.
1 John 4.1. Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they be of
God.


THe same reasons that moved me before to decline all intermedling with your
present affairs, prevail with me still in this my second Adventure. I would not
seem to reproach these venerable persons, My Lords the Judges, with the least
suspicion that they needed my aid to teach them either Skill or Virtue.

And as for the inferior Instruments of Justice in your proceedings, that
chiefly need Priestly counsel, whereby right may be done to them that here
dearly seek it, I think particular applications to be an expedient too weak and
unsufficient to encounter the Ages universal falseness and aversation to all
virtue and honesty. These sholes are not to be fished for, and caught to
Goodness, by such single hooks of particular directions; they must have a Net
spread over them of some more general concern in Religion, which may powerfully
influence them with the knowledge of, and obligation to their respective duties.

The last time therefore I attempted them with one of the largest compass, the
whole Body of Christianity, practically represented in the example of Christ. I
shall now endeavor to encompass them* with one of a lesser circle, (and yet as
reasonably promising success) and that is, an engagement to a more firm
adherence in some, and a speedier return in others, to the Communion of the
Church of England, as being a Church accommodated, more to the designs of the
Gospel, as to all morals, and the safety of all Societies, then any Church or
Profession in the World.

And as because woeful experience has taught us to date the Peoples declination
from the blessed practices of Justice, Honesty, Veneration of an Oath,
obedience to Authority, and all other Christian Virtues, (which only
necessarily suits the happy mannagement of such affairs as these) to the late
confusions; so to endeavor to bring men back to the same Church whence they
were fallen must be believed the most reasonable expedient to recover them to
the same excellent Virtues they lost by departing from it.

It is too pregnantly observed, that ever since the breaking up the Foundations
of this excellent Church, we have sunk every day more and more, in all the
neglects of our duty to God and Man: we have looked ever since like a People in
ill handling, possessed with an Evil Spirit, and bewitched (as Rebellion well
resembles it) to our mischief and undoing, and to an universal unthriftiness in
the enjoyment of Gods greatest mercies both spiritual and temporal.

O then it is high time to put to our hands for the Churches recovery, and to
bring back the People (as fast as we can) to her Communion: that they may learn
again to be honest and good, and recover the excellent Genius of the old
English spirit.

It is high time that we no more smother our defense, for fear of offending, or
to preserve the Mistaken Title of Moderation: Nor meal our mouths so long, till
we be choked against all purposes of after-help; and lest by pretending an
over indulgence to men of weak minds, we rock the People asleep in their Schism
and Folly, beyond all possibility of being ever awakened. Designing therefore
to do something which (besides the respect I had to the present affairs) I
judged might be of the more public and universal concernment in so general an
Assembly, I found nothing (as the state of the Church now stands) could answer
my purpose so fully, as to endeavor to confirm and fortify them that yet
adhere to the Church of England, against all temptations to decline or desert
it; and to undeceive all those that already have unhappily departed from it.
And my Text offers a fair opportunity to attempt both, in which are two parts
to be discoursed;

1. An Inhibition, Believe not every spirit. 2. An Exhortation, But try the
spirits, whether they be of God.
First, The inhibition; where it is fit we explicate the terms. The meaning of
Believing, as to Spirits, offers no difficulty; though in reference to God and
Christ, it has been perplexed with as many idle and extravagant notions, and
to as many ill purposes, as any word in Scripture ever was. But the word Spirit
will admit some little examination. Originally it signifies the Wind;
Scripturally and by Analogy, may other things: sometime the Soul of Man in
general, and then the several faculties in particular: oftentimes it is taken
for Angels, and those good and bad: most eminently it is taken for the Deity,
and then most distinctly for the third Person of the Trinity; and particularly
for it in its guiding and reaching Office, whether immediately by it self, or
mediately by others; and thus it is here taken really or so pretended. And then
the inhibition imports thus much: That Christians should not credulously, and
without sufficient trial, follow and be governed by every Teacher that pretends
to the Office by a Plea or Commission from the Spirit of God.

Now the Text it self offers two Arguments against such a credulity and aptness
of belief. First, because (as the comprehensive indefinite, (...) every,
purports) there be many kinds and varieties of Spirits, by which Teachers may
be deceived, and be able to deceive others; and which (how many soever they be)
must be all false but one. Thus the Devil (when God permits) turns a teaching
Spirit, I will, says he, be a lying spirit in the mouth of the Prophets, 1 Chronicles. 18.20.

And there is a spirit of perverseness, Isa. 19.14. vertiginis, as St. Hierome;
(...) as the Lxx; that is (as they render it) a spirit of turning about, or
error, which God suffers to be dispersed among a People, as a punishment upon
them. St. Paul mentions, (...), the spirit of a man; that is, his own fancy
and opinion; which is as various as the several humors and imaginations of
men, 1 Cor. 2.11. He adds, (...), a spirit of the world which St. Augustine
calls the spirit of Pride and Ambition. And this spirit sets up many a Teacher,
and is as various as the different circumstances and humors of Times, to which
it must be always garbed and accommodated.

Further, No man ought to wonder at the great variety of spirits, when he
considers what a strange gift of propagation every Evil spirit has been
observed to have; and how (if it has had any, the least respite from
restraint) it has presently branched it self into many several Families, and
divided apartments of new Spirits. And thus early the Mother-spirit of
Gnosticism (which we find so often reproved in the New Testament) did in a
short time, become the Parent of such a fruitful Progeny, that from its loins
descended the spirit of Valentinians, Saturninians, Macedonians, and others, as
Ireneus, and other Ancients testify. And St. Augustine observed of the Evil
spirit of Donatism, that it procreated so fast, that it begat a very great
company of new and disagreeing Parties.

But to go no further then our own experience: No sooner was this glorious
Church broken to pieces in our late Rebellion; no sooner had one common spirit
of Opposition (known then but by the one name of Puritanism) sacrificed the
Churches Peace and Unity, Government and Worship to its Rage and Lust; but it
begat Legions, spawned an Offspring of such hideous shapes; brought forth such
Litters of so many deformed stocks of new Spirits, as might make Heresy it
self blush to bear their names, and shamed any sort of men in the World into
repentance, but one, for being the unhappy Parent of such a monstrous and
equivocal issue. And then to consider how far every one of those new Spirits
had prevailed over the minds of men, to be deceived by them, I think it were
alone enough to arm us with a resolution most carefully to observe the
inhibition of my Text.

But that which makes it yet more reasonable and necessary, is because all such
spirits (how inconsistent soever they be among themselves) do always contrive,
by some pretense or other, to make themselves as like the Spirit of God, as the
case can possibly bear, and the Folly and credulity of their Followers admit.
For since the Devil can transform himself into an Angel of Light (as S. Paul
argues, 1 Cor. 13.14.) it will be much easier for all other Spirits to make an
assimilation.

All which being thus represented, as it must needs put the credulous into a
great sense of the danger of being deceived, so it makes their suspension of
not believing every spirit, very just and necessary. This the first:

Secondly, The second Argument from the Text (by the words which do immediately
follow it) is, Believe not every spirit, because many false Prophets are gone
out into the World; that is, because as there be varieties of spirits, to
delude the minds of men, so those spirits (while there is Folly, Pride, and
Passion in in the World) can never want agents, in every place to execute their
unkind offices; and that will be sedulously active, (by gratifying the base
humors and designs of some, and by surprising the weakness and credulity of
others) to disturb the Church and mislead the People.

Now there is no man that seriously considers the multitude, subtilty, and
unwearied diligence of such Officers of Evil spirits (when they are abroad) but
must believe himself to run a very great hazard of being deceived, without the
greatest care and strictest enquiry whom to trust.

And that the Church was never without such kinds of men, to offer temptations
to the most steadfast, will appear by a very few instances.

What considerate person might not tremble at the thoughts of his danger of
being deceived, if he reads but the story of Core and his accomplices: that such
persons should ever mask their wicked designs with such a prevailing disguise
of Piety as should be able to seduce so many thousands to their destruction.
Who would not dread his own instability, and be engaged in the carefullest
suspension of mind, whom to trust and follow, when he reads of the Jews
prodigious defection in the Samaritan Schism: or if ever he should meet a
parallel temptation to go astray, as they had who were obliged to believe one
Elias, against 450 Prophets of Baal set to deceive him? And if such presidents
of danger be not sufficient to chastize and awaken men's credulities, how should
our Saviors Cavear admonish them? Beware of false Prophets, Mat. 7.15. How
should the frequent Apostolic predictions of such Seducers advise them, as
when it was foretold, Acts 20.29. that grievous Wolves should enter in, not
sparing the Flock?

Lastly, How should the almost incredible multiplication of such Prophets in
every Age, engage them in the severest care, what spirits they should believe,
and by what Teachers they should be instructed? St. Augustine reckons up 88
several sorts of Heretics to his time, and Philastrius 128, and so
proportionably they increased in every following Century. Of all which
whosoever desires to see a perfect and yet compendious prospect to terrify him
from the danger of seducement through his own credulity, let him but overlook
the Churches Tragoedy lately acted in this Nation, and (as in a short Scene) he
may see almost all the heresies that ever were before (besides a progeny of new
ones) upon the Stage together: and may behold the subtle Professors of them,
not only acting over again all the ancient Arts of seduction, but practicing
new tricks, frauds and pageantries of Piety, to cheat, and deceive the World.

All which put together, makes it very reasonable, that (because many false
Prophets are gone out into the World) the inhibition in my Text, of not
believing every Spirit, should be as strictly and carefully observed, as men
would prize and secure their eternal safety. This the second Argument.

And now shall common observation of former dangers make us wary whom we
believe, or rely upon in our secular affairs; and shall we be carelessly
credulous in matters of spiritual concern?

Shall Wordly wisdom teach us to trust no body in temporal things, and yet
believe every body in matters of eternal moment? Shall we be more then wise men
in the one, and less then fools and babes in the other?

Can we suspend our faith in things in which sensible demonstration may direct
our prudence? And shall we easily trust, where the Arguments are spiritual, and
in the dark, (as to sense) and Evidence at distance, and the danger of
miscarrying the greatest that can be?

O let us be wary where we trust our souls! And since every spirit is not of
God, and our precious souls lie at stake upon a right choice, let us (and there
never was a time in which it was more needful) take all possible care, and use
all our faculties and skill, to try which are truly of God. And that leads me
to the second part of my Text, the Exhortation, But try the spirits.

2. The duty is, (...), to try: where we are first to observe (as an
encouragement to undertake it) that God has so delivered the things of our
Peace in Scripture, as we are Creatures of Reason, Choice, and Judgment: and
therefore he was pleased that much in Religion should depend upon the exercise
of our Reason by trial and examination. For so it is, as to the matter and
general substance of our happiness, we are obliged ((...), Phil. 1.12.) to try
and search for the things that are excellent: but there is no case wherein we
are more concerned then in this, the trial of spirits, the guides of souls;
upon whose Offices and Gods Ordinances in their hands, depends the Peace and
Unity of the Church, and the great event of every man's particular salvation.

Now that which makes this duty very reasonable, is, that as God was pleased
there should in natural things be differential marks, and incommunicable
characters to guide man's understanding in distinguishing one being from
another; so much more in spirituals, (where the concern is greater) we cannot
suspect that God should impose a duty to try and choose, and leave us without
sufficient means to discriminate and distinguish.

Not ought we to doubt it in this instant case in hand, that since God has put
it upon our Trial and Choice what Guides we are to follow, what spirits to
trust too, t^^t he has also allowed us some differencing notes and characters,
how to understand the spirits that are of God, from those that are not.

For the finding out of which at this needful time (in which there appears so
many different pretenders to conduct Religion and the souls of men) is the
business of this hour. And that I may be sure not to miscarry in this great
trial, I shall first lay down the characters which false spirits or Teachers,
may have in common with those that are of God, and then describe those that do
really evince the difference.

1. The first Character in common, and undistinctive, is a natural aptitude, or
a well acquired ability to Teach: Though they be improved to a more then
ordinary dexterity of the most gratifying and zealous utterance, in Praying and
Preaching. Therefore St. Paul, when he commanded the Romans to mark them that
make Divisions, renders them not distinguishable by their words and manner of
speaking; for says he, they shall ((...), Romans 16.18.) by good words and fair
speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. And when St. Peter forewarns them of
false Prophets he tells them they shall come with the speaking character,
(...), 2 Pet. 2.3. with feigned words; that is, framed and fashioned, perhaps
to the highest strains of Piety. But if those Teachers seem to be over-studious
to exceed others in more pleasing and melting modes of speaking, and to
habituate themselves to extraordinary winning and humouring expressions,
(though what they say be good) yet they may justly give occasion to wise
observers to collect some reasons to suspect their truth and sincerity.
Therefore St. Jerome observed in his time, affabilis sermo and blandum
eloquium, etc. sunt haereticorum laequei, quibus pisces capiunt and volucres,
an affable way of discoursing, and a flattering delivery, were the sna^es of
Heretics, by which they catched the little People into their affections, and
opinions. But if in stead of the true spirits modest endeavor to found the
Peoples souls in the common Articles of the Christian Faith, they shall choose
to fly aloft, like St. Judes empty Clouds, at higher doctrines, as they call
them. As when they turn the Gospel into a Mystery, of which they themselves
must pretend to be the only men that carry the Keys to open it; and, if instead
of instructing the People in their obligations to obey Christ's commandments,
and soberly directing them in all parts of holy life, as Justice, Mercy,
Obedience to Authority, and the like (which they reach the poor people to
undervalue as legal preaching) they be venturing at the seals of the
Revelation, numbering of heads, and horns, and beasts, controuling Governments,
and disputing Laws; or shall be towering up to the lofty Nothings of empty
Metaphors, extravagant Notions and Phrases; or be continually trading with St.
Judes (...), great swelling words of Privileges, Saintships, Liberties, Divine
Unions, and the like; or be always at a thousand repetitions of the name of
Christ, getting him, laying hold o^ him, closing with him, and the like; though
they do all this with the greatest earnestness, zeal, and sweat imaginable,
they grow beyond suspicion their design is not good.

The sum is, To be able to pray and preach with the best skill and capacity, is
no distinguishing mark; for men may have those faculties and yet nevertheless
be spirits, Teachers that are not of God.

2. Nor secondly can a pretense to a claim, for their doctrines from the holy
Scriptures, be a sufficient mark of distinction; for as much as no Ancient or
Modern Heretic, but did, and do cry up an interest in Gods Word, to support,
or at least to seem to palliate their plea and doctrines. And this is
pregnantly to be taken notice of through the whole stock of Ecclesiastic
Records. Tertullian very early observed in his famous Book, De
praescriptionibus Haereticorum, that Suadere non possunt de rebus fidei, nisi
de literis fidei scriptur as obtendunt, and hac sua audacia quosdam movent, it
had not been possible to have removed some from the truth, had they not been
prevailed with by the sacred name of Scripture. How much would this hour be too
little for such heaps of observations of this kind, as might be collected.

Now all the advantage which all false spirits do make by pretending
Scriptures, is because God has so delivered his truths in them, many of which
are so wrapped up in Metaphors, and other Tropes, and Figures, so immixt with
occasional discourses, and very often so obscurely delivered (or as St. Paul
expresses it, (...) so darkly, and as it were in a riddle) that they that have
designs to deceive others, that want humility to hear the sense of the Church,
and to obey their lawful Guides appointed to instruct them in their right
interpretation, may find Arguments semblable enough in Scripture, to serve the
ends of a Deceiver, to satisfy a private and prejudicate spirit in any error
in the world, wresting them (as St. Peter advises us) to their own
destruction. Hence it is that Heretics of the greatest inconsistency among
themselves, and some of them in perfect contradiction one to another, have laid
their Plea upon the holy Scriptures. So Vincentius observes of the Heretics
before his time, and instanceth in Photinus, Novatianus, Sabellius, Donatus,
and many others. And we our selves in our days have seen the same effect. To
instance, How have the Socinians found in Scripture, a seeming authority to
assert their denial of Christ's Divinity; and yet the Romanist can think he
thence finds proof enough, that a Priest in a Wafer may make him the mighty
God, and worship him accordingly? How have the contending Armies of the
Remonstrants and Contra Remonstrants, (whose principles stand at the Poles
distance one from another) managed their long War, with the same weapon of holy
Scripture? And how from thence have the three great parties among us, persuaded
themselves that each of them can in Scripture trace the measures of their
several Church-governments? And (which is most to be admired) how have the
unwarrantable practices of Rebellion, Murder, and confounding all that is
sacred, been so far patronized from Scripture, as to engage multitudes to
believe them to be the prosecutions of Gods cause, and instances of his most
acceptable service? Has not experience taught us, that such a distant Text,
as, Down with it, down with it, even to the ground, has prevailed more to
destroy the places of Public Worship, then that, This House shall be called a
House of Prayer, could persuade men to keep them up; that a binding Kings in
chains, have tempted men to the most execrable destruction of their natural
Princes; when, they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation, could
not satisfy their Consciences to preserve them. And have we not heard, that a
Curse ye Meroz, could justify all the Ravages committed upon the Loyal and the
Innocent? To be short, the sum is, A bate appeal and claim to Scripture, is not
an incommunicable mark, but that nevertheless, the spirit that does it may not
be of God.

3. Thirdly and lastly, A plausible and fair life and conversation does not
distinguish; for as much as the greatest enemies of truth in all Ages, have
been noted for a greater pretext of framed sanctimony, and formed piety,
outward innocence and humility, or so much of these as might serve to advance a
reputation to their Plea, and Doctrines. But this is the sheeps clothing of
false Prophets, Mat. 7.14. and the transformation of false Apostles into the
likeness of the Apostles of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.13. And it is that which St. Paul
calls, (...), 2 Timothy 3.5. the form or appearance of godliness. S. Austin
relates, that the great temperance and devotion of the Manachees, betrayed
himself and Alipius into the gross heresy of Manachism. And S. Basil affirms
of the Arians, that ob confictam sanctimoniam omnia concredita habuere, they
surprised an universal belief of their heresy by their contrived and fashioned
Piety. Which gave occasion to St. Bernard to affirm and observe, that haeresis
docta est non tantum lingua, sed vita mentiri, Heresy was as well skilled to
dissemble for its acceptance, with the cheat of life, as with the deceit of the
tongue.

Now the design of all this artificial zeal and piety, is to check the
unavoidable imperfections of the true Guides of souls-carthen-vessels, and to
raise a reputation to themselves from their disgrace, which they are always
studying to improve before the People.

But though the false spirits greater seeming piety may allure men of weak
minds, who understand not the cheat, and justify their errors, with such
whose pride and interest tempt them to a compliance with them; yet the wise and
innocent will easily suspect, that under the disguises of a more then ordinary
scenical Piety, most commonly there lies hid, some spiritual wickedness, some
close and undiscovered sin. We know that Jehu was a zealous Reformer; and John
of Leyaen was no inconsiderable Religionist, Earl Gowry was no small Professor;
and the Authors of our late troubles were not to be reckoned among the crowds
of the Profane, because most of them were great hearers, and had notable gifts
of Prayer; yet what impieties were lodged under their smooth professions, we
shall now not willingly recount.

Again, I would have it further considered, (because this Plea goes a great way
with the multitude) that it is one thing to live entirely to the precepts of
Christ, and by the just laws of Government; and another thing, to live up to
the humors and modes of a party, that distinguish themselves from others by a
manner of speaking, peculiar phrases, looks and garbs, by oppositions and
scruples, rather then by an observed stricter justice, nobler degrees of mercy,
tenderer loyalty, and other such like graces of Christianity, which gives the
only true reason of being denominated Godly, and without which, the
appellation is presumptuously assumed, and unwarrantably given. But let them be
as good as their proselytes can fame them, nay suppose them to be good (if
possible) without just exception, yet is it no incommunicable character of
distinction, or mark of office; but nevertheless they that have it, may yet be
spirits that are not of God.

Thus I have endeavored to describe the qualifications that hold in common
with the false spirits, and the spirits that are of God; and though they are
all required in the true spirits and teachers that are of God, to make them
capable subjects of the distinguishing characters, yet are not incommunicable
marks of a particular mission of God to the holy Calling.

We acknowledge and profess that the true Guides of souls should be really
qualified in all those three that I have mentioned.

1. They should, (...), 1 Timothy 3.2. be fit and able to teach others,
competently skilled in the present learned Languages of the Christian World, if
not in the Original Tongues; that by such aids of knowledge, their minds may be
furnished with a convenient (at least) stock of Learning, and their tongues
fitted to express themselves decently and significantly.

2. They should be principally skilled in the holy Scriptures, that as all
truth is either expressly or vertually contained in them, so they may be able
readily to appeal to them, preach and apply them to the good of souls.

3. They should be as St. Paul advises, (...), Tit. 1.6. (...), 1 Timothy 3.4.
blameless, and without just cause of accusation. And this was typified in the
Aaronical Priesthood, when none that had a blemish should come near to offer
the offerings of the Lord, Levit. 21.21. And therefore the true spirits of God
should rather, vitia morum quam verborum vitare; potior enim est been vivendi
quam been loquendi facultas, avoid ill living then ill speaking, for a good
life is the powerfullest and most prevalent instruction.

Now though they should be thus qualified, yet over and besides these, they
must be characteristically separated to their Ministerial Offices, by some
marks and testimonials that declare a mission from God; without which they that
shall presume to execute such offices, or any part of them, are guilty of a
great presumption in themselves; No man takes this honor to him unless he be
called of God as was Aaron, Heb. 5.4. and all their administrations, ought to
be judged invalid to others; for how can they preach, much more perform any
other Priestly Office, with blessing and success, unless they be sent, Romans
10.15. Which separation and mission must be made demonstrable, by some signal
mark and character, which may be a proof, quoad nos, to us, that they are so
separated and sent of God; otherwise how should any man be capable of
performing this duty of Trial, or be assured at any time of receiving any
blessing by any ministerial Offices, for their souls good.

The signal Characters of Christ and his Apostles separation to their
Ministerial Offices, were Miracles; without which it had been a ridiculous Plea
to have told the World (from any thing in themselves) that they were sent of
God: which Christ acknowledges, If I bear witness of my self (if I make my own
testimonial) my witness is not true; that is, it is not competent, nor rational.

But when Gods time was come, that Miracles should cease, he also shut that
door by which his Ministers first entered into the Church, and has been since
pleased that there should be no other separation, but by a mediate and ordinary
calling; which must be, sub aliquo signo sensibili ut not a sit Ecclesiae,
under some sensible signs, or marks, that they may be known to the Church, and
distinguished by them.

Now the sensible signal Characters and Testimonials, by which the Church knows
the spirits that are of God, from those that are not, are these three in
concurrence together.

Barnabas and Saul, Acts 13.2. and after fasting and prayer, it was signally
declared by laying on of hands, v. 3. Such a Character had Timothy and Titus,
(as the Epistles to them show) and the same to communicate to them that should
follow in their respective charges, Tit. 1.5. And the continuation of that
primitive practice of it, was so pregnant and universal, that Calvin himself
could not but say, that illa tam accurata observatio praecepti vice nobis esse
debet, the accurate observation of it could not amount to a less obligation
then that of a precept. He therefore that should presume to teach, admit, or
conduct Assemblies, and that has neither Miracles, as Christ and his Apostles,
nor imposition of hands (as the Church has always practiced, as in the first
so in all following Ages) to evidence his Commission, is a spirit not of God,
whatsoever excellencies of qualification, may otherwise be pretended; and they
that are guided by him and have not considered it to trial, follow him in sin,
if they understand it, in great wickedness.

Now the contrary mark of false Prophets, is declared by our Savior, (...),
Mat. 7. they come to you in sheeps clothing: they come, come voluntarily, and
are not sent.

And St. Paul, Act. 20.29. characterizeth them with an (...), enter in;
Grievous Wolves shall enter in, that is voluntarily assume the Office, not
called, sent, or placed by order or commission. Such are not (...). separated
by God in the Order of the Church, Romans 1. but (...), Jude 19. such as separate
themselves by their own presumption and intrusion. Such as these we are not to
trust to, as being spirits that are not of God.

and executed; and then the mark of the true spirits of God is to be separated
and ordained to their Offices by such persons, who by a continued chain, or
line of succession, can securely derive their Commission from the person of
Christ. From whom, as from our common Parent, there is an holy seed under the
new Covenant; though not annexed to a Family, as that of Aaron, yet to an holy
Calling, for a perpetual spiritual propagation. Now the end of this Chain is in
the hand of God, who sent Christ, who sent his Apostles; As my Father has sent
me, so send I you, Joh. 20.21. The Apostles to maintain that succession, did in
their respective charges, appoint and ordain successors, with engagement that
they should still propagate the Office of the Gospels holy Priesthood; as it
appears by St. Paul's order to Titus, I have left thee at Crete, to ordain
Elders in every City, Tit. 1.5. Hence it is that our Savior tells his
Apostles, Lo I am with you to the end of the World, Matthew. 28. that is, not
with them only in their persons, but in their successors also, who should
proceed directly from their spiritual loins. And for this reason it is that the
Ancients (unbiassed Judges in this Enquiry) have taken such care, and were
observed to be so curious in Marshalling the successions of the Bishops of the
principal seats of Christianity: for which Epiphanius gives this reason, (after
he had exactly recorded the very names of the several successions,) Let no man
wonder that we so carefully recite such things and names, for ( per haec enim
semper claritas ostenditur, they are an evidence of the truth of our holy
Calling, and consequently of the Church it self.

Now as to the present Church of England, we have had this blessing from God,
that both for the earliness and uninterruption of the line of our successions,
no Church in the Christian World, can pretend to a better evidence; and that
Rome it self (after all her insultations) must be content with one much more
perplexed, and doubtful, as might easily be made appear. And I am morally
assured of this comfort, that there is no Bishop, nor Priest of the Church of
England, but may and ought to believe his spiritual pedigree, as truly derived
from the Person of Jesus, (the first Bishop and Priest of the Gospel) as any
Prince, can make his title to his Crown, or any Noble man to his honor and
inheritance by a succession from Ancestors of far shorter Antiquity and
continuance. But of this honor and blessing, the two Milstones (as the great
Archbishop calls them) our Enemies on either hand have endeavored to deprive
us. First, The Romanists would fain blend our succession, by the vain Fable of
the Nagshead-Ordination. But Mason and incomparable Bramhall have so perfectly
baffled that idle and groundless story, that their late more learned
Controverters have wholly laid it aside, and so needs not the trouble of a
particular Confutation. On the other hand, our Fanatics do choose to question
and decry it, because the line ran through the time in which Romish
superstition prevailed.

But to this I answer, That succession is, as by acts of Propagation; and the
Roman Corruptions could have no more power or influence on our Ecclesiastic
Generation, then the unworthiness of a Parent in begetting a Child, or of a
Priest in baptizing it. And we know the succession of Mankind is not
interrupted in the one, nor Christian Profession in the other. But to conclude,
grant that some of our spiritual Ancestors were so corrupted, yet it is more
honorable to have had a bad great Grandfathers Grandfather, then to have no
known Father at all; or that the worst of Fathers should be our immediate
Predecessor.

On the other side, the contrary mark of the spirits that are not of God, is as
our Savior intimates, (...), Mat. 24.11. they shall arise, as without mission,
so without succession or propagation, by which the Churches lawful Pastors
lineally descend. They arise as the smoke ascends, that darkens the Sun and the
Air, Rev. 9.2. or like the Beast, (armed for mischief) with heads and horns,
Rev. 13.1. or like the Tares of the field, which the husbandman never sowed;
that is, they shall climb unto their Offices, by the steps of Ambition, or are
raised up to them by popular favor and voice of tumultuous Assemblies, who
commonly (if permitted, as St. Paul observes) love to heap to themselves their
own Teachers, 2 Timothy 4.3. whom they keep and govern, and by whom they may
always be uncontrollably humoured, and observed. But let them be made by whom
they please, they are not constituted by Gods order, and so not of God.

Arian Priests were such by their heretical principles, as well as the Arian
Presbyters by their unlawful Ordinations. But because the whole circle of the
differing parties (from the Romanist to the Quaker) do all make claim, and
center in this pretense, that their several doctrines are of God; and lest we
should seem barely to presume and assert our own, to be so, (as most of
Adversaries use to do) and not sufficiently demonstrate that they are so:
Therefore it is just and necessary that we endeavor to find out such marks that
may signally distinguish the doctrines that be of God from those that are not,
and then see how far the doctrines of the Church of England stand in agreement
with them.

1. First then, Those are the doctrines that are of God, which (as to the
fundamentals of Faith) are either expressly declared, or evidently deduced from
the holy Scriptures, and none to be believed as such, but those that are so.
And as to the super-fundamental Articles of Doctrine, contrived for the common
peace and order of particular Churches, (such as are our 39 Articles, and as
the Confessions of other Churches ought to be so accounted) if they be not
refutable by the Scriptures, and the analogy of Faith, nor be contrariant to
right reason, ought also to be reputed the Doctrines of God.

2. But then secondly, Because God was pleased so to deliver his truths in
Scripture, (for reasons before mentioned, to which many more might be added)
with some obscurity, (though not so much so by it self, as made so by the moral
infirmities of men's understandings) therefore Christ did provide and
immediately send another guide, (which the Apostles themselves did seem to
stand in need of, though they were blessed with Christ's personal instructions)
and that was the Holy Ghost, which he promised should guide them into all
truth, Joh. 16.13. And lest it should seem to have concerned the Apostles only
in their time, it was also promised to abide with them for ever, Joh. 14.16.
that is, for the benefit of their successors and the whole Church to the end of
the World. Therefore whosoever would afterward understand the doctrines which
were of God, was obliged not only to be governed by his own private reading
the Scriptures, and judgment upon them, but also to enquire for, and to submit
to the conduct of Gods Spirit wheresoever it was to be found. Now this is
principally to be understood, as to cases in controversy, and to difficult
places: but as to the fundamentals of the common Faith, and rules of Holy Life,
as they are plainly set down in Scripture, and easily discoverable to every
honest mind, so every man ought to be encouraged to a constant reading of them,
for the confirmation of his Faith, and government of his Life.

3. Therefore thirdly and lastly, Our next enquiry is, to understand where
those promises were or are fulfilled, and where the guiding Office of the Holy
Ghost was, or is, executed and performed; that men may attend to it, and be
guided by it in all cases of different persuasions and professions, that they
may know which are of God.

The Romanists would engross it to the Churches of their Communion only, and
that by as an infallible a conduct, as the Apostles enjoyed it. But because
this pretense has been so lately examined, and sufficiently baffled, I shall
only enquire how some Popes themselves should be recorded to have been
notorious Heretics; as particularly Liberius and Honorius; and then, how he
that relies on that pretense, can reasonably think himself secure.

The Fanatics on the other side, (if as to us they may be thought altogether
to be of two sides) lay claim to it, by an especial particular light given to
them of God, or (as the soberer sort of them) by a private sufficient
assistance from God, in the use of the best mears they can, for the
understanding the Scriptures. But there needs no other confuration of this
pretense, but their certain disappointment, that have trusted 'o it, made
evident by their own unconstancy of opining, and the perpetual disagreements of
those that have made that claim.

There is but one more that I know of, was ever pretended to; and indeed, then
which, I cannot imagine any other that can with any show of reason, be offered
in satisfaction to this Enquiry, and that is the Holy Ghosts guidance of the
universal Church in all Ages and places, to be observed in those doctrines and
interpretations of Scripture, (according to the famous rule of Vincentius
Lirinensis,) which claim to Primitive Antiquity, universal Profession and
Consent: ( Quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab emnibus, hoc vere proprieque
catholicum, cap. 30.) So that the sum of this Enquiry is, that those are the
doctrines of Christ and his Apostles, which have been received as such in the
first and purest Ages, and that have continued to be acknowledged as such, by
the most universal Consent and Profession.

Against the absoluteness, and unexceptionable exactness of this rule of
Vincentius; whatsoever may be alleged or granted, it must for ever stand
uncontrolled, till any other rule can be produced or imagined, (which I think
no man has pretended to attempt) that may in any degree demonstrate the
promises of the Holy Spirit guiding into all truth.

Now this is the Glory of the Church of England, and which has made her the
envy of all her dissenting Neighbors round about her, that in all her
Doctrines, Government and Worship, she alone can offer her self to this most
reasonable and ancient Rule to be tried and judged, to which no other Church in
the World dare pretend to submit. Therefore it is that all those doctrines
wherein we differ from the Church of Rome cannot be from the conduct of Gods
Spirit, and so not the doctrines of the Spirits that are of God, because they
want the first part of Vincentius his rule, that is, succession from primitive
antiquity. And therefore the great Archbishop offered this challenge, p. 382.
That if any Jesuit can prove, that by a visible continued succession to this
day, either Transubstantiation in the Eucharist, the Eucharist in one kind, or
Purgatory, or Worship of Images, or Prayers in an unknown Tongue, with diverse
other points, have been so taught, I, for my part will yield the cause, As to
the private opinions of some ancient Fathers (as those of Tertul, Orig. St.
Austin, and others) though they had antiquity, yet they wanted universal
consent, and so were maintained against that part of the evidence of being the
Doctrines of God.

And then as to the new opinions of these times so strongly contended for by
our present dissenters, (such as concern their new models of Government, manner
of Worship, and several opinions (as they stand in opposition to the present
established Church of England) could not be from Christ and his Apostles, and
they that teach them, not the spirits that are of God, because they want all
the marks of Gods Spirit, as having neither primitive Antiquity, nor universal
Consent, Profession or Practice; and we challenge them to show it if they have
any: which if they do, I shall willingly sacrifice all that I have said against
them, to shame and Recantation.

All the Arguments that I know they have to tempt them from their conformity to
this excellent Church, is either ignorance, because they understand it not; or
perverseness of humor, and discontentedness of mind, which in some men must
for ever be gratified by opposition; or else an habitual dislike which they
call tender Conscience, which we may then believe to be sincerely pretended,
when we see the same tenderness expressed in the most considerable practices of
Christianity and Holy Life, as Justice, Mercy, Obedience to Authority, and the
like; as well as in the declining a poor innocent Ceremony, or formation of
substantial Worship, no where forbidden by God, and commanded by the just Laws
of men. This is the third and last mark and Character of the Spirits that are
of God, to whose conduct we may entrust our souls, and that is such as teach
the Doctrines that are of God.

And now you see (by the transient applications that I have made, and the clear
evidence of the matter it self) upon what a sure foundation the present
constituted Church of England stands, above any Profession of Christianity in
the World. As to my endeavor of offering all the marks of a true Church and
its Ministry, I thank God I can testify to him that I have withheld no
evidence that I know of, that may discover the truth, nor offered any thing in
my applications of them, to our own, which my soul has not as faithfully
dictated, as my Tongue expressed.

Time gives me not leave to offer any further applications; only I desire and
pray to God, that those that yet truly adhere to this Church, may (by what I
have said) find reason to love and honor it, and the true Spirits of God
within it more and more: and that those that are departed from it, may timely
and seriously consider upon what slender evidence they have done it, and may
speed their return to it, as to a Church that has all the marks of God, and
Characters of truth upon it. And I hope there be many amongst us that have so
much compassion for them, as to be willing, (if God Almighty should grant it as
a condition of so great a mercy) to be something that may resemble St. Paul's
noble Charity, (when he wished himself accursed; that is, at least, to be
deprived of the happiness of an outward Profession of Christianity, to bring
the Romans to it, Romans 9.3. that such our dissenters were returned in mind and
practice, to serve God with us, with one heart and mouth. Which God grant for
Jesus sake.

FINIS.

