THE INNOCENCE AND Conscientiousness OF THE QUAKERS ASSERTED and CLEARED FROM
The Evil Surmises, False Aspersions, and Unrighteous Suggestions of Judge
KEELING; expressed in his Speech made the seventh of the seventh Month at the
Sessions House in the Old Bailey, being the day appointed for the Trial of some
of the said People by the late Act made to Prevent and Suppress Seditious
Conventicles.

Wherein also is showed that this Law does not concern them, they being no
seditious Sectaries, nor Contrivers of Insurrections, nor Evildoers; therefore
no just Law is against them.

He that justifies the Wicked, and he that condemns the Just, even they both
are an Abomination to the Lord. Prove. 17. 15. Published by a lover of Truth and
Righteousness, W. S.

Printed at London, in the Year 1664.

To the Judicial and Impartial READER.
EVer since the Devil (that enemy of Mankind, who is the leader of Nature out
of its course) got rule in Man's heart, his work and way has been to stir up
his Instruments, first, to cast Ignominious reproachful names upon the true
Worshippers of God, as New Sects, Turners of the World upside down, Pestilent
Fellows, Sowers of Sedition, Ringleaders of Sects, Blasphemers, Heretics,
Seditious Sectaries, Contrivers of Plots, and Stirrers up of Rebellion, etc.
Then when he has by his Emissaries clothed them in this mantle of Reproach,
he can the easilier bring his designs to pass upon them; whether it be to
Imprisoning in nasty infectious holes, or Whipping, Banishing, Burning or
Hanging, which has been his work through Ages, among both false Jews and false
Christians, as well as among those called Heathen, to this day: for as once
among the Heathen, it was crime enough to cause the true Christians to suffer,
to have the Name of a Christian (which was a name of Reproach in that day) and
carried enough with it to be guilty of all Crimes, in the judgment of the
Heathen, who believed all that was spoke and published against them, though
they saw no proof: The like Parallel is now; we have the name Quaker given us
in reproach and derision, and its crime enough to cause us to suffer (before
and among some) to have that name; And what is spoke and published, surmised
and evilly suggested of us, many believe without any manifest proof: but the
Wise and Judicious will not receive and believe every Report, nor give Judgment
of any Person or People because of a Name, Speech, or Report, though it be from
the mouth of a Judge, but will desire to know the Truth; therefore to inform
such is this Reply following published.

And we may truly say for ourselves, as Tertullian in his Apollogie once said
for the Christians, when the Heathen called their Society, Meetings or
Assemblies, Factious; Did we ever (says he) assemble to proclaim the hurt of
any one? As we are in the particular, so we are in the general; that is to say,
In whatsoever state we are found, we offend no body, we injure no body: And
further, says he, when any virtuous or godly People are associated, when any
pious or chaste persons assemble together; their Union should not be called a
Faction, but a Lawful Society. page 142.

The Innocence and Conscienciousness of the Quakers asserted and cleared from
the evil Surmises, false Aspersions, and unrighteous Suggestions of Judge
Keiling; expressed in his Speech made the 7th of the 7th month, at the
Sessions House in the Old Baily, etc.
Judge.
BEcause this day was appointed for the Trial of those People, And in as much
as many are come hither expecting what will be done, I shall say something
concerning them and their Principles, that they might not be thought worthy of
pity, as suffering more than they deserve: for they are a Stubborn Sect, and
the King has been very merciful with them. It was hoped that the Purity of the
Church of England would ere this have convinced them, but they will not be
reclaimed.

Answer.
Our Conversation for these many years, has been noted, and strictly observed
by many, and hitherto we have not been found Transgressors of any Law which is
made to preserve men's Persons or Estates, or for the punishment of Evildoers;
And so have not given the Magistrates occasion justly to appoint days of Trial
for us.

For the Law once in Tables of Stone, and all other just Laws were and are
added because of man's degeneration from the Law and Righteous Principle of
Life, which was once, or at the beginning, placed in his heart: So when man
fell from his obedience to this Righteous Law (which we say was not in a Book,
nor in Tables of Stone, in the beginning, but in the Heart) and abounded in
Acts of Cruelty, Violence, Oppression and Idolatry, Then because of these
Transgressions was that Outward Law added, in order to limit, bridle and
punish, and also to bring Mankind back again in a measure to that which he
degenerated from, as Moses witnesses (viz.) to the Word in the month and in
the heart, that they might hear it and do it (or obey it.) And true Christians
are come to Christ Jesus, who is the Power of God; and are created anew in him
unto good works, that they should walk in them; and are made Witnesses of that
Glorious Promise fulfilled in them, (viz.) as to have the Law written in their
hearts, and the Fear of the Lord put into their inward parts; which Law and
Fear teaches to depart from evil, and crucifieth that transgressing spirit
within, from whence all manner of wickedness proceeds; and against such there
is (or ought to be) no Law they being a Law to themselves, as it is written,
The Law is not made for the Righteous man; but for the Lawless and Disobedient,
for the Ungodly and for Sinners, for Unholy and Profane, for Murderers of
Fathers and Murderers of Mothers, for Manslayers, for Whoremongers and
Buggerers (or abusers of themselves with mankind) for Man-stealers, for Liars,
for Perjured Persons, and any other evils which are contrary to sound Doctrine.

And now seeing we are preserved by the Power of the living God, (whom we fear
and serve) from those and suchlike evils (which are the occasion of Law and
Magistrates, otherwise there would be no need of either) and yet
notwithstanding are persecuted and thronged into nasty Holes and Prisons, and
guarded with a great many Clubmen and Bill-men, and haled before Judgment-Seats
and Rulers, as if we were great malefactors: This makes People slock together,
and expect, and also wonder what will be the end of these things; That People
against whom no evil can be justly charged, should be the greatest Sufferers in
this Generation: And pity and compassion will arise in thousands, who shall see
or hear of our Sufferings for Innocence and Conscience toward God,
notwithstanding our cruel Adversaries endeavor to cloth us in Woolf-skins, to
make people believe that we are the Beasts of Prey, and a Stubborn Sect, which
will not be reclaimed by the Mercy of the King, nor the Purity of the Church of
England. As for the Kings Mercy it cannot save us, if we transgress against
God, and make shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience; his Righteous Judgments
will find us out, and we must give an account to him; and walk so, as we may
partake of His Mercy* which the King as well as the Beggar has and will have
need of also; howbeit we never yet forfeited our Interest in the King's
Promises of Liberty to tender Consciences, so often renewed by him; though it
appears by this Judge's so much inveighing against us, that he would fain make
people believe we do not deserve our Liberty or Interest therein; but that will
not clear him nor them in the sight of God concerning those Promises.

And as for the Purity of Englands Church it is out of our sight, except it
consists much in Swearing, which the Judge says is a special part of God's
Worship: If this be Purity, there is too much of that among the members thereof;
but that will never reclaim us, for we can see a great deal of Impurity,
Corruption and Soul-sickness in it; And as much the members of it confess
themselves, That they are full of putrified sores, from the crown of the head
to the soal of the feet; and that there is no health nor soundness in them; And
that they do those things they should not do, and leave undone those things
they should do; And that they are Miserable Offenders, and sin in their Best
Performances: Indeed they speak enough of themselves to cause all wholesome,
sound, understanding People to shun them and their Church and Worship, as men
shun a Contagious Disease or Infection; And it is manifest that the Nature and
Spirit of Christianity is wanting among them, and that the spirit of Cain (that
worshipper, who was the first Murderer about Religion) rules among them: And
what weapons have they ever used to reclaim us (or call us) back again to
worship as they do? have not their weapons been Carnal, and the course they
have taken Force and Violence, by stirring up the Magistrates to make cruel
Laws against us? which was never the true Christians work nor way to bring
people to believe their Doctrine, and to worship as they did, but Cains way;
and his wages will all Persecutors about Religion receive from the hand of the
Lord, as a just recompense of reward.

Judge.
They teach dangerous Principles; this for one, That it is not lawful to take
an Oath. You must not think their Leaders believe this Doctrine themselves,
only they persuade these poor ignorant souls so; but they have an Interest to
carry on against the Government, and therefore they will not swear Subjection
to it; and their end is Rebellion and Blood. You may easily know that they do
not believe themselves what they say, when they say it is not lawful to take an
Oath, if you look into the Scriptures; that Text (Mat. 5.) where our Savior
says, [Swear not at all] will clear it self from such a meaning as for bids
Swearing, if you look but into the next words, where it is said, Let your
communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay; and it is said, an Oath is the end of
all strife; this for the New Testament: And the Old is positive for Swearing.
And they that deny Swearing, deny God a special part of his Worship.

Answer.
Our Principles are Truth, and according to the Scriptures of Truth; but that
great Evil, to call Light darkness, and darkness Light; Good evil, and evil
Good, is befaln this Generation; And that which leads to Unity and the
Preservation of Mankind is now counted dangerous and destructive.

Swearing, or taking of Oaths was not in the beginning, there was no need or
occasion for it, Strife was not begun; but when Man broke his Unity with God,
and ran into Disobedience, then Strife, and every evil work followed among men:
Then to limit this evil spirit which Man followed into Transgression, an
Outward Law was added, and Swearing and Vowing under a Curse came up; and such
as vowed were to perform their Vows unto the Lord; and those that swore, were
to swear by, or in the Name of the Lord, and not in or by the name of an Idol,
or any other creature; and this was in the Fall, while the Wall of Partition
stood: Now Christ who is the Restorer and the maker up of Breaches, (who was
with the Father before any of these things were) in the Fullness of time, in a
Body prepared, he appeared, to fulfill the Law, and to put an end to Sin, which
was the occasion of the Law) and to finish Transgression, and to bring in
Everlasting Righteousness; and to restore and bring Man back again into the
knowledge and unity of his Maker, from whom he fell by disobedience: And these
things which the Father sent him to do, he finished and finisheth; for all that
received, believed, receivet and believe in him, and follow him in the
Regeneration.

And while he was with his Disciples, in that prepared Body in which he came to
do the Will of the Father, he gave forth many Precepts and Commands unto them,
among which this is one, minding them how it was in old time (viz.) under Moses
Law, how that they were to swear, and perform their Vows to the Lord; But says
he (who was before Moses was) I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by one
thing or another; but let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay: for
whatsoever is more than this comes of evil. And Moses Law, and the Old time
says also, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, smiting for smiting,
and that they should love their neighbor and hate their enemies; but Christ
taught and teaches his Disciples a harder lessen, of Bearing and Forhearing,
Love, Gentleness and Heavenly-kindness, that they might be more like their
heavenly Father than Moses's Disciples were; for says he, if you love them
that love you, and if you are friendly to your Brethren only, what do you do
more than sinners? etc.

So he that was before the Law, leads to the End of the Law, (which is Love)
and brings those that follow him, to be like-minded to him: as the Christians
in the Primitive times were, who said, they had the mind of Christ; and did
exhort one another to the same. And that this Command of Christ forbids all
Swearing, is not only clear from the end, and circumstance of the foregoing and
following words, but also from the Apostle James's Exhortation; who said Above
all things, my Brethren, Swear not, neither by Heaven nor Earth, nor any other
Oath, lest ye fall into condemnation. And it is also written, that if any say
they love Christ, and keep not his Commandments, they are Liars.

So who ever reads these Scriptures (Mat. 5. Jam. 5. 12.) except the god of
this world has blinded the eye of their minds, may plainly perceive, that not
only profane swearing, but all manner of Swearing among the Disciples of
Christ; who brings all that truly follow him, out of the strife which is among
men, into Love, Peace and Unity, which was before Oaths, and where there is no
need of any.

And the Swearing, Strife and Confusion, Rebellion and Bloodthirstiness is
among the false Christians, who have the Name of Christ in their Mouths, but
want his Spirit and Nature, being inwardly ravening Wolves, and by their fruits
are they known.

And it is true which a Bishop of Englands Church Bishop Gauden his Book
concerning Public Oaths.
once said; that Among false Christians Oaths are not to be regarded; and
amongst true Christians there was no need of them. Our Leader is Christ, whose
Voice we hear and follow, and whose Riches and Wisdom we partake of. And the
poor and ignorant souls are such as creep into houses (ignorantly called
Churches) and lead silly women captive, who are laden with sins, and led aside
with diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of
the Truth: While we were in Englands Church, we our selves were such, as knew
not the Physician of our souls, and so were full of putrified sores, and
unsoundness, and no health was in us; and we did those things we should not do,
and left undone those things we should do, etc. which is the states of Englands
Church still as the Members thereof confess in their common Service: so, does
not diverse lusts lead them? and are they not ever learning, and ever ignorant?
And do not many thousands of them go down to the Pit without the knowledge of
that precious Truth which makes free from Sin? Let God's Witness in the
Consciences of its Members answer.

Our Interest which we desire to carry on, is Truth and Righteousness; and we
shall rejoice to see it established: though we are counted as the filth of the
earth, and the offscouring of all things, and not sit to live in this the Land
of our Nativity, yet we have and do approve our selves friends to our Nation;
and since the Lord has made us a People, we have sought and endeavored its
temporal and Eternal Good, and have not been found contriving nor acting evil
against Persons or Governments, since we were brought to the knowledge of that
Truth we profess.

Therefore what ground of suspicion have we given to our cruel Persecutors,
that they should suggest and surmise so much evil of us, that our Design is
Rebellion and Blood? But what cause or occasion did harmless Abel give bloody
Cain to kill him? Consider and see the same is now.

Judge.
Now you shall see how this Principle of not Swearing tends to the Subversion
of the Government. First, It denies the King the Security he ought to have of
his Subjects for their Allegiance; which Oath they deny; and security by bond
is not so good: for thereby they are not engaged in Conscience, and they will
only wait for a convenient season to forfeit their Bonds without hazard, and
make sure work in overthrowing the present Government, and secure their own
securities; but an Oath binds the Conscience at all times, and that they cannot
abide. Again, this Principle tends to subvert the Government, because without
Swearing we can have no Justice done, no Law executed; you may be robbed, your
houses broke open, your goods taken away, and be injured in your persons, and
no Justice or recompense can be had, because the fact cannot be proved: the
truth is, no Government can stand without Swearing; and were these People to
have a Governmet among themselves, they cold not live without an Oath.

Answ.
If this Judge had the Mind of Christ, he would not speak after this manner:
for Government was before Swearing, and may be without it; and Oaths of
Alleagiance are but a novel thing to Government, hatched and imposed in the
Apostasy, and was not among the true Christians, whose Yea was Yea, and their
Nay Nay in all things; and the word and promise of a true Christian, is
security sufficient, and their Consciences are bound to perform what they say
and promise, as firm as they that Swear. There has been no want of Swearing in
these and other Nations called Christian, yet what subversions, turnings and
overturnings, and treacherous dealing has there been among the Princes and
People thereof? and many have sworn to one Governor and Government, and then
to another, and so to a third, and may be ready to swear to any that get to the
helm of Government; and these Swearers and Conformers to any thing that is
uppermost, make little conscience of Oaths, so they may save themselves from
suffering: and if we were or had been of this spirit, we need not have suffered
so exceeding deeply in our persons and estates in the time of Oliver, and the
other Powers: And it is envy which blindes the understanding of this Judge,
that makes him charge us, with not believing what we say, when we say, It is
not lawful for us to take an Oath; and that we have a Design to carry on, and
therefore will not Swear Allegiance to the King. Now if he did believe what he
says of us, that we should assert what we do not believe, or were so void of
Conscienciousness; then how can he in reason expect that an Imposed Oath should
be so much binding to us, if we could be forced to take it, especially since it
is a maxim of their own, that forced Oaths are not binding. And this Judge and
all such would do well to consider what weight their Oath has upon their
Consciences, whereby they are enjoined to do equal Law and Execution arightly
to all; but how this is performed, set the wise in heart judge, when they go
about with groundless Suggestions and Suspicions against an Innocent People, to
instigate both Juries and Country against them.

We are such as desire the good of all that are in Authority, that we may lead
a quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness and honesty under them; and have
never yet been found Designers or Contrivers of their Destruction: Therefore
the greater is this Judges evil, to endeavor to make us odious among the
People; and the unfiter he appears to be our Judge, being full fraighted with
enmity against us without cause: and a Judge ought to be impartial, a man
fearing God, and judging for him, and not for men; such Judges Judgment will
answer the righteous Principle of God in all Men, and such are a terror to the
evil doers, and a praise to those that do well; and the Lord is with such in
Judgment.

That which subverts, undermines and destroys Governors, Governments, and
People, is Cruelty, Oppression, Tyranny, Sin and Rebellion against the God of
Heaven, who has power to give the Kingdoms of this World to whom he pleases:
and who so rules in Righteousness, and answers the just and righteous Principle
of God in all men, needs not fear subversion or undermining; it is the evil doer
that is filled with fear and terror round about.

We are not the Obstructers of Justice, nor the Cause of it, our witness
against any evil doer, shall be as true as any that take Oaths; and if false,
our penalty the saw with false Swearers.

And further, Witnesses under Moses's Law, had no Oath administered to them,
though the crime bore witness of, reached life; but if any bore false witness,
the same punishment which should have been inflicted upon the person witnessed
against, should be insticted upon the false witness and witnesses: which thing
we desire may be done unto us: So then the fault is in the Law, and the Judges
of it, which denies true and faithful Evidence, (which in conscience they can
believe) except it be under the Ceremony of an Oath. It is a shame for
Christians to have a jealousy of each others testimony, except they Swear: it
was enough in the first age of Christianity, to confirm any testimony without
an Oath, to say [Christianus sum,] or, I am a Christian.

And if no Government could have been without taking of Oaths, the Author of
all true Government and Rule, would not have said, Swear not at all; but
swearing Oaths and Strife, is among men in the fall and degeneration (and not
among true Christians) where it will remain, till they know the Restorer of all
things take away the cause of it; which is sin.

Judge.
Whereas they pretend in their scibbles, that this Act against Conventicles
does not concern them; but such as under pretense of worshipping God, do at
their Meetings conspire against the Government. This is a mistake; for if they
should conspire, they should then be guilty of Treason, and we should try them
by other Laws; but this Act is against Meetings to prevent them of such
Conspiracy; for they meet to consult, to know their numbers, and to hold
correspondency, that they may in a short time be up in Arms.

Answ.
Our Writings which he calls Scribbles, are words of Truth, and pretend no more
than is true: for we are not the persons committing those Crimes the Act
expressly provides against, except we, under pretense of Tender Consciences, do
at our Meetings contrive Insurrection, as late experience has showed, and meet
also under color and pretense of Religious exercise, and so make this
Pretense of Religion, a Cloak to carry on and cover so me other Design, which
we never did; (for we meet indeed and in truth to wait upon God, and to worship
him;) Therefore this Law concerns us not, if it be not strained beyond the
expressed Reason of it, in the preamble, by our cruel Judges; who may be
compared to evening Wolves, which are greedy to devour: and it is time enough
to try us by this Act, or any other Law, when we do and commit the fact the Law
has expressly provided against.

We meet not to consult and to know our numbers, and to hold correspondencies,
nor to be up in arms in a short time; for so to do is Conspiracy; which he as
good as confesses and acknowledges that we are not guilty of; for he says if
we were, he would try us by some other Law. But these are evil suggestions, and
wickedly imagined against us, in order to destroy us: this is unrighteous
Judgment, and God will plead our Cause in the consciences of our Adversaries.

Judge.
I had the honor to serve the King at York, upon the Trial of those wicked
Plotters; and we found that those Plots was hatched and carried on in these
meetings; and we hanged up four or five of the Speakers or Praters; whom we
found to be chief Leaders in that Rebellion.

Answ.
It is and has been our portion and lot to be numbered among Transgressors, by
that envious spirit which seeks our ruin; though we have been found no
hatchers or carriers on of treacherous Designs against any at our Meetings: and
he might as well have compared us to those Members of Englands Church hanged
monthly at Tyburn.

Judge.
I warrant you their Leaders will keep themselves from the Third Offense, we
shall not take them; if we could catch their Leaders, we should try them by
some other Law, which, if executed, will take away their lives.

Answ.
We have no Leader but Christ Jesus, who is the Captain of our Salvation, and
he is our Shepherd, and we hear his Voice, and learn of him, and are the Sheep
of his Pasture, and in our Consciences we are bound and engaged, because we
love Him and his Paths of Purity, to follow Him, who leads our Souls to rest.

But for such which the Judge means by Leaders, who have been made instruments
to turn our minds from Darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan to God,
they, together with us, are resolved to keep to the Grace of God, (the true
Teacher) which teaches to deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously and Godly in this present world; and by this Grace (which
appears to all men) are we taught and preserved from offending against any Just
Laws once; and so he may well warrant himself and others, that they will not
offend three times: And his blemishing those he calls Leaders, as if they put
on others to suffer, and slay themselves, is altogether false; for it is
well-known in the Nation, that many of them are in prison, where some of them
have long remained for refusing to take the Oath of Allegiance; upon which
account diverse of them are permunired, and many suffer for meeting: howbeit, if
you should be suffered to take away some of their lives, which they can freely
give up, if called to it; yet know that the God whom we serve is unlimitted,
and will open the mouths of thousands to bear witness against Unrighteousness:
So when you do take and catch more of them, you will have no evil to lay to
their charge, nor nothing to accuse them for, but about matters appertaining to
God's Kingdom; as Conscience, Faith, Worship and Religion; which the Civil
Magistrate ought not to intermeddle withal, it belonging to God alone, to whom
all must give an account for such things: and people ought not to be imprisoned
and persecuted, and their lives taken away about Matters of Religion; for if a
People have a false faith, and a misguided conscience, and are by reason of
this faith and misguided conscience, exercised in a false worship and Religion;
these People deserve the more to be pitied, informed and dealt lovingly and
tenderly with, than to be persecuted, imprisoned, and destroyed, and so sent
quick to Hell: this is no Christian Love, nor the way to Restore.

Judge.
This is a Merciful Law; it takes not away their Estates, it leaves them
entire; only banisheth them for seven years, if they will not pay an hundred
pounds: and this is not for worshipping of God according to their Consciences,
for that they may do in their own Families; but forsooth they cannot do that,
but they must have thirty, forty, or an hundred others to contrive their
designs withal.

Answer.
As he began his Speech in falsehood and enmity, so it ends in the same: for if
this be a Merciful Law, as those that are Judges of it intend to execute it,
then we may truly say as it is written, That the very Mercies of the wicked are
Cruelty; for some Felons and Murderers choose rather to be Hanged than to be
Transported, Sold, and Banished; all which are threatened to be executed upon
us, and for no other cause but for worshipping God in such manner and way as we
are persuaded in our Consciences, which are made truly tender; And we dare not
make shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, to save our Persons and Estates
from the mouth of the Devourer; For it is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God for Disobedience; and Conscience is as a thousand
Witnesses, either to excuse or accuse; but fearedness of Conscience, as with an
hot Iron, and deadness and blindness of heart is befaln many in this
Generation: And from this state arises all such merciful Laws as this the
Judge speaks of, in order to bring others (who are tender and fearful to offend
God) into the same state they are in themselves; but we are in Conscience
constrained (if the God whom we serve so far permit) to suffer the Whore (the
false Church) to drink more of our Blood, but of her Cup of Fornic^^ion
wherewith she has made the Kings of the Earth and Nations drunk, we cannot
drink; And we are of the Household of God, and of one Family, and Members of one
Body; and though thirty, forty, or an hundred, or a thousand meet in one place
or another together, for no evil design, why should we be banished for that? If
this be Mercifulness, what is Cruelty? The Heathenish Romans showed more mercy
and manhood to Paul, in allowing him to have a Meeting in his own hired house,
where he preached, and taught All that came unto him, without let or any limit
as to number, two full years, though he was a Prisoner. O that ever a People
called Christians should be found more inhumane than Heathen, more merciless
than bruit beasts, to banish Fathers and Mothers from their young and tender
Children, and Children from their Parents, and Husbands from their Wives! and
all this for no evil or wrong done to any man's Person, Estate or Government, but
only for endeavoring to keep their Consciences pure to God, and void of
offense to him and all men.

POSTSCRIPT.
It is to be noted, that though the Judge at the beginning of his Speech said,
that that day was appointed for their Trial, yet they were not tried; for one
only, which he intended to begin withal, was brought from Newgate to the Bar,
being but a Boy and lately convinced of the evil of sin, and but as it were
turning from it, into a conscientious fear and obedience to God: When he had
ended his Speech, he asked if he were not at the Bull and Mouth on such a day?
he said he was not. Then the Judge took occasion to vilifte and reproach the
Profession of the Quakers, to the Jury and People, and said, For all their
pretentions to Truth and Plainness, could lie for their Interest, and to avoid
suffering: then asked him the same question again, and he answered as before
(for he was not there that day) then says he, we shall prove that you were
there; Will you stand to your Profession, said the Judge? Yes, said the Lad,
and seal it with my Blood. Then were Witnesses called in to prove that he was
at the Bull and Mouth such a day, but none could appear: Then the Judge soon
perceived that no Witnesses would be found to serve his turn against this Lad,
nor the rest. Then said he, There is a Disappointment fallen out, but threatened
some should suffer for it to their cost, and so dismissed the Jury; This
Disappointment being only want of Witnesses to bring about the designed purpose
of the Court. They have ordered since, that some of the Jaylors of Newgate,
together with the Marshal and his men, shall be at our Meetings, and be their
Witnesses against us at the next Sessions: so our Persecutors Cruelty is
further manifested in this, that they should (Jezebel- like) hire, force, or
command a company of hard-hearted men, who are daily exercised in Cruelty, and
who have not the true fear of God in their hearts, to be our only Accusers: but
the Righteous God, which sees the plots and designs of the wicked (against the
Innocent and harmless) will reward them according to their doings.

THE END.

