The Unworthy Non-Communicant.

A TREATISE Showing the Danger of Neglecting The Blessed Sacrament Of The Lords
Supper, AND Rectifying the Mistakes of many in This Age concerning it.

The First Part.

The Second Impression Corrected.

By William Smythies, the Morning Lecturer at Saint Michael Cornhil, London.

LONDON, Printed by T. Milbourn for Samuel Lee at the Feathers in Lumbard
Street, 1683.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL Richard Alie Esquire, Master. Mr. Edward Turgis, Wardens.
Mr. Richard Dawson, Wardens. Mr. Gilbert Vrwyn, Wardens. Mr. Edward Thursfield,
Wardens. Sir Robert Clayton, Aldermen. Sir James Smith, Aldermen. Sir Thomas
Gold, Aldermen. Mr. Thomas Tyther,
And others of the Court of Assistants, of the Company of Drapers, London.
Honored Sirs,
YOU have been pleased to heap so many of your Favors upon me and mine, that I
cannot but take this little Occasion to ease my Mind, by Complaining to the
World, that I never yet had the least Opportunity to express my Thankfulness;
but however, it is some Satisfaction to me, that I have not ceased to Pray to
God for You and your Families, in that Congregation in which you have been
pleased to place me.

It was a very remarkable and unexpected Providence, which directed you to make
Choice of me for the Morning Lecture, upon the Recommendation of my Two ever
honored Friends, Sir James Smith, and Mr. Thomas Tyther, considering the great
Interests that had been made for other Ministers, better deserving, and better
known in the City, in which I was then a Stranger. By this I accounted my self
the more abundantly obliged to take Care, that I did not Do the work of the
Lord negligently: And, that I might have the better Direction in it, you were
pleased to Command, That so much of the Pious Will of Mr. John Raney should be
showed to me, as related to the Performance of my Duty; and I hope it will not
be Offensive to you, if I show some part of it to the World, as follows;

-- And further, That before the beginning of every such Lecture on the Sabbath
Day Morning in St. Michael 's Church, the Lecturer, for the time being, do
Reverently Read such Good and Godly Prayers allowed by the Church of England,
as has been heretofore usually performed. And my desire is, That the said
Preacher and Lecturer in and by all his said Lectures and Sermons, do chiefly
Aim at the suppressing of Sin, and building up the Kingdom of Grace in the
Hearts of the Auditors: And that he shall, upon the first Sabbath Day Morning
in every Month, being the usual Communion Day, Exhort his Auditory for the
reverent and due Receiving of the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; and give
such Godly Instructions and Directions for the same, as shall be most fitting
for that Occasion.

When I had heard this part of the Will of the Religious Donor. I resolved, by
the Grace of God assisting, that I would observe what he so piously required of
me.

That I have made it my Business to suppress Sin, my Auditors can Testify; and
that I have observed his pleasure in Exhorting to the Receiving of the Blessed
Sacrament, may appear to you by this short Treatise; only with this difference,
that I have made it the chief part of my Work every Month (with very few
Intermissions) to Exhort my Auditors not to neglect it; because since the Death
of that Worthy Benefactor, the Sin of Neglecting has abounded more than the
Sin of Unworthy Receiving. I have, with a sorrowful Heart observed, That all
those Sermons which are designed to direct and prepare the People to Receive
the Holy Sacrament, have signified very little, because there are but very few
in this vicious and divided Age that do partake of it.

The good Success which I have had, (Praised be the God of Heaven for it,) and
the continued Importunities of some, who had forsaken the Communion of the
Church, and others who had forsaken all Religion, as to the Practice of it, but
are now become very Constant, and I hope very pious Communicants, have
prevailed with me to Publish those Arguments which I have been many Years
insisting and inlargeing upon: And if they have the same Influence upon the
Readers, which they have had upon the Hearers, it will exceedingly rejoice me;
And you will have the less cause to repent of your Choice, and be the more
willing, that I should still perform that Service, to which I have no other
Title, but the Continuance of your Favor and good Opinion of me: Which that I
may deserve, shall be the constant Endeavor of

Your most humble and faithful Servant, William Smythies.
Cripplegate, June 12th. 1683.
TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Hope you will Excuse me, that I have disappointed your Expectation, for I
have disappointed my Own. My daily and almost hourly Interruptions would not
permit me to Transcribe the whole Copy, as the Printer earnestly desired,
before I committed it to the Press: And the Truth is, I was unwilling to do it,
for fear that a Review of what I had done should alter my Mind, and frustrate
the Desire of my importunate Friends. By this, through my Unskillfulness in
taking Measures, I have been forced to break off very abruptly, being Confined
to a short and cheap Treatise. After I had considered the general Pretenses of
Non-Communicants, I intended to speak of some particular Cases, which I think
to be of great Moment: The Young Man's Pretense, the Poor Man's Pretense, and
the Melancholy Man's Pretense for Non-Communicating; which are all of them
very deplorable Cases. I intended likewise to have Treated upon another General
Head, and that is, The Vindication and Recommendation of the Way of
Administration in the Church of England; and to show that it does exceedingly
tend to the Promotion of that true Piety and Holiness, which all good Men do
highly Contend for, and which is the great Design of the Blessed Sacrament. I
have, of late, spent a great part of my Time and Thoughts upon this Argument,
and have observed the Apostles Rule, In meekness to instruct them that oppose
themselves. But I need not trouble my Self or the World about a Vindication of
the Church in any thing, because it has been sufficiently done many Years
since: And is again undertaken by many Ministers of this City, Men of very
Great Eminency, whose Books are not only sufficient to satisfy all that are
willing to be satisfied, but to make them Champions for the Church, as many
good Men have been who were Disaffected to Her.

To this I add a very earnest Request: If you have been mistaken concerning
the Duty or Danger of Communicating, read with a desire to be satisfied: If you
have lived a sinful Life, read with a Willingness to be Reformed, that you may
neither be an Unworthy Communicant, nor an Unworthy Non-Communicant; and if you
receive any benefit, give Praise to the God of Heaven.

Farewell.
THE CONTENTS.
IT is the great Duty of every Christian to frequent the Sacrament. page 10.
Mistakes concerning the Danger of Unworthy Receiving. p. 17. The Danger of
Neglecting it. p. 40. Those that neglect the Sacrament contemn their Baptism.
p. 83. Infant Baptism Vindicated. p. 87. The Pretenses of Non-Communicants
frivolous and dangerous. p. 94. The Pretense from the Solemnity of the
Ordinance. p. 96. The Pretense from Unpreparedness. p. 100. The Pretense from
the Danger of Relapsing. p. 123.
THE Unworthy Non-Communicant.
THE great Contempt that is cast upon Religion in this Age in which we live,
and especially upon this great ORDINANCE of the Blessed Sacrament of the LORDS
SVPPER, has made all undertakings of this nature very seasonable. I question
whether there was ever any people, of what Religion soever they were, that ever
slighted any Institution which they called Divine, as many thousands of
Christians slight the Sacrament.

If there were no other Argument to convince Christians of their duty to
Receive, and the danger of Neglecting; the Cunning and Subtilty of the Devil,
the great Enemy of our Salvation, by which he Cheats men in reference to this
Ordinance, might be of great force.

If we had lived with our Savior in the World, or with his Apostles after his
Ascension into Heaven, we could not have imagined, considering the plain words
of the Institution, and the obliging Circumstances that accompanied it, and
likewise the care and constancy of the first Christians to observe it according
to that plain Institution, that ever there should be a generation of Christians
in the World, who should make any Disputes concerning it.

Who could have thought, that there should have been any Priests or Ministers,
who should have kept back half the Sacrament from the People, since we find
that our Savior gave the Cup to all those to whom he gave the Bread? And the
Apostle tells the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11. ver. 27, 28, 29. in three Verses
together of their Receiving the Cup as well as the Bread; and in one of them,
expressly requires that they should Eat of that Bread, and Drink of that Cup,
ver. 28. And yet none will say, that the Corinthians were Priests or Ministers.

Who could have imagined, that ever there should have been such a non-sensical
Conceit as Transubstantiation, which is contrary to the very nature of a
Sacrament? It was very happy for the Primitive Christians, that there was no
such Conceit known in their days; for if it had, it would exceedingly have
hindered the propagating of the GOSPEL. If a Christian had come to a Heathen,
and told him that a piece of bread after a few Prayers, is no longer Bread, but
the very Body of Christ his Savior, and the Heathen had tasted of it, and
found that it was nothing but Bread still, surely he would have tried to laugh
that Christian to death, and to hiss him out of the World. If the Heathens had
heard any such thing, they would have concluded, That Christians were a sort of
men, who were deprived of their Senses, and that all they said, concerning
Christ's Miracles, and his Resurrection, his Ascension, and the power of the
Holy Ghost which followed it, was as true as Transubstantiation. And if they
had said that they eat their God, they would have concluded, That they deserved
to be hated of all men, and to be devoured by wild Beasts (one of their
Cruelties to the Christians) who devoured their God; Or else they would have
desired that they might eat with them: for, they could be contented to tear him
with their Teeth, to show their Hatred against him and his Doctrine. Besides,
it is an insignificant conceit, in that no man can imaginet, what good it could
do him to eat the very Body of his Savior.

Who could have Imagined, that amongst the men of our own Religion, there
should be a generation that should throw the Ordinance away as useless and
insignificant; pretending that they receive Christ in their Hearts, and
therefore there is no need of the outward Act: As if none were to Receive the
Sacrament, but those that are Unworthy, such as receive not Christ in their
Hearts: Or as if those to whom our Savior gave it, who had forsaken all for
his sake, did not receive Christ in their Hearts: Or as if the Primitive
Christians, those Holy and Blessed Martyrs, who were constant Communicants, did
not receive Christ in the Hearts. But alas, these poor deluded Creatures are
pufft up with a conceit, that they are more holy than those Blessed Martyrs
were, and that they know the mind and design of Christ better than they did.

But to come a little nearer to that which is my chief Design, Who could have
imagined that ever there should be men that expect Salvation by Christ (such as
have none of these Enthusiastic Whimseys) who should think it a very
indifferent thing, whether they observe this Institution of our Blessed Lord,
or let it alone, although Christ commanded that it should be Received?

There are too many amongst us, who are Unworthy Communicants, men that do not
fear God, and walk in his ways, who do not take care to keep their Souls pure
and undefiled, for which the Blessed Sacrament was appointed. But there are a
great many more, who are Unworthy Non-Communicants, who live in the continued
Neglect of this great Ordinance; such as are so far from crying as the
Disciples did, Lord evermore give us this Bread, that they concern not
themselves, whether they ever partake of it: And that is not all, but they
think they do very well in it; that they consult their own Safety, and befriend
their own Souls, by absenting from such a dangerous Ordinance, as the Sacrament
is. Nay, they do not only absent from it themselves, but either blame, or
wonder, at least, at them that adventure to come to it, as those that know not
what they do; and they account that those Laws which require men to receive the
Sacrament, are most Tyranical, and no more to be obeyed, than Edicts which
should command men, to damn their own Souls. Thus! thus! are men deluded by the
Devil, and affrighted from that Ordinance, which if they rightly understood,
they would not for all the World, live in the neglect of it.

We are offended at the Church of Rome, as well we may, and pity the People of
that Religion, for being content with half the Sacrament; but what shall we
say, when they tell us, that our people are content without any of it?

Had we heard our Saviors Institution of it, with the most endearing and
obliging circumstances, The same night in which he was Betrayed, which showed
that it was his farwel-Gift or Token of his Love: Or had we lived in the first
and purest Ages of Christianity, and seen with what Constancy as well as
Ardency, the Sacrament was Celebrated amongst them; and if any by the censures
of the Church, were kept back from the Lords Passover, what a dreadful
condition of Fear and Horror they were in; how they lay prostrate at the
Church-door, and begged with Tears and grievious Bemoanings the Prayers of the
Communicants, that they might be Admitted again with them to the Lords Table,
we would not have imagined, that ever there should be a Nation, in which the
Christian Religion should be professed, that should have thousands in it, who
had rather be without the Sacrament than have it: Who should think that they
can better be Saved without it, and that their Receiving of it, would rather
endanger, than further their Salvation?

And if we consider likewise, that our Saviors Institution of it was after he
had spent the last, and therefore we account it the best, part of his time in
persuading, and commanding his Disciples to love one another, and to be one as
he and his Father were one, which we may take as preparatory to his Instituting
the Blessed Supper; and if to all this we add, how careful the Primitive
Christians were, to obey them that had the Rule over them, and watched for their
Souls, in observing those Rules which they prescribed for the Administration of
the Sacrament (which Rules are many of them observed in the Church of England
at this day): It cannot but seem very strange, and be very grievous to all good
Christians amongst us, that there should be such causeless Divisions, and
Separations from this Blessed Ordinance.

To the end therefore, that men may not dishonor their Profession, nor be
cheated of that Spiritual Food, which Christ appointed for the nourishing of
their Souls to eternal Life, upon any pretense whatsoever, I earnestly entreat,
and beseech all Non-Communicants, seriously and impartially to consider these
following things.

I. It is the great Duty, as well as the great Privilege, of every Christian,
to Receive the Lords Supper.

It is our Saviors Command, This Do; and it is great and apparent Disobedience
in every Christian, who does it not. I think it very necessary, that this
should be my first Assertion, because the Practice of most men does suppose,
that every man is left at his Libery, and ought to be so; whether he will
Receive it or not: And if he Receives not in a whole year, or many years; or
not in all his lifetime, or not till he is in his last sickness (and then
calls for it, not for any love that he has to Christ, or any delight that he
takes in the Ordinance, but to make an experiment, whether that will ease his
tormented mind, when nothing else will) that in all this neglect he has not
offended God. That if he should come to the Sacrament, he might have cause to
repent; but his turning his back upon it, though never so often, needs no
Repentance.

There are a great many, who if they are required to come to the Lords Table,
answer, That they are not satisfied to Receive. But I would fain know of those
men, how they can be satisfied to let it alone and to to turn their backs upon
it, when others under the same Obligations, do make their solemn Approach to it.

I am sure, there never was any Divine Institution, concerning which, the
people under that Dispensation, thought they were left at their liberty,
whether they should observe it or not. Every Male was Circumcised. Concerning
the Passover, we read, Exodus 12. v. 28. And the Children of Israel went away,
and did as the Lord had commanded Moses, and Aaron, so did they. It is strange
to consider, how all the Ritual and Ceremonial Laws were Observed: That Burden
which they were not able to bear, they did not dare to throw off. And yet that
the Blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper, should be slighted, as if it were no
Divine Institution, but only that which our Savior mentioned, and left it to
the pleasure of his Disciples and Followers, whether they would observe it.

I can not Imagine, what exposition the Non-Communicant can make of the words
of the Institution, This Do in Remembrance of Me. He can not but say, that it
is positively Enjoined, and he cannot but say, that it is of Universal Extent.
Our Savior did not say, you may do This in Remembrance of Me, if you please.
He did not say, lest the Best of my Disciples do This, those that are
strongest, and of the highest Rank, and let others omit it: That had been to
leave both unsatisfied: The strongest being humble and modest, would always be
suspicious, that they had not Arrived at a Degree high enough, there being no
Standard; and the weakest would be troubled, that they were not permitted to
partake, and knew not when they should. But he said, This Do, without any
Restriction or Limitation; commanding the Observance of it, by all those who
expect Salvation by His Death, and Sufferings.

Besides the Institution of it by our Savior, that Admonition of the Apostle
to the Corinthians, is very Observable, 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man Examine
himself, and so let him Eat of that Bread, and Drink of that Cup. The Apostle
does not say, Let a man Examine himself, that he may know whether he shall
Receive or not; That he may either Eat, or let it alone, according as he finds
himself disposed in his own mind; If he be Religiously disposed, let him go to
the Lords Supper, if not, let him stay away; But, Let a man Examine himself,
and so let him Eat, etc. plainly intimating, that the Sacrament was an
Ordinance, not to be dispensed with, but to be prepared for; and that no man,
can satisfy his mind to neglect it, because he is Unworthy, but must prepare
and partake of it.

I think I need not say any more, to show, that it is the duty of every one,
who calls himself a Christian, to Receive the Blessed Sacrament. It will be
only requisite, that I speak somewhat for the determination of one case, and
that is, How often every one is Obliged to Receive? Because, some may think,
that unless they partake at every Communion, they are guilty of a sin of
Omission; and if they should, the Number of Communicants being very great, in
some places, it is impossible to be performed. To this I may Answer, that in
regard, our Savior made no Determination in this Matter; It is requisite, that
every one should take his Measures, from the appointment of the Church, and
from his own particular exigences, and necessities.

At first, the Christians met together, and received every day of the week,
their Hearts were Inflamed with Love to their Savior, and they were in
continued expectation, by Martyrdom to be sent to him. Afterward, it came to
four times in the week, besides the Festivals. The appointment of our Church
is, that every one should Receive at least three times in the year; and I
conceive that the monthly Administration of it, in great and populous Cities
is, partly, that there should not be so great a concourse at the Festivalls, as
that it should be impossible to Administer it to all at once, and much more,
that those who are zealously affected, and find a greater necessity than others
do, of Receiving it often, might have the more frequent Opportunities: For, the
reason why it is not Administered every Lord's Day (as it was formerly, and for
that reason, the Communion Service is still continued in the Church when there
is no Administration) is not because Christians may receive the Sacrament too
often, but because the Commonness of it, may lesson that Reverence and Esteem,
which is to be had for that great and solemn Ordinance. It would be a happiness
indeed, if from the number of Zealous Communicants, we should find it necessary
to Administer the Sacrament every Lord's Day.

II. The danger of Unworthy Receiving is not so great as many think it is, who
flee from the Sacrament as that which would bring them into a very great, and
irrecoverable danger. It is not an unpardonable Sin, but that which may be
amended.

I mention this in the second place, for the satisfaction of those who are
under such terrible fears of being Unworthy Communicants, that they Communicate
not at all, which I am apt to think, is the common case of Non-Communicants in
our Days.

These disquieting Fears, proceed from a mistake of two expressions in the
Apostles Admonition to the Corrinthians, 1 Cor. 11.29. For the that eats and
drinks Unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation to himself, not discerning
the Lords Body. They do not rightly understand what is meant by eating and
drinking Unworthily, nor by eating and drinking Damnation. And for want of a
right understanding of these Expressions, they start from the Sacrament, as if
the Lords Table were become a snare. They are so affrighted, that Christ's
Command signifies nothing to them, nor yet the benefit which he declared to his
Disciples they should receive by it. When they hear how former Ages frequented
the Sacrament, they regard it not, but think that they have discovered a danger
which their fore fathers never found out. They think that they are in the
surest way to Salvation, that come not to the Sacrament; and the seldomer that
any one Receives, the less danger he does incur to himself. And from a mistake
of this place it is, that many very Pious, and therefore Worthy Communicants,
come not to the Lords Table with that Joy and Alacrity of Spirit, which become
the Welcome Guests of our Blessed and Bountiful SAVIOR, but are oppressed with
Fears and Terrors, as if they suspected their coming would be to their
Prejudice.

As for the word (...), Unworthy: The sense in which we commonly make use of it
is a good interpretation of the Apostles meaning. We do not call a man
Unworthy, because he has not attained to any high Accomplishments; because he
is of meaner or lower degree than others; nor do we call a man Unworthy,
because of some Faults that he is guilty of, considering that in many things we
Offend all. But we call him Unworthy, who does a base Act from a base Design.
We call him Unworthy who is a Dissembler, who pretends Friendship to another
for his own ends, but it appears that he has no real Kindness for him. He is
Unworthy, who easts contempt upon him whom he ought to reverence, and honor as
his Superior. In such a sense as this is, we are to understand the meaning of
the Apostle. He is an Unworthy Communicant, who pretends to be the Disciple of
the Lord, and takes no care to keep his Commandments. He is an Unworthy
Communicant, who pretends great honor and reverence for his Savior and his
Ordinances, and yet comes Unreverently before him, which was the Corinthians
case.

For the right understanding of this word, no man must make the esteem which he
has for himself to be his Rule; for then we should conclude, that our Savior
made a Feast with a resolution that none should partake of it. The impenitent
Sinners Guilt tells him that he is Unworthy, and the penitent Sinners Humility
tells him that he is Unworthy; and so by consequence, none must come to the
Sacrament. According to this Rule, the Apostle himself was an Unworthy
Communicant; for he calls himself the Chief of Sinners. If this were the Rule,
every man should be a Worthy Communicant, according to the good conceit that he
has of himself. The boasting Pharisee should be Worthy, and the poor humble
and penitent Publican should be Unworthy.

It is great pity, but that every good Christian should understand the true
sense of the Word, because, otherwise those who are most Worthy, by reason of
their great Humility, and self-Abasement, are most apt to conclude themselves
Unworthy. It had been great pity, that the Centurion should have lost his
errand to our Savior, because, he accounted himself Unworthy that he should
come under his Roof. Our Savior would have accounted it great pity, that the
woman of Cana should have been rejected, because, she accounted her self as
Unworthy, as a Dog. It is a great pity, that any humble Christian should be
kept from the Sacrament because he thinks himself Unworthy of it; for, the
sense of his Unworthyness does show that he is Worthy.

Those who are under this mistake may be better Informed, by reading the Form
of Administration in our Church. We do not come to the Lords Table, and say,
Lord, we have now gotten a great Conquest over our sins, we are now Arrived to
a high measure of Grace and Piety beyond other men, and therefore now we
account our selves Worthy Communicants, and such as are fit to Sup with our
Lord. But on the contrary, we acknowledge and bewail our manifold sins and
wickedness, which we have grievously committed; we acknowledge, that we are not
Worthy to gather the Crumbs under his Table etc. By which it appears, that none
are to Receive the Sacrament, but those that, in this sense, judge themselves
Unworthy of it.

That every one therefore, may have a right Notion of this Word, Unworthy: The
Rule which they must judge by, is the Word of God. Every man must account
himself Worthy or Unworthy to Receive the Sacrament, not according to what he
thinks of himself, but according to what God's Word declares concerning him.
They are Worthy, whom God accepts of, according to his Covenant of Grace,
declared in, and by the Gospel. He that is sincerely Penitent, though he cannot
think himself Worthy, yet, God declares him to be so; and therefore, he is a
Worthy Communicant, and is offensive to God and injurious to himself if he
comes not to the Blessed Sacrament. He that sincerely desires, and endeavors
to walk in the ways of God and Religion, though by reason of his many failings
in his Duty, he thinks himself Unworthy, yet, God accounts him Worthy, and
therefore, he ought to come to the Sacrament, and to come with great Joy and
Alacrity of mind; and the Sacrament is very proper for him, because, it is an
excellent means to help him against that which troubles him.

There is a twofold Unworthyness; as to the Person, and as to the manner of
Communicating. As to the Person, when he is in a sinful and impenitent State,
when he allows himself in sensual Practices, and takes pleasure in them,
though he knows that he Acts contrary to the Command of Christ; either trying
to satisfy himself with Atheistical hopes that there is no World but this, or
else with the hopes of an after Repentance, which is the common snare of the
Devil. This Person can not be a Worthy Communicant, for, he is at enmity with
God in his mind: He is a Rebel against the Law of Christ, which his intention
to repent afterward, does suppose. He is one who cannot not think himself
welcome to Christ, because, he will not suffer him to be his Lord to Rule over
him.

There is Unworthyness likewise, as to the manner of Receiving, and that is,
when a man does not Receive with Reverence as becomes him, in that solemn
Approach to God. This was a great fault which the Corinthians were guilty of,
they came Unreverently and disorderly to the Sacrament from their Love Feasts,
forgetting that they were not in their own Houses but in Gods House, and that
they were not eating at their own Tables but at the Lords Table. This is the
proper meaning of the Apostles expression in the next words, Not discerning the
Lords Body; an expression which I have heard some Papists make use of, for
their whimsey of Transubstantiation, as if they Eat and Drank Unworthily who
did not discern by Faith, that it was the very Body of our Savior: but most
certain it is, that the Apostle had another meaning. The word (...) signifies
both to discriminate and to sanctify; and so the properest Account that can be
given of it is, that he who does not Receive after a devout and religious
manner, is Unworthy.

I hope I have said enough to take off the unnecessary, and causeless fears of
those who are humble Christians, and that they will not any longer give the
Enemy of their Salvation this advanvantage against them, but that they will
take right Measures, and be so far from keeping from the Sacrament because they
think themselves Unworthy, that they will account it a good qualification for
their Welcome at the Lords Table. Let such persons look into the Holy Gospel,
and they will find, that such persons as they are, were not only accepted of
Christ, but highly commended by him, and therefore are the most Welcome Guests
at the Lords Table.

The next thing to be considered, is, what the Apostle means by eating and
drinking Damnation; which is the affrighting expression that makes thousands
afraid to Receive the Sacrament. The trembling sinner is afraid that this
brings men into the condition of those who were guilty of the Blasphemy against
the Holy Ghost; that they have committed a sin which shall never be forgiven
them: That they having received Unworthily, are irrecoverably Lost and Ruined.
That they have swallowed down Poison to their Souls, and can never vomit it up
again. And if these be the interpretations that sinners make of those
Expressions, that it is very hard to say who is worthy to Receive; and yet if a
man be an Unworthy Receiver he is from thenceforth in a state of Damnation: It
is no wonder that there are so few Communicants. That I may therefore rectify
these mistakes, I desire these things may be considered.

1. It was not the design of the Apostle by this Expression, to scare the
wickedest men amongst Christians from the Sacrament, but only that they might
Repent and come to it. He did not suppose that what he said he would make any
afraid to perform their Duty in observing this Ordinance; nor had it any such
effect upon those to whom he wrote this Epistle. He was a more faithful steward
and Servant of Christ, than to do any thing with design, to discourage those
from coming to his Masters Table, who were invited to prepare, and to come to
it. If he had, he had been as Unworthy a Minister, as the worst sinner can be
an Unworthy Communicant. It is of great moment, and may exceedingly tend to the
satisfaction of the scrupulous, when they read the Scriptures, to consider well
what the design of the Penman is: for by this means they will prevent
misapplications, which are of very ill Consequence. 2. The word which is
translated Damnation, is (...) which signifies Judgment, and does as well
signify any temporal evil which befalls men in this world as the punishment in
the hellish State. And so the meaning is this and no more: He that Eats and
Drinks Unworthily offends God, and provokes the Judgment of God against
himself. 3. The case of the Corinthians is to be considered, and that may tend
exceedingly to the satisfaction of those that are thus affrighted: 1. They had
received Unworthily; but yet the Apostle does not tell them that they are
Damned, or that they are in a lost condition, and must now perrish for ever;
but Admonishes them to be more careful for the time to come, that they might
come with better Preparation than they had before. 2. In eating and drinking
Unworthily, they had eat and drank Damnation to themselves in the Apostles
sense: They had eat and drank Judgment, as appears in the next Verse. For this
cause many are weak and sickly amongst you, and many sleep. From which it is
concluded, that God sent a Plague at Corinth for their Unworthy Receiving. 3.
It must be considered, that the Apostle only blames the Corinthians for that
Fault which they were then guilty of, which was their Unworthy Receiving. There
were no Christians in those days that were Non-Communicants. They generally
Valued the Sacrament above their lives, and an opportunity of receiving, though
it were Administered every day in the week, above all the enjoyments of the
World. There was therefore no occasion for the Apostle to tell them the Danger
of living in the neglect of the Sacrament: If there had, no Man in his Wits can
imagine but that the Apostle would have threatened Damnation as well to Unworthy
Neglecters as he did to Unworthy Receivers of the Blessed Sacrament. 4. If this
which the Apostle says of Eating and Drinking Damnation be the cause of Men's
being afraid to come to the Sacrament, they may for the like reason, be afraid
to perform other Duties of Religion.
If any Impenitent Sinner Prays to God, without a resolution to avoid the same
course of Life, he cannot think but his Prayers will provoke God to punish him,
rather then obtain favor to him: that he has reason to expect that the
Judgment of God, both in reference to this Life, and that which is to come,
should be the consequent of it. he is one who confesses his sin to God, but
does not so much as intend to forsake it for the time to come: And this must
certainly be a great Provocation of the All-seeing God; For a Man to pretend
that he is sorry for what he has done, when he is not resolved to amend.

If an earthly King could know that the Malefactor, who beggs his Life,
intended to do the same wickedness for which he deserved to dye before, he
would be so far from granting his Petition, that he would hasten his Execution.

The Almighty God, the Great King of Heaven knows this to be the Sinners case,
that although he stands condemned for his evil deeds, yet he beggs pardon,
only as a thing in course, without any resolution of amendment; and can it be
imagined that any thing less than Damnation should be the end of this Sinner.
There is one case in which the Sinner does directly Pray Damnation to himself,
according to the Apostles Phrase, and that is the case of the Malicious and
Revengeful Sinner, he Prayers to God to forgive him his trespresses as he
forgives others: That is not at all, It is as if he should say, Lord be thou
revenged on me, for I am resolved to be revenged on my Brother: Besides, there
is no more cause of Terror from this Expression of the Apostle by which
Sinners are scared from the Sacrament, than there is in that of Solomon by
which wicked men may be afraid to Pray, Prove. 15.8. The Sacrifice, that is the
Prayer, of the Wicked is an Abomination unto the Lord. He that does that which
God loathes, that which is an Abomination to him, certainly can expect nothing
but Damnation to be the end of it. I would fain know of the Non-Communicant
whether, if the Apostles expression had been He that Eats and Drinks
Unworthily is an Abomination unto the Lord, and Solomon's expression had been,
The Prayer of the wicked brings Damnation to himself; that he would have
Received the Sacrament, but never prayed to God.

I may likewise instance in that great Duty of hearing Gods Word. Certainly
every man will grant, that for a man to come to the House of God, to hear what
God requires of him, without any intent to do it, and accordingly comes from
hearing Gods Commands with a resolution to break them, can expect nothing less
than Damnation to be the consequent of it. And although this be the case of
thousands of Sinners, yet they are not afraid to hear Gods Word. There is no
more cause of Terror from this expression of the Apostle to Unworthy
Communicants, than there is from many Expressions of our Savior and his
Apostles concerning Unworthy Hearers of Gods Word. I may instance first, in
that of our Savior, Luke 8.18. Take heed therefore how you hear; whosoever
has to him shall be given; and whosoever has not, from him shall be taken
even that which he seems to have. If our Savior had only given the Caution,
Take heed how you hear, it might startle the unprofitable Hearer, and give him
just cause to expect Judgment if he were not careful? But our Savior adding,
For whosoever has to him shall be given, and from him that has not, from him
shall be taken away, even that which he seems to have, is an expression which
signifies the condition of a careless Hearer to be so forlorn, that it may make
every such sinner afraid to enter into Gods House. The meaning of our Savior
by that proverbial saying is, He that is an Obedient Hearer shall grow in Grace
and Knowledge, and be in the case of a Rich man who increases his Riches to a
great Estate; but the careless Hearer who does not give diligent Attention, and
who comes to hear without resolution to Practice, is like a man of low Degree
who by taking no care to improve his Stock, loses that little that he has,
and comes to intolerable Beggary and Misery. How dreadful is the Condition of
that man, who may be said to hear away all that is good? Who, the longer he
Hears the less he Regards and the worse he is.

I might instance likewise in the comparison which our Savior makes between a
disobedient Hearer, and the foolish man who built his House upon the Sand, Mat.
7.26. of which he says, great was the fall of it. We can not imagine the great
fall of a Disobedient Hearer to be any thing less than a fall into Damnation
and everlasting Misery: And yet men are not therefore afraid to hear Gods Word
who refuse to do it. I may instance likewise in in the expressions of the
Apostles; St. James says, Chap. 1. v. 22. Be ye doers of the Word and not
hearers only deceiving your own selves. How do men deceive themselves, but by
expecting Salvation from Hearing, and Damnation must be their Portion for not
doing. And yet the sinner does not say, I shall but deceive my self, and
therefore it is in vain for me to go to Gods House to Hear his Word. There is
another expression of the Apostle; 2 Cor. 2.16. To the one we are a savor of
death unto death. The Apostle is speaking concerning the Ministry of the
Gospel, and the different Effectswhich it has upon men in reference to another
world. It is the savor of death unto death; an expression alluding to strong
perfumes which are pleasant to some, but are like poison suddenly destructive
to others. It is as if the Apostle should have said, Though to some our
Preaching the Gospel is exceedingly beneficial, yet to others who regard it not
it is most certainly destructive, for it brings eternal Death. There is more
terror in this Expression than there is in that of the Apostles eating and
drinking Damnation; for that, as I have showed, signifies any temporal evil as
well as the Punishment of another state; But this of the Apostle signifies only
the Death of the soul in another world; And yet for all this men are not afraid
to hear the Gospel Preached to them. By this I hope it has appeared, that
there is no more reason why Christians should be afraid to Receive the
Sacrament from that Expression of the Apostle, than they should be to perform
other Duties of Religion, considering what the Scripture says concerning those
that are Unworthy Performers of them.

5. I may add in the last place That this Expression of the Apostle how severe
soever it may seem to be, is no part of revealed Religion properly so called.
Revealed Religion is that of God, which we could not know if it were not told
us. But this of Unworthy Communicant eating and drinking judgment to
themselves, is that which the Corinthian and all Christans might know, though
the Apostle had never said it. Every man by the light of natural Reason knows,
that he who does not live in obedience to the Laws of his God or comes
Unreverently before him, is not accepted of him; but on the contrary, does
provoke him to anger, and consequently to punish that offender who does thus
disobey and contemn him.

If Heathens had been negligent or unreverent in their Sacrifices, and a plague
had happened amongst them, as it was supposed to be the case of the Corinthians,
they would doubtless have concluded, that the Plague came because of their
Neglect of their Duty. And therefore it is a hard case that men should be so
much afraid of the Sacrament, because they are told of a danger which Heathens
themselves might have known in the like case

It Is very probable that the Corinthians were so apprehensive of the infinite
love of Christ, and of the benefit which was to be received by this Ordinance,
that they were not so well aware of the danger of Unworthy Receiving as they
might have been; and therefore the Apostle thinks fit to give them this
Admonition, by which they might understand that, although the benefit was great
to the Worthy Receiver, yet a Man must not be so presumptuously confident of
it, as to think that he may come to it without a due consideration of, and
preparation for, such a near and solemn approach to God.

III. The danger of Unworthy Neglecting the Sacrament is generally greater than
the danger of Unworthy Receiving. I know that this Assertion will seem strange
to many and may be very offensive to some, who for many Years have heard the
Duty of preparing mightily urged, but have never heard that it is a Duty to
partake. They have heard the danger of Unworthy Receiving strained beyond its
due bounds and limits, but have heard nothing of the danger of living in the
continued Neglect of this Ordinance. But though I do not speak the Sense of a
great many in this vicious and divided Age, yet I hope every one will grant
that I speak the Sense of all Mankind in all former Ages, in reference to
divine and positive Institutions. Those, who of old were called Gods People,
because they had entered into Covenant with him, had positive Institutions from
God, which they were duly to observe, and to sanctify themselves for the
performance of. We are not to imagine that they thought their external
Sanctifications were enough, but that there must be an inward Sanctification of
the Heart, to which the other did relate. And although they were defective in
this, as appears by the great complaints which God made against them, yet they
did not dare to neglect the Observance of Gods positive Institutions; but all
the people were careful to do what God commanded as to the outward Act, though
they were negligent as to the inward disposition of their Minds and preparation
for it. When our Savior came into the World, the Passover was duly observed by
those whom he condemned as the worst men in the world, but yet he no where
tells them that they should not have observed it, or that it had been better
that the Ordinance had been wholly laid aside. Though all were not Israel that
were of Israel, yet all accounted it their Duty to observe the Ordinances of
the God of Israel.

If we likewise consider the Practice of the first Christians, we shall find,
that they accounted Non-Communicating to be the greatest danger. If they had
accounted that there was less danger in being Non-Communicants, or that they
might have been very good Christians though they did not Receive the Sacrament,
or that it would be no great danger to their own Souls to live in the Neglect
of it, they would not have lain prostrate at the Church Doors, begging the
Prayers of the Faithful, that they might be admitted to the Sacrament; but have
lived very contentedly without it, as a great many do in our days, who it may
be will say, that it was the Ignorance of those Christians which made them so
fondly desirous of it. Excommunication, by which they were debarred from coming
to the Sacrament, would have been no trouble to them, but they would have lived
very contentedly without it. Besides we find that when the Corinthians had
received Unworthily, the Apostle charges them to examine themselves, that they
might be better prepared; but afterward, when Christians began to be so remiss
as not to receive at all, it was determined in a Council at Antioch, That all
Non-Communicants should be Excommunicated; they were not thought worthy of the
name or society of Christians, who should turn their backs upon the Holy
Ordinance of the blessed JESUS, as if it were unnecessary to observe it.
Doubtless the most wicked Christian in the World will not be punished for
coming to the Sacrament, simply considered, but because he did not prepare his
Mind by leaving off his wickedness. He did that which was required of him, as
to the outward Act only, he did not take care to prepare himself for it. But
more particularly.

1. Non-communicating is a more manifest contempt of the Authority of God. A
Lawgiver is exceedingly despised when his Laws are not observed. It is an
Argument that his Authority is disputed, or that those whom he commands are not
obliged to obey him. Who can imagine that the Uuworthy Non-Communicant ownes
that God has exalted Christ To be a Prince and a Savior, and that he has
given him a Nome above every name, when he turns his back upon his Institution,
as if it were some Usurper that has said Do this, and one whom Men need not
own as their Prince, and as their Savior? This is such a contempt of Christ's
Authority, and such a reproach to the Christian Religion, that I may say Tell
it not in Gath, etc. Let not the Heathens hear that Christians have so little
regard to their Christ, as that they do not obey him in that Command which had
a special Relation to what they say he did for them. They have more reverence
and show, more regard and obedience to their Gods which yet are no Gods, as
appears by the account we have of their Sacrifices. Let not the Mahometans hear
of it: They are diligent to observe the commands of their Mahomet, in
abstaining from what he has forbidden, and in their Religious Duties, praying
five times every day, because they say that he had Authority from God, and what
he commanded they are obliged to do. Tell it not to the Jews; they observe the
Ordinances of Moses to this day in many things, because they own his Authority
from God: These Men of other Religions shame Christians, and may conclude if
they hear of Non-Communicants, That there are many who call themselves
Christians, who do not believe in their Hearts that their Christ came from God;
for they do not account themselves obliged to observe his Rites and
Institutions. This contempt of Christ's Authority cannot be so deeply charged
upon the Unworthy Receiver. That Servant who is not careful to do his duty
after such a manner as his Master requires of him, is not so guilty of
contempt, as he that turns his back, and does not do it at all. That
Christians, because Christ requires them to be Christians indeed, his
Disciples, and because they are threatened with Punishment if they are not
careful to perform their Duty as they ought, and as they may do, should think
to avoid Punishment, by not doing their Duty at all, is such a way to avoid
Punishment, as no Man ever yet thought of, and nothing but the delusion of the
Devil could ever put into the Minds of Men.

2. It is a greater contempt of the love of Christ. The love of God the Father
in sending Christ into the World is unconceivably great: God so loved the
world, so infinitely, so transcendently, so beyond all that Tongues can express,
or Hearts conceive: And Christ's giving his Body to be broken, and his Blood to
be shed, is such an expression of Love, as is only fit to put us into an Ecstasy
of Admiration. The Apostle tells us that it has length and breadth, and depth
and height, and that it is a love which passes Knowledge. A love which can not
be described, and therefore God allows us an Eternity to admire it in: That God
should become Man, that He should Die to whom it belongs to give Life, that he
should Die for Enemies, that He should Die such an ignominious Death as the
Death of the Cross, etc. Now we must know, that this Sacrament is an Ordinance
which Christ appointed on purpose to give us a lively Remembrance, and a
symbolical representation of that unconceivable Love: And although the Unworthy
Communicant is Unworthy indeed, in that it has not such an influence upon his
Life as it ought to have, yet in regard that he comes to the Sacrament, and by
his outward reverence does acknowledge Christ's Love to Sinners (and it may be
has grief in his heart at that time to think that that love has not obliged
him to better Obedience) he is not so much to blame as the Non-Communicant who
turns his back upon the Ordinance, as if Christ's love Exhibited and represented
by it were not worthy of his notice.

3. They cast great contempt upon the Wisdom of Christ, who frequent not the
Blessed Sacrament. Their Neglect of it supposes that they think there is no
great need of it, or no great good to be received by it.

There are a sort of People amongst us, who upon all occasions declare that
they hope to be saved, who yet think they need not Receive the Sacrament; And
what do these men less than charge Christ, that this Ordinance, which he
appointed as a means to Salvation, might as well have been let alone. It is
through their own great Folly that they call the Wisdom of him who is the
Wisdom of God into question; their not considering that the good that is to be
Received, is only from the Blessing of Heaven upon that Ordinance which Christ
appointed. The Non-Communicant in this case is like Naaman the Leper, 2 Kings
5.10.11. who was willing to go to the man of God to be recovered of his
Leprosy; but he was desirous that it might be done without his using any Means
for it; especially such as he could not understand should afford him any
benefit. Elisha sent a Messenger unto him, saying, Go and Wash in Jordan seven
times, and thy flesh shall come again unto thee, and thou shall be clean. But
Naaman was Wroth, and went away, and said, Behold, I thought, he will surely
come out to me, and stand, and call on the Name of the Lord his God, and strike
his hand over the place, and recover the Leper. Are not Abana and Pharpar
Rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? May I not wash in
them and be clean? So he turned and went away in a Rage. In like manner the
Non-Communicant knows no reason, why he should go to the Sacrament to be cured
of his Leprosy. It is enough, he thinks, that Christ died for Sinners, and that
he believes it, and that he is sorry for his Sins and asks God Pardon, or
intends to do so: He knows no need of the Sacrament, or to what purpose it was
appointed. But as Naaman kept his Leprosy till he was persuaded to wash in
Jordan; so Sinners have all the reason in the world to expect, that the Leprosy
of their Souls should continue till they frequent the Sacrament, it being an
Ordinance which Christ appointed, and therefore they have no reason to expect
the cure of their Souls without it.

The Unworthy Communicant acknowledges by his devout Receiving of it, that it
is an Ordinance of Heaven, worthy of all Reverence (though he fails in
examining himself before he comes to partake of it) and that from which great
benefit is to be expected; but the Unworthy Non-Communicant slights it as
inconsiderable and unnecessary to be observed. And every one knows that in so
doing he calls into question the Wisdom of our Blessed Savior.

4. Non-Communicants are worse than Unworthy Receivers, in that they cast away
the profession of Christianity, and that Public Declaration of the benefit of
the Death and Sufferings of Christ, for which this Ordinance was appointed.
When our Savior said, Do this in remembrance of Me: And the Apostle, As often as
ye Eat this Bread, and Drink this Cup ye do show the Lords Death until He come;
or (...), declare ye the Lords Death. It is very plain, that the Sacrament was
not only intended for the private good and benefit of the Receiver, but to bear
up the honor of God and the Christian Religion in the World: That it should be
used for a public Declaration, that Christ is the Savior of the World, and
that there is no other Name under Heaven by which a man can be Saved: That his
Death and Sufferings was the expiatory Sacrifice for the Sin of the whole
World: And that those who have not the Gospel Preached, but have only the guide
of their own Consciences and of natural Religion, are saved by virtue of his
Death, though they do not know him; because that it is by him that Gods Anger
is appeased to wards Mankind. By this we show forth the Lords Death, what a
great and mighty Savior he made himself by dying for Mankind.

The Unworthy Receiver is exceedingly to blame because he fails in the
Practice of Religion: But the Non-Communicant is more Unworthy, for he fails
not only in the Practice, but in the very Profession likewise. It were not
improper to ask him when he turns his back upon the Sacrament what Religion he
is of, that we may give an account to them that ask us? If he says a
Christian, why does he not own it by his solemn Approach to that Ordinance
which Christ appointed for that very end? If he says he goes to Church, so
may, and sometimes do Jews and Mahometans, men of other Religions.

5. Non-Communicating is of more dangerous and pernicious Consequence than
Unworthy Receiving. It is not only in many respects more offensive to God, but
likewise more destructive to the Souls of men. This may appear by a more
general or a more particular and special Consideration. Non-Communicating is
the great Inlet both of dreadful Divisions and horrid Debaucheries; which with
sorrowful hearts we have great cause to complain of.

It has been the great Inlet to all manner of Divisions by which the Church of
Christ, which is his Body, is torn Limb from Limb, and, we fear, is never like
to be healed in our days. The case is plain though there were nothing of sad
Experience to be alleged.

So long as men keep in societies, though but civil Societies, and are Obliged
to observe Rules and Orders: If any Controversy arisie, the dissatisfied
person, partly by his obligation to those rules and orders, and partly by the
advice and council of the rest of the society, does not presently separate but
submit; or if he be stubborn and insolent he may be turned out of the Society,
and be liable to severe penalties, till he be more modest, humble and
compliant. But if he thinks himself under no obligation to observe the rules
and orders of that Society, and no penalty be inflicted, then he breaks away
and makes Parties and brings all into confusion and disorder.

In the case of the Sacrament: If every one, who is admitted by Baptism to be a
member of the Church of Christ, does account it his duty as a member of that
Society, to observe the rules and orders of the Church, Peace and Union is
maintained; but if men think they are not obliged, but wholly left at their
liberty whether they will partake of this Ordinance or let it alone, then it is
no wonder if the members of that society be Scattered into as many divisions
and parties, as the great Enemy of the Sacrament and of their Salvation please.

For many years after our blessed Reformation from Popery, there were so many
received the Sacrament, that the number of inhabitants in every Parish was best
known by the number of Communicants. In those happy days of the Churches
peace, Masters and Mistresses came at one Communion, and their Servants after
public Catechizing and private Examination by their Ministers, came the next
Communion. It could not be Imagined but that there were some Unworthy
Communicants amongst them: There were such in the Church of Corinth, and will
be in all Churches to the end of the World. But that Evil was nothing in
comparison of the mischiefs that have happened since men took their Liberties
and forsook the Sacrament. Parishes now may better be computed by the number of
Non-Communicants, and those that run from the Sacrament, rather than of those
that come to it.

I cannot in this place forbear mentioning the substance of what I lately heard
from a very Aged, Grave, and Pious Person, who is now very conformable to the
Church of England. We were lamenting that the people would not be persuaded to
come to the Sacrament, and that their absenting was occasioned by the sad
Distractions and Divisions that are in the Church: I was, said he, one of those
who in the beginning of the late troubles found fault with the Surplice and with
the Cross in Baptism, and there were others who were discontented at those
things, who were good and holy men. But I am confident, if they could have
foreseen the dreadful mischiefs that have happened unto the Church, they would
never have so much as opened their lips, much less have done any thing against
the Church as it then was.

I know there ought to be great care taken to keep off scandalous Communicants,
and there would be greater care taken if the Divisions of the Church did not
hinder it. But I think all sober People will say, that if all the vicious men
in England came to the Sacrament, it would not be so great a scandal to
Religion, as the dreadful Divisions and Separations that have been in the
Church, since the People took their liberty to turn their backs upon that holy
Ordinance, and many Ministers made it their business to make them afraid of it,
by Preaching the danger of Unworthy Receiving, but not of Unworthy Neglecting
of it.

Another great Evil which is the Consequence of Non-Communicating is horrid
Debauchery and Profaneness; such as never was or could be whilst the Sacrament
was Frequented. There are thousands in this age who call themselves Christians,
and often say that they hope to be saved, but are so far from living like
Christians, that they would be abandoned by sober Heathens as unfit for Humane
Society. If we look into the Records of ancient times we shall find, that
though there were grievious Wickednesses and Impieties, yet they were attended
with some kind of fear and shame; but in our age Wickedness insults, as if it
hoped to have a better reputation than Piety and Virtue in the World. The
Apostle speaking of the sins of Heathens Ephesians. 5.11. calls them the Unfruitful
Works of Darkness. And in the next Verse he tells the Ephesians, that it is a
shame to speak of those things which are done in Secret. But in our age
wickedness appears Openly, as if there were no fear or shame that belonged to
it.

In former times they that were drunk were drunk in the Night, but now it is
Scarcely accounted a sin, and therefore is become a Noonday Entertainment. In
former times it was the sin of a rude ungoverned Rabble. When Hannah was
falsely accused of being drunk, count not, said she, thine handmaid for a
Daughter of Belial; Belial signifies without Yoke, and it is as if she had
said, I am none of those unruly forlorn Miscreants that will be drunk. I
suppose the proverb may be very ancient As drunk as a Beggar. But now it is the
sin (if I may be so bold as to call it so) of Lords and Gentlemen, and is in as
much Esteem amongst too many of them, as if it were some brave Achievement,
for which a man is willing to adventure the Ruin of himself and family.

Whoredom is another sin which has exceedingly abounded. It is an Old sin,
but the Impudence that attends it is new. In Jobs time the eye of the Adulterer
waited for the twilight, Chap. 24.15. The Whore which Solomon speaks of, Prove.
7.9. was only to be found in the Twilight, in the Evening, in the black and
dark night, and she was accounted to have an impudent face, v. 13. But how
impudent are those Whores who appear in the open streets at noon day, tempting
all that pass by to their filthy Embraces? We read in the Scripture of the
Attire of a Harlot, but now there is in this immodest age no distinction; but
by the show of women we may suspect that the Attire of Harlots is all the
fashion.

These two Sins have of late years so much abounded, that there are thousands
who are so far from living like Christians, that they are degenerated from the
common Principles of Humanity, and would be a shame to Heathens if they lived
amongst them. These sins have made many to become worse than beasts in the
esteem of all that are virtuous. And I am sure they have made them become
Devils to themselves and families.

There is another dreadful Sin which abounds, and that is profane Swearing. A
Sin which men commit only because the Devil will have it so; for there is
neither profit nor pleasure in it. Some are seldom guilty of it but when they
are provoked to Anger, and then they must be revenged by abusing the name of
God and destroying their own Souls: which lets us see what fools the Devil
makes them that forsake Religion. Sometimes it is attended with mirth and
jollity; Laughter and Swearing go together, as if to abuse the Holy Name of God
were a help to Mirth. But the reason of it is this, the Devil will not have his
servants to have innocent Mirth; if they should, their Damnation would not be
increased as he would have it upon all occasions. Sometimes we observe men
swearing in their ordinary Converse as if it were a grace to their speech: Of
which the truest account that I can give is; that their Hearts are so full of
Wickedness, and of contempt of God and of Religion, that it continually, as a
thing in course, runs out at their Mouths.

I may add another Impiety which does exceedingly increase, and that is
Contempt of Religion upon the Lords Day. Men of other Religions may call it the
Devils Day, considering what horrid Wickednesses men are guilty of on that Day.
He has more service done him on that day than in all the week besides. It Is
become the Ale-house-keepers Market or rather Fair-day. If Christians should
regard their Souls on that day, they could not pay their Rents.

These Wickednesses and many more have abounded since the days of
Non-Communicating. If these Ungodly Wretches had not turned their backs upon
the Sacrament at first, when they were of years in which they might have been
capable of Receiving it, and the Church required it; if they had been under a
Necessity of receiving it; no man can imagine that they could have been guilty
of such horrid Sins, and have lived such wicked Lives. It Is possible that they
might have been in a sinful State, and so have been Unworthy Communicants, and
thereby have eaten and drank Damnation to themselves; But now they do most
apparently damn their own Souls to the bottomless Pit of Destruction, and they
damn the souls of others; and in a sense they may be said to damn all Religion.

If these profligate Wretches were strictly required to come to the Sacrament,
they would be under a Necessity of reforming that they might be admitted to it.
There would be an Admonition from the Minister. There would be trerible Checks
from their own Consciences, which the Sacrament would rouse and cause to
terrify them. And if after (upon their promise of Amendment) they are admitted
to the Sacrament, they shall return to their former courses; Other Communicants
would take notice of them, and give them friendly and godly Admonitions, and if
those prevail not, they would at length complain to the Church, by which they
should be forced to live better, or be abandoned the society of Christians. But
when men turn their backs upon the Sacrament, they are then strangers to their
Neighbors, or at least, there is no acquaintance with them as they are
Christians. They are little or nothing concerned with one another in the things
of Religion. And if they are reproved, they answer to the Reprover, that he is
nothing concerned with them; which they could not do if they Communicated
together at the Blessed Sacrament. There is a great complaint of Unworthy
Communicants (and I hope it is greater than there is Cause for:) But what a
fearful cause is there to complain of the Unworthyness, of the horrid and
shameful Wickednesses of Non-Communicants?

The consequence of Non-Communicating may come likewise under a more special
Consideration. There are Thousands that are not openly scandalous and profane,
whose condition would not be so bad as it is, if they frequented the Sacrament.
There would not be so much guilt and trouble in their minds when they are in
health, nor so much fear and disquietment when sickness comes. This is a plain
case, and almost every days Experience proves the truth of it. Let every man
who lives in any known Sin examine his own Mind, whether, if he were under a
necessity of Receiving the Sacrament, he would not be more afraid to commit
that Sin; whether he would not be more afraid to neglect his Duty to God both
in public and private? And when he has Received after a solemn and devout
manner, and know that he must shortly renew his engagement to God again; He
would not be more careful of his ways? I know there are a great many who are
afraid to come to the Sacrament; but if they Examine themselves, and seriously
consider the state of their own Minds, they will have cause to conclude, That
it is from a suggestion of the Devil, and that he makes them afraid to Receive,
that they might be the less afraid to sin. He may be Unworthy who does Receive,
he may be one that lives a sinful Life; but we have much more cause to think
him Unworthy and in a sinful state, who Receives not at all.

There is likewise a more dreadful Consequence, in respect of Grief and Sorrow
when the Non-Communicant is sick, and forced to look back upon his former Life;
which I have had such frequent occasion to take notice of, that I visit the
Sick with some kind of Fear, lest I should find their Neglect of the Sacrament
tormenting their Consciences. I never yet heard any say, that they had damned
their Souls by Receiving the Sacrament; although I must confess I have heard
some lament, that they did not come to it so qualified as they might have done.
I never yet heard any say, I wish I had never received the Sacrament; although
in some cases, as I shall show, there may be cause for Persons to wish so. But,
that Men and Women have not received, is the Torment of their departing Souls;
because then their guilty minds tell them, that they ought to have received it,
and might have done it to their great Benefit and Advantage. I lately heard
this Expression from a Sick bed, which I mention because I think very useful.
As for the Sacrament I was afraid in my health to receive it, but I think if I
had received it, I should have been more careful of my ways than I have been.
We do for the most part find, that Persons are Comforted or Tormented upon
their Sick-Beds, according to their Communicating or Non-Communicating in the
time of their Healths. I know not which is more rare, in visiting the Sick, to
find a Communicant troubled in mind, or a Non-communicant that is not.

There is another dreadful Evil which is the consequence of Non-Communicating,
(which I might have mentioned under the former head) and that is most gross and
scandalous Ignorance. There never was any Age in which there were Ministers
more able to instruct the People, and it is well known their way of Preaching
the Gospel is most plain and intelligible to the meanest Capacities. And yet
The People perish for want of Knowledge. In many places, by reason of the vast
number of Inhabitants, it is impossible there can be a particular care of their
Souls by Converse with them in Private, which is of great necessity and
benefit; and there are a great many who would not endure it, but take occasion
to run from the Church. In the mean while there are thousands who have lived
long enough to be teachers of others, but had need themselves to be taught
which are the First Principles of the Oracles of God; Men that can give no
Account of their Faith, nor upon what Account it is that they expect Salvation.
And I am sure one great Cause of this, has been Neglect of Receiving the Lords
Supper. For if men were frequent Communicants, they would be under a great
Necessity and Obligation to enquire after Truth, that they might understand, at
least, the Principles of their Religion. They would be sensible of their
Ignorance, and come to their Minister, or Converse with other Communicants
concerning the things of God and of Religion. The Sacrament would be a Means by
which they would grow in Grace and Knowledge. But whilst they are only
concerned to come sometimes to the House of God, and think that it is enough
that they have been there, though they neither know nor Practice more than they
did before; and neglect that Solemn Institution, which would make them more
deeply concerned in the things of Religion: they remain most grossly Ignorant. I
do not think that any man will say, that the frequent Communicants are as
Ignorant as those are, that never come to the Sacrament.

By this time I hope I have sufficiently proved my Assertion, viz. That there
is generally more danger in Unworthy Neglecting, than there is in Unworthy
Receiving; and therefore the Sinner is not secure, unless it be in his Sin, who
turns his back upon this Ordinance from a supposition that he avoids danger, or
that of two Evils he does choose the least: Yet I am not willing to pass to
another head of Discourse, till I have earnestly entreated all Persons, that
they would not make an ill Use of what I have said. As the Apostle never
intended, by telling the Corinthians the danger of Unworthy Receiving, that any
should absent from the Sacrament; So far be it from me to design by showing the
danger of Unworthy Neglecting, that any should come unworthily to Receive it.
There is no Need, nor any Reason, for such an ill Inference to be made from it.
Besides I have only asserted that it is GENERALLY more dangerous. I do not say
that it is so in every Particular Case. It may be there are some who come to
the Sacrament on purpose to carry on wicked Designs, that they may be
accounted not only Upright toward men, but likewise Religious toward God.
It Is possible, there may be some who come to the Sacrament, that they may
covertly carry on Treasonable and Rebellious Designs; but I am loath to
suppose that there are any such who are no friends to Popery. If there be, it
had been well for those Judas's that they had never been born, and it would be
well for the world too if a Millstone were hanged about their Necks, and they
were cast into the Sea. Or it may be there are some who come to the Sacrament,
that they might be thought fit to be entrusted with the Concerns of Others, and
in the mean while intend to cheat them. No man can think, but it had been
better for such men if they had never come to the Holy Ordinance: Whether their
Designs be against public or private Persons, (though the first is the most
dreadful Case) It was not Christ and his Commands, but the Devil and his
Instigations that brought them to the Sacrament, and from him they must expect
their reward in the place of Torments.

There is (besides open debaucheries) another particular Case, which renders
the Condition of men so bad, and is in some the Occasion of so great a scandal
to Religion and to the Holy Ordinance, that I will not say but it had been
better if those that are Communicants had never been so; And that is, That men
should Receive the Sacrament only for the sake of their Employments, and that
they may keep places of Trust, which are profitable and beneficial to them.
Christians are to receive the Sacrament, because it is an Ordinance which
Christ Commanded; but these receive it not upon any such account. So long as it
was only the Command of Christ, they regarded it not; but when it became the
Command of the King they made have to it.

Christians are to receive the Sacrament for the good of their immortal Souls,
that having begun a Religious Life, they may grow in Grace, and be more and
more confirmed and strengthened in the ways of Religion and of Godliness. But
this is none of their business: These men come to the Sacrament about a
business in which their Souls are nothing concerned. And well it were for them
if their Souls could be nothing concerned in it. He that will be a Worthy
Communicant, must Examine himself, whether he can be content to forsake the
World, and all the Enjoyments in it for the sake of Religion? He is a Worthy
Communicant indeed, who is satisfied, that the Love he has for his Savior is
such, that he had rather quit the World and all the Enjoyments of it, than live
without this Ordinance. But this man, upon Examination of himself, finds, that
instead of being willing to forsake the World for the Love he has to the
Sacrament, he could be very well content to forsake the Sacrament, if it were
not for the regard that he has to the World.

If, when men are under a Necessity of receiving the Sacrament, that they may
continue in Places of Profit as well as Trust, they take this opportunity to
Examine their own Minds, Whether they are in the number of those that fear God,
and sincerely mind the things of Religion, and find that they might have been
Worthy Receivers, and that it has been their great fault, that they lived in
the Neglect of the Sacrament, which has been the Case of many? Or if upon
Examination they find, that they are impenitent Sinners, that have allowed
themselves in sins, either of Commission or Omission, and do resolve that for
the time to come, Sin shall not have Dominion over them, but they will every
day Pray to God in their Closets, which our Savior requires every one of his
Disciples to do; and that they will attend the Prayers of the Church with
Devotion, and the Reading and Preaching of the Word with honest Hearts? If they
are truly penitent for their former sins, and resolve to avoid the Occasions of
Evil for the time to come? If in order to these things they go to their own
Minister or to some other, whom they may think more fit to give them Advice
(which the Church allows, because it is a very tender Case;) And if they
resolve that they will be frequent Communicants for the time to come? They may
then bless God for that happy occasion of bringing them to the Sacrament. But
if men are Communicants only for the sake of worldly Profits, I will not say,
but it had been a less evil to have lived in the Neglect of it; It being a
great Affront to our Blessed Savior to come to his Supper for the sake of this
world; a great Contempt of the Ordinance, and of very ill consequence to
others, who will by such Examples be brought to a very low Esteem of it.

But may it not be Objected, That it is therefore a very grievous thing that
the Sacrament should be imposed? Is it not that which tends to the dishonor of
Religion, and the prejudice of men's Souls?

Ans. I know this is Objected, and there is a fearful Stir about it amongst men
of discontented Spirits, who cry, What have Governors to do to deprive me of
the liberty of Receiving then, and then only, when I find my self most fit for
it? Why should it be required that All should come to the Sacrament, when it is
not to be imagined, but most are unfit for it? Can it be supposed, that All men
have true Grace in them? Do All belong to the Election of Grace? These and such
like Questions we meet withal. But I do earnestly desire the Reader, to
consider in the first place, who they are that are thus offended. I have known
none, or very few, but those who Receive not at all, who make this Cavil. And
the truth is, there is more Reason why we should pity and pray to God for
them, than that we should otherwise regard what they say. They have two very
pernicious designs in it; One is to indulge their Lusts, which make them
afraid to Receive the Sacrament, any where; The other is, to do mischief to the
Church; for they do thereby endeavor to exasperate others against a lawful
Command, that they might separate from her Communion.

That the King may Command his Subjects to Receive the Sacrament, is so
reasonable, that I wonder any should offer to Object against it. I should think
him very Arrogant, who should say, that although Christ said, This Do, yet
Christian Kings and Princes are not at all concerned to see it done: That
although Kings under the Old Testament-Dispensation, were favored or rejected
of God, according to their Care, that the people should observe the Ordinances
of God, or their Neglect in that great Concern; yet under the
New-Testament-Dispensation, Kings are not to be concerned whether the
Ordinances of Christ be observed; but are to leave every one to their liberty.
I could almost as well say, that Constantine was to blame for settling
Christianity in his Dominions by a Law, as that Christian Kings in succeeding
Ages are to blame for taking Care, that the Ordinances of that Religion should
be duly observed. If any say, that the King must then Command the Receiving it
after the manner that our Savior prescribed; I answer, that that Objection
will only serve to throw the Ordinance out of the World; for neither Christ nor
his Apostles prescribed any way. But more of this under another Head.

As to what is said concerning the Qualification of Persons, That all have not
the grace of God, All are not of the number of the Elect, etc. I shall give no
other Answer but this. When there comes a man to me and tells me, that he is
required to Receive the Sacrament, and in order to it he has striven against
his Lusts with his utmost diligence: He has implored the Grace and holy Spirit
of God with the greatest earnestness, and yet he is forced to continue under
the power of his sin, and must eat and drink his own Damnation: I will then
conclude, that the Objection is of great force; but till then I wish that all
persons would take care of passing such a Construction of obscure places of
Scripture, as shall make them contradict the plainest Expressions of it, and
the Experience of every man that comes into the world.

This Objection being answered (for the sake of which I have made an unwonted
Digression) let me desire every one who is required to Receive the Sacrament,
as a Test to prove, that he fears God and is fit to be entrusted, take heed
that what I have said concerning the great Danger of Unworthy Neglecting, do
not encourage him to go to the Sacrament without due Examination and
Preparation for it. I would be very loath to be the occasion of his Deathbed
anguish of mind, when his departing soul shall be full of horror to think that
he is going hence, and must appear before the Judgment Seat of him whom he
regarded not; but for the sake of this present World.

It must likewise be considered, that I have been speaking of those who live in
the Neglect of the Sacrament, and not of those who seldom Communicate. I know
it is the great fault of Christians in this age, that they do not Communicate
so often as the Reverence which is due to the Ordinance, and the Necessities of
their Souls do require. But their fault is not to be compared to the fault of
those who live in the continued Neglect of it. I have no design to extenuate
the danger of Unworthy Receiving in any: For although I have I hope, made it
appear, that the danger of Unworthy Refusing the Sacrament is the greatest; Yet
when I consider what a fearful thing it is for Sinners, who do not fear God,
and savor the things of Religion, to come as the true Disciples of Christ, to
this Ordinance; I scarce know how to say that their danger is less. Let not
therefore an ill use be made of what I have said, but let every one conclude,
having often heard the danger of Unworthy Receiving, and now read the danger of
Unworthy Neglecting; That the Sacrament is a great and solemn. Ordinance which
lies in the sinners way to stop him in his broad way that leads to
destruction, and is a great argument to him to enter into the path of Life. For
it is on one hand a dreadful thing, that the Children and Servants of the Devil
who yield Obedience to him, should come to the Lords Supper amongst those that
are the Children and Servants of God, as if they could come undiscovered to the
All-seeing God: That those whom Christ calls his enemies, because they will not
suffer him to Rule over them, should come as if they were his Friends and
Subjects. And on the other hand for men to turn their backs upon this Ordinance
for the sake of their Sins, and thereby to throw away the great Institution of
him from whom they declare that they expect Salvation: This admits of greater
aggravations. Let every one therefore resolve that he will avoid both these
Rocks, by betaking himself to the sincere Practice of Religion, and by
frequenting this Holy Ordinance, by which he will enjoy great Pleasure and
Satisfaction to his mind in this world, and obtain good Assurance of
everlasting Glory and Happiness in the World to come.

IV. The Non-Communicant is Unworthy in that he does not only cast Contempt
upon the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, but upon the Sacrament of Baptism
likewise, and so both the positive Institutions of our Savior are
insignificant and of no account to him.

The two Sacraments have a special relation to each other. The Lords Supper is
a high Privilege which Christians have valued above their lives. It is the
Souls Feast of Fat Things. It is that Spiritual Banquet with which our Savior
entertaines those who are dearer, than his Life was, to him. Baptism is the
Ordinance which opens the door and lets us in to the Banqueting House: None but
those who are Baptized are to be admitted to the Lords Supper. If then the
Non-Communicant regards not the Lords Supper he does not regard but slights his
Baptism, at least, so far as it has relation to it. He that slights the
Feast, must needs slight that which gives Admission to it. The Sacrament of the
Lords Supper is a renewing of that Covenant which we made with God in our
Baptism; and is not only a renewed Engagement on our parts to Believe in God
and to Serve him, but on Gods part likewise by which he seals to us the
Forgiveness of our sins, that we are his Children and Heirs of Eternal Life. If
we care not for renewing this Covenant, it is a sign that we value not the
first Agreement that we made with God in our Baptism. Besides, the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper is a great means for our obtaining Grace to enable us to keep
the Covenant of our Baptism. If we come not to it, it is a sign that we have no
mind to perform what we promised, which of our selves we are not able to
perform.

Were it not a little besides my present purpose, I could easily show that
those who are Non-Communicants, if they had not been Baptized in their
Infancies, would never have received that Ordinance. No adult person can be
admitted into the Church of Christ by that Ordinance, who does not own the
Faith and Solemnly engage to live as becomes the Gospel. And those that perform
this which Baptism engages men to, are Worthy Communicants.

If we ask the Non-Communicant how he came to be called a Christian, he must
say, My Father made me so when I knew not what was done, and he or others
promised that which I never intend to perform.

I would argue thus with the Non-Communicant. Either you own your Baptism or
you do not? If you do not, why do you not declare it? Why do you call your self
a Christian, and profess that you expect Salvation from him, who appointed that
Ordinance to all that expect to enter into the Kingdom of God? If you do own
your Baptism, why do you not take care to perform that reasonable and necessary
Engagement which you made in it, by going to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
for Strength and Power to perform it?

But I had rather make another digression, which I hope the Reader will excuse,
considering that it may tend to the satisfaction of many who are in doubt
concerning Baptism, as it is now generally used in the Church of Christ. As
there are a great many whose Practices show, that they make no great account of
their Baptism, so there are a great many whose Principles are utterly against
it, and especially against Infant Baptism. And in regard that the practice of
the Church depends more upon Grounds and Reasons from Scripture, than from any
Express Instances in it; and there are some places which seem, to some, rather
to speak against it than for it, and to disallow of it rather than to commend
the practice of it; I shall for the satisfaction of those who incline to the
Anabaptists, and are willing to be satisfied (such as have not taken up an
Opinion and are resolved to stick to it what ever any say against it; which is
the great Cause of all errors) lay down these following Assertions, which I
desire all such persons soberly, and with humble and modest, and not with
haughty and stubborn minds to consider.

1. Children were members of the Jewish Church as well as Adult Persons, and
there was an Ordinance appointed for them which was their great Privilege: And
it is not to be imagined that our Savior, who took little Children up in his
arms and blessed them, should allow no Ordinance for them by which they should
be admitted into his Church.

Wheresoever God entered into Covenant with the Parent, he entered into Covenant
likewise with the Children of that Parent, that is, the Children were included
in the Covenant, and the Blessing of that Covenant belonged to the Children as
well as to the Parent

2. Our Savior took this Ordinance of Baptism from the Custom of the Jews, who
were wont to Baptize those who forsook Heathenism and embraced the true
Religion: And whenever they made Proselites, they did not only Baptize the
Parent but the Child likewise, upon engagement that the Child should be brought
up in the same Religion: So that it was not necessary, that our Savior should
give an Instance of that which every one to whom he came knew was practiced,
But it was necessary that he should have declared his Exceptions aganst Infants
Baptism if he intended their exclusion.

To what purpose should our Savior declare, that Infants should have the Seal
of a Covenant, when 'twas never otherwise? Or, how can we imagine, that our
Savior sent to Baptize Nations in which Infants had been commonly Baptized
before, and yet intended that they should be excluded? If indeed our Savior
had declared that Infants should not be Baptized: Or if we had read of the
Apostles Refusal of them: Or if there had been no Infants Baptized before nor
any Ordinance for Infants; the Anabaptists opinion had been built upon a good
Foundation, but otherwise it is very weak.

3. As a consequent of this, Infants were all along Baptized in the Primitive
Church, by the Holy Martyrs that Suffered for Christianity, of which those who
write against the Anabaptists have given undeniable proof. And we are sure,
that if our Savior had intended their Exclusion, they would never have done
it. And it is not to be imagined, that Anabaptists know better what was the
Mind of Christ than those Christians did. If those who are now of that
persuasion had lived in those days, and had considered from whence our Savior
took that Ordinance, with the Grounds and Reasons of it; they could not have
been of that Opinion which they have now espoused; because then the Original of
it was fresh in the World, and the Use and Practice of it was continued by the
most Holy men in the World. It is not only great Haughtiness of mind, by which
men think themselves wiser than the most Holy and Learned men in all ages of
the World, but Ignorance through length of time that makes an Anabaptist.

4. Infants are Believers in a sense or else they could not be saved, nor have
any right to the promises of Christ in the Gospel. And if they are in any sense
such Believers as are entitled to Salvation, they are such Believers as have a
right to Baptism. If the Estate belongs to a Child in the Cradle, the
Indentures and Seals of that Estate belong to him likewise. The Child of a
Believer may as well be called a Believer, as the Child of a Proselite was
called a Proselite. If God gives Children but the Denomination of Believers, it
is sufficient to entitle them to Baptism.

5. Those that consider the Case of the Anabaptists must needs be of another
Opinion. This in conjunction with the former Arguments must needs be of great
force to those that are serious and considerate, and not conceited and resolute
in a case which they have espoused.

As the condition of the Jews is a living Argument of the Truth of
Christianity, and the badness of their case: So I may say, that the Condition
of the Anabaptists and their Unsuccessfulness in all their attempts to
establish their Opinions does show, that God does not, nor ever did show any
such Favor to them, as might give any sober person cause to think that they
were Gods Church and People, however they plead his Word to be their Rule; but
that Infant Baptism is an Ordinance which God allows of and has countenanced
ever since there was any opposition made to it.

There is a Writer yet alive who gives a large and strange account of the
mischievous Practices of the Anabaptists in Germany and other places, what
Disturbers and not Promoters of Religion they have been wheresoever they have
come. But I wave all that can be said against them either in this Nation or
beyond the Seas, and will only say, That if I had the highest Opinion of them
for their Morals that I have for any sort of men in the World, yet I could
never believe, That all the Primitive Christians who owned and practiced
Infant Baptism, and the Martyrs in all Ages, were not Members rightly admitted
into the Church of Christ: That not only the Papists, but all the Reformed
Churches in the World, are mistaken in this point; and that the Anabaptists are
the only True and Rightful Members of Christ's Body. He must be very weak and
notorously partial, who considers these things, and does not conclude that they
are a Sect that Separate from the True Church which God has owned in all Ages,
and not the True Visible Church of Christ. This I thought fit to mention in
Conjunction with other Arguments, by which many wavering minds have been
established in the Truth; and God grant there may be the like success to those
in the like case, who shall read them.

V. Those Excuses which men generally make for their not Receiving, are so far
from Justifying their Neglect, that they do not so much as extenuate it: Nay,
they exceedingly aggravate the Guilt of most Non-Communicants. The Truth is, no
Excuses must be made in such a weighty matter as the Sacrament is. There may be
Interruptions, but there must be no Excuses. An Interruption is when a man
really intends to receive the Sacrament, but somewhat happens by which he is
prevented, and it is a great trouble to his mind that he is so. It is with
Christians in this case, as it was with those Israelites which we read of Number.
9.6, 7. who being hindered from eating the Passover by the legal defilement of a
Dead Corpse, were extremely troubled and came to Moses to know what they should
do. There were certain men who were defiled by the dead body of a man that they
could not keep the Passover on that day: and they came before Moses and before
Aaron on that day; And those men said unto him, we are defiled by the dead body
of a man: wherefore are we kept back that we may not offer an offering of the
Lord in his appointed Season, among the Children of Israel. Observe how far
those men were from making Excuses for neglecting Gods Ordinance, in that they
were extremely troubled at an interruption which probably they could not help;
for he that was in a Tent in which a man dyed, or came into it, was unclean,
chap. 19.14. and continued so Seven-days. This being of great moment, Moses
said unto them, stand still and I will hear what the Lord will command
concerning you. And we read that God in that Case appointed that they should
keep the Passover the next Month. God allowed of the Interruption for that
time, but there must be no Excuse. We read Number. 9.13. that the man who was not
thus hindered, if he did not keep the Passover at the time appointed, The same
soul shall be cut off from his people, because he brought not the Offering of
the Lord on his appointed Season. A place of Scripture very fit for
Non-Communicants to consider, who if they have no Impediments will make Excuses
instead of them, they will pretend somewhat to be the cause of their Neglect
which is not really the cause; but the little regard which they have for the
Ordinances of their Religion is the cause of their Neglect. I shall first
consider what the General Excuses are, and then consider some more special
Cases.

1. Some pretend that the Solemninity of the Ordinance is the cause of their
Neglect: It is a very great Ordinance and they durst not adventure to make
their approach to it. I know that there are some very good Christians to whom
this is not an excuse, but is a real Cause of their absenting from the
Sacrament. They think that it is too great an Adventure for such as they are,
to come to their Lords Supper, although they are such as love him and do
sincerely desire and endeavor to keep his Commandments. What I have already
said, may give satisfaction in this Case, viz. That Humility and a Sense of
Unworthyness is a good qualification for a Communicant; and that as the
Sacrament is a great and Solemn Ordinance, so it is a very great Duty to
partake of it; and therefore Christians must take care that they do not
complement our Savior, but that the examine themselves, and reverently observe
his Institution. Great men do sometimes allow of such excuses when they make
Invitations, but the Great God commands when he invites, and there can be no
Neglect but it is a great sin, as I have already showed.

But this is not the Case I have now in hand: My design is to speak of those
who make this a Pretense for their Non-Communicating. They say the Sacrament is
a solemn Ordinance, and therefore they dare not come to it. But I would have
such persons to consider, whither they go when they turn away from this Solemn
Ordinance. If it be to their Lusts, and a continuance in a sinful course of
Life, their condition is unspeakably miserable. What an Affront is this to the
Great God and our Blessed Savior? I may say to them as the Apostle to the
Galatians, Be not deceived God is not mocked. The best that can be said, is;
That you do very reverently mock Christ and his Ordinance: You are afraid to
come to such a Solemn Ordinance, and you are not fit for it, and therefore you
rather choose to live in the breach of his Commandment, which you find your
selves more fit for: This is Hail Master: This is to Crucify Christ from a
Reverent respect to him. And as he is guilty of great Contempt of God under a
pretense of Reverence to him, so he is guilty of most prodigious Folly. O
foolish Non-Communicants who have bewitched you, that you should think to avoid
danger by neglecting a great and Solemn duty; that you should turn from the
Sacrament to the Commission of sin to avoid Damnation! The Scripture says He
that comitteth sin is of the Devil. The Non-Communicant absents from the
Ordinance of Christ, and goes to the Service of the Devil to avoid Damnation.

All men should consider, that the Solemnity of the Ordinance is as well a
great Reason why men should partake, as it is why they should prepare; because
it is an Argument that God expects the Observance of it, and that his heart is
the more set upon it. When Servants are negligent of their Duty, they hope to
come off best by neglecting that which they think to be of least moment. No man
ever said, I omitted my Duty, and I hope to be excused because it was a great
Command, and I was required to take great care in the observance of it. Let not
any therefore think, that the Solemnity of the Ordinance will be their excuse
for not observing it, but that it will be their great Condemnation.

2. A second Pretense, which is a consequent of the former, is, That men are
not prepared for it, and therefore they had better let it alone. I earnestly
desire such persons to consider that, 1. This can be no Plea, because they may
be prepared if they please. I know that there are a great many who would charge
the sin of Non-Communicating upon Almighty God, pretending that he must prepare
them for it; or else they cannot receive worthily. But let me tell the sinner,
that his Contempt of God which brings destruction to him is of himself. Though
no man can be prepared without the grace of God and the assistance of his holy
Spirit, yet this is not the Cause of his being unprepared, for God has
promised his Holy Spirit to them that ask it. And the Experience of every
sinner, who is not strangely hardened in his impiety, cells him that in this he
does exceedingly provoke God; because he knows that God is so far from being
wanting to him, that he does secretly solicit him to prepare, that he may
worthily partake, and he will not. That sinner is in a very evil condition, who
charges God of requiring that of him which he can by no means perform. 2. Your
not being Prepared is of it self a sin, and therefore it must not be pleaded
for a neglect of your Duty. This is to excuse one sin with another. It is as
well a Duty to prepare as to partake, and the Neglect of it is a sin which God
does as surely punish, Luke 12.47. That Servant that knew his Lords will, and
prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with
many Stripes. The man in the Gospel that came to the Feast without the Wedding
Garment was Speechless. No man must plead Unpreparedness; because he may be
prepared, and it is his sin if he be not. 3. This is is a mere Delusion of the
Devil, by which he would keep men secure in a sinful course of life. This is
not an Unpreparedness which brings grief and trouble to the mind, as it ought
to do; but it is a contented Unpreparedness. The People love to have it so. He
that searches the heart knows that the Language there, is, I have no mind to
be prepared; and that renders the condition of the Non-Communicant to be very
dreadful. 4. This Pretense is endless. Art thou Unprepared, when will it be
otherwise? The longer that any one Neglects the Sacrament, the more Unprepared
he is for it. There are many, who when they were young pleaded they were not
prepared, are prepared now; but it is to scoff at Religion, and to contemn all
that is Holy. And those that are not openly Profane are more unprepared than
they were, by an increase of the Love of the World, and the fixing of Evil
Habits. The Sacrament is an Ordinance which comes to pluck up Sin at the Roots,
and if that be kept off, Sin must needs grow apace. He that being desired to
receive the Sacrament pleads that he is Unprepared, may as well say that he
never intends to receive, for he is more Unprepared now than he was formerly,
and is like to be more Unprepared for the time to come than he is now.


But it may be some will plead, That though every one may prepare, and it is
his Duty so to do, and his Sin if he do not; yet the case of many is such that
they cannot find Time to prepare: There had need be some days set a part on
purpose for Preparation: What shall Servants do that work all the week from
Morning till Night, and have no more than time enough for the necessary
supports of Nature, that are forced to rise early and go to Bed Late? And what
shall those do that have nothing but from hand to mouth, must they for the sake
of the Sacrament suffer their Families to want? To this I must answer; that
every man has or may have Time enough to prepare without any prejudice to his
Worldly affairs; though the Servant does not steal time from his Master, nor
the poor man from the necessities of his Family, and that may appear if we
consider.

1. That which bespeaks a man to be a Worthy Communicant, is not so much his
particular Acts of Piety and Devotion, as the general Habit and Bent of his
Mind. The great Question is, whether a man really fears God, and whether he be
Spiritually minded? He that lives in known sins without Repentance and
Amendment of Life, and intends to continue so, cannot be prepared for the
Sacrament, though he spends never so much time in Religious Duties; because he
himself is not Religiously dissposed. If a man should for many Days and Weeks
abstain from Sinful Acts which he has been Guilty of, and if he should spend
as much time in Religious Services both public and private as preparatory to
the Sacrament, without a Resolution not to return to the same course of Life
again, it would not render him a Worthy Communicant. This were but for a Child
of the Devil to dress himself in the counterfeit habit of Gods Children, and
then to return to his Father again. This is a most certain Truth; He that is
Religious and Fears God in the General course of his Life, is more fit to
receive the Sacrament without any special Preparation for it, than the other
can be, how much time soever he sets apart in Order to his Receiving. His
comeing to the Sacrament would not be like the Disciples of our Lord who had
left all to follow him, and did by this Ordinance engage themselves to live and
dye in the Faith, and in Obedience to his Commandments; but like the Whore
which Solomon speaks of, who said, I have paid my Vows, therefore came I forth
to meet thee, etc. Prove. 7.14, 15. Some are so dissolute as to think, that
having Received the Sacrament, and spent some time to put themselves into a
good mood in Order to it, they shall easily obtain a Pardon for the time to
come, having made even with God for the time past. But as the Whore was a Whore
still for all her Vows, so this Wicked man remains a Wicked man still,
notwithstanding his Preparation and Communicating, And his Sacrifice was an
Abomination to the Lord. It is not enough for a man to say, I must not sin this
Week, but avoid Temptations, because I intend to Receive the Sacrament; but I
must change the habit of my Mind, I must become a New Creature, I must resolve,
that because I have done Iniquity, I will do no more, or else all the
Preparation that can be made will signify nothing. There is a great difference
in the Design of these Communicants. He that is Religious in the General course
of his Life, comes to the Sacrament that he may be kept from sin for the time
to come. He that is only Religious in Order to his Receiving, comes to it that
he may sin again with less regret of mind than he did before. The First is one
who desires that Christ may dwell in his heart, and bear rule in him: The Other
is one of those who now and then gives God an unwellcome Visit, and then
returns to dwell with his sins again. He must needs be an Unworthy Communicant,
that comes to the Sacrament that he may with the greater freedom serve his sin
after it. It Is not any particular Preparation, how much time so ever any one
has for it, that bespeaks a man to be a Worthy Communicant, if he be not
heartily resolved to become a good man.

2. There is no Time prefixed for preparation to Communicate, but men are left
to the grace of the Gospel and of the New Covenant. We read in the Old
Testament of a special Time which God appointed for Preparation, when the
People were to make their solemn approaches to him: When God appointed the
People to meet him upon the Mount he required two Days preparation, Exodus
19.15. When God sent a Summons to the Seventy Elders to appear before him, he
required a Days preparation. Say unto the People, Sanctify your selves
against to Morrow; and more Instances might be given. But under the Gospel God
accepts the Will for the deed. He that would spend time if it were his own, in
a solemn Preparation for the Sacrament, is as welcome to God as if he had
really spent so much time in order to his Receiving. Where Time is wanting,
there may be, and doubtless is a supply from the grace of God. Solomon says,
Prove. 16.1. The preparation of the heart is from the Lord. And it is not to be
doubted, but through the Grace of God, those who have but little time to
prepare, do receive as much to their comfort, and find as great benefit by it
as those who have spent more time in Preparation for it.

I know that some very Pious Ministers have so much insisted upon the spending
of some considerable Time as preparatory to the Sacrament, that they have
discouraged many good Christians from coming to it, who have not had time from
their unavoidable Occasions, to prepare themselves for it. I will readily
grant, that it is of great Concern, that those who intend to Communicate should
spend Time in preparing themselves, and the more they spend the more Comfort
and Satisfaction it is to them: But this must not discourage Servants and
others from Communicating who want time, and whose time is not properly their
own. The Scripture has given no Standard in this case; and from thence it is
that some very pious Christians from an humble Sense of their Unworthyness and
Unfitness to receive, think they have not spent Time enough in preparing, and
therefore they will stay till the next Communion; and when that comes they
still think they have not spent Time enough; and by this means the most Worthy
guests are kept from the Lords Supper. I would have such persons, and all that
are pious and devout Christians, to consider the case of the Corinthians before
mentioned. They had Received Unworthily and thereby provoked God to Anger: The
Apostle admonishes them to Examine themselves before they received again, but
he does not prescribe any Time that they should spend, nor does he tell them
that it would be Convenient for them to forbear coming to the Sacrament for
some time; But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and
drink of that Cup; when it is probable there was to be a Communion the next day.

3. It is possible that men in this case of Preparation may be over Righteous,
nay it is possible they may be Superstitious too. They are over-Righteous who
spend that time in preparation for the Sacrament, which they cannot spare from
necessary Occasions. If the Poor man neglects his family, or the Servant his
Masters business, though it be for the sake of the Sacrament; God may say to
them, who has required this at your hands?

Some may be Superstitious in their Preparations: Such as think they shall be
accepted of God according to the number of Meals which they have abstained
from; Or the Hours they have spent in Reading, Prayer or Meditation. Whereas,
as to the first, Abstinence in it self signifies nothing. It is only to be used
so far as it may keep the mind from being indisposed for that which is good.
And to some persons their Constitutions cannot bear fasting, and if they
abstain they are more indisposed than if they continue their wonted Meals. And
by numbering the Hours or Prayers (as Papists do) a man may place Religion
wrong, and all that he does in his Religious Service may be without that
Devotion of mind, which alone is acceptable to God and preparatory to this holy
Ordinance.

Let men take heed that they mistake not; and set bounds and measures where God
has set none. Let them not think, that unless they had so much Time for
Preparation, God will not accept of them, for God has made no such
appointments. It Is not Time allowed that is of absolute necessity, but a sincere
Desire and endeavor to obey the commands of our Savior that makes a man a
Worthy Communicant.

4. Let him that complains of the Want of Time take heed, that he does not
neglect that time he has or may have to spend in preparing for the Sacrament.
What man is there in the World who for some additional Advantages would not
find time to spare from his necessary occasions? There are many who will work
harder than ordinary for the sake of a little Liberty: Others to gain some
Profit and Advantage to themselves. Surely such persons, if they have a desire
to walk in the pleasant ways of Religion, may make have to dispatch their
business, that they may have a little time to Examine themselves, to bethink
themselves of the State of their minds, and how the great affairs stand
between God and their own Souls. They may find time to consider what Sins they
have to repent of, and heartily to beg Gods grace that they may escape them
for the time to come, and if they do so they are Worthy Communicants, though
they have had but little time for the dispatch of these great Concerns.

I cannot think there is any man so employed but he may find time in the
Morning and Evening to pray to God, and if he cannot make it a set Duty, and be
alone, and be undisturbed; Yet there may be Fervent Ejaculations, by which he
may lift up his heart to God, which God will hear and have a special regard
to: And by the Use of them his mind will be kept in such a Religious Frame and
Temper, that he will be a Worthy Communicant, and a welcome Guest at the Lords
Table.

5. Let those who make this Excuse, that they want time to prepare, consider
the ill consequences of Neglecting the Sacrament. They that complain they want
Time to prepare for the Sacrament, find time enough to commit those sins which
make them unfit for that or any other Religious Duties. Whatever business they
have to do, they find time to harden their hearts against God and against
Religion, so that no impressions of Good may be made in them. He that at first
thought he might not come, because he wanted Time to prepare, will afterward
refuse to come, though he has more time than he knows what to do with. Nay, he
will rather throw it away, and his Soul with it, by spending it in the Service
of the Devil, than in preparing, that he may be a Worthy Communicant.

There is another Pretense for Unpreparedness, and that is the Temptations
which attend the dispatch of necessary business. Men say they are forced to
converse with sinful men, and are unavoidably betrayed to that which is Evil,
and therefore it is in Vain for them to think of Preparing for the Sacrament. I
desire such to consider.

1. It may be they complain without a Cause, and that in dispatch of their
business, they are not Tempted to that which is really Evil. It may be this man
thinks, that he cannot Prepare because his business will unhinge the Devotion
of his mind, and put it out of that Religious Frame and Temper which he would
keep it in, if he intended to partake. He thinks that a man may not Receive the
Sacrament, unless he can for some time keep his mind so free from such
Encumbrances, as not to have a Thought of worldly Business entertained by him.
There is no Reason why this should hinder his Receiving. The lawful Dispatch of
Worldly business must not hinder men from the Sacrament, nor must the Sacrament
hinder men from the dispatch of Worldly business. We have no such Rule. If a
man spends that time with his Customers, which he intended to spend with God in
secret Devotion, and there has been Innocent Mirth, this is no Offense to God,
only it is Advisable that at his return he reduce his mind to Seriousness and
Devotion in order to his Receiving, and then he needs not fear but he shall be
welcome at the Lords Table. 2. If in the Dispatch of business men do that which
is really evil: If they defraud, or if they are guilty of Drunkeness (which is
become such a Concomitant with Trade, that there are a great many whom the
Devil will not suffer to dispatch their Business with their Customers, unless
they dispatch their business with him at the same time) and it happens some
days before the Sacrament; Let him repent and humble his soul to God, to think
that he has forgotten God and his own Soul at that time when he should have
prepared for the Blessed Sacrament. And if he be sincerely Penitent he need not
omit it. Nay, he has the more need to receive it, by how much he sees how
prone he is to fall into Temptations, that he may be kept from them. And if
this has happened a little before the Sacrament, and so near to it that he
cannot be satisfied of his Repentance, so as to come to the Sacrament the next
time of Administration, let him go to his Minister, and bewail the Cause of his
not Receiving: Let him think how happy they are that are Worthy Communicants,
and what a sad thing it is that he should do that, for the sake of which he
dare not appear at the Lords Table. But if this be the Case, that he has
Neglected to Receive, and hopes that this will excuse him; if he be not in the
snare of the Devil, and under the Dominion of Sin, I am sure no man in the
World is. He may as well speak plainly, and say, I love my sin better than the
Sacrament, and Sinful Companions better than Pious Communicants. And I suppose
these are the men, as well as others, who keep from the Sacrament to avoid
Damnation. 3. If Worldly Business brings men into ill Company, and is the
Occasion of Sin, let them make have to dispatch it, and tell the company that
they are to Communicate. Our Savior said, If any shall be ashamed of me before
men, of him will I be ashamed before my Father. He doubtless spoke it in
reference to the Derision with which Jews and Heathens thought to make men
ashamed of Christianity (which was the reason of the Cross in Baptism:) But in
Our age we had need make use of it to encourage one Christian, whom another
derides for observing the Institutions of our Savior. If there be any that are
so ashamed of Christ and his Ordinance, that they will rather go on to commit
sin for Company sake than give such a reason; they are Unworthy indeed: For it
appears plainly, that they are ashamed of the Sacrament, but not of their Sin.
The Sacrament was appointed to keep men from sin, but if they may not both be
entertained, the Sacrament must keep off. 4. Let these Persons consider what
manifest Contempt they cast upon all other Ordinances of Christ. They can go to
Prayers and Sermons all the year long, and it signifies nothing; but they can
go to their sinful Companions all the week after, and it may be on the Lords
day as soon as the Public Service is done; as if it were in Defiance of those
little things of Religion. They can confess their sins, and, instead of
forsaking, run to them as soon as they have done. They can pray to the Great
King of Heaven for Pardon, and make haste to Rebel again. They can hear what
the great God commands, and what he promises, and what he threatens, but it all
signifies nothing to them. Pharaoh and Ahab regarded more what Ministers said,
than the do. It Is only the Sacrament that they are afraid of, because they have
some Guilt and Fear which will not suffer them to make that approach to God,
which they think is nearer and more Solemn. This shows the Case of the sinner
to be very desperate. It appears plainly that he is resolved to live a sinful
Life, and that he will not have to do with Religion any farther than it shall
leave him Irreligious. Praying and Hearing are weak things which his Sin keeps
under, and does not suffer them to prevail to the subduing of it; and because
he looks upon the Sacrament to be of greater force, therefore he will not come
at it. 5. If this be the Case of the sinner it is never like to be otherwise.
This man does not intend to leave his Trade, and therefore he intends not to
Communicate. 6. Let all Persons consider that the more worldly Business any one
has, the more necessary it is that he should be a frequent Communicant. I
mention this, because many think that they who have most Leisure from worldly
business ought to be most frequent Communicants, and that it cannot be expected
from those that have many or great Concerns. This supposes that the Sacrament
is only an Ordinance which was appointed, that Christians should pay their
respects and acknowledgments to Christ by it, and not that it is appointed also
for the good of men's Souls, and to keep up in them a quick Sense of the Love of
Christ to them, and to preserve them from the Power of Temptations, which
hinders the growth of Grace and Piety. The Rich man or the man that has many
Worldly Concerns should say: I have more need to frequent the Sacrament than
others. I am in great danger of loving the World more than Christ, and he has
declared that he will not account such to be Worthy of him. I am in more
Danger, than others, of my heart being stolen away from God, and therefore I
will frequent that Ordinance, that my Riches or the Desire of them may not
ruin me. He that pleads Business and neglects the Sacrament, does plainly
declare that the World is uppermost in his esteem, and that the Sacrament must
not be regarded, but when the World will give way to it.
To Conclude this; Let me tell every such Pretender, that he casts a most
manifest slight and Contempt upon the Sacrament. If the King should send for
him, and he were afraid of his displeasure, neither Business nor Company must
hinder, but that Christ commands his attendance is a little thing to him. If
any news were brought to him of an Estate or Legacy, or any great Worldly
advantage, business and company must give way; but the Sacrament is only the
concern of his Soul, and therefore it may be let alone.

3. There is another general Pretense, and that is the danger of Relapsing.
There are many who would receive the Sacrament, but they are afraid they should
fall into sin again. Let such Persons consider, 1. Their Case is very dangerous
whilst they neglect it. It is the Spiritual Food of the Soul. Men do not
forbear their nourishment for fear it should breed diseases. It is the Souls
Physic to purge away sin. Men do not refuse a Remedy for fear of a Relapse. He
that pleads this does not consider the Necessity of Communicating, but only the
Danger which may be to him that Receives. 2. It is not expected that any can
wholly avoid Temptations to sin after they have received, but that they should
be the more careful to avoid them. And that they should not allow themselves in
them, but repent and amend. If men could be so holy as this Pretense supposes,
no man should need to receive above once. But the Sacrament is appointed to be
a continued Means by which men are more and more enabled against their
Corruptions, which supposes a continued Contest, but not an absolute Victory.
Every man may resolve, that he will for the time to come strive against his
sin, and whenever his Conscience accuses him of sinful Compliances, that he
will repent and beg Gods Pardon: and Gods Grace to withstand it for the time
to come; and this every man must do that expects Salvation, tho he were not
required to receive the Sacrament; and if he do so, he is a Worthy Communicant.
3. Those that enter upon a Religious Life, and resolve to come to the
Sacrament, upon serious debates, have no cause to be Discouraged by the fear of
Relapses. If indeed a man comes to the Sacrament upon a sudden Fit, in hope
that it will remove some particular Trouble from him, and so make it an
Experiment only, and sin after he has Received; this is no Relapse into Sin,
for he never came off from it. But those who from a serious consideration of
their Duty, and of their danger whilst they Neglect their Duty for the sake of
their Sin, do resolve to enter into a new course of Life, and with serious
Resolutions and hearty Prayers for Gods Grace and Blessing, come to the
Sacrament, they need not fear but they shall persevere in the ways of
Religion. For 1. The Grace of God will not be wanting to them. 2. Those
Arguments which induced them to be Religious, will continue and be of no less
force for their Perseverance in the Practice of Religion. Such a man cannot
say, that when he began to be Religious he did not well consider to what end he
should be so, and therefore upon second thoughts he finds it best to go back
again. 3. The Pleasure of Religion will continue and increase. No man has
cause to say, it is such an uncouth and unpleasant thing to be Religious that I
had better leave it off: He cannot say the Non-Communicant who slights
Religion, and avoids the thoughts of his own condition, has more pleasure in
his mind than he that Examines himself, and so eats of that Bread, and Drinks
of that Cup. These things considered, there is no such danger of Relapsing as
the Non-Communicant is afraid of. 4. The good Success of Communicating shows
that there is no such great danger. It may be said indeed, that there are some
who are Communicants who live sinful Lives, but this is no reason why any
should keep from the Sacrament for fear of relapsing into such practices;
Because it is too probable that such Persons receive the Sacrament, chiefly from
their regard to the Profession of Christianity, and because it is the Duty of
every Christian, and not that they may be the more Holy and Religious. This is
a great Reason why you should Communicate from Principles of true Piety, but no
reason why you should fear relapsing, because they never relapsed but are the
same that ever they were. He that suggests this to keep men from the Sacrament,
knows the contrary. If there were such a Probability of revolting from God, he
would not be so busy to keep men from engaging themselves to him. Where there
is one sinner that perishes by returning to sin, there are thousands that
perish because they never began to be Religious.


These are the Pretenses by which men turn their backs upon their Savior. By
these do men gratify the great Enemy of their Salvation. These are his Devices
by which he gets Advantage against men. By these he cheats men of the greatest
Pleasures in this Life, and of Pleasures for ever more in the Life to come.

God of his Infinite Mercy grant, that Non-Communicants may consider of it, how
much they have Neglected their Duty and their Benefit: What Dishonor they have
occasioned to the Christian Religion, and What Destruction they are bringing to
themselves, whilst they foolishly think they are avoiding it. There never was
a Pretense, nor ever shall he, that will serve a man's turn for the Neglect of
his duty. God has made the way plain before every man, and if he turns out of
it, it is because he is resolved he will not walk in it. The Sacrament is a very
cheap and not a costly Sacrifice. No man is the Poorer, but every man may be
the Richer for it. God requires nothing of any man in order to his Observance
of it but what he may do, and if he neglects to do this in Remembrance of his
Savior, he cannot expect to be remembered by him in his Heavenly Kingdom.

FINIS.

