A New Catechism, Wherein many Truths are plainly opened by way of Question and
Answer, which may be a help and furtherance unto all tender hearted people, who
are breathing after the Lord, and waits for Redemption and Salvation by Jesus
Christ. ALSO, Something concerning the Foundation and Principle of the poor
afflicted people of God (called Quakers) and of their Faith and Love toward
God, and their good Will unto Men, being also plainly demonstrated by way of
Question and Answer. Given forth in the labor of Love, and put to View for the
Service of this present Generation, and also Generations to come.

William Smith.

Printed in the Year, 1665.

There is also Reprinted a PRIMMER Wherein is demonstrated The New and Living
Way; Held forth by way of Question and Answer, as from a Child's Enquiry after
Truth; to be informed by the Father.

Here being diverse particulars Answered, and plainly opened, that may be
profitable both in this present Age, and Ages to come.

Published for the benefit of all sorts of people and-may be very serviceable
for every Family, and of great use for young Children to learn in, so soon as
they can understand their Language, that they in the fear of God may be
instructed, and remember their Creator in the days of their Youth.

Other Foundations can no man lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ.

Behold, I write unto you both Old and Young, that you may know the Truth, and
that the Truth may make you free.

For which I Travel, enduring Affliction for the Truths sake, WILLIAM SMITH.


The Primer or Catechism may be had either Bound together, or a part.

An Epistle to the Reader.
Reader,
THou art to understand, that the natural man can neither see nor receive the
things of the Spirit of God, for they are Spiritually discerned, and it is the
Spiritual mind that is only in a capacity to receive and understand those
things which by the Spirit is declared and made manifest, for the Spirit is the
key by which Divine truths are opened, and by the intelligence of it they also
come to be understood, and the testimony which has been published and held
forth unto the precious truth of God in these latter days, has been
abundantly spread abroad, by the Spirits, Power and demonstration, through the
faithful and chosen witnessess of the New birth, unto whom the Lord God
everlasting, has revealed his secrets, and open the mysteries of glorious
kingdom; and has given unto them the tongue of the learned, and the power and
wisdom of his heavenly life, whereby they are able to divide the word aright,
and to dispense the Gospel of everlasting peace, and they have faithfully
served the Lord in their generation, and have not been negligent to run the way
of his commandments, but early and late have labored in their holy calling
whereunto the Lord has called them in the work of the Gospel, and their
testimony does stand for God this day, and is become a sweet Savor in the
hearts of many, and that glorious truth which so plentifully has been poured
forth by the holy Spirit of God, and so wonderfully is spread abroad through
the testimony of his faithful Servants, it does stand and remain as a sure
record which cannot be raced out, and though it might be sufficient to clear
the Lords faithful servants on their own behalf, as also to leave all people
without excuse, who hitherto have shut their hearts against it, yet such is
Gods tender love, that he continues his favors and goodness, and in the
openings of himself in the riches of his mercy, he fills his children and
servants with an overflowing cup of his precious virtue, which yet does
constrain them to make known the true and perfect way of peace, and to
proclaim the word of eternal life unto the Sons and Daughters of men, and
though many have walked unworthily, and have requited the Lord unkindly, yet
does his compassion move to his own begotten that sits in desolate and
sollitary places, as a babe without comfort, and in the virtue of his own life
he keeps his testimony fresh upon the hearts of his messengers, and they run in
his power and are not weary, and walks in his love and are not faint; but
continues in their race of well doing though many faces have ever been set
against them: therefore whosoever thou art that reads in this book, consider
the end of its manifestation, for it is not published to be only seen and
read, but to manifest the truth as it is in Jesus, which thou art to weigh and
ponder in the fear of God, for the matter in this book does lie out of sight
to the carnal eye, and the matter cannot be understood by reading the words
only, but by taking heed to the measure of Gods Spirit in thee, for if thou
do not read with the Spirit of God in thee, thou cannot understand the matter
in the words, though thou may read them over and over; for whosoever would come
to the true knowledge of God they must come to the measure of his Spirit
themselves, or otherwise they may read but reap no profit, and so the
Scriptures have been read and heard, but the Spirit not being minded in those
that read and hear, there is not an understanding of the matter of which the
words testify, and so the the book is sealed though the words be read and
heard, (mark that) for there is not another way to come to the true knowledge
of God, but through death to that part which would comprehend him, and though a
faithful testimony may be published by words and writings, yet cannot any
thereby come to the knowledge of God, for God is not so to be comprehended,
therefore it concerns every one that comes into the world to mind the light
of Christ, with which they are enlightened, and to wait in it for the
Revelation of God; for there is none knows the Father but the Son, and he to
whom the Son reveals him, and whosoever would compass the knowledge of God in
any other way, or by any other thing, they can never come to a true knowledge
of him; for where the will and desire is let at liberty to the comprehending of
God and Christ, there the mind overruns the true light in which the secrets of
God are opened and revealed, and though words and writings may in themselves be
true, yet none can profit by them, but as they join to that of God in
themselves, for the secrets of God cannot be any otherwise known or attained,
but as there is a patient waiting in that which opens, by it to be gathered
into the nature of that which is opened, and whosoever increass knowledge by any
other way, it is the veil which spreads over their hearts, and blinds their
minds for beholding the appearance of God in his light and life, and though
such as so gather knowledge may seem wise in what they kn^w, and in their
knowledge satisfy themselves, and esteem themselves to be the highest; yet
notwithstanding they are as strangers unto the heavenly mysteries of the
glorious Kingdom, for though the natural man may hear all words, and read all
writings which from the life is declared, yet is the mystery hid from his eyes,
and by how much he searches in his own wisdom to know, and strives with that
part to comprehend the mystery in the words declared; by so much the more does
he thicken the veil upon his understanding, and th^ugh a man may fill himself
with such a knowledge, and by his curious searching gather and compass much
riches, yet it is no more but enriching the false birth; and exalting it with
pride in the apprehension of its riches; and though such a man persuade himself
that he knows all things, yet he knows nothing as he ought to know, neither is
he any more but as sounding Brass, and a tinkling Cymbal; and there is no
greater danger then to fall into this Sea of Knowledge, and to be tossed about
with its restless waves; for it is as possible to number the Stars in the
Firmament, as for a man that swims in the Sea of Knowledge to be at rest. So,
Reader, this learn to understand, that the way of God is not as the way of man;
and it is most certain, that he which seeks riches by his own knowledge, he runs
in his own way, and the end of that way is death, but the way of God is life
and peace, and there is none can find it with all their searching and
comprehending, but by quiet and patient waiting, whereby man comes to feel the
light of Christ with which he is enlightened, and so comes down into the
humility, and into the poverty, where the light stops his wanderings and
runnings, and prevents him for walking in his own way, and with the light he
comes to see the danger that he is in, and so comes to stand still in silence,
in which man being contented, and waiting patiently upon God, the light will
turn him from his own way, and the cunning devices of his own heart, and bring
him into the new and living way, and there will become his leader and teacher,
and so lead him in the cross to his own Will, Wisdom, and Reason, the power of
God which is the cross of Christ, will strike over it, and cross it, and yoke
it down, and so he will be humbled to the death of the Cross, where to his own
wisdom he will become a fool, and to his own riches he will become poor, and
there dye the death to his own life, and then the babe rises up in the power,
and the secrets of God is with it, and that is the great gain of godliness,
when man is drawn out of himself, and comes to Christ, in whom is all the
treasures of wisdom and true knowledge, and in whom the fullness of the Godhead
dwells bodily; this is true translation out of the earthly into the heavenly,
where the babe knows the Father, and sits in the feeling of his presence with
joy, and there it is truly contented with what it has, and waits in patience
to receive what it has not, and whether it have more or less, it is contented,
and covets not beyond the fathers giving; and here is immortal food which
satisfies the immortal soul, which never can be compassed or gained in man's own
way, so to die is the greatest gain, and to become a fool, poor and nothing, is
the way to be truly wise, rich, and possess all things, and through this
strait gate, and in this narrow way is perfect peace and rest for ever.

And now, Reader, be thou diligent to understand what thou read, and
consider thy present state, that thou may not secure thy self in thy own way as
if there was no danger, and take up thy rest before thou have passed through
death, there is that in thee which would save its life, and will reason
strongly to defend it, but if thou love that life and seek to save it, thou
looses life eternal, therefore be considerate, the matter is weighty, and do
not deceive thy self through thy own belief, nor do not wrong thy self with a
vain hope, as if all should be well hereafter, but wait to understand what the
power of God has done for thee, and what thou have denied in pure love to God,
for if thou do not follow Christ in the daily Cross, thou art not his Disciple,
and if not a Disciple, then not an heir of God, nor a joint heir with Christ of
the heavenly inheritance, therefore please not thy self with thy own
comprehensions, as if thou had compassed God and Christ with thy own wisdom,
but consider whether thou be regenerated and born again of incorruptible seed,
and whether thou sit in the joy of Gods salvation, and whether thou have thy
portion in his Kingdom, this is weighty for thee to consider; for if in some
measure this be not fulfilled in thee, and witnessed by thee, in deed and in
truth, thy latter end will be bitterness if thou continue in thine own way, and
then thy fair sayings will not help thee, nor thy wealth and riches comfort
thee, when the Lord says, Depart from me. Therefore bow to the day of the Lord
in thy Conscience, that thou may feel Christ to conquer the restless part in
thee, and to subject the worker of iniquity; and do not outstand the tenders of
Gods love unto thee, but when he calls do thou hearken, and when he reproves do
thou obey, and when he commands do thou follow, and then, where ever he leads
thee, he will be with thee, and in all thy afflictions he will comfort thee,
and with his arm of power he will support thee, and out of all thy troubles he
will deliver thee, and there thou will know him and feel him beyond thy own
wisdom and reason, and he will make thee run when thy reason would stop thee,
and will be ready to save thee when the enemy tempts thee, and so thou will
know him a God at hand, if thou be faithful to his council, therefore fear
before him, and submit unto him, whilst his love is to thee, for he is God, and
there is not another, who can see him, and live? who can stand before him and
not be consumed? who can eat of the tree of life and not die by the flaming
Sword? All flesh is grass, and the height of all its glory must pass away; but
who are born of the seed immortal, they shall prosper unto a fair stature in
Christ, and in him live for ever. So do thou mind the light and power of God in
thy Conscience, and read in meekness and fear, and the truth in thy inward
parts will answer to the truth of what thou read, for truth is but one in
all, and it answers to its own as face answers face in a glass; and if thou
with the truth in thee, read the testimony without thee, thou will feel a
perfect closing with the matter in unity, for in the truth there is neither
error nor deceit, but a plain, simple, harmless, upright life in all godly
sincerity, in which thou feeling thy heart disposed, thou will both read and
profit; and if so it come to pass concerning thee, give God the praise and
glory, and therein the labor of my love will have true rejoicing, who seeks
the good and welfare of all men, and the glory of God alone.

Notingham County Goal, 1664. W. S.

A New CATECHISM etc.
Quest. HOw does God manifest himself unto man, so as man may know him to be
what he is?

A.sw. By opening himself in his love, whereby his own light breaks forth
from himself, in which he manifests himself unto man, to be what he is.

Q. What is that light, by which God manifests himself unto man?

A. That light is Christ, who is one with God.

Q. But is the light of Christ, one with God in nature?

A. Yes, for God is light, and the light is one with his nature.

Q. How does Christ manifest the nature of God?

A. In his light and life, in which he is the brightness of the Fathers glory,
and the express image of his person.

Q. And where is such a manifestation of God to be known?

A. It is to be known within man.

Q. Does God manifest himself within man?

A. Yes, and man cannot know him by any other way, but by the manifestation of
himself in his light within him.

Q. And has every man such a light within him, by which God does manifest
himself unto him?

A. Yes, for every man that comes into the world is enlightened by Christ.

Q. And is that the true light with which every man is enlightened?

A. Yes, it is the true light, for it is the light of Christ.

Q. And is there not another way to come to the knowledge of God, but by that
light within?

A. Nay, there is not, for Christ is the light, and Christ is the way, and all
other ways leads from God.

Q. How may it be known that the light does come from God, and that God does
manifest himself in it?

A. Because the light is pure, holy, just and righteous, which is the nature of
God.

Q. But how may it be known in such a manifestation of its purity?

A. By its checking, convincing, and reproving for sin, and every evil thought
word, and work, which man in the fall has a love unto, and pleasure in.

Q. But is that which checks and reproves man in his conscience for his sin,
the true light of Christ?

A. Yes, for there is nothing else within man that will check or reprove him so
sin and evil.

Q. But may it not be a natural light within man that has such reflections upon
him for his sin and evil, as to convince and reprove him for it?

A. It is the natural light of Christ but not of man in the fall, for there his
nature is corrupted, and the powers of darkness has dominion over him, and
that is the nature from which all sin and evil is committed; and that nature
which commits sin, will never convince or reprove for it; for if it was so, it
would be against it self, and therefore it must needs be, that it is the light
of Christ which convinces and reproves for sin, because in him there is no sin,
and the sin is committed in another nature, and is against him, which with his
light he reproves, as being against him, and so it is a natural light from
Christ, which reproves the natural man in the fall.

Q. But has man at any time known God as he is God, by that light which is
within him?

A. Yes, for the Apostle said, The light which shines in our hearts, gives us
the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, and
so he has been known, and is known, according to the measure of light manifest
in Christ within man.

Q. And is there any thing in man that is of a contrary nature to the light,
which does oppose it, and by which man is veiled from the knowledge of God?

A. Yes, there is darkness in man, in which the seed of enmity lodges, which
does oppose the light, and vailes man from the knowledge of God.

Q. How is darkness and light in opposition one to the other?

A. In their several workings, according to their natures; for darkness leads
to that which is evil, and the light leads to that which is good, and so they
are in opposition one to the other, for when the darkness works unto sin, the
light reproves it, and when the light works unto good, the darkness opposes
it in enmity.

Q. And does the Election and Reprobation stand in the Natures or Seeds of
light and darkness?

A. Yes, it does so, for the seed of light is Christ, whom God has elected and
chosen before the foundation of the world, and the seed of darkness is the
Devil and enmity which is reprobated for ever.

Q. And did Jacob and Esau signify the nature of these seeds, in which the
Election and Reprobation stands?

A. Yes, they did so, for Jacob was of the true seed of Abraham, the father of
the faithful, unto whom God sealed his Covenant, and to his seeds seed for
ever; and Esau was of the seed of Enmity, and so was out of Gods Covenant
Reprobated.

Q. How did Jacob and Esau stand in the sight of God whilst they were in the
womb, seeing that before they were born, or had done either good or evil, Jacob
was loved of God, and Esau hated?

A. They stood in their natures or seeds in which each was conceived, and
though both in Rebekahs womb as twins, yet the one was of flesh, the other of
spirit, and Esau being of the flesh, he was out of Gods Covenant, and Jacob
being the true seed, he was in Gods Covenant; so Jacob was in the Election and
God loved him, but Esau was in the reprobation and God hated him, and thus God
beheld them in the womb before they had done either good or evil, that his own
purpose according to Election might stand.

Q. And has these natures or seeds been in every man through all generations?

A. Yes, they have so, for they signified two natures or people, and so Nation
has been against Nation in man through all generations, in the natures of the
two seeeds.

Q. What is the state and condition of people that remain in the fall, and
abides in the transgression?

A. A state of trouble and vexation of Spirit.

Q. What dispensations must people pass through to come unto peace and rest in
God?

A. They must pass through the dispensation of the Law and the Prophets, unto
Christ the substance, in whom is rest and peace eternal.

Q. What is the Law in it self?

A. It is holy, spiritual, just and good.

Q. Is not that which is holy, spiritual, just and good, a dispensation in
which peace and rest is enjoyed?

A. As it comes to be fulfiiled by Christ it is, but the dispensation of it, as
it is the Law, is not, for the Law makes nothing perfect, and there can be no
true rest and peace, but in that which is perfect and makes perfect.

Q. What then does the administration of the Law serve unto, if it make nothing
perfect?

A. It serves as a Schoolmaster to bring unto Christ.

Q. How is it as a Schoolmaster in its administration?

A. In correcting and judging the transgressour, and instructing and teaching
in righteousness, for the Law was added because of transgression.

Q. Is not Christ manifest through the dispensations of the Law and and the
Prophets?

A. According to that dispensation unto which they serve, he is so, but it is
but darkly as in a glass.

Q. How must the Law and the Prophets be passed through to come unto Christ who
fulfills them.

A. By observing the Statutes and Ordinances that is therein contained, whereby
there is a going forward to the more full enjoyment of the perfection of
Christ, who fulfills the Law and the Prophets, in the more glorious appearance
of his own fullness and perfect life.

Q. Is the administration of the Law in force in this present age?

A. Yes, it is in force to take hold upon all transgressors, and it is
Ministered in justice against the transgressour, which erres from the Statutes
and Ordinances that is therein contained.

Q. But are not people in this age under a Gospel administration, and are they
to be brought back again under the Law?

A. They that have not passed thorough the administration of the Law in
themselves, they are not under a Gospel administration, and therefore they
cannot be brought back again, because they never went forward, but they are to
be brought into that which hitherto they have not known nor understood, for a
Gospel administration barely professed will not do people any good, and so it
is that many in this age looks over the Law as an administration below their
profession, and that the Law was a more proper administration in ages past, and
more particularly to the Jews, not understanding that it has its proper
administration in man, whilst sin and transgression remains in him, and so it
is in as full force in this age, upon all transgressors, as ever it has been
in ages past; for whosoever in this age that does offend in one point of it,
they will be found guilty of all, and the judgment will take hold to the
correcting of the guilty, for God will by no means clear the guilty.

Q. And is the throne of judgment set up under the Law to judge and condemn
the transgressors of the Law?

A. Yes, it is so, that every man might fear the Lord God, who gives forth his
Law in man to be kept and not to be broken.

Q. But is it possible that man can keep the Law in all things, and not offend
in any thing, or that he can perform the requirings of God in that
dispensation as it is a Covenant of works.

A. If there was not a possibility on man's part to keep it, then it would seem
hard that the Lord should command it and require it, and for not keeping it to
judge and condemn for it: and there was some in ages past, that walked before
the Lord with perfect hearts, and that under the administration of the Law, but
the shortness of observing or man's part is the weakness and unprofit ableness
of the flesh, so that he many times cannot do the things that he would, and
therein the first Covenant is found faulty, not in it self, but in the sinful
flesh; and if it had not been so concerning the observing of the first
Covenant, there could not be place for the second, and therefore the works of
the first Covenant does not obtain life and salvation, but the free grace in
the second Covenant, that all people might dye to themselves according to the
flesh, and live unto God according to the spirit, that so life and salvation
may not be of works but by Grace, in the rich mercy of God through Jesus
Christ, who in his full and glorious appearance in man is the end of the Law
for righteousness, and brings life and immortality to light by the Cospel, and
then there is no more servitude or bondage under the Law, because of the
weakness of the flesh, but redemption wrought by the power of Christ from under
it, into a more perfect state of freedom and liberty in his own life.

Q What is signified by the Prophesies?

A. The nearer approaching or drawing nigh of Christ in his own fullness and and
perfect life, that whereas he has been seen but darkly, as in a glass, under
the Law, he may be seen with open face in the complete beauty of his own glory
in the Cospel.

Q Of what service are the Scriptures as they are given forth and recorded
without?

A. Much every way unto those that have received the same Spirit from which
they were givenforth, for unto such they are profitable, and makes wise unto
salvation, and are unto them of service for instruction, edification and
comfort, the same Spirit in them receiving the Testimony of the Spirit as it is
declared in the Scripture, and there is an agreement and union in the Spirit
within, and also in the words without, and so there is instruction, edification
and comfort by the Scriptures unto all that are in the same Spirit as gave them
forth.

Q. But are they of no further service then only a Testimony of those things
which was present in that time?

A. So much of them as was given forth by the holy men of God, through the
inspiration of the Almighty, they testify of Christ, who was, and is, and is
to come, and that is only their service in their place, that through the
Testimony therein declared unto Christ, all people might come unto him, and
have life.

Q. By what does Christ manifest his life, so as that it may be known to be his
life?

A. By his light he manifests it, and as the light is received by which it is
manifest, so is life received in it.

Q. Is the light and the life distinct Principles?

A. Nay, the light is Christ, and the life is Christ, and they are not distinct
Principles, but he is known to be light in manifesting, and life in quickening.

Q. What is the administration of Christ in the appearance of his own fullness
and perfect life?

A. An administration of love, grace, and mercy.

Q. And does he appear to salvation in that administration of his love, grace
and mercy?

A. To as many as receives him in that appearance, he becomes their salvation,
but such as reject him, he is their condemnation.

Q. Is not that administration universal to salvation?

A. The manifestation of it is universal unto all, but unbelievers have no part
in it, as an administration to salvation.

Q. What is his administration in that appearance of love, grace, and mercy,
unto such as reject him?

A. An administration of Judgment, to cut down and destroy the worker of
iniquity, and the gainsaying and rebellious nature.

Q. How does he appear in love and judgment, in one and the same administration?

A. He appears in love to the tender breathings which simply thirsts after
him, and in judgment to the obstinate and rebellious nature, that stands in
opposition against him.

Q. How is this administration of the love, grace, and mercy of Christ to be
attained?

A. By his light in the conscience, for the light is manifest from his love and
life, and guids up to his love and life all that obey it in its manifestation.

Q. How does the light manifest it self in order to the attainment of life?

A. It manifests it self against all that in man, which alienates him from the
life.

Q. How is man alienated from the life?

A. By the power of darkness which rules in him, and leads him captive.

Q. What is captivity?

A. The bondage of the seed of God.

Q. What is that which causes bondage and captivity upon the seed of God?

A. The seed of the evil doer, and the generation of its unclean nature, from
which is produced all the heart lusts with which the holy seed of God is
oppressed and burdened.

Q. But does the light of Christ in the Conscience make manifest the ground of
bondage?

A. Yes, for the ground of bondage is darkness, and the light makes darkness
manifest, and appears against it, and all the deeds of it.

Q. What is the state of man in bondage?

A. A state of grief, sorrow, pain, anguish, tribulation, distress, sighing,
mourning, crying, complaining, heaviness and groaning.

Q. Is that the state of all people that are alienated from the life of Christ?

A. Yes, for man in the fall and in the apostasy is under the power of darkness
and all the evil deeds of darkness gender together in a body, and that is the
body of sin and death that lies upon him, and the seed of God travels in pain
under it and groans to be delivered.

Q. But are not some people joyful whilst they are alienated from the life of
Christ?

A. the seed of the evil doer may rejoice over the seed of God, but that joy is
bondage, and it is a joy that must come into mourning, and end in sorrow, and
in the midst of that joy there is sometimes a sense of trouble and pain.

Q. What are the deeds of darkness particularly, that do oppress and burden the
seed of God?

A. Fornication, uncleanness, laciviousness, inordinate affections, evil
concupisence, covetousness, drunkenness, pride, anger, malice, envy,
witchcraft, hatred, variance, strife, foolish jesting, vain communication,
vain thoughts, idle words, praying in the will of the flesh, preaching in the
wisdom below, self-righteousness, with all other things which are acted by the
motion of the flesh, which are all of a contrary nature to the pure and holy
seed of God, and is the oppression and burden of it.

Q. But how may such people know when they live in such things which does
burden and oppress the seed of God?

A. By the light of Christ in the Conscience, for the light does make them
manifest, and also reproves them.

Q. And does the light of Christ make such discoveries in the consciences of
people?

A. Yes, for there is never a secret thought but the light shows it; if the
heart intend any evil, it is seen in the intention, and that which makes such
discoveries is the light, for the light makes all things manifest (mark) all
things, and if all things, then there is not any thing that is hid from it; and
so people may know when there is an inclination or an intention in their hearts
to do any thing that they should not do, they sometimes are sensible that they
should not intend that which they do, and will say, They should not have such
thoughts and intentions as is stirring in them, and so they see in secret what
they incline unto, and many times are secretly convinced of the vil of their
own intentions and inclinations, and are stopped from doing that which they
have an intention to do; and that which thus secretly discovers, and secretly
convinces, it is the light of Christ, and so the compassion of God manifests it
self in the light, and he reaches to the oppressor with rebuke, and to the
oppressed in love and mercy.

Q. What is the ground of the manifestation of the light by which such
discoveries are made?

A. The ground of its manifestation is the love of God, for he would not that
any should perish; and all people in the fall are in a perishing state, and
therefore he manifests his light to convince and reprove the sinner in his way,
that he may turn from his way and live; and hereby he is manifest to be a God
gracious and merciful, in that he would not the death of a sinner, but shows
the sin to the sinner, and reproves him for it, that he might forsake it and
find mercy.

Q. But can man be freed from sin whilst he is in the body?

A. Yes, if he love the light which reproves it, the light will free him from
it; for in the light there is no sin, and therefore they that join to the light
which reproves sin, they with the light are guided out of sin, and so they come
from under Satan's power which is the ground of sin, unto the power of God which
takes the sin away, and thereby the Conscience comes to be purged and cleansed
from all iniquity and sin, and the righteousness of Christ comes to be revealed
in a new life.

Q. But is not the grace of God free by Jesus Christ, and has not Christ
accomplished the work of salvation by himself alone?

A. The grace of God is free by Jesus Christ, and in his light it is freely
manifest, and therein it appears unto all, and brings salvation unto all that
receives it, and so it may be felt what Christ accomplishes for salvation by
himself alone, which will not fall to an unbelievers part, either as to what he
has done, or is doing, in those that believe in him.

Q. But if there be a believing in Christ for Salvation, does not his Salvation
belong unto such without any thing done on their part.

A. Christ is the Author of Faith, and there is none can truly believe until
he give them Faith in his power, and he does not give Faith to any but such as
obeyes his light, and therefore such as applis Salvation by Christ through
their own belief of what he has accomplished for Salvation, they are not in
the Faith which saves, but contrariwise are in the unbelief to his light and
power, in which he brings Salvation, by the resurrection of his life.

Q. How does the light within man manifest it self in order to Salvation.

A. It manifests it self against the darkness, and all the deeds of it, it
finds out all wandering thoughts, and vain immaginations, so that man may see
with the light that is within him, when the darkness tempts him, and when the
lusts of the flesh are moving to any evil; and thus does the light within man
manifest it self in order to Salvation.

Q. And is the light an universal manifestation unto all men.

A. Yes, And that without respect of persons.

Q. And is the love of God universally tendered unto all in such a manifestation.

A. Yes, For the light being manifest from the love, it tendres it self in the
manifestation.

Q. And is the love received by all unto whom it is so tendered?

A. Nay, for many reject the light, and will not become subject to the reproof
of it, and they that do so, they do not receive the love which in that
manifestation is tendered unto them.

Q. But is there any thing that lies on man's part in order to his salvation?

A. Yes, he is to obey the light and follow it, and then the light will teach
him to deny himself, and to take up the daily Cross.

Q. And does the light work in order to salvation if man obey it and follow it?

A. Yes, for he that obeyes the light and follows it, he does not abide in
darkness, but comes to the light of life.

Q. Has man power in himself to turn to the light, and to obey it, and follow
it?

A. Nay, of himself he can do nothing that is good, nor turn from any thing
that is evil, but if he stand still when the light reproves him, he there
answers it in obedience, as not joining with that which the light reproves him
for, and so by giving diligence to the reproof, and standing still when
reproof comes, he is there in obedience to it, and then the love which is
tendered in that manifestation, it casts it self about him, and with its
strength it separates him from the sin, and begets a dislike in him unto it, so
that he begins to abhor the appearance of it, and then in the strength of the
love, he turns from the power of Satan unto the power of God, where the light
becomes his leader and teacher, in the way of peace, so that Salvation is in
the light alone, and not by any thing which is done by man of himself, yet the
light requires man to yield himself unto it, and yiedling himself unto it, he
answers the requirings of it in obedience, and so becomes a servant to the
light in all things.

Q. What does the light work when man so yields himself to serve it?

A. It then rises in power, and is felt to be powerful to the pulling down the
strong hold of sin, and unthroaning the powers of darkness, whereby the
unclean corrupted nature comes to be crucified, and fleshly lusts condemned,
and so the burdens, weights and loads are removed, under which man has
traveled and groaned.

Q. But is the light sufficient to save man from all sin, and to present him
holy and blameless before God?

A. Yes, it is so, and they that love it knows it to be so, for the light is
Christ and all power in heaven and earth is given unto him, and there is
nothing impossible with him, nor too hard for him, if man do not reject him
and rebel against him.

Q. And does the power in its rising work contrary to man's own will, wisdom,
and reason.

A. Yes, for the power is the Cross unto the will, wisdom and reason of man,
and in all things works as a cross unto that nature, and stops it, and
chains it, and yoaks it down when it would be at liberty.

Q. And is that work of the power unto Salvation?

A. Yes, if it be obeyed that the opposer do not quench it, it puts a
difference between the precious and the vile, and so rises as a hammer and
knocks down the vile, and takes hold on it as a fire and burns it up, and so
man comes into the furnace where God is a consuming fire.

Q. But can any abide the day of his coming in such a dispensation?

A. Yes, some there be that do abide it, who loves not their lives unto death,
but trusts in the Lord though he kills them.

Q. And is Salvation wrought through such a dispensation of Christ?

A. Yes, for he is terrible whilst the wicked stand in his sight, and reveals
himself in flaming fire to execute vengeance upon the rebellious nature, for
his appearance unto Salvation is in judgment against all, and upon all, that
would not that he should reign.

Q. And does Christ work this work in man?

A. Yes, for sin is within man, and there must Christ work to purge his
conscience, if ever he be made clean.

Q. But do none know Christ to be Salvation, but such as feels his work
within them.

A. No, for it is to be understood that whilst man remains in the fall, he is
under the power of darkness, and therefore the power of Christ must work within
him to subdue the power of darkness that rules over him, and to save him from
the temptations that the darkness entangles him in, and so man is ever to stand
in the pure fear of God, and to wait for the appearance of his power, to
deliver him out of the snares in which he lies entangled in the darkness, and
then he will feel the work of the power in him, to cast out the strong man
which has kept the house, and the power will keep man in the awe that he dare
not sin, for who have felt the judgment of the Lord for sin, they stand in the
pure fear, least at any time their feet should slip into sin, and this is true
love to God, when sin is denied, with which his Spirit is greived.

Q. And does the power work effectually to Salvation as man yields himself
unto it, and denies that which it does reprove him for?

A. Yes, it works effectually unto Salvation, by destroying death, and him that
has the power of it, which is the Devil, and so by the work of the power, the
old man is crucified, and the old works, words, and thoughts, they all dye, and
sin is condemned in the flesh, and the flesh is brought into subjection and
silence through death; and this man must know wrought in him by the power of
God, if ever he come to eternal life, for no unclean thing that must enter into
the Kingdom of God, and therefore it must be denied and put off before the
Kingdom can be obtained.

Q. But must man pass through death and rise again whilst he is in the body?

A. Yes, For except he be regenerated and born again, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God; and therefore he must dye to the first Adams flesh, and be
quickened and raised again in the second Adams spirit, and so in the
resurrection and life enter the Kingdom as a little child.

Q. And does the work of the power bring death upon the first Adam through out?

A. Yes, for no part or property of the first Adam that must live before God,
and as the second Adam rises in power, the first Adam is put to death; and so
the quickening spirit of the second Adam goes over the sinful flesh of the first
Adam, and there is the resurrection of the seed, and the translation of man
into its nature, where he receives a new body, and a new life, in which body
and life he bears the image of the heavenly, and then he is blameless in Body,
Soul, and Spirit.

Q. And is that the way by which man must come to inherit life eternal?

A. Yes, for life eternal is only in the Son, and man in his own life is
alienated from it, and therefore he must dye to his own life, before he can
inherit eternal life in the Son.

Q. And is there none that pleases God but who are thus regenerated and born
again?

A. None in the flesh can please God, and therefore man is to wait in the power
for a new birth, which is not after the flesh, but after the spirit, which
birth of the spirit is the Fathers beloved Son, in whom he is well pleased.

Q. How does the power dispose man in the death?

A. It disposes him in stilness, keeping all fleshly motions in silence, so as
a little child he lies nakedly and innocently before God, and has no will, nor
wisdom, nor reason left in him, but all baptized down into the sufferings of
Christ, where they are dissolved into nothingness, and there the power kills him
and gives him life again; and so man lays down his own life, and takes up life
in Christ, in which life he comes to be raised in the resurrection of Christ;
and here is the passing from death to life, where man puts on Christ, and is
made a new creature, and in a new life he then serves God, and pleases God,
for his thoughts, words, and works are all changed, and with a new tongue he
then sings the new songs, and gives glory, and honor and praise, and thanks
unto him that sits upon the throne, who lives for ever, and ever, and this is
in substance the whole matter.

Q. But does not the birth of the seed meet with much opposition in its
resurrection?

A. Yes, whilst it is in the travail it is strongly opposed by a contrary
nature, and many dangers that lies near on every hand, until death have passed
upon all, as is said before, but when the power has crucified the first Adam
throughout, and that the seed be raised into the glorious liberty of its own
life, then the seed reigns, and has dominion and government over all
oppositions, triumphing in victory.

Q. But how is oppositions removed, and dangers escaped in the travail?

A. By Faith in the power, and watching to be kept close to the leadings of it,
and so the power will remove oppositions, and defend from dangers, for the
watch being kept to it, and the Faith standing steadfast in it, the enemy has
no power to prevail though he may tempt, for the living power is as a wall on
the right hand and on the left, to preserve from dangers, and it goes before as
a conqueror to remove oppositions, and comes behind as a safe guard to keep
off the Enemy, for smiting the hind most part of the Camp, and thus Christ by
his power is all in all every way to the travailing Babe, that cannot rest in
any place below the freedom of his own life, and therefore let none enter into
unbelief, as if oppositions could never be removed, nor dangers clearly
escaped, for he that quickens and gives life to breath after him, he is
mighty in his power, and he does assuredly save to the utmost the birth of his
own begetting, which abides in the simple tender breathings to possess more of
his life.

Q. But may there not be captivity after the power be received, and that
something be quickened by the power to breath after God?

A. That present state is captivity, for that which by the power is quickened
to breath after God, it is then in captivity, and breathes in the power to be
delivered out of captivity, and as the power is received, and Faith kept in it,
the power works in order to deliverance.

Q. But may there not be captivity after there be deliverance in some measure
wrought by the power?

A. Yes, there may be so, for if the mind err from the power, and unbelief
enter, there may be captivity again in those very places out of which the power
has wrought deliverance, and so many may come to taste of the good word of
God, and the powers of the world to come, and yet may go back again, and here
captivity comes upon many who have had a long travail out of Egypt, and have
seen great and wonderful things wrought by the power.

Q. But is not the power sufficient to preserve from going a stray, and
returning again into such a state, as to come into captivity after it have
wrought deliverance?

A. The power is as sufficient to preserve as to deliver, and is not at al
weaker in the one then in the other, but where such a state comes to pass,
there is not Faithfulness to the power, but temptations enters and prevails,
and so the mind goes from the power into the temptations, whereby there is
away opened for the darkness to rise again, which in the day of tenderness and
faithfulness to the power, was kept in subjection under the yoke.

Q. And does the power follow after such again, after they err from it, and
do not abide faithful in it, to recover them and deliver them out of their
captivity?

A. Yes, for the Lord waits to be gracious, and though there may be a
backsliding, yet he does not shut up his compassion, but condiscends in bowels
of tenderness to follow the wandering sheep which is gone a stray, and by the
word of his power he calls to return and if there be a yiedling to the word of
power, and a joining to it again, the Lord heales the backslidings, and loves
as freely as ever he did, and so he brings the erring sheep again into the
Fold, and gives it pasture amongst his Flock, and here he shows his goodness in
the Riches of his mercy.

Q. And does the power preserve and keep all safe in their travail that abide
in it Faithfully?

A. Yes, for they that abide in the power, and are guided by the power, they
do not err, but by the power are kept through faith unto Salvation, and all
the babes that live in the power, they receive strength in the power, and do
not faint.

Q. What are the dangers that may befall whilst the seed is in travail?

A. There be very many which the light discovers distinctly, yet I shall name a
few of them.

1. To glory in the flesh, with that which is manifest from God in the day of
tenderness.

2. To gather the manifestation of truth into the wisdom below, and to enrich
the false birth.

3. To center in the form or practice of truth, as it stands in appearance
only.

4. To lie down at ease after something of truth be received.

5. To live upon the knowledge of what is seen a far off.

6. To enter into unbeleife in time of trial and afflictions.

7. To run out of the present measure of truth, and to hunt after the knowledge
of it through the comprehension.

8. To feed upon any thing that flows not from the immediate openings, and
springings of the life.

9. To draw any conclusion of security, and to lie down in it as in a place of
rest.

These with many more, which with the light may be seen, are all great dangers
in the travail, and temptations lies very near in them, which being joined
unto, bring the seed into captivity, after there may be deliverance out of
Egypt.

Q. How may such dangers be escaped, and a safe way walked in, through the
travail?

A. By keeping in the everlasting power, and living by Faith in it, for the
power is the cross unto man's own will, and stops Nimrods hunting nature, and
chains under all the unruly affections, and so the mind abiding in the power,
all dangers are escaped, and the innocent babe is safely preserved out of the
hands of all its enemies.

Q. What are the places particularly where the power becomes such a defense as
to preserve the birth safe in its travail?

A. 1. The loweness and humbleness of mind.

2. The poverty and nakedness.

3. The nothingness and emptiness.

4. The simplicity and innocence.

5. The integrity and sincerity.

6 The faith and patience.

7. The measure of the power received.

These places with many more, which with the light may be understood, are
places where the power over shadows the birth, and is a sure defense unto it,
whereby it is preserved out of all dangers whilst it is in the travail.

Q. But when there is a clear sight through some opening of the life, may
there not safely be a reaching to it, and a compassing of it into possession?

A. Oh no, take heed in that place, for if there be a reaching forth to compass
that which may clearly be seen through some opening of the life, that which
opens will presently shut up by darwing it self into its own perfect nature
and fullness, and then the enemy suddenly presents a transformed appearance
in the likeness of that which was truly opened, and the reaching part being at
liberty, it catches at the enemies presentation as if it was the same thing
which was seen in the openings of the life, and so lays hold upon it with an
eager desire and compasses the false likeness into possession, but misses of
the true substance, for when there is such a pure opening in the life, and that
there be a clear sight, that it is the spring or fountain which the innocent
thirsts after, then there is to be a silence in the fear, that so, that which
opens may compass that which thirsts, and bring it into a larger possession
of its own fullness, and so it is the life which opens, which must gather and
compass that which thirsts into its own opening, and that is a true and
everlasting possession of endless riches, which none can compass to themselves,
though there may be a clear sight in some openings, for the life is jealous of
its own glory, and will not give it to another, and so shuts up it self again
when there is a reaching to compass it through any opening.

Q. But does not some streams flow to the thirsty in such an opening of the
life, by which it is refreshed and comforted?

A. If there be silence in the fear, the thirsty receives consolation and
satisfaction through that which is measured forth from the fullness in the
opening, and so the streams of virtue does reach unto it; and there is not to
be a reaching forth to compass the fountain, and here strength is renewed
through the renewings of the mercy.

A. Is not that which is tasted and felt to consolation and refreshing at one
time, good for the same use and service at another time?

A. As it comes fresh from the fpring, and so the same it is; but if the same
as it has been once tasted and felt, then it is not, for the babe must have
the breast and the fresh milk from it again for consolation and refreshing, when
ever it stands in need, for that which once has been tasted, and felt, and
digested, is never good for nourishment any more, and therefore the babe is
ever to depend upon the fountain of its natural generation, and in silence and
fear waiting, all things good for food will be given unto it from time to time,
according to its need, and so the new birth lives by new food, which is never
corrupted, but in the fountain is preserved sweet and savoury, the feeling of
which as it is ministered in the fresh openings of the life, is pure consolation
and refreshing.

Q. And is rest and peace attained in the consolation and refreshing through
such a ministration?

A. Yes, the babe has rest and peace in it, for being consolated and refreshed
through the ministration, it lies down in rest and peace, and so through
nourishment and rest, it grows up into a more perfect stature of the measure of
Christ's fullness, and becomes strong in the Lord.

Q. How is the birth disposed when it comes into such a stature of the measure
of Christ's fullness?

A. It is disposed in love, mercy, gentleness, meekness, peace, justice,
equity, uprightness, sincerity, innocence, and simplicity, in which it bears
the heavenly Image of Christ in his own perfect nature, and in his heavenly
wisdom is in all things disposed toward God and Men.

Q. And does the pure Religion consist in the manifestation of such virtues and
graces?

A. The pure Religion consists in the power and wisdom of God, and such
virtues and graces are manifest from the pure Religion, and are the effects of
it, and so spreads abroad as natural branches of the life.

Q. And does all things become new in man after he be so changed through
regeneration?

A. Yes, for when all the old is dead and buried by the resurrection of the
seed, then all things becomes new in man, for the new birth has new thoughts
words, and works, and a new tongue.

Q. And has not the new birth any agreement with the old in any place?

A. Nay, that is not possible, for they are contrary one to the other in all
things, and there is no agreement between them in any thing.

Q. But do those things which are in appearance manifest the natures of the two
seeds?

A. Yes, for as they are contrary in nature, so they are contrary in
manifestation.

Q. And does the nature of the evil seed produce a manifestation according to
its nature?

A. Yes, for every manifestation has a conception before it be manifested, and
the evil seed being in government, it sends forth a manifestation according to
its nature, and so the tree may be known by its fruit.

Q. What is the manifestations that from the evil seed are produced?

A. They are generally included in those things which are by people
unregenerated observed, who are called the world, or worldly people, and so the
pride of life is not of the Father, but of the world, that is a manifestation
of the nature of the evil seed which rules in the world; and so it is
concerning all other things which are observed by people unregenerated, who are
not of the Father, but of the world.

Q. And cannot those that are born of the seed of God, join with those things
which by the world are observed?

A. Nay, there is an impossibility lies there also, for they are born of
another nature, and there is no agreement in contraryes, either in nature or
manifestation.

Q. And does not the world, or the birth of the flesh, despise and hate the
birth born of God, because it cannot answer what is observed in that nature?

A. Yes, and also persecutes it, and that is the ground of all envy, strife,
and persecution outward, because the birth born of God, delights to do the will
of God, and the will of God being contrary to the will of man, the birth born
of the will of man, hates the birth born of God, and persecutes it.

Q. And does the birth born of God endure persecution without resisting or
revenging?

A. Yes, for it suffers in the will of God, and so lies down in the patience
and quietness, in which it has true contentment and peace, through all things
that comes to pass by outward trials and afflictions.

Q. Then is it not the birth of the flesh that strives and persecutes about
Religion?

A. Yes, for the nature of it is envy, and where it is not bowed unto, then it
persecutes, and spoils, and destroys in its envious nature, and so revenges it
self in cruelty upon such as cannot walk in its way.

Q. And does not God wonderfully appear with his own birth in a state of
outward trials and sufferings?

A. Yes, more wonderfully then can be expressed in words.

Q. How does he appear with it in such a state?

A. In his endless, love, mercy, and goodness, through which his bowels of
compassion breaks in tenderness unto his afflicted children, whereby they
receive strength in him to stand in every trial that comes upon them for their
faithfulness unto him.

Q. And do all born of God put their trust in him alone?

A. Yes, for they have not another to trust in besides him, therefore they
wholly cast their care upon him in all conditions, and he forsakes them not in
their adversity, but strengthens their faith, and keeps them in patience to
endure unto the end.

Q. And what does outward afflictions work for such as are exercised in them?

A. They work for much good every way, for thereby man comes to see his own
nothingness and emptyness, and is brought into humbleness of mind to wait upon
God, for the renewing of his strength in the present exercise, that he may not
be weary nor faint in it.

Q. Then is it not good to be exercised in outward afflictions?

A. Man is not to make choice of any thing, but to stand in the will of God;
and if for the exercise of his Conscience toward God, afflictions do betide
him, then he will feel it work for much good; but the choice of it in his own
will does not bring any comfort.

Q. Is there any chooses outward sufferings in their own will?

A. There may that come to pass through the will as may cause outward
sufferings, but it cannot be truly said that the will chooses the sufferings,
but may act or practice such things as may cause outward sufferings to be
inflicted.

Q. How may it be known when a man suffers in the will of God, and when he
suffers for any thing done in his own will?

A. It may be known by the motion of Gods power in him, for by the power the
understanding is informed into the truth, as also, what is not of the truth,
and so the power constraines a man that is joined unto it, to bear witness unto
the truth, and against that which is out of the truth; and whoever comes into
outward sufferings for the exercise of their Conscience, in this testimony they
suffer in the will of God, but such as barely from the Scriptures concludes
something to themselves, either to be truth, or not the truth, and so puts
their own conclusions into practice, and then for their own conclusions comes
to suffer, it cannot be truly said of such, That they suffer in the will of
God, or that they choose sufferings in their own wills, but in their wills have
concluded something to themselves, and have chosen their own conclusions, which
in practice differs from the practice established by Nations Laws, for which
cause there are some that comes into outward sufferings, but more in that place
which chooses liberty rather.

Q. But may not a man in wisdom so order himself as to escape all outward
sufferings, concerning the exercise of his Conscience, by conforming to the
requirings of the present times, and yet keep a good conscience toward God?

A. Man in his own wisdom may so order himself, as to escape all outward
sufferings in that place by conforming, but this is to be understood, that such
a man does not stand in the will of God, neither in so doing can he stand with
a good Conscience toward God; for, he that conforms to any practice which man
observes, being convinced that such a practice is not according to the mind
and will of God, and so would escape outward sufferings by conforming, and does
not stand in the power of God, to bear a testimony for God, that man is not
born of the seed of God.

Q. In what does the testimony of God stand?

A. It stands in the seed, which has the mind of God, and delights to do the
will of God.

Q. And do all, born of the seed, bear forth a testimony for God?

A. Yes, they have a testimony in the seed, and such stands in the power, and
bears witness unto the truth, and are not ashamed of their testimony.

Q. What do such bear testimony unto?

A. To the truth as it is in Jesus, holding forth his life, power, wisdom,
righteousness, holiness, meekness, and patience, with all the graces and
virtues of his pure life.

Q. And what do they testify against?

A. They testify against all deceit and wickedness, vain customs, fashions,
and traditions of the world, against all hypocrisy and double-mindedness,
will-worships and self-righteousness, with all things generally that is
manifested by the birth of the flesh.

Q. And is that the ground why outward afflictions betide those that are born
of the seed of God, and bears forth a testimony for God?

A. Yes, for the seed of the evil doer being at enmity against the seed of God,
it labors every way to suppress the testimony of it, and so the birth of the
flesh has always persecuted the birth of the spirit; and this is to be
observed, that where there is no testimony, there is no persecution; for if the
birth of the flesh can be answered in its way, and not testified against, it
will not persecute, because it is answered by its own nature, and it is against
its nature to persecute its self, and so it is, that the world loves its own,
and hates such as are not of it, and persecutes them.

Q. And does not God answer all such as are faithful in their testimony with
peace and joy?

A. Yes, he is their strength and exceeding great reward, and they have much
peace in him, and fullness of joy in his presence.

Q. Why do not such as are born of the seed of God, revenge themselves upon
their adversaries when they may have opportunities?

A. Because revenge is contrary to their nature, for they are born of the
peaceable nature of Christ, in which they love their enemies, and bears good
will to all men, and so they lie down in the will of God, and gives their back
to the smiters, and cannot resist nor revenge, but are ready to do good to
those that hates them and persecutes them not rendering evil for evil, but
overcoms the evil with good; and herein it is manifest that they are born of
God, and knows God, and so commits their cause unto him, as unto a faithful
creator.

Q. But are not such people in great bondage through outward sufferings and
afflictions, and is not their suffering grievous unto them?

A. As to their bodies they are in much bondage and sufferings, but they have
inward liberty in God, and are the freest of all people, and they count their
outward afflictions but light, in comparison of their inward joy and glory, for
they are the living babes out of whose mouths God perfects his praise, and this
is the change wrought in man by the mighty power of God, in which power the
everlasting kingdom is known, and the riches of it inherited, in which the
babes sits down rejoicing in the midst of outward tribulations, and they learn
the new songs, and sings them with new tongues, with which they magnify the
Lamb that lives for ever and ever: Even so, Amen. Glory be to the most high
over all.

Something concerning the Foundation and Principle of the poor afflicted people
of God, called QUAKERS.
Quest. What is the ground and foundation which you (that are called Quakers)
do lay to your selves, as the principle of your Religion?

A.sw. Our ground and foundation is Jesus Christ, who is the only begotten of
the Father, and God has laid it for us, and not we to our selves; and it is a
sure foundation in it self, and also sure unto us, as being laid of God for us,
and this is the foundation and principle of our Religion.

Q. Where do you hold forth this foundation to be laid, which you say is laid
God for you?

A. It is laid of God within us, and the rock of our safety, and so we hold
forth to be a sure foundation, as knowing the strength and power of it, which
defends it self that the gates of Hell cannot prevail against it, nor against
us that stand steadfast upon it.

Q. How do you manifest this inward foundation, which you say is Christ, to be
the true and only foundation which God has laid?

A. From the feeling that we have of it, by which we know that it is sure in
us, and from that sure and certain knowledge which we have of it in the
feeling, we manifest it from its own nature and being, unto its own nature and
being in others.

Q. What is the nature and being of it?

A. It is unchangeable, in light, life, power, wisdom, and glory, full of all
goodness, virtue and mercy, and in its nature and being is unmovable.

Q. How do you manifest it to be the only foundation, and that there is not
another?

A. From the unchangeableness of its own nature and being, for we know that
God does not lay any visible or changable things for a foundation, but that
which is of himself within, and is invinsible to the natural eye, and
unchangable in its own nature, that is the foundation which God lays, and we
know no man can lay another.

Q. And is that which is within you the only foundation upon which you stand,
and the principle of your Religion?

A. That of God within us is so, for we know it is Christ, and being Christ, it
must needs be only, and principal, for that which is only, admits not of
another, and that which is principal is greatest in being, and thus we know
Christ in us, to be unto us the only and principal, who was before all things,
and in whom all things consist.

Q. But do you hold that this foundation and principle within you is
sufficient to give eternal life?

A. Yes, we do so, for as we know that it is Christ in us, so we also know the
eternal life which is in him, and that he is sufficient to give eternal life
from his own fullness, unto as many as receives him, in the gift of his grace
manifest within them.

Q. How came you to the knowledge of that foundation and principle, which you
say is within you?

A. By the light which is manifest from it, that in our hearts gives us the
light of the knowledge of it.

Q. How do you know that it is a true light which gives you such a knowledge?

A. By the operation and effects of it.

Q. How does it operate unto such a knowledge?

A. By the strength of its power in us, whereby that knowledge which was gained
through comprehending comes to decay and dye, and a loss comes upon all that
which has any way been fetched in by the motion of the earthly wisdom.

Q. And does it effect such a thing in you by its operation?

A. Yes, it works effectually in us, to the crucifying of that nature which
has rebelled against God.

Q. Does it operate unto such effects in you without Faith?

A. Nay, for it is the foundation and principle of our faith, and as our Faith
stands in it, we know the operation and effects of it by our Fath, and in this
Faith we please God, because we believe that by his power in us, he is able to
subdue all things to himself.

Q. How come you to receive this Faith?

A. By yiedling our selves to the manifestation of the light, whereby we come
to be drawn and gathered into the nature of it, and so receives Faith in it as
the gift of God.

Q. But have you not some Faith in it before you yield your selves unto it?

A. We have a persuasion wrought in us, that it is of God, and so yields our
selves unto it as being persuaded that it is truth, and by yiedling our selves
unto it, and receiving of it in its manifestation, we thereby come into union
with it, and knows it to be the author and finisher of our Faith.

Q. And does that Faith give you assurance of eternal life?

A. Yes, it does so, for Christ is the author of it, whereby we are assured of
his love toward us, and in the Faith that we have in him, we are sure that he
is Christ the son of the living God, and by this Faith we live in the
assurance of eternal life.

Q. But how may your Faith be known unto others to be true Faith?

A. By the fruits and effects that is manifest from it, through which it may be
known unto others to be true Faith.

Q. What are those fruits and effects by which your Faith may so be known?

A. Love, Mercy, Meekness, Gentleness, Peace, Long-suffering, Patience,
Righteousness, and Holiness of life, which is the fruit of our Faith, by which
others may know that it is true Faith.

Q. But how do you believe unto salvation?

A. By the Faith that we have in Christ Jesus, our foundation and principle,
through which we know that he is salvation unto us, and do believe that there
is not another name given under heaven by which any can be saved, but the name
of Jesus.

Q. But is there no true Faith but what stands in a principle within?

A. There is but one true Faith, and that stands in a principle within, which
is Christ, and the mystery of it is held in a pure conscience, and this is a
living Faith, in a living principle, and all other Faiths are dead.

Q. And can none have true Faith unto Salvation and life eternal, but such as
are of your opinion.

A. We are not in any opinion, but in the principle of life, by which we are
saved, and receives life; and in this state we stand not in any opinion, but
in a feeling of life and Salvation, for all opinions are in notions and
apprehensions, in which none feels the life and Salvation in Christ, but what
they apprehend in the natural part, unto that they give up their own belief,
and so erres from the life in themselves, and neither beleives unto Salvation,
nor receives life eternal.

Q. But do you judge all to be in the unbelief, that are not just as you are
in all things?

A. Nay, we do not so, for we believe that in every Nation, he that fears
God and works righteousness is accepted of him, and we also believe that
none can fear God and work righteousness to be accepted of him, but as they are
in some measure guided by the principle of his light in their conscience, and
have some Faith in it toward God, and we believe that many in some small
measure do thus fear God, and work righteousness, though they do not
understand the principle, by which they are drawn to do it, and such we do
not judge to be in the unbelief, but have unity with them in that measure of
Faith in which they simply breath after God, and according to their
understanding walks in his fear, and serves him in righteousness; and though
such be not just as we are in all things, yet being in any measure guided by
our principle to fear God and work righteousness, we truly love them, and have
tenderness toward them, that in the principle they may grow in Faith, and be
as we are in all things.

Q. And do you simply act from your Faith, in single love to God?

A. Yes, we do so, for we know that our Faith proceeds from his love unto us,
and that is the overcomming power, by which we are constrained to love him, for
he has begotten us; and quickened us in his life, in which our Faith is kept
fresh and living unto him: and by the same we act in simplicity and fervent
love toward him.

Q. What is your Faith concerning Christ in you as a mediator.

A. We believe that Christ in us, does offer up himself a living sacrifice
unto God for us, by which, the wrath and justice of God is appeased toward us,
and that through the offering end sacrifice of Christ for us, the hand writing
of ordinances which stood against us is blotted out, and a mediation wrought
between God and us; and so we know the consideration of Christ unto us, and his
mediation with the Father for us, and this is he in whom our Faith stands as
the one mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus.

Q. What is your Faith concerning Christ in you, as an intercessor?

A. We believe that Christ in us does interceed the Father in our behalf, and
by him we do appeal to God in all our distresses, and we believe that all our
breathings toward God have access unto him through the intercession of Christ
for us, for as he knows what we want, so he also knows the Fathers will, and
according to our want and the Fathers will he makes intercession, through whose
intercession all our breathings are accepted of God, and not only so, but we
have also boldness to draw nigh unto God, and by Christ, our intercessour we
have access to the throne of grace, and finds grace to help us in the time of
our need, so that we are relieved in our distressess and afflictions through
Christ that loves us, who by his mediation and intercession prevails with the
Father for us.

Q. What is your Faith concerning reconciliation whith God by Christ in you?

A. We believe, through the offering and sacrifice of Christ for us, that God
is satisfied concerning our sins, which in our alienation was committed against
him by us, for as then Christ bare our sins for us, so now by the offering up
himself unto God on our behalf, our sins are blotted out and done away, and
we through him are reconciled unto God, and having reconciled us, he is eased
of the sins which he bare for us in our alienated state, and so he has slain
the emnity which was the wall of partition between God and us, whereby we that
sometimes were strangers unto God, and enemies in our own minds by wicked
works, are now reconciled unto him in Christ, so that we are no more
foreigners and strangers in the emnity, but through the reconciling power of
Christ in us we are brought nigh unto God, and in his Covenant of life and
peace, we know his pardoning mercy in the remission of our sins.

Q. But do you now believe that you are now come to such a state as to be free
from sin?

A. We believe that Jesus Christ the righteous does make us free from sin, for
in him there is no sin, and we being made free by him, we are free indeed; so
that we now live by the Faith that is in him, and by our Faith in him we have
obtained victory over the world, the flesh and the devil, and in the victory we
are freed and walks with Christ in the glorious liberty of the Sons of God.

Q. But do you believe that you are so freed from sin as not to commit sin
whilst you remain in the body, or that there can be such a perfect state
attained in this life?

A. We believe that with God all things are possible, and we also believe that
whosoever are born of God does not commit sin, but is perfect as the heavenly
Father is perfect, whose children they are; and we believe that such a state is
attainable in this life, whilst in the body.

Q. But is it so with you at all times as that sin has no power over you?

A. There is a state whilst the birth is in travail, as that temptations may
at sometimes prevail; for in that state the birth is not come into full
strength through the growth of Faith, and so may sin through weakness, but
where it is so, there is a cry goes unto God to be delivered, and though there
may be such an over coming in weakness as that sin may have some power, yet
that which cries to God in the sense of sin, it has an advocate with the
Father, even Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation by whom the
atonement is made, and through whom the sin is pardoned and remitted, and so
the birth grows stronger in the Faith, and goes on from one degree to another,
until it be made perfect in Christ Jesus.

Q. But do you believe that such of you as are grown into such strength as to
have victory over the world the flesh and the devil, are not liable to
temptations, and that the motions of the flesh do not sometimes move and stir
in you to commit sin.

A. Yes, we find that daily, but we conquer over them through him that loves
us, so that when temptations are proffered, we resist them in the power of
Christ, and when the motions of the flesh do move or stir unto sin, we subdue
them and keep them under, and by our Faith in Christ we have victory over them,
and though such temptations and motions may be stirring as alive in themselves,
yet unto us they are all dead, and we are dead unto them; and though they may
tempt us, yet they prevail not, for by Christ we are preserved in the hour of
temptation, and the wicked one touches us not, and thus we are kept by the
mighty power of God, through Faith unto Salvation, and knows Christ in us to
reign over sin, which sometimes has reigned over us, and in the dominion of
his life we are conquerors in victory, and so our perfection is in Christ in
whom there is no sin, and we know that he is the finisher of sin, and the
bringer in of everlasting righteousness unto us, and in his righteousness and
holy life, we live to the glory of the Father.

Q. But if all these things be done for you by Christ within you, then what do
you believe concerning that great work which by the death of Christ was
accomplished on the Cross in time past according to the Scriptures, or does not
this your Faith concerning such things done for you by Christ in you, make
void his death upon the Cross, and the benefits which is to be received
thereby?

A. We believe that all things which are spoken by the holy Prophets and
Apostles concerning Christ, are true according to the Scriptures: and we
believe that all the dispensations of God which are manifested by the
Scriptures are altogether true, and that they were all fulfilled according to
the determinate will and council of God, so that our Faith concerning Christ
in us, and the work which he there works for us, does not at all make void
any of the dispensations of God, which in times past was revealed unto his holy
Prophets and Apostles, and by them testified in the Scriptures; so that the
work which the Father then gave unto the Son to do: we believe that he
fulfilled and finished according to the Fathers will, and that all things
partaining to life and salvation was fully and perfectly in him, and that he
humbled himself to the death of the Cross; and from death did rise again: and
we believe that he is the resurrection and the life, and gives eternal life to
all that believe in him, but that any do believe in him as he is Christ, who
are dispisers of his light and life in them, that is not our Faith, for as we
know him in us, and so have our Faith in him; we likewise know the dispensation
of God in times past, and the end of their manifestation, and the time of their
finishing, and the Scriptures are fulfilled in us who live in the Faith of
Christ, and walks in his Spirit: and we also know and believe, that he is the
same Christ in us, which in dispensations past did humble himself to the
Cross, and does perfect his work in us according to the determinate council
and will of the Father, so that our Faith concerning Christ in us, does not at
all make void what he has done or wrought in times past, but does fully and
perfectly establish it as a true dispensation, and by our Faith in Christ we
know in a good understanding, the things that are past, present, and to come,
and that Christ is yesterday, to day, and the same for ever, and of his life,
nature, and being there is neither variableness nor changing, but an enduring
substance of immortality, who is glorified with the Father in the same glory
that he had with him before the world began, who through every dispensation
has manifested his glory, and in this dispensation of his light and life he is
come unto us, and we know him to be the first and the last, the beginning and
the ending, for him has God the Father sealed, and in him our Faith stands
steadfast.

A. And have you such faith in God, and love unto him, as that you have respect
unto all his commands, and to answer him in all things according to his will?

A. Yes, our faith is such in him, and our love unto him, as that we have
respect unto all his commands; for as he has loved us and given Christ for us,
even so is our love begotten unto him, and in his love unto us, which is the
ground of our love unto him, we in the same are made willing to run the way of
all his commands, according to his will and they are not grievous unto us.

Q. But whether, do you not depend upon the things you do for life and
salvation?

Nay, we do not so, for we have life before we have motion to act or do any
thing that is pleasing unto God, and in the life we have salvation, and so life
and salvation is freely given us of God and by his grace we are saved, through
our faith which we have in him, and that puts us upon motion and action to do
his will in all things, and yet not to depend upon what we do for life, but to
answer his will in all faithfulness, because he has given us life; and so we
do not act or do any thing for life, but do all things which he commands us
from the motion of his life, and this is life before action, which moves us to
action, and not action before life, thereby to attain life; and so we are his
workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before
ordained that we should walk in them, and this is ordained of God to be the
fruit of our life and faith, and in these good works we walk to his glory, and
depends upon him alone for the renewing of our strength to continue in them
unto the end.

Q. But how do you manifest your good works which you say are ordained of God
for you to walk in?

A. By our faith we manifest them, and the manifestation does clearly
demonstrate the nature and root to be of God, in which they are created, and
the nature and root in which they are created being of God, they must needs be
good, and so they are good works as being of God, and of God ordained that we
should walk in them, and that of God in every conscience bears witness to the
same, so that we know all our works to be wrought by him in us and for us, and
we do walk in them who are born of him, and he alone has the glory, though the
natural man perceives not from whence they are, nor whither they go.

Q. And is it your faith and love toward God that makes you such a willing
people to serve God, and to do his will?

A. Yes, it is so, for the day of his power has overcome us, and therein he
has begotten us unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead, and in him our faith and love is increased and strengthened to run
without weariness, for in his life we have motion and action, whereby we are
willingly disposed to serve him, and to do his will.

Q. But how do you know all these things you act and do, are the commands of
God, and according to his will?

A. By the word of his power in us, through which we are made sensible of all
his commands unto us, for as we are born of him, so we know his voice, and by
his word we are instructed in his commands, and thereby put upon motion to act
and do them, and in our duty he gives us his peace, by which we know that all
those things which we act and do, are his commands unto us, and according to
his will.

Q. But are you so constrained through your faith and love toward God, as to
answer him in all things that he commands you?

A. Yes, for if we should say we love him, and do not keep his commands, we
should be liars; but we do so love him, and our faith is so steadfast in him, as
that we are thereby constrained to keep his commands in all things, for it is
natural unto his own birth to delight to do his will, and to do whatsoever he
commands, and hereby we know that his love is perfected in us, and our faith
and love is single unto him; and as his good will is manifested unto ns, even
so is our hearts disposed in good will toward all men.

Q. What good will have you to such as you judge and condemn, because they are
not like-minded with you?

A. Much every way, for that which we judge and condemn in any, is only that
spirit which wrongs them, by which our good will is manifested unto that which
suffers wrong, and this is our judgment according to truth; and knowing that
the judgment of the Lord is according to truth, and having felt it so in our
selves, through the condemnation of sin in the flesh, we judge sin in the flesh
in whomsoever it reigns, that sin in the flesh may be condemned, and they in
the spirit may be justified; and herein we manifest the universal love of God
to be shed abroad in our hearts, in which our good will extends unto all men.

Q. And is that the love with which you love your enemies?

A. Yes, for as God had pity upon us in the day of our alienation from him, and
followed us with many tender visitations, and also many righteous judgments;
even so we know that he would not have a sinner to perish, and in this love we
labor for the good of all people; and it is the greatest manifestation of love
to an enemy when his destruction is not sought, but rather a condescending to
recover him out of the state of his enmity, into a state of reconciliation and
peace; and we know that there is none that are enemies unto us, but they are
enemies unto God, and crucifies his life in themselves, and therefore our love
is in pity toward them, though they be enemies unto us, knowing that they
cannot have peace with God whilst in that state they remain.

Q. And are you so disposed toward your enemies as that you cannot seek
rerevenge when they do you wrong?

A. Yes, that is the disposition of our nature, not to seek revenge, though we
do suffer wrong; for the revenging nature is in the fall, in which people are
enemies unto God, and one to another; but it is not so with us whom God has
redeemed, for though we may have many enemies, yet we are not enemies unto any,
though in the power of God by which we are redeemed, we do bear testimony
against the evil and the sin, and that spirit in us does not seek after
revenge, but in all long-suffering and patience we bear the enmity of our
enemies, and waits to see their conversion out of the enmity, whereby our good
will is manifested in love to their souls.

Q. But are you not the cause of the sufferings that comes upon you, as being
contrary minded unto all other people, and so are enemies to your selves?

A. Nay, the cause of our sufferings are not from our selves, but from that
spirit which cannot bear our testimony which God has given us, which testimony
being contrary unto the actings and workings of the spirit of darkness, it
provokes the minds of such in whom it rules to enmity against us, and that is
the ground why sufferings comes upon us, and we are clear for being enemies
unto our selves in it, as having our faith and love toward God in those
things, for which we suffer.

Q. But why can you not be conformable unto those things which other people
observe and practice outwardly, and yet keep your Faith and love toward God
inwardly, and so have your Faith to your selves?

A. Because we dare not deny, or own that outwardly which God does manifest to
us inwardly, either to be truth, or out of the truth, for so we should deny our
Faith and love toward him every way; and it is not possible that any should
keep Faith and love to God inwardly, and conform to any practice outwardly
which is contrary to their inward principle, for as the body without the Spirit
is dead, so Faith without works is dead also, and they that have Faith to
themselves in the power of God, they also have Faith in him to serve him in
works of truth and righteousness, and so we show our Faith by our works, for
the Spirit of Faith being lived in as the inward principle, the body is
disposed by its motions, and it does never dispose the body to conform unto any
outward thing which is contrary to its own nature, so that the body is not to
act the spirit, but the spirit is to act and govern the body, and where it is
so, both the inward and the outward agrees in one, and there is faith inwardly
and good works outwardly, and we have a good evidence of the spirit in our
selves that so it is with us, whereby we are preserved upon our foundation
inwardly, and for joining with any practice that is contrary to it outwardly,
and here our bodies are alive unto God in his spirit, and are acted and ordered
by the power of it according to his will, and where it is not so, there is not
the sense of the spirit in the body, and so a dead body which others may move
and order in their own way.

Q. Well, but demonstrate in some particulars your Nonconformity, as first,
why you cannot conform to the Discipline of the Church of England, as it is now
established outwardly?

A. Because we do not find that it is established upon our foundation and
principle inwardly, and therefore we cannot have faith in it, nor love toward
it; and if we should conform to it outwardly, contrary to the inward
principle of our faith, we should commit sin, for that which is not of faith,
is sin; and if we should do so, we should commit a great evil, and our faith
and love unto God would be lost, and therefore it is why we cannot conform
to the way and Worship now observed according to that Discipline or order,
because the spirit of God, by which our bodies are alive to God, does not so
order and dispose us, and we dare not order our bodies in our own choice, for
if we could do so, and not sin against God, we should rather choose to conform
then suffer, but we know, that if we should do so, we could not keep our
consciences void of offense toward God (though we might in so doing please
many men) but should come under his rebuke and correction for transgression;
and so in our single faith and love toward God, we stand in the will of God,
and dare not move to observe any thing outwardly, but as the motion of his
power and life disposes us inwardly, in which we have true peace and
satisfaction in our greatest tribulations, and hereby it may be understood why
we cannot conform in this particular.

Q. And why is it that you cannot swear at all?

A. Because it is contrary to our inward principle, and our principle being the
truth it self, we know that as we are acted and disposed by its motion, that
all our words, promises and engagements are sure and steadfast, for they are
firmly established in our principle, and therefore we dare not swear at all,
knowing our yea is yea, and our nay is nay, in a sure and steadfast principle
that changes not, and our faith and love toward God is in our principle, and
if we should swear at all, we should deny our principle, which is Christ the
truth, who commands us not swear at all, and our faith standing in him, and
our love being toward him, we are constrained to keep his command, because we
know that all his commands are according to truth, and we believe that if we
should swear at all, we should go into transgression, and fall under
condemnation, and then we should loose the answer of a good Conscience, and
peace with God, which is of more value unto us, then the highest favors in the
world.

Q. But does your faith and love, which you say is toward God, lead you wholly
into opposition to the ordinances of men, who are to rule and govern Nations
and Kingdoms?

A. Nay, our faith and love toward God makes us to be subject to the
Ordinances of men for the Lords sake, and we do not despise Government
outwardly, but do believe that actual subjection ought to be given in all
things that pertain to the preservation and well-being of such as are under the
power of it, and for this cause pay we Tribute, and Custom, and that not only
for fear, but for Conscience sake, whereby our actual Subjection is manifested
and our Consciences kept void of offense toward God and men; for as we know
that our inward principle is just and righteous in it self, so we believe that
every power in outward Government that rules in Justice and Righteousness
between man and man, is to be owned and submitted unto, and not in any wise to
be resisted or denied; and this is something of our faith concerning this
particular, whereby it may appear that we are not wholy in opposition to
the Ordinances of men, as they act in Justice and Righteousness for the
well-being one of another, which is the main end of all outward Government.

Q. But do you not believe that you ought in all things to be actually subject
according to the institutions of Laws which are in being?

A. Nay, that is not our Faith, for where any Law concerns our Consciences,
and that contrary to our inward principle, in that case we dare not be
actually subject; for as our principle is the greatest in power, and so it is
most worthy of our subjection, and our faith and love constrains us so to do;
and where any outward Law, lies against our inward principle, as to things
pertaining to our Consciences, we in that case are passive, and patiently
suffers under it, and so we believe and are sure, that the exercise of our
Consciences, in matters of Worship and Religion, is to stand single unto God
alone, and not to be restrained or limited by any Ordinance of men.

Q. Why can you not give respect and honor unto persons that are in power and
Government, according to the Customs which are used?

A. Because it is against our faith to respect persons according to customs,
for we have not the faith our Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons; and yet
we give honor and respect to all men unto whom it is due, but the Hat and
Knee is a beggarly honor, and not worthy to be either given or received for
honor, being far below the honor that comes from above, and we being born of
the Royal seed of God, we cannot give honor to any thing below it; and all the
customs that are in being, and given, and received for honor amongst men, they
are all below the Royal seed, and the birth born of the seed can neither give
nor receive such honor: and this is our faith in this particular, That we are
to honor God, and all men in the Lord, but Customs and Observations, with the
Hat and Knee, we believe and are sure that God does not require us to give
respect or honor unto any person after that manner; and by our faith we live
in our principle, and we know that there is no honor due unto any man, but as
he has some union with the light and power of God in himself, which is the
principle unto which all honor belongs, and unto such we can give honor with
our hearts, though our Hats remain in their place of service, and our bodies
stand without moving, and this is the honor which we do give unto whom it
belongs, and it is the honor from above, and not from below.

Q. And why is it that you are so contrary minded unto all other people, both
in your behavior and language, seeing there is none besides you that behaves
themselves after such a manner, and you being so contrary unto all people in
your behavior and language, it makes you rediculous in their eye, and to
become a reproach in your generation?

A. The reason why we are contrary minded unto all other people in such things,
is this; we being come unto Christ the light, life and truth, we are come to a
principle which differs from other people, and as we are regenerated and born
again of incorruptible seed, we are not of the same mind as other people are,
nor as we our selves sometimes have been when we lived in the vanities of our
minds, and as our change is wrought by the power of God, so is the Spirit of
our minds renewed unto God, and our behavior and language is from that which
is pure in it self, and as is the root so are the branches, and in this lies
the difference between us and other people, which is the cause that makes us
rediculous in their eye, no that our behavior and language are so in
themselves; but proceeding from a plain, simple, honest mind in us according
to truth and righteousness: the heady and high minded looks upon them as
rediculous because contemptible in their eye, and so speaks reproachfully and
scornfully of us, for our behavior and language is from another principle then
other peoples are, and if it was not so, we should be as much esteemed and
respected amongst them, as when we were one with them in behavior and
language, which now being made to differ in our principle, and to appear
contrary unto them, their reproach and scorn falls upon us as a rediculous
people, but we know it is better with us, now that we endure such reproaches
because of our difference, then in the time when we lived in the pleasure of
sin, and had respect and esteem, and not reproach and scorn.

Q. But is there not some which hold an inward principle as you do, and yet
do not behave themselves after your manner, but can observe the things that
are in custom both in behavior and language?

A. There may be some such, but they are not upon our foundation, and though
they may hold an inward principle, yet they are not of us, for we know that the
birth of the flesh has an inward principle, and that will allow the liberty in
behavior and language according to the customs used; but we say that such an
inward principle that does allow such an outward practice is not of God, but of
the flesh, which answers the nature and will of the flesh, in behavior and
language, and we cannot follow such as our examples, though they may hold an
inward principle, but are made to differ from them both in root and branch; for
we believe and are sure that the Son of God is come unto us, and has given us
an understanding to know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, and
being in him that is true, we know our behavior and language is according to
truth; and so we know that all our works are wrought in God, and by Faith in
him we stand, and unto him alone gives glory for ever.

Q. But how may people come to be satisfied, that it is so with you as you say,
more then with others, who may say as much for themselves in their way as you
do in yours?

A. There is no other way for any people to be satisfied in this matter, but by
taking heed to the principle of God in themselves, for as we are born of God,
there is none can know us as to be satisfied concerning us, either in principle
or practice, but as they come to the same principle in which we are; for if
people will only reason about things that differ they may weary themselves and
yet never be satisfied, for we do not only say that so it is with us, and so
press it upon others to believe it, barely from our sayings, but we press all
people to a joining with the light and power of Christ within them, and if they
come unto that, then we know that we shall be manifest in their consciences,
and be known where we are, and so it is not what we or any others may say in
our own case, that can give true satisfaction to any enquirer; but what the
witness of God in the conscience says: for if that do not seal to what is
said, there is not any thing that is said, which can clearly evidence the
matter in question, and if we be not found by the vvitness of God to be as we
say, then let us not be believed, but if we be so, then people may be
satisfied that we are not only sayers, but also doers; and if we cannot be
believed by our sayings, being others may say as much as we in their own
case, yet let us be believed for our works sake which from our principle is
manifest to be of God, whereby we are distinquished from all fair sayers,
who may have many good words, but not in the life, and so are fruitless in
good works and the witness of God will never answer with a seal unto their
sayings though they may speak never so fair, but we know that whosoever does
the Fathers will, shall perfectly understand our principle, doctrine and works,
by which they may come to be satisfied that we do not speak of our selves, nor
act of our selves, but in the eternal motion of the power and life of Christ,
who is our foundation and principle; and they that would be satisfied
concerning us any way, they must find us and know us in the principle of life
where we are, and not in their own reason where we are not, for it is not
possible to find a man where he is not, or to know him until he be found and
beheld in the place where he moves, and so let none reason about us, for there
they can never know us or come unto us, but let all feel to that of God in
them and be faithful to it, and then they will not say, the Quakers Religion
is but young in years, or lately come up, and we know them not, nor what their
new doctrine means, by which people comes to be so altered and changed; but
they will know and understand, that our life is hid with Christ in God, and
that his life appears in us, and we in it, and so be put out of all doubts and
questions in the reasonings concerning us; and receive satisfaction in all
things that pertain unto us, in life and godliness, in which our Religion is
pure, holy and undefiled, and was before unholiness or unrighteousness was; and
will remain in i^s purity when years shall pass away and be no more, and
this is the meaning of our doctrine, to bring people to the everlasting word of
God in themselves, that they may come into rest and peace in the pure Religion,
where God is known in his loves grace, and riches of mercy.

Q. If your Faith give you such assurance of your principle and Religion to be
true and right, then why cannot you defend it by force, and so free your selves
from that outward bondage which you suffer for your Religion?

A. Our Faith does give us such an assurance, but yet we cannot strive with our
opposers and oppressors, nor any way by force of carnal weapons seek to defend
it, for we know that it is sufficient to defend it self, and also to defend us
that live in it, and our weapons are Spiritual and not carnal, and we fight the
good fight of Faith in the power of the Prince of peace, and so we war against
sin, but follows peace with all men, and can be ready in every office of love
to do good to our greatest enemies, and herein we have been sufficiently
proved to be a peacable people under every power by which we have or do
suffer, and we have never resisted, nor sought revenge upon any, but in all
things commits our cause unto God, in whose sight we stand approved, and he
knows that as we are in words or appearance, even so we are the same in heart,
and unto his judgment and trial we appeal in our innocence, and the
principle of his life in every one does bear witness for us, and all that
hearken unto it, will receive a true evidence in themselves concerning our
innocent and peaceable life.

Q. And do you refer your trial in all things to your own principle in others,
which you say is Christ, the light, and life, and witness of God.

A. Yes, We do so, for as we know that all judgment in heaven and earth is
committed unto Christ, so we know that there is not another that can truly try
or judge of us besides him, and therefore we have boldness to refer our trial
in all things unto him alone as knowing that his trial and judgment is
according to truth in every man, and as our Faith is in him, and our love unto
him, so we know that he will not condemn the works of his own hands, but
justify the fruit of his own life, power and virtue, and his trial and
judgment will clearly evidence for us, that we are his, and not our own.

Confession. It may now be perceived, that you do not hold or maintain the
things that you do to be from your selves or in your own wills but from Christ
the foundation and principle.

A. Yes, it is plainly so, for of our selves we can do nothing, but through
Christ, in whom we have our strength, we are able to do all things; so that
our sufficiency is in him alone, and by his power in us, all our good works are
wrought for us, and unto him they all return, that he in all things may have
the pre-eminence, and the glory for ever.

Resolved. It being so, there is no good ground why you should be called in
question, or any way suffer for your Faith and Religion, seeing that what you
do is from the power of Christ, and his works are not to be denied by any, nor
you to suffer in any case for the faith you have in him, and the love you have
to him; and seeing that you deny your selves in what you do (which many
hitherto have thought you did not) and that you are willing to be tried and
Judged according to the Judgment of truth in Christ, you ought not in any wise
to suffer by any other Trial or Judgment whatsoever; and all sober, moderate
people may be well satisfied with this Demonstration, that your principle is of
God, and that your faith and love is unto God, and your good will unto all men,
and none need not any farther stand in doubt of the truth of it, but may be
fully persuaded that you have Salvation and Eternal life by Jesus Christ, which
may overcome all that are yet contrary minded unto you, to join with your
principle, that they may be of your Faith and Religion, who are a people that
loves God so singly, and lives amongst men so peaceably, which indeed does
clearly manifest your principle and Religion to be of God.

W. S.

THE END.
A manifestation of Prayer in Formality, and Prayer in the Spirit of God.
IT has been a common Observation through Ages and Generations, to perform
something as a duty unto God by way of Prayer; and this common observation has
descended from one generation to another (ever since the Apostasy entered) in a
customary and formal way, still observing the practice in words, and continuing
the same as a duty unto God in the same manner and form, not at all regarding
or considering the present want, or necessity of the present Age or Generation,
nor the present states and conditions of particular people, but praying in the
same Words, and in the same Form, from time to time, and from generation to
generation; and so it flows, as a natural stream in a common and customary
practice, from one generation to another; and hence it is that people continue
asking but do not receive, because they ask amiss, not feeling the Spirit that
makes intercession. And so the Pharisees made long prayers, but received the
greater damnation, because they prayed not in the Spirit, but in the customary
formality, which by the Spirit was condemned. And it is very sad that people
should all their lifetime be complaining and asking, and never come to receive
satisfaction: And this is the common way of Prayer in this present generation,
who have many prayers in formed words, and with their mouths do often repeat
them, and in the formality make a practice of them, and so at set-times, and in
set-prayers, spend away their days, but feel not the Lord nor his goodness.
And this common way of Prayer, now used in the common Worship, never brings
people to obtain, but keeps them always asking; where, in answer to the
Commandments, they pray* no this wise, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our
hearts to keep this Law; and write all these thy Laws in our hearts, we beseech
thee. Now, if they would incline their hearts to the Spirit of God in
themselves, and obey it, then the Spirit would incline their hearts to keep
God's Law, and the Spirit would write his Law in their hearts, and put it into
their inward parts, and it would keep them that they should not depart from it,
and there they would feel Gods mercies, and so come to receive an answer of
their Prayers: For when the heart of man does not incline to the Spirit of God,
it is in rebellion against him, and God does not show mercy to the rebellious;
and so people pass over their time in words, but want the life which should do
them good; and when they come to finish their days, their hearts are as far
off from Gods Law, as the first day when they began to pray, That he would
incline their hearts to keep it; and they have no assurance that God will show
them mercy, though they have been praying in words all their lifetime. And
likewise in answer to the Lettany, where they pray after this manner, Good Lord
deliver us: And, We beseech thee to hear us good Lord. And this is the same in
their latter days, as in the beginning; and it is manifest that they are not
delivered from those things as in words they pray to be delivered from, nor are
not heard in those things which they beseech the Lord to hear them in, and so
they spend their days in observing a customary formality, and never come to
any assurance that they are delivered, or that their requests are heard and
answered. And again, in that which they call the Creed, they confess they
believe in God; now they that believe in God, their hearts are inclined to keep
his Law, and he shows them mercy, and hears them, and delivers them, for they
that believe in God, they do his will; and if any man do his will, him he
hears. And then again they confess, That they are miserable sinners, and do
those things they ought not to do: And if so, then not Believers; for they that
believe in Christ are not miserable sinners, neither do those things they ought
not to do, but by believing in Christ they are saved, and he takes away their
sin that makes them miserable, and sets them free from their misery, and they
do those things that are well-pleasing in his sight; for they that truly
believe in Christ, they do not only confess their sins, but also forsake them,
and so find mercy with the Lord; and they are not always complaining that they
do those things they ought not to do, but know his Will and do it, and are
blessed in their deed. And again, in that which they call the Lords Prayer,
they generally say, Our Father: Now the Children of God are not miserable
sinners, nor do not those things they ought not to do; for, whosoever is born
of God, does not commit sin: And, Whosoever sins, has not seen him, neither
known him: And there are not any that believe in God, or can call God Father in
truth, but those that are born of him; for those that are born of flesh and of
blood, and of the will of man, they do not believe in God, neither can truly
call God Father; for that is the nature in which sin is committed, which
makes people miserable, and that is the nature in which they do those things
they ought not to do, and that is the nature in which there is no saving
health; and there is not any prayer accepted of God, which in that nature is
performed: for none in the flesh can please God; and whatsoever is offered unto
him in that nature, he does not regard it, for it is the nature from which all
wickedness proceeds, and the prayers of the wicked are an abomination unto
God. And though there may be many which may deny the common way of Prayer,, as
it is used in the common Worship, and set up some other way of Prayer, as more
excellent; yet whilst the Flesh, and Blood, and Will of man conceives it, and
performs it, there is no difference in the ground, between that which they
deny, and that which they set up and practice, neither does God regard it any
more than that which they deny. And though such Prayers may not appear so
formal, as those that are commonly used in the common Worship, yet they are
conceived in the very same womb, and do not at all differ in the ground: for as
the Wisdom of the flesh has composed so many set-prayers in words, and has
prescribed a way to observe and practice the same, and that none is either to
add or diminish as to what is so composed; even so the same Wisdom may deny
that prescribed way, as being formal, and may invent something instead of it,
in a higher mystery of iniquity; and though they may not speak in such formal
composed words, yet in the same Wisdom their words are formal, not at all
differing in the ground or conception, but only in the expression and
observation, and in their practice it is as formal as that which they deny; for
they have a constant observation by way of Prayer, in what they practice, which
in it self is as formal as the set-prayers commonly used in the common Worship;
for they can set their own time both to begin and to make an end; and when they
will they can utter words, and when they will they can be silent; and they
have their own conceptions at command, and can either perform or not perform in
their own time; and this is the unclean part which offers unto God, which he
does not accept, neither is any Prayer regarded or accepted of God, but the
Prayer which is offered to him by his own birth.

So that these few things being seriously considered, it is manifest, that the
way of Prayer, as it is now commonly used, observed, and practiced in the
common Worship, is not true prayr, but a bare formality, and not only so, but
also contradictory, and so is not performed with a right understanding; and it
is as manifest that all other ways of praying, which are conceived and
performed in the wisdom of the flesh, is not true Prayer, neither does God
regard it more then the other, because it is performed in the same nature, and
differs in nothing but in the manner; and however they may differ in the
practice, yet they meet in the ground, and are offered up in the unclean part,
and so are not performed with an understanding, as Prayer in the Spirit of God
is.

Now the Spirit of Life, which is manifest from God in every man's conscience,
does so enlighten him, as to make him sensible that he is a sinner, and in
himself is miserable, and eternally liable to the Wrath of God, without the
Lord appear for him, and work his deliverance; and as man takes heed to that
Spirit which does so enlighten him, and makes manifest his condition to him,
then the Spirit begins to quicken and stir up something in him that desires
after God, and breathes after God, and the sighs and groans begin to arise in a
true sense of misery, and the breathings go forth in the earnest of the Spirit
unto God, and the cry arises for help and deliverance; and though that which is
quickened by the Spirit, to breath in the Spirit, be but as a babe in
youngness, and that it does not know what to pray for as it ought, but stands
sighing, and groaning, and mourning, in the sense ofburdens, weights and loads
that lie upon it, yet the Spirit in that state helps its infirmities, and
makes requests for it according to the will of God, for the Spirit knows what
the Babe wants, and with what it is burdened, and so makes intercession unto
God for it; and in the Spitit the Babe has access to God; and though it be but
young, yet it cries Abba, Father, and so it breathes in the Spirit, and cries
in the Spirt, and prays to the Father in the Spirit; and the sighs and groans,
do rise from a true sense of its own weakness, and the want of Gods Mercies;
for it understands in the Spirit what it wants, and is sensible what burdens
lies upon it, and in the Spirit it draws nigh to God, and submits its self to
the Throne of his Grace, and there finds Grace to help it in its need, for the
Spirit brings relief from the bosom of the Father, and supplies the Babe in
all its wants, and every breathing is ministered unto by the Spirit; and here
the Babe prays aright, and asks according to the will of God, and he hears
its complainings, and in his compassion he answers its petitions, and so it
comes to receive from his own hand, and he gives unto it daily bread, and
nourishes it with his own virtue, after which it breaths, and stands by it to
help it in the hour of temptation, and so the Babe begotten by the Spirit,
prays in the Spirit, and receives from the Spirit, and is strengthened with the
virtue of the Spirit; and this is true prayer, though never a word be spoken
through utterance: for the Babe breaths in the Spirit and cries in the Spirit,
and prays in the Spirit; and as it so breaths, and cries, and prays in
secret, even so the Father which sees in secret, does reward it openly, and by
his power removes the burdens from it, and with his own hand lifts up its
head, and in his own time he delivers it out of all troubles; and from its
quickening and first breathing it goes on from strength to strength, and from
virtue to virtue, even as by the Spirit of the Lord; and having received
strength in the Spirit, then by the Spirit it has utterance given, and can
utter words by the help of the Spirit, and so prays in the Spirit, and prays
with an understanding; and that which it expresses in words by the help of the
Spirit, and by the strength of the Spirit, that is a comfort to every babe that
is breathing in the same Spirit; and so the babes begotten by the Spirit, pray
in the unity of the spirit, and their prayers return into their bosom, and are
answered with a seal of the same spirit, for they ask in the Name of Christ,
and in his Name they receive their satisfaction; and so here is a time of
sighing, and groaning, and mourning, and complaining; and a time of breathing,
and crying, and praying; and a time of receiving, and rejoicing, wherein the
babes of life do come to inherit that with they have breathed after, and so come
to the living praises unto God, who has answered their prairs in the riches of
his Grace and Mercy.

So all must come to the spirit of God, by the spirit to be ordered, and cease
from their own words and from their own time, and learn to be silent until the
spirit give them utterance; for the Lord is weary of all formality and
hypocrisy, and he has no pleasure in any such performances, for his
Controversy is against the Son of Perdition, but he will exalt the Son of his
Love; and blessed are they that are born of his life, for whatsoever they ask
in his Name, their Petitions are answered, and their Requests granted, and the
prayrs of such are only accepted, and not the prayrs of those that think to be
heard for their much babbling, who have many words, but not in the life.

W. S.

THE END.

