THE TRUE LIGHT Shining in ENGLAND, To give unto all her Inhabitants the
Knowledge of their Ways; wherein they may behold things past, and things that
are, and thereby come to Repentance, and Escape that which is to come.

ALSO, Something DEMONSTRATED concerning the People of God (called QUAKERS) as
to their Principle and Practice; with what they own, and dare not deny: And
also, what they cannot own, nor join withal for Conscience sake.

Published in tender love unto all ENGLAND'S Inhabitants, Rulers, Teachers, and
People; that all may see what has been neglected, and every one in their place
may labor to amend it; And they who have any desires after the Knowledge of
the People of God, as to their Principle or Practice, or what they own or
disown, may here briefly see some things opened, not in many words to please
men, but in the Power of God, through one who seeks to please God; Whose Name
is, WILLIAM SMITH.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black-Spread-Eagle and
Windmil, in Martins Le Grand. 1660.

THE TRUE LIGHT Shining in ENGLAND, etc.
OH ENGLAND, ENGLAND! Thou have been often faithfully Warned, but thou have not
regarded, thou have been careless of thy own happiness, and have not respected
those that have sought thy good; thou have been a stubborn and a rebellious
Nation, and have set at naught many tender Visitations of Gods love unto thee,
which by the mouths of his faithful Servants have been declared; thou have been
a proud scornful, and disdainful Nation, stiff-necked and uncircumcised in
heart and ears, hating every Tender of Love that has been proffered to thee,
and have exalted they self in the strength of thy own might, against the Lord,
and against his faithful Servants, whom he has sent forth in his Love to
Declare his Goodness unto thee; and who have run, and yet do run in the
strength of his Power, early and late to do thee good; but thou have evilly
entreated them, and rendered Cruelty unto them, and raised bitter Persecution
against them for their travail within thee, and for their good will unto thee;
this Recompense have thou given them, whose lives are not dear unto them for
thy sake, Holes and Prisons, Stocks and Whips have been their Reward from thee,
for thou would not obey the voice of the Lords Servants, nor hearken to the
Lords Counsel, that thou might have humbled thy self before him; but thou
despised the day of Mercy, and lightly esteemed the Visitations of the
Almighty: Oh! how have thou provoked him daily, and caused his jealousy to
burn like fire; and yet for his Names sake, he spares thee, and does not bring
utter Desolation upon thee; such is his goodness toward thee, would thou
open thine eyes to see it, he has no pleasure to destroy thee and lay thee
wast, therefore has he exercised a day of Patience toward thee, and many
faithful Warnings have been sounded within thee from the Lords Power; how has
he striven with Thee, thy Rulers and Teachers, in these late years, that you
might have observed his Goodness, and thereby have come to Repentance; but thou
have been a perfidious Nation, turning every way to promote thy own Intrest;
and this has been the great work of thy Rulers and Teachers in late time:
Therefore is the Lord just concerning thee, with all thy Rulers and Teachers,
that had their day and time in thee, and the Lords tender Mercy is not yet shut
up from thee, though he has been rejected by thee, but Visitations of Love he
still reaches forth unto Thee, thy Rulers and Teachers, that now have their day
within thee, if any will turn unto him, if any will hear his voice, and do the
thing that is right in his sight, that he may not utterly cut off and destroy
at once.

Therefore hear O England, and let all thy Rulers and Teachers that now stand
within thee, incline to the Lords Counsel; for it is but a little while, and
the wicked shall be no more; then happy will they be that Rules for God, and
happy will they be that Teach Truth that God may be glorified, for he is risen
the works of men to try, and all that seek his right he will cut off, for that
he will not give to any: Therefore let all beware what they seek, and what they
take upon them, that they enter not upon his right, which he will not give to
any man, for he is glorifying his own Name, and exalting his own Son, and
spreading abroad his Living Truth; and this he will have to Reign as his own
Right, and let none strive to take it from him, for he is a jealous God.

Oh ENGLAND! thy way is much in darkness, and thou travellest through the
thickest Clouds, and with them thou compassest thy self about, and therein
sit secure, as if thou should never see sorrow more. Is the sound of the
Trumpet and Alarm of War so soon passed away from before thee? Is all the Blood
that has been spilt in thy Fields and Towns so soon gone out of thy
remembrance? Have thou so soon forgotten the years of thy Calamity that so
lately has been upon thee? If these things be passed out of thy mind, and thou
run out of the sense of them, as if they had never been, yet let the Treasure,
that thou so dearly love, which was spent within thee to uphold such Cruchy,
cause thee to remember the years of thy Misery, in which thou wast deeply
distressed, that thou may repent of all thy wickedness, and uncleanness, and
abominations, that thou do not draw down an heavier judgment upon thee than
yet thy eyes has beheld. What has been brought forth by men through all these
years of thy Calamity and Distress, into which thou have been plunged? Have any
been faithful unto God, or performed their Vows unto the Most High? Surely
they all corrupted their way, and none set their heart to do the thing that is
right; nor any that had respect to the Poor and Needy, but laid Burdens upon
them, and sorely oppressed them, and their Cry went unto the Lord, and he heard
them, and in his strength he rose to help them, and has undertaken the Cause
for them, and will plead it thoroughly with all men upon the Earth; for he has
great respect unto a poor and an innocent People, whom he has raised within
thee by his Eternal Power, which all thy Rulers and Teachers set themselves
against, and took counsel together how they might suppress them and root them
out: But the Lord does uphold them, and by the Arm of his Power has preserved
them, and they are standing, when those that did afflict them, and sought to
harm them, are cut down and fallen; and this is a mavelous thing, which the
Lord has brought to pass by an Invisible Power, who has laid all waste
before him, and has prospered his Work, and carried it on by his outstretched
Arm; and as man at any time has devised Crueky, then has he appeared in his
Mercy, that the more that Affliction has been laid upon his Innocent People,
the more have they multiplied; and this is the Lords doings, who pleads with
all flesh.

Oh England! much Enmity remains within thee, against an Innocent people that
seeks thy good; who travels to turn thee unto the Light that shines in thee,
that thou might not abide in darkness and perish, but might come to the
Light of life; And this is the Lords good will unto thee, who has raised an
Innocent people whose love is to thee, when thou art most filled with enmity
against them. How long have thou had it in thy heart to execute Cruelty, and
yet thou have not had power to do it unto the full! but by an Invisible hand
have been restrained from swallowing up, when thy mouth has been opened wide,
and thy heart thirsty to devour. There was a time when thou wast let loose, and
wast as a Bear bereaved of her whelps, and as a Lion sit for his prey; yet in
the height of thy fury thou wast chained, and thy bounds was set, and the chain
was too strong for thee, and the bounds thou could not drive away before thy
fury; thou stretchedst thy self to the length of thy chain, and came up in thy
strength to the utmost bounds, and there roared and swelled, and foamed out thy
shame, and cast up much of thy mire and dirt; but thou wast there stopped, and
thy proud and turbulent waves were limited, and the innocent Lambs were
preserved out of thy devouring mouth; and thou could not destroy them,
though thou soughtest it with all thy strength; and when thou could not
execute the mischief of thy heart unto the full, there was a hope in thee, that
power should be given thee in time to come; but the Lord forsakes not his
Chosen, neither gives he them wholly up for a prey into thy teeth, though some
do suffer by thee, which at that time were given into thy hands to try thee,
and thou cast them into prisons in thy rage and fury, when they were in the
Lords service, and laboring to do thee good, and had done nothing worthy of
bonds, neither have thou any such charge against them, but in thy wrath and
madness thou ran rashly upon them, when they neither disturbed thy Peace, nor
transgressed thy Law; and this was to try thee that thou might make thy self
manifest; and the witness against thee, is the Prisons within thee, into which
thou have cast the Lords faithful Servants, for whose sakes he will plead with
thee; and though thou have shut them up, and shows no pity toward them, but
lets them lie, though they have done nothing worthy of it, and keeps them in
thy malice and envy, some in one place, and some in another, as Lawcaster,
Lambeth-house, Nantwich, and diverse other places within thee, where the Lords
faithful Servants suffer under thy Cruelty, and are afflicted by thee, whose
innocent cause the Lord will certainly avenge upon thee, except thou speedily
repent; for there are many strong cries unto the Lord this day, and prayer and
supplication is made unto him in the strength of his own Spirit, which his ear
is open to hear, and he will not forget the Righteous, neither will he forsake
them, but will plead with all that seek to spoil them, and will recompense unto
them according to the fruit of their doings.

Oh England! thou art traced through, and thy doings are all found out with the
Light of Christ that shines in thee; which thy darkness cannot comprehend, and
all thy ways are manifest therein, and thou art found to be exceeding wicked
in thy heart, and exceeding vain in thy imaginations: Thou set not the Lord
before thee, therefore his displeasure is against thee, and except thou speedily
repent and obey his Counsel, thou can not escape the severity of his
judgment; for a fire is kindled in his breast, which shall burn to the
nethermost hell, and it will reach thee when thou go down thither for
counsel, and will be as hot burning coals in the midst of thy bowels, and there
will be none to quench it; for God will not spare thee in thy wickedness and
abominations which yet remain in thee, but will cut down and consume, until he
has cleansed the Land of Cruelty and Oppression.

And now the Revolution is gone about, and that which was out of sight is come
up, and that which was above is gone down and over-shadowed; so vain a thing is
man before his Maker; and this is not come to pass for the righteousness of
any man, or that any man should exalt himself in it, but for his own Names
sake, who Reigns over all.

Oh England! let all such as are now risen in thee to Rule, be careful and
mind well their doings; for the same God Rules still, and his Power changes
not, but brings to pass all changeable things in their time and place: and if
man now strive again to set up the same things which once provoked the Lord to
anger, and which his Controversy was against, and still continue the Burdens
by strengthening the Oppressors, which has from time to time drawn down
Judgment upon the heads of those that had Power to remove it, but did not, and
brought the Lords stroke upon them, and none could be found that were able to
uphold them, though many sought it with all their strength. Let not vain man
imagine that the Righteous God will either favor or allow these things to be
set up or continued in this day, against which he has appeared, and by his
Eternal Power overwhelmed; but certainly his Controversy is still against the
same things, and all that strengthens them, or endeavors to promote them; and
though neither Sword nor Spear may be used, yet will the Lord carry it on by
his own power, that works according to his own pleasure; for his way is not as
the way of man, who sometimes destroys and builds the same things again with
his changeable mind; But the way of the Most High is more equal, and he will
not allow the setting up of those things again, which once grieved his Holy
Spirit, and provoked him to Anger, which drew forth his Arm against them, by
which they were cut down; neither is this come to pass in ENGLAND that it
should be so done, but that all should FEAR before the God of Jacob, and BOW
before the Holy One of Israel, and mind his Goodness, and come to Repentance,
and be humbled in the dust for Iniquities committed, that he may spread forth
his Power, and Reign in his Right, and Order all things that concerns his
Service and Worship, and that none go about to keep him out of that, and take
it upon themselves, but let him be HEAD and KING, JUDGE and LAWGIVER, and
Supreme Governor over his Church, for that is his Right and his Glory who is
the Prince of Peace, and who seeks to take it from him, must fall before him,
for he will not give it to any man, and herein has his Controversy appeared
with all Sorts and Sects of People whom he has tried in their day, who would
never submit to his Government, nor yield unto him his Right, but took it to
themselves, and robbed him of his Glory; for which Cause the Lord has turned
their Glory into shame, and their day into darkness, and they are gone
downwards, and others are come upwards, and are new placed in Power to Rule
over their Heads, because the Warnings of the Lord had no place in them, but
were rejected by them; and the things that they should have done, they did them
not.

And thus are the Kingdoms of the World in the hand of the Almighty, and he
pulls down, and he sets up, and gives them unto whom he will; and he disposes
man's heart, and brings him into a sensibleness of some things that be evil and
profane, and orders him to declare his dislike against it, as in this present
Power has been made manifest by a Declaration against something profane; and
he also disposes man's heart into some Acts of Mercy, as likewise is made
manifest in this present Power, by freely pardoning many things, which in the
time of this great Revolution has been acted and done, which might have
occasioned great trouble upon the Nation, if they had not been remitted; and
this is the Lords doings, who disposes man's heart herein, and it is to be
prized as the Lords Mercy who has brought it to pass, though there be much
Excluded, which should have been compassed within it, and a free Pardon
Extended to it, that life in all might have been spared, and nothing Charged
against any to have taken away life; but a free Pardon should have reached unto
all for their lives, and that would have quenched all flames, and calmed all
boisterous winds, that there would not have been any blast to have blown up a
spark; for though the Lord gave them justly up to be scourged, yet not to be
destroyed; and Pardon should have reached the life of all, and no Revenge
should have been sought or Executed upon any to have taken away their lives,
though seemingly there might be Guilt upon them, and that done by them which
the Law of the Nation may seemingly Condemn; yet should Mercy have opened
toward such, and it should have been freely forgiven, which would sweetly have
healed and closed the hearts of thy Inhabitants together, O England, and made
them as one man: And it is upon me from the Lord to sound forth a Warning in
the power of his Eternal Spirit unto all thy Rulers, O England, whose day now
is, that they mind how the day is theirs, and who it is that has given it
them, and keep their hands from shedding of Blood, lest they provoke him who
has showed Mercy unto them; for by Cruelty acted, and then Revenge sought, it
opens the Fountain of Blood wider, but never stops it: And this is not the End
(O ye People who are now in POWER this day in ENGLAND) for which God has
raised you up, that you should destroy life, but to show Mercy as he has
showed Mercy unto you, and to try you if you will perform what they carelessly
neglected, whom he has given up into your hands without the stroke of any
Weapon of War, and has brought you up to Rule in Government wit hou the loss
of any Blood, which is such an infinite Mercy as might cause you to stop the
Issue of Blood, and not to open it: Something you have done, which in its
place, and in it self, is good; but the Work you have yet to do is weighty, if
you mind the Lords Counsel, and give up unto him, that he may dispose your
hearts to Answer the End which he does Expect from you, which is to show Mercy,
and to break off every yoke, and undo all heavy burdens, and remove all
Compelling Laws in things pertaining to the Conscience, and set the Oppressed
free, that Righteousness may Reign, and true Judgment and Equity may run down,
and a peaceable and quiet life may be enjoyed in all Godliness and Honesty: And
this is required of you all from the Lord God, and it is not to be neglected by
any of you in your Places, whether it be the KING as Supreme of the Nation, or
those that be set in Authority under him, but is a Work to be set upon
speedily; for the neglect of performing of it, when many Promises have been
made to do it, has drawn down Judgment upon such as have Ruled before you, who
promised much in these things, but performed little; and you are come to see
their day End, and the Beginning of your own; therefore reject not the Lords
Counsel, to follow your own Imaginations, that when you should do the thing
which God requires, you do not bring forth that which his Controversy is
against; that when you should set free, you lay not on a yoke and bring forth
Oppression, and continue Oppression; and so increase Burdens and make them
heavier when you should remove them, and take them away; this is not the End
for which God has raised you, that you should look back again, and begin to
build again those things which God has removed, and to seek your own Glory in
them; but to promote the everlasting Gospel which is the Power of God, and
freely given of God; and that all may stand in the freedom they have in God to
Worship him, without any Law to compel them otherwise under Penalties and
Punishments; this is some part of your Work in this your day which God has
given you; and as you obey the Lords Counsel, and mind the Light of Christ in
your own Consciences, you will see what is your whole Duty, and what the Lord
does require of you, not to make LORD-BISHOPS again, and DEANS and PREBENDS;
not to set up Common Prayer Book, Organs, and Anthems, and such Abominations
which the Saints never practiced, nor there is no Scripture for; and these
things, with much more that might be mentioned, the Lords Controversy was
against, and none could uphold them, though there was great Hosts of Men and
Horses appeared to defend them, they all fell before the Power of the Lord in
that day; And do you believe that God will take pleasure in them now? be not so
much deceived; for the Lord is provoked, and his Spirit is vexed, and his
Indignation rises against them, and he will not yet spare them, nor these that
strive to promote and uphold them, and compel a conformity unto them; and this
is in plainness of speech unto you all in the movings of Gods Power.

Oh England! thy Prophets deceive thee, and thy Teachers deal very
treacherously with thee, they cry peace to thee, when sudden destruction is
nigh to come upon thee; they know not the things that are, neither the things
that are coming to pass; for Night is come upon them, the Vision has failed
them, they have no Answer of God, and thus they have deceived thee in those
late years, who then had their day in thee, and were set up by thee, and thy
Faith stood in their Wisdom; they have all deceived thee by their lies and
flatteries, crying peace unto thee through all changes that have come to pass
in this great Revolution, and whatever came up to rule that favored their time
and day, they cried peace unto thee in it, though the Lord had determined to
overthrow it speedily; and when it was overthrown and destroyed, they covered
thee over with new lies and flatteries, and still cried peace within thy
borders, under the next appearance that came forth to rule within thee; So they
cried peace unto thee in O LIVER'S Day, and when he was cut down and fell, and
RICHARD his son seemed to arise in his place, then their sound went forth with
a noise, of a Star that was risen, and a Son that was born in Bethlehem to
establish Peace; and thus they cried aloud in their deceitful sound, which was
nothing but lies and flatteries: for these Star soon fell, and their Sun soon
set and was overshadowed, and Bethlehems Peace was broken: Can thou not see,
O England! how deceit has abounded within thee, and how thy Prophets and
Teachers have dealt with thee? Was ever such a prosessing People so blinded as
thou have been, and so overcome to believe lies and flatteries as thou have
done? and these are they which thou have labored to uphold, who have brought
that which thou made thy day into darkness and obscurity.

Oh England! the Lords love has been exceedingly toward thee, though thou
have been a Rebellious Nation, and it is yet with the Lord to do thee good, if
thou will but hearken and obey: Therefore turn unto the Lord God, and wait his
Counsel to receive, that Cruelty and Oppression, Vanities and Abominations
which do still abound in thee, may all be done away and removed out of thy
bowels, that a godly sorrow may come upon thee, and true Repentance may be
wrought in thee, never to be repented of; that a Life in the pure God thou
may come to know, and Uprightness of heart thou may learn by the
teachings of his own Spirit, and deny all thy Ungodliness, Profaneness and
Licentiousness, vain Customs, Worships, Fashions, and Traditions, and learn to
live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world, that God may divert
his Judgment from thee, which certainly thou art drawing down upon thy own
head, by those unclean abominations which still live and abide within thee; and
though the Revolution be come about, yet thou do not learn Righteousness,
neither make thy ways and doings good before the Lord; thou reapest little
profit by all that has come upon thee, and passed through thee in these late
years of thy Calamity; thou have had sufficient trial of man and his way, and
if thou do but mind in soberness, thou may see what the end of it is, and
whither, and into what it all turns. This may be a Warning unto thee, O
England, for ever placing thy Faith in man's Wisdom any more; for thou have
been long a deceived Nation, and the Lord has largely opened his love to thee,
that thou might have been undeceived, and not to have placed thy confidence
so much in man, but that thou might have turned unto the power of God, and
placed thy confidence in it, but thou have kicked as a wild Heifer that would
not come to the yoke, and did not regard the faithful MESSAGES that in thee
has been sounded forth.

Therefore, O ENGLAND! Turn, Fear, and Obey in this thy day, whilst the
visitation reaches thee, and mind the Teachings of God, and hearken to his
Reproof, that thy Faith may stand in his Power, and no more in the Wisdom of
men; that thy confidence may be placed in God, and not in the arm of flesh.

Oh ENGLAND! down into the dust with speed, and be humbled, for the day hastens
over, and night comes on a pace, in which darkness will be thy covering, and WOE
and MISERY thy portion, except thou speedily repent; then shall thou know that
God has raised up true Prophets in Israel this day, who run in obedience to
his movings to do thee good, and labor in thee to bring thee to repentance,
that thou may escape the judgment from which no man can hide thee, or
prevent it from coming upon thee if thou go on in Rebellion against the
Almighty God.

Therefore all RULERS, TEACHERS and PEOPLE, dread the Mighty God; and bow
before the Most High, and unto Him turn with speed, and join to his Spirit that
is manifest in you own Conscience, and make your ways and doings good therein,
love mercy, do justly, and walk humbly before the Lord, who respects no persons
in judgment. And this is a faithful warning unto thee, O England, with all thy
Rulers and Teachers, and all sorts and sects of people whatsoever that inhabit
within thy borders, and now have their day in thee, that all may turn to the
Light of Christ in their own conscience, and that none may neglect it any
longer, but turn to it speedily, that in it they may obtain mercy before he
strike in judgment, whose everlasting Power rules over all the Kingdoms of the
world.

Something concerning our PRINCIPLE, and what it is.
OUr PRINCIPLE is JESUS CHRIST, the LIGHT of the World, that does enlighten
every man that comes into the World; it is the free gift of God unto every
man, placed in his Conscience, to be a witness for God; it shows unto man all
his thoughts, words and deeds, and makes them manifest whether they be good or
evil: when man joyneth unto evil in thought word or deed, the Light reproves
him in his own Conscience, and finites him in judgment for Transgression; the
Light speaks near unto every man, and calls the workers of Iniquity to
Repentance, and to abstain from evil; it does not consent to any evil thing
which in man's heart arises, but secretly reproves it; if any intent arise that
is not brought forth, it searches it out and makes it manifest, and brings it
to a discovery that it may be seen of what sort it is; it brings man into a
sensibleness of his present state, the Light shows him whether hh be a
Drunkard, a Swearer, a Liar, an Envious man, or what ever it be that arises
from the Darkness, it is made manifest by the Light; if any thing lodge never
so secretly it finds it out; if there be an intent to Steal, or to Defraud, or
to Lie, or Anger, or Envy, or Pride, or Evil-will lodge in the heart of man,
and none can accuse him for any of them, yet the Light finds out such things,
and judges man, and reproves him in his own Conscience for them; the Light has
no Communion with Darkness, nor fellowship with Unrighteousness, but stands in
man, a witness against man that unto any evil thing is joined.

And this is something of our PRINCIPLE according to the Scriptures of Truth.

Something concerning the Operation of the LIGHT in all that Obey.
THe LIGHT is given for a Leader, and to be Salvation unto the Ends of the
Earth, in all that believe; as the Light is minded and obeyed, it leads out of
the Evil that it testifies against; when it reproves for Lying, then being
minded and the Reproof turned unto and obeyed, it will lead out of Lying, and
learn every man to speak Truth to his Neighbor; or what ever it is that man is
driven into through the Fall, and has taken up a life in it, the Light bears
witness against it, which being turned unto and obeyed, it leads out of it, and
leads unto that which is good, and it places Gods fear in the heart of man, and
brings him to depart from the Evil, and then he comes to the thing that is good
in the Leadings of the Light, and so man comes out of Anger and Envy, into
Meekness and Love, and is led from all the Works of the Flesh that be evil,
unto God who is the chiefest good; and this is the work of Christ, the Power of
God unto Salvation; he comes into the World, and reproves the World, he leaves
the World again, and saves out of it all that obey and follow him; So he makes
manifest all things that be evil, and he leads out of them, and saves from them
as obedience is given to him: So a Drunkard turning to the Light, when it
reproves him for Drunkenness, and yielding obedience to it, it leads him out of
Drunkenness into Soberness, and delivers him from under the power of Satan, who
has him Captive at his will; and so the Light makes all things manifest, and
as it is obeyed it leads out of all Evil, both in thought, word and deed; and
places true judgment upon all Evil things, and brings them all to the death of
the Cross, and slayes the Enmity, and makes all subject to its power, cutting
down the Man of Sin, and Crucifying the Flesh, with all the Affections and
Lusts of it; and so the old Man dies with all his corruptible deeds, and in the
Judgment is buried down, and the new Man is raised, which after God is created
in Righteousness; and so a holy Birth is born through the Operation of the
Power of the Light, in which the spirit of the mind is renewed, and Soul and
Body sanctified, and the Conscience purged from all dead works; and thus all
old things is put off, and all things are made new, in the work of
Regeneration, in which a new birth is raised, that abides in the Fathers House,
and feeds upon bread of Life.

And this is something of the Operation of the Light, in all that do obey
according to the Scriptures.

Something concerning our PRACTICE, and our walking therein.
WE meet together as we are moved of the Lord, and wait upon him in his Fear,
and are subject to the Power of his Spirit, that is manifest in us, and in the
measure of the Spirit which we receive of God, we Worship him, and in the
fervency of the Spirit we serve him, and as he moves upon any who in his Fear
waits upon him, and opens in them the Word of Eternal Life, and gives a Word to
minister in due season, and utterance to declare it in the power of his own
Spirit; so we minister one to another in the gift of Gods Spirit, and are
thereby Edified and Comforted one in another; and so our Preaching stands not
in the enticing words which man's Wisdom teaches; but in the Spirits
Demonstration and in Power; and this is the Gospel which we freely receive from
God, and freely Preach in his own Power.

And this is something of our Practice, and our walking therein according to
the Scriptures.

And thus do we own what stands in the Truth, and is brought forth in the
Spirit of Truth, and agrees with the Scriptures of Truth, and has its Root in
the Love and Meekness, Gentleness and Patience, that we own and dearly love in
whomsoever it does appear.
WE own MAGISTRACY that stands in the Power of God, and executes true
Judegment within the Gates, cutting down Sin and Evildoers, and setting up
Righteousness, and those that walk therein.

We own MINISTERS who are made of God, and sent forth in his Living Power, and
Preaches freely as they receive, and labors to gather People unto the Power of
God.

We own WORSHIP in the Spirit and in the Truth, which makes all flesh subject.

We own the CHURCH which is in God, of which Jesus Christ is HEAD and KING.

We own SINGING in the Spirit, which gives the Psalm and an understanding to
Sing at, and the Melody is made in the Heart unto the Lord.

We own PRAYER that is made in the Spirit, which teaches how to Pray, and what
to Pray for, and makes Request unto God according to his Will.

We own BAPTISM in the Spirit, by which all are Baptized into one Body.

These with many other things which is true according to the Scriptures, we own
and dearly love, with all that walk in the practice of them, being guided
thereunto by the Spirit of Truth, in the power of which we are constrained to
testify unto the Truth as we know it in Jesus; and these things which God has
opened unto us, and the practice of them, and in what they are to be performed
unto him, we dare not deny in the practice of it, neither can we be subject
unto any Traditions for Conscience sake.

Something that we cannot own for Conscience sake, being found contrary to the
Scriptures.
WE cannot own ENGLANDS WORSHIP, nor join with it, because it is set up by
Tradition, and not after Christ.

We cannot own ENGLANDS CHVRCH to be the Church of Christ, because it has been
set up in the night of Apostasy, and is but the Work of Men's hands, and found
amongst the many Inventions.

We cannot own ENGLANDS MINISTERS to be the Ministers of Christ, because they
walk contrary to him in all things, and are not endued with his power, nor made
Ministers in that; but are made at Schools and Colleges by natural Arts and
Languages, and so speak things they know not for filthy Lucres sake, making
their Belly their God, and Sues and Imprisons, and Persecutes such as cannot
put into their mouths.

We cannot own such a MINISTRY, nor for Conscience sake join with them, or any
way help to maintain them, because they walk contrary to Christ's Ministers, who
themselves were persecuted, but never persecuted any, or sued people at Law for
Wages: We cannot for Conscience sake pay unto any whether Priest or
Impropriator the Tenth part of our Increase, which is called Tyths; because the
Lord freely gives it unto us; and he does not Command us to give it to any
other; and knowing that Priesthood to be changed, who had a Maintenance out of
the Tyths: We also know that of necessity the Law must be changed, and of this
we are convinced by the manifestation of his Light, who has changed both that
Priesthood and Law, and is become the End of the Law for Righteousness unto us
that do believe; and we are also convinced of the Unjustness of it upon what
account soever it is claimed, whether unto a Minister, as given unto him by a
Law; or an Impropriator, as a Purchase, and assured unto him by a Law.

We cannot own that LAW to be just or equal, which compels us to give or set
out, contrary to our freedom, unto another man, any part of that which the Lord
freely gives unto us; or else gives him power to sue and Imprison us, and to
keep in prison until death, as some of late have been, or else give triple
damage, and power to distrain for it, and drive away Goods and sell them, and
make spoil and havoc of them, to the impoverishing and weakening the outward
Estates of many tender People in this Nation of England, within these late
years; in which time there has been many fair promises made for LIBERTY of
CONSCIENCE, but Persecution was never stayed, nor Cruelty stopped; but
unreasonable men executed their own Wills upon many tender Consciences, and
made a prey upon them notwithstanding all fair promises; And these things we
cannot own or conform unto, being found contrary to the Scriptures, and to the
Saints Life and Practice, though long they were pleaded for to be right
according to the Scriptures: But the DAY is sprung, and the LIGHT now shines in
ENGLAND, that has declared them and their Root, and they are of the POPES
Invention, and by his power settled in ENGLAND in the midnight of Apostasy; and
now they cannot be proved a lawful thing by the Scripture either to Priest or
Impropriator; They plead them right by the Nations Law, and so takes us to be
Transgressors of the Law, when we never resisted the Law, but always submitted
to it by a patient Suffering under it, for a Testimony against it, with all
such as Exercise Cruelty by it.

We cannot own that which they call SERMONS, neither can we join in that
Practice; because they make SERMONS by their natural Arts and humane
Inventions, which they have studied at Schools and Colleges, and then by their
Art they divide a portion of Scripture, which they call their TEXT, and raise
DOCTRINES, and make Uses and Arguments in such like things, as by their Art
they make; and so their Preaching stands in the Wisdom of man, and not in the
power of God.

We cannot own their SINGING David's Words in Meter, nor join in that practice;
because it stands amongst the many Inventions, in which people satisfy their
vain minds in Singing David's Words out of David's Condition, which is to Sing
Lies in Hypocrisy, when David roared all the day, and at night watered his
Couch with his tears; and they neither roar nor weep, but are Singing, they do
not Sing with an Understanding.

We cannot own their SPRINKLING INFANTS with Water, and calling it Baptism; nor
join in that practice, because it stands in the many Inventions, to bring a
little Child into their Congregation, and have certain People come up with it,
where they have a little Water, and call those People GODFATHERS and
GODMOTHERS, and put it upon them to confess a Faith on the Child's behalf, and
to promise for the Child, -- That it shall forsake the Devil and all his Works,
and keep Gods holy Will and Commandments -- with such like things, and then
sprinkle a little Water in its face, and say, they baptize it into the
Congregation of Christ's Church; and when the Child grows up, it runs in the
Vanity and the Pomp of the World, which is the Devil's Work; and so neither
keeps God's holy Will nor Commandments, which they promised on its behalf that
it should keep: And we cannot own this practice, knowing that the living God is
without beginning of days, or end of time, and has neither Father or Mother;
and they blaspheme the Lord and his Name, who give such names unto the
Creature; And there is none that can forsake the Devil and all his Works, but
as they come to the Light of Christ manifest in them, that does discover what
the Devils Works are, and gives power over them, and leads out of them all that
in it do believe.

We cannot own Made PRAYERS, and Reading them over in a Book, or any other
formal way; we cannot join with that practice, or those that pray after that
manner; because it stands amongst the Inventions, and is not performed in the
Spirit of Truth, that only has access to God and makes Request according to
his Will.

We cannot RESPECT PERSONS, of what quality soever they may be reputed; because
they that respect persons, commit sin. We cannot put off our Hats, as in honor
to the Person of any man, or give him any flattering Titles: for our Subjection
is to the Power of GOD; and all Men in that we honor, not with putting off the
Hat, and bowing the Knee, which is the honor below; but in Uprightness of our
hearts before the Lord we truly honor all Men in his Power.

We cannot speak any other language but THOU to any single person, which is the
language of Truth unto him, and according to the Scriptures of Truth; and that
which cannot receive it, is proud flesh, which we cannot satisfy, but speak
Truth to every man, without any respect to his person.

We cannot own the WORLDS CUSTOMS which they run into, and answer one another
in, when they meet one with another, or passing by one another, saying, Good
Morrow, or Good Even, or Good Day or Good Night; and this they have got in the
Custom, not understanding what they speak; but if the Custom of it be but
observed, and the words be spoken, they are pleased and satisfied, when they
know not that which made the Evening and the Morning good; So unto them neither
Morning nor Evening, nor Day nor Night is good, not dwelling in God's Power
that made all things good. So it is but words in Custom which fallen man, that
abides in the Evil, uses one to another; which Custom we cannot own, neither
dare we observe to do it unto any People upon the Earth. And this is the great
cause why we bear so many Reproaches from Ignorant People, who are in darkness,
and know nothing beyond their Customs; because we dare not speak but in the
Wisdom of God, which gives us words to speak in due season.

These things here mentioned, with much more that is observed in the Customs
and Worship of the World We cannot own, nor join withal, for no other cause
but only for Conscience sake, being convinced of the Evil of them; and being
redeemed by the Power of God from amongst them, we cannot return again to
observe them, or to come under the power of them: for, we have weighed them,
and find them to be out of the Truth, and contrary to the Scriptures of Truth;
and who will search the Scriptures, and wait in the Light to understand them,
may certainly know that our Testimony agrees with them, and what we are led to
witness for, or testify against, we find the Answer of a good Conscience in
it, and Peace with God, which is our Joy and Crown of Rejoicing.

And if any sober People desire any further satisfaction concerning us, we are
ready in the Power of God, to give a Reason unto any that asks us a Question of
the Hope that is in us in meekness and fear.

THE END.

