A CATECHISM FOR BISHOPS, DEANS, PREBENDS, DOCTORS, VICARS, CURATES, AND ALL
PRELATICALS, FOR Them to Read in the Fear of the LORD GOD, and with a meek and
quiet Spirit.

By WILLIAM SMITH.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662.

A Catechism for Bishops, Deans, Prebends, Doctors, Vicars, Curates, and all
Prelaticals, for Them to Read in the Fear of the Lord God, and with a meek and
quiet Spirit.
THere is in man a Corruptible will, an Earthly wisdom, and a Carnal mind; and
where these bear rule, there is a strong Enmity against God, and all things
that be good; and under these Corruptible, Earthly, Carnal things, the Seed of
God is in bondage, and groans under their burden; and in that state the
understanding of all men is darkened and fast closed, that the things of God
neither are nor can be perceived: And this is the ground of Error, when the
understanding is so darkened, that the things of God cannot be perceived; and
then not being known as they are in the ground, they are supposed to be what
they are not, and so Opinions drawn concerning them, and Professions made of
them, and a Worship and Service set up in them, when they have no savor of
God, nor agreement with the Scriptures of Truth; So, for Doctrine men set up
Traditions, which rise from the many Inventions: And from this ground is risen
all your Profession and Worship which in your Prelatical Power is set up, and
unto which you would compel a Conformity, and impose it upon all Consciences,
which is a thing of great weight, and needful to be truly tried and examined,
before it be so eagerly pursued, and so wilfully endeavored to be imposed.

Therefore admit in coolness of a true Examination and Trial by the Spirit of
Truth, and from the Scriptures of Truth, and if your Practice and Worship be
found to agree in one, without adding or diminishing, then you will be freely
owned, without any Law to compel; but if your Practice and Worship be found
contrary, then be not angry because it is denied and testified against; for in
so doing, you will manifest degeneration from reasonable men: therefore, hear
your Examination cooly and quietly, and if Truth prevail, then own it and
submit unto it, and cease from your Traditions; but if you have any thing
against it, then bring forth your strong Reasons, and prove them from the
Scriptures of Truth, that it may be manifest to the understandings of people,
what is Truth, and what is Error: And for the better understanding of it, here
follows a short Catechism, which is given forth in love to the Simple, and
for you to read and peruse, ye Bishops, Doctors, Vicars, Curats, and all
Prelaticals, wherein you may see Tradition and Truth moderately reasoning.

Tradition. I have heard that there is a God, and that he is the maker of all
things: and I have also heard that from Generation to Generation, this God has
been worshipped and served; and I think it but my reasonable duty to do as
others have done before me.


Truth. One only true wise God there is, who is the maker of all things, and
is over all things; but if thou have no more knowledge of him, than by what
thou hear, thou art yet without him, and a stranger to him, and art an
ignorant worshipper, and do not know what thou worshippest; and what others
have done in Generations past, will not make thy service accepted, though thou
may worship in the observation, and do all things in the custom of it; for
it is only the present manifestation of God's Spirit in every man, in which God
is truly served and worshipped, and in which the Service and Worship is
accepted.


Trad. But cannot I come to know God by hearing that which is reported of him?
and, cannot I worship him and serve him, by observing what others have done,
and how they have worshipped in Ages past, and so following them for my Example?


Truth. God is a Spirit, and makes himself manifest in Spirit; and that which
is truly reported of him, is from the Spirit's manifestation, which all the
holy men of God were inspired with, and made their Report from, and worshipped
God in; and thou may hear this Report, and read it, but being from the
Spirit of God manifest in thee, thou can neither know God, nor truly worship
him; for God's Worship stands not in the observation, but in his living power,
neither can thou follow the Example of the holy men of God, but by the
leadings of the same Spirit, which they were guided by, and lived in.


Trad. But it is safe for me to mind the Scriptures, and that which therein is
reported, and to endeavor to observe and do it, and then I question not but I
shall know God, and be a true worshipper of him.


Truth. That which all are to mind, is the manifestation of God's Spirit, for
that is his own gift to every man that they might profit; and all that turn to
it, and believe in it, their understandings are opened in the power of it, and
then the Scriptures are truly known; and this is safe and will not deceive any,
but will bring the assurance with it of Eternal Life: for, as thou stand in
the Questioning, so also in Doubting and Condemnation, and all thy endeavors
will not profit thee, or bring assurance of Eternal Life unto thee; for it is
not in him that wills, or in him that runs, but, standing still in
obedience to the present manifestation of God's Spirit, Salvation is seen and
showed in the Mercy of God: So thou must lay down thy life in thy observation,
which stands in thy Tradition, and come to Truths present manifestation


Trad. But I cannot know the Truth but by the Scripture, for it is the
Scripture that makes the Truth manifest, and from the Scripture do I set up my
Worship, and there ought to be a Conformity yielded unto it, and such as will
not, to compel them by a Law.


Truth. The understanding of Truth, is by the Spirit of Truth, and the Light of
Christ in every man's Conscience makes it manifest; and this is reported in the
Scripture, and is the sure Foundation, upon which the true Worship stands; and
all that come to the Spirit, and walk in the Spirit, they are truly subject to
it, and bow before it, and yield all obedience to the manifestation of it: and
this is the true Worship, and the true Worshippers; and they* that come into
this Worship, are not brought into it, or made conformable to it, by any
National Law, neither do they seek after any such Law to force or compel others
that differ from them, but commit it to the Power of God: And who comes into
subjection to God's Power, and are made conformable unto that, they are the
true Worshippers, and their service is performed unfeignedly, without any
deceit or hypocrisy; and they appear not so much in an outward Conformity, as
in Simplicity and godly Sincerity, in which they are approved in the sight of
God: So, thy Worship is found out of the Truth, and contrary to the Scriptures;
and thy Law of men, to compel into a Conformity unto thy Worship, is found to
be Antichristian, and to stand only in thy own Tradition, and not in the Power
of Christ; so thou must either prove it from the Scriptures, or all thou can
say of it will not be received for Truth.


Trad. My Worship is that which has been accustomed through many Generations,
and from many ancient Fathers I have good proof of it; and though some things
may be practiced in Worship, which I cannot positively prove from the
Scriptures, yet the continuance of them, and the National Law upholding them,
makes them warrantable and out of question.


Truth. That which is accustomed and not in the Power of God, is out of the
Truth, and an evil custom, and is to be abolished and not maintained; for that
is the subtle ground from which many are deceived, who have nothing to say for
their Religion and Worship, but what in thy bowels is generated; saying, It
has been good, and why is it not so now? and, our Fathers thus worshipped, and
why may not we? and the Nations Law warrants and upholds it, and we must be
subject to the Law. Thus do thy Children reason from thy deceivable working, by
which their minds are blinded, that they cannot see the things that are, but
lie groping after things that have been, which now are not, and from the
continuance draw conclusions of their lawfulness; And because Laws are made to
uphold them, therefore are they subject to them; when the Nation's Law does not
reach, nor is not to meddle with things that pertain to God, or to the
Conscience of any man: so that it does not make the thing warrantable, or put
it out of question, because it does provide for the upholding of it, seeing it
has not any thing at all to do with it, but the Truth does call it in
question; And if it cannot be proved to be a practice which the Scriptures do
allow, and warrant the lawfulness of it, Truth does reprove it, and also the
Nations Law that does provide for the upholding of it.


Trad. I would know what those things are that the Scriptures do not allow, or
bear witness to, which in my Worship is set up, and does belong unto it in the
custom of it, and if they be but ceremonial, I shall not stand so much upon
them; but as for my Fundamentals I shall prove them from Scriptures, and the
Saints practice, to be sound.


Truth. Lay down thy Fundamentals and what they are, that they may be known,
and, in their place, come to Trial, and be proved.


Trad. These be the Foundation-Principles of my Religion, and of which I have
good ground to believe that they are sound, because I find in the Scriptures
that the Saints performed them, and served God in them; and also such as were
appointed for the performance of them, which in my Worship I do truly observe,
as they did; for I have Churches, and Preaching, and Praying, and Singing, and
Bishops and Ministers to perform them, and also other Officers under them,
which is for my Church Order.


Truth. These in their place must all be examined and tried, and by the Spirit
of Truth proved, whether they be right in the ground, and have their rise from
the Power of God; But what thou can not prove amongst thy Ceremonies, to be
warrantable from the Scriptures of Truth, open thine eye and behold them, that
thou may see what Monsters thou have generated, and brought forth from thy
adulterous womb, and behold thy Eldest son that sits in the highest seat in
Rome, who has preferred and set up all thy Children in great honor and
dignity; and people in the Darkness have run after them, without any enquiry
from whence they came, and they have been delightful to the carnal mind, and
from thence have been highly esteemed; and so has the birth of thy adulterous
womb deceived the Nations, and the names that thou have given them are not to
be found in the Scripture, as in any ways to belong to the Saints Worship; thy
Rails, thy Altars, thy Sacraments, thy Cross in Childrens foreheads, and
sprinkling Water in their faces, and calling it Baptism; thy Organs, thy
Anthems, thy Singing-men and Boys, thy Hoods, thy Surplices and thy Tipits,
with many other things which by thee is observed in thy Service and Worship,
that the Lord never commanded, nor the Saints never practiced, neither is there
any Scripture for them, but thou have generated them and brought them forth in
this dark night of Apostasy, and have set them up in thy Worship, as things of
great use, and from that persuasion that in thy self thou have of them, thou
would compel by thy Laws all others to bow unto them.


Trad. I am reasonably, satisfied from what has been said, as to the
Ceremonies belonging to my Worship, and I do see that they are not of such
absolute necessity to be used, or by any Law to be imposed, therefore I shall
be willing to leave every man to his liberty in observing them, and shall not
force or compel any. But as for my Church, Preaching, Praying, Singing, Bishops
and Ministers, they must be duly observed, and every man by a Law compelled
thereunto, who in himself is not made willingly subject; for all these are
warrantable from the Scriptures, and I have their names from thence, and in
these cannot be deceived.


Truth. I shall try them in order, and if I find them right in the ground I
shall approve them, but if not, I must testify against them; for, I judge not
by the appearance, or by the names, but in the ground and nature; therefore
speak plainly what thy Church is, and also show the Foundation it stands upon,
that I may proceed to trial.


Trad. My Church is that, which through many Generations has been a place for
my Worship to be performed in, and it is consecrated and set apart for that
Service; and I have also looked many Ages past, and have found from ancient
Fathers that it has been much set by and highly esteemed, therefore the
Foundation cannot but be right, and I must uphold it and my Worship in it.


Truth. Now I shall try thy Church, and the Foundation of it, and see upon what
it stands: for if the Foundation be not right, the whole Building must fall;
and there is no man can lay another Foundation than that which is laid, which
is Jesus Christ, and that which is brought forth from his Power, that is of
God; and this is the Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of Truth:
And, if it be not in God, it is none of his, but an adulterated Harlot, covered
over with the mystery of Iniquity. Therefore Tradition be silent a little, and
Truth will show thee thy Error, and let thee see the false Foundation thy
Church stands upon, and also manifest the true Church, and thereby thou may
see how far thou art degenerated from the Life and Truth which the Saints
enjoyed and possessed, and upon which the Church of God has ever been builded
and stood. So, be cool, and hear what Truth says, for now thy Church comes to
trial.

Thou have perverted the right way of the Lord by thy Tradition and have been
setting up thy visible things in the stead of that which is spiritual, and have
given them a name out of the nature, by which thou have deceived the Nations,
and thy things that do appear are not the things of God; though thou have made
them very beautiful to behold, yet a sandy foundation they stand upon, and will
not abide the day of trial; for the Foundation of thy Church is of thy own
laying, and the Building is thy own handiwork, and thy Church has been set up
in the midnight of Apostasy, since the true Church has been driven into the
Wilderness; and the Consecration of it has been performed by men of polluted
lips, and thy Eldest son has been the promoter of it, who himself has lost
the key of knowledge, and so promotes and sets up what thou generates in thy
bowels; and this is come to pass since the days of the Apostles, the Spirit of
Truth being lost and ravined from, darkness has overspred, and gross darkness
has covered, and peoples minds have been blinded, that thy Witchcraft and
Sorceries has not been perceived, and so have thou formed a false likeness,
and given it a true name, by which thou have deceived* in drawing the minds of
people to believe that thy work is that which it is not: But the Foundation of
God is more sure, and the true Church is built upon it, and receives its name
from the nature, and not from any false conception; for, the Church is in God,
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and this is the pillar and ground of
Truth, and is laid upon Christ the living stone, in whom the building is fitly
framed, and grows up unto an holy Temple in the Lord, and it is presented
without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; and there is the Consecration of
it, received in the Holiness of his life, and he becomes the Head of it, and it
is truly his own Body, which he takes to himself in everlasting Righteousness,
and espouseth it in his Life for ever and ever; and this does not decay nor wax
old, but is the same, without any variableness* throughout all Generations. So
is thy Church truly tried, and the Foundation of it is found false, and the
true Church* nature it has not; therefore is the name to be blotted out, that
from henceforth none may be deceived with it.


Trad. This is strange, that my Church should be questioned, which through so
many Ages has been much esteemed and promoted; and, if it be not right, then
what is become of those that are gone before, and did not know it otherwise?


Truth. In thick darkness things seem to be that which they are not, but the
day makes them manifest as they are, and the Light of Christ truly discovers in
the ground, and being found amiss they must be questioned, and also denied. And
what other Generations have observed, and how they walked, is not now the
question; for, they knowing no more, and being faithful to what they did know,
they have their reward: And this proves nothing for thy false Church and
Worship, which thou upholdest by thy Tradition, and not from the present
manifestation of God's Spirit in this Age and Generation.


Trad. I shall further consider of this; but for my Preaching, which is a chief
thing in my Worship, I know that is sound, and there can be nothing against it.


Truth. That Preaching which stands in the demonstration of Gods Spirit, and in
Power, is sound Preaching, and pierces through the darkness unto that which
lies in bondage, and revives and raises it in Power; But that Preaching which
stands in the enticing words of man's wisdom, that is not sound: and this is
the ground of thy Preaching, which is so chiefly esteemed by thee in thy
Worship, and by which thou deceivest many people, having got good words, and in
thy wisdom speak them forth, and labourest in the strength of that wisdom to
entice and draw disciples after thee; and so do thou teach for Doctrine thy
own Tradition, and other men's lines and labors are the strength of thy
Preaching; and what Ambrose, Austine, Luther, Calvin, Gregory, and others have
said, and what Expositions they have made of the Scriptures, thou can say,
they have well observed. And this is the ground of thy Preaching, O thou
deceiving Tradition. And now is thy Preaching found to be out of Truths power,
and contrary to the Preaching of those, that were made able Ministers, not of
the Letter, but of the Spirit.


Trad. But cannot I have sound Preaching in my Worship, though something from
the Fathers may be quoted and observed? for, they have spoken good things, and
have expounded the Scriptures plainly, and given true meanings of them, which
is a great help in Preaching.


Truth. Sound Preaching is in the Power of God, and not from any Exposition or
meaning that from others is given upon the Scriptures; for, who run thither,
and speak from that, they stretch themselves beyond their own measure, which
the true Preachers dare not do, but keep to the gift of God; and as it moves in
the measure, so it is preached, and so believed: For true Preaching is a
declaration of the Truth of God, as it does arise and make it self manifest to
the understanding; and so there comes to be a true witnessing of it in the
Experience, through the operation of the Power of God, from which it is
preached as it is known: and this is not found among old Authors and
Expositors, nor in thy Rhetoric and Logic, or in thy made Doctrines, Uses,
Reasons, Helps, Motives, Arguments, and Applications, but in the Spirit's
Demonstration and in Power.


Trad. What is it I can say that will be received, and not opposed? Those
things that I have long observed, and Ages past have looked at them to be very
good, now are denied; but for my Praying in my Worship, that I know is right
and without exception, for it is mentioned in the Scriptures, and was practiced
very much by the Saints; and I have the Lord's Prayer, and have made many other
good Prayers, and have set them forth, which be very useful and comfortable for
all conditions, and upon all occasions; and I have put them together in a Book,
which I call the Book of Common Prayer, and make use of it in my Devotion and
Worship.


Truth. Prayer in the Spirit the Saints practiced, and their Service was
accepted; but from this thou art degenerated, and in thy Tradition have made
and formed such Prayers as the Lord has not required, neither does he open his
ear to hear them, though thou make many of them; and that which thou call
the Lord's Prayer, which is so often set down in thy Book of Common Prayer, and
with mouths and lips so often repeated, be thou silent, and make no mention of
it, for thou have nothing to do with it; and though thou have the words to
speak, yet thou do not perform the duty of Prayer, being from the Spirit that
makes Intercession with groans that cannot be uttered: For Prayer stands not
in words but in power, and the breathings go forth in secret, and the Father
that sees in secret he rewards openly; and the Babe receives a supply of
what it stands in need of; and this is performed in the Spirit that knows the
need, and makes requests with sighs and groans unexpressible, and also moves
unto words and expressions: and here is the unlimited Power, which works
according to the good pleasure of its own Will, which thou have limited in thy
set Forms and made Prayers, having given forth thy Directions what must be
said, and how much at a time; and people must say no more, nor go no further;
and sometimes thy Minister must say, and sometimes the People must say, and
sometimes the Clerk must say: Is not this thy practice in thy
Common-Prayer-Book-Worship? have thou not made Epistles and Gospels, and
Collects, and appointed them for their days and times? and have thou not made
a Letany, for thy Priest to say a part, and the People to say a part? and have
thou not given directions how People must be Married, and have set a Form and
made Prayers for the performance of that Service; and also how People must be
Buried, and what is to be said and done in that Service; and what the Priest is
to say, and what the Clerk is to say? And have thou not set a Form and made
many Prayers when Bread and Wine is to be received, which thou call a
Sacrament? and have thou not set a Form of words for the Priest to say unto the
People when he gives it, and how it must be received, and what words the Priest
must speak kneeling, and what standing; and when he must turn his face to the
People, and speak with a loud voice, and when he must turn his face another
way? And have thou not set a Form and made Prayers for Women to be Churched,
and what the Priest must say, and how he must pray in that Service? And have
thou not set a Form and made Prayers for Children when they are sprinkled with
Water, which thou call Baptizing? and have thou not ordered that there shall
be some people provided to undertake for them? and have not thou given them the
names of Godfathers and Godmothers? and have thou not ordered that for a
Male-Child there must be two Men and one Woman, and for a Female, two Women and
one Man? and have thou not set a Form in words, what the Priest must say unto
them, and what they must say unto the Priest? And have not thou ordered, that
after all these things performed which thou have invented, then the Priest to
pronounce the Peace of God, and the Blessing of God upon all the Congregation,
and then the Service is concluded? And is not this thy
Common-Prayer-Book-Worship, in which thou art limiting the Holy One, through
thy Tradition; and teaching people to ask and pray, when the Spirit is not felt
to help them? And have not people been long asking in thy formed words, but
have not received, neither are they satisfied? Oh thou adulterous Tradition,
what monstrous births have thou brought forth? and what names have thou given
them? and how like are thy names unto that which is true? Thou have given thy
formed words the name of Prayer, and can say. Come, let us pray, when thou
neither feel the movings of God's Spirit, nor his Power, but in thy own
words, which thou have made and formed, can speak in thy own will, and in thy
own time, and give it the name of Prayer: and with thy names have thou deceived
the Nations, who have not understood the nature; and thy named Church, and
Preaching and Praying, have thou veiled over with coverings of thy own making,
which are now rending off from thee; and thou can not hide thy self any
longer under the Names, for now is the Nature seen in the pure Light of Christ,
which makes all things manifest; and thy Common Prayer Book is seen to be
conceived in thy adulterous womb, and to branch forth from the Pope thy Eldest
son, and thou art made manifest to be out of the Truth, and thy Service and
Worship contrary to the Scriptures of Truth, and to the Saints Practice, who
prayed with the Spirit and with the Understanding.


Trad. But what if my Common Prayer Book do not fully agree with the Scriptures
and the Saints Practice, yet there are many good things in it, and many
Scripture-sentences, which may edify and comfort?


Truth. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that is against the
Spirit, and can neither edify nor comfort, though good words and
Scripture-sentences may be spoken: for it is not speaking the words of others
that does make a true Prayer or a living Sacrifice, but the receiving a measure
of the same Spirit of Prayer and Supplication, and to feel it poured forth, by
which Intercession is made, and a living Sacrifice performed, holy and
acceptable, which is not in thy Common Prayer Book to be found; therefore it is
made of none effect, because thy bowels bring it forth, and the Pope gives life
and breath unto it, and from his loins it draws its strength, and not from the
Power of God.


Trad. I see it is a very hard matter to be owned and received in this day; for
I could not have been believed that I should have ever been opposed, or my
Church, Preaching or Praying denied; but my Singing, which is another part of
my Worship, that is so plainly manifested to be the Saints Practice, that
certainly there is none can deny that.


Truth. Singing is owned where it is rightly used and practiced, and who are
raised out of the day of mourning by the Power of God, and have a Psalm given
them in the Spirit, they may sing and make melody in their hearts unto the
Lord; and this is a Spiritual Song which is put into the mouths of the Babes,
who sing with the Spirit and with the Understanding: but David's words being
rimed, and then tuned, and the mouths of Hypocrites filled with them, is such a
practice as the Saints never used; so that the mouths of all thy Singers must
be stopped, who have never mourned, nor have not learned to sing with the
Spirit and with the Understanding.


Trad. But there may be some that are joyful in the Lord; and though all cannot
witness that state, yet they may sing whose right it is.


Truth. None in the Fall have any right to sing; but the Ransomed return with
Songs; and these Songs are not David's words put into meeter, and then tuned,
and sung with a vain mind; but the living Praises of the Lord sounded forth of
the Babes mouth: So thy Singing must come into silence, and there sink down,
until thou have passed through the day of mourning to receive a Psalm in the
Spirit, and with the Spirit, and with the Understanding to sing it.


Trad. What can I say to be received for Truth? my Ceremonies they are all
denied and disproved; and my Fundamentals they are strongly opposed, yet I
shall not be out of love with them, though much has been said against them,
for I know my Bishops and Ministers set much by them, and chiefly by my
Common Prayer Book, for it is a great help unto them, and with the use of it,
their Service is made easy to them. And there can be nothing said against my
Bishops and Ministers, the Scriptures speak so plainly of them.


Truth. He that desires the Office of a Bishop, he desires a good thing; and he
that is a Minister of Christ, and labors in the Word and Doctrine, he is
worthy of double honor: and here was the Power of God in Timothy and Titus,
who were true Bishops, and the Power of God set them in that Office: and the
desire of this is a good thing; and by the Power of God they were Redeemed out
of the Earth, and were not covetous nor greedy of filthy lucre, nor proud and
lifted up; but with all meekness, gentleness and patience, they were instant in
the Word. And it may be read in 1 Timothy 3. what Paul did write concerning a
Bishop, and what manner of person he ought to be, and how he is to behave
himself. And there is nothing spoken of an Archbishop, or a Lord Bishop, or of
a Diocese, or hundreds a year for their maintenance; but he he says, they must
not be Novices, lest being lifted up with Pride they fall into the Condemnation
of the Devil. So it is not the name of a Bishop, but the Power of God which is
to be desired, in which the Office stands, and is a good thing; and this
makes a Bishop, and sets him in his Office, and to see to his Place with
diligence. And he that minds the Power of God, and desires the Power of God,
he desires the Office of a Bishop, and so comes into the good work, that is
wrought in the Power of God, where he is rightly ordered in his Office, and in
which his Office stands: And such a one is not a Novice, nor lifted up with
Pride, but stands in the Power and Wisdom of God, and rules in his Office with
all meekness and humbleness of mind; and he stands ready to watch over the
whole Flock of God, and to instruct the younger in the Power of God, in which
he bears his Office: and who comes to the Power of God, they come to the true
Ministry, and are true Laborers for God, and are instant in season and out of
season, that they may gather People to God: and as they receive the Gift of God
in the power, so they minister, as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God:
and such are true Bishops and true Ministers, who are born not of the will of
man, nor of flesh, nor of blood, but of God, and receive their Office and
Ministration in the Power of God.

And now, Tradition, hearken what Truth says, and give thy Answer to what is
demanded of thee. Who made thy Archbishops and Lord-Bishops? and who gave them
those Names? and who first divided unto them their several Diocesses, and
appointed them to rule within their own Diocese? And who first made Deans and
Prebends, Doctors, Vicars, and Curates? and who gave unto them their Names? And
who first set up certain places for Schools? and who gave the name of
Universities? and who set up the several Colleges? and how came they to be
called Christ's College, and Emmanuel College, and John's College, and Jesus
College, with other names severally for them? and who gave them such Names?
and who first ordai^^^ that men should be made Ministers at these Schools and
Colleges, and no where else? and who first ordered, that if he have not been
so many years at those places, and commenced to his Degrees, he cannot be
approved? and who set up such Commencements and Degrees, that a man must be
made a Batchellour of Art, or a Master of Art, before he can be approved to be
a Minister in thy Order? Who first brought up all these things, and from whence
have they sprung? And who first ordained that the Tenth part of things
increasing unto people, should be paid to thy Colledge-Ministers? and who first
made that Law which forces and compells the payment of the Tenth part of things
increased, unto such a Ministry? and whether are such the Ministers of Christ,
who make use of that Law to force their Maintenance, contrary to the freedom of
people; and to proceed against such as cannot give it them freely, by suing and
imprisoning their bodies, and spoiling their goods? Are these thy Bishops and
Ministers, which thou say there can be nothing said against them? Open thine
eye, and behold them, for they are Monsters, which from thy adulterous
Conception are brought forth, and they are stamped with thy Image, and not with
the Power of God; and all thy Abominations are denied and testified against,
being seen in the Eternal Spirit of God to be out of the Truth of God, and
contrary to the Scriptures and practice of the Saints; and thou have no proof
for the lawfulness of any of them, but Continuance and Custom, through which
thou have brought in thy Tradition, which has received strength from the Pope
thy Eldest son, who has set it up for Doctrine and Worship within the bowels
of England, and has made Laws and Statutes in the dark night of Apostasy for
the upholding of it, and compelling all people unto a Conformity to it. This is
a Charge against thee; and if thou have any thing to say for the clearing of
thy self, Truth will hear thee.


Trad. I have esteemed very much of my Bishops and Ministers, and looked upon
them to be exceeding serviceable in my Worship; and having elected them into
such Places, and put them upon such Offices, I judge it but a reasonable thing
to provide well for their Maintenance; and there is not a more equal way that I
could find out, than by requiring the Tenth part of things increased unto
people, and providing a Law to compel it from such as will not freely pay it;
and I have settled them in certain Places, and over certain People, which in
their respective Pla^^s, are to maintain them, by yielding and paying that part
of their Increase as I have appointed for them; and though I have not Scripture
for the Warrant of it, yet I have brought it forth as a thing that is decent
and orderly.


Truth. That which is decent and orderly, is brought forth in the Power of God,
and that brings forth all things justly and equally, and orders one man to do
to another, as they would have another to do unto them; and this does not
compel any man to pay or part with any of his Increase, contrary to his own
freedom, or else to sue him, and imprison his body, and spoil his goods; for he
himself would not be so done unto: So that what thou have provided for the
maintenance of thy Bishops and Ministers, is not according to the Truth of God,
nor answers not to the Maintenance of Bishops and Ministers in the Primitive
times, who first gathered people unto the Spiritual, before they reaped their
Carnal; and they had no need to compel the Carnal by a Law, after they had
gathered them to the Spiritual, and brought them to taste of that; there was
then an openness and a freeness begotten in their hearts to minister their
whole Substance, and to lay it down at the feet of them that had begotten them
into the Truth, and labored amongst them in the Service of God; and here was
no se^^ing out any part of what was increased, and a Law to compel it, either
of the Ninth or Tenth, or any other part; but the whole Substance freely
offered, and so much taken of it as there was need. And this is as truly
trusted in the hands of true Bishops and Ministers now, and they receive what
they need, and no more: and whether it be the Tenth, or Twentieth, or Thirtieth
part, If it supply their need, they are truly contented; and so they gather
Flocks, and feed upon the Milk of those they have gathered; and plant
Vineyards, and eat the Fruit of them; but do not compel by any outward Law,
Milk to be given them out of another Flock, nor Fruit out of another Vineyard:
So that thy decent Order which thou speak of, is proved Confusion and
Disorder, being out of the life and power of Truth; and all thy vain Tradition
is seen with the pure Light of Christ, in which all things are made manifest,
and with the Light and Truth thou art reproved.


Trad. Certainly this thing which makes such discoveries of my practices, and
with such boldness reproves me for them, it is of God; for it is not in any
fear of me or my Power, which now is strong and in great authority, and unto
which I had thought all would have bowed, without disputing or questioning; but
I see there is that risen that appears against me, and makes such discoveries
of me, that I cannot keep hid any longer; therefore I shall let it alone, and
deal with others that I can cause to be subject; for, the more I deal with this
Manifestation of Truth, the more is my Tradition discovered and opened unto all
People; so that it is safest for me to be quiet and let it alone, lest by
striving to uphold all, I come to lose all, and so be rejected and disesteemed;
and all my Honor and Dignity, wherein I now stand, be laid in the dust, and
trodden upon: And if I had thought that there had been such a thing made
manifest in this Age, as the Truth, I should have been more reserved and
retired, but I had thought I might have boasted and gloryed in my own
handiwork, and that it would have passed without being questioned, as
heretofore it has done; but now I see it is otherwise, therefore I shall be
silent.


Truth. That which does discover thee and thy deceitful practice, that is a
Manifestation of God, and is the Truth of God, which was before thou had a
name, and will abide when thy name is lost; and it does boldly reprove thee,
and is without any fear of thee or thy power, and has opened thee, and ripped up
thy bowels, and discovered thy adulterous womb, and all the false conceptions
that have been conceived therein; and it has made manifest thy firstborn and
eldest son, unto whom thou have given a name, and calls him the Pope of Rome;
and thy younger Children are also by the Truth discovered, and the names which
thou have given them, by which thou have deceived the Nations.


Now, behold ye Archbishops, Lord-Bishops, Deans, Prebends, Doctors, Vicars,
Curates, and all Prelaticals, here is the womb of your conception opened, and
that made manifest from which you draw your breath, and prolong the length of
your days, with all your Service and Worship, which you so much esteem and
promote, and labor to compel a Conformity to; It is here discovered in the
Power of Truth, and you may see, by perusing this Catechism in moderation, your
great degeneration from the Life of the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, and
how the Names invented, and the Worship by you practiced, differ in the ground
from the Practice and Worship that the Saints performed in the Power of God's
Spirit. Where have you from the Scriptures, or the Saints Practice, any Precept
or President for your builded Church of Wood and Stone, your Bells hanging in
the end of it, and to toul and ring them when you would have people come
together to your Worship; your set-time before midday, and your set-time after
midday to meet together, and perform your Worship, your Common Prayer Book and
your Letany, and your Prayers, divided and appointed when and how to be said;
your Preaching in your methods and forms, your Text taking, and your Doctrines
raising, with your Uses, Reasons, Helps, Motives, Arguments and Applications;
your Singing in the riming and tuning; your Bishoprics and Diocesses; your
Deanries and Prebendries; your Doctors, Vicars and Curates; your Tithes and set
Maintenance; your great Livings and lesser Livings; your Parishes, and places
of Settlement; your Mattens and Evensong; your Organs, Rails, Altars, Fonts,
Sacraments, Crossing Children in their foreheads, and sprinkling Water in their
faces, and calling it Baptism; your Anthems, and your Singing-men and Boys to
sing them; your Hoods, Surplices and Tipits; with many other things which by
you are observed in your Service and Worship, that the Lord never commanded,
nor the Saints ever practiced, nor any Scripture to prove the lawfulness of
them? Therefore consider the rise of them, and the truth of them, before you
pursue so eagerly to impose them, or compel a Conformity to them; for tender
people, who are come to the least manifestation of Truth, they cannot bear such
an Imposition upon their Consciences; though by Laws and Statutes you may
strive to impose them, and proceed against them as transgressors, if they deny
submission to them, yet will not your Cruelty bring tender People into a
Conformity to your Traditions; and if you will but consider coolly, and pursue
this Catechism soberly, you will see that it is not reasonable, to compel a
Conformity unto those things that you are setting up and practicing in your
Devotion and Worship, or to impose them upon the Consciences of any people, but
rather leave all to stand in their own liberty, and to choose or refuse as they
are persuaded in their own Conscience; which is but a reasonable thing to be
granted: for, if you see no further in your selves than that which Tradition
has brought in, and set up, and you in your Conscience be persuaded of its
lawfulness, and perform it as a matter of Conscience; would you think it
reasonable to be compelled from that unto another thing, and have another thing
imposed upon your Consciences by any outward power, which you do not feel a
persuasion in your minds unto? And if this seem hard unto you if it should be
so done, Then is it not the same unto another, And will you not do unto others,
as you would have others do unto you? And why cannot you be contented in your
own persuasion, and your own liberty in it, without imposing it upon the
Consciences of others who are otherwise persuaded? And this is not reasonable
in the sight of moderate men; therefore leave off exercising Lordship, that all
people may stand in their Liberty, and walk as they are persuaded in their own
Conscience, and impose not your Observations and your Traditions upon any, who
are not in themselves persuaded of their lawfulness; for that makes many
Hypocrites, but can never make one Christian. So, there must be first a
persuasion wrought in the Conscience, and a belief in the Truth and Lawfulness
of what is to be observed, or the heart can never stand right unto it, though
it be in great strictness imposed: And this brings people but into an
appearance, and to make a show of the thing outwardly, when the heart is not
after the thing which is imposed upon them; and when a Conformity is not
yielded, as by your Law is required, then to proceed in your Cruelty to
imprison and persecute the tenderhearted, who cannot for Conscience Sake bow
to your Traditions; This is not reasonable before moderate men, nor approved in
the sight of the living God. Therefore, hear and consider, ye Bishops, Deans,
Prebends, Doctors, Vicars and Curates, with all Pre^^ticals, and let your
moderation appear, for the Lord is at hand, and in his Eternal Power your way
he is trying, and you must come up to the Bar of his Judgment Seat, and give an
account; and think it not strange to be catechized, for you have need to be
taught what the first principle of the pure Religion is; and if you will but
soberly peruse this Catechism, you may know and learn that which your
Universities could never give you the knowledge of, nor all your Learning and
Wisdom could ever teach you; And in love to the Simple has Truth opened it
self plainly and simply, that you might come to know that which in the darkness
has from your eyes been hid, and that you might no longer oppose it, and
persecute those that walk in it, but leave Truth to its operation, which brings
forth true and perfect Freedom; and if you did but know the Truth, and the
Freedom that is begotten in it, you would not be so envious against it, and set
up your Tradition in opposition to it: But this is done that the Scripture
might be fulfilled, they hated me without a cause. And this is your honor and
worldly glory, which lifts you up in pride, which God is staining. And now, do
you believe that your Foundation is right, and your Building safe? I tell you,
Nay; for, God will destroy both it and you* if you do not speedily cease from
it, and repent of it, and do not busy and throng your selves so much to
promote it, and to finish it; for God has determined to overthrow it for ever.
Oh ye deceived men, who have no strength but in your Tradition, nor no comfort
but from the milk of her breast; you have been long drawing and sucking, and
yet are dry and lean, and your immortal Souls receive no refreshing nor
satisfaction. Why are ye so blinded, and so much deceived, and cannot otherwise
be persuaded but that Tradition is the right way, and from that Conclusion,
endeavor an Imposition upon every Conscience, when their Faith stands not in
the same thing, nor are not so persuaded of it as you are? and what have you to
do to impose Tradition upon the Consciences of others, more than others to
impose their Opinions and Judgments upon your Consciences? And, would you judge
it reasonable that any should so do unto you? And if it belong unto you to do
it on your parts, more than others to do it on their parts, then make it
manifest how, and from whom you have received that power? For moderate men are
now satisfied, that Schools and Colleges cannot give it you; and they are also
satisfied, that Christ does not give it you, and also that there is no
Scripture to warrant you; therefore Truth enquires moderately of you, from
whence, and from whom this Imposing Power* upon the Consciences of others you
receive, seeing it is made manifest that you walk by Tradition and not after
Christ: For Imposition and Persecution are an evident Testimony against you,
and fully open and make you manifest to be of a contrary spirit unto the
Apostles, who were hated and persecuted, yet they loved and blessed; and here
they manifested their love unto Him, who commanded that they should love their
Enemies, and do good to those that hated them; and they were his Disciples, and
kept his Commandments. And all that truly follow him in this day, he begets in
them the same mind* and they keep his Commandments with joy, and dare not
persecute any people upon the Earth for their Opinion and Judgment in matters
of Religion; nor dare they impose any thing upon the Consciences of others by
any outward Law, but leave it to Him that judges righteously, who has the
Ruling Power over the Conscience; and as he is believed in, he works a
persuasion in the Conscience unto the Truth, as he makes it manifest; and then
the Truth is joined unto, from a true Persuasion, and not from an outward
Imposition; and you are not to judge in these things, for in so doing you take
his Right from Him, and set up that which is not his; and when you have done
it, then you labor to impose it upon every Conscience: And this is a quite
contrary thing to the Saints practice, who durst not set up any thing that did
not stand in the Power of God: and when the Power had brought any thing forth,
they did not impose it upon the Conscience of any by an outward Law, that they
thereby might compel a Conformity to it, but they preached it in the Power, and
so commended themselves unto every man's Conscience in the sight of God.
Therefore, behold your degeneration, and what has happened unto you in this
apostatizing night of darkness, in which you have erred from the right way, and
gone astray from the leadings of God, and from the Power of his living Spirit,
and so have brought forth your own dead works, and are serving the living God
in them: And what you have sought out in your Tradition, that you have set up
for Doctrine and Worship, and would bring all people to bow unto it; but now
the day declares you, and in the Land of Tradition the Light has found you,
and the habitation of your dwelling-places is seen under the Groves and green
Trees of your own planting, and moderate people cannot come unto you, nor
inhabit with you; for your Rest is polluted, and sudden destruction is coming
upon it.

Now all Bishops, Deans, Prebends, Doctors, Vicars, Curates, and all
Prelaticals, turn to the Truth, and lay hold upon it, and let Tradition go; for
Truth was before Tradition, and the Truth will bring Tradition to an end. So
your Foundation is not safe, nor your Building steadfast, but stands in the
unstable waters of your own humane Inventions, and not upon Christ the Rock of
Ages. And now Truth has moderately enquired after you, and having found you
out of the Life of the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, it warns you all to
Repentance, that the Judgment may be diverted, and the hand of Severity stayed,
which certainly is hastening down upon you, without speedy Repentance. So
escape for your lives, that the stroke may not fall upon you, and smite you
down into the Death for ever.

Now all you High and Mighty, Wise and Learned Ones, give ear and hear Truth's
Testimony, and see if you can read the Parable, and learn what it means.

Truth. I was a stranger in a far Country, and amongst a strange people, and
under the Government of a strange King. I was in great Captivity and a great
distance from the Land of my Nativity; and I had many heavy Yokes laid upon
me, and the strange people did evil entreat me, and the strange King did sorely
oppress me, and laid heavy Burdens upon me; and when I had any desires toward
the Land of my Nativity, then did the strange King rise up against me, and
sorely afflicted me, and was cruel toward me. I sought how I might get forth
of his Country, that I might be freed from his Cruelty. I sought, but I could
not find; I traveled in sore pain, but could not find a man to give me ease.
Then my sorrow did much increase, and my anguish was sore upon me, so that I
was near unto fainting and despairing; yet a secret hope sometimes rose in me,
that I should be delivered and set free: Then I came into a stillne^^, and in
quietness stayed, and in patience waited, though I was desolate and sore
afflicted; and being brought to stand still, add in patience to wait, a
Deliverer I found near at hand, and from the Land of my Nativity a pure Light
did shine, and in it I see the way opened which passed through the Land, and I
presently joined to the Light, and it went forward toward the place from
whence it came, and I followed it diligently: Then did the King and People rise
to pursue me, to have taken and to have kept me; but the Light took my part,
and smote the King with his People, and discomfited them, and brake the Yoke,
and removed the Burdens from me; it was my guide, and led me by the hand and
from the wicked King and People it me redeemed: Then was my sorrow turned into
joy, and my mourning into songs of praises; for Deliverance came by an
outstretched Arm, and my Freedom was wrought by an invisible living Power,
unto which my Testimony stands for ever.

TRVTH.
In outward Bands at Worcester, but inwardly free in the Life of my
Well-beloved.
THE END.

