THE Great Salvation In another WORLD, Ascertained as to FAITH, And considered
as to PRACTICE.

By William Smith, D. D.

LONDON: Printed for R. Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1696.

TO AUGUSTINE BRIGGS, Esquire Mayor of Norwich.
SIR,
IN observance of your Request, and to perform my Promise upon it, I have
permitted the publishing this Discourse: But as to what induced you, with some
others, to desire it of me, I am yet to seek, how to make a tolerable
Conjecture. Only in this I satisfy my self, that whatsoever is found defective
in it, so as not to deserve a Public View, may possibly be sheltered under an
interpretation, that it was desired of me as from your own Personal kindness to
me; improved perhaps, for the sake of an Excellent Person Your worthy Father,
my most Especial Friend, now with God.

And for that reason, though I might please no body else, I should be bery
unworthy of your Friendship, and his Memory, if I should not think it
sufficiently satifactory to my self, that I have pleased you.

This is the true Figure of my Mind and Thoughts, by which I am always ready to
approve my self

Your very real Friend W. S.

ACTS xvi. xxx. Sirs, What must I do to be saved?
I shall not Abridge my intended Useful Enlargments upon so plain and short a
Text.

There needs no far fetched train of Pretexts for a long Introductive Preface
to Usher it in.

Nor shall I trouble you with any Historical Narrative of the Jaylor's Person,
or of those Circumstances in which he was at that time, when he made his Pious
Request to the Apostles, to know what he should do to be Saved.

Such as are Considerable enough for your Notice, will Occur in the following
Periods of my Discourse.

But the sum of my Design at present is, only to Entertain your Attentions with
two Useful Subjects of Discourse, Naturally deduced from the Text, and from
what relates to it.

I. The First is, to represent the Jaylor's Intent and Meaning, as to what kind
of Salvation it was, which he Enquired after, when he desired the Apostles to
Inform him, What he should do to be Saved.

II. The Second, shall be to Exhibit an Uncontrollable Argument, that the same
Rational Motives which induced the Jailer then to Enquire for Directions, how
he might be Saved, ought always to be upon our Minds and Thoughts, and to begin
the same presently without Delay upon any Pretense whatsoever.

And though it then happened, that the Jailer went about it, when he lay under
the pressing Sense of his own certain Ruin, upon the fear of his Prisoners
escape, according to the severity of the Roman Law in such a Case; yet I shall
prove the Obligation to be the same upon us at all Times, and in all
Conditions. These Two I shall pursue with the clearest Demonstrations I can.

1. As to the First proposed Subject, that is, what kind of Salvation it was,
which the Jailer Enquired after. I am satisfied it was Ultimately the Salvation
of his Soul in a future World; though with a desire also to be Directed by what
Means he might come to the obtaining of it.

And I know not any Expositor that so much as questioneth this Sense of it, and
I am sure the Apostles Answer, in directing him to Embrace the Christian
Religion, how it was to be Obtained, does necessarily Evince it.

And now we being thus ascertained, that the Jaylor's Concern was for the
Salvation of his Soul in another World, it cannot be presumed, that I should let
such a mighty Case and Subject pass, without some remarkable Reflections upon
it, by way of Application.

The Salvation of Souls in an Eternal State, being a matter of the highest
Importance, and most valuable Concern, with which the Mind of Man can possibly
be Affected.

But because this short space of time, in which I am to manage it, will not
admit such Enlargements of Application, as were expedient; I shall therefore
limit your Attentions to such only, as may be adjudg'd most seasonable, that is
most accommodable to the present Needs of Men's Minds according to the Humor of
the Times in which they are to Act, and Converse. Thus, (...), ( Romans 12. 11.)
to serve the Time, in a proper Sense.

Now forasmuch as we live in an Age, observably, by Men's Lives and Actions, of
great Degeneracy from Religion, and in which they seem too generally to be very
Careless and Inconsiderate of what shall become of them in the other World, I
thought it now Expedient, to move my Application toward the care of such a
Dangerous, and almost Epidemical Distemper.

And for that End, perhaps it might be thought proper, and sufficient enough,
if I should intensly only Urge, St. Paul's formidable Caution, ( Heb. 2. 3.)
How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation?

But our present Case requires much more; For we are not now only to Caution
Men from Neglecting their Salvation; but it is Incumbent upon us at this time,
to take special Care, how to preserve Men from entering into a real Unbelief, or
at least into a heedless uncertain Faith of any such State of Salvation at all:
Nay, sometimes from making it a Ridicule, and oftimes from some Men's mocking at
all those Religious Methods designed for the attainment of it.

And you know but little of the World, if you have not heard, that there be
many of the Ingeniously Vicious, who having no other Expedient to solve the
folly and unreasonableness of their Lewd and Profane Practices, are
necessitated, to save their Credit, to study all that is possible, to become
speculative Unbelievers, as Atheists, particularly as to the Faith of another
World.

And from the Influence of those Men's accustomed Buffoonries, and lewd
Examples, it is, that too many of the unheeding and careless part of common
Men, are encouraged to grow every day more and more unconcerned, whether there
be any such things, as a Judgment to come, or a future State at all: And are
resolved to run the hazard of a come what will on it, rather than quit their
Scandalous Sensualities, and Unjust Practices; or live unconformably to the
fashion of a vicious and foolish World.

And if the Case stand thus with us, (as I am afraid it is too true) then
surely it cannot be thought, but that the best Use and Application which ought
to be made of this great Subject in hand, were to undertake an arguing some
Men's Minds and Reasons into a firm Belief, and others into a more sensible
apprehension, that there is infallibly such a State to come, in which there
will be the certain Events of Eternal Salvation, or Damnation.

And I hope this will be accounted a contending for the Faith ( Jude 3.) in a
very approveable sense.

And though at this time I must not presume to go through with it, with such
enlargements of Proof, as so great a Case requires, yet I shall endeavor it (I
hope) to your satisfaction, by contracting my Thoughts into a lesser Compass,
lest I swell this Paragraph of my Discourse, into an unallowable Proportion.

And therefore to shorten the Work, I shall not trouble your Patience, as to
the Proof of another Worlds Existence, by what may be said about the Souls
Immortality; as it has been, and still is, the more general Sense of Mankind.
And for this I could produce a Cloud of Witnesses, both from Historical and
Philosophical Authorities, if time would admit.

And though many of those Philosophers spoke varioussly and uncertainly; and the
Learned, Ancient Poets very Romantickly in their Ingenious Fictions; and the
numerous Mahometans at this day most fondly and sensually of the surviving
State of Humane Things: Yet it is enough to shake the Foundations of all
Atheistical pretensions, that they all intimated an agreement in the main Point
of a future Existence; they could not get leave of their Reason to avoid the
Sense of it.

And then, as for their wild Ways of stating the Manner of it, it does not at
all invalidate the Truth, but rather confirms it: For as much as in any
Christians themselves, especially the Schoolmen, have run the Notion of the
State of the dead, into almost as extravagant Conjectures, as some Heathens had
done.

And all this arises from Men's undutisul Curiosities, to open the Curtain upon
that Secret, which Almighty God, for Reasons (I doubt not) accountable to
himself, and for the good of Mankind, has concealed from our present perfect
Knowledge. It Is now says the Apostle, (1 Cor. 13. 12.) (...), that is, darkly,
or as represented in a Riddle, as the original Word imports.

It Is sufficient for God's Designs, that there should be so much known in all
Ages concerning that State, as might serve for a sufficient Reason and
Encouragement to oblige Men to live Good and Virtuous Lives; and to affect
their hopes, that all shall be well in the End with them, who truly Fear him
and honestly Serve Him.

But now to avoid all Censure of being too short in so mighty a Case, and
withal consulting the confinements of my Time, I shall enlarge upon such Proofs
(and such only) as may be improved from all unprejudiced Men's Observations, as
they may easily and naturally occur to their Thoughts and Notice.

In which I doubt not but to say so much, as may give a full satisfaction to
all, that need a further assurance in that Important Point of a Life to come,
and of the Jaylor's great Salvation in that State.

And First, Let our studied Unbelievers, and all others whose Minds are any
ways disordered as to any real Sense of another World, but engage their
Thoughts and Reason to look first Abroad upon the Species of Mankind in
general, and then think, whether it is any way probable, that God should Create
a sort of Creatures, who of all Visible Beings, are only Endued with Rational
and Reflecting Minds; and yet be Naturally subjected to greater and more
numerous Miseries and sensible Calamities, than all other the Existing Beings
of the whole World besides, put all together, even with an Exception to those,
which Men may be said voluntarily to bring upon themselves.

So that if it were possible, that all the Miserable of Mankind were at any
time in one View to be represented, and that every sorrowful Heart were to tell
the sad Stories of his own afflicted Mind: That is, if all those who at any
present time lay under the pressing sense of Pains and Torments; All that are
pining in languishing Diseases, or pinched with wants of Necessaries: All that
are withering out their old Age in Contempt, Uselessness, and as a Burden to
others: All that are made Drudges, to serve the Ambitions and Pleasures of a
few: And Lastly, all such, as in a long continuance of extremity in troubles of
Mind, Body, or Fortune, lay under Temptations, to Sigh out their time in heavy
Wishes never to have been at all: I say, if all these could possibly be placed
in one Prospect, who is it that would not be too apt to think, that a great
part of Mankind would even seem to Live in an Hospital of the Miserable, rather
than in a Region of so much Ease and Convenience, as might acquit the Infinite
Goodness of the great Creator, why he gave Man a Being, and then permitted him
to Live in such hazzards of being possibly Miserable a thousand Ways; and at
last in a short time to be shut up in a Night of nothing, like a dead Fly,
whithout any following Compensation? Nothing, but the belief of another World,
can possibly solve this Difficulty in a thinking Mind.

But further, let our silly Prodigals of their Souls, (as concurrent with this)
make another prospect of the State of Mankind, from an universally acknowledged
Observation of the promiscuous Usages and Events of the Good and Evil in this
World: Which puzzel'd the Minds of the most Learned Opposers of the Christian
Religion, as might easily be shown if time would allow it.

And from thence let our Bravadoes in Unbelief consider, whether it is possible,
that any Man of Reason should entertain such unworthy Thoughts of a Wise and
Kind Creator, that such numbers of Unjust and Unworthy Men should ever be
permitted to have it in their power, to ride in Triumph upon the Necks and
Ruins of the Good and Harmless, and that such Oppressed good Men, must
remedilesly bear the Characters of the Unfortunate to their Lives End; and then
become Nothing, without any possible Redress for the Future.

And how can this be solved to the Honor of the Great God, without a Belief,
that Mankind should elsewhere Exist after their Mortal Durations; and thereby
be Blessed with the Great Salvation in the Life to me?

And this is the first Reasoning Experiment to be made by Observations from
Abroad, to ascertain the Being of another World, and a State of Salvation to be
expected in it.

2. The next Advertisement I give to those of unwilling Minds to Believe the
Being of another World, is, That they would turn the use of their Reason
inward, and look if they cannot make some Observations from every Man's created
Nature within, to give them a full Assurance that there is such a State in
future. That is, let them try, whether there be not some Dispositions or
Qualifications, sovereignly implanted in their Natures, which must exert their
Operations with the same Necessity, that inanimate Beings must necessarily
follow the Conduct of that Instinct and Impulse which the Creator put upon
their several Natures, oftimes to act contrary Motions and Operations. And then
let them observe, whether there be nothing in those Qualifications, which God
implanted in Man's Nature on purpose out of Kindness to prevent his Undoing in
another World by Sin and Impenitence: And which may afford an Evidence for the
assured Existence of such a State to come.

Now of those natural Qualifications, though there be many, yet I shall
instance but in two only.

The First of those natural Dispositions or Qualifications, is, that
unavoidably Men's Minds will have an uneasy, and sometimes a tormenting Sense
of Guilt upon them, after Crimes committed: And which must forebode something
that is very terrible to come, after their mortal Lives are ended.

And this may easily be manifested to be true, when it is observed, that such a
Sense of Guilt will pursue such Criminals, though their Crimes were committed
with the profoundest Secrecy; and when those guilty Persons enjoyed all the
Advantages of Human Life to divert and extinguish their terrifying
Apprehensions of it.

And further, in Proof of this, though I might produce as many Authors upon
that Subject, as almost in any other Case whatsoever, yet I only choose now to
offer what the Heathen Poet Juvenal could aver concerning some Roman Emperors,
-- Non tamen hosts
Evasisse putes, quos diu conscia facti
Men's habet attonitos, and surdo verbere caedit.


Though they had, says he, conquered all their Enemies abroad, yet their
Consciences created some more terrible ones within; which severely scourged
them with the invisible Strokes of their own guilty Minds.

It was this intolerable Sense of Guilt, that choked Judas with Sorrow; when
it is probable, he might otherwise have shifted well enough in the World with
what he might get from his Bag-office, and with the Bargain he had made to
betray his Master, had not his guilty Mind arrested him with the unsupportable
Terrors of a Judgment, and a Hell to come.

Whence is it else, that such a Sense should always float upon the Surface of
Men's guilty Minds and Memories! Witness that of Joseph's Brethren, when
distressed in a Case of a foreign Nature, Verily, say they, we are guilty
concerning our Brother, (Genesis 42. 21.) And as it was with Herod, when they were
conjecturing, who Christ should be, he quickly had it ready in his guilty Mind,
It Is John, says he, whom I beheaded (Mark 6. 16.) And hence come the frightful
Conflicts of most dying wicked Men, when their Souls are convulsed with
unaccountable Terrors, after a long continued Habit of Impenitence, and a
wilful Disregard to all God's indearing Tenders of Grace and Mercy.

It cannot be supposed, but that they must have then a sense of some Terrible
thing to come after their last Breath should Land them into another state of
Beings. This Terror they could not at that time avoid, by all the confident
Pretensions which they before made use of, to elude that their Natural
disposition, which God had purposely Implanted in their Natures, that by their
sense of such an unhappy state of Mind, they might the more readily and
naturally look out for Relief by taking wiser measures for their own
everlasting Good and present Ease.

But then Secondly, There is another Quality naturally implanted in all Men's
Minds by a Merciful Creator, and consequent to that Natural sense of Guilt; and
that is, that all Wicked Men must necessarily and unavoidably endure the
sorrowful and shameful work of Repenting themselves of their wicked Actions at
one time or other. Either in this World by Improving that natural necessary
Quality with a timely Repentance to Salvation, or else it will Exert it self to
be an Everlasting Punishment (perhaps the severest) in such Wicked Men's endless
Scenes of Misery.

And as this Disposition was naturally given to Mankind by God's Mercy, so it
will for ever acquit his Justice, though such Wicked Men be Eternally Punished
for Sins transiently committed in time:

Because the duration of their Punishments shall be no longer, than according
to the impressed Instinct of their Natures, which the Good Creator gave them in
Kindness.

And further it may be supposed, that in their Sinning State, they could not be
alogether insensible of the Immortality of their Beings, especially if they had
as carefully consulted their Reason, as they did Voluntarily all along, attend
to the vain Solicitations of their lower Appetites and Affections to overruled
that beneficial disposition of their Nature, to their own Eternal Ruin.

And thus I have Arraigned our resolved Unbelievers, and inconsiderate Halters
in the Faith, at the Bar of their own Reason, only upon what may be deduced
from matters of common Observation from abroad, and within, if attended to with
serious Consideration.

But I have yet more to say to stumble our pretenders to the unbelief of
another World: And that is, that besides these Demonstrations from natural
Observations, there is moreover a sufficient Revelation by the Christian
Religion, which brought Immortality to light, (2 Timothy 1. 10.)

Not but that a Good God, had before allowed his World of Rational Beings a
demonstrable Notice, by some natural Evidences, of a State to come, sufficient
for their Safety then, if they would have attended to the use of their natural
Understandings; and also to such Divine Assistances, which may be presumed an
Impartially Good God might bestow upon them, in the Name of Christ ( Acts 4.
13.) That is, for the Sake or Cause of the Lamb Vertually slain from the
Foundation of the World ( Rev. 13. 8.) Otherwise how could it reasonably be
affirmed, that he died for all Men, (2 Cor. 5. 15.) or That he tasted death for
every Man, (Heb. 2. 9.) if all of the former World were absolutely Excepted
from all the Benefits of his Universal Redemption, which Redemption will be
Propitious to all them, who are not wilfully guilty of the Ignorance of it; or
which being known, do not as wilfully refuse the Conditions of it, and so make
themselves incapable of its Blessings.

And now the Reason, why Almighty God might so long respit the ascertaining
Mankind of another Life by Revelation, I am apt to believe, it was because the
World, upon several possible accounts, (best known to Himself) was not in
Temper, nor yet in fit Circumstances, to receive an assurance of such a State
to come, by that happy Method.

But as soon as God saw the World was Prepared, and in Circumstances to admit
it, he then opened the Doors of Heaven, and sent forth his Holy Son to Proclaim
it, with the mighty Credentials of Divine Attestation.

So that the Being of a future World is now ((...) 1 Timothy 1. 15.) made Credible
by a sufficient Testimony, which before (as to the greatest part of Mankind)
was only to be made demonstrable by natural Principles, and rational Evidence.

And that it may be said, that we are now Saved by Faith ( Ephesians. 2. 5.) that is,
if we act all the methods of our Salvation by the Influence of that Powerful
Principle. And it is a great Mercy of God to the general State of Mankind, that
it should be so: It being far easier to Men's Minds in common, to Believe by
Testimony, than to depend upon the necessity of Reasoning by Demonstration; or
as the Jews had it by obscurer intimations, and by some Prophecy not to be
unaccomplished, till that fullness of Time, or seasonable Opportunity was come,
when the long expected Messiah should appear. ( Gal. 4. 4.)

Now what can our Hectoring Unbelievers, or Men of careless and inconsiderate
Minds say to all this?

Can they, dare they, Control the Validity of such a Divine Attestation, as
the Gospel Exhibits for another World? Either they must plainly and positively
prove, that the whole Gospel is False, and the Religion of it a Cheat, and our
Savior an Impostor; or they are utterly lost and undone by their Atheistical
Pretensions, upon which they license themselves to live in their Vicious and
Lewd Practices; or at best to act only for their Worldly Ease, and present
Pleafures.

I say again, are they sure, Infallibly sure, that they have Arguments
sufficient enough to overruled the Truth of Christiantty, so as to adventure
the Eternal Loss of their Souls upon it?

A Truth which even to this day has so controlled all published Contests by
fair Trials of Learning, that the Vast Nations which do now Embrace a Religion
in opposition to it, are necessitated to let their People creep in the dark
shades of Ignorance, to preserve their fond Persuasions from any Learned
Discourses, or Rational Inquisitions.

And now who would Venture the Loss of an Eternal Safety, upon the hazard (if
it were no more) that Christianity should not prove to be true at last?

The very Doubt of it upon such likelihoods of Truth, do not so much commend
the Discretion of such, as take a liberty from thence to act only for the
Concerns of the Vain and Transient World, and then lose their Souls at last.

This is the last Part of my Arguing Application, to ascertain the Existence of
the Great Salvation.

And now having dispatched my First Subject of Discourse, upon that future
Salvation, which the Jailer Enquired after, and made the best Use and
Application I could think proper, as to the Ages Irreligious Humor, I am
fairly prepared to undertake the next Discourse I promised you.

And that is, To demonstrate by an uncontrollable Argument, that there is an
Obligation upon every Man whomsoever, in the very instant, in which they now
exist, without any pretensions, to make any delay of following the Jaylor's
Example, in seeking after, and then acting, what they should do to be Saved.

And to make this Argument plainly Convincing, I shall move to the Conclusion
of it, from these three Approveable Premises, apartly to be Considered.

I. First, I hope I need not Question your Belief, but that the only Season in
which it is possible for any Man to pursue and finish the Work of his
Salvation, must be acted in the compass of his Mortal Life.

For when that short Scene is over, there will be no after Attempts to be made;
no Rafts to save Life, after that Natural Shipwreck.

The foolish Virgins knocked too late for Admission: The undressed Guest had no
Apology for himself, when the time was elapsed, in which he might have put on
his Wedding Garment. This the First.

II. Secondly, as my next Promise, let me persuade you to consider, what the
Worth is, which must be done in that short Season, before you can secure your
Salvation at last.

And that I may assist your Thoughts and Memories therein, give me Leave to
offer a summary Account, in few Words, of that Work, which is to be done to
attain your Salvaion.

First, I desire you to consider, what Work your Intellectual Faculties have to
perform, that is, fully to understand, what that whole Will of God is, which
must be done, if you expect ever to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, says our
Savior ( Mat. 7. 21.)

And are you sure, that you have done all that is morally possible in that
Point, to avoid the Danger of perishing, for the willful Ignorance of your Duty
in any Part of it?

And then have you informed your selves, how many unruly Passions you are to
subdue; how many impetuous Appetites to be restrained; how many Temptations to
contest and overcome; sometimes in Cases, which may perhaps make a Self-denial
as severe, as if you were obliged to pluck out your righ Eye, or cut off your
right Hand, as our Savior advertiseth ( Mat. 5. 29, 30.) in a particular Case?

Then consider how nice and numerous the Cases of Justice and a peaceable Life
are; and then to understand how necessary it is, that Satisfactions are to be
undertaken, when Breaches are made as to either Duty.

After that I may put you in mind, how many Possibilities of doing good God
has allowed you; and for the Omission of which, you will be accountable at the
last Day ( Mat. 25.)

Then advertise your selves, how many Prayers and Acts of Devotion will be
sufficient, to answer St. Paul's Injunction of performing them without ceasing
(1 These. 5. 17.)

And are you sure, you have discharged your Duty of receiving the holy
Sacrament, with that Frequency, which St. Paul intimates (1 Cor. 11. 25.) and
which holy Men in holy times carefully practiced.

But to shorten this my Undertaking, take all the Commandments into a general
View of your Consciences, and examine your selves, whether you live knowingly,
deliberately, and habitually in the Transgression of any one of them.

And if so, then consider what must follow, that is, either your inevitable
eternal Ruin, or a timely Repentance.

And when it is come to the Case of repenting, are you sure you have found out
the true Notion of that necessary Duty, and the various Acts and Circumstances
of performing it? It may cost you some Labor to be delivered from the mistaken
Senses of them both.

And then when you come to lead a new Life (the chief End and Design of
repenting,) and that you cannot but observe the many Failings and Imperfections,
which the greatest Care cannot always avoid; And that then, nothing else but an
entire Sincerity of Endeavor will avail; Your next Work then must be, how to
acquit your Consciences, as to the Reality of that Sincerity. A Case that has
perplexed some very good Men's Minds unto their Lives End.

Now take all this whole work into one View, and seriously think with your
selves, whether every Man is not necessarily obliged on that account, instantly
to enter upon the Jaylor's Design in Enquiring what he should do to be Saved.

But if it be Objected, in confront to my Representation of this Work, (that
the Apostles did only advertise the Jailer, to Believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and he should be saved (Ver. 31.)

In Answer to this, it is to be presumed, that the Apostles intended that he
should afterward take upon him, and proceed in, the whole Discipleship of
Christ, of which Faith was to be but an entering and an initiating Grace, and
Duty.

Had the Jailer gone no further than Believing, he had stumbled at the
Threshold of all his Hopes; as too many amongst us (I fear) have done, when
they pretended to make Faith, as it were, an abridged Sum of the
Gospel-Condition, not considering that if they would enter into Life, besides
their Faith, they must keep (All) the Commandments ( Mat. 19. 17.) to which
Faith was only designed to be a Beginning, and afterward to be a constant and
necessary Attendant upon the whole Work. This is the Second of the Premises.

III. The Third and Last, which gives the full force to the Argument for a
speedy present Undertaking the Jaylor's Enquiry after his Salvation, It Is the
uncertainty of every Man's Continuance in this short Life to do so Great a
Work: Always fearing, lest too long a presumptuous neglect, should provoke God
to cut a Man off before it is done. Our time is in God's Hand, (as the Psalmist
says Psalm. 31. 17.) that is, unaccountably to shorten or lengthen it as he
pleases. It Is his Divine Prerogative.

And then who could think, that any Man, who has the least spark of Faith, or
even of Reason in his Mind, could be so desperately adventurous, as to defer
the acting that Saving Work for his Soul one Hour longer, lest in the very next
(beyond which he has no absolute assurance to Exist,) he be left to an
impossibility of ever-after, either to Act or Hope for his Deliverance, from
being as Miserable a Wretch as can enjoy a Being?

I say, if the Case stands so with him, why should he any more sit down to Eat,
or go about to close his Eyes to Sleep, (quis hoc sub Casu ducere possit
Somnos?) one Night more, till he has taken a firm Resolution, the next
Mornining to make an Entrance upon that Happy Work?

And for the keeping him awake in that present Night to think of it, it were
well for him, if his Conscience would lay him down in that posture, which the
Prophet ingeniously describes, ( Isa. 28. 20.) that is, that his Bed should be
shorter then he can stretch himself upon it, and his Covering narrower then he
can wrap himself in it.

And if his Uneasiness can persuade him to bethink himself of Enquiring after,
and then Acting for his Future Salvation, it would prove the most Propitious
Night, that ever he were like to enjoy in his whole Life.

Oh consider this ye that forget God, lest he pluck you away before your Work
is done, and there be none to Deliver you. Make no tarrying to turn to the
Lord, and put not off from day to day, ( Ecclus. 5. 7.)

And thus I have fairly represented to you, as well as I could, the Conclusive
stress of my designed Argument, why every one of you, even the Youngest,
Strongest, and most Prosperous amongst you, should in this instant go about to
begin, and then to go on in the business of the Jaylor's Enquiry, What shall I
do to be Saved?

And now presuming that I have said enough to Convince your Reason of the
certain Existence of a State to come, in which Salvation is to be attained; And
also plainly represented the Great Work you have to do in order to it; (with an
assurance that the Gospel has declared it to be no less) my Design now is, to
stir up your Minds with the most Affectionate and Zealous Purposes presently,
without any pretense of Delay on any account whatsoever, to enter upon that
most Important Business, by the force of two persuasive Motives, with which if
you refuse to be Affected, I know not what can be said more to bring you to a
sense of Religion, and to the care of your Eternal Welfare.

I. The First of them, which I offer to the Minds of the delaying Neglecters of
their own Salvation, is to Consider, that God in his Infinite Loving kindness
has so ordered it, that in the same instant in which an inconsiderate Sinner
begins with the Jailer to be Enquiring after his Saving Business, in the same
instant he makes his first Step toward God's beginning Favor; and if he shall
Religiously go on for his own Everlasting Interest, he may assure himself then
of his peculiar Love and Blessing, but not till then.

As if God had most kindly confined, almost all the Services to be done to
himself, to such Actions only which Man is obliged to perform for his own
chiefest Good and Happiness.

And as if God should say to them, Do but mind your own principal Concern: Be
but Wise for your selves: Do but forbear such things as must Infallibly tend to
your Eternal Ruin, I am Served, I am then Pleased.

Be but your own Friends, and I am then your, even upon those Terms, and for
that very Reason.

But if Men resolve Obstinately to continue in their Delay, and still go on to
neglect their own Saving Good, they are to Believe, that so long God has
nothing to do with them, any more than they have to do with God. For all that
unhappy while of delay, God is, as it were an Alien to them, and stands at
distance from them: And that not only as a Stranger, but as yet as an Enemy.

Only so far Reconciled to them, that as soon as they shall go about to Mind
and Act for their own Chiefest Good and Interest, they shall readily be
accepted to Peace with him.

Oh then I Beseech you all, that are at this time conscious of your Obstinate
or Careless Neglect hitherto, don't let God and your Souls stand at these odds
any longer; but presently go about your Salvation-business with this certain
Encouragement, that you shall then assureedly come to God, as to your Friend,
and into his Gracious Arms, which are always open Joyfully to receive you. He
will then become your Guide, your Protector, and Blessing, (Oh dread that heavy
Word) but not till then. This is the First Persuasive Motive.

II. The next is, with an assurance, that as that Saving Work will bring you
first to God, and to his Favor, and to a Communion with him; so the first Step
you make toward your own Salvation, you do not only come to Him, but you come
to be your selves, according to your own Rational Nature, as you are Men.

For all the while that inconsiderate Men refuse to Live according to the
Measures of Religious Wisdom, in order to their own Safety in a future World,
they are not to be accounted in a Moral sense Rational Creatures, but are to be
reckoned among such, as are besides themselves, or out of their Senses, (as
it is vulgarly Phrased) that is, they all the while may be thought to act as mad
or distracted Men. Or it may be said of them, that they have changed their
Human Natures into another Species of Beings, that is, by some Sins, into the
Nature of Devils, (St. Paul calls some of them ((...), Tit. 2. 3) Or that they
may have assumed the Nature of Brutes in other Sins, (St. Peter calls some such
bruit Beasts, 2 Pet. 2. 12.) Or they may be said to act according to the
senseless Humor of Fools, (our Savior calls one of them by that name, ( Luke
12. 20.) but by no means, they must not be allowed to act according to the
Quality, Reason, and sober Counsels of Intellectual Beings.

And if some such half or no Men, who drown their Intellectual Faculties, in
the pleasures of Sense: And others who employ their Minds and Time in the
acquisitions of some heightning degrees of Wealth or Honor, shall be offended,
and think themselves too wise to be so reproached by these my severe
Representations; and shall scornfully Deride us, as the greatest Fools for
doing so; let them tell themselves, that for certain at one time or other,
especially when they are in a near prospect of their Dying Periods, they will
justify us to their Cost, that all that I have said is true. And then may
wish, that I had exposed their Follies with greater degrees of Severity, that
they might caution their Friends and Relatives, no longer to play the Fools in
such comparatively ridiculous ways of Living, as must necessarily hazard the
loss of God's Love, and Favor; the sweet Peace of their own Minds, and their
being Eternally at last Undone in a future World.

And then let them consider, whether their Unbelieving Principles, or their
hopes of any worldly Advantages, can shelter them from those dreadful Events.

But now on the other hand, let them be assured, that whenever any of those
sinful and foolish Delayers shall begin to enter upon thoughts, and sincere
purposes, to act for their Eternal Salvation; they shall certainly then make
the first Step, and begin to be themselves; come into their Wits, come out out
of Bedlam, and act their own Rational Natures, so as to deserve the honorable
Title of being Men.

Of this the wise Ecclesiastes gives us a clear assurance, Fear God, says he,
and keep his Commandments, (Eccl. 12. 13.) (...), This is Man. Not as some
mistakingly would have it, the Duty, or the whole Duty of Man; but positively
this is Man; which he was not justly to be so accounted, till a Religious Mind
and Life had made him one.

And then further, when he goes about to turn himself to be a Man (St. Paul
calls it the new Man,) he will every day be more and more improving himself for
a Happy Life, even in this World; so far as a mortal State will admit of it,
with the common allays of the Worlds unavoidable Inconveniences.

His Pious Mind will never let him want a directive Guide how to manage his
best Prosperity discreetly, and satisfactorily to himself; and create a Love
and a Respect from all that depend upon him; and most probably a Friendship
from all those, with whom he converseth, and holds Neighbourly communions.

And if it happens, that any adverse Fortune, or cross Accidents sometimes
occur, his wise and religious Mind will be ready to suggest Reasons enough, why
he should bear them patiently; sometimes even Eligibly; and always Thankfully.

And if he hears the noise of Wars and National Commotions, when VVorldly Men
are harrassing their Minds with Fears and passionate Concerns for Parties and
Interests, he bears the Character of the Psalmist's Blessed Man that fears the
Lord, (Psalm. 112) that is, (Verse the seventh) He will not be afraid of any
Evil Tidings; for his Heart stands fast, and believes in the Lord. He
quietly awaits God's Pleasure in the Issue and Event of things, and is content
that he should be Glorified either in his Mercy, or Justice, as he pleases.

And if our Pious regarder of his Salvation, shall perceive, that the days are
coming on, in which he is like to have no pleasure in them, he will be so far
from troubling himself with murmuring complaints, that God gave him a Mortal
Life on those (as Worldlings imagine,) hard terms; that he shall intellectually
rejoice, that God and Nature allows him such a respit, in which he may have
time perfectly to Extirpate the very relicts of every evil Habit, contracted
perhaps in the inadvertent part of his Life. And then that all the beguiling
temptations of the vain World, are now growing every day more and more
pleasantly insipid to him.

And then it being presumed that in his declining Age he may have less to do
with the Affairs of the World, and but little attendance to be given to the
Satisfactions of Sense, he finds that he has a happy leisure, to be
endeavoring to dress up his Soul with such Divine Qualifications, as may make
himself as like, as possible, to the Nature of that Good God, especially in his
impartially Universal Love and Goodness; unto whose Beatifical Presence he
hopes ere long to have a merciful admission.

And when he is endeavoring to finish that principal design, he finds that he
has time also, to form his Mind with those obliging Qualities, and Graces,
which may adapt him to be a fit Companion in that Blessed Society; where the
Holy Angels, and the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect, (being all of a Piece in
their Tempers) do keep up a sweet and happy Communion of Joy and Love, without
any such interruptions, as they met withal in the former froward World.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by R. Clavel, at the Peacock in S. Paul's
Churchyard.
THE Church History cleared from the Roman Forgeries and Corruptions found in
the Councils and Baronius: In Four Parts. From the Beginning of Christianity,
to the End of the fifth General Council. 553. By Thomas Comber D. D. Dean of
Durham.

The Reasons of Praying for the Peace of Jerusalem: In a Sermon Preached before
the Queen at White Hall, on the Fast Day, being Wednesday, August 29. 1694. By
Thomas Comber, D. D. Dean of Durham, and Chaplain in Ordinary to their
Majesty's. Printed by their Majesty's special Command.

A Daily Office for the Sick; Compiled out of the Holy Scriptures, and the
Liturgy of our Church; with occasional Prayers Meditations and Directions.

The Catechism of the Church, with Proofs from the New Testament, and some
additional Questions and Answers, divided into twelve Sections, by Z. I. D. D.
Author of the Book lately published, Entitled a Daily Office for the Sick,
with Directions, etc.

A Church Catechism, with a brief and easy Explanation thereof, for the Help
of the meanest Capacities and weakest Memories, in order to the establishing
them in the Religion of the Church of England. By T. C. Dean of Durham.

The Pantheon, representing the Fabulous Histories of the Heathen Gods, and
most Illustrious Heroes: in a short, plain, and familiar Method, by the way of
Dialogue, for the Use of Schools. Written by Fra. Pomey, of the Society of
Jesus; Author of the French and Latin Dictionary, for the Use of the Dauphin.

A Second Admonition to the Dissenting Inhabitants of the Diocese of
Londonderry, concerning Mr. Boyse's Vindication of his Remarks on a Discourse
concerning the Inventions of Men in the Worship of God, with an Appendix
containing an Answer to Mr. Boyse's Objections against the Sign of the Cross.
By William Lord Bishop of Derry.


