A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable, Sr. Thomas Stamp, LORD MAYOR;
THE Court of Aldermen, AND Citizens of LONDON, September 29th. 1692.

AT The Election of the Lord Mayor for the Year ensuing.

By WILLIAM SMYTHIES Curate of St. Giles Cripplegate.

LONDON, Printed for J. Southby at the Harrow in Cornhil, 1692.

To the Right Honorable, Sr. Tho. Stamp, LORD MAYOR, etc.
My Lord;
I Have obeyed the Command of your Lordship, and the Court of Aldermen, in this
Publication, which will Vindicate my Reputation, to all sober Men, from those
Calumnies which are cast upon me. I delivered nothing in this Sermon, (to which
there is such unjust Exception taken) but what I ought to have said, in any
City or Corporation in the King's Dominions, on the like occasion. And had the
Citizens been as really united in their Hearts, as Truth and Honesty are joined
together in this plain Discourse there would have been no such Reproaches. That
London may so know the Things which belong to H^ Peace, that they may never be
hid from her Eyes: And that succeeding Magistrates may follow your Example in
your Great Station, is the Prayer of,

My LORD, Your Lordships most Humble and Obedient Servant, W. SMYTHIES.

AN Election-Sermon Preached September 29th. 1692.
PROVE. xxix. Ver. 2. When the Righteous are in Authority the People rejoice.


THERE needs no Preface to a Proverb. This is one of the Aphorisms of the Wise
Man, which are therefore highly to be valued, and diligently to be observed,
because he had the Wisdom which is from above. God is the Master of these
Sentences: And they are of excellent Use for the Regulation of Men's Lives and
Actions through all the various affairs of this Life.

In this Book we are furnished with Ethics, Oeconomicks, and Politics; by
which every Man may know how to govern himself, every Master may know how to
govern his Family, and every Magistrate may know how to govern those that are
under his Jurisdiction and Authority.

My Text has relation to the last of these, and is fit for our Direction in
the great Affair of this Day.

I cannot, in the first place, but take notice of Solomon's Supposition, which
is the necessity of Authority or Government. There needs no Interregnum to
convince us of this: For by the daily Irregularities and Outrages of Men under
a strict Government and severe Laws, we may conclude, that if there were no
Authority to punish Offenders, the World would be worse than a Forest of Wild
Beasts: And all honest Men, like Job, would curse the day in which they came
into it. Nay, it would, in one respect, be worse than Hell it self, where the
Devils have Belzeebub for their Head, and are under a sort of Government, as we
learn from our Blessed Savior.

As therefore it is of absolute necessity that there should be Government, so
it is one of the greatest Concerns of this Life, that there should be Righteous
Governors.

The due Administration of Justice in a City, is like the Fountains or Rivers
which supply it, without which the Inhabitants could not subsist. And where
there is Maladministration, that City would be like to Jericho, of which it is
said, 2 King. 2.19. that it is well situated, but the Waters are naught. And
where there has been any such Miscarriage, a Righteous Magistrate may, like
Elisha, make the Waters to be sweet again.

I come now to that which I chiefly intend, which is to show, First, Who is a
Righteous Magistrate. And, Secondly, That the People have cause to Rejoice in
him.


We may understand the Word Righteous in the largest sense, as taking in all
necessary Qualifications for the Magistratioal Office. And these I shall rank
under Six Heads.

I. The First is Wisdom. The Government of a great City, is of great
Importance, and requires great Wisdom and Prudence for the management of it;
for he must be a Wile Man both in the Government of himself and others.

First, In the Government of himself, and this must be over his Appetite, and
over his Passion.

1. He must govern his Appotite, that by luxurious Eating and Drinking, he may
not be unfit for the discharge of his great Undertaking. The Sin of Drunkenness
is a shame to the meanest Beggar, but how inexpressibly shameful is it in him,
who is to punish the Drunkard and the Beggar too. The Scripture calls
Magistrates, Gods; because they are in God's place on Earth, to execute Justice
and Judgment: But they are very unfit to be called so, who are unworthy to be
called Men.

I have read of Two Laws amongst the Heathens, for the prevention of this Sin
in Magistrates: One was, that they should drink no Wine: And the other was,
that they should be put to Death, if they drank too much. So necessary was
Sobriety and Temperance accounted in them that govern, by those who had not the
Laws of Heaven to oblige them to it, as Christians have.

Places of Authority are Places of Honor, in which Men must have a care that
they be not guilty of any Vice, which will be a reproach to them whilst they
live, and cause their Names to rot when they are dead.

History tells us of a great Magistrate, of whom it was said, that he lived,
non ut vivat sed ut bibat, he lived only to gratify his drunken Appetite. And
when he was turned out of his Office, and for grief hanged himself, the people
derided his dead Body, and said, There hangs up a Tankard. So odious was
Intemperance in him, who should have been an Example of Sobriety, and a
Punisher of that Vice of which he himself was guilty. Solomon says, Eccl.
10.16. Woe unto thee O Land when thy Princes eat in the Morning. And v. 17.
Blessed art thou O Land when thy Princes eat in due season, for strength and
not for drunkenness. Where, by eating, we are to understand luxurious eating
and drinking. Eating and drinking is far from being the end of our Beings, but
appointed as a means to enable us for the duties of our several Places; the
doing of which is a great end for which we live. This Temperance ought to be
the care of all Men, and in an especial manner, of all those who are in
Authority. Their Minds had need to be upon their business, and not upon their
Bellies, upon whom the Welfare of a great City does so much depend. They
should imitate Moses, of whom we read, Exodus 18.13. that he arose in the Morning
to sit in Judgment. And David says, Psalm. 108.1. I will early destroy all the
Wicked of the Land. By which Expesitors understand, that he made the Morning to
be the time of Judicature. He was an early riser to do his Devotion to God,
Psalm. 5.3. My Voice shall thou hear in the morning, in the morning will I
direct my Prayer unto thee and will look up. And from that Duty, like a pious
Magistrate, he went to the discharge of the other. It was Gods special Command
to the House of David, Jer. 21.12. that they should execute Judgment in the
morning, which was anciently the time of that Administration, because
Magistrates were then more sit for that great Affair than after they had eaten
and drank. Intemperance makes a Man forget his business, and therefore the
Heathens were wont to call the God of Wine the Son of Forgetfulness. If
Magistrates are guilty of this, it may cause them to pervert Justice. The
Prince who was made sick with bottles of Wine, stretched out his hand with
scorners, Hos. 7.5. when he should have stretched out his hand against them.

2. There must be wisdom in the government of his Passion, I mean that of
anger, for when that prevails it is a second drunkenness. And truly he that is
in the seat of judicature had need to have command of himself, considering how
many, and how great the provocations are which he daily meets with. We read of
wise Heathens, who were very averse to Magistratical engagements, because of
the vexations that attended them. One said, that he could better endure
banishment. Another, that he had rather go to his grave in quiet. Most certain
it is, that the Office will try the Temper and Patience of him that undertakes
it. Moses was the meekest Man in the world, and yet not always meek enough to
govern his passion when disturbed by a disorderly and Murmuring people, who (as
the Psalmist says) provoked him so, that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips,
for which God was offended at him. Solomon says, he that is slow to anger is
better than the mighty; and he that ruseth his Spirit, than he that takes a
City, Prove. 16.32. The meaning is, that he who overcomes himself is more to be
valued than he who, by force and violence, overcomes others. Immoderate anger
is called by the Latins Impotentia. It is the weakness and impotency of a man,
which will give occasion to the Envious to Reproach them that are placed above
them. Where passion prevails in the chief Magistrate, the whole City may be
discomposed by his discomposure. And amongst other evils (which are too many
for me to reckon up) this great one is to be expected from a passionate
Magistrate, viz. passing hasty judgment, it being impossible for him with due
attendance and sedateness, to weigh and consider all that is offered on both
sides. Slanderous Ziba putting King David into a passion, caused a very
undeserved severity against Mephibosheth. It was a good saying concerning good
Magistrates. Ad puniendum, non ^racundia sed equitate, ducuntur. It Is not
passion, but equity, that is their guide.

2. He must have wisdom to govern others. By wisdom I chiefly mean, knowledge
of the Laws which he is to execute, and of those rights and privileges which
he is to preserve. What Solomon says of a Nation, I may say of a City ( Prove.
28.) By a man of understanding, the state thereof is prolonged. It reflects
upon the Wisdom of Electors when a man is chosen, who is only Honored to his
Face, because of his High Station, and ridiculed behind his back, in many
Companies, for his great inability to perform the duty of it. And I may use the
words of Selomon in another place, with little alteration, Eccl. 10. v. 16. Woe
unto thee, O City when thy Governor is a Child; which is all one in reference
to age and understanding. It was a great judgment which God threatened to the
disobedient: That he would take away the mighty man, and the prudent man, and
give them Children to be their Princes and Babes to Rule over them, Esa. 3. And
on the contrary, it is a great blessing of God to have wise and good
governors, which he promised by the prophet Esaiah as an encouragement to
reform the disobedient, (c. 1.25.) I will restore thy Judges at the first, and
thy Counselors as at the beginning: Such as Moses, and Joshua, and David were.
The world never was without mischievous men who would destroy the welfare of
it, nor any great City without those that seek to undermine its peace and
prosperity: By which every one may understand how necessary it is that it
should be governed by a wise Magistrate, according to that of Solomon, Prove.
29.8. Scornful men, or (as it is rendered) pestilent men bring a City into a
snare, but Wise Men turn away wrath. They prevent the fury of those men. It was
a good saying of a wise Heathen. Vbi preses fuerit Philosophus, ibi civitas
erit felix; where the President or Magistrate of a City is a wise man, that
City is happy: And another says, that, of all arts, the well-government of a
City has the pre-eminence. Wisdom is a necessary Qualification.. That Is the
first.

II. A Second is Justice and Uprightness. Which must appear by these two
Negatives.

First, He must not be biased by any personal favor. Secondly, He must not be
biased by any sinister design of advantage to himself.
First, Not by any personal favor or affection. He must be an upright Man that
does not lean on one side. A Malefactor must not be spared for any former
friendship, nor receive the greater punishment because of any former pique or
prejudice. Solomon says, Prove. 24, 25. To accept persons in judgment is not
good, which (is a Meiosis, and) signifies that it is exceedingly bad and
abominable.

We read of two Eminent Heathens who acted diversely for this principle of
uprightness and impartiality: One of them being chosen a Senator, and accepting
of it, made a splendid Feast to which he invited all his friends, and
entertained them with all imaginable respect and kindness: But at the end of
it, he took a solemn leave of them, as if he had been going into another
Country at that time when he was only going into another Station; intimating
thereby, that no friend must expect the least favor or kindness from him in
the discharge of that Office, in which the peace of his Conscience, and the
welfare of the City were greatly concerned. The other being Elected, utterly
refused it, saying that he would never be placed at that post where he should
be obliged to make no difference between his friends and his foes. We may, by
these instances, see how just and upright these men were who had only the light
of natural Principles, and not that revelation of the will of the Righteous
Lord, who loves Righteousness, and whose countenance does behold the upright,
Psalm. 11.7. And who threatens his Eternal wrath and displeasure to the
unrighteous.

I may add farther, that Magistrates must not only turn their backs upon their
friends, and acquaintance, that justice may take place, but upon their nearest
and dearest Relations. A Magistrate must be like Melchizedeck, without Father
and without Mother. He must imitare our Savior, who, when he was told, That
his Mother and his Brethren were without waiting for him, said, Who is my
Mother and my Brethren? Intimating, that he had that business to do, to which
Natural Affection must give place. Justice and Uprightness must prevail above
all Obligations whatsoever. God and Conscience, and the Public Good, must be
preferred above all.

2. As Favor and Affection must not sway a Magistrate; so much less must
Covetousness and the Love of Riches. They must be Men of Truth, (that is, Men
of Honesty and Sincerity) and hating Covetousness, Exodus 18.21. which is sordid
and base in the esteem of all Men. A Magistrate may love his Friend, but he
must hate Covetousness.

He that will prostitute Justice to any base mercenary design, is one that
sells his Reputation, and the Reputation of his Electors, and (which is more
than all) he sells the Peace of his own Conscience: Or I may say of him as
'twas said of Ahab, He sells himself to work wickedness. This is a Sin so
odious to God, and so provoking, that it were better for such a Magistrate,
that a Mill stone (and not a Chain) were hanged about his neck, and he cast
into the Sea. It were endless to give an Account of all that the Scriptures
speak to this purpose. Solomon justly gives the Title of a wicked man to such a
Magistrate, Prove. 17.23. A wicked man takes a gift out of the bosom, to
pervert the ways of Judgment; that is, he takes it secretly out of the bosom
of another man. But whatever the Value of the Gift be, it connot compensate the
Guilt that is, and the Terror that will be in his own bosom. Let it be never
so secret, it is as open and manifest to God, as it would be to men, if that
which is engraven in his Conscience, were set over his door, Here is Justice to
be Sold.

The Scripture tells us of Rulers, who instead of hating Covetousness,
delighted in nothing more than Bribes. The Rulers, with shame, do love, Give
ye, Hos. 4.18. The shame spoken of, does not denote the Temper of the man, for
he is past shame, but the Nature of the Crime; to which purpose some Expositors
read it, O Dedecus! O Ignominia! The Rulers, O Shame! O Disgrace! do love, Give
ye. And we find in the beginning of the next Chapter, the severe Judgment of
God threatened against them. The like Complaint we find by the Prophet Micah,
Chap. 7. ver. 3. They do evil with both hands earnestly. The Prince asheth, and
the Judge asks a Reward, and the great Man utters his mischievous desire,
so they wrap it up. There were corrupt Magistrates, who for a Reward, would
gratifio mischievous Designs, and let Justice and the prosecution of it, drop
out of their hands. They had but two hands, and they were both wickedly
employed, They did evil with both hands earnestly, and the mischievous desires
were wrapped up. But God would not wrap them up, for he hastened their visitation
and perplexity, in the next Verse. This is hateful to God and man. When the man
that took a Reward was cursed, all the People were to say Amen, Deuteronomy. 27.25.

There is another Consideration which I am loath to omit. He that is guilty of
this abominable sin, is a Reproach to this brave and generous City. All the
three Kingdoms, and it may be, most of the Kingdoms in this part of the World,
do ring of the Noble and Charitable Acts which have been done by the
Magistrates and other Worthy Citizens of London, such as have not with shame
loved, Give ye; but, with honor and renown, have loved, I will give.

They have been, and are at this day, Fathers of the Fatherless, by whose
Bounty, Orphans, who might have perished, are so happily provided for when
their Parents are dead and gone, that as it is said in Job, Their Children come
to Honor and they know it not.

They are Husbands to the Widows, who are so comfortably relieved, that (as Job
says of himself) they make the Widows hearts to sing for joy.

They are good Samaritans, who have provided Houses for the Wounded, and Wine
and Oil to supply them, to the end of the World.

They have provided Hospitals for the Lame and Impotent, who have been carried
in, with pale faces, and dejected countenances, but have come out again, like
the man whom the Apostles cured, walking and leaping and praising God, for such
Benefactors.

And a most excellent Structure is built for those who have lost themselves,
their Reason I mean, (without which all the World signities nothing) who have
had that Benefit by their Charity, which the Lunaticks in the Gospel had by our
Saviors Miracles, restoration to their right Minds.

It Is Pity, that a Covetous man should ever be the Governor of a City, that
has been so liberal. And the Truth is, those that are Citizens indeed, will
account themselves obliged to do such worthy Acts, as a grateful Acknowledgment
of the good which they have received in the City. We often find in the
Scriptures, that Cities are called Mothers, and the Citizens are called their
Children; from which we may conclude, that there lies a kind of Natural
Obligation upon them to do good to the City, in which they enjoy Prosperity,
and which has been as a tender Mother that has swadled and brought them up,
Lam. 2.22. And such Worthy Men are highly to be valued. We read in St. Lukes
Gospel, Chap. 7. That when the Centurions Servant, who was dear to him, was
taken sick, the Elders came to our Savior to desire him to go to his House,
and urged this prevailing Argument, He is worthy for whom thou shall do this,
for he loves our Nation and has built us a Synagogue. He who loves the City,
and has a mind disposed to Acts of Piety and Charity, is worthy of all the
Respect and Honor that Citizens can show to him.

III. A third Qualification is Diligence. A Magistrate must be a Man that will
bestir himself, to do God and the King and the City service, in his great
Station. He who loves to have his hand in his bosom, ought not to have the
sword put into it. He must be like Job who was diligent as well as just (and if
he had not been diligent he could not have been just) who says, Chap. 29, 16.
The cause which I knew not I searched out. He did not consult his own ease, by
hudling up the cause which came before him, but searched into the bottom of it:
And in this he showed himself to be a Righteous Magistrate, according to that
of Solomon, Prove. 29.7. The righteous considers the cause of the poor, but
the wicked regards not to know it. Magistrates, as it is said in Deutronomy,
Chapter 13. v. 14. must enquire and make search and ask diligently. The Office,
though very Honorable, is very burthensom, (as Jethro told Moses) it had not
need to be laid upon the shoulder of him that loves his ease. Moses his
diligence made him an excellent Magistrate who was from the Morning unto the
Evening sitting in Judgment, Exodus 18, 13.

IV. A Magistrate must have Courage. He must not be afraid to do his Duty,
whomsoever he disobliges. He cannot be a righteous Magistrate who is not a
Courageous one, because he will be afraid to do his Duty, upon the appearance
of any danger. He must not be like Ephraim, A Silly Dove without Heart, but one
who will know his place, and make others know it too. He that says, This man
will be Angry, and the other will be disobliged, is more fit to have a Feather
than a Sword born before him. Solomon's Throne was supported by Lions, to
signify that those that are in Authority must be as bold as that Creature.

As Uprightness and Impartiality is necessary for doing right to the Poor; so
is Courage and Magnanimity, for the punishing of great and rich Offenders.
Magistrates must fear God, but they must not fear men. The Electors should
therefore resolve as Gideon did, that they will not have one who is fearful and
afraid, but one that will do by the stoutest Offender, as David did by the Lion
and the Bear, when the Lamb was taken out of the Flock. He was not afraid to
take the Lion by the Beard and slay him, to rescue the poor innocent Creature,
1 Samuel 17.35. He must be as stout in the Execution of his Office, as Job was,
who brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of their teeth, Job
29.17. He must not do by Men as Saul did by the Amalekites Cattle. God
commanded him to slay all the Cattle, and he only slew the leanest, and spared
the fattest, because he feared the People and obeyed their Voice. Achilles's
Armor must not be on a Cowards back. The Punishment of a great Malefactor, is
a fearing Example to the small ones, because it convinces them, that the
Magistrate is resolved that no evildoer, brought before him, shall escape.

V. Loyalty to the Supreme Magistrate, is another necessary Qualification. Qui
Coesarem portat, He that bears the King's Authority in his hand, will be the
fitter to govern if he bears true Affection to him in his Heart. And to choose
one that does not, may prove very fatal.

The Loyalty of the Chief Magistrate of the Metropolis or Imperial City, is a
great security to the Crown, because danger does commonly arise there. What
Alexander once said to one of his Chieftains, in whom he placed great
considence, may the King and Queen say to the Lord Mayor of this City, if he be
Loyal; If you be awake I may sleep. The King sees with the Eyes of his
Magistrates, and with none more than with His Eyes, who sits in the Chair of
this great City. This is probably the meaning of Solomon, Prove. 20.8. A King
that sits upon the Throne scatters away all evil with his eyes; that is,
with the Eyes of his Magistrates. And if they be so blind that they will not
see, the Kings and the Peoples Case must be very dangerous.

And there is a necessity of more than ordinary Loyalty at this Time, when the
great Concerns, not only of this but of other neighboring Nations, require the
Kings frequent and long absence. And when there are so many amongst us, who are
so insensible of our wonderful Deliverance from the Tyranny o^ Popery, that
they would bring us back again into that worse than Egyptian Bondage: Men who
desire nothing so much as to act the part of blind Sampson, by pulling down the
House the they perish themselves by the fall of it. When the Disciples would
have fetched Fire from Heaven, to destroy the Samaritans, our Savior rebuked
them and said, Ye know not what Spirit ye are of. What Spirit then are these
men of, who would fetch Fire from Hell, (I mean from France) to destroy their
own Countrymen and the men of their own Religion? But I hope there will be a
Lord Mayor chosen again, who will use his utmost diligence to disappoint the
Design of these blind Protestants. The Jesuits (Thanks be to God) are gone, but
wherever they are, they cannot but be exceedingly pleased, that they have
Protestant Agents who are carrying on that Design which will bring them all
back again, to sit at the Helm as they did before. By this it may appear what a
necessary Qualification Loyalty is.

VI. And Lastly, Piety, which is the best Qualification. He that rules men
must be just, ruling in the fear of God, 2 Samuel 23.3. The Ancient Romans would
not endure that a Sentence should be passed by a vicious Magistrate. Good
Magistrates make good Cities. When God would restore to his People, Judges as
at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning, it presently follows, Thou
shall be called, The City of Righteousness, the faithful City, Esa. 1.26. And
on the contrary, Cities are spoiled when they are governed by vicious Men. It
the Magistrate be a Ruler of Sodom, it is the way for the Citizens to be the
People of Gomorrha.

A Pious Magistrate is therefore highly to be valued, because he will have a
special regard to Religion, and the Church of God. He will remember the Lord
and let Jerusalem, as well as London, come into his mind, Jer. 51.50. It has
pleased God to bless our Church with many pious and Learned Prelates. And if it
pleases God to bless our State with Pious and wise Magistrates, we may hope
that we shall be at unity in our selves, and that judgment will run down like
waters, and righteousness with such a mighty stream, that vicious men will not
be able to stemm the torrent of it. God guided his people through the
wilderness by Moses and Aaron. When Magistrates and Ministers join in the
promoting of Gods Honor, we may expect that piety should increase, and
wickedness be suppressed. Ministers cannot do it alone. We can only tell sinners
of the wrath of God that is to come, and they either look upon it at a
distance, which they may timely enough prevent: Or else they will not believe
it till they irrecoverably fall under it. But the wrath of the Magistrate is
like a Roaring Lion, to them in this world that is ready to tear them if they
obey not. The sword of the Spirit will not reach them, but the Sword of the
Magistrate may. They are too hard to be hewn by the Prophets, but they may be
hewn by the Magistrates. We complain with sorrowful hearts, that we labor in
vain, but the Magistrate shall not need to bear the sword in vain, but may be a
terror to evil doers: And he has reason to expect that God will be a terror
to him, if he be not. The Magistrate should consider that his Sword is the
Sword of the Lord, as well as Gideons for the overcoming of those that are
enemies to God and Goodness.

Cato exhorting Magistrates to punish offenders, said, That those who can
suppress wickedness, and will not, deserve to be stoned to death, Quod ad
scelerum licentiam invitarent improbos. By not punishing wickedness they
invited men to the commission of it. The Council therefore which Jethro gave to
Moses, is fit to be observerd by the Citizens this day, viz. That they Choose an
able Man, and one that fears God, Exo. 18.21. And such a Man will do as Moses
did, v. 16. Make the people to know the statutes of God and his Laws, by
severely punishing the disobedient.

Thus I have given you the qualifications which make a Righteous Magistrate.
And the nearer that any man comes to these, the Happier will the City be, and
the greater cause will the Citizens have to rejoice.

I Come now to the second thing in the Text. The people Rejoice, of which I
shall need to speak but little, because every considerate man knows that the
due Administration of Justice by a Magistrate duly qualified, is the great
preservative of his Happiness. David could call for no greater hurt to his
enemies than that a wicked man should be set over them. And, by the Rule of
Contraries, it is one of the greatest blessings of this life for any Nation or
City to have a Righteous Man set over them. A Governor of Atheas thanked God,
that he never made an Athenian weep. A Righteous Magistrate will take such Care
of the City, and of the Rights and privileges of it, as never to grieve an
Honest Citizen By such a one, good men will be greatly encouraged, and vicious
men will be severely punished, which is a great cause of rejoicing. When the
Righteous are exalted, the City rejoices; and when the wicked perish, there is
shouting, Prove. 11.10.

We read of a Heathen who refused the Office of a Magistrate, saying, That if
he governed ill, he should offend the Gods; And if he governed well, he should
offend the Citizens. But (thanks be to God) as bad as the world is, it is not
so bad but that those who take Care to Govern well, shall please the Citizens.
A Righteous Magistrate will have that applause from all good and sober men,
which Job had chapter 29.11. When the ear heard me, then it blessed me; and when
the eye saw me, it gave witness to me. He, being a Righteous Magistrate, all
that saw him or heard him, rejoiced in him.

As therefore you expect such a Magistrate, be careful that you have a right
Aim in your Choice, and that you be not misguided by favor or affection or any
sinister end. Let me give my advice to you in these two concluding particulars.

First, Act like true Citizens, that value the good and wellsare of the City,
and be not biased to Act contrary to your own judgment. Consider.

First. That personal Obligations must not sway you in such a great concern as
the choice of a Magistrate. You must not do the City an injury because a
particular man has done you a kindness. If in this Case, my best friend and my
greatest enemy should be in Competition, and I am satisfied that my Enemy is
the fittest man to govern and would be most serviceable to the City; I cannot
satisfy God, and my own Conscience, if I do not vote for my enemy, because it is
the public good from which I must take my measures.

2. The Relation and Obligations of a Society must not prevail. I must confess
that it is a very pleasant sight to behold the brotherly love, which the
members of particular Societies show to each other. And when a Brother of a
Company proves in a Man's Judgment, to be the fittest man, it is great
satisfaction to the mind: But otherwise a man shall deal Perfidiously and
Treacherously by the City. It Is (according to what I mentioned before) as if a
man should kill his Mother to do his Brother a kindness. Besides, every man
desires to have a Magistrate that will Act impartially, without favor and
affection, but how can you expect it if you are partial, and act only from
personal favor and affection in the choice of him? It is a great concern; And
though it be but for one year, yet it may prove a very Critical one, and may
require great wisdom, as well as the other qualifications, in him whom you make
the Chief Magistrate. Solomon tells us, Eccl. 9.14. A parable of a poor wise
man, who delivered a City by his wisdom, when a great King came against it. We
know that there is a Potent King who wages war against us, and if by Treachery
or force he can overcome this City, he will look upon his work as more then
half done. And what a great blessing then may a wise man be, who has Authority
as well as wisdom, to preserve the City?

2. Act like good Christians. Let me beseech you in the name of that God who is
the God of peace, and by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Prince
of Peace, that there be no Unchristian Jarrings and Contentions amongst you,
which are a great dishonor to our Religion, and a great prejudice to the Souls
of Men. How can you expect that God should prosper your choice, if you offend
him at the same time? Remember I beseech you, that if you are True Christians,
you are fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God, which is
the highest Obligation to Christian Love and Unity. Every man may use his
privilege, though he does not disparage the name of Christianity. He may Vote
according to the best of his judgment without showing any disrespect to him
that Votes for other men. It is a very deplorable Case, if a Christian
Magistrate cannot be Chosen by Christian Citizens without the breach of
Christian Love.

I pray God of Heaven keep you from Unchristian Heats and Animosities, and give
you his direction and blessing in this great and important affair; that a
Righteous man may be in Authority, and that you may all have cause to Rejoice
in him.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THE Unworthy Non-Communicant.

The Necessity of Restitution.

The Benefit of Early Piety.

Advice to Young Men to beware of Theft, and to beware of Drunkenness. By Mr.
Smythies.

The aforesaid Books are Sold by J. Southby at the Harrow in Cornhil.


