A True Account of several Passages relating to the Execution of Sir John
Johnston.
By William Smythies Curate of St. Giles's Cripple-gate.
I Had forborne this Publication, (notwithstanding many importunities) if a
Printed Paper had not come abroad, which gave a very imperfect, and in some
things, a very false Account concerning Sir John Johnston; with which there was
an aspersion that I was the Pen man of it. I have been likewise informed, That
the Ministers who Visited him in the Prison, are accused, of being too
credulous and easy to be imposed upon. And I am sure, there is great Wrong done
to an Apothecary in Newgate-Street. I have therefore resolved to a give very
just Account of Matter of Fact, and no more.

On Thursday, the 10th. Instant, Sir John Johnston sent an importunate Request
to Dr. W. beseeching him, though a stranger, to grant his Assistance to a dying
Man; to which, the Dr. readily complied: And after he had twice given him the
Blessed Sacrament, and heard the most Solemn repeated Protestations of his
Innocence; desired Dr. F. to meet him the next day in the Prison, and to bring
some other Ministers with him, which occasioned my Attendance. When we came to
him, the Doctors adjur'd him by all that was Sacred and Terrible, (with such
Expressions as might have made even an innocent man to tremble) to speak
nothing but the Truth; assuring him withal that there was very little hope of
his obtaining favor, considering that many Great Men believed him Guilty of
that for which he was Condemned, and many other enormous Crimes. He then gave
us an Account concerning the taking away of the Young Heiress; the Substance of
which is contained in this following Letter, which he wrote with his own hand,
a little after he had received the Sacrament the third or fourth time, and when
he was going to his Execution.

SIR,
I Think it is not amiss, as a dying Man, to give you a short Account of all my
Innocence, and all the Reason, I know, they have for bringing me to this
untimely End. On Friday Morning, being the Day she was taken away; about Ten of
the Clock, Captain Campbell and Mr. Montgomery came to my Lodging with a Haunch
of Venison. I asked them what they were going to do with that; Mr. Montgomery
told me, it was to Treat Madam Biarly, and the rest of the Young Ladies; and
that he would have Captain Campbell Married to one of them this night, and
asked me if I would go and be a Witness to it. I told him, It must be by
Consent, or else I would have nothing to do with it: He told me, That if he did
not procure her Consent, he would not meddle with it, and so we parted, he
desiring me to come and meet him, at six of the Clock, at a Coffee house near
his Lodging; which I did, and met Capt. Campbell there; and some time
afterward, Mr. Montgomery came and called us to the door, and told us, The
Business was done. About Eight of the Clock, Madam Biarly's Coach came by, and
they went all away: Capt. Campbell called a Coa^h and six Horses, and bid us go
in, and ordered the Coachman to drive after her Coach, and stop in Great Queen
street.

When she was put into the Coach, as I am a Dying Man and now Receiving the
Sacrament, I could perceive no Discomposure in her at all; for after some Time
spent [by Mr. Campbell] in his Amors. She began to talk of my Lord Argyle, and
told us, That she had seen some of his Children at Ham, and that he was Married
to the Datchess of Lauderdales Daughter, and asked him if he were the Second
Brother. Upon some Discourse, which I do not well remember, she gave him her
Hand that she would Marry him. This good Humor continued still with her; so
that when the Parson desired her to say the Words after him, she spoke with so
audible a Voice, that the whole People in the Room distinctly heard her louder
than the Minister. After the Cerem^ny was over, it was observed, Her
Wedding-Ring was too big; her Husband told her he would have it changed to
morrow: She said, No, it is not Lucky to change a Wedding-Ring. At Supper,
there was nothing to be observed, but an equal Satisfaction betwixt both. When
it was ask't her, Whether she inclined to go to Bed, she freely Consented. Next
Morning, when we came and asked them how they Rested, she in particular
Answered me, very well. About Ten of the Clock Mr. Montgomery asked her, If she
would go to Mr. Pontac's to Dinner; she said, With all her heart: Where we
went, and stayed till Four in the Afternoon, and the House full of People. Then
we went to our Lodgings, and played at Cards till half an Hour after Nine; then
she went to Bed with all the seeming Pleasantness imaginable. This is the
Truth, and no more, as I am a Dying Man; neither truly was it ever my Intention
or Design to be a Witness of any thing that would look like a Force, neither
indeed was there any Occasion for it, she being so very frank and Free, of her
self, to the Marriage. I have forgot to tell you, That I desired her in the
Coach not to be afraid of any thing; for I told her, there should be nothing of
Force imposed upon her: She told me that she was not at all afraid of that. She
wrote likewise to her Aunt freely, a Letter, desiring she might not be troubled
for her, for she was very well with her Husband, Captain Campbell. As for her
Husband desiring her to go before my Lord Mayor, I know nothing of that. I find
in the Printed [Session] Paper, they do us a great deal of Injury, in saying,
That she was forced to bed upon Promises, and several other things. Truly I
never heard of any such thing till I read it in that Paper, neither do I
believe it.


The Truth of what is contained in this Letter, he solemnly protested upon his
frequent Receiving the Sacrament, and likewise at the time of the Execution. He
told us, that he had not been concerned in the carrying away the Young
Gentlewoman, if he had not understood by Mr. Montgomery that she was willing to
be taken from her Aunt, and would make no Noise or Disturbance when it was
done. He had a Paper containing the Substance of this Letter, ready at his
Trial, but was advised, for very obvious Reasons, not to make use of it.

That which follows, is a Letter to his Kinsman, occasioned by an Information
secretly given to him, that his Blood would be revenged upon his Prosecutors.

Dear Sir,
BEing now on my Last Preparation for Another World, I esteem my self obliged
to Communicate to you my last Desires, with Relation to This. I thank God, I
not only freely forgive all who have been Accessory to my Death, but desire by
this my Final Request to my Friends, whom I shall leave behind, to forgive them
all. And therefore must beg you in my Name, to Communicate this my Request to
them, and to beg them, if they cannot wholly forget who have been my Enemies;
yet at least, not to do the least Prejudice to any of them, on my Account. This
I am very earnest with you in, and thereby you will much oblige,

Your Friend and Servant, John Johnston.


One of the Doctors told him of a Report, That he had Three Months before,
agreed with Mr. Campbell to steal the Young Gentlewoman, and that they were to
cast Lots which should have her, and that he on whom the Lot fell, should give
to the other Three Hundred Pounds. To this he solemnly protested, that there
was not one Syllable of it true, and that he knew nothing concerning her, till
the Morning of that day in which she was Married.

The same Dr. told him of a Report from Chester, That there was a Rape Sworn
against him. He confessed the Truth of it, and gave this following Account. His
Soldiers had been so affronted by several of the Townsmen, that the Sentinels
could not keep their Posts, without danger of hurt done them, by Stones thrown
from the tops of Houses, and that there was one Gun discharged, which had like
to have killed one of them: That coming to the Castle late in the Evening, he
saw a Man and a Woman standing in a place, which made him suspect some ill
design against his Soldiers, where upon he commanded one of his Officers to
seize them, but the Man escaping the Woman only was committed to the Sarjeant,
till she should discover who the Man was, which she did, and the next Morning
she was discharged: About a Fortnight after this, Sir John came to London to
complain to the King, of some Indignities which had been done to him. In the
mean time, the Woman swore a Ra^e against him; but her Conscience accusing her,
and the Sergeant, with others, being able to Testify that Sir John came not at
her; she confessed her wickedness to some Persons in the Town, and said, that
her Brother threatened to kill her, if she did not do it, and desired that she
might go into Ireland to avoid the consequence of his displeasure; Sir John
being informed of this, and having taken her Confession before several
Witnesses, gave her Five Pounds to bear her charges. He desired not to obtain
any mercy from God or Man, if upon a Reprieve, till there could be a Return
from Chester, he was not fully Vindicated from that Calumny: And in order to
it, one of the Doctors promised to write to the Bishop of Chester, to entreat
him, to examine the Truth of it from several Persons of Note in the Town.

He blessed God, that he had daily performed the Duties of Religion, but
lamented, with very great Expressions of Grief, that his darling Sin returned
upon him. I asked him, If he had not defrauded any; to which he replied, That
he had nothing of that guilt in his Conscience; and took occasion to thank God,
that though he had been often Engaged in Duels, yet he had never Killed his
Combatant, it being his desire only to overcome, and not to destroy.

It was thought by some, that he prolonged his Speech and his Devotions at the
place of Execution, in hope of a Reprieve. But I am far from thinking so, for
before he came out of the Prison, he blessed God, that his mind was so well
satisfied and by the grace of God, he was so prepared to dye, that if a
Reprieve should come, it would do him an injury rather than a kindness. And
when he came to the place of Execution, one of his Friends told him, by the
Coach-side, That he then came from the King and no Reprieve could be obtained
for him, at which he did not in the least, seem to be moved.

Some of his Country men told me, That he was Sir John Johnston o^ Cascaban,
the second Baronet in Scotland.

LONDON, Printed December, 30th. 1690.


